T2038 E580_1 99863598 115808
A Clavis to the Bible. OR A NEW COMMENT UPON THE Pentateuch: OR Five Books of MOSES. Wherein are 1. Difficult Texts explained. 2. Controversies discussed. 3. Common-places handled. 4. Cases of Conscience cleer∣ed. 5. Many Remarkable matters hinted, that had by other In∣terpreters been omitted. 6. Besides, divers Texts of Scripture which occasional∣ly occur, are fully opened. 7. And the whole so inter∣mixed with pertinent Hi∣stories, as will yeeld both pleasure and profit to the Judicious, pious Reader. By JOHN TRAPP, Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Glocestershire. LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the George in Little-Brittain, 1650.
TO THE VVORSHIPFVLL, his highly honoured friend, William Comb, Esquire of Stratford upon Avon; Justice of the Peace for the County  Warwickt Worthy Sir, YOu may well wonder, not so much that I now dedicate this peece of my pains unto you, as that I did it not till now; consider∣ing how long I have known you, and how very much I am oblieged to You. The truth is this; These Notes (upon Genesis) were the first, in this kind, that ever I finished; and You were deservedly among the first that came into my thoughts, for a Patron to them. But as Pharez once made a breach upon his brother Zarah, Gen. 38.29. and gat into the world before him, so did those other Works of mine (if at least, that name be not too good for them) deal by This, which now, with its red threed, (a sign of its intended seniority,) humbly implores Your patronage, and (if worth while) your perusal: I know you have somewhat else to do, then to read Commentaries; and yet I must needs know too, that You (that are so sedulous a searcher of the Scriptures, and so seriously in∣quisitive after the genuine sense of such and such dark Texts therein, as, in conference occasionally, You have oft proposed
unto me,) cannot but delight to be duely exercised in books of this nature. Dr. Cumber. That Reverend Doctour of Cambridge, that (in the behalf of himself, and his whole Colledg, for a very good turn you did them,) presented You with the fairest great Bible that ever I beheld, saw something, surely, of your pious inclina∣tion to the study of that blessed Book: And, if to the better understanding thereof, this, or any thing else that I have yet written, may be any way serviceable, I have that I sought for. Alphonsus, King of Arragon, is said to have read over the Bible fourteen times, Panormitan. with Lyra's Notes upon it. And those English Exiles for Christ at Geneva, knew they could not pre∣sent any thing more pleasing, to that Incomparable Queen Eli∣zabeth, then their new Translation of, and marginal Notes up∣pon the holy Bible; which Book of books she had received, with both her hands, Speed. from the Londoners, soon after her Coro∣nation; and kissing it, laid it to her breast, saying, That the same had been her chiefest delight, and should be the rule whereby she meant to frame her whole deportment. Let it be still Yours, Good Sir, as hitherto it hath been; and let this poor piece of mine (if at any time you think good to consult with it) tell you, in my absence, what my sense is of such places, as wherein, with that noble Eunuch, (Act. 8.31.) You may need an Interpreter. No more, Jam. 1.17. 2 Cor. 4.6. Sir, at present, then to pray the Father of lights (who commanded the light to shine out of darknesse,) to give You the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, Vers. 7. in the face of Jesus Christ; That though You have this treasure presented to you in an earthen vessel, . in a vile oyster-shell; as the Greek hath it,) yet You may partake of the excellency of the power that is of God, and not of Me, Vers. 5. who preach not, present not, my self, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and my self Your Servant for Jesus sake, JOHN TRAPP.
: : : : : : : : Thomas Richardson, Oxen: Pastor Ecclesiae de Newbold pace. . . . , , , , , . , , , , . . . . Tho: Dugard. Art. Mag. Rector Barsordiae.
LECTORI. HAbes hîc Lector pretii quantivis Librum; Prioribus Limatissimis et lectissimis illis Annota∣tionibus in Novum Testa∣mentum; unam cum locorum communium decade: nec non duobus aliis, idiomate etiam vernacu∣lo conscriptis, quorum alteri nomen, God's Love-tokens, &c. alteri, The true Treasure, &c. quos trivistilatus parem; Notas in Mosis Pentadem; unde denuò Sic splendet ille, t Mnte quum descenderet, Magni Tonantis inclytus Tabellio. At non at olim Claritate territans Abegit accedentes, nunc parili modo (Ne contremas) tibi prodit formidabilis. Accede sis, et intuere; senties Lucem stupendam, sed quae oculos beet tuos. Tenebras fugari gestis? ecce Phosphorus. Aenigmata solvi? te penes est nunc Oedipus. Gazas recludi? clavem cernis auream. Tenebricosior est subinde Legifen; Et Sphingis instar, et gazas premit suas. Ast Trappus clarat, solvit, pandit omnia. Trappi nil quicquam est invium solertiae. Nec Luce solùm donat: ut scientior, Et auctior Capite, ita corde purior (Modò tibi nè desis) hinc discedas. Vale. Dugardus.
TO THE BOOK. WElcome sweet Babe into the Light: A Light thy self to Him, whose sight Was at twice sixty undecay'd; Deut. 34.7. Whose Infancy ravisht a maid. His wind-and-wave-rockt Cradle she, That gracious Princess, needs would see; And seeing, fell in love with him Whose first three moneths were taught to swim. As he to her, so thou to me Art full of Amabilitie. Exceeding fair and proper too, He was, thou art: who can but wooe? , Act. 7.20. , Heb. 11.23. Who can but fix on thee his eye? And much affect thy company? So sweet is thy discourse; where meet Piety, Learning, Eloquence, wit; Profit and Pleasure; Muse and Grace; Maschil and Michtam; here's the place Where golden apples we may find With silver pictures fitly joyn'd. Were it not so, I durst profess, That thou, sweet child, wer't nothing less Than Son of Trappe; whose pregnant Head So often hath us Treasured With gallant Births: in which we see Whatsoever can be said of thee. o now, sweet Babe, and certifi Thy Sire, his Readers Thoughts are high, Of his enlightened Pentateuch; And that they cannot chuse but look, That Joshua Moses should succeed, And then the rest; for Light all need.
And Moses only Earnest is; One draught, from whence their Thirst doth rise Which will not quenched be, untill Each Sacred Penman tastes his Quill. Tell him, his Readers do believe, While time shall be, his Sons will live. They only pray, his Sons may grow, In Number, and in Greatness too: For this defect is in them All; Being so Fine, they are too Small. Idem.
A COMMENTARY or EXPOSITION UPON GENESIS. WHEREIN The TEXT is explained, some Con∣troversies are discussed, divers common places▪ are handled, and many remarkable Matters hinted, that had by former INTERPRETERS been pretermitted. CHAP. I. Verse 1. In the beginning] A Beginning there was then; Ar. Physic. l 8. Vide Sharpei symphon. p. 11. Plin. lib. 1. c. 1. Veritatem qua rit Philosophia invenit Theol∣gia, &c. Jo. Picus Mi∣rand. D. Prid. e. Cathedra. Whatever Aristotle fancied of the Worlds eternity. So true is that of a learned Italian, Phi∣losophy seeks after Truth, Divinity onely findes it, Religion improves it. But the Philosopher would be yet better satisfied. He had read (say some) this first of Genesis, and was heard to say thereupon, regè diei domine Moses, sed quomodo probas? Well said, Sir Moses; how prove you, what you have so said? An Ancient
answereth, Credo, non pro bo, Augustin. Piscatoribus cre∣dimus, non Dia∣lecticis. Amb. Multò melius credendo intelli∣guntur, quàm in∣elligndo cre∣duntur fidei Christianae myria, Ru∣pert. Abbas Turiesis. Theologia non est argumenta∣tiva, Alsted. Aristotelis oc∣a, seu Theolo∣gia, sophistica est mnium, quae li∣teris unquam mandatae sum, maximè lulta, maximeque im∣ia: Ramus in Theolog. Job 35.10. Psal 1.9.1. Eccles. 12.1. Moses was read every Sabbath, Acts 15.21. with a Lecture cut of the Pro∣phets. Acts 13.15. Psal. 53.6. . Suidas. . In Pmandro. Nm b pro∣pria est Hbrai verbi significa∣tio. Jun. Irride Galenus Mosen, eò quod dicat, Deum ex nulla praexistente materia ondidisse mundum. Buchol. 1 Cor. 2.14. . I beleeve it, I need not prove it. Another, We believe the holy Penmen, before Heathen wisemen. A third, The mysteries of Christian. Religion are better understood by believing, then be∣lieved by understanding. But best of all, the Apostle, Through Fa  understand, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear, Heb. 11.3. Divinity doth not use to prove her princi∣ples (whereof this is one.) No, not Aristotles own Divinity (his Metaphysicks, I mean,) wherein he requires, to be believed upon his bare words Albeit, (if Ramus may be judg) those, fourteen Books of his, are the most idle and impious piece of Sophistry, that ever was set forth by any man. Thus, Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, Rom. 1.22. Behold, they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jerem. 8.9. God created.] Heb. Dii creavit. The Mystery of the blessed Tri∣nity, called by Elihu, Eloah Gnoscai, God my Makers; and by David, The Makers of Israel; And remember thy Creators, saith Solomon. To the same sense, sweetly sounds the Haphtara or por∣tion of Scripture, which is read by the Jews, together with this of Moses, viz. Isai. 42.5. And that of the Psalmist, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them, by the breath (or Spirit) of his mouth: That is, God the Father, by the Son, through the Holy Ghost, created all. This, Trismegist an ancient Egyptian (for he flourished before Pharaoh) acknow∣ledged, and thence had his name. The Hebrews also of old, were no strangers to this Mystery, though their posterity understood it not. R. Solomon Jarchi writing on that, Cant. 1.11. We will make, &c. Interprets it, I and my Judgment-hall. Now a Judg∣ment-hall in Israel consisted of three at least, which in their close manner of speech, they applyed to God, who is Three in one, and One in three. Created] Made all things of nothing, in a most marvellous and magnificent manner, as the word signifieth. This Plato doubts of, Aristotle denies; Galen derides, as a thing im∣possible, because, with Nicodemus, he cannot conceive how these things can be. The natural man (the meer animal, whose Reason is not elevated by Religion) perceiveth not these things of the Spirit of God: They are foolishness unto him. The Cock on the dunghil meddles not with these matters. Well might Saint Paul tell the
men of Athens, (and yet Athens was the Greece of Greece, Athenaeus. Acts 17.23, 24. Somniaverat Deum non cog∣noverat. Instit. l. 5. c. 14. and had in it the most Mercurial wits in the world,) That God, that made all things of nothing, was to them the unknown God: And Lactantius fitly sayth of Plato (who yet merited the stile of Divine amongst them,) that he dreamt of God, rather then had any true knowledg of him. He no where called God the Creator, but , the Workman; as one that had made the World of a praeexistent Matter, coeternal to himself. There were four Errors (saith a late learned man) about the Creation: Some affirmed, Zanch. that the world was eternal; some, that it had a material begin∣ing, and was made of something; some held two beginners of things: That one beginner made things incorruptible, and another made things corruptible. Lastly, Some said, God made the superior creatures himself, and the inferior by Angels. This very first verse of the Bible confutes all four. In the beginning, shews the world not to be eternal. Created, notes that it was made of nothing. The heaven and the earth, shews, That God was the onely beginner of all creatures. God created all: This excludes the Angels. In the government of the World, we grant they have a great stroke, Ezek. 1.5, 6, &c. Dan. 10. & 11. Not so in the making of the World, wherein God was alone, and by him∣self, Isai. 44.24. And lest any should imagine otherwise; the creation of Angels is not so much as mentioned by Moses, unless it be tacitely intimated in these words, The heaven and the earth. . Aristot. de Mundo. c. 2. Matth. 24.36. Gal. 1.8. Yates his Model of Divinity. The world and all things that are therein, Acts 17.24. Things visi∣ble and invisible, (Colos. 1.16.) Whether they be thrones or domini∣ons, &c. called elsewhere, Angels of heaven; because (probably) created with, and in the highest Heaven; as Christs soul was created with, and in his body, in the Virgins womb, the self-same moment. The highest Heaven, and the Angels were of necessity (say some) to be created the first instant, that they might have their perfection of matter and form together; otherwise, they should be corruptible. For whatsoever is of a praeexistent matter, is resolvable, and subject to corruption. But that which is imme∣diately of nothing, is perfectly composed, hath no other change, but by the same hand to return to nothing again. But if this were the Heaven, Quest. what was the Earth here men∣tioned? Not that we now tread upon (for that was not made till the third day.) But the Matter of all, Answ. that was after∣wards
to be created; being all things in power, nothing in act. Vers. 2. And the earth was without form, and voyd.] That is, as yet it had neither essential nor accidental perfection. The Lord afterward did form it into Light, the Firmament, the Water, and the Earth: So beginning above, and building downwards (in the new Creature he doth otherwise;) and in three days laying the parts of the World; and in other three days adorning them. The Rabbins tell us, Alsted. Lexic. Theol. p. 111. that Tohu and Bohu, do properly import Materia prima and privatio: and others of Tohu, derive Chaos; whence the ancient Latines called the World Chohus, and borrowed their word Incho, &c. And darkness was upon the face of the deep.] That is, . not of Hell, as Origen expounds it, but of the deep waters (see the like, Luke 8.31.) Which, as a garment covered the earth, and stood above the mountains, Psal. 104.6. This darkness God created not, for it was but the want of Light. And to say, That God dwelt in darkness, till he had created Light, was a devil∣ish sarcasm of the Manichees; as if God were not Light it self, and the Father of lights: 1 John 1.5. James 1. Or, as if God had not ever been a Hea∣ven to himself, Ere ever he had formed the earth and the heavens, Psal 92.2. What he did, or how he imployed himself before the Creation, is a Sea, over which no ship hath sailed; a Mine, into which no spade hath delved; an Abyss, into which no bucket hath dived. D. Preston of Gods Attri∣butes, p. 34. Our sight is too tender to behold this Sun. A thousand yeers (saith a great Divine) are to God but as one day, &c. And who knoweth what the Lord hath done? Indeed, he made but one World to our knowledg; but who knoweth what he did be∣fore, and what he will do after: Thus he. As for Saint Augustine, Prasul ad haec Lybicus,Sabin. Po. fabricabat Tartara, dixit His, quos scrutari lia, mente juvat. Excellently another, Cuff his Differ. of Ages, p. 22. who wanted no wit: As in the eliament of fire (saith he) there is a faculty of heating and inlightning; whence proceedeth heat and light, unto the external neer bodies: And besides this faculty, there is also in it a natural power to go upward; which when it cometh into act, is received into no other subject, but the fire it self: So that if fire could, by abstractive imagination, be conceived of, as wanting those two transient operations, yet could we not justly say it had no action; foras∣much as it might move upward, which is an immanent and in∣ward
action: So, and much more so, though we grant that there was no external work of the Godhead, until the making of the World, yet can there be no necessary illation of idleness: Seeing it might have (as indeed it had) actions immanent, included in the circle of the Trinity: This is an answer to such as ask, what God did, before he made the World? Plotin. Eund. 3. lib. 2. c. 2. God (saith Plotinus the Platonist) not working at all, but resting in himself, doth, and performeth very great things. And the Spirit of God moved, &c.] Or, hovered over, and hatched out the creature, Ferebatur super aquas non per∣vagatione, sed potestate, non per spatium loco∣rum, ut Sol su∣per terram, sed per potentiam sublimitatis suae. Eucberius. Psal. 145 9. as the Hen doth her chickens; or, as the Eagle fluttereth over her young, to pro∣voke them to flight, Deut. 32.11. Or, as by a like operation, this same holy Spirit formed the childe Jesus in the Virgins womb, in that wonderful over shadowing, Luke 1.35. The Chaldee here hath it, The Spirit breathed: and David saith the same, Psal. 33.6. He became to that rude dead mass, a quickning, comforting Spirit. He kept it together, which else would have shattered. And so he doth still, or else all would soon fall asunder, Heb. 1.3. Psal. 104.29. were not his conserving Mercy, still over (or upon) all his Works. Verse 3. And God said, Let there, &c.] He commanded the light to shine out of darkness: He spake the word, and it was done. 2 Cor. 4.6. Psal. 33.9. & 148.5. Creation is no motion, but a simple and bare emanation; which is, when without any repugnancy of the Patient, or labor of the Agent, the work or effect, Dei Dicere eft Efficere. doth voluntarily and freely arise from the action of the working cause, as the shadow from the body. So Gods irresistible power made this admirable Work of the world, by his bare word, as the shadow and obscure representa∣tion of his unsearchable wisdom, and omnipotency. And there was light.] This first light was not the Angels, as Augustine would have it; nor the Element of fire, as Damascen; nor the Sun, which was not yet created; nor a lightsome cloud, or any such thing; but the first day, which God could make without means, as Galvin well observeth. This light was the first orna∣ment of the visible World, and so is still of the hidden man of the heart, the new Creature, Acts 26.18. The first thing, in Saint Pauls commission there, was to open mens eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, &c. To dart such a saving light into the soul; as might illighten both Organ and Object. In which great work al∣so, Christs words are operative together with his commands in the mouths of his Ministers. (Know the Lord, understand O ye
bruitish among the people, &c.) There goes forth a Power to heal, as it did, Luke 5.1. Or, as when he bade Lazarus arie, he made him to arise: So here, the Word and the Spirit go together; and then what wonder, that the spirit of darkness falls from the hea∣ven of mens hearts, Ephes 5 8.  1 Pet 2 9. as lightning, Luke 10.18. So as that, they that est were darkness, are now light in the Lord, and do preach forth the praises of him, who hath called them out of darkness, into his marvellous light? Verse 4. And God saw the light that it was good.] Praeviderat autèm; sberellus. so one rendereth it: he saw this long before, but he would have us to see it; he commends the goodness of this work of his to us. Good it is surely, and a goodly creature: Sweet, saith Solo∣mon, Eccles. 11.7. Comfortable, saith David, Psal 97.11. Which when one made question of; . Aristot. Beatumss ho∣minem Deo fru∣entem, sicut ocu∣lus luce. August. de Civitat. Dei. l. 8. 2 Cor. 6.14. 1 Thes. 5., 6, 7. . 2 Pet. 1.13. Lactant. That's a blinde mans question, said the Philosopher. What is it then to enjoy him, that is Light Essential? The Platonists (who were blinde in divinis, and could not see far off, yet they) could say, that he was a blessed man, who enjoyed God, as the eye doth enjoy the light. And God divided the light, &c.] Let not us confound them, and so alter Gods order by doing deeds of darkness, in a day of Grace, in a Land of Light. What make Owls at Athens? or such spots among Saints, as count it pleasure to riot in the day time? It was a shame that it should be said, There was never less wisdom in Greece, then in the time of the seven wisemen of Greece. It was a worse shame, that it should be said to the Corinthians, That some of them had not the knowledg of God; 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 5.1. 2 Cor. 6. and that such Fornication was found among them, as was not heard of among the Heathen. For what fellowship hath light with darkness? Surely none. Our morning shadows fall as far as they can toward the West, Evening toward the East, Plutarch. Noon day toward the North, &c. Alexander having a souldier of his name that was a coward, he bade him either leave off the name of Alexander, or be a souldier. Verse 5. And God called the light Day, &c.] He taught men to call them so, Day, from the noise and hurry; Night, from the yelling of wild beasts. Darknesse he created not, but onely by ac∣cident; and yet not that, without some notable use. Much lesse that darknesse of affliction which he is said to create, Esa. 45.7. Ʋn∣to the upright there ariseth light in darknesse, yea light by dark∣nesse, Psal. 112.4. as to Paul, whose bodily blindnesse opened the eyes of his minde. Opera Dei sunt in mediis cotrariis, saith Luther,
Gods workes are effected usually by contraries, . Nazinz. Laerius. And the evening and the morning &c.] Thales (one of the seven Sages) had learned this truth, by going to Schoole in Egypt. For being asked whe∣ther was first the Day or the Night? he answered, that the Night was sooner by one Day. As who should say, afore God had crea∣ted the light, it must needs be confessed that out of him, there was nothing but darknesse. Evening seperates by darknesse, morn∣ing by light: so the one dis-joynes day from night, the other night from day. Onely this first evening seperated not, because light was then uncreated. Yet was it of God appointed (even then) to stand betwixt light and darknesse. In the first Evening was Heaven and Earth created, and in the first Morning the light, 2 Cor. 11.25. both which make the civill day, called  by the Apostle. And this (which doubtlesse is the naturall order of reckoning the day, Pli. lib. 2. c. 7 from evening to evening) was in use among the Athenians, and is to this day retained by the Jewes, Italians, Bohemians, Si esians, and o∣ther Nations. Our life likewise is such a day, and begins with the darke evening of misery here; but death is to Saints the day-breake of eternall brightnesse. Morning lasteth but till morning: Nay, Psal. 30.5. not so long; for, Behold at even-tide trouble, and before the morning he is not, Esay 17.14. It is but a moment, yea a very little moment, and the indignation will pertransire be overpast, saith the Prophet; Esa. 16.10. . Heb 6.10.37. so little a while as you can scarce imagine, saith the Apostle. If it seem otherwise to any of us, consider; 1 That we have some lucida intervalla, some respites, interspiriates, breathing whiles. And it is a mercy that the man is not alwayes sweating out a poor living, Gen. 3. Rom. 6.23. the woman ever in pangs of child-birth, &c. 2 That this is nothing to eternity, of extreamity which is the just hire of the least sin. 3 That much good accrues unto us hereby, Heb. 12.10. Yea this light af∣fliction which is but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. worketh out unto us that far most excellent and eternall weight of glory. Oh pray, pray, that the eyes of our understanding being enlightned by that Spirit of wisdome, and rvellation, we may know what is the riches of the glory of his inheri∣tance in the Saints, &c. Eph. 1.17, 18. Verse 6. Let there be a firmament.] Yet not so firme, but it shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3.11. That it is not presently so; that those windowes of heaven are not opened, as once in the deluge, (having no better a bar then the liquid ayre) and we suddenly bu∣ried in one universall grave of waters, see a miracle of Gods mercy, and thanke him for this powerfull word of his, Let there be a fir∣mament.]
Bartholinus tells us, that in the yeare of Christ, 1551. a very great multitude of men and cattell were drowned by a terrible tempest, the clouds suddenly dissolving, and the wa∣ters pouring downe againe, Barthol lib. 2 de meteoris. with such a strange stupendious violence, that the massie walls of many Cities, divers Vine∣yards, and faire houses were utterly destroyed and ruined. Clouds, those bottles of raine, are vessells as thin as the liquor which is contained in them. D. H. Contep. There they hang and move, though weighty with their burdens. How they are upheld (saith a Re∣verend Divine) and why they fall here and now, we know not, and wonder, Job 26.8. They water our lands, as we doe our gardens, and are therefore called our heavens, Deut. 33.28. Verse 7. Waters which were above the firmament.] That is, the clouds, and watery meteors above the lower region of the ayre, where Gods pavillion round about him is darke waters, Psal. 18.11. Jer. 10.13. and thicke clouds of the skies. These he weighes by measure, not a drop falls in vaine, or in a wrong place, Job 28.15. And this is the first heaven: As the second is the starry skie, which is firme and fast, as a molten looking-glasse, Job 37.18. To this heaven, some that have calculated curiously, have found it 500 yeares journey. Others say, that if a stone should fall from from the eight sphere, and should passe every houre an hundreth miles, Burton of Me∣lancholly. . De Clo, tex 99. Deut. 10.14. Luke 22.42. Luke 16.22. Job. 14.2. Heb. 12.22. Heb. 11.14. it would be 65 yeares or more, before it would come to ground. Beyond this second heaven, Aristotle acknowledgeth none other. Beyond the move∣able heavens (saith he) there is neither body, nor time, nor place, nor Vacuum. But we have a more sure word of prophesie. Gods blessed booke assures us of a third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. called else∣where the heaven of heavens, the Paradise of God, the bosome of Abraham, the Fathers house, the City of the living God, the Coun∣try of his pilgrims. A body it is (for bodies are in it) but a subtile, fine, spirituall body: next in purity to the substance of Angels and mens soules. It is also, say some, solid as stone, but cleare as chry∣stall, Rev. 21.11. Job 37.18. A true firmament indeed; not pene∣trable by any (no not by Angells, Yates his Mo∣dell. spirits, and bodies of just men made perfect) but by a miracle, God making way by his power, where there is no naturall passage. It opens to the very Angels, Job. 1.51. Gen. 28.12. who yet are able to penetrate all under it. The other two heavens are to be passed through by the grossest bodies. Verse 8. And the evening, &c.] Here's no mention of Gods approbation of this second dayes worke. Not for that hell was
then ceated, or the reprobate Angels then ejected (as the Jewes give in the reason of it;) but because this dayes worke was left un∣perfected, till the next; to the which therefore the blessing was re∣served, and is then redoubled. God delights to doe his workes, not all at once, but by degrees, that we may take time to contemplate them peece-meal, and see him in every of them, as in an opticke glasse. Consider the lillies of the field, saith our Saviour. Matth. 6.18. Prov. 6.6. Goe to the Pismire, thou sluggard, saith Solomon. Luther wisht Pontanus, the Chancellour of Saxony, to contemplate the Starchamber of Hea∣ven (that stupendious arch-worke) born up by no props or pillars, Proponit con∣templandam pul∣cherrimam coeli concamerationem Nullis pilis & columnis imposi∣tam, &c. Scultet. Annal. 276. and yet not falling on our heads: the thicke clouds also hanging often over us with great weight, and yet vanishing againe, (when they have saluted us but) with their threatning lookes. And can∣not God as easily uphold his sinking Saints, and blow over any storme, that hangs over their heads? An Artificer takes it ill, if when he hath finished some curious piece of work, and sets it forth to be seen (as Apelles was wont to do) men slight it, and take no notice of his handy-work. And is there not a woe to such stupid persons, as regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the opera∣tion of his hands? A sino quispiam narrabat fabulam, Esay 5.12. at ille movebat aures, is a proverb among the Greeks. Christ was by at the Crea∣tion, and rejoyced, Prov. 8.30. Angels also were by at the doing of a great deale, and were rapt with admiration, Job 38.4, 5, 6. Shall they shout for joy, and we be silent? Oh how should we vex at the vile dulnesse of our hearts, are no more affected with these indelible ravishments! Verse 9, 10. Let the waters under the heaven be gathered, &c.] The water, they say, is ten times greater then the earth, as is the ayre ten times greater then the water, and the fire then the ayre. Sure it it is, that the proper place of the water is to be above the earth, Psal. 104.6. Saylers tell us, that as they draw nigh to shore, when they enter into the haven, they run as it were downe-hill. The waters stood above the mountains, till (at Gods rebuke here) they fled, and hasted away at the voyce of his thunder, Psal. 104.6, 7. to the place which he had founded for them. This drew from Aristotle, Lib. de mirabil. in one place, a testimony of Gods providence, which elsewhere he denyes. And David in that Psal. 104. (which one calleth his Physicks) tells us, that till this word of command, Let the wa∣ters, &c.] God had covered the earth with the deepe, as with a gar∣ment; For as the garment in the proper use of it is above the body,
so is the sea above the land. And such a garment, (saith the di∣vine Cosmographer) would it have been to the earth, but for Gods providence toward us, as the shirt made for the murthring of Agamemnon, Psal. 104.6, 9. where he had no issue out. But thou hast set a bound, saith the Psalmist, that they may not passe over, that they turn not againe to cover the earth. God hath set the solid earth upon and above the liquid waters, for our conveniny: so that men are said to goe downe (not up) to the sea in ships, Psal. 107.23. See his mercy herein, as in a mirrour, and believe, that God (whose work it is still to appoint us the bounds of our habitations) will not faile to provide us an hospitium, Act. 17.26. a place to reside in, when cast out of all, as he did David, Psal. 27.10. and Davids parents, 1 Sam 22.4 and the Apostles, 2 Cor 6.10. and the English exiles in Queen Maries dayes, Sculet Aal. and before them, Luther, (who being asked where he thought to be safe? answered Sub Coelo) and yet before him, those persecuted Waldenses; Rev. 12.15. after whom the Romish Dragon cast out so much water as a flood, but the earth swallowed it; and God so provided, that they could travell from Cullen in Germany to Millain in Italy, Cade of the Church, p. 180. and every night lodge with hosts of their own profession. The waters of affliction are often gathered together against the godly, but, by Gods gracious appointment, ever under the heaven (where our conversation is, Tareus in loc. Philip. 3.20. though our commoration be a while upon earth) and unto one place, as the Text here hath it. The dry-land will appeare, and we shall come safe to shore, be sure of it. Esay 26.4. The Rock of eternity (whereupon we are set) is above all bil∣lows; washt we may be, as Paul was in the shipwrack, drowned we cannot be, 1 Pet. 1.5. because in the same bottome with Christ, and kept by the power of God, through faith, to salvation. Verse 11.12. Psal. 104. Let the earth bring forth, &c. Grasse for the cattle, and herb for the use of man,] and both these, before either man or or beast were created. He made meat before mouthes. He fills for us two bottles of milke before we come into the world. Herbes and other creatures we have still ad esum & ad usum. Our land flowes not with milke onely for necessity, but with hone too, for delight. Nature amidst all is content with a little, Grace with lesse. Sing we merrily with him, Hoc mihi pro certo, Georg. Fabricius Chemnicensis. quod vitam qui dedit, idem Et velit & possit suppeditare cibum. , .
Verse 12. and the earth brought forth &c.] St. Austine thinks that thorns and thistles, brambles and briars were before the Fall, Aug de Gen.  cap. .8. though not in that abundance that now. Basil thinks otherwise, and that till sin came in, the rose was without prickles. Its likely, there were such shrubs at first created, non ut laederent hominem non pecantem, sed peccaturum, saith Pareus. Now since the Fall, all creatures are armed against man: as that sword which Hector gave Ajax; which, so long as he used against men (his enemies) served for help and defence: But after he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtless beas, it turned into his own bowels. yielding fruit after his kind.] So that men doe not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. Luk. 6.44. Jam. 3.12. Can a fig-tree, saith St. James, bear olive-berries; or a vine, figs? that were monstrous. And should not every man, in like man∣ner, bear his own fruit (proper to his kinde, to his calling?) doe his own work? weed his own garden, Psal. 101.2. walk within his own house with a perfect heart, till God come unto him? Come he will, and look for fruit in its season. When he comes, he will turn up our leaves, and look that, like the tree of life, Rev. 22.21. we bear fruit every moneth: or that we be like the lemmon-tree, which ever and anon sendeth forth new lemmons, assoon as the former are fallen down with ripeness. Or the Egyptian fig-tree; Ʋnde pomum decirpscris, alte∣rum sine mora protuberat Sol. in. Polyhist. cap. 45. Plin. lib. 10. which, saith Solinus, beareth fruit seven times in a year: pull off a fig, and another breaks forth in the place, shortly after. Now if we be found, like the barren fig-tree Luk. 13. that had leaves onl: or the Cypress-tree which is said to be fair and tall, but altoge∣ther fruitless: Or the Cypar it-tree, of which Pliny affirmeth, that it is natu morosa, fructu supervacanea, baccis parva, foliis amara, odore violenta, ac ne umbrâ quidem gratiosa; what can we expect, but that he should set down his basket, and, taking up his axe, hew us down, as fewel for the fire of hell? In Hispania ni∣hil Igavum, i∣hil sterile Solin. Spain is sayd to have nothing barren in it, or not some way useful; and why should Christs orchard, the Church? John 15.2. , he pares and prunes our leaves and luxuriancies: Yea cuts and slashes where need requires; and all, that we may bear more fruit. Sincerity alone will not comfort a man, unless it grow up to fruitfulness; which, springing from the exercise of grace, Isa. 38.3. 2 Pet. 1.3. hath a sweet reflection on the soul, as in sick Hezekiah; and sweetly seals up our calling to glory and vertue, as the budding of Aarons rod, did his calling to the presthood: whereupon One
well observeth, that not only all the plants of Gods setting, but the very boughs cut off from the body of them will flourish. Quest. Here some demand, were the trees so created at first, that if sin had never entered, they had ever flourished, laden with fruit? Answer is made by a worthy Divine, Answ. Brightm. on Rev. that the allusion▪ Rev. 22.2. seems to intimate some such matter. And perhaps Christ would else never have cursed the fruitless fig-tree, sith the time of figs was not yet come, Mark. 11.13. Verse 14.15. Let there be light] The Sun, Moon, and Stars, are, as it were, certain vessels, whereinto the Lord did gather the light, of  Chald. Ministra∣vit. Psa. 19.5. which before was scattered in the Heavens. The Sun, that prince of planets, but servant to the Saints of the most High (as his name imports,) cometh out of his chamber, as a bride-groom; and rejoyceth, as a strong man, to run a race. This he doth with such a wonderful swiftness, as exceedeth the Eagles flight, more then it goeth beyond the slow motion of a snail: and with such incomparable sweetness, Eccles. 11.7. that Eudoxus the Philoso∣pher professed, Plutarch. that he would be willing to be burnt up by the Sun presently, Herodot. Chrysost. Hom. 8 ad pop. Anti∣och. so he might be admitted to come so neer it, as to learn the nature of it. Aeternùm atri et tetri sunto & habentor, qui non tam cute, quàm corde Aethiopici, Solem, quò magis luceat, eò ma∣gis execrentur. Chrysostome cannot but wonder; that whereas all fire tends upwards, the Sun should shoot down his rayes to the earth, and send his light abroad all beneath him. This is the Lords own work, and it ought to be marvellous in our eyes. Deut. 4.19. It illuminates and beautifies all the orbes and heavenly bodies about it, yea it strikes through the firmament, in the trans∣parent parts, and seeks to bestow its beauty and brightness, even beyond the Heavens. Bolt. walk. with God. It illightens even the Opposite part of Heaven, (gliding by the sides of the earth,) with all those glorious stars we see shining in the night. Yea, it insinuates into every chink and cranny of the earth, and concurres to the make∣ing of those precious metals which lye in her bowels, besides those precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the precious things thrust forth by the Moon; Deut. 33.14. For as the Sun by warmth, so the Moon by moisture, maketh the earth fruitful: whence also she hath her name in the Hebrew, Jareach, from re∣freshing the earth with her cool influences. She is here called a light, and a great light: therefore She hath some light of her own, (as the stars also have) besides what she borroweth of the
Sun, though not strong enough to rule the night without light from the Sun. Galileus used perspectives to descry mountaines in the Moone; and some will needs place hell in the hollow of it. It is easie to discerne that her body is not all alike lightsome (some parts being thicker, and some thinner then others) and that the light of the Sun falling on her, is not alike diffused through her. It is sufficient that the Church looketh forth (at first) as the morn∣ing or day-dawning, she shall be faire as the Moon at least (in regard of sanctification) and (for justification) cleare as the Sun, Cant. 6.10. and therefore to the devill and his angels terrible as an Army with banners. Clouded she may be or eclipsed, but not utterly dark∣ned, or denyed of light. Astronomers tell us, that she hath at all times as much light as in the full; but often-times a great part of the bright side is turned to heaven, and a lesser part to the earth. God seems therefore to have set it lowest in the heavens, and nearest the earth, D. Hackwels Apolog. Preface that it might daily put us in minde of the con∣stancy of the one, and inconstancy of the other; her selfe in some sort partaking of both, though in a different manner; of the one in her substance, of the other in her visage. Verse 16.17. He made also the stars,] To be receptacles of that first light, (whence they are called, Stars of light, Psal. 148.3.) and to worke upon inferiour bodies, which they doe by their mo∣tion, light and influence, efficiendo imbres, ventos, grandines, pro∣cellas sudum, &c. by causing foule or faire weather, as God ap∣points it. Stars are the store-houses of Gods good treasure, which he openeth to our profit, Deut. 38.12. By their influence they make a scatter of riches upon the earth, which good men gather, and muck-wormes scramble for. Every star is like a purse of gold, out of which God throwes downe riches and plentiounesse into the earth. The heavens also are garnished by them, Job 26.13. they are, as it were, the spangled curtaine of the Bride-groomes chamber, the glorious and glittering rough-cast of his heavenly palace, the utmost court of it at least: from the which they twinckle to us, and teach us to remember our and their Creator, who in them makes himselfe visible, nay palpable, Psal. 19 1. Haba. 3.3.  Act. 17.27. his wisdome, power, justice, and goodnesse, are lined out unto us in the browes of the firmament; the countenance whereof we are bound to marke, and to discerne the face of the heavens, which therefore are somewhere compared to a scroll that is written. The heavens, those Catholicke Preachers, declare the glory of God, &c.
Their line, saith David, their voice (saith Paul, citing the same text) is gone out throughout all the earth; Rom. 10.8.  2 Pet. 2.16 they are reall postills of his Divinity. These (nay far meaner creatures) teach us, as Ba∣laams Asse did that mad Prophet: to this Schoole are we now put backe, as idle truants, to their ABC. Onely let us not, as children, looke most on the babies on the backside of our bookes; gaze not, as they doe, on the guilded leaves and covers, never look∣ing to our lessons; but as travellers in a forreigne Country, observe and make use of every thing; not content with the naturall use of the creature, as bruite beasts; but marke how every creature reads us a Divinity Lecture, from the highest Angell, to the lowest worme. Verse 21. And God created great Whales,] In creating where∣of, Plin. l. 9. c. 3. Ad quas nautae appellentes non▪ nunquam mag∣num incurrunt discrimen Heid. Plin. 32. c. 1. Cur piscos vo∣cat reptile? Re∣pere communiter dicuntur omnia , vel quae habent pedes brevieres, ut nures, &c. creavit Deus vastitatus & stupores. For, as Pliny writeth of them, when they swim and shew themselves above water, annare insulas putes, they seem to be so many Islands, and have been so esteemed by sea-faring men, to their great danger and disadvan∣tage. Into the Rivers of Arabia, saith Pliny, there have come Whales 600 foot long, and 360 foot broad. This is that Leviathan that playes in the sea, besides other creeping, or mooving, things in∣numerble, Psal. 104.25. This one word of Gods mouth, Fiat, hath made such infinite numbers of fishes, that their names may fill a Dictionary. Philosophers tell us, that whatsoever creature is upon the earth, there is the like thereof in the sea, yea many that are no where else to be found; but with this difference, that those things that on the earth are hurtfull, the like thereunto in the waters are hurtlesse; as Eeles, those water-snakes, are without poyson, &c. yea they are wholesome and delicious food. Pisis comes of Pasco: And in Hebrew the same word signifieth a pond or fish-pool, and blessing. Many Islands are maintained, and people fed by fish; besides the wealth of the Sea. The ill-favoured Oyster hath sometimes a bright pearle in it. In allusion whereunto, we have our treasure (that pearle of price, the Gospell) saith S. Paul, , 2 Cor. 4.7. in Oyster-shells. And albeit now every creature of God is good, 1 Tim. 4.3. and to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, yet under the Law, those fish onely were reputed cleane, Lev. 11.9. Deut. 14.9. Bern. Serm. 1. in die Sancti Andrae. that had fins and scales. So, saith St. Bernard, are those onely cleane in the sight of God, qui squammas & loricam habent patientiae, & pinnulas hilaritatis, that have the scales of patience, and sins of cheerfulnesse. And every winged foule.] Birds were
made of all foure clements, yet have more of the earth, Gen. 2.19. And therefore that they are so light, and doe so de∣light in the ayre, it is so much the more marvellous. They sing not at all till they have taken up a stand to their minde, nor shall we praise God till content with our estate. They use not to sing when they are on the ground, but when got into the ayre, or on the tops of trees. Nor can we praise God aright, unlesse weanedly affected to the world. It was a good speech of Heathen Epictetus, Si luscinia essem, facerem quod luscinia. Cum autem, Epist. Enchirid. homo ratio∣nalis sim, quid faciam? Laudabo Deum, nec cessabo unquam, vos vero▪ ut idem faciatis, hortor. But concerning the crea∣tion of birds, Macrob. l. 7 c. 16 there is in Macrobius a large dispute and disquisi∣tion, whether were first, the egge or the bird? And here Reason cannot resolve it, sith neither can the egge be produced without the bird, nor yet the bird without the egge. But now both Scripture and Nature determine it, that all things were at first produced in their essentiall perfection. Verse 22. Be fruitfull and multiply.] By bidding them do so, he made them do so, for his words are operative. Trismegist saith the selfe same things in effect that Moses here doth. God, saith he, Morneu de ve∣rit. relig. cap. 9. cryeth out to his works by his holy word, saying, Bring yee forth fruit, grow and increase, &c. Note the harmony here (and in twen∣ty more passages) between Mercury and Moses. God hath not left his truth without witness from the mouthes of heathen wri∣ters. We may profitably read them, but not for ostentation. That were to make a calfe of the treasure gotten out of Egypt. Verse 24.25. Let the earth, &c.] Loe here the earth, Act. 16.8. in it selfe a dead element, brings forth, at Gods command, living creatures, tame, wild and creeping: Why then should it be thought a thing in∣credible, that the same earth, at Gods command, should bring forth againe our dead bodies restored to life, at the last day? Surely if that speech of Christ, Joh. 11.43. Lazarus come forth, had been directed to all the dead, they had all presently risen. If he speake to the rocks, they rent; if to the mountaines, they melt; if to the earth, it opens; if to the sea, it yeelds up her dead; if to the whole host of heaven, they tremble, and stand amazed, waiting his pleasure. And shall he not prevaile by his mighty power, the same that he put forth in the raising of his Son Christ, Eph. 1.19. to raise us from the death of sin; and of carnall, Esa. 51.16. to make us a people created againe, Psal. 102.18? Doth he not plant the heavens, and
lay the foundation of the earth, that he may say to Zion thou art my people? Empty man would be wise (saith Zophar, Job 11.12.) though man be born like a wild asse colt. Mans heart is a meer emptiness, a very Tohu vabohu, as void of matter to mae him a new creature of, as the hollow of a tree is of heart of oake. God therefore creates in his people cleane hearts; Psal. 50.10. and, as in the first crea∣tion, so in the new creature, the first day, as it were, God works light of knowledge; the second day, the firmament of faith; the third day seas and trees, that is, repentant tears, and worthy fruits; the fourth day, Lightf. Miscel. the Sun, joyning light and heat together, heat of zeale, with light of knowledge; the fifth day, fishes to play, and foules to flye; so, to live and rejoyce in a sea of troubles, and flye heaven-ward by prayer and contemplation. The sixt day, God makes beasts and man, yea, of a wild asse-colt, a man in Christ, with whom old things are past, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. . 1 Thess 4. And to whom (besides that they are all taught of God) the very beasts, Esa. 1.2. and birds, Jer. 8.7. doe read a Divinity Lecture. Aske now the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the foules of the ayre they shall tell thee, Anton. Eremita ap. Aug. lib. 1. de doctr. Christ. Niceph. l. 8. c. 40 Clem. Alex. Job 12.8. The whole world is nothing else, saith One, but God expressed, so that we cannot plead ignorance; for all are, or may be book learned in the creature. This is the Shepherds Callender, the Plowmans Alphabet; we may run and read in this great book, which hath three leaves, Heaven, Earth, Sea. A bruitish man knows not, nei∣ther doth a foole understand this. Psal. 9 29. They stand gazing and gaping on the outside of things onely, but asknot, Who is their Father, their Creator? Like little children, which when they finde a Picture in their booke, they gaze, and make sport with it, but never consider it. Either their mindes are like a clocke that is over wound above the ordinary pitch, and so stands still; their thoughts are amazed for a time; they are like a blocke, thinking nothing at all; Esa. 40.28. or else they think Atheistically, that all comes by nature; (but hast thou not known, saith the Prophet? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator? &c.) or at best, as the common passenger looks onely at the hand of the Diall to see what of the clock it is, but takes no notice of the clock-work within the wheels, and poises, and various turnings and windings in the work: so it is here with the man that is no more then a meer naturall. 1 Cor. 2.15. But he that is spirituall discerneth all things; he entreth into the
clock-house, as it were, and views every motion, beginning at the great wheel, and ending in the least and last that is moved. He studies the glory of God revealed in this great book of Nature, and pray∣seth his power, wisdome▪ goodness. &c. And for that in these things He cannot order his speech, because of darkness▪ Job 37.38, 39. he begs of God a larger heart and better language, and cryes out continual∣ly with David, Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who onely doth wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for ever and eer, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen. Plal. 72.18, 19. Verse 26. And God said, Let us make man.] Man is the master∣peece of Gods handy-work. Sun, Moon, and Stars, are but the work of his fingers, Psal. 8.3. but man the work of his hands, Psal. 1 9.14. He is cura divini ingenii, made by counsell at first, Let us make, &c. and his body, which is but the souls sheath, Dan. 7.15. Animae vagina. is still curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, that is, in the womb, Psal. 139.15. with Eph. 4.9. as curious workmen, when they have some choice peece in hand, they perfect it in private, and then bring it forth to light for men to gaze at. Thine bands have mude me (or took speciall pains about me) and fashioned me, saith Job. Thou hast formed me by the book, saith David, Psal, 139.16. Job 10.8. yea emroidered me with nerves, veyns, and variety of limbs, mi∣racles enough, saith One, betwixt head and foot to fill a Vo∣lume. Man, saith a Heathen, is the bold attempt of daring nature the faire workmanship of a wise Artificer, saith another; . Tris∣megist.  Eurip. . Xnoph. Miraculorum omnium maxi∣mum Stoici. Gal. lib. 3. de usu partium. Lib. 11. & 1. The greatest of all miracles, saith a third. And surely should a man be born into the world but once in a hundred years, all the world would run to see the wonder. Sed miracula assiduitate vilescunt. Galen (that prophane man) was forced upon the description of man, and the parts of his body only, to sing a hymn to the Crea∣tor, whom yet he knew not. I make here, saith he, a true hymn in the honour of our Maker; whose service▪ I beleeve verily, consisteth not in the sacrificing of Hecatombs, or in burning great heaps of Frankinsence before him, but in acknowledging the greatness of his wisdome, power and goodness; and in making the same known to others &c. And in another place, Now is he, saith Gallen, which looking but only upon the skin of a thing, wondreth not of the cunning at the Creator? Yet notwithstanding, he dissembleth not that he had tryed by all means to find some reason of the com∣posing of living creatures; and that he would rather have fathered the doing thereof upon Nature, then upon the very Authour of
Nature. Lib. 15. And in the end concludeth thus; I confesse that I know not what the soule is, though I have sought very narrowly for it. Favorinus the Philosopher, Nibil in terra magnum prater bominm, nibil in homine praeter mentem, Fav. ap. Gel. was wont to say, The greatest thing in this world is Man, and the greatest thing in man is his soule. It is an abridgement of the invisible world, as the Body is of the vi∣sible. Hence man is called by the Hebrewes Gnolam haktaton, and by the Greeks Microcosmus, A little world. And it was a witty essay of him, who stiled woman, the second Edition of the Epitome of the whole world. The soule is set in the body of them both, as a little god in this little world, as Jehovah is a great God in the great world. Whence Proclus the Philosopher could say, that the minde that is in us, is an image of the first minde, that is, of God. [In our image, after our likenesse.] That is, as like us as may be, to come as neare us as is possible; for these two expressions signifie but one and the same thing, and therefore vers. 27. and chap. 5.1. and 9.6. one of them onely is used: Howbeit Basil referreth image to the reasonable soule in man, similitude to a conformity to God in holy actions. Some of the Fathers, had a conceit that Christ made mans body with his owne hands according to the forme and likenesse of that body which himselfe would afterwards assume and suffer in. We deny not, but that mans body also is Gods image, as it is a little world, and so the idea or example of the world, that was in God from all eternity, is, as it were, briefly and summarily exprest by God in mans body. But far be it from us to conceive of God as a bodily substance, to thinke him like un∣to us, as we are very apt to doe. God made man in his owne image, Molinaeus de gu. Dei. and men of the other side, quasi ad hostimentum, would make God after their image. It was seriously disputed by the Monks of Egypt, Anno Dom. 493. (and much adoe there was a∣bout it) whether God were not a bodily substance, Funcius Chron. in Commentar. having hands, eyes, eares, and other parts, as we have? For so the simpler sort among them were clearly of opinion. Acutè obtusi. And in the second Council of Nice under Irene, John one of the Legates of the Easterne Churches proved the making of Images lawfull, because God had said in this text, Let us make man after our owne Image. And it was there decreed that they should be reverenced and adored in as ample and pious manner as the glorious Trinity. D. Heylins Geog. p. 53 3. But God is a Spirit, Job. 4.4. saith our Saviour, who best knew, for he came out of his Fathers bosome. And mans soule is a spirit likewise, indivisible, im∣materiall immortall, distinguisht into three powes, which all make
up one spirit. Spirit signifies breath, which indeed is a body. Oms  Jebova era sunt spiritual, ut denttur De∣um esse spiritum, Alssed. But because it is the finest body, the most subtile and most invisible, therefore immateriall substances, which we are not able to conceive, are represented unto us under this name. Such is the soule of man, which (for the worth of it) the Stoicks called the whole of Man. The body is but the sheath of the soule saith Daniel; the shell of it, Solam mentem digam esse quae home appelletur Stoici statuunt, Sic Plato scripsit  Corpus five cor∣por quasi cordis por. i.e. puer five farmus. Came∣rar.  quasi . i.e. vinculum s, anima Macrob. Som. Scip. l. 1. c. 11. said Zoroaster; the servant, yea the sepulchre of it, say others. Compared to the soule, it is but as a clay-wall that encompasseth a treasure, as a wodden box of a Jeweller; as a course case to a rich instrument; or as a mask to a beautifull face. He that alone knew, and went to the worth of soules hath told us that a soule is more worth then all the world besides, because infused by God and stamped with his image and superscription. Now if we must give to Cesar the things that are Cesars, , (three ar∣ticles, for one in the former clause Matth. 22.21.) Cur non & nos animam nostram, Dei imaginem, soli Deo consignemus, saith Gaspar Ens? Why give we not our soules to God, sith they are made in his image? Verse 27. So God created man in his owne image.] There is a double image of God in the soule. One in the substance of it, whereof I have spoken in the former verse. The other in the qua∣lities and supernaturall graces, of knowledge in the Understanding, rightness or straightness in the Will, and holiness in the affe∣ctions: In all these, Man, when he came first out of Gods mint, shone most gloriously. But now O! quvntum haec Niobe, &c. Ezra 3.12. Oh think of this burnt Temple, and mourn, as they in Ezra, Eber, candidissimum, adhibito igne, nigrescit. Verse 28. Subdue the earth, and have dominion.] Make it ha∣bitable by driving out the wild beasts, that infest and annoy it. Make it arable also, and usefull to your selves and yours. Psal. 8. Qui dominari in catera pssit. Natus homo est. The crea∣tures are mans servants and houshold-sluffe. God hath put all things under his feet, that he may raise himselfe thereby to God his Maker. A wise Philosopher could say, That man is the end of all things in a semicircle; that is, All things in the world are made for him, and he is made for God; to know and acknowledge him, to serve and expresse him, to say to him as David, and that Sonne of David. Lord, a body (a soul) hast thou given me; Heb. 10.5. behold I come to doe thy will O God. The very Manichees, that denyed God to bee the Author of the body, fasted on Sundayes, and in fasting exer∣cised an humiliation of the body. The Paternians are not worth
speaking of, Asted. Chron. p. 387. who held this heresie (in the yeare of Christ, 387) that the lower parts of mans body were not made by God, but by the devill; and therefore allowing liberty of all wickedness to those parts, they lived most impurely. But if superstitious persons must reckon for it, Coloss. 2. ult. that punish their bodies without commandement from God, where shall those beasts appar that defile their bodies, and damn their soule? How shall all the creatures instead of serving them, take up arms for God, and serve against them? yea rise up in judgement and condemne them, for that when all other things keep their fit and proper places in the frame, and observe their pe∣culiar ends and uses whereunto they were created, men onely (as so many Heteroclites and Irregulars) should prove unprofitable, un∣usefull, nay hurtfull to the whole frame, causing vanity and misery to the poor creature which groans under it, and so defiling the very visible heavens that they must be purged by the last fire, as those vessells were in the Law that held the sin-offering? Rom 8. As for those that are in Christ, these are restored to the priviledges of their first creation, as fellowship with God, dominion over the creatures▪ &c. as appears by comparing Psal. 8.45. with Heb. 2.6, 7. &c. where whatever is spoken of man is applied to Christ, and so is proper to the Church, which is Christ mysticall, union being the ground of communion. Christ is married to his people in faithfulness; and as part of a joynture, he hath taken and bound over the best of the creatures to serve them, & bring them in provision, Hos. 2.20, 21, 22. Verse 29. Behold, I have given you] By this, Behold, God stirs up them and us to confidence, thankfulness and obedience to so li∣berall a Lord, so bountifull a Benefactor. And surely as iron put into the fire, seems to be nothing but fire, so Adam, thus beloved of God, Psal. 16.12. was turned into a lump of love, and bethinks himselfe what to do by way of retribution. All other creatures also wil∣lingly submitted to Gods ordinance and mans service, well apaid of Gods provision, that great house-keeper of the world, that hath continually so many millions at bed and board. This is intimated in that last clause, And it was so. An undoubted argument surely of Gods infinite goodness, thus to have provided for so divers natures and appetites divers food, remedies, and armour, Psal. 104. for men especially, filling their hearts with food and gladnesse, Act. 14.17. Verse 31. Behold, it was very good] Or, extream good, pleasant and profitable, a curious and glorious frame, full of admirable va∣riety
and skill, such as caused delight and complacency in God, and commands contemplation and admiration from us; like as a great garden stored with fruits and flowers, calls our eyes on every side: Wherefore else hath God given us a reasonable soule, and a Sab∣bath day, a countenance bent upward, and, as they say, peculiar nerves in the eyes to pull them up toward the seat of their rest? be∣sides a nature carried with delight after playes, pageants, masks, Bodin. Theas. Natur. strange shews and rare sights; which oft are sinfull or vain, or at best, imperfect, and unsatisfactory? Surely those that regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, God shall destroy, and not build them up, Psal. 28.4. which to prevent, good is the counsel of the Prophet Amos, & that upon this very ground, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel: For loe, he that formeth the mountains and createth the wind, &c. Amos 4.12, 13. when he had made man, he made an end of making any thing more, because he meant to rest in man, to delight in him, to communicate himselfe unto him, and to be enjoyed by him throughout all eternity. And notwithstanding the fall, he hath found a ransome, Job 33.24. and creating us in Christ Jesus unto good works, Eph. 2.10. he rejoyceth over his new workmanship with joy, yea he rests in his love, Roderit. sanctii Hist Hisp. p. 4. c. 5. xantiq. An∣nalib. and will seek no further, Zeph. 3.17. But what a mouth of madness did Alfonso the Wise open, when he said openly, that if he had been of Gods counsell at the Creation, some things should have been better made and marshalled. Prodigious blasphemy! CHAP. II. Verse 1. All the host of them.] HIs upper and nether forces, his horse and foot, as it were, all creatures in heaven, earth or under earth, called Gods Host, for their, 1. number, 2. order, 3. obedience. Kimchi. These the Rabbines call magnleh cheloth and matteh cheloth, the upper and lower troopes ready prest. Verse 2. He rested] That is, He ceased to create, which work he had done, without either labour or lassitude, Esa. 4.28. He made all nutu non motu. Verse 3. God blessed the seventh day] i. e. made it an ef∣fectuall meanes of blessing to him that sanctifieth it, as a rest
from bodily labour and spirituall idleness, . Ignat. Epist. 3. ad Magnesis. Spec Europ. as Ignatius exhorteth. And sanctified it] i e. Consecrated and set it apart for holy use, as they sanctified (that is, appointed) Kedesh for a City of refuge, Josh. 20.7. Verse 4. Jehovah God] Moses first calls God Jehovah here, when the universall creation had its absolute being. This is the proper name of God. The Jewes pronounce it not, we profane it, which is to them a great stumbling block. The first among the Christians that pronounced Jehovah, was Petrus Galatinus. But if ye would pronounce it according to the own letters, it should be Jahuo, of Jarmuth, Jagnakb. Verse 5. The Lord God had not caused it to rain] And none but he can give raine, Jer. 14.22. the meanes of fruitfulnesse, which yet he is not tyed to, as here. The Egyptians used in mockery to tell the Grecians, that if God should forget to raine, they might chance to starve for it. Verse 6. But there went up a mist] The mater of raine: And hereby God tempered the morter whereof he would make man, as he did the clay with spittle, wherewith he cured the blinde, Ioh. 9. Verse 7. Zuinglius. Formed man of the dust] not of the rocks of the earth, but dust, that is soon disperst; to note our frailty, vility, and impurity. Lutum enim conspurcat omnia, sic & caro. But why should so glorious a soul (called here Neshamah, of affinity to Shamajim, Heaven, whence it came) dwell in this corruptible and contemptible body? Lomb lib. 2. dist. 1. For answer; besides Gods will, and for order of the universe. Lombard saith, that by the conjunction of the soul with the body (so far its inferiour) man might learn and beleeve a possibility of the union of man with God in glory, notwithstand∣ing the vast distance of nature, and excellence; the infinitness of both in God, the finiteness of both in man. And breathed into his nostrils] Quidam volunt metaphoram sumptam à vitrorum formatione. The greatest man is but a little ayre and dust tempe∣red together. Nazian. What is man, saith One, but , soul and soyle, Breath and Body, a pile of dust the one, a puffe of wind the other, no solidity in either? And man became a living soul] Dicaearchus doubted of the soul, usc. quaest. whether there were such a thing in rerum natura. He could not have doubted of it, with∣out it, as man cannot prove logicke to be unnecessary, but by logick.
Verse 8. And the Lord God planted] Had planted (to wit, on the third day, when he made trees) for mans pleasure, a garden or paradise in Eden (whence ) in the upper part of Chaldea, whereabout Babel was founded. It was destroyed by the Deluge; the place indeed remained, but not the pleasantness of the place, cecidi rosa, mansit spina. Herod l. 1. Plin. l. 6. c, 16 Donec à sp ad speciem transtret And yet that Country is still very fruit∣full, returning (if Herodotus and Pliny may be believed) the seed beyond credulity. He put the man whom he had formed] And for∣med him not far from the garden, say the Hebrewes; to minde him, that he was not here to set up his rest, but to wait till his change should come. Verse 9. Every tree, &c.] The Hebrewes think, that the world was created in September, because the fruits were then ripe and ready, . The tree of life also] A symbolicall tree; by the eating of the fruit whereof Adam should have had Gaius his pro∣sperity, his body should have been in health, 3 Jo. 2. as his soule. prospered. The tree of knowledge of good and evill] So called not because it selfe either knew, or could cause man to know; but from the event, God Forewarning our first parents, that they should know by wofull experience, unlesse they abstained, what was the worth of good, by the want of it; and what the presence of evill, by the sence of it. In like sort the waters of Meribah, and Kibroth Hattaavah, or the graves of lust, received their names from that which fell out in those places. Verse 10. And a river went out] Pliny writeth, Plin. l. 2. c. 106. that in the Province of Babylon, there is burning and smothering a certaine lake or bog, about the bignesse of an acre. And who knowes, whether that be not a peece of Paradise, now drowned and de∣stroyed? V. 11. Where there is gold] Which (though never so much admired & studiously acquired) is but the guts & garbage of the earth. Gold is that which the basest element yeelds, the most savage Indians get, servile Apprentices work, Midianitish Camels carry, miserable muck-worms adore, unthrifty Ruffians spend. It is to be wondred, thatt reading upon the Minerals, we canot contemn them. They lye furthest from heaven, and the best of them in Havilah, furthest of all from the Church. Adam had them in the first paradise: In the second, we shall not need them. Money is the Monarch of this world, and answers all things: but in the matters of God, money bears no mastery, will fetch in no commodity, Iob 28.15. Wise∣men
esteemed it as the stones of the street, 2 Chron. 1.15. children of wisdome might not possesse it in their girdles, Matth. 10.9. Medes cared not for it, Esa. 13.17. and divels were set to keep rich and pleasant Palaces, verse 22. So subject these mettals are to ensnare and defile us, that God made a law to have them purified, ere he would have them used, Num. 31.22, 23. and appointed the snuffers and snuffe-dishes of the Sanctuary to be made of pure gold, Exod. 25.28. to teach us to make no account of that, that he put to so base offices, and is frequently given to so bad men. The Spaniard found in the mines of America more gold then earth. D. Heyl. Geogr. p 774. Hasten we to that Country where God shall be our gold, and we shall have plenty of silver, Iob 22.25. Verse 15. To dresse it, and to keepe it] This he did as without ne∣cessity, so without paines, without wearinesse. It was rather his recreation then his occupation. He laboured now by an Ordi∣nance, it was after his fall laid upon him as a punishment, Gen. 3.19. to eat his bread in the sweat of his nose. God never made any, as he made Leviathan, to sport himselfe only; or to do as it is said of the people of Tombutum in Affrick, that they spend their whole time in piping and dancing; ph. 4.28. but to work either with his hands or his head (in the sweat of his brow, or of his braine) the thing that is good; and with how much the more cheerfulnesse any one goeth about his businesse, by so much the nearer he commeth to his Pa∣radise. Verse 16. Commanded the man, saying] God hath given man dominion over all the sublunary creatures; and lest he should for∣get that he had a Lord whom to serve and obey, he gave him this command to keep. [Of every tree of the Garden thou maist freely eat] The lesse need he had, to have been so licorish after forbidden fruit.  hic adhibet; quod miserecordiae est. But stoln wa∣ters are sweet, Nitimur in vetitum, &c. Verse 17. But of the tree, &c.] An exploratory prohibition. God knew well where we are weakest, and worst able to with∣stand; viz. about moderating the pleasures of our touch and taste, because these befall us not as men, Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 3. but as living creatures. Here therefore he layes a law upon Adam, for the triall of his love; which, left to his owne free-will, he soon transgressed. Thou shalt surely dye] Certissimè citissimé{que} morieris, saith Zuinglius, thou shalt surely and shortly or suddenly dye. And without doubt e∣very man should dye the same day he is born: the wages of death
should be paid him presently. But Christ begs their lives for a season. For which cause he is said to be the Saviour of all men, not of eternall preservation, but of temporall reservation. 1 Tim. 4.10. In which respect also, God is said so to have loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, &c. It was a mercy to all mankind, Iob. 3.16. that the Messiah was promised and provided, sealed and sent into the world, that some might be saved, and the rest sustained in life, for their sakes. Symmachus renders it, Thou shalt be mortall. Verse 18. And the Lord God said] Had said, to wit, on the sixth day when he made Man, and there was not a meet help found for him. Then God said, It is not good, &c. and so created the woman by deliberate councell, as before he had done the man. Only there it was in the plural, Let us make, here, I will make; to shew the unity of the Essence in the Trinity of persons. . Athenis in nup∣tiis dici solitum. Zenod. Proverb. It is not good for man to be alone] It is neither for his profit, nor his comfort. Optimum sola∣tium sodalatium. I will make him a helpe meet for him] or, such another as himselfe, of the same form for perfection of nature, and for gifts inward and outward; one in whom he may see himself, and that may be to him as an Alter-ego, a second-self, Eph. 5.28. Such an one as may be a help to him both so this life, 1. By conti∣nuall society and cohabitation. 2. For procreation and education of children. And for the life to come, 1. As a remedy against sin, 1 Cor. 7.2. Secondly, As a companion in Gods service, 1 Pet. 3.7. Nazianzen saith, Naz. in pat. pi∣taph. that his mother was not only a meet help to his father in matters of piety, but also a doctresse and a governesse; and yet he was no baby, but an able Minister of the Gospel. Budaeus (that learned French-man) had a great help of his wife in points of learning; she would be as busie in his study, Non tractat negligentius li∣bros eos quàm liberos. Daniels Chron. fol. 262. as a∣bout her huswifery. Placilla the Empresse was a singular help to her husband Theodosius in things both temporall and spirituall: And so was our King Edward the thirds Queen, a Lady of excel∣lent vertue, the same that built Queens Colledge in Oxford. She drew evenly (saith the Historian) with the King her husband in all the courses of honour, that appertained to her side, and seems a piece so just cut for him, as answered him rightly in every joynt. Verse 19. To see what he would call them] If he had been per∣mitted to name himself, it should have been probably, Luke 3. ult. the Sonne of God, as he is called by St. Luke in regard of his creation. But God, to humble him, calls him first Adam, (and after the fall)
Enosh, that is, frail, sorry man, a map of mortality, a masse of misery. Verse 20. Adam gave names] A sign of his Soveraignty, Num. 32.38, 41. an argument also of his wisdome, in giving them names according to their natures, as Hebricians well know. But for Adam there was not found, &c.] God set all the creatures be∣fore him, ere he gave him a wife: 1. That seeing the sexes, he might desire to have a help in his kinde, and nature also. Men should not marry, till they finde in themselves the need of a wife. Vt ei commenda∣tius esset Dei donum. Pet. Martyr. 2. That seeing no other fit help, he might the more prize her. Verse 21. And the Lord God caused a deep sleep] It may be thought that Adam, observing that among all the creatures there was no meet match found for him, prayed in this deep sleep, or ex∣tasie, Gen. 24.63. that such a help might be given unto him. This is Peter Martyrs note upon the text. Isaac went forth to pray, when he had sent forth for a wife; Prov. 19.14. A bad wise is but the image of a wife, or (as Lamchs wives name was) a shadow of a wife, tsilla, um∣bra ipsius. Mr. Gatak. and it was but reason, For a prudent wife is from the Lord. And he that findeth a wife, findeth a good thing, saith the Wise-man. A wife, that is, a good wife; for every married woman is not a wife, unlesse she be a help to her husband, in the best things especially. The Heathen well saith, that every man when he marrieth, brings either a good or an evill spirit into his house, and so makes it either a heaven, or a hell. And it is a de∣vice of the Rabbines (but the morall is good) that in the names of Ish and Ishah is included Jah, the name of God; and that, if you take out Jod and He, whereof that name consists, there remains no∣thing Esch, Esch, fire, fire; the fire of dissention and brawl, which burneth, and consumeth to the fire of hell. It is not evill therefore to marry, but it is good to be wary, to marry in the Lord, as the Apostle hath it. He that marrieth in the Lord, marrieth also with the Lord; and he cannot be absent from his own mar∣riage. A good wife was one of the first reall and royall gifts be∣stowed upon Adam; and God consults not with him, to make him happy. As he was ignorant while himself was made, so shall he not know, while a second-selfe is made out of him; both that the comfort might be greater then was expected, as also, that he might nor upbraid his wife with any great dependence or obligation; See Yates his Modell. he neither willing the work, nor suffering any pain, to have it done. The rib can challenge no more of her, then the earth can of him. And he tooke one of his ribs] The woman was made of a bone
(saith a Reverend Writer) and but one bone, Ne esset ossea, B. Kings Vitis Palatina. lest she should be stiffe and stubborne. The species of the bone is ex∣prest to be a rib (a bone that might be best spared because there are many of them) a bone of the side, not of the head; (the wife must not usurp authority over her husband) nor yet of the foot; she is not a slave, but a fellow-helper. A bone, not of any anterior part, she is not praelata, preferred before the man: neither yet of any hinder part, she is not post-posita, set behind the man; A yokefellow standing on even ground with thee, though draw∣ing on the lest side. Gatak. but a bone of the side, of the middle and indifferent part; to shew, that she is a companion, and the wife of thy covenant, Mal. 2.14. A bone she is from under the arm, to put man in mind of protection and defence to the woman. A bone not far from his heart, to put him in mind of dilection and love to the woman. A bone from the left side (as many think likely) where the heart is, to teach, that hearty love ought to be betwixt married couples: Ʋxorem vir amato, marito pareat uxor; Conjugis illa suae cor, caput ille sua. Vers. 22. And the rib which the Lord God had taken,] Matter, in the beginning of time, was taken from man, to make a woman: And matter, in the fulness of time, was taken from a woman to make a man, even the man Christ Jesus. 1 Tim. 2.5. And as out of the side of sleeping Adam, Eve was formed; so from the blood issuing out of the side and flesh of dying Christ, came his Spouse the Church. Ephes. 5.26. Diabolus per costam tanquam per scalam, ad cor Adami as∣cendit. Mor. l. 3. c 5. Sic Phoroneus apud Bruson. l. 7. c. 22. Requirit vir costam suam, re∣quirit soemina sedem suam. Hinc Ruth 3.1.9. Annon quaererem tibi requiem? Aben-zra. His chief care therein was to sanctifie and cleanse his Church, and therefore he came by water and blood. So should it be every husbands; then would not the devil so oft break his head with his own rib; or as Saint Gregory hath it, Climbe so oft by hs rib to his heart, as by a ladder. A good wife doth him good, and not evil, all her days. But this is not every mans happiness. Sylla faelix, si non habuisset uxorem. So Job and Moses, quorum conjugium, conjurgium. There is in most, a propension to the nup∣tial conjunction. The man misseth his rib (say the Rabbines;) the woman would be in her old place again, under the mans arm or wing. Then Naomi her mother in law, said unto her, My daugh∣ter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee? Ruth 3.1. [Made he a woman,] Heb. builded, That is, created with special care, art, and fit proportion, in the manner of a house. A body hath God given the woman more capacious and room∣thy, both for the conceiving and containing of her young babe, which dwells in her womb, as in its house; and hath all its
houshold-stuffe, as it were about it, till time produce it into the light of life. Adam was formed, Eve builded; her frame consists of rarer rooms, of a more exact composition then his doth. And if place be any priviledge, we finde, saith one, hers built in Paradise, when his was made out of it. [And brought her unto the man] Marriage then is of divine institution. The Saturnilian hereticks sinfully said, that it was of the devill. And the blemish will never be wiped off from some of the Ancients, who to establish their own doll of I know not what Virginity, have written most wickedly and basely against marriage. Three things we have here out of Moses to say for it against whatsoever opposite, viz. Gods 1. Dixit. 2. Duxit. 3. Benedixit, Gen. 1.28. God the Father or∣dained it. God the Son honoured it with his first miracle. God the Holy Ghost did the like, by overshadowing the betrothed Virgin, Papists and others that disgrace it, appear herein more like Devils then Divines, if S. Paul may be judge, 1 Tim. 4.2 or Ignatius, who saith, Habet inbabita∣torem Draconem Apostaa. Ignat. Epist. ad Philad. If any call marriage a defilement, he hath the Devil dwel∣ling in him, and speaking by him. Verse 23. This is now bone of my bone, &c.] This sentence (saith Tertullian, and after him, Beda) is the first Prophesie that was e∣ver uttered in the world. And it is uttered in a way of admiration, which they that are taken with, do commonly use a concise kinde of speech; especially, if overjoyed as Adam here was upon the first sight of the woman; whom he no sooner saw but knew, and there∣upon cryed out, as wondring at Gods goodness to himself, [This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh.] Luther, the night be∣fore he dyed, was reasonably well, and sate with his friends at table. The matter of their discourse was, whether they should know one another in heaven or no? Luther held it affirmatively, and this was one reason he gave. Melch. Adam. Adam as soon as he saw Eve, knew what she was, not by discourse, but by divine revelation; so shall we in the life to come. All the Saints shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, having communion with them, not only as godly men, but as Abraham, Isaac, & Jacob. And if with them, why not with others? S. Chrysostome saith we shal point them out, and say, Lo yon∣der is Peter, . and that's Paul, & there are the Prophets, Apostles, &c. [She shall be called Woman] Or Manness, of Man, as Ishah of Ish. He gave her her name, from his own, by taking away one nume∣rall letter that stands for ten, and adding another that stands for five; to note her infirmity, and duty of submitting to her
husband, whose very naming of her notes her subjection. Vers. 24. Therefore shall a man leave, &c.] Whether these are the words of God, Adam or Moses, it is uncertain, and not much material. The husband is bound more to love his wife then his parents, in regard of domestical communion, Paraus ad lo∣cum. adhsion and cohabitation, not in regard of honor, obedience and recompence. [And they two shall be one flesh.] Two in one flesh, not three or four, as the Patriarks of old through ignorance, or inobservance of that plain prohibition, Levit. 18.18. It is possible they might mistake the word (sister) for one so by blood, which was spoken of a sister by nation, as those clauses (to vex her) and (during her life) do evince. Vers. 25. They were both naked, and not ashamed,] Neither needed they. Sin and shame, as Papists say, hops and heresie, came in together. Cloaths are the ensignes of our sin, and covers of our shame: To be proud of them is as great folly, as for a beg∣ar to be proud of his rags, or a thief of his halter. As the pri∣soner looking on his irons, thinketh on his theft; so we, looking on our garments, should think on our sins. CHAP. III. Verse 1. Now the Serpent was more subtil, &c.] ANd so a more fit instrument of that old Serpent the Devil, Theodotion. Cui Paulus  Cor. 11.3.  oppoit, quam mundus vocat Sillmess, sheep∣ishness. Revel. 12.9. Authoramentu majoris infide∣litatis. Terul. Isai. 55.3. Plin. l. 8. c. 25. that deceiveth all the world. Good natural parts abused, prove rather as press-money to impiety (as he phraseth it,) and their wisdom Culpae suasoria, as Ambrose speaketh. Wit un∣sanctified, is a fit tool for the devil to work withal: Neither is there a likelier Anvil in all the shop of Hell, whereon to forge mischief, then one that is learned and leud, ingeniosê nequam, Wittily wicked. [And he said,] That is, the Devil in the Ser∣pent, as the Angel in Balaams Ass. Satan istius primae fabulae Poetafuit, serpens histrio. By the ear he brought death into the world: And God, to cross him, brings life in by the same door: For it is, Hear and your souls shall live. The Dragon bites the Elephants ear, and thence sucks his blood: Because he knows that to be the onely place, which he cannot reach with his trunk to defend. So here, that great red Dragon delt with miserable man∣kinde,
setting first upon the woman as the weaker vessel (where the hedg is lowest, there the beast leaps over) and so climbing by Adams rib to his heart, as by a ladder; as I said before, out of Saint Gregory. [Yea, hath God said,] In the Chaldee, Is it true that God hath said? Vide simile Ruth 2.21. in Hebraeo, & 1 Sam. 14.30. A concise expression, implying, That this was not the first of their discourse: Something had been said before. It is not safe parling with the Devil. Satan etsi semel videatur verax, millies est mendax, & semper fallax. Halter him up there∣fore, and stop his mouth soon, as our Saviour did. Or do, as the French say in their Proverb, When the Spaniard comes to parley of peace, then double bolt the door. The Hollanders are said to make no conditions with the Spaniard, but such as are made at Sea, and sealed with great Ordnance, Spec. bel. sacr. Greenbam. &c. He shoots with Satan in his own bowe, that thinks by parling with him to put him off. [Hath God said, Ye shall not eat.] Here, he began his assault upon our first-parents; here, upon Christ, Matth. 4.3. with 3.17. and here, he doth still upon us: Endeavoring to elevate the truth and certainty of Gods Word, and to weaken our Faith in his pre∣cepts, promises, and menaces. And here, if he take us out of our trenches, if he can but wring this sword of the Spirit out of our hands, he may do what he will with us. Get but the Heretickes (said that subtil Sophiter) out of the paper-walls of the Scri∣ptures, Bristow his Motives. into the open field of Fathers and Councils, and ye shall soon do well enough with them. Vers. 3. Neither shall ye touch it] This is of the womans own addition, and of a good intention doubtlesse. For afterwards, when she had drunk in more of the Serpents deadly poyson, Hausis virus peritura, & pe∣riturs paritura. Bern. from gazing upon the fruit, she fell to gaping after it, from touching to tasting. He that would not feed on sins meat, must beware of the broth; keep thee far from an evill matter, saith Moses, Exod. 23.7. A good man dare not come near the train, though he be far off the blow: He dare not venture on the occasion, lest his tinder should take fire. Circa serpent is antrum poitu non eris di illa∣sus. Isidor. It is ill playing upon the hole of the Aspe, or coming too near Hell-mouth: For by so doing, you may beseem to drop in. Watch therefore, and pray too, that ye enter not into temptation, saith our blessed Saviour; and mark his reason, The spirit is will∣ing, but the flesh is weak. q. d. Though the Spirit purpose other∣wise, the flesh will faulter, and be foyled: Witness the woman here with her left ye die. She held the precept in the utmost extent of it: But that which she failed in, was, That she minced the
matter, and opposed not the commination to the temptation; And see how the Devil works upon her weakness, as he watch∣eth for our haltings, and where to have us on the lip. Vers. 4. Ye shall not surely die,] He saith not, Dying ye shall not dye; or, Surely ye shall not die: This had been too plain a contradiction to that word of God, that had threatned assured death. But, Ye shall not die in dying; That is, It is not certain ye shall die. And this latter is more nice and ambiguous. She seems to doubt of the certainty of what God had said. He plainly, and yet clearly impugnes it: Whereas had Gods Word abidden in her, she had overcome that wicked one, 1 John 2.14. The word is compared to mustard seed, which being mixt with vinegar, is (they say) a soveraign medicine against Serpents. Vers. 5. For God doth know, &c.] Picherellus in Cosmopaea. Id quod cuns Deum non lateat, sibi cavet. It is remarkable, that the devil here chargeth God with envy, which is his own proper disease: For ever since, he himself fell from Heaven, he cannot abide that any should come there; but of pure spight hindereth them, all that may be. Here he envyed that God should be served by man, and that man should be gifted and graced by God. So that he paints out and points out himself, in saying, That God envyed man the gift of Wisdom. There is nothing more usual with the wicked, then to muse as they use, and to suppose that evil to be in others, that they inde to be in themselves. Die in Calig. Act. & Mon. fol. 1441. Caligula (that impure beast) would not beleeve there was any chast person upon earth. And, I dare say (said Bonner to Hawks the Martyr) that Cranmer would re∣cant, if he might have his living. So judging others by himself: For Papists apply themselves (said our Protomartyr Mr. Rogers) to the present state; yea, if the state should change ten times in the yeer, they would ever be ready at hand to change with it, and so follow the cry, and rather utterly forsake God, and be of no Religion, then that they would forgo lust, or Living for God or Religion. [Then your eyes shall be opened.] There is an open∣ing of the eyes of the minde to contemplation and joy: There is also an opening of the eyes of the body to confusion and shame. . 2 Cor. 1 King. 22.15. Cioesus Halyn ps ma∣nam dipds pum vim. Herod. He promiseth them the former, but intends the latter, and so cheats them, as he doth thousands now adays, by the cogging of a Dye, (as Saint Paul hath it) giving them an apple in exchange for paradise. Thus of old he couzened Aab and Croesus with promises of victory; which when it fell out otherwise, he had a
hole to creep out, and save his credit by an equivocation. Thus of latter time be gulled Pope Silvester the second, assuring him that he shoud never dye till he came to say Mass in Jerusalem; He, resolving never to come there, made no reckonin but to live a long time. But it fll out somewhat otherwise: For as he was saying Mass in a certain Church in Rome called Jerusalem, fearing no∣thing, uncius in Cronol Intelligit e a di∣abolo, amphibol vocis, circumven∣tum, auimadver∣tit sibi morien∣dum esse pen∣sum{que} Sataae reddendum, &c. the Devill claymed his due, and had it. For he was there, and then taken with a strong feaver, and lying on his death bed, he sent for all his Cardinais, and declaring before them what a wret∣ched bargain he had made with the devill (selling his soul for the Popedome, and deceivedby him with promise of long lfe) he bit∣terly bewayled his own folly, and advised them to beware by his example. And was not Leoline the second, Prince of North-Wales, as finely cheated? For consulting with a Witch he was told, that it was his destiny to ride through London with a crown on his head. Hereupon he growing burdensome to the English borders was in a battle overthrown. His head fixt upon a stake, and adorn∣ed with a paper-crown was by a horseman triumphantly carried through London: Heylins Geog. p. 493. and so the prophesie was fulfilled, Anno Dom. 1282. [And ye shall be as Gods] The Serpents Grammar first taught (saith Damianus) Deum pluralitèr declinare, eritis sicut Dii This the woman understood of the Trinity, as appears, vers. 22. but the Devill might mean it of the Angels, (so our Chaldee Pa∣raphrast translates it) which had sinned, and now had wofull ex∣perience of the good which they had lost, and the evill wherein they lay. Verse 6. And when the woman saw] At this Cinque-port the devill entred. How many thousand souls have dyed of the wound of the eye, Ovid. and cryed out, as Eve might here, ut vidi, ut perii! If we do not let in sin at the window of the eye, or the door of the ear, it cannot enter into our hearts. Vitiis nobis in animum per oculos est via, saith Quintilian. Wherefore if thine eye offend thee, pull it out. In Barbary, 'tis death for any man to see one of the Xoriffes concubines; and for them too, if when they see a man (though but through a casement) they doe not suddenly screek out. Quintil. declam. [She took of the fruit thereof] Whatever it were, whether an apple (as Ber∣nard, Heyl. Geog. p. 196. Prrexit Pomum & surripuit pa∣radisum. Bern. and others; gather out of Cant. 2.3.) or a fig, as Theodorot; or a pomegranate, as Mahomet in his Alchoran; or a peach) (malum persicum) or Pomum Paradisi, as the Syrians call a kinde of fruit common amongst them: God created us of nothing, and we of∣fended
him for a matter of nothing. All the legions of the repro∣bate devills, saith one, entred into one beast, and, Yates his Me∣dell. by the Pitho and Suada of that viperous tongue, crept into the bosome of ve, as it were by all the Topick places in Logick, figures in Rhetorick, and other engines of guile and deceit, till they had brought her into a fools paradise, with the loss of the earthly, and hazard of the hea∣venly. [And gave it also to her husband] It is probable (saith the same Author) that Adam stood by all the time of the disputation, therefore his sin was the greater, that he rebuked not the Ser∣pent, &c. And again, I cannot believe, saith he, but that the de∣vills in the Serpent did as well tempt Adam as Eve, though first they began with her, as a further means of enticing him. Others are of another minde, as that the tempter set upon the woman a∣lone and apart from her husband, as she was curiously prying into the pleasures of the garden. Paraeus. That the Serpent crept into Paradise unseen of Adam, who was to keep beasts out of it; Cartw. Catach. that he remain∣ed there without being espied of him, and crept out again when he had done his feat: That when she gave him the fruit, she gave him also a relation of the Serpents promise, concerning the force of that fruit, that it would make them wise as God, knowing good and evill, &c. whence he is said to have harkned to her voice, vers. 17. And surely, every Adam hath still his Eve, every David his Bathsheba, a tempter in his own bosome (his own flesh) where∣by he is eftsoons drawn away, and enticed as a fish by the bait, (beauty is a hook without a bait, Jam. 1.14.15. . as one saith) till when lust hath conceived (as here it did in Eve) it bringeth forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Sathan hath onely a perswa∣ding sleight, not an inforcing might. It is our own concupiscence that carrieth the greatest stroke. Vers. 7. They knew that they were naked] Bereft of Gods blessed Image; no more of it left, then, as of one of Jobs messengers, to bear witness of our great loss. I call it ours, because we were all in Adam, as Levi was in Abraham, or as the whole Country is in a Parliament man. He was our head; and if the head plot treason, Hos. 13.9. all the body is guilty. Hence the Prophet Hosea; O Israel, One hath destroyed thee, but in me is thy help. So some read it. Had we been by when this wretched One destroyed us all: had we seen him stand staggering betwixt Gods Commandment, and Eves allure∣ment, not yet resolved which way to incline, and could have fore∣seen the danger hanging over him and our selves, we would surely
have cryed out to him Cave miser, Augustine. Take heed thou wretch. And why do we not the same to our selves, when sollicited to sin? Alterius perditio tua sit cautio, saith Ifidore: and cavebis si pave∣bis, saith Another. There is a practical judgment still practised in our hearts. On the one side, is propounded the commodity of sin; on the other, the offence, whereby we provoke God. So that in the one end of the ballance, is laid God, in the other sin, and man stands in the midst, rejecting the command of God, and accepting the pleasure of sin. What is this, but to prefer Paris before Paradise with Cardinal Burbon, Barabbas, before Christ, a thing of nought before Heavens happiness? Our first parents were born with the royal Robe of Righteousness (as those Por∣phyrogniti in Constantinople,) Purchas Pil∣grim. but the devil soon stripped them of it (the same day, as some think) and so they became fore ashamed of their bodily nakedness, which therefore they fought to cover, by making themselves Aprons, to cover their Pri∣vities. But why did they (and do we still) so studiously hide those parts, Quest. rather then their eyes and ears, which they had abused to sin with? Because sin is become natural, Answ. Psal. 51.7. Gen. 5 3. and derived by generation. Therefore circumcision was also on that part of mans body; to shew, That that which was begotten thereby, deserved in like maner, as execrable and accursed to be cut off, and thrown away by God. Here some ground their opinion, That it is a sin against nature, to look on the nakedness of another. A foul shame it was for old Noah to lye so uncovered in the midst of his Tent: but far fouler for those worshipers of Priapus, (which Jerome and Isidore make to be that Baal-Peor, Num. 25.5.) that shamed not to say, Empedoclis vo∣cab. apud Arist. Nos, puabre pulso, stamus sub Jove, coleis apertis, &c. But in mans soul is now a  the seed of all sin, though never so hainous or hideous: Neither by nature is there ever a better of us; but as in Water face answereth to face, so doth the heart of a man to a man, Prov. 27.19. And as there were many Marii in one Caesar, so are there many Cains and Caiaphasses in the best of us all. Totus homo est inversus decalogus. The whole man is in evil, and whole evil is in man. As the Chaos had the seeds of all Creatures, and wanted onely the Spirits motion to produce them: So our corrupt nature hath all sins in it, and wants but the warmth of Satans temptation to bring them into
act, if God restrain not. Sure it is, we can stay no more from sinning, then the heart can from panting, and the pulse from beating. The first man defiled the nature, and ever since the na∣ture defiles the man. As poyson put into a cup of wine disperseth it self, and makes it deadly: so Original sin polluteth and pson∣eth our whole man. And as the whitest ivory turns with the fire, into the deepst black, the sweetest wine becomes the sowrest vineger: So here. The more unnatural any quality is, the more extream will it be, as a cold wind from the south is intolerable, &c. So Adam, being in honor, was without understanding, Psal. 49. ult. and is now in worse case then the very beasts that perish: Pecoribus morticiuis, saith Tremel: The beasts that die of the murrain, and so become carrion, and are good for nothing. Vers. 8. And they heard the voyce of the Lord.] Either speak∣ing something by himself of that which Adam had done against his command; as who should say, Hath he served me so indeed? or else, calling to Adam in a mighty thunder, as to Pharaoh, Exod. 9.28. or in a terrible whirlwind, as to Job, Chap. 38.1. the better to humble him, and prepare him for a Sermon of mercy and for∣giveness. God poureth not the oyl of his grace, save onely into broken vessels. Christ came to cure not the sound, but the sick with sin: Isai. 35.7. & 44.3. The Holy Ghost is poured out upon thirsty souls one∣ly, that are scorched and parched with the sense of sin, and fear of wrath. As the way to Sion was by Sinai, so, unless we desire rather to be carnally secured, then soundly comforted, we must pass by Baca to Berachah, by a sight of our sin and misery, to a sense of Gods grace and mercy. [Walking in the Garden in the cool of the day.] God did not meet the man angerly, Exod. 4. as he did Moses in the Inn, when he had much ado to forbear killing him; nor as the Angel did Balaam, with a drawn sword in his hand to destroy him: Neither did he rush upon him, as David ran upon Goliah, and cut off his head. But with a soft and slow pace, Gressu gralla∣torio. Isai. 28.21. . Ad vesperam dici. (as if he had no minde to it) he comes walking toward them, to do this his work, his strange work, of sentencing sinners; and that in the cool of the day too, or towards the evening, as Saint Ambrose hath it after the Septuagint. Whereas to shew mercy, behold, he comes leaping upon the Mountains, skipping upon the Hills. Lo, this is the voyce, and the pace of my beloved. Cant. 2.8. God was but six days in making the whole world, yet seven days in destroying one city Jericho, as Chrysostom long since observed. He scourgeth
not his people, Isai. 42.14. till there be no remedy, 2 Chron. 36.16. He for∣bears us, though he cry like a travelling woman, to be delivered of his judgments. [And Adam and his wife, hid themselves.] Their covering of figleaves then, was too short; for, here they run with their aprons, into the thicket, to hide from God. A poor shift, God wot, but such as is still too much in use. If I have covered my transgressions as Adam, Job 31.33. or after the maner of men, saith Job, then let this and this evil befal me. The bad heart runs from God, and would run from its own terrors, as the wound∣ed Deer from the deadly Arrow that sticks in his side; Facti sunt à cor∣de suo fugitivi. Tertul. but re∣fusing ordinary tryal, it is in danger to be prest to death inevita∣bly. We have no better refuge, then to run from God to God. Blood-letting is a cure of bleeding, a Burn of a burn: To close and get in, avoyds the blow, &c. Vers. 9. Where art thou,] Not, as if God knew not; for he searcheth Jerusalem with lights; Jam. 1.17. yea, himself is the father of lights, the great eye of the world, to whom the Sun it self, is but a snuff. Zach. 3.9. 2 Chron. 16 9. Heb. 4.13. exp. He hath seven eyes upon one stone; yea, his eyes run to and fro through the earth, and all things are naked and open: Naked (for the outside,) and open (for the inside) before the eyes of him, with whom we have to deal. Simple men hide God from themselves, and then think they have hid themselves from God; like the Struthiocamelus they thrust their heads into a hole, Plin. when hunted, and then think none seeth them. But he searcheth (so one may do, yet not finde) and knoweth, Psal. 139.1. He seeth (so one may do, yet not observe) and pondereth, Prov. 5.21. Though men hide their sins, as close as Rachel did her idols, or Rahab the spyes: Though they dig deep to hide their counsels, God can and will detect them, Prov. 15.11. with a wo to boot, Isai. 29.15. For hell and destruction are before him; how then can Saul think to be hid behinde the stuff, or Adam behinde the bush? At the voyce of the Lord he must appear, will he nill he, to give ac∣count of his fear, of his flight. This he doth, (but untowardly) in the words following. Vers. 10. I heard thy voyce,] So he had done before his fall, and feared not. Are not my words good to the upright? Micah 2.7. Excellently Saint Austin, Adversarius est nobis, quamdiú sumus & ipsi nobis: Quamdiú tu tibi inimicus es, inimitum habe∣bis Sermonem Dei. Yea, but I was naked, and therefore hid my self. This also was non-causa pro causa. There was another pad
in the straw, which he studiously conceals; viz. The conscience of his sin. Hic verò non factum suum, Excusando se∣ipsum accusat. Gregor. Prov. 19.3. sed Dei factum in semetipso reprehendit, saith Rupertus. He blames not himself but God, for making him naked; and so verifies that of Solomon, The foolish∣ness of man perverteth his way; and then (to mend the matter) his heart fretteth against the Lord. O silly simple! Vers. 11. Who told thee.] His own conscience awakened and cited by Gods voyce, Joh. 4. told him (as the woman of Samaria said of our Saviour) all that ever he did. Before and in the acting of sin, we will hear nothing; but afterwards, Conscience will send forth a shrill and sharp voyce, that shall be heard all the soul over; such as was that of Reuben to his brethren. Did not I warn you, saying, Sin not against the childe, &c. The Books of our Consciences are now sealed up, and the woful contents are not read by the Law: They remain as Letters written with the juyce of Oringes or Onions, which are onely to be made legible by the fire of Gods wrath. Then shall the wicked run away (but all in vain) with those words in their mouthes, Isai. 33.14. Who amongst us shall dwell with this devouring fire? Who shall abide by these everlasting burnings? Then shall they tire the Mountains with their hideous out-cryes, Fall upon us, hide us, crush us in pieces, grinde us to powder. But how can that be, when the Mountains melt, and the Rocks rent asunder at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob? Vers. 12. The woman whom thou gavest.] Here he rejects the fault upon the woman, and thorow her, upon God, who gave her to be with him, or before him; or such another as himself, (with reference to that Lenegdo, Chap. 2.20.) or a help meet for him. This she might have been to him, had he been (that he ought to her) a manly guide in the way to Heaven. He should have rebuked her, as Job did his wicked wife, for transgressing Gods Law, and tempting him to the like. Then had her sin been personal, rested upon her self, and gone no further, had not he hearkned to her voyce. But he not onely not did thus, but insteed of agnizing his fault, seeks to transfer it upon God: That sith he could not be like unto God in the divinity, which he aymed at, he might make God like unto himself in iniquity, which was to fill up the measure of his sin, that wrath might have come upon him to the utmost; but that Gods mercy was then, and is still over all his own good, and our bad works.
Vers. 13. And the woman said, The Serpent.] Thus the Flesh never wants excuses: Nature need not be taught to tell her own tale. Sin and shifting came into the world together; never yet any came to Hell, but had some pretence for coming thither. It is a very course Wool that will take no Dye: Sin and Satan are alike in this; they cannot abide to appear in their own colour. Men wrap themselves in excuses, as they do their hands, to defend them from pricks. This is still the vile poyson of our hearts; that they will needs be naught, and yet will not yield, but that there is reason to be mad, and great sence in sin∣ing. Vers. 14. And the Lord God said to the Serpent.] The Serpent was not examined, because God would shew no mercy to him: But presently doemed, Hestod. because of meer malice, he had offended. The Heathens called certain Devils  quasi  . Evil befel him, that evil bethought him: As Balaam that ad∣vised evil against Israel, was slain by the sword of Israel. The Serpent also hath his part in the punishment, because instrument∣al to the Devil. Both Authors, Actors, and Abettors of evil, shall rue it together. The Serpent here, is, first cut shorter by the feet, and made to wriggle upon his belly; secondly, confined to the dust for his dict; which is also, saith an Ancient  the Devils diet: For your Adversary the Devil (that Ruler of the darkness of this world) as he dwells in dark hearts, Ephes. 6.12. as so many holes and caverns. Job 40.10. So, Behemoth-like, he cats grass as an Ox; yea, dust as a Serpent, continually seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pat. 5.7. And is therefore cursed above all Creatures. He hath swallowed down souls, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly, Job 20.15. He sinneth every day the sin against the Holy Ghost, and shall lye lowest in Hell. Every foul that he drew thither by his temptation, shall be as a milstone hang'd about his neck, to hold him down in the bottomless lake. Vers. 15. And I will put enmity,] Instead of that amity and familiarity, thou hast lately had with the woman. And here begins the Book of the Lords wars: His hand is here upon his Throne, he hath solemnly sworn, That he will have war (not with Amalek onely, Exod. 17.16. but) with the whole Serpentine seed, from generation to generation. There is also a capital antipathy
(saith Bodinus) between the woman and the Serpent: Bodin. Theat. lib. 3. So that in a great multitude of men, if there be but one woman amongst them, he makes at her, and stings her about the heel. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 63. & lib. 7. c. 2. Pliny also tells us, That the fasting-spittle of a man, is deadly to Ser∣pents; and that if a Serpent wound a man, he is no more en∣tertained by the earth, or admitted thereinto. Others tell us, Sphinx Philos. That a Snake fears and flies from a naked man, but pursues him when clothed or covered. Put on Christ, and thou art safe. His blood, as Polium, is a preservative against Serpents, Revel. 12.9. Plin. lib. 2. c. 2. [It shall bruise thy head.] And so kill thee quite; as a Serpent is not killed dead, till knockt on the head; which he therefore care∣fully saves with the hazzard of his whole body. To elude, or elevate at least, this sweet promise (this grand Charter of our Salvation) the Devil, no doubt, devised, and by his Factors, the Poets divulged that frivolous fable of Hercules his clubbing down the Lernaan Serpent, and cutting off his many heads. But Christ alone is that stronger man, that, drawing the Dragon out of his Den, hath crackt his crown, destroyed his works, made him to fall as lightning from the heaven of mens hearts, and will tread him also under our feet shortly, as he hath already done under his own, when spoyling these principalities and powers, Rom. 16. he made a shew of them, openly triumphing over them on his cross, Colos. 2.15. As in the mean while, till this be fully done, nibble he may at our heel, but cannot come at our head. Achilles is said to have taken his death, by a wound in his heel. But he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one (the De∣vil) toucheth him not, 1 John 5.18. That is, Tactu qualitative, saith Cajeta, with a deadly touch; he thrusteth not his sting so far into him, as to do him to death. For Christ (who is our life, Colos. 3.4) can assoon die at the right hand of his heavenly Father, as in the heart of a faithful Christian; fith our life is hid with Christ in God; his life is bound up in his Childes life. He shall make the broken horns of Satan to be the Trumpets of his glory, and the Cornets of our joy. [Thou shalt bruise his heel.] Not both his heels, but one onely: So that he shall stand upon one, though hurt in the other; or if overthrown, yet he shall rise again, and be more then a conqueror, . Rom. 8. or over overcome him that overturned him. He is the Victor, that breaketh the head: When as he that bruiseth the heel (though he be an enemy) yet he lyes along, and can do no great mischief there. And hereto
the Prophet seems to refer, when he saith, Why should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels (that is, when the punishment of mine iniquity that reacheth but to the heels) shall compass me about? God will redeem my soul from the hand of hell, Psal. 49.6, 16. I conclude with that memorable saying of a holy Martyr: Bradford. If we had a lively feeling of the Serpents poyson, we could not but rejoyce in our Captain, who hath bruised his head. What though the Serpent shoot his sting into our heel, and make us halt, Heb. 12.2, 3. yet let us go on, though halting to Heaven; Yea, run with patience the race that is set before us; looking at Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, &c. Vers. 16. I will greatly multiply thy sorrow,] The greatest of sorrows this is, as we are given to understand, both out of di∣vine, Decie in bello mori mallem quam parere vel semel adhuc. Euripid. and humane Writings. I had rather dye in battle ten times over, then bring forth but once onely, said Medea in the Tragedy. But we have a better example in the Ecclesiastical History, of a Roman Lady, called Sabina; Who being great with childe, was cast in prison for the Profession of Christs Truth. Now when the time came, that she should be delivered, and she cryed out for extremity of pain; the Keeper of the prison asked her, Job. Manlii, loc. com p. 124. Why she made such a stir now? And how she would, two or three days hence endure to dye at a stake, or by the sword? She answered, Now I suffer as a woman, the punishment of my sin; but then, I shall not suffer, but Christ shall suffer in me. In peace-offerings there might be oyl mixed, not so in sin-offerings. In our sufferings for Christ, there is joy, not so, when we suffer for our sins. [In sorrow thou shalt bring forth.] And in sorrow shalt thou bring up, Liberi sunt dul∣ci acerbitas, seu us Tertul. loquitur, amariss. voluptas. after the birth, as Gen. 50.23. Chil∣dren are certain cares, but uncertain comforts. Eve had a great catch of it, when she had got a manchilde of the Lord, she called him Cain, a possession, as David did Absolom, his Fathers peace. But Fallitur augurio spes bona sape suo. Excellently Saint Gregory, Ante partum liberi sunt onerosi, in partu dolorosi, post partum laboriosi. [And he shall rule over thee.] Yet not with rigor. She must (though to her grief and regret) be subject to all her husbands lawful, both commands and restraints. But he must carry himself as a man of knowledg towards her; and make her yoke as easie as may be. It is re∣markable, Colos. 3.19. That when the Apostle had bid Wives submit to your
own husbands, &c. He doth not say, Husbands, rule over your wives, (for that they will do fast enough without bid∣ing,) but husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. Vers. 17. Because thou hast hearkned to the voyce of thy wife.] Our English Historian, relating the deadly difference that fell out betwixt those two noble Seymours (the Lord Protector, Sir Johu Hey∣wood in the life of K. Edw. 6. p. 84. and the Admiral his Brother, in Edward the sixt time) thorough the instigation of their ambitious wives, passionately cryes out, O wives! The most sweet poyson, the most desired evil in the world, &c. Woman was first given to man for a Comforter, saith he, not for a Counsellor, much less a controller and director. And therefore in the first sentence against man, this cause is expressed, Because thou hast obeyed the voyce of thy wife, &c. [Cursed is the ground for thy sake.] & Ar∣vuum ab Heb.  Hence the Greeks and Latines bor∣row their words for ground of the Hebrew word that signifieth cursed. The curse of emptiness and unsatisfyingness lyes upon it, that no man hath enough, though never so much of it. The curse also of barrenness, or unprofitable fruits, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.8. The whole earth and the works therein, 2 Pet. 3.10. shall be burnt up. It was never beautiful, nor chearful, since Adams fall. At this day it lyes bed-rid, waiting for the coming of the Son of God, that it may be delivered from the bondage of corruption, Rom. 8.20. Vers. 18. Thorns also and thisties,] Ʋbi veritas dixit, quod terra homini spinas & tribulos germinaret subintelligendum fuit, ait Petrareha, & rusticos tribulis omnibus asperiores. Petrarch. de re∣med ver. fort. Dial. 59. Judg. 8.7-16. The Clowns of Midian drove Jethroes daughters from the water they had drawn. Rudeness hath no respect, either to sex or condition. Those Churls of Succoth, were worthily threshed with thorns of the Wilderness, and with bryars, and thereby taught better manners. [Thou shalt eat the herb of the field.] And no longer feed on these pleasant fruits of Paradise, which by thy sin thou hast forfeited. Thus man is driven from his dainty and delicate dyet, to eat husks with hogs, as the Prodigal, or at least, grass with the Ox, as Nebuchadnezzar, and be glad of it too; as our Ancestours, who though they fed not at first on acorns, as the Poets fable, Hic holus quisi. . yet if they could get a dish of good green herbs, they held themselves as well provided for, as if they had all.
Verse 19. Picherellus in Cosmp. In the sweat of thy face] Or, of thy nose, as One rendreth it, that sweat that beginning in thy brow runs down by thy nose, through thy hard labour. This is a law laid upon all sorts to sweat out a poor living, to humble themselves by just labour, to sweat either their brows or their brains (for this latter also is a sore occupation, Eccles. 1.13. and the Ministers toyl is compared to that of those that cleave wood, or work hard in harvest, 1 Thess. 3.5. Math. 10.1  1 Cor. 9.14. See my true ealure.  &c.) [Shalt thou eat bread] Not herbs onely as vers. 18. And here take notice of an elegant gradation, to∣gether with a mercifull mitigation of mans misery. Thou shalt▪ eat earth, ver. 17. herbs, vers. 18. and now here, Thou shalt eat bread, that stay and staffe of mans life under his hard labour. Panem dictum volunt à  Isidor. 1.20. [Ʋntill thou returne unto the ground] O earth, earth, earth, bear the word of the Lord, i.e. Earth by creation, Earth by corruption, Earth by resolution. This is the end of all men, and the living should lay it to heart. J. 22.29. In this third of Genesis we find Mans Exodus. This is the first text of mortality, and all comments, yea all dead corpses con∣cur to the exposition of it. Etiam mut cl∣mant cadava. Basil. [For dust thou art] Think on this, and be proud, if thou canst. We were created , but now we live  saith Agapetus. Had we so sweet a generation as that little creature Scaliger speaks of, Exercit ad ad Cardan. that is bred in sugar, we might have had some ground of boasting; but now we may sprinkle the dust of humility on our heads, as the Ancients used to do, in token that they had deserved to be as far under, as now they were above ground. [And to dust thou shalt return] By this limitation God restrains mans death here threatned, to that earthy part of him, his body. The forest death is when a man dyes in his sins, as those Jewes did, Joh. 8.21. (better dye in a ditch a fair deal) when he is killed with death, as Jesabels children, Rev. 2.23. this is the second death. The condemned person comes out of a dark prison, and goes to the place of execution; so do many from the womb to the tomb, nay to that tormenting Tophet, to the which death is but a trap-door, to give them entrance. Verse 20. And Adam caed his wives name Eve] That is, Life, or Living. Not, per antiphraesim, as some would have it, much less out of pride and stomack, in contempt of the divine sentence denounced against them both, that they should surely dye, as Ru∣pertus would have it; but because she was to be mother of all li∣ving, whether a naturall or a spirituall life; and likewise for a testimony of his faith in, and thankfulness for that lively and life∣giving
oracle, vers. 15. i. e.  [The mother of all living] Have we not all, as one father, Mal. 3.10. so, one mother? did we not all tumble in a belly? why, do we then deale treacherously every man against his brother? ib. This one consideration should charm down our rising and boyling spirits one against another, as it did Abrahams, Gen. 13 8. Verse 21. Coats of skins and clothed them] God put them in leather, when yet there was better means of cloathing, to humble them doubtless, and draw them to repentance. Whether God created these skins anew, or took them off the backs of sheep and goats killed for sacrifice, to mind man of his mortality and mor∣tification, it much matters not. Our first parents, who even after the fall were the goodliest creatures that ever lived, went no bet∣ter cloathed: no more did those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37. And surely, The dogs that kept Vulcan temple would tear those that came in tatte∣red clothes. Hospinian. howsoever our con∣dition and calling afford us better array, and the vulgar like a Bo∣hemian cur fawn upon every good suit. (purpuram magis quam De∣um colunt,) yet we must take heed that pride creep not into our cloaths, those ensignes of our sin and shame, sith our fineness is our filthiness, our neatness our nastiness. It is a sure sign of a base minde, though in high place, to think he can make himself great with any thing that is lesse then himself, and win more credit by his garments, then his graces. St. Peter teacheth women, (who many of them are too much addicted to over much fineness) to garnish themselves not with gay cloathes, but with a meek and quiet spirit as Sarah did, and not as those mincing dames, 1Vestium curiosi∣tas, deformitatis mentium & mo∣rum indicium est. Bernard. Pet. 3.3, 4. whose pride the Prophet inveighs against, as punctually as if he had viewed the Ladies wardrobes in Jerusalem. Esa. 3. Rich apparell are but fine covers of the foulest shame. The worst is Natures garment, the best but follies garnish. How blessed a Nation were we, if every silken suit did cover a sanctified soul: or if we would look upon out cloathes, as our first parents did, as love-tokens from God; Nam, cum charissinia semper Munera, sunt Author quae pretiosa facit, How could they but see it to be a singular favour that God with own hands should cloath them, (though he had cast them out of Paradise for their nurture) a visible Sacrament of his invisible love and grace concerning their soules, in covering their sins, and so interresting them into true blessedness, Psal. 32 1, 2. Verse 22. The man is bcome as one of us] A holy irrisionof mans
vain affectation of the Deity. Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, tu l∣gas cum fleu. Aug. de Gen. ad eram. 1.11. c. 3. Howbeit St. Aug. is of opinion that God speaks thus, not by way of insulting over Adam, but deterring others from such proud attempts. Discite justitiam moniti, &c. [And take also of the tree of life] And so think to elude the sentence of death pronounced upon him by God; which yet he could not have done, had he eaten up tree and all. He should but have added to his sin and judgement by abuse of this Sacrament; which would have sealed up life unto him, had he held his integrity. Multi etiam hodie propter arborem scientiae amittunt arborem vitae: Aug. In ter∣ris manducant quod apudinferos digerunt. Verse 23. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth] He gently dismissed him, as the word signifies, placed him over against Pa∣radise in the sight thereof (as Stella observeth out of the Septua∣gint) that, Stella in Luc. 7 by often beholding, the sorrow of his sin might be in∣creased, Iisdem, quibu videmus, culis flemus. Lam. 3. 2 Cor. 2.7.11. that his eye might affect his heart. Yet lest he should be swallowed up of over much sorrow, and so Satan get an advantage of him (for God is not ignorant of his devices) Christ the pro∣mised seed, was by his voluntary banishment, to bring back all be∣leevers to their heavenly home; to bear them by his Angels into Abrahams bosome, and to give them to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. Our whole life here is nothing else but a banishment. That we like it no worse is, because we never knew better. They that were born in hell, saith the Proverb, think there's no other heaven. The poor posterity of a banished Prince take their mean condition well-aworth; Moses counts Egypt (where yet he was but a sojourner) his home; and in reference to it calls his son, (born in Midian) Gershom, that is, a stranger there. Oh how should we breath after our heavenly home, A Paradisi Gesner. groaning within our selves like those birds of Paradise, Na∣turalists speak of! stretching forth the neck, as the Apostles word importeth, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our bo∣dies, Rom. 8. Rom. 8.23. glorifying God. (mean-while) with our spirits and bodies, devouring all difficulties, donec à spe ad speciem trans∣eamus, till Christ, who is gone to prepare a place for us, returne and say, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Verse 24. So he drove out the man] The Hebrews say, God led Adam gently by the hand, till he came to the porch of Para∣dise, and then thrust him out violently, who hungback, and plaid loth to depart. That he went out unwillingly, as I wonder not, so
that he should strive with God about his going out, I believe not. This garden planted meerly for his pleasure, and all the benefits created for his use and service in six dayes, he lost in six houres say some; in nine, say others; the same day he was made, say All, al∣most: What cause then have all his sinfull posterity to distrust themselves? And how little cause had that blasphemous Pope to set his mouth against heaven, Juius 3. when being in a great rage at his Steward for a cold Peacock not brought to table according to his appointment; and desired by one of his Cardinals, not to be so much moved at a matter of so small moment, he answered: If God were so angry for an apple, that he cast our first parents out of Paradise for the same; why may not I, being his Vicar, be angry then for a Peacock, sith it is a greater matter then an apple? Act. & Mon. fol. 1417. Is not this that mouth of the Beast that speaketh great things and blasphemies? Rev. 13.5. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. I have gotten a man from the Lord] OR, that famous Man the Lord, as if she had brought forth the Man Christ Jesus. These were verba spei, non rei; for Cain was of that wicked one, the Devill, 1 Joh. 3.12. as all reprobates are, 1 Joh. 3.10. Cain the Authour of the City of the World, saith Augustine, is born first, and called Cain, that is, a possession, be∣cause he buildeth a City, is given to the cares and pomp of the world, and persecutes his brother that was chosen out of the world. But Abel, the Authour of the City of God, Aug. de civit. Di. l. 15. c. 1. is born se∣cond; called Vanity, because he saw the worlds vanity, and is there∣fore driven out of the world by an untimely death; so early came martyrdome into the world: the first man that dyed, dyed for Religion. H. Broughton of the 10 patr. ex Rab. Bochai. In a witty sense (saith Hugh Broughton) Cain and Abel contain in their names advertisements for matter of true continu∣ance and corruption. Cain betokeneth possession in this world: And Abel betokeneth one humbled in minde, and holding such possession vain. Such was his offering, sheep-kinde, the gentlest of all living beasts, and therefore the favour of God followed him. And the offering of Cain was of the fruit of the earth; as he loved the possession of this world, and the service of the body (which
yet can have no continuance) and followed after bodily lusts; therefore the blessed God favored him not. Thus far he out of the Rabbines. Another English Divine hath this note upon these words, Yaes his Model of Divin. I have gotten a man from the Lord; Jehovah. Adam and Eve were all about the composition of Cain. His soul was inspired pure and holy; yet assoon as the vital spirits laid hold of it, it was in the compound, a son of Adam. A skilful Artificer makes a clock of all his essential parts most accurately; onely he leaves the putting of all parts together to his unskilful apprentise; who so jumbles together the several joynts, that all falls to jar∣ing, and can keep no time at all, every wheel running backward∣way. So God most artificially still perfects both body and soul: but our accursed parents put all out of frame, and set every part in a contrary course to Gods will. Sin is propagated and pro∣ceeds from the union of body and soul into one man. That phrase, Warmed in sin, Psal. 51.5. is meant of the preparation of the body, as an instrument of evil, which is not so actually, till the soul come. Vers. 3. In process of time] That distance of time between the Creation, and the general Flood, Varro the most learned of the Romans calleth  obscure or unknown, because the Hea∣then had no Records of that, which we now clearly understand, to have been then done, out of the holy Scriptures. [Cain brought of the fruit.] Godw. Hebr. Antiq. p. 27. They brought their sacrifices to Adam, the high Priest of the family, who offered them to God in their name. So in the Levitical Law, though a mans offering were never so good, he might not offer it himself, upon pain of death: But the Priest must offer it. And the Priest was to offer as well the poor mans Turtle, as the rich mans Ox: To teach, that none may present his service to God, how good soever he may conceit it, but in the hand of the high Priest of the New Testament Jesus Christ, Revel. 5. the just one, who will not onely present, but perfume the poorest performances of an upright heart, with his odors. Vers. 4. See Num. 18.12. Fat taken for the best of all things. , Mark 12.41. Mal. 1. Of the firstlings of his flock.] He brought the best of the best, not any thing that came next to hand, as Cain seems to have done holding any thing good enough, as did those rich wretches that cast brass-money into the treasury. But cursed be that couzener, that hath a male in his flock, and offereth to God a corrupt thing. Offer it now to thy Prince, will he be content with
thy refuse stuff? Behold, I am a great King, saith God; he stands upon his seniority, and looks to be honored with the best of our subtance. Mary that loved much, thought nothing too much for her sweet Saviour. John 12.9. She brought an Alabaster box of oyntment of great price, and poured it upon him, and he defends her in it against those that held it waste. Among the Papists, their Lady of Loretto hath her Churches so stuffed with vowed presents of the best, Sir Edw. Sands Relation of West. Relig. sect  Turk hist. fol. 342. 1 Pet. 3.11. Isai. 66.2. as they are fain to hang their Cloysters and Church-yards with them. Shall not their supestition rise up and condemn our irreligion, our slubbering services, and dough-baked duties? The Turks build their private houses, low and homely, but their Moschces or Temples stately and magnificent. [Had respect to Abel and his offering.] The eye of the Lord is still upon the righ∣teous, and his ears are in their prayers: He looks upon such with singular delight, with special intimation of his love; he is ravish∣ed with one of their eyes lifted up in prayer, Cant. 4.9. with one chain of their graces; when as he was no whit affected with the offer of all the worlds glory, Matth. 4. He saith of such to the wicked, as the Prophet said of Jehosaphat to the King of Israel. Surely, 2 King. 3.14. were it not that I regard the presence of Jehosaphat King of Judah, I would not look toward the, nor see thee: Cain here for instance. Vers. 5. But to Cain and his offering, &c.] Because he brought non personam sed opus personae, as Luther hath it; Luth. in Decal. who also calls those Cainists, that offer to God the work done, but do not offer themselves to God. Works materially good, may never prove so, formally and eventually. Luke 16. Levit. 11.18. That which is fair to men, is abomination to God. He rejected the Swan for sacrifice, be∣cause under a white feather, it hath black skin. Sordet in conspectu Judicis quod fulget in conspectu operantis, saith Gregory. A thing may shine in the night from its rottenness. Vers. 6. Why is thy countenance fn?] Why dost lowre and look so like a dog under a door? Vultu saepe laeditur pietas: Cicer. orat. pro Amerin. Ovid. Meta. Dif∣ficile est animum non prodere vult. He was discontented at God, and displeased at his brother. He looks but sowre and suffen upon him, and od takes him up for it. He so loves his little ones, that he cannot abide the cold wind should blow upon them. The Sun must not smte them by day, nor the Moon by night. Psal. 121. Cant . The North and South must both blow good to them. Better, a mil∣stone, &c. then offend one of these little ones, be it but by a
frown or a frump. Better anger all the witches in the world, then one of Gods zealous witnesses: Revel. 11.5. For there goeth a fire out of their mouths to devour their enemies. Vers. 7. Resipiscenti re∣missio, pertinaci supplicium im∣minet, idque proximum & prae entiss. Jun. Nemes dicitur , quod . nemo eam effugere possit. Sin lyes at the door.] Like a great ban-dog ready to pull out the throat of thy soul, if thou but look over the hatch. Say this dog lie asleep for a while, yet the door is for continual pass and repass, and so no fit place for any long sleep. Your sin will surely finde you out (saith Moses) as a blood-hound, and haunt you like a hell-hag, as the Heathen could say, Nemo crimen gerit in pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. Vers. 8. And Cain talked with Abel.] What talk they had, is not set down. The Septuagint and vulgar Versions tell us Cain said, Let us go out into the field. The Chaldee addeth that he should say, There was no judgment, nor judg, nor world to come, nor reward for justice, nor vengeance for wickedness, &c. Certain it is, That those that are set to go on in sin, do lay hold upon all the principles in their heads, Rom. 1.18. and imprison them in unrighteous∣ness, that they may sin more freely; they muzzle the mouths of their consciences, that they may satisfie their lusts without con∣troul. But had Zimri peace that slew his master? or Cain that slew his brother? hath any ever waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4. [Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew.] So, Cain was the devils Patriark, and Abel the Churches Protomartyr. Act. & Mon. fol. 814. It is not long since Alphonsus Diazius a Spaniard, an Advocate in the Court of Rome, came from Rome to Neoberg in Germany, to kill his own brother John Diazius, a faithful Pro∣fessor of the Reformed Religion, and a familiar friend to Buer, who gives him an excellent commendation. But it is worth the observing, Bucbolc. saith One, That the first quarrel about Religion arose propemodùm inter media sacrificia, in the midst of the sacrifices almost. These Theological hatreds (as I may call them) are most bitter hatreds, and are carried on for most part, with Cain-like rage, and bloody opposition. No fire sooner breaks forth, none goes out more slowly, then that which is kindled about matters of Religion: and the nearer any come to other, the more deadly are their differences, and the more desperate their designes one 'gainst another. The Persians and Turks are both Mahometans, and yet disagreeing about some small points in the Interpretati∣on of their Alchoran; Turk, hist. the Persians burn whatsoever Books they finde of the Turkish Sect. And the Turks hold it more merito∣rious
to kill one Persian, then seventy Christians. The Jew can better brook a Heathen then a Christian; they curse us in their daily devotions, concluding them with a Maledic Domine Naza∣raeis. The Pope will dispense with Jews, but not with Protestants. See D. Day on 1 Cor. 16.9. Lutherans will sooner joyn hands with a Papist then a Calvinist. And what a spirit had he, that in a Sermon at Norwich, not long since, inveighing against Puritans, said, If a cup of cold water had a reward, much more a cup of such mens blood? Bucholcer. Mort est Cain, sed utinam ille non viveret in suis filiis, qui clavam ejus. sanguine Abelis rubentm, ut rem sacram, circumferunt, adorant & venerantur. The place where Cain slew Abel, is by some thought to be Damascus in Syria, called therefore Damesec, that is, a bag of blood. Vers. 9. I know not: Am I my brothers keeper?] As if he had bid God, go look. Let not us think much to receive dogged answers and disdainful speeches, from profane persons. When they have learned to think better, they will speak better. As till then, pity and pray for them. These churlish dogs will be bark∣ing. Vers. 10. What hast thou done?] Here God appeals to the murderers conscience, which is insteed of a thousand witnesses. As oft as we feel the secret smitings of our own hearts for sin, think we hear him that is greater then our hearts, saying to us as here, What hast thou done? And that there is no good to be done by denying or dawbing, for he knoweth all things, 1 John 3.20. and requireth that we should see our sins to confession, or we shall see them to our confusion. [The voyce of thy brothers bloods] The blood of one Abel had so many tongues as drops; and every drop, a voyce to cry for vengeance. Give them blood to drink, Revel. 16.6. for they are worthy. Charls the ninth of France, Author of that bloody massacre of Paris, died of exceeding bleeding. Mr. Camdens Elisab. 165. Richard the third of this Kingdom, and Q. Mary, had the shortest raignes of any since the Conquest; according to that, Psal. 55.23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Anno 1586. Walsh Bishop of Ossery in Ireland, a man of honest life, with his two servants, were stabbed to death by one Dulland, Ibidem 241. an Irish old Souldier, whilest he gravely admonished him of his foul adulte∣ries; and the wicked murtherer escaped away, who had now committed fourty five murthers with his own hand. At length, revenge pursuing him, he was by another bloody fellow Donald
Spaniah shortly after slain himself, and his head presented to the Lord Deputy of Ireland. Vers. 11. And now thou art crsed.] The Pope contrarily blesseth and sainteth Traytors to their Countrey, and murtherers of their natural Soveraigns; as Ravilliac, and other his Assasines, those sworn sword men of the Devil. Bucer in Pra∣sat ad Senar∣claei hister. de morte Diar. Lonicer. Alphonsus Diarius, who killed his own brother for the cause of Religion, as above said, fled to Rome, and was there highly commended for his zeal, and largely rewarded, as Bucer reporteth. But, driven thereto by the terrors of his own guilty conscience, like another Judas, he after∣wards hanged himself upon the neck of his own Mule, for want of a better Gallows. Vers. 12. A fugitive and a vagabond, &c.] The Patriarks were Pilgrims, and staid not long in a place. The Apostles also were hurried about, 2 Cor. 4.11. Rom. 15.19. and had no certain dwelling place. But first, God numbred their flittings, Psal. 56.8. He kept just reckoning of them in his Count-book. Secondly, Their hearts were fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psal. 112.7. They could call their souls to rest, when they had no rest in their bones: And flie up to Heaven with the wings of a Dove, when hunted on Earth as so many Patridges. Facti sun a corde suo fugi∣tivi, Tertul. So could not Cain the caytiff. He was not more a fugitive in the Earth, then in his own conscience: Fain he would have fled from the terrors of it, but could not, he was langold to it, and must abide by it. Hence the Greek translates this Text, Sighing and trembling shalt thou be on the earth; and so the word here used is applyed elsewhere, to the trembling of the heart, Isa. 7.2. to the walking of the lips, 1 Sam. 1.13. to the shaking of the Forest by a violent wind, Isa. 7.2. to the leaping of the Lintel at the presence of the Lord, Isai. 6.4, &c. And this (in all proba∣bility) was that mark, that God set upon him, v. 15. Not a horn in his forehead, as the Jews fain, but a hornet in his conscience, such as God vexed the Hivites with, Exod. 23.28. stinging them with unquestionable conviction and horror. Cicer. orst. pro Ros. Amer. For assuredly a body is not so tormented with stings, or torne with stripes, as a minde with remembrance of wicked actions. Vers. 13. My punishment is greater then I can bear.] Or, Mine iniquity is greater then can be forgiven. In either sense he sins ex∣ceedingly, and worse perhaps then in slaying his brother, whether he murmur against Gods justice, or despair of his mercy. Mine iniquity is greater, &c. Mentiris Cain, saith a Father, Cain did
not say so, because it was so: But it was so, because he said so. Despair is Satans master-piece; it carries men head-long to hell, as the Devils did the herd of Swine into the deep; Act. & Mon fol. 1908. Gellus in dia∣log. secundo Chimaeric. witness Guar∣lacus, Bomelius, Latomus of Lovain, Johannes de Canis, our English Hubertus, a covetous Oppressor, who made this will, I yield my goods to the King, my body to the grave, my soul to the devil. Vers. 14. From the face of the earth] That is, of this earth, this countrey, my Fathers family; which in the next words, he calls Gods face, the place of his publike worship, from the which Cain was here justly excommunicated. And surely, Saint Judes wo will light heavy upon all such, as going in the way of Cain, and not willing to hear of their wicked ways, do wilfully absent themselves from the powerful preaching of the Word. They that will not hear the Word, shall hear the Rod, Mic. 6.9. Yea, a sword shall peirce thorow their souls, as it did Cains here; in whom was fulfil∣ed that of Eliphaz, Job 15.21, 22. A dreadful sound was in his ears, lest in his prosperity the destroyer should come upon him. He beleeved not that he should return out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword. [Every one that findes me, Petron. shall slay me] Quàm male est extra legem viventibus: quicquid meruerunt semper ex∣pectant: Fat Swine cry hideously, if but touched or medled with, as knowing they ow their life, to them that will take it. Tiberius felt the remorse of conscience so violent, that he protested to the Senate, that he suffered death daily: Tacitus. Whereupon Tacitus makes this good note, Tandèm facinora & flagitia in supplicium vertuntur. As every body hath its shadow appertaining to it, so hath every sin its punishment. And although they escape the lash of the Law, yet vengeance will not suffer them to live, Acts 28.4. (as the Barbari rashly censured Saint Paul) to live quietly at least. Richard the third, after the murther of his two innocent Nephews, had fearful dreams and visions; insomuch, that he did often leap out of his bed in the dark, and catching his sword (which alway naked, Daniels Chron. continued by Trussel. 249. stuck by his side) he would go distractedly about the chamber, every where seeking to finde out the cause of his own occasioned disquiet. Polydor Virgil thus writes of his dream that night before Bosworth-field, where he was slain, that he thought that all the devils in hell, pulled and haled him in most hideous and ugly shapes; and concludes of it at last; I do not think it was so much his dream, as his evil conscience,
that bred those terrors. It is as proper for sin to raise fears in the soul, as for rotten flesh and wood to breed worms. That worm that never dyes is bred here in the froth of filthy lusts and slagiti∣ous courses, and lyes gnawing and grubbing upon mens inwards, many times in the ruffe of all their jollity. This makes Saul call for aminstrell, Belshazzar for his carrousing cups, Cain for his workmen to build him a City, others for other of the Devills anodynes, to put by the pangs of their wounded spirits, and throb∣bing consciences. Thuan. lib. 57. Charles the ninth, after the massacre of France, could never endure to be awakened in the night without musick, or some like diversion; he became as terrible to himself, as former∣ly he had been to others. But above all, I pity the loss of their souls, who serve themselves as the Jesuite in Lancashire, fol∣lowed by one that found his glove, with a desire to restore it him. M. Wards Ser∣mons. But pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, he leaps over a hedge, plunges into a Marle-pit behinde it, unseen and unthought of, wherein he was drowned. Vers. 15. The Lord set a mark, &c.] Some say it was the let∣ter Tau; others, some letter of Jehovah: probably, it was the per∣petuall trembling of his hands, Totum Cedreni opus est stabulum quisquiliarum &c. Scalig. and whole body; the very sight whereof, made people pity him, till at length he was slain, say some, by his nephew Lamech. Cedrenus tells us (if we may believe him) that Cain took his death by the fall of a house in the year of the world, 931. the next year after the death of his father Adam. But however he dyed, sure it is, he had but an ill life of it. He was marked, 'Ne semel morte defungerctur, sed ut atatem totam moriendo exige∣ret. Philo. saith Philo, but to his misery; he might not be killed by any, that he might every day be dying; having a hell in his consci∣ence, and standing in fear of every man he met with. He that would not harken to God, so sweetly inciting and enticing him to doe well, Lactan. Instit. vers. 7. hath now Pavor and Pallor for his gods, as Lactantius reporteth of Tullius Hostilius, who had prophanely derided the devotions of his predecessour Numa, as here Cain had done his brother Abels. Vers. 16. And Cain went out from the presence, &c.] But whi∣ter could he goe from Gods Spirit? or whither could he flye from his presence? Psal. 139.7. bi est Deus? quid dixi miser? sed ubi non est? Bern. Act. 17. Coloss▪ 1.17. From the presence of his power he could not: for, Entèr, praesenter, Deus hic & ubi{que} potentè. God is not very far from any one of us, saith St. Paul. Not so far surely as the bark is from the tree, for all things consist in him: so
that a wicked man cannot wag hand or foot, without his privity. But it was the presence of his grace, and use of his Ordinances that this wretch fled from; as did likewise Jonas (in that, as wise as he) so going out of the grace of God into the warm sun, as we say. Jon. 1.3. God fetcht Jonas home again by weeping cross, Jon. 2.8. and made him feelingly acknowledge (for it had like to have cost him a choaking) that they that observe lying vanities, as he had done, forsake their owne mercies. But Cain seated himself in the land of Nod, and there fell to building and planting in contempt, as it is thought, of the divine doom denounced against him; Sigon. or rather to drown the noise of his conscience, as the old Italians were wont to do the noise of the heavens in time of thunder, by ringing their greatest Bels, and letting off their greatest Ordnance. Vers. 17. And he builded a City] So, many drown themselves either in secular businesses, or sensull pleasures, and all to put by their melancholly dumps, and heart-qualms, as they call them; in∣deed, to muffle up the mouthes of their horribly guilty consciences: So Nicephorus Phocas, when Zimri like, he had killed his master, he laboured like Cain, to secure himself with building high walls: After which, he heard a voice telling him, . Cedren. that though he built his walls never so high, yet sin within the walls would undermine all. Besides that, one small drop of an evill conscience troubleth a whole sea of outward comforts and contentments: a confluence whereof would no more ease conscience, then a silken stocking would doe a broken leg. Silly are they that think to glide away their groans with games, and their cares with cards, &c. [Called the City after the name of his son Enoch] That he might be stiled, Lord Enoch of Enoch. This is the ambition of worldly men; their names are not written in heaven; they will propagate them there∣fore upon earth, as Nimrod by his tower, Absolom by his pillar, Cain by his city, Enoch (which St. Augustine fitly maketh a figure of Rome, because both of them were built by a parricide.) Psal. 49.11. Their inward thought is, saith the Psalmist, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; and therefore, they call their lands after their own names. De mali quaes vix gaudet ter∣tius baeres. Lucian. They seek to immortalize themselves upon their possessions; but the third heire seldome ever owns them. Hence houses and lands, shift masters so oft; (Olim eram Menipi, nunc Speusippi, &c. said that house in the Apologie.) God justly crosseth these inhabitants of the earth, Rev. 12. Philip. 3. as they are called, in opposition to the Saints, whose conversation is
in heaven, whereof they are Fellow-citizens. These know that they have here no abiding City, they look for one therefore above, not Henochta, but Heaven, Whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10. Vers. 19. And unto Enoch was born Irad. &c.] Cain had a numerous off-spring. Seven generations of his are here reckoned: Seh is not yet born, that we hear of. The wicked are ful of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes, Psal. 17.14. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance. Job. 21.11, 12, 13. They dance to the timbrell and harp (as here Jabal and Jubul did) but they suddenly turn into hell, and so their merry dance ends in a miserable downfall. Vers. 19. Lamech took unto himself] As his own lust led him, not caring for consent of parents: Lamech polyga∣mus unam co∣stam in dus di∣visit. Hier. And two wives; as little caring for the comand of God▪ that two, and no more, should be one flesh, Gen. 2.24. yea though he had the residue of the spirit, and so could have made many wives for Adam, yet made he but one, saith the Prophet. And wherefore one? but that he might seek a godly seed. Solomons polygamy was punished with barreness. Mal. 12.5. We read not of any son he had but one, Heroum filii noxae. (and, he none of the wisest neither) Rehoboam. This great King hath but one son by many house-fulls of wives, when many a poor man hath an house Full of children by one wife. Erasmus tels astory of a certain poor English creeple, lame on both legs, that married a blinde woman, Procreatis ex ist conjugio 12. fratrib, nul∣o{que} naevo defor∣matis. De instit. Matr. Deni duodeni{que} unam uxorem ducebant. De morib. gent. .1 cap. 1. Vt cui{que} libitum fuerit, pecudum more lasciviunt. Twini Com∣ment. de reb. Britan. ex Hron. Act & Mon. fol. 791. and gave this reason, We shall the better agree, when neither can hit other in the teeth with our severall defects and deformities. Nec ffellit hominem judi∣cium, saith he, It prooved a happy match. They lived lovingly and cheerfully together, and God Almighty blessed them with a dozen lusty boyes, that had not the least deformity about them. Sardus tels us, that the old Britains would, ten or twelve of them take one woman to wife: Belike women were scarce amongst them. But yet that was better then the old Scots, of whom St. Hierome reports, that they took no wives; but satisfied their lusts up and down as they listed, and wheresoever they liked, after the manner of bruit creatures. I have somewhere read, that not many hundreds of years since, they had a custome kept up amongst them, that the Landlord might demand the first night of his Te∣nants wife, as a chiee rent. And Mr. Fox relates, that the Friars in Germany were grown to that height of impudency, as to re∣quire the tenth night of every mans wife, as a tithe due to them.
Which to prevent, the Helvetians, when they received any new Priest into their Churches, they bargained with him before, to take his Concubine, lest he should attempt any misuse of their wives and daughters. How much better were it, for the avoyding of fornication, if every man of them had his owne wife, 1 Cor. 7. saith Paul. Not so, saith Cardinall Campeius: for if comparison should be made, much greater offence it is, a Priest to have a wife, Ibid. 790. then to have and keep at home many harlots. For they that keep harlots, (saith he) as it is nought that they do, so doe they acknowledge their sin. The other perswade themselves they doe well, and so continue without repentance, or conscience of their fact. A fit reason for a carnall Cardinall. Such another was his brother, Car∣dinalis Cremonensis, who after his stout replying in the Councel of London, against the married estate of Priests; Ibid. 1065. exclaiming what a shamefull thing it was, to rise from the sides of a whore, to make Christs body, the night following was shamefully taken with a notable Whore. This was bad enough: but that was worse in Johannes a Cassa, Dean of the Popes chamber, Ibid. 14 17. who so far forgot humanity and honesty, that he set forth a book in Italian meeter, in commendation of Sodomitry, saying, that he never used any other. This might better have become a Turk, then a Bishop. Blunts Voyage, p. 79. Ibid. 14. Sodomy in the Levant is not held a vice, so debauched they are grown. The Turkish Bashaws, besides their wives, whereof they have ton at least, each Bashaw hath as many, or likely more Cata∣mites, which are their serious loves. For their wives are used but to dresse their meat, to Laundress, and for reputation. Onely when the great Turk gives his daughter or sister to any Bashaw to wife, 'tis somewhat otherwise: For he giveth her at the same time a dagger, saying, I give thee this man to be thy slave and bed∣fellow. If he be not loving, obedient, and dutifull to thee, Heyl. Geog. p. 583. I give thee here this cunhare or dagger to out off his head. Yet can she not forbid him to marry more wives to vex her, (Levit. 18.18.) and to fret her, as Peninnah did Hannah, yea to make her to thunder, as the word there signifies: For Turks may take as many wives, 1 Sam. 1.6. as they are able to maintain. Hence it is that in jealousie they cend Italians; making their women go moed all but the eyes; 106. and not suffeing them to go to Church, or so much as looke out at their own windows. Vers. 20. Adah b a Jaba] Jabal a good husband, Ial a merry Greek, whence the word Iubilo in Latine, and our Eng∣lish
Joiall. Jaball that dwelt in tents and tended the herds, had Juball to his brother, the father of hadnd wind musick. Jaball and Juball, frugality and mirth, good hsbandry and sweet content dwel together. Virgil makes mention of a happy husband∣man in his time, who Regum aequabat opes animis seraque reversus Virg. Georg. Nocte domum, dpibus mensas onerabat inemptis. Vers. 22. And Zillah bare Tubalcam] Perhaps the same that the Poets call Vulcan. He was a cunning Artificer in brasse and iron. To oles they had before, and instruments of iron: how else could they have plowed the accursed earth? Vide Natal. Com. Mythol. l. 2. c. 5. But this man, artem jam inventam excoluit ornavitque, saith Iunius; and is therefore called, A whetter or polisher of every Artificer in brasse and iron. They had the art of it before: but he added to their skill by his invention, he sharply and wittily taught Smiths-craft; and is therefore by the heathens fained to be the god of Smiths, saith another Interpreter. Vers. 23. And Lamech said unto his wives] Who it seems were troublesome to him with their domesticall discords, and led him a discontented life. He therefore gives them to understand in this set speech, what a man he is, if molested by them or any other; and what slaughters he can make, if provoked by an adver∣sary. I would slay a man, if but wounded, &c. This revenge he counts man-hood, Plutar. in Pe∣lopid. which indeed is dog-hood rather. So Alexander Phereus consecrated his javelin, wherewith he slew his uncle Polyphron (as a monument of his man-hood) and called it his god Tychon. Ne memoria tam prlarae rei dilueresur. So Sylla caused it to be registred in the publicke Records, that he had prescribed, and put to death foure thousand and seven hundred Romanes. So Stokesly Bishop of London, comforted himself upon his death bed with this, Act. & Mon. that in his time he had burned fifty Heretickes as he called them. Phil. 3. Is not this to glory in their shame, and to have damnation for their end? Is it not the Devill that sets men a worke to do thus, as he did Saul to seek Davids life, and Lamech to domineer in this sort over his wives, New-Engl. first fruits. p. 4. seeking so to represse their strife? A certaine Indian comming into a house of the New-English, where a man and his wife were brawling, and they bidding him sit downe, he was welcome: he answered, he would not stay there; Hobomack, that is the Devill, was there; and so de∣parted.
Vers. 24. If Cain shall e avenged sevenfold, &c.] Thraso∣nicall Lamech brags, and goes on to out-dare God himself. For it is as if he should say, If God will take vengeance on them that contemne him, why may not I on those that contemne me, wives or other? Nay, though God will forgive evills against him, yet will not I evills against me. Ile have the oddes of him, seventy to seven; so Iunius interprets it. A desperate expres∣sion, and somewhat like that of Pope Iulius the third, above-mentioned in the last note upon the former Chapter; whereunto may here be added, that the same Pope being forbidden by his Phsitian to eat Swine flesh, as being noysome and nought for his gout, he called to hs Steward in a great rage, and said, Act. & Mon. fol. 1417. Bring me my pork-flesh, al despito di dio, In despite of God. O wretch! Vers. 25. She bare a son, and called, &c.] Virgil. The Duke of Florence gave for his Ensign, a great tre with many spreading boughes, one of them being cut off, with this Posie, Vno avul∣so, &c. Sic uno avulso non de∣ficit alter Aureus. Dead bones may revive, and out of the ashes of a Phoenix, another Phoenix spring. Jana jacet Phoenix nato Phoe∣nice, &c. The two witnesses that were killed, received the spirit of life from God againe, Rev. 11.11. Iobn Baptist revivet in our Saviour, (qui huic succentuiatus est) and Steven in Paul: John Hus in Luther (the Goose in the Swan) and the suppressed Waldenses in the Protestants. The Papists gave out that when Luther dyed, all his sect would dye with him: and when Queene Elisabeths head was laid, we should have strange worke in England. A false Jesuit in a scandalous libell published it, that she wished that she might after her death, hang a while in the ayre, to see what striving would be for her Kingdome. But she both lived and dyed with glory: Camdens Elisab. her rightfull successour came in peaceably, not a dog moving his tongue at him: The true Reformed Religion was established, and is hitherto main∣tained amongst us, maugre the malice of Rome and Hell. It was the Legacy left us by our Ancestours: the blood of those blessed Martyrs was the seed of our Church, of which I may say, as he of his City, Victa tamen vinces, eversaque Troja resurges: Obruit hostiles illa ruina domos. When the Devill and his Imps had got Abel into his grave, and saw Adam without another in his room for an hundred and thirty years space, or near upon, what a deal of joy was there, think we, amongst them, and sending of gifts? But God in due time sets
up a Seth, instead of Abel, and so cuts the devils comb, confutes his confidence. He will have a Church, when all's done. The Pope could tell the Turk so much in a message, Niteris incassùm Christi submergere navem: Pius 2. ad Im∣perat. Turc. Fluctuat, at nunquàm mergitur illa ratis. Vers. 26. Then began men to call upon, &c.] Publikely, and in solemn assemblies to serve the Lord; and to make a bold and wise profession of his name: , Phil. 2. shining as Lamps amidst that per∣verse generation of irreligious Canites, who said unto God, De∣part from us, &c. Job 22.17. This Job speaks there of these wick∣ed, which were cut down out of time, their foundation was over∣flown with the flood, Vers. 16. CHAP. V. Verse 1. This is the Book of the generations. SEpher, a ciphering up of their names, acts, and accidents; that we might know, first, who were Christs Progenitors; second∣ly, by whom the Church was continued; thirdly, how long the old World lasted, viz. one thousand six hundred fifty and six yeers. Whence some have grounded a conjecture, that the yeer of Christ one thousand six hundred fifty and six, will bring forth some strange alteration in the world. Alsted. Chron. p. 494. Others, think the world will be then at an end, and they ground upon this Chrongramme, MƲnDI Conf Lagrat Io. [In the likeness of God made he him.] This is much inculcated, that it may be much observed, and we much humbled, that have parted with so fair a patrimony; striving as much as may be, . Heb. 1.3. to recover it in Christ, who being the express Image of his Fathers Person, is both apt and able to re∣new that lost Image of God in us, by his Merit and Spirit, by his Value and Vertue. Vers. 2. Blunts Voyage, p. 122. Male and female, created he them.] The Jews at this day have base conceits of women: as that they have not so divine a soul, as men; that they are of a lower creation, made onely for the propagation and pleasure of man, &c. And therefore, they suffer them not to enter the Synagogue, but appoint them a gal∣lery without. Matth, 22. Thus they err, not knowing the Scriptures. See the Notes on Chap. 2. v. 22.
Vers. 3. Adam lived one hundred and thirty yeers, and begat] This was a great tryal to his faith, to wait so long for a better issue, when the Cainites spred amain, erected cities, and perhaps meditated Monarchies. [After his own image] Corruptus cor∣ruptum: For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, Job 14.4. John 3. saith Job? That which is of the flesh is flesh, saith our Saviour, and we can say no better of it. This is hard to perswade men to; for each one is apt to think his own peny good silver: And a dead woman will have four to carry her forth, as the Proverb hath it. The Pharisee, bad enough, though he be, yet is very brag of his good estate to God-ward: And Novatus cryes out, Non habeo, Domine, quod mihi ignoscas. How much better Saint Augustine, Ego admisi, Domine, unde tu damnare potes me; sed non amisisti, unde tusalvre potes me. One hath destroyed me, but of thee is my help; my safety here, and salvation hereafter. Lord I am Hell, but thou art Heaven, as that Martyr once said, &c. B. Hooper. Psal. 42. One depth calleth upon another; the depth of my misery, the depth of thy mercy. Heaven denyes me, earth grones under me, Hell gapes for me: Help Lord, or thy servant perisheth, Psal. 51 2. Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and purge me from my sin; whether that im∣puted to me, inherent in me, or issuing from me. V. 4. He begat sons and daughters.] Philo and Epiphanius give him twelve sons, Beda thirty sons, and as many daughters. Vers. 5. Nine hundred and thirty yeers,] Till the fifty sixt yeer of the Patriark Lamech. In all which time, he (doubtless) in∣structed his good nephews, in all those great things, which him∣self had learned from Gods mouth, and proved in his own ex∣perience, what that good, and holy, and acceptable Will of God was. Moreover, out of his mouth, as out of a Fountain, Rom. 12.. flowed whatsoever profitable Doctrine, Discipline, Skill and Wisdom, is in the world. [And he dyed.] This is not in vain so often itera∣ted in this Chapter; for there is in us by nature, a secret conceit of immortality, and we can hardly be beaten out of it. That all must dye, every man will yield; but that he may live yet, a day longer at least, there is none but hopeth. We can see death in other mens brows, but not in our own bosomes. It must make forcible entry, and break in violently: , Matth. 24.51. 2 Cor. .4. God must cut men in twain, and tear their souls from their bodies, ere they will yield to die. The best are too backward, and would not be unclothed, but clothed upon, if they might have their will. Moses himself
prayes, Psal 9.12. Lord teach us so to number our days, that we may apply, (or, as the Hebrew hath it,) that we may cause our hearts to come to wisdom: Cause them to come, whther they will or no; for naturally they hang off, and would not come to any such bargain. How needful is it therefore to be told us, that Adam died, that Seth, Enos and Cinan died, &c. That this may be, as a hand∣writing on the Wall, to tell us, That we must also dye, and come to judgment. Vers. 9. Enos begat Cainan.] Enosh, that is, Sorry man be∣gat Cainan; i. e. A man of sorrows. Thus the Fathers, though long-lived, were not unmindful of their mortality and misery. Vers. 20. Nine hundred sixty and two yeers.] Rabbi Levi, citante Genebrardo, Genebr. Chron. long aevitatem patriarcharum opus providentiae, non naturae appellat. Their children also, that they waited so long for, were not more the issue of their bodies, then of their faith. Vers. 23. All the days of Enoch, were three hundred sixty and five yeers.] So many yeers onely lived Henoch, as there be days in the yeer. But what he wanted in the shortning of his time, was made up in his son Methuselah the longest liver: Besides that, God took him to a better place, transplanted him, as it were out of the Kitchin-garden into his heavenly Paradise; Cant 6.2. To gather Lil∣lies, i. e. To transplant his people into Heaven. which was not more to his own benefit, then to the comfort of the other Patri∣arks, that survived him, against the fear of death, and the crosses of life: Sith in Henoch (what discouragement soever they had in Abels death) they had an ocular demonstration, that there is a re∣ward for the righteous, and that it is not altogether in vain to walk with God. Vers. 24. And Enoch walked with God.] And so condemned the World: First, Heb. 11. by his life; secondly, at his death. By his life, in that he kept a constant counter-motion to the corrupt courses of the times; not onely not swimming down the stream with the wicked, but denouncing Gods severe judgment against them, even to the extream curse of Anathema Maranatha, Jude 14. as Saint Jude tells us. Secondly, By his death he condemned them: In that so strange a Testimony of Gods grace and glory, in his won∣derful translation, did not affect and move them to amend their evil manners. The Heathens had heard somewhat afar off, concern∣ing this Candidate of Immortality, Alsted. Chron. p. 85. as the Ancients call him, and thence grounded their Apotheôses. Eupolemon saith, That their
Atlas was Henoch, as their Janus was Nah. Gentes sunt An∣tbrislus um suis asseclis. Paaeus. Jac. Revi hist. Pontif. Rom. p 309. And how fitly are the Papists called Heathens by Saint John, Revel. 11.2. Sith be∣sides their Atlas of Rome, on whose shoulders the whole Church (that new heaven) must rest; there was at Ruremund in Gilder∣land a play acted by the Jesuites, Anno 1622, under the title of the Apotheosis of Saint Ignatius. Vers. 27. And all the days of Methuselah.] He lived longest of any, yet wanted thirty one yeers of a thousand. Nemo patriar∣charum mille annos complevit, qua numerus iste typum babe∣at perfectionis. ic nulla per∣fectio pietatis. Occolampad. Oecolampa∣dius thinks there was a mystery in this, that they all dyed short of a thousand, which is a type of perfection; To teach us, saith he, that live we never so long here, and grow we never so fast in Grace, we cannot possibly be perfect, till we get to Heaven. Henoch lived long in a little time; and foreseeing the flood, named his son Methuselah; that is to say, He dyeth, and the dart (or flood) cometh. And so it fell out; for no sooner was his head laid, but in came the flood. Isai. 57.1. The righteous are taken away from the evil to come: And their death is a sad presage of an imminent calamity. Hippo could not be taken, whiles Augustine lived, nor Heidelberg while Paraeus. Semen sanctum statumen terrae, Isai. 6.13. Junius. The holy Seed upholdeth the State. Tertul. Absque stationibus non staret mun∣dus. The innocent shall deliver the Iland, and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hands alone, Job 22.30. When, one sinner de∣stroyeth much good, Eccles 9.18. Paulin. Nolan. in vita Ambros. De Fabio Cun∣ctatore, Silius. Ambrose is said to have been the Walls of Italy. Stilico the Earl said, That his death did threaten destruction to that Countrey. Hic patria est, murique urbis stant pectore in uno. Vers. 29. This same shall comfort us.] Herein a figure of Christ. And Peter Martyr thinks that Lamech was in hope, that this son of his would have been the Christ: A pardonable error, proceeding from an earnest desire of seeing his day, whom their souls loved, and longed for: Saluting the promise afar off, , Heb. 11. Heb. 11. and waiting for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. Vers. 32. And Nah begat Sem, Ham, and Japheth.] Twenty yeers he had heard from God, That the world should be destroy∣ed, before he had any childe. Revel. 14. Here was the Faith and patience of this Saint. At length he hath Japheth first; though Shem be first named, because he was in dignity preferred, before his brother, to be grandfather to the Messiah. Now any relation to Christ, en∣nobleth either place or person. If it were an honor to Mark to have been Barnabas his sisters son, what is it then to be allyed to
the son of God? Mic. 5.2. Matth. 2.6. Bethlehem where he was born, though it were least, saith Micah; yet it was not the least, saith Matthew, among all the cities of Judah, because out of it should come Christ the Governor. CHAP. VI. Verse 1. When men began to multiply.] NOt good men onely, but bad men too; who therefore took them more wives then one, that they might multiply amain. A numerous off-spring is no sure signe of Gods special favor. It is well observed, That when God promised children as a blessing, he said, Psal. 118.3. Psal. 104.15. Judg. 9.13. The wife should be as the vine, and the children as olive plants: Two of the best fruits, the one for chearing the heart, the other for clearing the face; the one for sweetness, the other for fatness. Blessed is the man that hath his quiver full of such, as are as the arrows of a strong man. Whence it follows, That they must have more in them thn nature; for arrows are not arrows by growth, but by art: So they must be such children, the knottiness of whose nature is refined and reformed, and made smooth by Grace. This workmanship of God in the hearts and lives of children, is like the graving of a Kings Pallace, or the pollished corners of the tem∣ple. Psal. 144.12. This preserves Jacob from confusion, and his face from waxing pale. This makes religious parents to sanctifie Gods name, even to sanctifie the holy One, and with singular en∣couragement from the God of Israel, Isai. 29.22, 23. It never goes well with the Church, but when the Son marries the Mother, Isai. 62.5. Vers. 2. That the sons of God saw the daughters.] Sons of God, such as had called themselves by his name, Chap. 4.26. his peculiar professant people, called Sons of Jehovah, Deut. 14.1. yea, his first-born, and so higher then the Kings of the earth, Psal. 89.27. Dan. 7.17, 18. Hence Dan. 7. after mention made of the four Monarchies, a greater then them all succeedeth; and that is the Kingdom of the Saints of the most high. Saints at large he meaneth; all that have made a covenant with him by sacrifice, Psal. 50.5. Now we read of sacrificing Sodomites, Isai. 1, 10. sinners in Sion, Isai. 33.14. profligate professors, Matth. 7.23. That, though called
Israel yet, are to God as Ethiopians, Amos 9.7. Such were these Sons of God. [Saw the daughters of men, that they were fair.] Beauty is a dangerous bait, and lust is sharp-sighted. It is not safe gazing on a fair woman: How many have died of the wound in the eye? No one means hath so enriched hell, as beauti∣ful faces. Take heed our eyes be not windows of wickedness, and loop-holes of lust. Make a covenant with them as Joh: Job 31.1. Pray against the abuse of them with David, Psal. 119.37. and curb them from for∣bidden objects, as Nazianzen, who had learned  to nurture his eyes, as himself tells us. See the Note on Chap. 3.6. [They took them wives.] Of their own heads with∣out Gods license, or parents consent, as Esau did: And of all which they chose, that is, That they liked and loved. Thus, Amor sormae ra∣tionis est oblivio, insaniae proxi∣mus, turbat cou∣silia, altos & gencrosos spiri∣tus frangit. Jerom. Eccles. 11. as some marry by their ears, upon meer hear-say; others, by their fingers ends, for money: so these gallants married by their eyes, they were led by the lust of their hearts, and sight of their eyes, as Solomons yonker; not considering that favor is deceitful, beauty, vanity, &c. And that many a woman is like Helen without, but Hecuba within, or an Earthen potsherd covered with silver-dross, Prov. 26.23. Vers. 3. My spirit shall not alway strive.] That is, I'll consult no longer, but resolve to ruine them (as some gloss it:) Or, I'll pull the sword out of the sheath, the soul out of the body; as others gather out of the Hebrew word here used. Sunt qui dedu∣ctum volunt à Nadan Vagina. But they do best (in my minde) that sense it thus: My Spirit, whreby I hither∣to went and Preached, by Noe and other Patriarks, to those spirits (once in pleasure, now) in prison, but prevailed not, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. shall not al∣way strive with perverse men by preaching, disputing, convincing, in the mouths of my servants, whom I have sent unto them; nor in their own mindes and consciences, by inward checks and motions, which they have made no good use of. Delicata res est spiritus Dei. Grieve it once, and you may drive it away for ever. Ideò detriores sumus, quia meliores esse d∣bmus. Sav. It bloweth where it listeth, and will not be at your whistle. [For that he also is flesh,] He is therefore the worse, because he ought to be better. God expects singular things from his people, and takes it ill, when they are carnal and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. They should be higher then others by head and shoulders, as Saul was; and all that is in them, or comes from them, should be as the fruit of the trees in Paradise, fair to the eye, and swet to the taste. [Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty yeers.] It shall be so
long ere I destroy. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. 2 Pet 2.5. This long-suffering of God is celebrated by St. Peter, and well it may; for had he not been God, and not man, he could never have held his hands so long. Neither indeed did he; for so extream was the provocation, that he cut them off twenty yeers of this promised count: That all the earth might know to their wo, Numb. 14.34. his breach of promise. Vers. 4. There were Gyants.] Gigantes, quasi , Earth∣sprung. John 3.31. They were of the earth, they spake of the earth, and the earth heard them. Heard them. I say, and fell before them; as the beasts of the field do before the roaring Lyon. Hence they are called in Hebrew Nephilim; such as being faln from God, fell upon men, Job 1.15. and by fear and force, made others fall before them. Thus they sought to renown and raise themselves, by depressing others, and doing violence. But this was not the way: For now they lie shrowded in the sheet of shame. To do Worthily in Ephrata, is to be famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.11. To be patiently perseverant in well-doing, is to seek for glory and honor; yea, to attain immortality and eternal life, Romans 2.7. Vers. 5. The wickedness of man was great in the earth.] Which was now grown so foul, that God saw it but time to wash it with a flood; as he shall shortly do again with streams of fire. He destroyed the world then with water, for the heat of lust, he shall destroy it with fire, for the coldness of love, as saith Ludolfus. Devita Christi. l. 2. c. 7. [And that every imagination of the thoughts,] Omne figmentum cogitationum: The whole fiction, or every creature of the heart, as the Apostle hath it, Hebr. 4.13. speaking there of the thoughts, All the thoughts exten∣sively are inten∣sively onely evil, and proten∣sively continu∣ally. and intents of the heart. There is a general ataxy, the whole frame is out of frame. The understand∣ing dark as hell, and yet proud as the devil. The will cross and overthwart. The memory slippery and waterish, to receive and re∣tain good impressions; but of a marble firmness, to hold fast that which is evil. The affections crooked and preposterous. The very tongue a world of wickedness, what then the heart? Si trabes in oculo, strues in corde. The operations thereof are evil, onely evil; Every day evil, saith this Text: And assigneth it for the source of the old worlds wickedness. David also resolves his adultery and murther, into this pravity of his nature, as the principle of it, Psal. 51.5. so doth Job, Chap. 40.4. Paul, Rom. 7.24. Isaiah, Chap. 6.5. The whole Church (Isai. 64.6.) cryes out,
Ʋnclean, Ʋnclean; and Chap. 53.6. Lev. 13.45. Esa. 1.3. All we like sheep have gone astray. Now as no creature is more apt to wander, so none less able to return, then a sheep. The Oxe knoweth his owner, the Asse his masters crib. The very Swine accustomed to the trough, if he goe abroad, yet at night will finde the way home again: Not so the Sheep. Loe such is man. Quintilian therefore was quite out when he said, It is more marvell that one man sinneth, then that all men should live honestly: sin is so against the nature of man. But he erred, not knowing the Scripture. For doe ye think, Jam. 4.5. saith St. James (alluding to this text) that the Scripture saith in vaine, The spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy? The civill mans na∣mans nature is as bad as the worst, not changed, but chained up: Truely said Tully, Cum primùm nascimur in omni continuò pravi∣tate versamur. We are no sooner born then buried in a bog of wickedness. Vers. 6. And it repented the Lord, &c. and it grieved him] These things are spoken of God, , after the manner of men; but must be taken and understood , as it beseemeth God. Perkins. When Repentance is attributed to God (saith Mr. Perkins) it noteth onely the alteration of things and actions done by him, and no change of his purpose and secret decree, which is im∣mutable. M. Gataker. Gods repentance (saith another learned Divine) is not a change of his will, but of his work: Repentance with man, is the changing of his will: Repentance with God, is the willing of a change: Mutatiorei, non Dei; effectus, non affectus; facti, non consilii. Vers. 7. I will destroy man] See here the venemous and mis∣chievous nature of sin: It causeth God to make a World, and again to unmake it: it sets him against Man his Master-piece, and makes him (though he be ) not onely to devise, but to delight in the destruction of his owne creature, to mock at, and make merry in his calamity, Prov. 1.26. to deliver the beloved of his soule into the hands of the destroyer. Time was, when Christ, being by at the Creation, Jer. 12 7. rejoyced in this habitable part of Gods earth, & his delights were with the sons of men, Prov. 8.31. But since the Fall it is far otherwise; Haba. 1. for he is of more pure eyes the to be∣hold sin with patience: He hates it worse then he hates the Devill: for he hates the Devill for sins sake, and not sin for the Devills sake. Now the naturall and next effect of hatred, is revenge. Hence he resolves, I will destroy man. [Both man and beast, the
creeping thing, &c.] Why, what have those poore sheep done? They are all undone by mans sin, and are (for his punishment) to perish with him, as they were created for him. This is a piece of that bondage they are still subject to; and grievously groan under, waiting deliverance, Rom. 8.21, 22. Vers. 8. But Noh found grace] Because in Covenant with God; who of himself was a childe of wrath, and saved by grace onely, though just and perfect in his generation. The Mercy-seat was no larger then the Arke; to shew, that the grace of God ex∣tends no further then the Covenant: As all out of the Arke were drowned, so all out of the Covenant are damned. Vers. 9. Justitia Impuaa, Impertita. Noah was a just man] By a two-fold justice, 1. Im∣puted. 2. Imparted By the former he was justified; by the latter sanctified: and note, that he found grace in Gods eyes, before he was either of these; for Grace is the foundation of all our felicity, and comprehends all blessings, as Mannah is said to have done all good tastes. Ecclesiasticus. [Perfect in his generation] At best in those worst times, which is a singular commendation; and perfect, that is, up∣right; Heb. 13.18. ayming at perfection, willing in all things to please God; and yet not more desiring to be perfect, then hating to seem onely to be so. Or, Noah was perfect, compared to that sinfull genera∣tion; which yet gloried in the title of the sons of God, and chil∣dren of the Church. But was not Judas called Friend, and Dives Son? Matth. 26. Luk. 16. Hath not many a Ship been known by the name of Safeguard and Good-speed, which yet hath dashed upon the rocks, or miscar∣ried by Pirates? Externall priviledges profit not, where the heart is not upright, but increase wrath. It was an aggravation to Solo∣mons sin, That God had appeared unto him twice; and that he had been timely forewarned by his mother to beware of wine and women, 1. King. 11.9. Prov. 31.3.4. Prov. 31. both which he was afterwards, neverthelesse, most inordinately addicted to, Eccles. 2. Vers. 11. The earth also was corrupt before God] Or, rotten, putrid, and stanke againe. Sin is an offence to all Gods senses; yea to his very soul, as he complaines, Esa. 1.1. to 16. Oh that it were so to ours then would we not hide it under our tongues (as a childe doth sugar) and harbour it in our hearts; yea let it eat of our meat, and drink of our cup, and lye in our bosomes, as the poor mans lamb did in Nathans parable. Lust was but a stranger to David, 2 Sam. 11.3 as the Prophet there intimates, vers. 4. At other times, and when himself, I hate vain thoughts, saith he, Psal. 119, 113.
yea every false way, 104. as the vomit of a dog, as the devils ex∣crements, as the putrifaction of a dead soul, dead in trespasses; dead and rotten, as here, stinking worse before God, . Job. 11. then Lazarus did or could doe, after he had lain four dayes in the grave. Vers. 12. All flesh had corrupted his way] Generall defection precedes generall destruction; as here all sorts and sexes were fallen from God. All kinde of sins were common amongst them. In the family promiscuous lusts, unlawfull marriages, &c. In the State tyranny, violence, injustice: In the Church contempt of Gods word, abuse of his patience to presumption; of his bounty to secu∣rity in sin. For they eat, they dranke, they married, they planted, they builded, &c. And all this they did constantly and pleasantly, passing from eating to drinking; from drinking to marrying; (for Venus in vinis, and gluttony is the Gallery that wantonnesse walks through) from marrying to planting, for the use of poste∣rity, as St. Luke weetly sets forth by an elegant Asynd. , &c. Luke 17.27. All this they did, and God was silent, therefore their hearts grew fat as brawn, and they knew nothing, saith our Saviour, nor would know, till the very day that the flood came: Into such a dead le∣thargy were they cast by their sins, which were therefore grown ripe, and ready for the sickle. Vers. 13. The end of all flesh is come before me] I will surely, Certissimè ci∣tissimeque. and swiftly destroy them. A like threatning there is used, Ezek 7.2, 3, 6. against Israel, when once their sins were full ripe, and hang'd but for mowing, as we say. The end is come, is come, is come, and so some ten or twelve times, is come, is come, q. d. destruction is at next doore by, and Noah must know it too: Not by his skill in Astrologie, as Berosus belyes him, but by divine praemoni∣tion. Gen. 18.17. Psal. 25.14. Amos 3.7. For shall I hide from Noah (from Abraham) that thing which I doe? No surely; they shall know all: they shall be both of Gods Come and Coell; For the secr of the Lord is with them that feare him. And the Lord will doe nothing (of this nature) but he will first reveal it unto his servants the Prophets. And even to this day, the more faithfull and familiar we are with God, so much the sooner, and better do we foresee his judgements, and can foreshew them to others; as those that are well acquainted with men, know by their looks and gestures that which strangers understand not, but by their actions. As finer tumpers are more sensible of the changes of weather, &c. [I will destroy them]: I
will corrupt them (so the Hebrew hath it) I will punish them in kinde, pay them in their own coyn, corrupt them from the earth, as they have corrupted themselves in the earth, which also now is burdened with them, and cryes to me for a vomit to spue them out. Vers. 14. Make thee an Ark] Or chest, or coffin. And indeed by the description here set down, the Arke, in shape, was like to a coffin for a mans body, six times so long as it was broad, and ten times so long as it was high: And so fit to figure out (saith an Interpreter) Christs death and buriall, Mr. Ainsworth. and ours with him, by mor∣tification of the old man: as the Apostle applies this type to baptisme, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. whereby we are become dead and buried with Christ, Rom. 6.3, 4, 6. Vers. 16. A window shalt thou make] The Arke had little outward light, so the Church, till she become triumphant. There could not but be much stench among all those creatures, though shut up in severall rooms; Heb. 5. ult. so here, there is much annoyance to those that have their senses exercised to discern good and evill. Com∣pare the estate of Prince Charles, in his Queen-mothers womb with his condition at full age, in all the glory of his fathers Court, there is a broad difference. And it may fitly resemble (saith One) the difference of our present and future estate; while the Church doth here travell of us, we are pent up in darke cloysters, and annoyed with much stench of sinne, Baines Lett. both in our selves and others; but when we come to heaven, we shall see and enjoy the light of life, our feet shall be as hindes feet, upon the everlasting mountaines. Vers. 17. And behold I, even I] Verba stomachantis, & confirmantis veritatem comminationis suae. Abused mercy turnes into fury. Mimus. God will not alway serve men for a sinning-stock. Crudelem medicum intemperans ager facit. [Every thing, that is in the earth, shall dye] A dismall doom; and God is now absolute in his threatning, because he will be resolute in his execution: Oh tremble and sin not; Psal. 4. while others sin and tremble not. Kisse the Son, lest he be angry; Who knoweth the power of his anger? Surely according to our fear, Psal. 90.11. is his wrath. It is a just presage and desert of ruine, not to be warned. God hath hang'd up the old world in gibbets, as it were, for our admonition. Worthily are they made examples, that will not take them. Who pities the second Captaine, consumed by fire with his company, 2 King. 1. sith he had a fair
warning, but would not beware by it. Mal. 4.1. Behold the day of the Lord commeth, that shall burne as an Oven. This last day was foretold by Enoch, before the deluge was by Noah. Longer it is before it comes, but shall be more terrible when it is come. Vers. 18. Thou and thy sons] Yet Ham, soon after, degenera∣ted: for the present he concealed his wickedness from men, from God he could not. He beares with hypocrites in his visible Church for a season, till the time of separation. Augusti. Matth. 3.12. Zach. 14.21. In area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt. He will throughly purge his floore. The Canaanite shall not be in the land any longer; nor the uncleane spirit, Zach. 13.2. O faelicem illam dieculam▪ Vers. 20. Two of every sort shall come unto thee] For they are all thy servants, saith David, they wait upon thy word. Psal. 119.91. This Noah might make good use of, and did, no doubt. See how sequacious these poor creatures are to God their Centurion. If he bid them come, they come; if go, they go. And shall not I obey God, and follow his call, be there never so many Lions in my way? Vers. 21. Take thou unto thee of all food] God could have kept them alive without either food or arke. But he will have us serve his providence, in use of lawfull means; and so to trust him, as that we do not tempt him. Vers. 22. Thus did Noah, according to all, &c.] The wicked world could not slout him out of his faith; Heb. 11.7. but that moved with fear, he preacheth, and buildeth, and finisheth; He preached without prea∣ching saith Ba∣sil of Selucia. every stroke upon the Arke, being a reall Sermon (as Nazianzen hath it) to forewarn them to flee from the wrath to come; which yet they did not: No not the very Ship-wrights that made the Arke, but were all buried together, in one universall grave of waters. CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. For thee have I seen righteous before me] NOt onely before men, as Pharisees, Luke 16.15. and civill Justitiaries, Rom. 2.29. but before me who see the inside, and love truth in the hidden man of the heart. Psal. 51.6. 1 Pet. 3.5. And here Noahs sin∣cerity prevailed with God for his safety, as did likewise Lots,
whom God hid in Zoar; and Abrahams, to whom God was a shield to save him from the deadly thrusts of destruction, when he pursued the four Kings and foyled them, because he walked before him, and was upright, Gen. 15.1. with Gen. 14.15, So true is that of Solomon, Prov. 10.9. Prov. 14.26. Isai. 26.3. He that walketh uprightly, walketh safely, as if he were in a tower of brass, or town of war. And again, In the fear of the Lord is strong considence, and his children have a place of refuge. The old Rock is still ready to relieve them. [In this generation.] 2 Pet. 2.5. Called by Saint Peter, a world of ungodly ones, far worse, no doubt, then those in Henochs days. The greater praise was it to Noah, that (by an holy Antiperistasis) he kindled from their coldness, and became nothing the worse, but much the better (as it is the nature of true goodness) by their oppositions. It was an invincible Faith, whereby he both conquered the world, and condemned it. What else could have carried him over so many difficulties, as he must needs encounter? Well might the Apostle say, Heb. 11.7. By faith he prepared an Ark. For if he had been led by sense, he would have fled as far as Jonas did, ere ever he had gone about it. Vers. 2. Of every clean beast, thou shalt take by sevens.] Three pair for generation, and a single one for sacrifice, after the flood was past, as Chap. 8.20. God must have a moyet, and good rea∣son. But that two onely of a sort, of the unclean hurtful crea∣tures, were preserved, note his fatherly providence. To this day we see, though sheep and birds be so killed up for mans use, yet there are far more of them, then of other unserviceable or cruel creatures. Besides, the weaker creatures go in herds together, the stronger and savager go alone. For if they should go in mul∣titudes, no man, nor beast could stand before them. This you shall finde set down to your hand, Job 37. Psal. 104. Ammianus Marcellinus writeth, That in Chaldaea there are a huge number of Lyons, which were like enough to devour up both men and beasts, throughout the Countrey. But withal, he saith, That by reason of the store of water and mud thereof, there breed yeerly an innumerable company of gnats, whose property is to flee into the eye of the Lyon, as being a bright and orient thing: Where biting and stinging the Lyon, he teareth so fiercely with his claws, that he puts out his own eyes: And by that means many are drowned in the rivers, Boin. in Thea∣tro. lib. 3. others starve for want of prey; and many the more easily killed by the inhabitants. Bodin telleth us, That
the Wolf never seeth his sire, his dam, nor his young: For that, the herd of Wolves sets upon, and killeth that Wolf, which by the smell they perceive to have coupled with the she-wolf; which unless they did, what a deal of mischief would be done by them every where among cattle? Vers. 4. For yet seven days, &c.] God could have destroyed them by water, or otherwise, in a far shorter space: But, of his Free-grace, he gives them yet seven days further, and then rains upon the earth fourty days, as not willing that any should eter∣nally perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Hebrew Doctors (as they are very injurious to Noah, because we read not that he prayed for the old world, but onely took care of himself, and his own family, censuring him therefore of self-love and hard-heartedness; so they judg very uncharitably of those that perished in the flood; sending them all to hell, and wresting some Scriptures thereunto: As, that in this present verse, God saith, He will destroy them, or blot them out; That is, R. Menachem, in loc. (say they) out of the land of the world to come, the land of the living. I deny not, but many of their spirits are in prison, so saith Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.19. But withal, in the next Chapter, the same Apostle tells us, That for this cause, the Gospel was preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit. Compare these words with those 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. and it will appear, the Apostle speaks of these Antediluvians. All were not saved that were in the Ark, nor all damned, we may well think, that were out of it. Could they see their foundation overflown with a flood (as the phrase is, Job 22.16.) and not lay for themselves a good foundation by laying hold on eternal life? 1 Tim. 6.19. Saint Am∣brose conceiveth, that Noah was seven days in the Ark, afore the flood came: That as God was six days in creating the world, and rested the seventh; so these perishing persons, admonished by the number of the days of the Creation, Eccles. 12.1. might remember their Creator, and make their peace. Nunquam serò, si seriò. Vers. 5. And Noah did according unto all.] This (All,) is a little word, but of large extent, He doth not his masters, but his own will, that doth no more then himself will. A dispensatory conscience is an evil conscience. God cryes to us,
Quicquid prop∣ter Dm fit, aqualis or fit. . He will have universal obedience, both for subject and object. We must be entirely willing in all things to please God, or weutterly displease him. Herod did many things and was not a but∣ton the better. Jehu's golden calves made an end of him, though he made an end of Baals worship. He that doth some, and not all Gods wills, , Acts 13.22. with David (in desire and affection, at least) doth but as Benhadad, recover of one disease and die of another: yea, if he take not a better course for himself, he doth but take pains to go to hell. Psal. 119.6. Then shall we not be ashamed, when we have respect (at least) to all Gods Commandments. Vers. 7. And Noah went in and his sons, &c.] Not till he was compelled by the coming in of the flood, say the Jews: Of no good will, but because there was no other remedy. Thus they belye the good old Preacher. Let no man think much to be mis-judged. Jo. Wooveius in Polymath. Novit sapiens ad hoc scomma se productum, ut depugnet cum iis, qui maledictis aluntur, ut venenis capreae. Vers 9. There went in two and two,] Of their own accord, by divine instinct. Noah was not put to the pains of hunting after them, or driving them in. Onely he seems to have been six days in receiving, and disposing of them in their several cells, and fetch∣ing in food. When God bids us do this or that, never stand to cast perils; but set upon the work, yield the obedience of Faith, and fear nothing. The creatures came into Noah, without his care or cost. He had no more to do, but to take them in, and place them. The Prophet alldes hereto, sai. 11.6, 7. all bloodi∣ness and rapine laid aside. Vers. 10. The waters of the flood were upon the earth,] God is as faithful in his menaces, Zeph. 3.5. as in his promises. The wicked think them but wind, but they shall feel them to be fire, Jere. 5.14. Your fathers where are they? Vexatio dat in∣tellectum. Did not my words (though never so much slighted) lay hold upon them? And they returned (that is, changed their mindes, when they smarted) and said, Like as the Lord thought to do unto us, so hath he delt with us, Zach. 1.5, 6. There wanted not those in the old world, that held all the threats of a flood to be interrorem onely; and, when they heard Noah thundering, Luke 20.16. put off all, as those in the Gospel with, God forbid. We cannot get men to believe, that God is so just, or the devil so black, or sin so heavy, or hell so hot; till it hath even closed her mouth upon them. Prov. 14.16. Prov. 12.3. The fool rageth and is confident, passeth on and is punished, and will not be better advised. But what said the Martyr, Brdford. They that tremble not in hearing, shall be crusht to
peeces in feeling. Gods wrath is such as none can avert or avoyd. Vers. 11. In the second moneth] In April, as it is thought; then when every thing was in its prime, and pride, birds chirping, trees sprouting, &c. nothing less looked for then a flood; then God shot at them with an arrow suddenly, as saith the Psalmist: Psal 64.7. 1 Thes. 5.3. So shall sudden destruction come upon the wicked at last day, when they lest look for it. So the Sun shone fair upon Sodom the same day, wherein, ere night, it was fearfully consumed. What can be more lovely to look on, then the corn-field a day before harvest, or a vineyard before the vintage? Nos quasi medi∣os inter duo s∣pulchra posuit. [All the fountains of the great deep, &c.] So, we live continually betwixt two deaths, the waters above and below us. Serve the Lord with fear. Vers. 13. In the self same day.] Things are repeated, that they may be the better observed, and the greatness of the mercy the more acknowledged; that God should single out so few, and save them, &c. Vers. 16. And the Lord shut him in.] A mean office, one would think, for God to shut the door after Noah. He could not well do it himself, (the door doubtless being great and heavy,) and others that were without would not do him so much service. God therefore doth it himself, and therefore it could not but be well done indeed. In a case of necessity, we need not question Gods readiness, to do us any good office, so long as we keep close to him in a holy Communion. In a Letter of B. Hoopers, 2 Chron. 15.2. to certain good people, taken praying in Bowe Church-yard, and now in trouble, thus he writes. Read the second Chapter of Luke; there the shep∣herds that watched upon their sheep all night, assoon as they heard Christ was born at Bethlehem, by and by they went to see him. They did not reason, nor debate with themselves, Act. & Mon. fol. 1347. who should keep the Wolf from the sheep in the mean while; but did as they were com∣manded, and committed their sheep to him, whose pleasure they obeyed. So let us do; now we be called, commit all other things to him, that calleth us. He will take heed that all things shall be well; he will help the husband, comfort the wife, guide the servants, keep the house, preserve the goods: yea, rather then it shall be undone, he will wash the dishes, and rock the cradle. Cast therefore all your care upon God, &c. Thus he. Vers. 17. It was lift up above the waters.] Afterwards, it went upon the face of the waters; till at last, the highest hills
were covered with waters, the Ark floting upon the surface of them, and not swallowed up by them. In reference whereunto David prayes, Psal. 69.15. Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up. The true Christian may be tossed on the waters of affliction, yea, dowced over head and ears: and as a drowning man, sink twice to the bottom; yet shall up again, if out of the deep, he call upon God, as Jonah did. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, Jonas 2.4. (there you may take him up for dead) yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple, (there he revives, and recovers comfort:) yea, though Hell had swallowed up a servant of God into her bowels, yet it must, in despight of it, render him up, as the Whale did Jonas; which, if he had light upon the Mariners, would have devoured and disgested twenty of them in less space. Vers. 19. And all the high hills.] So high, some of them, that their tops are above the clouds and winds. And yet as high as they were, they could not save those from the flood that fled to them. Surely, (might they say) in vain is salvation hoped for from the mountains, Isaiah 3.23. Well for them, if (taught by their present distress and danger) they could go on with the Church there, and say, Surely, in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. Happy storm, that beats us into the Harbor! Vers. 21. And every man died.] Now these mockers behold that Ark with envy, that er'st they beheld with scorn; they wish themselves in the darkest corner of it, that lately laughed at it; and perhaps did what they could, Verismile est non abstinuisse manus ab opere turbando. Piscat. to hinder the finishing of it. Yea some, likely, to save them from drowning, caught at and clang as fast to the outside of the Ark, as Joab for the same cause, did to the horns of the Altar. But all in vain: For Vers. 22. All in whose nostrils was the breath of life died, of all that was in the dry land.] This last clause exempteth fishes; though the Jews would needs perswade us, that these also died; for that the waters of the flood were boyling hot. But rain∣water useth not to be hot, we know; and therefore we reject this conceit as a Jewish fable.
CHAP. VIII. Vers. 1. And God remembred Noah] HE might begin to think that God had forgotten him; having not heard from God for five months together; Fuit in arca per annum integrum & decem dies. Piscator. and not yet seeing how he could possibly escape. He had been a whole year in the Arke, and now was ready to groan out that dolefull Ʋsque∣quò Domine: Hast thou forgotten to be mercifull, &c? But for∣getfulness befalls not the Almighty. The Butler may forget Joseph, and Joseph, his fathers house: Ahashuerosh may forget Mordecai, and the delivered City, Eccles. 9.15. the poor man that by his wisdome preser∣ved it: The Sichemites may forget Gideon; But God is not unfaith∣full to forget your worke and labour of love, saith the Apostle. Heb. 6.10. And there is a book of remembrance written before him, Mal. 3.16. saith the Pro∣phet, for them that feare the Lord. A metaphor from Kings that commonly keep a Callendar or Chronicle of such as have done them good service; as Ahashuerosh and Tamerlain, Esth. 6.1. who had a catalogue of their names and good deserts, which he daily perused, oftentimes saying that day to be lost, Turk. hist. p. 227. wherein he had not given them something. God also is said to have such a book of remem∣brance. Not that he hath so, or needeth to have: for all things both past and future, are present with him: he hath the Idaea of them within himself, and every thought is before his eyes, Psal. 139.16. so that he cannot be forgetfull. But he is said to remember his people (so he is pleased to speak to our capacity) when he sheweth his care of us, and makes good his promise to us. We also are said to be his remembrancers, when we plead his promise, Esa. 62.6. and presse him to per∣formance. Not that we perswade him thereby to do us good, but we perswade our own hearts to more faith, love, obedience, &c. whereby we become more capable of that good. [God made a wind] So he worketh usually by means, though he needeth them not. But many times his works are, as Luther speaketh, in contra∣riis mediis. As here he asswageth the waters by a wind, which na∣turally lifteth up the waves thereof, and inrageth them, Psal. 107.25. . Jon. 1.4. God worketh by contraries, saith Nazianzen, that he may be the more admired. Vers. 2. And the raine from heaven was restrained] These four keyes (say the Rabbines) God keeps under his own girdle; 1. Of
the Womb: 2. Of the Grave: 3. Of the Rain: 4. Of the heart. Revel. 3. He openeth, and no man shutteth; he shutteth, and no man openeth. Vers. 3. And the waters returned continually,] Or, hastily. Heb. In going and returning; or, heaving and shooving, with all possible speed to return to their place, at ods appointment. See a like cheerfulness in Gods servants, Zach 8.21. Isai. 60.8. Psal. 110.3. Vers. 4. Mountains of Ararat.] On the tops of the Gordaean Mountains (where Noahs Ark rested) we finde many ruines, The Prebers travels by Job. Cartwright. p. 32. Joseph. Antiq lib. 1. cap. 5. and huge foundations (saith the Preacher in his travels) of which no reason can be rendered, but that which Josephus gives; That they that escaped the flood, were so astonished and amazed, that they durst not descend into the Plains, and Low Countries, but kept on the tops of those Mountains, and there builded. Vers. 5. The waters decreased.] Not all on the sudden, but by little and little, Isa. 28.16. for exercise of Noahs faith. He that beleeveth, maketh not haste. God limiteth our sufferings for time, maner, and measure. Joseph was a prisoner till the time came. Smyr was in tribulation for ten days. Physick must have a time to work, and Gold must lye some-while in the fire. In the oppor∣tunity of time, . 1 Pet. 5.6. saith Peter, God will exalt you. Prescribe not to him, with those Bethulians in Judith: but wait his leasure, and let him do what is good in his own eyes. He waits a fit season to shew us mercy, Isai. 30.18. and thinks as long of the time, as we do. Vers. 7. And he sent forth a Raven] Which when it is made tame, though it delights in dead carcases, whereof Noah knew the earth was now full; yet doth not easily forget its station, but returns thereto, when nature is satisfied. [Which went forth to and fro.] Fluttered about the Ark, but kept out of it. Manet foris cum voce corvina, qui non habet simplicitatem columbinam, August. Vers. 8. Also he sent forth a Dove.] A bird that being swift and simple, ai. 60.8. willingly flies back to his Windows, through ove and faithfulness to his mate and young. Besides, he fleeth a long while together, and very near the ground, and so was fitter for this service. Josephus saith, That he came into the Ark with his feet and wings, wet and dirty, which could not but be good news to Noah.
Vers. 9. Psal. 38.10. My heart patth , as Merchants run from Country to Couany. Buchl. And the Dove found no rest] No more doth mans soul (Gods Turtle) till it rest in God. Domine, (saith Saint Augustine) fecisti nos ad te, ideoque cor nostrum inquietum est, done requieverit in te. Hic finis nostrae formationis, saith another, ut homo sit templum Dei, & Deus ara hominis. How oft doth the good soul cry, Oh that I had the wings of a Dove, &c. Or, if that Oh will not set him at liberty, she takes up that (wo) to express her misery: Wo is me that I sojourn in Meshec, &c. Vers. 11. In her mouth was an olive-leaf.] The olive never casteth her leaf, and is greenest in the spring, saith Pliny. It might very well continue so under water, during the flood. It may also very well, by an allegory, set forth that Grace and Peace by Jesus Christ, brought in the mouth of his Ministers in this Evening of the World, Rom. 10.15. The Dove returned at first without her errand; but sent again, she brought better tidings. . 2 Tim. 2.24. . Epictet. The Man of God must not onely be apt to teach, but patient, in meekness in∣structing those that oppose themselves; proving, if at any time God will give them repentance. All are not sent into the vineyard at the same hour of the day. Holy Melancthon, being himself new∣ly converted, thought it impossible for his hearers to withstand the evidence of the Gospel. But after he had been a Preacher a while, 'tis said he complained, That old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon. And yet, he wanted not afterwards the Seal of his Ministry. For, among many others converted by him, was that sweet Saint, George Prince of Anhalt, whose house was Ecclesia, Academia, Curia; Melch. Adam. and whose heart was so upright with God, his life so laudable amongst men, that Melancthon once, (publikely defending the certainty of our future felicity by this Argument, that godly men must be hereafter rewarded, wicked men punished,) he named this pious Prince, Scultet. ex ore Bucholceri, qu Melancthonis fuit auditor. as an unquestionable example of such a man, as might assuredly expect the promised Crown of Life eternal, which God the righteous Judg will give to all his, 2 Tim. 4.8. Vers. 16. Go forth of the Ark] Learn we of this holy Pa∣triark, to do all by Gods direction, and not dare to attempt any thing without his warrant; approving our selves to him in our comings in, and goings out. Psal. 91. He hath charged his Angels with us so long as we keep the Kings high way: Jere. 20.7. But if we go out of his precincts, we go out of his protection. Take counse at his mouth, and then we may safely say, Lord, if I be deceived, thou
hast deceived me. This, as at all times we have need to do, so now especially, when there is (as 2 Chron. 15.5)  peace to him that goeth out, nor to him that cometh in, but great vexation upon all countries. Nation being destroyed of Nation, and City of City, &c. Vers. 19. Every beast after their kinde.] Heb. after their families: That is, not confusedly and pell-mell (as we say) but distinctly and in order: The Lyon with the Lyoness, &c. every male with his female, the clean by themselves, and the unclean by themselves. And as these latter came to the Ark unclean, and unclean they departed; so do millions now-adays, to the Ordi∣nances. A Preacher hath as much joy to see them there, as John Baptist had to see the Pharisees thronging to his Baptism, when he cryed out, Matth. 3. O generation of vipers, who sent for you? who hath forewarned you, &c? Vers. 20. And Noah builded an altar to the Lord.] This was his first care, and so it was Abrahams where-ever he came. It must be also ours, after great deliverances especially. Gods mer∣cies are binders: Beneficium postlat officium. He is content we have the comfort of his blessings, so he may have the praise of them. This Pepper-corn is all the rent he looks for. O cover we Gods Altar with the calves of our lips, Heb. 13.15. Psal. 69.31. giving thanks to his name. This will please him better then an ox that hath horns and hoofs. Onely let it be done, the first thing that we do, after the receipt of a benefit, which else will soon wax stale and putrifie as fish. No part of the thank offering might be kept unspent to the third day. Hezekiah wrote his song the third day after his recovery. Noah was no sooner out of the Ark, but he offered on his new-built Altar; as well for testification of his thankfulness, as for con∣firmation of his Faith, in that Lamb of God, slain and sacrificed from the beginning of the world. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was now also in Christ reconciling this new world to himself. Vers. 21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor,] Heb. a savor of rest. —Minimo capi∣ur thuris honor Deu. . Isai. 1. Greek, , which the Apostle followeth, saying, That Christ gave himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice to God, for a small of sweet savor, Ephes. 5.2. All our sacrifices are accept∣ed for this of Christ, which otherwise would be turned off, with who required these things at your hands? The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord; yea, though he should bring thousands of rams, Micah 6.7. and ten thousand rivers of oy, with those mis∣creants in Micah, that by their munificence would fain have pur∣creants
chased a dispensation to sin: whereas Noah with his Oxe, Ram, Propter anima∣lia multa vel grandia non pla∣cuit. Peter. . He-goat, Turtle, and young Pigeon, laid in for him by God him∣self for this same purpose, is highly accepted in that beloved One, as Christ is called, Eph. 1.6. [The Lord said in his heart] All his promises are heart-sprung, the issue of a most faithfull and righteous will, void of any the least insincerity and falshood: whatsoever he speaks, he speaks from his heart; we may write upon't. The Eternity of Israel cannot lye, 1 Sam. 15.29. [I will not again curse the ground, &c for the imagination of mans heart] As who should say, Man doth but his kind now, in committing evill before me. He hath by his fall brought upon himself a miserable necessity of sinning, so that he cannot but doe wickedly with both hands earnestly; which though it be no excuse, Mic. 7.3. but an aggravation rather of his actuall sin (that he doth it out of the pravity of his nature) yet I will not take advantages to deal with him after his deserts; for then there would be no end of making worlds, and unmaking them againe. I will not curse, I will not smite any more. Esa. 9.13. Where note, That Gods smiting his creature, is a fruit of sin, and a peece of the curse. And unless men returne to him that smiteth them, all that they suffer here, is but a typicall hell. Here the leaves onely fall upon them, the trees will fall upon them hereafter. Vers. 27. While the earth remaineth] Heb. All the dayes of the earth. The earth then (though Solomon in some sense say it endu∣reth for ever) hath its set and certaine number of dayes appointed it by God. For the earth also, and the works therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 2.10. And this the Heathen had heard of, and hammered at; as Lucretius who disputes the matter out of naturall causes. So doth Tully, de nat. Deorum, lib. 1, 2. And Ovid. Metamorph. 1. Esse quoque in fatis meminit, &c. There he hath also a large relation of the generall flood in Deucalions dayes; so he calleth Noah. Lucian hath the like in his book, de Dea Syriae. And Plutarch speaketh of the sending forth of the Dove, Dialog. de in∣dustr. animal. and of her return unto Deucalion into the Ark. But we have a more sure word of Prophesie. [Cold and heat, and summer and winter, &c.] Lopez de Gomar, saith that the Kings of Mexico, when they are consecrated, Lopez de Gom. use to take their oath after this manner: I swear that the Sun, during my life shall bold on his course, and keep his wonted glory and brightnesse and that the clouds shall send down rain, the rivers shall run, and the earth bring forth all manner of fruit, &c. But can any of the vanities of the Heathen give rain, &c?
CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. Be fruitfull and multiply] HEre God reneweth the world by the same word wherewith he had created it; and being reconciled to mankinde, he bles∣seth them in like manner, as before the Fall. Sin once pardoned, is as if it never had been committed. Christ tells his returning Shula∣mite, that she was as amiable in every point as she had been before her relapse, Cant 7.1. Chap. 4.1. her haire, teeth, temples, all as faire, and well featured as ever. Vers. 2. And the feare of you, &c.] Timor, quo à bestiis timea∣mini, & terror quo bestias terreatis. Piscat. This is a peece of Gods Image yet remaining in man, that every nature of wild beasts, birds, Jam. 3.7. Monoceros inte∣rimi potest, capi nan potest Solin. creeping things, and things in the sea is tamed, and hath been tamed of the nature of man. Vers. 3. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you] God of his goodness grants here to mankinde, after the flood the use of flesh and wine, that the new and much-weakned world might have new and more strengthning nourishment. For it is not to be doubted, but that by the deluge, a great decay was wrought both in the earth with its fruits, and also in mans nature. Divers wales and scarres as it were, of Gods wrath and malediction did abide and appear in the earth. Sundry maladies also and infirmities befell mans body, not felt before the flood. God therefore in great mercy provides, penu quoddam & pharmacopolium mundo senescenti, new food and physick for the languishing world. Every moving thing that liveth, &c. Onely, as the green herb have I given you all things. That is, as you may use them as freely as you used to do herbes, so you must use them soberly, and without curiosity; taking such things as are at hand, and eating to live, not living to eat, as the rich glutton, that fared deliciously every day; Ingluvies, Horat. & tempestas, barathrumque macelli. Vers. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, the blood] Blood was forbidden, First, as not so wholsome food. Secondly, lest by being flesht in blood, they should become bloody minded. Thirdly, blood, the organ of life, is holy to God the authour of life (who was also to be pacified by the blood of his Son) and therefore they should not pollute or prophane it, by devouring thereof.
Vers. 5. Your blood of your lives will I require] i. e. I will punish it either by the Magistrate, or (if he faile to do his office) by mine own immediate hand; as he did in David, Flac. Illyric. Charles the ninth of France, Richard the third of England, Felix Count of Waterburg, and others, that either were above Law, or escaped the lash of it. See for this, The Thunderbolt of Gods judgements, lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 16. Richard the third, Daniels Chro. continued by Trussel. used the instruments of his bloody plots, as men do their candles; burn the first out to a snuffe and then having lighted another, tread that under foot. Vers. 6. Who so sheddeth mans blood] Some are of opinion, that before the flood, the punishment of murther and other capitall crimes, was onely excommunication, and exclusion from the Church and their fathers family. And that now first, God made murther to be a matter of death. The first-born had power, at first, over their own families, to bless, curse, cast out, dis-inherit, yea and punish with death, Gen. 38.24. even in case of adultery, Godw. Heb. Antiq. as some will have it thus among the people of God. But what a madness was that in the Egyptians to make no conscience of murther, that they might enjoy their lust? And what a blindness to make less account of murther then adultry? Gen. 12.13. The Preachers Travels by Jo Cartwright. I have seen (saith the Preacher in his travels) the King of Persia many times to alight from his horse, onely to do justice to a poor body. He punisheth theft and man-slaughter so severely, Les ombres des defuncts sciurs de Villemor & de Fontaues. pag. 46. that in an age a man shall not hear either of the one, or of the other. A severity fit for France; where within ten years, six thousand Gentlemen have been slain, saith he, as it appears by the Kings pardons. Vers. 9. And I, behold I establish my Covenant with you] This Covenant God had made with them before the flood; but here he renews it for their further confirmation; for he knows our in∣firmities, and therefore seals againe. This Covenant is said to be made with an oath, Isa. 54.9. yet we finde no such thing here ex∣pressed, because Gods bare word, is as sure as an oath. So God is said to have sworn to Abraham, that which he said to him onely, Exod. 32.13. with Gen. 12.7. Vers. 10. And with every living creature, &c.] Note this a∣gainst Anabaptists, who exclude Infants, for that they want the use of reason. And yet that was but a foolish reason of the Canonist, that Infants are therefore to be baptised, Sphinx Philos. pag. 229. because the Disciples brought to our Saviour, not the Asse onely, but the Foal also.
Vers. 12. This is the tken of the Covenant, &c.] See here the antiquity of confirming mens faith, by outward signs, as by the two trees in Paradise: and here, the Word and Sacrament go to∣gether. And as God, in Noah, made a Covenant with his poste∣rity also, and confirmed it with a sign, so doth he in Christ with the Church, and ratified it with the Sacraments; besides, witnes∣ses we have three in heaven, and three in earth, &c. Vers. 13. I doe set my bow in the cloud, &c.] There it was be∣fore, but not till now as a token of the Covenant; as still it is ap∣plyed for a sign of grace from God to his Church, Rev. 4.3. and 10.1. Ezek. 1.28. It is planted in the clouds, as if man were shooting at God, and not God at man. This bow with both ends downward, and back to heaven, must needs be an emblem of mer∣cy; for he that shooteth, holdeth the back of the bow from him. Of Gods bow we read, Ambros. but not of his arrows, saith Ambrose on this text. Psal. 7.12, 13. He hath bent his bow, and made it ready, saith David but if he ordain his arrows, it is not, but against the persetours. If he shoot at his servants, it is as Jonathan shot at his friend David; to warn them, not to wound them. They are arrows of the Lords deliverance, 2 King. 13.17, 19. Psal. 32.7. which therefore he multiplyes, that they may compass him about with songs of deliverance. If he bend his bow like an enemy. Lam. .4. yet in wrath he remembreth mercy. Vers. 14. The bow shall be seen in the cloud] In this heaven-bow, there are many wonders: First, the beautifull shape and va∣rious colours; In which respect Plato thinks the Poets feign Iris, or the Rainbow, to be the daughter of Thanmas, or admiration. The waterish colours therein signifie (say some) the former over∣throw of the world by water. The fiery colours, the future judge∣ment of the world by fire. The green, that present grace of free∣dome from both, by vertue of Gods Covenant, whereof this bow is a sign. Next, the Rainbow hath in it two contrary significati∣ons, viz. of rain, and fair-weather; of this in the evening, of that in the morning, saith Scaliger. Adde hereunto, that whereas na∣turally it is a sign of rain (and is therefore feigned by the Poets to be the messenger of Jun, and called imbrifera, or showry) yet it is turned by God into a sure sign of dry weather, and of restraint of waters. Let us learn to look upon it, not onely in the naturall causes, as it is an effect of the Sun in a thick cloud; but as a Sacra∣mentall sign of the Covenant of Grace; Esa. 54.9, 10. a monument of Gods both Justice in drowning the world, and Mercy in conserving it
from the like calamity. The Jews have an odd conceit, That the name Jehovah is written on the Rainbow. And therefore, as oft as it appeareth unto them, they go forth of doors, Maimoy. hide their eyes, confess their sins, (that deserved a second deluge▪) and cele∣brate Gods goodness, in sparing the wicked world, and remem∣bring his Covenant. Set aside their superstition, and their practice invites our imitation. Bern. Tam Dei meminisse opui est quam respirare. Vers. 15, 16. I will remember] That is, I will make you to know and remember by this visible Monitor. Segniùs irritant animum demissa per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus. The Rainbow is a double Sacrament, answering both to Baptism and the Lords Supper; and declares by its colours (saith One) how Christ came by water and blood, 1 John 5.6. Vers. 17. This is the token of the Covenant.] This is often re∣peated, that it may be the better observed, and we full assured; Deut. 6.7. Exacues ea, i est, accuratè & commodissimè inculcabis. Bux∣torf. Lexic. as Pharaohs dream was for this cause doubled. God goes over the same thing often with us, as the knif doth the Whetstone, which is the Scripture-allusion. He well knows how slow of heart we are, and how dull of hearing; and therefore whets and beats things of high concernment upon us, that we may once apprehend and embrace them, Revel. 10.1. Revel. 10.1. exp. Christ is said to have a Rainbow on his head, to shew that he is faithful and constant in his pro∣mises, and that tempests shall blow over. Let us see Gods love in his corrections, as by a Rainbow we see the beautiful image of the Suns light, in the midst of a dark and waterish cloud. Vers. 20. And Noah began to be an husbandman] Veteres si quem virum, bonum colonum appellassent, amplissime laudasse ex∣istimabant. Cic. Nunquam vilior erat annona Romae, referente Pliuio, quàm cum terram colerent iidem qui Remp. regerent; quasi gauderet terra laureato vomere, scilicet, & Aratore triumphali. See 2 Chron. 26.10. [And he planted a vineyard.] Hence Bero∣sus, and the Poets call him Janus Oenotrius. Janus, of the He∣brew iajin vinum, and Oenotrius of , whence our English word Wine. Vers. 21. And was drunk.] For his own shame, but our learn∣ing. Instruunt nos patres tum docentes tum labentes. Augustin. The best have their blemishes, and a black-part, as that cloud had, that conducted Israel out of Egypt; Heb. 12.1. which while the Egyptians fol∣lowed,
they fell into the Sea. [And was uncovered within his tent.] Operta recludit. One hours drunkenness bewrayes that, which more then six hundred yeers sobriety had modestly concealed. Well might Solomon say, Wine is a mocker: For it mocked Noah with a witness; and exposed him to the mockage of his own bosom-bird. Vers. 22. And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw] The Hebrews say, That Canaan first saw it, and then shewed it to Ham his father, who looks upon it with delight, Ʋt vultures ad malè olentia feruntur, saith Basil, As carrion-kites are carried after stinking carcases. [And told his two brethren without.] Sic & impii hodiè ex Ecclesiae tragoediis comoedias componunt. How glad are the wicked, if they can but get any hint to lay hold on, where∣by to blaspheme, Jere. 20.10. and blaze abroad the Saints infirmities. Report, say they, and wee'l report: yea, rather then want matter against Gods people, they'll suck it out of their own fingers ends. But if such a thing as this fall out, that Noah be drunk, though but once in an age, the banks of blasphemy will soon be broken down, and the whole race of Religious persons must rue for it; among these Canaanites some also will be found to excuse them in it, as Scaliger doth Ham. Vers. 23. And Sem and Japhet took a garment.] Ham had no hand in this good work; Constant. Mag. Theodoret. lib. 1. Eccles. hist. ap. 11. which shews, what a good one he was, and how far from being of that good Emperors minde, who said, That if he should finde a Bishop committing adultery, he would rather cover that unclean act with his imperial cloak, then suffer it to come abroad to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn of the wicked. Vers. 24. And Noah awoke from his wine.] And returned no more to it. Once was enough: the time past may well suffice, to have walked in excess of wine, 1 Pet. 4.3. saith Peter. Wee'l buy repentance so dear no more. It is expresly noted of Judah, that he knew Tamar again no more. Gen. 38.26. And we may be well assured, That Noah was never drunk again. Prov. 23.35. Solomons drunkard cryes, When shall I awake! I will seek it yet again. As Swine break their bellies, so do such men their heads, Hos. 4.11. Malle se vitam quam vinum cripi. August. de temp. serm. 131. with filthy quaffing; yea, Whoredom and wine, and new wine, take away the heart, saith the Prophet: They besot and infatuate, yea, rob a man of himself, and lay a beast in his room. Our drunkards say, as the Vine in Jothams parable. Non possum relinquere vinum meum. Take away my liquor, you
take away my life. Mr. Harris his drunkards cup. How often (saith a grave Divine) have I seen vermine sucking the drunkards blood, as fast as he that of the grape and mault, yet would he not leave his hold, or loose his draught! Some be buckt with drink, and then laid out to be sun'd and scorn'd. [And knew what his yonger son had done unto him.] It is probable, That finding himself covered with a cloke, he asked his wife and children how he came covered? Piscator. and that then Sem and Japhet told him all the matter; which moved him to bless them. It is our wisest way, to do what good we can to others. And though they, for present, being drunk with malice, or rash anger, know it not, yet a waking-time may come, when they may see the good, and bless us for it, as David did Abigail, 2 Sam. 25.33. When he had slept out his drunken passion, he saw cause to bless God, to bless her, and to bless her counsel. Master Gilpins plain-dealing with the Bishop of Durham how well it succeeded; See his life written by Bishop Carleton, pag. 58. Vers. 25. And he said, Cursed be Canaan.] Because an imitator, and abbettor of his fathers sin: Neither good egg, nor good bird, as they say. God himself hath cursed such caytiffs with a curse. Prov. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother; the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it. Now they are cursed with a witness, Effossos oeidos voret atro gut∣ture corvus. Catul. Per coacervatos poreat domus im∣pia luctus. Oedip. apud Ovid. Daniels Chron. pag. 112. whom the Holy Ghost thus curseth, in such emphatical maner, with such exquisite terms. Their parents also through their un∣naturalness are compell'd to curse them, as Noah here: As Oedi∣pus of old, and our Henry the second, who seeing a few hours before he died, a list of their names, that had conspired with the King of France, and Earl Richard (his son and successor) against him; and finding therein his son John to be the first, falls into a grievous passion, both cursing his sons, and the day wherein him∣self was born; and in that distemperature, departs the world, which so often himself had distempered. The causeless curse in∣deed (though from a parents mouth) shall not come, Prov. 26.2. Such as was that, that befel Julius Palmer Martyr, who when he asked his mother blessing, Thou shalt, said she, have Christs curse and mine, wheresoever thou goest. He pausing a little, as one a∣mazed at so heavy a greeting, at length said, O mother, your own curse you may give me, which God knoweth I never deserved; but Gods curse you cannot; for he hath already blessed me, and I shall be
blessed. As for money and goods, said she, which thou suest to me for, as bequeathed thee by thy father, I have none of thine. Thy father bequeathed nothing for hereticks: Faggots I have to burn thee; more thou gettest not at my hands. Mother, said he, where∣a you have cursed me; I again pray to God to bless and prosper you, all your life long. And so he departed, and shortly after, valiantly suffered for the truth, Act. & Mn. fol. 1755. & 1761. The wilde Irish inflict an heavy curse on all their posterity, if ever they should sow corn, build houses, or learn the English tongue. Heyl. Geog. 508. Camdens E∣lisab. p. 116, 117. at Newbury in Barkshire, having sometimes been Fellow of Magdalen Colledg in Oxford; and all King Edwards days an obstinate Papist. Thus for the causeless curse of parents. But where it is just, it lights heavy. The very complaint of a parent makes a loud cry in Gods ears, Judg. 9.56. It is said, That God, by cutting off Abimelech, rendred the wickedness that he did to his father. And who can read with dry eyes that pitiful sup∣plication of the old Emperor Andronicus, to his young nephew of the same name, Turk. hist. fol. 172? But when it proceeds to a corse, lamentable effects have followed. Leonard son of the Lord Dacres (one of the Rebels in the North against Queen Eli∣zabeth) whose father prayed God upon his death-bed, to send him much sorrow for his disobedience, drew forth a most poor life in the Netherlands, whither he escaped, living upon a very slender pension from the Spaniard. That Rebellion (like the bubbles which children blow up into the ayr,) was no sooner blown up, then blown out; and fell into the eyes of those, which with the blasts of ambition, and superstition held it up. But most remarkable is that, and apposite to our present purpose, that Manlius reports of a certain mother, J. Manlii. loc. co. 228. Invole in te diabus. whom he and many others had seen leading about her miserable daughter, who was possessed by the devil upon her cursing her, and bidding the devil take her. Luther and others prayed publikely for the Girl; and when Luther said to the Devil, Increpet te De∣m▪ The Lord rebuke thee Satan, the Devil answered, muttering through the Maids lips, Increpet, incrept. Another like example, the same Author hath, of a certain angry old man, Idem ibidem. in the Town of Friburg in Misnia; Who bidding his son do some business for him, and he making no hast to do it, nor stirring from the place he stood in; the father cursed him, and wished he might never stir alive from that place. God said Amen to it: and although he lived seven yeers after, yet there he stood, leaning upon a desk while he slept, eating little, and speaking not much. When he was asked how he did? he would answer, That he was chastised justly by God, in whose hand it was, what should
at length become of him here. But of his eternal salvation by the merits of Christ alone, he nothing doubted; being chastised of the Lord, that he might not be condemned with the world. The prints of his feet are to be seen in the pavement, where he stood to this day, saith the Historian. After seven yeers suffer∣ing, he departed in the true Faith of Christ, with good hopes of a better estate in Heaven, September the eleventh, Anno 1552. [A servant of servants shall he be to his brethren:] In which title, the Pope of Rome (not without the providence of God) will needs be his successor. A servant of Gods servants, he will by all means be called. And yet he stamps upon his coyn, That Nation and Countrey that will not serve thee, shall be rooted out. What pride equal to the Popes, making Kings kiss his Pantofles, (upon which he hath Christs Cross shining with Pearls and precious stones, Ʋt plenis faucibus crucem Christi derideat?) Sands his Re∣lation of West. relig. sect. 12. What humility greater then his, shriving himself daily to an ordinary Priest? One while he will be filled, Servus servorum Dei; another while, Dominus regnorum mundi▪ which is one of the Devils titles; yea, Dominus Deus noster Papa, Johan. 23. i Extravag. taking upon him a power to excommunicate the very Angels also; yea, lifting up himself above Christ, who is called Pontifex Magnus, Hebrews 4.14. but the Pope calls himself Pontifex maximus. Gregory the Great was the first that stiled himself, A servant of servants; in opposition forsooth, to that proud Prelate of Constantinople, who affected to be called Ʋniversal Bishop. But after the death of Mauricius, Phcae adular suppariseri, &c. Ut suam posta∣tem per favorem parricidae ex∣tenderet. Revii hist pontif. p. 45. when Phocas the Traytor came to be Emperor, this Gregory clawed him shame∣fully, and all to attain that dignity and dominion, that he so much condemned in another. The Pope of Constantinople could not bear a superior, nor the Pope of Rome an equal. The one sought to subdue to himself the East, the other East and West too; and thence grew all the heat betwixt them. See the like ambition under the colour of zeal for their Religion in Selymus the Turk and Hismael the Persian, Turk. histor. foli 515. Vers. 26. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem.] Shem seems to have been the chief actor and perswader of that reverent behavi∣or; and therefore, as he is first named, Vers. 23. before his elder brother Japhet; so here he hath the first and chief blessing. It is good to be first in a good matter, yea, prompt and present to
every good work, , Tit. 3.1. as Paul hath it. [And Canaan shall be hs servant.] This curse was not fulfilled of many hundred yeers after; till the sins of the Amorites were grown full, and then it was accomplished. Gods forbearance is no acquittance. He can also turn a curse into a blessing, as he did this to Araunah the Jebusite, 2 Sam. 5.7. of the worst and most stubborn of the Canaanites: For they held the Tower of Jebus from the posterity of Sem, after all the rest had yielded: Yet he became a godly Proselyte, and gave as a King his free-hold to King David, to build an Altar on, 2 Sam. 24.18. And this deed of his was long after remem∣bred. Zach. 9.7. The like may be said of the Gibeonites, who are called Nethinims in Ezra and Nehemiah. They were made ser∣vants to the Shemites, drawers of water to the Temple, as a kinde of punishment. God made this Cross a Mercy. Their employ∣ment so near the house of God, gave them fit occasion to be par∣takers of the things of God. And the Lord, we see, did wonder∣fully honor them; the nearer they were to the Church, the nearer to God. It is good getting into his house, though to be but a door-keeper with David, or a tankard-bearer, with these Gibeonites. Stand but in Gods way as he passeth, and thou shalt be preferred. Vers. 27. God perswade Japhet,] Formone else can do it. Men may speak perswasively, but to perswade, is proper to God alone. He speaks to the heart, Hos. 2.14. we to the ear onely. He per∣swadeth and allureth not onely by a moral perswasion, but by an irresistible inward drawing, Acts 11.17. In the Hebrew there is a sweet Agnomination, q. d. God shall perswade the perswasible. He shall draw them to faith and obedience, Monendo potiùs quàm minando, docondo quàm ducendo, saith Saint Austin, by in∣forming not inforcing. He brings in his Elect by a merciful vio∣lence. He sent forth at first not swordmen, but fisher-men; and prevailed by them in those places, Britannorum inaccessa Roma∣nis loa, Christo tamen subdit. Tertul. where the Romans could never come with all their forces. Elisha could do more with a kiss then his man could do with a staff, in raising the dead childe. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2. And then follows, Draw me, we will run after thee. [And he shall dwell in the tents of Sem.] The Churches abode here, is but in tents: She hath no continuing City on earth, Heb. 13.14. 1 Tim. 3.16. but seeks one to come. This, whether pro∣phecy or prayer, was fulfilled when God manifested in the flesh, was preached unto the Gentiles, and beleeved on in the world, some
thousands of yeers after. The Gentiles were converted by vertue of this prayer (as Paul was by Saint Stevens,) and as we enjoy the Gospel by Latimers yet once more, and the prayers of other Martyrs. Vers. 28, 29. And Noah lived after the flood, &c.] This man, if ever any that was born of a woman, had a long life, Job 14.1. and full of misery. He saw the tenth generation after him before his death. But oh how oft was he occasioned to get under the Juniper-tree with Elias, and desire to dye? Before the flood, what a deal of wickedness and disorder beheld he in family, Church, and Com∣mon-wealth, and all this punished by the deluge to his unspeak∣able heart-break? Soon after, he was mockt by his own son, and despised by almost all the rest of his posterity; whose unheard-of hardiness in building the Tower of Babel, he was nolens volens, forced to see and suffer; and then shortly after, the confusion of tongues as their just punishment. What should I speak of their so many and so great cruelties, insolencies, tyrannical usurpations, effusions of innocent blood, wars, stirs strifes, superstitions, and abominable idolatries under Nimrod, Jupiter Belus, Semiramis, Vix mihi persua∣deo virum ex homie miserio∣rem natum fusse quam Noah. Funccii Chron. fol. 17. Zoroaster, (the Magick-Master,) and other Emims and Zam∣zummims of the Earth? Of all which, and a great deal more, this good old Patriark was, to his sorrow, not onely an ear but an eye-witness? All which considered, it must needs be granted, that, living so long, never any Martyr or other, out of Hell, suffered more misery then Noah did. And the like may be said of Athanasius, of whom Master Hooker witnesseth, That for the space of fourty six yeers, from the time of his consecration to succeed Alexander Archbishop of Alexandria, till the last hour of his life in this world, his enemies never suffered him to enjoy the comfort of a peaceable day. Was not he to be reckoned a Martyr though he dyed in his bed? Erasm. in vitae Chrysost. Cur veriar Chrysostomum ap∣pellare Martyrem? saith Erasmus. And why may not any man say as much of Luther, &c.
CHAP. X. Vers. 5. By these were the the Isles of the Gentiles] THat is, en , & , quasi dilaatio.  Ignis Domini. Q. Curtius saith of Darim, that he called upon the sacred and e∣ternall fire. the Countries of Europe and Asia the less, inhabited by Japhets posterity. Europe hath its name, in Greek, from the latitude, and large surface of it; which answers well to the name of Japhet (signifying inlargement) who together with his off-spring, was by Gods appointment, to rule there far and wide toward the West and North. Asia hath its name from two Hebrew words that signifie the fire of the Lord, which in Persia and other parts thereof, they superstitiously deified. Asia the less, was so called first by Attalus King of Pergamus; who being the last of that name, and race, made the Romans his heyrs by will. They turned his Country into a Province, and called it Asia by the name of the Continent; as devouring, doubtless, in hope, that whole part of the world, by this small beginning. Hence, likely, came that first distinction of the lesser Asia. Vers. 8. Nimrod, he began to be a mighty one] His name signi∣fies a Rebell: he was the chiefe Babel-builder, and there began to be a mighty one, a Giant, saith the Greek (such another as Goliah was in his generation, 1 Sam. 17.51. where the same word is used) a Magnifico, a Grandio, such a one as sought to make himself great even to a proverb, vers. 9. But there is a double greatness: First, Genuine. Secondly, Belluine. This latter is no such commen∣dation; a beast in this may, and doth exceed us; as in the latter, we exceed our selves, and others. Vers. 9. He was a mighty hunter] Of men, whose lives he sacrificed to his lust, not of beasts for sacrifice to the Lord, as Aben-Ezra will have it, and takes occasion thereupon highly to commend him. Epiphan. heres. 38. But there wanted not those that commended Cain also for killing his brother, and were therefore called Cainites. Of others we read, that extolled the Sodomites, Core and his complices, Judas the Traytor. Yea there was one Bruno found, that wrote an Oration in commendation of the Devill, who hath given him his Guerdon, no doubt, by this, unless he recanted that monstrous madness. Vers. 11. Out of that land went forth Assur] Either because wickedness dwelt there, Zach. 5.11. for Ashur was a son of Sem;
and might have so much goodness in him, vers. 22. Or else he was hunted there-hence by Nimrod, who made himself the first Monarch, and had Babel, in the land of Shinar, or Chaldea, for the beginning of his Kingdome. Vers. 12. The same is a great City] As consisting of three Cities, and having more people within the walls, then are now in some one Kingdome. See the greatness of this City set forth in the, Preachers Travels, pag. 89. The greatest City in the world at this day, is said to be Quinsai in Tartary, Paul. Venet. which is a hundred miles about, as M. Paulus Venetus writeth, who himself dwelt therein, Turk. hist. fo. 75 about the year 1260. Cambalu the Imperiall City, and seat of the great Cham of Tartary is in circuit twenty eight miles about. Nineveh was three dayes journey in Jonah's dayes: Now it is de∣stroyed (as was long since prophesied by Nahum) being nothing else then a sepulchre of her self, a little Town of small trade, Nah. 2. & 3. where the Patriarch of the Nestorians keeps his seat at the devotion of the Turk. As Susa in Persia, once a Lilly (as the name signifies) for the sweet scite, and so rich, as afterwards is reported, (cap. 11. Preachers Tra∣vels, 88. vers. 30) is now called Valdac of the poverty of the place. Vers. 20. These are the sons of Ham] More in number, and more sweetly situated, then the posterity of either Shem or Japheth thirty sons and nephews of cursed Ham are here recited and re∣gistred; when of blessed Shem we finde but six and twenty, and of Japheth, but fourteen. And for their Countries, Canaan hath the navell of the world (Sumen totius orbis, as one calls that Country) a land that floweth with milk for necessity, and hony for delight; where the hardest rocks sweat out hony and oyl, Deut. 32.13. Exod. 3.17. Nihil mollius clo, nihil uberius solo, L. Flor. l. 1. c. 16 See Deut. 8.7, 8, 9, & cap. 11.11, 12. as Florus saith of Campania; a land that God had spied out among all lands for his own peculiar people, yea for himself to dwell in. Lo this was Hams possession; when his two better brethren, dwelt in the more barren waste Countries of the East and West. God deals by his people here, as the host doth by his guests, who lets them have the best meats, and fairest lodgings, but reserves the inheritance for his children. The Lord holds his servants to hard-meat many times (but then they have it of free-cost) whereas the wicked eat of the fat and drink of the sweet, but their meat in their bowels is turned into the gall of spes, God shall cast it out of their bellies, Job 20.14, 15. In fatting them he doth but fit them for de∣struction, as he did these Canaanites, whose pleasant land he after∣wards
made a spoyl to his own Israel. They grew a burden to that good land, which therefore for their wickedness spued them out, Lev. 18.25. after they had filled it from corner to corner, with their abominable uncleannesses, Ezra 9.11. Vers. 25. Peleg, for in his dayes was the earth divided] Eber (of whom came the Ebrews or Israelites, Exod. 1.15.) that he might have before his eyes a perpetuall monument of Gods just displeasure against the ambitious Babel-builders, alls his sonne Peleg, or Division, because in his dayes was the earth divided. It is good to write the remembrance of Gods worthy works whether of mercy or justice, upon the names of our children, or otherwise as we can best, to put us in minde of them; for we need all helps, such is either our dulness or forgetfulness. What was it else that made David so often to put the thorn to his breast? Psal. 103.1, 2, 3. And why would God have the plates of the censers of those sinners against their own souls, to be a covering to the Altar, but to be a memoriall to the children of Israel, that no stranger come near to offer incense, that he be not as Corah and his company, &c? Numb. 16.38, 40. Vers. 26. Jokan begat Almodad, &c.] This man with his sons may seem to have seated in the East-Indies. But fallen from Hebers faith to Hethenisme, they are written in the dust: there's little mention of them in the Scriptures. They have lost their Genealogie, as those degenerate Priests, who in the time of the captivity took scorn to be in the register, and were therefore wor∣thily afterwards rejected by the Tirshata. ra 2.61. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. And the Whole earth was of one language] UNity without verity, is no better then conspiracy. A legion of Devills could accord to get into one man; and, though many, yet they speak and act as one in that possession. That infer∣nall Kingdome is not divided against it self. A shame for Gods Saints to be at difference: What should sheep do snarling, like dogs, one at another? The children of this world are wiser, a fair deal, in their generation; they can combine and comply, as here, though their society be as unsavoury as the slime and filth that
is congealed, when many Toads and other Vermine meet to∣gether. Vers. 2. In the land of Shinar] Which was a part of the gar∣den of Eden, as most Geographers think, fat and fruitfull still above beliefe, Herodot. l. 1. c. 193. Plin. l. 6.26. Vers. 3. And they said one to another] One broached this counsell, and the rest soon consented. Heb. 3. . Act. 18.5. Intùs & apud se aestuabat prae el ardore. Let us consider one another to whet on to love and good works: One live-coal may set a whole stack on fire. When Silas came, Paul burned in spirit, and preached lustily. [Let us make brick▪ &c.] Thus, wanting stones they devised matter for their cursed building. Good cause hath the Church to be as ingenious and sedulous in building Stair-cases for heaven, as the Devill and his Imps, in digging descents to hell. Apud Babylonem Trajanu Imp. vidit lacum bi∣tumiis, ex quo moenia Babylonis aedificata suerant Cujus tanta vis est, ut permixtum cum lateribus, quovis saxs sit aut ferro poten∣tius. Dio in vita Trajan. Jam cum Jove de divitiis licet certetis, Cassiod l. 7. Var. pist, 15. Habac. 2. Matth 11.12. Diriiunt, me∣tapb, à castris aut arc quapiam, quae irrumpeutib. ho∣stbu diripitur. Hlar. [And they had brick for stone and slime for morter] And yet though the walls were high and huge, this City was taken first by Cyrus, afterwards by Alexander, and plundered at severall times by many other enemies. Shusa in Persia was first built by Tithonus and his son Memnon, who was so exceeding prodigall, that, as Cassidorus writeth, he joyned the stones together with gold; so rich it was, that Aristagoras thus cheared up his souldiers that besieged it: This City if you can take, you may vye with Jove himself for wealth and riches. Here Alexander found 50000. talents of gold, besides silver. But what is all this to the heavenly Jerusalem, whose pavement is pure gold, and her walls garnished with all pre∣tious stones  Rev. 21.19. Why do we then labour in the fire, to load our selves with thick clay? Why doth not this Kingdome of heaven suffer violence by us, sith the violent take it by force, or make a prey, a prize of it (so Hilary rendreth it) as souldiers do of a City they have taken? Oh that we could say of heaven, as Sixtus Ruffus doth of Cyprus, Cyprus famosa divitiis paupertatem populi Rom. ut occuparetur, sollicitavit! This Island was anciently called, Macaria: Heaven more truly. Vers. 4. Let us build us a City and a Tower] This Tower rai∣sed a head of Majesty, 5164. paces from the ground, having its basis and circumference equall to the height. The passage to goe up, went winding about the outside, and was of an exceeding great breadth; there being not onely room for horses, carts, &c. Hey! Geog. to meet and turn, but lodgings also for man and beast, and (as Ver∣stegan reporteth) grasse and corn▪fields for their nourishment. [Let us make us a name] This is a disease that cleaves to us all, to
receive honour one of another, and not seek the honour that cammeth from God onely, Joh. 5.44. A rare man he is surely, that hath not some Babel of his own, Dr. Prid. contra Eudamon Joh. whereon he bestows pains and cost, onely to be talked of. Hoc ego primus vidi, was Zabarelles . Epicurus, would have us believe, that he was the first that ever found out the truth of things. Secum literas esse natas, & moriuras, Suc∣ton. Aug. de Civit. D, l. 16. Plamon gave out, that all learn∣ing was born, and would dye with him. Aratus the Astrologer, that he had numbred the Star, and written of them all. Archi∣medes the Mathematician, that if he had but where to set his foot. he could move the earth out of its place. Herestratus burnt Diana's Temple for a name: And Plato writes of Protagoras, that he vaunted, Plat in Me Tusc. 3. Pro Archi Pocta. that whereas he had lived sixty years, forty of them he had spent in corrupting of youth. Tully tells us, that Gracchus did all for popular applause; and observes that those Philosophers that have written of the contempt of glory, have yet set their names to their own writings, which shews an itch after that glory, they perswaded others to despise. These two things (saith Tully somewhere of himself) I have to boast of, Epist. famil. l. 7. Optima∣rum artium scientiam, & maximarum rerum gloriam, my learned works, and noble acts. Julius Caesar had his picture set upon the globe of the world, with a sword in his right hand, a book in his left, Gabriel Simon in Symbois. Dion Cass in Tyberto. with this Motto, Ex utroque Caesar Vibius Rufus used the chair wherein Caesar was wont to sit, and was slain; he married also Tullies widow, and boasted of them both, as if either for that seat he had been Caesar, or for that wife an Oratour. When Maxi∣mus dyed in the last day of his Consulship, Caninius Rebilus pe∣titioned Caesar, O vigilantem Consulem qui tuto consulat sui tempore, som∣num non vidit. for that part of the day, that he might be said to have been Consul. So many of the Popish Clergy have with great care and cost procured a Cardinals hat, when they have lain a∣dying, that they might be entituled Cardinals in their Epitaph, as Erasmus writeth. But for mens enobling themselves by building, those seven wonders of the world were made meerly for a name. Pharos a watch-tower in Egypt (being one of the seven) was built by Ptolomie Philadelph, all of white marble; the chief Architect was Sostratus of Gnidos, who engraved on the work this inscripti∣on, Sostratus of Gnidos, son of Dexiphanes, to the Gods protectours, for the safeguard of Saylors. Heylis Geog. 750. This Inscription he covered with plaister, and thereon engraved the name, and title of the King the founder: that (that soon wasted and washed away) his own that was written in marble, might be eternized to posterity. This Tower,
saith Wickam, is a known story. B. God wines Catalogue. And Phidias the famous carver so cunningly enchased his own countenance into Minerva's sheild at Athens, That it could not be defaced, but the sheild it self must be disfigured. Heyl. Geog. pag. 140. The Hague in Holland hath two thousand housholds in it. The inhabitants will not wall it, as desiring to have it counted rather the principle Village of Europe, then a lesser City. And Sextus Marius, being once offended with his Neighbor, invited him to be his guest, for two days together. The first of those two days he pulled down his Neighbors Farm∣house; the next, he set it up again, far bigger, Dio in Tiberio. and better then be∣fore. And all this for a name, that his Neighbors might see and say, What good or hurt he could do them at his pleasure. Vers. 5. And the Lord came down] Non motu locali, sed actu judiciali. To see the City, &c. that so his sentence grounded not upon hear-say, or uncertain information, might be above all cavilla∣tion or exception. A fair president for Judges. Caiaphas first sentenced our Saviour, and then asked the Assessors what they thought of it? The chief captain first commanded Paul to be scourged, and then examined, Acts 22. This was proposterous. God though he knew all before, yet is said to come down to see. Let his actions be our instructions. No man must be rashly pro∣nounced a Leper: And the Judges must make diligent inquisiti∣on, Deut. 19.18. as flints they must carry fire, but not easily ex∣press it. Potiphar was too hasty with Joseph, and David with Mephibosheth. Aeneas Sylvius tells us of some places, Aene. Sylvius. Europ. cap. 20. where theeves taken but upon suspition, are presently trussed up, and three days after, they sit in judgment upon the party executed. If they finde him guilty, they let him hang, till he fall. As if not, they take down the body, and bury it honorably at the publike charge. This is not God-like, nor a point of wisdom; for Ner∣vus est sapientiae non temerè credere. [Which the children of men builded.] Nimrod chiefly, with his fellow Chamites. But that some of Shems and Japhts posterity had a hand in it, is more then probable, by their common punishment, the confusion of tongues, Heber and his, had nothing to do with them; and there∣fore retained the Hebrew tongue, called thenceforth the Jews Language, Isai 36.11. Until they were carried captive to Baby∣lon, where grew a mixture amongst them of Hebrew and Chal∣dee: Whence came up the Syrik tongue common in our Savi∣ours time, as appears by many Syriack words in the Gospels.
Vers. 6. Behold the people is one, &c.] This benefit they abused to their pride and ambition, which they should have used to the help of humane society, and common intercourse. They built, and God bare with them for a time, that he might make fools of them in the end. And this he doth daily. Vers. 7. Go to, let us go down] Go to, say they: Go to, saith he. Let us build to Heaven, say they: Let us go down and see it, saith he. Let us make us a name, say they: Let us confound their Language, that they may not so much as know their own names, saith he. Lest we be scattered, say they; Let us scatter them abroad the world, saith he. Thus God words it with them, and con∣futes their folly from point to point. Thus he sets himself in bat∣tle-ray against the proud, , Jam. 4.7. as Saint James hath it, and overthrows them in plain field. He delt more severely with David for num∣bring the people, then for the matter of Ʋriah. He turned Ne∣buchadnezzar a grazing among beasts, for pruning and priding himself upon this Babel. Is not this great Babel, that I have built? Why no, Nimrod built it, and Ninus, and Semiramis: Nebuchadnezzar onely beautified it, or, at utmost, inlarged it. But pride detracts from God and man, and is therefore justly hated and scorned of both. [And there confound their Language.] When men began once , they were compelled by God . Bring me, quoth one, a trowel quickly, quick One brings him up a hammer; hew this brick Another bids, Dubartas. and then they cleave a tree; Make fast this rope, and then they let it flee. One calls for plank; another morter lacks: They bring the first a stone, the last an ax. Neither is there any better understanding and agreement among the Babel-builders at this day, (Babylon enim altera, nempe pro∣pinquior atque recentior adhuc stat, citò itidem casura, si essetis viri, said Petrarch long since) witness their many sects and deadly dissensions among themselves, De rem. utri∣usque fort. dial. 118. of which, read the Peace of Rome, Rhemes against Rome, and divers other English Treatises to the same purpose. Bellarmine teacheth, That the bread in the Sacra∣ment is not turned into Christs body productivè, but adductivè. And this saith he, Cade of the Church. 247. is the opinion of the Church of Rome. This Suarez denyes, and saith, It is not the Churches opinion. Thus these great master-builders are confounded in their Language, and understand
not their own Mother. The greatest Clarks amongst them, can∣not yet determine how the Saints know our hearts and prayers: Whether by hearing or seeing, or presence every where, or by Gods relating or revealing mens prayers, and needs unto them. Mtons Ap∣peal lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 5. All which ways some of them hold, as possible or probable; and others deny and confute them as untrue. Vers. 8. So the Lord scattered them abroad] Which was the evil they eared, and by this enterprize, sought to prevent. But there is neither counsel, power, nor policy against the Lord. The fear of the wiked shall come upon him, Prov. 10.24. As it befel those wretched Jews. Iohn 11.48. The Romans shall come, &c. and come they did accordingly. Pilate for fear of losing his Office, delivered up Christ, and was by Caius kickt off the bench. Vers. 9. The Lord did there confound the Language.] A sore cross and hinderance of interchange of commodities between Nation and Nation. This great labor also hath God laid, hereby, upon the sons of men, that a great part of our best time is spent about the shell (in learning of Language) before we can come at the kernel of true wisdom; Scripture-wisdom especially. Our Saviours Epitaph written in Hebrew, Greek and Latine, as it sets forth Christ unto us to be, First, The most holy (for the Hebrew tongue is called the holy Tongue.) Secondly, Lashon hacca∣dosh. The most wise (for in Greek, is all humane wisdom written.) Thirdly, The most powerful (for the Latines were Lords of the earth, and propa∣gated their tongue amongst all Nations.) So it signifies that God would have the dignity and study of these three tongues, to be retained and maintained in the Churches of Christ to the worlds end. Hebricians (saith Reuchlin) drink of the Fountains, Hebraei bibunt fontes, Graeci rivos. Latini paludes. Reuchl. Joh. Mani. loc. com. p. 130. Greci∣ans of the Rivers, Latinists of the standing pools onely. There were that mocked at the multitude of tongues, Acts 2.13. And the Monks were mad almost at such Camilli literarii, as chased out barbarism, and brought in the learned Languages. But let us ac∣knowledg it a singular gift of God, as for the gathering of the Church at first, Acts 2. Ephes. 4.13. So still for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come unto a perfect man, to speak the Language of Canaan, in the Kingdom of Heaven. [And from thence did the Lord scatter them.] The Hebrew Doctors say, R. Menahem in Gen. 11. That at this dispersi∣on there were seventy Nations with seventy sundry Languages. Epiphanius saith, That their one Language was divided into
seventy two; for so many men were then present, and each man had his several dialect, and went his several way with it. Cleopatra is famous in history for her skill in tongues: She could give a ready answer to Ambassadors that came; whether they were Ethiopi∣ans, Hebrews, Arabians, Syrians, Medes, or Parthians: Yea, she could tune and turn her tongue, as an instrument of many strings (saith Plutarch) to what language soever she pleased. . Plut. This mindes me of those cloven tongues, and of that utterance the Spirit gave them, Acts 2. Parthians, Medes, Elamites, strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, heard the Apostles, speak in their own tongue the wonderful works of God, to the singular advantage of the Church, that was then out of all Nations to be collected, and that by a like means, as these Rebels were scattered. Vers. 11. And She lived after he begat, &c.] He saw ten generations, and lived till Isaac was fifty yeer old, who might well be his Pupil; which (if Shem were Melchisedech) is so much the more likely. Heber also lived till Abraham was dead; a singular blessing to them both. This comfort the Patriarks had of their tiresome and tedious pilgrimage; that as Shem saw Lamech, so Lmech saw Adam, and Isaac saw Shem. Now, ipse aspectus viri boni delectat, saith Seneca. How much more, when they that fear the Lord, speak often one to another, Mal. 3.16. for mutual edification and encouragement. This the mad world calls faction, and caprichiousness. Tert. Apel. ad∣vers. geutes, cap. 39. . 520. But what saith Tertullian to it? Cùm boni, cum probi coeunt, cum pii, cum casti congregantur, non est factio dicenda, sed curia: Et è contrario illis nomen factionis accom∣modandum est, qui in odium bonorum & proborum conspi∣rant. Vers. 28. And Haran died before his father Torah.] The Hebrews say he died a Martyr, being burnt with fire by his Countrymen the Chaldees, because he would not worship the Fire, which they had made their god. Martyrdom came early in∣to the world, as we know in Abel; who as he was the first that died, so he died for Religion. Now if this be true of Haran, as the Jew Doctors will have it; then he had, for ought we know, the maidenhead (as a certain Martyr phrased it) of that kinde of Martyrdom. The first that were burnt for Religion, since the Reformation, are said to be Henry and John, two Augustine Monksat Brussels, Anno 1523. under James Hogostratus the
Domician Inquisitor. The executioner being demanded, whether they recanted in the flames, he denyed there was any such thing: But said, That when the fire was put to them, they continued sing∣ing the Creed, and T Deum, Erasm. lib. 24. Eist. 4. till the flame took away their voyce. All this Erasmus testifieth, though he were no Lutheran; and thereupon maketh this good, but wary note, Damnari, disse∣cari, suspendi, exuri, decollari, piis cum impiis sunt communia: daere, dissecare, in cruoem agere, exurere, decollare, bonis judii∣bus cum piratis ac tyrannis communia sunt. Varia sunt hominum judicia, ille faelix qui judice Deo absolvitur. Our Protomartyr in Queen Maries days was Reverend Master Rogers; he gave the first adventure upon the fire. His wife and children, being eleven in number, ten able to go, and one sucking at her brest, Act. & Mn. fol. 1356. met him by the way, as he went toward Smithfield. This sorrowful sight of his own flesh and blood, could nothing move him, but that he constantly held out to the death, and so received a crown of life. Neither hath God left himself without witness among the very Heathens. For in the City of Lima in Mexico, not two moneths before our coming thither (saith Captain Drake) twelve persons were condemned by the Spaniards there, The world en∣compassed by S. Fr. Drake. p. 59. for profession of the Gospel: Of which, six were bound to one stake and burnt; the rest remained yet in prison, to drink of the same cup within a few days. Vers. 30. But Sarai was barren.] Till she had prayed for a childe thirty yeers, and then she had him with abundance of joy. At first she beleeved not the promise, but laughed at the unlikely∣hood and was checkt for it. But when she had better bethought her self, Through faith she received strength to conceive seed, be∣cause she judged him faithful who had promised, Heb. 11.11. She was, (when past age) delivered of a childe; who was not more the childe of her flesh, then of her Faith. Whether she were that Iscah spoken of in the verse next aforegoing, the Doctors are divided. Some say, Ea quae clavum administration is tenes. that Iscah in Chaldee signifieth the same that Saai in Hebrew. Others more probably make Sarai another woman, and the daughter not of Haran but of Terah: How else could Abram say of her, That she was the daughter of his father,  not of his mother? Gen. 20.12. Vers. 31. And Terah took, &c.] Being admonished of the Divine Oracl, Act 7.12 by his son Abraham, he rebuked him not, neither charged him, upon his blessing, to abide in his native
Countrey, as many a father would have done (for, what? was he wiser and better then his forefathers?) but abandoned his idols, and went as far as his old legs cou carry him toward the Coun∣trey that God should shew them. Heb. 11. For as yet they went forth, not knowing whither they went. Instar caeci ocu∣los claufit. vo cantemque Deum secuus est. Bu∣cholcer. But having God by the hand, they knew they could not go amiss. This was a blessed blinde obedience, not to dispute but to dispatch; to wink, and put themselves into Gods hand, to be led about at his pleasure, to follow him without sciseitation. CHAP. XII. Verse 1. Now the Lord had said to Abraham] BUt was not this to command him to do that which was against nature? No, but onely against corrupt nature, which must be denyed, and mortified, or there is no Heaven to be had. Father and friends must be hated, (that is, not loved, as Esau have I hated) where they hang in our light, or stand in our way to keep us from Christ, Matth. 10.37. [Get thee out of thy Countrey] This is a hard saying to flesh and blood, for Nescio qua natale solum, &c. But hard, or not hard, it must be done, because God bids it; and difficulty in such a case, doth but whet on heroick spirits, making them the more eager and resolute. It pleased David well to be set to fetch a hundred foreskins of the Philistims. Gods Kingdom must be taken by violence. It is but a delicacy to dream of coming thither in a Feather-bed. Too many with Joseph dream of their preferment, but not of their imprisonment. He that will be Christs Disciple here, and coheire hereafter, must deny himself; that's an indispensable duty. A∣braham was old-excellent at it. [And from thy kinred, and fathers house] Who set out fair with Abraham, as did likewise Orphah with Ruth: But setled in Haran, which was also in Chaldea, not far from Ʋr, and would go no further, after the old mans death. There they had feathered their nests, gathered substance, and got souls, that is servants, vers. 4. and therefore, there they would set up their staff, and afterwards turned again to Idolatry, Gen. 31.30, 53. Joshua 24.2. Many follow God as Sampson did his parents, till be light upon a honycomb; or as a dog doth
his master, till he meet with carrion; and then turn him up. De∣mas forsook God, and embracing this present world, became afterwards a Priest in an Idol-Temple, as Dorotheus tells us. [Ʋn∣to a land, that I will shew thee.] Yet told him not whither, Dorotheus. till he was upon the way, but called him to his foot; that is, to follow him, and his direction, Isai. 41.2. Magnus est animus qui se Deo tradidit; saith Seneca. Eundum quocunque Deus vocarit, saith Another, Etiamsi in ea loca migrandum esset —Pigris ubi nulla lampas Arbor aestivâ recreatur aurâ: Quod latus mundi nebulae malusque Jupiter urget: Vers. 2. And I will make of thee a great Nation.] Pareus in Rom. 11.25. See my true Treasure.  297 Why then should the scornful Jews call us Nations or Gentiles in contempt? yea, Heathen-bastards, Heathen-dogs, as they do at this day? Surely, either themselves are of this great Goi or Nation here men∣tioned, or else they have not Abraham to their father; chuse them which. [I will bless thee] As a father his children, with all spi∣ritual comforts and earthly contentments; Eph. 1.3. Judg. 1. with the blessings of the right hand, and of the left; with the upper and nether springs, as Caleb blessed his daughter Achsah. He will give grace and glory, and (if that be not enough) no good thing will he withhold, &c. Psal. 84.11. Hence Moses cryes out, Happy art thou O Israel: Who is like unto thee, &c. Deut. 33.29. [And make thy name great] A great name then is a great blessing. So David took it, 2 Sam. 7.9. And it was no small comfort to him, that whatever he did, pleased the people. Blessing and praise (or good name) is ex∣pressed, by one and the same word in both Testaments, Prov. 27.21. Onely (as it is in the same Text) it then proves a blessing, . when it is to a man as the fining pot for silver, and furnace for gold; when it melts us, and makes us better; when it works in us a care to walk worthy of the praise is given us, to purge our selves from all filth, that we may be as pure vessels, meet for the Masters use, fit to be set upon the celestial shelf, as that Martyr phrased it. Act. & Mon. Since thou hast been precious in my sight, thou hast been honorable, Isai. 43.4. Ver∣tue is insteed of a thousand Escucheons. [And thou shalt be a blessing.] That is, in a high degree blessed; Vir bonus est commune bonum. or a common blessing to all, whereever thou comest, who shall fare the better for thee. Or, a publike pattern of blessing (so some Hebrews expound it.) Those that wish well to themselves, or others, shall pray God, that
Abrahams blessedness may befal them. The contrary hereunto is now befaln his unhappy posterity for their obstinacy. A curse they are become among the Gentiles, In execrationi∣bus dicunt Ju∣daeus sim si fallo. Sanct. as was foretold them, Zach. 8.13. Sanctius upon that text tells us, That all over Turkey they have taken it up for a curse, I would I might die a Jew then: And let me be a Jew if I deceive thee. Vers. 3. And I will bless them that bless thee] Some there are, that will curse those whom God blesseth, but nothing so many as they that will rise up and call them blessed. These are expressed here in the plural number, those in the singular onely. For who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good, 1 Pet. 3.13. But say there be some Balaams that would curse Gods Israel, or some Esaus that could wish them unblest again; yet God will turn Balaams curse into a blessing, Neh. 13.2. (which is reck∣oned as a great favor,) and he will tell Esau (if not in his ear, yet in his conscience) that Jacob is blest, and he shall be blest. If Isaac, Gen. 27.33. drawn aside by natural affection, would go about to reverse the blessing, God will cause him to tremble very exceedingly, and so over-aw him, that he shall not be able to do it. But see here (as in a mirror) the wonderful love of God to his children: So dear they are unto him, that he cannot but love all that love them, and bless those that bless them. They have a powerful speech in Spain, He that wipes the childes nose, kisseth the mothers cheek. Surely, as natural parents take the kindnesses and unkindnesses, shewed to their children as done to themselves, so doth God. [And in thee shall all families, &c.] That is, In thy seed, as it is interpreted, Acts 3.25. Gal. 3.9, 16. Gen. 22.18. To wit, In Christ that shall take flesh of thee, as both Peter and Paul expound it. Hence Christ is called the gift. John 4.10. and the benefit, 1 Tim. 6.2. by an excellency; and the desire of all Nations, Haggai 2.7. sent a purpose to bless us, in turning every one of us from our iniquities, Acts 3.25. Vers. 4. So Abram departed,] He had now enough, having such precious promises, though he had had nothing else. He part∣ed with his friends and kindred, but is now become the friend of God, and akin to Christ. Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold in the world worth one days society with Jesus Christ, and his holy Spirit, said that Noble Marquess Ga∣leacius Caracciolus, His life set forth by Master Crashaw. who being Nephew to Pope Paul the fifth, and a Prince of great wealth and power, left all for Christ, living
and dying a poor exile at Geneva, that he might enjoy the liberty of his Conscience, and serve God according to the truth of the Gospel. Remarkable is that which Calvin writes of him in his Dedicatory Epistle to him, set before his Commentary upon the first to the Corinthians. Etsi neque tu, &c. [And Lot went with him] Herein Abraham was more happy then Caracciolus. For he being converted by Peter Martyrs Lecture on the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and resolving thereupon to leave all, and go to Geneva, opened his minde to some of his most familiar friends, and wrought upon them so far, as they promised and vowed to accompany him, &c. But when they came to the borders of Italy, and considered what they forsook, they first looked back with Lots wife; and then, without any intreaty, went back as Or∣phab; so going out of Gods blessing, into the worlds warm Sun, Ibid. p. 11. as they say, which yet they long enjoyed not: For they were after taken by the Spanish Inquisition, and forced to abjure Christian Religion, being neither trusted nor loved of one side nor other. [And Abraham was seventy five yeers old when he departed] So he continued a Pilgrim for a hundred yeers together, Gen. 25.7. having ten sore tryals, and every one worse then other. Vers. 5. And Abraham took Sarai his wife] The faithful companion of all his travels and troubles, One that did him good, and not evil all her days: Prov. 31. And although she suffered much hardship with him, and for his sake, and was oft put too't, yet she was not afraid with any amazement, as many a woman would have been, 1 Pet. 3.6. A valiant woman she was, and no less vio∣lent then he, for Gods Kingdom, whereof Canaan was but a type. Vers. 6, 7. And the Canaanite was then in the Land. And the Lord appeared to Abram.] The sight of those wicked Canaanites might discourage him, and unsettle his faith. But then the sight of God relieved him, (he is the first man that God is said to ap∣pear to) and the promise unto thy seed will I give this Land, could not but put spirits into him, and make his good old heart to dance Lvaltoes in his bosom. When the poor soul even sinks sometimes at the sight of these Canaanites (corruptions) and despairs almost of a Conquest, God lets in a beam of his own Light, and com∣forts it with some cordial promise, which is as Boaz was to Naomi, A restorer of his life, and a nourisher of his old age, Ruth 4.15.
Vers. 8. And there builded he an altar to Jehovah] Although the Canaanite was then in the land. God hath promised when he cleanseth his Church, that the Canaanite shall be there no more, Zach. 14.21. Philip. 2 15. But while they are there, we must shine as lamps amidst a crooked and cursed generation, Holding forth the word of life, as an ensign, bearing up Gods name as a badge, or beacon; wearing his mark in our foreheads, Rev. 9. the place of open pro∣fession; setting up an altar even amidst Idolaters as Abraham, and calling it Jehovah Nissi, The Lord is my banner, as Moses, Exod. 17.15. Some that seemed to wish well to Edmund. Allin Martyr, bid him keep his conscience to himself, and to follow Baruchs coun∣sell. Act. & Mon. fol. 1796. Chap. 6. wherefore when ye see the multitude of people wor∣shipping them behinde and before, say in your hearts, O Lord, it is thou that oughtest onely to be worshipped. These had more of Nico∣demus in them, then of Nathaniel. Vers. 8. And he removed from thence] Because his building altars to Jehovah was offensive to the Canaanites: Indeed it was a wonder they stoned him not; but God restrained them. [And there he builded an altar to the Lord] This was still his first care, where ever he came, and should be ours. We are a Kingdome of Priests, and have an altar, Heb. 13.10. which is Christ, who sancti∣fies the offering, Matth. 23.19. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, Heb. 13.15. Imo altare ex∣truamus non lapideum, sed carneum in cordibus. Vers. 9. Going on still toward the South] As toward the Sun, whereby may be figured, saith an Expositor, his progresse in faith and grace, as Prov. 8.14. 2 Cor. 3.18. Vers. 10. Abram went down into Egypt] Which the Hebrews much condemn him for, saying that it was out of distrust, and that for this fault of his, the Israelites suffered so long and hard bondage in Egypt. But that's but a rash judgement, and as weak an argument: For God, though he must be trusted, yet he may not be tempted. But tempted he is, First, when men are too much addicted to the means, as Thomas. Secondly, when they reject them, as Ahaz, who would not ask a sign, though offered him; it was not diffidence, but obedience in Abraham to go down to Egypt (that Granary of the world) when now by the want of food in Canaan, he found it was Gods will he should seek out. Vers. 11. Behold now I know that thou art a fair woman] And
yet she was now sixty five years of age; wherein she was a figure of Jerusalem the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. with Cant. 1.14. and 4.1. Sarahs chief beauty was that of the hidden man of the heart, as saith St. Pet. 1 Pet. 3.4, 6. But outward beauty is very lovely and attractive. Plato calls it the principality of nature: Aristotle, a greater commendation then all Epistles: And being asked, whether beauty were amiable? He answered, . That's a blinde mans question. The Poet could say, Gratior est pulchro ve∣niens in corpore virtus, That virtue hath a better grace, That shineth from a vertuous face. Howbeit, Seneca saith, he was out in that saying; Ipsa magnum sui decu est, & cor∣pus suum conse∣crat. Sen. Epist. 67. for that Vertue needs no ornament more then she hath of her own, but beautifies her self sufficiently, and consecrates the body, wherein she dwels. But by the leave of so great a Philosopher, I am of the Poets minde: And although I grant that favour without grace, Salvian. Guus praeter formam nihil unquam, bonus laudavit. Salust. . Dio. Artax omnium hominum pul∣cher. ait. Aemil. Prob. Aelia var. hist. l. 12. c. 1. Cavete ab hoc quem natura notavit. is but a gold ring in a Swines snout, as Solomon hath it, or ornamentum in luto, as another (so it was in Alcibiades for a man, and in Au∣relia Orestilla for a woman) yet surely, where they meet, they make a happy conjunction, and draw all hearts to them, as in Germanicus (for a man) in whom beauty and vertue strove for precedency: and Artaxerxes Longimanus, the son of Esther, who is said to have been of all men the most beautifull and most boun∣tifull. So in Esther (for a woman) who obtained favour in the sight of all that looked upon her, Esth. 2.15. And Aspasia Milesia the wife of Cyrus, who deserved to be stiled , Fair and Wise, as Aelian relateth: As on the other side in Vatinius, deformity of body strove with dishonesty of minde, adeo ut animus ejus dignissimo domicilio inclusus videretur, saith Paterculus. Vers. 12. Therefore it shall come to passe, &c.] Note here (saith Pererius) the raging affection of the Egyptians, that made no conscience of murther to enjoy their lust. 2. Their blindness, that made less account of murther then adultery. Note again (saith Piscator) that beauty exposeth a body to the danger of dishonesty, and that, as the Poet hath it, Lis est cum formâ magna pudicitiae. Let those therefore that have beauty, look to their chastity, and possesse their vessels in holiness and honour; Thesaurum cum virgo, tuum vas fictile servet, Ʋt caveas quae sunt noxia, tuta time.
Filthiness in a woman is most abominable; therefore is a Whore called a strange woman. Vers. 13. Say I pray thee, thou art my sister.] The truth was here not onely concealed, but dissembled. As the Moon hath her specks, so the best have their blemishes: A Sheep may slip into a slough as soon as a Swine, and an Apple-tree may have a fit of bar∣renness, as well as a Crab-tree. Vers. 14. The Egyptians beheld the woman] Pleasure is blamed, in Xenophon, for this, that she ever and anon looketh back upon her own shadow, Decet haber oculos continen∣ter. ma & linguam. and giveth her eyes leave to rove and range without restraint. An honest man (saith Plautus) should have continent eyes, hands, and tongue. Nihil enim interest, quibus membris cinoedi sitis posterioribus an prioribus, said Archelaus the Philosopher to a wanton yonker. The eye (that light of all the members) is an ornament to the whole body. And yet that light∣some part of the body, draweth too too oft the whole soul into darkness. Job. 31.1. This Job knew, and therefore made a Covenant to look to his looks; th of looking came luing. Charles the fifth, when the City of Antwerp thought to gratifie him in a Mask, Job. Mauli loc. Com. p. 34. Saepe claufit sene∣stram, n inspic∣rt formosiores mi &c. De Carolo 5. Preu hist. pres medul. pag. 08. Matth. 5.28, 29 with the sight of certain fair Maids brought in before him almost naked, he would not once look at them. The young Lord Harrington when he should meet with fair women in the streets, or elsewhere, would usually pull his hat over his eyes, as knowing that of our Saviour, He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, &c. where∣upon immediately follows, If thine eye offend thee, &c. Eckius was sharply rebuked at a feast, by a modest matrone, for his un∣civill glances, and carriages in these words (as Melancthon relateth) Es tu doctor? Joh. Manlii loc. com. p. 32. Non existimo te in honesta familia, sed in lupanari educatum: Thou a Doctour? I do not believe thou wast bred any where else but in a brothel-house. See the Notes on Chap. 6. Vers. 2. Vers. 15. The Princes also of Pharaoh, &c.] Flattering Cour∣tiers please Princes humours, and serve their delights, though to the procuring of their plagues as here, and in young King Joash. If a ruler hearken to lyes, . Herod. l. 3. saith Solomon, all his servants are wicked Prov. 29.12. Aulicisunt instar spuli, saith One. And Mirifica est sympthia, saith another, inter magnates & parasits. Herdorus writeth, that when Cambyses demanded of his Courtiers and Counsellours, whether it were not lawfull for him to marry his own sister whom he greatly desired? they answered: That they
found no law to license such a match: but another law they found, that the King of Persia might do what he would. [And the wo∣man was taken into Pharaohs house] Not for any worse purpose, then to get her good will to become his wife. Vers. 16. And he entreated Aram well for her sake] To the end, that he might sollicite his sister to yeeld consent; or might not be a back-friend, at least, out of displeasure, because they had taken away his sister from him to the Court. So K. Hen. 8. advanced all Anne Bullens kindred, &c. Vers. 17. And the Lord plagued Pharaoh] Plagued him with plagues, saith the Hebrew: tormented him with torments, or set him on the rack, saith the Greek. And for this, he might thank his Court-parasites, who put him upon this rape. Chrysostome think∣eth that Sarah was abed with the King; and that in the bed, God by his plague so restrained him, that she remained untoucht. But we cannot gather by the text, that he intended to commit adul∣tery, sed quòd levitate & vaga libidine peccavit, but offended one∣ly, in going after the sight of his eyes, a and lust of his heart, as Solomon hath it. Vers. 18. What is this that thou hast done unto me] God had reproved Pharaoh (according to that, Psal. 105.14. He suffered no man to doe them wrong, but reproved Kings for them) and now Pharaoh re∣proves Abraham. It is a sad thing, that Saints should do that for which they should justly fall under the reproofe of the wicked: we should rather dazle their eyes, and draw from their consciences, at least, a testimony of our innocency, as David did from Sauls, when he said, Thou art more righteous then I my son David: Whose oxe have I taken, saith Samuel? And which of you can condemne me of sin, saith Christ? Now the life of a Christian should be a Commentary upon Christs life, 1 Pet. 2. Ye are a holy nation, . 1 Pet. 2.9. a pe∣culiar people, that ye should preach forth his vertues, and not hang his picture (his image and graces) in a dark hole, but in a conspi∣cuous place. Bucer so lived that neither could his friends suffici∣ently praise him, nor his foes justly blame him, for any miscarriage. Act & Mon. And Bradford was had in so great reverence and admiration for his holiness, that a multitude which never knew him, but by fame, Ibid. 1458. greatly lamented his death; yea and a number also of Papists them∣selves wished heartily his life. But to have Egyptians jear us, and that for sin, is threatned as a grievous misery, Hos. 7.16. Vers. 19. Why saidst thou she is my sister?] He might have
answered, because I was afraid. His fear it was that put him upon this exploit. So it did David when he changed his behaviour, and Peter when he denied his Master, &c. Men should rather dye then lye. Firmus Episc. Togastensis. Nec prodam, nec mentiar, said that good Bishop in St. Au∣gustine. And that was a brave woman in St. Hierome, that being on the rack resolved, and answered the tormentour, Non ideo ne∣gare volo, ne peream, sed ideo mentiri nolo, ne peccem. The Chamae∣leon, saith Pliny, is the most fearfull of all creatures, and doth therefore turn into all colours, to save it self. So will timorous persons, See Zeph. 3.13. Let us fortifie our hearts against this cowardly passion. Vers. 20. And Pharaoh commanded] Thus God comes as it were out of an Engine, . and helps his people at a pinch. Abraham had brought himself into the briars, and could finde no way out. Many a heavy heart he had, no doubt, for his dear wife (who suffered by his default) and she again for him. God upon their repentance provides graciously for them both: She is kept undefiled, he greatly enriched for her sake; and now they are both secured, and dismissed with the Kings safe conduct. Oh who would not serve such a God, as turns our errours and evill counsells to our great good, as the Athenians dreamt their god∣desse Minerva did for them. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. And Abram went up out of Egypt] THere must be likewise daily ascensions in our hearts, out of the Egypt of this world, to the heavenly Canaan, where Christ our altar is. The Church is compared to pillars of smoke ascending, Cant. 3.6. Black she is as smoke in regard of infirmities, yet hath a principle to carry her upwards. Who is this that ascends out of this Egypt below with pillars of smoke, elationibus fumi, that is, with her affections,, thoughts, desires, upward, heavenward? Our Edward the first had a mighty desire to go to the holy land; Act. & Mon. and because he was hindred, he gave his son a charge upon his death-bed, to carry his heart thither, and prepared 32000. pound to that purpose. The children of faithfull Abram, though their bodies be on earth, yet they take much pains, and are at great
charge to get up their hearts to heaven. Matth. 14.28. Cant 7 4. Hence they are called Eagles for their high-soaring, and are said to have noses like the tower of Lebanon. for their singular sagacity in resenting and smelling after Christ the true all quickning carcasse. Vers. 2. And Abraham was very rich] All rich men therefore are not rejected of God, though it be hard for such to hit on hea∣ven. Poor Lazarus lyes in the bosome of rich Abraham there. Riches neither further nor hinder in themselves, but as they are used: As a cypher by it self is nothing, but a figure being set be∣fore it, it encreaseth the summe. Wealth, if well used, is an orna∣ment, an incouragement to duty, and an instrument of much good: All the danger lyes in loving these things. Have them we may, and use them too as a traveller doth his staffe to help him the sooner to his journeys end; but when we passe away our hearts to them, they become a mischief, and (as the word here rendred rich, signifies in the originall) a burden. Let not therefore the bramble be King: let not earthly things bear rule over thy affecti∣ons; fire will rise out of them that will consume thy Cedars; Judg 9.15. emas∣culate all the powers of thy soul, as they did Solomons, whose wealth did him more hurt then his wisdome good. How many have we now adayes, that when poor, could pray, read, &c who grown rich, resemble the Moon, which grown full gets furthest oft from the Sun, never suffers eclipse but then, and that by earths in∣terposition. Socrates divitis comparabat tu∣nicis talaribus. Quis generum meum ad gladi∣um alligavit? Cic. Dio in Augusto. Herodot. Let rich men therefore take heed how they handle their thorns; let them gird up the loyns of their mindes, lest their long garments hinder them in the way to heaven: Let them see to it, that they be not tyed to their abundance, as little Lentulus was said to have been to his long sword: that they be not held prisoners in those golden fetters, as the Kings of Armenia was by Anthony, and so sent by him for a present to Cleopatra; lest at length, they send their Mammon of unrighteousness, as Craesus did his fetters, for a present to the Devill, who had deluded him with false hopes of victory. Vers. 3. And he went on his journeys] Many a weary step, and rested not, till he came to his old altar at Bethel. Lo here a patern of great piety and singular zeal, in Father Abram. Egypt with all her plenty and pleasure, had not stoln away his heart so as not to hold his own in the promised Land. Neither had he so laden himself with thick clay, but that he went from strength to strength (as those good souls did, Psal. 84.7.) he took long
strides, perexit per profectiones suas, as it is here, He went journey after journey, till he appeared before God at his altar, there to sanctifie that good he had got in Egypt, and to give God thanks for it; yea to consecrate all to him the bestower of it. Oh let us shew our selves children of Abraham indeed, by walking in these steps of our father Abraham, Rom. 4.12. Otherwise our outward profession and priviledges will profit us no more then it did Dives in hell, Luk. 16. that he could call Abraham, Father. Vers. 4. Ʋnto the place of the altar, &c.] There he had found God to his comfort, and there he looks now to finde him so again. It will be some help to us, for the strengthning of our faith in prayer, to hol our selves to the same place, to have a set Orory. Vers. 5. And Lot also which went with Abram] So he lost not all, by leaving friends and means, to go with Abram. They that fide with the Saints, shall thrive with the Saints. God had pro∣mised to bless Abram, and he did it; for it is the blessing of God that maketh rich. God had promised again, to bless them that blessed Abram, or wished well to him, and did him any favour or furtherance. pecudes, & posteà synec∣dochicōs opes significant. Let Lot speak now whether this were not made good to him in those flocks and herds of his (that is, in all kinde of riches) and tents, that is, servants dwelling in tents? Jer. 49.29. 1 Chron. 4.41. Vers. 6. And the land was not able to bear them] This was sowre sawce to their sweet meat, lest they should surfet of their abundance. All earthly comfort are dissweetned with crosses, and there are pins in all the worlds roses. It is seldome seen that God allows any, though never so dear to himself, a perfect content∣ment. Something they must have to complain of, that shall give an unsavoury verdure to their sweetest morsels, that they may long after heaven. It could not but be a great cut to this good couple, to be now at length sundered, and deprived of mutuall society. Vers. 7. And there was a strife between] How oft do servants set masters at variance? But the devill is in it, when good folk fall out especially. He is restless himself, and doth what he can to disquiet others. He loves to fish in troubled waters; and well knows out of his divelish wisdome (saith St. James) that where envying, and strife is, Jam. 3.15, 16. there is confusion, and every evill work. But what was it that made the herdsmen fall out, but penury of pasture?
and what bred penury of pasture, but plenty of cattle? Great riches many times breed great brabbles. This the Heathen found, and therefore feigned that Mars was the son of Juno, Natalis Comes. because Juno is the goddess of riches, which prove the cause of strife, and stirs amongst many. [And the Canaanite and the Prizite was then in the lad] This is added, either as a cause of their being straitned of fit pasture, because the Canaanites possessed the better grounds: Or else, to set forth how unseasonable and unsavoury it was, for such men to jar, and so to expose themselves to the scan∣dall and scorn of such wicked neighbours, Nisi Lyra y rasset. &c. as desired no better sport then to see them falling out. This latter is Lyra's glosse, and I like it well. One of the main scandals the Jews take at this day from Protestants, is their dissentions. Scultet. Annal. Cyprianus inex∣piabilem discor∣dia maculam martyrii sangui∣ne ablui, & passione purgari negat. Error condonari potest, modo fides adsit in Christum: discordiam, ne{que} si sanguinem fundamus, expiabimus, said Reverend Olampadius in a letter to the litigi∣ous Lutherans of Sueveland. Vers. 8. And Abram said to Lot] Speech endeth anger, Si∣lence nourisheth it. Much malice and grudge would be avoided, and the very poyson of it drawn out, did we but give it a vent at first, by reasoning with the party that wronged us, and expo∣stulating the injury, which, most times, is but a meer mistake. Now many (on the contrary) harbour this viper in their bo∣somes, till it hath eaten to their hearts; Eph. 4.26. they not onely let the Sun go down, but go its whole round upon their wrath, and cannot finde time from one end of the year to the other, to utter their mindes, and compound their discords. Not onely Abraham, but Aristippus shall rise up in judgement against such Pseudo-Christians, and condemn them. For when Aeschines and he had been at long debate; and there was, I stout, and thou stout, and neither could find in their hearts to go to other; Aristippus went at length to Aeschines, and said unto him, Shall we not agree to be friends, Plutarch. de co∣bib. ira. Laer. l. 2. before we make our selves a common scorn to the whole Country? Whereunto when Aeschines answered, that he was content to be friends with all his heart; Aristippus replied, Remember then, that although I were the elder, and the better man, yet I first sought unto thee. In very deed, said Aeschines, Thou art a far better man then I; for I began the quarrell, and thou hast been first in making up the breach. And thus, these two became fast friends for ever. [For we are brethren] This is a cooler; and should be like the Angell that staid Abrams hand, when the blow was comming.
Vers. 9. Is not the whole land before thee] Abraham chuseth rather to take wrong then to strive for his right, which he here parts with for peace sake. They that do otherwise, though they think they do bravely, and get the tter of their adversary, yet (if St. Paul may judge) they sit down by the loss. For he purposely disgraceth their contentious courses, in standing for their utmost right, without respect to peace and quietness, by a word that signi∣fieth disgrace, . or loss of victory, 1 Cor. 6.7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault, or a dfect of true manhood amongst you, because yee goe to law one with another: Why doe yee not rather take wrong? Ehic. why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrau∣ded? Aristotle by the dim light of nature, could see and say, that it is better to suffer wrong then do it. It was a brave speech of Calvin, Though Luther call me Devill, yet I will honour him as a servant of God. And when a fierce Frier, in dis∣pute with Beza and his colleagues, called them Foxes, Apes▪ Asss, &c. Beza answered no more but this, Nos non magis credere, quàm Transubstantiationem. In rixa is iferiorest, quì victor est saith Basil. And Demosthenes when he was reproached by One, thought it sufficient to say, Interdum dis∣junctio meliu alit amiciam, &c. Buchol. Nolim tecum in hoc genus certaminis descendere, in quo quivincitur ipso victore est melior. [Separate thy self I pray thee from me] Sometimes, and betwixt some natures, separation one from another better nourisheth friendship then nearer familiarity. There are that can never fadge together. [If thou wilt take the right hand, &c.] As who should say, We will not be far asunder, though we cannot be together) but still helpfull one to the other, Peerius. as the right hand is to the left. Vers. 10. And Lot lifted up his eyes] This was the lust of the eye, The leper sha∣ved his eye∣brows to teach us to mortifie the lust of the eyes. St. John speaketh of, 1 Ep. 2.16. as he afterwards fell into the lust of the flesh, Chap. 19.33. his incestuous posterity into the pride of life. We have heard of the pride of Moab, and the am∣bition of Ammon, Jer. 48, and 49. Lot might not be suffered so much as to look at Sodome, whiles it was burning, as Abram might. God knew his weakness, and so prevented the temptati∣on. He should have had the good manners to let his Uncle chuse first; but the dust of covetousness had put out his eyes, that he saw not what beseemed him for present▪ as afterwards he did, when God so crossed him, De Triboniano, Procopius. in that which he chose and so blessed Abram in that which was left him. Lot was a good man, but this, , somewhat obscured his vertues. [That it was well
watered every where] And so fruitful. Hence the inhabitants, Psal. 66.12. Psal. 107.33.35. through abuse of their plenty, became wholly drowned in fleshly delights. It faring with them in this respect, as with the Inhabitants of Oenoe, a dry Iland besides Athens, who bestowed much labor to draw into it a River to water it, and make it more fruitful. But, when all the passages were opened, Una est ex te∣trapoli Attica. Steph. 1 Tim. 6.9. . It immergunt, ut in aquae sum∣mitate cursu on bulliant. and the receptacles pre∣pared, the water came in so plentifully, that it over-flowed all, and at the first tide, drowned the Iland, and all the people. They that will be rich, saith the Apostle (that are resolved to rise in the world, by what means it matters not, these) fall into temptation, and a snare, as Lot, (that's the least evil can come of it) and into many foolish and noysom lusts, as his neighbors the Sodomites did, which desperately drown men in double destruction. [Like the land of Egypt.] Which was called of old publicum orbis horreum; The worlds great granary. A Country so fair and fertile, that the Egyptians were wont to boast, they could feed all men, and feast all the gods without any sensible diminution of their pro∣vision. Vers. 13. But the men of Sodom were wicked, &c.] See their chief sins set down, Ezek. 16.49, 50. The Chaldee Paraphrast here translateth, they were first unrighteous with their Mammon, and secondly, sinners with their bodies, before the Lord. . That un∣nameable sin had its name from them, who against nature were scalded in their lust, one toward another, Rom. 1.27. The Apostle there gives it in of the Heathen Philosophers, many of whom were patrones of this abhorred filth; Senca delecta∣batur exolis, &c. Dio in Nerone. Jam. 1.17. as Cicero complains of Plato; and Socrates was shrewdly suspected, to be no honester then he should be with Alcibiades; nor Seneca with Nero. The wisdom from above is pure, saith Saint James; and in this wisdom is truth and purity, saith Solomon, Prov. 8.7. whereas all worldly wisdom is stained with error or leudness. God punisheth the pride of all flesh with some foul sin, and so sets a Noverint uni∣versi, as it were, upon the worlds wisards, That all men may know them to be but arrant fools. [And sinners before the Lord ex∣ceedingly] They were grown so debauched, and impudent in evil, That neither fear of God, nor shame of men could restrain them. Though God looked on, they were no whit abashed or abased be∣fore him. God found not out their sins by secret search, Jere. 2.34. he needed not to search them with lights. Zeph. 1.12. For the shew of their countenance did witness against them; they could
blush no more then a sackbut: shamelesness sat in their foreheads, they declared their sins, even to a proverb, Isai. 3.9. They se them in open view upon the cliff of the rock, Ezek. 24.7. They faced the Heavens, and held their heads aloft, as if they deserved com∣mendation, rather then else. This is a high degree of sin, and an immediate forerunner of destruction. Vers. 14. After that Lot was separated from him] Till Lot was departed and the strife ceased. God appeared not. He is the God of peace; and hates contention; which as it indisposeth us to holy duties, 1 Pet. 3.7. so it keepeth God from us by his com∣forts and influences. They say of Bees, that stir and strife amongst them, is a signe their King is about to remove, to leave the hive, and to be gone some where else. God refuseth to be served till the matter be agreed, Matth 5.24. [Lift up now thine eyes,] Gods comforts are therefore most sweet, because most seasonable. Abram had now parted with Lot, to his great grief. God makes up that loss to him in his own gracious presence and promise: which he here repeateth, to teach us moreover, that the countinual weakness of man needeth continual comfort from God. Vers. 15. For all the land which thou seest is thine.] God gave him no inheritance in it, Acts 7.5. no not so much as a foot bredth; yet he promised, that he would give it to him: And that Abram took for good free-hold. Men use to reckon their wealth, not by what ready money they have, onely, but by the good Bonds and Leases, they can produce. A great part of a Christians estate lyes in Bonds and Bills of Gods hand. Vers. 16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth] Afterwards, Gen. 15.5. God promiseth that his seed shall be as the stars of heaven. Moses his choice by Mr. Burr. Abrahams seed, saith One, are of two sorts: Some are visible members of a Church, yet have earthly hearts: Others are as the stars of Heaven, for spiritual Light, motion, and influence. Vers. 17. Arise, walk through the Land.] Thus God rewards contented Abram with the whole Countrey. He never suffers any man to lose by an humble remission of his right, in a desire of peace. Matth. 5.5. The meek shall inherit the earth, and have Heaven to boot; which was the cheif thing here promised to Abraham, in this survey, Heb. 11.10, 16.
CHAP. XIV. Verse 2. That these made War.] VVAr is the slaughter-house of mankinde, and the hell of this present world. It hews it self a way through a wood of men, and layes heaps upon heaps, (as Sampson did, Judg. 15.16.) not with a jaw-bone of an Ass, and one after ano∣ther, but in a minute of time, and by the mouth of a murdering peece. Alphonsus D. of Ferrara, Peachams Val∣ly of varieties. had two of these Cannons of a wonderful bigness; the one whereof he called Archidiabalo, the other, the Earthquake. Revel. 9 17. Fire, smoke and brimstone seem to note out the Turks Guns and Ord∣nance. For the drawing of that Gun that Mahomet used in besiging Constantinople, seventy yokes of Oxen, and two thousand men were em∣ployed. Deut. 2 20. The Turks battered the Walls of the Rhodes, with twelve Basilisks, so aptly named of the Serpent Basiliscus, who (as Pliny writeth) killeth man or beast, with his very sight. But before these bloody instruments of death were heard of in the world, men could finde means to slaughter one another in war; witness these five Kings, that came with Chedar∣laomer, and smote the Rephaims or Gyants, the Zuzims, or Zamzummims, and the Emims or terrible ones, as their name importeth. These they slew by the way, besides what they did in the vale of Siddim, where they joyned battle with the five Kings, and cut off many. If we may judg of one battle by an∣other, hear what was done in a bloody fight between Amurath the third, King of Turks, and Lazarus Despot of Servia. Many thousands fell on both sides; the brightness of the Armor and Weapons was, as it had been the Lightning; the multitude of Launces and other Horsemens Staves, shadow the light of the Sun. Arrows and Darts fell so fast, that a man would have thought, Turk bist. fol. 200. they had poured down from Heaven. The noyse of the instru∣ments of War, with the neighing of horses, and out cryes of men, was so terrible and great, That the wilde Beasts in the Mountains, stood astonied therewith; and the Turkish Histories, to express the terror of the day, vainly say, That the Angels in Heaven, amazed with that hideous noyse, for that time, forgot the heavenly Hymnes, wherewith they always glorifie God. In conclusion, Lazarus was slain, and Amurath had the victory, but a very bloody one, and such as he had no great joy of. For he lost a∣bundance of his Turks; as did likewise Adrian the Emperor of his Romans, when he fought against the Jews, and had the better:
but with such a loss of his own men, that when he wrote of his victory to the Senate, Dio in Adriano. he forbore to use that common exordium, that the Emperors in like ease were wont to use, Si vos, liberique vestri valeatis, bene est: Ego quidem & exercitus valemus. There was no such thing, beleeve it, nor but seldom is there. But as the Dragon sucks out the blood of the Elephant; Plin. and the waight of the falling Elephant oppresseth the Dragon, and both usually perish together; so doth it many times fall out with those, that undertake war. These four Kings beat the five; but ere they gat home, became a prey to Abraham and his confederates. The Low-Countrey-men are said to grow rich, Heyl. Geog. pag. 253. (whereas all other Nations grow poor) with war. But they may thank a good Queen, under od (Queen Elisabeth, I mean) who first undertook their protection against the Spaniard. Ano 1585. Camdens E∣lisab. For the which act of hers, all Princes admired her fortitude: and the King of Sweden said, That she had now taken the Diadem from her head, and set it upon the doubtful chance of War. Dulia sanè est Martis alea, ne rarò utrique parti noxia, saith Bucholcerus. And I cannot but (as the case stands with us, Bucholc. Chro. p. 583. especially at this present, by reason of these unnatural, un∣civil Wars stirred up amongst us,) go on, and give my vote with him. Ideo pons aureus (ut vulgato proverbio dicitur) hosti fugienti extruendus est, & magno precio, precibus, pati∣entia ac prudentia, alma pax redimenda, ne infoelicitatis portas, pacis tempore clausas, Dulce bellum in∣expertis. infaustum bellum aperiat. War is sweet, they say, to them that never made tryal of it. But I cannot sufficiently wonder at Pyrrhus King of Epirus, Nulli ma orem ex imperio quàm Pyrrho ex bello voluptatem fuisse. Tit. 1.12. of whom Justin witnesseth, That he took as much pleasure in War, as others do in Supream Government. He might have learned better of his own Prophets (so Saint Paul calleth their Poets.) Homer (the Prince of them) ever brings in Mars, as most hated of Jupiter, above any other god, as born for a common mischeif, and being right of his mother Juno's dis∣position, which was fierce, vast, contumacious, and malignant. We that are Christians, as we cannot but, with the Prophet Isaiah, count and call War a singular evil: So we must ac∣knowledg with him, Mlum per  ut bllum quia minim bllm per autiphrasin. that it is an evil of Gods own creating, Isaiah Chap. 45. vers. 7. I make peac, and create evil, that is, War. I, is emphatical and exclusive, as who should say, I and I alone. Whence-soever the Sword comes, it is bathed
in Heaven, Isaiah Chapter 34. verse 5. God is pleased for this, to stile himself A man of war, Exodus 15.3. The Chaldee expresseth it thus, The Lord and Victor of wars, Gen. 17.1. Eundem vict∣rem & vasta∣torem esse opor∣tet. Genesis 17.1. God elsewhere calleth himself, El Shaddai. Aben-Ezra in∣terpreteth Shaddai a Conqueror. And indeed the Hebrew word Shadad signifieth to dissipate and destroy: both which, he must needs do that becomes a Conqueror. Gods seems to glory much in his workings, about warlike affairs. Hence Psalm 24.8. Who is the King of glory? Psal. 24.8. The Lord strong and mighty; the Lord mighty in battle. He is in Scripture said to send the Sword, Ezekiel 14.17. To muster the men, Isaiah 13.4. To order the Ammunition, Jeremiah 50.25. To bring up both van and rear, Isaiah 52.12. To give wisdom, valor, and victory, Psalm 144.1. Ezekiel 30.24. Ecclesiastes 9.11. The whole battle is his, 1 Samuel 17.47. And he oft thereby re∣vengeth the quarrel of his Covenant. Levit. 26. So he hath done already upon the Jews and Germans: so he is now doing, alass, upon Ireland and England. And here I cannot but insert that which I finde observed by a prime Preacher of our Kingdom. The late battle at Edge-hill, was fought in a place called, The Vale of the Red Horse; as if God had said, I have now sent you the Red Horse, to avenge the quarrel of the White, Revel. 6.2, 4. The blood spilt at Edge-hill the same day of the moneth, in which, the Rebellion brake out in Ireland, the yeer before, October 23. Yea, and upon the self-same day (if our Intelli∣gence be true) in which, that bloody battle was fought neer Leipsick in Germany: This Conjuncture is a sad Presage, That England is to drink deep in Germany's and Irelands Cup. Father, if it be thy will, let this Cup pass from us. A Cup of trembling it is, surely, to my self, among many others; such as maketh my Pen almost to fall out of my fingers, whiles I write these things: and affecteth me no otherwise (when I consider of the many fearful convulsions of our Kingdom, tending doubtless to a deadly consumption,) then the siege of Rome did Saint Jerome. For hearing that that City was besieged, Hieron. Conn. in Ezekiel. Proem. at such time as he was writing a Commentary upon Ezekiel, and that many of his godly acquaintance there were slain; he was so astonished at the news, That for many nights and days, he could think of nothing. When I think of what should move the Lord to make this breach upon us, and notwithstanding that
he hath been so earnestly besought; yet for all this, his anger is not turned away, Haec srisi cor∣dcits do os August. 21. 1643. but his hand is stretched out still: that of Cajetan comes before me; who then Commenting upon Matthew, when the French Souldiers having broken into Rome, offered all maner of abuse, and violence to the Clergy, inserts this passage into his Ns on Matth. 5.13. Te are the salt of the earth, as my former Author alleadgeth, and rendereth him. We the Prelates of Rome, Mr. Arrowsmith. ub suprà. p. do now finde the truth of this by woful experience, being become a scorn, and a prey, not to Infidels, but Christians, by the most righteous judgment of God, because we, who by our places, should have been the Salt of the Earth, had lost our savor, and were good for little else, but looking after the rites and revenues of the Church. Evanuimu, a ad nibilum uti∣les, nisi ad ex∣tern caeremo∣nias, externaque bona, &c. Heyl. Geog. Hence it is, that together with us, this City comes to be trodden under foot, this sixth of May, 1527. That City, till it became idolatrous, was ever victorious: But since it hath been the nest of Antichrist, it was never besieged, but it was taken and sacked. The God of Hea∣ven purge out of our Church, daily more and more, that Land∣desolating sin of Idolatry, Zach. 14.11. and masse good his promise, That there shall be no more the Canite in the house of the Lord of hstes, no evil spirit left in the Land. Fiat, Fiat. For of England we may now well say, Tacit. bist. lib. 1. cap. 1. as he once did of Rome: Nunquam magis justis judiciis approbatum est, non esse curae De securitatem nostram, esse vindict. Vers. 8 And there went out the King of Sodom, &c.] These five neighboring Kings, were combined against the four Kings that invaded them. It was not then a civile Dissension (that worst of Wars) such as was that of France, (and is now, alass, Hist. of Coun. of Tret. 647. of England,) wherein the sons fought against their Fa∣thers, and Brothers against Brothers; and even women took Arms on both sides for defence of their Religion. That was not more monstrous, Heyl. Geog. pag. 289. That the Snevi women threw their young children at the Romans, their enemies, instead of darts, then that other was pitios, between the Romans themselves, those that were for Vitellius, and the other for Vespasian; That when the women brought the Vitellians victuals by night, into the Camp, they not onely refreshed themselves, but their adver∣saries also, with meat and drink. Each man called to his adver∣sary by name, Dio in vit visellii. and said, Accipe, micommillto, ede: Non enim tibi gladium praebeo, sed panem. Accipe rursm & bibe: Non
euim tibi scutum, sed poculum trado: ut sive tu me interficias, sive ego t, moriamur facilius: atque ut ne me, enervatâ atque imbecillâ manu occidas, aut ego te. Hae nostrae sunt exequi, no∣his adhuc viventibus. Thus they greeted over night, . Dio. and the next day dispatcht one another; they gave wounds and took wounds; they slew, and were slain, as the same Author hath it. Which as oft as I think on, I cannot but highly commend that Speech of Oth the Emperor to his Souldiers, a little afore he took his end: I hate civil wars, though I were sure to overcome. . Dio. In vita Otho∣nis. Daniels Chrn. continued by Yrussel. fol. 249. Ome bellum sumitur facilè, caeterum aeger∣rimè desinit. Non enim in ejusdem potestate est initium belli, ejusque finis. Salust, n Jugu. I know not why any Englishman should love it; that shall call to minde, that in the civil Dissentions between the Houses of York and Lancaster, there were slain (re the quarrel ended) fourscore Princes of the Blood Royal, and twice as many Natives of England, as were lost in the two Conquests of France. War is easily taken up (saith the Wise Historian) but not so easily laid down again: Neither is the beginning and the end of a War, in any one mans power. If the Scots should come in on the one side, and the French or Irish on the other, What an Acheldam should we soon become; what an Ire-land, a seat of Wrath, because a seat of War? It is never to be for∣gotten by us, That the Dissension between England and Scot∣land consumed more Christian blood, wrought more spoil and destruction, and continued longer then ever quarrel we read of did, between any two people of the World. Our Edward the first, adjured his Son and Nobles, That if he dyed in his jour∣ney into Scotland, they should carry his Corps about Scotland, and not suffer it to be interred, till they had absolutely subdued the Countrey. A desire more Martial then Christian; a de∣signe of revenge beyond his life: Such spirits are raised in men that delight in war, Psalm 68.30. O pray for the peace of Jeru∣salem. So saith David, Psalm 122.6. And so doth David in the next verse, Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy pallaces. The Athenians, when they had gotten the better at Sea of the Lacedemonians, were so overjoyed, Tum primùm arae Paci pub∣licae sunt factae, eique Deae pulvi∣na insttutum. Cornel. Nepos. Psal. 85.9, 10. Luke 1.74. That they then first st up Altars to the Publike Peace; and appointed a Cushion to be laid thereon, for that godess to rest upon. Oh would the Lord, but once more grant us, that Righteousness and Peace might kiss each other, and Mercy and Truth meet in our Land; How happy should we hold our selves; how infinitely
oblieged to sing Servati sumus, ut serviamus! How should we prize our restored Peace, and improve it as Abraham did here, to the paying of Tithes, in token of thankfulness; yea, to the set∣ing up of Altars (not to Publike Peace, as those Heathens,) but to the God of peace, as Abraham after this did, when he had con∣cluded a peace with King Abimelech, and his General Phicol? Gen. 21.32, 33. Vers. 10. And the vale of Siddim was full of slime-pits.] Chosen therefore on purpose by the five Kings, who fled and fell there; or (as some understand the Text) made haste to fall down there; Celeritèr se dejecerunt. Piscat. Eo cosilio ut hostes ignari locorum, &c. Idem. sculking and scouting, till their enemies should pursue them, and so perish in those Pits. But their cunning failed them: For as they had travelled with iniquity, and conceived-mischief, so they brought forth a lye. They made a Pit and digged it, but fell into the ditch, that themselves had made, Psal. 7.15, 16. The way of this world (saith One) is like the vale of Siddim, slimy and slippery, full of Lime-pits, and Pit-falls, Springs, and Stumbling∣blocks, laid by Satan to maim or mischieve us, to procure our ruine or ruth. To defeat him therefore (as these four Kings did the five,) Let us tread gingerly, stp warily, lift not up one foot, till we finde sure footing for the other: Let us look ere we lep. Alioqui saliens antequam videat, Bern. de bon. deser. casurus est antequam debeat, as Saint Bernard hath it. Vers. 11. And all their victuals.] Ezek. 16.49. Amos 4. Fulness of bread was a part of their sin; and now cleanness of teeth is made a piece of their punishment, in Gods just judgment. Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur & ipse. Vers. 12. And they took Lot] God passeth not by the sins of his dearest Saints, without a sensible check. Lot for his affecting the first choyce, had soon enough of it. Strong affections bring strong afflictions, as hard knots require hard wedges. Earthly things court us, that they may cut our throats: These Hoasts welcom us into our Inne with smiling countenance, that they may dispatch us in our Beds. Beware of the worlds cut throat kind∣nesses; consort not with Sodomites, lest ye partake of their plagues. Hamath lyes nigh to Damascus in place, and fares the worse for its neighborhood, Zach. 9.2. Lot loseth his goods and liberty, 2 Chro. 18.31. & 19.2. Jehosaphat had well-nigh lost his life, for loving those that hated God.
Vers. 13. And there came one that had escaped] A Sodomite likely, but a servant to Gods good providence, 2 Pet. 2.9. Eph. 4. Psal. 126 4. for Lots rescue. The Lord knoweth how to deliver his, &c. He that led captivity captive, can turn our captivity as the streams in the South. Vers. 14. He armed his trained servants] Or, catechised, such as he had painfully principled both in Religion, and Military Dis∣cipline, tractable, and trusty, ready prest for any such purpose. It is recorded to the commendation of Queen Elisabeth that she provi∣ded for war, even when she had most perfect peace with all men. Camdens Elis. fol. 164. Darts foreseen are dintless. Vers. 15. Smote them, and pursued them] Abram came upon them as they were, secure, sleepy, and drunken, as Josephus wri∣teth. So did David upon the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 30.16. and Ahab the Syrians, 1 King. 20.16. The division of his company, and taking benefit of the night, wacheth the use of godly policies and stratagems. Vers. 16. And he brought back all the goods] The five Kings were deprived of the whole victory, because they spared not a man whom they should have spared. One act of injustice, oft loseth much that was justly gotten. Beware (saith a Reverend Writer hereupon) of swallowing ill gotten wealth; Mr. Whatelyes Archetypes. it hath a poysonfull operation: and like some evill simple in the stomack, will bring up the good food together with the evill humours. [And also brought again his brother Lot] Many a crooked nature would have thought of the old jar, and let Lot taste of the fruits of his departure. In a friends distress, let former faults be forgot∣ten, and all possible helps afforded. [And the women also, and the people] The hope of this might haply move that officious mes∣senger to address himself to the old Hebrew, vers. 13. little set by, till now that they were in distress. Generall Vere told the King of Denmarke, Spec bellisacri. 253. that Kings cared not for souldiers (no more did the King of Sodome for Abraham, and his Reformados) untill such time, as the Crowns hang on the one side of their heads. Vers. 18. Melchizedek King of Salem] Who this Mel∣chisedek was, is much controverted, Some would have him to be the holy Ghost. Others, the Lord Christ in the habit of a King and Priest. The Jerusalem Targum saith, Hu Shem Rabba. This was Shem the Great; and of the same opinion are not a few of the Hebrew Doctours, and others. But what should Shem do in Ca∣naan; which Country fell not to him, but to his brother Ham?
To this they answer; That by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, he left his own posterity now fallen away, for most part, to Ido∣latry, and came to the land of Canaan, a type of Heaven, and the place from whence peace and salvation should be preached to all people. If this were so, it might very well be, that Amraphel, who was of Shems lineage, Dr. Prideaux Lt, de Melchis. p 95. and his fellow-souldiers, moved with reverence of this their great Grand-father Shem, might forbear to molest him at Salem, or invade his territories, when they wasted and smote all the neighbour-nations. But then, on the other side, if Melchisedek were Shem; why doth not Moses calf him so▪ but change his name? 2. Why did not Abram, dwelling so near, visit him all this while, that was so near allyed to him, and so highly respected by him, as it was meet? 3. Why did Melchisedek the Grand-father, take tithes of his Nephew, to whom he should ra∣ther have given gifts and legacies? 2 Cor. 12.14. Most likely, Melchisedek was a Canaanite of the Canaanites; yet a most righte∣ous King and Priest of the most High God, and so a pledge and first-fruits of the calling of the Gentiles to the knowledge and obedience of Jesus Christ, of whom he was a lively type, Heb. 7.2. [Brought forth brend and wine] This he did as a King; as a Priest he blessed Abraham; which latter therefore the Apostle pitcheth upon, Heb. 7.1. as being to treat of Christs Priesthood. The Papists think to finde footing here for their unbloody sacrifice in the Masse. Melchisedee, say they, as a Priest offered bread and wine to God; for he was a Priest of the living God. So they render it, Tert. de Prae∣scrip. advers. haeret. or rather wrest this text, to make it speak what it never meant. Caedem Scriptuarum faciunt ad materiam suam, they mur∣ther the Scriptures to serve their own purposes, saith Tertullian. Where can they shew us in all the Book of God, that the Hebrew word Hotsi here used, signifieth to offer? But any thing serves turn, that hath but a shew of what they alleadge it for. A Sor∣bonist, finding it written at the end of St. Pauls Epistles, Missa est, Bee-hive of Rom. Church, chap. 3. fol. 93. Nelancthon orat. de encom. elo∣quentiae. Pref. to his book of the Sa∣craments. &c. brag'd he had found the Masse in his Bible. So another reading, Joh. 1.41. Invenimus Messiam, made the same conclusion. A third, no whit wiser then the two former, speaking of these words I now write upon, Rex Salem panem & vinum protulit, fell into a large discourse of the nature of Salt. Agreable where∣unto Dr. Poynes writes, that it was foretold in the Old Testament, that the Protestants were a Malignant Church, alleadging 2 Chron. 24.19. Mitbatque prophetas, ut rvr∣terentur
ad Dominum, quos rotestantes illi audire nolebant. Vers. 19. And he blessed him] Lo here an instance of the communion of Saints: Melchisedek doth all good offices to Abraham (a beleever, though a stranger) not of curtesie onely and humanity, but of charity and piety. Vers. 20. And he gave him tithe of all] Not of the Sodomites goods, which he restored wholly, ver. 23. but of the other law∣full spoyle he had taken from the foure conquered Kings; in testimony of his thankfulness to God the giver of all victory. Vers. 21. And the King of Sodome said] He, that a few dayes since, faced the heavens, and cared not for foure Kings, can now become suppliant to a forlorn forreigner. Affliction will tame and take down the proudest spirits; they buckle in adversity, that bore their heads on high in prosperity. In their moneth you may finde these wild-asses. [Give me the persons] Abram did so, Jer. 2.24. and yet they were no whit amended by their late captivity, or former servitude; from both which now they are freed by Abra∣ham, but still held captive by the Devill, who owes them yet a further spite, as we shall see Chapt. 19. Vers. 22. I have lifted up my hand] A swearing gesture, Dan. 12.7. Rev. 10.5.6. Neither doth he this rashly, but for very good reason; First, that by this oath, as by a buckler, he might fence himself against all covetous desires of the spoyle. Secondly, to shew that he did seriously remit of that which was his right, and went not to war for wages. Thirdly, hereby to profess his faith and Religion, in opposition to their superstitious vanities, &c [The possessour of heaven and earth] The true and rightfull proprietary, whose tenants at pleasure we all are, Philo. as Philo from this text well observeth. And here take notice how Melchisedek and Abraham concut in the very termes of professing their faith, The most high God possessour of heaven and earth. Whereunto Abram addes Je∣hovah, by which name Melchisedek happily knew not God as yet; like as Apollos was ignorant of many needfull truths, till bet∣ter instructed by Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18.26. Vers. 23. That I will not take from a threed] Melchisedek from God had made Abram heir of all things; for saith he, I am the Priest of the most High God, possessour of heaven and earth, who hath sent me with this bread and wine, as by turfe and twig, as by an earnest, and a little for the whole, to give thee possession of both. Now therefore when the King of Sodome, presently after
offers him the goods he had taken, Abraham would none; he was grown too great to accept of such an offer; God was his ex∣ceeding great reward, Chap. 15.1. Aquila non captat muscas. [Lest thou shouldst say, I have made Abram rich] Occasion must not be given to any to speak the least evill of us, lest Christ be dishonou∣red: For every Christian quartereth arms with Christ. And if Abram do any thing unbeseeming himself, Abrahams God shall be blasphemed at Sodome. Vers. 24. Let them take their portion] In things indifferent, we may abridge our selves, we may not prescribe to others, as if they must needs be just of our make. My brethren be not many masters, Jam. 3.1. as Magistri nostri parisienses. See 1 Cor. 9.14, 15. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. Fear not Abram] EIther as Daniel feared upon sight of a like vision, Dan. 10.7, 8. Or as Jacob feared after the sack of Shechem, lest he should be set upon by those whom he had lately discomfited. Or, fear not lest thou shalt dye childless; which seemeth to be that that chiefly affrighted and afflicted him at this time. The heart is not in case to receive promises, till freed of false fears. These are quelled and killed by faith onely. [I am thy shield] From the envy of thy neighbours, and enmity of others, whom thou hast lately van∣quished; yea I will deliver thee from all danger, as I have done from this. See a like promise to all beleevers, Psal. 115.9, 10, 11. The shield is betwixt the body, and the thrust; so is God betwixt his and harm. He beareth them as on Eagles wings: The Eagle fleeth with her young on her back; Deut. 32.11. Aquilae pullos suos in ali por∣tant; alites reli∣quiter pedes. Munster. in Scho. ex Rab. Salom. there's no shooting them but through her body: no more can any devoratory evill (as Tertul∣lians phrase is) befall the Saints, but through God. [And thy ex∣ceeding great reward] So that thou shalt lose nothing, by refusing the King of Sodoms offer. God is a liberall pay-master, and his retributions are more then bountifull. A hundred fold here, and heaven hereafter. Not onely Caleb shall have Hebron for his va∣lour; but Nebuchadnezzar shall have Egypt, as his pay, for his pains at Tyre. Never ask with Peter, What shall we have? you
shall have whatever heart can wish, or need require. The world gives hard wages; but Gods reward is exceeding great. He will also recompence our losses for his sake, as the King of Poland did his noble servant Zelilaus; having lost his hand in his wars, Cromerus. he sent him a golden hand for it. So Caius gave Agrippa that had been imprisoned for his sake, a chain of gold as heavy as his chain of iron had been. Vers. 2. Lord God, what wilt thou give me, &c.] Dominator Johovah. Adonai cum Camets sonat Dominator: A stately stile. We must magnifie God, when we have got him into our hearts, and inlarge his room there, when we conceive of him, as much as may be: Do our utmost, and then say, Claudicat ingenium, Lucrt. delirat linguaque, mensque. [Seeing I goe childless] He had no great joy of his former victory, or the present promise, because childless. His mouth was so out of taste with the sense of this want, that he could relish no comfort. This was his fault, and is often ours: Like children, if we have not that peece we would have, we grow sullen, and will have none. Had not God been to Abraham in∣stead of ten children? Is he not All in All to his? [And the steward of my house] Filius discursitationis, vel derelictionis domus mae He that now runs about my business, and to whom I am likely to leave all. A faithfull steward he was, and fearing God, Prov. 22.29. Gen. 24.2, 3. &c. and therefore might look not to live long in a low place. [This Eliezer of Damascus] Or Eliazar, as Exod. 6.25. Whence Lazarus, said in the parable to be in Abrahams bosome, Luke 16.23. as dear to him, and set next him in heaven. Vers. 3. And Abram said, Behold to me, &c.] He harps a∣gain upon the same string; when we fall upon crosses, we adde, we multiply, we rise in our discourse, we are eloquent above mea∣sure, and beyond truth sometimes. But how comes Abram to speak thus to God once and again? In former visions God onely spake, here Abram answers It appears he grew in an holy fami∣liarity with the divine Majesty, and an humble boldness, as Cajetan here observeth. Vers. 4. And behold the word of the Lord &c.] Abrams Behold of griefe, is answered with Gods Behold, of grace. The Greek rendreth it, And straightway. God was straight at hand to help Abrams infirmity, and to raise up his faith that began to flag and hang the wing, as the best faith will, if long put to't. Adeò nihil est in nobis magni, quod non queat minui.
Vers. 5. And he brought him forth abroad] Abram having prayed a good part of the day within, Joh. 16.24. 1 Thes. 5.16, 17 is now drawn forth at night to receive the promise. Pray that ye may joy, saith Christ: And, if ye will rejoyce evermore, Pray continually, saith the Apostle. [If thou be able to number them] Then maist thou number thy posterity; and they, their priviledges. It is God onely that counteth the stars, and calleth them all by names, Psal. 147.4. No man can number them, Jer. 33.22. And yet Aratus and Eu∣doxus vainly vaunted (saith St. Augustin) that they had cast up the stars, Aug de Civ. Det. l. 16. and could call them all by their names. Vers. 6. And he beleeved] When thus the promise was repea∣ted. So needfull it is, that the word should be often preached, and the sweet promises of the Gospell beaten to the smell; that Gods name being as an oyntment poured out, The Virgins may love him, beleeve in him, Cant. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.8. and rejoyce with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. [And he counted it to him for righteousness] This imputative righteousness the Papists scoffe at, calling it putative, or imaginary. This the Jews also jear at, to this day, as their Fathers did of old, Rom. 10.2, 3. so do they. For being asked, whether they beleeve to be saved by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them? they an∣swer, That every Fox must pay his own skin to the Fleaer. But is not Christ called, Jer. 23.6. in their law, Jehovah our righteousness? And how so, but by means of that imputation so often hammered on by the Apostle? Rom. 4. adding after all, that what is said here of Abram, is not written for his sake alone that it was imputed to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we beleeve on him that raised up Jesus, &c. Rom. 4.24. If Adams sin be mine, though I committed it not; why should it seem so strange, that the merit of Christs intire obedience should by the like means be mine, though I wrought it not? See Rom. 5.19. 2 Cor. 5.19. If he hath wronged thee ought, reckon that to me, said Paul to Phi∣lemon, Philem. 18. concerning Onesimus; saith Christ to his Father, concerning us. And (to stop the Papists mouth.) If another mans faith may benefit Infants at their Baptisme, as Bellarmine affirmeth; why should it seem so absurd, that beleevers should be benefited by Christs righteousness imputed? Vers. 7. I am the Lord that brought thee] Let the remembrance of what I have done for thee, confirme thy confidence, sith every former mercy, is a pledge of a future. God giveth after he hath given, as the spring runneth, after it hath run: And as the eye is
not weary of seeing, nor the ear of hearing, no more is God of doing good to his people. Draw out thy loving kindness, Psal. 36.10. saith David, as a continued series or chain, where one linke draws on another to the utmost length. Vers. 8. Lord God whereby shall I know] He desires assign, not that he beleeved not before, but that he might better beleeve. How great is Gods love in giving us Sacraments, and therein to make himself to us visible, as well as audible? Vers. 9. Take me an heifer, &c.] Here God commands him abusie sacrifice, and then casts him into a terrible sleep; the better to prepare him to receive the ensuing oracle, and to teach him, that he may not rashly rush upon divine mysteries. Heathens could say, Non loquendum de Deo absque lumine; that is, Pythagra. without prae∣meditation and advised consideration. Vers. 10. Divided them in the midst] In signum exitii foedi∣frago eventuri. This was the federall rite both among Jews, Jer. 34.18, 19. and Gentiles, as is to be seen in Virgil, Aeneid. l. 8. describing the covenant of Romulus and Tatius. God also threatneth to cut the evill servant in twain; that forgetteth the Covenant of his God, Matth. 24. These dissected creatures are the oppressed Israelites; the parts laid each against other, signifie, that God will make them up again, though disjected; the fowls that came down upon them, are the Egyptians; Abrams huffing of them away, is their deliverance by Moses after foure hundred years, signified by those foure kindes of creatures, as Luther interpreteth. Vers. 12. And when the Sun was going down] Heb. when he was ready to enter, to wit, into his Bride chamber, Psal. 19 6. Vers. 13. Know of a surety that thy seed] Must first suffer, be∣fore they can enter; and so be conformed to Christ their Captain, Heb. 5.9. who was perfected by sufferings, and came not to the Crown, but by the Crosse. Dissicile est ut prasemibus bonis quis fruatur & futuris; ut hic ventrem, illi mentem resiciat ut de delicis ad delicias transeat; ut in coelo & in terra gloriosus appareat, saith St. Hierome. Erigito tibi sca∣lam Aco, & solus ascenito. Constant. Mag. Through many tribulations we must enter into heaven. He that will goe any other way, let him (as the Emperour said to the H∣retick) erect a ladder, and go up alone. Vers. 14. Afterward they shall come out, &c.] All the Saints abasements, are but in order to their advancement. As God brought forth his Israel with jewels, and other wealth; so the afflicted Church, and tossed with tempest, shall build her walls,
and lay her foundations with Sapphires, and Agates, Esa. 54.11, 12. See Esa. 62.3.4. Vers. 15. Thou shalt go to thy fathers] The spirits of just men made perfect; all the court of Heaven shall meet thee and welcome thee into their society, that brave Panegyris, Heb. 12.22, 23. [In peace] So Josiah did, Bellum, cui nos instamus pax est, non bellum. Zuingl. apud Melch. Adam. Prov. 16.31. though he dyed in battle, according to the promise, 2 Chron. 34.28. God made war to be peace to him [In a good old age] Heb. With a good hoar head, which is a Crown, when found in the way of righteousness. Vers. 16. The iniquity of the Amorites, &c.] A metaphor from a large vessell filled by drops; as elsewhere, from an harvest ready for the sickle, and from the vine ripe for the wine-press. Pererius the Jesuit writing upon this text saith, Perer. in loc. If any marvell why England continueth to flourish, notwithstanding the cruell persecution of Catholikes there? (just execution of Cacolikes he should have said) Answers because their sin is not yet full. (God grant it, Jer. 28.6.) Sed veniet tandem iniquitatis complementum, saith he. Ezek. 7.6, 7, 10 A true Prophet, I fear me. That terrible text rings in mine ears, An end is come, the end is come, it watcheth for thee, behold it is come, it is come. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. Now Sarai Abrams wife bare him no children] GOd had foretold him of his childrens affliction, and yet gave him no child, but holds him still in suspense. He knows how to commend his favours to us by withholding them, Citò data citò vilescunt; we account it scarce worth taking, that is not twice worth asking. [A handmaid, an Egyptian] One of those maids, belike, that were given her in Egypt, Gen. 12.16. Vers. 2. The Lord hath restrained me] She faults herself, not her husband, as many a crank dame would have done. [It may be that I may obtain children by her] Heb. Be builded by her, as God made the midwives houses; that is, gave them children, for their mercy to the poor children, Exod. 1.21. and as he promised to make David an house, 2 Sam. 7.11, 12 that is, to give him seed to sit upon his Throne. Saraies ayme was good here, but the means she used naught. She was too hasty, Abram too facile, both to blame for
want of faith, and violation of wedlock. Albeit this might be a sin of ignorance in them, as was also polygamy. God had pro∣mised a seed to Abram, but not expresly as yet unto Sarai. Now, Ainsworth. by the Law, bond-servants children were their masters, Exod. 21.4. And among the Heathens, Stratonice the wife of King Diotarus being barren, Plutarch. gave secretly her maid Electra unto her husband, by whom she had an heir to the Crown. Vers. 3. After Abram had dwelt ten years] The Rabbines tell us of a tradition that the Hebrews grounded from hence; That if a woman had no child in the first ten years, she might be held barren, and another wife taken. But this is like one of their ill glosses that marr'd so many good texts, Matth. 5. and refuted by our Saviour the Law-giver, who best understood his own meaning. Vers. 4. Her Mistress was despised in her eyes] Heb. Allevata est, sive elevata est, and so she was beaten with her own rod, and yet complains. Neither is it any wonder; For, for three things the earth is disquieted, saith Agur, and two of them are, Prov. 30.21, 23 For an odious woman, when she is married, and a handmaid that is heir to her mistress. Asperius nihil est humili dum surgit in altum. Set a beggar on horse-back, and there's no hoe with him. Vers. 5. My wrong be upon thee] The greatest wrong-doers are the greatest complainers commonly, as Exod. 2.13, 14. guilti∣ness is ever exceptions, and clamorous. Here be verba stomachant is atque imprecantis. Or as some think rather, verba implorantis vin∣dictam divinam seque consolantis spe defensionis divinae. Take it which way you will, as a passionate person she powrs out foolishness, and (besides the false charge she layes upon her husband) takes Gods name in vain. Fret not thy self to do evill. Prov. 15.2. Psal. 37. [The Lord judge] He must be sent for all in haste, to decide the controversie; who if he had come, you may soon see which of them would have had the worst of it. The best, we see, have their domesticall con∣tentions; some houshold words will now and then pass betwixt them: we match not with Angels, but men and women. Two flints may assoon smite together, and not fire come forth, as two persons meet in marriage, and not offences fall out: Pub. Rubius Celer was held a happy man among the Romans, that commanded it to be engraven upon his grave-stone, That he had lived three and forty years and eight months with G. Ennia his wife, sine querela, without the least quarrell. Another I have read of, that com∣plained that his conjugium, was a continuall conjurgium; and when
he dyed, Legitur id Roma citante Phil. Camerar. cen. 1. . 51. gave order it should be written upon his tombe, He, Viter, miraculu! hic vir & uxor non litigant, &c. This to prevent, Alphons King of Arragon was wont to say, that to pro∣cure a quiet life, the husband must be deaf, and the wife blinde. But they say better that advise to a mutuall forbearance, lest no offence be given on either side; or if given, yet not taken; the second blow makes the fray, we say. Be not both incensed together. If Abraham were to blame in conniving at Hagars contempt of her Mistress, (as it may be he was somewhat) yet it was his wisdome to bear with Sarah when she was in her passion. Let two fires meet, and it will be hard quenching them. A cholerick couple be∣ing asked how they agreed so well? the husband made this answer, When my wives fit is on her, I bear with her (as Abraham did with Sarai) and when my fit is on me, Greenham. she bears with me; and so we never chide together, but asunder. Those unkinde husbands had much to answer for, Malach. 2.13. that caused their wives to cover the Louds altar with tears, with weeping, and with cry∣ing out, so that he regarded not the offering any more. And those wies can never answer it to God, that live customarily in the sin of frowardness, or rebellion against their husbands. Amongst all the infirmitie noted in any godly woman in the Scriptures, there is no example of any that did so. This of Sarah is but of one onely fact: And for that of Zipporah, the errour seems to be as much in her judgement, as in her affections. Those couples that are even warbling, can neither be at peace within themselves, 1 Cor. 7.15. nor pray as they should do to God, 1 Pet. 3.7. which if they did often, as Isaac and Rebecca did, they could not disagree. For either praying together would make them leave jarring, or jar∣ring, will make them leave praying; which the Apostle accounts no small hindrance. Vers. 6. But Abram said to Sarai, Behold, &c.] Here that of Solomonis verified, A soft answer pacifieth wrath. Hard to soft doth no hurt, as a bullet against a wooll-sack. Ʋxoris vitium aut tollen∣dum, aut tollerandum, said Varro,  The woman is the wants, . and hath many provocations among children and ser∣vants, that the man met not with. This must be considered, and all bitterness abandoned. . pracep▪ . The Heathens when they sacrificed at their marriage feasts, used to cast the gall of the beast sacrificed out of doors. . 7. Viper virus, ob venerationem nuptiarum, vmit (saith St. Basil): & in dritiem animi, in feritatm, tu crudelitatem ob
unionis reverutiam non deponis? What kin art thou to him whose name is Wormwood? Rev. 8.11. [And when Sarai dealt hardly with her] Beat her, belike: For a servant will not be corrected by words, Prov. 29.19. and then he must have blows, and be buf∣feted, 1 Pet. 2.20. Not so a wie. M. Aurelius the Emperour, though a Heathen, could say to the shame of many Bedlams a∣mongst us: Ʋxor admonenda persapt, reprehendendararo, violentis manibus tructanda nunquam. [She fled] This was her fault, Eccles. 10.4. But our natures are refractory, and will sooner break then bend, till God subdue them. Vers. 7. In the way to Shur] Which lay between Canaan and Egypt. So she was hying homewards to her own country. Oh that our afflictions might drive us heaven-ward! Vers. 8. Hagar Sarai's maid] This was a good item to her, that she was out of her way, because out of her place. [Whence camest thou? and whither wilt t] Such is the sweet and secret voyce of Gods Spirit (that Angelus Tutelaris, as I may say) in our hearts, when extravagant; So that we cannot do the evill we would, Gal. 5.17. [I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai] Who haply had over-done, as we are all apt to do, when we are judges in our own causes, and concernments. She should have thought of that of Job, chap. 31.15. Did not he that made me in the womb▪ make her? and that of Paul, Have not I also a master in Heaven? Colos. 4.1. But passion is head-long, and like heavy bodies, down steep hills, once in motion, rest not till they come to the bottome. Look to it therefore, in corrections especially. Vers. 9. Return to thy Mistress] When now she had smarted, she is in case to be counselled. There's great skill in the choice of a fit time for admonition. It is not to give a man a purge in a fever-fit. [Submit thy self] Heb. Afflict thy self, or suffer thy self to be afflicted or humbled under her hands. Jam. 4.9. The like counsell is given us all by St. James, Be afflicted, and weep, and mourn, &c. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and he will lift you up. Vers. 10. I will multiply thy seed] Thus God contemneth not poor servants: nay, if they be faithfull, Coloss. 3.24. he will give them the re∣ward of inheritance, even a childs part, as Hagar, and her child had. We read not that she cryed to God; but her affliction spake for her; and he is oft (ont of his meer Philanthropie) found of them that sought him not. He heareth the young Ravens that
cry to him onely by way of implication. Pal. 147.9. The Lord hath heard thy affliction, saith the Angel in the next verse. Vers. 12. And he will be a wild-man] Heb. A wild-asse, which is fierce, untractable, and untameable. And such by nature is every mothers childe of us, Job 11.12. A wild-asse-colt. An Asse is none of the wisest creatures, much less an Asses-colt; least of all, Vigimus, inque vicem praebemus tela sagitis. a wild-asse-colt. Lo such is man. [His hand will be against every man] This was first accomplished in his person, and thn in his posterity. For himself, he was ferus & pugnax, ever quarrelling and contending. Now a quarrelsome man is like a Cock of the game, that is still blood, with the blood of others, and of himself. As for his posterity, the Saracens, Mahomet, the mischiefe of mankinde, had his generation from this wild-asse. And Sarai was utterly disappointed; for these Agarens were ever enemies, and so continue to be to her seed. Vers. 13. Thou God seest me] This shews she had been well trained and tutored in her Master Abrams house. Before, she told the Angell the plain truth, and lyed not, vers. 8▪ And here she thankfully acknowledgeth Gods goodness in looking upon her forlorn solitariness, setting up a memoriall of that mercy to all posterity. The greater was her sin again, that being so well principled, she should have any thoughts of returning to Egypt, there to forsake her faith learn'd in Abrams family. [Have I also here looked, Gen. 32.30. Exod. 24.11. Jug. 1.23. &c.] q. d. Have I found God here also in the wilderness, as I had done oft before in my Masters house? Or, am I yet alive, though I have seen God? CHAP. XVII. Vers. 1. The Lord appeared to Abram] AFter thirteen years absence and silence, for ought we read; so that Abram began to conclude that Ismael surely was the pro∣mised seed, & all the sons he was likely to have to inherit the land: The Church then may erre, when she cleaves not close to the word; though God at length will direct her into the right way, , Aquila. , Plato . as here he did Abraham. [I am God All-mighty] Or Al. sufficient, Self-sufficient (so Aquila)▪ Independent, Absolute, the Original, Universall good.
Aben-Ezra interprets Shaddai, a Conqueor: Others a De∣stroyer, which a Conqueror must needs be. Eundem victorem & vastatorem esse oportet, saith Cameron. And to this the Scripture alludes, when it saith Shod shall come from Shaddai, Destruction from the Almighty, Esa. 13.6. Some there are that derive Shaddai of Shad a dug, because God feeds his children with suffi∣ciency of all good things, as the loving mother doth the child with the milk of her breasts. Hence the Heathen called Diana (and likewise Ceres)  & Mammosam, as if she were the Nurse of all living creatures. God is the onely satisfactory good, proportionable and sitting to our souls, as the dug to the childes stomach. [Walk before me] Heb. Indesinentèr ambula, Walk constantly, step for step, and keep pace with me. Austin would not, for the gain of a million of worlds, be an Atheist for half an houre, because he new not but God might in that time make an end of him. Am. 3.3. For can two walk together and they not agreed, saith the Prophet? Ye cannot serve the Lord (saith Joshua to the people that promised fair) that is, Jsh. 24.19. unless ye will serve him entirely, walk uprightly, as Abram here; walk evenly, without halting or halving with him. Holiness must run thorough the whole life, as the warp doth thorough the woof: all the parts of our line of life must be streight before God. As for such as turne aside to their crooked wayes (as the Planets steal back by a secret slow motion of their own, contrary to that of the Primum Mobile) The Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, with openly prophane persons (Psal. 125.5.) when peace shall be upon Israel, upon all that are Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile. Surely, as an unequall pulse shews a distempered body, so doth uneven walking an unsound soul, such as is not verily perswaded that God is All-sufficient, able and ready to reward the upright, and punish the hypocrite. Vers. 2. And I will make my Covenant] This is now the fifth confirmation of the Covenant; which shews that it is the prora and puppis, the first, second and third of our salvation; and it is fit we should be well studied in it, and assured of our interest. For as the Mercy-seat was no larger then the Ark, so neither is the Grace of God then the Covenant. And as the Ark and Mercy∣seat were never separated; Exod. 25.10. to 17. so neither is his mercy from his people.
Vers. 3. And Abram fell on his face] Twas sit he should, now that God talked with him. Such a posture of body befits us at the hearing of the word, as may best express our reverence, and further our attention. Balac is bid to rise up to hear Balaams parable. Eglon though a fat unweildy man, riseth up from his seat to hear Gods message from Ehud. Neh. 8.5. The people in Nehemiah stood to hear the Law read and expounded. Constantine the Great, Euseb. would not be entreated to sit down or be covered at a Sermon: No more would our Edward the sixth, whose custome was also to take notes of what he heard, Act & Mn. which (together with his own applications of the word to himself) he wrote in Greek cha∣racters, that his servants might not read them. The Thessalonians are commended for this, that they heard Pauls preaching as the word of God, and not of man. Had Samuel thought it had been God that called to him (and not Eli) he would not have slept, but fallen on his face before the Lord as Abram here, who was no novice, but knew well, that though God loves to be acquainted with men in the walks of their obedience, yet he takes state upon him in his Ordinances, and will be trembled at in his word and judgements. Vers. 4. As for me] Ego ecce. An abrupt speech, to shew what haste God made to comfort and confirm Abram, now fallen at his feet. [Thou shalt be a father of many nations.] The Israelites, Ismaelites, Edomites, Keturites, &c. besides all Beleevers, Gal. 3.28, 29. Vers. 5. Neither shall thy name any more, &c.] This is recko∣ned for an high favour by those holy Levites, Neh. 9.7. The Jews say, that for honours sake; God inserted one of the letters of his own incommunicable name Jehovah into the name of Abram, now Abraham. Sure it is, that by stiling himselfe the God of Abra∣ham, he doth him more honour then if he had ingraven the word Abraham upon the firmament, or in the clouds in letters of gold. Vers. 6. I will make thee exceeding fruitfull] Heb. Foecundabo te valdè valdè: And as oft as thou thinkest upon thy new name, thou shalt remember my promise, and rest assured of my perfor∣mance. See how God of his grace, condescends unto us, and ac∣commodates us. Vers. 7. For an ever lasting Covenant] Circumcision, the out∣ward sign of it, was temporary, and changeable into baptisme;
but the Covenant of grace, thereby then, and by baptisme now sealed up unto us, is eternall; being stablished and ratified by the death of the Testatour, by the blood of the Arch-shepherd, Heb. 13.20. Here it must be considered, that there is a twofold Co∣venant; 1. Single, such as God makes with children, when baptized; viz. If ye will repent, believe and walk with me, ye shall be saved. Now if they break the condition, God is freed, D. Preston of Gods Attrib. he is not bound any further. 2. Double, such as God kes with his elect onely; and that is to perform both parts, sc. If you will beleeve, repent, obey, ye shall be saved. And further, I will give you a new heart, so that you shall repent, beleeve, &c. and be saved. Thus God undertakes for both parts, and so it becomes an everlasting Covenant; such as hath the sure or unfailable mercies of David. And here those, that are thus in Double-Covenant with God, . are fitly compared to them that are gone in at a Church-door: some are further in then others, but yet all are in. So, though the weak in faith be not so forward, yet they may be in, though not so far in. [And to thy seed after thee] See the Note on the next Verse. Vers. 8. All the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession] And yet now, for their inexpiable guilt, in putting to death the Lord of life, they are utterly dispossessed of that pleasant land. In Jerusalem it self there are not to be found a hundred housholds of Jews. Adri the Emperour drove them utterly out of Jewry, Breerewood and commanded them by proclamation not so much as to look to∣ward it, from any Tower or high-mountain: Yea long before this, the Lord, for their wickedness, counted them but usurpers, Funceiu. and called them sojourners in that land, Ezek. 20.38. and 11.15. If men forfeit their priviledges, God may, at his pleasure, take the forfeiture and dis-priviledge them, as he did Saul, and Judas, who by transgression fell from his office, that he might go to his own place, Act. 1.25. [I will be their God] This is a singular comfort for all beleeving parents. Their greatest care is for their poor little ones, what they shall do another day: why, cast them upon God, their God as well as thine: for is not he in Covenant with them too? It would be a great stay of minde, if God should say to us for our children, as David said to Mephibosheth, or to Barzillai for his son Chimham; Chimham shall go with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee, and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that I will do for thee. Behold God saith all this and more to us, 2 Sam. 19.38. when he saith, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. I
remember a sweet passage of Mr. Saunders the Martyr in a Letter to his wise: Act. & Mon. 1364. Though we do shortly depart hence, and leave our poor Infant (to our seeming) at all adventures, yet shall he have our gra∣cious God to be his God: For so hath he said (and he cannot lye;) I will be thy God, and of thy seed. Yea, if you leave him in the Wilder∣ness, destiue of all helps, being called of God to do his will, either to die for the confession of Christ, or any work of obedience; that God which heard the cry of the little poor Infant of Hagar, and did succor it, will do the like to the children of you, or any other fearing him, and trusting in him. Vers. 9. Thou shalt keep my Covenant.] This is the stipulation on Abrahams part, by receiving the Sacrament of Circumcision, to avouch God to be his God, Deut. 26.17. Now to the making the Lord to be our God, it is required that with highest estimations, most vigorous affections, and utmost endeavors we bestow our selves upon him. Thus if we chuse God for our God, Psal. 73.25. We shall be assured, that he hath chosen, and avouched us for his people, 1 John 4.19. Vers. 10. Every man-childe amongst you.] Infants were cir∣cumcised, to signifie that we had better be flayed, and have our skin quite stripped off, then to have it as a skin-bottle hanging in the smoke of filthy desires, and blown full of unclean motions with the breath of Satan. That wretched Renegado that betrayed the Rhodes was well served. For his promised wife and portion were presented: but the Turk told him, that he would not have a Christian to be his son in law, Spec. bol. sac. p. 157. but he must be a Mussle-man, that is, a beleeving Turk, within and without. And therefore he caused his baptized skin (as he called it) to be fleyed off, and him to be cast in a bed, strawed with Salt, that he might get a new skin, and so he should be his son-in-law. But the wicked wretch ended his life with shame and torment. Vers. 11. It shall be a token of the Covenant.] It seals up no∣thing then to those that are not in Covenant. Circumcision to such is but as a seal to a blank. Unregenerate Israel was to God as Ethiopia, Amos 9.7. Circumcision of it self, avails nothing, if the heart be uncircumcised. The Apostle distinguisheth of Cir∣cumcision, Colos. 2.11. and tells us that the true Circumcision is made without hands, and is that of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, . Rom. 2.29. It is a wonderful work of the Spirit, wrought by the Word, upon the Saints in their first Conversion,
whereby corruption of nature is wounded, beloved sins cast away with sorrow, and the sinner received into an everlasting commu∣nion with God, and his Saints. Labor this, or you are not a button the better for your Baptism. A man may go to Hell with Font∣water on his face, if not baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. Circumcision seals not up any Covenant of Grace to Turks, as it did not, of old, to Ismaelites, Edomites, and Midianites, who yet would needs be circumcised. Vers. 12. And he that is eight days old.] This warrants our baptising of Infants of both Sexes. See the Notes on Chap. 9. Vers. 10. Vers. 13. He that is born in thy house,] Housholders must see to it, that their families fear God: They walk not in a perfect way, that do otherwise, Psal. 101.2. that look not Aedibus in propriis, quae prava, aut recta gerantur. [My Covenant shall be in your flesh.] That is, the signe of my Covenant (by a Metonymy of the Subject) seem it never so simple, and prove it never so painful and shameful. The foolishness of God is wiser then men, that cry Credat Judaeus Apella, &c. Vers. 14. That soul shall be cut off.] From the Common-wealth of Israel: So shall those be from benefit by Christ, that are un∣circumcised in heart; As hateful to him, as Goliah was to David. Pray therefore, that God will thrust his holy hand into thy bo∣some, and pull off that abominable fore-skin. He had much ado to forbear Moses, when he met him in the Inne; and we know why, Exod. 4.24. Vers. 15. Thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah.] The Chaldee Sarai, is made Hebrew Sarah: One of the four Letters of Jehovah being also added (as before in Abraham) that she may be absolutely a Lady or Princess. Vers. 17. Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed.] Not as doubting, much less deriding, Rom. 4 19. but as rejoycing and ad∣miring the goodness and power of God. The narrow mouthed ves∣sel of his heart not quickly capable of so great comfort, (for Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides) he fell upon his face and laughed. Vers. 18. Oh that Ishmael might live.] The life of grace here, and of glory hereafter: That he be not killed with death when he dies, as Jesabels children were, Revel. 2.23. Vers. 19. I will establish my Covenant with him.] This was a far greater favor, thn that bestowed on Ismael in the next verse.
Twelve Princes shall he beget. Nothing so ennobleth, as Christ, Graces, being in the Covenant, &c. Isai. 19.25. Assyria is the work of Gods hands, but Israel his inheritance. Vers. 20. And as for Ismael, I have heard thee.] Faithful prayer may have any thing at Gods hands. It is but ask and have with Abraham: As Zedekiah said to his courtiers glosingly, God saith to his servants seriously; The King can deny you nothing. Let this encourage to pray for our selves and children; for by prayer we may take out of Gods treasury, plentiful mercy for our selves and ours. Vers. 21. But my Covenant.] This is the thirteenth time that the Covenant is named in this Chapter, saith an Interpreter; and hereby is meant the promise of Christ and salvation by him. A subject so sweet to every sanctified soul, that Saint Paul cannot come off it. He names the Lord Jesus Christ, ten times together in ten verses, 1 Cor. 1.1. to 10. It was to him Mel in re, melos in aure, Bernard. jublum in corde. Vers. 22. And he left off talking with him.] As a man with his friend. Mr. John Hol∣land, Bach. of Divin. See my True Treas. p. 373. Such honor have all his Saints. O speak it when I am gone, and preach it at my funeral, God dealeth familiarly with man, said that heavenly Spark, how ready to be extinct. Saint Paul calls prayer , an entreparlance with God, 1 Tim. 2.1. and , the confident intergatory or rejoyndre of a good con∣science toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. The Persian Monarks held it a piece of their silly glory, to secret themselves from their greatest subjects, Esther 4.11. And Jupiters Image at Creet was made without ears. Plutarch gives the Reason, Non enim convenit audiri ab eo quenquam, qui omnium rerum sit Dominus at que prin∣ceps. A pretty plea for Baal. He is too great to talk with men. Our God thinks not himself so. He sollicites suitors, and loves to be, interchangeably, sollicited by them. Vers. 23. Abraham took Ismael.] To make the other more willing. [Circumcised the flesh.] Not regarding the affliction, danger, scandal, shame of the action in the eyes of the world. Vers. 26. In the self same day.] To shew his prompt and pre∣sent obedience, without shucking and hucking, without delays and consults. Vers. 27. All the men of his house.] Faciles se praebent in re ardua & ridicula. An excellent pattern of a well ordered family.
CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. And the Lord appeared unto him] 1. UT praeludium incarnationis. 2. Ex Philanthropia: his de∣light is in the habitable part of Gods earth, Prov. 8.31. [And he sate in the tent-door] He dwelt in a tent (let us be content though we dwell not to our minds) yet kept a good house. A very hearty housholder he was. [In the heat of the day] The usuall time of rest and repast, when travellers wax faint and hungry. Vers. 2. And he lift up his eyes and looked]. As pursuing hospitality (that's the Apostles expression, Rom 12.13.) and wai∣ting an opportunity of doing good. Charity is no churle. The liberall man deviseth liberall things, Aug. in Psal. 103.  Usibus non ne∣cessitatibus. Ne∣quis existimet prius non succur∣rendum proxime quam ad necessi∣tatem fit reda∣ctus. Act & Mon. so. 1369. Ibid. 1388. Cicero. Esa. 32.8. he considereth the poor and needy, Psal. 41.1. Praeoccupat vocem petituri, as Augustin expounds it; he stayes not till he is asked a good turn, he ministreth to the uses, not onely to the necessities of the Saints, as the Apostles word is, Rom. 12.13. And as Bishop Hoopers, and Dr. Taylours practise was. The one had his boord of beggars sent for, and served every day with whole and wholesome meats, ere him∣self sate down to dinner. And the other went once a fortnight at the least to the Almeshouse, and other poor men that had many children, and were sick, to see what they lacked, and to supply them. [And bowed himself toward the ground] Piety is no enemy to courtesie; it doth not remove, but rectifie it, that it be not onely complementall and ridiculous. Potest Augur Augurem videre & non ridere? So it may it be said of our common cringers. Vers. 5. For therefore are ye come to your servant] He meaneth not, that they therefore came to him to taste of his chear; but that God by his providence, had so ordered that he should see them passing, and invite them to his house. How glad was this good man of an occasion to shew kindness, acknowledging Gods good providence! And how improvident are we for our selves, that will not offer a sacrifice, when God sets up an altar before us? [So do as thou hast said] The Angels needed not his courtesie, yet kindly accept of it. Good offers or offices, even from inferiours, are not to be rejected, but regarded, yea rewarded. Vers. 6. Make ready quickly] Habent aulae suum Ciò, Ciò, saith One. So had Abrahams house here. He, she, the boy, and
all hasted, and had their severall offices. The very expression it self here used, is concise and quick: Much like that of the Prophet in the case of returning to God, If ye will enquire, enquire; return, come. Esa. 21.12. Silius. Praecipitatempus; mors atra impendet agenti. [Three measures of fine meal] Three pecks, for three mens din∣ners; and the best of the best too, fine meal, the fat calf, butter and milk, Gods plenty of all, and hearty welcome; the good-man himself standing by, and bidding them, Go to: which shews his humanity, and his humility also. Dat bene, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum. Vers. 9. Behold in the tent] David compares a good woman to the vines upon the walls of the house, because she cleaveth to her house. Others to a snail, that carrieth her house on her back. St. Paul reckons it for a vertue in a woman to keep at home; Tit. 2 5. Prov. 7.11. and Solomon for a sign of a lewd huswife, that her feet abide not in her house. Vers. 10. According to the time of life] That is, when this time shall return again; this time twelve-moneth. See vers. 14. with the Note to it. [Sarah heard it in the tent door] She was listning, out of womanish curiosity. Yet some think, the Angel asked for her on purpose, that she hearing her name mentioned might listen. Vers. 11. Now Abraham and Sarah were old] So, when we were altogether without strength, according to the time of life, Christ dyed for the ungodly, Rom. 5.6. Vers. 12. Sarah laughed] Gods promises seem absurd and ridiculous, many of them, to humane reason, which therefore must be silenced, and shut out, as Hagar was; for it will argue carnally, as that unbeleeving Lord, 2 King. 7.2. storms at Gods offers as Naaman at the message, looks upon Gods Jordan with Syrian eyes, as he, and after all, cryes out with Nicodemus, How can these things be? measuring God by its own modell, and casting him into its own mould. [After I am waxed old, shall I lust?] Old and cold, . is our English proverb; and the Greek word for an old body signifies one, in whom naturall heat is exstinct. It is a most undecent thing to see the pleasures of youth prevailing in times of age, among old decrepit goats. Were it not monstrous to behold green apples on a tree in winter? [My Lord being old also] This was the onely good word in the whole sentence: God takes no∣tice
of it, and by St. Peter records it to her eternall commendation, 1 Pet. 3.6. yea, he was so well pleased with her subjection to her husband, whom she here in her heart calleth Lord, that he is con∣tent to forgive her great sin of unbeliefe. Vers. 1.3. Said to Abraham, wherefore did Sarah laugh?] The wives sin reflects upon the husband. But Solomon shews that some wives are so intemperate and wilfull, that a man may as well hide the wind in his fist, or oyl in his hand, as restrain them from ill∣doing, Prov. 27.15, 16. Liberum arbitrium, Hcidfeld. pro quo tantopere contenditur, viri amiserunt, xores arripuerunt, saith One wittily. Vers. 14. Is any thin oo hard for God] He can do all things pessile and honourable. He cannot lye, dye, deny himself, for that implyeth impotency. He could not do any mighty work in his own Country because of their unbeleef, Mark 6.5, 6. He could not, because he would not. He can do more then he will, as of stones raise up Churches, Matth. 3.9. Call for legions, Matth. 26.53. Create more worlds in an instant. But whatsoever he willeth, that he doth in heaven and earth, and none can sa, What doest thou? Our God can deliver us, Dan. 3.17. Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean, Matth. 8.2. &c. [I will re∣turn to thee according to the time of life] He returned not personally, that we read of; but virtually he did, by making good his promise at the appointed time. That of Doctour Sands, afterwards Bishop of Worcester, is wonderfull, and worth relating. He departing the land for fear of Q. Mary, took his leave of his Host and Hostess who was childless, and had been married eight years. When the wind served, as he went toward the ship, he gave his Hostess a fine hand-kerchief, and an old royall of gold in it, thank∣ing her much, and said, Be of good comfort, Act & Mon. fol. 1874. ere that one whole year be past, God shall give you a child, a boy. And it came to pass, that day twelve-moneth, lacking one day, God gave her a fair son. Vers. 15. I laughed not, for she was afraid] And well she might; for as every body hath its shadow, so hath every sin its fear. Her sin she saw was detected, and her conscience she felt was troubled; hence her fear. [Nay, but thou didst laugh] A lye must be roundly reproved, and the truth asserted. She laughed but within her self, but as good she might have laughed out aloud; for God searcheth the heart. I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my say∣ing,
when I was in my Country? Jon. 4.2. No, Jonas, it was not thy saying, it was onely thy thinking: but that's all one before him, who understandeth thy thoughts afar off, Psal. 139.2. Vers. 16. To bring them on the way] A special piece of courtesie, and much spoken of in Scripture, 3 Joh. 6. Acts 20.38. & 21.5. Ram. 15.24. 1 Cor. 16.11. Tit. 3.13. Vers. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham.] My bosom-friend. He shall be both of Gods Court, and his Councel. His secret is with them that fear him. The Kings of Israel had some one Courtier, called the Kings Friend by a specialty; to whom they imparted arcana Imperii, State-secrets. Such an Office had Abra∣ham about God, who calls him Abraham my Friend. See what our Saviour saith to all his, John 15.15. This honor have all his Saias. Vers. 18, 19.] Seeing that Abraham, &c.] Gods first mo∣tive here is, from his own antecedent love to Abraham, as the second from his consequent. Vers. 19. For I know him.] God hath a quick eye to see our good works. He weighs and rewards every circumstance. Christ could tell, that the people had come from far to heat him; that they had fasted three days; John 6. that they went in a Wilderness, where they could not cater for themselves; that if they should be sent home, so, they would faint by the way. What was it that he took not knowledg of? I know thy works, and thy labor, in doing them, Revel. 2.2. [That he will command his children, &c.] A good houshder, whatsoever he gets abroad, he brings home to his family, Prov. 10.21. as Bees bring all their hony to the hive. The lips of the righteous feed many, those under his own roof especially. Wel∣fare Popery for that. Old folks will tell us, that when, in those days, they had holy bread given them at Church, they would bear a part thereof to those that did abide at home. The way to get more, it to communicate that we have, according to that, Hbenri dabitur. No man hath received ought from God for private use: Neither is any one born for himself, much less new-born. He that kid his talent, was soon shred of it. Vers. 20. Because their sin is very grieo.] Or, very heavy, such as the very ground groans under: The Ale-tre of the arth is ready to break under it. Sin is a burden to God, A. 12. It was so to Christ; he fell to the ground when he was in his agony. It was so to the Angels, who sunk into Idll under in. It was so to
Kore, and his company, the earth could not bear them. It was so to the Sodomites; . James 1.23. they were so clogged with this excrement of naughtiness (as Saint James calleth it) that God came from Hea∣ven, to give their land a vomit. Vers. 21. I will go down now, and see, &c.] The Sodomites sin∣ed as freely and securely, as if God knew nothing. Now therefore he is come to know, that is, to give them to know, that he knew all, as well as if he had been in their bosoms. Vers. 22. Abraham stood yet before the Lord] And without such to stand and pray, the world could not stand: they bear up the pillars of it. Oh the price with God, and profit to men, of praying persons! God will yield something to such, when most of all enraged, Matth 24.20. or resolved. Lot was saved for A∣brahams sake, when all the rest perished. Vers. 23. And Abraham drew neer] A priviledg proper to uch, as have a true heart, full assurance of Faith and a good con∣science, Heb. 10.22. The hypocrite shall not come before him, Job 13.16. He must stand without as a vagrant at the gate, that knows not whether the master is providing for him an alms, or a cudgel. But the upright comes into the arlor; yea dwells in Gods presence, Psal. 140.13. In the light of his countenance. [Wilt thou also destroy the righteous?] Single suites speed not: we must back them with sound Arguments, and Reason the case with God concerning his judgments, Jere. 12.1. Vers. 24. Peradventure there be fifty righteous] Charity pre∣sumes the best, hopes the best. The Disciples could not imagine that Judas was so very a Traytor: each one suspects himself soon∣er then him: And when our Saviour said, What thou doest, do quickly; they thought he had meant of making provision, or giving something to the poor. Vers. 25. Shall not the Judg, &c.] He fills his mouth with Arguments. Let us also: This will encrease Faith and Fer∣vency. Vers. 26. If I finde fifty righteous] The Saints are the Salt of the earth, that keep the rest from rotting and putrefying. Vers. 27. Which  but dust and ashes] Gaphar veephar,  & cinis: None so humble as they that have nearest communion with God. The Angels that stand before him, cover the  with two wings, as with a double scarie, Isaiah, Chap 6. verse 2.
Vers 29. Alsted. And he spake unto him yet again] Cùm in colloqui∣um descendimus cum Deo, replicemus licet, duplicemus, triplice∣mus, & quadruplicemus. The bolder we make, the better wel∣come. Vers. 30. I will not do it, &c.] If God so yielded to Abra∣ham interceding for wicked Sodom, will he not hear us for his laboring Church? Joa never pleased David better, then when he sued to him for Absolm. What shall we think of God in like case? How angry is he with those that help forward the anger? Zach. 1.15. How ready to answer those that speak to him for his Church, with good words, and comfortable words? Zach. 1.13. Yea, should there be no praying Christians amongst us (as there are many thousands,) yet there is hope, if any of another Kingdom make intercession for us, as Abraham here did for Sodom, to the which he was a stranger. Vers. 32. Peradventure ten shall be found there] Lo, all that slavery and misery they had sustained, hath not yet made ten good men in those five bad Cities. Till God strike the stroke, and work upon the heart, afflictions, Gods hammers do but beat upon cold Iron. The wicked are no whit better by them, but much the worse, as water becomes more cold after a heat, and naughty boyes more stubborn and stupid after a whipping. Vers. 33. And the Lord went his way] Abraham hucked with the Lord so long, till he had brought him down from fifty to ten: And mark, that he left begging are God left bating. Let us finde praying hearts, and he will finde a pittying heart. CHAP. XIX. Verse 1. Lot sate in the gate] NOt as a Judg (as the Hebrews will have it,) nor as a Merchant; much less as a Noveller, but as a good housholder, looking for his herds, and as a good house-keeper looking for guests. Vers. 2. Nay, but we will abide in the street] They would have done so, Luke 24. but for Lots importunity. So our Saviour would have gone further, but that the two Disciples constrained him to stay. This was no simulation; or if so, yet it was onely exploratory without deceit or hypocrisie. And if Solomon sinned not in
making beleeve he would do that which was unlawful to be done. 1 King. 3.24. It can be no sin to do the like in things indiffer∣ent. Vers. 4. Both old and young] Nulla aetas erat culpae immunis, ideò nec exitii, Ambros. Sin spreds as leaven, and is as catching as the plague; like the Jerusalem Artichoke, plant it where you will, it over runs the ground, and chokes the heart. Vers. 5. That we may know them] O faces hatcht with impu∣dency! They shroud not their sin in a mantle of secrecy, but hang out these sowre Grapes to the Sun to ripen. Vers. 6. Lot went out] So he exposed himself, to save his strangers, hoping to save them from that abominable violence. The right of strangers is so holy, that there was scarce ever any nation so barbarous, that would violate the same. When Steven Gardiner had in his power the Renowned Clark Peter Martyr, then teaching at Oxford, he would not keep him to punish him: but when he should go his way, as it is reported, gave him where∣with to bear his charges. But these Sodomites had not so much humanity left in them. They had put off the man, and were be∣come dogs and worse, Deut. 23.18. The price of a dog, that is, of a buggerer, saith Juius and Deodatus, on that Text. And, Am I a dog, saith Abuer; that is, 2 Sam. 3.8. so given as dogs be to lust? Vers. 7. Do not so wickedly] They were the first that fell into this foul sin, and were therefore worthily hanged up in gibbets by God for a terror to others; and besides, they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Iude 7. The Pope pretends to be Christs Vicar, and presumes to assume the title of Holiness. But how far he is from expressing God to the World, appears by his (if not commit∣ing, yet conniving at) this detestable sin of Sodomy. To speak no more of that debauched villain Johannes a Casa (that Printed a Poem in commendation of this wickedness, Act. & Mon. 417. Caesar Brgis buggerd a grave Bishop by force. Ignat. concl. 58. Heyl. Geog. pag▪ 23. being at the same time Dean of the Popes Chamber, and Bishop of Beneventum.) One Petro Alvegi Faruesis committed an unspeakable violence on the person of Cosmus Chaerius, Bishop of Fanum, and then poy∣soned him. For which execrable action, he received no other chastisement of his father, Pope Paul the third, then Haec vitia, me non commonstratore, didicit; He never learned these tricks of his father. But whom did the Cardinal of Saint Lucia learn it of? Jcob. Revius de vis. Pontif. To whom and his whole family Pope Sixtus quartus permit∣ed,
by license, the free use of this filhiness, for the three hotter moeths of the year, June, July, and August; with that Apostilla of his, Fiat ut petitur. Lupanar etiam utriusque veneris Romae , Ibid. p. 119. saith Agrippa. In the time of Pope Nicolas the second (when Priests marriage was termed the heresie of the Nicolaitans) Invas mentèr Sodomiticum scel, saith mine Author; So∣domy was held no sin (as at this day it is not among the Turks.) Blounts Vey∣age. p. 79. In  and those parts, Whoredom and Sodomy, those Spanish verus, are common without reproof. The Popes pardons being more rife there, then in any part of Europe, for these filthinesses, whereout he sucketh no small advantage. Notwithstanding, the Indians abhor this most loathsom living; The World en∣compassed by Sir Fr. Drake. p. 58. shewing themselves in respect of the Spaniards, as the Scythians did in respect of the Grecians; whom they so far excelled in life and behavior, as they were short of them in learning and knowledg. God hath deliver∣ed up these Pagans (as he did those Pagans, Rom. 1.) to repro∣bate sense, to vile affections, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, for that they have worshipped, and served the creature more then the Creator, Vers. 24, 25, 26. Hence it is, that Rome is called Sodom in the Revelation. Revel 11.8. Vers. 8. Behold now, I have two daughters] This was an in∣considerate motion, such as the best mindes easily yield, when once troubled. It was proper to the Lord Christ to be subject to natural passions and perturbations, yet without sin: as a Chrystal Glass full of clear water remains still pure, howsoever it be shaken. The Hebrews think, That for this sinful offering to prostitute his daughters, he was given up by God, to commit incest with his daughters. Vers. 9. Stand back, &c.] They set up the bristles at Lots admonition, a sure fore-runner of destruction, as in Elies sons. Vers. 10. But the men] Thus Lot is rescued at a dead lift: that's Gods opportunity, who knows how, &c. 2 Peter 2. vers. 9. Vers. 11. With blindness] Subite scotomate, saith Junius: With blindness both of body and minde, saith Aben-Ezra: Such as tormented their eyes, as if they had been pricked with thorns, as the Hebrew word signifies. And yet they continue groping for the door, as if they were ambitious of destruction, which now was at next door by. Dous quem destruit dementat. So Pharaoh,
when under that palpable three days darkness, rageth against God, and threatneth Moses with death. Though doomsday should be to morrow next, wicked men must and will serve their lusts. Vale lumen amicum, said Theotimus in St. Ambrose, who chose rather to lose his sight then his sin. Vers. 12. Hast thou here any, &c.] It is something for safety, to be Lots Kinsman. So the Kenites in Sauls time, receive life from Jethro's dust, many ages after his death, 1 Sam. 15.6. and favor from his hospitality. Vers. 13. For we will destroy this place] Even the good Angels are Gods executioners. And the first execution they did in the world, that we read of, was upon these filthy Sodomites. So will it be (likely) at the last day. And Saint Peter seems to say as much, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord reserves the unjust to the day of judgment, to be punished, But chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness. Mark that (chiefly.) Vers. 14. But he seemed as one that mocked] Sed fuit habitus tanquam joabundus. Graceless hearts jear when they should fear, and are senceless and secure, as if they were out of the reach of Gods rod, and needed not to fear his wrath. Ridetur cum suo Jehoua: sed risus impiorum est Sardonius. Par. Lot here is counted but a Lob, of his own sons in law. Wonder not, if we meet with the same measure. Vers. 15. Left thou be consumed] So Revel. 18.4. Come out of her, that ye receive not of her plagues. Musculiruiis imminn∣tibus pramigrant, & aranei cum telis primicadunt, saith Pliny. Plin. lib 8. cap 28. . Septuag. Swine live home, afore a storm. Vers. 16. And while he lingred] Or distracted himself with much business, which David did not, Psal. 119 60. [The Lord being merciful unto him] What is he then to us, in delivering us from the th to come? 1 Thes. 1.10, Acts 2.40 Why save we not our selves from this unto ward generation? Why see we not his mercy to us in our losses and crosses? His hand laying hold on us, when he takes away that, that may hinder us from Heaven? Vers. 17. Look not behinde thee] As loth to depart. Non minùs difficultèr à deliciis Sudemorum abstrabimur, quàm canis ab uncto cori. Vers. 18. O not so my Lord] But who shall, prescribe to the Almighty? Or limit the holy One of Israel? Are we wiser then he▪ Have we a trick beynd him? He lets us sometimes have our way but to our wo at last.
Vers. 19. Behold now thy servant, &c.] We can receive and commend Gods favors, but be backward enough to obey him. Vers. 20. Is it not a little one?] Let no man use this plea for his sin. . Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. Even the Philosopher tells us, That the smallest errors prove many times most dangerous. It is as much treason to coyn pence, as bigger peeces. Vers. 21. I will not overthrow this City] Zoar, of all the five Cities, was preserved by Lots prayers, saith Jerome. See Deut. 29.23. Isai. 15. Vers. 22. For I cannot do any thing] Not that the execution of the divine decree, depended simply upon Lots remove to Zoar; but upon another decree, for Lots remove ere Sodom were destroyed. Vers. 23. The Sun was risen upon Sodom] But ere night, there was a dismal change. Nescis quid serus vesper vehat. Vers. 24. Then the Lord rained, &c.] Lot was no sooner taken out of Sodom, but Sodom was soon taken out of the world. The wicked are reprieved for the godlies sake; who, but for them, would suddenly be ruined. Isai. 30.33. [Rained upon Sodom, &c.] Rained, not sprinkled; and not fire onely, but brimstone and fire for in∣crease of torment, and for an Hell above ground, and afore∣hand, Jude 7. Hot fire they had for their burning lusts; and stinking brimstone for their stinking brutishness. Charls the second, King of Navarre, was much given to sensual pleasures, which so wasted his spirits, that in his old age, he fell into a kinde of Le∣thargy. To comfort his benummed joynts he was bound and sewed up naked in a sheet, Hryl. Geog. pag. 42. steeped in boyling Aqua vitae: The Surgeon having made an end of sewing him, and wanting a knife to cut off the thred, took a wax candle that stood lighted by him. But the flame, running down by the thred, caught hold on the sheet; which, according to the nature of the Aqua vita, burned with that vehemency, that the miserable King ended his days in the fire. Vers. 25. Lib. 5. de bell Jud. Omne carcus vita in profun∣dam mergitur, squid vivum arte alique im∣merseri super enibis. And he overthrew, &c.] Some footsteps of this overthrow, are to be read of in Solinus and Tacitus. Josephus tells us of the mock-apples of Sodom, and saith, That an Ox, having all his Legs bound, will not sink into the lake of Sodom, the water is so thick. Vers. 26. But his wise looked back] Whether out of curiosity, or foolish pity, or as loth to leave so sweet a Countrey, she turn∣ed
her about, and she was turned. Some think she was a Sodomite, and some tell us her name was Tytea. Her sin, Tyteam dictam volunt uxorem Loti, &c. Hedelf. seem it never so light, was a compound of many sins. And her punishment was part of the plague of Sodom, which was Brimstone and Salt, so that it became a Sea of Salt, Deuter. 29.23. And all this to Season us, saith Augustine; to Caution us, saith our Saviour, that we look not back. The Fable of Eurydice, lost by her husbands looking back upon her, was devised by the devil to elude this holy History. Vers. 27. And Abraham gat up] So sollicitous he was for Sodom, that (as Luther thinks) he could not sleep all night. Lot was delivered by his prayers, though Abraham knew it not. Vers. 28. And he looked] Abraham might look upon the smoke of Sodom, Lot might not; because it would work more on Lots heart, then on Abrahams, who had more grace. [The smoke of the countrey] Nothing else was now to be seen of that fair and fruitful Plain. Sic transit gloria mundi. When we most greedily grasp earthly things, we embrace nothing but smoke, which wrings tears from our eyes, and soon vanisheth into nothing. Vers. 29. God remembred Abraham, &c.] And shall he forget us, who have Christ to intercede for us? Vers. 30. Lot went up out of Zoar, &c.] So he should have done at first; and so he had obeyed God, saved his wife, and pre∣vented that sin of incest with his daughters. Vers. 31. And the first born, &c.] Its dangerous to live in a wicked place: For though thy self mayst escape infection, thy children may be tainted, as Lots were. Vers, 32. Come let us make our father drink.] So the great Whore cometh forth with a Cup. Revel. 17. She knew too well, that Venus est in venis, ignis in igne furit. It is like they had wine from Zoar: they sinned against conscience; and therefore intoxicated their father, who now forgets that he is a father, and does that in a drunken pang, that Heaven and Earth were after∣wards ashamed of. Vers. 33. Nor when she arose] There is a tittle extraordinary in the Hebrew, to note that this is a thing incredible, Appungunt de∣super quasi in∣credibile; quaest. in Genes. Coire quempiam nescientem. Cajetan and Pererius conclude it possible, and give Reasons for it. Calvin saith best, That it was not so much his wine, as a spirit of slumber sent upon him from God, for a scourge of his intemperance. Luther addes, No nos abeamus in securitatem, That we may watch against security.
Vers. 35. . Athenaus. And they made, &c.] Decepit ebrietas Lotum, quem Sodoma non decepit, saith Origen. Well might Athenaeus call drunkenness the metropolis of mischief. Vers. 37. Called his name Moab] That is, the begotten of my father: So Benammi, that is, begotten of one of my near kinred, viz. her father. Isai. 3.9. Thus they declared their sin as Sodom, they hid it not, but gloried in their shame. It is as hard to come from Sodom, and not taste of the sap of such a soyl, as to walk bare∣fac'd in the hot Sun, and not be tanned. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. And Abraham journeyed from thence, &c.] EIther as grieved at the sight of Sodom; or annoyed by the ill ayr thereof; Inde tàm gravis halitus manat, ut cum nulla animalia perferant, cujus solo lfactu in∣tereant. Hom. Odyss. or as loathing Lots incest; or driven out by a famine; or desireous of doing good to many. Whatever it was that occasioned his remove, we finde him ever and anon journey∣ing from one place, and sojourning in another. Gods people are a brood of travellers. This was Abram the Hebrew, of Heber, which signifieth, Pilgrim or stranger. They look toward Heaven in their home, as Vlysses is said to do toward Ithaca, as a bird looks to her nest on the highest Rocks. Vers. 2. She is my sister] This is the second time he thus sinned, both against Piety by distrust, and Charity, in exposing his wife to other mens pleasure, and his neighbor thereby to Gods displea∣sure. 2 Chron. 19.2. & 20.37. So Jehosaphat was twice taken tardy in Ahabs amity. Jonah twice reproved for Rebellion, and John for Angel wor∣ship. Judg. 15.20. & 16.1. Sampson, twenty yeers after he had loved the Philistim-woman, goes down to Gaza, and went in to Dalilah. Lot committed incest two nights together. Indeed the orifice of his lust was not yet stopped by repentance. But Jonas had surely repented of his former frowardness; and so had Sampson, Jehosaphat, Non dubium, quin Abram poenitudire ductus, &c. Pareus in Gen. 12.16. and Abraham too, of his former dissimulation; which made the Lord to move Pharaoh to deal kindly with him, so that he had sheep and oxen, &c. Gen. 12.16. But what shall we say to that example of the Apostles, Luke 22.24. Amongst whom there was a strife who should be accounted the greatest? And this was not the first, but the third time they had thus
offended by ambition; and ever, after our Saviour had discoursed unto them of his Cross. But this last time, most absurdly, and unseasonably, after that he had foretold his Passion to follow within two days; had taught them that he was anoynted by the woman against the day of his burial; had administred to them the Sacrament, that Seal of Mutual Love; had washed their Feet, to teach them Humility and Charity, &c. Oh the incredi∣ble perverseness of corrupt Nature! How strongly do the best still smell of the old cask, taste of the old stock, though ingraft∣ed into Christ, and though poured from vessel to vessel? And this have ye done again, saith the Lord, Mal. 2.13. John 5.14. A great aggravation; as numbers added to numbers, are first ten times more, and then a hundred, and then a thousand. Psal. 78.40. How oft did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desart? A regenerate man may fall into the same sin again that he hath truly repented of: Nor can we define how oft, and into how hainous; but surely, not oft into the same, that is hainous and scandalous. That's a graceless person that hath eyes full of adul∣tery, and that cannot cease to sin, 2 Peter 2.19. An enemy to God, that goeth on in his trespasses, Psal. 68.21. It is expresly noted of Judah, Gen. 38.26. that he knew Tamar again no more. [And Abimelech King of Gerar] A fit name for a King; and a common name to the Kings of this Countrey: It signifies Father-King. I was a father to the poor, saith Job. Job 29.16. And Kings shall be nursing fathers to the Church, saith Isaiah. Isai. 49.23. . Dio. Ibi. in vita. Bucholc. in Indice Chronol. Orbis amor & deliciae. Corculum appel. latut est. Tusc. quast. l. 1. Parei Medul. Hist. proan. p. 482. Augustus was stiled 'Pater Patriae. And Trajan gloried most in his title Optimus. He desired more to be loved, then honored, and counted it a greater dignity, Prodesse quàm praeesse. He tare his own Garment to binde up therewith the wounds of his Souldi∣ers; and professed, That he would so carry himself to private persons, now that he was Emperor, as he wished, when he was a private man, that the Emperors should carry themselves to∣ward him. Titus, for his sweet nature and carriage, was called the Worlds darling. Scipio the Cities Sweet-heart. Julian the Apostate, as he came not short of the greatest Philosophers for learning; so neither of Titus for Lenity, of Antoninus for Clemency, of M. Aurelius for Moderation, setting aside his Satanical hatred of Christian Religion. Queen Elisabeth ever accounted Devotion and Mercy, Camd. Elis. 494. the brightest Stars in the Sphere of Majesty. She always thought it more fit to offend a man,
then to hate him, saith Master Camden. In the yeer 1579. a young man discharged a peece out of a Boat, and shot one of the Barge-men in the Queens Barge (where she was then) through both his arms; who was soon apprehended, and led to the Gallows for a terror to him. But whereas he religiously affirmed, That he did it unwittingly, and thought no hurt, he was discharged: Idem ibid. fol. 205. The Queen many times, saying, That she could beleeve nothing of her people, that Parents would not beleeve of their children. This made her so beloved at home, and admired abroad. Queen Elisabeth was the most glorious and happy woman that ever ware a Crown, said that thrice Noble princess Anna Atestina, Thuan. hist. lib. 129.  Dio. the Mother of the Dukes of Guise and Nemours, as Thuanus hath Recorded it. Her Subjects were ready to say to Her, as the Senate said to Severus, All is well with us, so long as thou rulest well over us. Vers. 3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream] Dreams are either natural, or supernatural. Natural dreams are not much to be regarded, Eccles. 5.7. Diviners and Dreamers we are forbid to hearken to, Jere. 27.9. Cicero confutes them that do, in his Books de Divinatione. Somnia ne cures, nam mens bua∣a quod optat, &c. That use there is of them, is in Physick, to discern our temperatures in Divinity, our beloved sins. Super∣natural dreams are sent by God, and his Angels; and that either to comfort us, as Matth. 2.19. or to chasten us, Job 7.13, 14. And these are, first, usually repeated, till they are regarded, as Pharaohs, and young Samuels dreams: Secondly, they do much affect us, and leave a certain perswasion, an inward sence of Gods presence in the soul; as Daniels, Josephs, and Pareus his dreams. In the Calends of April (saith he, in his domestical Diary or Day-Book,) 1618. I had a terrible dream at four of the clock in the morning. Vidi Heidelber∣gam totam oc∣culto incendio undiquaque fu∣migantem, &c. Philip. Par. in vita Davidis Parei, operib. ejus praefina. For me thought, I saw all Heidelberg on a thick smoke, but the Prince his Pallace all on a light fire. O Deus clementissime averte sinistrum omen, & serva Sareptam tuam a vastatione hostium intùs & foris. Thus that good man dream't, and thus he pray'd: but the decree was passed, and shortly after executed, according to his dream. There are also dreams diabolical. Eusebius tells us, that Simon Magus had his dream-haunting Devils, , his familiars by whom he deluded men in their dreams, and drew them into the admiration of himself.
These devilish dreams are either meer illusions, as that of Eliphaz is thought to be no better, Job 4.12, 16, 17. Marbury of Re∣pent. Or else they tend to sin, as nocturnall pollutions, and other evill dreams; whereby the devill sometimes fasteneth that sin upon the Saints when asleep, that he cannot prevail with them to commit whiles awake. As for Pilats wives dream, some Divines think it was from the de∣vill, seeking thereby to hinder the work of our Redemption. [For she is a mans wife] Adultery, even in Kings, is punishable by death. Emperors and Popes have been cut off by the just hand of God, in, and for this filthy sin. Society and the purity of po∣sterity could not otherwise continue amongst men, if this crime were not capitall. Moritur Paulu 4. nimto Veneris usu &c. Valen∣tinian. Imp. Heyl. Geog. At Geneva they punish fornication with nine dayes fasting; Adultery with death. God appointed that such should be stoned. He stoneth them, howsoever, with the stone in the heart, Hos. 4.11. Prov. 7.22. Hetfer the Anabaptist was put to death for this sin at Constance: He being a learned man, and a Preacher, insinuated himself into the familiarity of many women of good ranke and repute, and defiled them; when he came to ex∣ecution, he confessed that he would many times have repented of that foul sin, but could not; Joh. Manlii lec. com. p. 322. so fast was he held in the devills bonds: and that now he was willing to dye, and accept of the chastisement of his iniquity. Howbeit, Ibid. 487. it is an opinion held and maintained by the Anabaptists, that Adultery is not to be punished by men, because the Scripture saith, Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Others would prove the same from those words of our Saviour (Joh. 8.11.) to the woman taken in adultery, Neither do I condemne thee. But they may as well say, That inheritances are not to be divided betwixt brethren, because Christ would not di∣vide them, when required thereto, Luke 12.14. Vers. 4. But Abimelech had not come near her] Being hindred by sickness, vers. 17. Well might St. Ambrose call siekness, Morbos virtu∣tum officinas vo∣cat Ambros. Nuper me amici▪ cujusdam lan∣guor admonuit opimos esse not dum inirmi su∣m. Plin. Epist. 26. l. 7. Manl. loc. com. p. 667. The shop of vertues. When men are fastened to their beds, and their bones made to rattle in their skin, lust will be laid asleep, and little leisure left for luxury. This made King Alured pray God to send him alwayes some sickness, whereby his body might be tamed, and he the better disposed & affectioned to God-ward. If it be painfull to the vine to bleed, 'tis worse to wither. Better be pruned to grow, then cut up to burn. Otho tertius, Imperator, dictus miraculum mundi, amoribus periit. How much happier he that sang, Periissem nisi Periissem? [Lord wilt thou slay also a righteous Nation?] For
he knew, that whole Nations had smarted for the sins of their Rulers; this sin of Adultery especially, as we read of Shechem, Troy, &c. How wore the Greeks plagued for the rape of Chrysis? and the Lacedemonian Common wealth utterly overturned by Epaminendas in the battle of Leuctra, for a rape committed upon the two daughters of Scedasus by a couple of Spartan Gentle∣men, traveling to Delphos: This might make Abimelech afraid, lest for his fault, wrath should fall upon his people also. Vers. 5. Said he not unto me, She is my sister, &c.] Here Abraham and Sarah, Rom. 4. 1 Pet. 3. though both famous, he for his faith, and she for not being afraid with any amazement, 1 Pet. 3.6. yet here they shew some trepidation. Sense (saith One) fights sore against faith, when it is upon its own dunghill, I mean in a sensible danger. Natures retraction of it self from a visible fear, M. Vines his Fast-Sermon. Elias fulminator ad Jezabalis minas trepidat. may cause the pulse of a Christian that beats truly and strongly in the main point, (the state of the soul) to intermit and faulter at such a time. [In the integrity of my heart] Great is the boldness of a clear con∣science, be it but in some one particular, as here in Abimelech; a man that was magis extra vitia quàm cum virtutibus (as Tacitus saith of Galba) rather not evill then good; one whose nature was not changed, Tac. l. 1. c. 12. but chained up onely. Civill men are but Wolves chained up, tame Devils, Swine in a fair meadow; and yet these are the worlds honest men, and as high a price set upon them, as was once upon a cab of Doves-dung in the famine of Samaria. But these Abimelechs, these Catoes, these civill Justiciaries, they want sincerity in the first Table, and integrity in the Second; for they stand not upon the inward corruptions, nor lesser breaches of the Law. Abimelech (for all his confidence here) was to blame for his wandring rash lust. And Cato, that mirror of mo∣rality, was a griping Usurer, prostituted his wife, and slew himself. Hist. lib. 2 And yet Paterculus will tell you, that he was, Homo virtuti simillimus, & per omnia virtute Diis quàm homini∣bus propior, &c. Vers 6. Yea I know that thou didst this, &c.] God takes his excuse, and yet chastiseth him; to teach us, saith Calvin, Non prorsus vacare culpâ qui humane modo puri sunt. He can finde flawes in that, for which we may look for thanks. This makes Nehemiah. crave pardon of his zealous reformations; and David crys out, Enter not into judgement, &c. Sordet in conspect judi∣cis,
quod fulget in conspectu operantis, saith Gregory. Ye are they that justifie your selves before men (saith Christ to the Pharisees) but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. A thing which I see in the night may shine, and that shining pro∣ceed from nothing but rottenness. But be not deceived (or if ye be, yet) God is not mocked. Sacco soluto ap∣paruit argentum. Ambro. When he comes to turn the bottome of the bag upwards (as the Steward did Benjamins) all our secret thefts will out, all our collusions come to light. His Law is a Law of fire, Deut. 33.2. His tribunall of fire, Ezek. 1.27. His pleading with sinners, in flames of fire, Esa. 60.15, 16. The triall of our works shall be by fire; and God before whom is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Happy are they that are here purged by that Spirit of judgement and burning, Esa. 4.4. These shall stand in judgement, yea dwell with everlasting burnings, Esa. 33.14. [For I also with held thee] Either by sickness, as aforesaid, or by a spirit of restraint, a gift that God gives to men, yea to the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them, Psal. 68.18. in his Religion and worshippers; which else the wicked would never suffer. Thus God chained up Laban, and made Saul to melt over David, &c. Now many take this poor counter, (that is, I am not as some others are, so bad as the worst) and set it down for a thousand pound. Our Saviour indeed is said to have looked upon the young Pharisee, and to have loved him, Mark. 10.21. because he saw him to be a tame man, free from foule crimes, and fit to live in a Commonwealth: But no otherwise then as we love pictures, which are pretty things to look on, and that's all they are good for. A better nature, if rested in, is but a beautifull abomination, a smooth way to hell. And yet, say what we can, this kinde of men grow crooked and aged with good opinions of themselves, and can seldome or never be set straight again. They will trust in Moses, Job. 5.45. and when they have sick fits and qualms of con∣science, lick themselves whole by their repentance, and so rest in it: Which made Austin say, that Repentance damneth more then sin. They seek not to be saved by the righteousness of faith, neither see they any necessity of growing from faith to faith. No, they are set, they are as good as ever they mean to be; they that outstrip them are too forward, they that fall short of them, are deeply censured. Vers. 7. Now therefore restore] Let knowledge reforme what
ignorance offended in. The times of ignorance God winked at, but now commandeth all men every where to repent, Act. 17.30. As a Ma∣ster, when he sets up his servant a double light, expects more work and better. We have a priviledg not onely above the blinde Eth∣nicks, but above the Church of the Old Testament. The sea about the Altar was brazen, 1 King. 7.23. And what eyes could pierce thorough it? Now our sea about the Throne is glassie, Rom. 4.6. like to Chrystall, clearly conveying the light and sight of God to our eyes. God hath destroyed the face of the covering cast over all people, Esa. 25.7. And we all with ope face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, must see to it, that we be changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. If those good souls passed from strength to strength, Psal. 84.7. travelling many a weary step, to see the face of God in Sion, in the obscure glass of the Ceremonies; vae torpori nostro, wo to us, if now, that such a light is sprung up, we walk not as children of that light! To know hea∣venly things, is to ascend into heaven, Prov. 30.3, 4. And to know our masters will is a great talent; of all other, there is a much in that, Luke 12.48. But then, not to do his will so known, is to be beaten with many stripes. None so deep in hell, as your knowing men, because they imprisoned the truth (which is as a Prophet from God) in unrighteousness, Rom 1.18. they kept it in their heads, as rain in the middle region, Sapientes sapien ter descendunt in infernum. Bern. not suffering it to warm their hearts, or work upon their affections; therefore came wrath upon them to the utmost. None are oftner drowned then they that are most skilfull in swimming. So none sooner miscarry then men of grea∣test parts. [For he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee] The proper work of a Prophet, Jer. 27.18. If they be Prophets, let them intreat the Lord; they shall be heard, when others shall not, as the fathers blessing is most effectuall; as the child could not be raised till Elisha came himself, nor the sick be healed, till the Elders of the Church be called for, Jam. 5.14. The Apostles divided their time betwixt praying and preaching, Act. 6.4. So did the Priests of the Old Testament, Deut. 33.10. They shall teach Jacob thy judge∣ments, they shall put incense before thee. As with every sacrifice there was incense, so should every Ministeriall duty be performed with prayer. St. Paul begins his Epistles with prayer, and pro∣ceeds and ends in like manner. What is it that he would have every of his Epistles stamped with by his own hand, but prayer for all his people? 2 Thess. 3.17, 18. [Thou shalt surely dye] So dear
to God are his Saints, that he grievously punisheth, even Kings for their sakes; as Jehoram in his bowels with an incurable disease, 2 Chron. 21.18 Non desunt qui ad phthiriasin re∣ferunt, quo avs quoque ipsius Herod. mag. pe∣riit. Beza An∣not. in Act. 12. Oroius. He protested, si∣quam sui corporis partem Lutheri∣anismo sciret in∣sectam revulsu∣rum illicè, ne longiùs serperet. Sleid. Com∣ment. l. 9. Act & Mon. 1914. the two Herods by the lousie malady. Maximinus the Emperor, a cruell persecutor, cast upon his bed of sickness by God, was glad to crave the prayers of the Church, as Eusebius relates it. Valens being to subscribe an Order for the banishment of Basil, was smitten with a sudden trembling of his hand, that he could not: Afterward he was burned to death by the Gothes, whom he had corrupted, by sending them Arrian teachers. The putting out of that French Kings eyes, which promised before with his eyes to see Anne du Bourg (one of Gods true servants) burned, who seeth not to be the stroke of Gods own hand? Then, his son Francis not regarding his fathers stripe, would needs yet proceed in the burn∣ing the same man. And did not the same God, give him such a blow on the ear, as cost him his life? As for Charles the ninth, author of the French massacre, though he were wittily warned by Beza to beware (upon occasion, of that new Star appearing in Cassiopeia, Novem 1572. which he applied to that Star at Christs birth, and to the infanticide then) with, Tu verò, Camdens Elis. sol. 165. Herodes sangui∣nolente, time; yet because he repented not, God gave him blood to drink, as he was worthy; for the fifth moneth after the vanish∣ing of this Star▪ Constans fama est illum, Act. & Mon. fol. 1949. dum è variis corporis partibus sanguis emanaret, in lecto saepe volutatum, inter terribilium blasphemiarum diras tantam sanguinis vim projecisse ut, paucas post horas, mortuus fuerit. This Charles the ninth, in the massacre of Paris, beholding the bloody bodies of the butchered Protestants, Spec. bel. sac p. 248. and feeding his eye upon that wofull spectacle, is said to have breathed out this bloody speech, Quam bonus est odor hostis mor∣tui! Another great Queen, seeing the ground covered with the naked carcasses of her Protestant Subjects said, M. Newcomn Fast Serm. 27. Like Hannibals O formosum spe∣ctaculum. De Alexandra Josephus. Act & Mon. fol. 1 901. that it was the bravest peece of Tapestry that ever she beheld; but it was not long that she beheld it. Our Queen Mary, though non naturâ sed Pontiiciorum arte ferox (Ipsa solùm nomen regium ferebat, caterùm mnem regi potestatem Pharisaei possidebant) dyed of a Tympany, or as some (by her much sighing before her death) supposed, she dyed of thought and sorrow, either for the loss of Callice, or for the departure of King Phillip. This King going from the Low-countries into Spain by Sea, with resolution never to remove thence, fell into a storm, in which almost all the Fleet was wracked, his houshold-stuffe of very great value lost,
and himself hardly escaped. Hist. of Coun. of Trent. 417. He said he was delivered by the singular providence of God, to root out Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do; protesting that he had rather have no Subjects, then Lutheran Subjects. Whether it was this Phillip or his successor▪ I cannot certainly tell. But Carolus Sexiba tells a lamentable story of one of those two Phillips: Hear him else, Ʋlcerum magnitudinem, multitudinem, acorbitatem, fatorem, lecto tanquam durae cruc, o integra, affixionem, ut in nullam prope commoveri partem possit, acres continuosque annr um sex po∣dagrae dolores, febrim  cum dupici per anos  intima, Carot. Sribn. Instit. princip, c. 20. adeoque & ossi medullas depascentem gravissimam 22. dierum dysenteriam, qu nc moram dart, nec detersionm admitte∣ret, perpetua stomahifastidia, nullo pou sitim medicandam, capitis & oculorum insanos dolores, ingentom puris ex ulcaribus redundan∣ti▪ quae binas indie scutellat divite padere impleret: Inter her, malignissimi oder is gravitat , quae omem illi souum ademerat; hac, inquam▪ Rex potentissimus longo tempore perpessus est. So true is that of an Ancient. Potentes potutèr torquebuntur. Be wise now therefore▪ Psal. 2.10. O ye Kings: Kiss the son, lest he be angry. He can soon break men with his iron Mace, and dash them in peeces as a potters vessell. Ingentla, heresicia, ingentia slagitia, ingentia supplicia, as the Centurists have it. Christ shall raign, when Kings and Kesars shall lye in the dust. Rev. 19.16. ex∣pounded. His name is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and this name is written upon his Vesture (that all creatures may see his power) and upon his Thigh, to shew the eternity of his Monarchy, in his children and posterity. This ever∣lasting Father shall have an endless government, Esa. 6.6,7. He shall see his seed (the fruit of his thigh;) he shall prolong his daye, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands, Esa. 53.10. I shut up this Discourse with the story of Ladislaus King of Bo∣hemiae and Hungary, who most unjustly had caused Ladislaut, son to Hunniade, to be beheaded; and together with many other Popish Princes, had conspired to root out the true Christians in Bobemia; which should have been put in execution at the time of hi mariage: immediately before, in the midst of his great prepa∣ration he sell sick, Buru and within thirty six hours dyed of a postilent sore in his gro. Paul. . Like as Attila that King of Hunnes, and scourge of Christendome, had dyed before, being suffocated in his own blood, at such time as he celebrated his wedding, having distempered his body with excess in wine and venery, adeò ut pro∣verbio
deeo dictam fit, eum per eandem partem animam profudisse, Jacob. Revius. per quam accepera. He went out of the world the same way that he came into it, and sent his soul, as a harbinger to the devill, to provide room for his body Vers. 8. Therefore Abimelech rose early, &c.] He made hast, and delayed not to keep Gods Commandments, Psal. 119.60. This is check to out dulness, whom so many exhortations and menaces of Gods month move not to amend. Some are semper victur, as Seneca saith, they defer so long till the Draw bridge be taken up, till the gale of Grace be blown over, till the Bridegroom go by, and so are shut out with the foolish Virgins, for their lingring and futhring. Nolte vero tempus in gis tere, vel Crus, ut ille, . Vox crat Archiae illi∣us Thcbanrum praefecti. Seria, rejectis in hilari compotatione, literis indiciis hodie , proteliere. At the next pue of breath thou mayst blow away thy life; or, by not discerning thy time, thou mayst lose thy soul, as Saul did his Kingdome. Opportunities are headlong. [And cul∣led all his servants] Nature taught Infidels to take re of their own famillies. Socrates is said to have called Philosophy down from heaven to earth; that is, Wl in Tili∣ani . Philo∣soph. to have directed men to be good at home, and setting aside other studies, chiefly to minde, Aedibus in propriis quae prava aut recta gerantur. Cato said that he could pardon all mens faults, Dio in vita. Suetou in Aug. c. 65. save onely the faults of his own family. And Augustus, when he went about to re∣strain garish attire, and looseness of life in others, was scared and upbraided at Rome, with the excesses and enormities of his own houshold. He had three untoward children whom he was won to tearm tres vomicas, tri carcinomara. So many mattery im∣postumes, ulcerous sores. His wife Livia was thought to be too familiar with her friend and Physitian, Endemus; Pliny calls him her Paramour. Tacitus saith, he was specie artis, frequens se∣cretis. All this might be without his fault, but not without his reproach. The malicious Pharisees could object it to our Saviour; Thy Disciples wash not, thy Disciples fast not, &c. As if he were much to blame for suffering such things. And surely, he is not a compleat Christian, walks not in a perfect way, Psal. 101.2. that is not good at home, that is not relatively good. The fifth Commandement is called by Philo, , a mixt Commandement, and made a part of the first Table. It is therefore set betwixt both Tables of the Law, saith Another, because all we get from God or men, we bring it home to our houses (as Abimelech here relates his divine
dream to his servants) the place of well-employing it. [And the men were sore afraid]. This fear freed them; for according to mens fear, Bradford of Repent. so is Gods displeasure, Psal. 90. Cavebis si pavebis, Rom. 11.21. But they that tremble not in hearing, shall be crushed to peeces in feeling, said that Martyr. This was a sign that the Israelites feared God, when they beleeved God, and his ser∣vant Moses, Exod. 4.31. The best way of prevention is to tremble at Gods judgements, whiles they hang in the threatnings. But frequentissimum initium calamitatis, securitas, saith Patercu∣lus. Sola igitur securit as est, nunquam esse securum, sed semper pavidum & trementem, R. Grostbead. Coloss. 3.23. saith another. Should servants fear their masters, because they have power over the flesh, and not we fear God, &c? Vers. 9. 'What hast thou done unto us, &c.] Some warmth must be in a reproof, but it must not be scalding hot. Words of reviling and disgrace, Aegros, qus potus fortis non curavit, ad salu∣tempristiam aquatepus rev∣eavit. Greg. they scald as it were; but words that tend to stir up the conscience to a due consideration of the fault (as here) they be duely warm, and tend to make the physick work more kindly. How could Abraham resist this sweet and sovereign reprehension? How could he but be much ashamed, that he should give occasion to it? No oratory is so powerfull with good natures as that of mildness. Remember to reprove with modesty and moderation. Vers. 11. Surely the fear of God, &c.] The onely best curb to restrain from evill, and spur to incite to good. All honesty flows from this holy fear. It is a problem in Aristotle, why men are credited more then other creatures? The answer is, On  Man onely reverenceth God, therefore you may trust him, therefore you may commit your self to him. Sed quia alitèr facere non po∣tuit. Velleius. He that truely feareth God is like unto Cato, of whom it is said, He never did well that he might appear to do so, but because he could do no otherwise. You need not fear me, said Joseph to his brethren, for I fear God, and so dare do you no hurt. Ought ye not to have feared God, said Nehemiah to those usurious Jews? Neh. 5.9. Vers. 12. And yet indeed] See the Notes on Chapt. 11.29. Vers. 13. When God caused me to wander] Cum facerent Dii, when they, even God, caused me. The mystery of the Trinity, though Calvin interpret it of the Angels; Mysterium Tri∣ados. Jun. as Cartwright like∣wise doth that of Solomon, which Junius conceiveth to be spoken of the blessed Trinity, There bee higher then they,
Eccles. 5.8. sc. That Three in One, and One in Three. Vers. 14. And Abimelech took oxen] Great men should be bountiful to good men. Aeneas Sylvius was wont to say of learning (how much more may it be said of grace?) Popular men should esteem it as silver, Noblemen as gold, Princes prize it as pearls. Arcadius the Emperor gave his Schoolmaster Arsenes, (a holy man) the revenues of all Egypt, desiring him to pray for him. Pecuni none∣gere, quòd mundo jampridèm mor∣tuus esset. Pari hist prosau. medul. pag. 495. Rom. 12.17. Arsenes promised him his prayers, but refused his rich offer; saying, that he wanted no mony, as being long since dead to the world. Vers. 16. I have given thy brother] Not thee, to avoyd suspi∣tion. Provide, we must, things honest in the sight of all men: and not onely keep a good conscience, but a good name as much as may be; learning this of the unjust Steward, by lawful (though he did it by unlawful) means. For our Saviour noted this defect, when he said, The children of this world, &c. Luke 16.8. It was good counsel that Livia gave her husband Augustus, . Dio in vita. It behoveth thee not onely, not to do wrong, but not to seem to do so, &c. We must shun, and be shy of the very shew and shadow of sin, if either we tender our credit abroad, or comfort at home. The Church took it ill, that her veil was pulled off, and that she was judged to be a dishonest woman, Cant. 5.7. As in the first Chapter, She prayes her Spouse to tell her where she may come to him: for why should she be as one that turneth aside, or as one that was veiled or cover∣ed, a signe of lightness and dishonesty, Gen. 38.14, 15. She was willing to eschew all appearance of evil. Some sense the Text thus: I have given thy husband mony to buy thee a veil, to cover thy face that all may know thee to be a married woman Vers. 17. So Abraham prayed, and God healed Abimelech] Here was that of Saint James verefied. Jam. 5.15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgotten him. So he is healed on both sides. Melch. Adam in vita Luther. The story of Luther is well known, how by his prayers he recovered Theodorus Vitus of a Consumption, after the Physicians had given him up for dead. The Saints are Gods favorites, they may have any thing of him. Sejanus found Tiberius so facile, that he needed onely to ask, Life of Sejanus by P. M p. 5. and give thanks. He never denyed him any thing, and oft-times pre∣vented his request. What shall we think of Gods good-will to his faithful servants and suppliants? Vers. 18. For the Lord had fast closed up all, &c.] In quibus
peccamus, in iisdem plectimur. God oft takes notice of the offend∣ing member. Dives was tormented most in his tongue, Quià linguâ plus peccaverat, Evg. lib. 1. saith Cyprian. Nestorii lingua vermibus exesa. Archbishop Arundel was so smitten in his tongue, that he could neither swallow nor speak, for divers days before his death. Atque id multi tum fieri putabant, Tho. Gascon. in Diction. Theolog. Acts & Mon. 1622. Zonaras. quòd verbum Dei alligasset, ne suo tempore praedicaretur, saith the Historian. The like is re∣ported of Steven Gardiner, Fertur Heraclius Imp. inguine sur∣sùm converso faciem suam perminxisse, nisi urina (tabellâ imo ventri appositâ) averteretur. Idei accidisse creditum, ob incestum cum fratris filia coitum. CHAP. XXI. Verse 1. And the Lord visited Sarah] GOd payes not his people with words onely, Plutarch. as Sertorius did his Souldiers. He fools them not off with fair promises, as Ptolomee (sirnamed therefore ) did his favorites. Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest. But is real, yea, royal in his promises and perfomances. Of many pro∣misers it may be said, as Tertullian of the Peacock, All in change∣able colours; as oft changed as moved. Italians all; as Aeneas Sylvius said of Italy, Novitate quadam, nihil habet stabile. Not so their Ancestors, the Romans. They had a great care always to perform their word. Insomuch, that the first Temple built in Rome, was dedicated to the godess Fidelity. Great mens words, saith One, are like dead mens shooes: he may go barefoot that waits for them. Not so good men, they will stand to their oath, though it tend to their loss, Psal. 15.4. They are children that will not lye, Isai. 63.8. Tit. 1.2. Isai. 65.16. Their Father is a God, that cannot lye. He is the God of Amen, as Isaiah calleth him; and all his promises, are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, the faithful and true witness, 2 Cor. 1.20. Revel. 3.14. Judah would not break promise with the Harlot, lest he should be shamed, Gen. 38.23. One of the laws of the Knights of the band in Spain was, That if any of them broke his promise, he went alone by himself, and no body spake to him, nor he to any. When God serves any so, let him be so served. But the promises are ancient, Tit. 1.2. And not any tittle of
them, as yet, ever fell to the ground. Wherefore, gird up the loyns of your mindes, and trust perfectly on the Grace that is brought unto you, 1 Peter 1.13. Faithful is he that hath promised, who also will do it. 1 Thessalonians, chapter 5. vers. 24. Vers. 2. For Sarah conceived] By the force of her Faith, though at first she faltered, Heb. 11.11. [And bare Abraham a son, in his old age] Beatae senectutis & emeritae fidei filium, Buc hole. as One well calleth Isaac. St. Paul for this saith, he was born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. Vers. 3. And Abraham called the name, &c.] A ridiculous name, but such as God had imposed. All Gods wayes are foolishness to the World, Christ and all. But (as old men use to say to young) They think us fools; we know them to be so. It will not be long ere they shall wail and howl out; Nos insensati, Wisd 5. we fools held their life madness, &c. Say therefore with David, If this be to be vile, wee'l be more vile. God hath a barren womb for mocking Michal. He is a fool, we say, that would be laughed out of his coat; but he is a double fool that would be laughed out of his skin, that would hazard his soul, because loath to be laughed at. Caligula socerum Scyllanum, molestum ei propter virtutem & affinitatem, ad mortem sibi consciscendam ludibriis adegit. More fool him. Vers. 4. And Abraham circumcised his Son] At Circumcision (so as now at Baptisme) names were given. Let them be such as are significant, and may immind us of some good, either person or thing; all will be found little enough, Optima nomina, Columel. e re rust. l. 1. c. 7. Hoat. Epod. 2. non appellan∣do, mala fieri, Alphius foenerator dixisse verissimè fertur. We read of a good woman, that had named her three daughters, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And when she was to be condemned by Bonner; My Lord, said she, If you burn me, I hope you will keep Faith, Hope, and Charity; no by my troth, will I not, quoth the Bishop; Act & Mon. 1798. keep them who will, Ile take no charge of them. We read also of another, that courting an harlot, asked her name: she answered, Mary; whereupon, remembring Mary Magdalen that penitent harlot, he repented him of his evill purpose; and advising the curtisan, to repent by her example, departed, and lived honestly. Stage Viney. in Palest. We cannot have too many monitors to mind us of our duty. Vers. 5. And Abraham was an hundred yeers old] After twenty yeers praying, and waiting the fulfilling of the promise; besides, thirteen of those yeers silence, for ought we read, after
the promise of a childe. This was a sore tryal; but God knew him to be armor of proof, and therefore tryed him thus with Musket-shot. Heb. 10.36. Well might the Apostle say, Ye have need of pati∣ence, that after ye have done the will of God (and suffered it too) ye might receive the promise. The spoyling of their goods required patience: but this waiting much more. Good men finde it casier to bear evil, then to wait till the promised good be enjoyed. This waiting is nothing, Importuno tem∣pore poma decer∣unt. Cyprian. but hope and trust lengthened. Which they that cannot do, like children, they pull Apples afore they are ripe, and have Worms bred of them; as those hasty Ephraim∣ites, that set upon the Philistims, and were slain in Gath. They had indeed a promise of the Land, but the time was not yet come: See my Love∣tokens, pag. 94. They were weary of the Egyptian bondage, and would have thus got out; but they were too hasty. Fugientes erg fumum, incidebant in ignem, 1 Chronicles 7.21, 2. Psalm 78. v. 9. Vers. 6. Prov. 10.1. God hath made me to laugh] A wise son maketh a glad father. Monstri autèm simile est, quandò pro risu sunt fletus, sunt flagellum. And yet this is many a good mans case. How many parents are put to wish Moses his wish, Num. 11.11. Lord, If I have found favor in thy sight, kill me, that I behold not my misery. Had he lived to have seen, what ways his grand-childe Jonathan took, what a grief would it have been unto him! Judg. 18.30. Ac proinde stu∣dio inseruisse literam Nun, suspensam ta∣men; in fignum, am adesse vel abesse posse, ut fit & filius  vel  istius prosapiâ, hujus imitatione. Bux∣torf. Tiber. . Euseb. Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, &c. In the best Hebrew Copies, Nun is suspended in that name: where∣upon the Hebrews descant, that this Gershom was the son of Moses; but because he and his posterity walked not in the wayes of Moses, but rather of Manasses, 2 King. 21. and did his works; therefore the Penman of this Book, would not so far disgrace Moses, as to make him his son, as indeed he was, Exod. 2.1 Chron. 23.14. but rather of Manasses, whom he imitated and resembled. How much better and happier had it been for them both, if they had expressed their fathers maners, as Constantines sons did: of whom it is said, That they had put on whole Con∣stantine, and in all good things did exactly resemble him. Vers. 7. That Sarah should have given children suck] So she had a double blessing, of the belly, and of the brests. Milk she had at those yeers, and great store of it too: whence she is said to give children suck, not a childe onely. She could have nursed another for a need, besides her own. Note, that though she were a
great Lady, yet, she was a nurse. Let it not be niceness, but neces∣sity that hinders any mother from so doing; lest she be found more monstrous then the sea-monsters, that draw out their brest, and give suck to their young, Lam. 4.3. If the childe must be set out, let a fit nurse be looked after. Quidam scrofae lacte nutritus cum esset, Sphinx Philo∣soph. p. 235. in coeno sese identidem volutabar. Vers. 8. And Abraham made a great feast] A laudable custome, saith Cajetan, That the beginning of the eating of the first-born, should be celebrated with a feast. St. Augustine observeth here, That this solemnity at the weaning of Isaac, was a type of our spiritual regeneration: at, and after which, the faithful keep a continual feast. Let us keep the festivity, or holy-day, saith Paul, . 1 Cor. 5.7. . Diog. ap. Plu∣tarch. that feast of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, Isai. 25.6. proceeding from milk to stronger meat, Heb. 5.12. and being to the world, as a weaned childe. His mouth doth not water after homely provisions, that hath lately tasted of delicate sustenance. Vers. 9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar mocking] At that mystical name Isaac, as a gaud, or laughing-stock. At the feast also, made upon such a frivolous occasion. As who should say, What care I, though this ado be made now about Isaacs weaning? I am the first-born, and beloved of my Father, who will not deny me the inheritance. This Sarah had soon spyed, or over-heard, Libe∣rorum curiosi sunt parentes. The mother especially observeth the wrong done to the childe. And besides, Dislike soon spies a fault. Textor. epist. A fault it was no doubt, and a great one too. Otherwise, the Apo∣stle would not have called it persecution: Gal. 3. nor God have punished it with ejection. Machiavel, that scoffing Atheist, rotted in the prison at Florence. Jearing Julian had his payment from Heaven. Sir Thomas Moor (qui scopticè & scabiose de Luthero & Religione Reformata loquebatur) lost his head. Another lost his wits for mocking at James Abbes Martyr, as a mad man; for that, Act. & Mon. fol. 1904. having no mony, he gave his apparel to the poor; some to one, some to another, as he went to the stake. What's truth? Joh. 18.38. said Pilate to our Saviour, in a scornful prophane maner. Not long after which, he became his own deaths-man. Appian scoffed at Circumcision, Joseph. and had an Ulcer at the same time, and in the same place. Surely, God is the avenger of all such: he calls it blasphemy in the second Table, and shews his wrath from Heaven against it, as that which proceeds from the very superfluity of malice (as here in Ismael)
and tends to murther. The Hebrew word here used, signifies, that he not onely mocked Isaac, but also made others to mock him. Vers. 10. Cast out this bond-woman] Who had been (likely) either an Author or Abbettor of her sons sin, in ambitiously seek∣ing the inheritance. Out they must therefore together: as all Hypocrites one day must be cast out of Gods Kingdom. Heaven is an undefiled inheritance: no dirty dog ever trampled on that Golden pavement. There is no passing è coeno in coelum. Heaven would be no Heaven to the unregenerate. Beetles love dunghils better then oyntments; and Swine love mud, better then a garden. Paris ut vivat, Horat▪ epist. 2. regnetque beatus Cogi posse negat.— Vers. 11. And the thing was very grievous, &c.] See; there's grief sometimes betwixt the best couples, as abovesaid, Chap. 16.5. But why was it so grievous to cast out Ismael, when in the next Chapter, it seems no such grief to him, to slay Isaac? Surely for that, here, he hears onely his wives voyce: there he well under∣stood it to be the will of God. Baldassar in epist. ad Oeco∣lamp. Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, & submittem illi, sexcenta si nobis essent colla, said that Reverend Dutchman. When Abraham came to know is was Gods will, as well as Sarahs, he soon yielded. Vers. 12. In all that Sarah hath said unto thee, &c.] The wife then is to be harkned to, when she speaks reason. Sampsons mother had more faith then her husband: And Priscilla is sometimes set before Aquila. Pauls hearers at Philippi, were onely women at first, Acts 16.13. And Saint Peter tells Christian wives, that they may win their husbands to Christ, 1 Pet. 3.1. by their chaste conversation coupled with fear. The Scripture is said to say, what Sarah here saith, Gal. 4.30. Vers. 13. Because he is thy seed] So bountiful a master is God, so liberal a Lord; that he blesseth his servants in their seed too. We count it a great favor, if an earthly lord give an old servant a coun∣trey cottage, with some small annuity for life; but Gods love ex∣tends beyond life: as Davids love to Jonathan preserves Mephi∣bsheth from the Gallows, yea, promoteth him to a princely allow∣ance, Act & M. ol. 1481. and respect at court. Your children shall finde and feel it, double and treble, (said that Martyr) whatsoever you do or suffer for the Lords sake. V. 14. And Abraham rose up early] He was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, but set upon the execution of Gods will with expedition. Voluntas Dei, necessitas rei. A godly man sayes Amen
to Gods Amen, go it never so much against the hair with him: He puts his Fiat, his Placet to Gods; and saith, as Acts 21.14. The will of the Lord be done, which was Vox verè Christianorum, as One saith. Vers. 15. And the water was spent in the bottle] All creature∣comforts will fade and fail us; as the brook Cherith dryed up whiles the Prophet was drinking of it; as those pools about Jeru∣salem, that might be dryed up, with the tramplings of horse and horsemen, 2 King. 19.24. But they that drink of Christs water, shall never thirst: For it shall be in them (as the widows oyl, or Aarons oyntment) a well springing up to eternal life, Joh. 4.14. [She cast the childe, &c.] Whom till then, she had led in her hand, faint, and ready to dye for thirst; who erst lived at the full in his fathers house, but could not be contented. God loves to let us see the worth of his favors by the want of them: Carendo ptiùs quàm fruend. To chasten mens in∣solency with indigency, as he did the prodigal in the Gospel. Vers. 16. Let me not see the death of the childe] This, Babington. saith an Interpreter, was but poor love. Give me a friend that will not leave in the instant of death, Gen. 46.4. [She lift up her voyce and wept] As Hinds by calving, so we by weeping cast out our sorrows, Job 39.3. Expletur lathrymis, egeriturque dolor. Vers. 17. And God heard the voyce of the lad] Weeping hath a voyce, Psal. 6.8. And as Musick upon the Waters sounds far∣ther and more harmoniously then upon the Land, so Prayers joyn'd with Tears. These, if they proceed from Faith, are showres quenching the devils cannon-shot; a second Baptism of the soul, wherein it is rinsed anew, nay, perfectly cured: As the tears of Vines cure the Leprosie, as the lame were healed in the troubled waters. Whether Hagars and Ismaels tears were for sin, Lachrymas an∣gustiae, exprimit crux; Lachrymas poenitentiae, peccatum. or for the present pressure onely, I have not to say. But God is so pitiful, that he hears and helps our affliction, as he had done Hagars once afore, Gen. 16.11. And as our Saviour raised the young man of Nains, though none sought to him, meerly because he was the onely son of his mother, a widow, the stay of her life, and staff of her old age. See a sweet place, 2 King. 14.26, 27. Vers. 18. For I will make him a great nation] A Nation by himself, as he had promised to Abraham. This had not come to pass, had not she missed of her way to Egypt, and wandred in this wilderness. God, by his providence, ordereth our disorders to his
own glory. Gregor. Divinum consilium dum devitatur, impletur: Humana sapienia dum reluctatur, comprehenditur. Vers. 19. God opened her eyes▪ &c.] The well was there before; but she saw it not till her eye, were opened. So till God irradiate both the Organ and the Object, we neither see nor suck those brests of consolation, Isai. 66.11. We turn the back, and not the palm of the hand, to the staffe of the promises. Vers. 20 And God was with the lad, &c.] The fountain of Hagar (saith a Divine) lying between Bared and Kadesh-barnea, was afterward called the well of the living God; and seemeth myi∣cally to represent Baptism, the laver of regeneration. For the Church like Hagar, with her son Ismael, travelling through the wilderness of this world, is pressed with a multitude of sins and miseries, &c. Wherefore they joyning together in Prayer, crave to be refreshed with the water of life. For Hagar signifieth a Pil∣grim. Itinerar. script. fol. 95. Ishmael, a man whom the Lord heareth; who travelling together with her Mother the Church in this World, fighteth against the enemies thereof, and shooteth the Arrows of Faith against all infernal and cruel beasts and lusts. Thus he. Vers. 21. And his mother took him a wife] Adeò est juris non gentium, sed ipsius naturae, ut parentes matrimonia liberis procurent. Children are a chief part of their parents goods; therefore to be disposed of by them in marriage. When Satan had commission to afflict Job in his goods, he fell upon his children: Yet in the Church of Rome, Parents consent is not much regarded. Vers. 22. God is with thee in all that thou doest] Natural con∣science cannot chuse but stoop to the Image of God stamped upon the Natures and Works of the godly. When they see in them that which is above ordinary, they are afraid of the name of God called upon by them. Deut. 28.9, 10. Their hearts even ake and quake within them. Vers. 23. Swear unto me here by God, &c.] This visit, we see, was more of fear then of love (there can be no hearty love indeed, but between true Christians.) Kings then have their cares, Crowns their crosses: Thistles in their arms, and Thorns in their sides. This made one cry out of his Diadem, O vilis pannus, &c And Canutus set his Crown upon the Crucifix. Frederick, the Elector of Saxony, is said to have been born with the signe of a Cross upon his back: Set. Aunal. and the next night after that, Rodulphus Rufus was crowned Emperor of Germany, An. Dom. 1273. over the Temple, where the Crown was set upon his head, a golden Cross was seen
to shine, like a Star, to the admiration of all that beheld it. These were the same Emperors Verses concerning his Crown Imperia, Nobils es fatcor, rutilisque onera a lapillis: Don. Pae. hist proan. medulla. 7 23. & 728. Innunieris curis sed comitata venis; Quod benè si nossent omnes expendere, nemo Nemo foret, qui te tollere vellet humo. Vers. 24. I will swear] Abraham quickly consents to so reason∣able a request, from so honorable a person. The wisdom from above is easie to be intreated. The churl Nabal holds it a goodly thing, Jam. 3.17. Matth. 6. to hold off. It is but maners to reciprocate: very Publicans can finde in their hearts, to do good to those that have been good to them. Vers. 25. And Abraham reproved Abimelech] Inferiors may reprove their superiors, so they do it wisely and modestly. Vers. 26. I wot not who hath done this thing] A fault it might be in Abraham, not to complain to the King. For many a good Prince, is even bought and sold by his Officers and Councellors, as it was said of Aurelian the Emperor; who might know nothing but as they informed him. As of another German Prince it was said, Esset alius, si esset apud alios. Bucholc. V. 27. Abraham took sheep and oxen] In token of true and hearty reconciliation. Reconciliatioes, saith Menander, Menander. sunt lupina amici∣tiae Let it be so among heathens. But we have not so learned Christ. Vers. 31. They sware both of them] Or, they were sworn. The Hebrew is passive: To shew, that an oath is not rashly to be un∣dertaken, but by a kinde of necessity imposed. It comes of a root that signifies to satisfie; because he, to whom we swear, must therewith be contented. An oath is an end of strife, Heb. 7. saith the Apostle: The Greeks call it  quasi , a hedg, which a man may not break. Vers. 32. A Covenant] Foeds . Sic fidus Vers. 33. Abraham planted a grove] That he might have a pri∣vate place, for prayer and meditation. And thus he improved and employed that late place, he had made with Abimeleh. Oh that God would once more try us, and trust us with the blessing of peace! How should we now prize it, and praise him for it. Bona à tergo formosissima. Vers. 34. Many days] Twenty five yeers at least: for so old was Isaac when he went to be sacrificed. Some Halcyons God vouch∣safes to his afflicted, and tossed with tempest: Isai. 54.1. Some rest and repose to his poor Pilgrims. Laus Deo.
CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. God did tempt Abraham] TEmptation is twofold; 1. Probationis. 2. Perditionis. The former is of God, the latter of the devill. God is said to tempt, when he puts us upon the triall of our faith and obedience, that he may do us good in the latter end, Deut. 8.26. Satan ever seeks to do us hurt. He, when he comes to tempt, comes with his sieve as to Peter. Christ with his fan, Matth. 3.12. Now a Fan casteth out the worst, and keepeth in the best; a Sieve keepeth in the worst, D. Playfere. and casteth out the best. Right so Christ (and histrials) purgeth out corruption, and increaseth grace: contrarily the Devill, if there be any ill thing in us, confirmeth it; if faith, or any good thing in us, he weakneth it. Now the temptations of Satan are either, 1. Of seducement, Jam. 1.15. r 2. of buffetting and grievance, 2 Cor. 12.7. In seducement we are pressed with some lesser or darling corruption, whereto our appetites by nature are most propense. And here Satan hath his machinations, 2 Cor. 2.11. methods, Eph. 6.11. depths, Rev. 2.24. darts, Eph. 6.16. fiery darts pointed and poysoned with the venome of Serpents, which set the heart on fire from one lust to another. In buffettings we are dogg'd with foulest lusts of Atheisme, self-murther, &c. such as Nature startleth at, and abhorreth; and these, if we resist, and be meerly passive, are onely our crosses, Satans sins. For before a temptation can be a sin, it must have somewhat of coveting in it. And trialls are onely taps to give vent to corruption. Vers. 2. Take now thy son, thine onely son Isaac, &c.] This was the last of Abrahams ten trialls, and the forest. All our troubles to this, are but as the slivers and chips of that cross, upon which this good Patriarch was crucified. Origen hence perswades parents to bear patiently the loss of their children. Laetus offer filium Deo, esto sacerdos animae filii tui, &c. Abraham was not onely to kill his onely son (which yet was more then to have tome out his own heart, with his own hands) but to cut him in peeces, to lay him orderly on the Altar, after the manner of a sacrifice, and to burn him to ashes; himself making and tending the fire, and putting him in, piece after piece, when any was out. A hard and heavy task; especially, since it directly crossed the promise, that in Isaac
all nations of the earth should be blessed; and seemed to involve the utter ruine of all mankinde. Here Reason was at a stand: It was faith onely that could extricate the perplexed Patriarch, by giving him to know that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, Heb. 11.19. Hoc, Abrahamum fecit, . This was it that kept him from tripping. [Get thee into the Land of Moriah] Both Abrahams great temptations began with one strain vade tibi, Get thee gone, Gen. 12.1. Gen. 22.2 Here God led Abra∣ham into temptation, but delivered him from evill. Have you not been tempted (saith a Holy man) in this or that kinde? It is be∣cause God in mercy would not lead you into temptation. Baines Letters. Yea this is in some sort more to be acknowledged then victory, when you are tempted. For not to be tempted is more immediately from God, and less in mans power then to prevail against temptation: Sith nothing doth overcome us against our will: but without our will God doth lead us into triall: for he knoweth we would taste little of these if we might be our own carvers. Vers. 3. And Abraham rose up early, &c.] To shew his prompt and present obedience. He neither consulted with his wife, nor with his own reason. Exod. 4. She might have haply hung upon him and hindered him, as Zipporah did Moses to the hazarding of his life. He captivates all the powers of the soul to his Creator, goes after him without sciscitation, and so shews himself to be renewed in the spirit of his minde; that is, in his naturall reason: for that like an old Beldam, is the mother and nurse of all our distempers and outstrayes. Cassianus tells us of a young man that had given himself up to a Christian life: And his parents, Cassianus. misliking that way, wrote letters to disswade him from it; which when he knew, he would not once open them, but threw them in the fire. Let us do so, by the suggestions of flesh and blood, and the counsell of carnall friends, or we shall never rest and feast in Abrahams bosome. I know not by what reason (said Borthwick the Scotch Martyr) they so called them my friends, Act & Mon. fol. 1157. which so greatly labou∣red to convert me (as they called it:) neither will I more esteem them, then the Madianites, which in time past called the children of Israel to do sacrifice to their Idols.
Vers. 4. Then on the third day] A great while for him to be plodding, ere he came to the place. But we must conceive that his brains were better busied, then many of ours would have been therewhile. We must not weigh the cross, for then it will proveheavy: we must not chew the pill, but swallow it whole, else it will prove bitter. We must not plod too much, but ply the Throne of Grace for a good use and a good issue of all our trialls and tribulations. Vers. 5. Abide you here with the Asse] This the Hebrews use for a proverb, against such as are dull and uncapable. Zophar saith, That man is born as a wild-asses-colt. As an Asses foal for rudeness, and a wild-asses for unruliness. Job. 11.11. It imports that he is untamed and untractable, till a new heart be put into him. Agur had not the un∣derstanding of a man, till he spake to Ithiel and Ʋcall for it, Prov. 30.1, 2. He wants the totum hominis, that doth not fear God and keep his Commandements. Eccles. 12.13. Tu & Asinus unum estote, Alex. Cook. his Abatement of Popish brags. Epist. will not do it, which was the counsell given to a young Novice, entring a Monastery. [And come again to you] Nesciens formam rei futurae, prophetavit sciens de eventu, prophetavit quod ignoravit, saith Amb. Vers. 6. And laid it upon Isaac his son] Who was herein a lively type of Christ, bearing the cross, whereon he was offered up. , saith Plutarch, speaking of the Roman fashion of crucifying malefactors. And surely it was by a wonderfull providence of God, that the Jews brought our Saviour to Pilate to be put to death; sith they hated nothing more then to confirm or countenance the Roman tyranny among them, by any means. Hence Gamaliel gave counsell to dismiss the Apostles, Act. 5.38. And hence the chiefe Priests and Rulers took it so exceeding haynously, that Paul was taken out of their hands, by the chiefe Captain, Act. 23. But God had a hand in it, that this and other types and Scriptures might be ful∣filled, that foretold the very manner of his death on a tree. Let the Jews stumble now at the cross, and fall backward. Let the Gentiles jear us, (borreo dicere)  In vita peregr. Omnis hom aut est cum Christo regnaturus, aut cum Diabolo cruciandus. Aug. Justin. l. 18. as Lucin doth, for that we deny the multitude of their gods, and yet believe in a crucified God. Let us desire to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified; and if ever we desire to be Kings in heaven (and every man must be aut Caesar, aut nul∣lus, a King, or a caytiffe.) Let us seek by the eye of faith to see the Sun of righteousness in the West (as Stratoes servant taught him:) Let us look upon Christ hanging on the cross, dying on that Altar, and we shall live for ever. Vers. 7. Where is the Lamb, for a burnt offering] Isaac was not to be told now, what belonged to a sacrifice. He had been
long since taught by his father, what was to be done in the service of God. When I was young, my father taught me, saith Solomon, Prov. 4.4. so did his mother also, Primas in Phi∣lip. Greg. Moral. l. 27. c. 14. Prov. 31. in her Lemuels lesson. Plantas tenellas frequentius adaquare proderit, saith Pri∣masius. Vers. 8. God will provide himself a Lamb] A pious and preci∣ous Proverb; much to be mused on, and made use of, Qui finxit alas papilioni, is cu∣rabit omma. when we are in an exigent, and see not whither to turn us. Then say, Deus vi∣derit▪ God will with the temptation also give an issue, 1 Cor. 10.13. Necesse est adesse divinum, ubi humanum cessat auxilium, saith Philo. Sciat etiam Celsitudo vestra (saith Luther in a letter to the Prince Elector of Saxony;) Sutet. Ann. I would your Highness should well know, that businesses are far otherwise carried, and concluded in heaven then at the Diet at Norinberg, &c. And to Phillip Me∣lancthon he writes thus: Si nos ruemus, ruet Christus unà, ille reg∣nator mundi: & esto ruat, &c. Sed scribo haec frustrà, quia tu, Scutet. Annal se∣cundùm philosophiam vestram, has res ratione regere▪ hoc est, ut ait ille, cum ratione insanire pergis, & occidis teipsum; nec vides prorsus extra manum tuam & consilium positam esse causam, etiam extra curam tuam velle agi. Vers. 9. And they came to the place] Mount Moriah where the Temple was afterwards built. This was a little from Salem, 2 Chron. 3.1. as Mount Calvary also, was a little from Jerusalem. [And bound Isaac his son] Who strugled not, neither resisted, though able for his age (being twenty five year old, as Josephus makes him; others thirty three) to have overmastered his old father. He was acquainted with Gods counsell, saith Luther, wherein he rested. Yet he was bound, 1. For that the rite of sacrifices so required. (ee 2 King. 10.12.) 2. Lest any involuntary motion by pangs of death, should be procured. Whence divers of the Martyrs, as Ridley, Rawlins, &c. desired to be bound fast to the stake, lest the flesh should play its part. Rins)▪ when the Smith cast a chain about him at the stake, I pray you, good friend, said he, Knock in the chain fast; for it may be, Act. & Mon. ol. 1415. that the flesh would strive mightily. But God of thy great mercy give me strength and patience, to abide the extremity. Nture at death will have a bout with the best, whether he dye as Elisa, slowly, or as Eliah, suddenly. Vers. 10. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, &c.] What Painter in the world can possibly express the affection of Abra∣ham,
when thus he bound his son, and bent his sword? Surely that Painter that set forth the sacrificing of Iphigenia, Aspi vulius ecce meos, uti∣amque culos in pectora po es In∣serre. Sol Phe∣tonti, apud Ovid 1 Cor. 3. would here also have drawn Abraham, as he did Agamemnon, with his face veyled; as not able to delineate his unconceivable grief. But a man in Christ is more then a man, and can do that that other men, cannot reach unto. It was a matter of blame to the carnall Co∣rinthians, that they walked as men: And our Saviour looks for some singular thing to be done by those that pretend to him, Matth. 6.47. Abraham had denyed himself in his beloved Isaac, and therefore went an end with his work, hard though it were. Another that hath not done so, shall finde a heavy business of it, an unsupportable burden. Sozomen tells of a certain Merchant, whose two sons being taken captives, Sozom l. c. 14. and adjudged to dye, he offered himself to dye for them; and withall promised to give the Souldiers all the gold he had. They pitying the poor mans cala∣mity, admitted of his request for one of his sons (which he would) but let them both scape they could not, because such a number must be put to death. The miserable man therefore, looking at and lamenting both his sons, could not finde in his heart to make choice of either (as overcome with an equall love to them both) but stood doubting and deliberating, till they were both slain. At the siege of Buda in Hungary there was among the German Cap∣tains a Noble-man, called Erkius Raschachius, whose son a vali∣ant young Gentleman being got out of the Army without his fa∣thers knowledge, bore himself so gallantly in fight against the enemy, in the sight of his father and the Army, that he was highly commended of all men, and especially of his father that knew him not at all. Yet before he could clear himself, he was compassed in with the Enemy, and valiantly fighting, slain. Raschachius ex∣ceedingly moved with the death of so brave a man, ignorant how near he touched himself, turning about to the other Captains, said, This noble Gentleman, whatsoever he be, is worthy of eter∣nall commendation, and to be most honourably buried by the whole Army. As the rest of the Captains were with like com∣passion approving his speech, the dead body of the unfortu∣nate son rescued, was presented to the most miserable father; which caused all them that were there present, Tukish hist. to shed tears. But such a sudden and inward grief surprized the aged fa∣ther, and struck so to his heart, that after he had stood a while speechless, with his eyes set in his head, he suddenly fell down
dead, Anno Dom. 1541. Heb. 11. [And took the knife to slay his son] The Apostle saith▪ He did offer him up a slain sacrifice. God took it in as good part as if indeed he had done it, because he would have done it. Every man is so good before God, are he truely desires to be. Bernard. In vitae libro scribuntur omnes, qui quod possunt faciunt, etsi quod debent, non possunt, saith one Father. And another, Augustin. Basil. Tota vita boni Christiani sanctum desiderium est. Ambulas, siamas. Non enim passibus and Deum sed affectibus currimus. Tantùm velis, & Deus tibi praeoccurret, saith a Third. Vers. 11. And said, Abraham, Abraham] Twice for haste∣sake: yet not at all, till the very instant. When the knife was up, the Lord came. God delights to bring his people to the Mount, yea to the very brow of the hill, till their feet slip, and then delivers them. He reserves his holy hand for a dead lift. Onely be sure you look to your calling; for it was otherwise with Jepthta, Judg. 11. whom St. Augustin calls facinorosum & improbum, a lewd and naughty man, in his questions upon the Old Testament. What then would he have said to Thomas the Anabaptist, Stumpf. l. 5. who beheaded his brother Leonard, in the sight of his parents, at Sangall in France, Anno 1526. pretending the example of Abraham? As did likewise those odious Idolaters of old, that offered their children in sacrifice to Moloch, in the valley of Hinnom; which was so called because the poor child put into the arms of the red-hot image, was  nohem that is roaring; or because the Priests comforting the parents said, Condimetum crit tibi. Jalkut n Jerem. Jeheunh Lach. It shall be profitable or pleasant to thee, as Kim∣chi hath it. So because Abraham planted a grove to serve God in, Gen. 21.33. the Devil, Gods Ape, set the blind Heathens a work to plant a thicket near the altar of their god 'Priapus, whereinto his worshippers stepped, when the sacrifice was ended, and there, like bruit beasts promiscuously satisfied their lusts, thereby, as they con∣ceived, best pleasing their God; which was the true cause, as it seems, that the true God commanded, that no Groves should be planted near the place of his worship; and if any were, they should be cut down. Vers. 12. Lay not thine hand upon the Lad] As he was about to do, having armed his pious hand, not onely with the knife, but with faith that works by love; as had likewise David, when going against the Giant, he slyes upon him, Bucholcer. perinde ac si fundae suae tunicis non lapillum, sed Deum ipsum induisset a implicuisset. [Now I know that thou fearest me] With a fear of love, Hos. 3.5. Fulgentius. And
here that of Fulgentius is true, and taketh place. Deum siquis parùm metuit, valdè contemnit; hujus qui non memorat beneficen∣tiam, auget injuriam. God knew Abrahams fear before, but now he made experience of it. Nunc expertus sum, saith Junius. Nune omnibus declarasti, saith Chrysost. Vers. 13. Behold behind him a Ram] Belike the Angell called behinde him; which when he turned to listen▪ to, he spied the Ram caught in a thicket, Heb. Sabech; which signifies the per∣plexity, winding or binding of a bush or briar. And to this both David seems to allude, Psal. 94.19. and the son of David in that famous Lammah Sabachtani of his, Bastards Serm. on Gen. 22.1. Mark. 15.24. [And Abraham went and took the Ram, &c.] How likely is it, saith One, that we will offer to God Isaac our joy, which will not sacrifice the Ram; that is, mortifie our sinfull lusts, and the desires of our flesh? God tempteth us now (saith Mr. Philpot Martyr) as he did our Father Abraham, commanding him to slay his son Isaac, which by interpretation signifieth mirth and joy; who by his obe∣dience preserved Isaac unto life, and offered a Ram in his stead. Semblably, we are to sacrifice to God, our Isaac; that is, our joy and consolation; which if we be ready to do, our joy shall not perish, but live and be increased: although our Ram be sacrificed; that is, the pride and concupiscence of our flesh intangled, through sin, with the cares of this stinging world, for the preservation and perfect augmentation of our mirth and joy, Act. & Mon. 1667. sealed up for us in Christ. Thus he. And as God provided another sacrifice (saith a Third) for Abraham, that so he might save his Son, which was a Ram tyed and intangled in thornes: Itinerar. Scrip∣turae, fol. 99. so God provided a sacrifice for the salvation of the world, Christ that immaculate Lamb; whose head being crowned with thorns, and hanging on the Cross, by his death opened unto us the door of life, and made us capable of eternall happiness. It is probable, saith Bucholcerus, that Abraham, when he slew and sacrificed the Ram, looked up to heaven with new eyes full of divine light; and that being filled with the Spirit of God, and carried beyond himself, he thought of more things, he felt more, he seemed to see and hear more then was possible to be uttered. Ipse Deus quodammodo expositurus, & de∣claraturus Abrahae actionis praesentis augustam significationem, Bucholc. in Chron. p. 187. & manu eum ducturus ad introspicienda hujus sacrificii sui adyta, promissionem de Christo repetit, & jurejurando confirmat. Vers. 14. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen] God will be
found of his in fit time and place. To him belong the issues of death, Psal. 68.20. None can take us out of his hands. He knows how to deliver his, and when, as Peter spake feelingly, 2 Pet. 2.9. with Act. 12.11. [And Abraham called the name of that place, Jehovah Jireh] To perpetuate the memory of Gods mercy, not of his own obedience, which yet was notable, and not to be matched again. If we honour God, we shall have honour; that's a bargain of Gods own making, 1 Sam. 2.31. Vers. 16. By my self have I sworn] God swears for the fur∣ther confirmation of our faith. For here he swore, not more for Abrahams sake, then ours, as the Apostle shews, Heb. 6.13, 14, 17, 18. As when he spake with Jacob at Penuel, there he spake with us, Hos. 12.4. and what he said to Joshua, he said to all, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. [And hast not with-held thy son, thine onely son] And yet what was this to that sic without a sicut, that hyperbole, that excess of love in God, that moved him to send his Son to dye for our sins? He loved Christ far better then Abraham could love Isaac; and yet he gave him up freely, which Abraham would never have done without a com∣mand: and to dye as a malefactor, and by the hands of barbarous and bloody enemies; whereas Isaac was to dye as a holy sacrifice, and by the hand of a tender father. How much more cause have we to say, Now I know the Lord loves me; Psal. 119.106. and to swear as David did, to keep his righteous judgements? Vers. 18. Because thou hast obeyed] This (because) is not so much causall, as rationall. Significat non causam meritoriam, sed subalternam, & sine qua non. Vers. 19. Went together to Beersheba] The Hebrews conceive, because here's no mention of Isaac's return, that he was sent by his father to Shem, or that he remained for certain years in Mount Moriah. But this is uncertain. Vers. 20. It was told Abraham] Good news out of a far Countrey; God usually chears up his children after sharpest trialls; brings them, as once from Mrah to Elim, &c. Vers. 23. And Bethuel begat Rebeccah] Rebeccah is born, Sarah dyes: Thus one generation passeth, and another commeth. Our children are the Danes that drive us out of the Countrey.
CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 1. And Sarah was an hundred, &c.] IT is observed by Divines, that God thought not fit to tell us of the length of the life of any woman in Scripte, but Sarah, to humble that sex, that because they were first in bringing in death, deserved not to have the continuance of their lives recorded by Gods Pen. Vers. 2. And Sarah died] The Jews would perswade us that the Devill represented to her the offering of Isaac, whereat she took a conceit and dyed. This is but a meer conceit of theirs; for Abraham then dwelt at Borsheb, now at Hebron. [And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah,] So she was the first, that we read of, mourned for at death; and it is mentioned as an honour to her. Solons Mors ma ne carea luchrymis, is to be preferred before, Hin , & Justa de∣functorum. Testamentum Augusti praeleg it tanto simulato gemitu, u non medò x, sed & spirit deficere . Dio Eumse lgere simulaban quem necverat. Dio in Claud. Gen. 37.35. Jer. 31.15. Ennius his Nemo me decoret lachrymis. It is one of the dues of the dead, to be lamented at their funeralls; and the want of it is threatned as a curse in many Scriptures. It is a practise warranted by the best in all ages; and mourn we may in death of friends, so we mourn 1. In truth, and not fainedly. 2. In measure, and not as men without hope. For the first, how grossely did Tiberius dissemble at the death of Augustus, and at the funerall of Drusus? Whereupon Tacitus makes this note, Vana & irris vero & honesto fidem adimunt. So when Julius Caesar wept over Pompey's head presented to him in Egypt, they that saw it, laughed in their sleeves, and held them no better then Cro∣codiles tears. So the mourning that Nero and his mother made over the Emperor Claudius, whose death they had conspired and effected, was deep dissimulation. This is no less hatefull, then to mourn heartily, but yet immoderately, is unlawfull. Here Jacob forgat himself, when so overgrown with grief for his Joseph, and Rachel for the rest of their children, that they would not be com∣forted. So David for his Absolom: Alexander the Great for his friend Hephestin; when he not onely clipped his horse and mules hair, Plutar. in vita lop. but plucked down also the battlements of the walls of the City, &c. The Souldiers of Pelopidas were no less excessive, when for grief of his death they would neither unbridle their horses, nor untie their armor, nor dress their wounds. Something here may be yeelded to nature, nothing to impatiency. Immoderate
sorrow for losses past hope of recovery, is more sullen then usefull: Our stomach may be bewrayed by it, not our wisdome. The Egyptians mourned seventy dayes for Jacob: Joseph (who had more cause, but withall more grace) mourned but twenty dayes. Mark. 5.38. . ut Iam. .1. God flatly forbad his people those heathenish customes, of shaving their heads, and cutting their flesh, Lev. 21. intoken of mourning for the dead. We read in the Gospel of minstrels and people making a noise at the terming-house, as they call it, Matth. 9.23. And the Jews that were comforting Mary, Perinde ac  intercute labe∣rantes salsamen∣ta comederent. Cartwr. when they saw her rise up hastily, and go forth, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there, Joh. 11.31. Such customes, it seems, they had in those dayes amongst them, to provoke themselves to weeping and la∣mentation; which was (saith One) as if they that have the dropsie, should eat salt meats. How much better Father Abraham here, who came indeed from his own tent to Sarahs, to mourn for her (as good reason he had) but exceeded not, as the Jews think is signified by that one letter less then ordinary in the Hebrew word for weep (Libcothah) used here in the text. Baal-turim gives but a bald reason of it, parùm flevit; erat enim vetula. Abraham wept not much for her, she being but an old-wife, and past her best. Buxtorfe gives a better, ptiùs quià luctus ejus fuit modera∣tus. And therefore also in the next verse it is said, that he stood up from before his dead (where in likelyhood he had sitten a while on the earth, as was the manner of mourners to do, Job 2.12, 13. Esa. 47.1.) to take order for her buriall, as having good hopes of a glorious resurrection. Excellent for our purpose is that of St. Hierome, Lugeatur mortuus, sed ille quem Gehenna suscipit, quem Tartarus devorat, in cujus poenam aeternus ignis aestuat. Nos, quorum exitum Angelorum turba comitatur, quibus obviam Christus occurret, &c. gravemur magis, si diutiùs in tabernacul ist habitemus. Mourn for none, but such as are dead in their sins, killed with death, as those, Rev. 2.23. Vers. 3. And Abraham stood up from before his dead] So she is called eight severall times in this Chapter; Pareus in loc. to note that death makes not any such divorce between godly couples and friends, but that there remains still a blessed conjunction betwixt them, which is founded in the hope of a happy resurrection. Jobs children were still his, even after they were dead and buried. How else could it be said, that God gave Job twice as much of every thing as he had before, Iob. 4.10, 13. sith he had afterwards but
his first number of children, viz. Seven Sonnes, and three daughters? Vers. 4. That I may bury my dead out of my sight] She that had been the desire of his eyes, Ezek. 24.16. the sweet companion of his life, is by death so defaced, that he loathed to look on her. This we are to think on in our mourning for the dead; to bewail the common curse of mankinde, the defacing of Gods image by death through sin, &c. And yet to comfort our selves in this, that these vile bodies of ours, shall once be conformed to Christs glorious body (the standard) in incorruption, Phillip. 3. ult. agility, beauty, brightness, and other most blessed and unconceivable parts and properties. Vers. 6. Thou art a Prince of God amongst us] That is, excellent or prosperous, as Gen. 21.22. and it was their ingenuity and candor to acknowledge it. Gods people are Princes in all lands, Psal. 45. Kings they are in righteousness and peace: but somewhat obscure ones, as was Melchisedec, and therefore little set by, 1 Joh. 3.1, 2. Ʋnkent, unkist, as the Northern Proverb is. So was Christ the heir of all. But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; that's enough for us. In the mean space, the righteous is more excellent then his neighbour (let him dwell by whomsoever) and shall be more prosperous, if it may be for his good. Vers. 7. Abraham stood up and bowed himself, &c.] It is very comely in Christians to salute willingly; and in words and gestures to shew civill respect even to wicked men. Abrahams behaviour to these Hittites may shame the most Christians; yea the very Hittites themselves, D. Hall. may teach them good manners. Even the savage Cannibals (saith a grave Divine) may receive an answer of outward courtesie. If a very dog fawn upon us, we stroke him on the head, and clap him on the side. Much less is the common band of humanity untied by grace. If Elisha bad his man, or our Saviour his Disciples, salute no man by the way, that was for haste sake; they should not hinder themselves in their journey by over∣much courtesie. Our Saviour was sweet and sociable in his whole conversation, and the proud Pharisees upbraided him with it. He never refused to go to any mans table when invited, yea to Zacheus he invited himself: Not for the pleasure of the dishes, but for the benefit of so winning a conversation. Corn. Nepos in vita Attii. Courtesie allureth mens minds, as fair flowers do their eyes. Pomponius Atticus so carried himself at Athens, Harpocrat. in vo∣ce . ut communis infimis, par principibus vide∣retur. Alexander the Great, got the hearts of his Foot-souldiers,
by calling them , his fellow-footmen. Aristotle, the better to insinuate into his hearers, read not to them (as other Philosophers used to do) from a lofty seat or desk, but walking and talking with them familiarly, as with his friends, . Dig. in Apollo's porch, he made them great Philosophers. Vespasian was as highly esteemed by the people for his courtesie, as Coriolanus contemned and condemned of all for his rusticity. With one churlish breath Rehoboam lost ten tribes, whom he would, and might not recover with his blood. But whatsoever David did, pleased the people. What a deal of courtesie passed betwixt Boaz and his reapers? The Lord be with you, said he; The Lord bles thee, said they, Ruth 2.4. The Turks salutation at this day is, Salaum alek Peace be to thee; the reply is, Aleek salum, Peace be to thee also. Blounts voyage into the Levant The Romans had their  and their , answerable to our Good-morrow, and Good even. That finger next to the thumb they called Salutaris, Dio in vita Adriani Becman. de Ori∣gin. in verbo Di∣gitus. because they put that finger to their mouth (as at this day the Roman Dames do) when they saluted any. Charles the fifth is renowned for his courtesie: when he passed by John Frederick the Elector of Saxony, he ever put off his hat and bowed to him, though he were his prisoner, and had been taken by him in battle. Parei Hist. pro∣san. Medul. 90 And when he had in his power. Melancthon, Poeran and other Divines of the Reformed Religion, he courteously dismissed them. As hee's the best Christian that's most humble; Peachams Compl. Gentle. so is he the truest Gentleman, that's most courteous. Your haughty upstarts, the French call Gentle▪ villains. Vers. 8. If it be your minde that I should bury my dead] Alex∣ander the Great, lay unburied thirty dayes together. His conquests above ground purchased him no title for habitation under ground. So Pompey the Great, Nudus pascit aves, jacet en qui possidet orbem, Ciaudiau. Exiguae tellu is iops — Ʋt cui modò ad victoriam terra defuerat, desset ad sepulturam, saith Paterculus. So Wil. the Conquerors corps lay unburied for three dayes; Daniels Chron. fol. 50. his interment being hindered by one that claymed the ground to be his. Abraham therefore doth well to make sure of a place of Sepulture for him and his; and this at Hebrn, which signifieth society or conjunction▪ for thee lay those reverend couples, Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Leah, &c. These dyed upon the promised Land, and being there buried, kept possession, as it were, for their posterity; as those that are
dead in Christ do of heaven, Veieres sepul∣chrum mortuo∣rum domicilium credebant, & portum corporis appellabant. Turnb. . for the Saints that survive them. Sepulchrs are symbols of the communion of Saints, and of the Resurrection of the dead. Hence the Hebrews call Church∣yards Beth-chajim the ouse of the living. Job also calls the grave the Congregation house of all living, Job 30.23. As the Apostle, after him, calleth Heaven the Congregation-house of the first-born, Heb. 12.23. The Hebrews call it gulam hammàliachim, the world of Angels; and the Author to the Hebrews saith that the Saints are come by Christ to an inumerable company of Angels. Heb. 12. When godly mo dye they are said to be gathered to their people. They do no more then repatriasse, as Bernard hath it; they are not put out of service, but removed onely out of one room into another, out of the out houses into the Presence-chamber; D Pres. They change their place, but not their company, as that good Doctor said upon his death-bed: they are gathered by Christs hand, as Lillies, Cant. 6.2. and transplanted into the Paradise of God. And this, Plotinus the Philosopher had a notion of, . Synes. Epist. 139. . when breathing his last, he said; That in me, that is Divine. I resign up to the first Divine, that i to God. As for the body it is but the case, the cabinet, the suit, the slough, the sheath of the soul, as Daniel calleth it, Scaligeri quodrliquum est, was Julius Scaligers Epitaph. It returns to its originall dust. and is sown as seed in the ground till the Resur∣rection▪ 1 Cor. 15.35. Vers. 9. For a possession of a burying-place] It is remarkable, that the first purchase of possession mentioned in Scripture, was a place to bury in, not to build in. The Jews also had their Sepul∣chr hwn out long before their deaths, to minde them of their mortality. Joseph of Arimathea had his tomb in his garden, to season his delights with the meditation of his end. The Egypti∣ans had a deaths-head carried about the table at their feasts. The Emperors of Constantinople had a Mason came to them on their Coronation day with choice of Tomb-stones, and these Verses in his mouth, Elig ab his saxis ex quo (invictissime Caesar) Ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare velis. Our first parents (saith One) made them garments of Fig-leaves: D. Plays. But, God misliking that, gave them garments of Skins. So in the Gospell he cursed the Fig-tree, which did bear onely leaves to co∣ver our sin, but commended the Baptist who did wear Skins to discover our mortality.
Vers. 11. The field give I thee, &c.] A brave speech of a bountifull spirit, to a stranger especially; and in that respect beyond that of Araunah the noble Jebusite to David his liege Lord, All these things did Araunah as a King give to the King, 2 Sam. 24.23. Indeed, to give is a Kingly employment; making men like, to the Father of lights, from whom comes every good gift and perfect giving. Kings are stiled Benefactors; Jam. 1.17. . Diodo Sic. l. 1. . Epicur. and of the ancient Kings of Egypt, it is recorded, and was rehearsed amongst other of their prayses, that they were, , willing to distribute, ready to communicate, which are the Apostles two words, 1 Tim. 6.18. Gyrus took more delight in giving then possessing, as his Souldiers could say of him in Xenophon. It is not onely better, but sweeter to do good, then to receive good, said Epicurus. It is a more blessed thing, saith our Saviour. Titus would say, when he had done none good, he had lost a day, & molestis erat Severo Imperatori nihil peti, quam dare. Our Generall Norrice, like that Bishop of Lincoln, never thought he had that thing, which he did not give. Few such now adayes. Vers. 13. I will give thee money] Full money, as he had said, vers. 7. or as much money as it is worth. Such is the care of the conscientious, that they had rather lose of their own, then usurp of anothers. And that he gives a just price for the field, was an act of great wisdome; for hereby he provided that his posterity might not hereafter be put beside it. Vers. 16. In the audience of the sons of Heth] Whom he takes to witness, and so provideth for his security and quietness after∣wards; as did also Jeremy in the purchase of his Uncles field. Wisdome and circumspection is to be used in Contracts and Covenants. [Currant with the Merchant] It may well be said of Money-hoarders, they have no Quick-silver, no currant money. Vers. 19. And Abraham buried Sarah his wife] The last of∣fice of love to bring the deceased Saints honourably to their long home, to lay them in their last bed, Eccles. 12.5. Esa. 57.2. Iob. 14.14. to put them into the grave as into a haven and harbor, where they may rest from their labours, till their change shall come. This is to deal kindly with the dead, Ruth. 1.8. To shew mercy to them, 2 Sam. 2.5. especially when the mourners go about the streets, Eccles 12.5. when there is a great mourning made over them, as for Steven, Act. 8.2. and a great burning for them, as for Asa, 2 Chron. 16.14. Of whom also it
is further added, as an honour, that he was buried in his own. Se∣pulchre which he had digged for himself among the Kings of Israel in the City of David, and laid in the bed that was filled with sweet odours, &c. Of Joram, Joas, and Ahaz, it is expresly noted in the Chronicles, that they were buried in the City of David, but not in the Sepulchres of the Kings of Judah. A worse place was thought good enough for them, unless they had been better. As of Tiberius the Emperour it is storied, that he was so hated for his tyranny, Slae Gemonia. Quidam etiam Terram matrem orarent, &c. Pareus. Cornel Nepos in vita Dionis. Dionys. Lambin. in Annot. ad lo∣cum. that when he was dead▪ some of the people would have had him thrown into the River Tiber; some, hang'd up at such another place as Tiburn. Others also made prayer to mother Earth, to grant him, now dead, no place but among the wicked. Contrarily when Dio died, the people of Syracuse would have gladly redeemed his life with their own blood; which because they could not, they buried him very honourably in an eminent place of their City. Whereas anciently (as Lambinus well noteth) Kings and Princes, in Homer and other Poets, are not read to have been buried, but without the gates, somewhere in the fields and gardens; as the Patriarchs also were, looking for the return of that everlasting Spring. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 1. And Abraham was old] NOn tam canis & annis, Beurer. in vita Attici. quàm virtutibus & sapientiâ gravis, as One saith of Atticus. Abraham had a good gray head, as it is elsewhere said of him: Hence, so honored not onely at home, but of the Hittites, Chap. 23. Cognata sunt  (ut  & ) old-age and honor are neer a kin in the Greek tongue. And God bids, honor the face of the old man, Levit. 19.32. for the hoary-head is a crown, Psal. 111.9. Si prolixa facit sapientem barba, qud obsta Barbatus posset quin caper esse Plato? Baron. Annal. so that it be found in the way of righteousness. God is called the Ancient of dayes: and, because holy, therefore reverend is his name, as saith the Psalmist. But it is a poor praise to Nectarius, who succeeded Nazianzen in the Church of Antioch, that he was venerandâ canitie & vultu sacer∣dote digno, a comely old man, and of a Bishop-like visage, and that was all that could be said for him. Vers. 2. Put I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh] Either as a
token of subjection, or for the honor of circumcision, Quae erat in parte femoris. q. d. I adjure thee by the Lord of the Covenant, whereof Circumcision is a signe. Or (which is most likely) in re∣ference to Christ, who was to come of Abraham, according to that phrase, Gea. 46.26. The souls that came out of Jacobs thigh. Vers. 3. I will make thee swear by the Lord] Who alone is the proper object of an oath, Isaiah 65.16. Jere. 12.6. Howbeit, in lawful contracts with an Infidel or Idolater, we may admit of such oaths, whereby they swear by false gods; as those of old, that swore by God and Malcom; and the Turks great oath now∣adayes is, By the immortall God, Turk. Hist. fol. 345. and by the four hundred Pro∣phets, by Mahomet, by his Fathers soul, by his own children, and by the sword wherewith he is girt, &c. [That thou shalt not take a wife unto my son, &c.] Lest they should turn away his heart from following God, Deut. 7.3, 4. as those Outlandish wives did Solomon, Neh. 13.26. whom therefore God Almighty punished both in himself and his successor Rehoboam, his onely son (that we read of) by so many Wives and Concubines; and he was none of the wisest, nor happiest: 2 Cor 6.14. tam auspicata sunt conjugia contra Dei legem contracta, saith the Divine Chronologer. Be not unequally yoked therefore, with any untamed heifer that bears not Christs yoke. If Religion be any other then a cipher, how dare we not regard it in our most important choice? D. Hall. I wish Manoah could speak so loud (saith a Reverend Divine) that all our Israelites might hear him: Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all Gods people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistimes? What's the reason, the Pope will not dispense in Spain or Italy, if a Papist marry a Pro∣testant (yet here they will;) but in hope to draw more to them? For they well know what power wives many times get over their husbands, as Jesabel did over Ahab; the Hen was suffered to crow, and all went as she would have it. And therefore the Legats in the Councell of Trent, Hist. of Count. of Trent, fol. 680. were blamed for suffering the Article of Priests-marriage to be disputed, as dangerous; because it is plaine, that married Priests will turne their affections and love to wife and children; and by consequence to their house and Countrey. So that the strict dependence that the Clergy hath upon the Apostolick See, would cease: And to grant Marriage to Priests, would destroy the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy,
and make the Pope to be Bishop of Rome onely. Vers. 4. But thou shalt go unto my Countrey, &c.] Nhors stock were neither pure in Religion, nor precise in life, Josh. 24.2. Gen. 31.30. yet far better in both, then those cursed Canaanites. Some knowledge they retained of the true God, of whom they speak much in this Chapter, and concerning whom they hear Eleazer here relating, how he had answered his prayer, and pro∣spered his journey. And for their manners, we finde them hospitable, and their daughter, though fair, yet a pure Virgin. Now, Lis est, cum forma, magna pdicitiae. Like unto these are the Greek Church at this day, Breerewoods Enquiries, p. 139. B. Vshers Serm. at Wansteed. D. Field of the Church. Jac Reviue de vit. Pentif. p. 320. which is far greater then the Roman: And though in some points unsound, and in other very superstitious, yet holdeth sufficient for salvation. Cyrill their good Patriarch of Constantinople, set forth the Con∣fession of the faith of those Eastern Churches, Anno 1629. agree∣able in all things for most part, to the Reformed Protestant Re∣ligion, but diametrally opposite to that they call the Roman Ca∣tholick. He is also busie about a generall Reformation among them, and hath done much good. Vers. 5. Peradventure the woman, &c.] He swears cautelously, he doth not rashly rush upon his oath; he swears not in jest, but in judgement; so must we, Jer. 4.2. duely considering the conditions and circumstances, as the nature of an oath, the matter where∣about, the person by whom, and before whom, the time, the place, our calling, and warrant thereunto, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash; the best that can come of that, , as the Ro∣mans in Plu∣tarch said of Pmpey. is repentance, that fair and happy daughter of an ugly and odious mother. Swear not in heat and choller, as David did when he was going against Nabal; but soon after blessed Abigail for better counsell. Swear not in jest, lest ye go to hell in earnest, Jam. 5.12. Swear not petty oaths, those ci∣vilified complements, and interjections of common talk, Faith and Troth, &c. Thou must not swear by thy hairs, thou canst not make one of them white or black; much less by Faith and Troth, that is more worth then hairs. Remember that large rowl, ten yards long, and five yards broad, full of curses against the swearer, Zach. 5.2. And it res upon his house, where he thinks himself most secure. When we are called to take a lawfull oath, we must be reverently affected (as this good servant in the text) according to the excellency of the duty, and greatness of the person, whom
we attest and invocate. The ancient form of taking and imposing an oath was, Give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. Joh. 9.24. And he that took the oath was said, to confess to God, Esa. 45.23. with Rom. 14.11. Therefore also St. Paul in swearing, useth a word of attention, and saith, Behold I speak it before God. Gal. 1.20. Lewis the French King was taken prisoner by Meletisaka the Sultan; and conditions of peace being concluded between them, for more assurance thereof, the Sultan offered to swear, that if he failed in performance of any thing, to renounce his Mahomet; Turk. Hist. requiring likewise of the King to swear, if he failed in any thing that he had promised, to deny his Christ to be God: which profane oath the King detesting, and wishing rather to dye then to give the same, the Sultan wondring at his constancy, took his word without any oath at all, and so published the League. As o'tother side, King Iohn of England, being overlaid in his Barons Wars, when he sent Embassadors to the Monarch of Morocco for aid, Heyl. Geog. p. 714. offering to swear fealty unto him, and to receive the law of Mahomet, he grew into such dislike of our King, that ever after he abhorred the mention of him. Vers. 6. That thou bring not my son thither again] Where yet he had never been, but in his fathers loyns. He would not, his son should part with the promised Land for any out ward accom∣modations. Let us fear, . Heb. 4.1. lest a promise being left us of entring into Gods rest, any of us should seem to come short, to fall back. or be lft behinde. Take we all heed, lest for our lingering and hankering after the flesh-pots of Egypt, God carry us back again into Egypt, which was the last & greatest curse, threatned against the people of Israel, and is the greatest misery can come upon this Nation, Deut. 28.68. Vers. 7. He shall send his Angel] There are myriads of Angels, and all sent out for the solace and safe conduct of the Saints. Dan. 7. Heb. 1.14. Oh the dignity and safety of a childe of God! [Thou shalt take a wife] He argues from what God hath done for him, to what he will doe. Every former favour, is a pledge of a future. Thou hast, thou wilt, is a Scripture demonstration. See Psal. 86.1, 2, 3, 4 Six Thou-hasts, whereupon he infers and in∣forceth his, Turn us O God of our salvation, &c. Vers. 8. Onely bring not my son thither again] This second time he layes charge on his servant not to do it. Better no wife, then displease God, then violate conscience. He purchaseth his pleasure at too dear a rate, that payes his honesy to get it. He
hath lesse of the ballast, and more of the sayl, makes more haste then good speed, that thus speeds himself. Vers. 9. And the servant put his hand, &c] That, and the lifting up of the hand to heaven, Gen. 14.22. was the ceremony of old, as now it is, laying the hand upon the book. Let it be what it will, if not wicked, we need not struple it. Henry the Third of England un∣dertaking the croysade, in taking his oath laid his right hand on his breast (according to the manner of a Priest, Daniels Chron. saith the History;) and after on the book, and kissed it as a Lay-man. The Moors, when they swear to be faithfull to any, Turk. Hist. fol. 747. they put their sword to their own throats. At the siege of Norwich by Ket and his complices in Edward the sixths time, the Earle of Warwick Generall for the King, Life of Edw. 6. by Sir Jo. Hey∣wood, p. 75. drew his sword, and caused others to do the like; and (ac∣cording to a Souldery custome in cases of extremity) by enter∣change of a kiss by every of them upon the swords of others, they bound themselves, as by an oath, to maintain the place. Vers. 10. Took ten Camels] Creatures that are famous for their swiftness, strength, hardiness; for they will travell, they say, three dayes together, without water; which, in those hot Coun∣tries, is in many places hard to come by. Sir Francis Drake in his Travels tells us of certain Sheep in America as big as a Cow, World encomp. p. 55. and supplying the room of Horses for burden or travell. The Mule, they say, must have the bag hang by his mouth; so must some, the pipe or the pot at their elbows. Vers. 11. And he made his Camels kneel down] Or, rest them∣selves, Prov. 12.10. Rom. 8.22. as the Greek interprets it. A good man is mercifull to his beast; but the poor creature groaneth and travelleth in pain under our abuses. Vers. 12. And he said, O Lord God] Begin we all our enter∣prizes with prayer. God may give good success without, but it will be nothing so sweet: See therefore that. Hoc primum repetas opu, Hor. Ep. 6. hoc postremus omittas. Vers. 13. And the daughters, &c.] So did Rachel, and those in Deborahs Song, that rehearsed the Acts of the Lord at the places of drawing water, Judg 5.11. and Jethro's daughters, though he were Prince of Midian: Oh the simplicity and plain∣ness of those times! They that plead Rebecca's ornaments for their garish attire, would be loath to take her office, be at the pains that she was. Vers. 14. Drink, and I will give thy Camels, &c.] This argued a
good nature, a kinde courteous disposition; which therefore it may be he singled out, as a token of a meet wife, as a thing espe∣cially to be looked at in a wife. Good dispositions sanctified, be∣come more usefull, because more amiable; and so more graceful to the Gospel, and powerful with others. As if not yet sanctified, yet there is more hopes they may be. For where a good nature is, the Soul is a plain smooth board, whereon a Painter may more easily draw a Picture: and a harsh crabbed nature, is as a board full of knots, and rugged, whereon the Artificer cannot so well shew his workmanship. ee Mr. Valent Fast. Serm. And though the power of God will shew it self, wheresoever he intends to make a vessel of Mercy, yet it is with more ado; and will cost a man the more sorrow, and him that hath the working of it, the more pains. Vers. 15. Before he had done speaking] So quick is God, many times, in the answer of prayers, Isai. 65.24. Dan. 9.23. The Angel had even tired himself with flight, to tell Daniel, that his prayers were heard. David did but say, I will confess my trans∣gressions unto the Lord; and before he could do it, God forgave the iniquity of his sin, Psal. 32.5. [Rebeccah came out] She took her name, saith One, as it may seem, Itinera. Script. pag. 97. from the expectation of eternal life. For Rebecca denoteth a woman, which expecteth a free de∣livery from all calamity, and an inheritance of eternal life. There∣fore, she is a notable type of the Church, which is the Spouse of Christ shadowed in Isaac. Vers. 16. And the damosel was very fair] , Aelian. var. hist. l. 12. c. 1. Fair and wise, as it was said of Aspasia Milesia. Here beauty was not ill bestowed, as a Gold-Ring in a Swines Snout, but (as the History reports of the Lady Jane Gray) adorned with all variety of moral Vertues, as a clear Skie with Stars, Life of Edw. 6. p. 176. . Bucholcer. as a princely Dia∣dem with Jewels. Beauty is of it self very attractive, as the Poet hath it. For which cause, Heraclonas the young Emperor of Con∣stantinople, being sent into banishment, together with Martina his mother, had his nose cut off, lest his beauty should move the people to pity. And Angli tanquàm Angeli, ab quod ab  vecra∣tio. Sic aus quasi  or∣natus. said Gregory the Great, of the English boyes presented to him. How much more when accompanyed and accomplished with Chastity, as in this Damosel? [A Virgin, neither had any man known her] This latter clause is added, because many pass for Virgins that are not so; if that of the Poet be true, especially Quae, quia non licuit, non facit, illa facit;
and that of the Orator, . in decla∣nt. Incesta est, & sine stupro, quae stuprum eupit. The Romans cashiered a Vestal Virgin for uttering this Verse, Foelices nuptae! moriar, nisi nubere dulce est. The Strumpet when she eats ftoln bread, hath such dexterity in wiping her lips, that not the least crum shall be seem to her shame. So that Solo∣mon shews it to be as hard to finde it out, Prov. 30.18, 19, 20. As the way of an Eagle in the ayr, the way of a Serpent upon a Rock, the way of a Ship in the Sea, and the way of a man with a maid, that is a close and chaste Virgin; Muffet. in lo∣cum. one that should be haste at least, as being kept close from the access of strangers. [Filled her pitcher, and came up.] Here was no tarrying, gazing, gosipping. Not slothful in busi∣ness, Rom. 12.11. She had not been delicately or wantonly bred, but inured to hard labor, Thucyd. lib. 2. and she followed it close. Thucydides scribit Lacedaemoniis . Vers. 20. And ran again to the Well] In the City of Haran, at this day, (saith One) there is to be seen a Well of very clear water, where Rebecca gave drink to Eleazer, and his Camels; there likewise, Rachel Labans daughter, first spake to Jacob, &c. It is called by the Townsmen Abrahams Well. This water hath a very pleasant taste, Itinerar. Script. p. 83. and is a notable type of holy Baptism. For as the Patriarchs took their Wives by this Well; so Christ receiveth his Spouse the Church, by that Sacrament; which is, Beersheba, the Well of an Oath, where we pass into the Covenant, and are be∣trothed unto Christ in faithfulness, Hos. 2.20. the Thistle to the Cedar, 2 King. 19.4. Vers. 22. The man took a golden Ear-ring] Abiliment or Jewel, Ʋt imponeret naso ejus, saith Junius, to hang upon her nose, or forehead, as vers. 47. Each Countrey hath their fashions, and garnishes. In very many places of America, they have their lower lips bored through; as likewise, the upper parts of their ears, and something put into them. Archb. Abbots Geog. 278. Which, as it seems to themselves to be a point of beauty; so it makes them appear to others, to be won∣drous ugly. Vers. 25. She said moreover unto him, &c.] It is well observed by an Interpreter, Aisworth. that in the Narration of this story (which yet seemeth to be of light and trivial matters) the Spirit of God is very exact and large; whereas other things wherein great Myste∣ries are infolded (as the History of Melchisedech, &c.) are set down in few words. That men might consider Gods Wisdom,
and Providence in things of least esteem amongst men. I adde, that all may see what delight he takes in the meanest actions and speeches of his dearest children; when the great acts and exploits of Nimrod, Ninus, and other Grandees of the world are not once mentioned, but lye shrouded in the sheet of oblivion or shame. Vers. 26. And the man bowed down his head] See how he rellisheth of his masters house, and sheweth a gracious heart, ready to offer up a sacrifice of praise, whereever God shall please to set it up an Altar. The same word in Greek signifieth, . Grace and Thanks; to shew, that as any man hath more grace, he is more grateful to God and man. It is observable also, that our Saviour sets these two together, the unthankful, and the evil, Luke 6.35. He is kinde to the unthankful, and the evil. Vers. 30. These make earth their throne, Hea∣ven their foot∣stool. August. When he saw the ear-ring and bracelts] These were the bones that Laban looked after; these drew the churl forth, and made him so courteous. Worldlings in serving God, serve themselves of God; they follow him for loaves, more then for love. Vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum. Hypocrites would use Christ as a bridg to get to Heaven by; which if they could com∣pass, let Christ fink or swim for them, they would not much care: Their love is meretricious, their obedience mercenary; they work onely for wages. Fac me pontificem & ero Christianus, Ezra 2.62. said one Pammachius a Heathen, to the Pope. Those degenerate Priests would fain have had Prists places, when something was to be got, but might not. Vers. 33. I will not eat, till I have told mine errand.] He pre∣ferred his work before his food. So did our Saviour at the Well of Samaria, John 4. And another time, when he thought to have slaked his hunger at the barren fig-tree, and found nothing but leaves, he went on to Jerusalem; and forgetting his hunger, as he had before forgot his break-fust, he turned not into a victualing-house, but went to the Temple, and taught the people; and con∣futed the Elders all that day long, till the evening. Matth. 21.18, &c. with Mark 11.13, &c. Job 23.12. Job esteemed Gods word more then his necessary food; not onely more then his dainties or supersuities. Vers. 35. And the Lord hath blessed my master] Ministers, Christs Paranymphs, must likewise wo for Christ, by setting forth his great wealth; and not speak one word for Christ, and two for themselves, as those did, Phil. 1.15. John Baptist was no such
spokesman, Joh. 3.29. It is the speciall office of the Ministery, to lay Christ open, to hold up the Tapistry, and let men see him as he is set forth, Heb. 1.2, 3. that they may be sick of love; for other∣wise, Christ is like to have but a cold suit of it. Vers. 39. Peradventure the woman will not] Here he leaveth out, in his discretion, Abrahams charge, vers. 6. For that would but have offended and irritated. Part of the truth may be con∣cealed sometimes, as Jer. 38.27. Quid, quod, ubi, per quos, quoties, cur, quomodo, quando, Quilibet haec animo reputet, medicamina dando. Vers. 44. The woman, whom the Lord hath appointed] God is the Match-maker, and Marriages are made in Heaven, as very Heathens have yeelded. The Governour of Eski-chisar hearing Othomans relation of a fair Lady, with whom he was in love, seemed greatly to like of his choice; Turk. Hist. fol. 136. saying, that she was by the Divine Providence (for so the Turks religiously use to speak) ap∣pointed onely for him to have. Vers. 47. And I put the ear ring upon her face] So did Christ put upon his Spouse his own comeliness, which was as a jewell on her forehead, an ear-ring in her ear, and a beautifull Crown upon her head, Ezek. 16.12, 14. whence she is called Callah, of the perfection of her beauty and bravery, Vxor splender radiis mariti. A maxime in the Civill Law Jer. 2.32. And Hephzibah, Isa. 62.4. of his delight in her; since he hath purified her, as Esther, sanctified her, Ephes. 5.26. and so beautified her, that now he rejoyceth over her as a bridegroom doth over his bride, Esa. 62.5. Yea he resteth in his love, and will seek no further; he joyeth over her with singing, as wel-apaid of his choyce, Zeph. 3.17. Vers. 53. And gave them to Rebeccah, he gave also] Note that the custome was then, Heyl. Geog. to give gifts to the bride and her friends. Now it is otherwise. Yet in Hungary their women have no por∣tion (they say) but a new coat at their wedding. Mor is est apud Thraces (saith Solinus) ut nupturae non parentum arbitratu transe∣ant ad maritos; sed quae prae caeteris specie valent, subhastari volunt; Solin. cap. 14. & licntiâ taxationis admissâ, non moribus nubunt, sed praemiis. Vers. 54. And they did eat and drink] It is lawfull to be ho∣nestly merry, after business dispatcht. Vers. 55. Let the Damosell abide with us] Men promise in haste, perform by leisure. Vers. 56. Hinder me not] Say we so to Satan solliciting
us to stay a while in our old courses and companies. Vers. 57. And enquire at her mouth] Eve was not dragg'd, but brought by God to her husband. There must be a mutual con∣sent, or it is not of God. Vers. 59. And her nurse] Deborah, who was a great stay to Jacobs family, and her loss much lamented, Gen. 35.8. Vers. 60. Be thou the mother of thousands] Votum nuptiale, Hebraeis solenne. We wish them joy, we assure them sorrow, and that in the flesh, where they look for most felicity. Vers. 61. They rode upon the Camels] A tiresome and tedious journey it was, but for a good husband. Suffer we with, and for Christ, that we may be glorified together, when the marriage shall be consummated. Heaven will pay for all. What though thou ride on a trotting Camell; it is to be married. He that rides to becrowned, will not think much of a rainy day. Vers. 63. To meditate in the field] Or to pray; there he had his Oratory, there he used to pray secretly (but now more earnest∣ly, upon so important an occasion) with deep meditation or soli∣loquy. Domitiau, about the beginning of his Empire, Sueton. usually sequestred himself from company an hour every day; but did no∣thing the while, but catch flyes, and kill them with a pen-knife: Gods people can better employ their solitariness, and do never want company, as having God and themselves to talk with. And these secret meals are those that make the soul fat. It was a witty and divine speech of Bernard, that Christ, the souls Spouse, is bashfull; neither willingly commeth to his Bride, in the presence of a multitude. Vers. 65. She lighted off the Camell] To meet him with the more reverence and submission; for which cause also, she veyled her self. Here that of the Poet hold not, Fastus inest pulchris, sequiturque superbia formam. Ovid. Vers. 66. And the servant told Isaac] Ministers also must give account of their Stewardship. Happy he, that can present his people as a chaste Virgin to Christ, with Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2. that can say with the Prophet, Here am I, and the children that thou hast given me: And with that Arch-Prophet, I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do, Joh. 17.4. Reverend Mr. Stork was wont to protest, Abrab. deceas by M. Gatk. that it was more comfort to him, to win one of his own charge, then twenty others.
Vers. 67. Isaac brought her into his mothers tent] There to rest till the marriage-rites were performed; till he had got her good-will, till their affections were knit, and in some sort settled; till they had plighted their mutuall troth, sought God for a bles∣sing, and performed such solemnities as the time required. Youth rides in post to be married: but in the end, findes the Inne of re∣pentance to be lodged in. [And took Rebeccah] Not as Shechem took Dinah, or Amnon Tamar, to desloure her; but as Boaz took Ruth, and David Abigail, to make her his wife by lawfull wedlock. [And he loved her] Not onely as his Country-woman, or his kinswoman, or a good woman, &c. but, as his woman with a conjugall love. And he had reason: For 1. She was his wife, the proper object of his love. 2. A wife of Gods providing, a mate meet for him, none in all the world so meet. 3. She was love-worthy, because fair, courteous, vertuous: And as meat pleaseth us better in a clean dish, so doth vertue in comely persons, saith Hugo. 4. She forgat her fathers house, and forsook all her friends for him, &c. [And Isaac was comforted] If God takes away one comfort, he will give another. Chear up therefore. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. Then again Abraham, &c.] AFfter Sarahs death, though Calvin thinks otherwise. His body dry and dead forty years before, is now, by Gods bles∣sing, made lively and lusty. Vers. 5. Abraham gave all, &c.] So Esa. 19.25. Assyria is the work of Gods hand, and Israel his inheritance. Vers. 6. . Sopb. Gasp. Es. Panis mica quam dives pater-fa∣milias projicit canibu. Abraham gave gifts] So doth God to reprobates, but they are giftless gifts, better be without them. Saepe Deus dat iratus quod egat propitius. God gives wealth to the wicked, non aliter ac siquis crumenam auro plenam latrinae injiciat. The Turkish Empire (saith Luther) as great as it is, is but a crust cast to the dogs by the rich House-holder, or as Josephs cup, &c. [East-ward to the East-countrey] To both the Arabia's, which were Countries rough, but rich; looked rudely, but searched regularly, afforded great store of fine gold, pretious stones, and pleasant odours.
Vers. 8. Gave up the Ghost] Defecit, lenitèr expiravit. De∣scribit Moses placidam & optatam quasi , which in Abra∣ham Gods friend, is no wonder. But how could that Apostate Julian say, trow, Vitam reposcenti naturae, tanquam debitor bonae fidei, rediturus, exulto? Sure it was but a copy of his countenance, but not of his dying countenance; for no wicked man alive, can look death in the face, with blood in his cheeks. [Dyed in a good old age] Or with a hoar head, after a hundred years troublesome∣pilgrimage, in the promised land. We, if for one year, we suffer hardship, think it a great business. Non quia dura, sed quia molles patimur, saith Seneca. [An old man, and full of years] The godly have oft a satiety of life: as willing they are to leave the world, as men are wont to be, to rise from the board, when they have eaten their fill, Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis? Said the Heathen Poet: and they feign that when Tithonus might have been made immortal, he would not, because of the miseries of life. This made Plotinus the Platonist account mortality a mercy, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 10. Siquis Deus mihi largiatur ut ex hac aetate repurascam, & in cunis vagi∣am, valdèrecu∣sem. Cato ap. Cic. de senect. Camd. Elisa∣beth, fol. 325. and Cato protest, that if any God would grant him, of old to be made young again, he would seriously refuse it. As for me, said Queen Elisabeth (in a certain speech) I see no such great cause why I should be fond to live, or afraid to dye. And again, whiles I call to minde things past, behold things present, and expect things to come, I hold him happiest, that goeth hence soonest. Vers. 9. And his sons Isaac and Ismael, &c.] It is like, that Abraham, a little afore his death, sent for his two sons, and re∣conciled them. This joyning with Isaac in the burying of Abra∣ham, some take for an argument of his repenance; whereunto also they adde, that his whole life time is recorded in holy Scripture (which cannot be shewed of any reprobate) and that he is said, when he dyed, to be gathered to his fathers. [Which is besides Mamre] Where, seventy six years before, he had entertained the Lord Christ, and heard from his mouth, the promise of the Messiah. Wherefore, in remembrance of that most amiable apparition, and for love and honour of the divine promise there uttered, he would there be buried, in full hope of a glorious Resurrection; and that his posterity might take notice that he even dyed upon the promise. As that brave Roman Captain told his Souldiers, Xiphilinus. that if they could not conquer Britain, yet they would get possession of it by laying their bones in it.
Vers. 13. These are the names of the sons of Ishmael] When Isaac was twenty yeers married, and had no childe; and after∣wards, nothing so many as Ishmael, nor so great in the world. This is Gods usual way of dealing forth his favours: Saints suffer, wieked prosper. This made Pompey deny Divine Providence, Brutus cry out, . Dio Cassius. . Thu∣cyd. Psal. 73.10. expounded. Exoriuntur, sed exuruntur, Hos. 14. : O miserable Vertue, slave of Fortune, &c. The Athenians, in Thucydides, when they had lost Nicias their good General, (who, together with his whole Ar∣my perished in Sicily) were at a great stand, and much offended; seeing so pious a person fare nothing better then those that were far worse. And what wonder, when Jeremiah and David stum∣bled at the same stone, ran upon the same rock, and were well-high shipwrackt? Jer. 12.1. Psal 73.3, 4. Neither they onely, but many other of Gods dear servants, as it is in the same I salm, vers. 10. Therefore his people return hither; that is, are every whit as wise (or rather, as foolish) as I have been, to mis-censure and mis∣construe Gods dealings on this manner; to repent me of my re∣pentance, and to condemn the generation of the just, because wa∣ters of a full cup are wrung out to the wicked. When David went into Gods Sanctuary, and there consulted his Word, he was bet∣ter resolved: Then he saw, that the sunshine of Prosperity doth but ripen the sin of the wicked, and so fits them for destruction: as fatted ware are but fitted for the slaughter. What good is there in having a fine suit with the plague in it? Poison in wine works more furiously, then in water. Had Haman known the danger of Esthers banquet, he would not have been so brag of it. The prosperity of the wicked hath ever plus deceptionis, quam de∣lectionis, saith One; more deceit then delight; able to entice, and ready to kill the entangled: As cunning to do that, as the spirit that seduced Ahab; and as willing to do the other, as the Ghost that met Brutus at the battel of Philippi. In which respect, Da∣vid, Psal. 17. having spoken of these men of Gods hand, that have their portion in this life, &c. wishes them, make them merry with it, and subjoyns, As for me, I will behold thy face in righte∣ousess; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness: As who should say, I neither envie, nor covet their happiness, but long after a glorious resurrection; and have, in the mean while, that which is sufficient to sustain me, I shall behold thy face in righte∣ousess, Menach. on Levit. 10. that is, Beshechinah, in Christ, as Rabbi Menachem ex∣pounds it. And one good look of God, is worth all the world.
It is better to feel his favour one hour, then to sit whole ages, as these Ishmaelites did, under the worlds warmest sun-shine. Vers. 14. And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massah] Out of these three names, (which signifie Hearing, Silence, and Suffering) the Masorites gather the three principal duties of man, in com∣mon conversation; viz. to hear, keep silence, and bear: these (say they) make a quiet and good life. Sustine & Abstine, . Epictt. Camd. Elisab. Psal. 120.6. is the Philosophers counsel: Video, Taceo, I see, and say nothing, was Queen Elizabeths Motto: and, I am for peace, was Davids; (or, as the Hebrew hath it, I am peace) He heard the slander of many, fear was on every side, Psal. 31.13. but he as a deaf man heard not, and as a dumb man, so he opened not his mouth, Psal. 38.13. Facile est in me dicere, cum non sim responsurus, said One once, to another that revil'd at him: Thou shalt fight without an ad∣versary; for I will hear and bear, and say nothing. The best an∣swer to words of scorn and petulancy, (saith learned Hooker) is Isaac's apologie to his brother Ishmael, patience and silence, no apo∣logie. . A man would not be bound to such a slavery, as to answer every calumny. Qui nescit ferre ca∣lumnias, convitia, injurias, nescit vivere, saith Chytraeus. He that cannot patiently bear reproaches and injuries, may make up his pack, and get him out of the world; for here's no being for him. Vitus Theodorus sent to advise with Melancthon, what he should do when Osiander preacht against him: Melch. Adam. Melancthon per Deum obtestatur, ut taceret, & se it a gereret quasi non audiret: Melanct∣hon besought him, for Gods sake, to say nothing in that case, but to carry himself so, as if he heard not. Vitus writes back, that this was very hard; yet he would obey. It is hard to swallow down Physical Pills: but better swallow them whole, then chaw them between the teeth. Vers. 15. Naphish and Kedamah] Twelve in all, Princes of their Tribes, as was promised, Gen. 17.20. See, saith One here, B. Babington. what God can do for a poor boy, sent out with a bottle of water on his back. God seteth the solitary in families, Psal: 68.6. he raiseth the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the begger from the dung▪hill, to set them among Princes, &c. 1 Sam 2.8. Vers. 16. These are their names by their towns] which they called after their own names, as Cain did that first built City Fnoch, af∣ter his sons name; that he might be stiled Lord Enoch of Enoch. So, the many Alexandria's, Caesarea's, Augusta's, &c. See Psal. 49.11.
Vers. 17. And he gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered] Sc. to the Congregation-house of all living, (as the grave is called, Job 30.23.) and (for ought we know) to the Congregation∣house of the first-born, . (as heaven is called, Heb. 12.23.) Abra∣ham prayed, that Ishmael might live in Gods sight: Ishmael joyn∣ed with his brother Isaac in burying their father Abraham, vers. 9. of this Chapter. Here he hath his whole life-time recorded; (the like whereof cannot be shewed of any reprobate:) and at his death, he is said gently to give up the ghost▪ or yeeld up the spirit, (as Abraham also did, vers. 8.) and to be gathered to his people, as he. These are probable arguments, that (however he lived) yet he died in the faith of his father Abraham. He runs far, we say, that never turns. Nunquam serò si seri. Vers. 18. And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur] A large tract and territory; but nothing so large as his posterity the Sara∣cens, (called more rightly Hagarens, Psal. 83.6.) proved to be; whose Name and Empire notwithstanding is now swallowed up in the greatness of the Turkish Empire; Turk. hist. which laboureth with no∣thing more, then with the weightiness of it self. And he died] Or, dwelt, as some read it. Compare Chap. 16, 12. Vers. 19. And these are the generations] That is, the affairs and occurrences. Vers. 20. And Isaac was fourty yeers old] He was not over∣hasty to marry in the heat of his youth: but by hard labour, ar∣dent prayers, and pious meditations, kept under his body, and brought it into subjection, as Saint Paul likewise did, 1 Cor. 9.27. We are not debters to the flesh, Rom. 8.12. we owe it nothing but stripes, nothing but the blue eye, that the Apostle gave it. Vers. 21. And Isaac intreated the Lord for his wife] He did it constantly and instantly, (as the word signifies) he multiplied prayer, which (as those arrows of deliverance, 2 Kings 13.19.) must be often iterated, ere the mercy can be obtained. And the Lord was intreated of him] though it were long first, even full twenty yeers. God knows how to commend his mercies to us, and therefore holds us long in suspence. Citò data, vilescunt. Manna, lightly come by, was as lightly set by. Vers. 22. Jitbrotsatsu. And the children struggled together] Heb. They ran at tilt, (as it were) and justled one against another, even to brui∣sing and hurting. Esau (that he might lose no time) be∣gan
to set against Jacob, before he was born. If it be sò, why am I thus?] A passionate abrupt speech: q. d. Better no children, then so troubled with them. See Chap. 27.46. compare Chap. 3.16. I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception. This she should have born more patiently: but she presently bethought her of the best course; for she went to enquire of the Lord: she got into a corner, and prayed, and was answer∣ed. She prayed down her passions, (as a man sleeps out his drun∣kenness) and sets to work lustily, and so got the ensuing oracle. Vers. 2. And the Lord said unto her] Either by an Angel, or a Prophet, or some divine answer in her own heart. Two nations are in thy womb] So, what can a man see in the Shu∣lamite, (in every sanctified soul) but as it were the company of two armies? Cant. 6.13.) Every good man is a divided man: every new man, two men. Vers. 24. And when her days to be delivered] Which fell out fifteen yeers before Abrahams death, to his great comfort, no doubt. God doth for his, his best at last. There were twins in her womb] See Cant. 4.2. with Isai. 66.8. Vers. 25. And the first came ont red] Red and rough, cruel and crafty, as that red old dragon, Rev. 12.3. who inhabited in him, and both acted and agitated him. Eph. 2.2. ab ascensore su daemone perurgebatur, saith Bernard. And so are those Romish Edomites, Esauites, Jesuites, &c. And they called his name Esau] Factus & perfectus pilis, a bearded man, one that had every thing more like a man then a babe; a manly childe. Vers. 26. And after that, came his brother out] God could have brought Jacob out first, (for it is he that takes us out of the womb, Psal. 22.9.) but he suffereth Esau for a time to enjoy the first birth-right, till his own time came to set things to rights. God waits to be gracious; for he is a God of judgement, Isai. 30.18. And his hand took hold on Jacobs heel] As if he would have turned up his heels, and got to the goal before him. And his name was called Jacob] Calcanearius, an heel-catcher, or supplanter, as he afterwards proved to Esau, who hit him also in teeth with it, Gen. 27. Conveniunt rebus nomina saepè suis. And Isaac was threescore yeers old] He lived twice threescore
yeers after this, being an hundred and eighty, when he died, Gen. 35.28. five yeers longer he lived, then his father Abraham, Gen. 27.5. being bison for the last fourty, Gen. 27. Vers. 27. And the boys grew] Nature, Art, Grace, all proceed from less perfect to more perfect. Grow in grace, saith Peter: grow unto a perfect man, saith Paul, even unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, saith Paul. Eph. 4.13. And Esau was a cunning hunter] Like Nimrod and Ishmael, whom he chose to imitate, rather then Abraham, and those holy Patriarchs that had lived before him, A plain man] Sept. , without welt or gard, guile or gall. Gregory hereby notes the diverse dispositions of worldly and godly men. Vers. 28. And Isaac loved Esau, &c.] Here (as likewise in Manoah's wife) more grace appears in the woman, then in the man; whose blinde and misplaced love, for carnal ends, commends and illustrates the divine adoption. Vers. 29. And Jacob sod pottage] Pottage of lentiles, which was a kinde of pulse much like to Vetches or small Pease: so fru∣gal and sparing was the diet of those precious Patriarchs, to the shame of our Luxury. Seneca. . Quicquid avium volitat, quicquid piscium natat, quicquid ferarum discurrit, nostris sepelitur ventribus. We devour the wealth of earth, air, and sea. Esau came from the field, and he was faint] Labor est etiam ipsa voluptas. Of carnal pleasures, a man may break his neck sooner then his fast. Nor is it want of variety in them, but inward weak∣ness, or the curse of unsatisfyingness, that lies upon them. The creature is now as the husk without the grain, the shell without the kernel, full of nothing but emptiness; and so may faint us, but not fill us. Vers. 30. Feed me, I pray thee, with that red, red] He doubleth it, Geminatio indi∣cat vehementiam appetitus. Pa∣reus. (and could not, for haste and hunger, tell what to call it) to shew his greediness. And saith, Feed me, or let me swallow at once; as Camels are fed by casting gobbets into their mouth. He thought he should never have enough. Our proverb is, As hungry as a hunter: but this hunter hath no ho with him, and is therefore branded for a profane sensualist, Edom. The word used for a glut∣ton, Jer. 15.19. Deut. 21.20, is used for a vile person, or a losel, Jer. 15.19. Vers. 31. Sell me this day thy birth-right] Which he knew, by the instruction of his mother, to be his by Gods appointment; and
therefore takes this opportunity to get it. A well-chosen season, is the greatest advantage of any action. Vers. 32. What profit shall this birth-right, &c.] Pluris faci pulticulam bonam, quam titulum inanem. Sensualists look onely at the present pleasure, and sell their souls for it. Earthly things are present and pleasant; therefore we so cleave to them; striving (like the toad) who shall fall asleep with most earth in his paws. Vers. 33. Swear to me] With fickle men, make all firm and fast. Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? Horat. And he sold his birth right to Jacob] And with it heaven also, as the Jerusalemy Paraphrast addeth, whereof the birth-right was a type and pledge. So his sin was in unthankfulness for such a dignity; in limiting it to this life; in selling it so light cheap: but especially, in his profane parting with a spiritual blessing, for a tem∣poral. Such a foolish bargain makes every impenitent person, in the sale of his soul for a thing of nought: which Christ (who onely went to the price of a soul) saith, is more worth then a world. Let there be no fornicator, (as every worlding is, Jam. 4.4.) or profane person amongst us, as Esau, Heb. 12.16. And that there may not, let not men take pleasure in pleasure, spend too much time in it, shoot their affections over-far into it. It is no wisdom, to go as far as we may. It was not simply a sin in Esau to go a hunting: but yet the more he used it, the more profane he grew by it, and came at length to contemn his birth-right. Adrian the Emperour was a great hunter, brake his leg in hunting; called a city that he built in Mysia, by the name of Adrians huntings: Dio in vita. Adeò venandi rabie percus ut 7 continuis anis, nec urbis, nec ruris tecto fit u us. but how little care he took for his poor soul, that Animula vagula blandula of his, abundantly testifieth. The maddest hunter that ever I read of, was Mithridates; who was so set upon it, that he came not into any house, either of city or country, for seven yeers together, To lawful delights and recreations, God allows men to stoop, for their bodies sake; as the eagle to the prey▪ or as Gide∣ons souldiers, to soop their handful, not to swill their belly-full. An honest mans heart is where his calling is: such a one, when he is elsewhere, is like a fish in the air, whereunto if it leap for recre∣ation or necessity, yet it soon returns to his own clement. Vers 23. He did eat and drink▪ and rose up, &c.] Hac congerie, Piscator. impoenitentia Esaui describitur. Away he went, without shewing the least remorse or regret, for what he had done. Lysimachus
soon repented him for parting with his Crown, O dii, quam bre∣vis voluptatis gratia ex rege me feci servum! for a draught of cold water, in his extreme thirst. Wine is a prohibited ware a∣mong Turks; which makes some drink with scruple, others with danger. The baser sort, when taken drunk, are often bastinadoed on the bare feet. And I have seen some (saith mine Author) after a fit of drunkenness, Blounts voy∣age, pag. 105. lie a whole night, crying and praying to Ma∣homet for intercession, that I could not sleep neer them: so strong is conscience, even where the foundation is but imaginary; to the shame of many profligate professors, cauterized Christians. XXVI. Vers. 1. Besides the first famine.] NEw sins bring new plagues. Flagitium & flagellum, ut acus & filum. Where iniquity breaks fast, calamity will be sure to dine, to sup where it dines, and to lodge where it sups. If the Ca∣nanites had amended by the former famine, this later had been prevented; for God afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men, Lam. 3.35. Polybius wonders, why Man should be held the wisest of creatures, when to him he seemeth the foolish∣est. For other things, saith he, where they have smarted once, will beware for the future. The Fox will not rashly return to the snare; the Wolf to the pitfal, the dog to the cudgel, &c. Solus homo, ab avo ad aevum peccut ferè in iisdem, & in iisdem plectitur. Onely Man is neither weary of sinning, nor wary of smarting for it. And Isaac went to Abimelech] As Abraham had done before to Pharaoh, Gen. 12.10. The trials of Gods servants, in several ages, are much alike: we suffer the same things that our betters have done afore us: which both Paul and Peter press as a lenitive to our miseries, and a motive to patience, 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Pet. 5.9. The same fable is acted over again in the world, as of old; the persons onely changed. That which hath been, is now; and that which is to be, hath already been: and there is no new thing under the sun, Eccles. 13 5. and 1.9, 10. saith Solomon. Vers. 2. And the Lord appeared unto him] God knows our souls, and our souls him, best, in adversity. See Zech. 13.9. This famine was to the Canaanites in the nature of a curse, to Isaac, of a cure. Hinc distinctio illa poen in conferentem & nocentem, sive
in suffocantem & promoventem; item in poenam vindictae & poenam cautelae, sive in condemnant em & corrigentem. Vers. 3. Sojourn in this land] Though it lay under the com∣mon lash; that he might see Gods power in providing for him, amidst greatest straights and difficulties. Alex. Ales. p. 3. q. 5. m. 1. Poena duplicem habet or∣dinationem: unam ad culpam quae praecedit, alteram, ad gloriam Dei quam praecedit. Vers. 5. Because that Abraham] His obedience was universal to all the wills of God; and is here alleadged, not as the meritori∣ous cause, but as an antecedent, of the blessing. Our good works do truely please God in Christ, and move him, after a sort, Rolloc. de Vo∣catione, p. 25. to do us good; yet not as merits, but as certain effects of Christs merits alone, and such as testifie of his merit. Vers. 7. She is my sister] How apt are children to imitate their fathers infirmities! 1 Pet. 1.18. which yet is no excuse, . Ezek. 18, 14. but an aggravation, Dan. 5.22, 23. The Orator therefore was far wide, that said, Me ex ea opinione, Tull. de natur. Deor. quam a Majoribus acce∣pi, de cultu deorum immortalium, nullius unquam oratio aut docti aut indocti movebit. Isaac's fault here, was greater then Abra∣hams, because he was not warned by domestical examples. Seest thou another make shipwrack of a good conscience? look well to thy tacklings. Sin is worse, after warning. For he feared to say, &c.] Fear and infidelity is found in the most faithful. Corruption, in the best, will have some flurts, some out-bursts. As therefore Luther intreats his Readers, if they finde in his writings any thing, that smelleth of the old cask of Popery, to remember he was once a poor Monk: So when we see the Saints humanum aliquid pati, to play some mad pranks; we must consi∣der, they were but lately cured of a spiritual phrensie. Because she was fair to look upon] Beauty therefore is not much to be desired, or the want of it to be bewailed; Sabiua, cum ali∣quando se non satis bona forma in speculo cerne∣ret, mori prius∣quam senescerct, optavis. Dio. because it creates so many dangers to them that have it, and their dearest husbands. The British virgins deformed themselves, that the Danes might not deflower them. Vers. 8. Sporting with Rebeccah his wife] Or, laughing and rejoycing; according to that of Solomon, Prov. 5.18, 19. Rejoyce with the wife of thy youth: let her be as the loving hinde, and pleasant roe, &c. The Hinde and Roe are the females of the Hart, and Roe-buck. Now of the Hart and Roe-buck it is noted (saith a grave Divine) that of all other beasts, D. Gouge. they are most enamoured (as I may so speak)
with their mates, and even mad again with heat and desire after them. Which being taken in a good sense, doth set forth the law∣ful vehement affection that an Isaac may bear to his Rebeccah; which may be such, as that others may think he even doats on her. And so much is imported in that which follows: Let her brests satisfie thee at all times, and earn thou always in her love. Not but that a man may be out in this lawful errour too, and exceed in love to his wife; as he in Seneca did, who, when ever he went abroad, wore his wives fillet on his bosom for a favour, would ne∣ver willingly be without her company, nor drink, but when she drank to him; with many the like fooleries, in quae improvida vis affectus erumpebat, saith he. The beginning of this love was honest; but the nimiety was not without deformity. Est modus in rebus. Vers. 9. Lest I die for her] See the Notes upon Gen. 20.11, 12, &c. Vers. 10. Brought guiltiness upon us] Or, a shameful crime, subjecting us to condign punishment. This is more then many pseudo-Christians will yeeld; who hold adultery a light sin, if any at all, a trick of youth: being of the same minde with that old dotard in Terence: Non est, mihi crede, flagitium, adolescentem belluari, potare, scortari, fores effringere. It is nothing for a young man to be found potting, piping, drinking, drabbing, swearing, whoring, &c. And this poisonful position passed (it seems) for currant at Corinthus; whence the Apostle Paul so strives to stock up by the roots that wretched opinion, by many arguments, 1 Cor. 6. And Chap. 10.8, in stead of the cloke of heat of youth, he puts upon fornication a bloody cloke, bathed in the blood of three and twenty thou∣sand. Vers. 11. He that toucheth this man, &c.] So sweetly doth God, many times, turn even our sins to our safety here, and to our salvation hereafter▪ What is not God able to do for his? Vers. 12. Then Isaac sowed in that land] In ground hired for his use, and managed by himself: for it was anciently a great com∣mendation, Veteres siquem virum bonum colonum appel∣lassent, amplissi∣me lauasse ex∣stimabant. Cic. saith Cicero, to be a good husbandman. M. Curius, after three triumphs, returned to the plow, and held it no disgrace; neither ever was there more plenty at Rome than then, saith Pliny; Quasi gauderet terra laureato vomere, & Aratore triumphali. This good husband in the text, sowing in that barren land, and in a time of famine too, hath an hundred-fold increase; which is the utmost that our Saviour mentioneth, Matth. 13.23. in the parable of the
sower: And in reference hereunto, Matth. 19.29. he elsewhere assureth such as part with all for his sake and the Gospels, they shall receive an hundred-fold here, and eternal life hereafter. Her. lib. 1. Plin. l. 6. c. 26. That which Hero∣dotus and Pliny report of Babylon, is beyond belief; That the land thereabouts returns two hundred-fold increase. But grant it were true, yet he that is a good husband for his soul, sowes in a better ground, and shall have a better return: For, Gal. 6.8, 9. he that sowes to the Spirit, shall, of the Spirit, reap life everlasting. Onely it is requi∣red, that he be not weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. We must not look to sowe and reap all in a day, as he saith of the Hyperborean-people far north; Heresbach. de re rustica. that they sowe shortly after the sun-rising, and reap before the sun-set; be∣cause the whole half yeer is one continual day with them. We must wait, with the husbandman, for the precious fruit of the earth, and have long patience for it, until we receive the former and later rain, James 5.7. And be diligent in the mean while, that when Christ comes, we may be found of him in peace, 2 Pet. 3.14. Heaven will pay for all our pains and patience. He which soweth sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that soweth bountifully, shall reap bountifully, even blessing upon blessing, . 2 Cor. 9.6. Psal. 126.6. as the word there sig∣nifies: be shall doubtless come again with joy, bringing his sheaves with him. Vers. 13. And the man waxed great] Because the Lord blessed him, vers. 12. for it is his blessing that maketh rich. He sowed, and feared God, and the Lord blessed him. Godliness hath the promises of both lives, 1 Tim. 4.8. Now the promises, are the unsearchable riches of Christ, Eph. 3.6, 9. who is the heir of all, Heb 1.2, and hath made godly men his co-heirs, Rom. 8.17, en∣tailing upon them riches and honour, delight and pleasure, Prov. 3.16, 17. & 8.18. Deut. 28. Psal. 112.2, 3. life and length of days, the blessings of both hands. Godly men, in Scri∣pture, are read to have been richer then any; as Abraham, Isaac, David, &c. so they might be now, (likely) if they would be as godly. Bonus Deus Constantinum Magnum, Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 25. tantis terrenis imple∣vit muneribus, quanta opt are nullus auderet, saith Augustine. If God deny gain to godliness, it is, that it may be admired for it self, as having an autarky, a self-sufficiency, 1 Tim. 6.6. he makes up in the true treasure: and a grain of grace is worth all the gold of Ophi; a remnant of faith, better then all gay clothing. A∣chans wedge of gold served for no better purpose, then to cleave asunder his soul from his body; and the Babylonish garment but
for a shrowd. Prov. 31.12. But, contented godliness, like Solomons good wife, doth a man good, and not evil, all his days: for it brings his minde and his means together, and makes him rest well assured of a suffi∣ciency, though he miss of a superfluity. Vers. 14. And the Philistims envied him] Envie is the constant companion of prosperity, as David felt, and complained. Succoth and Penuel contemn Gideon, out of envie of his victory; Josephs brethren cannot abide him, because more favoured of his father. Corah maligneth Moses; Saul, David; the Pharisees, our Savi∣our; Dio in vita Caligulae. their malice wilfully crossing their consciences. Caligula sa∣crificed to Neptune and Envie, ne sibi, ut ipse dicebat, invidere∣tur. He thought other men sick (belike) of his disease, (as the devil accused God of envie, to our first parents;) for certainly, there was not a more envious person living, Sueton. cap. 3 & 4. Lucano, quòd ar∣te poetica clarus erat, vetitum suit, ne carmen saceret. Dio in Nerone. Seneca. Dio in vita Tiberii. Sueton. c. 53. Am. Marcell. lib. 30. cap. 29. then he; witness his throwing down the statues of all famous men, and defacing their titles; forbidding any new to be set up, without his leave and liking. So, that Tyger Tiberius laid hold, with his spiteful teeth, on all the excellent spirits of his time: He put a Poet to death, for making an excellent Tragedy; and banished a certain Architect, for building a curious Porch at Rome, which he could not chuse but admire, and reward with money. Nero envied all men that were any whit gracious with the people. Valentinian hated all that were well apparelled, or well learned, or wealthy, or noble. Fortibus etiam detrahere solebat, ut solus videretur bonis artibus eminere, saith Ammianus. Germanicus had not any more deadly enemies, then his own ornaments: Tacitus. and his adversaries (as here Isaac's) had nothing to complain of him, more then his greatness. So true is that of Salust. Salust. in Catil. Difficillimum inter mortales est, gloriâ invidiam vincere. Hercules had not more ado with Hydra, then a good man shall have with this beast. Envied he shall be of his neigh∣bour, for his labour, and right work. Eccles. 4.4. This is also vanity, and vexation of spirit. Vers. 15. The Philistims had stopped them] They deprived themselves of the benefit of those Wells, so that Isaac might not water at them. Aug. in Psal. 139. Envie doth nothing with reason. It is vitium di∣abolicum, saith Augustine. The devil, of pure spite, hinders men from heaven: he rageth and rangeth, roaring up and down, seek∣ing whom to devour; and not caring to be double-damn'd him∣self, so that others may not be saved. We should be so far from envying at the happiness of others, that we should rejoyce in it.
This were to be as the Angels of God; and the contrary, is to be like the devils of hell: as Saul was; who, because he could not see Davids heart, fed upon his own. Envie devours it self, as the worm doth the nut out of which it grows. Vers. 16. Go from us; for thou art, &c.] Isaaco ob benedictio∣nem Dei Ostracismus indicitur. It was well, they had nothing worse against him. Of Isaac it may be more truely said, then of Mithridates, Virtute eximius, aliquando fortunâ, Paterculus. semper animo maximus. , Dio, lib. 41. as Dio saith of Pompey. Vers. 17. And Isaac departed thence] was compelled to do so; though, not long before, the king of the country had charged all his people, on pain of death, not to disquiet him. Antipho. . So neer neighbours are Prosperity and Adversity. Friends are very changeable creatures, saith Plato. Friends, . Plato. . Trussels con∣tin. of Dan. Chronicle. there's no friend, saith Socrates; no fast friend. Faithful friends (quoth the Duke of Buckingham to Bishop Morton, in Richard the third's time) are in this age, all, for the most part, gone in pilgrimage; and their return is uncertain. Sejanus his friends shewed themselves (as did likewise Hamans) most passionate against him; saying, that if Cesar had clemency, he ought to reserve it for men, not use it toward monsters. Carnal friends were never true to any that trusted to them: whereas, trust in God, at length, will triumph, as we see in this Patriarch. Vers. 18. Isaac digged again the wells, &c.] Both for more certainty to finde water, a scarce commodity in those hot coun∣tries; and because the labour was the easier, and his right the bet∣ter, sith they had once been his fathers. Vers. 19. A well of springing water] Heb. living; so called, for their continual motion. Life consisteth in action: and the godly esteem of life, by that stirring they finde in their souls. O Lord, saith Hezekiah, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit. And thus, many a man lives more in a shorter, then others in a longer time. S. Jerome tells of One, Hieron. Epist. ad Fri. qui in brevi vitae spacio tempora virtuim multa replevit. As Se∣neca of another, qui non diu vixit, sed diù fuit: Non multum na∣vigavit, sed multum jactatus est. Oh live, live, live, (saith a Re∣verend man) quickly, much, long: else, you are but histed, and kickt off this stage of the world, as Phocas was by Heraclius. Nay, Abners fun. by M. Harris. many (as Job 27.23. and v. 15.) who were buried before half dead.
Vers. 20. And the herd-men of Gerar▪] Not content to have cast him out, they pursued him, with cruel hatred; and, by deny∣ing him water, went about to destroy both him and his herds. Crosses seldom come single, Eccles. 12.2. but in a croud. James 1.2. The clouds return after the rain, and cluster against a new storm. See therefore, that ye keep your cloke close about you. Vers. 21. And he called the name of it Sitnah] Of Satan; to hate deadly, as the devil doth. So the Preacher in his travels, tells us of a place called The mouth of hell. And we read of a Country called Terra del fuego. Preach. trav. pag. 106. Heyl. Geog. 130. Savoy, for the strait passages infested with thieves, was once called Malvoy; till a worthy adventu∣rer cleared the coasts, and then 'twas called Salvoy, or Savoy, quasi salva via. Ibid. 474. So, King Alfred, as he divided the kingdom in∣to shires, so the subjects, in the several shires, into Tens, or Tythings; every of which should give bond for the good abearing of each other. The ancientest of the ten, was called the Tything-man. And the Kingdom was called Regnum Dei, Polyd. Virg. and Albion, quasi Ol∣bion, happie; as Angli quasi Angeli; for that then, a poor girl might safely travel with a bag of gold in her hand, and none durst meddle with her. Vers. 22. And he removed from thence, &c.] See here a pattern of a patient and peaceable disposition; not broken by the conti∣nual injuries and affronts of the Philistims, that maligned and mo∣lested him. Psal. 120.7. I am peace, saith David; and I, saith Isaac, and I, saith every son of peace, every childe of wisdom. How well might good Isaac take up that of David, Psal. 26.12. Psal. 4.2. and say, My feet stand in an even place, (now that he was at Rehoboth especially, and God had made room for him:) The scales of his minde neither rose up to∣ward the beam, Barthol. West∣mer. in Psal. 26. through their own lightness; nor were too much depressed with any load of sorrow: but hanging equally and un∣moved between both, gave him liberty, in all occurrences, to en∣joy himself. Our mindes (saith a Divine) should be like to the Adamant, Ambros. He∣xam. 4. that no knife can cut; the Salamander, that no fire can burn; the Rock, which no waves can shake; the Cypress-tree, which no weather can alter; the hill Olympus, higher then storm or tempest, winde or weather can reach unto; or rather, like mount Sion, Psal. 15.1. Philip. 4.11. Act. & Mon. that cannot be removed, but standeth fast for ever. Thus Paul had learned how to abound, and to be abased. Bradford, if the Queen would give him life, he would thank her; if banish him, he would thank her; if burn him, he will thank her; if con∣demn
him to perpetual imprisonment, he will thank her; as he told one Creswel, that offered to intercede for him. Praeclara est aequabilitas in omni vita, & idem semper vulius, eademque frons, Aelian. lib. 9. Solin. cap. 8. ut de Socrate, idemque de C. Laelio accepimus, saith Tully, in his books of Offices; which book the old Lord Burleigh, Peachams comp. Gent. pag. 45. Lord high Trea∣surer to Queen Elisabeth, would always carry about him, to his dying day, either in his bosom or pocket: And what use he made of it, take M. Camdens testimony: Camd. Elis. fol. 495. Burleigh Lord Treasurer was wont to say, that he overcame envie more by patience then perti∣nacy. His private estate he managed with that integrity, that he never sued any man, no man ever sued him. He was in the number of those few, that both lived and died with glory. Vers. 23. And he went up] to the place of Gods worship. Strabo writeth, that the Metapontines, Dedicasse in Delphis, . when they were enriched by a good yeer of corn, dedicated to Apollo a golden harvest. Vers. 24. Fear not] for the continued opposition of the Phi∣listims, or what-ever other discouragement. The best mindes, when troubled for any long time, yeeld inconsiderate motions, and suffer some perturbation; as water that is violenly stirred, sends up bubbles. They cannot be so much master over their passions, as not otherwhiles to be disquieted: for, not the evenest weights, but at their first putting into the balance, somewhat sway both parts thereof, not without some shew of inequality; which, after some little motion, settle themselves in a meet poize. Potissimùm verò fidei murus, Bucholcer. Chronol. 320. tentationum ariete durius aliquantò pulsatus & concus∣sus, facilè nutare ac ruinam minari incipit, nisi divinitus sustentetur. Vers. 25. And called upon the Name of the Lord] that had made room for him; and now, by his presence and promise, com∣forted him. Let the streams of Gods bounty lead us, as the wa∣ter-course doth, either to the spring upward, or downward to the main Ocean, to the source and fountain whence they flow. Let God taste of the fruit of his own planting. Otherwise, it is no better then the refreshing of him that standeth by a good fire, and crieth, Ah, ah, I am warm. Isai. 44.16. We are no better then bruit beasts, if, contenting our selves with a natural use of the creatures, we rise not up to the Author; if, in stead of being temples of his praise, we become graves of his benefits. Isaac first built an altar, and then digg'd a Well. Vers. 26. And Abimelech went to him] Not of any great love, but as 1. prickt in conscience; 2. to provide for posterity.
It was a mercy to him, howsoever, that strangers and Heathens should do him this honour: as it was to Luther, that when the Pope had excommunicated him, the Emperour proscribed him, two Kings written against him, &c. the Elector of Saxony should nevertheless stick to him; Manh. loc. com. and that the Great Turk should send him word, not to be discouraged, for he would become his graci∣ous Lord, &c. through From such a Lord, said Luther, good Lord deliver me. Vers. 27. Wherefore come ye to me] Here was his magnanimi∣ty, and his modesty both, in expostulating the wrongs they had done unto him. He could not but be sensible of their discourtesies. though he dissembled them. A sheep feels the bite of a dog, as well as a swine, though she make no such noise. Isaac having now a fit opportunity, Job 6. gives them the telling of it: and how forcible are right words! There is a real confutation of injuries: and we should consult, whether, in such a case, it be best to deal with the wrong-doers, at all, by words. Gods way is by works: and he must get an Isaac-like temperance and prudence, that thinks him∣self able to convince them by reason, and to set them down. Vers. 28. Let there be now an oath] See here, saith Chrysostom, how great the power of vertue is, Quanta virtutis potentia, quan∣tum mansuetudi∣nis robur, &c. Chrysost. Hom. quinta. Prov. 16.7. and the might of meekness: For they that lately drove him out from amongst them, now come to him in courtesie, though a forlorn forraigner; and not onely give him satisfaction, but seek his friendship. Thus, When a mans ways please the Lord, he maketh his enemies to be at peace with him. Vers. 29. Thou art now the blessed of the Lord] This they had observed, and therefore did him this honour. So the King of Ba∣bylon sent Ambassadours, and a Present, to Hezekiah, because he had heard of the miracle of the Suns going back for him. Now because the Sun, which was their god, had honoured him so much, the King of Babylon would honour him too, Abulens. in 2 Reg. 20. as Abulensis hath well observed. Vers. 30. And he made them a feast] Not to mischief them thereat, as Absalom did Amnon, as Alexander did Philotas, as the Great Turk doth the Bashaws whom he intends to strangle; Turk. hist. but to shew, there was no rancour, or purpose of revenge. Vers. 31. And they rose up betime, &c.] The proverb is, De sero convivium, de mane consilium. It was the Persians barbarous manner, in the midst of their cups, to advise of their weightiest
affairs, as Pererius here noteth: Ardua negotia, praesertim in qui∣bus juramentum intervenit jejuno stomacho suscipi peragique debent, saith Piscator. Weighty businesses are best dispatched fasting. Vers. 32. We have found water] As crosses, so mercies, seldom come single, but by troops; as she said, when her son Gad was born, A company cometh. Vers. 33. Je Beershebah to this day] So it was before; Gen. 21.31. but the name was almost worn out, the Well being stopped up: Isaac therefore new names it, and so preserves it for a monument of Gods mercy to his father, and to himself. Vers. 34. And Esau was fourty yeers old] In an apish imitati∣on of his father, who married not till that age; keeping under his body, and bringing it into subjection, as Paul, being inured by good education, to hard labour, prayer, and pious meditation. 1 Cor. 9. But Esau did not so, a pleasure-monger; he was a profane person, and, as the Hebrews say, a filthy whore-master. So much also the Apo∣stle seems to intimate, when he sets them together, and saith, Let there be no fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, Heb. 12.16. [He took to wife] Not consulting his parents, or craving their con∣sent. This was abdicationis praeludium; Deus quem destruit, de∣mentat. Vers. 35. Which were a grief] because idolatresses, Rev. 2.2. and untractable, because given up by God, Hos. 4.17. Rom. 1.28. XXVII. Vers. 1. Isaac was old, and his eyes di] OLd-age is of it self a disease, and the sink of all diseases. This Solomon sweetly sets forth, Eccles, 12. by a continued allegory, Ʋbi quot lumina imò flumina orationis exserit? saith One. In ge∣neral, he calls it The evil day, Eccles. 12.2, 3. &c. expoun∣ded. the yeers that have no pleasure in them. In particular, the Senses all fail; the hands tremble; the legs buckle; the teeth cannot do their office, as being either lost or loosened; the silver cord, that is, the marrow of their backs, is consumed; the golden ewre, that is, the brain-pan, broke; the pitcher at the well, that is, the veins at the liver; the wheel at the cistern, that is, the head, which draws the power of life from the heart: all these worn weak, and wanting to their office: So that
sleep faileth, desire faileth Sept. , quum & ppetitum & Veuerem irritat.; neither spring nor summer (signified by the almond-tree and grashopper) shall affect with pleasure: the daughters of musick shall be brought lowe, as they were in old Bar∣zillai: the sun, moon, and stars are darkened, for any delight they take in their sweet shine: yea, the clouds return after rain; a con∣tinual succession of miseries, like April-weather, as one shower is unburthened, another is brewed, and the skie is still over-cast with clouds. Lo, such is old age: and is this a fit Present for God? wilt thou give him the dregs, the bottom, the very last sands, thy dotage, Mal. 1.8. which thy self and friends are weary of? Offer it now to thy prince, will he be pleased with thee? The Circassians (a kinde of mongrel-Christians) as they baptize not their children till the eighth yeer, so they enter not into the Church (the Gentlemen especially) till the sixtieth yeer, Brerewoods Enquires, 135. but hear Divine Service standing without the Temple; that is to say, till, through age, they grow unable to continue their rapines and robberies, to which sin that Nation is exceedingly addicted: so dividing their time betwixt sin and devotion; dedicating their youth to rapine, and their old-age to repentance. But God will not be so put off: He is a great King, and stands upon his seniority, Mal. 1.14. In the Levitical Law, there were three sorts of first-fruits: 1. Of the ears of corn, of∣fered about the Passeover. 2. Of the loaves, offered about Pente∣cost. 3. About the end of the yeer, in Autumn. Now of the two first, God had a part; but not of the last: to teach us, that he will accept of the services of our youth or middle-age: but for old-age, vix aut ne vix quidem. Besides Abraham in the Old Testament, and Nicodemus in the New, I know not whether we read of any old man ever brought home to God. Vers. 2. I am old, I know not the day of my death] No more doth any, though never so young. There be as many young sculls as old, in Golgotha. But, young men, we say, may die; old men must die. To the old, Death is projanuis; to the young, in insi∣diis. Senex, quasi seminex. Old men have pedcm in cymba Cha∣rontis, one foot in the grave already. Our decrepit age both ex∣pects death, and sollicites it: it goes groveling, as groaning for the grave. Ter. in Adelph. Vel quod curvus scilices cernat; vel quòd mox si∣lentibu umbris cerend sit. . Whence Terence calls an old men Silicernium; and the Greeks, , of looking toward the ground, whither he is tending; or (as others will have it) of loving earth and earthly things; which old folk greedily grasp at, because they fear they shall not have to suffice them while alive, and to bring
them honestly home (as they say) when they are dead; . as Plu∣tarch gives the reason. Vers. 3. Take me some venison] It is some blemish to holy I∣saac, that he so over-loved Esau, and that because he did eat of his venison, or because venison was in his mouth, Gen. 25.28. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under of any thing. 1 Cor. 6.12. It is a shame to a Saint, to be a slave to his appetite; that it should be said of him, as it was of Epicurus, Ennius. Dum palato quid sit opti∣mum judicat, coeli palatium non suspexit. Vers. 4. That my soul may bless thee, before I die] The words of dying men, are living oracles. It was the Patriarchs care, and must be ours, to leave a blessing behinde us; to seek the salvation of our children whiles we live, and to say something to same purpose when we die, that may stick by them. So, when we are laid in our graves, our stock remains, goes forwards, and shall do, till the day of doom. Vers. 5. Esau went to the field to hunt, &c.] But before he re∣turned, the blessing was otherwise bestowed. The hope of the hype∣crite shall perish. How many lie languishing at hopes hospital, as he at the pool of Bethesda, and no help comes! Joh. 5. they repair to the creatures, as to a Lottery, with heads full of hopes, but return with hearts full of blanks. Or, if they draw nigh to God, they think they take hold of him; but it is but as the childe that catcheth at the shadow on the wall, which he thinks he holds fast in his hand; but it vanisheth. The common hope is ill bottom'd. Hope unfail∣able, Rom. 5.5, is founded upon faith unfeigned, 1 Tim. 1.5. Deo consist nunquam confusi. Hos. 2.13. He speaketh sweetest comfort to the heart, in the wilderness. Vers. 6. I heard thy father] She over-heard what Isaac spake secretly. Women will be listening, as Sarah behinde the door; when she laughed, and little thought to be questioned for it. Vers. 7. That I may eat, and bless thee] Being cheared up by thy good cheer and wine, I may be the fitter instrument of the Spirit of God. So the Prophet called for a minstrel, 2 Kings 3.14, 15. Plato called Wine and Musick , the mollifying medicines of humane miseries. Chearfulness is called for in all ser∣vices. Vers. 8. Now therefore, my son, obey my voice] Which yet he ought not to have done, because she commanded him that which was evil: and they that do thus, are peremptores, potius quàm pa∣rentes;
rather parricides then parents, as saith S. Bernard. Vers. 9. savoury meat for thy father, &c.] She knew his diet, and could fit his tooth. The wife is to take care to please her hus∣band; . to use her wits, and busie her thoughts how to give him con∣tent in diet, and other things of the world, as the Apostle hath it, 1 Cor. 7.34. It was devillish policie in Agrippina, (the mother of Nero; Dixit Nero bo∣letos , quòd Claudius boleto in numerum De∣orum relatus esses. Dlo. and it came home to her) to temper the poison that she gave her husband Claudius the Emperour, in the meat he most de∣lighted in, and then to make a jest of it. Let us be sure to bring God such service as he loveth: He will eat, not onely our honey, but our honey-comb: he will drink, not onely our Wine, but our milk, Cant. 5.1. take in good part unperfect performances, so the heart be upright: But displeasing service is a double dishonour. The fat of rams was rejected with infinite disdain, Isai. 1.11, 15. where the hands are full of blood, the heart of sin. The Philosopher could com∣plain of his country-men, Dg. Laert. that when they went to offer sacrifice to Health, they did then banquet most riotously against Health. Vers. 10. And thou shalt bring it to thy father] Though this action, in the general intendment, was good, yet the execution of it wanted not particular errour. Her course had been, rather, to have minded her husband of Gods promise to Jacob, and gently to have exhorted him to do nothing against it; and then, to have in∣treated the Lord, to bend his minde to the obedience of his divine will, though to the crossing of his own. But the Saints righteous∣ness (while here) is mixt; as light and darkness, dimness at least, in a painted glass, dyed with some obscure and dim colour: it is transparent, and giveth good, but not clear and pure, light. Vers. 11. Esau my brother is an hairy man] This, Rebeccah thought not of. Plus vident oculi, quam oculus. Two is better then one; but wo be to him that is alone. We want much of our strength, in the want of a faithful friend, who might be our moni∣tor: Whence David so bemoans the loss of his Jonathan; and S. Paul counted it a special mercy to him, that Epaphroditus recover∣ed, Cyprian. epist. Phil. 2.27. This the Heathen persecutors knew, and there∣fore banished the Christians, and confined them to Isles, and mines, where they could not have access one to another. Doctor Tay∣lor rejoyced that ever he came into prison, there to be acquainted with that Angel of God (so he calls him) John Bradford. While Ridley and Latimer lived, they kept up Cranmer from entertaining
counsels of revolt. It was not for nothing, surely, that our Sa∣viour sent forth his disciples by two and two: He knew by expe∣rience, that Satan is readiest to assault, when none is by to assist. Aaron may be for a mouth to Moses, Exod. 4.16. Moses for a God to Aa∣ron. Vers. 12. My father peradventure will feel me] Our heaven∣ly Father will certainly feel us, and better feel us; and we shall feel him too, in his fatherly corrections, before he bless us. Suffer we must, or ere we reign: no coming to the Crown, but by the Cross. Christ himself was perfected by sufferings; Heb. 5. Rom. 8.29. and we must be conformed to his image. When Ignatius came to the wilde beasts, Now, saith he, I begin to be a Christian. Qui non est Crucianus, non est Christianus, saith Luther, on the 29 of Genesis: And in another place; I have no stronger argument, saith he, Luth. T.2. a∣gainst the Popes kingdom, then this, that he reigneth without the Cross. [And I shall seem to him as a deeiver] So shall all com∣plementing hypocrites to God, that pretend his service to their wicked or worldly ends and aims. They think, belike, Saiens num∣mularius Dus est nummum fi∣ctum non reci∣piet. Bern. Job 36.13. Bern. to deceive him; but therein they are fairly deceived, (for he searcheth the hearts) and bring a curse, in stead of a blessing, upon themselves and their posterity. The hypocrite in heart heaps up wrath. Ne∣mo enim magis iram meretur, (saith a Father) quàm amicum simulans inimicus. Where shall we read of an hypocrite received to mercy. Vers. 13. Ʋpon me be thy curse, my son] A bold speech: but she respected the promise by faith; she relied on that oracle, Gen. 25.23. which Isaac might mis-interpret, understanding it not of the persons of his sons, but of their posterity. Bernardus non vi∣dit omnia. Isaac was not more blinde in his eyes, then in his affe∣ction to his first-born; and that might mislead him. But Rebeccah saw further then he, and therefore made this bold adventure (not without some mixture of infirmity) to procure Jacob the blessing, against her husbands will and intention. A wife is not to perform such blinde obedience to her husband, as Plutarch prescribeth; when he layeth it as a Law of Wedlock, on the wife, Plut. Moral. 318. to acknowledge and worship the same gods, and none else, but those whom her husband honours and reputes for gods. Men be they pleased or displeased, God must not be displeased. Vers. 15. And Rebeccah took goodly raiment] The Priestly garments (some think) proper to Esau, had he kept his birth right;
but kept, not by Esau or his wives, but by the mother of the fami∣ly. The Hebrew calleth them, Vestes desiderabiles, garments of desires, goodly, sweet, precious; yet far inferiour to that rich and royal robe of Christs righteousness, that garment of our elder brother; wherewith arayed, we obtain the blessing. We read of Solomons bravery, Athenaeus. of Herods cloth of silver, of Alcisthenes the Sybarite's cloke, sold to the Carthaginians by 'Dionysius, for 120 talents; Propter invidi∣osam impendii magnisicentiam. of Demetrius his robe of estate, which, for the exceed∣ing costliness of it, no Prince that came after him would ever put on. But all these were but rags to the robe of righteousness, that fine White linen, and shining, Rev. 19. Vers. 16. And she put the skins of the goats] This, by some, is excused, as if it were onely dolus bonus, to keep her husband from wrong-doing; as, when the Physitian deceives his Patient, that he may heal him. But howsoever that she did may be extenuated, it can hardly be justified, albeit God ordered it to his own pur∣pose. Vers. 19. I am Esau, thy first born, &c.] Here he utters three lyes in a breath; besides his intitling God to that he did, vers. 20, so taking that Reverend Name in vain. This was his sin, and he smarted for it, to his dying day: for he had scarce a merry hour after this; but God followed him with one sorrow upon another, to teach him and us, Jer. 2.19. Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. c. 7. what an evil and bitter thing sin is, and how it ensnares and ensnarls us. Aristotle could say, that a lye is in it self evil and wicked. The Hebrews call it Aven, a great iniquity. And the Scripture reckons it among monstrous sins, Rev. 21.8, and condemns it to hell; whether it be the officious, merry, or pernici∣ous lye. Indeed every lye is pernicious to our selves, or others, or both; because flatly forbidden of God, and because it is against the order of nature, 1 Joh. 2.21. Joh. 8.44. and for that no lye is of the truth, (as S. John hath it) but of the devil, who began, and still upholds his king∣dom by lyes. Contrarily, God is Truth, and his children are all such as will not lye, Isai. 63.8. Rev. 14.5. at least, not get a haunt and a habit of lying, which David calls a way of lying: Re∣move from me the way of lying, saith he, that I make not a trade or common practice of it. We finde, that, 1 Sam. 21.2, he very roundly telleth two or three lyes together, (as Jacob here did;) and all deliberate. 1 Sam. 27.8, 10, 11. So that tale he told Achish, of invading the South of Judah, when he had been upon the Geshurites and Gerar∣ites, I know not how it can be excused. But this was not Davids
way, his common course; pity it should. Honest Heathens con∣demned lying: The Persians punished it severely in their children: Xenoph. Cy∣top. lib. 1. . Hom. Cor. Nepos, in vita Epam. Homer censures it in Dolon, Ʋlysses, and others. Clitarchi histo∣rici (saith Quintilian) ingenium probatur, sides infamatur. Nepos reporteth of Epaminondas, that he so loved truth, that he would not once lye, no not in jest. A shame to many Christians, who think the officious and sporting lye to be nothing. Whereas, Gal. 1.10. we must not speak the truth to please men, much less lye. And for saving our selves, we must rather die, then lye: else Peter had not sinned, in denying his Master. As for profiting others, Job 13.7, 8, 9. we may not lye, though it were to save a soul, Rom. 3.7. We may as well commit fornication with the Moabites, to draw them to our Religion; or steal from rich men, to give to the poor; as lye to do another man a good turn. Vers. 20. How is it that thou hast found it so quickly] A man may very well ask our common Protestants this question, concern∣ing the Faith they so much boast of, but came by it too quickly, to be right. They were never yet in the furnace of Mortification, felt the spirit of bondage, the terrours of God in their consciences. Their Faith is like Jonah's gourd, that grew up in a night; or a bullet in a mould, that's made in a moment. Let ours be like the water of Bethlehem, much longed for, and hardly come by, &c. Vers. 21. That I may feel thee, my son] Here Isaac used all his Senses, and yet is cozened. There is neither Wisdom nor counsel a∣gainst the Lord. Gasp. Ens. Mihi hominum prudentia similis videtur talpa∣rum labori, non sine dexteritate sub terra fodientium, sed ad lumen Solis caecutientium. Vers. 22. The voice is Jacobs voice] Jacob must name himself Esau, with the voice of Jacob. It is hard, if our tongues do not bewray us, in spite of our habit, as it did the wife of Jeroboam. Vers. 24. Art thou, &c. and he said, I am] Thus one sin enter∣tained, fetcheth in another; a lye especially, which, being a tinker∣ly blushful sin, is either denied by the lyer, who is ashamed to be ta∣ken with it; or else covered by another and another lye, as we see here in Jacob; who being once over shooes, will be over boots too; but he will perswade his father, that he is his very son Esau. Vers. 25. Bring it neer to me] Divinum consilium dum de∣vitatur, impletur: humana sapientia, dum reluctatur, com∣prehenditur, saith Gregory, Here Isaac doth unwilling and un∣witting justice.
Vers. Arist. lib. de mirab. auscult. 27. As the smell of a field] Compare Cant. 2.13. & 4.12, 13, 14. Aristotle writes of a parcel of ground in Sicily, that sendeth such a strong smell of fragrant flowers, to all the fields and leazes thereabouts, that no hound can hunt there, the scent is so confounded with the sweet smell of those flowers. Labour we so to resent heavenly sweetnesses, so to savour the things above, that we may have no minde to hunt after earthly vanities, &c. Ale∣xanders body is said to be of such an exact constitution, that it gave a sweet scent where it went. Christ (the true carcase) smells so sweet to all heavenly eagles, Matth. 24. Joh. 12. that, being now lifted up, he draws them after him. Vers. Esau likewise hath the like, but not with a God give thee. 28. God give thee of the dew] For that country was dry and thirsty: They had rain, say some, but twice a yeer; the for∣mer in seed-time, and the later rain in May. The blessings here bestowed, are plenty, victory, domestical preeminency, and out∣ward prosperity. But beyond all these, some better thing was pro∣vided and promised. Erant enim speculum, & pignus coelestium. The Church of Rome borrows her mark from the market-plenty, or cheapness, &c. she vaunts of her temporal felicity, and makes a catalogue of the strange victories which the Catholikes have had. Immò vix unquam fuerunt Haeretici superiores quando justo praelio dimicatum est, Bell. tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. ult. saith Bellarmine. Upon one of the Easter-holy∣days, saith George Marsh, Martyr, Master Sherburn and Master More sent for me, perswading me much to leave mine opinions; saying, All the bringers up and favourers of that Religion, had ill luck, Act. and Mon. fol. 1421. and were either put to death, or in prison, and in danger of life. Again, the favourers of the Religion now used, had won∣drous good luck, and prosperity in all things. These wizards, these disputers of this world, as the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 1.20, either knew not, Ecclesia baeres Crucis. or believed not, that the Church is the heir of the Cross, as an Ancient speaketh; that Opposition is (as Calvin wrote o the French King) Evangelii genius, the bad genius that dogs the Gospel; Veritas odium parit. Ter. that Truth breeds hatred, (as the fair Nymphs did the ill-favoured Fawns and Satyrs) and seldom goes without a scratcht face. Some Halcyons the Church hath here, as in Con∣stantines time, (Repugnante contra temetipsam tua foelicitate, saith Salvian, in his first book to the Catholike Church;) but grace she shall be sure of here, with persecution; and glory hereafter, with∣out interruption. As for outward things, aut aderunt sanè, aut non oberunt; either she shall have them, or be as well without
them. God shall be her Cornu-copia, her All-sufficient, her shield, Sine Deo, omis copia est egestas. and exceeding great reward. Vers. 29. Let thy mothers sons bow down to thee] That is, thy brethren; which are therefore denominated from the mother, quòd certior est a matre progenies, quàm a patre, Castalio in An∣notat. ad locum saith an Interpre∣ter. But this blessing is pronounced in an higher stile then ordi∣nary; therefore sentences are doubled; and that kinde of speech is here used, which, with us, is either Poetical, or not far from it. Vers. 30. Esau his brother came in] All-too-late. Detained he was by the devil, (say the Hebrews) who not seldom makes a fool of hunters, and leads them about. A sweet providence of God there was in it, certainly, that he should come in as soon as Isaac had done, and Jacob was gone, and no sooner. Like as there was in that which Master Fox reports of Luther, that on a time, Act. & Mon. fol. 793. as he was sitting in a certain place upon his stool, a great stone there was in the vault, over his head, which being staid miraculously so long as he was sitting, as soon as he was up, immediately fell upon the place where he sate, able to have crushed him in pieces. A War∣rant once came down, under Seal, for the execution of the Lady Elizabeth; Steven Gardiner was the engineer, and thought he had been sure of his prey: But God pulled the morsel out of his mouth; Englands Eli∣zabeth, by Hey∣wood. for one Master Bridges, mistrusting false play, presently made haste to the Queen, who renounced and reversed it. Another time, while Sir Henry Benning field her Keeper was at Court, one Basset, a Gentleman, and a great favourite of Steven Gardiners, came, with twenty men well appointed, to Woodstock, to have murther∣ed her: But, by Gods great providence, Sir Henry had left so strict a charge behinde him, that no living soul might have access unto the Princess, upon what occasion soever, till his return, that they could not be admitted; whereby, their bloody enterprise was ut∣terly disappointed. The Lord knoweth how to deliver his: Psal. 34. he keep∣eth all their bones, not one of them is broken. Vers. 31. And he also had made savoury meat] Esau's works here, are better then Jacobs. Election is not of works, but of grace, Rom. 9.11. Quis te discernit? saith the Apostle. Cor. 4.7. Gree∣vinchovius the Arminian sawcily answers, Ego meipsum discerno. And surely, had the cause of our election been either by our faith, or good works foreseen (as the Papists and Arminians would have it) Saint Paul might have spared his question, or soon received a rea∣dy answer.
Vers. 33. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly] The fear of God reined him, in that he durst not reverse the blessing, (though haply he had a minde to it;) nay, he stablished it to Jacob here, and more advisedly, in the next Chapter. Noli peccare: nam Deus videt, Angeli astant, diabolus accusabit, conscientia testabitur, in∣fernus cruciabit. A reverend and religious man had this written before his eyes, in his Study, saith M. Gataker. Vers. 34. He cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry] Not for his sin, Non dolet de peccato venditi∣onis, sed de damno perditi∣onis. Par. Hos. 7.14. in selling the birth-right; but for his loss, in missing the blessing: though, having sold the birth-right, he had no right to the blessing. This is the guise of the ungodly. He cries Perii, not Peccavi. If he howl upon his bed, it is for corn and oil, as a dog tied up howls for his dinner, It never troubles him, that a good God is offended, which to an honest heart is the prime cause of greatest sorrow. Vers. 35. Thy brother came with subtilty] Junius observes, that Isaac here, to please his son, committeth some over-sight, in transferring the fault upon Jacob. He might have seen how God chastised his seeking to cross the Oracle, in the sin of Rebeccah and Jacob, who beguiled him. But our mindes are as ill-set as our eyes, neither of them apt to turn inwards. Vers. 36. Is he not rightly named Jacob] He cavils and quarrels at his brothers guile, at his fathers store; (Hast thou but one bles∣sing, &c.) but not a word we hear of his own profaneness. How apt are men to mistake the cause of their sufferings, and to blame any thing sooner then their own untowardness! Vers. 38. Esau lift up his voice, and wept] Yet, found no place for repentance, Heb. 12.17. that is, he could not, by his tears, pre∣vail with his father, to reverse the blessing. See the fruit of Gods holy fear. Moses his rod was not so famous for being turned into a Serpent, (for even the Magicians did as much) as for devouring the Magicians rod: So the true fear of God is most eminent and effectual, when set in emulation or opposition to other fears, or car∣nal aims and affections. Vers. 39. Answered and said unto him] Dixit, non benedixit, quia ptiùs fuit praedictio futurae conditionis, quàm benedictio, saith Pareus. And whereas we read, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven; Castalio renders it thus: Tua quidem sedes a terrae pinguitudine, & a supero coeli rore aberit. For Mishmanne, saith he, signifieth ab pinguitudine, sive
sine pinguitudine; as it doth also, Psal. 109.24. Sic dicimus Ab re, , & com∣positè, Amens, abesse, . My flesh faileth from fatness, (that is, for lack of fatness;) or, Without fatness. So the sence he sets upon this Text, is; Thou shalt dwell far from the fatness of the earth, in a barren country, &c. For Isaac could not give Esau what he had given Jacob afore: and this was that, that Esau so grieved at, and threatned his brother for. Or if he could, what cause had Esau so to take on? why should it trouble me, that another partakes of the sun-light with me, when I have never the less? &c. Object. But the Apostle saith, Heb. 11.20. Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau. Sol. It was a blessing, no doubt, that Edom should shake off Israels yoke; as it follows, vers. 40. and fell out, 2 Kings 8.20. Vers. 40. When thou shalt have the dominion] Cùm planxeris, saith Junius; when thou hast, for some time, undergone hard, troublesom, and lamentable servitude, the grief whereof thou dost greatly groan under; as in Davids time, who cast his shoe over them, Psal 60.8. The Sodomites, those worst of men, 2 Sam. 8.14. were the first that we finde in Scripture brought in bondage to others, Gen. 14.4. When the Danes and other forraigners domineer'd in this Kingdom, was it not a lamentable time? were not mens dearest lives sold as cheap, as sparrows were among the Jews, five for two farthings? Did we but live a while in Turkie, Persia, yea, or but in France, (saith One) a dram of that liberty we yet enjoy, would be as precious, as a drop of cold water would have been to the rich man in hell, when he was so grievously tormented with those slames. Take we heed, lest for the abuse of this sweet mercy, God send not in the Midianites to thresh out our corn, the Assyrians to drink up our milk, to make a spoil of our cattel, Jer. 49.32, and to cause us to eat the bread of our souls in the peril of our lives, as our fathers did in Queen Maries days. Vers. 41. And Esau hated Jacob, &c.] Because God said, Ja∣cob have I loved. And, as all hatred is bloody, he resolves to be his death. The righteous is abomination to the wicked, saith Solomon. Prov. 29.27. Moab was irked because of Israel, or, did fret and vex at them, Num. 22.3, 4. who yet passed by them in peace. But the old serpent had set his limbs in them, transfused his venom into them: hence that deadly hatred, that is and will be betwixt the godly and the wicked. Pliny speaks of the Scorpion, that there is not one minute, wherein he doth not put forth the sting: So doth that serpentine seed, acted by Satan. The Panther so hates man, that
he flies upon the very picture of a man, and tears it to pieces. So doth Satan and his imps upon the image of God, in whomsoever they finde it. Psal. 35.19. Scito quia ab ascensore suo dae∣mone perurge∣tur. Bern. They Satanically hate me, saith David of his enemies. And seest thou thy persecutor full of rage? (saith Bernard) know thou, that he is spurr'd on by the devil that rides him, that acts and agitates him, Eph. 2.2. [And Esau said in his heart] Effu∣tiverat etiam minaces voces; he had also bolted out some suspici∣ous speeches, (as our Gunpowder-traitors did) whereby he was prevented. [The days of mourning for my father] No matter for his mother: Levit. 19.3. yet God saith, Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father. The mother is first mentioned, because usually most slighted. Vindicab me afferendo Patri luctum, caede fratris. Luth. Luther thinks, he threatneth his father also, in these words; as if he should say, I will be avenged, by being the death of my brother, though it be to the breaking of my fathers heart. A bloody speech of a vindictive spirit, whom nothing would sa∣tisfie, but to be a double parricide. [I will slay my brother] But threatned men live long: for even Isaac, who died soonest, lived above fourty yeers beyond this. Psal. 31.15. My times are in thy hand, saith David. Vers. 42. And these words of Esau, &c.] For he could not hold, as Absalom did; who, intending to murther Amnon, spake neither good nor evil to him. These still revenges are most dangerous, as a dog that barks not. That Esau vented himself in words, was a great mercy of God to Jacob. He thought nothing, (good man) but followed his calling, not knowing his danger. But his provident mother hearkened it out, and took course to prevent it. So doth the sweet fatherly providence of God take care and course for the safety of his servants, when they are either ignorant or secure. Masses were said in Rome, for the good success of the Powder-plot; but no prayers in England, for our deliverance: and yet we were delivered. A seven-fold Psalmody they had framed here, which secretly passed from hand to hand, with tunes set, to be sung for the chearing up of their wicked hearts, with an expe∣ctation (as they called it) of their day of Jubilee. The matter consisteth of railing upon King Edward, Queen Elizabeth, and King James; Spec. bell. sacri. of petition, imprecation, prophecie, and praise. This Psalter is hard to be had: for they are taken up by the Pa∣pists, as other books be, that discover their shame. But Mendo∣za, that lyer, (conveniunt rebus nomina saepè suis) sounded the Triumph before the Victory. That blinde Letter of theirs
brought all to light, by the meer mercy of the Father of lights, who was pleased to put a divine sentence into the mouth of the King. Sorex suo perit indicio. Hunc tibi pugionem mittit Senatus, dixit ille: detexit facinus fatuus, & non imple vit. So here. See the like, 1 Sam. 19.2. Acts 9.24. & 23.16. [And she sent and called Jacob] Why did she not call both her sons together, and make them friends, by causing the younger to resigne up his blessing to the elder? Because she preferred heaven before earth, and eternity before any the worlds amity or felicity whatsoever. The devil would fain compound with us, when he cannot conquer us; as Pharaoh would let some go, not all; or if all, yet not far. Religi∣osum oport et esse, sed non religentem. He cannot abide this strict∣ne's, &c. But we must be resolute for God and heaven. It's bet∣ter flee, with Jacob, yea, die a thousand deaths, then, with the loss of Gods blessing, to accord with Esau. Vers. 43. Flee thou to Laban] Flee then we may, when in dan∣ger of life; so it be with the wings of a dove, not with the pinni∣ons of a dragon. God must be trusted, not tempted. Means must be neither trusted, nor neglected. Vers. 44. Tarry with him a few days] Heb. unos dies. Sed facti sunt viginti anni. She reckoned upon a few days; but it pro∣ved to be twenty whole yeers: and she never saw Jacob again, as the Hebrew Doctors gather. Thus Man purposeth, God dispo∣seth. Some think she sent Deborah her nurse, to fetch him home, who died in the return, Gen. 35.8. Vers. 45. And he forget, &c.] Whiles wrongs are remembred, they are not remitted. He forgives not, that forgets not. When an inconsiderate fellow had stricken Cato in the Bath, Sen. de ira, lib. 1. and after∣wards cried him mercy; he replied, I remember not that thou didst strike me. Our Henry the sixth is said to have been of that happie memory, that he never forgat any thing but injuries. Esau was none such: He was of that sort, whom they call , soon angry, but not soon pleased. His anger was like coles of ju∣niper, Psal. 120.4. which burn extremely, last long, (a whole twelve-moneth about, as some write;) and though they seem ex∣tinct, revive again: Flamma redardescit, quae modò nulla fuit. Ovid. Vers. 46. I am weary of my life, &c.] A wise woman (saith an Interpreter) not willing to grieve her husband, she conceals from him Esau's malicious hatred of Jacob, and pretends another
cause of sending him away, to take him a fit wife. Let women learn, not to exasperate their husbands with quick words, or fro∣ward deeds; but study their quiet. Livia, wife to Augustus, being asked how she could so absolutely rule her husband, Do in Aug. answer∣ed, By not prying into his actions, and dissembling his affecti∣ons, &c. XXVIII. Vers. 1. Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him] HE doth not rate him, or rail at him. Anger must have an end. The Prodigals father met him, and kist him, when one would have thought, he should rather have kickt him, kill'd him. Pro peccato magno, Terent. paululum supplicii satis est patri. Vers. 2. Arise, go to Padan-aram] Jacob was no sooner blest, but banisht: so our Saviour was no sooner out of the water of Baptism, and had heard, This is my beloved Son, &c. but he was presently in the fire of temptation, and heard, If thou be the Son, &c. When Hezekiah had set all in good order, 2 Chron. 31. then up came Sennacherib with an army, Chap. 32.1. God will put his people to it; and often, after sweetest feelings. Vers. 3. And God Almighty bless thee] Here Isaac stablish∣eth the blessing to Jacob, lest haply he should think, that the bles∣sing so got, would be of no force to him. God passeth by the evil of our actions, and blesseth the good. Vers. 4. And give thee the blessing of Abraham] Here he is made heir of the blessing, as are also all true Christians, 1 Pet. 3.9. Caesar, when he was sad, said to himself, Cogita te esse Caesarem: so, think thou art an heir of heaven, and be sad if thou canst. Vers. 5. Isaac sent away Jacob] with his staff onely, Gen. 32.10. and to serve for a wife, Hos. 12.12. It was otherwise, when a wife was provided for Isaac. But Jacob went as privately as he could, probably, that his brother Esau might not know of his journey, and wait him a shrewd turn by the way. Hos. 12.12. he sled into Syria. Theodoret saith, it was, that the divine providence might be the better declared toward him, no better attended or accommodated. Vers. 6. When Esau saw, . &c.] But he was ever too late, and therefore that he did, was to little purpose. An over-late sight
is good neither in piety nor policy. They will finde it so, that are semper victuri; and never can finde time to begin, Seneca. till they are shut out of heaven for their trifling. How many have we known taken away in their offers and essays, before they had prepared their hearts to cleave to God! Vers. 7. And was gone to Padan-aram] Which was distant from Beer-sheba almost five hundred miles. This was the father of the brood of travellers; and his affliction is our instruction, Rom. 14.4. 1 Cor. 10.11. Vers. 8. pleased not his father] Whether himself or they plea∣sed God, or not, was no part of his care. God is not in all the wicked mans thoughts. That he strives for, is, to be well esteemed of by others, to have the good will and good word of his neigh∣bours and friends, such especially as he hopes for benefit by. Thus Julian counterfeited zeal, till he had got the Empire: afterwards, of Julian, he became Idolian, as Nazianzen saith he was common∣ly called, because he set open again the Idols temples, (which had been shut up by Constantine) and restored them to the Heathens. Vers. 9. Then went Esau unto Ishmael] Stulta haec fuit , & hypocrisis, saith Pareus rightly. Apes will be imitating men: Spiders have their webs, and Wasps their honey-combs. Hypocrites will needs do something, that they may seem to be some-body: but, for want of an inward principle, they do no∣thing well: they amend one errour with another, as Esau here; and as Herod prevents perjury by murther. Thus, while they shun the sands, they rush upon the rocks; Incidit in Scyl∣lam, cupiens vi∣tare Charybdim. and while they keep off the shallows, they fall into the whirl-pool. Sed nemo it a perplexus tenetur inter du vitia, quin exitus pateat absque tertio, saith an Ancient. Vers. 10. And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba] A long jour∣ney; but nothing so long as Christ took, from heaven to earth, to serve for a wife, his Church; who yet is more coy then Rachel, and can hardly be spoken withal, though he stand clapping and calling, Open to me, my sister, my spouse. Stupenda dignatio, saith One; a wonderful condescending. Vers. 11. And he lighted upon a certain place] Little thinking to have found heaven there. Let this comfort travellers, and friends that part with them. Jacob never lay better, Mal cubans suaviter dorm & slicitèr somt. then when he lay without doors; nor yet slept sweeter, then when he laid his head upon a stone. He was a rich mans son, and yet inured to take hard on.
Vers. 12. Behold a ladder] Scala est piorum in hoc mundo pere∣grinatio, saith Pareus, after Iunius. But besides this interpretati∣on, our Saviour offereth us another, Ioh 1.51, applying it to him∣self, the true ladder of life, per quem solùm in coelum ascendere possimus. He that will go up any other way, must, as the Empe∣rour once said, erect a ladder, and go up alone. He touched hea∣ven, in respect of his Deity; earth, in respect of his humanity; and joyned earth to heaven, by reconciling Man to God. Gregory speaks elegantly of Christ, , that he joyned heaven and earth together, as with a bridge; being the onely true Pontifex, or bridge-maker. Heaven is now open and obvious, to them that ac∣knowledge him their sole Mediator, and lay hold, by the hand of faith, on his merits, as the rounds of this heavenly ladder: These onely ascend; that is, their consciences are drawn out of the depths of despair, and put into heaven, as it were, by pardon, and peace with God, rest sweetly in his bosom, calling him Abba Father; and have the holy angels ascending, to report their necessities; and descending, as messengers of mercies. We must also ascend (saith S. Bernard) by those two feet, (as it were) Meditation, and Prayer: yea, there must be continual ascensions in our hearts, as that Martyr said: M. Philpot. And as Iacob saw the Angels ascending and descending, and none standing still; so must we be active, and a∣bundant in Gods work, as knowing, that our labour is not in vain in the Lord; Bern. and that, non proficere, est deficere; not to go for∣ward, is to go backward. Vers. 13. I am the Lord God of Abraham, &c.] What an ho∣nour is this to Abraham, that God was not ashamed to be called, His and his sons God! Eusebs the Historian, was called Eu∣sebius Pamphili, for the love that was betwixt him and the Mar∣tyr Pamphilus, as S. Hierome testifieth. Friend to Sir Philip Sid∣ney is ingraven upon a Noble-mans Tomb in this Kingdom, The old Lord Brook. as one of his Titles. Behold the goodness of God, stooping so lowe, as to stile himself, The God of Abraham, and Abraham again, The friend of God. Vers. 14, 15. And thy seed shall be as the dust] Against his four∣fold cross, here's a fourfold comfort, (as Pererius well observeth) a plaister as broad as the sore, and soveraign for it. Against the loss of his friends, I will be with thee: 2. of his country; I will give thee this lond: 3. against his poverty; Thou shalt spread abroad, to the east, west, &c. 4. his soltariness and aloneness; Angels shall at∣tend
thee; and, Thy seed shall be as the dust, Num. 23.10. &c. And who can count the dust of Iacob? saith Balaam, that Spelman of the devil, as One calls him. Whereunto we may adde that which surpasseth and comprehendeth all the rest; In thee, and thy seed shall all the fami∣lies of the earth be blessed. Now whatsoever God spake here with Iacob, he spake with us, as well as with him, saith Hosea, Chap. 12.4. Vers, 16. And I knew it not] Viz. that God is graciously pre∣sent in one place, as well as in another. Our ignorance and unbe∣lief is freely to be confessed, and acknowledged. Thus David, Psal. 73.22. Agur, Prov. 30.2. Pray for me, In his Letter to Ridley, Act. & Mon. 1565. Sem. in 3 Sund. in Ad∣vent. saith Father La∣timer to his friend; pray for me, I say: for I am sometimes so fearful, that I would creep into a mouse-hole. And in a certain Sermon; I my self, saith he, have used, in mine earnest matters, to say, Yea by S. Mary; which indeed is naught. Vers. 17. How dreadful is this place! The place of Gods pub∣like Worship, is a place of Angels and Archangels, . (saith Chryso∣stom;) it is the Kingdom of God; it is very heaven: What wonder then, though Iacob be afraid, albeit he saw nothing but vi∣sions of love and mercy? Psal. 5.7. In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple, saith David. The very Turk, when he comes into his Temple, lays by all his State, and hath none to attend him all the while. Omninò oportet nos, orationis tempore, curiam intrare coelestem, (saith S. Bernard) in qua Rex regum stellato sedet solio, Bern. de di∣vers. 25. &c. Quanta ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, quantâ illuc hu∣militate accedere debet e palude suâ procedens & repens vilis ranun∣cula? Our addresses must be made unto God, with the greatest reverence that is possible. Vers. 18. And set it up for a pillar] The better to perpetuate the memory of that mercy he had there received; and that it might be a witness against him, if hereafter he failed of fulfilling his vow. It is not amiss, in making holy vows, to take some friend to witness, that, in case we be not careful so to fulfil them, may minde us, and admonish us, of our duty in that behalf. Iacob, that was here so free, when the matter was fresh, to promise God a Chappel at Bethel, was afterwards backward enough; and stood in need that God should pull him by the ear, once and again, with a Go up to Bethel, and punish him for his delays, in the rape of his daughter, cruelty of his sons, &c. Gen. 35. Vers. 20. And Iacob vowed a vow] The first holy votary that
ever we read of: whence Iacob also is called, The father of vows; which, out of this Text, may be thus described A Vow is no∣thing else, but a religious promise made to God in prayer, and grounded upon the promise of God; whereby we tie our selves, by way of thankfulness, to do something that is lawful, and with∣in our power; with condition of obtaining some further favour at the hands of God. Thus Iacob vows to God onely: he is the sole object of Fear, therefore also of Vows. See them set toge∣ther, Psal. 76.11. Next, he prays when he vows. : a vow and a prayer are of neer and necessary affinity. See Psal. 61.6. Iudg 11.30, 31. That was a blasphemous vow of Pope Iulius, that said, Act. & Mon. he would have his will, al despito di Dio. And not unlike of Solyman the Great Turk, in a Speech to his Souldiers: So help me great Mahomet, Turk. hist. I vow, in despite of Christ and Iohn, in short time to set up mine Ensignes with the Moon, in the middle of the Market-place in Rhodes. Iacob, as he vowed onely by the Fear of his father Isaac; so he presented his vow in an holy prayer, not in an hellish execration. I adde, that it is a promise, grounded upon Gods promise: so was Iacobs here, in all points; as is to be seen, if compared with verse 15 of this Chapter. Next, I say, that by this Vow we binde our selves, &c. Not as casting any new snare upon our selves thereby; but rather a new provocation to the pay∣ment of an old debt. For what can Iacob vow to God, that he he owes him not before hand, without any such obligation? This he doth too, by way of thankfulness; as doth likewise David, Psal. 116.8, 9. and other-where. And that which he voweth, is lawful, and possible: not as theirs was, that vowed Pauls death, Acts 23. or as Iulian the Apostata's; who, going against the Persians, made this vow, that, if he sped well, he would offer the blood of Christians. Act. & Mon. 1914. Or as that Constable of France, who cove∣nanted with God, that if he had the Victory at S. Quintins, he would set upon Geneva. These men thought, they had made a great good bargain with God; but did not his hot wrath kindle against them? Camd. Elisab. fol. 258. A. D. 1583. So Gerald Earl of Desmond's Irish men were justly consumed with famined sword, which had barbarously vowed to forswear God, before they would forsake him. Lastly, all this that Iacob doth, is on condition of some further favour: If God will be with me, and will preserve me, and provido for me, &c. All which he doubts not of, as having a promise; but yet helps for∣ward his faith by this holy vow; then shall God have the utmost,
both in inward and outward worship: for God shall be his God; and he will build him an house, and pay him Tythes, &c. [And will give me bread to eat] Having food and raiment, (saith the A∣postle) let us therewith be content. Nature is content with little; grace, with less. Insaniae damnandi sunt, quitam multa, Vir bonus pau∣cis indiget. tam anxiè congerunt, quum sit tam paucis opus, saith Lud. Vives. , saith Clem. Alex. Cibus & potus sunt divitiae Christianorum, saith Hierome. Bread and water, with the Gospel, are good chear, saith Greenham. Cui cum paupertate bene convenit pauper non est. Seneca. The disciples are bid pray for bread, not bisket: they dined, on a Sabbath-day, with corn rubb'd in their hands, with broiled fish, Melch. Adam. &c. Luther made many a meal of a herring; Junius, of an egge. One told a Philosopher, If you'll be content to please Dionysius, you need not feed upon green herbs. He replied; And if you be content to feed upon green herbs, you need not please Dionysius. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 1. Then Jacob went on his journey] HEb. lift up his feet: indefessi cursoris instar; as it were a ge∣nerous and manly horse, refresht with his bait by the way, he went lightly on his long journey. Neh. 8.10. The joy of the Lord was Ja∣cobs strength: it became as oil; wherewith his soul being suppled, he was made more lithe, nimble, and fit for action. He that is once soaked in this oil, and bathed, with Jacob, in this bath at Bethel, will chearfully do or suffer ought for Gods sake. Tua praesentia Domine Laurentio ipsam craticulam dulcem fecit, saith One. Gau∣debat Crispina cùm tenebatur, eùm audiebatur, cùm damnabatur, Aug. in Psal. 137. Crux enim in∣uncta est, &c. Crucem multi abhom inautur, crucem videutes, sed non videntes unctionem. Bern. Act. & Mon. fol. 857. Ibid. 813. cùm ducebatur, saith Austin. So did many of the Marian Martyrs, as were easie to instance. Bernard gives the reason: The Cross is oiled, saith he; and, by the grace of the Spirit helping our infirmities, it is made, not onely light, but sweet; and not onely not troublous and terrible, but desirable and delectable. From the delectable Or∣chard of the Leonine prison: so that Italian Martyr Algerius dated his Letter. Another Dutch Martyr, feeling the flame to come to his beard, Ah, said he, what a small pain is this, to be compared to the glory to come! Let us pluck up our feet, pass from strength to strength, and take long and lusty strides toward
heaven. It is but a little afore us; and a ready heart rids the way apace. Vers. 2. Three stocks of sheep lying by it] Semblaby Christ, the chief Shepherd, Rev. 7.16, 17. Psal. 23.2. feeds and leads his flock to the lively fountains of waters; commanding his under-shepherds, the Ministers, to roll a way the stone, by opening the promises, that his sheep may drink water with joy, Isai. 12. out of those wells of salvation. Vers. 3. And he put the stone again upon the wells mou] To keep the waters clean and filth-free. Turk, hist. The Turks had procured some traitor in Scodra (where Scanderbeg ruled) to poison the Town-well. The Pope hath endeavoured the like, by pouring out his deadly poison upon the rivers and fountains of water (the Scri∣ptures) that they might become blood: Rev. 16.4. witness that Heathenish Decree of the Councel of Trent; equalizing, if not preferring, the Apocrypha, to the Canonical Scripture; the vulgar Translation, to the Original; Traditions, to holy Writ: and affirming, that the holy Ghost himself is not to be heard, D. Prid. Lect. de Testib. though he bring never so plain Scripture for himself, nisi accedat meretricis pnrpuratae effrons interpretatio, saith a learned Doctor; unless the Pope may inter∣pret it. Horrible blasphemy! Had not Gods servants need to see to the cleansing of this Well, and the keeping it free from the tramplings and defilements of this foul Beast? The Councel of Constance comes in with a Non-obstante, Licèt Christus, post coenam, in∣stituerit, & suis discipulis admi∣nistraverit, &c. Caranza, Sum. Concil. sess. 13. Bee-hive of Rome, p. 12. against Christs Instituti∣on; withholding the Cup from the Sacrament. Before that the Gospel was corrected, amended, and expounded, (y the Canon∣ists) there were many things permitted, (as Priests Marriage;) which now, since the time is come that all things are made perfect, are clearly abolished and taken away. When the Hussites denied to admit any Doctrine that could not be proved by the holy Scri∣ptures, the Councel of Basil answered them, by Cardinal Cusanus, that the Scriptures were not of the essence of the Church, but of the well-being of it onely; That the Word of God was so much the better taught the people, Tautò dignius verbum Dei tra∣di, quanto remo∣tiu ab omni Scriptura: cam explicandam juxta currentem Ecclesiae ritum, &c. Revius de vit. Pontif. p. 235. by how much it had less of the Scri∣ptures in it: That the Scripture was to be interpreted according to the currant Rite of the Church; quâ mutante sententiam, mu∣tetur & Dei judicium. Can any hear this, and his ears not tingle? This was then the Popes Express: for in Popish Councels, the Bi∣shops and others have no more to do, but simply, inclinao capite, to say Placet to that, which in the Popes name is propounded to them: As nothing was resolved by the Trent-Fathers, but all in
Rome: whence grew that blasphemous Proverb, Hist. of Counc. of Trent, 497. Rev. 16.3. Brightman. which habhor to relate. This Councel was that sea, upon which the second Angel poured out his vial, and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living soul died in that sea. Cavete. Vers. 4. And Jacob said] These petty passages are recorded, when the acts of mighty Monarchs are unmentioned; to shew Gods dear respect to his poor servants. The Lion and Eagle were not offered in sacrifice, as the Lamb and Dove were. Master Fox being asked, whether he knew such an honest poor man; answered, I remember him well: I tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies, to re∣member such. So doth God. Vers. 6. And behold Rachel his daughter] Note, that our least and ordinary actions, are ordered and directed by God; as Na∣thaneel's being under the fig-tree, &c. Joh. 1.48. Birds flying seem to flie at liberty, yet are guided by an over-ruling hand of Heaven: so are our thoughts, affections, actions. Sic curat Deus universos, quasi singulos; sic singulos, quasi solos, saith Augustine. Rachel, by a divine providence, meets Jacob at the Well: so doth the Church (that shepherdess, Cant. 1.7.8.) meet Christ in his Ordinances, Psal. 23.2, 3. Vers. 7. Neither is it time, &c.] Time is a precious commodi∣ty, and must be thriftily husbanded. The common complaint is, We want time: But the truth is, we do not so much want, Non parùm ha∣bemus temperis, sed multum per∣dimus. Sen. as waste it; as the Heathen observed: which they that do, are wast∣fullest prodigals: for, of all other possessions, two may be had to∣gether; but two moments of time cannot be possest together. This made the Philosopher so parsimonious of time; Senec. Epist. Nullus mihi per otium exit dies; I cannot afford to cast away a day; partem noctium studiis vendico; part of the night I take for my studies. So did Charles the Great; and after him, Charles the fifth, He had, for that purpose, as his Instructor, Turrianus of Cremona ever with him. who (when at any time in the field against the enemy) spent what hours he could spare, in the studie of the Mathematicks. As if he had been of Cato's minde, That great men must be able to give good account, non minus otii. quàm negotii; no less of their leasure, then of their labour. His constant custom was, saith Cicero, Cato in Orig. Cic. desenect. to call to minde, at evening, what thing soever he had seen, read, or done, that day. King Alfred, that reigned here, Anno Dom. 872, is said to have cast the natural day into three parts: Eight hours he spent in praying, studie, and writing; eight in the service of his body; eight in the affairs of State. Which spaces, (having then
no other engine for it) he measured by a great wax light, Dan. Chron. fol. 13. divided into so many parts; receiving notice by the keeper thereof, as the several hours passed in the burning. Qui nescit quo vita modo volat, audiat horas: Quàm sit vita brevis, nos docet ille sonus. Vers. 8. We cannot, until all the flocks] As we are not (by the example of these shepherds) to enterprise things above our strength, Psal. 131.1. so neither to be discouraged by every dissi∣culty; but to lend, and borrow help one of another; each man pleasing his neighbour for his good, Rom. 14.2. and serving him in love, to edi∣fication. Divisae his operae, sed mens suit unica, pavit Ore Lutherus oves, flore Melancthon apes. Vers. 9. For she kept them] Leah might be left at home, for the tenderness of her eyes. A man is to see, that all under his roof have a fit employment; as the Master gave each servant his task, Matth. 25.15. his talent, according to his several ability, secundum peritiam & potentiam. And every one hath some excellency or other in him, can we but finde, and improve it. God hath dispensed his gifts diversly, for the common benefit. And as, in the same pa∣sture, the ox can finde fodder, the hound a hare, the stork a lizard, the fair maid flowers: so there is none so worthless, but something may be made of him; some good extracted out of the unlikeliest. Yea, wisdom is such an Elixar, as by contaction (if there any dis∣position of goodness in the same metal) it will render it of the property. Vers. 10. Went neer, and rolled the stone, &c.] If he did this alone, as the Text seemeth to say, it was very strange. He might put forth his strength, to gratifie Rachel, and to insinuate himself into her love. Vers. 11. Lifted up his voice, and wept] For joy, that he had so happily light upon his kinswoman. It argued also his great af∣fection, and passion of minde, for her sake: Love is exstatical; —nec juris se sinit esse sui. Animus est ubi amat, non ubi ani∣mat. He kisseth Rachel, as if he would have transfused his soul into her: Ovid. Amor. lib. 2. Magin, in Geogr. and wept aloud; not as those vain lovers, who ut flerent, oculos erudiêre suos: Nor as the Brasileans, whose faculty is such, that tears are for a present salutation; and as soon gone, as if they had said, How do you? But as Joseph wept over Benjamin; the Prodigals father over him, &c.
Vers. 12. That he was her fathers brother] And therefore made so bold with her, upon no further acquaintance. His kisses were not unchaste, but modest; such as were common among kinred. And yet here care must betaken, that Satan corrupt not our courte∣sie, or more intimate acquaintance, with never so near an alliance. Flyes may settle upon the sweetest perfumes, and putrifie them. S. Paul saw cause to exhort Timothy, 2 Tim. 5.2. (that mortified young man) to exhort the younger women, as sisters, With all purity; because, through the subtilty of Satan, and the deceit of his own heart, even whiles he was exhorting them to chastity, some unchaste motions might steal upon him. A great deal of caution doth no hurt. Abundaus cau∣tela non nocet. Vers. 13. He ran to meet him, and embraced him] All in hypo∣crisie, as the Hebrews hold. There be many Labans; hot at first, cold at last; friendly in the beginning, froward in the end. A free friend at first, a kinde friend to the last, is Rara avis in terris. Mic. 7.5. Trust not in a friend, put not confidence in a brother, &c. Look rather unto the Lord, as the Church doth there he is the onely Suresby, as they say; and will never fail us: when the World, as Laban, will shew it self at parting, if not before. [He told Laban all these things] why, and how he came so poorly to him; when as Abra∣hams servant, coming upon a like errand, came far better attended and appointed: which was the thing that Laban, likely, looked af∣ter, when he ran out to meet Jacob. Vers. 14. Surely thou art my bone, &c.] Good words cost no∣thing; and the veriest carls are commonly freer of them, then of real courtesies. Pertinax the Emperour was sirnamed , quòd blandus esset, magis quàm benignus. But that of Nero was abo∣minable; who, the very day before he killed his mother, . Dio in Ner. most lo∣vingly embraced her, kissed her eyes and hands; and accompanying her, when she departed, used these sweet words; All happiness at∣tend you, my good mother: for in you I live, and by you I raign. As a potsheard covered with silver-dross, so are burning lips, and a wicked heart, Prov. 26.23. Vers. 15. Shouldst thou therefore serve me] He pretends loveand equity, to his covetous aims and reaches. Candid he would needs seem, (according to his name) and considerate. Laban, est can∣didus. But as Black∣moors have their teeth onely white; so is Labans kindness from the teeth outward. He was as a whited wall, or painted sepul∣chre, or an Egyptian temple; fair and specious without; but with∣in, some cat, rat, or calf there idolized, and adored. Hypocrites,
whatever they pretend, have a hawks eye to praise or profit: they must be gainers by their piety or humanity; which must be another Dianae, to bring gain to the crafts-master. The Eagle, when she soareth highest, hath an eye ever to the prey. Vers. 17. Leah was tender-eyed] Purblinde, or squint, as One interprets it. Turk. hist. fol. 483. Now a froward look, and squint eyes, (saith the Hi∣storian) are the certain notes of a nature to be suspected. The Je∣rusalemy Targum tells us, that her eyes were tender with weeping and praying. Mary Magdalene is famous for her tears; and Christ was never so neer her, as when she could not see him for weeping. Heidfeld. After which, she spent (as some report) thirty yeers in Gallia Narbonensi, in weeping for her sins. [But Rachel was beautiful, &c.] Plate calls beauty, the principality of nature: A∣ristorle, a greater commendation then all Epistles. See the Notes on Chap. 24 16. Vers. 18. I will serve thee seven yeers] He had nothing to en∣dow her with; he would therefore earn her, with his hard la∣bour: which, as it shews Labans churlishness to suffer it, and his baseness, to make a prize and a prey of his two daughters; so it sets forth Jacob's meekness, poverty, patience, and hard condition here, mentioned many yeers after by the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 12.12. He was a man of many sorrows; and from him therefore the Church hath her denomination: neither were the faithful ever since called Abrahamites, but Israelites. Vers. 19. It is better that I give her to thee] Indeed, he sold her to him, for seven yeers service. This was Laban, or Nabal, chuse you which. Their names were not more like, then their conditions. Labans daughters, and Nabals wife, were also alike handled by their unkinde parents. He hath sold us, said they, and hath also quite devoured our money, Gen. 31.15. And, He hath married me, might Abigail have said, to the money, and not to the man; and though he named me his joy, yet he hath caused me much sorrow. How many a childe is so cast away, by the covetous parents! It was better with Labans two daughters; but no thanks to their father. Nox longa qui∣bus mentitur a∣mica, diesque longa videtur opu debentibus, & piger annu pupillis. Vers. 20. And they seemed unto him but a few days] And yet lovers hours are full of eternity. But love facilitated the service, and made the time seem short. Should any thing seem hard or heavie to us, so we may have heaven at length? The affliction is but light and momentany; the glory massie, and for all eternity.
Hold out, Faith and Patience. Love is a passion, and seen most in suffering; much water cannot quench it. Nay, like fire, Cant. 8.7. it devours all delays and difficulties; spending and exhaling it self, as it were, in continual wishes to be at home, to be with Christ, . Phil. 1.23. which is far far the better. Oh let the eternal weight of the Crown, weigh down, with us, the light and momentany weight of the Cross. Vers. 21. Give me my wife; for my days, &c.] Jacob had ser∣ved out his time, and now demands his due. David also is said to have served the will of God, for his own age; and John Baptist, Acts 13.35. to have fulfilled his course, (in the same Chapter.) Vers. 25. Moses also was faithful in all Gods house, as a servant. Yet these could not call for heaven, as their wages, because they were (as the best are, at their best) but unprofitable servants, and did not, in any measure, Luke 17.10. what their duty was to do. We have not a bit of bread of our own earning; and are therefore taught to pray, Give us this day our daily bread: we get our living by begging. Our best plea is, Domine, non sum dignus, nihilominùs tamen sum indigens: Lord, I am not worthy, but I am needy, as Pomeran said. Then will God, of his free grace, supply all our necessities, and afterwards receive us to glory. He will bring us into the Bride-chamber of heaven, and there will he give us his loves. He will let out himself into us, to our infinite delight. Of all natural delights, that of Marriage is the most, because there is the greatest communication of one creature to another; and according to the degrees of communi∣cation, are the degrees of delight. Think the same in the mysti∣cal Marriage. Vers. 22. And made a feast] Never more seasonable, surely, then at the recovery of the lost rib. The Wedding-day is called, The day of the rejoycing of a mans heart, Cant. 3.11. Our Savi∣our graced such a feast, with his presence, and first miracle: Ho supplied them with wine, to glad their hearts: not with a little, for healths sake onely; but with a great quantity, for sober delight, and honest affluence. It is noted, as an absurd thing, in Samson's wife, that she wept all the days of the feast. A feast then there was at Samson's wedding, and of seven days continuance. Judg. 14.10, 11 And so there was at Jacob's, as may be gathered out of vers. 27. Fulfil her week, saith Laban; to wit, of banquet or Bride-ale, as we call it: Onely that of Chrysostom comes here in fitly; De nuptiis Jacobi legimus; de choreis & tripudiis, non legimus: Of Jacobs Wedding-feast we read; but of dancing and dalliance, of tracing,
and tripping on the toe, we read not. In maxima libertate, mini∣ma licentia, saith Salvian. Merry we may be, at such a time; but, in the Lord: Deut. 12.7. eat and drink we may; but, before the Lord. The old world may be a warning to us: they fed without fear; and therefore perished, Jude 12. without favour. Let such look to it, as live in pleasure, James 5. and are wanton; that cat to excess, and drink to drun∣kenness; accounting nothing mirth, but madness; no bread sweet, but stollen; no such pleasure, as to have the devil their play-fellow: so nourishing their hearts as in a day of slaughter, Multi apud ho∣mines mandu∣cant, quod apud iferos digerunt. Aug. or belly chear, James 5.5. and swallowing down those murthering morsels now, that they must digest in hell. Vers. 23. He took Leah his daughter] The elder, for the young∣er; by a like fraud as Rebeccah his mother had, not long before, in a cunning disguise, substituted him  younger son, for the elder. God pays us often in our own coyn, and measures to us again the self-same measure that we have meted to others. Plerunque Deus servat legem talionis. Herod mocked the Wise-men, and is mocked of them: And how oft do we see those that would beguile others, punished with illusion? God usu∣ally retaliates, and proportions jealousie to jealousie, provocation to provocation, Deut. 32.21. number to number, Isai. 65.11, 12. choice to choice, Isai. 66.3, 4. device to device, Mic. 2.1, 3. fro∣wardness to frowardness, Psal. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety, Levit. 26.21. Even the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, Prov. 11.13. as was Jacob. Vers 25. In the morning, behold it was Leah] A foul disap∣pointment: but so the world ever serves us. The Hebrews have taken up this passage for a proverb, when a mans hopes are decei∣ved in a wife; or any thing else, wherein he lookt for content and comfort. Vers. 26. It must not be so done in our country] A sorry excuse: but better, he thought, then none at all. A subtil fox he was, and far too hard for honest Jacob, who was simple to evil, but of a large reach for heaven. The children of this world are wise in their gene∣ration; and so is the Fox in his: but God will take them in their own craft, 1 Cor. 3.20. . Manu capere et firmiter tenere Cic. ad Attic. 1 Cor. 2.12. as wilde beasts in a snare, made and taken to be de∣strayed. Let us take heed how we deal with them, and make our bargains as wise as we can. Crebr nobis, sicut Ciceroni, vafer illè Siculus insusurret Epicharmi cantilenam illam suam, . We have not received the spirit of this world; we cannot skill of the devils depths: but we have received a better
thing; the Spirit which searcheth all, yea the deep things of God. 1 Cor. 2 10. Vers. 27. We will give thee this also] See here the guise of wicked and deceitful men: when one setch hath fadg'd to their mindes, they devise another; and make no end of over-reaching; there never wanting (as the Proverb hath it) a new knack in a knaves cap. They will search the devils scull, but they will finde out one slippery trick or another, to cheat, and go beyond those they deal with. But let them look to it; God is the avenger of all such, 1 Thess. 4. whose not not heads onely, but bellies prepare deceit, Job 15.35. Vers. 28. And Jacob did so] A mirrour of patience; which, in Jacob here, had line and rope, her perfect work; shewing him, James 1.3. to be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Godly people can bear wrongs best of any: com them to go a mile, they'll be content, if it may do good, to go twain; yea, as far as the shooes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace will carry them. Vers. 30. And he went in also unto Rachel] Which incestuous fact cannot ordinarily be justified, nor may at all be imitated. Wicked Julia solliting Caracalla to incestuous marriage with her; when he answered, Vollem si liceret, replied impudently, (and is therefore, by very Heathens, condemned extremely) Si libet, licet: an nescis te Imperatorem esse leges dare non accipere? &c. Herod, for marrying his brothers wife, was reproved, and punished. Vers. 31. When the Lord saw that Leah was hated] That is, less loved and respected. So God hated Esau; and accounts the neglects of wife or husband, no better then hatred, Eph. 5.25. [But Rachel was barren] God commonly crosseth mens preposte∣rous affections, that he may draw all love to himself. Jonah loseth his gourd, (and we our dearest delights) by over-loving them. Vers. 32. They tke my husband will love me] This was her greatest care, (and is every good wives) to please her husband, and to win his love. Vers. 33. And she conceived again] God usually heapeth his favours upon those, whom others slight, and look aloof on. Vers. 34. And she conceived again] So, what she wanted in beauty, she had in foecundity or fruitfulness: and this redounded to Gods greater glory, by Leah's thankfulness; who might say, Si mihi difficilis formam natura negavit, Sappho ap Ovid. Laude Dei, formae, damna rependo, meae.
Vers. 35. Now will I praise the Lord] So she had done before, at the birth of her other children: But now she would do it anew, upon the receit of a new mercy: according to that, Sing unto the Lord a new song. Isai. 42.10. A good woman she seems to have been; and the better, because not so well beloved of her husband; which she could not but see to be just upon her, for her consenting to the sin (with her father) of deceiving Jacob. CHAP. XXX. Verse 1. Give me children, or else I die] SHe was sick of the fret; and could not live, unless Jacob could cure her. Prov. 14.30. Envie is the rottenness of the bones, and ever devours it self first; as the worm doth the nut out of which it groweth. Vers. 2. And Jacobs anger was kindled] He that will be an∣gry, and not sin, must not be angry, but for sin. Reprove thy wife, thou maist; chide her, thou maist not, unless the offence be against God, as here, and Job 2.10. And here a man may carry a severe rebuke in his countenance, as God doth, Psal. 80.16. though he say nothing: he may chide with his looks onely. [Am I in Gods stead?] who carrieth this key under his own girdle; as is afore-noted. Lo, children are an heritage that cometh of the Lord, as David once sang for Solomon, who had the experience of it: for of so many wives, he had but one son, that we read of; and he was none of the wisest. Eccles. 2.19. This Solomon foresaw, and bewailed, as one unhappie bird, in his nest of Vanities. Vers. 3. Behold my maid Bilhah] Given her by her father on purpose, it may seem; that in case she proved barren, she might be built up by her. So Stratonice, the wife of King Deitarus, being barren, gave secretly her maid Electra unto her husband; by whom she had an heir to the Crown, as Plutarch relateth. Vers. 4. And Jacob went in unto her] Meerly to please his wise, he yeelded to that which he could not but disallow, as evil. Heed must be taken, that the hen crow not, that the wife rule nor. This , was a part of Jacob's punishment. Vers. 6. God hath judged me, &c.] A vile prophanation of Gods holy Name, under an opinion and pretence of piety. So they that, brow-beating their brethren, better then themselves,
said, Let the Lord be glorified: and it grew to a Proverb, Isai. 66.5. In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. Act. & Mon. The Conspirators in Edward the sixth's time, indorsed their Letters with Glory be to God on high, on arth peace, &c. A fair glove drawn upon a foul hand. Vers. 8. With great wrestlings] Heb. with wrestlings of God; Magno defiderio, precibu, suspi∣riis, luctata est adversus sorrem Parcus in loc. that is, with excellent and most earnest wrestlings and endeavours; by storms of sighs, and showers of tears. Stupidity is the lowe extreme, like the dull earth. Despair is as much too high, as it were in the element of fire, which scorches up the spirit. The mid∣dle region of Air and Water, Sighs and Tears, is the best. Vers. 14. And found mandrakes] Some render it, Lovely flow∣ers; others, Violets; others, Lilies; others again, Cherries of Ju∣ry; the Greek, and most Interpreters, Mandrakes, or Mandrake∣apples. It is a plant very amiable, Vide Drus. in fine com Ruth. (according to the name) both for sweetness of smell, Ca. 7.13; the loveliness of the flower, resembling a man; and for the peculiar vertue it hath, to cause sleep, affection, and conception. Vers. 15. Therefore he shall lie with thee, &c.] Thus he is bought and sold by his emulous wives: which was no small affliction to him, and a punishment of his Polygamy. Vers. 16. Thou must come in unto me] These contentions (saith an Interpreter) were not meerly carnal, but partly also, Ainsw. for desire of Gods ordinary blessing in propagation; and chiefly, for the increase of the Church, and obtaining the promised seed for sal∣vation. Vers. 18. God hath given me my hire] Wherein she was much mistaken, as having not her senses exercised to discern good and evil. Here she rejoyceth, in that for which she should have re∣pented; and was in the common errour, Foelix seclus virtus vocatur. Tull. de divn. lib. 2. of measuring and judging of things, by the success; as if God were not many times angry with men, though they outwardly prosper. Thus Dionysius, after the spoils of an Idol-temple, finding the windes favourable, Lo, said he, how the gods approve of sacriledge. Vers. 20. God hath endued me with a good dowry] That is as it proves, though. Children are dulcis acerbitas, saith One, Plutar. de pro∣lis amore. certain cares; but uncertain comforts, saith Another; yet all men desire them: How much more should we covet grace, and those things that accompany salvation? These having gotten, we may safely and surely say, God hath endued me with a good dowry. Vers. 22. And God remembred Rachel] She begun to think,
that God had forgotten her, because she was so long suspended, and her prayers not answerd, This is a common fault. David bewails it in himself. Basil grew so weary of the Arrian persecu∣tion, Psal. 77. that once he cried out, An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit Dominus? an novissima hora est? &c. So the Church of old; Where is thy zeal and thy strength, Isa. 63.15. Lord? the soundings of thy bow∣els, and of thy mercies towards us? are they restrained? Here we must check and chide our selves, for once questioning Gods kinde remembrance of us, whom we cannot forget; and learn, and labour not to waken our Welbeloved, Cant. 3.5. Isa. 30.19. Cant. 2.17. until he please. He Waits to be gra∣cious; and, when it is fit, will come leaping over the mountains of Bether, all lets and impediments. Vers. 23. God hath taken away my reproach] That is, her bar∣renness, (with which she was often upbraided) when now she was sufficiently humbled; besides that her children, (as the rest of those women that were long barren) are noted to have been the best, and most gracious: Ambrose as Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, Samuel, the Baptist, &c. A childe of many prayers cannot lightly miscarry, as he told Monica. Vers. 24. The Lord shall add to me another son] A sweet and sure way of argumentation, God that hath thus and thus done me good, Psal. 138.8. Bernard. will not be wanting to me in any thing, that may conduce to mine eternal comfort; but will perfect that which concerneth me. Qui ad vituli hortatur esum, quid tandem mihi negaturus est? Vers. 26. Exod. 2. Let me goe] Here Iacob was too hasty; as Moses was, in doing justice before his time, and therefore fled for it. Vers. 27. I pray thee, if I have found favour &c.] This miserable muck-worm, so he may advance his own ends, abaseth himself to his servants, colloguing, or any thing, to curry favour, and compass com∣modity. But he that is swallowed up of the earth (as Core was) his eares stopped, his heart stuffed, and all passages for Gods spirit obstructed by it, shall have earth enough, when he dyes: his mouth shall be filled with a spade-ful of mould, and his Never-enough quit with fire enough, in the bottom of hell. Such another courteous caytife as this in the text, was that Plautianus a rich Roman; Dio in vita Se∣veri. Is tantum filiae suaededit quan∣tum reginis 50 saisesset. Ibid. of great authority with Severus the Emperour. Omnia enim petebat ab omnibus, et cupiebat omnia, saith the Historian. Herein only he differed from Laban; when he married his daugh∣ter to Antonius the son of Severus, he gave her as much por∣tion, as would have sufficed for fifty Queens.
Vers. 30. The Lord hath blessed thee since my coming] Heb. at my foot. Hence grew that proverb used in Africa; Homo boni pedis; a man whose coming is prosperous; and is appliable to the Ministers of the Gospel; whose feet are beautiful and prosperous, if they faithfully feed the flock. Vers. 21. What shall I give thee?] Solent multum quaerere, qui cupiunt parum dare. But Laban would know his price, that he might be out of his pain. Vers. 32. And of such shall be my hire] As white and black sheep were most set by in Mesopotamia, so were the party colour∣ed in Palestina, (Jacob's countrey) whence the shepherds there are called Nochudim, (Amos 1.1) that is, keepers of spotted cattel. This might be a reason, why Jacob desires to be paid in such; and, perhaps, had learned that skill there, which he used in the follow∣ing verses. Vers. 33. So shall my righteousness, &c.] A good conscience fears no judge, no not God himself, in some particulars; as Psal. 7.3, 4. That which Jacob did here, was of God, Chap. 31.10. It was also a plain bargain between them; and Laban was handled in his kinde. Besides, the means Jacob used, was not fraudulent, but natural; not depending on mans skill, but Gods blessing: and all to recover out of the wretches hands, that which was but due to him for his hard service, and for his wives dowry. Vers. 34. Behold, I would it might be] He was glad to have him on the hip for a bad bargain, but is fairly deceived himself. God will see to his servants, that they shall not lose all: though the world think it neither sin, nor pity, to defraud them of their due. Vers. 36. And he set three days journey] Hoping so to disap∣point Jacob of having any thing, and to make his own party good with him. For, naturally, the cattel would bring forth others like themselves; and so Jacobs part should be little enough. Sed & hic fallitur sordidus impostor, saith Pareus. Laban was utterly out in his count, and cross'd in his designe. Vers. 38. And he set the rods which he had pilled] This was done, partly by the force of the phantasie, which is much affected with objects of the sight; or some other cogitation in the time of conception: partly, and chiefly, by the blessing of God: For, he that shall now try the same conclusion, shall finde himself frustra∣ted. Vers. 43. And the man increased exceedingly] So shall all
those do, (if it be for their eternal good) that depend upon God for success, and blessing upon their hard and honest labours. As for others, that will needs care and carve for themselves, being troubled about many things, but neglecting that One thing necessa∣ry, the Lord either gives the souls of such over to fuster shipwrack, or else strips them of all their lading and tacklings, breaking their estates all to pieces, and making them glad to go to heaven upon a broken plank. CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 1. And he heard the Words of Labans sons] THese were chips of the old block▪ as they say: as like the fa∣ther, as if spit out of his mouth. Avarice made them think, as Sejaus did, Tacitus. Quicquid non acquiritur, damnum; all lost, that fell beside their own lips. As a ship may be over-laden with gold and silver, even unto sinking, and yet have compass and sides enough to hold ten times more: so, covetous men, though they have enough to sink them, yet have they never enough to satisfie them. [Hath he gotten all this glory] That is, all this wealth, which easily gets glory; and goes therefore joyned with it, Prov. 3.16. & 8.18. This regina pecunia doth all, Eccles. 10.19. and hath all here belowe, saith Solomon. Money beareth the mastery, and is the Monarch of this world. None so admired, or so soon admitted, as he that is well moneyed. The Chaldee word for money, , of  strong, and , to prepare. . Plut. in Emyl. Manl.loc.com. P. 441. signifies to do some great work. It was commonly said in Greece, that not Philip, but his money, took their Cities. And a certain Grecian coming to Rome, where the honour of a Lord was offered unto him, answered, . Alli had a Cardinals that there bestowed upon him by the Pope: but because his hat had so thin lining; he wanted wealth, I mean, to support his state, he was commonly called, The starveling Car∣dinal; and no body cared for him. Vers. 2. And Jacob behelà the countenance of Laban] He said little, for shame, but thought the more; and could not so conceal his discontent, but that it appeared in his lowring looks. That which he had parted with in his riches, was, as it were, raked out of his belly, Job 20.11. he had as lief have parted with his very heart∣blood.
And this was plain to Jacob by his countenance, which had been friendly, smoothe, and smiling; but now was cloudy, sad, spiteful. The young men were hot, and could not hold or hide what was in their heart, but blurted it out, and spake their mindes freely. This old fox held his tongue, but could not keep his countenance. En, quàm difficile est animum non prodere vultu. Vers. 3. Return to the land of thy fathers] Labans frowns were a grief to Jacob; the Lord calls upon him therefore to look home∣ward. Let the worlds affronts, and the change of mens counte∣nances, drive us to him, who changeth not; and minde us of hea∣ven, where is a perpetual serenity and sweetness. Vers. 4. And Jacob sent, and called Rachel, &c.] He consults with his wives; so should we in matters of weight, of remove especially. They are our companions, the wives of our covenant, Mal. 2.14. not our vassals, or foot-stools; and must therefore be both of our court and counsel. Vers. 5. I see your fathers countenance, &c.] Merces mundi. . Pindar. Orat. pro Planc. This is the worlds wages. All Jacob's good service is now forgotten. Do an un∣thankful person nineteen kindnesses, unless you adde the twentieth, all's lost. Perraro grati homines reperiuntur, saith Cicero. Nemo benesicium in Calendarium scribit, saith Seneca. And the Poet Ausonius not unfitly, Sunt homines humeris quos siquis gest at ad urbem Ausoniam, domiti quae caput orbis erat: Nec tamen ad portam placide deponat eosdem, Gratia praeteriti nulla laboris erit. Vers. 6. With all my power I have served] The word transla∣ted power, signifieth that natural moisture of the body that ma∣keth it lively and lusty, vigorous and valorous to do service. So it is used, Gen. 49.3. Psal. 22.15. Now if Jacob served Laban with all his might, should not we the Lord, a far better Master? Ba∣ruch repaired earnestly, Nebem. 3.20. Caleb fulfilled after God, Num. 14.24 Nehemiah traded every talent, with which divine providence had trusted him: He worketh, warreth, watcheth, 2 Sam. 6.14. commandeth, encourageth, threatneth, punisheth, &c. David danced with all his might, and did all the wills of God to his dying day; painfully serving out his time, to the last. Happie is he that can say, in a spiritual sense, as it was said of Moses, that, after long profession of Religion, he remits not of his zeal; his sight is
not waxed dim, nor his natural heat or force abated; that he is not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Vers. 7. Changed my wages ten times] And ever for the worse. The matter mended, with poor Jacob, as sowre ale doth in sum∣mer. Laban the churl, the richer he grew by him, the harder he was to him: like children with mouthes full, and hands full, who will yet rather spoil all, then part with any. It is the love, not the lack of money, that makes men churls. Vers. 9. Thus God hath taken away, &c.] He is the true Pro∣prietary, and gives and takes away these outward things at plea∣sure; Psal. 75.6. as Hannah th it, 1 Sam. .7. And, Promotion cometh nei∣ther from the east, nor west, saith David; nor yet from the south, where the warm sun-shine is: much less from the north; (for, Ab Aquilone nihil boni:) But God is the Judge; he puts down La∣ban, and sets up Jacob: he spoiled the Egyptians, and enriched the Israelites with their jewels; which yet proved a snare to them, perhaps, Exod. 32.13. in the matter of the golden calf; as riches always do, when sent in to men by Gods providence onely, and not out of his favour, (as here to Jacob) and by vertue of the promise. Vers. 10, 11, 12. I saw in a dream, &c.] Of divine dreams, such as this was, see the Notes above, upon Chap 20.3. Vers. 12. I have seen all that Laban doth] And am resolved to fleece him for thy hire. Gain ill got, will burn mens fingers, and burn thorow their purses. Yea, the greater wealth, the greater spoil awaits such Misers; as, a tree with thick and large boughs, every man desires to lop him. Vers. 13. I am the God of Bethel, &c.] Here God pulls Jacob by the ear, as it were, and mindes him of his vow, which he had well-nigh forgotten: But the Lord looked for a performance, and afterward punished him for his slackness. Most mens practice proclaims, that, having escaped the danger, they would willing∣ly deceive the Saint. Sciapato il mor∣bo, fraudato il Sante. And of those that vow against sin, how many have we, who, when temptations, like strong Philistims, are upon them, break all bonds of God? whereby foul breaches are made into their consciences, such as nothing can cure, but the Blood of that great Votary, that Nazarite, Christ Jesus. Vows are solemn services; and they have much to answer for, that care not either to make or keep them; that dally and play with them, as children do with nuts and gawds. When the Cardinals meet to chuse a Pope, they make
a Vow, Whosoever is chosen, Sleid. Comm. he shall swear to such Articles as they make. And Sleidan saith, The Pope is no sooner chosen, but he breaks them all, and checks their insolencies; as if they went a∣bout to limit his power, to whom all power is given, both in hea∣ven and earth. Is not this pretty collusion? But God is the aven∣ger of all such. Vers. 15. Are we not counted of him as strangers?] Isidor. Plus. lib. 3. cp. 24. 1 Tim. 6.10. Well might that Father say, . The love of money is the root of all evil, as the Apostle hath it. This Kyte-footed corruption, wheresoever it seizeth and domineereth, it blasteth and banisheth all nobleness of spirit, natural affection, humanity, reason, discretion, manliness, mutual entertainment, in∣tercourse of kindness and love: so that, for any fair dealing, a man had as good converse with a Cannibal, as with a ruely co∣vetous caitiff. Well might the Apostle set covetousness, and want of natural affection, together, as signes of a reprobate sense, Rom. 1.29, 31. Laban sells his own daughters here, and devours also their price. Match. 15. And the covetous Pharisees taught children to starve their parents, to offer to the altar; that is, to their paunches and purses. Vers. 16. For all the riches, &c.] Here they speak the truth; but offend, 1. In that they utter it passionately, and with pertur∣bation of spirit: 2. In that they seem somewhat to obscure Gods blessing; as though it were but their due, as daughters. In dealing with those that have done us wrong, it is hard not to offend, either in the matter or manner of our expressions. [Now then, whatsoever God hath said, &c.] Thus they prefer an husband to a father. So did Michal, though there was no great store of re∣ligion in her. And so Nature had taught that daughter of women to do, Dan. 11.17. Antiochus the Great gave Cleopatra his daughter to Ptolomee Epiphanes, thinking to use her as an instru∣ment to destroy him: But she, contrary to his expectation, clave to her husband. Vers. 19. Rachel had stollen the images] She was somewhat tackt with her fathers superstition, though somewhat reclaimed. Little children, keep your selves from idols, 1 Joh. 5. Nothing so natural to us, as Image-worship. Nothing so retained by us, when once enter∣tained. After all that airing in the wilderness, Micah's mother smels of Egypt, and hath her molten & graven gods, Judg. 17.3 Rachel al∣so had her Mawmets long time after this, Gen. 35.2, 4. The devil is
, saith Synesius, and so he would have us. Fence we therefore our selves and ours, against this abomination: the itch of it, once got, is hardly ever cured and clawed off. Vers. 20. And Jacob stole away] Gods Saints are put upon the use of such means sometimes, for their own safety, as render them contemptible to worldly men. All whose contumelies they can bravely bear, so long as their consciences clear and chear them: yea, then can rejoyce, and say, It is a mercy they know no worse by me. It is a great work of nature, to keep the filth of the body, when it is in man, from being unsavoury to others. But it is a greater work of God to keep the filth of the soul, that is so unsavoury to him, from the knowledge of those that wait all occasions to blaze and blaspheme us. Vers. 21. He passed over the river] Euphrates; and so decli∣ned the ordinary way, that Laban might not overtake him; which yet he did. So God would have it, that he might have the greater glory of Jacobs deliverance. Vers. 23. And he took his brethren] The wicked may band themselves, and bend their strength against the Saints; but they are bounded by God. He lets them have the ball on their foot, ma∣ny times, till they come to the very goal, and yet then makes them miss the game. He lets out their tedder, and then pulls them back again, to their task. Vers. 24. Take heed thou speak not good or bad] That is, that thou seek not, either by flattery or force, by allurement or affright∣ment, to bring him back. They write of the Asp, that he never wanders alone, without his companion with him. So the flattering promises of the Churches adversaries, go ever accompanied with cruel menaces, their tising tongues with their terrifying saws, Heb. 11.37. None of them shall want their mate; as the Scripture speaks of those birds of prey and desolation, Isai. 34.16. Vers. 25. Iacob had pitched his tent] Seeing Laban so neer, he set himself in as good order as he could, fearing the worst, saith Musculus. But God was better to him, then his fears. He spake for him; and so he can, and doth oft, for us, in the hearts of our enemies. See Isai. 41.9. Charles the fifth, (then whom, all Chri∣stendom had not a more prudent rince, Act. & Mon. fol. 1784. nor the Church of Christ almost a sorer enemy) when he had in his hand Luther dead, and Melancthon, Pomeran, and certain other Preachers of the Gospel alive, he not onely determined not any thing extremely against
them, or violated their graves; but also, intreating them gently, sent them away, not so much as once forbidding them to publish openly the doctrine that they professed. Vers. 26. As captives taken with the sword] No such matter; but that the old churl must have somewhat to say: for Jacob had their good-wills to go with him: and besides, they were now his, more then Labans. Jacob had them in Marriage, and not in bon∣dage: he carried them not as his captives, but companions. Vers. 27. That I might have sent thee away with mirth] A likely, matter: but 'tis the hypocrites best now, to say the best. He durst do no other; for God had over-awed him, Isai. 58▪5. and put his hook into his nostrils. Hypocrites are likened to bull-rushes, which are green and smoothe; and he is curious to a miracle, that can finde a knot in them: but within is nothing, but an useless and spongie pith. Compared they are also to vipers, that are painted, Matth. 3.7. as it were, without, but poisonful within: they have their teeth also buried in their gums, saith Pliny, so that one would think him to be harmless beasts, and that they could not bite: So hypocrites seem most innocent. Who would have thought otherwise of Laban, that had not known him; considering his contestation here with Jacob, his protestation, afterwards, of deep and dear love to his daughters; and lastly, his attestation, and taking God to witness for their good usage, and his heap of stones to witness (together with his heap of words to small purpose) calling it first Jegar-sa∣hadutha, as a witness betwixt man and man; and then Mizpeh, as a watch-tower or witness betwixt God and Man. Who could take Laban for less now, then a loving father, yea, and an honest man? But, as the Historian saith of another, so may we of him; Palàm compositus pudor, intùs summa adipiscendi libido. Tacit. de Se∣jano. 1 Thess. 2.5. Pers. All this was but blanched hypocrisie, and coloured covetousness, as Saint Paul calls it. Astutam vapido servat sub pecctore vulpem. Vers. 28. Thou hast done foolishly] And yet he had done no more then God bade him do. Wretched men dare reprehend that, which they do not comprehend. But if a wise man speak evil of thee, or to thee, endure him; if a fool, pardon him. Shake off reproaches, and hard censures, as Paul did the viper; yea, in a holy scorn, laugh at them, as the wilde ass doth at the horse and his rider. Diotrephes prates against us, saith Saint John, 3 Epist. 10. In the Greek it is, trifles against us with malicious words. . Al∣though
his words were malicious, and he a great man, yet all was but trifles, to a clear conscience. Vers. 29. It is in the power of my hand] It was, he might have said, till God forbade him: though indeed it never was, (as our Saviour told Pilate, upon a like bravado, Joh. 19.10, 11.) further then given him from above. To God belong the issues of death, what∣ever tyrants dream they can do. Rideo, dicebat Caligula, Consuli∣bus, quòd uno nutu meo jugulare vos possim, & uxori tam bona cer∣vix, simul ac jussero, demetur. And Caesar told Metellus, that he could as easily take away his life, as bid it be done. But what saith our Saviour? Matth. 10.28. Fear not them that kill the body; to wit, by divine permission He saith not, them that can kill the body, have power to do it at their own pleasure: for that's a royalty belongs to God onely. [But the God of your fathers spake unto me, &c.] Hypo∣crites forbear sin, as dogs do their meat; not because they hate the carrion, but fear the cudgel. These are as wicked, in their fearful abstaining from sin, as in their furious committing of it. Lupus venit ad ovile: Aug. de verb. Apost. serm. 21 quaerit invadere, jugulare, devorare. Vigilant pa∣stores, latrant canes—Lupus venit fremens, redit tremens: lupus est tamen, & fremens & tremens, saith Augustine. Vers. 30. Why hast thou stollen my gods?] Goodly gods, that could not save themselves from the thief. See Jer. 10.5, 11, 15. But Iacob, a just man, is here made a thief of. The best must look to be blasted; as deceivers, and yet true, 2 Cor. 6.8. Wicked mens throats are open sepulchres, 2 Cor. 6.8. wherein the good names of Gods in∣nocent ones too oft lie buried: their breath, as fire, shall devour you, Isai. 33.11. saith the Prophet. Ioseph suffered as a dishonest person; Eli∣sha, as a troubler of the State; Ieremiah, as a traitor; Luther, as the trumpet of rebellion. Tuba rebellionis Nay, in one of his Epistles to Spalati∣nus, Prorsùs Satan est Lutherus, saith he; sed Christus vivit & regnat, Amen. He addes his Amen to it; so little was he moved at it. He had learned, and so must we, to pass thorow good and evil report, 2 Cor. 6.8. with Paul. Epiphanius saith, somewhere, that the Jews give out, that Saint Paul turned Christian for spite, because he could not obtain the high-priests daughter in Marriage. We are made the filth of the world, . the sweepings of all things, saith Saint Paul of himself and his companions; who yet were the very glory of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. Phagius reports a story of an Egy∣ptian, who said, The Christians were a company of most filthy lecherous people. And for the keeping of the Sabbath, he saith,
they had a disease upon them, and were therefore fain to rest the seventh day. Vers. 31. Because I was afraid] Note the Patriarch's simplici∣ty and veracity, without cunning or colouring. Truth is like our first parents; most beautiful, when naked. It was sin covered them, and so this, for the most part. Vers. 32. Let him not live] This was a rash sentence. Hastie speech may work much wo. How sorry would Jacob have been, if Laban had found the images under Rachel, and taken him at his word! What a snare befel Jephtah, by his rash speaking  It is a Proverb among the Arabians, Scal. Prov. A∣rab. Cent. 1. Prov. 75. James 3.2, 8. Cave ne feriat lingua tua collum tuum. He is a perfect man, that offends not in word, saith Saint James: for the tongue is an unruly evil. Sooner may a man teach a Camel to dance upon a rope, then bridle his tongue from evil-speaking. Pareus reckons up five vertues of the tongue, Veracitas, Con∣stantia, doeili∣tas, taciturnitas, urbanitas. Pa∣reus in Jac. 3.5. Perald. tom. 1. pag. 264. that per∣fect a man: but Peraldus recounts four and twenty several vices of it, that, if not restrained, will work his ruth and ruine. It should seem by that of our Saviour, Matth 12.37, that a mans most and worst sins, are his words. And Saint Paul, making the anatomy of a natural man, stands more upon the organ of speaking, then on all the other members, Rom. 3. Let therefore thy words be few, true, and ponderous. An open mouth is a Purgatory to the master. Carry a pair of balances betwixt thy lips. Cassiod. lib, 10. Ep. 4. Nescit poeni∣tenda loqui, qui proferenda priùs suo tradidit examini, saith Cassio∣dore. Jacob might have learned of the Heathen Romanes, to speak warily in passing sentence on, or giving testimony of ano∣ther. Romani semper Videri in sententiis, in testimoniis Arbitrari, dicebant, saith Cicero. Vers. 32. And Laban Went into Jacobs tent] Hypocrites are suspicious of others, better then themselves; and impudently in∣quisitive: Curiosi ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosi ad cor∣rigendam suam; as S. Augustine hath it Those that are most in∣quisitive about other mens manners, are most careless of their own. Vers. 34. Put them in the camels furniture, and sat upon them] Presumptuous sinners deal as homely with the dear mercies of Al∣mighty God, pleading and pretending them to their wicked cour∣ses; and so kicking against his bowels; which are therefore fast closed against them. Vers. 35. For the custom of women is upon me] A subtil, but sin∣ful
excuse, to shift a shame. Womens wits, we say, are best at  pinch: but they must take heed they be not as C. Curio the Ro∣mane, Velleius. ingeniose nequam, wittily wicked. Wit will not bear out sin. Vers. 36. And Jacob was wroth, and chode] An angry expostu∣lation; but not without some errour, in the heat of altercation. Be angry, and sin not, is (saith One) the easiest charge, under the hardest condition, that can be. It is difficult to kindle and keep quick the fire of zeal, (which is the best kinde of anger) without all smoke of sin. Vers. 37. Set it here before my brethren] See the confidence of a clear conscience! Happie is be, that can be acquitted by himself in private; in publike, by others; in both, by God. Lucrum in arca, saepè facit damnum in conscientia. But all such as conceive with guile, by that time they have reckoned their moneths a right, though they grow never so big, shall bring forth nothing but winde and vanity. Yea, they that sowe the winde, shall reap the whirl∣winde. Let that thou hast, be well gotten, and thou needst not care whom thou lookst in the face; thou shalt not be ashamed to speak with thine enemies in the gate. Vers. 38. The rams of thy fleck I have not eaten] A lively pi∣cture of a careful Pastor. He fats not himself, but feeds the flock: he seeks not theirs, 2 Cor. 11. (neither fleece, nor flesh) but them, and their welfare. He takes not to him the instruments of a foolish shepherd, Zech. 11.15. that is, forcipes & mulctram, that he may carry away lac & lana; but feeds the flock of God, and takes care of the cure, 1 Pet. 5.2. as Peter bids; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready minde, &c. About the yeer of Christ 1260, the People and Clergie of Eng∣land (the Popes Ass, as it was called) opposed themselves to the Legat's exactions. And when Rustandus the Legat alleadged, that all Churches were the Popes; Leonard, a learned man of those times, Jac. Revius, de vitis Pontif. pag. 178. answered, Tuitione, non fruitione; defensione, non dissipa∣tione. Vers. 39. Of my hand didst thou require it] Which was against all right and reason, Exod. 22.10, 13. but that weighed little with this covetous cormorant. God smites his fists at such dishonest gain, as Balak did at Balaam, in token of extreme indignation, Ezek. 22.13. And lest Laban, or any like, should object, that these were but great words, The Lord would not do it, They would deal well enough with the Lord for that matter; he addes, in the ne verse, Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be
strong, in the day that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it; vers. 14. Vers. 40. Thus was I in the day, &c.] Non-residents do none of all this, those Idol, and idle shepherds: they cry out, as he, Vig. Pan curet oves, oviúmque magistros; . Odyss. ℥. being herein not onely worse then this good shepherd in the text, but also then Ʋlysses his swine∣hord, in Homer, who would not lie from his charge. Vers. 41. I served thee fourteen yeers, &c.] If all this, to be son-in-law to Laban; what should not we do, or suffer gladly, to be the sons of God? Vers. 42. The Fear of Isaac] God, the proper object of fear; whence he is absolutely called, the Fear: Psal. 76.12. Bring pre∣sents to Fear; that is, to him, to whom all dread is due. The Cha∣dee Paraphrast rendeth Teraphim, (verse 32 of this Chapter) La∣bans fear. It was an atheisticall speech of Statius, Primus in orbe deos fecit Timor. But it was a true saying of Varro, Qui primi deo∣rum simulachra induxeru, er∣rrem auxerunt, metum dempse∣runt. Va. as Calvin cites his words; They that first brought in Images of the gods, increased mens errour, but took away their fear. Vers. 43. These daughters are my daughters, &c.] All this is a flaunt, or rather a flattery. Now he seeks to curry favour, where he could not exercise cruelty; smoothing over the matter, as if he meant them no hurt: when he was meerly bridled, and could not do them that hurt that he desired. This is still the guise of hypocrites, and false brethren; they would be taken for friends, and seek to build up themselves upon better mens ruines: as here Laban would render Jacob suspicious to his daughters, as one that would hereaf∣ter deal hardly with them, if not bound by him, in a covenant, to his good abearance toward them. Vers. 44. Now therefore come thou, &c.] A fool is full of words, saith Solemon. Which odious custom of his, is expressed , in his vain tautologies: A man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can tell? Eccles. 10.14. Laban likewise talks a great deal here; and is up with the more, and down with the less, (as they say.) A Covenant he will have, a pillar he will have, and a heap he will have; and that heap shall be a wit∣ness, and that pillar a witness, and God a witness, and a judge too, Qui nou quid, sed quantum di∣cat, ponderare comvit. Hicon. in Apol. ad Do∣mnion. &c. there's no end of his discourse; as if, 'Domnio-like, he cared not so much what, as how much he spake. The basest things are ever most plentiful. History and experience tells us, that some kinde of mouse breedeth an hundred and twenty young ones in
one nest: whereas the Lion and Elephant bears but one at once. So the least worth, yeelds the most words. Vers. 53. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father] The Chal∣dee Paraphrast sometimes useth the word Fear, or Terrour, for God, for the reason above-given, vers. 42. Hence Jacob, coming from Syria, and being to swear to a Syrian, swears here by the Fear of his father Isaac. Where note, that he riseth up no higher then his father; whereas Laban the Idolater pretends Antiquity, ap∣peals to the Gods of Abraham, of Nahor, and of their father Te∣rah, who served strange gods, Josh. 24.2. Papists boast much of Antiquity, as once the Gileonites did of old shooes, and mouldy bread. A Gentleman being importuned by a Popish Questionist, to tell where our Religion was before Luther; answered, That our Religion was always in the Bible, Ignat. where your Religion never was. Mine Antiquity is Jesus Christ, saith Ignatius, and we with him. Vers. 54. Called his brethren to eat bread] And so overcame evil with good; which is the noblest of all victories. God cannot but love, in us, this imitation of his mercy; and that love is never fruitless. Vers. 55. Laban rose up] Laban leaves him, Esau meets him, and both with a kiss. When a mans ways please the Lord, &c. CHAP. XXXII. Vers. 1. Angels of God met him.] SEnsibly and visibly, as servants meet their masters, as the guard their Prince. Oh the dignity and safety of the Saints! who are in five respects, (say some) above the Angels. 1. Our nature is more highly advanced in Christ. 2. The righteousness whereby we come to glory, is more excellent then theirs; which, though perfect in its kinde, is but the righteousness of meer creatures, such as God may finde fault with, Job 4.18. such as may need mercy; therefore the Cherubims are said to stand upon the Mercy-seat, and to be made of the matter thereof. 3. The sonship of the Saints is founded in a higher right then theirs; viz. in the Sonship of the second Person in Trinity. 4. They are members of Christ, and so in neerer union then any creature. 5. They are the Spouse, the Bride; Angels onely servants of the Bridegroom, and ministring
spirits, sent out (as here) to minister for them that shall be heirs of salvation. They meet us still, as they did Jacob: they minister many blessings to us, yet will not be seen to receive any thank of us: they stand at our right hands, Luke 1.11. as ready to relieve us, as the devils to mischief us, Zech. 3.1. If Satan, for terrour, shew himself like the great Leviathan; or, for fraud, like a crook∣ed and piercing serpent; or, for violence and fury, like the dragon in the seas: yet the Lord will smite him by his Angels, as with his great, and sore, and strong sword, Isai. 27.1. Angels are in heaven, as in their watch-tower, (whence they are called watch-men, Dan. 4.10.) to keep the world, the Saints especially, their chief charge; in whose behalf, they stand ever before the face of God, waiting and wishing to be sent upon any designe or expedition, Matth. 18.10. for the ser∣vice and safety of the Saints. They are like Master or Tutors, to whom the great King of heaven commits his children: these they bear in their bosoms, as the nurse doth her babe, or as the servants of the house do their young Master; glad to do them any good of∣fice; ready to secure them from that roaring Lion, that rangeth up and down, seeking to devour them. The Philosopher told his friends, when they came into his little and lowe cottage, , The gods are here with me. The true Christian may say, though he dwell never so meanly, God and his holy An∣gels are ever with him, &c. Vers. 2. This is Gods host] So called, for their number, order, obedience, strength, &c. God hath a compleat hest of horse and foot. Angels, and heavenly bodies, are his horse, as it were; horses and chariots of fire, 2 Kings 6.17. yea, both horse and foot: for there are whole legions of them, Matth. 26.53. Now a Legion is judged to be six thousand foot, and seven hundred horse. Daniel tells us, there be millions of Angels, Dan. 7.10. yea, an innumera∣ble company, saith the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 12.22. The Greek Poet could say, There were thirty thousands of them here upon earth, keepers of mortal men, and observers of their works: Hesiod. Some think they are meant in the Parable, by the ninety and nine sheep; as if they were ninety and nine times as many as mankind, in number. All these, how many soever, pitch camp round about the godly, Psal. 38.8. make a lane for them, as they did here for Jacob at Mahanajim, (which signifies a double camp;) fight in battel-ray against their enemies, Dan. 10.20. and convey them at death, as they did Lazarus, thorow their enemies country, the air, Luke 16.
into Abrahams bosom. So that all Gods children may call death, as Jacob did this place, Mahanaim; because there th Angels meet them. And as the palsie-man, in the Gospel, was let down with his bed thorow the tyling before Jesus. Luke 5.18. so is every good soul taken up in a heavenly couch, (or coach, rather) thorow the roof of his house, and carried into Christs presence, by the blessed Angels. Vers. 3. And Jacob sent messengers] Means, he knew, was to be used by him, though well assured of safeguard. God must be trusted, not tempted: means must be used, but not trusted. Jacob was as one that fled from a Lion, Amos 5.19. and a Bear met him. Laban, as a Lion, had some shamefac'dness, saith a Rabbi: Esau, as a Bear, had none. Pirkei R. Eliez. c. 37 Jacob therefore prays, and sends, and submits, and presents him; and all to pacifie him. He that meets with a Bear, will not strive with him for the wall, but be glad to scape by him. Vers. 4. to my lord Esau, Thy servant Jacob, &c.] This was not baseness of spirit, much less a renouncing of his birth-right and blessing; but a necessary submission for a time, (such as was that of David to Saul) till the prophecie of his superiority should be fulfilled. 1 Sam. 24.7, 9. That was baseness in the Samaritanes, that in writing to Antiochus Epiphanes, that great king of Syria, because he tor∣mented the Jews; to excuse themselves that they were no Jews, they stiled him, Josephus. Antiochus the mighty God: the Scripture stiles him a vile person, Dan. 11.21. So was that also in Teridates king of the Parthians; who, with bended knee, and hands held up, worshipped Nero, and thus bespake that monster of mankinde: To thee I come, Dio, in vita Neronis. as to my god; and thee I adore, as I do the sun: what thou decreest of me, I will be, and do; for thou art, to me, both Fate and Fortune, &c. And what shall we think of those superstitious Silicians, who, when they were excommunicated by Pope Martin the fourth, laid themselves prostrate at his feet, and cried, O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, grant us thy peace. The Venetians also, being excommunicated by Pope Clemens the fifth, Jac. Rev. de vi∣tis Pontif. p. 198 Unde et Gavis cognomentum apud suos. Ib. could not be absolved, till such time as their Ambassadour Dandalus had not onely fallen at the Popes feet, but lain also under his table as a dog, with an iron chain about his neck, feeding on such scraps as were cast unto him. Had this dog dealt by the Pope, as the Earl of Wiltshire's Spaniel did, he had served him but right. This Earl, with Doctor Cranmer, and others, being sent Ambassadour to Rome, about King Henry's di∣vorce;
when he should have kissed the Popes foot, Act. & Mon. fol. 1690. his Spaniel (as though he had been of purpose appointed thereunto) went and caught the Pope by the great toe; which the Spaniel haply mistook for some kinde of repast. But this by the way onely. What hard servitude Kings and Emperours were forced to undergo in former times, and how basely to avile themselves to the Beast of Rome, is better known, then that it need to be here related. Henry the se∣cond of England Henry the fourth of France, and Henry the fourth Emperour of Germany, for instance. This last came, in the midst of a sore winter, upon his bare feet, to the gates of the Castle of Canusium; and stood there fasting, from morning to night, for three days together, waiting for the Popes judicial sentence, and craving his pardon: which yet he could not obtain, by his own or others tears, or by the intercession of any Saint, Brightm. upon the Revel. fol. 449. save onely of a certain harlot, with whom the Pope was then taking his carnal pleasure. The good Emperour mistook, who thought that the Pope could be pacified by fasting and prayer. This god required another kinde of sacrifice then these. And here that of Solomon was fulfilled, Eccles. 10.7. Vers. 5. And I have oxen and asses, &c.] This, Jacob menti∣oneth in his message, that Esau might not think, that he sought to him for any need; but onely for his favour. And this was some∣thing, to a man of Esau's making; for such like not to hear of, or be haunted with their poor kinred. Luke 15.30. This thy son, Et cum fortuna statque caditque fides. saith he, that felt no want: He saith not, This my brother: he would not own him, because in poverty. Vers. 6. And four hundred men with him] Four hundred cut∣throats as appears, vers. 8. And here, good Jacob is brought again into the briars. When he was well rid of his father-in-law, he thought all safe; and his joy was compleated, by the sight of that army of angels. Presently upon this, Ex coelo repentè quasi in inser∣num detruditur. he is so damped and terrified with this sad message of Esau's approach, and hostile intentions, that he knew not what course to take to. Out of heaven, he is thrust suddenly, as it were, into hell, saith Pareus. . This is the god∣ly mans case, while here. Fluctus fluctum trudit: one trouble fol∣lows in the neck of another. Ripen we apace, and so get to hea∣ven, if we would be out of the gun-shot. The Ark was transpor∣tative, till setled in Solomon's temple; so, till we come to heaven, shall we be tossed up & down, and turmoiled: within will be fears, 2 Cor. 7. without fightings, whiles we are in hoc exilio, in hoc ergastulo, in
hac peregrinatione, in hac valle lachrymarum, as Bernard hath it; in this pilgrimage, in this purgatory, in this vale of tears. Vers. 7. Then Iacob was greatly afraid] This was his weak∣ness, (and may be ours, in like case) as looking to the present peril, and forgeting the consolation (as the Apostle speaketh) that he might have drawn from the promise of God, Heb. 12.5. and presence of an∣gels. Faith quelleth and killeth distrustful fears: but Satan, in a distress, hides from us that which should support us, and greatens that that may appale us. But what saith the Spanish proverb? The Lion is not so fierce as he is painted; nor danger, usually, so great as it is represented. Some hold, that Esau was here wronged, by being presumed an enemy, when he was a friend. Pessimus in du∣biis augur Timor. Vers. 8. If Esau come, &c.] It is a point of prudence, if we cannot keep all, to save what we can. Vers. 9. The Lord which saidst unto me] Promises must be prayed over. God loves to be burdened with, and to be importu∣ned in, his own words; to be sued upon his own bond. Prayer is a putting the promises into suit. And it is no arrogancy, nor pre∣sumption, Act. & Mon. fol. 1553. to burden God, as it were, with his promise; and of duty to claim and challenge his aid, help, and assistance, in all perils, said Robert Glover, Martyr, in a Letter to his wife. Such prayers will be nigh the Lord day and night, 1 Kings 8.59. he can as little deny them, as deny himself. Vers. 10. I am not worthy of the least, &c.] In prayer, we must avile our selves before God to the utmost; confessing our extreme both indigency and indignity of better. I am dust and ashes, saith Abraham. I am a worm, and no man, saith David. I am more bruitish then any man, Luke 5.8. saith Agur. I am a man, a sinner, saith Pe∣ter. I am not worthy to be called thy son, saith the Prodigal. Pha∣risaeus non vulnera, sed munera ostendit: The proud Pharisee sets forth, not his wants, but his worth: God, I thank thee, &c. But if David were so humbled before Saul, 1 Sam. 26. 20. that he called himself a flea, what should we do to God? Unworthy we should acknowledge our selves of the least mercies we enjoy, with Iacob; and yet not rest satisfied with the greatest things in the world, for our portion, as Luther. Melch. Adam. in vita Luth. Valdè protestatus sum me nolle sic a Deo satiari: he deeply protested, that God should not put him off with these poor things below. [For with my staff I passed over this Iordan] Paupertatem baculinam commemorat. Iacob, though now grown
great, forgets not his former meanness; but cries out, with that noble Captain, : From how small, to how great an estate, Iphierates. am I raised I So did Agathocles, who, of a Potters son, became King of Sicily; yet, would ever be served in earthen vessels. And in the yeer of Christ 1011, one Willigis, Bishop of Ments, being son to a Wheel-wright, caused wheels, and such like things, Siffridus Bu∣cholc. to be hanged on the walls, up and down his Palace, with these words written over them, in capital letters; Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris. Excellent was that counsel that Placilla the Empress gave her hus∣band Theodosius: Remember, O husband, what lately you were, Hist. Trip. and what now you are: so shall you govern well the Empire, and give God his due praise, for so great an advancement. Vers. 11. And the mother with the children] It seems to be a metaphor taken from birds, when fowlers take away the young and the dams together; which God forbad, Deut. 22.6. See the like also of the ewe and the lamb, not to be slain in one day, Lev. 22.28. But Homo homini Iupus, nay daemon. The Indians would say, that it had been better for them, that their country had been given to the devils of hell, then to the Spaniards, (such hath been their cruelty towards those poor creatures;) and that, if Spani∣ards went to heaven, they would never come there. Three poor women were burnt at the Isle of Garnesey for Religion; Act. & Mon. fol. 1392. together with the infant-childe falling out of the mothers womb, and cru∣elly cast back into the flames. Another sweet childe of eight or nine yeers old, coming to Bonners house, to see if he might speak with his father, a prisoner in the Lollards Tower, was, Ibid. 1864. for some bold answer that he gave the Bishops Chaplain, so cruelly whipt, that he died within four days after. At Merindol in France, be∣sides other execrable outrages and butcheries there done by Mine∣rius, one of the Popes Captains; the paps of many women were cut off, which gave suck to their children; Ibid. 868. which looking for suck at their mothers brests, being dead before, died also for hunger. Was not this, to kill the mother with the children? And was not that a barbarous act of Pope Honorius the third, in the yeer of grace 1224, to cause four hundred Scots to be hanged up, and their chil∣dren gelt! and all for the death of Adam, Bishop of Cathnes, who was burnt in his own kitchin, by his own Citizens, Jacob. Rev. de vitis Pontif. pag. 163. for that he had excommunicated some of them, for non-payment of Tythes. Vers. 12. And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good] So Ja∣cob interprets that promise, I will be with thee: which, indeed, hath
in it whatsoever heart can wish, or need require. This promise was so sweet to the Patriarch, that he repeats and ruminates it, rolling it, Psal. 62.11. as sugar, in his mouth, land hiding it under his tongue. God spake it once, he heard it twice; as David, in another case. He sucks, and is satisfied with these brests of consolation; he presseth and oppresseth them, (such a metaphor there is in that text, Isai. 66.11.) as a rich man doth the poor man, till he hath gotten out of him all that he hath. A flye can make little of a flower; but a bee will not off, till he hath the sweet thyme out of it. The pro∣mises are precious spices, which, being beaten to the smell, by the preaching of the Word, yeeld an heavenly and supernatural scent in the souls of Gods people. Oh it is a sweet time with them, when Christ brings them into his banqueting house of the holy Scriptures, and there stays them with flagons of divine consolati∣ons, and bolsters them up with apples of heavenly doctrines. These, when by the Spirit they are applied to the love-sick soul; then is Christs left hand under their head, and his right hand (which teach∣eth him terrible things, Psal. 45.5.) doth embrace them. All in Christ, is for their support and succour: his love also is displayed over them, as a banner. And this doth so fully satisfie their souls, and transport them with joy, that now they are content to wait Gods leasure for deliverance; and would not have their Belo∣ved wakened, until he please, See all this, Cant. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. Vers. 13. And took of that which came to his hand, &c.] Or, that was in his power. Such as he had, he sent. Silver and gold he had none; cattel he had, and of these he made no spare: for he knew, that A gift (such a rich gift, especially) maketh room for a man, and bringeth him before great ones, Prov. 18.16. And here Ja∣cob (for our instruction) takes a right course, observes a right me∣thod; Reusner. which is, to pray, and use means; to use means, and pray. Ora & labora, was the Emperours Symbol; and, Admotâ manu invocanda est Minerva, the Heathens proverb. Why criest thou unto me? Exod. 14.15. (saith God to Moses;) speak unto the children of Is∣rael, that they go forward. There was a fault: Moses craved help, but was not forward in the course, whereby to make way for Gods help. Josh. 7.10, 11. So, Get thee up, (saith God to praying Joshun;) wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? Israel hath finned, and thou must go search, &c. So, he that would have knowledge, must not onely beg for it, but dig for it, saith Solomon, out of his own experience, Prov. 2.3, 4, 5.
Vers. 14. Two hundred she-goats, &c.] A very great present for a private person to send. Five hundred and fifty beasts, of sundry sorts, for store. He spares for no cost, that he may buy his peace, and enjoy his birth-right. Heaven, he knew, (whereof Canaan was a type and pledge) would pay for all. Get but a Patriarchs eye, to see heaven afar off, and we shall be soon ready to buy it at any rate: The pearl of price cannot be a dear bargain, though we part with all, to purchase it. Moses was fourty yeers old, (and therefore no babie) when he preferred the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11.24. (the worst thing about him) before the treasures of Egypt. Egypt was a country rich, fruitful, and learned: 2 Chron. 9. Thence Solomon had his chief horses; thence the harlot had her fine linens, Prov. 7.16. Moses might, in likelihood, have been king of Egypt, yea, and of Ethiopia too, as some think: but he had a better prize in his hand, and therefore slights all the worlds flitting and flattering felicities. When Basil was tempted with money and preferment, he answer∣ed, Pecuniam da quae permaneat, ac continuò duret, gloriam quae semper floreat. This the world cannot do, nay it cannot keep off diseases, death, &c. Non domus & fundus, &c. When Mi∣achael Paleologus, Emperour of Constantinople, Nunquid cala∣mitates, morbos, aut mortem de∣pellere possent? Pachymer, hist. lib. 5. sent to Nugas the Scythian Prince, for a present, certain royal robes and rich orna∣ments; he set light by them, asking, Whether they could drive away calamities, sickness, death. No, no: this, nothing can do, but the favour of God, and interest in Christ. Wherefore should I die, being so rich? was the foolish question of that rich and wretched Cardinal, Henry Beauford, Bishop of Winchester, Act. & Mon. fol. 925. and Chancellour of England, in the raign of Henry the sixth. Fie, quoth he, will not death be hired? will money do nothing? No, Prov. 10.2. saith Solomon: Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but righ∣teousness delivereth from death. Many are loath to die, because they have treasures in the world; as those ten men had in the field, Jer. 41.8. The Irish ask, What such men mean to die. But such men must die; nor can their riches reprieve them. Oh happie is he, that, with Jacob, lays hold on the heavenly inheri∣tance, though with the loss of earthly possessions; that cares not to part with his cattel, so he may have his Crown; with his swine, so he may have his Saviour. This is the wise merchant, this is the true trades-man, that traffiques for heaven; looking upon the world as a great dung-hill, with Paul, Phil. 3.8. , dogs dung. Vers. 16. Every drove by themselves] That Esau, having oc∣casion
of viewing the present, questioning the servants, and hear∣ing Jacob's submission, might be somewhat mollified, and his an∣ger abated. Be wise as serpents. Ʋt fragilis glacies, occidit ira morâ. Vers. 18. They be thy servant Jacobs] A soft answer turneth away wrath, Frangitur ira gravis, quand est responsio suavis. (Prov. 15.1.) but grievous words stir up anger. And it is easier to stir strife, then stint it. Still rain softens the hard earth: and though nothing be more violent then the windes, Ii∣dem tamen imbribus sopiuntur, saith Pliny. Lenis alit flammas, grandior aura necat. How daintily did Gedeon disarm the angry Ephraimites, (Judg. 8. 1, 2, 3.) by a milde answer! [It is a present sent, &c.] For, a gift in secret, pacifieth anger, Prov. 21.14. This proverb, in an abbre∣viature, Godw. Heb. Antiq. ex Bux∣torf. after their manner, the Jews wrote upon their Alms-box. [And behold also, he is behinde us] He sends not onely, but comes after us himself; to salute thee, and offer his service unto thee. Thus, by all means, he seeks to asswage the wrath of that rough man. Vers. 21. And himself lodged that night] But lay upon thorns, and had little rest. . The master is the greatest servant in the house, and hath most busi∣ness. Jo. Manlii loc. com. This verse did so please Luther, that he translated it in certain Dutch rhymes. Vers. 24. And Jacob was left alone] Purposely, for secret prayer: so the Church gets her into the clefts of the rocks, Cant. 2.14. Isaac, into the fields; Daniel, to the rivers side; Christ, into the mount; Peter, up to the leads, or house top; that they might pour out their prayers, and solace themselves with God, in secret. This an hypocrite may seem to do, either of custom, or vain-glory: as the Pharisee went up to the Temple, to pray solitarily, as well as the Publican; the Temple being then, in regard of Ceremonial holiness, the place as well of private as publike prayer. But will the hypocrite delight in God? Job. 27.10. will he pray always? [There wrestled a man with him] In a proper combat, by might and slight; to the raising of dust, and causing of sweat; as the word import∣eth. This strife was not onely corporal, but spiritual; as well by the force of his faith, Hos. 12.4. Luke 22.44. Rom. 15.30. . as strength of body. He prevailed, saith the Prophet, by prayers and tears. Our Saviour also pray'd himself into an agony; and we are bidden to strive in prayer, even to an
agony. Nehemiah prayed himself pale; Nehem. 2 6. Dan. 8.27. 1 Sam. 1. 1 Kings 18.42. Daniel prayed himself sick; Hannah prayed, striving with such an unusual motion of her lips, that old Eli, looking upon her, thought her drunk. Elijah puts his head betwixt his legs, as straining every string of his heart in prayer: He prayed, and prayed, saith S. James; and, by his prayer, James 5 17. he had what he would of God. Whereupon also he infers, (as a Consectary) that the effectual prayer of a righteous man, James 5.16. avails much, if it be fervent, or working; . if it be such as sets all the fa∣culties awork, and all the graces a work, then it speeds. Every sound is not Musick; so neither is every uttering petitions to God, a prayer. It is not the labour of the lips, but the travel of the heart. Com∣mon beggery, is the easiest and poorest trade: but this beggery, as it is the richest, so the hardest. A man can with more ease hear two hours together, then pray half an hour, Jude v. 20. if he pray in the holy Ghost, as Saint Jude hath it. He must strive with his own indevo∣tion, with Satans temptations, with the worlds distraction: he must wrestle with God, and wring the blessing out of his hands, as the woman of Canaan did: Isai. 64.7. 2 Kings 4.30. Cant. 3.4. he must stir up himself to take hold of God, as the Shunamite did of Elisha, as the Church did of her Spouse; and not let him go, till he bless us. This is to wrestle; this is to threaten heaven, as Gorgonia did, thus to be modestly impu∣dent and invincible, as her brother speaks of her; in beseeching God, to besiege him, and get the better of him, as Jacob; whose wrest∣ling, was by weeping; and his prevailing, by praying. Vers. 25. And when he saw that he prevailed not] He, that is, the Angel, (Christ) that redeemed Jacob from all evil, Gen. 48.16. and here held him up with the one hand, as he strove against him with the other; and yeelded himself overcome by the Patriarch's prayers and tears. Deus ipse, qui nullis contrase viribus superari potest, precibus vincitur, saith Hierome. [He touched the hollow of his thigh] That, if he would needs have the blessing, he might have somewhat with it, that might keep him humble, Victoria non fit fine vulnere▪ luxat nobis se∣mur: immittit stimulum carni, &c. not ascri∣bing the victory to his own strength. Pride is a weed that will grow out of any ground, (like Missleto, that will grow up∣on any tree;) but, for most part, from the best. Like air in all bodies, it will have a being in every soul, and creeps into e∣very action, either in the beginning, proceeding, or conclusi∣on. Now therefore it is Gods care, to cure his people of this dangerous disease, as he did Jacob here, and afterwards Paul; who, if he had not been buffeted, had been exalted, 2 Cor. 1.
and carried higher in conceit, then ever he was in his ecstasie. Vers. 26. Let me go, &c] Pugna suum finem, cùm rogat bostis, habet. Jacob, though lamed, and hard laid at, will not let Christ go, without a blessing: To teach us, as our Saviour did, by the pa∣rable of the importunate widow, Luke 18.1. to persevere in prayer, and to de∣vour all discouragements. Jcob holds with his hands, when his joynts were out of joynt. The woman of Canaan will not be put off, either with silence, or sad answers. The importunate widow teacheth us, to press God so far, till we put him to the blush, yea leave a blot in his face, . Luke 18.5. (as the word, there used, signifies) unless we be masters of our requests. Latimer so plied the throne of grace with his Once again, Act. & Mon. once again, restore the Gospel to England, that he would have no nay at Gods hands. He many times continued kneeling and knocking so long together, Ibid. that he was not able to rise without help. His knees were grown hard, like camels knees, as Eusebius reports of James the Lords brother. 2 Cor. 12. Paul prayed thrice, that is, often; till he had his desire. Nay, Paulus Aemyli∣us, the Roman General, being to fight against Perses King of Ma∣cedony, when as he had sacrificed to his god Hercules, and it proved not to his minde, Sabellicus. he slew twenty several sacrifices one after ano∣ther; and would not give over, till in the one and twentieth he had descried certain arguments of Victory. Surely, his superstiti∣on, shames our indevotion; his importunity, our faint-heartedness, and shortness of spirit. Surely, as painfulness of speaking shews a sick body; so doth irksomness of praying, a sick soul. Vers. 27. What is thy name?] As if the Angel should say, Thou art such a fellow as I never met withal: Titles of honour are not worthy of thee. Kneel thou down Jacob, rise up Israel: Thou art a conqueror, Bucholc. if ever any were. Factus & teipso fortior, & Creatore tuo superior. O quàm hic honos no est omnium! Vers. 28. No more Jacob, but Israel] That is, Not onely, or not so much Jacob, as Israel. Both these names he had given him, of striving and strugling. All Gods Israel are wrestlers by calling, Eph. 6, Nuquam bella bos, unquam discrimina de∣sunt. 12. and, as good souldiers of Jesus Christ, must suffer hard∣ship. Nothing is to be seen in the Shulamite, but as the appearance of two armies, maintaining civil broils within her. The spirit would always get the better of the flesh, were it upon equal terms: but when the flesh shall get the hill, (as it were) of temptation, and shall have the winde to drive the smoke upon the eyes of the combatant, and so to blinde him; upon such a disadvantage, he is
overcome. For it is not flesh and blood onely, that we wrestle against, (whether we take the Apostles meaning, for the weakness of our nature, or the corruption of it;) but against principalities, against powers, &c. against many, mighty, malicious adversaies, spiritual wickednesses in high places, that are above us, and hang over our necks. Wherefore, we have more then need to take un∣to us the whole armour of God, and to strengthen our selves with every piece of it: whether those of defence; as, the girdle of truth, Eph. 6.14. the brest-plate of righteousness, the shooes of peace, and patience, the shield of faith, the helmet of hope: or those of offence; as, the sword of the spirit, and the darts of prayer. At no place must we lie open; for our enemy is a serpent: If he can but bite the heel, he will transfuse his venom to the heart and head. Gods Spirit, in us, sets up a standard, Isai. 59.19, The Apostle sounds the alarm, Arm, arm, Eph. 6. The holy Scripture is our Armory, Cant. 4.4. like Solo∣mons tower, where hang a thousand shields, and all the weapons of strong men. God himself is the' , that both ordain∣eth and ordereth our temptations with his own hand; as he dealt with Jacob. And the Lord Christ stands over us, Acts 7. (as he did once over Steven) with a crown upon his head, and another in his hand, with this inscription, Vincenti dabo; To him that overcometh, Revel. 2. will I give, &c. Fight but with his arms, and with his armour, and we are sure to overcome, before we fight: for he hath made all our foes our footstool, and hath caused us to triumph. 2 Cor. 2.14. Let there∣fore the assaults of our already-vanquished enemies, not weaken, but waken us: let their faint oppositions, and spruntings before death, encourage us, or rather enrage us, to do them to death: we are sure to be more then conquerours, D. Ussier. de Britan. Eccls primord. p. 332. and to have Victoriam Halle∣luiaticam, as the Britains, fighting for their Religion, had once a∣gainst the Saxons and Picts in this kingdom. Vers. 29. And he blessed him there] That was a better thing to Jacob, then to answer his curious request of knowing the An∣gels name. So when the disciples asked our Saviour, Acts 1.6, Wilt then at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? It is not for you to know the times, saith he; but ye shall receive the holy Ghost; that's better for you, &c. vers. 8. God, sometimes, doth not one∣ly grant a mans prayer, but fulfil his counsel, Psal. 20.4. This if he do not, because we sometimes ask we know not what; yet some better thing we shall be sure of. Zech. 10.6. I will strengthen the house of Judah, and they shall be as if I had not cast them off; and I will hear them.
Vers. 30. I have seen God face to face] Christ would not tell Jacob his name, to lift up his minde above what he saw of him; and to insinuate, that his name was Wonderful, his essence incom∣prehensible. Judg. 13.17, 18 And whereas Iacob said here, he had seen God face to face; he means onely praesens praesentem, as Moses spake with God mouth to mouth, Num. 12.8. He saw not Gods Majesty and Essence: Isai. 8.17. 1 Tim. 6.16. for he is a God that hides himself, and dwells in the light unapproachable. But he saw him more apparently and mani∣festly, then ever he had done before. We can see but his back parts, and live; we need see no more, that we may live. God that fills all, (saith Nazianzen) though he lighten the minde, yet flies be∣fore the beams thereof; still leaving it, as it is able, in sight, to fol∣low him; draws it, by degrees, to higher things▪ but ever in∣terposeth between it and his incomparable Essence, as many vails, as were over the tabernacle. Some created shape, some glimpse of glory, Jacob saw; whereby God was pleased, for present, to testifie his more immediate presence; but not himself. Vers. 31. He halted upon his thigh] Yet had the blessing. So Gods people are promised an hundred fold here, with persecution; that's tied, as a tag, to the profession of Christianity. No heaven can be had, without tribulation. Christ, our Captain, had a bloody victory of it. Gal. 6. 1 Cor. 12. Joh. Manl. loc. com. 127. Paul bare in his body the marks, or scars, of the Lord Jesus; and glories in these infirmities, as he calls them. These are Gods gems, and precious ornaments, (said Munster to his friends, pointing them to his sores and ulcers) wherewith God decketh his children, that he may draw them to himself. This he said, a little before his death. At death, (saith Piscator) God wrestles with his people, laying hold on their consciences, by the menaces of the Law. They again resist this assault, by laying hold upon God, by the faith of the Gospel: well assured, that Christ hath freed them from the curse of the Law, by being made a curse for them on the Cross. God yeelds himself overcome, by this re∣encounter; but yet toucheth their thigh, takes away their life. Howbeit, this hindereth not the Sun of life eternal to arise upon them, as they pass over Peel. Vers. 32. Therefore the children, &c.] This custom, Josephus saith, continued till his time. A ceremony indifferent in it self, and good by institution, (in remembrance of that famous conquest) might become evil, by abuse, if it turned into superstition.
CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 1. He divided the children.] CArnal fear oft expectorates a mans wisdom, and leaves him shiftless. But Jacob, after he had prayed, and prevailed, was not so moped, as not to know what to do in that great danger: he masters his fears, and makes use of two the likeliest means: 1. The marshalling of his wives and children in best manner, for the saving of the last, at least. 2. The marching before them him∣self, and doing lowe obeysance. So Esther, when she had prayed, resolved to venture to the King, whatever came of it. And our Saviour, though before fearful, yet, after he had prayed in the gar∣den, goes forth, and meets his enemies in the face, asking them, Whom seek ye? Great is the power of prayer, to steel the heart against whatsoever amazements. Vers. 2. He put the handmaids, &c.] Of children and friends, some may be better beloved then others: And whereas all cannot be saved or succoured, the dearest may be chiefly cared for. Vers. 3. And he passed over before them] As a good Captain and Shepherd, ready to be sacrificed for the safety of his charge. So the Captain of our salvation, the Arch-shepherd, Christ. So should the under-shepherds, the captains, (as Ministers are called, Heb. 12.5.) fight in the front, and bear the brunt of the battel; not loving their lives unto the death, so they may finish their course with joy; de scuto magis quàm de vita solliciti, as Epaminondas. The diamond in the Priests brest-plate, shewed what should be their hardness, and hardiness, for the peoples welfare. Vers. 4. And kissed him] The word kissed hath a prick over every letter, in the Original: to note, say the Hebrew Doctors, that this was a false and hypocritical kiss, a Judas-kiss. , saith Philo: Amor non semper est in osculo. But our Interpreters are agreed, that this kiss was a signe, Qui probabilus loquntur, aiuns co ipsooari ani∣mi Esauici c∣verionem. Am. that his heart was changed from his former hatred; and that those extraordinary pricks do denote the wonder of Gods work therein: which is fur∣ther confirmed, in that they both wept; which could not easily be counterfeit; though they were in Ishmael, that notable hypocrite, Jer. 41.6, and in the Emperour Andronicus, who, when he had
injuriously caused many of the Nobility to be put to death, pre∣tended himself sorry for them, Turk. hist. fol. 50. and that with tears plentifully run∣ning down his aged cheeks, as if he had been the most sorrowful man alive. Ibid. fol. 175. So the Egyptian Crocodile, having killed some living beast, lieth upon the dead body, and washeth the head thereof with her warm tears; which she afterward devoureth, with the dead body. We judge more charitably of Esau here. And yet we cannot be of their minde, that here-hence conclude his true conver∣sion and salvation. We must take heed we neither make Censures whip, nor Charities cloke too long: we may offend in both, and incur the curse, Isai. 5.20. Joh. Manl. loc. com. 496. as well by calling evil good, as good evil. Latomus of Lovain wrote, that there was no other a faith in Abraham, then in Cicero. Another wrote a long Defence and Commenda∣tion of Cicero, and makes him a very good Christian, and true pe∣nitentiary; Ibid. 483. because he saith, somewhere, Reprehendo peccata mea, quòd Pompeio confisus, ejusque partes secutus fuerim. I believe nei∣ther of them. Vers. 5. The children which God hath graciously given] Sept. . For children are Gods gifts, as David taught Solomon, Psal. 127. It is well observed, that good Jacob, before a bad man, speaks religiously; (God of his grace, &c.) and Esau, as bad as he was, makes no jest of it. There is no surer signe of a profane heart, then to jeer at good expressions; then which, nothing now adays is more familiar. Carnal spirits cannot hear savoury words, but they turn them off with a scorn, as Pilate did our Saviour, speaking of the truth, with that scornful profane question, What's truth? Shall these scoffers be counted Christians? Could any that heard Elijah mocking the service and servants of Baal, believe, that Baal was god in his esteem? Shall not Esau rise up in judgement against such profane persons? And shall not Jacob disclaim all such pro∣fligate professors for having any relation to him, that dare not speak religiously, for fear of some Esau in company? that are ashamed to seem what they are, with Zedekiah, lest they that are fallen to the Chaldeans should mock them? Vers. 7. After came Joseph neer, &c.] Jussus accedere Joseph, (saith Junius;) for he was but a little one of six yeers old; there∣fore he did nothing, but as his mother bade him; and, because he went before her, he is first named. Vers. 8. What meanest thou by all this drove, &c.] He met it, but had not yet accepted of it: either that he might take occasion, at
their meeting, more mannerly to refuse the Present; or, that he might shew his brotherly affection frankly and freely, not purcha∣sed or procured by any gift or Present. Piscator. Ʋtrunque liberale & civile est, oblata munera modestè recusare, praesertim si grandia sint, & ea∣dem ab instante humaniter acceptare. Vers. 9. I have enough, my brother] Here's no mention of God: God is not in all the wicked mans thoughts: he contents himself with a natural use of the creature, (as bruit beasts do;) the godly taketh all as from God; and findeth no such sweetness, as in tasting how good the Lord is, in the creature. Tam Dei memi∣nisse, opus est, quàm respirare, saith One. But prophane Esaus will neither have God in their heads, Psal. 10.4, nor hearts, Psal. 14.1, nor ways, Tit. 1.16, nor words, Psal. 12.4. They stand in a posture of distance, nay of defiance to God. Vers. 10. As though I had seen the face of God] I cannot but see God, and his goodness, in thy so unexpected kindness. The Lord hath done great things for me, whereof I am glad, and think my Present well bestowed. Vers. 11. I have enough] Heb. I have all. Esau had much, but Iacob had all, because he had the God of all. Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia, saith Augustine. Esau's enough, in the Original, is not the same with Iacob's. There are two manner of enoughs: Godliness onely hath contentedness, 1 Tim. 6.6. Vers. 12. Let us take our journey] The Hebrews note, that Esau speaks in few, Iacob more fully: because it is the guise of proud stately persons, to speak briefly, and hardly to bring forth half their words. The poor speaketh supplications, saith Solomon; Prov. 18.23. but the rich answer roughly. Vers. 13. If men should over-drive] A pattern of a good Pa∣stor, ever to have an eye to the weak ones; and so to regard all in his flock, as he over-drive not any. Zech. 4.10. Rom. 14.1. Who hath despised the day of small things? Weak ones are to be received, but not to doubtful disputations. Novices are not to be put upon the austerities of Re∣ligion, Matth. 9.15. Christ preached as they were able to hear, Mark 4.33. Peter was specially charged to look to the lambs, Ioh. 21.15. Christ bears them in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with young, Isai. 40.11. Vers 14. Ʋntil I come to my lord, to Seir] Which yet he never meant, say some: it was but an officious lye, saith Tostatus. Others think, that he did go to Seir, though it be not recorded. It is like he
purposed to go, but was otherwise warned by God; as the wise∣men were, Matth. 2. or necessarily hindered, as Saint Paul was, in many of his intended journeys. Vers. 15. Let me finde grace] That is, Condescend unto me, and leave none. Vers. 16. On his way, unto Seir] Whither God had sent him aforehand, to plant, out of Jacobs way. He was grown rich, de∣sired liberty, and saw that his wives were offensive to the old cou∣ple; therefore he removed his dwelling to mount Seir, and left better room for Jacob; who, perhaps, had intelligence thereof from his mother, by Deborah, and so was the rather willing to re∣turn. Vers. 17. built him an house, and made boothes] So did his po∣sterity, at their going out of Egypt, Exod. 12.37. and, for a per∣petual memorial thereof, Tuguria, a te∣gedo dicta. were appointed to keep a yeerly feast of boothes or tabernacles, Lev. 23.34, made of green boughs of trees, in praise of God, who had now vouchsafed them better houses. And here one would wonder, M. Th. Goodw. (saith a Divine) that all along, du∣ring the raign of David and Solomon, (who gave a pattern of, and built the Temple) and all those succeeding reformers, there should something be omitted about this feast of tabernacles, till their return from Babylon: Yet so it was, Neb. 8.16, 17. This feast was kept (as 'tis thought) by Solomon, 2 Chron. 7.8, and by these same Jews, Ezra 3.4. yet not in this manner, Neh. 8.14. Now they had learned, by sad experience, to keep it aright, in dwel∣ling in boothes, by having been lately strangers out of their own land: to signifie which, and profess themselves strangers, (as this Syrian ready to perish, Deut. 26.5. their father, was now at Succoth) was the intent of that feast, and that rite of it, dwelling in boothes. This is intimated, vers. 17. They did read also out of the law, &c. vers. 19. which, till then, they had not done. Vers. 18. Came to Shalem] Or, came safe and sound to Shechem, as the Chaldee interprets it. Vers. 19. Sic pecunia, a pecude. For an hundred pieces of money] Heb. lambs, (as we call Angels, Jacobusses) because stampt with the image of a lamb. So Josh. 24.32. Job 42.11. Vers. 20. And he erected there a altar] 1. As a memorial of the promises, and a symbol of Gods presence. 2. As an external profession of his piety. 3. That he might set up God in his fami∣ly, and season all his worldly affairs with a rellish of Religion.
CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 1. Went out to see the daughters of the land.] VVHo went abroad at this time, with timbrels, to play, say the Hebrews; kept a solemn feast, saith Iosephus. Hence Dinah's desire to see them. But what saith S. Bernard? Si tu oti∣osè spectas, otiosè non spectaris: tu curiosè spectas, sed curiosiùs spe∣ctars. Dinah's wanton gadding, and gazing on others, gave oc∣casion to the adulterer to look and lust after her. See the fruit of her needless jetting abroad, to see fashions and novelties. The name of a virgin, in the Original tongues, of  a house;  of  to hide:  of  to shadow. , of , to lay up. , a virgin, and the apple of the eye. Mars viet banc, visamqu cupit, potiturque cupita. Ovid. Jer. 9.6. Bond. in Horat. is derived from the house, hiding, shadow, lockt treasure, apple of the eye: to teach them to refrain ill company, and idle gadding. Young women are taught to be keepers at home, Tit. 2.2. As when they come a∣broad among men, they must be, if not vailed, (as at Venice) yet clothed, and in their right mindes, (as that Demoniack, Luk. 8.35.) And this not onely in winter, that they take no cold; but in the summer, that others take no heat from them, (which may rather burn them, then warm them) as Shechem here did. Vers. 2. saw her, he took her, and lay with her] Ʋt vidit, periit. By those windows of the eyes and ears, sin and death often enter: thorow them, the devil throws balls of wild-fire into the soul, and sets all into a combustion. Visus, colloquium, contactus, osculum, concubitus, do too oft one succeed another. See to the Cinque∣ports, if ye would keep out the enemy. Shut up the five windows, if ye would have the house (the heart) full of light, saith the A∣rabian proverb. Joseph's mistress cast her eyes upon him; but when she laid hands on him, she was the more inflamed, and set agog, as it were. The viewing, touching, or familiar talking with a wo∣man, either without necessary occasion, or then, Time well spent, by M. Ezek. Culverwel,  pag. 53. without prayer for holy affection, is dangerous, saith a grave Divine. Thou maist not look intently upon what thou maist not love. Democritus the Philosopher pulled out his eyes, that he might not look upon forbid∣den beauties. This was no part of his wisdom: But it shall be ours, by mortification, to pluck the wanton eye out of old Adam, and to set it sober into the new man: to get that oculum irretortum, that well-ordered eye, that Job had, Chap. 31.1, that Joseph had; that Gregory
Nazianzen had, who could , tutor his eyes: that Charles the fifth, Emperour of Germany, had, who would shut the casements, Saepé clausit e∣nestram, e in∣spiceret formosi∣ores soeminas, &c. Parci hist. profan. p. 908. when at any time he saw fair women afar off, or heard that such were to pass by his window. It is not safe, to pry into the beauty of a fair woman. Circe may inchant us, the Coc∣katrice slay us with her sight: Let her not take thee with her eye∣brows, saith Solomon; as larks, while they gaze in a glass, are taken in a day-net. See the Notes on Chap. 6.2. and 26.7. Vers. 3. And his soul clave unto Dinah] He kickt her not out of doors, (as Amnn did Tamar, far sweeter to him in the ambition, then in the fruition;) but to make amends (as they call it) by Mar∣riage, he seeks to go by the old Rule in that case, Et dotet, & ducat. Howbeit, Marriage (Gods ordinance) is not to be entred into thorow the devils portal. Vers. 4. Get me this damosel to wife] This is praise-worthy in Shechem, as bad as he was, that he correcteth his base-born love, (or lust rather) by seeking to make her his wife; not without con∣sent of parents on both sides; which, in the Church of Rome, is oft-times not regarded. Children are a principal part of their parents possessions, (as Job's children were accounted by Satan) yea, a piece of themselves, Matth. 15.22. Have mercy upon me, that is, upon my daughter. Fit it is therefore, that they should by the parents be disposed of in Marriage. Vers. 5. And Jacob heard] To his very great grief and regret: For she was his onely daughter; a damosel of not above fifteen yeers of age. The Hebrews say, she was afterwards given to Job in marriage: But that's not likely; for she is reckoned among those that went down to Egypt, Gen. 46. [And Jacob held his peace] He felt Gods hand upon his back; he therefore lays his own hand upon his mouth. And herein he did better in ruling his own spirit, then his sons did, Prov. 16.32. Lam. 3.28. Levit. 10.3. Psal. 39.10. that took the City, vers. 27. He sitteth alone, and is silent, saith the Prophet of the afflicted person. So was Aaron, so was David, so was the Lord Christ, as a sheep dumb before the shearer. The Romanes placed the image of their goddess Ange∣ronia, upon the altar of Volupia, with her mouth shut, and sealed up: Macrob. lib. 1. in Som. Scip. to signifie, saith Macrobius, that they that bridle their grief, and say nothing, shall, by their patience, soon attain to greatest pleasure. Acts 19.35, 16. Patience in the soul, as the Town-clerk at Ephesus, sends away mutinous thoughts, as he did the many-headed multitude: it quiets the boiling spirit, as Christ becalmed the raging sea, with
Peace, and be still: it makes a David dumb: a dumb shew, but a very good one: it says, Cedamus: leve fit, quod benè fertur onus. Vers. 6. And Hamor the father of Shechem] Unruly youth put their aged parents, many times, to much travel and trouble; as Samson, Shechem, Paris, &c. Green wood is ever shrinking and warping; whereas the well-seasoned holds a constant firm∣ness. Vers. 7. The men were grieved, Heb. exarserit cis nasus. and very wroth] A pair of un∣ruly passions, when combined, especially: they ride one upon the back of another, as kine do in a strait passage; and will make an Alexander kill his best friends, such as he would afterwards have revived, with the best and warmest blood in his own heart. —qui non moderabitur irae Infectum velit esse, dolor quod suaserit, & mens. Horat. [Because he had wrought folly in Israel] That is, in the Church, where fornication should not be once named, much less committed, Eph. 5.3. Sin is odious any-where; most of all, among Saints. A thistle is unseemly in a garden, filthiness in a vestal, baseness in a Prince. And yet, by the malice of Satan, there are, many times, more scandals in the Church, then elsewhere: such incest at Co∣rinth, as not among Heathens; such folly in Jacob's family, as not at Shechem, or Seir. Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters, Ezek. 16.48. This is lamentable. Vers. 8. And Hamor communed with them] A fond father seeks to satisfie the lust of a loose son, whom he should severely have punished, Such parents are peremptores potius quàm parentes, faith Bernard; like apes, that kill their young with culling them. They shew their love as little, as if, by clapping their hands on their childrens mouthes, to keep the cold winde from them, they should strangle them to death. A fair hand, here, maketh a foul wound; when correction would be a kinde of cure. Severitas tamen non sit tetra, sed tetrica, saith Sidonius. For, Sidonius, lib. 4. Ep. 9. as a cur by ty∣ing waxeth fiercer; and as new wine breaketh weak vessels; so too much severity overthroweth, and quite spilleth a tender minde. Vers. 9. And make ye marriages with us] The world thinks, we may do as they; and what need we be so scrupulous and strait∣laced? But Saints must walk accurately, by line, and by rule; , Eph. 5.15. . not as unwise, but as wise; having their feet where other mens heads are: for the way of the wise is on high, saith Solomon; he goes a
higher way to work then others: he may not buckle, and stoop to their base courses. Singular things are conferred upon him, singu∣lar things are expected from him. An Israelite dare not yoke himself with any Sichemish heifer, that bears not the yoke of Jesus Christ. Those that stood with the Lamb, had not defiled them∣selves with women, &c. Rev. 14.14. Nec aliunde noscibiles (saith Tertullian of those Primitive Christians) quàm de emendatione vi∣tierum pristinorum. Tertull. ad Scapulam. They were distinguished from all others, by their holy behaviour. Vers. 10. And ye shall dwell with us, &c.] Thus the world tempts the Saints, by offer of profits, pleasures, and preferments. Sed surdo cantilenam. For they answer the world, as here, We can∣not do this thing, vers. 14. or as the children of Israel bespake the king of Edom; Let us pass, I pray thee, thorow thy country: We will not pass thorow the fields of profit, or vineyards of pleasure, &c. we will go by the kings high-way, chalked unto us in the holy Scri∣ptures: we will not turn to the right hand, or to the left, for any allurement or affrightment of thine, until we have passed thy bor∣ders, Num. 20.17. Vers. 11, 12] Ask me never so much dowry] Heb. Multiply ye upon me, vehemently. Gen. 38.18. Unbridled affection spares for no cost, so it may be satisfied. Judah parted with his signet, bracelets, and staff, to the harlot. Herod, that old fornicator, bids the dancing damosel ask what she will, Demosth. to the half of his kingdom. One there was, that would not buy repentance so dear, as the harlot demand∣ed. But those miscreants in Micah, will give any thing for a dis∣pensation to live in sin: they offer thousands of rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil; Micah 6.7. yea, the sons of their body, for the sins of their souls. Vers. 13. deceitfully, and said, Because he had, &c.] Therefore they thought, they had reason to do as they did. Satan doth so bemist men, many times, that they think they have reason to be mad, and that there is some sense in sinning: whenas, indeed, our onely wisdom is, to keep God's Laws, Deut. 4.6. All which are founded upon so good reason, that, had God never made them, yet it had been best for us to have practised them. Vers. 14. That Were a reproach unto us] And yet the world reproached them with nothing more, then with their Circumcisi∣on; as it is to be seen in Horace, Juvenal, Tacitus. Appion scoffs at it, and is answered by Iosephus. But, as he were a fool, that
would be mokt out of his inheritance; so he, much more, that would be moked out of his Religion. Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, saith David, because the Lord is hrefuge; because he runs to God by prayer. But, to shew how little he regarded their reproaches, he falls presently a praying, O that the salvation of Isra∣el &c. Psal 14.6, 7. So Nazareth was a reproach cast upon Christ; and he glories in it, Acts 22.8. I am Jesus of Nazareth, Whom thou persecutest. He saith not, I am the Son of God, heir of all things, King of the Church, &c. but, I am Jesus of Nazareth. If this be to be vile, said David, I Will be yet more vile. Vers. 15. That every male of you be circumcised] Lo, herein was their deceit. How often is Religion pretended, made a stale and stalking-horse to worldly and wicked aims and respects! A horrible profanation: as when Naoth was put to death at a fast; Henry the seventh, Emperour, poisoned in the Sacramental bread, by a Monk. He pretends to worship Christ, intends to worry him, &c. From such stand off, saith S. Paul; or, 1 Tim. 6.5. Rom. 16, 17, 18 if ye come neer them, set a mark upon them. Foenum habet in cornu. Vers. 16. Then will we give our daughters] Whether Jacob were present at this whole conference, it is not certain. It is pro∣bable, that he was not. For surely, he would either have disswa∣ded them from thus doing: or if he had consented, he would have said something more, to the Shechemites, for their better assurance. It is a Maxime in Machiavel; Fidem tamdiu servandam esse, quamdiu expediat. But Jacob had not known this depth of the devil: his sons better could skill of it. They seem to be somewhat akin to those Thracians, of whom it was anciently said, Eos foedera nescire; that they knew no covenants: or the Turks at this day, whose Covenants, grounded upon the Law of Nations, be they with never so strong capitulations concluded, Turk. hist. or solemnity of oath confirmed, have, with them, no longer force, then standeth with their own profit; serving, indeed, but as snares, to entangle other Princes in. There is no faith, say they, to be kept with dogs; that is, Ibid. 755. with Christians. And this, perhaps, they have learned of those pseudo Christians, the Papists, who dealt so perfidiously with them, at the great Battel of Varna: Where Amurath, the Great Turk, seeing the great slaughter of his men, against the oath given him by King Ladislaus, (dispensed with by the Pope's Legat) and behold∣ing the picture of the Crucifix in the displayed Ensignes of the vo∣luntary Christians; he pluckt the Writing out of his bosom,
wherein the late League was comprised; and holding it up in his hand, with his eyes cast up to heaven, said, Behold, thou crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians, in thy Name, made with me; Ibid. 297. which they have, without cause, violated. Now, if thou be a God, as they say thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done to thy Name, and me; and shew thy power upon thy perjurious people, who, in their deeds, deny thee their God. And it fell out ac∣cordingly: For God hates foul and faithless dealing, Zech. 5.4. Rom. 1.31. Heu miser, etsi quis primò per∣juriacelat, Sera tamen tacitis paena venit pe∣dibus. Tibull. Perjurii poena divina exitium; humana, dedecus. This was one of the Laws of the twelve Tables in Rome. Vers. 17. But if ye will not hearken] How often have men found treason in trust; and murther, under shew of marriage! as 1 Sam. 18.17, 25. Dan. 11.17. and in the Massacre of Paris. Vers. 18. And their words] See the force of love, and hope of profit! Vers. 19. And the young man deferred not, &c.] Heb. Neque distulit puer; The lad deferred not. He is called a lad or a childe, that is, a fool; because he was carried, not by right reason, but blinde affection, walking in the ways of his heart, and sight of his eyes, ., of , of . Eccles. 11.9. And, vers. 10. the word used to signifie youth, signifieth darkness; to note, that youth is the dark age, hot, and headlong, indeliberate and slippery, such as had need to cleanse their ways, by cleaving to the Word, saith David, Psal. 119.9. where the word for cleansing, properly signifies the cleansing of glass; which, as it is slick and slippery; so, though it be very clean, yet it will gather filth, even in the sun beams, and of it self: which noteth the great corruption of this age. Vers. 20. And Hamor and Shechem, &c.] These great men easily perswaded, and prevailed with the people, to have what they would. Great need have we to pray for good Governours. When Crispus believed, who was the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, ma∣ny Corinthians believed also, Acts 18.8. Paul was loath to lose the Deputy; because his conversion would draw on many o∣thers. As on the contrary, Jeroboam caused Israel to sin; and generally, as the Kings were good or evil, so were the people; in which, as in a beast, the whole body follows the head. Vers. 21. These men are peaceable, &c.] Nothing more ordi∣nary, with Polititians, then to cover private ends and respects, with pretence of publike good: As Jeroboam told the people, it was too much trouble for them to go up to Jerusalem to worship; they
should take a shorter cut to Dan and Bethel. So Jehu, in all his reformations, had a hawks eye to a kingdom; his main end was, to settle the Crown upon his own head. The Turkish Janizaries, Parei Hist. pro∣fan. Medul. 1176. desirous to be rid of their Sultan Osman, pretended, and perswa∣ded the people, that he was Jaour, that is, an Infidel; and that he endeavoured to betray the Turkish Empire to Christian dogs, May 18. 1622. Vers. 23. Shall not their cattel, &c.] Profit perswades mightily with the multitude: They all look to their own way; Isai. 56.11. every one for his gain from his quarter. Who Will shew us any good? is Vox populi. And who begs not attention, or inoculates not his faithful endeavour into his friends Creed and Belief, with a tale of utile! Vers. 24. And every male was circumcised] Many have lost their blood, and suffered so much trouble for their lusts, as, had it been for Religion, they had been Martyrs. But the Cause, and not the Punishment, makes the Martyr. Samson and the Philistims died together; sed diverso fine ac fato. Multum interest, saith Augustine, & qualia quis, & qualis quisque patiatur. Vers. 25. On the third day] Which is the worst day, to those that are wounded; the critical day, as the Chirurgeons call it. Wicked men are witty, to take their opportunity to act villany. Vers. 26. And they slew Hamor and Shechem] This is com∣mended in Apocryphal Judith, Chap. 9.2, for zeal; which the Canonical Scripture condemneth for self-will; and Iacob, on his death-bed, cursed it for cruelty, and blessed himself from their as∣sembly, Gen. 49.6, 7. Quest. But why doth he not more sharply reprove it here? Answ. First, he considered Gods just judge∣ment on the Shechemites; who, without the knowledge and faith of God, had profaned the Sacrament of Circumcision. A sin that God suffereth not to pass without a sensible check, in his dearest children; how much less in strangers and enemies? The Donatists, 1 Cor. 11.29, 30 that cast the holy clements of the Lords Supper to dogs, were devoured of dogs. He that came without his wedding-garment, was taken from the table, to the tormenter. Secondly, Iacob gave place, for present, to his sons rage and fury. Discretion in the choice of seasons for reproving, is no less necessary, then zeal and faithfulness in reproving. Good Physitians use not to evacuate the body, in the extremities of heat and cold. Good Mariners do not hoise up sail in every winde. Vers. 27. Because they had defiled their sister] So it was just in
God, though unjust in the instruments; who were therefore cur∣sed by Iacob; Gen. 49.7. but yet not rejected by God. His election is of free grace, and not of foreseen faith or works. Vers. 28. They took their sheep, &c.] One onely sinned, all suf∣fered. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. All the Corin∣thians were tackt with, 1 Cor. 5.2, 6. and taxed for the incestuous mans offence, because they bewailed it not, repressed it not. He knew what he did, that prayed for pardon of his other-mens-sins. Vers. 29. And all their wealth] Or, power: For, in a mans wealth, is his power; yea, it is his tower of strength, Prov. 18.10, 11. and so much he is valued at, as he is able to disburse. See the Notes on Chap. 31.1. [And spoiled even all that was in the house] So dealt Minerius, at Merindol; Charles the fifth, at Magdeburg; the bloody Papists, at the Parisian Massacre. But when the Lord came to make inquisition for blood, Psal. 9.12. he remembred them. He drew Articles of enquiry against them, as strict, and as critical, as ever the Spanish Inquisition; and dealt with them accordingly. Cam∣byses lighting off his horse, Justin. after he had been shewing great cruelty to them of Athens, his sword flew out of the seabberd, and slew him. If these brethren in iniquity sped better, they may thank a good God, whose terrour fell upon the adjacent Cities. For they did enough to undo, not themselves onely, but their father, and his whole family. It was good counsel to such, that Tertullian gives to bloody Scapula; Si nobis non parcis, tibi parce: si non tibi, Car∣thageni: See thou undo not thy self, and thy City, by thy cruelty to Christians. Vers. 30. Cùm in auimo, tum in rationi∣hus. Jun. Ye have troubled me] In minde, and state: and ma∣ny such trouble-houses and trouble-towns there are abroad: All places are full of them, and so is hell too. There God will trouble them another while, as he did Achan, Josh. 7.25. when he will shew mercy to such Iacobs, in whose families that is committed, that they abhor. Methe mispar. [I being few in number] So the Saints were ever, a little flock, a poor few, to the many: Jewels, nothing so much in bulk, as lumber; strangers, few, in respect of home dwel∣lers; sons of God, few, to common subjects. When Christ came to his own, Joh. 1.12. Joh. 1. his own received him not: He wondered at one good Nathaneel, and set an ecce upon him, as a rare bird. Vers. 31. Should he deal with our sister as an harlot?] Why no: But should you therefore speak so big to your father, and deal so cruelly with your Confederates; whom you first cozened into a
Covenant, and then basely butchered, when not able to help them∣selves? But anger is outragious, and forethinks not what will fol∣low hereafter, or becomes a man for present. Bridle it therefore. CHAP. XXXV. Vers. 1. Arise, go up to Bethel.] THis is not the first time that God tells him of that Vow, and calls for performance. See Chap. 31.13. It is with us, as with children; Eaten bread is soon forgotten: deliverances, com∣monly, are but nine days wonderment, at utmost; and it is ten to one, that any leper returns to give praise to God. If any thing arrouze and raise up our hearts to thankful remembrance of former mercy, it must be the sense of some present misery, as here. Jacob was in a great straight, and fright: His sons had troubled him; the country was ready to rise upon him, and root him out: God also was justly displeased with him, for his forgotten Vow; yet chides him not, now that he was in heaviness; but takes his opportunity, (for we are best, when at worst) and gently mindes him of what was his duty, and would be for his safety. Numa is said to have put so much confidence in his gods, that when he was sacrificing, and news came, that the enemy was at hand; he laugh∣ed, and said, At ego rm divinam facio. , Plut. Those Philistims were even ambitious of destruction, and ran to meet their ruine, that gathered themselves against Israel, whiles they were sacrificing, 1 Sam. 7.7. Cant. 6.10. and serving the Lord, in their meet at Mizpeh. The Church, in her Worships, is terrible as an army with banners; a cup of trem∣bling to all the people round about; a burdensome stone for all peo∣ple; a torch of fire in a sheof, Zech. 12.2, 3, 6. Isai. 37.22. He is a mad man that will meddle with her, whiles she is upon good terms with Christ, her Champion. Balaam knew this, and therefore gave that villanous counsel. Germani non∣dum, vio hte, Dani o terrore persi iiffuge∣runt. Parcus. All Germany was in arms against that handful of Hssites in Bohemia vet could not suppress them. Ge∣neva, a small people invirond with enemies, and barred from aid of neighburs, yet ithf with God, hath been hitherto strange∣ly upheld. At the siege of Mountabone in France, Spec. blli sacri, 282. the people of God, using dily humiliation, as their service would permit, did sing a Psalm after, and immediately before their sallying forth.
With which practice the enemy coming acquainted, ever, upon the singing of the Psalm, (upon which they expected a sally) they would so quake and tremble, crying, They come they come, as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon them. Vers. 2. Then Jacob said unto his houshold] So Gedeon began his reformation at his fathers house. David also would walk wise∣ly in the midst of his house; Psal. 101.2. and this he calls a perfect way, a signe of sincerity, Psal. 101. This Psalm, Bishop Ridley read over often to his family, hiring them to learn it by heart; and taking care, that they might be a spectacle to all others, of vertue and ho∣nesty. [Put away the strange gods] Strange it was, that such Mawmets should be suffered among them. Calvin thinks, that Jacob winked at Rachel's superstition, of a blinde love to her; as Solomon gratified his mistresses of Moab. I should think rather, that they were the idols of Shechem, brought into the house, either by Jacob's sons and servants, or by the captive women. [Be clean, and change your garments] God is to be approached unto, with the best preparation we can make. . Plut. Heathens had their Coenapura before their so∣lemn sacrifices. Godw. Antiq. Heathens saw, that God is not to be drawn nigh unto, hand over head; but preparation to be made at home. We wash us every day; but, when to dine with great ones, we wash us with balls, and put on our best. Vers. 3. And was with me in the way, &c.] Deducendo, redu∣cendo, franumque socero, fratri, finitimisque Shecemi injiciendo, ne me ullo pacto laederent, saith Junius. All this called for thankful∣ness. Prayer and thanks, should be like the double motion of the lungs. The air that is sucked in by prayer, should be breathed out again by praises. God had heard Jacob, now he should hear of him. Vers. 4. And they gave unto Jacob] Now they were in danger of destruction, they would do any thing. So those false Israelites, when God slew them, then they sought him, Psal. 78.34. So ma∣ny, Daniels Chro. fol. 58. when they are deadly sick, are wondrous good; as William Rufus, who vowed, upon his recovery, to see all vacancies furnish∣ed. Dike of deceitf. pag. 217. In the Sweating sickness, so long as the ferventness of the Plague lasted, there was crying, Peccavi, peccavi: the Ministers were sought for in every corner; You must come to my Lord, you must come to my Lady, &c. The Walnut-tree is most fruitful, when most beaten. Fish thrive best, in cold and salt waters. The most plentiful Summer, follows upon the hardest Winter. David was never so tender, as when hunted like a partridge; nor Jonah
so watchful, prayerfull, as in the Whales belly. Vigilabat in ceto qui stertebat in navi. Lam. 3.39, 41. When men suf∣fer for their sin, hands, and hearts, and all, are list up to heaven; that before were as without God in the world, & thought they could do well enough without him. A Lethargie is commonly cured by a Fever; worms killed with alocs: so are crawling lusts, by bitter afflictions. Israel under the cross, will defile the dols that they had deified, Isai. 30.22. and after that they were captives in Ba∣bylon, they could never be drawn to that sin, whatever they suffered for their refusal; as under Antiochus. I end with S. Ambrose: Beata anima, quae est instar domus Jacobi, in qua nulla simulachra, nulla effigies vanitatis: Blessed is that soul, that, like Jacob's house, hath no Idol in it. Vers. 5. The terrour of God was upon them] The Hebrews tell us, that they pursued Jacob, and were beaten back by him: where∣upon he saith, Gen. 48.22, that he took that country out of the hand of the Amorites, with his sword, and with his bowe, God might send a pannick terrour upon them, as they were fighting a∣gainst Iacob, and so bridle them from further attempts. The Sy∣rians heard a noise of chariots and horses in the air, (made by An∣gels, likely; or whether it were but their own fancie, as Iudg. 9.36. and as the Burgundians took a field of standing corn for an army of fighting men) and fled for their lives. 2 Kings 7.7. Theodosius the Empe∣rour overcame the Persians and Saracens, Alsted. Chro∣nol. pag. 300. by means of a pannick terrour smitten into them by God; so that they ran into the river Euphrates, and above an hundred thousand of them perished in the waters. Vers. 6. So Iacob came to Luz] Which was thirty miles from Shechem: a long journey for such a large family, who went it with hearts full of heaviness; for, without were fightings, within fears: but this was their comfort, they went to see the face of God at Bethel. As they that passed thorow the valley of Baca, Psal. 84.6, 7. though they took many a weary step, yet went from strength to strength, because they were to appear before God in Zion. Popish Pil∣grims, though used hardly, and put to much expence and inconve∣nience; yet satisfie themselves in this, I have that I came for, viz. the sight of a dumb Idol, (as Calvin noteth.) What then should not we suffer, to see God in his Ordinances? Isal. 66.20. They shall bring your brethren as an offering to the Lord, upon horses, in chariots, and in bitters, saith the Prophet: that is, though sck, weakly, and unfit for travel; yet, rather in litters, then not at all.
Vers. 7. Because there God appeared] Heb. Revelavissent Dii: Not the Angels, but the sacred Trinity. See the Notes on Chap. 1. vers. 1. Vers. 8. But Deborah, Rebeccah's nurse, died] A grave matron she was; of great use, while she lived; and much missed, when she died. This is not every mans case. Some have their souls, as swine, Suillo peccori anima pro sale. for no other use, then, as salt, to keep their bodies from pu∣trefaction: And when they die, there's no more miss of them, then of the sweepings of the house, or parings of the nails. Vers. 9. And God appeared, &c.] A sweet allayment of his late heaviness for Deborah, and a gracious preparative to the ensuing loss of Rachel. The joy of the Lord is the Christian mans strength, Neh. 8. One sight of him, is enough to carry one thorow all con∣ditions with comfort. As a man that hath his bones filled with marrow, and that hath abundance of good blood, and fresh spirits in his body, he can endure to go with less clothes then another, be∣cause he is well lined within: so it is with a heart that hath a great deal of fat and marrow, communion with God, and feeling of his favour; he will go thorow troubles, in the fail of outward com∣forts. And as the lily is fresh, and looks fair, though among thorns; so will he, amidst miseries. Vers. 10. And God said unto him, &c.] It is usual with God, to revive and renew the promises, with fresh supplies of comforts upon the hearts of his faithful servants, for the further confirma∣tion of their faith and hope. . Phil. 1.19. Eph. 1.13. Eph. 4.30. Thus he seals to us at every Sacra∣ment, besides those sweet supplies of the Spirit of promise, where∣by we are daily sealed to the day of redemption, as the merchants goods are signed with his seal. Vers. 11. I am God Almighty] This is hardly perswaded; and yet it is the ground of all true comfort and spiritual security. We are apt to measure things according to our own model, as to think God so powerful, as our understanding can reach, &c. But, for a finite creature to believe the infinite All-sufficiency of God, he is not able to do it thorowly, without supernatural grace; nor can he be soundly comforted, till he comes to comprehend it. Of his will to do us good, we doubt not, till, in some measure, we doubt of his power to help. Vers. 13. And God went up from him] Not by local ascension; (for he is every-where) but in respect of that visible signe of his glory, which he now withdrew from over, or from upon Iacob.
For the righteous are as Gods chariot, say the Hebrews on this Text. Confer Cant. 6.12. [Where he talked with him] Prayer is a free and familiar conference or intercourse with God; a par∣ling with his Majesty, as Saint Paul calls it; . 1 Tim. 2.1. a standing upon inter∣rogatories with him; especially when Satan, sin, and conscience ac∣cuse. It was a part of the Persian Kings silly glory, to keep their greatest subjects from coming neer them, without special license, Esth. 4.11. To God we have free access, upon all occasions; and are bid to come boldly, Heb. 4.16. If Seneca could say, Audacter Deum roges, nihil illum de alieno rogaturus; how much more may the faithful Christian, sith All is his, God and all! 1 Cor. 3.22. Moses and Luther could have what they would of God. Fiat voluntas mea, saith Luther; and then he addes, Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua: Let my will be done; but no otherwise mine, then as thine, Lord. Vers. 14. And Iacob set up a pillar] Or, had set up a pillar, had poured a drink offering, &c. to wit, Chap. 28.18, 19. And now he either repeats it in the presence, and for the edification of his family; or else he repairs the pillar now ruinated, and new con∣secrates it, by the old name Bethel. Vers. 16. She had hard labour] Woman, of all creatures, bring∣eth forth with most pain and peril, as the Philosopher observeth, Arist. de ani∣ma, l. 7. and experience confirmeth. Her onely way is, to send for Lady Faith, the best Midwife; and thereby, to repose upon him, whose voice causeth the hindes to calve, Psal. 29.9 which yet, of all bruit creatures, bring forth with greatest trouble; bowing themselves, Job 39.4, 6. bruising their young, and casting out their sorrows. Vers. 17. Thou shalt have this son also] So she had children, ac∣cording to her desire; but this last, to her cost, for a chastisement of her strong affections, which drew on strong afflictions; as hard knots must have hard wedges They that would needs have a peny for their pains, had no joy of their peny: Matth. 20.13. when the end of the day came, when they were to go into another world, they saw, that their peny was no such good silver; that preferment, profit, credit, were but empty things, and could not satisfie. It is best to be mo∣derate in our desires after these outward things; and not so set upon't, as to indent with God for such, and so much: this may be dangerous.
Vers. 18. As her soul was in departing] Viz. To God that gave it. It is a spiritual, immortal substance, distinct from the bo∣dy;and can subsist of it self; Epicharmcum est illud; Concretum fuit & discretum est, rediitque unde venerat, terra deorsum, spiritus, ursum. as the Mariner can, when the ship is broken. [For she died] In our birth, we rent our mothers, (to death sometimes) whom before we had burthened; so far Nature witnessing our viperous generation, because of sin, which we bring into the world. [But his father called him Benjamin] Lest the former name should be a daily revival of his loss. Let men make their burdens as light as they can, and not increase their worldly sorrow, by sight of sad objects. It will come (as we say of foul weather) soon enough; we need not send for it. What should dropsie-men do eating salt meats? Vers. 19. Juaei vitrum ex quo sposus & sponsa bibe∣runt, confrin∣gunt; ut memo∣res int sponsi fragilitatis hu∣manae. And Rachel died] We forfeit many favours, by over∣affecting them. Our jealous God will not endure us to idolize any creature: Let them that have wives, (or any other thing they hold most dear to themselves) be as if they had none. So love, as to think of loss. Let all outward things hang loose, as an upper garment, that we can throw off at pleasure. Vers. 20. And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave] To testifie his love, and continue her remembrance. Dead friends may be lawfully thus honoured with Monuments, modò vitetur luxus & superstitio. Vers. 21. beyond the tower of Edar] Or, of the flock. This tower was built, it seems, for the safety and service of shepherds. There it was, probably, that those shepherds, Luke 2. watched their flocks. There also, Helena, mother to Constantine the Great, did afterwards build a Temple, for a memorial of the Angels that there appeared to those shepherds, carolling Christ into the world. Vers. 22. Reuben went, and lay with Bilhah] A foul fault, in so good a family: but so it sometimes falls out, by the malice of Sa∣tan, Selcucus Syriae rex tradidit filio Antiocho nover∣cam Stratonicen, cujus amore ille decumbebat. Appian, in Sy∣riacis. Dani. Chron. pag. 12. for the discrediting of Religion. Such ugly incest was com∣mitted at Corinth, as was hardly heard of among Heathen, that a man should have his fathers wife, 2 Cor. 5.1. Some such there were among the Kings of Egypt; but not many. Ethelbald, King of West-Saxons, with great infamy marrying his fathers widow Judith, enjoyed his Kingdom but two yeers and a half. But how hateful is that Spanish incest, by Papal dispensation? King Philip of Spain might call the Arch-duke Albert, both Brother, Couzen, Nephew, and Son: for, all this was he unto him, either by blood, Sands his Re∣lation of West, Religion. or affinity; being Uncle to himself, Couzen-german to his father, Husband to his sister, and Father to his wife. Abhorred filth! [And Israel heard it] And held his peace, because he
saw God in it, chastising him for his Polygamy. The punishment is sometimes so like the sin, that a man may boldly say, Such a sin was the mother of such a misery. And here's a pause in the He∣brew, to shew Jacob's great amazement at this sad tidings. Dolo∣res ingentes stupent. He was even dumb, and opened not his mouth, because God was in it, Psal. 39.9. Vers. 23. Reuben, Jacobs first-born] Who, though by his sin he fell from his birth-right, yet is here reckoned as a Patriarch; and afterwards, upon his repentance, not a little honoured, Exod 28.21, 29. Rev. 21.12. God is not off and on with his elect: their frowardness interrupts not the course of his goodness. Vers. 24. And Isaac gave up the ghost] Twelve yeers after Jo∣seph was sold, and fourty yeers after he first became blinde. Three special friends Jacob buries, in this Chapter. Crosses come thick: be patient. CHAP. XXXVI. Vers. 1. This is Edom.] THe name and note of his profaneness. A stigmatical Belialist. It were a happiness to the wicked, if they might be forgotten, Eccles. 8.10. Vers. 4. Eliphaz] Job's friend, say some: a good man; but much mistaken in Job, whom he so sharply censures. Vers. 6. From the face of his brother Jacob] Or, before the com∣ing of his brother Jacob; by a special providence of God, to make room for the right heir. It is he that determineth the bounds of our habitations, Acts 17.26. It was he, that espied out this land for his peculiar people; and that kept the room empty all the time of the Babylonish Captivity, till the return of the Natives; though it were a pleasant country, left destitute of inhabitants, and surround∣ed with many warlike Nations. Piscator renders this text, propter Jacobum, and expounds it, Because he knew that the land of Ca∣naan should be Jacob's, according to Gods promise made to him in his fathers blessing of him. But I doubt whether Esau would yeeld to him for any such reason. Vers. 7. For their riches were more, &c.] And besides, mount Seir was fitter for a hunter. A good ease it was to Iacob, who
had little joy in his neighbourhood. God will not take the ungodly by the hand, Job 8.20. no more will his people. When they are forced to be in ill company, they cry, Oh that I had the wings of a dove, that I might flee away! Or if that Oh will not set them at liberty, they take up that Wo, to express their misery; Wo is me, that I sojourn in Meshec, &c. It was once the prayer of a good Gentlewoman, when she came to die, being in much trouble of conscience; Moses his choice, by M. Bur. pag. 330. O Lord, let me not go to hell, where the wicked are: for, Lord, thou knowest, I never loved their company here. Vers. 11. And the sons of Eliphaz] See here the fulfilling of Gods predictions and promises, even to an Esan: will he be want∣ing to his obedient people? Vers. 20. These are the sons of Seir] Esau was by marriage allied to this Seir; for he married his neece Aholibamah, vers. 2. yet the children of Esau chased away the Horims of Seir, and dwelt in their stead in mount Seir, Deut. 2.12. Wicked men are void of natural affection, in their pursuit of profit or prefer∣ment. Abimelech, Absalom, Athaliah, for instance; and that Amida, Turk. hist. fol. 745 747.642. son of Muleasses King of Tunes, who rose up against his father, and possessing himself of his Kingdom, slew his Captains, polluted his wives, took the Castle of Tunes; and, after all, put out his fathers and brethrens eyes, like as Muleasses himself, before, had dealt with his own brethren. Vers. 24. That found the mules] By coupling divers kindes to∣gether, contrary to Levit. 19.19. Neither did the world, till then, want any perfect kinde of creature; for the mule and the ass dif∣fer not, . B. Babington. Fuit olim psitta∣cus Romae aureis centum compara∣tus, &c. C. Rhodig. l 2. c. 32. Maiolus in Canic. colloq. 23. Sphinx Philos. pag. 785. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 12. but onely in degree. The Greeks call mules half-asses. See here (saith one) the busie curiosity of some mens natures, given to news, and strange inventions. So he that taught a Parrot in Rome to repeat the Creed, every Article in order, and by it self, distinct∣ly. Another, that painted the whole story of our Saviour's pas∣sion (both for persons and things) upon the nails of his own fin∣gers. Had not he little to do, that learned to write a fair hand with his feet? (Heidfeld saith he saw it, with wonderment.) And he as little, that enclosed Homer's Iliads written in a nut? which Cicero tell us, he saw with his eyes. These were toilsome toys, quae nec ignoranti nocent, nec scientent juvant, as Seneca saith of So∣phistry. Hard they are to come by; but of no use or worth: like an olive, or date-stone; hard to crack the one, or cleave the other: but nothing, or nothing worth ought, when crackt or cloven,
within either. This same foolish wittiness Alexander wittily scoffed, when he gave a fellow onely a bushel of pease, for his pains of throwing, every time, a pease upon a needles point, standing a pretty way off. Vers. 31. Before there raigned any king, &c.] Sicut herba te∣ctorum praecocem habet vigorem, sed citius arescit. Exoriuntur im∣pii, sed exuruntur. They are set up on high, but on slippery places, Psal. 73.18. advanced, as Haman; but to be brought down again, with a vengeance. This observation the Hebrews make upon this text. Whiles Edom raigneth and flourisheth, Israel groaneth un∣der the servitude of Egypt. omp and prosperity, then, is no sure note of the true Church. Vers. 40. Duke Timnah, duke Alvah] We had a Duke d'Al∣va lately in the Netherlands, Governour there for the Spaniard, Grimston, hist. of Ne∣therlands. infamous for his inhumanity. For he rosted some to death, star∣ved others, and that even after quarter; saying, though he promi∣sed to give them their lives, he did not promise to finde them meat. This was a right Romish Edomite. The Hebrews think, the Romanes came of the Idumeans. Sure I am, if they be not of the natural descent, they are of the spiritual, (or unnatural;) and so like, as, by the one, we may see the face, favour, and affection, of the other. Vers. 43. These be the dukes of Edom] As the Principality of Edom began with Dukes, and rose to Kings; so it returneth to Dukes again, after the death of Hadad, in Moses his time, 1 Chro. 1.51. It is likely, (saith an Interpreter) that, upon the unkinde dealing of that Hadad, in denying to let Israel pass thorow his land, the Lord removed the dignity of Kings from that Common∣wealth, and let it be ruled by Dukes again; whereof, eleven are here by name rehearsed. So sensible is God, and so severe, in punish∣ing the least unkindness done to his people. Julius Pflugius com∣plaining to the Emperour (by whom he had been employed) of great wrong done him by the Duke of Saxony, received this an∣swer: Have a little patience, Tua caus erit mea causa. So saith God to his abused: He reproveth, yea deposeth even Kings for their sakes; and accounts, that the whole world is not worthy of them, nay, not worth one of them, how mean soever in regard of outwards; as Chrysostome expounds that, Heb. 11.38.
CHAP. XXXVII. Vers. 1. In the land of his fathers sojournings.] THe Dukes of Edom had habitations in the land of their pos∣sessions, Chap. 36.43. But Jacob, with his father Isaac, were pilgrims in the land of Canaan; content to dwell in tents here, that they might dwell with God for ever. , &c. Epist. ad Diognetum. Justin Martyr saith of the Christians of his time; they dwell in their own coun∣tries but as strangers; have right to all, as Citizens; but suffer hardship, as forraigners, &c. Vers. 2. These are the generations] That is, events, begotten of time, after he came to live with his father Isaac, who also wept for Ioseph, vers. 35, as Iunius. [With the sons of Bilhah, &c.] It is thought, that these sons of the handmaids, for the baseness of their birth, were more modest then the rest; and that Ioseph therefore, out of his humility, sorted himself with them. Proba∣ble it is, they were more unruly then the rest, and ill conditioned, (as such are, commonly) whereof Ioseph made complaint, and was therefore hated. Veritas odium parit. Truth is a good mistress; but he that follows her too close at heels, may hap have his teeth struck out. An expectas ut Quintilianus ametur? said he. Those that are wakened out of sleep, are usually unquiet, ready to brawl with their best friends. So here. Vers. 3. Because he was the son of his old-age] The Chaldee Paraphrast renders it morally, Because he was a wise son, in quo ante canos sapientia: such a one as Macarius was, of whom Ni∣cephorus saith, that, for his prudence and gravity, whiles he was yet but a youth, he was sirnamed , The old stripling. Io∣sephus saith, He was very like his mother, Rachel; and therefore his father so loved him. But Chrysostome saith, better, that it was for his vertuous life, and godly disposition. Goodness is lovely in any, much more in an own childe. Iohn was the best beloved disci∣ple, because best conditioned. But otherwise, Cavete, saith Am∣brose, ne quos natura conjunxit, paterna gratia dividat. Parents partiality, may breed heart-burnings, Eph. 6.4. Vers. 4. They hated him] There is a passion of hatred: This is a kinde of aversness, and rising of the heart against a man, when
one seeth him; so that he cannot away with him, nor speak to him, nor look courteously or peaceably upon him; but ones coun∣tenance falls when he sees him, and he even turns away, and, by his good will, would have nothing to do with him. 2. There is a ha∣bit of hatred: when the soul is so sowred with this leven, so setled in this alienation and estrangement, that it grows to wish, and de∣sire, and seek his hurt. And this is one difference betwixt Hatred and Envie: whom men hate, they will harm; but sometimes mens gifts are envied, against whom no hurt is intended. Vers. 5. And Ioseph dreamed] Of divine dreams to be regard∣ed as Oracles, see the Notes on Chap. 20. vers. 3. [They hated him yet the more] So the Jews did Jesus, for his parables; especi∣ally, when he spake of his exaltation. Vers. 7. We were binding sheaves] This was fulfilled, when they came to him for corn into Egypt. Here Ioseph dreams of his ad∣vancement, but not of his imprisonment: So do many professors, which therefore prove apostates. Vers. 8. Shalt thou indeed raign over us?] They rightly inter∣preted the dream, yet stubbornly resist the revealed will of God. This leaves sin without a cloke, Ioh. 15.22, as it did in the Phari∣sees. They rightly interpreted that place in Micah, Matth. 2, &c. and yet, when Christ, to whom all their own signes did so well agree, came amongst them, they would by no means receive him; nay, they sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to raign over us. Vers. 9. Beheld, the sun, and the moon] The father of the fami∣ly should be as the sun, full of heavenly light, and illightning all about him: The mother, as the moon, shining out in her husbands absence, and veiling to him, when he is in place. The children, as stars of light, or rather, as a heaven full of stars, as one saith well of Ioseph: Fuit Iosephi vita coelum quoddam lucidissimis virtu∣tum stellis exornatum. The people of God are called, the host of heaven, Dan. 8.10: and are bid to shine as lamps, or rather, as those great lights of heaven, Phil. 2.15. Vers. 10. And his father rebuked him] Either as not yet under∣standing the mystery, or dissembling it. It is wisdom, at some time, and in some place, to pretend a dislike of another mans fact, (so far as we may with truth) for the preventing of envie. This, some think, was Iacobs drift here. And therefore he draws an ar∣gument, ab impossibili & absurdo; Shall thy dead mother rise and
reverence thee? A likely matter: and yet, as light as Iacob made of it, (to deonerate Ioseph of the envie) he laid it to heart, vers. 11. Vers. 11. And his brethren envied him] Envie is a filthy fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5.25. and the devil; who is called, the envious man, Matth. 13.20. and such wisdom is said to be devillish, Jam. 3.15. The Pharisees, envying our Saviour, did the devils Work, Joh. 8. So did Cain, the devils Patriarch, when he laid his cruel club on the innocent head of his brother Abel. And Saul, when seized upon by the evil spirit, (more then a melancholy humour) he envied David, and sought his death. For, this vice, as it makes the heart to boil with hellish venom; so it blisters out at the tongue, as here; They could not speak peaceably to Ioseph, but scoff, and consult his ruine. It sits also looking out at the windows of the eyes; Nescio quis tene∣ros, &c. fascino, , i. e. . and, as a Basilisk, blasteth the object. Hence invidere, to see with an evil eye, and naughty minde: And our English saith, to over-look a thing; that is, to bewitch it. This very looking upon others precellencies, whereby we are over-shined, so as to lust to have that light put out, that our candle might shine above it, (this is every mans sin;) though it act nothing, yet it is abominable, Iam. 4.5. As on the other side, to rejoyce in the good parts of others, though it eclipseth our light; and this from the heart; this is indeed more then to excel others in any excellency, if this be wanting. For this, it is good to get the heart fraught with mer∣cy, meekness of wisdom, fear of God, (whose providence cuts us out our several conditions and proportions) zeal for his glory, as Moses; humility, charity, (Love envieth not, 1 Cor. 13.4.) And to take heed of strife, Rom. 13.13. Envie and strife go coupled; they are brought in there by the brace: and as it were twisted to∣gether. Likewise, of pride, and vainglory, Phil. 2.3. covetous∣ness, Prov. 28.22, logomachies, 1 Tim. 6.4. self-love, ignorance, &c. all which, make the soul sick of the fret, and to pierce it self thorow with many sorrows. Psal. 37. Psal. 73. , of , to con∣sume. For this sin killeth the silly one, Job 5.2, if it kill no other. Envie and murder go coupled, Rom. 1. Gal. 5. An hectick it is to it self, however; the same that rust is to iron, blasting to corn, or a moth to the cloth it breeds in. It drinketh the most part of its own venom, gnaws on its own heart, is consumed in its own fire as Nadab and Abih were; and, like the snake in the fable, licks off its own tongue, as envying teeth to the file in the forge. Serram aimae. Socrates called it, The Saw of the soul.
David compares it to fire in billets of Juniper, which burns vehe∣mently; and continues, they say, more years then one. Simul pec∣cat & plectitur: expedita justitia, saith Petrarch. Other sins have some pleasure; this hath none, but torment. It is a very hell-above∣ground, and paves a way to the unpardonable sin, as in Saul, and the Pharisees. Vers. 13. And he said unto him, Here am I.] Children obey your parents, (quorum divina est dignitas, saith Chrysostom: Our parents are , saith Another; and Philo, for this maketh the fifth Commandement a part of the first table,) for this is right, Ephes. 6.1. Blind Nature saw it to be so. . Aristot. Rhe∣tor. For it is not fit (saith the Philosopher) to cross the gods, a mans own father, and his Tutor, or Teacher. Vers. 14. Well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks] His first care is for the welfare of his children. Many a Laban is more sollicitous of his flock, then of his family. Macrob. It was better being He∣rods swine, then his son, said Augustus. Hawks and Hounds are better tended and tutoured in some great houses, then children. Or if they be taught manners, and handsome behaviour, that's all that's cared for. But piety must be principally planted, where Gods blessing upon posterity is expected: the promise whereof, is therefore specially annexed to the second Commandment. Vers. 15. What seekest thou?] This was not the Angel Ga∣briel, (as the Hebrews will have it) but some courteous passenger, that thus offereth himself to wandring Joseph, and sets him in his way again. At Athens, Dion. Lambin. in Corn. Nep. there were publike curses appointed against such as shewed not those their errour, that were out of the way. See the like, Deut. 27.18. Brethren, saith St. James, Jam. 5.19, 20. if any of you do erre from the truth, and one convert him, Let him know that he saves a soul from death; yea, he pulls him out of the fire of hell, saith St. Jude: for they that erre from Gods Commandments, Jude 23. Ex igne gehe∣nali. Pareus. are cursed, Psal. 11.21. Vers 16. I seek my brethren] He staid not at Shch em, whi∣ther his father sent him; but missing of them there, he seeks fur∣ther, till he found them. This is true obedience, whether to God or man; when we look not so much to the letter of the law, as to the mind of the Law-maker; Apices juris non sunt jus. Vers. 17. He found them in Dothan] That is, in defection; So found our Saviour his lost sheep, in utter defection, both of doctrine and manners: some four, or fewer, that looked for the consolation of Israel.
Vers. 18. They conspired against him] So did the husband∣men against Christ, Luk. 20.14 This is te heir, say they, &c. The word is by one rendred, They craftily conspired. The Greek hath it malignantly: craft, and cruelty, go usually together in the Churches adversaries. The Devil lends them his seven heads to plot, and his ten horns, to push poor Joseph, that dreads no danger. Vers. 19. Behold this dreamer] This Captain-dreamer, or, this Architect of dreams, A lewd scoffe, and withal, a cruel calumny. Envy, so it may gall, or kill, cares not how true or false it be, that it alledgeth: it usually aggravates the matter beyond truth, to do mischief, as here. Their hearts were so big-swollen with spite and spleen, that they could not call him by his name, but this dreamer. So the Pharisees called our Saviour, this fellow. And the Jews sought him at the feast, Joh. 7.11. and said, Where is He? they could not find in their hearts to say, Where is Jesus? as Saul asked not for David, but for the son of Jesse, by way of contempt. Christ tells his Disciples, that men shall, in hatred of them cast out their names for evil, Sic apud Lati∣nos dicebautur capitis dimiuti∣ouem pati, qui ex albo a censoribus expungebantr. for his sake, Luk. 6.22. Their persons should be proscri∣bed, and their names expunged, as unworthy to breathe on the common ar. That like as we give names to new-born-babes; so when we cannot afford to mention a mans name, it shews, we wish him out of the world: Nomine Christianorum deleto, qui Remp. exercebant. So those bloody tyrants of the primitive times, sounded the triumph before-hand, and engraved the victory they never got, upon Pillars of Marble; Ʋbicunque invenitur nomen Calvini, deleatur, saith the Index expurgatorius. After Stephen Brune the Martyrs death, his adversaries commanded it to be cry∣ed, Act. & Mon. fol. 820. that none should make any more mention of him, under pain of heresie. So in Queen Maries dayes, one Tooly hanged for fel∣lony, for defying the Pope, was, after his death, suspended and ex∣communicated; and strict charge given, that no man should eat or drink with him; or if any met him by the way, he should not bid him good morrow, Ibidem. 1439. or call him by his name. It was not for no∣thing, surely, that our Saviour, in token of hearty reconciliation, requires men to salute their enemies, and to call them friendly by their names, Matth. 5.47. Vers. 20. And we will say] So they consult, to cover their murder with a lie. One sin admitted, makes way for another. He that hath fallen down one round of Hells ladder, knowes not where he shall stop, till he break his neck at the bottome.
Vers. 21. And he delivered him out of their bands] Josephus re∣lates his Arguments, whereby he prevailed with them: As 1. That God would surely see them. 2. Their father would extreamly grieve at it. 3. That Ioseph was but a child, and their brother. 4. That they would bring upon themselves the guilt of innocent blood, &c. It was happy they hearkned to him. God would have it so: And he will ever have one Reuben or another, to deliver his. It is not in vain, for some one to stand for God and his people, a∣gainst many adversaries. When the Pharisees had destined our Saviour to death, Ioh. 7. Nicodemus, though he had none in the Counsel to second him, spoke in his behalf, ver. 51. and for that time, frustrated their bloody intention. See the like, Ier. 26.24. Vers. 22. Shed no blood] Every drop of it hath a tongue to cry for vengeance. Well might K. James say, that if God did leave him to kill a man, he would think God did not love him. David, Gods darling, falling into that crimson sin, carried the bruise of that fall with him to his grave, Woe to those Italians, Sands his Re∣lation of West. Relig. Sect. 13. that blaspheme oftner, then swear; and murther more, then revile or slander. Vers. 23. They stript Joseph out of his coat] For, 1. It was an eye-sore to them. 2. Therewith they would colour their cruelty. And this whiles they were doing, Ioseph used many intreaties for himself, but they would not hear him, Gen. 42.21. Reuben also pleaded hard for the child, but all to no purpose, Gen. 42.22. their tender mercies were cruelties. Vers. 24. They cast him into a pit] Where they meant he should pine and perish with hunger, which is a more cruel death, Druso adcò ali∣menta subducta, ut tomentum a culcitra tentave∣rit mandere. Tacit. then to dye by the sword, Lam. 4.5. Thus dyed Drusus by the command of Tiberius; meat being denyed him, he had eaten the stuffings of his bed. I have heard of a certain Bishop (saith Melancthon) who having cast ten men into a dungeon for their religion sake, kept them there so long without all manner of meat, that they de∣voured one another. Joh. Manl. loc. com. 124. Vers. 25. And they sate down to eat] To weep for their wick∣edness, they should have sate down rather. But the Devill had drawn a hard hoof over their hearts, that either they felt no re∣morse of what they had done, for present; or else, they sought to ease themselves of it, by eating, and merry-making. They drank wine in bowles; but no man was sorry for the affliction of Jo∣seph. Nay, perhaps, Amos 6.8. they had so tyred themselves with making
away their brother, that they were even spent again, and stood in need of some refreshing. The good providence of God was in it howsoever, that they should there sit down, till the Merchants came by from Gilead, which was a Mart for Merchants, Ier. 8.22. & 22.6. All things co-operate for good to them that love God, Rom. 8.28. Vers. 26. What profit is it, &c.] Cui bono? said that old Judge in Rome. Cic. orat. pro C. Rabir. This is a song that most men will listen to, As the Jas∣sians in Strabo, delighted with the musick of an excellent Harper, ran all away, when once they heard the Market-bell ring, save a deaf old man, that could take little delight in the Harpers ditties. But it were to be wisht, that whenever we are tempted to sin, we would ask our selves this question, What profit is it? &c. Vers. 27. For he is our brother, and our flesh] This considerati∣on should be, as the Angels call to Abraham, to stay our hand from striking another; 1. That he is our brother, in respect of God, for have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? Mal. 3.10. Next, that he is our flesh, in regard of our first pa∣rents, Act. 17.26. Esay 58.7. Vers. 28. For twenty peeces of silver] A goodly price; not all out the price of a slave, Exod. 21.32. Here they sold the just one for silver, Pirke R. Eliez. ch. 38. and the poor for a pair of shooes, Amos 2.6. The Hebrews tell us, that of these twenty shekels, every of the ten bre∣thren had two, to buy shooes for their feet. [And they brought Ioseph into Egypt] Little knowing what a price they had in their hand, even the Jewel of the world, and him that should one day be Lord of Egypt. The Saints for their worth, are called Princes in all lands, Many righte∣ous, are many Kings. Com∣pare Matth. 13.17. with Luk. 10.24. Psal. 45. Kings in righteousness, though somewhat ob∣scure ones; as Melchizedek Heb. 7. They are called the world, Joh. 3.16. every creature, Mark 16.16. all things, Col. 1.20. Gods portion, Deut. 32.9. the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. a royal Diadem in the hand of Iehovah, Esay, 62.3. This the cock on the dunghill, the Midianitish muck-worms take no notice of. They could see no comliness in Christ, (though the fairest of ten thousand) nothing more then a despicable man. Joh. 6. How can this man give us his flesh to eat? God had hid him (in whom all the trea∣sures of worth and wisdom were hid) under the Carpenters son: Colos. 2. This pearl was covered with a shell-fish; so are all Gods precious people, for most part, abjects in the worlds eye; their glory is within; their life is hid: they are great heirs, but as yet in their
non-age; Kings, but in a strange country, heads destinated to the diadem; but this the world knows not, 1 Ioh. 3.1. Let it suffice us, that God, and all that can spiritually discern, know it; and so shall others: as Ioseph's brethren did him, in his bravery. For when Christ, our life, shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory. Vers. 30. The child is not, and I, &c:] In an old Manuscript, I met with these words thus pathetically rendred; Heu quid agam! periit puer ille, puer puer ille: Reuben was the eldest, and therefore thought he should be most blamed. Besides, he had not forgot how highly his father had been lately offended with him, for his detestable incest. Vers. 32. Know now whether it be thy sons coat] One Philip, Bishop of Beau-vieu in France, in the time of our Richard the first, being a martial man, and much annoying our borders, was by King Richard in a skirmish happily taken, and put in prison. The Bishop hereupon complained to the Pope, who wrote in the behalf of his son, as an Ecclesiasticall person, &c. The King sent to the Pope, the armour he was taken in, with these words engraven thereon, Know whether this be thy sons coat, or not. Heyl. Geog. pag. 108. Which the Pope view∣ing, sware it was rather the coat of a son of Mars, then a son of the Church; and so bad the King use his pleasure. Vers. 33. It is my sons coat, &c.] The Lord may well say as much of hypocrites. Their outward from of godliness is the garb of my sons and daughters; but some evil spirit hath devoured them, who use it only in hypocrisie. They are fair professors, but foul sinners. And when the filthy sinner goes damed to hell, what shall become of the zealous professor? As the Churl said to the Bishop of Cullen, praying in the Church like a Bishop; but as he was a Duke, going guarded like a tyrant; Whither thinkest thou the Bishop shall go, when the Duke shall be damned? Vers. 34. Mourned for his son many dayes] Puerilitas est pe∣riculorum pelagus; Few live to be old, for one evil beast or ano∣ther that devours them: As for one apple, that hangs till it falls, many are endgel'd down, or gathered off the tree. We should learn to bury children and friends, whiles yet alive; by acting their death to our selves aforehand. Vers. 35. And all his sons, &c.] Oh faces hatcht with impu∣dence! Oh hearts hewen out of a rock! Could they cause his wo, and then comfort him? Miserable comforters were they all; such
as the Usurer is to the young Novice; or the Crocodile that weeps over the dead body that it is devouring. These were the evill beasts that devoured Ioseph. Nullae infestae hominibus bestiae ut sunt si∣bi fales pleri∣que Christiti. Am. Marcell. l. 2. c. 2. A sad thing, that a Heathen should see cause to say so. Heb. 11.34. [But he refused to be comfort∣ed] Wherein he shewed his fatherly love, but not his son-like sub∣jection to Gods good providence: without the which, no evil beast could have set tooth in Joseph; whom he was sure also to re∣ceive safe and whole again at the Resurrection: which was a great comfort to those afflicted Iews, Dan. 12.2. and those mangled Martyrs. [His father also wept for him] Iacobs father Isaac, saith Iunius; which might very well be; for he lived twelve years after this, and likely loved Ioseph best, for his great towardli∣nesse. Vers. 36. And the Midianites] Little knew Ioseph what God was in doing. Have patience, till he have brought both ends to∣gether. CHAP. XXXVIII. Vers. 1. And it came to passe at that time] BEfore the rape of Dinah, the sale of Ioseph, and soon after their return from Mesopotamia. [Iudah went down from his brethren] A green youth of 13. or 14. years of age, left his com∣pany, where he might have had better counsel. There is a special tye to perseverance, in the Communion of Saints. They that for∣sake the assembling of themselves together, are in a fair way for Apostacy, Heb. 10.25. [To a certain Adullamite] There is a double danger of evil company: 1. Infection of sin, at least, de∣fection from grace. 2. Infliction of punishment, Rev. 18.4. Vers. 2. And Iudah saw there, &c.] He saw, took, went in, all in haste: Patre inconsulto, forte etiam invito; His father nei∣ther willing nor witting. Hence, for a punishment, was so little mercy shewed to his sons. These hasty headlong matches, seldom succeed well. It is not amiss to marry, but good to be wary. Young men are blamed of folly, for following the sight of their eyes, and lust of their hearts, Eccles. 11. Sed, Leo cassibus irretitus dicet, Si praescivissem. Vers. 3. Bruson. lib. 4. cap. 9. And she conceived, &c.] St. Hierome tells us of a cer∣tain drunken nurse, that was got with child by her nursling, a boy
of ten years old. This he relateth as monstrous, and takes God to witness, that he knew it to be so. Vers. 6. And Iudah took a wife for Er] When he was but 14. Musculus. years of age (as appears by the Chronicle) seven years after the sell∣ing of Ioseph. And here it is well observed, that though Iudah took a wife without his fathers consent, yet he will not have Er to do so. Vers. 7. Wicked in the sight of the Lord] A Sodomite, In Heb. vi ety esse alusio seu inver, o neminis,  erat : q. d. Er erat vigil perversu. say the Hebrews; but this is hard to say. As an evil doer, he was soon cut off, Psal. 37.9. God would not have such to be his Son Christs progenitor. Too wicked he was to live: you may know him to be the son of a Canaanitess. Partus sequitur ventrem. Vers. 8. And Iudah said unto Ona] At fourteen years of age likewise. For from the birth of Iudah, to their going down to Egypt, were but 43. years. And yet before that, Perez had Hez∣ron, and Hamul, being married about the fourteenth year of his age; which was, doubtless, too soon. Childhood is counted and called the flower of age, 1 Cor. 7.36. And so long the Apostle would have marriage forborn. Whilest the flower of the plant sprouteth, the seed is green, unfit to be sown. Either it comes not up, or soon withereth. Over early marriages, is one cause of our over∣short lives. Venery is deaths best harbinger, saith One. Vers. 9. When e went in unto his brothers wife] God, for the respect he bears to his own Institution of marriage, is pleased to bear with, cover, and not impute many frailties, follies, vanities, wickednesses that are found betwixt man and wife. Howbeit, Intemperans, in conjugio,  suae adulter est. Aug. In uxorem alie∣nam mnis am turpis est, in suam vero  imi∣us. Hieron. Seneca. there is required of such an holy care and conscience, to preserve between themselves, by a conjugal chastity, the marriage▪bed un∣defiled; taking heed of an intemperate, or intempestive use of it: which by Divines, both Ancient and Modern, is deemed no better then plain adultery before God. Qui cum uxore sua, quasi cum aliena concumbit, adulter est, saith that Heathen; Onans sin here was self polution, aggravated much, by his envy that moved him to it, expressed in these words, lest he should give seed to has decea sed brother. And the more sinful was this sin of his, Hebraei inquiunt perinde ut homi∣cidam, reum esse qui temere se∣men prosurdit. Mercer. in loc. in spilling his seed; because it should have served for the propagation of the Messiah; Therefore the Lord slew him: As also; because he was not warned by his brothers punishment. Vers. 10. Wherefore he slew him] God oft punisheth the abuse of the marriage-bed, either with untimely death, (It was well said of One, that Venus provideth not for those that are already born, Cuffes Differ. of Ages. 106.
but for those that shall be born:) or else with no children, mis∣shapen children, ideots, or prodigiously-wicked children, &c. Ca∣vete. Let this consideration be as the Angel standing with a drawn sword over Balaam's shoulders. Vers. 11. Lest peradventure he die also, &c.] Judah lays the fault all on her, whereas it was in his sons. Sarah, on the other side, blamed her self onely for barrenness, Gen. 16.2. Judge not, that ye be not judged: but if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged. In judging of the cause of our crosses, we are oft as far out as she was, that laid the death of her childe to the presence of the good Prophet. Vers. 12. The daughter of Shuah, &c.] This was just, in God, upon Judah, for his fraudulent dealing with Tamar; whom he nei∣ther married to his son Shelah, nor suffered to be married to ano∣ther. Sin is oft punished in kinde. Vers. 13. To shear his sheep] And so to put by his sorrow, as Jonathan did his anger, by going into the field to shoot. At sheep∣shearings they had feasts, 1 Sam. 25.8, 11. Vers. 14. Covered her with a vail] As they that do evil, shun the light. She was going about a deed of darkness. [For she saw that She was grown] She ran into this foul sin, partly for re∣venge, and partly for issue. But this excuseth her not: for the re∣venge she took, was private; and she should have sought a godly seed, by lawful Wedlock, and not by abominable Incest. Discon∣tent is the mother of much mischief; as it was in Judas, Haman, &c. Vers. 15. He thought her to be a harlot] Because she sate in an open place: first, In bivio, saith Junius, where there is liberty of looking every way; the guise and garb of harlots, Prov. 7.12. and 9.14. Ezek. 16.24, 25. Next, she sate covered: Whores were not altogether so shameless then, as now: they shun not to be seen, with bold and bare faces, brests, and wrists. Such a sight may soon enflame a Judah; Hos. 2.2. Let her take away her fornication from her face, and her adul∣tery from be∣tween her brests, laid out, and painted, or patched. nay, occasion a Job to break his covenant, Job 31.1. The Ivie-bush sheweth, there is wine within: which, though no evil follow upon it; yet the party shall be damned, saith Hierome, because she offered poison to others, though none would drink it. See Isai. 3.16. [Because she had covered her face] Some read, Because she had coloured, or painted her face. But, that he knew her not by her voice, one would wonder. Surely, he was so set upon the satisfying of his lust, that he minded nothing
else. Lust is blinde; and if the blinde lead the blinde, &c. Vers. 16. Let me come in unto thee] This is recorded, 1. To cut the comb of those d Jews, that glory so much of their pe∣digree, and name of Juah. How could they say, We be not born of fornication? Joh. 8.41. 2. To minde us, that there is no Church to be found on earth, without blot and blemish. 3. That we may consider and admire the utter abasement of our Lord Christ, who would be born, not onely of holy, but of impure parentage. And this, to shew, 1. That he borrowed no grace or glory from his progenitors: and as he needed not to be ennobled, so neither was he disparaged by them. 2. That by his purity and passion, all our sins are expiated and done away; like as the sun cleareth what∣soever filth is found in the air, or on the earth. Three women one∣ly are mentioned in his Genealogie; Rahab the harlot, Matth. 1. Bathsheba the adulteress, and this incestuous Tamar; to shew his readiness to receive the most notorious offenders, that come unto him with bleeding and believing hearts, 1 Tim. 1.15. Vers. 17. 1 Tim. 6.9. Wilt thou give me] The love of money breeds noi∣some lusts. Harlots are sordida poscinummia, as Plautus hath it. Vers. 18. And he gave it her, and came in unto her] He gave her whatsoever she desired; as the manner of such men is: and al∣though he committed incest ignorantly, yet not through ignorance, but through heat of lust; which is bruitish and boistrous, burning, as an oven: whence the Greeks have named it: , ardere. Plato appeti∣tum assimilat equo, qui fit, . and Plato com∣pares it to a head-strong horse. Vers. 20. By the hand of his friend] His broker. Fie upon such Adullamites. Such cole-carriers as this, (saith One) be good to scowre an hot oven withal. Such another was Jonadab to Amnon. How much better that Heathen, that answered, Ami∣cus tibi sum, sed usque ad aras. Vers. 21. Where is the harlot?] The holy whore, as the Hebrew word importeth; such as committed that filthiness, under a pretence of holiness. Such, among the Heathens, were the lewd worship∣pers of Priapus; (this is thought to be Baal-peor;) and Venus at Cyprus; where the maids, in honour of their goddess, prostitu∣ted their chastity to all that would, once a yeer. So in their Luper∣cals and Bacchanals at Rome, in quibus discurrebatur ad publicos concubitus, for like reason. Of such unclean persons, even by Gods house, we read, 2 Kings 23.8. and of such as sacrificed with har∣lots, Hos. 4.14. who brought their hire for a vow; called there∣fore,
the price of a salt bitch, Deut. 23.17, 18. Vah propûdium! [There was no harlot in this place] Few places can say so. Sanè hercle bo∣mo voluptati ob∣sequens Fuit dum vixit. Te∣rent. Heyl. Geog. pag. 96. Every house in Egypt had a dead corpse in it;  too many houses here have such, as, living in pleasure, are dead while they live, 1 Tim. 5.6. Of this sort was that Arlet, a Skinners daughter in Normandy, whose nimblenefs in her dance, made Duke Robert enamoured, &c. On her, he begat our William the Conqueror. In spite to whom, and disgrace to his mother the English called all whores Harlets. But who can read, without detestation, that in Rome a Jewess may not be admitted into the stews, Espencae. de Continentia, lib. 3. cap. 4. unless she will be first baptized? as Espencaeus, an honest Papist, complaineth. Vers. 23. Lest we be shamed] His care was more to shun shame, then sin. How much better that Heathen! Stis nobis persuasum esse debet, Nihil tamen a∣varè, nibil in∣justè, nibil libi∣dinosè, nibil in∣continenter esse faciendum. Tull. Offic. Siscirem homi∣nes ignoraturos, & Deos ignosci∣tures, tamen pro∣pter peccati tur∣pitudinem pec∣care on vellem. Sen. . Auson. &c. This we should be fully perswaded of, saith he, that although we could conceal the matter from all, both gods and men, yet we should do nothing covetously, nothing un∣justly, nothing against chastity, or common honesty. Though I were sure, (saith another Philosopher) that all men would be ignorant of what evil I do, and that all the gods would forgive it me; yet, for the filthiness that is n sin, I would not commit it. Plato condemneth the Poets, for saying, that it were no matter though mon did commit sin, so they could hide it. Si non castè, sultem cautè. How much better the Christian Poet? Turpe quid acturus, te, sine teste, time. Wherefore hast thou despised the com∣mandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight, though none else saw thee? saith God to David, 2 Sam. 12.9. And David, in his sor∣rowful confession, saith as much to God, upon the matter, Psal. 51.4. Against thee, thee onely, have I sinned; viz. in respect of the secrecy of my sin; therefore it is added, And done this evil in thy sight. [Behold, I sent this kid, &c.] He comforts him∣self, Quasi dieat, Ego steti pro∣missis, hoc mihi sufficit. in the loss of his pledge, that yet he had been as good as his word: but not a word we hear of sorrow for his sin; which, if he can but keep secret, he rests secure. This is a piece of natural athe∣ism; and it is general. Vers. 24. Bring her forth, and let her be burnt] He was willing to be rid of her, Dio. lib. 57. Verba Judae de vivicomburio Thamarae, non sunt Judicis, sed Accusatoris. Alsted. for fear of losing his son Shelah; and therefore passeth a precipitate and savage sentence, to burn a great-bellied woman; which the very Heathens condemned, as a cruelty, in Claudius. Howbeit, there are, that take these to be his words, not as a Judge in the cause, but as an accuser. Bring her forth, sc.
into the gates, before the Judges; and let her be burnt, if found guilty, according to the custom of the country. We read not of any that were, by Gods Law, to be burnt with fire, but the high-priests daughter onely, for adultery, Levit. 29.1. Hence the He∣brews say, that this Tamar was Melchizedek the high-priests daughter. But it is more likely, she was a Canaanitish proselyte. Let us beware of that sin, for which so peculiar a plague was ap∣pointed, and by very Heathens executed. See Jer. 29.22, 23. Vers. 25. By the man whose these are, &c.] Ut taceant he∣mines jumenta loquctur. Ju∣ven. So his secret sin comes to light. All will out at length, though never so studiously concealed, Matth. 10.26. Eccles. 10.20. That which hath wings shall tell the matter. It was a quill, a piece of a wing, that disco∣vered the powder plot. [Discern, I pray thee, whose are these] So, when we come to God, though he seem never so angry, and ill set against us; can we but present unto him our selves his own; our prayer, Mediatour, arguments, all his; and then say, as she here to Judah, Whose are these? he cannot deny himself. Vers. 26. She hath been more righteous then I] A free confessi∣on, joyned with confusion of his sin; for he knew her no more. This was, to confess and forsake sin, as Solomon hath it. Prov. 28.13. Not like that of Saul; I have sinned, yet honour me before the people; or that of those in the wilderness; We have sinned; we will go up: they might as well have said, We have sinned, we will sin, Deut. 1.41. The worser sort of Papists will say, When we have sinned, Sands his Re∣lation of West. Relig. sect. 8. we must confess; and when we have confessed, we must sin again, that we may also confess again, and make work for new Indulgen∣ces and Jubilees; making account of confessing, as drunkards do of vomiting. But true confession goes along with hatred, care, apo∣logie. Vers. 27. Behold, twins were in her womb] Betokening two peoples pertaining to Christ. The Jews first put forth their hand, as it were, willing to be justified by their works, and to regenerate themselves. For this, they were bound with a Scarlet thred, con∣demned by the Law: wherefore, pulling back their hand, they fell from God. Then came forth Perez, the breach-maker, that is, the violent and valiant Gentiles; who took the first-birth-right and kingdom by force: who when they are fully born, then shall the Jews come forth again, Rom. 11.11, 25, 26. And that this is not far off, hear what a worthy Divine (yet living) saith: Mr. Case, his Gods, wait: to be grac. pag. 58. Dan. 1.11, we have a prophecie of the final restauration of the Jews;
and the time is expressed, which is One thousand two hundred ninety yeers, after the ceasing of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up of the abomination of desolation, which is conceived to be in Julian's time; who did assay to re-build the Temple of the Jews, which was an abomination to God; who therefore destroyed it by fire out of the earth, tearing up the very foundation thereof, to the nethermost stone. This was Anno Dom. 360; to which if you adde 1290 years, it will pitch this calculation upon the year, 1650. Before this Babylon must down, &c. CHAP. XXXIX. Vers. 1. And Potiphar an officer of Pharaoh's] SEe here a sweet providence, that Ioseph should fall into such hands. Potiphar was Provost-Martial, keeper of the Kings pri∣soners. And what could Ioseph have wished better then this, that, sith he must be a prisoner, he should be put into that prison, where he might, by interpreting the Butlers dream, come to so great preferment? Chrysostome, in his 19. Hom. on the Ephesians, saith; we must not once doubt of the Divine providence, though we presently perceive not the causes, and reasons of many passages. And this he sweetly sets forth by apt by similitudes drawn from the works of Carpenters, Painters, bees, ants, spiders, swallows, &c. Surely, as a man, by a chain made up of divers links, some of gold, others of silver, See M. Renold. on Psal. 110.5. some of brass, iron, or tin, may be drawn out of a pit: so the Lord by the concurrence of several subordinate things, which have no manner of dependance, or natural co-incidency a∣mong themselves, hath oftentimes wrought and brought about the deliverance and exaltation of his children, that it might appear to be the work of his own hand. Vers. 2. And the Lord was with Ioseph, and he, &c.] The Lord also is with you, while ye be with him, 2 Chron. 15.3. and so long you may promise your selves prosperity, that of Gaius, howsoever, that your souls shall prosper; and for most part also, your outward estates. If it fall out otherwise, it is, because God will have godli∣ness admired for it self. If ungodly men prsper, it is, that case may slay them, Prov. 1.32. and that they may perish for ever, Psal. 37.20. Moritur Zacharias Papa, rebus pro Ecclesiae salute & Aposto∣licae
sedis dignitate, non tam piè quam prosperè gestis, saith Sigonius. Sigonius. This was little to his commendation, that he was not so pious, as he was prosperous. Vers. 3. And his Master saw] Though he knew not God, yet he acknowledged that God was the giver of prosperity, and that piety pleaseth him. This ran into his senses, but wrought not kindly upon his heart. Vers. 4. And Joseph found grace in his sight] This also was of God, who fashioneth mens opinions; and therefore Paul, though he went to carry alms, (and such are commonly welcome) yet prayes that his service may be accepted of the Saints. Rom. 15.31. [And he served him] As his Page, or Chamberlain; afterwards, he be∣came his Steward. He that is faithful in a little, shall be master of more. Vers. 5. The Lord blessed the Egyptian] There's nothing lost, by any love men shew to the Saints. God is not unfaithful to forget it, nor unmindful to reward it. Vers. 6. And he knew not ought he had &c.] Some expound this of Joseph, that he took nothing for all his pains, but the meat he eat; did not feather his own nest, as many in his place would have done; nor embezel his masters goods committed to his trust. But without doubt, the other is the better sense: Potiphar took what was provided for him, and cared for no more. This is few mens happinesse; for usually the master is the greatest servant in the house. [And Joseph was a goodly person] But nothing so goodly on the out-side, as on the in-side. Pulchior in lu∣ce cordis quam facile corporis. His brethren had stript him of his coat, but could not dis-robe him of his graces. Still he retained his piety and fear of God, his integrity and faithful∣ness toward his master, his chastity and modesty toward his mi∣stress, his spiritual prudence and watchfulness over himself. How stoutly did he resist the Devil, despise the world, subdue the flesh? Many archers shot at him, but his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made firm by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, Gen. 49.23, 24. Of bodily beauty, see notes on Chap. 6.2.
Vers. 7. After these things] After he had been ten or eleven years in that house; so long he was safe: Yet at length set upon. Learn we alwaies to stand upon our guard; to do, as it is reported of the bird Onocrotalus, that she is so well practised to expect the Hawk to grapple with her, that even, when she shutteth her eyes,she sleepeth with her beak exalted, The Divine Cosmographer pag. 94. as if she would contend with her adversary. A man is to expect, if he live out his dayes, to be ur∣ged to all sins; to the breach of every branch of the ten Com∣mandements, and to be put to it, in respect of every article of our Creed. [His masters wife cast her eyes upon Jo∣seph] She looked and lusted. Non dicit Mo∣ses, Vidit, apexit, &c. Hic suit aspectu impudicus. Pa∣reus. Pareus in Me∣dul. hist. pro∣fanae, pag. 786. Haec stultas vo∣cabat virgines pro Christi nomiue passs, quo voluptatum gaudia non gustassent. See for this, Notes on Chap. 34. vers. 2. [And she said, Lye with me] An impudent harlotry, that could so barely and basely sollicite. Such a frontless propudium was that in the Proverbs, Chap. 7.13, 18. Such were those insatiate Empresses, Messalin, wife to Claudius; and Barbara, wife to Sigismund, Emperour of Germany, foemin immensae libidinis & procacitatis inverecundae, quae saepiùs viros peteret quàm peteretur. Vitam omnem censuit inanem, quae non coitu, lxu, ac libidine conte∣reretur. And such were those brazen-faced curtisans, that Fran∣ciscus Junius (that learned man) met with; and for their sakes, abhorred the company of all women ever after, as himself record∣eth, in his own life. Vers. 8. But he refused] So would but a few have done of his years, (he was now about seven and twenty) and that might have committed this sweet sin, (as they wickedly call it) with so much security and secrecie, &c. The fear of God is both a vertue, and a keeper of other vertues. It is the bond of perfections, as Paul saith of Charity. It is the riband, or string, that tyes together all those precious pearls, the graces; as Peter saith of Humility. It is, . 1 Pet. 5.5. . Chrysost. as Basil saith of the same grace, caeterarum virtutum , the store-house of other vertues; and as Chrysostome, the mother, and root, and nurse, and foundation, and ligament of all good things in us. [Behold my master wotteth not, &c.] Be∣neficium postulat officum. To argue from bounty to duty, is but right reason: But to argue, as most do, from Gods liberality, to liberty in sin, is the Devils Logick. Joseph will not deal so basely with his mastor, though an Egyptian. To render good for evil, is Divine; good for good, is humane; evil for evil, is bruitish; but evil for good, Ezra 9.14. is divelish. Should we again break thy Commande∣ments, saith holy Ezra, after so many mercies and deliverances? There is so much unthankfulness, and dis-ingenuity in such an en∣tertainment of mercy, that heaven and earth, he thinks, would be ashamed of it. Every blessing is a binder; and each new deli∣verance, Rom. 2.4. a new tye to obedience. The goodnesse of God should lead us to repentance, saith Paul. And this, Peter picks out of Paul's
Epistles, as one of the choycest sentences, and urgeth it upon those to whom he wrote, 2 Pet. 3.15. Vers. 9. Neither hath he kept any thing back from me, but thee] As the beams of the Sun shining upon fire, doth discourage the burning of that; so should the shining of Gods mercies, or mans favours on us, quench and quell lust and licentiousness in us. Because thou art his wife] In primitiva Ecclesia. Eusis, equus, mu∣licr: coeiera . Christiani animo animaque inter se miscebantur, & omnia, praeter uxorer, indiscreta habebant, saith Tertullian. Community of wives is a monster in Religion. [How then can I do this great wickednesse, &c?] So he calls it, not a trick of youth, a light offence, a peccadillo, but wickedness, and great wickedness. Abhorred be that Religion of Rome, that licenceth it; nothing better herein, then that of the Turks, whose Alchoran tells us, Blunt's voyage into the Lev∣ant. 82. that God did not give men lusts and appetites to be frustrated, but enjoyed; as made for the gust of man, and not for his torment, wherein his Creatour delights not. [And sin against God] Who makes the marriage-cove∣nant; and keepeth the bonds, Prov. 2.17. Thus David, sal. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, &c. The trespass was against Ʋriah, but the transgression against God; Psal. 16.8. who only can remove the guilt, remit the punishment. And here, though the iron en∣tred into Joseph's soul, sin could not; because it was fraught with Gods fear. He had set God at his right hand, with David, and therefore was not moved by the importunate impdency of his wanton mistress. Satan knockt oft at that dooor, but there was none within to answer, or open. He struck fire, but upon wet tin∣der. Joseph in Egypt, like a pearl in a puddle, keeps his vertue still, wherever he came. Vers. 10. And it came to pass, as she spake, &c.] A violent temptation valiantly withstood and vanquished; and that by the force of the fear of God, that powerful grace, where it may bear sway. Alexander, Scipio, Pompey, tempted with the exquisite∣ness and variety of choyeest beauties, forbare that villany: Not for conscience sake, or fear of God, whom they knew not, but lest thereby they should stop the current of their victories, and obscure the glory of their remarkable valour. But what saith Cyprian? As it is the greatest pleasure to have overcome pleasure, so there is no such victory, as that that is gotten over a mans lusts. This none but a Joseph fearing God, can do. For the fear of the Lord is pure, saith David, Psal. 19.9. it is to hate evil, not forbear it only,
saith Solomon: and he instanceth in inward evils, as pride, arrogan∣cy, &c. so unchast thoughts, lustful longings, and hankerings after strange flesh. These the fear of God purgeth upon, and repres∣seth; not suffering a man to sin though he could do it so closely and covertly, that the world should be never the wiser. Loe, this is Chastity: And it differs herein from Continency; (which is the best we can say for those Heathens aforementioned.) The Conti∣nent person refrains the outward act of uncleanness; either for love of praise, or fear of punishment, but not without grief; for in∣wardly he is scalded with boyling lust. Whereas the chaste man, (like S. Pauls virgin, 1 Cor. 7.34.) is holy, both in body and in spirit; and this with delight, out of fear of God, and love of ver∣tue. Now if upon such a ground, we can refuse proferred plea∣sures, and preferments; resolving rather to lye in the dust with Ioseph, then to rise by wicked principles, the triall is as sound, as if we had indured the tortures of the rack, Heb. 11. [As she spake to Ioseph day by day] Satan will not be said with a little, . nor sit down by a light repulse. A man must give him a peremptory de∣nial again and again, as our Saviour did; and yet the tempter de∣parted not, but for a season. He is called Beelzebub, that is the Master-flye, because he is impudent as a flye, and soon returns to the bait, from which he was beaten. He will be egging us again and again, to the same sin: and try every way to overturn us. Many times he tempts by extreams; Mr. Perkins. as he did Mr. Iohn Knox, on his death bed; first, to despair, by setting before him his sins; and (when foyled there) afterwards to presumption, and challenging of heaven as his due, for his many good works, and zeal in the Scottish Reformation. So he dealt here by Ioseph: he first set upon him on the left hand, when he sold him for a slave. And when this prevailed not, he sets here a Dalilah to tickle him on the right side, and to tye him with the green withes of youthful plea∣sures. Sed pari successu; but he lost his labour. Ioseph was sem∣per idem; famous for all the four cardinal vertues, if ever any were. See here in this one temptation, his fortitude, justice, temperance & prudence; in that he shuns the occasion: (for he would not only, not lye with her, but not be with her, saith the Text;) And that a man is indeed, that he is in a temptation; which is but a tap, to give vent to corruption. Exod. 23.7. Prov. 5.8. 1 Cor. 6.18. [To lye by her, or to be with her] Keep thee far from an evil matter, saith Moses. Come not nigh the door of the harlots house, saith Solomon. Flee fornication, saith Paul.
And, flye youthful lusts. Not abstain from them only, 2 Tim. 2.22. but flye them, as ye would do a flying Serpent. These are Gods comman∣dements: and they are to be kept as the sight of the eye, Prov. 7.2. The Nazarite might not only, not drink wine, but not taste a rasin, or the husk of a grape. The Leper was to shave his hair, Numb. 7. and pare his nailes. 1 Thess. 5. The good Christian is taught to abstain from all appearance of evil; and to hate the very garment that is spotted by the flesh. The Devil counts a fit occasion, half a Conquest; for he knows that corrupt Nature hath a , a seed-plot of all sin: which being drawn forth and watered by the breath of ill company, or some other occasion, is soon set awork, to the pro∣ducing of death. Satan cozens us, when he perswades us, its no conquest, except we beat away the temptation, yet keep the oc∣casion by us. God will not remove the temptation, till we remove the occasion. And in such case to pray, Lead us not, &c. but de∣liver us from evil, is to thrust our finger into the fire, and then pray it may not be burnt. A bird whiles aloft, is safe; but she comes not near the snare, without danger. Solomon thought him∣self wise enough to convert his wives, & not be corrupted by them. 1 King. 11.4. But it came to passe, when Solomon was old; that his wives turned away his heart after other gods, &c. He that can shun, or remove the occasion of his own proper motion, as Ioseph did, hee's the Man; this is grace, here's a victory. Vers. 10. To do his businesse] To look up his bills of account, saith the Chaldee. Idleness is the Devils opportunity, the hour of temptation. But let a man be never so busie about his lawfull employments, he is to expect assaults. As he is not idle, so nei∣ther is Satan: but walks about, and spreads his snares for us in all places, and businesses; speaking a good word also in temptations that come from the flesh, which are therefore called his messengers, 2 Cor. 12.7. and by giving place to them, we give place to the De∣vil, Ephes. 4.26. And there was none of the men of the house within] Josephus saith, that they were all gone forth to a feast; and she only left at home, as faining her self sick. Sick she was (as likewise Amnon) with the lust of concupiscence, which the Apostle calls ; a disease, 1 Thess. 4.5. such as those which the Physitians say, are cor∣ruptio totius substantiae; the body and soul, Quod sanitas in corpore, sanctitas in corde. Bern. are both tainted and rotted by it. Other diseases consume only the matter of the bo∣dy, but this, the holiness and honour of the body. Other sick∣nesses
sanctifie us, but this profanes us, and lets the divell into our hearts. Behemoth lyeth in the fennes, Iob 40.21. That is, the di∣vill in sensuall hearts; Gul. Paris. Ezek. 47.11. as Gul. Paris. applyeth it. And when the waters of the Sanctuary slowed, the miry places could not be healed. Vers. 12. And she caught him by the garment] By wanton touches and dalliance, mentall adultery is oft committed. He that toucheth his neighbours wife, Prov. 6.29. shall not be innocent saith Solomon. This is the offensive right hand, that must be cut off, Mat. 5.30. The harlot caught the silly simple, and kissed him; and with an impudent face said unto him, Prov. 7.13. till a dart struck through his liver, vers. 23. cogit amare jecur And he left his garment in her hand] This second time is Joseph stript of his garment; before, in the violence of envy, now of lust: before, of necessity, now of choyce: before, to deceive his father; now his master. Infamy and other misery he was sure to suffer, but that must not drive from duty. 2 Cor. 6.8. The Church comes from the wilderness, Cant. 8.5. ex∣pounded. that is, through troubles and afflictions, leaning on her beloved; chusing rather to suffer, then to sin. The good heart goes in a right line to God, and will not fetch a com∣pass: but strikes through all troubles and hazards, to get to him. It will not break the hedg of any commandement, to avoid any piece of foul way. The primitive Christians chose rather to be thrown to lyons without, then left to lusts within: Ad leonem magis quam lenonem; saith Tertullian. I had rather go to hell pure from sin, saith Anselme, then to Heaven, polluted with that filth. Mallem purus a peccato & inno∣cens gehennam intrare &c. Potius in arden∣tem rogum iofil∣uero quam ullum peccatum in deum commisero. Pintus in Dan. Jam. 1. ult. Psal. 119.1. I will rather leape into a bone-fire (saith another of the Fa∣thers) then wilfully commit wickedness against God. Of the Mouse of Armenia they write, that she will rather dye, then be defiled with any filth. Insomuch as if her hole be besmeared with dirt; she will rather chuse to be taken, then to be polluted: Such are or ought to be, the servants of God; unspotted of the world, undefiled in the way. Vers. 13. And it came to pass, &c.] Incontinency is a breeder. It never goes alone (as some say the asp doth not) but hath many vices; Impudency, subtilty, treacherous cruelty, &c. that come of it, and accompany it; crying out, and calling to one another, as they once did; 2 King. 3.23. Now Moab to the spoil. Vers. 14. See, he hath brought in an Hebrew] So she cals him, by way of contempt; as they called our Saviour Nazarene, and
his followers Galileans. The Arrians called the true Christians Ambrosians, Athanasians, Homousians, &c. And at this day, S. Humph. Lynde. D. Fulk. Rhem. Test. on act 11 sect. 4. the most honourable name of Christian, is, in Italy, and at Rome, a name of reproach: and usually abused, to signifie a fool, or a dolt. Vers. 15. And it came to pass, &c.] How many innocents, in all ages, have perished by false accusation! Here, this vermine, accuseth her husband of foolishness, her servant of filthiness; which she first affirmeth, secondly confirmeth, Rev. 12. by producing his garment, left in her hands. That accuser of the brethren set her on; as he did the malicious heathens, to traduce and denigrate those pure primitive Christians, (purer then snow, whiter then milke; ruddier then rubies; their polishing was of Sapphire, Lam. Tertullian. 4.7.) as so many murderers, man-eaters, adulterers, Church-robbers, tray∣tors, &c. Which last, Lipsius calls Ʋnicum crimen corum, Arch. Vssier. de christ. Ec∣cles. success. & statu. page 236. qui crimine vacabant. So the Waldenses were spitefully accused of Manichisme, and Catharisme; and thereupon a Croisado was published against them, as common enemies. So, a little afore the Massacre of Paris, it was given out by the French Papists, that the Protestants in their conventicles plotted treason, acted villany, &c. And after the Massacre, there was a coyn stamped; Camd. Elisab. fol. 163. Qui son chin vult tuer, la rage luy met sus. A French pro∣verb. in the fore-part whereof, together with the Kings picture, was this inscription; Virtus in rebelles: and on the other side, Pietas excitavit justitiam. Those that kill a dog, make the world believe, he was mad first: So the enemies of the Church, first ever tra∣duced her to the world, and then persecuted her; first pulled off her vaile, and then wounded her, Cant. 5.6. Vers. 17. And she spake unto him, &c.] Here the adulteress hunteth for the precious life, Prov. 6.26. Her lust (as Amnons) turn∣eth into extream hatred. This is just the custome of a Curti∣san; Aut te ardentèr amat, aut te capitaliter odit. Mantuan. Heathens tell us the like of their Hippolytus; that when Phaedra his step-mother could not win him to her will this way, she acensed him to his father Theseus, as if he had attempted her chastity: whereupon he was forced to fly his country. Likewise of Belle∣rophon, a young Prince; with whose beauty Sthenobaea, Queen of Argives, being taken, sollicited him to lye with her; which when he refused, she accused him to her husband, Ovid. Metam. that he would have ravished her. This he believing, sent him with letters to Iobates King of Lycia, to make him away; Iobates put him upon many
desperate services, Homer. Iliad. l. 6. to have dispatcht him. But finding him a va∣liant and victorious man, he afterward bestowed his daughter on him, with part of his Kingdom. Which when Sthenobaea heard of, she hang'd her self for wo. So perhaps did this huswife in the text, when she saw Ioseph so highly advanced by Pharaoh. The death, howsoever, was too good for her. Vers. 19. His wrath was kindled] Heb. exarsit nasus ejus. Good cause he had; if all had been true that his wife told him, Prov. 6.34, 35. It is well known how the rape of Lucrece was punished upon the Tarquines. Valentinian the Emperour defiled the wife of his subject Maximus. Maximus afterwards slew Valentinian, Eudoniam Va∣leutiniani uxo∣rem vi compres∣sam, turpi uptiis sibi co∣pulas. succeeded him in the Empire, ravished his wife, and forced her to marry him. She, to be revenged, sent for Genseri∣cus, who seized upon all Italy, &c. But Potiphar was too light of belief; and should have examined the matter, ere he had con∣demned the man. Credulity is a note of folly, Prov. 14.15. Vers. 20. And Iosephs Master took him] It was a providence, that he had not presently slain him, upon that false accusation. The Devil is first a liar, and then a murtherer: But he is limited by God. Joh. 3. Ioseph is imprisoned in the round tower; where they hurt his feet with fetters, Psal. 105.18. the iron entred into his soul. He, meanwhile, either pleads not, or is not heard. Doubtless he denyed the fact; but durst not accuse the offender. His innocency might afterwards appear, and thereupon, the chief Keeper shew him favour, ver. 21. But his Master should have been better advised. If he lived till Ioseph was advanced, he had as good cause to fear his power, as ever Ioseph's brethren did. Cardinal Woolsey was first School∣master of Magdalen School in Oxford; after that, beneficed by Marquess Dorset, whose children he had there taught. Where he had not long been, but one Sir Iames Paulet, upon some displea∣sure, Negotiations of Card. Wols. pag. 2. set him by the heels: which affront was afterwards, neither forgotten, nor forgiven. For when the School-master became Lord Chancellour of England, he sent for him; and after a sharp reproof, imprisoned him: A good president for men in authori∣ty, which work their own wiles without wit; not to punish out of humour, &c. Discite justitiam moniti, &c. Despise not any mans meanness, we know not his destiny. Vers. 21. But the Lord was with Ioseph] A prison keeps not God from his; witness the Apostles, and Martyrs, whose prisons, by Gods presence, became palaces; the fiery furnace, a gallery of
pleasure; the stocks, a musick-school, Act. 16.25. Bradford, Act. & Mon. sol. 1489. af∣ter he was put in prison, had better health, then before; and found great favour with his Keeper, who suffered him to go whither he would, upon his promise to return, by such an hour, Ibid. 1457. to his prison again. CHAP. XL. Vers. 1. Had offended their Lord, the King of Egypt] VVHat their offence was, is not expressed. The Hebrews say, Pharaoh found a flye in his cup, and a little gravel in his bread, and therefore imprisoned these two great Officers. But this had been, to kill a fly (as one said) upon a mans forehead with a great beetle. Some think they attempted the chastity of Pha∣raoh's daughters. Such a thing as this, made Augustus so angry against Ovid. But most likely it was, for some conspiracy; such as was that of Bigthan and Teresh, Esth. 4. Thucyd. The present govern∣ment is, for most part, alwayes grievous; to some discontented great Ones especially, who know not when they are well: but are ready to drive a good Prince out of the world, and then would dig him up again, if they could; as the swain said of Dionisius. Dionisium refodio. But what said Alphonsus, that renowned King, to this, in a speech to the Popes Embassadour? He professed, that he did not so much wonder at his Courtiers ingratitude to him, who had raised sun∣dry of them from mean to great estates; as at his own to God. whom by every sin we seek to depose, nay to murther: for Pecca∣tum est Deicidium, Rom. 1.30. with 1 Joh. 3.15. Vers. 2. And Pharaoh was wroth, &c.] That had been enough to have broke their hearts: as a frown from Augustus, did Cor∣nelius Gallus; and another from Queen Elizabeth, Camd. Elizab. fol. 406. did Lord Chancellour Hatton. Ʋt mala nulla feram, nisi nudam Caesaris iram Nuda parùm nobis Caesaris ira mali est? saith Ovid. And again, Omne trahit secum, Caesaris ira, malum. Vers. 3. And he put them in ward, &c.] See the slippery estate of Courtiers: to day in favour, to morrow in disgrace; as Haman, Sejanus, whom the same Senatours conducted to the prison, who
had accompanied him to the Senate. They which sacrificed unto him, as to their god, which kneeled down to adore him, now scoff∣ed at him, seeing him drag'd from the Temple to the goale, from supream honour, Tacit. to extream ignominy. His greatest friends were most passionate against him, &c. they would not once look at him; as men look not after Sun-dials, longer then the Sun shines upon them. [The place where Joseph was bound] Here was a wheel within a wheel, Ezek. 1. a sweet providence; that these ob∣noxious Officers should be sent to Joseph's prison. Vers. 4. And the Captain of the guard, &c.] This was Poti∣phar probably; who by this time, saw his own error, and Joseph's innocency: yet kept him still in prison, perhaps to save his wives honesty. Truth is the daughter of Time; it will not alwayes lye hid. ab . Caseus in Ethic. Splendet cum obscuratur, vincit cum opprimitur. Hinc ut pacis templum in media urbc extruxerunt olim Romani, ita Veritatis statuam in suis urbibus olim coluerunt Aegyptii. Vers. 5. And they dreamed, &c.] Of dreams natural, and super∣natural, see the Notes on Chap. 20. vers. 3. Vers 6. And behold they were sad] Or, angry; and yet knew not how to help themselves. But carnal men disgest their passi∣ons, as horses do their choler, by chewing on the bit. Pope Bo∣niface being clapt up prisoner by Cardinal Columnus, tore his own flesh with his own teeth, Revius. and dyed raving. Bajazet the great Turk, could not be pacified in three dayes, after he was taken by Tamberlane; Turk. hist. fol. 220. but, as a desperate man, still sought after death, and called for it. Vivere noluit, morinesciit, as it is said of that Bishop of Salisbury, Roger Bishop of Salisbury. prisoner in King Steven's dayes. Vers. 7. And he asked Pharaoh's officers, &c.] Vincula qui son∣sit, didicit succurrere vinctis. Josephs tender heart soon earned to∣ward them, upon the sight of their sadness: and unasked, he of∣fers himself to them; as our Saviour did to the widow of Naim, and to those two doubting Disciples, Luk. 24.17. S. Cyprians compassion is remarkable: Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, mae∣roris & funeris pondera luctuosa participo: cum plangentibus plan∣go, cum deflentibus defleo, &c. I weep with those that weep, and am like-affected, as if like-afflicted. Vers. 8. And there is no Interpreter] The superstitious Egypti∣ans did curiously observe their dreams; and commonly repaired to the sooth-sayers for an interpretation, Gen. 41.8. Joseph calleth these Idolaters from their superstitious vanities, to the living God;
as Esay did those of his time, Chap. 8.19, 20. and Daniel those of his, Chap. 2.28. & 5.18. He had consulted with God by prayer, and with the Scripture, which revealed sufficient direction to him, Ezek. 31.1, to 12. and so, soon dispatched the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan. 4.10. So Joseph here; he suffered troubles as an evil doer, even unto bonds: 2 Tim. 2.9. but the Word of God is not bound. Vers. 9. Behold, a vine was before me] God, of his infinite grace and wisdome, gives men such signs, as excellently answer and agree to the thing thereby signified. Those two Sacraments of the New Testament for instance; which the Greek Fathers (in the Apostles sense, Heb. 9.24.) call , signs and symbols of bet∣ter things, signified and sealed up thereby to the Believer. The Lord (saith Venerable Beza) knowing well the vanity of our na∣tures prone to idolatry, hath appointed us two Sacraments only; and those consisting also of most simple signs, and rites. For signs, he gave us water, bread and wine. The rites are no more then to sprinkle, eat, drink, Nempe nemiscri mortales in isto∣rum mysteriorum usu, in rebus terrstrthus hae∣reant, & obstu∣pscant. Bez. Confess. (things of most common use) and a very lit∣tle of these too; that men may not too much dote on the elements, or external acts in the Sacrament: but be wholly raised up to the mystery, and by faith mount up to Christ thereby set forth and ex∣hibited: and fetching him down, as it were, that we may feed on him. Hence the outward sign is no further used, then may serve to mind us of the inward grace. The Minister also stirrs up the peo∣ple, to look higher then to what they see, with Sursùm corda; Sacerdos parat fratrum mentes, dicendo, Sursum cerda. Cyprian. Lift up your hearts. A thing in use among the Primitive Christi∣ans. Vers. 12. The three branches are three days,] That is, they signifie three days. So Chap. 41.26. The seven kine, are seven years. So, this is my body; that is, this signifyeth my body, saith Zuinglius, after Augustine and Ambrose. Or, Hun. de Sa∣cram. cap. 14. Hm. ad. 3. Victimas quibus soe era sancie∣ba tur , i.e. soe era vo∣t. Vngil. sal∣lere dextram dixi i.e. fidem, & jusjurandum, quod datis dex∣tris concipitur. this is the sign and figure of my body, saith Calvin, after Augustine and Tertullian; whatsoever Bellarmine and Hunnius, prate to the contrary. It is an ordinary Metonimy, whereby the name of a thing signified, is given to the sign, for the analogy that is betwixt them, and for the certainty of signification: Homer and Virgil have the like. As for those Christians that eate their God, let my soul be with the Philosophers, rather then with them, saith Averoes the lear∣ned Arabian: When it was objected to Nilas Shetterden Martyr, by Archdeacon Harps-feild; that the words of Christ,
when he said, hoc est corpus meum did change the substance, without any other interpretation, or Spirituall meaning; he answered. Then belike when Christ said, this cup is my blood, the substance of the cup was changed into his blood, without any other mea∣ning; Act. & Mon. fol. 1515. and so the cup was changed, and not the wine. Harpsfield hereupon, was forced to confess, that Christs Testament was bro∣ken, and his institution changed from that he left it; but he said, they had power so to do. Vers. 13. Yet within three dayes] Joseph foresaw the time of the Butlers deliverance, he knew not the time of his own. In good hope he was, that now he should have been delivered, upon the restauration of the Butler, and his intercession for him; but he was fain to stay two years longer; till the time that Gods Word came: Psal. 105.19. the Word of the Lord tryed him; by trying, as in a fire, his faith and patience in afflictions. Vers. 14. But think on me, &c.] Liberty is sweet, and should be sought by all lawful means, 1 Cor. 7.21. The Jews censure Jo∣seph, for requesting this favour of the Butler; and say, he was there∣fore two years longer imprisoned. But this is a hard saying. Pos∣sible it is, that Joseph might trust too much to this man, and be over-hasty to set God this time, and no other; and so might be justly crossed of his expectation. It is hard and happy so to use the means, as not to trust to them; and so to wait Gods good leisure, as not to limit the holy One of Israel. We trust a skillfull workman to go his own way to work, and to take his own time. Shall we not do as much for God? He oft goes a way by himself, and gives a blessing to those times and means, whereof we de∣spair. Vers. 15. For indeed I was stollen away] Joseph inveighs not against his brethren, that he may clear himself; but hideth their in∣famy, . Sophoel. with the mantle of charity: which is large enough to cover a multitude of sins. It is a fault to speak of other mens faults, un∣less it be in an ordinance. Infamy soon spreads. [Out of the land of the Hebrews] So he by faith calls the land of Canaan; which yet was detained from them, till the sins of the Amorites were become full, But Gods promises are good free-hold. Jacob disposeth of this land on his death-bed; though least master of it. And here also I have done nothing, &c.] We may not betray our innocency by a base silence, Dan. .22. Act. 24.12, 13. but make seasonable apology; as did Daniel, Paul, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and other the primitive
Apologists. Francis King of France, to excuse his cruelty exercised upon his Protestant Subjects, to the German Princes, whose friend∣ship he sought after, set forth a declaration to this purpose, That he punished only Anabaptists, that preferred their private revela∣tions before the Word of God, Scultet. Anl. P. 454. and set at nought all civil govern∣ment. Which brand, set upon the true Religion, and all the Pro∣fessors thereof, Calvin not enduring, though he were then a young Divine, (of five and twenty years of age,) yot he compiled and set forth that admirable work of his, called, The Institu∣tion of Christian Religion; In commendation whereof, One writes boldly; Praeter Apostolieas post Christi tempora chartas Paul. Meliss. Huic peperere libro saecula nulla parem. Vers. 16. When the chief Baker saw] So when hypocrites hear good to be spoken, in the Word, to Gods children, they also listen, and fasten upon the comforts, as pertaining to them: Matth. 13. they receive the word with joy: they laugh, as men use to do in some merry dream: they catch at the sweet-meats as children, and conclude with Haman, that they are the men whom the King means to ho∣nour. But when they must practise duty, or bear the cross, they depart sad; and Christ may keep his heaven to himself, if it be to be had on no other conditions. Vers. 17. And the birds did eat them] He seeth not that he did any thing, but suffereth only. He heareth therefore an un∣pleasing interpretation, saith Pareus. Vers. 18. And Joseph answered, &c.] It is probable, he used some preface to this sad destiny he reads him; Ʋtinamtale somnium non vidisses. Dan. 4.19. as Philo brings him in saying, I would thou hadst not dreamt such a dream: or as Da∣niel prefaced to Nebuchadnezzar; My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation to thine enemies. If Ministers, Gods Interpreters, must be mannerly in the form, yet in the mat∣ter of their message, they must be resolute. Not only toothless, but bitter truths must be told, however they be taken. If I yet please men, &c. Gal. 1.10. Vers. 19. And shall hang thee on a tree, &c.] This was cold com∣fort to the Baker: so shall the last judgment be to the ungodly; when the Saints, as the Butler, shall lift up their heads with joy. But what a sweet providence of God was this, that the Butler should first relate his dream, and receive his interpretation, as good as he
could wish? Had the Baker begun, the Butler would have been disheartned, and hindered, perhaps, from declaring his dream. And then, where had Joseph's hopes been of deliverance by the Butler? How could he have had that opportunity of setting forth his inno∣cency, Piscator. and requesting the Butlers favour, and good word to Pha∣raoh, for his freedom? See how all things work together for good to them that love God. The birds shall eat thy flesh] Those that were hanged, among the Jews, were taken down, Deut. 21.23. Not so among the Gen∣tiles. Effossos oculos vret atr gut∣ture corvus. Catull. Lib. 1. de cruce. c. 6. Deut. 21.22. A sore judgment of God threatned, in a special manner, against those that despise parents, Prov. 30.17. and fulfilled in Absolom. Abslon Marte furens, pensilis arbore obit. Greser the Jesuite, to shew his wit, calls that tree, a cross; and makes it a manifest figure of the cross of Christ. Sed ô mirum & delirum figurativae crucis fabrum! Our Lord indeed dyed upon the cross, and that with a curse. But that Absolom should, in that behalf, be a type of him, is a new Jesuitical invention. Some say, that in honour of Christ crucified, Constantine the Great abolished that kind of death, throughout the Empire. Vers. 20. Which was Pharaohs birth-day] An ancient and com∣mendable custome, to keep banquets on birth-dayes; in honour of God, our Sospitator, for his mercy in our creation, education, preservation, &c. Vers. 21. So he hanged the chief Baker] Gods menaces, as well as promises, will have their accomplishment. Vengeance is in readiness for the rebellious, 2 Cor. 10.6. Every whit as ready in Gods hand, as in the Ministers mouth. Vers. 22. Yet did not the chief Butler] Too many such But∣lers, that forget poor Ioseph. What cares Nabal though David dye at his door, so he may eat the fat, and drink the sweet, &c? The Heathens picture of their graces, young and fresh, two looking towards you, and one from you, bids check to all ungratefull per∣sons.
CHAP. XLI. Vers. 1. At the end of two full years] AFter the Butler was restored; by whose intercession, Joseph hoped to have been presently delivered, but was fairly decei∣ved. So are all such sure to be, as depend upon living men, (never true to them that trust in them) or deceased Saints to intercede for them to God, Deus O. M. pro ineffabili sua clementia dignetur, & in posterum Divo Kiliano intercessore, Amplitudinem tuam con∣tra fidei & Ecclesiae hostes tueri fortiter, & fovere suaviter, Epist. dedicat. ad Episcop. Herbipolens. saith Eckius, in a certain Epistle to a Popish Bishop. Such a prayer begs nothing but a denial, with a curse to boot. Vers. 2. There came up out of the river] Nilus: which, by over-flowing, fatteneth the Plain of Egypt, filling it with fruits; Mercer. and so fitly deciphering the seven years of plenty. Blunt's voyage, pag. 37. So far as this river watereth, is a black mould so fruitful; as they do but throw in the seed, and have four rich harvests, in less then four moneths, say travellers. Vers. 3. Seven other kine came out of the river] These, by their leanness, portended drougth and dearth, though they came up out of Nilus also. This River, when it overflowes unto twelve cubits height only, causeth famine; when to thirteen, scarcity; when to fourteen, chearfulness; when to fifteen, affluence; when to sixteen, abundance, as Pliny tells us. The greatest increase ever known, was of 18 cubits, under Claudius: Suet. in Clau∣dio. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. c. 2. Luc. l. 5. c. 9. (we read of a general famine in his dayes, Act. 11.28. mentioned also by Suetonius, and Jo∣sephus;) The smallest, of five cubits; in the history of the Phar∣salian Wars. Such a thing might fall out now, to cause this sore famine. Or the river, for their sins, might be dryed up, as God threatens them, Ezek. 29.3, 9. Esay 19.5, 6. Sen. nat. quaest. lib. 4. cap. 2. Creditur Aegyptus car∣uisse juvanti∣bus ava Ibribus, at{que} annis sicca fuisse novem. Ovid. Art. 1.1. And as it fell out in the reign of Cleopatra, that prodigiously prodigal Queen, the river overflowed not for two years together, saith Seneca: as at ano∣ther time it overflowed not, for nine years together, saith Callima∣chus; and after him, Ovid. How easie is it for God, to starve us all, by denying us a few harvests? In case of famine, let us enquire the supernatural cause; as David did, 2 Sam. 21.1. when he know the natural cause to be the drought.
Vers. 4. Dideat up the seven, &c.] In famine is not only out∣ward want, . Appetitus ca∣ninus. Thucyd. Polyb. Joseph. but a greedy dog-like appetite within, that an ordina∣ry meal sufficeth not, Esay 9.20. but men are ready to eat one an∣other: as they did at Potidea, in the Peloponnesian War; at Ʋtica, when it was besieged by Amilcar the father of Hannibal; at Je∣rusalem, when it was beleagured by Vespasian; at Tunes, in the African War, Manl. loc. com. 278. when the souldiers were tithed; that is, every tenth man was cut in pieces and devoured. Such a famine there was at Rome in the dayes of Honorius the Emperour, that they were ready to eat one another; Alsted. Chro∣nol. pag 300. and this voyce was heard in the place of publike meeting. Pone pretium humanae carni. At An∣tioch in Syria, Turk. hist. fol. 18. many of the Christians, (in the holy war) through famine, devoured the dead bodies of their late slain enemies. At the siege of Scodra, they were well night put to this extremity, when horses were dainty meat: Ibid. 426. yea they were glad to eat dogs, cats, rats, and the skins of beasts sodd. It exceedeth all credit, to tell at what exceeding great price a little mouse was sold, or puddings made of dogs guts. And if our relations deceived us not, such things as these we heard of lately, to have fallen out in Germany. Alterius perditio, tuacautio. Seest thou another man perish? see to thy self. Vers. 5. And dreamed the second time] Divine dreams use to be repeated, and to take deep impression, as this did, vers. 8. Pha∣raoh's spirit was troubled. Heb. behammered. Vers. 7. Behold, it was a dream] That is, it was but a dream, and no more; yet a divine dream: whereof, see the Notes on Chap. 20. ver. 3. Vers. 8. All the Magitians] Or, naturall Philosophers, that studied the secrets of nature, and could give a ready reason of every thing: Magus is a persian word, and hath affinity with the Hebrew  a contemplative person; : Such as was Aristotle among the heathens, and Augustine amongst Christians; the greatest and accuratest of men, after the Apostles, in contemplation and argumentation, Planudes cum transtulit annis aliquot ante Constantino▪ plim captam. Manl. loc. com. pag. 684. 2 Tim. 3.8. as many are of opinion. The Grecians were so delighted with his learned labours, that they have translated him wholly into their tongue. As for the deep Theorems of naturall Philosophy; they make one learned indeed, but seldome better, oft-times worse, meer Atheists; as these wise∣men of Egypt, else where called enchanters, wizards, Exod. 7.11. Of these were Iannes and Iambres that resisted Moses; learned
they were, and lewd, as were those Philosophers, Rom. 1. [But there was none that could interpret] Because God had smitten them with a spirit of diziness▪ Isai. 29.14. and made the wisdome of the wise to pe∣rish; for else, it had been easie for them, to have seen plenty in the fat kine, and penury in the leane, &c. But God had reserved that honour to Joseph, as a step or stirrop to further preferment. Vers. 9. I remember my fault this day] Oratio vere aulica, saith Pareus, a right courtiers speech. e so relates the history of his imprisonment, that he takes all the blame thereof to him∣self; gives Pharaoh the full commendation of his justice and cle∣mency. As for Joseph, he mentions him to the King; (lest if any esse should have done it before him, he should have been shent for hisilence;) but somewhat slenderly, and more for self-respects, then of any good affection to the innocent prisoner; whom he calls a young-man, a bond-man, and hebrew; in whose behalf he neither adviseth, nor entreateth that he may be sent for. So very little is it, that Joseph oweth to this Patrone. And such, for most part, are court▪commendations. There you have ; as one said of old, delayes and changes good store: every man seeking and serving his own aims and ends; but little minding the good of others, further then subservient to their own. Vers. 10. Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, &c.] It is wis∣dome in a man to confess his faults, before the Prince whom he hath offended; and to commend his clemency in pardoning them: Orat. pro. M. Marcello, & Q. Ligario, &c. As Tully did Caesars, as Mephibosheth did Davids, &c. The Lord Cob∣ham, the L. Gray, Sir Griffin Markham, being condemned for trea∣son, about the beginning of King James, Anno 1603; B. Carletons thankefull re∣membrance of Gods mercies. pag. 181. and brought forth to execution: as they were upon the scaffold, the Sheriffe notified the Kings pardon, his Majesties warrant for the stay of the execution: at which unexpected clemency, besides the great shouts of the people, the condemned wished, that they might sa∣crifice their lives, to redeem their fault, and to repurchase so mer∣cifull a Princes love. Vers. 11. Each man according to the interpretation] That is, no vain dreame, but significant, and deserving an interpreter. Vers. 12. And he interpreted to us our dreams] And well you requited him: but better late then never; Paerstat sero quam nunquam. though a ready dis∣patch doubleth the benefit; howbeit God had an over-ruling hand in it, for Iosephs greatest good: he turneth the worlds ingratitude, to the salvation of his servants.
Vers. 13. As he interpreted to us, so it was] Semblably, as Christ foretold the two theeves with whom he suffered, so it fell out; the one went to Heaven, the other to Hell. And so it shall fare with all men at last day, according to Isai. 3.10.11. Vers. 14. And they brought him hastily] Heb. They made him run: who haply knew not, what this haste and hrry meant, but was betwixt hope and fear, till he came to the King. It is God that bringeth low, and lifteth up; that raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the begger from the dunghill, to set him among Princes, &c. 1 Sam. 2.7, 8. In the year of Grace 1622. The Turkish Janizaries (who have learned that damnable art of ma∣king, and unmaking their King at pleasure) drew Mustapha, (whom they had formerly deposed) out of prison: and when he begged for his life, they assured him of the Empire; and carrying him forth upon their shoulders, Mustapha subita ill mutatione, qua ex carcere ad summam digui∣tatem & poten∣tiam evectus erat ita commetus fuit, ut animi de∣liquium patere∣tur, &c. Parei Medul. pag. 1165. Dan. hist. of Engl. p. 48. cryed with a loud voyce; This is Mustapha, Sultan of the Turks, God save Mustapha, &c. with which sudden change the man was so affected, that he fell in∣to a swoon for joy, and they had much adoe to keep life in him: Our Henry fourth was crowned the very same day, that, the year before, he had been banished the Realm. [And changed his rai∣ment, and came in unto Pharaoh] And should not we get on our best, when we are to come before God? Should we accost him, in the nasty tattered rags of the old Adam? and not spruse up our selves, with the best of our preparation. Vers. 15. I have dreamed a dream, and there is none, &c.] So men send not for the Minister, till given up by the Physitian. Then they cry out with him in the Gospel: Mark. 9.22. Sir if thou canst do any thing, help us, &c. Whereunto what can we reply, but as that king of Israel did to the woman that cryed to him for help, 2 King 6.27. in the famine of Samaria; If the Lord help the not, whence shall I help thee? out of the barn-floor, or out of the wine-press? Did not I fore∣warn you, saying, touch not the unclean thing, &c. and ye would not hear. Gen. 42.22. with 2 Cor. 6.17. Amor ingenii e∣minem unquam divi secit. Petron. Nescio qumodo bonae mentis so∣ror est pauper∣tas. Ib. Therefore is this thing come upon you. [And I have heard say, &c.] Pharaoh despiseth not wisdome, how meanly soe∣ver habited. Saepe sub attrita latitat sapientia veste: Paupertas est philosophia vernacula, saith he in Apuleius: And Eumolpus in Petronius, being asked why he went so poorly apparrelled, answe∣red; the study of wisdome, never made any man wealthy. And afterward he addeth; however it comes to pass, poverty is the sister of piety, and vertue is forsaken of fortunne. Nudus opum,
sed cui coelum terraeque paterent, saith Silius of Archimedes, that great Mathematician. And Aelian observes, Aelian. l. 2. Lactantius quasi quidam fluvius Tulliaae elo∣quentiae. Hieror. that the best of the Greeks, Aristides, Phocion, Pelopidas, Epaminondas, Socrates, were very poor men: Lactantius, that Christian Cicero, as Hierome calleth him, was so needy, that he wanted necessaries. All that Calvin left behinde him, books and all, came scarce to three hun∣dred French crowns: as Boz his colleague witnesseth. Vers. 16. It is not in me, God shall give Pharaoh, &c.] This is the voyce of all that have true worth in them: they are humble, upon the knowledg of their perfections; they vilifie and nullifie themselves before God and men; like true balme, that put into water, sinks to the bottome: or like a vessel cast into the Sea, which the more it fills, the deeper it sinks. And this is the bottome and bosome of humility, and very next degree to exaltation, as here. Vers. 25. The dream of Pharaoh is one] One in signification, but diverse, in respect of vision. Why it was doubled, see ver. 32. Repetitions in Scripture are not tautologies, but serve to set forth to us, the necessity, excellency, or difficulty of the thing so re-in∣forced. To write to the Philippians the same things, to S. Paul it is not grievous, and for them it is safe, Phil. 3.1. Seneca. Nunquàm sa∣tis dicitur, quod nunquàm satis discitur. Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros. Iu∣ven. Away then with those nice Novellists, that can abide to hear nothing but what is new∣minted. Ministers meet with many that are slow of heart, and dull of hearing; these must have precept upon precept, line upon line, &c. Many also of brawny breasts and horny-heart strings; that as duck∣lings stoop and dive at any little stone thrown by a man at them, yet shrink not at the heavens great thunder, &c. Here a Minister must beat and inculcate; turn himself into all fashions of spirit and speech, to win and work upon his hearers. He must so long pursue and stand upon one and the same point, (saith Austin) till, Aug. de doct. Christ. & in Psal. 10. Psal. 49.1.2. by the gesture and countenance of his Auditors, he perceives they under∣stand and assent to it. Hear this, all ye people, give ear all ye In∣habitants of the world, (saith the Psalmist) Both low and high, rich and poor together. Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissr hiatu, Horat. will some proud spirit say? what so great matter is there delivered in this Psalm, that so much attention is called for? Is it not an ordinary argument, such as we have heard of an hundred times, (viz. the happy and secure estate of the Saints, though in trouble, and the miserable and slippery condition of the wicked, though
they prosper in the world?) True, saith the Holy Ghost; this is the subject of this Psalme; and this, how common a theme soe∣ver, is the great wisdome, and the dark saying, that I will here open unto you and that calls for your utmost attention. Vers. 33. Now therefore let Pharaoh, &c.] This was good counsell, and it proved best to the councellour. The Iewes inju∣riously charge him with ambitious self-seeking: So they did Noah (as is above noted); with hard-heartedness, and in compassionate∣ness to the old world. These made the worst of things, and so condemned the generation of Gods Children. How much better had it been, Eâ quem{que} ansâ prebendamus quâ commodè teneri queat. Epictet. Fran. de Sales c. 28. to have followed that golden rule of Epictetus? Take every man by that handle, whereby he may best be held; as Virgill dealt by Ennius, Cyprian by Tertullian, Hierome by Origen, Au∣gust in by Tichonius. If an action had an hundred several faces, we should alwaies cast our sight upon the fairest; and make the best of every thing. What Ioseph did here, he did doubtless, by divine direction. Vers. 34. Let him appoint officers] Bishops or overseers. Pakid. Episco∣pu Such amongst the Romans were praefecti annoae. The word signifyeth, any such as have publike charge and office, whe∣ther in Church, or common-wealth. But how many of our Episco∣pi, are now become Aposcopi, by-seers, rather then over-seers; as Espencaeus long since complained? Our land groans for some Mo∣ses, to take away the evil-Officers. Nam non unum tantùm vitu∣lum, sed multos habemus, as honest Ferus said of his times. And as John Hus, Multa quae illi or dinem dicunt, omnium rerum in christianismo consufionem pa∣riunt. Bell. Hus∣siticum. pag. q. of his Church-men; Many things, saith he, which they call order, breed confusion of all things, throughout whole Christendome. And take up the fifth part of the land] For so much money, as it is worth: the Egyptians might well spare it, and the King might as well buy it, sith he should sell it again, for very good profit. Neither would Joseph advise, nor Pharaoh be advised, to take his Subjects goods by violence. When Samuel tells the people, that their King, Bucholc. whom they called for, would take their fields and vine∣yards, the best of them, and give them to his servants, &c. loquitur non tam de jure quam de more, he speaks not of the right of Kings, (as if all were theirs, and no man had any thing of his own) but of the manner, and illimited power that some Kings take over their subjects goods; as in Turkie, Persia, &c. Let it be the voyce of a Nero, whensoever he put any one in office, Scis quid mihi opus sit, Sueton. in Nerone. & hoc agamus, nequis quicquam habeat: Of a Seleucus, to
proclaim, that the Kings pleasure is the only law; . Appian. as if it were not enough, to be above men, but above mankind: as those Princes Would be, saith our English Chronicler, that would have their will to be law. Melancthon tells us of a certain Prince, in those parts, Dan. hist. of Engl. f. 144. Primò unn dem llebat, minitans, &c. Manl. loc. com. 636. Eram aliquandò in die Natali, in cujusdam con∣cione, &c. Erant  quibus gratificabatur & assentiebatur quorundam auri∣bus, &c. Ibid. 479. that extorted money from his miserable subjects, by knocking out their teeth. First he knockt out one tooth, threatning to do so by the rest, unless they brought him in such a sum, by such a time, as he demanded. The same Author elsewhere relates, that he was at a Sermon on the birth-day of our Saviour: The Preacher took his text out of Luk. 2.1. There went out a decree from Caesar Au∣gustus, that all the world should be taxed. And whereas the audi∣ence expected, that the Preacher should have discoursed of Christs Nativity, of the hypostatical union, &c. he spent his whole hour (the weather being extream cold) in this subject, that Obedience must be yeelded to the higher powers; that they must have as much money given them, as they call for; with a great deal of such like stuff, little to the purpose, but much to the pleasure of some Prin∣ces then and there present. Such Court-Parasites, many times, do much mischief in a State; as well by seducing good Princes, (qui essent alii, si essent apudalios) as by stickling against them, when the world doth not favour them. When Edward the second, sir∣named Carnarvan, was pursued by his Queen, and son, the Bishop of Hereford being to preach before her at Oxford, and to deliver the cause of her proceeding, took for his text, My head aketh, Dan. hist. of Engl. fol. 216. my head aketh; and concluded most undivinely, that an aking and sick head of a Kingdom, was, of necessity, to be taken off, and no other∣wise cured. Vers. 35. And let them gather all the food] This text war∣ranteth providence, in laying up for a rainy day. Solomon sends us to school to the pismire, to learn this lesson, Prov. 6.6. And it is well observed, that our Saviour had a purse for common store for himself and those about him. Neither was this a penny-pouch, but a bag so big, as needed a bearer. God would have us to be good husbands, and see that Condus be fortior promo, our comings in, more then our layings out; Parents must lay up for their chil∣dren, 2 Cor. 12.14. yea, leave inheritance to childrens children, Prov 13.22. playing the good husbands abroad and at home, Prov. 27.26, 27. Vers. 37. And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh] The Devil, no doubt, by the Magicians and Politicians of those times,
did his utmost to hinder the Kings purpose of preferring Joseph; as he did here for Cromwell, that great Reformer, whom King Henry the eight, Act. & Mon. 1070. of a Smiths son, made Farl of Essex. But these is neither counsel nor wisdom against the Lord, Prov. 21.30. Vers. 38. And Pharaoh said unto his servants] He would re∣solve nothing without the advice of his Counsel. Val. Max. lib. 9. cap. 5. He was not like the Persian Monarchs, who gave their Peers no freedom nor liber∣ty of advice: Nor that wilful King James of Scotland, (that reign∣ed in our Edward the fourth's time) that would seldom ask counsel, but never follow any: so wedded he was to his own opinion, (saith the Historian) that he could not endure any mans advice (how good soever) that he fancied not. Dan. hist. of England, contin. by Trussel. 107. Pharaoh heard what his servants could say to it; who all, at length, consented, when the ill-affected saw it was no boot to dissent. Can we find such a man as this] Hence some collect, that Joseph preached many more things to the King, of God, his power, pro∣vidence, goodness, &c. then are here recorded; and was therefore so admired, Psal. 105.22. and advarced to the office of teaching his Senatours wisdom. To bind his Princes to his soul, and make wise his Elders, as the Original hath it. Vers. 39. Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this] Pharaoh, at first, took him for no other, then a cunning sooth-sayer, and conjecturer of dreams. Now he finds better worth in him, a spirit of wisdom and discretion: He seeth him to be a man spiritually rational, and rationally spiritual; one that seemed to see the in∣sides of Nature and Grace, and the world and heaven, by those perfect anatomies he had made of them all. Briefly, such a heart so well headed, nor such a head better hearted, he had never met with. Wherefore he resolves to set him at the stern of the State; there being not any thing that makes a man so good a Patriot, as true Religion; which admits not of that distinction between a good man and a good Citizen. Vers. 40. Thou shalt be over my house, &c.] Pharaoh prefers him, because he found good parts in him. They that bestow pla∣ces of charge in Church or Common-wealth, upon undeserving persons, for by-respects, shall have Pharaoh to rise up in judgment against them. The life of King Edward the sixth; by Sir Jo. Heywood, pag. 6. In King Edward the sixth's minority, Dignity waited upon desert, (saith the Historian) which caused it again to be waited upon by respect. Order also was taken, that no man should have any benefice from the King, but first he should preach
before him. Ibid. 115. Tamberlane-never bestowed his preferments upon such as ambitiously sought them; as deeming them, in so doing, unworthy thereof: but upon such, as whose modesty or desert, Turk. hist. fol. 227. he thought worthy of those his great favours. Vers. 41. See, I have set thee over all, &c.] So Antoninus the Emperour, made Pertinax (a mean man, Pertinax obres praeclarè gestas emsul est factu: enjus causa multi indignati sunt, &c. Dio. Idem in vita Pertinacis. but well qualified) Con∣sul; which many murmured at. But he was afterwards made Emperour; and finding the publike treasure wofully wasted by his predecessor Commodus, he restored it by his good husbandry; which many Magnifico'es laughed at; caeteri, quibus virtus luxuriâ potior erat, laudabamus, saith the Historian. Vers. 42. And Pharaoh took off his ring] Pliny therefore is out, that thinks the use of rings came not up before the Trojan War. How happy had he been, bello librorum. (that was so great a book-devourer) had he light upon the Bible. He was in-sighted in all the secrets of Nature; as appears by his works; Nihil unquam legit, quin ex∣cerperet: nec in Bibliotheca tan∣tum, sed in lecti∣ca; sed equitan quoque vel scri∣bebat vel scri∣bendum aliquod dictabat. Textor. Offi∣cina. (which is non minùs varium quam ipsa rerum natura, saith Erasmus:). He never read any thing but he excerped it; neither in his library only, but in his couch; and whiles he was on horseback, he either wrote, or dictated some∣what to be written. When he saw his Nephew walk out some houres without studying, he said to him, Poteras has horas non perdere. He lived in the dayes of Vespasian; and was a great dealer under him. What pity it was, that neither by Jews nor Christi∣ans he came to the knowledg of the Scriptures; where he might have met with many Antiquities, (as this of the use of the ring, an ornament of honour) not elsewhere to be read of. But God had hid these things from the wise and prudent, because it so seemed good in his sight, Matth. 11.25, 26. [And put a gold chain about his neck] Behold (saith a learned Interpreter) one hour hath changed his fetters into a chain of gold, his rags into robes, D. Hall. his stocks into a chariot, his jayl into a palace; Potiphar's captive, to his Masters Lord; the noise of his chains into Abrech. God com∣monly exalts his people to the contrary good to that evil, he had cast them into; as Joseph, here, of a slave, to be a Ruler; Christ judged, to be Judge of all. So Caius, so soon as he came to the Empire, the first thing he did, was to prefer Agrippa, (who had suffered imprisonment for wishing him Emperour:) he made him King of Judaea, (this was that Herod that was eaten with worms, Act. 12) and gave him a chain of gold, as heavy as the chain of iron, that was upon him in prison.
Vers. 43. Bow the knee] Or, tender Father, because he was young in years, but old in wildom, , as Macarius was called. Not the ancient are wise, but the wise ancient. Vers 44. I am Pharaoh] Of a root that signifieth to make bare, because (say some) he was to be bared, that is, sifted and ma∣nifested by Joseph. without thee shall no man lift up his hand] And yet the Egyp∣tians (in Seneca's time however) were a proud peremptory people, Agyptus lo∣qux & ingeni∣osà in contume∣liam praefecto∣rum provincia: in qua qui vita∣veri culpam on effagit in sami∣am. Seneca. Salvator mundi. Hier. . Ioseph. apt to cast contempt and contumely upon their Governours, were they never so upright and unblameable. Joseph had said, without me, God shall answer Pharaoh; And now he heareth, without thee shall no man, &c. Vers. 45. Zaphnath Paneach] That is, saith Idiprome, the Sa∣viour of the world. An high stile: so the Greeks, when Flamini∣us, who had freed them from bondage, came amongst them, called him, Saviour, Saviour, with such a courage, that the birds that flew over their heads, amazed at the noise, fell to the ground. Hunniades, Plutarch. having overthrown Mesites, the Turks Generall, at his return into the camp, a wonderful number of the poor captives came, and falling at his feet and kissing them, gave God thanks for their deliverance by him. Some called him Father; some, the Defender of his country; the souldiers, their invincible General; The captives, their Saviour; the women, their protectour; the young men and children, their tender father. He again, with tears standing in his eyes, cunceously embraced them, rejoycing at the publike good; Tur. hist. fol. 269. and himself, giving most hearty thanks unto God, commanded the like to be done, in all the Churches of that pro∣vince. [The daughter of Potipherah Prince of On] Called Aven. Ezek. 30.1. that is, wickedness, because there they sacri∣ficed to the Sun; whence it was called, Heliopolis. The chiefe ruler here under Pharaoh▪ was Priest of the Sun: belike, Priests were no small men in those days, amongst the Egyptians. Among the Ethiopians (their neighbours,) the Priests of Iupiter were grown to that height of insolency, and had so bewitched the peo∣ple with their superstitions, Nullo detrectan∣te, donec ad Er∣ganem regem perventum est, qui omues occidit & sacerdotium Sustulit. Alex. ab Alexandro, that they would sometimes take upon them to depose, and kill their Kings. This had been often done there; till at length, when they attempted the same upon Erganes King of that country, he slew them all, and took away their priest∣hood. O that God would once put into the hearts of Christian Kings, to deal so by that high-priest of Rome, who hath so long
usurped authority, to depose and abuse them at his pleasure! Vers. 46. And Joseph was thirty year old] This is mentioned, to shew what wonderfull graces he had attained, at those years; what rare endowments, both of piety and policy. Julius Caesar beholding the picture of Alexander, in Hercules his temple at Gades, wept, that he had done no worthy act at those yeares, wherein Alexander had conquered the whole world. Behold, Ioseph at thirty, shewed more wisdome and vertue, then either of them; (as Pererius, on this text, well observeth:) and hath for his 13 years service, and imprisonment, fourscore years liberty, prospe∣rity, and honour: God is a liberal pay-master. Vers. 47. By handfulls] Manipulation. Ex uno grano integer manipu∣lvs colligebatur, Act. 14.17. Every grain of corn yeelds a handfull of increase. Thus God filled their hearts with food and gladness; and so left not himself without witnesse, amongst those Infidels. Vers. 48. And laid up the food of the cities] He provided store∣houses for every city; so they needed not to travel far. It is our happiness, that we have the Word, that bread of life, brought home to us. Yet some are so wretched, that unless God will set up a ulpit at the Ale-house door, they will not come to hear him. They will run to hell as fast as they can; and if God cannot catch them, they care not, they will not return. V. 50. Asenath the daughter of Potipherah] This was not Potiphar, Ioseph's Master. Ioseph would not marry the daughter of such a hus∣wife. Partus firè sequitur ventrem. Ingenium ipsum aque indoles (veluti conclusio sequitur inferiorem partm plerun{que} matrissat. Vers. 51. Manass for God, said he, hath, &c.] He writes Gods mercies to himself, upon the names of his two children; that might be as so many Monitours to thankfulness and obedience. The Stork is said to leave one of her young ones where she hatch∣eth, as it were out of some instinct of gratitude. Doves, at every grain they pick, look upward, as giving thanks. [And all my fa∣thers house] Even that toyl and those indignities that were offered me in my fathers house, (so Iunius;) the grief whereof, his prefer∣ment allayed and mitigated. Vers. 53. And the seven years of plenteousness., &c.] All earth∣ly felicities will determine; they are called a sea of glasse mingled with fire; that is, with affliction. Henry the sixth, Rev. 15.2. Trussels Con∣nuation. s. 189. that had been the most potent Monarch for Dominions, that ever England had, was, when deposed, not the master of a mole-hill, nor owner of
his own liberty; so various are the changes and chances of this mor∣tal life. Vers. 54. According as Ioseph had said] Joseph foresaw and foretold the famine, but caused it not: so Gods prescience, &c. In all the land of Egypt] Such a revenue is thrift and parsimony. Optimum vectigal parsimonia. Cic. Vers. 55. . Dio. Cryed to Pharaoh] Though they knew he had de∣puted Ioseph: So 1 King. 6.27. ; we should be as Gods, if we had not businesses, cares and feares, about any of our sub∣jects; said Augustus to his wife Livia. Vers. 57. All countries came to Joseph, &c.] Forrainers also should be relieved, so much as may be; King Edward the 6. sent 5000 pound, Hi frondibus & gramine vesce∣bantur. Scultet. Annal. pag. 315. to relieve Protestants beyond seas. Geneva received our fugitives for religion, in Q. Maries time: and Strasborough, the poor banished Lorrainers, that were well nigh famished, be∣ing forced to feed on hips and hawes, &c. CHAP. XLII. Vers. 1. Now when Jacob saw that there was corn] A Sale of Corn. Heb. A breaking: so called, either because corn breaks famine; or, because it is broken and ground to make bread of: or for that they made their bread in thin cakes, and so broke it. Or lastly, because he that selleth it, breakes the heape, and gives part to the buyer. Why look ye one upon another?] As hopeless and helplesse; or, as at your wits ends, and not knowing whither to turne you. Youth is one while witlesse, another while shift-lesse. Let dayes speake, and multitude of yeares teach wisedome. Convivium sit simile Alphabe∣to, &. Iob. 32.7. As at feasts, so at other meetings, old men should be vowels, young men, Mutes; or at most, but semi-vowels. Vers. 2. Get you down thither] Here the Divine decree of Israels sojourning and suffering in Egypt, begins to be fulfilled, by a won∣derful providence. The fulness of Josephs barns invites Jacob, first to send, and then to go thither himself, for relief. Shall not the fulness that is in Christ, incite and entice us to come to him; as bees to a meddow full of flowers; as Merchants to the Indies full of spices and other riches; as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, full
of wisdom; as Jacob's sons to Egypt full of corn, in that extream famine, that we may return full fraught with treasures of truth and grace? It pleased God, that in him should all fulnesse dwell. Joh. 1.16. Colos. 1.19. And his fulness is not only repletive, but diffusive; a fulness of plenty and abundance, but of bounty also, and redundance. He was anoint∣ed with the oyl of gladness, not only above, but for his fellows. Heb. 1.9. that we may live, and not dye] Saints have their share in com∣mon calamities. Jacob tasted of the famine, as well as his neigh∣bours the Canaanites; so had Abraham and Isaac done before him. Both the good figs and bad figs were carried captive, Ier. 24. the corn, as well as the weeds, is cut down at harvest, &c. Vers. 3. And Josephs ten brethren went] Fourty or fifty miles anend: Austin saith three hundred. Should we think much to go a few steps, (say it be miles) to get food for our souls? Be∣ware that famine, Am. 8.11, 12. The seven Churches of Asia, Bohemia, the Palatinate, and many other parts of Germany, are under it already. So is the large Region of Nubia in Africk; which had from the Apostles time (as 'tis thought) professed the Christian faith; but now embraced Mahometisme, through lack of Ministers. For, as Alvarez hath recorded; at his being in the King of Habassia's Court, there were Embassadours out of Nubia, Alvar. hist. Athiopic. cap. 137. to intreat him for a supply of Ministers, to instruct their Nation, and repair Christianity, gone to ruine among them: but were re∣jected. O fearful! Vers. 4. But Benjamin, Jacob sent not] Because best beloved; as last born, and likeliest to live longest; and the least, and least able to shift for himself; and all that was left of his dearest Rachel; his only darling, that had been alwayes at hand, and in the fathers eye. Vers. 5. And the sons of Israel came] God could have fed them by a miracle, as he did Eliah by the ravens; Dedit cis pluvi∣am escatilem, & petram aquati∣lem. Tertull. and Israel in the wil∣derness, (where he rained them down Manna, and set the flint abroach:) and Merlin (hid in a haymow in the Massacre of Paris) by a hen that came thither, and laid an egg by him, every morning. But he worketh ordinarily by means, and will have them used, Dikes Mich. & the drag. but not trusted to. Vers. 6. And Joseph was the Governour] Of the Hebrew word here used, is made in Arabick, the title Sultan, given at this day to the great Turk by his Subjects; among whom the Arabick is now the learned language. Their Alchoran is written in it, and prohi∣bited
to be translated; which both preserves the tongue, they say, and conceals Religion. [And Josephs brethren came and bow∣ed] This, those mockers little thought ever to have done, to that Dreamer. But the will of the Lord, that shall stand. Vers. 7. Spake roughly to them] To bring them the sooner to a sight of their sin. God also, for like purpose, writes bitter things against his people, stands afar off, hides his love, as Ioseph, out of increasement of love; fights against them with his own hand, as he threw his brethren into prison, Nihil est tenta∣tio vel universi mundi & totius enferni in unum conflata, ad eam qua Dem contra∣riu bomini po∣ni. Luther. &c. then the which there is no greater affliction, saith Luther; and all to shew them their sin, and to bring them home to himself by repentance. Vers. 8. But they knew not him] As being now altered in sta∣ture, voyce, visage, his present pomp, and haply also, by his former imprisonment and affliction. We read of a young man, that being condemned to dye, was turn'd gray-headed in one night, through fore-thought and fear of death, and was thereupon spared. Vers. 9. Then Ioseph remembred the dreams] Event is the best interpreter of Divine Oracles. The Disciples understood not many things at first, that our Saviour said to them; as that, Ioh. 2.22. Ioh. 12.16. So Iohn Baptists preaching wrought not, for some years after it was delivered, and then it did, Ioh. 18.41, 42. The Spouse either heard not, or heeded not that speech of her Beloved, Open unto me my sister, my spouse, till some while after he was gone, Cant. 5.2-6. [Ye are spies] This, Ioseph speaks not, assertivè, but tentativè; not seriously, but by a covert counsel: not as him∣self thought, Exploratores deputo bimini meritomendacii vestri. Aug. but as the Egyptians suspected: or not absolutely, but conditionally; ye are spies, unless you prove what ye have spo∣ken. Vers. 10. Nay, my Lord] The world is well changed, since they said one to another, behold his dreamer cometh. Then they could not finde in their hearts, to cll him brother; now they call him Lord. God, when he pleaseth, can change the note of our worst enemies to us. There is a promise, that they shall bow down to us, with their faces toward the earth, and lik up the dust of our feet, Esay 49.23. Vers. 11. We are all mans sons] Therefore no Spies; for what one man would hazard all his sons at once, upon so dangerous a design? [we are true men] Heb. Recti. The Popish Doctors reject those ancient Authors, De Christo lib. 1 cap. 4. that are alledged against them, with, Non sunt Recti in Curia. Bellarmine saith; To Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Eusebius, and Luther; I answer, Omnes manifesti haeretici sunt; when any thing in the decrees likes not the Pope, he sets Palea up∣on it, &c. Vers. 12. Nay but to see the nakedness] That is, the weakness, and where we may be best invaded; as Num. 13.19. By this wile he gets out of them, that which he much longed to hear of; his father and brother Benjamines health and welfare. See vers. 9. Vers. 13. And one is not] They tell Joseph, that Ioseph is not. When God holds mens eyes, they see not the truth that lyes before them; who is blind as my servant? Isai. 42.19. Vers. 14. This is it that I spake unto you] He lays it hard to them still: As who should say, the longer I hear you, the worse I like you; ere while ye said, ye were ten brethren of you: Now you acknowledg two more: lyars had need to have good memo∣ries, &c. Be we as jealous of Satan, Medacem oper∣tet esse memom. and as watchfull against his wiles, when he comes to set out the nakedness of our souls; that where the hedge is lowest, this beast may leap over; watch him, I say, and learn out his haunts, for we have heard and felt, that he is very subtle; as Saul said of David, 1 Sam. 23.22. V. 15. By the life of Pharaoh] Ioseph, that he might seem enough an Egyptian, sweares heathennishly; Egyptians, partly of flattery, and partly of superstition, used to sweare by the life, or, (as the greek here hath it,) by the health of their King. The Spaniards, in the pride of their Monarchy, are grown also now to sweare by the life of their King. The Hebrews write, to this day, Sands his rela∣tion of West. Relig. that he which false∣ly sweares by the Kings head, in a money-matter, shall be put to death; as Pererius upon this text tells us. This grew, doubtless, of that cursed custome of deifying their Kings; as Antiochus sirnamed, ; and Caligula would be stiled Dominus Deus: as at this day the Popes Parasites call him Dominum Deum nostrum papam. To be sworn by, is an honour peculiar to God, Isai. 65.16. Ier. 12.6. That of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15.31. Is not an oath but an obtesta∣tion; or, a taking of his afflictions for Christ, to witness. That of the Spouse, Cant. 3.5. is not an oath, but an adjuration: for he chargeth his Churches enemies not to trouble her; and if they do, Roes and Hindes shall testifie against them; which would not do so, had they but Reason. This of Ioseph likewise, Non est forma juramenti, led as∣severationit se∣ria, & otes∣tionis dome,  is by some said to be not an oath, but an earnest asseveration: as who should say; as true as Pharaoh liveth; or, so Pharaoh live. Be it what it will, Ioseph cannot altogether be excused, for conforming him
self to the Egyptians. The place had somewhat tainted him; and he might well take up that of the Prophet Isaiah; Wee is me, for I am a man of unclean lips; and why? for I dwell amidst a people of unclean lips. Isai. 6.5. Courts and great places are ill ayre, for zeal to breathe in: 'tis hard for such, not to remit somewhat of their for∣mer fervor, and contract filth of sin, which is as catching as the plague. As sheep among thornes lose part of their fleece; so do the Saints, part of their goodness, among the wicked. Vers. 16. By the life of Pharaoh, surely &c.] See how easily sin entreth twice, where it had once entred. Be not overcome of evill, Rom. 12.21. Some sweare, and finde it not; they would be sorry their excrements should pass from them, and they feel it not. Oh, cross this ill custome; and though ye cannot so soon turn the streame, yet swim against it. It is the devill that saith unto thee, as those Iewes did to Pilate; do as thou hast ever done, Mark 15.8. God also will answer such, when they plead for their swearing, that they have got a custome, and cannot leave it; as the judg did that theefe, that desired him to spare him; for stealing, had been his custome from his youth: the judg replyed, it was also his cu∣stome, Barker on the command. Iam. 5.12. to give judgment against such malefactours, therefore he mut be condemned. Sweare neither by heaven, nor by earth, lest ye fall into condemnation, saith Saint Iames, to the converted Iewes. This they had learned of the Pharisees, to whom it was familiar, to swear by creatures, Hoc  a judaismo con∣versis tenaciter adbaerebat Pa∣reus in lac. 5.12. Mat. 5. & 23. And though now conver∣ted, they could not leave it: but they must, or be damned for it, chuse them which; as the Apostle there assures them. And whereas such kind of oaths, are now grown a piece of gallantry; and such as cannot sweare them, are thought to want their tropes and figures, befitting a gentleman: God will deal with such, as that judg did with one that pleaded for his life, that he might not be hang'd, because he was a gentleman; he told him, that therefore, You keep a good watch, my Lord. Act. and Mon. he should have the gallows made higher for him: So shall these have a deeper damnation, because better bred, and should have kept a better watch; as that Martyr, told the swea∣ring Bishop Bonner. Vers. 17. En conclave ali∣quod ubi custo∣iebantur. Piscat Doctor Chet∣wind Deane of Bristow. And he put them all together into ward three dayes] Not into close prison, but into some chamber, or private roome, where they might have opportunity of reflecting upon themselves, and repenting. I have heard of a grave Divine (lately living,) that did much good upon many, that came to him to ave almes;
by shutting them up in a room by themselves, having first taken great pains with them by way of direction, what to do to be sa∣ved, joyning in prayer, setting them in a course of better living, and then providing for them fit services. Vers. 18. And Ioseph said unto them the third day] So God, af∣ter two dayes, will revive his; in the third day he will raise them up, and they shall live in his sight, Hos. 6.2. Psal. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, lest they put forth their hand to folly; lest their spirits fail before him: for others he cares not so much, as for the choyce spirits of his faithfull people: when we beat ordinary spices, we care not for every dust, but let some flye out, and fall on the ground. But if Bezoar-stone, or some such pre∣cious stuff, every little is lookt to. So here. [For I fear God] Deum illum, saith Iunius, that true God, the proper object of fear; and therefore you need not doubt of fair dealing. See the Notes, on Chap. 20.11. Learn here, that confession of our faith is to be made as oft, as thereby God may be glorified, and our bre∣thren edified. Vers. 19. Let one of your brethren be bound] By binding Sime∣on, he brought down Benjamin to himself. So doth God, by chastening our bodies, save our souls. Vers. 20. But bring your youngest brother unto me] So saith God to all his worshippers, See that you bring your hearts with you, whatever you leave behind you. And as David sent to Abner, Thou shalt not see my face, 2 Sam. 3.13. except thou bring Michal Sauls daugh∣ter: so here. The poor widows heart, being put to her mite, gaue it weight, above the greater, but heartless largesses of the Phari∣sees. Vers. 21. We are very guilty, &c.] See here the force of Con∣science, and fruit of affliction; to bring old sins to a new reckon∣ing. Conscience, though for a while still, and seemingly asleep, yet is faithful in recording, and fearful in accusing. It writes bit∣ter things, and will article against the sinner in the evil day. There∣fore as B. Latimer took special heed to the placing of his words in his examination before Bonner, Act. & Mon. when he heard the pen walking in the chimney behind the cloth, and describing whatsoever he said; So should we; sith Conscience is not only Gods Spy, but Notary: And albeit it doth not alwayes execute the acts of accusing, yet hath alwayes the habit of it. And that we shall know, when trou∣ble overtakes us; then shall we feel those darts of the Almighty,
dagging at the heart, and those arrows of his, drinking up the spi∣rit. Daniel chose rather to be cast into the den of Lions, then to carry about a Lion in his bosome, an inraged Conscience. Vers. 22. Spake not I unto you, &c.] Fellows in sin oft fall out, and then all comes to light. Mahomet the great Turk, had with great rewards, procured two Turks, to undertake to kill Scander∣beg. These traytors came to Scanderbeg, making such a shew of the detestation, both of Mahomet his tyrannical government, and vain superstition, that they were, both of Scanderbeg and others, reputed to be indeed the men they desired to be accounted: And so, after they had learned the principles of the Christian Religion, were, by their own desire, baptized. But so it fell out by Gods good providence, that these false traytors, expecting nothing but opportunity to perform their devillish device, upon some occasion, fell at variance betwixt themselves; and in their heat, let some such words fall, as being taken up by some there present, drew them both into suspition. And thereupon, being straightly examined, it was, Turk. hist. fol. 400. at last, by them confessed, That they were sent for such a pur∣pose; for which they were both presently executed, as they had well deserved. Evill men are as glass that is soddered together; as soon as the sodder is melted, the glass falls in pieces, and all is discovered. Vers. 24. And wept, and returned, &c.] The better any one is, the more inclined to weeping; 1 Sam. 20. as David, then Jonathan. Nam faciles motus mens generosa capit. Paulus non tam atramento quam lachrymis chartas inficiebat, saith Lorinus. And took from them Simeon, and bound him.] He is thought to have been the chief doer in the sale of Joseph; and is therefore singled out for punishment. Judas Iscariot is said to come of his tribe. Of a turbulent and restless spirit, Joseph knew him to be; and therefore detained him, saith Musculus, lest he should have hindered the motion of bringing down Renjamin. Vers. 25. Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks] This was the revenge he took upon them, for their many misusages. So Jo∣shua marched all night, and fought all day, for the Gibeonites, that had deceived him. So Elisha set bread and water before the Sy∣rians that came to surprize him. So S. Paul bids, If thine enemy hunger, feed him, &c. Injuries are more bravely overcome with
benefits, then recompenced with the pertinacy of a mutual hatred, Specisius ali∣quanto injuriae beneficiis vin∣cuntur, quam muni odii per∣tinacia pensan∣tur. Val. Max. lib. 4. c. 2. said a very Heathen. Vers. 27. To give his Asse provender in the Inne.] Their Innes then, were not so well furnished as ours are; but they were forced to carry their provender, which was a trouble. Vers. 28. My money is restered] Joseph had stollen this benefit upon them, which they mis-interpret; their own misgiving hearts telling them, that Gods just hand was in it for their hurt. Con∣science, being now awakened, meets them at every turn; till they were soundly humbled, and had made their peace. Better a sore, then a seared conscience; as, better a tormentful strangury, then a senseless lethargy. Bee-masters tell us, that those are the best hives, that make the greatest noise. Vers. 29. And they came to Iacob] Who had looked many a long look for them, no doubt, and was now glad to see their fa∣ces, and full sacks. But this joy lasted but a little while; for no sooner had he heard them speak, but he was thunderstruck, as it were: so little stability is there in any worldly felicity. The Saints have all here their back-burdens of afflictions; yet some have more then some; as Iacob, who was seldom without: God not only gave him a draught of them, but made him a dyet-drink. Look how your refiners of sugar, taking sugar, out of the same chest, some thereof they melt but once; other, again and again: not that it hath more dross in it, but because they would have it more refined: So is it here. Vers. 35. And it came to passe, as they emptied] Calvin's note on this text, is, that Ioseph was herein overshot, and ill-advised; for that intending to succour his father, by sending back his money, he grieved and frighted him. But this might be Iacob's fault, more then Iosephs. We many times mistake God himself, through self∣guiltiness; as if he meant to kill us with kindness, which is a great unthankfulness. See my Love-tokens, p. 32. Vers. 36. Simeon is not] That is, As good he were not; for ye have left him prisoner, and unless ye return the sooner with Benjamin, (which I cannot yeeld to) is like to be put to death, as a Spie. See here the pangs and passions of a parent, and how love descends! Vers. 37. Slay my two sons] A simple and sinfull offer. Reuben was the eldest, but not the wisest. Age is no just measure of wis∣dome. Howbeit, of him we may learn, in our parents fear, no
be hardy and hearty; in our brethrens distress, to be eager and earnest. Vers. 38. Ye shall bring down my gray haires, &c.] To the state of the dead, not to hell, or Limbus Patrum. Many of the Anci∣ents erroneously held, that mens souls were not judged, till the last day; nor rewarded, or punished, but reserved in some secret Re∣ceptacles, Bell. de Purg. lib. 1. unto the general Judgment. Bellarmine would hence prove Purgatory. Luther also seems to approve of that figment of the Fathers. For in his notes upon this text, he will have Sheol here translated the grave, to be an under-ground-receptacle of all souls, where they rest and sleep till the coming of Christ. But gray haires descend not further then the grave. And Luther some∣where intreats his Readers, that if they find any thing in his books, that smelleth of the old cask, they should consider, he was not only a man, but sometime had been a poor Monk, &c. CHAP. XLIII. Vers. 1. And the famine was sore in the Land] IN the promised Land. Drus. in Adag. Hold out faith and patience. Os quod in sorte tua cecidit, rodas: Bear thy cross, and be content. Vers. 2. Buy us a little food] They had learned to live with a little, which is a great skill; nature is content with a little, grace with less. Paratum se esse cum jove de fali∣citate coutendere, fi aquam habe∣ret & offam. Alian. Epicurus himself was wont to say, if he might have but aquam & offam, a draught of water, and a morsell of meate, he could live happily. Vers. 3. Ye shall not see my face, &c.] No acceptation with∣out Benjamin, that son of sorrow: So, neither with God, with∣out sound repentance. This is the rainbow, which if God seeth shining in our hearts, he will never drown our souls. Vers. 6. And Israel said, &c.] Here he begins to outwrestle his fears, by resting upon God; and is therefore called Israel. Vers. 7. Could we certainly know, &c.] Inferences many times are made, upon what we say or do, such as we never thought of, Aug. lib. 1. de Trint. c. 3. ad sinem. Arbitror nonnullos in quibusdam locis librorum meorum opina∣turos, me sensisse quod non sensi, aut non sensisse quod sensi, faith Augustine: And it fell out accordingly. For as Baronius wit∣nesseth, after Saint Austins death, there arose up divers, who out
of his writings wrested and inconstructed, Quiex ejus scriptis male perceptis complu∣res invexerunt errores. Annal. tom 6. ad Ann. 450. brought in many er∣rours; which they endeavoured to maintain, by the name and au∣thority of Saint Augustine. And the like may be said of Lu∣ther. Vers. 8. Send the lad] A large lad, that was thirty year old, and had ten children. But he is so called, because the yongest son of them, and the fathers darling. Vers. 9. I will be surety for him] Herein he was a type of Christ, (that came of him) who is both our surety to God, for the discharge of our debt, and duty; and Gods surety to us, for the performance of his promises, Heb. 7.22. Vers. 10. For except we had lingered, &c.] In the words of God there is not any hyperbole to be found. In the words of men, related by the Scripture, if we meet with such kind of expressions, as this, and that, Joh. 21.25. it nothing derogates from the autho∣rity of the Scripture: as Pareus here noteth. Vers. 11. If it must be so now, &c.] Perplexity is blind, and untractable. Let the mind but settle, and it will soon yeeld to a reasonable motion, if seasonable, especially; as this of Iudah was: for, besides the weightiness of his words, necessity now spake for him, that most powerfull Oratour. Ex carmine, vel melodia vel mo∣dulatione, vel dentque Psalme, Esay 65.8.  [Take of the best fruits] De laudatissimis rebus, saith Junius; Of the verse or melody, saith the Original; that is, of the most praise-worthy fruits; such as deserve to be commended in verse, and sung of, to the praise of God, the Giver. A little balme, and a little honey] Great men regard not the worth of the gift, but the will of the giver. If I had had more, . Aelian. I would have given more, said that Greek to Augustus; and it was accepted. The poor Persian that met Artaxerxes with a handfull of water, out of the river Cyrus, went away well re∣warded. So did the gardener, that presented the Duke of Bur∣gundy with a rape-root; which when the master of his house ob∣served, he presented his Lord with a brave palfrey, looking for like liberality, but was disappointed. Vers. 12. And take double-money] Invaluerat enim fames, vers. 1. ideoque annonae pretium auctum erat, saith Junius: It went hard with the inhabitants of Samaria, when an asses head, was worth four pounds. [Peradventure it was an over-sight] Which called for restitution; we must buy and sell by that standard, Mat. 7.12. Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do you the
same to them. Now no man would be cozened. Woe be to him that cryes, Qui nescit dis∣simulare, nescit vivere. caveat emptor; He that cannot lye, cannot live, &c. 1 Thess. 4.8. God is the avenger of all such. Vers. 14. And God Almighty give you mercy] Heb. give you bowells, the seat of mercy. Here God not only grants Jacob's prayer, but fulfills his counsel, gives him the very particular he prayes for; ver. 30. Joseph's bowels yerned upon Benjamin. If I be bereaved, I am bereaved] This is like that of Esther, com∣mitting her self and her attempt to God, Esth. 4.16. If I perish, I perish; and like that of those Saints in the Acts, The Will of the Lord be done; which is, saith One, Vox verè Christianorum. Iacob prayes for Benjamins safety, but will be content his own will be crossed, so that Gods Will may be accomplished. This is the right way of praying; this is to draw near with à true heart, Heb. 10.22. Hy∣pocrites seek God only out of self-love; which is as little pleasing to him, as if a woman should strive to content to her husband, not out of love to him, but to another. Vers. 16. Slay, and make ready] Heb. slay a slaughter of beasts, as at feasts is usual. Sen. Quaere nunc cur subitò moriamur? saith Se∣neca; quia mortibus vivimus; What wonder we dye suddenly, that live by the death of others? Shall dine with me at noon] After serlous business dispatcht in the morning. Aristotle disposed of the morning in studying Phi∣losophy; Of the afternoon, in Eloquence, or whatever else he made his recreation. Vers. 18. And the men were afraid] Where no fear was; but that an ill conscience haunted them, Levit. 26.36. and so the sound of a shaken leaf put them into a fright: As every body hath its shadow, so hath every sin its fear; and fear, torment, 1 Ioh. 4.18. Vers. 20. O sir, we came indeed, &c.] We must not lye wretch∣lesly, under suspition of dishonesty; but carefully clear our selves, as there is opportunity. Vers. 23. Peace be to you, fear not] The feeble-minded must be comforted; 1 Thess. 5.14. not crushed, or cashiered, as the wounded Deer is by the whole heard. David, in the spirit of Prophecy, pronoun∣ceth a bitter curse upon those that persecuted him whom God hath smitten, Psal. 69.26. and talked to the grief of those whom he had wounded. Io∣seph's Steward had learned better things of his master. Vers. 25. And they made ready the Present.] For, a mans gist makes roomth for him, and bringeth him before great men, Prov.
18.16. So it doth also before God, who looks for a Prsent, Psal. 72.10. and loves to hear from us, Praise waiteth for thee, Psal. 65.1. O God, in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be performed. Vers. 29. God be gracious unto thee, my son] Governours should temper clemency with severity, so as to be at once loved & feared. Mercy is the brightest star in the sphere of Majesty. Q. Elizabeth, next to the bible, took special delight in Seneca's tract, de Clementia. Vers. 30. And Joseph made haste, &c.] He hid his affection, as a wise and valiant man, till he had once more beaten vehement∣ly upon their guilty consciences; and so brought them to a more sound and serious sight of their sin, that they might repent, and make sure work for their souls. Vers. 31. Set on bread] Which the Latines call Panis of , either because all covet it, or because whatever else the chear be, Isidor. l. 20. men alwayes set on bread. Vers. 32. Because the Egyptians might not eat, &c.] Such was their pride and superstition. Such was the hatred between the Jews and Samaritans: as is little at this day, between Papists and Protestants. If a Protestant give thanks at his meat, though this chaseth not a Catholick from his dinner, (which were to his loss) yet he must forbear to say Amen to it. As on the other side, some Romane Catholicks will not say grace, though it be at their own table, when a Protestant is present; Sand's his Re∣lation of West Relig. Sect. 32. thinking it better to leave God unserved, then that a Protestant joyn in serving him. They hold us no better then dogs; worse then Turks or Jews; damned Hereticks, cursed caytiffes, unworthy to live on Gods ground, fit for nothing but fire and fagot. Certain it is, that whosoever in this new faith and service hath ended this life, is in hell most certainly, saith Bristow, in his 36. Motive. It cannot be, that a Lutheran so dying, can escape the damnation of hell, (saith Coster the Jesuite) If I lye, let me be damned with Lucifer. Coster. resp. ad Enchirid. Osiand. propos. 8. Are not Gods Hebrews an utter abomination now, to these Romish Egyptians? Vers. 33. And they sate before him, &c.] He marshalled them in their right rank and degree; and this amazed them. He made them an absolute feast, such as Varro describes with these conditi∣ons; Si belli conveniant homines, si temporis sit habita ratio, In veter. fragm. so lo∣cus sit non ingratus, si non negligens apparatus. This feast is of that sort in use among the Romanes, that were called , Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1. to which were invited none but kinsfolks, to continue love, and seek recon∣ciliation,
where had been any breach. Vers. 34. And he took and sent messes] So did Cyrus in Xeno∣phon, to such as he favoured, But Benjamins messe, &c.] Love will creep where it cannot go; and good blood will never belie it self. Ambrose makes it a type and token of S. Pauls excellent parts and gifts, above the rest of the Apostles, &c. CHAP. XLIV. Vers. 1. And he commanded the Steward] PEccata extrinsecus radere, & non intrinsecus eradicare, fictio est, saith Bernard. Humiliation for sin must be sound and soaking, or else it is to no purpose. Hypocrites hang down their heads as a bulrush, Esay 58.5. whiles some storm of trouble is upon them; but in a fair sun-shine-day, they lift up their heads as upright as ever. Some∣thing they do about sin, but nothing against it. As artificial jug∣lers seem to wound, but do not; or as Players seem to thrust them∣selves through their bodies, but the sword passeth only through their clot hes. This Joseph well knew; and therefore, that his bre∣thren might make sure-work, and have their hearts leavened and sowred (as Davids was, Psal. 73.21.) with the greatness of godly sorrow that they might mourn as men do, in the death of their dearest friends, Zach. 10.12. that their sorrow might be according to God, . 2 Cor. 7.10. deep and daily; like that sorrow, 2 Sam. 13.36. that waters of Marah might slow from their eyes, and their hearts fall asunder in their bosomes, like drops of water; he puts them to one more grievous fright and agony, before he makes himself known unto them. And this was an high point of hea∣venly wisdom in him. For had he presently entertained and em∣braced them as his brethren, they would sooner have gloried of their wickedness, then repented of it. Neither would a little re∣pentance serve for a sin so ingrained, and such a long time layn in. Their hearts were wofully hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, their consciences festered; and had it been fit for him to scarfe their bones before they were set; and lap up their sores before they were searcht? Repent ye, saith S. Peter to those that had crucified Christ, and were now pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37, 38. He
saith not; Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven, now that you feel some remorse for them; but stay a while upon the work of repentance, and be thorough in it: leave not circumcising your hearts, till you finde them as sore, as the Shechemites felt their bodies, the third day. And this the Apostle said to such, as al∣ready felt the nailes, wherewith they had crucified Christ, sticking fast in their own hearts, and piercing them with horrour. Take we heed of laying cordials upon full and foul stomacks: the fee∣ble minded only are to be comforted, such as are in danger to be swallowed up with grief. But some mens staines are so invete∣rate, that they will hardly be got out, till the cloth be almost rub'd to pieces. Vers. 2. He did according to the word] Servus est nomen officii. . A servant is not , one that moveth absolutely of himself, saith Aristotle; but the masters instrument, and , wholly his. Such was this servant of Ioseph; and such should we all be to God. Vers. 4. Wherefore have ye rewarded evill for good?] This, blind Nature saw, to be the summe of all sins. Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris: Some vices are such, as Nature smiles upon, though frown'd at, by divine justice; not so, this. Hercules is much con∣demned by the heathens, for killing his schoolmaster Linus; Alexander, for doing the like by his friend Clitus; Nero by his tutour Seneca: Muleasses King of Tunes is cryed out on, Turk. hist. fol. 642. for torturing to death the Manifet and Mesnar, by whose meanes especially, he had aspired to the kingdome. Philip King of Ma∣cedony, caused a souldier of his, that had offered unkindness to one that had kindly entertained him, to be branded in the forehead, with these two words; Hospes ingratus: Manl. loc. com. Unthankfulness is a monster in nature, a solecisme in manners, a paradox in Divinity, a parching winde, to dry up the fountain of further favour. Ben∣jamines five-fold-mess, was no small aggravation to the theft, here laid to his charge. Vers. 5. And whereby indeed he divineth] Iunius reads it thus, Et nonne ipse experimento certò didicenit per illum, quales sitis? q. d. Hath he not by this fact of yours, found out your fraud and false dealing; whereby ye have hitherto sought to delude him? Is it not plain, ye are spyes, and naughty-packs? The Ierusalemy Targum, seemeth to tax Iesoph here fona sooth-sayer; or at least, a seeker to such; which God forbad, Deut. 18.10. Calvin also
thinks he did grievously offend, in pretending to be such an one; and did impiously profane the gift of the Spirit, in professing him∣self a Magician. But pace tanti viri, this is too heavy a censure, and a forcing of the text, faith Iunius. All that Ioseph did, was to sift his brethren, and to try their affection to Benjamin. And if he took upon him to be a Diviner, he did it not seriously; but made use of that conceit, the vulgar had of him: like as Saint Paul, made use of that superstitious custome, among the Corin∣thians; 1 Cor. 15.29. Sealig. Not. of baptizing over the dead, to prove the resurrection. Vers. 7. God forbid that thy servants should do] Rapine and robbery was ever condemned, amongst very heathens, and severe∣ly punished. Tamerlane in his expedition against Bajazet, took such order with his souldiers, that none were injured; insomuch, that if a souldier had but taken an apple, or other thing of like value from any man, he dyed for it. One of his souldiers having taken a little milk, Turk. hist. fol. 313. from a country-woman, and she thereof complaining, he ript up his stmck; where when he found the milk, he contented the woman, and sent her away, who had other∣wise dyed, for her false accusation. Vers. 9. With whomsoever it be found, &c.] Innocency is bold, but withalli had need to be wise, for fear of further inconvenience. See notes on Chap. 31.32. Vers. 12. And he searched, and began at the eldest] The bet∣ter to avoid suspition; for he knew well enough, where to find the cup. So Ionadab, Amnons carnall friend, but spirituall enemy, could tell David, that not all the Kings sons (as the report ran,) but Amnon only was slain by Absolon. The devill also when he hath conveyed his cups into our sack, his goods into our houses, (as the Russians use to deal by their enemies, Heyl. Geog. pag. 243. and then accuse them of theft,) his in jections into our hearts; if we fancy them never so little, will accuse us to God, and claim both them and us too, for his own. And the cup was found in Benjamins sack.] Sacco soluto app∣rit argentum, saith Ambrose. When God comes to turn the bottome of the bag upward, all will out. Sin not therefore in hope of secrecy; on the fair day, (at the last day) all packs shall be opened. Vers. 13. Then they rent their clothes] In token of the renting of their hearts for their sins, which now had found them out, and they their sins: for misery, is the best art of memory; being like to
that helve, Elisha cast into the waters, which fetcht up the iron in the bottome. Conscience is like a looking-glass, which while it lyeth all covered with dust, sheweth not a man his naturall visage: but when it is wiped, then it makes the least blemish ap∣pear Never till now, could we hear these men confess. Now, what shall we say unto my Lord? what shall we speak (saith Iudah the Confessour, so his name signifieth?) Or how shall we cleer our selves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants. Not this, that they were now charged with; (for why should they be false, to their own innocency?) but their cruelty to Ioseph, and other like foul offences; for the which God in his just judgment, had now brought them to condigne punishment. How could Ioseph hold, when he heard all this; and not cry out, as Paul did, in a like case, to his disconsolate Corinthians? Though I made you sorry with a letter, (with a cup,) I do not repent, though I did re∣pent: for I perceive that this same epistle (cup) hath made you sorry, though it were but for a season. Now I rejoyce, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: For ye were made sorry, after a godly manner, that ye might receive dammage by us in nothing. For behold this self-same thing, that ye forrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it hath wrought in you: yea what apology, yea what indignation, yea what fear, , Sa∣tisfaction, saith the old Inter∣preter. It may be he meant a new life, to make amends thereby to the Congregation offended, saith Bradford, Serm. of Repent. 14. Dan. hist. fol. 51. yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what revenge! in all things ye have approved your selves, to be clear in this mat∣ter. Vers. 14. They fell before him on the ground] Humble submis∣sion, they knew, if any thing, would make their peace, and procure their pardon; Sic ventos vincit, dùm se submittit arundo. It is no hoysing up sail in a storm, no standing before a Lion, &c. William the Conquerour often pardoned rebels, and received them into favour; as he held submission satisfactory for the greatest of∣fences, and sought not to defeat them, but their enterprizes. Vers. 15. What deed is this that ye have done] As Joseph here, so Christ sometimes, personates an adversary, when he intends most love.  [Wot ye not that such a man as I, &c.] If that be true, that some conceive of Joseph, that he here, and ver. 5. made him∣self a sooth-sayer, he was certainly too blame. The lip of excellen∣oy becometh not a fool, saith Solomon, but much less doth lying beseem a worthy man. That is, It is naught when wicked men will be
using gracious words, to seem religious: But it is far worse, when good men will use the fashion of the wicked, that they may seem impious. Vers. 16. What shall we say, &c.] An ingenuous and penitent confession, joyned with self-loathing, and self-judging; teaching us how to confess to God. Sit simplex, humilis confessio, pura, fidelis, Atque frequens, nuda, discreta et, lubens, verecunda, Integra, secreta & lachrymabilis, accelerata, Fortis, & accusans, & se punire parata. These sixteen conditions were composed in these verses, by the Schoolmen. And such a Confession is the spunge that wipes away all the blots and blurs of our lives, 1 Ioh. 1.7. Never any confessed his sin in this sort to God, but went away with his pardon. Wot ye what? (quoth King Henry the eighth, to the Duke of Suffolk, con∣cerning Stephen Gardiner, when he had confessed his Popery, for which he should have been, the morrow after, sent to the Tower) he hath confessed himself as guilty in this matter, as his man; and hath with much sorrow and pensiveness, Act. & Mon. fol. 1175. sued for my pardon. And you know what my nature and custome hath been, in such matters, evermore, to pardon them that will not dissemble, but confess their fault. How much more will God? Vers. 17. But the man in whose hand, &c.] This was the white that Joseph shot at in all this interdealing with them, to try the truth of their love to Benjamin; and whether they would stick to him in his utmost perill. God hath like ends in afflicting his chil∣dren, Ezek. 21.21. The King of Babylon stood at the parting way, at the head of the two wayes, to use divination. So doth God; he knows that the best divining of men, is at the parting-way: there every dog will shew, to what master he belongs. God shoots at his servants, for triall, as men shoot bullets against armour of proof, not to hurt it, but to praise it. Vers. 18. For ihou art even as Pharaoh] This he saith, the bet∣ter to insinuate; for great men love to hear of their honour, and are tickled with their great titles. P. Jovius. Paulus Jovius, writing of Pompey Colomia, Bishop of Reatino, saith, that when the said Bishop, by the means of many great personages, was reconciled again, and brought into favour with the Pope, whom he had for∣merly offended; and that when they signified so much unto him in a short letter, in whose superscription, Bishop of Reatino, by chance,
was left out; he receiving the letter, threw it away, and bad the messenger go seek some other Pompeio, to whom the letter was di∣rected. Vers. 30. Seeing that his life is bound up.] God loved his Son Jesus infinitely more then Iacob did Benjamin; he exalts his love far above that of any earthly parent; which is but a spark of his slame, a drop of his Ocean. And yet he freely parted with him, to certain and shameful death, for our sakes. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. &c. This is a Sic without a Si∣cut; there is nothing in nature whereby to resemble it. Vers. 32. For thy servant became surety] So did Christ for us; and therefore he must acquit us of all our sins, ere he could go to his father. Loe, herein lyes the strength of that reason, Joh. 16.10. He shall convince the world of righteousnesse, because I go to the Father. Vers. 34. For how shall I go up, &c.] Here love ascends, as fit it should. Iudah (a man wise, and well-spoken) prefers his fathers life, before his own liberty. He could not live to see the death of his aged father. B. Fulgos. lib. 5. A certain Citizen of Toledo being condemned to dye, his son ceased not with prayers and tears to intreat, that he might be put to death instead of his father. This he obtained after much suite, and most gladly dyed for him. At Gaunt in Flanders, when a father and his son were condemned to dye together, the Earl desirous to make trial, whether of the two were more loving, granted, that he should live, that would cut off the others head. And after much adoe between them, the father, Philip. Came∣ar. Cent. 1. cap. 92. by many argu∣ments, perswaded his son, to be his executioner. CHAP. XLV. Vers. 1. Then Joseph could not refrain] NO more can Jesus, in the extream afflictions of his brethren, Esay 42.14. he must cry like a travelling woman; which, though she bite in her pain for a while, cannot long contain. Herodot. As Croesus his dumb son burst forth into, Kill not King Croesus: so when the Church is over-laid by Satan, or his instruments, his bow∣els work, he can hold no longer, but cryes, Save my child, Do the young man Absolom no hurt. I was but a little displeased, and they
have helped forward the affliction. Zach. 1.15, 16. Therefore thus saith the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies, or bowels; Their groans and moans, as every word of Judah's pathetical speech to Joseph, are as so many darts and daggers at his heart; he must take course for their relief and rescue. For he is a very tender-hearted Ioseph, (said that Martyr) and though he speak roughly to his brethren, and handle them hardly, M. Sanders Act. and Mon. 164. yea and threaten grievous bondage to his best beloved Benjamin, yet can he not contain himself from weep∣ing with us, and upon us, with falling on our necks, and sweetly kissing us, &c. (as he sweetly goes on in a letter to his wife) pray, pray for us every body; we be shortly to be dispatched hence to our good Christ, Amen, Amen. Cause every man to go out from me] That he might weep his fill, and not discover his brethrens faults to strangers. It is wis∣dome, in plaistering the wounds of others, to clap our hand on the place, that the world may be never the wiser. Mercer thinks, that Ioseph concealed from his very father, the hard dealings of his brethren with him; for if he had known, he would, likely, have set some note upon them for their cruelty, as he did upon Simeon, and Levi, for their bloody butchering of the Shechemites. Vers. 3. I am Joseph] What a word was that? At the hearing thereof, what a strange conflict of contrary passions fell out in the hearts of the Patriarchs? Wonder, doubt, reverence, fear, hope, guiltiness, joy, grief, struck them at once. Shall it not be so with the Jews at their glorious conversion, when they shall hear, I am Jesus of Nazareth, Zach. 12.10. Rev. 1.7. whom ye have persecuted, and pierced. See the Notes on Chap. 38. ver. 27. Vers. 4. I am Ioseph, your brother] Therefore you are to expect no hard sentence from a brothers mouth. Christ is not ashamed, nor will be at last day, to call us brethren. Pattern of Pie∣ty. He that was willingly judg'd for me, (said that good woman) will surely give no hard sentence against me. We may say boldly to him, as Ruth did to Boaz, Spread thy skirt over me, for thou art a neer kinsman, Ruth, 3.9. Vers. 5. Now therefore be not grieved, &c.] See here a lively image of Christs love toward his enemies, for whom he prayed and dyed, to give them repentance and remission, Act. 5.31. This Angel of the Covenant first troubles the waters, and then cures those cripples that step in. This Sun of righteousness first draws up vapours of godly grief, and then dispells them. A bruised reed
shall he not break, and smoaking wick shall he not quench, Mat. 12.20. till he bring. forth judgment to victory, that is, weak grace to perfection. To preserve life] Animant is cujusque vita in fugaest, saith the Philosopher; and must be maintained by means. Isai. 57.10. Hence it is call∣ed the life of our hands, because upheld by the labour of our hands. Vers. 7. God sent me before you] He it is that by a powerfull providence, orders all the disorders of the world, by a certain counsell, to his own ends, and at length to his own glory. The hands that nailed Christ to the cross, were wicked hands, Act. 2. 23. And Iudas was sent to his place, for being guide to them that took Iesus. And yet they did no more, Act. 1.16. then what Gods hand and counsell, determined before to be done, Act. 4.28. for his glory, and the salvation of his elect. This Pliny derides as a strange doctrine: but Plato hammers at it, when he saith, Irridendum ver curam agere re∣rum humanarum illu quicquid est summum. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7. that God doth always . Indeed he doth all, in number, weight, and measure, as the wise-man saith. He alters the pro∣perty of his peoples afflictions, and, by an Almighty Alchymy, turns dross to gold, &c. As a skilfull Apothecary, he makes of a poisonfull viper, a wholesome triacle. Vers. 8. It was not you that sent me] Ioseph makes the best of an ill matter, that they may not be over-whelmed with grief, Ier. 31.19. Postquam osten. sum fuerit mihi. Tremell. and so made a prey to the divell; 2 Cor. 2.11. After I was made known to my self, saith Ephrahim, I repented. Get thee, saith Mr. Bradford, Gods Law, as a glass, to look in; so shalt thou see thy face foul-arraie, and so shamefull, saucy, mangy, pocky and scabbed; that thou canst not but be sorry, at the contemplation thereof, &c. Especially if thou look to the tag, M. Bradf. Serm. of Repent. pag. 26.27. tied to Gods Law, the malediction, which is such, as cannot but make us to cast our currish tailes betwixt our legs, if we believe it. But here, to cleer our eye-sight, and keep us upright, we must annoynt our eyes, with Christs eye-salve Rev. 3.17. We read of a sensible eye-salve, made of Christs spittle and clay. Ioh. 9.6. As it were, Bright. in. loc. of the knowledg of Christ by his word, which proceedeth out of his mouth, as also of the knowledg of our selves; who being made of earth, do savour nothing else but earth. Both of these two knowledges, are to be joyned, and beaten together in a lumpe: else they help not. For our misery acknowledged, without Christ, breedeth desperation: and Christ, without sence of our vile∣ness, presumption. Vers. 9. Come down unto me, tarry not] Christ seems to send
from Heaven, and say unto us in like sort, God hath made me Lord of all; come up unto me, tarry not. Should the King call us to court, upon no other condition, then to have and enjoy the pleasures and treasures, there to be had; old Iacob never went so willingly into Egypt, as we should gladly accept, and imbrace such a motion. Vers. 10. Thou shalt be neer unto me] So sweet a comfort to friends, Cyprian. epist. that death it self, is called but a departure. This the hea∣then persecutours knew, and therefore banished the Christian Con∣fessours far asunder. One man may be by his counsell, an Angell to another, Ezra 10.3. As Bradford was to D. Taylour in prison: communion with such, 1 Sam. 25. is the being bound up in the bundle of life, which was the blessing of Abigail upon David. St. Iohn trusted to come unto the Elect Lady, 2 Ioh. 12. and speak face to face, that their joy might be full. When one desired to see Alexanders treasure, he bid one of his servants shew him, not , but , Liban. Progyn. Chria. 1. Ioh 15.14. not his wealth, but his friends. What an honour is that, that Christ should say to us; ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoe∣ver I command you: And should say to his Father; Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me, Ioh. 17.24. 1 Tim. 5.4. A thenis capi∣tale suit, parenti∣bus  non persolvere. Melancth. Not. in Hesiod. Plin. I 10. c. 23. Propriam ma∣trem crudeliter deverat, curru∣cam silicat. Me∣lancth. Mures genitores fuos alunt infig∣al pietate Sphinx Philos. p. 230. Macrob. lib. 1. Satur. cap. 6. . Ariston de Mundo. cap. 6. be with me were I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me? what could Ioseph say more, for his father and brethren? Vers. 11. And there will I nourish thee] To requite parents, is good and acceptable before God. At Athens it was death, not to be kinde to parents, and cherish them. The Stork nourisheth her old sire and damme, with admirable piety, saith Pliny; and is therefore called by the Hebrews Chasidah, or Mercifull: and by the Latines Pietati-cultrix. The cuckooe, on the other side, is worthily hated, for that she cruelly devoureth her own damme, the hedge-sparrow, saith Melancthon: Mice are said to nonrish their old ones, that cannot shift for themselves, insigni pietate. Cornelius, among the Romans, got the name of Scipio, by his kindness to his blind father; to whom he was the staff of his old age; as Macrobius relateth. And Aristotle tels a strange story, how that, when from the hill Aetna, there ran down a torrent of fire, that consumed all the houses thereabouts; in the midst of those fearfull stames, Gods speciall care of the godly, shined most brightly. For the river of fire parted it self; and made a kinde of lane for those, who ventured to rescue their aged parents, and pluck them out of the jawes of death. Our Saviour much dista∣sted
and detested that damnable doctrine of the Pharisees, teaching children to starve their parents, Matth. 15. under pretence of devoti∣on. And what would he have said to the Popish Pharisees, that say, that a Monk may not leave his cloister to relievo his father, but rather let him dye for hunger in the streets? Christ upon his Cross, though as full of sorrow as heart could cold, commded his mother to be kept by the Disciple whom he loved, with , Joh. 19.27. Agreeable whereunto, was that speech of the Samians, I give thee this woman for a mother, . when to the richer of the Citizens, the Mothers of those who dyed in the wars, were given to be maintained by them. Vers. 13. And you shall tell my father] So the Lord Christ bad Mary Magdalen tell his Disciples and Peter, (because he was most dejected for denying his Master, and in his dumps, he must know with the first,) I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. Vers. 14. And he fell upon his brother, &c.] Gods people are not senseless Stoicks, or flinty Nabals; but have natural affections in them, as others; yea above others, that have banished good nature, and can weep as little as witches. The enemy hath stopt the Wells, and staid the water-courses, as Holophernes: what should hinder him now from taking the town? Vers. 16. It pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants] And there∣fore his servants, because Pharaoh. For, Aulici sunt instar specu∣li, saith Pareus. Courtiers are their Princes looking-glasses; If he laugh, so do they; where he loves, they love, in pretence at least; Cic. de Divi∣natione, lib. 2. for all's but counterfeit. And here, Potest Augur Augurem vi∣dere, & non ridere? saith Cato in Tully. The Senate gave publike thanks to the gods, for all that Nero did, (even when he had killed his mother,) though they never so much abhor'd it. When he sang at any time, though it were never so ill, (for he had a small harsh voyce) his Courtiers would sooth him up, with, Quam pulcher Caesar, Apollo, Augustus, , Dio in No∣rone. &c. And because he hated the Senate, (notwithstanding all their flatteries) Vatinius was greatly in favour with him, for saying, Odi te Caesar, quòd Senator es. Parasiti principum sputa, instar ca∣num lingunt. Vers. 17. And Pharaoh said unto Ioseph] Pharaoh is good to Jacob and his house, for Ioseph's sake; so is God to us and ours,
for Jesus sake. As any man was intimate with Sejanus, so he found favour with Tiberius. Ut quisque S∣jano ltimus, it a ad Caesaris ami∣citiam valius contra, quibus insesus esset, metu ac sordidus conflictabantur, Tacit. Matth. 11. As if any were at odds with him, they lived in continual danger and durance, saith Tacitus; so here. O miserabilis humana conditio, &, sine Christo, vanum omne quod vivimus, saith S. Hierome. Epitaph. Nep. tom. 1. p. 25. O the misery of those that be without Christ in the world! Vers. 8. Come unto me, and I will give you &c.] So saith Christ, Come unto me, and ye shall find rest to your souls, health to your bones, all the blessings of this life and a better. Say you meet with some trouble by the way, as haply Iacob had foul weather erc he came down to Egypt; Non sunt condignae passiones ad praeteritam culpam quae remittitur, ad praesentis consolationis gratiam, quae im∣mittitur, ad futuram gloriam, quae promittitur, saith Bernard, sweetly. What is a drop of vineger, put into an Occan of wine? No country hath more venemous creatures then Egypt, none more Antidotes. So godliness, saith One, hath many troubles, and as many helps a∣gainst trouble. Vers. 19. Take you wagons out of the land of Egypt] Christ also will send his wagons for us, his Cherubims, and clouds to fetch us up to him to heaven, at the last day, 1 Thess. 4.15. as they did Moses and Elias, Matth. 17. This, David foresaw, and there∣fore envied not the pomp and state of those men of Gods hand, that are whirled here up and down in wagons and chariots, &c. Psal. 17.14, 15. Vers. 20. Also regard not your stuff] The same saith God to his; Care not for your lumber and trumpery, suffer with joy, the loss of your goods: Come, come away in your affections, I have far better things for you above; the good of all the land of the li∣ving is yours, &c. And should we not cheerfully follow the Divine call? Many play loth to depart, because they have treasure in the world, as those ten men had in the field, Ier. 41.8. But all that this world affords, is but trashto the truly religious: Alexander hearing of the riches of the Indies, divided his Kingdom of Macedony a∣mong his Captains and Souldiers. And being asked what he had left for himself? he answered, Hope. And should not the hope of heaven make us slight all earthly vanities? Spes in terrenis incerti nomen boni: spes in divinis, nomen est certissimi, Heb. 11.1. Vers. 21. And gave them provision for the way] So doth God give all his, meat that the world knows not of, joy that the natu∣ral
heart never tasted of, the white Stone, the hidden Manna, the continual feast, the foretaste of eternal life, to hold up their hearts till they come home to heaven. On the cates of a good conscience, he goes on feeding as Sampson did on his honey-comb, till he came to his parents; as Josephs brethren here did on their venison, till they came to their father Jacob. Vers. 22. But to Benjamin, 1 Tim. 4.10. he gave, &c.] Gods gives his best blessings to his Benjamins. He is the Saviour of all men, but speci∣ally of them that believe. The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind, the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down. These are common fa∣vours; but behold a better thing, The Lord loveth the righteous. Psal. 146.8. This is more then all the rest. Outward things God gives to the wicked also, but as Ioseph put his cup into their sack, to pick a quar∣rell with them; or at best, as he gave them here change of raiment, to shew his general love to them: but three hundred silverlings, and five suites, none but a Benjamin shall have the honour and favour of. Artabazus in Xenophon complained, when Cyrus had given him a cup of gold, and Chrysantas a kiss, in token of his speciall respect and love, saying, that the cup that he gave him, was not so good gold, as the kiss that he gave Chrysantas. When David said to Ziba, All is thine that pertained to Mephibosheth, 2 Sam. 16.4. Ziba an∣swereth, I humbly beseech thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: As who should say, I had rather have the Kings favour, then the lands. Valdè protestatus sum, said Luther, me nolle sic ab eo satia∣ri. He would not be put off with lands, and large offers. And Moses would not hear of an Angel to go along with them. He would have God himself, or none. Psal. 134.3. The blessings that come out of Sion, are choyce, peculiar, even above any that come out of heaven and earth. Vers. 24. Fall not out by the way] Such a charge layeth Christ upon all his, to love one another; and to keep the unity of the Spi∣rit in the bond of peace. Si collidimur, frangimur, If we clash, we are broken; according to the old fable of the two earthen-pots, swimming in the Sea. The daughter of dissention, is dissolution, said Nazianzen. And every subdivision, in point of Religion, is a strong weapon in the hand of the contrary party, Hist. of Coun. of Trent. fol. 49. as he upon the Councel of Trent, wisely observed. Castor & pollux, if they ap∣pear not together, it presageth a storm. Vers. 26. Joseph is yet alive] This was the joyfullest news that ever Iacob heard, and the sincerest pleasure that ever he had; which
therefore, God reserves for his age. How did his good heart, af∣ter he had recollected himself, dance Levaltoes in his bosome, to hear of Iosephs honour, but especially of his life? what shall ours do, when we see Christ in his Kingdom? [Jacobs heart fainted, for he believed them not] They had told him a tale before; and he that once hath crackt his credit, is hardly, after, believed, Besides, he thought the news was too good, to be true. Tarda so∣let magnis rebus inesse sides: The joy of heaven is so great, that we must enter into it, it cannot enter into us. Enter into thy Ma∣sters joy. Vers. 27. When he saw he waggons] Such assurance have deeds above words. Segnius irritant animos demissae per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis commissa. . Nos non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus, said those Primitive Christians. And no Christian is an ill-lived man, un∣less he be a pretender only to that religion, saith Athenagoras, in his Apology for them. For as one said of Davids words, in the 119. Psalm, that they are verba vivenda, non legenda; so is Reli∣gion to be credited, by the power and practice of it. Christians should lead convincing lives; and, by their piety and patience, muzzle the malevolent, thrattle envy it self. I have read of a woman, Mr. Ward's Serm. The happ. of Para∣dise. who living in professed doubt of the God-head, after better illumination and repentance, did often protest, that the vi∣tious life of a knowing man in that town, did conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul. The difference betwixt Divinity and other sciences, is, that it is not enough to know, but you must do it; as lessons of Musick must be practised; and a copy not read one∣ly, but acted. [The spirit of Jacob their father revived] How will our spirits exalt and triumph, when we shall hear the last trump, see the mestengers and wagons sent for us? consider the crowns, scepters, Kingdoms, glories, beauties, Angelical entertain∣ments, beatifical visions, sweetest varieties, felicities, eternities, that we are now to be possessed of? Surely, as Aeneas and his compa∣ny, when they came within view of Italy, after long tossing in the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas, joyfully cryed out, Italiam, Virg. Italiam primus conclamat Achates; Italiam socii laeto clamore salutant: And as when Godfrey of Bulloine, and his company went to Jeru∣salem; as soon as they saw the high turrets, they gave a mighty shout, that the earth rang; so when we shall see the battlements of the new Jerusalem, what acclamations will it ring of, &c? Vers. 28. It is enough, Ioseph is yet alie] lcob rejoyceth
more for his life, then his honour. Why is living man sorrowfull? Lam. 3.39. yet he is alive; that's a mercy, amidst all his miseries. before I dye] This he speaks after the manner of old men, whose song is' My breath is corrupt, my dayes extinct, the graves are rea∣dy for me, Job 17.1. CHAP. XLVI. Vers. 1. And came to Beersheb. A Place, 1. Consecrated to Gods worship. 2. Where he and his fathers had met God, and received many mercies. 3. That lay in his way from Hebron to Egypt. But say it had been out of his way, yet it had been nothing out of his way to go thi∣ther, and seek God. A whet, is no let; a bait by the way, no hinderance; the oyling of the wheel, furthers the journey. As it is, Tithe, and be rich; so, Pray, and be prosperous. But say it should be some prejudice, Is it not wisdom, 2 Chron. 25.9 to make Gods service costly to us? Cannot he make us amends? give us much more then the hundred talents? Is any thing lost by his service? Prayer furthers thrift. The night of Popery will shame many of us; who in their superstitious zeal, had this proverb, Masse and meat, hin∣dereth no mans thrift. The very Heathen offered sacrifices, when they took journeys; as Festus witnesseth. Fest. lib. 14. Vers. 2. Here am I.] Josephus tells us, he said, who is there? He seems never seriously to have read the Bible; Lib. 1. Antiq. but only in tran∣scursu, & quasi aliud agens. Quod vere ad bistoiam Vet. Test. cam suse et ma∣gis ex vulgi in∣tellectu in Jose∣pho inveniunt. Barcl. paraen. Is not that then a proper excuse for the Church of Rome her sacriledg, in robbing the vulgar of the ho∣ly Scriptures, that she allows them to read Josephus; where they may find the history of the old Testament more plainly and plenti∣fully set forth, then in the Bible? But Barclay, that made this apology, was of the minde (belike) of Walter Mapes, some∣times Arch-Deacon of Oxford; who relating the gross simony of the Pope, for confirming the election of Reginald, bastard son to Iocelin, Bishop of Sarum, into the Sea of Bathe: concludes his narration thus. D. Sanderson. Sit tamen domina mater{que} nostra Roma bacu∣lus in aqua fractus, et absit credere quae vidimus. Howbeit, far be it from us, to believe our own eyes.
Vers. 3. Fear not to go down to Egypt] Cause of fear he mightsee sufficient: But God would have him not to look downward on the rushing and roaring streams of miseries, that ran so swiftly under him and his posterity; but stedfastly fasten on his power and providence, who was his God, and the God of his father. He loves to perfect his strength in our weakness; as Eliab would have the sacrifice covered with water; that Gods power might the more appear in the fire from heaven. Vers. 4. I will go down with thee] That was as good security, as could be. Prge contra tempestatem for∣ti animo. Cae∣sarem fers, & fortunam Caesa∣ris. For if Caesar could say to the fearful Ferry-man, in a ter∣rible storm, Be of good chear, thou carriest Caesar, and therefore canst not miscarry; how much more may he presume to be safe, that hath God in his company? A child in the dark fears nothing, whiles he hath his father by the hand. [And I will also sure∣ly bring thee up again] So saith God to his dying people, when they are to enter into the grave. He will surely bring them back from the jawes of death, to the joyes of eternal life. Yea by rotting, he will refine their frail bodies; as the Goldsmith melts a picture of gold, or bruised peece of plate, that's out of fashion, to make it up better. [And Ioseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes] An ancient and an honourable custome, in use among the Romanes al∣so; as Pliny tells us. The eyes are commonly open, lift up to hea∣ven, when men are adying; unless they be such as that Pope was, who breathing out his last, Joh. 24. Sic Benedic. 9. Alexander 6. & Leo 10. Bell. de arte moriendi, lib. 2. cap. 10. said, Now I shall know whether the soul be immortal, or not. Or that desperate Advocate in the Court of Rome, mentioned by Bellarmine, who dying, used these words, Ego propero ad inferos, neque est, ut aliquid pro me agat Deus. But Iacob had hope in his death; and Ioseph had the ho∣nour of closing up those eyes, that shall shortly see God again in the flesh, Iob 19.26. Vers. 5. And Iacob rose up from Beersheba] The word (rose up) is Emphatical, and imports, that his heart was lightened, and his joynts oyled, and nimbled, as it were, with the heavenly vision. As when he had seen God at Bethel, he lift. up his feet, and went on his way lustily, Gen. 28.1. so here, as fast as his old legs would carry him; Act. & Mon. as Father Latimer said to Ridley, when they were going to the stake. And as it is recorded of good old Rawlins White, Martyr; that whereas before, he was wont to go stooping, or rather crooked, through infirmity of age, having a sad counte∣nance, Act. & Mon. fol. 1415. and very feeble complexion, and withal, very soft in speech and gesture; now he went and stretched up himself, not only bolt
upright (as he went to the stake,) but also bare, withall, a most pleasant and comfortable countenance, not without great courage and audacity, both in speech and behaviour. In like sort, Iacob here, having sought God, and received a gracious promise of his presence and protection, rose up merrily from Beersheba, and doubts not to follow God, whithersoever he shall leade him. Vers. 6. And they took their cattle and their goods] Though Pharaoh sent to them they should not, yet, not willing to be much chargeable, they brought that they had. It is a happiness so to live with others, as not to be much beholden; but rather helpfull, then burthensome. He that receives a courtesie, we say, sells his liberty: And the borrower, is servant to the lender. Saint Paul glories in this, to the liberall Corinthians; that when he was pre∣sent with them, he was chargeable to no man. , I dunnied no man, I was no mans trencher-fly. torped piscis, cujus ea est natura ut pre∣pius accedentes seque tangentes obstupefaciat. Hine  obstupe, cum ali∣cujus incommode Pasr. Heil. Geog pag. 291. Turk. hist. fol. 477.950. He was not of those, that served not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their own bellies, Rom. 16. The Duke of Bavaria's house, is so pestered with Friers and Iesuites, that, notwithstanding the greatness of his re∣venue, he is very poor; as spending all his estate, upon these Popish Parasites. Such among the Turks are the Dervislars and Imailers, that under pretence of religion, live, like body-lic, upon other mens sweat and labours. Vers. 7. His daughters, and his sons daughters] That is, by a Synechdoche integri; his neece Serah, and his daughter Dinah; who came down with the rest into Egypt, and therefore was not Iobs wife, as the Iewes would perswade us. Vers. 12. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron] Hezron and Hamul, not yet born, are reckoned in stead of Er and Ona, who were dead before the descent into Egypt. See Funccius his Chro∣nolog. Comment. A. M. 2273. Vers. 26. Which came out of his loynes] Heb. è femore ejus, A modest description of generation, by the instrumentall and materiall cause thereof. And because it is said, that so many souls came out of Iacobs body; Augustine moves the question here, whether souls also are not begotten, as well as bodies? Annon igitur animae propage∣tur extraduce? Argumenta post tridum demum solve. Melanc∣thon. Chemnitius. And when the learned Father demurred, and would not presently de∣termine the point; a rash young man, one Vincentius Victor (as Chemnitius relates it) boldly censured the Fathers unresolvedness: and vaunted that he would undertake, to prove by demonstration, that souls are created, de novo,, by God. For which peremptory
rashness, the Father returned the young men, a sober reprehensi∣on. But, souls are, doubtless, here put for persons, which the La∣tines call Capita. Vers. 27. Threescore and ten] Saint Steven reckons 75. Act. 7.14. And so the Greek translateth here, which Steven seemeth to follow; as doth likewise Saint Luke for Cainn, Chap 3. 36. That translati∣on being then received, and they not willing to alter it. The Iewes say, that these seventy souls were as much as all the seventy nations of the world. And Moses tells them, that whereas their fathers went down into Egypt, with seventy souls; now Iehovah had made them, as the stars of Heaven for multitude, Deut. 10.22. Vers. 28. And he sent Iudah before him] A good man guides his affaires with discretion, Psal. 112.5. Colos. 2.5. doth all things decently, and in order. It was great joy to the Apostle, to behold the Colossians order, &c. Vers. 29. Presented himself unto him] Joseph a Prince, was no whit ashamed of the poor old shepherd his father, afore so many his compeeres, and other Courtiers, that accompanied him; and abhominated such kinde of persons. Colonell Edmonds is much commended, for his ingenuous reply to a countryman of his, newly come to him, into the low-countries, out of Scotland. This fellow desiring entertainment of him, told him; My Lord his father, and such Knights and Gentlemen his cousins, and kins∣men, Peacham's compleat Gentlem. pag. 5. were in good health. Quoth Colonell Edmonds, gentlemen, (to his friends by,) believe not one word he sayes; my father is but a poor baker; whom this knave would make a Lord, to cur∣ry favour with me, and make you believe, I am a great man born. See the notes, on Chap. 32. Vers. 10. And he fell on his neck, and wept, &c.] For exceeding joy; what then shall be the meeting of Saints in Heaven! Christ shall say, come ye blessed of my father. As if he should say, where have ye been all this while, my dear brethren? It was a part of his joy, when he was on earth, that we should be where he is, to be∣hold his glory, Ioh. 17.24. And this he now prayes not, but, Fa∣ther I will that they be with me; ugiedum ad lissrmam p∣triam: ibi pater, ibi omnia. Aug. de civit. Dci. l. 9. c. 16. as that which he had merited for them. And now, what joy there will be, to see them and suaviate them, for whose sake, he shed his most pretious blood; through which they may safely saile, into the bosome of the Fa∣ther. Surely, if Plotinus the Philosopher could say, let us make
haste to our heavenly country; there's our Father, there are all our friends: how much more triumphantly, may Christians say so? If Cicero could say, O praeclarum di∣em cum ad illud animorum conci∣lium caetumque pro ficiscar, ad Catonem meum &c. Cic. de sen. : Heb. 12.23. O praeclarum diem cum ad illum animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, &c. O what a brave day will that be, when I shall go to that councell and company of happy souls; to my Cato, and other Romane worthies, dead before me: How much more may Christians exult, to think of that glorious night-less day, as Nazianzen cals it, when they shall be admitted into the congregation house of the first born; as the Apostle calls Heaven; and joyfully welcommed by Abraham, David, Paul, &c. Who shall be no less glad of their, then of their own hap∣piness? Who can conceive the comfort of Jacob and Joseph? Or, of those two cousins, Mary and Elizabeth, at their first meeting? But for the joyes of Heaven, it is as impossible to com∣prehend them, as to compass Heaven it self with a span, or con∣tain the ocean in a nut-shell. They are such, saith Augustine; ut quic quid homo dixerit quasi gutta de mari, quasi scincilla de foco. Aug. de triplci habitu. c. 4. . Luk. 1.44. If the presence of Christ, though but in the womb, made Iohn to spring, and dance a galliard, as the word imports; what shall it do, when we come to Heaven? Sermo non valet exprimere, expe∣rimento opus est, saith Chrysostom. It's fitter to be believed, then possible to be discoursed, saith Prosper. Nec Christus nec coelum patitur hyperbolen, saith another. The Apostle, after he had spo∣ken of Glorification, breaks forth by way of admiration, into these words; what shall we say to these things? Rom. 8.31. , 2 Cor. 4. these word-less words, as he elsewhere phraseth it; and ever uttereth himself, in a transcendent expression, as 2 Cor. 4.17. Where he calleth it a weight of glory; such as, if the body were not by the power of God upheld, it were not able to bear. Iacob could hardly hear the news of Ioseph, and live: but when once he saw him; Now let me dye, saith he, &c. Vers. 30. Now let me dye] What would this good old man have said, had he sen Christ in the flesh, Optavit se vide∣re potuisse Ro∣mam in flore, Paulum in ore, Christum in corpore. Luk. 2.29, 30. which was one of Au∣gustines three with s? how merrily would he have sung out his soul, as Simem did, who had long looked for the consolation of Israel; and having now laid in his heart, what he lapt in his armes, cryes, Nunc dimittas domine: I fear no sin, I dread no death; (as one englisheth it:) I have lived enough, I have my life; I have long'd enough, I have my love: I have seen enough, I have my light: I have served enough, I have my Saint: I have sorrow'd enough,
I have my joy. Sweet babe, let this song, serve for a lullaby to thee, and a funerall for me. O sleep, in my armes; and let me sleep in thy peace. Because thou art yet alive] If this were so great a matter to Iacob, what should it be to us, that Christ was dead, and is alive; yea that he ever lives, Act. 7.56. to make request for us? and that he stands at the right hand of his father, (when any Steven of his is stoned;) as ready prest to interpose betwixt them and any hurt, that may thereby come unto them? If Seneca could say to his Polybius. Fas tibi non est salvo Caesare de fortuna tua queri; how much less cause have we to complain, so long as Christ is a live? Can our hearts dye within us, whiles our head is the Lord of life? yea our life, as Saint Paul calls him. Vers. 32. The men are shepherds] The truly vertuous or valo∣rous, are no whit ashamed of their mean parentage, but rather glo∣ry in themselves, that their merit hath advanced them above so ma∣ny thousands, far better descended. Doctor Cox Almoner, and Sir John Cheek, Sir Jo. Heyw. in his Edw. 6. Tutor to King Edward the sixth, were men of mean birth, but so well esteemed (saith the Historian) for vertue and learning, that they might well be said to be born of themselves. So were Iphicrates, that brave Athenian, the son of a cobler; Eumenes, one of Alexanders best Captains, the son of a Carter; Agathocles King of Sicily, of a potter, &c. And these would ma∣ny times freely discourse of their beginning, and plainly relate their bringing up, and what their parents were. [And they have brought their flocks] As chusing rather a poor shepherds life in Gods service, then to ruffle it, as Courtiers, out of the Church. So did Moses afterwards, and David, Isal. 84, 10. and the poor Prophet that dyed so deep in debt; and Micaiah, and those that wandered about in sheep-skins, Heb. 11.37. and goat-skins, who haply might have rustled in silks and velvets, if they would have strained their consciences. Origen was contented to be a poor Catechist at Alexandria, every day in fear of death, when he might have been with his fellow-pupill Plotinus, in great authory and favour, if not a Christian. Luther was offered a Cardinalship, to have held his tongue. Galeacius Caraciplus, a great sum of gold, to have re∣turned to his Marquesdom in Italy, &c. God takes it kindly when men will go after him in the wilderness, in a land not sown, Ier. 2.2. that is, chuse him and his wayes in affliction, and with self-de∣iall.
Vers. 33. When Pharaoh shall call you] At Athens every man gave an yearly account to the Magistrate, by what trade, Lex illa Solonis inprimis com∣mendatur, ut, quisque quot an∣nis, &c. Textor Epist. Peacham. or course of life, he maintain'd himself; which if he could not do, he was banished. By the law, Mahomet, the great Turk, himself is bound to exercise some manual trade or occupation, (for none must be idle:) as Solyman the Magnificent, his trade was, making of arrow∣heads. Achmat the last, horn-rings for Archers, &c. Vers. 34. Thy servants trade hath been, &c.] They were not ashamed of their trade, though mean and despicable. Tertull. de fug. Persee. Malo mi∣serandum quam erubescendum, saith Tertullian; No lawful call∣ing, but hath an honour put upon it by God; unlawful only, are shameful. Ask a poor scavenger, what his occupation is, hee'l answer, I am a Scavenger, Tankerd-bearer, &c. Ask an Usurer, Gamester, &c. that question, and he will not say, I am an Usurer, &c. [That ye may dwell in the land of Goshen] Which as it was next to the land of Canaan, so it was most fat, fertile, and fit for their cattle. Sumen totius regionis, the like to Egypt, that Cam∣pauia was to Italy; of which, Florus thus writeth; L. Flor. lib. 1. cap. 16. Nihil mollius coelo, nihil uberius solo, nihil hospitalius mari, &c. Liberi, Cereris∣que certamen dicitur. [For every shepherd is an abomination, &c.] An Israelite is still an abomination to an Egyptian, the righ∣teous to the wicked, Prov. 29.27. and will be to the worlds end. And there is no love lost betwixt them. The shepherds of Israel especially, are by profane great ones, thought scarce worthy to wait upon their trenchers; the baser sort make songs of them, and the abjects vilifie them. Papists make more of hedge-Priests, then most amongst us do of powerful preachers: A sad fore-runner of the departure of the gospel. If dishonour kept Christ from Na∣zareth, Joh. 4.44. much more will it drive him thence, when he is come. CHAP. XLVII. Vers. 1. Then Ioseph came and told Pharaoh] Scipioni ob∣trectabat Carbo; Alcibiadi Hyper∣bolus; Homero Zoilus; Ciceroni Clodius. Ha∣buerunt & suos cuculos omnes docti & heroici▪ THis was great wisdom in him, to do nothing for his friends, (though he were so great a favourite) without the Kings pri∣vity and approbation. There wanted not those that waited for his halting; envy attends upon honour, and alwayes aymeth at the
highest; as the tallest trees are weakest at the tops. Melancthon tells us, he once saw a certain ancient piece of coyn, having on the one side, Manl. loc. com. p. 414. Corn. Nepos in vita Bata∣mis & Hannib. Sal. in Catilin. Zopyrus; on the other, Zoilus: It was an emblem of Kings courts, saith He; where calumnies accompany the well-de∣serving; as they did Daniel, Datames, Hannibal, &c. Difficili∣mum inter mortales est gloriâ invidiam vincere, saith Salust. How potent that quick-sighted and sharp-fanged malignity is, we may guess by that question, Prov. 27.4. Vers. 3. Psal. 104.26. What is your occupation?] That they had an occupa∣tion, Pharaoh took for granted. God made Leviathan to play in the sea, but none to do so upon earth. Turks and Pagans will rise up in judgment against the idle. See Notes on Chap. 46.33. Pe∣riander made a law at Corinth, that whosoever could not prove that he lived by his honest labour, he should suffer as a thief. The Apostle bids him that stole, Eph. 4.28. steal no more, but labour with his hands the thing that is good, &c. Not to labour, then, with hand, or head, or both, is to steal. Every one must bring some honey into the common hive, Igavum sucs pecus, &c. Matth. 25. unless he will be cast out as a drone. Thou idle and evil servant, saith our Saviour. To be idle then, is to be evil; and he shall not but do naughtily, that does nothing. God wills that men should earn their bread afore they eat it, 2 Thess. 3.12. neither may they make religion a mask for idleness, ver. 11. Vers. 4. For to sojourn in the land are we come] And had they returned home again after the death of Ioseph, they had taken a right course for themselves. But as God had otherwise decreed it, so they thought it best being there; and therefore, not without their own fault, they fell into servitude. Vers. 5. And Pharaoh spake unto Ioseph] Kind he was, and constant, Herodot. lib. 4. Cromerus. to so good a servant, as Darius likewise was to his Zo∣pyrus, whom he preferred before the taking of twenty Babylons; the King of Poland, to his noble servant Zelislaus, to whom he sent a golden hand, instead of that hand he lost in his wars. Vers. 6. If thou knowest any man of activity] Or ability of body and mind; 1 King. 11.28. such as Jeroboam, a mighty man of valour, and fit for the work; prudent and diligent, ingenious and industrious, that hath a dexterity and handiness to the business. Such S. Paul would have all Christians to be, Tit. 3.8, 14. Let them that have believed in God, . Homer. saith He, be careful to maintain good works, or profess honest trades, for necessary uses, and that therein they be, their crafts∣masters, and excell others, .
This was Cicero's posie from his youth, as himself witnesseth. . Plut. And Plutarch tells us, that all his strife and drift was, all his life long, to leave others behind him, and to be the best at any thing he ever undertook. This should be every mans endeavour in his place and station, as that which is good before God, and profitable unto men, as the Apostle there subjoyneth. Solomon also assures us, that such shall stand before Kings, and not live long in a low place, Prov. 22.29. Vers. 7. Jacob blessed Pharaoh] That is, he prayed God to bless him, both at meeting and parting. To salute, is comely, but see that ye be hearty, not frothy; prayerful, not complementall. We are heirs of blessing, and must therefore be free of it, 1 Pet. 3.9. Vers. 8. And Pharaoh said unto Iacob] This King took not pleasure (as those Persian Kings did) in a wild retiredness, or stern austerity, but in a mild affableness, and heart-attracting courte∣sie. He shews not himself strange, or Stoicall; but sweet and so∣ciable. So Atticus seemed in his carriage, communis infimis, Cor. Nepos Spartan. Dio. par principibus. Adrian the Emperour would most courteously con∣fer with the meanest. Vespasian was wont, not only to salute the chief Senatours, but even private persons; inviting them many times to his table; himself again going to their houses, especially, if he found them learned and vertuous. Pharaoh might find Iacob both these; and so make very good use of him, as his faithful Coun∣sellour. Princes had learned men ever with them, called Monitours, or Remembrancers; as Dio, had his Plato; Scipio, his Polybius, . Patriarchae prae∣ipue professionis medicae studisi fuerunt, ut A∣braham, Isaac, Jacob: unde re∣gibus grati, quos postea in doctri∣na Christiana si∣mul institucrut. Meclancth. &c. Abimelech made much of Abraham, and afterwards of Isaac; some think it was for their skill in Physick and Astronomy. Why might not Pharaoh find and favour the same worth in Iacob, and learn the same wisdom from him, that his Senatours, by his appoint∣ment, did of his son Ioseph? Vers. 9. The dayes of the years of my pilgrimage] All Saints here are Sojourners, all good people pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 11.13, 14. Far they are from home, meet with hard measure; as Israel did in Egypt, as those three worthies in Baby∣lon, Dan. 3. Their manners, are of another manner: hence the world owns them not, Ioh. 15.19. But God both owns, Isa. 63.13. Psal. 32.8. Isa. 40.11. and hon∣ours them: he knows heir whole way, Psal. 1.6. Leades them in his hand, guides them with his eye, bears them in his bosome, when wayes are rough and rugged: provides mansions for them, Joh. 14.3.
where they shall rest in their beds; Isa. 57.2. Matth. 8.11. Gen. 25.8. Jer. 50.4, 5. Psal. 84.7. Ruth 2.10. Gal. 4. Psal. 119.63. Neh. 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.11. Philip. 3.21. feast with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob; walk arme in arme with Angels, Zach. 3.7. Be gathe∣red to their people, Heb. 12.23. to their God, to their Christ, &c. Provided that in the mean while, they set their faces towards Sion; enquiring the way, that they walk therein, from strength to strength; that they take in good part any kindness, as Ruth did; that they put up any unkindness, as Paul did; that they make much of any company, send home by any hand, abstain from fleshly lusts, and have their conversation in Heaven; eating, drin∣king, and sleeping eternall life; so wishing to be at home, yet waiting the Fathers call: sighing out, when moved to be merry; as the French King did, when prisoner here in England, in the days of King Edward the third: how can we sing songs, in a strange land? Vers. 11. In the land of Rameses] That is, in the whole ter∣ritory where Ramases was afterwards built, Exod. 1.11. Vers. 12. And Joseph nourished his Father] For which end, he was sent before by God: and for whose sake, so many thou∣sands were preserved, that else would have perished. What fools then are they, that hunt out the Saints, their only safeguard! and hate them, to whom they owe all the good they have? This is, with the foolish deere, to eate up the leaves, that hid them from the hunter. Vers. 13. The famine was very sore] Of this famine, mention is made by Justin: lib. 1. and Orosius, lib. 1. cap. 8. [So that the land of Egypt fainted] Furebat, See Prov. 26.18. saith Junius. The Egyptians in the fifth year of the famine began to rage, if they could have told at what; and were well-nigh mad. So Mark 3.21. Our Saviours friends, went out to lay hold of him: for they said, he is besides himself. Or, as some render it, he will faint: for, vers. 20. The multitude came so together, So Gen. 45.26. . Sept. that they could not so much as eate bread. These Egyptians, whether they fainted or fretted, it was for want of bread, Joseph had foretold them, of this seven years famine: but saturity and security had so besotted them, that they feared nothing, till they felt it. Fulness bred forgetfulness; and now, they are ready to let fly at others; because pinched with that penury, Prov. 19.3. that they might have prevented. The Wickedness of a man perverts his way, and his heart fret a against the Lord. See it in that furious King, 2 King. 6.33. Vers. 14. And Ioseph gathered up all the money] There is some∣thing
then (besides grace,) that is better then money: though Misers will as easily part with their blood, as with their good: Chaldaei num∣mum , id est, Sanguinem ap∣pellant. Constantinople was lost, through the Citizens covetousness: the like is reported of Heydelberg. Worthy they were, in this name, to have been served, as the great Chaliph of Babylon was, by the great Cham of Tartary. He was set in the middest of those infi∣nite treasures, which he and his predecessours had most covetously amassed; and bidden to eate of that gold, silver, Turk. hist. fol. 113. and precious stones, what he pleased, and make no spare. In which order, the covetous Caytiffe kept for certain dayes, miserably dyed for hun∣ger: Money is a baser thing, then food and raiment: 1 Tim. 6.8. these if we have, let us be content. Vers. 15. Why should we dye, in thy presence] When it is in thy power, to save us alive, in this our extreame indigency. Qui non cum potest, juvat, occidit, saith the Proverb. And is it lawfull on the Sabbath, to do good, or to do evill; to save, or to destroy a life? Mark. 3.4. In∣timating, that not to save, when we may, is to destroy. The Egyptians therefore put Joseph to it: Money they had none, but must have answered, if now it had been required of them, as those Inhabitants of Andros, did Themistoles. Ingens telum. Necessitas. He being sent by the Athenians for tribute money, told them, that he came on that errand accompanied with two goddesses; Eloquence to perswade, and Violence to inforce them. Whereunto the Andraeans made this answer; that they had on their side, also, two goddesses as strong; Piutarch. necessity (they had it not;) and impossibility, whereby they could not part with that, which they possest not. Vers. 17. And Ioseph gave them bread in exchange] An ancient, and yet usuall way of trafick, with Savages and Barbarians espe∣cially; as in Virginia, &c. Where they usually change, as Glaucus did with Diomedes; . Homer. II. lib. 6 Vers. 18. We will not hide it from my Lord] Confess we our pittifull indigence also to God, and he will furnish us, with food and feed. Say with learned Pomeran; Eltamsi non sum dignus, nihi lominus tamen sum indigens. Vers. 19. Buy us, and our land for bread] It was their own de∣sire, therefore no injury. Nay it was charity in Ioseph, in remit∣ting their services, and taking only their ands: yea liberallity, in reserving the fifth part, only, to the King; when husbandmen usually till, for halfe the encrease. And this the Egyptians thank∣fully acknowledg, Vers. 25.
Vers. 20. So the land became Pharaoh's] Regi acquisivit impe∣rium despoticum. This the Egyptians would never have yielded unto, but that stark hunger drove the wolfe out of the wood, as the proverb is. Philo Iudaeus reports, of an heathenish people, who in their warrs, used only this expression, to put spirit into their soul∣diers; Dan. hist. of Engl. Estote viri, libertas agitur. The contention was hot in this land, between Prince and people, for fourscore years together, about liberty, and property; and ceased not, till the great Charter, made to keep the beame right, bet wixt soveraignty, and subjection, was in the maturity of a judiciall Prince, Edward the first, freely ratified. Vers. 21. And as for the people, he removed them] So to alter the property of their land, and to settle it upon Pharaoh; who with his own money, had bought it. See his prudence, and policy, for his Lord and Master. So Daniel, though sick, did the Kings business, with all his might. These were, as the Philosopher saith, ; few such now a dayes. Great need we have all to fly to Christ, who dwels with prudence Prov. 8.12. as Agur did, when he found his own foolishness: It was he, that made Aholiab wise-hearted. Vers. 22. Only the land of the Priests, bought he not] Mini∣sters maintenance, we see, is of the law of nature. Jezabel provi∣ded for her Priests; 1 Cor. 9.13. Micah for his Levite. Doe ye not know (saith that great Apostle,) that they which Minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple  and they which waite at the altar, are partakers with the altar? Where, by holy things, Saint Am∣brose understands the law of the Gentiles: by the Altar, the law of the Iewes. Before them both, Melchizedec , tithed Abraham; by the same right, whereby he blessed him, Heb. 7.6. As after them, the Apostle rightly inferrs, Even so, hath the Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.14. that they which preach the Gospell, should live of the Gos∣pell. But where hath the Lord ordained it? Mat. 10.10. The labourer is worthy of his meate, saith Mathew; of his hire, saith Luke: of both, no doubt; as the labourers in harvest, who have better fare provided, then ordinary, and larger wages. See Nehemiah's zeal, for Church-maintenance; Chap. 13.10, 14. He knew well, that a scant offering, makes a cold Altar; and that, ad tenuitatem beneficiorum necessariò sequitur ignorantia sacerdo∣tum; Panormitan. Heyl. Geog. pag. 504. as in Ireland, where, in former time, some of the Bishops had no more revenue, then the pasture of two milch-kine, &c.
In the whole Province of Connaught, the stipend of the incumbent is not above forty shillings; in some places, but sixteen shillings. Melancthon complains of his Germany, that the Ministers, for most part, were ready to say with him in Plautus: Ego non servio Manl. loc. co. 472. libenter: herus meus me non habet libenter, tamen utitur me ut lip∣pis oculis. Such use Micah made of his Levite; more fit to have made a Gibeonite, to cleave wood, then to divide the word; and yet he maintained him; and doubted not, thereupon, to pro∣mise himself Gods blessing. He is a niggard to himself, that scants his beneficence to a Prophet; whose very cold water, shall not go unrewarded. Many rich, Mat. 10. refuse to give any thing to the Ministers maintenance; because they cannot be tithed. Perstringit te∣naces. Parus. But be not deceived; God is not mocked (saith the Apostle, in this very case, Gal, 6.6, 7.) Let him that is taught in the word, communi∣cate unto him, that teacheth, in all his goods. Such tribes as had more cityes in their inheritance, were to part with more, to the Priests: such as had less, with fewer, Num. 35.8. The equity of which pro∣portion, is still in force. The Iewes, at this day, though not in their own country, nor have a Leviticall Priesthood; yet those who will be reputed religious among them, do distribute, in lieu of tithes, the tenth of their encrease, unto the poor: being perswa∣ded, that God doth bless their encrease the more; Godw. Heb. Antiq. 277. according to that proverb of theirs, tithe and be rich. But how is both the word, and the world, now altered amongst us? All's thought, by the most, to be well saved, that is kept from the Minister; whom to deceive, is held neither sin, nor pitty. Fisco potius apud multos consulitur quam Christo, ac tonsioni potius gregis, Episc. Winton. quam at∣tentioni; as one complaineth. Covetous Patrons, Virgill. care not to sauce their meate, with the blood of souls; whiles by them, Et succus pecori, lac et subducitur agnis: Besides, they bestow their Benefices, non ubi optimè, sed ubi quaestuosissime; being herein worse then these Egyptians, shall I say? nay then the traytour Iudas. He sold the head, they the members: he the shepherd, they the sheep; he but the body, they the souls; like that Romish strumpet, Rev. 18.13. of whom they have learnt it. But let them look to it, lest they rue their wages of wickedness, with Iudas. In the mean while, let them give us a just commentary upon that, Prov. 20.25. and tell us, M. Harris. who hath authority to take that (from a Church shall I say? nay,) from God, that hath been once given him? We can tell them a sad story, of five servants
of Cardinal Wolsey's, employed by him, in tot priorum hominum, donariis intervertendis, Sculter. Annal. pag. 332. saith the Annalist, and came all to fearful ends. Two of them fell out; and challenging the field, One kill∣ed the other, and was hang'd for it. A third drowned himself in a Well. The fourth, from great riches, fell to extreme beggery, and was hunger-starved. The last, one Doctor Alan, being Arch∣bishop of Dublin, was there cruelly murthered by his enemies. Now, if Divine Justice so severely and exemplarily pursued and punished these, that converted those abused goods of the Church, to better uses without question, though they looked not at that, but at the satisfying of their own greedy lusts: What will be the end of such Sacrilegious persons, as enrich themselves with that, which should be their Ministers maintenance? Sacrum, sacrove commendatum qui clepserit rapserit{que} Ex duod. tab. Neand. Chron. parricida esto, said the Romane law. It is not only sacriledg, but parricide, to rob the Church. Vers. 25. Let us find grace] That is, do us the favour, to in∣tercede for us to Pharaoh, that we may be his perpetual farmers, and hold of him. It seems that Pharaoh was no proper name, but common to the Kings of Egypt; as Caesar, to the Emperours of Rome; a title of honour, as (His Majesty) amongst us. Other∣wise these poor people had been over-bold with his name. Vers. 27. Grew and multiplyed exceedingly] Here that promise, Chap. 46.3. began to be accomplished. God dyes not in any mans debt. Vers. 28. Iacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years] So long he had nourished Ioseph; and so long Ioseph nourished him; paying his  to the utmost penny. These were the sweet∣est dayes that ever Iacob saw. God reserved his best to the last. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for (be his beginning and his middle never so troublesome) the end of that man is peace. Psal. 37.47. A Goshen he shall have, either here, or in heaven. Vers. 29. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt] This he requested, partly, to testifie his faith concerning the promised land, heaven, and the resurrection; partly, to confirm his family in the same faith; and that they might not be glewed to the pleasures of Egypt, but wait for their return to Canaan. And partly also, to declare his love to his ancestours, together with the felicity he took in the communion of Saints. Vers. 30. Bury me in their burying-place] That he might keep possession, at least, by his dead body, of the promised land. There
they would be buried, not pompously, but, reverently, that they might rise again with Christ. Some of the Fathers think, that these Patriarches were those that rose corporally with him, Matth. 27.57. Vers. 31. And Israel bowed himself] In way of thankfulness to God, framing himself to the lowliest gesture he was able; rear∣ing himself up upon his pillow, leaning also upon his third leg, his staffe, Heb. 11.21. In effoeta senecta, fides non effoeta. CHAP. XLVIII. Vers. 1. Behold, thy father is sick] ANd yet 'twas, Iacob have I loved. So, Behold, he whom thou lovest, is sick, Joh. 11.3. Si amatur, quomodò infirmatur? saith a Father. Very well, may we say. The best, before they come to the very gates of death, pass oft thorough a very strait, long, heavy lane of sickness; and this in mercy, that they may learn more of God, and depart with more ease, out of the world. Such as must have a member cut off, willingly yeeld to have it bound, though it be painful; because, when it is mortified and deaded with strait binding, they shall the better endure the cutting of it off: So here, when the body is weakned and wasted with much sickness, that it cannot so bustle, we dye more easily. Happy is he, (saith a Reverend Writer) that after due preparation, D. Hall. Con∣temp. is passed thorow the gates of death, ere he be aware; happy is he, that by the holy use of long sickness, is taught to see the gates of death afar off, and addresseth for a resolute passage. The one dyes like He∣noch, and Eliah; the other, like Iacob and Elisha; both, blessed∣ly. Vers. 2. And Israel strengthened himself] Ipse aspectus viri boni delectat, saith Seneca; sure it is, that the sight of a dear friend reviveth the sick. One man, for comfort and counsel, may be an Angel to another; nay, as God himself. Such was Nathan to David; B. Ridley to King Edward the sixth; and that poor Priest to Edward the third, who (when all the Kings friends and favourites forsook him in his last agony, leaving his chamber quite empty) called upon him to remember his Saviour, Dan. hist. of Engl. 255. and to ask mercy for his sins. This none before him would do, every one putting him still
in hope of life, though they knew death was upon him. But now, stirred up by the voyce of this Priest, he shew'd all signs of contri∣tion; and at his last breath, expresses the name of Jesu. Vers. 3. God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz] The truly thankful, keep calenders and catalogues of Gods gracious dealings with them, and delight to their last, to recount and reckon them up; not in the lump only, and by whole-sale, as it were; but by particular enumeration, upon every good occasion; setting them forth one by one, as here, and Ciphering them up, as Davids word is, Psal. 9.1. we should be like civet-boxes, which still retain the scent, when the civit is taken out of them. See Psal, 145, 1, 2. Exod. 18.8. Vers. 5. As Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.] God hath, in like part, 2 Cor. 6.18. adopted us for his dear children; saying, I will be a fa∣ther unto them, and they shall be my sons, and my daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. This, S. Iohn calls a royalty, or prerogative, Joh. 1.12. such as he elsewhere stands amazed at, 1 Ioh. 3.1. And well he may; for all Gods children are first-born, and so higher then all the Kings of the Earth, Psal. 89.27. They, in the fulnesse of their sufficiency, are in straits, Job 20.22. Whereas the Saints, in the fulness of their straits, are in an All-sufficiency. Vers. 6. After the name of their brethren] That is, of Ephraim and Manasseh; as if they were not their brethren, but their sons. Thus Iacob transfers the birth-right from Reuben to Ioseph, 1 Chro. 5.1, 2. Vers. 7. And I buried her there] He could not carry her to the cave of Machpelah; and he would not bury her at Bethlehem among Infidels. This he tells Ioseph, to teach him and the rest, not to set up their rest any where, but in the land of Ca∣naan. Vers. 8. Who are these?] Here Jacob seeing Ioseph's two sons, and now first understanding who they were, breaks off his speech to Ioseph, till the two last verses of the chapter, and falls a blessing his sons; Titus 3.1. teaching us to be ready to every good word and work; laying hold of every hint that God puts into our hands, accounting it a mercy that we may have opportunity. Vers. 9. They are my sons, whom God, &c.] The Lord Christ in like sort, presents us to his heavenly Father with, Here am I, and the children whom thou hast given me. Whereunto the Father re∣plyes, as Iacob here, Bring them now unto me, and I will bless them.
Vers. 11. I had not thought to see thy face] God delights to out-bid the hopes of his people, and to be better to them then their deserts, then their desires, yea then their faith, Esay 64.2, 3, 12, 14. As it is storied of a certain Fmperour, that he delighted in no un∣dertaking somuch, as in those that his Counsellors and Captains held impossible: And he seldom miscarried. So God, Exod. 15.11. Vers. 12. from between his knees] That is, from between his fathers knees, that he might place them right, to receive the bles∣sing, presenting them again according to their age. This he did for the best; but God only wise had otherwise ordered it. We many times think we do well, when it proves much otherwise. Lean not therefore to thine own understanding, saith the Wise man, Prov. 3.5. but make out to him, that dwells with prudence, Prov. 8.12. Vers. 14. Guiding his hands wittingly] Cognoscebat palpando manibus suis, saith Iunius: Intelligere fecit manus saith Parleus. An emphaticall Metaphor: As if he should say: Iacob with his eyes, could not distinguish them, but his hands shall, therefore, Bartol. lib. 1. de ver. oblig. do the office of his eyes. Bartolus writes of Doctour Gabriel Nele, that by the only motion of the lips, without any utterance, he understood all men; perceived and read, in every mans counte∣nance, what was their conceit. But that is far more credible, Hier. in Cata∣logo vitor. illushium. and no less admirable, that Hicrome reports of Didymus of Alexan∣dria; that though he had been blind of a child, little; yet hew as excellently skilled in all the liberall arts; and had written commen∣taries upon the Psalmes and Gospels, being at this time, saith he, eighty three years of age. Vers. 15. God, before whom my fathers walked] This is the high∣est praise, that can be given to ancestours: this is the crown of all commendation, to have walked with God, as a man walketh with his friend. This is better then a thousand escucheons. [The God which fed me all my life long] As a shepherd tends and feeds his sheep, Psal. 23.1. & 80.1. Iacob looks beyond all second causes, and sees at once, at Bethel, God on the top of the ladder, Gen. 28. Vers. 16. The Angell which redeemed me] Christ the Angell of the Covenant, the Mediatour of the new Testament, the Re∣deemer, the Lamb slain, from the beginning of the world. For we were not redeemed with silver and gold, but with the blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.19. Paul by that free∣dome,
Act. 22.28. escaped whipping: we by this, the pain of eternall torment. [And let my name be named on them] Lest any should think it to be some prejudice to them, that they were born in Egypt, and of an Egyptian mother, he adopts them for his own. Vers. 17. And when Ioseph saw that, &c.] So great a Prophet and diviner, as Ioseph was, in this was out in his judgment. He seeth not, that mans dignity is not by works, or nature, but grace and election, Rom. 9.7, 8, 11, 12. Vers. 18. Not so my father, &c.] Here are a couple of Holy Prophets, differing in their judgments; yet not about the sub∣stance of the blessing, but the circumstance of it: wonder not though such things still fall out it in the true Church, and the Doctours be eft-soons divided, in points less materiall, and that touch not the foundation. Luther interprets those words of Christ, this is my body. Synechdochiaelly; Calvin, Metonimically. Hence the Jesuites straight cry out; the Spirit of God dissents not from it self: but these interpretations dissent one from ano∣ther, See the peace of Rome. therefore they are not of the Spirit. Now it were easie, to stop their foul mouths, by telling them of their own, far worse differences. But is it not a dolefull thing, that we should, with those birds, agnoscere in nostris vulneribus nostras pennas. Brother goe to law with brother, and that before infidels? This is the di∣vels malice, to sow tares, &c. Christ came to destroy his works; yet never were so many possest, as about that time. Vers. 19. And his father refused, and said] Here are father and son devided, in matter of ceremony; as Bishop Babington observeth. This hath been an ancient quarrell, from the very cra∣dle of the Christian Church. The Iewish converts stood hard for a mixture, of Christ and Moses: their rites they called the rudi∣ments of the world, Coloss. 2.8. Because they held them as need∣full, as the four elements of the world; or as the first letters of the book, to school Gods people: Soon after, what a coyle was there, among the Primitive Christians, even unto blows, and blood-sheed, Queritur. Aug. suo tempere Ec∣clesiam, quam mi∣serecordia dei esse liberam vo∣suit, &c. Pareus in Mat. 15.2. about the time of keeping Easter; and other like trifles, and niceties. Saint Augustine complains, that in his time the Church (which the mercy of God would have to be at liber∣ty,) was wofully opprest, with many burthens and bondages this way; so that the condition of the Iewes was, in this respect, more tolerable; for that they were held under, by legall injuncti∣ons,
and not by humane presumptions. What would this Fa∣ther have said, to the following times, under the rise and raign of Antichrist? wherein the formality of Gods worship, had utter∣ly eaten up the reality of it, (as Pharaohs lean kine did the fatter) and gotten out the very heart, and life of it; as the ivy dealeth by the oake it grows on. Our Heroicall reformers; Luther, Zuing∣lins, &c. pruned and pared off these luxuriancies, for the most part; which caused Iohn Hunt a Roman Catholike, in his humble Appeale to King Iames, thus to blaspheme. The God of the Protestants, is the most uncivile, D. Sheldons Mak of the Beast. op. ded. Scultet. Annal. and ill-mannered God of all those, who have born the name of gods, upon the earth; yea worse then Pan, god of the clowns, which can endure no cere∣monies, nor good manners at all. But yet, what a grievous stirr was there, about these indifferents, Alsted. Chron. pag. 559. between Luther and Carolosta∣dius, at Wittenberg; between the Doctours of Magdeburg and Leipswick, Anno Dom. 1549. and between Calvin, and his Auditours of Geneva, about wafer-cakes, at the communion; insomuch as he was compelled to depart the city, till he had yeelded they should be used, though he never liked them, Bza in vita but could have wished it otherwise. Who knows not what jarrs and heart∣burnings were here between Ridley and Hooper, two godly Bishops, in King Edward the sixths time, about cap and surpliss. They could never agree, till they met in prison; and then misery bred unity; then they could heartily bewaile their former dissentions, about matters of no more moment. Epist. 36. ad Reg. Eliza∣beth. Peter Martyr commends it to the care of Queen Elizabeth; that Church-governours indeavour not to carry the Gospell into England, upon the cart of needless cere∣monies. By his advice (among others,) in King Edward the sixths days, some people contending for one image, some for another; the King took down all those Balams-blocks. And the very self-same day and hour, wherein the reformation enjoyned by Parliment, was pat in execution at London, by burning of idola∣trous images; the English put to slight their enemies, Act. & Mon.  in Muscle∣borough field, is Mr. Fox hath well observed. We had Images and other like popsh paltrement, pressing in upon us again, and amain, not long since: till God stirred up the spirit of our religious Nehemi ths, to step between, and stop the torrent: whom there∣fore God, I doubt not, will crown with conquest, over all their and his Churches enemies. Vers. 20. And he set Ephraim before] God, many times, sets
the yonger, before the elder; makes the last to be first; and the first, last; to shew the freedom of his grace, and that, he seeth not, as man seeth, 1 Sam. 16, 7. The maids were first purified, and per∣fumed, before Ahashuerosh chose one: But Christ first loves, and then parifies his Church, Eph. 5.25, 26. and loves, because he loves, Deut. 7.7, 8. And hath mercy, on whom he will have mercy, Rom. 9.18. Vers. 21. Behold I dye] This was a speech of faith, uttered without the least fear, consternation, or dismayment, As it was no more, betwixt God and Moses, but goe up and dye, so be∣twixt God and Iacob; but behold I dye. Death, he knew, to him should neither be totall, but of the body only; nor perpetuall of the body, but for a season only. See both these set forth, by the Apostle; Rom. 8.10, 11. Vers. 22. I have given thee one portion] Ioseph had the double portion, (as Iudah the dignity) from Reuben; who had forfeited both, by his incest. And here it appeareth, that the right of the first-born, to a double portion, was in force, and in use, before that law, Deut. 21.17. as was also the Sabbath, circumcision, and the raising up seed, to a deceased brother [With my sword, and with my bow] That is, with the warlike weapons of my sons, Si∣meon and Levi, whose victory he ascribeth to himself; not as it was wickedly got by his sons; (for so he disavows and detests it, Chap. 49.) but as by a miracle from heaven, the Canaanites were held in from revenging that slaughter, and made to fear his force and valour. The Chaldee Paraphrast expounds it metaphorically; I took it with my sword and my bow, hoc est, oratione & depreca∣tione mea, saith He, by my prayer and supplication. Prayers, in∣deed, are bombardae & instrumenta bellic a Christianorum, saith Luther, a Christians best Arms and Ammunition. The Jesuites pretend and protest, that they have no other weapons, or wayes to work, but preces & lachrymas. Whereas, it is too well known, that they are the greatest Incendiaries and boutefeau's of Christen∣dome; and their faction a most agile sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed, at pleasure, in the bowels of every Common-wealth; but the handle reacheth to Rome and Spain.
CHAP. XLIX. Vers. 1. Gather your selves together] THis is Jacobs swan-like song▪ his last bequeath, Sic ubi fata v∣cant, uis ab∣jectus in herbis, Ad vada Mae∣andri conciuit albus olor. Ovid. Epist. his farewell to the world; and it is a most heavenly one. The wine of Gods Spirit is usually strongest, and best at last, in the hearts of his peo∣ple: his Motions quickest, when natural motions are slowest; most sensible, when the body begins to be senseless; most lively, when holy men are adying. Look how the Sun shines most amiably toward the descent; and Rivers, the nearer they draw to the sea, the sooner they are met by the tide; so is it with the Saints, when nigh to death, when grace is changing into glory, they deliver them∣selves usually to the standers by, most sweetly. So, besides Jacob, did Moses, Joshuah, Paul, and He, (in whose one example is a globe of precepts) Our Lord Jesus Christ, in that last heavenly Sermon and Prayer of his, Ioh. 14.15.16.17. Whereunto, let me add that faithful Martyr, John Diazius, who was cruelly but∣chered by his own brother, Alphonsus Diazius, and that meerly for his religion. See the Notes on Chap. 4. ver. 8. I remember (saith Senarclaeus. his friend and bed-fellow, who wrote the histo∣ry of his death) when he and I were at Newburg, the very night before he was murthered, he prayed before he went to bed, more ardently then ordinary, and for a longer time together. After which, he spent a good part of the night in discoursing of the great works of God; and exhorting me to the practice of true piety.
Ego verò illius oratione sic in∣coudebar, ut cum eum iss entem audirem, piri∣tus ancti verba me audire exsti∣marem. Ibid. Quest. Answ. And truly, I felt my self so inflamed and quickned by his words that when I heard him discoursing, methoughts I heard the Spirit of God speaking unto me. This, and much more, Senarclaeus writes to Bucer; who at that time, had employed Diazus to over-look the right printing of a book of his, that was then in the Press. [That I may tell you that which shall befall you] But how knew Moses this last speech of Jacob being born so long after? Partly, by Revelation, and partly also by Tradition. For the words of dying men, are living Oracles; and their last speeches are long remembred. And the accomplishment of all these Prophecies in their due time, as the following Scriptures shew, adds much tothe authority of Moses's writings, and confirms them to be faith∣ful and true, as He saith, Joh. 21.24. Vers. 2. Hear ye sons of Jcaob, and hearken] Draw up the ears of your souls, to the ears of your bodies, that one sound may pierce both at once. Let him hat hath an ear to hear, hear: not only with that outward gristle that grows upon his head, but with his utmost intention of mind, attention of body, and retention of memory, and of pracc also. He that hears the Word of God, must hear, as if he did (for so he doth) hear for life and death; he must, as Jacob bids his sons, hear, and hearken. Vers. 3. Virgil. My might and beginning of my strength.] Nate meae vires —. The word here used, signifieth the straining of the body forcibly, . to effect a thing much desired; such as was that of S. Paul, Phil. 3.13. and that of Eliah, 1 King. 18.42. when he prayed and prayed, Jam. 5.17. as St. Iames hath it, that is, with utmost intention of af∣fection. [The excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power] That is, saith the Chaee Paraphralt. Excellens principatu & sa∣cerdotio. Both these he forfeited and fell from; so cannot Chr∣stians, Rev. 1.6. Vers. 4. Ʋastable as waters] Easily drawn to sin, and sud∣denly down from his dignity. Reuben, for a short sinful pleasure, lost great priviledges and blessings. So do all Epicures, that lose heaven for a base lust, their sonls for their sin. As Ambrose re∣ports of one Theotinus, that having a diseased body, and told by the Physitian, that unless he lived temperately, he would lose his eyes; Vale lumen amicum, said he; if my eyes will not away with my lusts, they are no eyes for me. So here; Men will have their swing in sin, whatever come of it. They may so, and for a time, hear no more of it; as Reuben did not, for almost fourty years af∣ter his incest was committed. . But, quod defertur non statim auser∣tur. The Heathen Historian could see, and say, That, sooner or later, great sins will have great punishments from Cod. Deus horrenda peccata horrendis poenis immutabiliter vindicat, saith Pa∣veus on this Text. [He went up to my couch] The fact was so odious to Iacob, that, abhorring the very thought of it, he turneth his speech from Reuben to the rest. Rom. 12.9. . Ephes. 5.3. Hate as hell, that which is evil, saith Paul. And, as for fornication, and all uncleannesse, let it not be once named amongst you. Spit it out of your mouthes, as the Devils drivel.
Vers. 5. Simeon and Levi are brethren] Nobile par fratrum, Horat. Metaphora et la. tens Antanacla∣sis. Piscat. not more in nature, then in iniquity. Here Moses blancheth not over the blemishes, of his progenitours, but wrote as he was inspi∣red, by the inpartiall Spirit of truth. If it could be said of Sue∣tonius, that in writing the lives of the twelve Caesas, Eal bertate sorisit Impera∣torum vitas, qua ii vixrunt. he took the same liberty to set down their faults, that they took to commit them: how much more truly may this be said of the holy pn∣men? they spared not themselves, much less their friends. See my true treasure, pag. 21. Mekerah alii relaumper Grae∣cam con, Ma∣chaerae ram Nonincomme. Pareus. . Do. The world en∣mp. by Sr. Fr. Drake. pag. 53. [Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations] Or, are their swords. Barbarous and brutish persons they were, skilfull to destroy, Ezek. 21.31. Such a one was Dru∣sus, the son of Tiberius the Emperonr; so set upon bloodshed, that the sharpest swords were, from him, called in Rome, 'Drusians. The Spainards are said to try the goodness of their swords, upon the bodies of the poor Indians: and they suppose (saith Sir Fran∣cis Drake,) that they shew the wretches great favour, when they do not, for their pleasure, whip them with cords; and day by day, drop their naked bodies with burning bacon; which is oe of their least cruelties. Vers. 7. O my soul come not thou, &c.] Iacob here meaneth, that neither should any, neither would he approve of their per∣fidie, saith an Interpreter. And yet Tha us writes, Thuah. that the Pope caused the Massacre of Paris, to be painted in his Pallace. Another of them highly extolled in his Consistory the noble act of Clement the Monk, that killed the King of France, Icob. Revins de viis Pont. f. pag. 291. compa∣ring it with the work of creation, incarnation, &c. rier Garnet our chiefe powder plotter, had his picture set among the rest of their Saints, in the Iesues Church at Rome. And Cornel. a La∣pide, upon Apocalyps. 7.3. crowns this traytour, with fresh Encomiasticks. [In their anger they slew a man] Yea, r. r. Apol. contra lesuit. many innocents; and then cryed out, O remregiam! as Valesius did, when he had slain three-hundred: O pulchrum speaculum; as Hannibal, when he saw a pit full of mans blood; Quam bonus est odor hostis mortui! as Charles the ninth, in the Massacre of Paris; where they poisoned the Queen of Navarr, pistold the Prince of Condee, murdered the most part of the peereess Peeres of France, their wives and children; Answ. to Ca∣thol. Supplic, by Gab. Powell. with a great sort of the common people, in divers parts of the Realm; 30000 in one moneth, 300000 in the space of a year. Mahomet the first, Em∣perour of Turks, was thought, in his time, to have been the death
of 800000 men. Selymus the second, in revenge of the loss he had received, at the battell of Lepanto, would have put to death all the Christians in his dominion, in number infinite. Mithrida∣tes King of Pontus, Ibid. 885. Val. Max. lib. 9. with one letter, slew fourscore thousand Ci∣tizens of Rome, in Asia, that were scattered up and down the country, for traffique-sake. It was the cruel manner of Ʋladus, Prince of Valachia, Turle. hist. fol. 363. together with the offendours, to execute the whole familie; yea, sometimes, the whole kindred. Did not these two brethren in sin, do so, and worse. Vers. 7. Cursed be their anger] Of the mischiefe of rash an∣ger, and means to repress it, See the notes, on Chap. 34. vers. 7. See my Common-place of anger. [I will divide them in Ia∣cob] A punishment, suitable to their sin: they conspired to do mischief, and are therefore divided in Iacob. Of Simeon, Judas Iscariot is said to have come; who tumbled, as a stone, till he came to his place. Levi had his habitation among the other tribes; and this curse was afterwards turned to a blessing; when they were consecrated, as Priests, to preserve, and present knowledg to their brethren; Deut. 33.9, 10. to teach Iacob Gods judgments, and Israel his laws. Vers. 8. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren] All this is chiefly verified in Christ, and of him to be understood. In him is beauty, bounty, goodness, greatness, and whatsoever else is praise∣worthy. Rev. 6.2. He goeth forth, riding on his white horse, conquering and to conquer, Saint Paul, his chief Herald, proclaimes his victory, with a world of solemnity and triumph, 1 Cor. 15.56. and calls upon all his brethren, to bow down before him, Philip. 2.10. as they do, Rev. 12.10. casting down their crowns at his feet, Rev. 4. Apud. Rom. siqui servati essent, solebant Servato rem su∣um coronare. . Polyb. lib. 6, In indiis. In subsidiis. ult. and setting the crown upon his head; as the manner was, among the Romans, that the saved should crown their Sa∣viours, and honour them, as their fathers, all their lives long, be∣ing wholly at their service. It was not without mystery, that Da∣vid did reverence to his son Solomon, when he was newly crowned: what would he have done, think we, to his Lord (as he calls Christ, Psal. 110.1.) had he been there in his Royalty? Vers. 9. Judah is a Lions whelp] Many Lion-like Lysimachusses came of this tribe: that, as Sampson, and David, first fought with lions, and then with their enemies; all which were types of that lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. The divell is a roaring, lion, Leo , lyes in wait for the Church: but Christ her
invincible Champion, is ever at hand for her help, who is also Leo; , as Saint Paul hath it, the Lion of the tribe of Idah, 2 Thess. 1. ult. that delivereth us from the wrath to come. And when this Lyon roareth, all creatures tremble, Amos 3.8. Saint Ambrose tells us, that when the Lyon puts forth his voyce, many creatures that could out-run him, are so astonied at the terrour of his roar, that they are not able to stir from the place. And Isidore writeth, that the Lions whelp, for the first three dayes after it comes into the world, lyeth as it were asleep, and is afterwards rouzed and rai∣sed by the old Lions roaring, which makes the very den to shake. Christ, at the last day, shall come with the voyce of the Archan∣gell, and trump of God, &c. And then shall they that sleep in the dust of death awake, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting horrour and amazement, Dan 12.2. Vers. 10. Till Shiloh come] Shiloh is by some expounded, Ʋsque dum ven∣turae erunt se∣cundinae ejus, id est Judae, ut masculin genua in Heb. ostendit. Athemate Sha∣lab, unde Sha∣luab, Tranquil∣litas. Unde Lat. Salvere, Salvus, salvare. Amama. Sub August cuncta atque continua totius generis humani aus pax fuit, aut pactio. Flor. hist. l. 4. the son of his secundines. The Hebrew word implyes, His son, and Her son; that is, the son of the Virgin, that came of the line of Iudah. Secundines are proper to women. He therefore, whom Secundines alone brought forth, without help of man, is Christ alone, the promised seed. Others render Shiloh, Tranquillator, Salvator, The Safe-maker, The Peace-maker, The Prosperer. This Prince of Peace, was born in a time of peace, not long after that Pompey had subdued Iudaea to the Romane Government, and redu∣ced it into a Province. Then was the Scepter newly departed from Iudah; and Herod, an Edomite, made King of the Country. And unto him shall the gathering of the people be] As unto the standard-bearer, Cant. 5.10. the carkase, Matth. 24.28. the de∣sire of all nations, Hag. 2.7. with Heb. 12.25. Totus ipse desideria, saith the Church, Cant. 5.16. and, When I am lifted up, saith He, I will draw all men after me, Joh. 12.32. they follow the Lamb wheresoever he goeth; as the hop and heliotrope do the sun. Vers 11. Binding his foal unto the vine] Vines shall be so plen∣tiful, that as Country-men tye their asses to briars and shrubs, so shall Judah to the vines, that shall grow thick every where. Where Christ is set up in the power and purity of his ordinance, there is usually a confluence of all inward and outward comforts and con∣tentments. He is the Cornu-copia of both to his Church and cho∣sen. Vers. 12. His eyes shall be red, &c.] Wine and milk are used,
to signisie plenty of spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Esay 55.1. & 25.6. Vers. 13. Act. 17. Zebulun shall dwell, &c.] It is God that appoints us the bounds of our habitations. Be content therefore; and although we have not all things to our minds, yet having God for our por∣tion, let us cry out with David, The lines are fallen unto me in a fair place, &c. Zebulon is placed by the sea-side. Now shore men are said to be borridi, immanes, latrocini dediti, omnium denique pessimi. Hence the Proverb, Maritimi mores. And hce, haply, that rash and harsh character that Scalger gives of us, Scal. de re Poet. cap. 16. Heyl. Geog. p. 468. Angli pr∣fidi, inflati feri, contemptores, stolidi, amentes, inertes, inhpitales immanes. His bolt, you see, (saith One) is soon sht; and so you may haply guess at the quality of the Archer. Be it that our Ancestors were such, yet the Gospel hath civilized us at least▪ what∣ever the more be. Christ left Nazareth, and came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the sea-coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Napbtali. Ever since which, The people which sate in dark∣ness, have seen a great light, &c. Matth. 4.13, 16. And when Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty, Reuben was busic about his sheep, Dan about his ships, Asher about his breaches, &c. Zabulon and Naphtali are much commended, Judg. 5.16, 17, 18. for a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field; that studied and promoted the publike, more then their own pirticular interests. Oh, it is a brave thing to be of a pablike spirit, and to study Gods ends more then our own. Surely, if od saw us to be such, we might have what we would, and God even think himself beholden to us. Shall a Heathen say, Cicero. Loel. Non nobis solùm nati sumus, &c. And again, Mi∣hi non minoris curae est, qualis resp. post meam motem futura sit, quam qualis hodiè sit? And shall Christians be all for themselves, looking only to their own things, and not to the things of one an∣other, the common good of all specially? S. Chrysostome upon those words, 1 Cor. 10.33. Not seeking mine own profit▪ &c. saith, that to seek the publike good of the Charch, . and to prefer the sal∣vation of others, before his own safety and commodity, is the most perfect Canon of Christianity, the ghest pitch of perfection, the very to-gallant of Religion. And, I could not but love the man (saith Theodosius the Emperour, concerning Ambrose) who when he dyed, Magis de Ecclesiarum statu, quam de suis periculis ange∣batur;
was more troubled for the Churches troubles, then for his own dangers. This made the same good Emperour say, that he knew none that deserved to be called a Bishop, but Ambrose. . Paul n. Nolan. in vita Amb. He was called the walls of Italy, whiles he lived: As when he dyed, Stilico the Earl said, that his death did threaten the destruction of that whole country. Vers. 14. Issachar is a streng asse, &c.] He so commends his strength, that withal, he condemns his dulness. This Christ can so little abide, that he said even to Judas, That thou doest▪ do quick∣ly. God utterly refused an asse in sacrifice. The firstling of an asse must either be redeemed, or have his ne broke. Bellarmine gives the reason, (and it is a very good one) quia tardum & pi∣grum animal, because it is a slow sluggish creature, segnis quasi seignis, without fire; heavy to action, which God, who is himself a pure act, cannot abide. Vers. 15. And he saw that rest was good] He submitted to any burdens and hard conditions, for quiet life. This was a low poor spirit; and his posterity were, for the general, very unworthy and vile. For Issachars lot fell in Galilee, Josh. 19.18. &c. Now, doth any good come out of Galilee? The best that we read of them, was, that they had understanding of the times, 1 Chro. 12.32 to know what Israel ought to do, and were therefore in great account with Da∣vid. But for action, it seems they were heavy-spirited, dull∣mettal'd men; much like those potters, mentioned, 1 Chron. 4.23. that dwelt among plants and hedges; the base brood of their degenerated fore-fathers in Babylon. Ho, ho, come forth and stee from the land of the North, said the Lord unto them, Zach. 2.6. Cyrus also had proclaimed liberty to all that would, to return to Jerusalem But these dull droans, because they got a poor living by making of pots for the King of Babylon, they thought them∣selves well as they were; and chose rather to stay under the hedges of Babylon. These are res obsoletae, (so Junius renders the text there) things worn out and forgotten, and indeed they deserve to be forgotten. Vers. 16. Dan shall judge] Here is an allusion to his name in the Original; q. d. the Judger shall judge. This is an high ho∣nour, to sit in the seat of judicature, and no less a burden: Fructu honos oneris, fructus honoris onus. They that are called to this of∣fice, must neither spare the Great for might, nor the mean for mi∣sery; as they must have nothing to lose, so nothing to gt nei∣ther;
they must be above all price or sale; and straining out all self-affections, Deut. 16.20. see to it, that Justice, justice, as Moses speaks, that is, pure justice, without mud, run down as a mighty tor∣rent. Vers. 17. Dan shall be an adder by the way] He shall subtily set upon his enemies, and suddenly surprize them: as they did the men of Laish; and as Sampson, of this tribe, did the Philistims. Moses saith, Leonina pelli vulpinam assue∣re. Dan is a Lions whelp, Deut. 33.22. But when his Lions hide would not serve turn, he could piece it out with his fox-skin or serpents slough; he could, if not outfight his enemics, outwit them: And, — dolus, Virg. and virtus, quis in hoste requirat? Of Decebalus King of Dacians it is reported, to his singular com∣mendation, that he could, optimè insidias facere, praelium commit∣tere, optimè uti victoriâ, et acceptam cladem ferre moderatè. All which were the parts and points, Dio in vita Domit. of an excellent warriour. Vers. 18. I have waited for thy salvation] A sudden and sweet ejaculation; either, as feeling himself faint, and spent with spea∣king, he desires to be dissolved, and so to be freed from all infir∣mities: Or else, fore-seeing the defection of this tribe to idola∣try, and their many miseries thereupon; he darts up this holy de∣sire to God for them, and himself, in them. Good Nehemiah is much in these heavenly ejaculations: And the ancient Christi∣ans of Egypt, were wont to use very short and frequent prayers, saith Augustine; lest, in longer, their fervour of affection should suffer diminution: N per moras evanesceret et be∣betaretur oratio. Aug. Exod. 14.15. Ioh. 16.33. Why cryest thou unto me, saith God to Moses? This was but a sudden desire darted up. Vers. 19. Gad, a troope shall overcome him, but] This is every good Christians case, in the Spirituall warfare; he conquers, but comes to it, through many conflicts and counterbuffs, Apoc. 13.7. He made war upon the Saints, and overcame them: for a season it may be, according to humane conceit howsoever. But Chap. 12.11. They conquered and overcame him, according to the truth of the thing, by the blood of the lamb, in whom they do overcome, and are more then conquerours, Rom. 8. This was fulfilled in the tribe of Gad, 1 Chron. 5.18, 19, 20. Vers. 20. Out of Asher, his bread shall be fat] The kidneys of wheate, as the Psalmist hath it, Psal. 81.16. Or choicest bread-corn. Moses expoundeth this; Asher shall dip his foot in oyle, Deut. 33.24. That is, he shall dwell in the horn of the son of oyle, as the
expression is, Isai. 5.1. Or in a very fruitfull corn-countrey; which was a singular blessing, according to his name, which signifieth bliss and happiness. [He shall yeel dainties for a King] Kings use to feed of the finest. Yet of Augustus we reade, that he was never curious in his diet, but content with ordinary and common viands. He never drank but thrice at one meale, and lived neer fourscore years. Queen Elizabeth of England, New-landors cure by Sr. Edw. Vaughan. Camd. Elisab. Sabellic. AEnead. 2. Plures pereunt gulâ quam gla∣dio, lancibus quam lanceis, crapulâ quam capul, &c. Heidfeld. did seldome eate but one sort of meate, rose ever with an appetite, and lived about seventy years: King Edward the sixth, called her by no other name, then his sweet sister temperance. Contrarily, Sylla the Roman Dictator, by surfeiting and banquetting, at last gat a most misera∣ble disease, and dyed full of lice. Surfeters either dig their graves with their own teeth: (The Grecians called the intempe∣rate, , as wanting health:) Or else they come to some untimely end, by the just judgment of God; as those monstrous Epicures Caligula, Heliogabalus, Geta the Emperour, who was served in with dainties by the Alphabet. One while he would have anserem, anatem aprum. Another time, he would have phasianum, farra, ficus: Sometime again, pullum, pavonem, Bruson. lib. 3. cap. 1. perdicem, porcellum, piscem, pernam, &c. This was one of those Caesars, who gat nothing by their honour, but ut citius interfice∣rentur. Vers. 21. Naphtali is a hinde let loose] Swift of foot; and which when it slieth, looketh behind it, saith the Chaldee Para∣phrast, on Cant. 8.14. This was fulfilled in Barac of this tribe, Iudg. 4.6, 10, 15, 16. Veget. lib. 1. cap. 24. which who went up on his feet, against Sisera's iron chariots; were first a terrour, and afterwards a scorn, as Vegetius saith of chariots, armed with sithes and hookes. Origen observes, that in all the victories God gave his people in Canaan, he never used the help of horses. The adversaries, both Egyptians and Canaa∣nites had chariots, and horses; not so Isracl. A horse is a war∣like creature, full of terrour, Iob 41.20. Prov. 21.31. So swift, that the Persians (as Pausanias hath it,) . Paus. Prov. 21.31. dedicates him to their God the Sun; as the swiftest creature, to the swiftest God. But what saith David; An horse is a vain thing for safety, Psal. 33.18. And to the same purpose, Solomon; A horse s prepared for the day of battell: but (when al's done,) salvation is of the Lord. This, Barac with his friend Deborah, found, and celebrated▪ in that fa∣mous song, Iudg. 5. [He giveth goodly words] In the afore∣said Song. Christ also began to utter his words of grace, in the
land of Nepthtali, Mat. 4.13. And this is the Reason, that as of the children by Leahs side, Iudah obtained the first place, among those that were sealed, Revel. 7. because Christ sprang of him; so of those on Rachels side, Nephtali is first named, because there he dwelt; (at Capernaum where he had hired a house,) and prea∣ched, ut ubique superemineat Christi praerogativa, saith a learned Interpreter. Medes in Apocalyps. Compare with this text, Deut. 3.23. and then ob∣serve, that good words do ingratiate with God and men. Vers. 22. Joseph is a fruitfull bough] Of the vine, saith the Chaldee Paraphrast. Uno anno septies fructus sufficit. Vnde pomum decerpseris, alte∣rum fine mora protuberat. Solin. But it may be, Iacob meant it of the Egypti∣an fig-tree, whereof Solinus reporteth, that it beareth fruit, seven times in the year; pull one fig, and another presently puts forth, saith he. Vers. 23. The archers have sorely grieved him] These were his barbarous brethren, that sold him; his adulterous mistress, that harlot-like, hunted for his precious life; his injurious Master, that without any desert of his, imprisoned him; the tumulcuating Egyptians, that pined with hunger, perhaps, spake of stoning him, as 1 Sam. 30.6. and the envious courtiers, and inchanters, that spake evill of him before Pharaoh, to bring him out of favour: as the Ierusalemy Targum addeth. All these arrow-masters, as the Hebrew here hath it, set against Ioseph, and shot at him, as their but-mark; willing to have abused him, but that Gods grace, provi∣dence, and unchangeable decree (called here, Joseph's bow and strength, vers. 24.) would not permit them; as those cruel Turks, did one Iohn de Chabas a Frenchman, at the taking of Tripolis in Barbary. Turk hist. 756. They brought him into the town; and when they had cut of his hands, and nose, put him quick into the ground, up to the wast, and there, for their pleasure, shot at him with their ar∣rows, and afterwards cut his throat. Vers. 24. But his bow abode in strength] He gave not place to them by subjection, Cal. 2.5. Prov. 24.10. , Phlt. no not for an hour. If thou faint in adversity, thy strength is small, saith Solomon. Ioseph did not, but as it was said of old Rome; Roma cladibus animosior; and as of Mithridates, he never wanted courage, or counsell, when he was at the worst; so neither did Ioseph: Virtus lecythos habet in malis. The sound heart, stands firme under greatest pressures, 2 Cor. 1.9, 12. Where∣as if a bone be broak, or but the skin rub'd up, and raw; the light∣est load will be troublesome; hang heavy weights, upon rotten boughes, they presently break. But Iosephs were green and had sap.
By the hands of the mighty God of Jacob] It was said of Achilles, that he was Styge armatus; but Joseph was Deo forti armatus, and thence his safety. He used his bow against his adversaries, as David did his sling against Goliah. He slung, saith One, Bucholcer. perinde ac si fundae suae tunicis non lapillum, sed Deum ipsum induisset ac im∣plicuisset, as if he had wrapt up God in his sling. Vers. 25. Who shall help thee] God hath, God shall, is an or∣dinary way of arguing; it is a demonstration of Scripture Logick, as Psal. 85.1, 2, 3, 4. So 2 Cor. 1.10. Every former favour is a pledg of a future. [With the blessings of heaven above, &c.] God shall hear the heaven, the heaven shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, wine, and oyl: the genealogy of all which is resolved into God, Hos. 2.21, 22. [with the bles∣sings of the breasts, and of the womb] Yet rather then Ephraim shall bring forth children to the murtherer, the Prophet prayes God to give them (as a blessing, as some think) a miscarrying womb, Matth. 24.19. and dry breasts, Hos. 9.13, 14. And our Saviour saith, Woe be to such as are with child, and give suck in those dayes of war and trouble. Vers. 26. Above the blessings of my progenitors] Chiefly, because Jacob pointed them out the particular tribe, whereof, and the very time, wherein, Shiloh should come. This mystery was made known to the Church, not all at once, but by degrees. Adam was told, the seed of the woman should break &c. but whether Jew or Gen∣tile, he heard not a word. Abraham the Hebrew, long after was certified, that In his seed all nations should be blessed; but of what tribe Christ should come, till now, the world never heard. After this, David was made to know, that Christ should be a male; but that he should be born of a Virgin, was not known till Esay's time. Thus God crumbles his mercies to mankind; and we have his blessings by retail, (saith One) to maintain trading and com∣munion betwixt him and us. So the cloud empties not it self at a sudden burst, but dissolves upon the earth, drop after drop. unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills.] Spiritual bles∣sings in heavenly things, whereof those temporals afore promised, Eph. 1.3. were but types and pledges. Whence David doubts not to argue from temporals to spirituals, Psal. 23.5, 6. God in the Churches infancy fed them, and led them along, Sunt qui autu∣mant hanc pro∣phtiam Paulo applicari debore. Bez. Annot. ad Act. 83. by earthly to heavenly bles∣sings, speaking unto them as they could hear. Vers. 27. Benjamin shall ravin as a Woolf] There are that think, that this ought to be applyed to S. 'Paul the Benjamite; who
while he was Saul, not content to consent to S. Stephen's death, (though it be all one to hold the sack, and to fill it; to do evil, and to consent unto it,) Act. 8.1, 3. he made havock of the Church, like a ravening Woolf; entring into houses also, and haling men and women to prison. Yea, Act. 9.1. he lyes breathing out threatnings and slaugh∣ter, panting and windless, as a tired Woolf: and having recovered himself, is marching toward Damascus for more prey: But met by the chief shepherd, of a Woolf, he is made a Lamb, Esay 11.6. not once opening his mouth, unless it were to crave direction; What wilt thou have me to do, , Philip. 3.14. 2 Cor. 5.13. with Act. 26.11. Sand's his sur∣vey of West. Relig. Lord? After which time, he never persecuted the Saints so fast, as now he pursues and presses hard to∣ward the high prize; and as mad every whit, he is thought to be for Christ, as ever he was against him. The papists, some of them, have censured him for a hot-headed person, and said, that there was no great reckoning to be made of his assertions. Is this blasphe∣my in the first or second table, say you? Porphyry, the Philosopher, could say, that it was pity such a man as Paul, was cast away upon our religion. And the Monarch of Morocco, told the English Em∣bassadour in King John's time, that he had lately read Paul's Epi∣stles, which he liked so well, that were he now to chuse his Religi∣on, Heyl. Geog. pag. 714. he would, before any other, embrace Christianity. But every one ought, said He, to dye in his own religion: And the leaving of the faith wherein he was born, was the only thing that he disli∣ked in that Apostle. Vers. 28. Blessed them every one according &c.] These hard blessings (to some of them especially) hindered not the covenant. Still they were Patriarchs, and heirs of the Promises. Afflictions, how sharp soever, shew us not to be cast-awayes. If a man should be baited, and used as a dog or a bear, yet so long as he hath hu∣mane shape, and a reasonable soul, he will not believe he is either dog or bear. Let not crosses cause us to take up hard thoughts of God, or heavy thoughts of our selves, as if out of his favour; but account it a mercy rather, that we may scape so; and be judged here of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world. Jacob is here said to have blessed all his sons. He rather seemed to curse some of them. And for his welbeloved Benjamin, Parum auspicata & honorifera videtur haec prophetia, saith Pareus. But because they were not rejected from being among Gods people, (as Ishmael and Esau were, for less faults perhaps) though they were to undergo great and sore afflictions, they are said to be blessed,
yea and they shall be blessed, as Isaac said to his whining son, Esau. Vers. 29. I am to be gathered, &c.] That is, I am now going to heaven; whereof being so well assured, what wonder though he were so willing to dye? I know that my Redeemer liveth, saith Job; I know whom I have trusted, saith Paul: Ipse viderit ubi anima mca man sura fit, qui pro∣ea sic sollicitus suit, ut vitam pro ea posuerit. Luther Occidere potest, ladere non po∣test. And what shall become of my soul when I dye, let him see to it, who laid down his life for it, said Luther. Death may kill me, but cannot hurt me, said Another. This assurance of heaven is, as Mr. Larymer calls it, the sweet-meats of the feast of a good conscience. There are other dainty dishes in this feast, but this is the banquet. Vers. 33. He gathered up his feet] He quietly composed him∣self, as it were, to sleep in Jesus. He had stretcht out himself be∣fore (saith Musculus) as well as he could, for reverence to the Word of God, which he delivered, &c. [And was gathered to his people] To the general Assembly and Church of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. In Jerusalem re∣cords were kept of the names of all the citizens, Psal. 48.3. So is it in Heaven, where Jacob is now a denizon. CHAP. L. Vers. 1. And Joseph fell upon his fathers face] AS willing to have wept him alive again, if possible; , famulor, curo .i. remedia morbo adhibco. . Adrian. Imp. Tritum est, nul∣lum medicum esse peritum, nisi 30 homines, Orco demiscrit. Farewell Phy∣sick, was Chau∣cers Motto. Olim exponeba∣tur aeger obvio cuilibet sanan∣dus. yet more moderate then his father had been in the supposed death of him, by an evil beast devouring him. But of mourning for the dead, see Notes on Chap. 23.2. Vers. 2. And Ioseph commanded his servants the Physitians] Physitians (it seems) were formerly of no great esteem; perhaps it was, because, through ignorance, they many times officiously kill∣ed their patients. We know who it was that cryed out, upon his death-bed, Many Physitians have killed the Emperour. And it is grown to a Proverb; No Physitian can be his crafts-master, till he have been the death of thirty men. The Egyptians, to prevent this mischief, appointed for every ordinary disease, a several Phy∣sitian; enjoyning them to study the cure of that only. And till then, the fashion was to lay the sick man at his door: where eve∣ry passenger was bound to enquire the nature of his disease; that if
either himself, or any within his knowledg, had recovered of the like, Plutarch. Herodot. lib. 1. he might tell by what means, or stay to make tryal of that skill he had upon the Patient. Physick is, without question, the ordinance of God, Exod. 15.26. Exod. 31.19. He stiles himself, Jehovah Rophe, the Lord the Physitian. And a Physitian is more worth then many others, . Hom. saith the Heathen Poet. Use them we must, when there is need, Mar. 2.17. 1 Tim. 4.4. but not idolize them; as 2 Chron. 16.12. [And the Physitians embalmed Israel] According to the custome of that country; Herodot. Eu∣terpe. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 27.2 Chron. 16.14. & 21.16. concerning which, he that will see more, may read in Heredotus and Pliny. This custome continued also in after-ages, as well among Jews as Gentiles. But the De∣vil turned it, in time, into most vain superstition, both among the Greeks, whom Lucian frequently jeers for it; and among the La∣tines; witness that of Ennius, Tarquinii corpus bona foemina lavit & unxit. Ioseph embalmed his fathers corpse, partly to honour him with this solemnity; and partly, to preserve him for so long a journey; but principally, to testifie his faith of the Resurrection, and that incorruption he hoped for at the last day. Some think the Apostle hath relation to this, , voce medi. in that, 1 Cor. 15.29. and they read it thus; Why do they then wash over the dead? Confer Act, 9 37. Vers. 3. And the Egyptians mourned for him seventy dayes] Longer then Ioseph mourned; they did it through ignorance, and as men without hope; (for both which, see 1 Thess. 4.13.) Ioseph could look thorow hs own loss, and see his fathers gain beyond it. Besides, Hieron. ad Julian. he could say, as Hierome in like case, Tulisti, Domine, pa∣trem, quem ipse de leras: Non contristor quòd recepisti; ago gratias, quò dedisti. Cic. de inib. lib. 2. And if Epicures could comfort themselves in their greatest dejections, ex praeteritarum voluptatum recordatione; How much more could Ioseph now? not only by calling to mind this last seventeen years enjoyment of his dear father, beyond all hope and expectation; but chiefly, that happy change his father had made, from darkness to light, from death to life, from sorrow to solace; from a factious world, to a heavenly habitation, where he drinks of that torrent of pleasure, without let or loathing. Vers. 4. Speak, I pray you, in the cars of Pharaoh] He spake not to the King himself, but set others a work. Not because he was fallen out of favour, Parcus. (for he had the happiness to be favourite to five Kings, Orus, Amasis, Chebron, Amenophes, and Mephiris, in the eleventh year of whose reign, he dyed) but because he was now
a mourner; and such were not wont to come before Kings, Esth. 4.2. though none but such as mourn, are suffered to come before God, Matth. 5.4. Vers. 5. In my grave which I have digged for me] An usual thing of old, 2 Chron. 16.14. Matth. 27.60. See the Notes on Chap. 23. vers. 9. Quintillus Plautianus, an ancient Senatour of Rome, in the dayes of Severus the Emperour, Postulavit, ut ea quae ad sepultu∣ram suam compa∣raverat, &c. . Dio. being wrongfully accused and condemned to dye, desired afore his death, to see those things that he had long since laid by for his burial. Which when he saw to be little worth with long lying, Quid hoc rei est, inquit? itane cunctati sumus? What a thing is this, said He? Have we made no more haste to dye then so? Ver 6. As he made thee swear] Oathes must be religiously kept, even those that are private, betwixt friend and friend. For al∣though whatsoever is more then Yea and Nay, in our ordinary communication, is evil, Matth. 5.37. yet a private oath, (as betwixt Boaz and Ruth) so it be sparingly and warily used, is not unlawful. For in serious and weighty affairs, if it be lawful in private to ad∣mit God as a Judge, why may he not as well be called to witness, and to avenge? But this only in case of necessity, when Yea and Nay will not be taken. Vers. 7. And with him went up all the servants] That is, most of them; as Matth. 3.5. In doing the Patriarch this honour, they stand renowned for thankful men; and such (saith One) are worth their weight in gold. Blessed be he of the Lord, who leaveth not off his kindnesse to the living and to the dead Ruth 2.20. But how base was Bonner, that railed so bitterly against his Patrone Cromwell, Act. & Mon. 1089. (whose creature he had been) after his death; calling him the rankest heretick that ever lived, and that it had been good he had been dispatcht long ago? And Cardinal Pool plaid the unworthy man, in having an intent to take up King Henry the eighth's body at Windsor, and to have burned it. Ibid. 1905. This the Papists did to Paulus Phagius, a learned German, that dyed at Cambridge, being sent for over by King Edward the sixth. And although they ne∣ver heard him speak, Ibid. 1789. for he dyed soon after his coming into the Realm, having not time either to dispute, or preach here, yet they unburied him, and burnt his bones. Of all fowl, we most hate and detest crowes; and of all beasts, those called Jackals, (a kinde of foxes in Barbary) because the one diggs up the graves and devoures the flesh; the other picks out the eyes of the dead. D. Featly his Transubstant. exploded. 219.
Vers. 10. And he made a mourning for his father] Not seventy dayes, as those Infidels did, vers. 3. But why mourned he at all, Ob. Sol. sith God had signified his will? So far forth as something concurs with Gods Will, that is grie∣vous to us, we may mourn moderately without offence. Vers. 11. Abel-Mizraim, which is beyond Iordan] A graci∣ous providence of God, (as Piscator well observeth) that for the confirmation of the Israelites faith, when they were to pass over Jordan, and afterwards, there should be a standing monument there, of the transportation of Iacobs body out of Egypt, into Ca∣naan, Rom. 8.28. for burial-sake. Thus all things work together for good to Gods beloved. Vers. 15. Ioseph will peradventure hate us] An ill conscience, we are sure, still haunts them as a hell-hag, and fills them with un∣questionable conviction and horrour. Btter be langold to a lion, then to an unquiet conscience. See Notes on Chap. 4. ver. 14. and Notes on Chap. 42. ver. 21. Such take no more rest, then one upon a rack, or bed of thorns. There were not many to kill Cain besides his father and his mother, and yet he cryes, Every one that finds me, &c. Vers. 16. Thy father did command, &c] It is a just question, whether there were ever a true word of all this. For Iacob, pro∣bably, never knew how ill they had used Ioseph, as is above-said: But if this had been his command howsoever, as they pretend, would not Iacob have spoken himself for them to Ioseph, afore he dyed? Prov. 29.25. Fear of man causeth lying, Zeph. 3.13. and so brings a snare to the soul. Vers. 17. Forgive I pray thee now] In this case a man is bound, not only to let fall all wrath, and desire of revenge, but to make a solemn profession of hearty forgiveness, Luk. 17.4. If the wrong∣doer say, I repent, you must say, I forgive; as ever you hope to be forgiven of God. Our Saviour, Luk. 11.14. seems to make our forgiving our trespassers, the intervenient cause (that which they call Sine qua non) of Gods forgiving us. Mark this, lest we be constrained to do, as Latimer reports of some in his dayes, that being not willing to forgive their enemies, would not say their Pater-noster, lest they should therein curse themselves; but instead thereof, took their Lady-Psalter in hand, because they were per∣swaded, that, by that, they might obtain forgiveness of favour, without putting of so hard a condition, as forgiveness of their ene∣mies.
[For they did unto thee evil] Joseph had long agone seen their sorrow; never till now, heard their confession; and is abundantly satisfied. Think the same of God. Do but confess, and he must forgive, upon his Faithfulness, 1 Iob. 4.9. In the Courts of men, it is the safest plea (saith Quintilian) to cry, Non feci; not so here. Take away the iniquity of thy servant, saith Da∣vid; and to prove himself so, he adds, For I have done foolishly, 2 Sam. 24.10. Acknowledg the debt, and God will forthwith cross the book. Forgive the trespasse of the servants of the God, &c.] Nothing should more perswade to unity, then religion, Eph. 4.3. 4, 5. Others may cleave together, as the clay in Nebuchadnezzars image; but the Saints only incorporate into each other. Vers. 18. Behold we be thy servants] Oh that God might hear such words fall from us, prostrate at his feet! How soon would he take us up, and embrace us! Deus redire nos sibi, non perire, desiderat, saith Chrysologus, , saith Basil; suffundere sanguinem quam effundere, saith Tertullian. I agnized my sin, and the amends was soon made, saith David, Psal. 32. Vers. 19. Am I in the place of God?] q.d. Can I hurt you, when God intends good to you? Is it for me to cross his decree? Vers. 21. I will nourish you] To requite your kindness, that consulted to starve me, in the waterless pit. This was a noble way of revenging; this was heroicall, and fit for christian imita∣tion. If thy enemy hunger, feed him. Vers. 22. And Ioseph lived an hundered and ten years] Four∣score of these, he lived in great wealth; and all of them, perhaps, in very good health; as Pliny reports of one Xenophilus, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 5. that he lived 105 years without sickness; which yet was a rare thing, and few mens happiness. Vers. 23. Brought up on Josephs knees] Who with great joy, danced and dandled them. So God is said to do his people, Deut. Pedibus suis inservit. Metaph. a paren∣tibus qui filioles suos quos chares habent, sic tract∣tant. Cartw. hist. Christi. Sic Shindler. Buxtorf, Qui priù digi∣to coelum attin∣gere videbantur, nunc bumi dere∣pente serpere si∣derates esse dice∣res. Bud. 1 Chron. 7.22. Psal. 78.9. 33.3. As some understand it. Vers. 24. And Ioseph said unto his brethren, I dye] A sad say∣ing to them poor souls. For now began their misery and slavery in Egypt. When Epaminondas dyed, his whole country dyed with him; the Thebanes were never after known by their victories, but by their overthrowes. When Augustus dyed, the Sun seemed to the Romanes, to fall from heaven▪ such an alteration presently fol∣lowed in that State. When Lewis the twelfth departed this
world, (saith Budaeus) he that erewhile seemed to touch heaven with his finger, lay groveling, as if he had been thunderstruck. All Israels prosperity dyed with Josiah; and so did their liberty and worldly felicity with Ioseph. His Nephews, the Ephramites, at∣tempted, before the time, their own deliverance, not long after Iosephs death, even whiles their father Ephraim was yet alive, but with ill success, to his great grief and regret. Hasty work seldom ends well: how this of mine will do, I know not, made up (as it might be) in little more then four-moneths space, amidst manifold feares and distractions, at spare-hours: and bearing date, from mine enlargement, Anno Dom. 1643. Iuly the 11. that happy day, that saw me both a prisoner, and a free-man, by the good hand of my God, upon me; to whom be glory and praise for ever. As for this my book (made purposely, to testifie my thankfulness to God, mine Almighty Deliverer, See mine Epist. Dedicat. set before my Com. on the four Evangel. and to those, whom he was pleased to use, as instruments of my much-indeared liberty;) such as it is, ; as he said of his Rhetoricks: and, if I shall cast in my verdict, Cum relego, Ovid. de Pont. Eleg 1.6. scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerne, Me quoque, qui scripsi, judice, digna lini, Deo Soli Gloria. FINIS.
A COMMENTARIE: OR, EXPOSITION UPON THE Second BOOK of Moses, called EXODƲS. CHAP. I. Vers. 1. Now these are] Heb. And these are &c. FOR this Book is a continuation of the former historie: and this vers a repetition of what was before recorded. . Gen. 46.8. The whole law (saie the Schoolmen) is but one copulative. The whole Scripture but Cor & anima Dei (saith a Father) the Heart and Soul of God, Luke 1.. uttered by the mouth of the holie Prophets which have been since the world began. Vers. 5. And all the souls] That is persons; for souls are not begotten, but infused, beeing divine particulae aurae. Eccles. 12.7.
Aristotle himself saw and acknowledged as much. lib. 2. cap. 9. de gene. ar. Were seventie souls] More worth then the seventie nations of the whole world, saie the Jews: God reckon's of men by their righte∣ousness. Vers. 6. And all that generation] Eâ enim lege nati sumus ut moriamur: God also maketh haste to have the number of his Elect fulfilled; and therefore dispatcheth away the gene∣rations. Vers. 7. Increased abundantly] Heb. spawned and bred, swiftly as fishes. Trogus author affirmat in Aegypto septenos vno utero simul gigni. Aegypt is a fruitful Countrie: it is ordinarie there, saith Trogus, to have seven children at a birth; Solinus give's the rea∣son, quòd faetifero potu Nilus, non tantùm terrarum, sed etiam homi∣num faecundat arva. The River Nilus, whereof they drink, make's men, as well as fields, fruitful. But this increas of the Israëlites was also by the extraordinarie blessing of God, that they might becom a mightie and populous Nation, Deut. 26.5. Vers. 8. A new King] Called Busiris, a most savage Tyrant, as Heathen histories report him. Who knew not] Nothing sooner perisheth then the remembrance of a good turn. The Aegyptians are renowned in histories for a thankful people; Diod. Sicul. Lib. 2. But it ill appeared in their dealing here with Joseph; who (had hee now been alive) might well have said to them as Themistocles once did to his Athenians, Are yee wearie of recei∣ving so manie benefits by one man? But herein was fulfilled that of the Wise man, Eccles. 9.15. Vers. 9 More and mightier] Hee speak's as if hee had look∣ed through a multiplying glass. See the Note on Gen. 31.1. Vers. 10. Com let us deal wisely] So as the world's wisards use to do: But God taketh these foxes in their own craft, 1 Cor. 3.19. Your laboring men have the most and lustiest chil∣dren. Everie Oppressoris a fool, Pro. 28.16. Lest when there fall out anie war] It may seem by 1 Chron. 3.21.22. compared with Psal. 78.9. That the Ephraïmites, wearie of the Aegyptian bon∣dage, and over-hastie to enjoie the promised land, invaded the Philistines, and plundered them. But were pursued and slain by the men of Gath, to the great grief of their father Ephraïm, and to the further exasperating of the Aegyptians against all the children of Israël; which might occasion also this cruel edict and proceeding against them. It is a singular skill to bear bon∣dage
or anie other burden wisely and moderately. They that break prion before God's gaol-deliverie, get nothing but more irons laid upon them. Vers. 11. To afflict them] Becaus they would not serv God with gladness of heart, Deut. 28.47, 48. For now they began to go a whoring after the Idols of Egypt, Ezek. 23.8. and 20.5, 7, 8. And they built for Pharaoh treasure-cities] They built also those famous Pyramides (as som think) of which it is reported that for the great hight of them, Bucholcer. a man cannot shoot an arrow so high, as the mid'st of the lower tower, whereon the spire standeth. Turk. hist. sol. 544. Vers. 12. The more they multiplied] As the ground is most fruitful that is most harrowed: and as the wal-nut tree bear's best when most beaten. Fish thrive better in cold and salt-wa∣ters, then in warm and fresh. And they were grieved] Or irked, as Moab likewise was becaus of Israel: they did fret and vex at them, Num. 22.3, 4. Yet they were allied, and passed by them in peace: No other reason, but the old enmitie, Gen. 3. and that utter antipathie, Pro. 29.27. Vers. 13. To serv with rigor] Heb. With fierceness: Quidam cum ferocia voce la∣tinâ onserunt. Mercer. so thinking to cow out their spirits, and to exanimate them. So deal's the Turk with the Christians. Vers. 14. Bitter with hard bondage] Did wee but live a while (saith One) in Turkie, Persia, yea or but in France, a dream of that libertie wee yet enjoie would bee as precious to us, as a drop of cold water would have been to the rich man in hell, when hee was so grievously tormented in those flames. Vers. 15. To the Hebrew Midwives] In Egypt and Greece, the midwives of old had their schools; and som of them were great writers; I know not whether the Priests were then so of∣ficious to them as manie are now among the Papists; who saie they therefore studie Albertus Magnus de secretis mulierum that they may advise the Midwives: . Rom. 1. but I doubt it is for a wors pur∣pose; to gratifie and greaten those abominable lusts, where∣with they are scalded. Vers. 16. Then yee shall kill him] No greater argument of an ill caus then a bloodie persecution. George Tankerfield the Martyr was in King Edward's daies a verie papist, Act & Man. fol. 1535. till the time Queen Marie came in: And then, perceiving the great crueltie used on the Popes side, was brought into a misdoubt of their
doing, and began, as hee said, in his heart to abhor them. Vers. 17. And did not as the King &c] Wherein they did no more (though out of a better principle) then Nature it self dictateth. Antigona saith thus in Sophocles, Magis obtemper andum est Dijs apud quos diutiùs manendum erit, quàm hominibus, quibuscum admodum breui tempore vivendum est. (See the Note on Act. 4.19) Wee must rather obeie God then men. Vers. 18. Why have yee don this thing] They might well have answered, as shee did in Euripides, Obediemus Atridis bonesta man∣dantibus: Sin verò inhonesta mandabunt, non Obediemus. If you command things honest wee will obeie you; not els. Or as that brave woman upon the rack, Non ideo negare volo, nè peream: sed ideo mentiri nolo, Hieronym. nè peccem. Vers. 19. For they are livelie] By that voice of the Lord, which maketh the hindes to calv. Psal. 29. Ladie Faith was their mid∣wife: And shee hath delivered the graves of their dead. (Heb. 11.35.) how much more wombes of their quick Children? Vers. 20. dealt well with the midwives] God is a liberal paie∣master: and his retributions are more then bountiful. Bee yee therefore stedfast and unmoveable, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord: sith yee know your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15. vlt. Greg. Moral. And the people multiplied] Sic divinum consilium dum devita∣tur, impletur: humana sapientia, dum reluctatur, comprehenditur, as Gregory hath it. Prov. 19.21. There are manie devices in the heart of a man: but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. Among the Ro∣manes, the more children anie man had, the more hee was freed from publick burdens. And of Adrian the Emperor it is storied, that when those that had manie Children were accused of anie crime, Dio in Adriano. hee mitigated their punishment, according to the num∣ber of their Children. But these poor Israëlites were otherwise used. Vers. 21. Becaus the midwives feared God] There is no neces∣sitie of granting, that the midwives told the King a lie, see ver. 19. But if they did, St. Austin saith well. Non remunerata fuit ijs fallacia, sed benevolentia; benignitas mentis, non iniquitas menti∣enis. Their lie was not rewarded, but their kind-heartedness. That hee made them houses] i. e. hee gave them posteritie: Thus hee builded David an hous. 2 Sam. 7. And thus Rachel and Leah are said to have built the hous of Israël Ruth. 4.11. The
parents are as it were the soundation of the hous, the children as so manie livelie stones in the building. Hence the Hebrews call a Son Ben of Banah to build, quòd sit aedificium & struciura pa∣rentum, quoad generationem & educationem. Ver. 22. And Pharaoh charged] Imperio non tam duro quàm diro. This was a most bloodie edict: therefore when God came to make inquisition for blood, hee gave them blood again to drink, for they were worthie. Tertullian. The like hee did to Nero (qui orientem fidem primus Romae cruentavit) to Julian, Valens, Valerian, Attilas, Girzerichus. Charls the ninth of France, and manie other bloodie Persecutors. See the note on Rev. 16.6. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. And took to wife] HIs own Aunt. Exod. 6.20. Num. 26.59. The Law against Incest, Levit. 18.12. was not yet given, nor the state of Israël settled. But what excuse can there bee for that abomina∣ble Incest of the Hous of Austria by Papal dispensation? Spec. Europ. King Philip of Spain was Uncle to himself, Cousin-german to his Father, Husband to his Sister, and Father to his Wife. And what shal wee say of our Modern Sectaries, whose practising of Incest is now avowed publickly in Print? they shame not to af∣firm that those marriages are most lawful that are betwixt per∣sons nearest in blood, brother and sister, father and daughter, See Mr Bayly his disswasion part. 2. and Mr Edwards Gangr. par. 3. mother and son, uncle and neece. The prohibition of degrees in Leviticus is to bee understood, say they, of Fornication, not of Marriage. Tamar did not doubt to bee her brother Amnon's wife, but detested the act of Fornication, &c. Lo here, Little Non∣such. p. 5.6.7. what noon-day devils do now, in this unhappie open-tide, walk with open face amongst us. Ver. 2. A goodly child] Fair to God. Act. 7.20. See the note there. Art thou fair? bee not like an Egyptian temple, where som beast is worshipped: Art thou foul? let thy Soul bee like a rich pearl in a rude shell. Ver. 3. And shee laid it in the flags] This shee did by the force of her Faith. Heb. 11. Casting the childe upon God, and un∣der hope believing against hope. Ver. 4. And his Sister] by a singular instinct of the holy Spi∣rit,
as appear's by the event. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psal. 37.23. Hee keepeth the feet of his Saints, 1 Sam. 2.9. Ver. 5. And the daughter of Pharaoh] shee was brought hither at this time by a special providence, to do that which shee little dreamt of. So when Heidelberg was taken by the Imperialists, the copie of Ʋrsinus's Catechism enlarged by Pareus, was among many other papers carried away by a plundering Souldier; but happily dropt in the streets, and found the next daie by a young Student: who knowing his master's hand, restored it to his son Philip Pareus; Vita David Pae per Phi∣lippum filium. who afterwards published that golden book, to the great Glorie of God, who had so graciously preser∣ved it. Ver. 6. One of the Hebrews] so called of Heber: see the Note on Gen. 13.14. Ver. 9. And I will give thee thy wages] The nurs expect's not her paie from the childe but from the parents. Ministers (in case their people prove unkinde or unthankful) must look up. Ver. 10. Shee called his name Moses] Hee was also by the Egyp∣tians called Mneves, as Diodorus Siculus relateth: and Monios, as Aben-Ezra. Musaeus calleth him , Water-sprung, becaus drawn (as David was afterwards) out of manie waters, Psal. 18. ver. 17. Ver. 11. When Moses was grown] In stature and autoritie, bee∣ing mightie in words and deeds, Act. 7.22. beeing a great Ora∣tor, a great warriour. See the Note on Heb. 11.24. Hee was (as Plinie saith of Cato Censorius) optimus Orator, optimus Imperator, optimus Senator, omniúmque bonarum artium magister, a man everie waie accomplish't. That hee went out unto his Brethren] Associate∣ing himself to them, though afflicted, and refusing the pleasures and treasures of Egypt: for hee had respect to the recompens of reward, Heb. 11.26.  hee cast an eie, hee stole a look from glorie, when hee was on his journie, and so got fresh en∣couragement. Ver. 12. Hee slew the Egyptian] This deed of his was heroïck and extraordinarie, and therefore not to bee imitated by every Birchet, who by this example of Moses and that other of Ehud, persuaded himself it was lawful to kill such as oppose the truth of the Gospel: Camdens Elisa. fol. 174. whereupon hee wounded Hawkins, slew his keeper, and thought hee had a calling to kill a great personage
in this Kingdom, whom hee took to bee God's enemie. The like madness is reported of the Monasterian Anabaptists. Master Bay∣lies disswas. par. 2. Vers. 13. Behold two men of the Hebrews strove] What pitie was it that brethren should strive and one Hebrew smite ano∣ther; as if blows enow were not dealt them by the Egyptians! Still Satan is thus busie, and Christians are thus malici∣ous. Thus wee have seen doves beat, and sheep butt one another. Vers. 14. And hee said] Yea hee thrust Moses awaie, Act. 7.27. Doing wickedly with both hands earnestly, Mich. 7. This act of his is imputed to the whole people, who therefore were deprived of Moses for fortie years. So true is that of the wise man, One sinner destroieth much good. Eccles. 9.18. Vers. 15. But Moses fled] God by fortie years exile sitted Mo∣ses for further light and advancement. Much hee had learned in Egypt, Act. 7.22. but more in Midian. Master Ascham was a good Schoolmaster to Q. Elisabeth, but Affliction was a better. Men commonly beat and bruis their links before they light them, to make them burn the brighter. Moses had neither been so illuminate a Doctor nor so excellent a Ruler, if not first humbled, as here. Vers. 16. Now the priest] Or Prince. The old Egyptians chose their Kings from among the Priests. Samuel was both a Priest and a Judg in Israel. The Emperor of Rome had for one of his Titles Pontifex Maximus the High-Priest. Among the Turks, the Judges at this daie are ever Ecclesiastical persons, Blunts voiage. pag. 89. whereby both Orders joined give reputation to one another, and manteinance. And they came and drew water] They were not so delicately bred as our daintie dames are now-a daies, but did earn it before they eat it. Vers. 17. And drove them away] From the water that they had drawn, and so had most right unto. Sic cedit viribus aequum, Might oft overcom's right, see here what wee ow to good laws well executed; No man els should enjoie so much as his own water. Vers. 18. To Revel their father] Indeed, their grand-father, Num. 10.29. Old men are usually about hom and can do little els but see to things, and advise. Vers. 19. Delivered us out of the hand] Moses if hee may not in Egypt, hee will bee doing justice in Midian. Christ went about
doing good: the place is the better wherever a good man com∣eth: his trade, saith one, is a compound of charitie and justice. Ver. 20. Call him that hee may eat bread] If the watering of a sheep were thus rewarded, how shall God recompens a cup of cold water given to those of his little Flock? Ver. 21. . Lycophron. Zipporah his daughter] a peevish piece; a cold armful. Hee had better, haply, have been married to a quartan ague. Sylla felix si non hahuisset uxorem, &c. It is not ill to marrie, but good to bee warie; lest wee make shipwrack in the haven. Ver. 22. I have been a stranger] So wee are all, whiles here: Our own place is paradise: haste to it. Ver. 23. Sighed by reason of their Bondage] They had changed their masters, but not their miseries, . but sel∣dom com's a better. Job's stroke was heavier then his groan∣ing chap. 23.2. Ver. 24. God heard their groaning] Yea their breathing. Lam. 3.56. men's verie miserie crie's to God, as Hagar's did. Ver. 25. Had respect] Heb. Knew them. Hee knew their souls in adversitie. Psal. 31.7. CHAP. III. Ver. 1. To the back-side of the desert] HEre it was that Moses wrote the book of GENESIS, (and that of Job too, Alsted. Chron. as som conceiv) for the comfort of his poor oppressed countrie-men in Egypt, that they might lean upon, and live by faith in the promises made to the Fathers. Ver. 2. And the Angel of the Lord] Christ that Angel of the Covenant, and of the great Counsel. [And the bush was not consu∣med] No more is the Church (whereof this is an excellent em∣bleme) by the fire of tribulation. Isa. 43.2. becaus of the good∣will of him that dwelt in the bush. Deut 33.16. Ver. 3. I will now turn aside and see] Moses came out of cu∣riositie, but was called by God: so do manie to the ordinances for noveltie (as the Jewes did to John Baptist) or for som other sinister respect, to catch, it may bee, and are caught, as those Job. 7.46. Or as Austin, who coming to Ambrose to have his ears tickled, had his heart touched. It is good to hear howsoever:
Com, said Latimer, to the publick meetings, though thou commest to sleep: It may bee, God may take thee napping. Absence is without hope: what a deal lost Thomas by beeing but once absent? This great vision] Great indeed: there was a flame of sire, els how was the bush burning? There was light, els how did Moses see it? There was no heat: els how was not the bush consumed? Yet in everie of God's afflicted (saith One) you may see this great vision. The voice of the Lord in his affliction (as in this fire) divideth the heat from the light, so that hee is not consumed by the heat (nay rather his infirmities and car∣nal concupiscences are consumed thereby) but onely illumina∣ted by the light. See the Note on chap. 2.15. Vers. 4. And when the Lord saw &c.] God meeteth him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness. Isa. 64.5. Acti agimus. The Miller cannot command a winde, yet hee will spread his sails, bee in the waie to have it, if it com. As our libertie (in exter∣nal acts) is still som (as to com to church, to hear, to repeat &c.) so must our indevors bee answerable. Vers. 5. Draw not nigh] Bee not rash, but reverent. Hea∣thens could saie, Non loquendum de Deo sine lumine. God will bee sanctified of all that draw nigh unto him. Levit. 10.2. Put off thy shoos] Of sensualitie and other sins. Quid pedes (saith Erasmus) nisi af∣fectus? Quid pedes calceamentorum onere liberi nisi animus nullis terrenis cupiditatibus oneratus? Affections are the feet of the soul; keep them unclogg'd. Vers. 6. Hid his face.] So did the Seraphims with a double scarf as it were. Esa. 6.2. Let a man but see God, and his plumes will soon fall. For hee was afraid] Yea hee trembled and durst not behold. Act. 7.32. This was his first meeting with God: When better acquainted, hee grew more bold. Vers. 7. For I know their sorrows] That's a sweet support to a sinking soul, that God know's all, and bears a part. Mat. 6. Your heavenlie Father know's, &c. That's enough. Vers. 8. I am com down] Hamanitus dictum, ut Gen. 11.7. and 18.21. See the notes there. Milk and honie] plentie and dainties; all things both for necessitie and delight. Vers. 9. The oppressions wherewith] Wee are oft more behol∣den to our enemies insolencie, then to anie innocencie of our own. Deut. 32.27. Vers. 10. That thou mai'st bring forth] Which, though as un∣likely
to bee don as to remove a rock with his shoulder; yet, setting upon it in God's strength, hee effecteth it. Tantiem velis, & Deus tibi praeoccurret. Chrysost. Howbeit, let a man do what hee can na∣turally, and God will meet him graciously: There is no truth in such an assertion. Vers. 11. Who am I?] Worth is modest: The proud man asketh, Who am I not? , Cyri Majoris sepul∣cro inscriptum refert Arrianus. Worth with modestie is ; nothing is so amiable. Vers. 12. This shall bee a token unto thee] So hee had a double sign for his suller and further confirmation: that of the burn∣ing bush, for the present; this of serving God at Horeb, for the future. Vers. 13. Bde. What is his name?] God is above all name, all notion. When Manoah enquired after his name; 'Tis wonderful said hee: Victorinus. that is, I am called as I am called, but such is thy weakness that it surpasseth thy conception. Afri vocant Deum ignotum Amon, id est, Heus tu, quis es? Vers. 14. Plutarch. de Isid. & Osiride. I am that I am] Heb. I will bee that I will bee. The Septuagint render it  I am that Hee that is; Agree∣ably hereunto Plato calleth God  and . This name of God is fully opened Rev. 16.5. It import's two of God's incommunicable Attributes: 1. his Eternitie when hee saith, I will bee. 2. His Immutabilitie, when hee saith, That I will bee. As Pilat said, what I have written, I have written; I wil not alter it. But how far out was Paulus Burgensis in de∣nying Ehich to bee anie of God's names? Whether Aph-hu 2 King. 2.14. bee one, Weems. is far more questionable. Vers. 15. Ʋnto all generations] The Jews, to countenance their conceit of the ineffabilitie of the name Jehovah, did cor∣rupt this text: and for This is my name Legnolam for ever, they read, Glatinus. This is my name Legnalam to bee concealed. Vers. 16. The God of Abraham, &c.] His friends, with whom hee had all things common. This was a greater honor don to these Patriarches, then if God had written their names in the visible heavens, to bee read of all men. Vers. 17. I have said I will bring you up] And now I am com to do it. This is som part of the import of I am that I am, the same yesterday, Heb. 13.8. to daie, and forever; Ero qui eram, I will bee the same to you in my performances, that I was to your fathers in
my promises. A Land flowing with milk] Sumen totius orbis, as One calleth it, where the hard rocks did sweat out oil and ho∣nie. Deut. 32.13. See vers. 8. Vers. 18. Hath met with us] Of his own accord, and with∣out our seeking. Nolentem praevenit Deus ut velit, Aug. Enchir. cap. 32. volentem subse∣quitur nè frustrà velit. I am found of those that sought mee not. Isa. 65.1. Vers. 19. Will not let you go] A sturdie Rebel hee was; but God tamed him and took him down by those ten plagues, com∣prised in these four verses, Fit cruor ex undis, conspurcant omnia ranae; Dat pulvis cimices, postea musca venit. Dein pestis, pòst vlcera, grando, locusta, tenebrae: Tandem prototocos ultima plaga necat. Vers. 20. And after that, hee will let you go] When hee dare hold you no longer: when I have sufficiently tam'd him and taught him, as Gideon taught the men of Succoth with thorns and briars of the wilderness. Judg. 8.16. Vers. 21. I will give this people favor] It is God that fashion∣eth men's spirits, and speaketh oft-times for them in the hearts of their greatest enemies. Vers. 22. Yee shall spoil the Aegyptians] By a special dispen∣sation, which none could grant but the Law-maker. So Ezek. 39.10. These Jewels did afterwards becom a snare to the Israë∣lies in the matter of the golden Calf. CHAP. III. Vers. i. They will not believ mee] THey had formerly refused him, and thrust him away. Exod. 2.14. Act. 7.27. And so they might again, if hee had not somwhat to shew for his extraordinarie calling. Quae{que} repul∣sa gravis. Hor. In the year 434, the Jews of Creet were shamefully seduced by a Pseudo-Moses, who promised to divide the sea for them to bring them back to their own Countrie. Funccius in Comm. Chron. Those that will not receiv the love of the truth, are justly given up to the efficacie of error. 2 Thess. 2.10.11. Vers. 3. And it became a serpent] So doth the word to those that cast away the care of it; it sting's them with unquestiona∣ble
conviction and horror. With this rod Moses should guide the Israëlites, sting the Egyptians. Isai. 14.29. Jer. 8.17. And Moses fled from before it] First flie from sin as from a serpent, saith one: But if thou hast taken this serpent into thy hand, rest not till, like Moses serpent, it bee turned into a rod again to scourge thy soul. Bee either innocent or penitent. Vers. 4. Take it by the tail] which was dreadful to bee don, becaus of the antipathie and likely danger: but faith fortifie's the heart against the fear of the creature, and carrie's a man thorough the difficultie of dutie. Vers. 5. That they may believ] Miracles are sufficient testi∣monies of an extraordinarie calling from God: provided that they bee true Miracles, (not such as Deut. 13) to confirm a calling that is agreeable to God's holy word, as here. Vers. 6. Put now thine hand] Here was sign upon sign, as Chap. 3 12. So low stoop's the most high to our meanness. And doth hee not the same favor for us by the often administration of the Lords Supper? Doth hee not seal again and again, &c? Was leprous as snow] Let us but laie our hand upon our hearts, thrust them into our bosoms to rifle there, and wee shall bee sure to take them out leprous, all of a tetter. Vers. 7. As his other flesh] To shew him, that God by small means could bring about great matters, and that in a moment. See Isai. 66.7, 8. Which yet was ill applied by Card. Pool to this revolting nation in Q. Maries daies. Vers. 8. The voice of the first sign] God's signes have a voice, and words. Psal. 105.27. They speak not onely to our eies, but ears; as those manie prodigies did before the last desolation of Jerusalem; as that terrible tempest at Rome, (Anno. 1516. The same year that Luther began to stir) that so struck the Church where Pope Leo was creäting his Cardinals, Balcus Cen∣tur. 8. that it removed the Childe Jesus out of the lap of his Mother, and the Keies out of St. Peter's hand. So the two Suns seen in London at the comming in of King Phillip, Feb. 15.1553. The new star in Cas∣siopeia. Anno, 1572. The prodigious Comet. Anno. 1618, &c. Vers. 9. Shall becom blood] In the year 874, at Brixia in Ita∣lie, Funce. Chronol. it rained blood for three daies and three nights. Anno. 1505. There appeared in Germanie upon the garments of men and women, Act. and Mon. fol. 769. divers prints and tokens of the nails, of the spunge, of the spear, of the Lords coat, and of bloodie crosses, Maxi∣milian
the Emperor had, and shewed the same to Francis Miran∣dula, who thereupon wrote his Staurestichon, and therein thus. Non ignota cano, Caesar monstravit, & ipsi Vidimus; innumeros prompsit Germania testes. Ibid. 1853. In the third yeer of Q. Marie, William Pikes beeing at liber∣tie after imprisonment, and going into his garden, took with him a Bible: where sitting and reading, there soddainly fell down upon his Book four drops of fresh blood, and hee knew not from whence it came. Whereat hee beeing sore astonished, and wiping out one of the drops with his finger, called his wife and said, in the virtue of God, wife, what meaneth this? Will the Lord have four sacrifices? I see well enough the Lord will have blood: his will bee don, and give mee grace to abide the trial, &c. Vers. 10. I am not eloquent] Heb. A man of words, a master of speech, as Paul was. Act. 14.12. Hee had not (that first, se∣cond and third of an Orator) Elocution or Pronunciation. . And yet God made chois of him rather then of eloquent Aaron to praie. Exod. 17. Not gifts but graces prevail in praier. Slow of speech] Of a letsom deliverie, word-bound. Vers. 11. Who hath made man's mouth?] There is no mouth into which God cannot put fit words. Balaam's Ass was ena∣bled by God to convince his Master. Whereas by a man, never so full and fluent, hee cannot bring forth his conceptions, without the obstetrication of God's assistance. Prov. 16.1. Vers. 12. I will bee with thy mouth] See the Note on Matth. 10.19. Vers. 13. By the hand of him whom thou wilt] Or shouldest send, By that excellent Speaker the Messiah, cujus dicere est facere. Thus when God had answered all Mose's objections, hee for∣wardly denie's to go notwithstanding, and bid's him send by his son, as one that was better fitted for the service. That which made Moses so unwilling, was (whatever hee pretended) the fear of his life: which rub when God had once removed, hee went on end, vers. 19, 20. Vers. 14. And the anger of the Lord] And no wonder: Patien∣tia laesa fit furor. Where God commandeth, there to ask a reason is presumption; but to oppose reason, is a kind of Rebellion. I know that hee can speak well] The gift of utterance is an high fa∣vor, a piece of a Christian's riches. 1 Cor. 1.5. See the Note
there. Aaron (as Tully saith of Aristotle) had aureum flumen orationis, a golden gift of speech. Ver. 15. Will teach you] See the note on ver. 11.12. Ver. 16. And hee shal bee thy spokesman] God hath made mee ill-favored in this world, and without grace in the sight of men (said Tindal to Frith) speechless and rude, Act. and Mo∣um. p. 988. dull and slow∣witted: your part shal be to supplie that wch lacketh in mee: re∣membring, that as lowliness of heart shall make you high with God, even so meekness of words shall make you sink into the hearts of men. [In stead of God] To dictate unto him my minde and counsel. Such a God to every Christian, is his sanctified Conscience. Ver. 17. Wherewith thou shalt do signs] God, of his free-will joining his operation thereunto; as likewise hee doth to the outward signs in the two Sacraments: and hence their energie, which els would bee none. Ver. 18. Whether they bee yet alive] which if they bee, though in a low condition, both they and I shall see caus to bee thank∣ful. Lam. 3.39. Eccles. 9.4. Ver. 19. For all the men are dead] Here the Lord laie's his fin∣ger upon the sore. This was that pad in the straw, the thing that made Moses hang off as hee did; however hee pretended the people's incredulitie, his own inabilitie, and this and that, nei∣ther did hee altogether dissemble: but self-love need's not bee taught to tell her tale. Ver. 20. Ʋpon an Ass] This may argue his povertie, as, Zach. 9. ver. 9. Especially if hee had but one Ass for the whole Fa∣milie. Ver. 21. But I will harden his heart] with a judiciarie penal hardness. And thus God is in this book eight times said to have hardned Pharaoh's heart: thrice it is said that hee hardened his own heart, and five times his heart is said to have been hardned viz. by the devil, through the just judgment of God. Ver. 22. Even my first-born] And so higher then the Kings of the earth. Psal. 89.27. Ver. 23. Let my Songo] God commanding Pharaoh to let go his people, and yet hardning his heart that hee would not let them go, is not contrarie to himself. For by so commanding him, hee requireth his obedience, and by so hardning him, hee punisheth his disobedience
Ver. 24. And sought to kill him] to do justice upon him accord∣ing to Gen. 17.14. and as upon one that was an unmeet man to take care of the Church, having no better ordered his own hous. 1 Tim. 3.5. God passeth not by the sins of his best chil∣dren without a sensible check, if scandalous especially and com∣mitted against conscience. Hee hath much ado to forbear kil∣ling us in such cases: Hee is even readie to have a blow at us, and crie's like a travelling woman (who bite's in her pain while shee can) to bee delivered of his judgments. Isa. 42.14. Ver. 25. Surely a bloodie husband] A peevish wife whose fro∣wardness is either tollenda or toleranda, cured or carried patient∣ly, nè conjugium fiat conjurgium. Shee was not so hot, but Moses was as meek. Ver. 26. A bloodie husband thou art] This peal shee ring's oft in his ears, and so taught him patience. Conjugium humanae divina Academia vitae. Certain it is that wee are a bloodie spous to Christ: the Church is Acheldama, a field of blood. Ver. 27. And the Lord said unto Aaron]. To this religious Fa∣milie rather then to anie other, God appeareth: which mercie is remembred. 1 Sam. 2.27. [Met him in the mount of God] His wife either had left him, or was sent back by him to her father. God suppli'es that comfort by the coming of Aaron. Ver. 28. And Moses told Aaron] So clouds, when full, powr down, and the spouts run, and the eavs shed, and the presses overflow, Aromatical trees sweat out their precious oils; and as Amber-greece is nothing so sweet in it self, as when com∣pounded with other things: so good men are great gainers by communicating themselvs to each other. Ver. 31. They bowed their heads] An ordinarie gesture among the Jews then: as at this day, the reverence they shew is in standing up, Spec. Europ. and the gesture of adoration in the bowing for∣ward of their bodies: for kneeling they use none, neither stir they their bonnets in their Synagogues to anie man, but remain still covered.
CHAP. V. Ver. 1. That they may hold a Feast] CHap. 4.23. That they may serv mee. Let us keep the feast. 1 Cor. 5.8. which is the same with Let us serv God accepta∣bly. Heb. 12.28. It is a Feast and better for a good soul to con∣vers with God. Psal. 63.5. Isa. 25.6. Ver. 2. Who is the Lord?] God's attributes either shew what hee is, or who hee is. To the question of Moses, what hee is? God gave a short answer, I am. To this second by Pharaoh, Who hee is? God made a large replie, till Pharaoh was com∣pelled to answer himself, The Lord is righteous. Ver. 3. Three daies journie] viz. to mount Horeb. They made it three months journie e're they came there. Exod. 13.17, 18. God lead's his people oft not the nearest, but the safest waie to their journies end. Ver. 4. Let the people from their works] Moses talk's of sacrifice, Pharaoh of work. Anie thing seem's due work to a carnal minde saving God's service; nothing superfluous but religious duties: Aug. de Civit. Dei. Seneca saith, the Jewes cast away a seventh part of their time upon a weekly Sabbath. To what end is this loss said Judas. Ver. 5. The people of the Land are manie] & nihil agendo malè agere discent. Iphicrates never suffered his souldiers to bee out of emploiment; , &c. Polym. stratag. lib. 3. but, if out of militarie services, hee set them to dig or lop trees, or carrie burdens, &c. to keep them from mu∣tining or wors doing. Ver. 6. And Pharaoh commanded] Hee raged the more for the message of dismission: so wholesom admonitions make ill men wors. Corruptions encreas and biggen by the Law. Rom. 7. ver. 8. Ver. 7. Yee shall no more give the people straw] Speculum tyran∣nidis semper augescentis atque invalescentis. The matter mend's with us, Acts and Mon. said those Martyrs in prison, as sowr Ale doth in Summer. Ver. 8. For they bee idle] I heard a great man once say (saith Luther) Necesse est otiosos esse homines qui ista negotia Religionis cu∣rant. They must needs bee idle fellows that are so much taken
up about the business of religion. See the Note on vers. 4. Vers. 9. And not regard vain words] Vain lying words. So this profane Prince calleth, and counteth the word of God. What's Truth? saith Pilat scoffingly. Vers. 10. I will not give you straw] Cold comfort: things commonly go backward with the Saints before they com for∣ward, as the corn groweth downward ere it grow upward. Hold out faith and patience; deliverance is at next dore by. Cùm duplicantur lateres, venit Moyses. When things are at worst they'le mend. Vers. 11. Yet not ought]. Such hard service put's Satan his slaves to, and yet they rejoice in their bondage. Vers. 12. So the people were scattered] So are most people now-a daies busied about trash and trifles, neglecting the one thing necessarie. In the inthronization of the Pope before hee put's on his criple Crown, a wad of straw is set on fire before him, and one appointed to saie, Sic transit gloria mundi, the glo∣rie of this world is but a blaze of straw or stubble, soon extinct. They that highly esem it rejoice in a thing of nought, feed upon ashes &c. Amos 7.8, 9. with 13. Vers. 13. And the task-masters] Who were Egyptians, as the officers under them were Israëlites, and beaten. vers. 14. Vers. 14. Were beaten] It is the miserie of those that are trusted with autoritie that their inferiors faults are beaten up∣on their backs. Vers. 15. Came and crie'd unto Pharaoh] They did not rail upon him to his face, as the Janizaries did in an uproar upon Bajazet the second their Prince, saying that they would by and by teach him, as a drunkard, Turk. hist. fol. 444. a beast and a rascal to use his great place and calling with more sobrietie and discretion. Neither did they go behinde his back, and call him, as Sanders did Q. Elisabeth, his natural Sovereign, Lupam Anglicanam, the English wolfe, or as Rhiston calleth her, leaenam, omnes Athalias, Maachas, Rivetti Jesuita vapulans. page. 263. Jezabeles, Herodiades &c. superantem, a lioness wors then anie Athaliah, Maacha, Jezabel. A foul-mouthed Jesuite made this fals Anagram of her, Elisabeth, Jezabel. Tis omitted; Fuller's holy State. fol. 317. the pre∣sage of the gallowes, whereon this Anagrammatist was after∣wards justly executed. Aretine, by a longer custom of libel∣ous and contumelious speaking against Princes, had got such
a habit, that at last hee came to diminish and disesteem God himself. Vers. 16. But the fault is in thine own people] Fffugiunt corvi, vexat censura columbas. As a man is friended, so is his matter end∣ed. And where the hedg is low, a man may lightly make large leaps. Or as the French man saith, Qui son chien vult tuer, la rage luy met sus, Hee that hath a minde to kill a dog, give's out that hee is mad. It was fault enough in God's Israël, that they would not bee miserable. Vers. 17. Yee are idle] See the Note on vers. 4, and 8. Vers. 18. Yet shall yee deliver the tale of bricks] Or bee miser∣ably beaten, if but one bee missing. The Spaniards (besides other intolerable burdens and bondages that they laie upon the poor Indians) suppose they shew the wretches great favor, when they do not, Sir Fran. Drake World encompas. pag. 53. for their pleasure, whip them with cords, and daie by daie drop their naked bodies with burning bacon. Regi∣ment without Righteousness turn's into tyrannie. Vers. 19. In an evil case] For their evil courses. Ezek. 23.8. 20.5, 7, 8. Ios. 24.14. It is written as a heavie curs of God. Levit. 26.17. If yee still trespass against mee, I will set Princes over you that shall hate you: Mischeivous, odious Princes, odious to God, malignant to the people. Vers. 20. And they met Moses] How readie are wee to mi∣stake the grounds of our afflictions, and to cast them upon fals causes? 1 King. 17.18. The Sareptan told the Prophet that hee had killed her son. Vers. 21. The Lord look upon you] Thus wee have seen dogs in a chafe bark at their best friends. Vers. 22. And Moses returned unto the Lord] Hee turned aside, as it were to speak with a friend, and to disburthen himself in∣to God's bosom. This is the Saints privilege. See the Note on Math. 11.25. Vers 23. Neither hast thou delivered] Here Moses himself was too short-spirited. Hee considered not, belike, that God's pro∣mises do manie times bear a long date, neither is it fit to set him a time, or to awaken him whom our soul loveth; untill hee pleas. Do but wait, saith the Lord. Habac. 2.3. You shall bee delivered, you shall bee delivered, you shall bee delivered, you shall, you shall. So much that text in effect soundeth and assureth.
CHAP VI. Vers. 1. Then the Lord said unto Moses. PArdoning the faults of his praier, God grant's him a graci∣ous answer, so hee dealt with David. Psal. 31.22. For I said in my hast I am cut off from before thine eies: Never∣theless thou heardest the voice of my supplication when I cried unto thee. Vers. 2. Scalig. de Sub∣tit. I am Jehovah]  Scaliger's word) that do Peress (Gregorie's word) that have beeing of my self, give bee∣ing to all things elf, and in special to my promises, to perform with my hand wht I have spoken with my mouth, 1 King. 8.15. onely God exspect's that men put his promises in suit by their prayers, as here, and burthen him with them, as that Martyr said. Vers. 3. By the name of God Almightie] See the Note on Gen. 17.1. The sens is this, saith Cameron, Quantum illis sufficiebat tantum indulsit, Camer. de Eccles. non indulsit quod erat summum. Hee gave them enough, but not the main. But by my name Jehovah.] That is, by the import of this his name, the full performance of his pro∣mises. God was known to the Patriarchs by this name Jeho∣vah quoad esse Dei, but not quoad esse rei. Vers. 4. To give them the land of Canaan] And a better thing with it, the Kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 11.10.16. Vers. 5. I have heard the groanings] Hee heareth the young ra∣vens that crie unto him but by implication onely, Psal. 147.9.  and with a hoars voice unfit to move pitie: (whence also they have their name in the Hebrew) how much more his own covenanters? Vers. 6. And I will bring you out] A great deliverance; but nothing to that which Christ hath wrought for us from the tyrannie of sin and terror of hell. Vers. 7. And I will bee to you a God] This is the top of anie man's happines, to have God for his God. What can such a man want? Psalm. 23.1. As hee in Plutarch said of the Egypti∣ans, that though they had no musick nor vines amongst them, Plut. . yet they had Gods. Vers. 8. And I will bring you] See vers. 4. Vers. 9. But they hearkned not] The ear, which taste's words as the mouth doth meat, was so filled with choller, that they
could relish no comfort. It is ill sowing in a storm, giving physick in a feaver-fit. The easiest medicines, or waters are troublesom to sore cies: So here. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. Vers. 11. Go in speak unto Pharaoh] Whether hee will hear. or whether hee will forbear. Ezek. 2.5. Speak when God bid's us, though it may seem to little purpose: Wee have lost manie a wors labor. The man of God must bee patient (tolerant) to all yea to those that oppose, proving if at anie time God will give them repen∣tance. 2 Tim. 2.25. . &c. Vers. 12. Of uncircumcised lips] Or of an heavie speech, word bound, Thick-lipped: A thin lip is a sign of eloquence. Job. 12.20. Pitho sits in such lips. Vers. 13. And the Lord spake unto Moses] Notwithstanding his former tergiversation, and the peoples peevishness. Mens wickedness cannot interrupt the cours of God's goodness. Vers. 14. These bee the heads] This is a digression to shew the descent of Moses and Aaron. Digressions in divine discourses are not alwaies and absolutely unlawful. God's Spirit somtimes draws aside the doctrine, to satisfie som soul which the Preacher know's not: and sparingly used it quickeneth attention. Vers. 15. The son of a Canaanitess] whom it was not lawful for him to marrie; but hee was a head long and head-strong, bold and fierce fellow. Gen. 34.25. and 49.7. Bound by Joseph Gen. 42.24. As one that had been most forward to sell him to the Midianitish Merchants. Simeon also is left out in Moses his blessing. Deut. 33. Vers. 16. Of the sons of Levi] Upon this family hee insist's, and therefore hasten's to it. Speak ever to the purpose. Vers. 20. Jochebed, his father's sister] See Chap. 2.1. Vers. 21. Thuc. hist. ib. 124. Korah] That ringleader of Rebels. Num. 16.1. Vers 23. Elishaba] Or Elisabeth, a prince's sister Num. 2.3. Our English Elisabeth, was by a French Dutchess said to bee the most glorious and most happie woman that ever swayed Scepter. Vers. 30. Of uncircumcised] See the Note on vers 12.
CHAP. VII. Ver. 1. And the Lord said unto Moses] IN answer to his last exception, which yet hee had answered before. chap. 4. ver. 16. God bear's with our infirmities. A God to Pharaoh] Armed with mine autoritie, a Vice-God. Shall bee thy Prophet] i. e. Thy spokesman, and interpreter. Vers. 2. Thou shalt speak] Gods word must bee spoken how∣ever it bee taken. Vers. 3. And I will harden] See the Note on chap. 4.21. The Dutch have a proverb, Quem Deus excaecaturus est, huic primum oculos claudit. When God will blinde a man, hee first closeth up his eies. Vers. 4. And Pharaoh shall not hearken] This judgment God layeth upon manie of our hearers at this daie, of whom, after much paines taking, wee may well complain as the herdsman did in the Poet. Heu mihi! quàm pingui macer est mibi urus in aruo. Vers. 5. And the Egyptians shall know] To their cost, when the Lord's hand that is lifted up in threatning, shal fall down in punishing. Lord (saith the Prophet) when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see, &c. Isai. 26.11. God will unseal their heavie eies with scorching plagues, and rous them with horror enough. Vers 6. Did as the Lord commanded them] Mallem obedie, quàm miracula facere, faith Luther. Their obedience yielded them more comfort, then their working of wonders. Vers 7. Fourscore years old] And so might saie to his coun∣trie-men and others, as old Augustus did to his mutinous soul∣diers, Audite senem inuenes, quem invenem senes audierunt. Vers 9. Shew a miracle for you] A perswading wonder, an admirable work, above the power of nature, as beeing a kinde of creation, and, such as requireth omnipotencie. But Pharaoh's heart was such a nether milstone, as neither miracle, nor mini∣strie, nor miserie, nor mercie could possibly mollifie. At the burning of Bainham the Martyr, when his arms and legs were half consumed, hee cried out to the standers by and said, O yee Papists, behold you look for miracles, here now you may see a
miracle: Act. and Mon. l 9 40. for in this sire I feel no more pain, then if I were in a bed of doun, or of roses. Thus hee: sed surdis fabulam. Vers 10. And it became a serpent] Or, a dragon, in token of desolation, if they disobeied; and that their countrie should becom a dn of dragons. Isai. 13.22. Vers 11. The wise men, and the sorcerers] Magick is either pure and natural, or impure and diabolical; which implyeth a compact with the devil, either overt or covert. The chief of these juglers here were Jannes and Jambres. 2 Tim. 3.8. Whose names are also mentioned in the Talmud. Vers 12. And they became serpents] Not really such, but in appearance onely. The devils miracles are mere impostures, phantasms, delusions. And this was the first plague that God inflicted upon Pharaoh. Swallowed up their rods] That is their dragons. so hath Christ (who is life essential) swallowed up death in victorie. 1 Cor. 15.55. Vers 13. And hee hardened Pharaoh's heart] Not by bare pre∣science, or permission onely, but by withdrawing his grace, directing the Tyrant's actions to his own glorie, irritating his corruptions by oracles and miracles, and delivering him up to Satan to bee urther hardened. Vers 14. Pharaoh's heart is hardened] Heb. heavie, clogg'd with corruption, and held down by the devil: as on the contrarie, Jehosaphat's heart was light and lift up in the waies of the Lord. 2 Chron. 17.6. So were Doctor Taylor's, and George Roper's the Martyrs: Act and Mon. 1386. and 1629. the former fetch't a frisk, the later a great leap, when they came to the stake. Vers 15. In the morning] It was in the night then that God appeared to Moses. But afterwards mouth to mouth apparent∣ly, by special privilege. Num. 12.6, 8. Exod 33.11. As a man speaketh with his friend. Vers 16. Hitherto thou would'st not hear] Indeed hee could not hear; as little as those Jews could believ Christ's miracles. Joh. 12.37. Therefore they could not believ (saith the Text) becaus that Isaiah had said, hee hath blinded their eies, and hardened their hearts, &c. Vers 17. In this thou shalt know] q. d. I shall really answer thee to that stomachfull question of thine. cap. 5.2. See the Note there. Vers 18. Shall loath to drink of the river] Nilus. God will
confute them in their confidences. Ezek. 29.3, 9 Isa. 19.5, 6. The Egyptians use to brag of their river, and in mockerie to tell the Grecians, that if God should forget to rain, they might chance to perish for it: The rain they thought, was of God, but not the River: Hee there∣fore threateneth to drie it up, and here to bereav them of all comfortable use of it. Vers 19. Ʋpon their ponds] Fish-ponds are in Hebrew called Berechoth, Blssings. But how soon can God cursour blessings. Mal. 2.2. And destroie us, after that hee hath don us good. Josh. 24.20. Vers 20. Were turned into blood] To shew them (as in a mir∣ror) their blood-guiltiness: These bloodie and deceitful men had blood to drink, for they were worthie. Revel. 16.6. See the Note there. Vers 21. And the Fish] That was their common food. Num. 11.5. The flesh of manie beasts they (through superstition) would not eat of, as One well noteth from Exod. 8.26. Vers 22. Did so with their inchantments] With their secret slights and juglings, they seemed to do so. (See vers 12.) for Pharaoh's further hardening. Ver. 23. Neither did hee set his heart] But to his iron sinews hee added browes of brass. Isai. 48.4. To his natural and hereditarie hardness, adventitious and habitual. Vers 24. Digged round about] If by drawing the waters they might purifie them, but they looked not to the maker thereof, they returned not to him that smote them. Isa. 22.11. and 9.13. Ver. 25. And seven daies were fulfilled] So long, the plague continued that they might bee sensible of it: and not do as the dog, who getting out of the water, shakes his ears and there's an end. Surely if these Egyptians had believed the prediction of this plague, they would have don as Plinie saith Camels do. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 18. Implentur cameli, cùm bibendi est occasio & in praeteritum & in fuu∣rum, they would have drunk for hereafter also.
CHAP. VIII. Ver. 1. That they may serv mee] EVentus plagarum est alius per accidens, Alsted. ut Simulata emendatio Pha∣raonis; alius per se, ut Dimissio populi. Ver. 8. Behold I will smite] God usually (not alwaies) warn's before hee wound's, ideó{que} minatur, ut non puniat, and therefore threateneth that hee may not punish his creature. Ver. 3. And the river shall bring forth frogs] In stead of fishes. Thus the first and this second plague are about the water, the third and fourth about the earth, the five next about the air, and the last about man. Ver. 4. And the frogs shall com up] Neither wals nor wea∣pons could keep of the frogs from Pharaoh and his people. A muribus in Rheno confectus perit. Anno. 923. As neither could Hatto Arch-Bishop of Ments bee possibly rid of that armie of mice, that God sent out against him for his cru∣eltie to som of his poor subjects, till they had devoured him. Aristoph. in Ranis. Ver. 6. And the frogs came up] with their hateful hearing of Breker, & ex coax, coax. Ver. 7. And the Magicians did so] See the note on chap. 11.22. Ver. 8. Intreat the Lord] In extremitie an hypocrite will crie for help, as a pig under the knife, as a prisoner at the bar, as a drowning man will catch at that twig, which erst standing on the bank hee despised; Joab in distress run's to the horns of the altar; Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they powred forth a charm when thy chastening was upon them, saith the Prophet of those hy∣pocrits, that yet brought forth no better then winde. Isai. 26.16, 18. But will the hypocrite praie alwaies as &c? Job. 27.10. Did they at all fast unto mee, even to mee? Zech. 7.5. I will let the people] For the present it may be, he purposed so to do. Good thoughts make but a thorough-fare of carnal hearts: they cannot settle there. Thy goodness is as the morning dew &c. Ver. 9. Glorie over mee] Or jear mee, Hos. 6.4. and reject mee, as thou hast don heretofore: but when thou hast so don, thou must bee beholden to mee for my praiers, or thou art like to lie under the plague, for ought that thy wisards can do to reliev and re∣leas
thee. In the river onely] For a Memento; Horat. that thou flinch not, nor forget thy promise. Quo teneam vultus &c. Ver. 10. To morrow] Cras vox corvina. To daie if yee will hear his voice. Now is the daie of grace, &c. procrastination is perilous. Annibal when hee could have taken Rome, would not: when hee would, could not: Plutarch. So  said that fool. Let serious matters alone till to morrow: but hee was slain that night. Nemo tam divos habuit faventes, Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri. Ver. 12. And Moses cried unto the Lord] Not for Pharaoh's conversion; for hee knew hee was past cure) but for his d∣liverance from the present plague, that the power of God might bee the more manifested, and the tyrants conscience the more convinced. Ver. 13. According to the word] Iste vir potuit apud Deum quod voluit. Moses might do what hee would with God, as One said of Luther. Ver. 14. And the land stank] As once this land also did by those unclean frogs that came out of the Pope's mouth. Revel. 16.13. But England is now no more a babe (said K. Henrie 8th. Act and Mon. fol. 990. in his protestation against the Pope:) there is no man here but now hee know's that they do foolishly that give gold for lead, &c. Surely except God take awaie our right wits, not onely the Pope's autoritie shall bee driven out for ever, but his name also shall shortly bee forgotten in England, &c. Thus hee, and much more to like purpose. God hath promised to take awaie the unclean spirit out of the land. Zach. 13.2. Fiat, Fiat. Sure∣ly the societie of ungodly men (whether Papists or Atheists) is unsavourie and tedious, like the slime and filth that is con∣gealed, when frogs and toads and other vermine join together. Ver. 15. But when Pharaoh saw, &c.] Heb: A breathing or respi∣ration: so fulfilling that of the Prophet Esai. 26 10. In like sort William Rufus, beeing dangerously sick at Glocester in the 6th year of his raign, vowed upon his recoverie, to see all va∣cancies in the Church furnished: which hee did, Daniel's hist. fol. 58. Sciaputo il Morbo fauda∣to  Sao. but with so great a do, as shewed that having escaped the danger he would gladly have deceived the Saint; like the man in Erasmus his Nau∣fragium, who in a storm promised the Virgin a picture of wax as big as S• Christopher: but when hee came to shore would
not give a tallow candle. Thus in the sweating-sickness mini∣sters were sent for and large promises made of amendment: but no sooner were they recovered, but they returned to their old courses, as Mr. Bradford complaineth: Whence Plinie (in one of his Epistles to one, who desired rules from him how to or∣der his life aright) I will saith hee, give you one rule, that shall bee in stead of a thousand, ut tales esse perseveremus sani, qua∣les nos futuros esse profitemur infirmi. That wee go on to bee such when well, as wee promised to bee when sick. Men roar when upon the rack: but once got off, they think they may do as they list. Vers. 16. Stretch out thy rod] Here's no warning given, which shew's great wrath. Impenitencie make's God wearie of repent∣ing. Jer. 15.6. Absolute in his threatnings (if anie) resolute in his executions as. Deut. 29 19.20. Vers. 17. All the dust of the land became lice] Or gnats. Quid ciniphe vilius (saith Philo?) what so base and vile a creature as a lows, a gnat? and yet by this poor vermin God so plagued all Egypt, that fainting under it, they were forced to crie out, This is the verie finger of God. Vers. 18. But they could not] Though they endevourd it, as did the Juggler of Antwerp, who beeing required by the English Merchants there to plaie his feats and shew his cunning; after much sweating and toil, Acts & Mon. fol. 985. when hee saw that nothing could go forward, but that all his inchantments were void, hee was compelled openly to confess that there was som man there at supper which disturbed and letted all his doings. This was Mr. Tindal the Martyr; who hearing of this juggler, had desired certain of the Merchants that hee might bee present to see him plaie, &c. Vers. 19. This is the finger of God] An act of Omnipotencie, as Luke 11.20. Psal. 8.3. The heavens are the work of God's fingers. Deus disponit membra pulicis & culicis, saith Augustin. [And hee hearkened not to them] Neither to Moses, nor to his own Magicians beeing a kin to the Catadupes that dwell at the fall of his river Nilus, and are deaf. Ver. 20. Rise up early in the morning] Sanctificat, sanat, ditat quo{que} surgere mané. Early rising is good for health, wealth and Godliness. David prevented the dawning of the morning, &c. Psal. 119.147. Christ rose up a great while before daie. Mark 1.35. See the note there.
Vers. 21. Shall bee full of swarms of flies] Of all the ten plagues this was the most troublesom: for that they never suf∣fered men to rest: so worldly cares; noce ac die non dabunt requiem, as those Tyrants, Jer. 16. Vers. 22. And I will sever] Heb Marvelously separate, by setting upon them my signum salutare, Ezek. 9. so that the worst that are shall return and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.18. See Exod. 33.16. Docuit Ari∣stoteles Provi∣dentiam Dei ad coeum Lu∣nae usque pro∣tendi, non ultra. [In the midst of the earth] Not in heaven onely, whereunto Aristotle and other Atheists would confine his Providence. Lysippus made Alexander's pi∣cture with this posie; Iuppiter asserui terram mihi, tu assere coelum. Vers. 23. And I will put a division] Heb. a redemption; so Luke 1.68. Aristotle reporteth, that when from the hill Aetna, there ran down a torrent of fire that consumed all the houses thereabouts; in the midst of those fearful flames, , Arist. de Mundo cap. 6. the river of fire parted it self, and made a kinde of lane for those who ventured to rescue their aged parents. This extorted from him an acknowledgment of God's good providence for the godlie here on earth. Vers. 24. A grievous swarm of flies] i.e. Numerous and per∣nicious; yet not so bad as those manie noisom thoughts that swarm daily in men's hearts. There is that Leviathan; there are also creeping things innumerable. And these manie times marr and flie-blow our praiers, so as that they stink in the no∣strils of God. Vers. 25. Sacrifice to your God in the land] Persecutors, when they cannot conquer, would compound. Vers. 26. Will they not stone us?] Superstition is cruel; wit∣ness the Popish Inquisition to Lithgow, who in ten houres recei∣ved 70. several torments: And the Massacre of Paris, wherein they poisoned the Queen of Navarre; murdered the most part of the pearless Nobilitie in France, their wives and children, with a great sort of the common people, an hundred thousand in one year in divers parts of the Realm, som saie three hun∣dred thousand. So in Ireland, what havock have those breath∣ing-Divels made of the innocent English &c? And what threatnings and slaughter do our desperate Malignants now breathe out against us. Vers. 27. As hee shall command us] Manner as well as mat∣ter,
circumstance as well as substance is to bee heeded in God's service; els there may bee malum opus in bona materia, (as one saith) an evil work in a good matter. Vers. 28. Onely yee shall not go verie far] So loath was hee to loos his hold; useb. so is the Divel. The Pope made large offers to Queen Elisabeth, as also to our King, when in Spain. [In∣treat for mee] So Simon Magus in a fright begg's Peter's praiers; so Maximinus the persecuting Emperor sent to the Church for Praiers, when God had laid upon him a grievous diseas. So Ezra 6.10. praie for the King's life, and for his Sons. Vers. 29. Deal deceitfully anie more] Som are so slipperie, there's no believing of them. Egesippus saith of Pilate, that hee was vir nequam, & parvi faciens mendacium, a naughtie man, and one that made no conscience of a lie. No more did Pharaoh. Vers. 30. Intreated the Lord] See the Note on Vers. 12. Vers. 31. There remained not one] Praier make's clean work; it can do wonders in heaven and earth. Saie thou with David, Cleans thou mee from secret faults, Psal. 19.12. those that are of dailie and hourlie incursion. Praier will scour the coast, clear the con∣science of dead works. Acts 8.22. Vers. 32. And Pharaoh hardened] All blows and pressures were so far from mollifying him, that hee hardened and em∣marbled more and more. CHAP. IX. Ver. 1. Let my People go] THe verie same message to a word, as before often. Austin perswade's God's Messengers so long to insist upon the same point, De Dctrina Christian. beating and repeating of it in the same words, till they perceiv by the gesture and countenance of the hearers that they understand and embrace it. Chrysostom at Antioch preached manie Sermons against swearing; and told the people (that seemed to bee wearie of that subject) that till they left their swearing, hee would never leav preaching against that sin; , said Socrates. Vers. 3. Is upon thy Cattle] Both those ad esum, and those
ad usum. Men sin, these suffer, and therefore groan. Rom. 8. Ver. 4. And there shall nothing die] It is fair weather oft with the Saints, when it is foulest with the wicked. God hideth his in the hollow of his hand. Psal. 91. till the indignation bee overpast. Isa. 26.20. Hee giv's the like charge of them as David did of Absolom. 2 Sam. 18.5. Ver. 6. And all the cattel] That is, a great sort of them, Non universli∣ter sod comma∣niter. not all. chap. 9.19.25. And this was the fifth of those ten plagues, a number of perfection; to note that God therein did most per∣fectly administer and execute his judgments. Ver. 7. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened] like a Smith's an∣vil, hee grew harder for hammerine. There was little need to saie to Pharaoh as the Smith did to the Lantgrave of Thuring, Pet. Nicol. Gelstronp. Du∣rescite, durescite, O infex Lantgravi Hee hardned fast enough. Ver. 8. Sprinkle's it toward the heaven] in token that this plague should in a special manner bee inflicted from heaven: The Phi∣listims by their golden emrods acknowledged, that the emrods in their flesh were from God. Hippocrates called the pestilence  the divine diseas, as wee call the spots thereof God's marks. The Falling sickness was antiently called morbus sacer, as an im∣mediate hand of God. Life of K Ed∣ward 6. by Sir John Heywood, pag. 127. And what can wee conceiv less of the Sweating sickness with which no stranger in England was touch∣ed: and yet the English were chased therewith, not onely in England, but in other countries abroad: which made them like tyrants both feared and avoided wherever they came. Ver. 9. A boil breaking forth] this Moses threatneth to all dis∣obedient persons. Deut. 28.27. Job's boils were rather probatio∣nal then penal. So were Munster's ulcers (medicinal they were howsoever) which hee shewed to his friend and said, He sunt gemmae & pretiosa ornamenta Dei, quibus Deus amicos suos ornat, ut eos ad se attrahat. These bee those gems and jewels wherewith God adorneth his best friends, that hee may bring them nearer to himself. Ver. 11. For the boil was upon the Magicians] who were con∣victed, but not converted. Exod, 8.9. They stood still to with∣stand Moses, as Balaam against the light of his own conscience, was resolved to curs howsoever; and therefore went not aside as at other times to speak with God, but set his face toward the wilderness; Like a head-strong hors that get's the Bit in his teeth and run's away with his Rider.
Ver. 12. And the Lord hardned] See ver. 7. and chap. 4.21. &c. Ver. 13. Let my people go] See ver. 1. Ver. 14. All my plagues upon thine hart] Hart-plagues are the worst plagues of all. A hard Hart is in som respects wors then Hel: sith one of the greatest sins is greater in evil then anie of the greatest punishments. Ver. 15. For now I will stretch out] His former preservation was but a reservation: and hee hath hitherto escaped with his life; not for anie love that God bare to him, but to shew his power on him. Wicked men may have common mercies and de∣liverances, but the Lord loveth the righteous. Psal. 146.8. Ver. 16. Have I raised thee up] Heb. I have constituted and set thee up as a But-mark, that I may let flie at thee and follow thee close with plague upon plague, till I have beaten the verie breath out of thy bodie. See Prov. 16.4. Rom. 9.17. Ver. 17. As yet exaltest thou thy self] q. d. No amendment yet? A sore sign of a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction. It is ill with the bodie when physick will either not enter, or not staie with us. Ver. 18. Such as hath not been in Egypt] Dio maketh mention of a shower of blood and of water, Dio in Aug. that fell in Egypt a little be∣fore it was subjected by Augustus, in quae loca ne stilla quidem aquae antè ceciderat saith hee, where never anie drop of water (much less of blood) ever fell before. Ver. 19. Jam. 2.13. Send therefore now] Here mercie rejoiceth against judgment, Solinus. if by anie means hee might bee wrought upon. Sed Rhinoceros interimi potest, capi non potest. It was past time of daie to do Pharaoh good. Ver. 20. Hee that feared the Lord] As few will do till they feel his hand. Bradford. But they that tremble not in hearing, shal bee crush't to pieces in feeling said that Martyr. Ver. 21. And hee that regardeth not] This was (doubtless) the greater number, Qualis Rex, talis grex. This was a just presage and desert of ruin, not to bee warned. Ver. 22. Stretch forth thy hand] i. e. Thy rod in thine hand. ver. 23. Ver. 23. And the fire ran along upon the ground] such hail-stones and coals of fire wee also read of Psal. 18.13, 14, 15. Isa. 30.30, 31. and in the Roman historie, when Marcus Antonius the Phi∣losopher fought with the Quades, and by the praiers of the thun∣dering
legion (as they were afterwards called) of the Christi∣ans rain was obtained to the refreshing of the Roman armie, ingens grando complura{que} fulmin in hostes ceciderunt: Ita{que} Dio in vita M. Ant. Phil. lice∣bat videre in eodem loco aquam ignem{que} simul de coelo cadere, at∣que obcam causam, Romanos valere ac bibere. Quados exuri & pe∣nitùs interire. i. e. A huge hail and manie light-bolts fell upon the enemie: Fire and water fell at once from heaven, the Ro∣mans drank of the water and were relieved, the Quades were burn't by the fire, and perished. Ver. 25. And break everie tree of the field! Here was strages & clades horrenda, yet Pharaoh's heart is not broken, Aug. but remain's obdurate. Perdidistis fructum afflictionis, was an heavie charge. Ducklings stoop and dive at anie little stone thrown by a man at them; yet shrink not at the heavens great thunder. Ver. 26. Onely in the land of Goshen] See the note on chap. 8. ver. 23. Dio reports further of the fire forementioned, ver. 23. That that fire from heaven either fell not at all upon the Ro∣mans; or, if it did, it was presently quenched: neither did the waters help the Quades, Dio ubi suprà but inflamed them as if it had been oil, so that they called for water to cool them, when the rain fell upon them; and wounded their own bodies to quench the fire with their blood. Ver. 27. The Lord is righteous] See the note on chap. 5. ver. 2. Ver. 28. I will let you go] But though hee spake thus fair, Prov. 26.25. believ him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart: No sooner was Pharaoh off the rack, but hee bite's in his confes∣sion, and retract's his promise. Ver. 29. I will spread abroad mine hands] viz In praier; holding up and out the palmes of the han, as those do that ex∣spect to receiv an almes, in a having manner: So did Solomon. 2 Chron. 6.13. See Psalm. 143.6. Ezr. 9.9. [That the earth is the Lords] See the note on ver. 14. Ver. 30. That yee will not yet fear] Howbit I will praie for you, and you shall feel the fruit of it. Thus God is good to the just and unjust. Matt. 5. Ver. 34. But sinned yet more] As iron is verie soft and mal∣leable, while in the fire: but soon after return's to its former hardness. So here.
CHAP. X. Ver. 1. For I have hardened his Heart] AS hee that bring's in a light, blinde's an Owl; or as hee that powr's on water kindle's the Lime whereupon it is powred: so the Lord by publishing his commands and by do∣ing his miracles hardened the heart of Pharaoh; who, for his wilful rebellion was justly forsaken of God, and delivered up to his own heart, which is somwhat wors them to bee delivered up to the divel. Ver. 2. And that thou maiest tell] The memorie of God's (ma∣gnalia) great works must bee transmitted to posteritie: Ʋt nati natorum & qui nascentur ab illis, that after-Ages may hear and fear this great God. See 1 Sam. 4. ver 8. Ver. 3. How long wilt thou refuse] God think's long of the time that men misspend and waste in wicked courses Jer. 4.14. and 13.27. It is a savorie saying of Bernard, Totum vitae meae tem∣pus perdidi, quia perditè vixi: the time of my loosness I have ut∣terly lost. Ver. 4. Els if thou refuse] Men should look up with David, and see the punishing Angel over their heads with a drawn sword, and submit. As if not Balaam's As shal condemn them for their desperate Lewdness: for hee fell down before the Angel. Si quties pec∣cent homi∣ues, &c. [I will bring the locusts] God hath treasuries of plagues for the obstinate, neither cn hee bee (as the Poet feared of his Jupiter) possibly exhausted. Ver. 5. And they shall cover] For they go forth by heaps. Pro. 30.27. and huge multiudes. Jud 6.5. [And shall eat everie tree] See Joel 1.7. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 29. Ver. 6. And hee turned himself] No man may turn himself to go out of the great Turk's presence, Turk. Hist. but must go backward till hee bee out of the room. Dissention talling out between Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex about a fit man for Govern∣ment of Ireland, hee uncivilly turned his back, as it were in contempt with a scornful look: Camden's Elis. fol. 494. Shee, waxing impatient, gave him a cuff on the ear; bidding him com again when shee sent for him, &c. But Moses may not bee imagined to have so turn∣ed himself.
Ver. 7. And Pharaob's servants said unto him] They were con∣vinced and mollified, though hee was not. Whom Hee will God hardeneth. Rom 9.18. [How long shall this man bee a snare unto us?] Hee was not the snare, but their own sin. Pre. 29.6. Howbeit hee must bear the blame. As if som sond people should accuse the Herald or the Trumpet as the caus of their war: oras if som ignorant peasant, when hee see's his fowls bathing in his Pond, should crie out of them as the causses of foul weather. Ver. 8. And Moses and Aaron were brought, &c.] Somthing the tyrant would seem to yield to his Counsellors, and not to deal by them as the Persian Monarchs, who were wont to advise with their Peers: but if anie of them delivered that which was con∣trarie to the King's minde, flagris caedebantur, Keckerman. they were whip∣ped: which is a punishment also usually inflicted at this daie by the great Turk, even upon the greatest Bassa's of the Court, Tuk. Hist. upon the least displeasure. Ver. 9. For wee must hold a Feast] See the Note on Exodus 5. ver. 1. Ver. 10. Let the Lord bee so with you] In cursing them, hee un∣wittingly blessed them. Exod. 12.30, 31. and 13.21, 22. See Psal. 109.28. Cursing men are Cursed men. But God's people fare the better for beeing cursed. Let them curs but do thou bless, is not more a Praier then a Prophecie. Ver. 12. Even all that the hail hath left] How easily can God strai∣ten, yea, starv us all, if hee but send forth his forraging Armies. Joel 1.6. Ver. 13. An East-winde] The proper and ordinarie office whereof is to purge the air. Ver. 14. And the locusts went up] As a formidable armie: see a graphical description of a like plague threatned. Joel 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Ver. 16. I have sinned against the Lord]. A fair confession, but forced and extorted. Thus the toad, if beaten on the bellie, will vomit up his venom, and the malefactor on the rack will utter all. But as water heated, if taken off the sire, Aristot. Meteor. 1.12. will soon return to its natural coldness, yea becom colder after heating then be∣fore; so hypocrites heats are not kindely from the Spirit, but violent from the outward fire of God's judgments: therefore when that is out, these are gone. Ver. 17. Now therefore forgive] Moses must forgive his sin:
God is not in all his thoughts. David crie's peccavi Pharnob pe∣rii: David, Against Thee, Thee onely have I sinned: Pharaoh crie's to Moses to pardon his sin. Man may forgive the trespass, but God onely the transgression. Ver. 18. And hee went out] The wisdom from above is gencle, easie to bee intreated, readie to everie good work. The Divels are called Shegnirim, rough and rugged. Ver. 19. A mightie strong West-winde] Rupertus call's the windes mundi scopas, the beesoms wherewith God sweep's his great hous of this world: Like as his spiritual house (the hearts of his peo∣ple) hee sweep's off all foul lusts (those hellish locusts) with that rushing mightie winde spoken of. Act. 2.2. Ver. 20. But the Lord hardned] See the Note on ver. 1. Ver. 21. Stretch out thy band] Here was no warning. See Exod. 8.16. as good, the more unexspected, is the more welcom; so evil the more sudden, the more terrible. Ver. 23. They saw not one another] That they might know the worth of light, by the want of it. One being asked whi∣ther light was pleasant? . answered, That's a blinde man's que∣stion. Little do wee prize this excellent creature. Ver. 24. Called unto Moses] viz. when the darkness was over: though som think that, even during the darkness, Pharaoh (such was his madness) raged against God, and menaced Moses. Ver. 25. Thou must give us also sacrifices] God gave Noah of everie clean beast seven (for sacrifice likely) but of everie un∣clean two onely. Gen. 7.2. Ver. 26. Not an boof] God's Law must bee kept as the apple of our cie. Prov. 7.2. A dispensatorie conscience is an evil consci∣ence. Repentance make's clean work: as the Flood drown'd all, even Noab's friends also. Ver. 28. Get thee from mee] Evermore when God's messen∣gers are abandoned, destruction is at next door by. I know that the Lord hath a purpose to destrole thee. See 2 Chron. 36.16. Ver. 29. Thou hast spoken well] q.d. When I see thee next, do thy pleasure by mee. This was an act of faith in him, whereby hee feared not the wrath of the King. Heb. 11.27. So when Va∣lens the Arrian Emperor threatned Basil with bonds and banish∣ment, Pueris illa terriculamenta proponat, said hee, Let them threaten boies with those fray-bugs. The Emperor may take away my life, but not my faith; my head, but not my crown.
CHAP. XI. Ver. 1. One plague more upon Pharaoh] WHo, after the hardness of his impenitent heart treasured up to himself wrath. Rom. 2.5. God strike's still upon the thick bosses of his bckler. Job. 15.26. When men are no whit better by afflictions, and wors with admonitions, God finde's it time to strike home. Ver. 2. Borrow of his neighbor] This was an extraordinarie command, and may not bee made a president but in the same case, and upon the same warrant. The Law-giver onely can dispens with his own Law. Ordinarily it is the wicked that borroweth, and paieth not again. Psal. 37.21. Ver. 3. Was verie great in the Land of Egypt] Great hee was both in gift and autoritie; so that for his sake the Israëlites might have what they would of the Egyptians: It was not here as once at Rome, Calamitas nostra Magnus est: Sic Mimus olim de Pompeio, plaudente populo Romano tam eleganti soloecismo. Ver. 4. And Moses said] sil. before hee went out of Pha∣raoh's presence: for afterwards hee saw his face no more. chap. 10. ver. 29. Ver. 5. That sitteth upon his throne] As co-partner in the Kingdom. Our Henrie the second crowned his eldest son Hen∣rie, while hee was yet alive. But this young King, through dis∣content, fell into a fever, whereof hee died before his father; who cast him away first by his indulgence, and after by his ri∣gor, not suffering him to bee what himself had made him. [That it behinde the Mil] The hand-mil, which they drove before them. Judg. 16.21. Isa. 47.2. Mat. 24.41. Ver. 6. Agreat crie] Becaus in everie hous there shal bee a dead corps, and so a Conclamatum est. They had made Israël crie: and God usually retaliate's spoil to spoil. Exek. 39.10. number to number. Isa. 65.11, 12. choice to choice. Isa. 66.3, 4. crie to crie. Jam. 5.1, 4. &c. Ver. 7. Shall not a dog move his tongue] And yet how many dead dogs do now adaies bark and snarl at the Israël of God? Canina sacun∣dia. which, nevertheless, is not without God. 2 Sam. 16.9, 10. who will one daie make iniquitie to stop her mouth. Job 5.16. Why should this dead dog curs? said Abishal.
Ver. 8. In a great anger] Heb. In heat of anger▪ wherewith in the caus of God hee was blessedly blown up. Meekness here had been but mopishness. Ver. 9. That my wonders] See the note on Rom. 9.17. Ver. 10. Did all these wonders] But all was wors then spilt upon him: he was even set in sin, and resolved never to remove; God had a hand in it. CHAP. XII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] BEfore the slaughter of the first-born, yea before that plague was threatned. See Mr Torshel his design for harmonizing the BIBLE. Ver. 2. This moneth] Called Abib. Exod. 13.4. with us called March or April; when the daie lengthning, and the Sun asseen∣ding, each thing begin's to revive: To shew, saith one, that by the true passover Christ JESUS, not onely is our time and all other things sanctified, but also that wee should in recent re∣membrance of that benefit of our Redemption, all our daies and years bee thankful to our gracious Redeemer, and that by his death, true life and reviving unto mankinde. [It shall bee the first moneth] viz. in respect of sacred, not civil affairs, as Junius here prooveth out of Josephus. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4. The Jubies began in Septem∣ber. Lev. 25.8. Exod. 23.16, 9, 10. The Creätion of the world began then, as som will have it: but Luther and others think it was in the Spring rather. Ver. 3. In the tenth daie] The Paschal-Lamb was taken up the tenth daie, but not sacrificed till the fourteenth, that they might so kill the passover as first to sanctisie themselvs and pre∣pare their brethren. Hospin. de crig. est. cap. 5. 2 Chron. 35.6. For which caus also it was a received tradition among the the Jewes, that during those four daies the Lamb was tied to their bed posts. Ver. 4. Shall make your count] seil. of Communicants; that the whole may bee eaten up, and everie one have enough. Spi∣ritual blessings may bee divided in solidum, one may have as much as another, and all alike. The Gentiles also are called to fruition and feeding on the Lamb. Ver. 5. Without blemish] Christ that immaculate Lamb of
God was hereby typified. 1 Pet. 1.19. See the Note there. [From the sheep, or from the goats] A lamb, to shew Christ's inno∣cencie, meekness, patience, profitableness. Or a kid, to shew that hee was a sinner: 1. By Imputation, for God made our sins to meet upon him. Isa. 53.6. 2. By Reputation, for hee made his grave with the wicked, ver. 9. Ver. 6. Ʋntil the fourteenth daie] See the note on ver. 3. [In the evening] Christ came in the evening of the world. Heb. 1.2. in the last hour. 1 Job. 5. when all laie buried in darkness; in the even-tide of our sin and death. Ver. 7. And strike it on the two side-posts] Not on the threshold. Wee may not tread under foot the Son of God, or count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing. Heb. 10.29. but get our hearts sprinkled therewith by the hysop-bunch of Faith from an evil conscience, that wee may serv the living God. Heb. 9.14. Ver. 8. In that night] By candle-light: so must wee feed up∣on Christ, lumine supernaturali: Isa. 53. by his knowledg doth God's righ∣teous servant justifie manie. [Rost with fire] Not raw: wee may not grosly conceiv of Christ, nor rashly receiv him. Not boil∣ed, bur rost: to shew that Christ was rosted in the fire of his father's wrath: & sicut tostis cibariis non adhibentur alia, ut in lixis fieri consuevit: it à solum Christum debemus apprehendere fide, Alsted. saith an Interpreter. [And unleavened bread] See the Note on 1. Cor. 5.7, 8. [And with bitter herbs] To teach, that looking upon Christ whom they have pierced men must bee in bitterness. Zach. 12.10. and feel what an evil and bitter thing sin is. Jer. 2.19. beeing readie to suffer hardship with Christ, though hee should feed us to the full with bitter herbs, and make us drunk with worm∣wood. Lam. 3.15. Ver. 9. His head with his legs] To let us see our need of whole Christ, and our most perfect comunion with Him. Ver. 10. And yee shall let nothing of it remain] Wee may not presume to sin in hope of pardon. Christ will not stand us for a sinning-stock. Ver. 11. With your loins girt] As prest and intent to the ser∣vice: so wee should bee at all times, but especially when to de∣part out of the Fypt of this life, and to take heaven by force. Then, if ever, wee should hoc agere, gird up the loins of our minds, &c. 1 Pet. 1. [And yee shll at it in hast] As not doubt∣ing of deliverance, and waiting a call out of life. [It is the
Lord's passover] A sacramental expression, like that of our Savi∣or, This is my bodie. Mat. 26.26. see the Note there. The sa∣craments of the old Testament were both saeraments and types: but those of the New, are sacraments onely. Ver. 12. And will smite all the first-born] This crosseth not that in Ezek. 18. The son shall not bear the iniquitie of his father: for God never punisheth the innocent, becaus all are guiltie before Him. These Egyptians had slain Israël God's first-born. And it is the observation of Theodoret, that when God smote Pha∣raoh's first-born, hee drew blood of the arm for the cure of the head: which becaus it mended not thereupon, came also to confusion. [and upon all the Gods of Egypt] As hee did here upon the Popish Idols in the begining of the Reformation, by detecting their vanitie and laying their honor in the dust. Ver. 13. I will pass over you] Or, over-skip you. So hee dealeth oft by his, who should therefore keep a passover for our safetie. Ver. 14. By an Ordinance for ever] Till Christ our pass∣over should bee sacrificed for us; and then the Christian pass∣over was to succed. Ver. 15. Yee shall put away leaven] All unsoundness in point of Faith, and insinceritie in point of Practice. See the Note on 1 Cor. 5.7. Ver. 16. An boli convocation] This same word (in the He∣brew) signifieth the holie Scriptures; Nehem. 8 9. to teach us, saith one, that the Scriptures ought to be read in the Congregation, and holie Assemblies. Ver. 17. In this self-same daie] Heb. In the bodie or strength of this daie: so the mid-daie is called. Art thou delivered, help∣ed? write up the time and place. Ver. 18. Ʋntil the ane and twentieth dai] As Austin said of the feast of Pentecost, might these of the Passover, may wee of the Powder plot; Gaudet produci haec solemnitas. It were well i this holie-daie were a double-daie. Ver. 19. No leaven found] See the Note on ver. 15. [Shal bee cut off] For a smal fault, as it may seem to som: but the less the matter, the greater is the contempt in denying to do it. Keep therefore God's commandement as the sight of thine eie. Look to those minntula Legi, that yee may live.
Ver. 20. Yee shal eat nothing leavened] Watch carefully against corruption in life and doctrine: bee punctual in your preparati∣on to, and participation of the Christian passover. Ver. 21. All the elders of Israël] The masters of Families; who in this Familie-service were to kill and eat, and set before the rest of the houshold, as priests at home; and to shew them the meaning of that mysterie. Ver. 22. A bunch of hysop] An herb of a purging propertie. See 1 Cor. 6.11. [The blood that is in the bason] The remem∣brance of Christ's bloodie passion must bee kept fresh in our hearts. [Strike the lintel] Profess Christ crucified, Tm recent mili nunc Christus ac si hac borâ ∣disst sanguinem. Luth. honor him by a holie conversation, minde him in your out-goings and in comings [None of you shal go out] Bee not of those that withdraw to perdition, but of them that believ to the salvation of the soul. Heb. 10.39. Mingle no more with the Egy∣ptians. Ver. 23. Will not suffer the destroier] Angels delight to bee executioners of God's judgments, and Saviors of his people. Ver. 24. For ever] See the Note on ver. 15. Ver. 25. Yee shal keep this service] yet with som variation of circumstance. Ver. 26. When your children] Children are to bee carefully catechised and informed. Eph. 6.4. See the note there. Luther scorned not to profess himself discipulum Catechismi, a Catechism Scholar. Ver. 27. Bowed the head] In token of submission to the com∣mand and thank fulness for such a salvation. Ver. 28. Went away and did &c.] They that will not timous∣ly obeie God's sweet precepts, shal one daie have no other com∣mand to obeie but that bitter, Ite maledicti, Go yee cursed, &c. Ver. 29. From the first-born of Pharaoh] See ver. 12. Ver. 30. For there was not an hous] Neither is there an hous amongst us (hardly) where not one, but manie are dead in tre∣spasses and sins. Our land even stink's again with such, as Egypt did with the frogs. Ver. 31. And bee called for Moses] That is, hee sent them to bee packing. See chap. 10.29. Ver. 32. Bless mee also] So Maximinus the Persecutor beeing sorely diseased, sent to beg the praiers of the Church. In their moneth you shal finde these wilde asses. Jer. 2.24.
Ver. 33. Wee bee all dead men] Quis autem vult mori? prorsus nemo. . Aristot. Everie thing make's much of life, from the highest An∣gel to the lowest worm. Ver. 35. And they borrowed] For their use at that solemn feast they were to keep in the wilderness: Pons aureus fu∣gient hostiex∣tredu. The Egyptians denied them nothing; as willing to bee rid of them upon anie terms. Ver. 36. Spoiled the Egyptians] See the note on chap. 8.2. Ver. 37. About 600000] So that promise to Abraham was fulfilled Gen. 15.14. and that to Jacob. Gen. 46.3. Ver. 38. And a mixed multitude] Of strangers, that took hold of the skirts of these Jews and said, Wee will go with you. Zac. 8.23. but aferwards turned tippet. Num. 11.4. lusted great∣ly and greedily; and made Israël to sin. Coals touched, will either burn or sullie us. Ver. 39. And they baked unleavened cakes] A memorial of which sweet mercie they kept on foot by that yearly feast of unleavened cakes. Deut. 16.3. Ver. 40. Was four bundred and thirtie years] scil. from the time that Abrabam began to sojourn in the Land of Canaan, and to pass into Egypt. Gen. 12.10. See Gal. 3.17. with the Note there. Ver. 41. Even the self-same daie] God (saith one) had well∣nigh forfeited his bond; but e're the Sun went down hee paied the debt. His promises are good sure-hold. At midnight the first-born were slain, becaus then exactly the four hundred and thirtie years were exspired. Ver 42. This is That night] That, with an accent. God, ex∣pect's our returns should bee answerable to our receipts. God's blessings are binders: and of all things hee can least abide to bee forgotten. Ver. 43. There shall no stranger, &c.] Strangers are excluded; to shew, that the faithful onely have fellowship with Christ; contra quam Lutherani ineptiunt, saith one. Ver. 44. When thou hast circumeised him] And so admitted him into the fellowship of the faithful. A man must live before hee can bee nourished, bred, before hee can bee fed. Ver. 45. A forreigner] Unless a Proselyte. Ver. 46. In one bous] To teach them unitie; which indeed is not anie where found, but in the Church. Cam. 6.9. My Dove is but one, &c.
Ver. 47. Shall keep it] or perish for their neglect. Aut faci∣endum aut patiendum: either men must do it, or die for it. CHAP. XIII. Ver. 2. It is mine] BY right of Redemption also. Hee that is saved is not his own, but his that saved him. Servati sumus ut serviamus. Luk. 1.74. Ver. 3. Remember] Heb. To remember indefinitely, q. d. Re∣member perpetually, and commemorate. Ver. 3. In the moneth Abib] The flowrie-moneth, as Macarius call's it. See the Note on chap. 12.2. Ver. 5. Aland flowing with milk and honie] Where fulness may breed forget fulness saturitie, securitie. Ver. 6. Seven daies] Figuring our whole life. Ver. 7. See the Note on chap. 12.19.20. Ver. 8. And thou shalt shew] See the Note on chap. 12.26. Ver. 9. And for a memorial] See the Note on Mat. 23.5. Ver. 12. The males shall bee the Lords] This God did, that with the first-born son (commonly best beloved) hee might draw all the love to himself. Ver. 13. And every firstling of an Ass] This God would not have paid him in kinde, eò quòd Asinus tardum & pigrum animal, Tusc. Quaest. lib. quinto. as Bellarmine give's the reason The zealous God hate's dulness. Tardis mentibus virtus non facilè committitur. Ver. 14. That thou shalt saie unto him] Plantas tenellas frequen∣tiùs adaquare proderit: Primas. Greg. Mag. young plants must bee often watered. Ver. 17. That God led them not] Hee carefully chose their waie out of Egypt; not the nearer, but the safer. Hee tempt's not above what wee are able: but so order's the matter, that evils are not readie for us. till wee for them. Ver. 18. God led the people about] Philo writeth that it was not much above three dies iournie from Egypt to Canaan the next waie: Sed Dei volu tas est summa necessitas. Tertul. Ver. 20. From Suot] their first Rendevouz chap. 12.37. Ver. 21. And the ord] See Psal. 105.39. Isa. 4.5, 6. God prot ct's, direct's and everie waie suit's the necessities of his people.
CHAP. XIV. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] IT was of God then, Necesse est ades∣se divinum ubi bumonum cessat auxilium. Philo Jud. then that the people fell into such straits: that where humane help failed, divine might com in. Ver. 2. That they turn] i.e. return. In passing the red Sea, the Israëlites made a semicircle. Confer Exod. 13.20. with Num. 33.6. God must bee followed, though hee lead us through a maze or Labyrinth. Ver. 3. They are intangled] Perplexed, intricated, they know not what to do, or which waie to turn. Enemies watch oppor∣tunities, but oft miss of their meaning. Ver. 4. And I will bee honored] By subduing this sturdie Re∣bel, and bringing his violent dealing upon his own pate. Psal. 7.16. 1 King. 13. When the Prophet cried to Jeroboam's altar, it clave pre∣sently asunder. Jer. 23.29. But the mightie hammer of God's word, with ten miracles, gave ten mightie strokes at Pharaoh's heart, and yet could finde no entrance. God will therefore now take ano∣ther cours with him. Ver. 5. That the people fled] i. e. Ran quite awaie, without anie resolution ever to return. This troubled the tyrant: Crowns have their cares. Little David like's his hook the bet∣ter ever since hee saw the Court. Ver. 6. Made readie his charet] To meet his destruction. Ver. 7. Veget. lib. 1. ap. 24. 600 chosen charets] They fought of old out of char∣rets arm'd with sithes and hooks; which at first were a terror, and after a scorn. Ver. 8. With an high hand] Bravely, boldly, in battle-raie, (not as run-awaies) in all comly equipage. Ver. 9. But the Egyptians pursued]. And God made fair waie before them, till they came into the red sea. Ver. 10. For they were sore affraid] Becaus sorely distressed: they saw no waie to escape, unless they could have gone up to heaven: which becaus they could not, heaven came down to them (though unworthie) that God might get him a name. Isa. 63.12, 14. The Israëlites herein were far more happie then those antient Britains, who beeing greatly distressed by their Northern Enemies in the time of Valentinian the third, implo∣ed the aid of Aetius the Roman Prefect of Gaul, using these
words: To Aetius thrice consul the sigh's of the Britains: Daniels Chronicle. and after thus they complain. The barbarous enemie beat's us to the sea; the sea beats us back to the enemie: between these two kindes of deaths, wee are either murthered or drowned. But their implorations prevailed not: Neither found they anie other remedie then what the Prince of Orange shewed to his souldiers at the battle of New∣port; Hist. of Ne∣therl. when they had the sea on one side, and the Spaniards on the other: If, saith Hee, you will live, you must either eat up these Spaniards, or drink up this Sea. Ver. 11. Becaus there were no graves] Thus they rebelled at the sea, at the red-sea, yet hee saved them for his names sake. Psal 106.7.8. Ver. 12. Is not this the word] Invalidum omne naturâ queru∣lum. Weak spirits are ever quarrelling and contending. Seneca. Ver. 13. Stand still and see the salvation] Thus God heard their crie at the red-sea] Neh. 9.9. Though it were not the crie of faith, but of fright and perturbation. So hee heard the voice of the lad. Gen. 21.17. Ver. 14. Yee shall hold your peace] i. e. Yee shall neither saie, nor do. Ver. 15. Wherefore criest thou unto mee?] sc. with inward groanings, without anie audible voice Moses egit vocis silentium, ut corde clamaret. And God was readier to answer, then hee to ask. [Speak unto the children of Israël] q. d. August. Ther's somthing more to bee don then to praie. Ora & labora. Wee must not one∣ly crave God's help, but bee forward in the cours, whereby to make waie for God's help. [That they gforward] Though upon a manifest danger. This is an act of strong faith, pure obedience. Ver. 16. But lift thou up thy rod] This rod God make's use of, for the greater manifestation of his own power, and the gracing of his servant Moses. Ver. 18. When I have gotten mee honor] Made mee a name as at this daie. Neh. 9.10. For this hee was famous in far coun∣tries. Jethro (the first proselyte to the Jewish Church) was hereby converted, saie the Rabbines. 1 Sam. 4.8. And the Philistimes crie Woe unto us, these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the Wilderness. Ver. 19. And the Angel of God] Christ the Angel of God's presence. See chap. 13.21. and 23.22. [Went behinde them]
So the glorie of the Lord was their rereward. Isai. 58.8. Hee will bee to his both Van and Rere▪ Isai. 52.12. Ver. 20. A cloud and darkness to them] See the Note on Heb. 12.2. Ver. 21. Func; Chron. And Moses stretched out his hand] Of that Pseudo-Moses that cozeed manie credulous Jews of Creet into the midst of the sea, Anno. 434. See Funccius at that year. [And the waters were divided] So was that torrent of fire (if Aristotle may bee beleived) that ran from Aetna, De mundo. cap. 6. consuming the countrie, and yet parted it self; making a kinde of a lane for those that ventured to rescue their aged parents. Ver. 22. Were a wall unto them] Everie main affliction is our red-sea (saith One) which, while it threat's to swallow, preserv's us. Ver. 24. In the morning watch] God watcheth upon the evil to bring it upon his enemies, then when hee may do them a greatest mischeif. Dan. 9.14. Hee picketh his times for venge∣ance Isai. 33.10. [The Lord looked upon the host] Hoe set his eies upon them (as Paul did upon Elymas the sorcerer) with high∣est offence, and utmost indignation. After which lightening follow's that terrible thunderclap, wherewith hee troubled them and took off their wheeles. See Psal. 77.18, 19. and 18.15. Ver. 25. For the Lord fighteth for them] Our late great successes have extorted the like acknowledgments from som of Satan's sworn swordmen: as at the dissolution of the seige at Plim∣mouth. Ver. 26. That the waters may com again.] By winde that God sent. Exod. 15.10, The windes blow, the waters flow. Psal. 147.18. Ver. 27. Returned to his strength] For by beeing divided, it had been weakened. si collidimur, frangimur. The daughter of dissension is dissolution. Ver. 28. There remained not one of them] No more doth there of our subdued iniquities. Mic. 7.19. Peccata non redeunt. Wee shall see them no more, anie otherwise then these Israëlites did their enemies, dead upon the shore.
CHAP. XV. Ver. 1. Then sang Moses] PResently upon the deliverance, whiles their hearts were hot, and the mercie fresh. No part of the thank-offering might bee kept unspent till the third day. Benesits soon grow stale, and putresie, as fish. Ver. 2. I will prepare him an habitation] Or I will adorn him, I will give him ornaments and trimmings. Such God account's our poor praises. Ver. 3. The Lord is a man of war] Yea hee alone is a whole Armie of men, Van and Rere both. Isai. 52.12. Hee send's the sword. Ezek. 14.17. Muster's the men. Isai. 13.4. Order's the ammunition▪ Jer. 50.25. Give's the victorie; Whence hee is here styled by the Chaldee. The Lord and Victor of wars. Ver. 4. In the red sea] So called haply from that red man Esau or Edom, who usurped the dominion of that sea, now cal∣led Sinus Arabicus. Ver. 5. As a stone] So shall Rome. Rev. 15.5. Ver. 6. Hath dashed in pieces] It is a fearful thing to fall in∣to the punishing hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31. For who knoweth the power of his anger? Psal. 90.11. Ver. 7. That rose up against thee] Becaus against thine. There is a league offensive, and defensive, betwixt God and his people. Ver. 8. And with the blast] In celebrating God's favors, wee must bee punctual and particular. Ver. 9. The enemie said I will] They made account all was their own, but were soon confuted, as were likewise Sisera, and Sennacherib. Where the begining of a business is coni∣dence, the end is consusion. Ver. 10. Thou did'st blow, &c.] Here it was that the Arm of the Lord put on strength to cut Rahab, and wound the dragon. Isai. 51.9. Ver. 11. Who is like thee] One of the most stately descripti∣ons of God that is found in holy-writ. God is to bee magni∣fied: Wee must make room for him. Ver. 12. The earth swallowed them] That is the sea, which compasseth the earth about as a girdle: God having set the solid earth upon the liquid waters. See Jon. 2.6. Psal. 24.2.
Ver. 13. Ʋnto thy holie habitation] Canaan where God chose to dwell. This Hee is said alreadie to have don, becaus hee would certainly do it. God's promises are his performances, and everie former mercie a pledg of a future. Ver. 14. Sorrow shall take hold] So it did. 1 Sam. 4.8. [Then the Dukes of Edom] See Deut. 2.4. Ver. 15. The mightie men] See it fulfilled. Num. 22.3. [shall melt] So they did. Iosh. 2.9, 10, 11. Ver. 16. Till thy people pass over] Over Jordan (as now they have don over the red sea,) into Canaan. Ver. 17. Of thine inheritance] provided and purchased by thee for thy first-born, Israël. Ver. 18. The Lord shall reign] Gaudeo quòd Christus Dominus est: alioqui totus desperâssem, write's Miconius to Calvin, upon the view of the Churches enemies. The Lord Christ reigneth. Or els I had been out of all hope of better. Ver. 19. For the hors of Pharaob] A good soul is altogether unsatisfiable in sanctifying God's name, and setting forth his goodness. Should I do nothing els all the daies of my life (said that Martyr) yea as long as the daies of heaven shall last, Act. & Mon. but kneel on my knees and repete David's Psalms, yet should I fall infinitely short of what I ow to God. Ver. 20. And Miriam] Souls have no sexes: And if souls follow the temperament of their bodies (as Philosophie saith they do) womens bodies consist of rater roomes, of a more exact composition then mens do. Ver. 21. Sing yee to the Lord] This seem's to have been the burden of the song: as Psal. 136.1. Ver. 22. And found no water] Thirst and bitterness was their first handsel in their voiage. Ver. 23. They could not drink] Water they now had, but what the better? God can give us blessings, but with such a tang, that wee shall have no great joie of them. Ver. 24. Seneca. Murmured against Moses] Hee must bear the blame of all. Publick persons are sure to have an ill life of it. Qui vita∣verit culpam, non effugit infamiam. Ver. 25. Shewed him a tree] A type of Christs sweet cross, and easie yoke, that sweetneth and facilitateth all our light af∣flictions. Ver. 26. And said if thou, &c.] This God premiseth as a
preface to the law, to bee shortly after given in Sinai. [I am the Lord that healeth thee] Both on the inside, by forgiving all thine iniquities, and on the outside, by healing all thy diseases. Psal. 103. I am Jehovah the Physician. And omnipotenti medico nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus. Isidor. To an Almightie Physician no diseas is uncurable. Ver. 27. And they came to Elim] The Heathens slandered the Jews, Corn. Tacit. Annal. l. 12. that they found these fountains by the means of cer∣tain asses that guided them: Whence they are called Asinarij by Molon and Appion of Alexandria; who affirmed that for this caus the Jews worshipped the golden head of an ass, &c. CHAP. XVI. Ver. 1. Ʋnto the wilderness of Sin] SO called becaus it bordered upon the citie of Sin, whereof see Ezek. 30.15.16. With Ezek. 20.35, 36. Or of the ma∣nie brambles that grew therein. Ver. 2. And the whole Congregation] The most part of the people. Diaconos paucitas honorabiles fecit, saith Hierom: sic & veros Israëlitas. Ver. 3. To kill this whole Assemblie] Thus discontent will saie anie thing: neither careth it how true the charge bee, but how stinging and stabbing. Ver. 4. I will rain bread from heaven] Not hell from hea∣ven, as once hee did upon Sodom. If thine enemie hunger, feed him, as God here doth. Ver. 5. On the sixth daie they shall prepare] The Jews prepara∣tion to the Sabboth began at three a clock in the afternoon. Buxtorf. Synagog. The best and wealthiest of them, even those that had manie ser∣vants, did with their own hands further the preparation: So that somtimes the masters themselvs would chop hearbs, sweep the hous, cleav wood, kindle the fire, &c. Ver. 6. That the Lord] And not wee without his autoritie: so that in murmuring against us, yee have set your mouthes against heaven. Caveant  Grudg not, behold the Judg standeth before the doore. Ver. 7. Jam 5.9. Yee shall see the glorie of the Lord] Shining in that wonderful work of his, the bread from heaven. Confer Num. 4.21. Ib. 11.40.
Ver. 8. In the evening flesh to eat &c] Never was Prince so served in his greatest pomp, as these rebellious Israëlites. How good shall wee finde him then to those that pleat him? Ver. 9. For hee hath heard your murmurings] Now then what will you do, sith God riseth up. And sith hee viteth, what will yee answer? Ib. 31.14. Ver. 10. Toward the wilderness] Where the cloud was in the forefront of their armies. Ver. 11. And the Lord spake] i. e. Hee ad before spoken. Ver. 12. And in the morning] They have their flesh at Even, and bread in th morning. God will bee waited on, and give the consummation of his blessings at his leisure. The cloud emptie's not it self at a suddain burst, but dissolve's upon the earth, drop after drop. Ver. 13. The dew laie round] i. e. The Manna that came down in the dew, as Christ the bread of life doth in the Mini∣sterie of the word. See Deut. 32.2. Ver. 14. The dew that laie] And covered the Manna: whence that promie of hidden Manna. Revel. 2.17. Ver. 15. Lib: 26. cap. 14. It is Manna] i. e. What shall I call? Herba Anony∣mus non inveniendonomen, invenit, saith Plinie: so Manna. Others interpret Manna, a portion, an admirable gift, or meat pre∣pared. Ver. 16. Everie man according to his eating] Thus they were inured in diem vivere, as Quintilian saith the birds do, to de▪ pend upon God for their daily bread. Ver. 17. Som more, som less] ecundùm proportionem arithmeticam, sed non secundum proportionem ceomeicam. as a man had more or less mouthes in his familie to eed. Ver. 18. Hee that gathered much] See the Note on 2 Cor. 8.15. Ver. 19. Let no man leav of it, &c.] It was to bee gathered in the morning, and not kept till the morrow. I made baste and delaied not, saith David. Psal. 119 60. Ver. 20. Left of it untill, &c.] Eiter through distru, or curiositie. Vers. 21. It melted] Or putrefied, faded, disolved. Som Papists derive their Mass from this root: and well it may bee; nam per eam omnis pietas liquefacta est & dissoluta, saith Rivet: for it is the utter bane of all good, as beeing a mass or heap of ab∣hominations.
Vers. 22. And told Moses] As fearing that the people had not don so well, as indeed they did: or as desirous of further direction. Vers. 23. Laie up for you &c.] This is no plea for the Po∣pish keeping of their breaden God in a pyx, for here was a command so to do, lest the Sabbath should bee profaned: but for the other, there is none. Vers. 24. Till the morning] The Sabbath-morning wherein it putrified not, but continued sound and savorie by the speci∣al hand of God; that they might keep the Sabbath; as it ap∣pear's here they did, before the Law given at Sinai. Papists press the sanctification of the Sabbath as a meer humane institution in religious worship. Our Anti-sabbatarian Prelates took this text for an Anticipation onely, and made little account of the fourth commandment, which Spalato had taught them was don awaie, &c. Ver. 25. Eat that to daie] So shall those that labor in the Lord rest, and feast in heaven. Thus the Rabbines moralize it. Ver. 27. And it came to pass] See the Note on ver. 20. Som unrulie beasts (masterless monsters) will bee breaking over the hedg: but the Law will hamper them. Ver. 28. How long refuse yee] The rulers are shent for the peoples unruliness. [To keep my commandments] For in break∣ing that one of the Sabbath, they had broken all: the whole Law is but one copulative. See Jam. 2.10. Ver. 29. Hath given you the Sabbath] And a great gift it was. Nehe. 9.14. Were it not for the weekly sabbath wee should all run wilde. [Abide yee everie man in his place] Sabbath com∣ing from Shabath to ceas or rest, hath som affinitie with Ja∣shabh to sit still, and with Shabath to worship and give prais, to shew, that this rest must be sanctified: for els it is but Asinorum sabbatum, as One saith, the Sabbath of the Ox and Ass. for these also must rest. Ver. 30. So the people rested] According to their custom, though probably intermitted for a season in Egypt, dureing their hard servitude. D. prideaux. Sed rationem reddat qui potest (saith a learn∣ed Doctor) quare, ante legem promulgatam, in die septimo cessavit Manna, nisi quia, ad exemplum Domini, ab ipsius mundi primordio invaluisset sabbati observatio. This ceasing of Manna on the se∣venth day shew's that the Sabbath was kept from the begining.
Ver. 31. And the taste of it] It had not all manner of good tastes, according to everie man's appetite; as Wisd. 16.20, 21. It is said, but as Num. 11.8. Els why should the people lust and murmur, as there they did. ver. 4, 5. Ver. 32. Fill an omer] Monuments and memorials of God's great mercies are to bee set up, lest (as it fare's with children) Eaten bread bee soon forgotten. Strabo Geog. Ver. 33. Take a pot] A golden pot. Heb. 9.4. Strabo wri∣teth, that the Metapontini (after a plentiful harvest which had much enriched them) dedicated to Apollo at Delphos  an harvest of gold. Ver. 34. To bee kept] For the use of succeeding ages, in the most holie places: so Christ, glorified in his humanitie, abide's for ever. Heb 7. Ver. 35. Ʋntill they came] So till wee com to heaven, shall wee have need of Ordinances. Ver. 36. Of an Ephah] Or of a bushel: a plentiful allow∣ance: see the Note on Ioh. 2.7. CHAP. XVII. Ver. 1. After their journies] i. e. AFter they had firs;t been at Dophcah, and at Alush. Num. 33.12, 13, 14. [There was no water] Bread they had from heaven, but wanted water. Our condition here is a condition of singular indigencie: wee are ever wanting somwhat, or other. Ver. 2. The people did chide with Moses] As they did before for bread. And as thirst is the more eager appetite, so they are more eager and earnest for water, then they were for bread, [Wherefore do yee tempt the Lord] viz Whether hee bee amongst you, and bee able by miracle to reliev you. Ver. 3. Murmured against Moses] Magistrates have manie times a wearie life, with the mutinous multitude. Seneca ob∣serveth of Egypt (it proved true of this people newly com out of Egypt) that it was loquax & ingeniosa in contumeliam proefecto∣rum provincia: in qua, qui vitaverit culpam, non effugit infamiam. That it was  province apt to prate against their Governors, and to cast a slur upon them, though never so well deserving. Ver. 4. Readie to stone mee] Well might hee ask with our
Saviour, For which of my good works do yee stone mee? John 10.32. But the bel∣lie hath no cars. Ver. 5. Take with thee of the Elders] As witnesses of this great work of God; which the people for their unbelief might not behold. God put's up their rebellion, and sat ise's their thirst: but yet intimates his just displeasure, by denying them this pri∣vilege of seeing the rock smitten. Ver. 6. Ʋpon the rock] If God had not stood upon the rock, in vain had Moses struck it. Means must bee used, but God one∣ly depended upon for success. It is hee alone that set's the rock abroach. [Thou shalt smite the rock] Here in a type of Christ, stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. Isa. 53.4. 1 Cor. 10.4. [And there shall com water out of it] Not sire, (that had not been so miraculous,) but water. This cleaving the hard rock. Psalm 78.15. This turning of the slint into a fountain. Psalm 114.8. was a work of Omnipotencie, and is therefore much celebrated. Deut. 8.15. Psalm 105.41 Nehem. 9 15. Dioscorides tell's us of the stone Galactites, quèd suceum emittat lacieum, that it yield's a kinde of moisture like milk which, if it bee true, is verie strange. [That the peole may dink] And so bee cooled and comforted in their weariness and wandrings. Ho, everie one that thirsteth, &c. Isa 55.1. Ver. 7. Is the Lord amongst us?] As if that could not bee, and they athirst? But hee is most present, when hee afflict's: Hee know's our souls in adversitie. Ver. 8. Then came Amalek] Not having the fear of God before his eles. Deut. 25.18. but carried on by the antient en∣mitie: for Amalek was Esau's grandchilde. Ver. 9. I will stand on the top] Where the people might see him with that Ensign in his hand, and bee incouraged, Xerxes used to pitch his tent on high, and stand looking on his armie, when in fight, for their incouragement. Ver. 10. Aaron and Hur] This Hur, saith Josephus, was hus∣band to Miriäm, and Moses his Deputie. Exod. 24.14. [Went up to the top of a hill] To praie together. Psalm 76.2.3. In the Congregation where the Saints are praying, there the arrow, shield, and spear are broken. 2 Sam. 18.3. From thence shalt thou help us; (said the people to David) that is, thy praiers shall prevail with God for our assistance. Non tam praeliando
quàm precando. The King of Sweden assoon as hee set foot in Germanie fell down to praier, and hee proved verie victorious. Ver. 11. When Moses held up his hands] The push of Moses's praiers did more then the pikes of all Israël besides. Moses orat & vincit, Bucholcer. Chronol. cessat & vincitur, saith one. Great is the power of praiers. Henricus Anceps, the Emperor of Germanie, slew and put to flight a huge armie of the Hungarians, his souldiers all crying out with a loud voice, Idem ibid. Kyrie eleison, Kyrie eleison, i, e. Lord have mercie upon us, Lord have mercie upon us. This was don before the citie of Mersburg. Ver. 12. But Moses's hands were heavie] It is a prais proper to God, that his hand is stretched out still: As for men, even the best, though the spirit in them bee willing, yet the flesh is weak, and will not suffer anie long intention. [And Aaron and Hur staid up his hands] Neither did they onely rais up their hands, but their mindes with his. There are that here observ, that upon the fourtieth daie after their coming out of Egypt, Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up into the Mount, where Moses's hands are thus supported, while Amalek is discomfited; and that Mo∣ses the Prophet, Hur the Prince, and Aaron the Priest, all put together, were a type of Christ; who on the fourtieth daie after his Resurrection asscended into the Mount of Heaven; where, as our Prophet, Priest, and Prince, hee hold's up the hands of his Intercession for his Church Militant, whiles shee fight's with spiritual Amalek, Sin, Satan, Antichrist, World, Flesh, &c. Ver. 13. And Joshua discomfited] How should hee do other∣wise, when hee fought with such weapons? Praiers are the bombardae, & instrumenta bellica Christianorum, saith Luther: The great guns, and warlike weapons of the Saints. The Romans in a great distress were driven to take the weapons out of the Temples of their gods, and overcame. The Parliament soul∣diers at Edg-hill-battle falling on with courage, and crying out, Now for the fruit of praier, Now for the fruit of praier; prevailed mightily, slaying near ten to one, &c. Ver. 14. In a book] Or, in the book that thou art now in writing: viz. the Pentateuch, the most antient book that is extant. [I will utterly put out &c.] The portion of wicked men is to bee forgotten in the citie where they had so don,
Eccles. 8.10. their memorie die's with them: or, if it bee pre∣served, it stink's in keeping, and remain's as a curs and perpe∣tual disgrace. Ver. 15. And Moses built an Altar] As a lasting monument of God's great Mercie in that first victorie. The Romans had a custom, that the Conqueror in his triumphant chariot rode to the Capitol, and offered a white ox to Jupiter. Liv lib 6. Decad 3. Ver. 16. Becaus the Lord, &c.] Heb. The hand upon the throne of the Lord. God's hand is laid upon his own throne, as swear∣ing to root out Amalek. Or Amalek's hand is lifted up against God's throne, that is the Church (called God's throne of glorie. Jer. 4.21. and crown of glorie. Isa. 62.3.) therefore hee will have perpetual war with him. Tua caussa erit mea caussa, said the Emperor Charls the Fifth to Julius Pflugius, who, bee∣ing his Agent, had received wrong by the Duke of Saxonie; so saith God to all that belong to him. CHAP. XVIII. Ver. 1. Heard of all] ANd thereby was converted, (saie the Rabbins) beeing the first Proselyte to the Jewish Church that wee read of in in Scripture. Ver. 2. After hee had sent her back] Becaus shee was trouble∣som with her peevishness, and a hinderance to the good work in hand. Chap. 4.25, 26. Sylla felix fuisset ni uxorem duxisset; Adrianus ni imperitâsset. Moses, both. Ver. 3. In a strange land] See the Note on Chap. 2.22. Ver. 4. Eliezer] Or Lazarus. Wee should write God's mercies upon the names of our children, or som other waies perpetuate the memorie of them. Ver. 5. At the Mount of God] Horeb, whither they were re∣moved from Rephidim, though the remove bee not mentioned. Ver. 6. And hee said] That is, sent him word: so God's messages to us are to bee received as his own immediate words. Hee that heareth you, heareth mee. Ver. 7. And did obeisance] Sr. Thomas More Lord Chancellor, would in Westminster-hall beg his Father's blessing on his knees.
Ver. 8. All that the Lord bath don] It is not enough to relate God's mercies to us in the lump, and by whole sale; but wee must instance the particulars both to God and men. [That had com upon them] Heb. Had found them; yet not without a provi∣dence. Job 5.6. God cut's us out our several conditions: it is his hand that finde's us when wee suffer ought. Ver. 9. And Jethro rejoiced] So must all Sion's sons, Isa. 66.10. Ver. 10. And Jethro said &c.] Cheerfulness make's thank∣fulness. Luke 1.46. Jam. 5.13. Ver. 11. Now I know] See the Note on Ver. 1. So the peo∣ple knew that Jehovah was God. 1 King. 18.37. See 2 Cro. 33.13. [Hee was above them] God sit's in the heavens. Psal. 2.4. where hee see's that their daie is coming. Psal 37.16. and mean while scorneth these scorners. Prov. 3. Fright's them, as hee did those Syrians. 2 King. 7.6. Over-aw's them, as hee did Laban. Divert's them, as hee did Saul, Senacherib, &c. or otherwise de∣feat's them, as hee did Benhadad, disclosing their counsels, bla∣sting their designs, &c. Ver. 12. Before God] i.e. as in his presence, with reverence and godlie fear. To feed without fear is a foul fault. Jude 12. See my Common-place of Abstinence. Ver. 13. And the people stood by Moses] Beeing haply (as the French are said to bee) verie litigious, and thereunto abuting Moses's lenitie: whereas had they been soundly whipped (as among Mahumetans they are, that go to law for light attrs) there would have been but few and short suits amongst them. Sure it is, that if men's hearts were not bigger then their suits, there would not bee half so manie. Ver. 14. What is this thing] A man by good counsel may becom an Angel; nay, a God to another. Alexander beeing re∣quested by som Embassadors to shew them his treasures, shewed them his faithful Counsellors. Ver. 15. To enquire of God] For a divine sentence is in the mouth of the Judg: therefore also the place of Judicature is called the holie place. Eccles. 8.10. Let those that go to law in∣quire of God, and rest in his will. Ver. 16. When they have a matter] In our ordinarie suits there is, for the most part more malice then matter. The late Judg Dier, if there came anie such trilling controversies to bee tried
before him, would usually saie, That either the parties are wilful, or their neighbors without charitie, becaus their suits were not quietly compromised. Ver. 17. Is not good] Wee commonly saie, Hee that receiv's a curtesie, sell's his libertie. But so did not Jethro. Ver. 18. Thou wilt surely wear away] Heb. Fading, thou wilt fade, as a leaf that wanteth moisture. Melanchthon was wont to saie, that none labored so hard as Travelling women, Magi∣strates, and Ministers. Politici & Ecclesiastici labores maximi sunt, saith Luther. Atterunt enim corpus, & tanquam ex imis medullis exhauriunt succum. Ver. 19. I will give thee counsel] A Midianite counsel's Moses: God hereby teacheth him humilitie. Ver. 21. Out of all the people] Magistrates must bee drained from the dregs, sifted from the bran of the ordinarie sort of people. [Able men] Able and active, strong and stout∣hearted, wealthie also, and well underlaied. See Jethro's Justice of Peace in a Sermon by Mr. Sam. Ward. Ver. 22. So shall it bee easier, &c.] How thankless is their labor that do wilfully over-spend themselvs in their ordinarie vocations? Ver. 23. To their place] To the promised land, Or to their own homes, well apaid, and with good content. Ver. 24. So Moses hearkned] Of a meek man it is said that a childe shall lead him Isa 11.6. how much more so grave a counsellor as Jethro? Dio. in Au∣gusto. Augustus  was over-joyed with the plain dealings of his friends and coun∣sellors: as of Mecoenas. Ver. 25. And Moses chose] Not without the peoples con∣sent. Deut. 1.13, 14. Ver. 27. Into his own land] An honest man's heart is where his calling is: such a one when hee is abroad is like a fish in the air; whereinto if it leap for recreation or necessitie, yet it soon return's to his own element.
CHAP. XIX. Ver. 1. Into the wilderness of Sinai] A Place where were manie bushes and briars. Here they re∣ceived he Law, which like briars and brambles pricketh and pierceth the consciences of evil livers. And this sell out 430. years after the Promise made to Abraham; not to disanul the Promise. Gal. 3.17. but to advance it: and, that guilt bee∣ing discovered, and everie mouth stopped. Rom. 3.19. wee might acknowledg the riches of free Grace and Mercie. Ver. 2. For they were departed] See the Note on Chap. 18.5. Ver. 3. And Moses went up] See the note on Chap. 3.6. Ver. 4. On Eagles wings] The Eagle beat's her young ones out of their sluggish nest, that they may learn to flie: there was somwhat to do to bring Israël out of Egypt. Munster. in Schol. in Deut. 32.11. ex R. Solomon. The Eagle car∣rie's her young upon her wings (and not between her talons as other birds do) openly, safely, speedily: So did God his Israël, beeing choice and charie of them all the waie; securing them also from their enemies, who could do them as little hurt, as anie can do the Eagle's young, which cannot bee shot but through the bodie of the old one. Som by Eagles here un∣derstand Moses and Aaron, who are so called (saie they) propter acumen intelligentiae & altitudinem vitae, for the sharpness of their understanding, and the loftiness of their lives. See the Note on Deut. 32.11. Ver. 5. If yee will obeie my voice indeed] As I am good to you indeed, and not in pretens or profession onely. Nathanaël was an Israëlite indeed. John 1.47. And Caleb fulfilled after God (or fully followed him) so did not Solomon. 1 King. 11.6. Ver. 6. A kingdom of Priests] A holie state, such as shall bee all satiated with fatness. Jer 31.14. See the Notes on 1 Pet. 2.9. & Rev. 1.6. Ver. 7. Laid before their faces] Or plainly proposed the minde of God: . so did Paul. Acts 17.3. So must Ministers. Ver. 8. All that the Lord hath spoken] Sed, quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor biau? How easily over-ween wee our own abilities? Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest. Words are good cheap.
Ver. 9. And believ thee] Without suspicion of an impo∣sture; such as was that of Mahomet. Ver. 10. Sanctifie them to daie, and to morrow] Men must com before God with the best preparation they can get. Hee will bee sanctified in all them that draw nigh unto him. This the blinde Heathens saw, and therefore said, Plutarch. , worship not God by the by, but with all possible preparation. Hence they had their coena pura before their solemn sacrifices. Bucholcer. Numa nihil rerum sacra∣rum cives voluit neglectim agere. Hinc solenne illud, Hoc agite. The Ministers likewise in the Primitive Church prepared the peo∣ple's mindes by saying, Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts; Cyprian. de Oratione. Chrysost. Basil. and the Deacons used to call upon the people in these words, Ore∣mus, attendamus: Let us praie, let us attend. Ver. 11. Against the third daie] That is, three daies hence, on the daie of Pentecost. Ver. 12. That yee go not up into the Mount] God love's at once familiaritie and fear (saith a learned Divine) familiaritie with him in our conversation, D. Hall. and fear of him in his com∣mands. Hee love's to bee acquainted with men in the walks of their obedience, yet hee take's state upon him in his ordinan∣ces and will bee trembled at in his Word and Judgments. Ver. 13. They shall com up to the Mount] i. e. To the bottom of the Mount, to the foot thereof. Vers 17. See the Note on Heb. 12.20. Ver. 14. And washed their clothes] In token of washing their hearts, and cleansing themselvs from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. The Gentiles also washed, Plaut. in Alul. Act. 3. scen. 6. Tertul. cap. 11. de Orat. that they might go to sa∣crifice: and the Primitive Christians before Praier. Ver. 15. Bee readie against the third daie] If the word of a Command exspected such readiness, what shall the word of Promiss? &c. [Com not at your wives] For the Legal unclean∣ness that was in it. Lev. 15.18. 1 Sam. 21.4. figuring the filth of original sin. Ver. 16. There were thunders and lightnings] The Law was delivered in this terrible manner; partly to procure reverence to the Doctrine of it, and partly to set forth the Nature and Office of it; which is to terrifie and thunder-strike offenders. Ver. 17. To meet with God] Who came with ten thousands of his Saints, as Moses (that climbed up that hill, Deut. 33.2. and alone
saw it) saie's. And if hee thus gave the Law, how shall hee re∣quire it at the last daie? Ver. 18. The Lord descended upon it in fire] This fire wherein the Law was given, is still in it, and will never out. Deut. 33.2. Ver. 19. Moses spake] Yet not without horror. Heb. 12.21. Ver. 20. And Moses went up] As a Mediator between God and his people. Gal. 3.19. with Acts 7.38. A Mediator Moses was, not of Redemption (as Christ that Mediator of the new Covenant and suretie of a better Testament. Heb. 7.22. and 9.15.) but of receiving the Law, and delivering it to the peo∣ple, for which end here hee went up. Ver. 21. And manie of them perish] As the men of Bethshe∣mesh did for prying into the Ark. 1 Sam. 6.19. Arcana Dei, sunt Arca Dei: Calvin. God's secrets are his Ark. Eorum quae scire nec datur, nec fas est, docta est ignorantia; scientiae appetentia, insaniae spe∣cies. Not to know what is not fit to know, is a learned igno∣rance: to desire to know in that case is a kinde of madness. Hee that curiously searcheth into God's Majestie, shall bee op∣pressed of his glorie. Ver. 22. And let the Priests] The first-born of the familie, which before the Levitical Law, had the Priest-hood. [San∣ctifie themselvs] With a singular care, above that of the rest of the people. Much is required of Ministers. Ver. 23. The people cannot com up] i. e. Siquid ego aut capio, aut sapio, they cannot: that which I know not teach thou mee. Ver. 24. Away, get thee down] Abundans cautela non nocet. It is fit that men should know and keep their distance. [Thou and Aaron with thee] These onely (who were types of Christ's Princely and Priestly office) might com up unto the Lord. CHAP. XX. Ver. 1. God spake all, &c.] ALL the Ten are of divine autoritie. Papists disanulling the second, that yet they may retein the number of ten words (so loth are Hereticks to have their ass cars seon) they divide the last, which yet is called the Commandement, not the Commandements. Rom. 7.7. Vasques not able to answer our
Argument, saith, That the second Commandement belonged to the Jews onely. Ver. 2. Which have brought thee] God's blessings are bin∣ders; and everie deliverance a tie to obedience. Ver. 3. Thou shalt have] This Thou reacheth everie man. Xenophon saith of Cyrus, that when hee gave anie thing in com∣mand, hee never said, Let som one do this; but, Do thou this. Hoc tu facias. Xenophon. Cyropaed. [No other Gods before mee] But know and serv mee alone with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde. 1 Chron. 28.9. Hoc primo praecepto reliquorum omnium observantia praecipitur, saith Lu∣ther. In this first Commandement the keeping of all the other nine is commanded. Ver. 4. Thou shalt not make unto thee] i. e. For religious use; for civil they may bee made. Mat. 22.20. Howbeit the Turks will not indure anie Image, no not upon their coins, becaus of this second Commandement. The Papists by their sacrile∣geous practices have taken away this Commandement out of their vulgar Catechism. This is a great stumbling-block to the Jews, and a let to their conversion: for ever since their return from Babylon, they do infinitely abhor Idolatrie. And for their coming to Christian Sermons, they saie, That as long as they shall see the Preacher direct his speech and praier to that little wooden Crucifix, that stand's on the Pulpit by him, Specul. Europ. to call it his Lord and Saviour, to kneel to it, to embrace it, to kiss it, to weep upon it (as is the fashion of Italie) this is preach∣ing sufficient for them, and perswade's them more with the verie sight of it, to hate Christian Religion, then anie reason that the world can allege to love it. Ver. 5. Thou shalt not bow down] Images came first from Ba∣bylon. For Ninus having made an Image of his father Belus, all that came to see it were pardoned for their former offenses: whence in time that Image came to bee worshipped, through the instigation of the Divel, who is, saith Synesius, , one that rejoiceth in Images. [Am a jealous God] Bee the gods of the Heathens good-fellows, saith one: the true God is a jea∣lous God and will not share his glorie with another, nor bee served by anie but in his own waie. They that wit-wanton it with God, may look to speed wors then that Citizen in K. Edward the Fourth's daies did; who was executed in Cheap∣side as a traitor, Speed's Chron for saying hee would make his son heir of
the crown; though hee onely meant his own hous, having a crown for the sign. [Visiting the iniquitie] This second Com∣mandement is the first with punishment: becaus men do com∣monly punish such as worship God in spirit and truth. As therefore one fire, so one fear should drive out another; the fear of God, the fear of men. Ver. 6. Ʋnto thousands] Of succeeding generations. Perso∣nal goodness is profitable to posteritie. And this promiss though made to all, yet is more specially annexed to this se∣cond Commandement; to teach (saith one) that parents should chiefly labor to plant pietie in their families, as they would have God's blessing intailed upon their issue. Ver. 7. The Name of the Lord] That holie and reverend Name. Psal. 111.9. that Nomen Majestativum, as Tertullian cal∣leth it, dreadful among the Heathen. Mal. 1.14. The verie Turks at this daie chastise the Christians that live amongst them for their oaths and blasphemies, darted up against God and Christ. The Jews also are much offended thereat, and it should bee no small grief to us to hear it. When one of Da∣rius his Eunuchs saw Alexander the Great setting his feet upon a low table that had been highly esteemed by his master, hee wept. Diod. Sic. lib. 17. Beeing asked the reason by Alexander, hee said, It was to see the thing that his master so highly esteemed, to bee now contemned, and made his foot-stool. Ver. 8. Remember the Sabbath daie] Hee saith not, The seventh daie from the Creätion, but the daie of religious rest; such as is now our Christian Sabbath, called a Sabbath-daie by our Sa∣viour. Mat. 24.20. who is Lord of this Sabbath; called there∣fore the Lord's-daie, Rev. 1. 1 Cor. 10. as one of our Sacraments is called the Lord's Supper, and the table of the Lord, becaus instituted by him. Pope Sylvester presumed to alter the Christian Sabbath; Hospin. de fest Christ. de∣creeing that Thursdaie should bee kept through the whole year; becaus on that daie Christ asscended, and on that insti∣tuted the blessed Sacrament of his bodie and bloud. And gene∣rally Papists press the sanctification of the Sabbath as a mere humane institution in religious worship; an ordinance of the Church; and do in their celebration more solemnly ob∣serv the Festivals of the Saints, then the Lord's Sabbaths, making it as Bacchus's Orgies, &c. that, according to what their practice is, it may more fitly bee styled, Dies daemoniacus
quàm Dominicus. The divel's-daie then God's. [To sanctifie it] Let everie one of us keep the Sabbath spiritually, (saith Ignatius) , Epist. 3.2d Magnesian. rejoicing in the meditation of Christ's Law, more then in the rest of our bodies. The ox and ass must rest, wee must consecrate a rest: s God on the seventh daie re∣sted not from his works of preservation. John 5.17. Ver. 9. Six daies shalt thou labor] God hath reserved but one daie in seven, (as hee reserved the Tree of knowledg of Good and Evil. Gen. 2.) yet wretched men must needs clip the Lord's coin. In manie places God's Sabbaths are made the voider and dunghil for all refuse businesses. The Sabbath of the Lord, the sanctified day of his rest (saith one) is shamelesly troubled and disquieted. B. King on Jon. Lect. 7. The world is now grown perfectly profane (saith another) and can plaie on the Lord's-daie without book. Ver. 10. But the seventh daie] Or, a seventh daie. Not onely Hebrews, but also Greeks and Barbarians, did rest from work on the seventh daie: witness Josephus, Clemens Alexand. and Eusehius. That which they tell us of the river Sabbatius it's re∣sting, and not running on that daie, I look upon as fabulous. [Thou shalt not do anie work] Onely works of Pietie, of Cha∣ritie, and of Necessitie may bee don on the Sabbath daie. Hee that but gathered sticks was paid home with stones. The first blow given the Germane Churches was upon the Sabbath daie, Dike of Cons. pag. 276. which they carelesly observed. Prague was lost upon that daie. [Thou and thy son, &c.] Everie mother's childe. The baser sort of people in Swethland do alwaies break the Sabbath, David's desire by. R. Abbot. saying, That it's for Gentlemen to keep that daie. [Thy man∣servant] There is an old law of the Saxon King Ina, If a vil∣lain work on Sundaie by his Lord's command, hee shall bee free. Sr. H Spelman in Concil. Ver. 11. For in six daies] God took six daies to make the world in, to the end, that wee might bee in a muse when wee think of it; and think on his works in that order that hee made them. [And rested the seventh daie] Not as tired out, (for hee made all without either tool or toil; his Fiat onely did the deed) but to give us example, as John 13.15. [Wherefore the Lord blessed, &c.] How God esteemeth the strict observation of the Sabbath daie, may appear by the exact deliverie of it. For hee hath fenced it about, like Mount Sinai, with marks and bounds, that profaneness might not approach it. 1. By his
watch-word, Remember. 2. By his bountie, Six daies, &c. 3. By his sovereigntie, It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. 4. By the latitude, Thou and thy son, &c. 5. By his own ex∣ample, And rested the seventh daie. 6. By his benediction, as here, Hee blessed it, and ordained it to bee a means of much blessing to those that observ it. Add hereunto, that God hath placed this Command in the midst of the Decalogue, betwixt the two tables; as much conducing to the keeping of both. It stand's like the sensus communis between the inward and out∣ward senses, Boin. Theat. Naturae. beeing serviceable to both. [And hallowed it] Di∣em septimam opifex, ut mundi natalem, sibi sacravit. Ver. 12. Honor thy father, &c.] Philo well observeth, that this fifth Commandement (which therefore hee maketh a branch of the first Table, and so divide's the Tables equally) is a mixt Commandement; . and differ's somwhat from the rest of those in the second Table. They consider man as our neigh∣bor, in nature like us: this, as God's Deputie by him set over us, and in his name, and by his autoritie performing offices about us. [That thy daies may bee long] A good childe length∣neth his father's daies; therefore God promiseth to lengthen his. Ill children, as they bring their parents graie hairs with sorrow to the grave; so they are manie times cut off in the midst of their daies, as Abimelech was: God rendring upon him the evil that hee did to his father. Judg. 13.5. Besides the pnnishment they have in their posteritie (to whom they have been perempto∣res potiùs quàm parentes.) Bern. One complained that never father had so undutiful a childe as hee had: yes, said his son, (with less grace then truth) my grandfather had. Ver. 13. Thou shalt not kill] A crying sin. Gen. 4. For the which God make's inquisition. Psalm 9.12. and strangely bring's it to light. It was a saying of King James, that if God did leav him to kill a man, hee would think God did not love him. Ver. 14. Thou shalt not commit adulterie] Adulterie onely is named; because bestialitie, Sodomie, and other uncleannesses (though more hainous) yet they do not directly fight against the puritie of posteritie, and humane societie, which the Law mainly respect's. Ver. 15. Thou shalt not steal] i.e. Not rob or wrong ano∣ther, . Naz. either by force or fraud. 1 Thes. 4.6. See the Note there.
Basil chargeth the Divel as a thief of the truth, in that hee had decked his crows with her feathers. And it was of the Divel surely that Shee had learned her answer, who beeing charged by her mistress for stealing her linnens, Light for smoke. p. 85. and other things which shee found in her trunk, said, that shee stole them not: and when shee was asked, how came they to bee laid and locked up there? Did not you do this? No (said shee) it was not I, but sin that dwelleth in mee. Ver. 16. Thou shalt not bear] Neither bear it, nor hear it; rais, nor receiv wrong reports of another. Deut. 19.16. Make a lie, nor love it when it is made. Rev. 22.15. The truth must bee spoken, and that in love. Doeg had a fals tongue, though hee spoke nothing but truth against David. Psal. 120.3. Ver. 17. Thou shalt not covet] See the Note on Rom. 7.7. and on Heb. 13.5. [Thy neighbor's hous] House is here first set, as that which hold's and harbor's all the rest. To these ten words written by God himself in the daie of the Assemblie, Divines have reduced those other Laws, Moral, Judicial, and Cerimonial, written by Moses. 34.27, 28. Deut. 10.4. And herein Alstedius (that excellent Methodist) hath in his Harmonia Musica (as in all those brief but pithie Notes up∣on the Pentateuch) don the Church of Christ singular good service; whom therefore (for a Preface to that which follow's in the opening of this and the three next Books, and for the use of mine English Reader) I have abbridged, translated, and the same here inserted. SECT. I. Of reducing all the Moral Laws to the Decalogue. TO the first Commandement belong laws that concern Faith, Hope, and Love to God. First, Faith: as, that there is but one God, and three Per∣sons Jehovah Elohim; that hee will send them a Prophet greater then Meses. Deut. 18. that hee is to bee honored with our con∣fidence, patience, and inward worship. Next, Hope: of Favor, Grace, and Glorie. Thirdly, Love to God with the whole heart; filial fear, humble praier, holie vows, constant care to avoid idolizing
the creature, seeking to the Divel, tempting of God, listening to Seducers, &c. To the second Commandement belong laws made against gross Idolatrie, will-worship, &c. and for right worship. To the third pertein laws for Praier, Thanksgiving, Oaths, Lots, Blasphemies, worthie walking, &c. To the fourth; all laws of sanctifying the Sabbath. To the fifth; of honoring and reverencing Parents, Prin∣ces, Elders, &c. and of punishing rebellious children. To the sixth may bee reduced all laws concerning Mur∣ther, Revenge, Rancor, Smiting, Fighting, cursing the Deaf, laying a block before the blinde, &c. To the seventh, all that is said against Fornication, Adul∣terie, Sodomie, Incest, wearing the Apparel of the other Sex. To the eighth; Laws against Robberie, Rapine, Usurie, Sa∣crilege, deteining Wages or Pledges, removing Land-marks, accepting of Persons, taking of Gifts, fals Weights, &c. To the ninth belong laws against Back-biting, Tale-bearing, Fals-witnessing, judging, not admonishing, &c. To the tenth no laws are referred: becaus it is wholly spiri∣tual, and hath no visible violations. SECT. II. Of reducing Judicial Laws to the Decalogue. TO the first Commandement: It was death 1. to denie obe∣dience to the Priest, who was a type of Christ. 2. To perswade Apostacie from the true God. 3. To seek to witches and wizzards. It was likewise unlawful to make a covenant with the Ca∣naanites, whom God had cursed: to make mixtures of divers kindes of creatures, &c. whereby they are taught sinceritie in Religion and conversation. To the second Commandement: God commanded to abo∣lish Images, Pictures, Idolatrous temples, Altars, Groves, &c. and forbad them, upon pain of death, to bow to Sun, Moon, or anie other strange gods; because Moses his politie could not consist of true worshippers, and professed Idolaters. To the third Commandement: there were two kindes of
blasphemie or cursing of God; (whether it were mediate or immediate, direct or indirect) One proceeding of insirmitie and impatience, the other of malice and obstinacie. This later was to bee punished with stoning: that former with som cor∣poral punishment; as, beating, boring the tongue, &c. To the fourth Commandement: The wilful profanation of the Sabbath was punished with death. Tithes, Offerings, First∣fruits, Firstlings, and the like, were commanded by God, as part of the Priest's maintenance, due to them by the verie law of Nature. And the same custom is at this daie commendably kept up, there not beeing a more equal and easie waie of main∣teining the Ministers of the Church, and so of upholding the Church's Ministerie. To the fifth Commandement: Wrong don to a Parent (whe∣ther by striking or cursing) is parricide, and to bee punished with death: so is wrong offered to the chief Magistrate; this is treason. Parents had power to command and correct their children, yea, in som cases, to sell them to their brethren the Israëlites, and to sue out a Writ of Execution against them, if uncounsellable and incorrigible. The Privilege of Primogeniture made for the honor of the familie, and prefigured hrist. The chief Magistrate is both ordained and ordered by God. Deut. 17. Inferior Magistrates must neither bee strangers, nor eunuchs, nor bastards, nor Ammonites, nor Moabites. Deut. 23. But they must bee men of courage, fearing God, &c. To the sixth Commandement: Four sorts of capital punish∣ments were in use among God's people: viz. stoning, burning, beheading, and strangling. Execution was don either by the whole people, or els som deputed thereunto. Man-slaughter was committed either by man or beast. If by a man, either it was voluntarie; and that was punished with death: or involuntarie; and in that case, they had their cities of Refuge: these prefigured Christ, our sole Sanctuarie of safe∣tie. But if by a beast, the beast was stoned, as also the master of the beast, if don by his default. Blows that caussed loss of limbs, were punished with the like loss; or if not, with a reasonable recompens. Violence offered to a woman quick with childe, so as shee
lost her fruit, was death: but if shee were not quick, it was one∣ly a monie-mulct. God straitly charged them to abstein from the use of beast's blood; that they might learn to abstein much more from shed∣did man's blood. Lepers were to live apart, lest the sound should bee infected: and to intimate the contagiousness of sin. A Jewish servant, if hee should not go free at the year of Ju∣bilee, was to bee bored in the ear with an awl, and to live and die with his master. Hereto also pertein their laws for War: as, that new-mar∣ried men, timorous persons, and plough-men should bee ex∣cused; that a souldier should bee twentie years of age at least; that the General should desire passage through his brother's countrie; that hee should send forth spies; offer peace; lead on his souldiers; use stratagems; spare fruit-trees, equally di∣vide the spoil; reserv a part thereof for God; see that the Camp bee kept clean from sin, &c. To the seventh Commandement: Adulterie was death: and, in the High-priest's daughter, Fornication was burning; be∣caus hee was a special type of Christ, and therefore his fa∣milie should bee without blame or blemish. Sodomie and bestialitie were likewise death: so was the de∣flouring of an espoused virgin, and a rape. The Priest might not marrie anie, but a virgin. The price of an harlot might not bee brought into the San∣ctuarie. Polygamie and Divorce were permitted onely, and not commanded. Marrying with the brother's widdow was peculiar to the old Testament. They were to marrie within their own tribes; becaus our Lord was to spring of the Tribe of Judah. Hee that defiled a virgin, was both to marrie her, and to en∣dow her, so that hee had her parents consent thereunto. The prohibited degrees both of Consanguinitie and Affini∣tie are Moral, Lev. 18. & 20. and grounded upon verie good reason. To the eighth Commandement: Man-stealing, Sacrilege, and compound theft, were punished with death. Usurie is condemned by the Law of God.
The Law for things borrowed, deposited, intrusted, lent, or found, is grounded upon this Rule. Hee that marreth another man's goods, robbeth him. God would not have anie poor (that is, sturdie beggers) amongst his people. To the ninth Commandement: Hereunto belong the laws for Ecclesiastical and Civil judgments. SECT. III. Of the signification of the Cerimonial Laws; and first for holie Places. THese Laws concern either holie Places, Times, Things, or Persons. The general law for holie Places was; That in that place onely that God should chuse, holie Services should bee perfor∣med. And this signified, 1. that through Christ alone wee must go to God in everie divine dutie. 2. That the time shall com, when wee shall injoie the immediate presence of God in heaven. The special Law was, as touching the Tabernacle, a lively type of Christ, and of the Church, and of each Christian. Now in the Tabernacle are considerable, 1. The causses, and 2. the parts thereof. The causses that concurred to the making of it up, are, 1. The Matter; which was various, voluntarie, and suffici∣ent: This figured that Free-will-offering, wherewith everie man ought to honor God, by trading with his talent, and by doing what hee is able for the maintenance of the Ministe∣rie, andrelief of the needie. 2. The Form: and so the Tabernacle was to bee made ac∣cording to the pattern received in the Mount. To teach us, that God will bee served according to his own prescript onely, and not after man's inventions. 3. The Efficient, was everie skilful workman, and by name Bezaleël and Aholiab. These later figured out the Churches Chieftains, and Master-builders; as those former, all gifted Ministers. These were the causses of the Tabernacle: the parts thereof
(as well conteining as conteined) follow. These all were so framed, as that they might easily bee set up or taken down, and so transported from place to place: whereby was signified, that while wee are in this tabernacle of the bodie (which shall bee taken down by death, and set up again by the resurrection) wee are absent from the Lord: and that the whole Church not one∣ly is a stranger upon earth, but also moveth from one place to another, as God disposeth it. The Covering of the Tabernacle set forth; that the Church and her members do ever sit safe under God's protection. The Court made up of divers pillars, signified, that the Church, in regard of the Ministerie therein, is the pillar of Truth; and that the offices and abilities of the several members ought to bee as props to the whole bodie. The holie Instruments and implements served to set forth all the pretious gifts and ordinances of the Church; such as are the Word, Sacraments, Faith, Holiness, &c. The Taches, whereby the Curtains were knit together, sig∣nified, that the several members of the Church Militant and Triumphant are but one Tabernacle. The Covering of the Tabernacle was two-fold; Inward, and Outward; whereby was signified the internal and external estate of the Church. The glorious gate signified the hearts of God's people made glorious by faith, whereby wee entertein Christ. The Tabernacle fitly knit together by it's joints, and rightly erected, signified the Church of Christ fitly compacted by that which everie joint supplieth, and making increas with the in∣creas of God. Ephes. 4.16. Col. 2.19. The Veil signified the flesh of Christ, whereby his Deitie was covered, and a waie paved for us to heaven. The Veil was filled with Cherubims: to shew how service∣able the Angels are to Christ and his people. The Holie of Holies shadowed out the third heaven, into the which Christ onely entred, and wee by him. The Ark of the Covenant covered with gold, figured Christ, in whom the God-head dwelleth bodily; and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, &c. The Testimonie laid up in the Ark, signified Christ, the end of the Law; which also hath it's testimonie from him.
The golden Censer signified, that all our services must bee perfumed, and perfected by Christ, before they can bee accepted. The golden pot of Manna in the side of the Ark was a sa∣crament of that eternal life, that is laid up for us in Christ. Col. 3.3. Aaron's rod blossoming was a sign of God's fatherlie affe∣ction, whereby it com's to pass, that wee bloom and flourish under the cross. The Sanctuarie, or Tabernacle of the Congregation was the waie into the Holie of Holies; and signified the Church-Militant, through which wee enter into heaven. The brasen Altar for Burnt-offerings shadowed out the hu∣manitie of Christ, which is sanctified by his Detie, and suppor∣ted under all his sufferings for us. The Altar of Incens signified, that Christ appeareth for us before his Father, and maketh all our services accepted by the sacrifice of himself, once offered for sin. The Table furnished with so manie loavs, as there were Tribes in Israël, signified, that God keep's a constant table in his Church for all believers. The golden Candlestick with his seven lamps figured the glorious light of the Gospel, whereby God hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledg of the glorie of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6. The Laver wherein the Priests washed themselves before they ministred in the Tabernacle, signified, that wee cannot draw nigh to God in his services, without due preparation. The outer Court signified the visible Church, wherein hy∣pocrites also partake of external privileges. Lo, these are the things typed out by the Tabernacle: and and they cannot bee better understood then by God's own in∣terpretation of them, when hee saith. Exod. 25. Let them make mee a Sanctuarie that I may dwell in the middest of them. For in those words (as learned Junius observeth) is conteined an explication of all the above-said Cerimonies.
SECT. IIII. Treating of Holie Times. COncerning holie Times, the Law is either general or special. The general Law is, partly, concerning the most strict rest from all servile works; and partly concerning the Sacrifices which were on those holie daies to bee offered. The former figured that Rest, whereunto God in his due time will bring us. The later served not onely to exercise the Jews (prone to ex∣cess) with the hard yoke of great expens; but also, by the great charge they were at, to shadow out the great worth of Christ, far beyond all worldly treasures. The special Law concerned, 1. holie Daies. 2. Holie Years. Holie-daies were either quotidian, or solemn. And these later were partly the New-moons, partly the Sabbath, and partly the Feasts; which Feasts were either more solemn; as the Pass∣over, Pentecost, and Feast of Tabernacles; or less solemn; as the Feast of Trumpets, and the Feast of Attonement. Holie years, were 1. the Sabbatical or seventh year. Or, 2. the Jubilee or fiftieth year. The explication of all these is, as followeth. 1. The continual Sacrifice was offered twice everie daie; that the people might, everie morning and evening, bee admo∣nished of their sin-guiltiness: and withal, might bee exercised in the remembrance and belief of the continual sacrifice of Christ for their sin. It signified also our daily service, or con∣tinual sacrifice of Prais and Holiness, offered up to God in the name of Christ. 2. The New-moon-sacrifice served to set forth, that all our time, and actions don therein, are sanctified unto us by Christ. 3. The Sabbath was a memorial of the Creätion: it was also a type partly of Christ's resting in the grave, and partly of our rest in Christ; the begining whereof wee have here, the perfection of it in heaven. And whereas special order was taken, that no fire should bee kindled on that daie; it was to
signifie that Christ his rest, and ours in him, was, and should bee free from the fire of affliction. 4. The holie Feasts were (in general) appointed for these ends and uses. 1. To distinguish the people of God from other nations. 2. To keep afoot the remembrance of benefits alreadie received. 3. To bee a type and sigure of bnefits yet further to bee conferred upon them by Christ. 4. To unite God's people in holie worships. 5. To preserv puritie in holie wor∣ships prescribed by God. 5. The Passover of those that were clean, celebrated in the begining of the year, figured out the time, manner, and fruit of Christ's Passion. The Passover kept by those that had been unclean, signified, that Christ profiteth not sinners as long as they persist in their uncleanness: and so it figured out the time of repentance. 6. At the Feast of Pentecost, there was a daie of waving and of offering the First-fruits. The former signified, that the handful of our fruits, that is, our faith and good works are not accepted of God, unless they bee waved by Christ, our High-priest. The later, that God's blessings are to bee joyfully and thankfully received, and remembred. 7. The Feast of Tabernacles, besides that it brought to minde the Israëlites wandering in the wilderness, it did nota∣bly set forth the Church's pilgrimage in this present world; which yet is so to bee thought on, as that, with greatest spiri∣tual joie, wee remember and celebrate our Redemption by Christ's death. 8. The Feast of Trumpets signified that continual caus of cheerfulness and thankfulness, that the Saints should have by Christ's death. 9. The Feast of Attonement signified, that the sins of God's people in their holie-meetings, and daily services, should bee expiated by Christ. Moreover, Attonement was also made for the most holie Place, and for the Sanctuarie. That signified, that the visible heaven also was defiled by our sin, and need bee purged by Christ's blood. This, that the Catholick Church is by the same blood of Christ made alone acceptable to God. By the application that was made for several persons, was set forth the applicatorie force of faith. Furthermore, that applicati∣on and expiation was made by a live and a slain goat. Upon
the live goat (called the scape-goat) were put the offenses of the Children of Israël; and the goat thus Cerimonially laden, was let go into the wilderness: the other goat was set apart for a whole-burnt-offering. The former Cerimonie signified, that the Son of God came down from heaven into the wilder∣ness of this world, that hee might take away the sins of the world: The later shadowed out the blood of Christ, which alone cleanseth us from all sin. 10. The seventh-year-Sabbath had both an Ecclesiastical and a Civil use. For 1. it did set forth and commend to the people the spiritual Sabbath, which begineth in the expiation wrought by Christ. 2. It distinguished this Nation from others. 3. It exercised the people in confidence of God's Providence. 4. It much conduced to the fruitfulness of the fields, which, if exhausted with continual tillage, would have grown barren, and so an evil report would have passed of the holie Land. 11. The years of Jubilee had their Ecclesiastical, Political, and Chronological use. For 1. they signified the Jubilee of Grace and Glorie; both which Christ doth both proclaim, and confer upon his people. 2. They were a great help to the poor. 3. They preserved the distinction of Tribes. 4. They served to distinguish the times thence forth, from the division of the Land, in the year of the World 2050 to the destruction of Jerusalem. 5. They figured the Rest that the Land should have by the just judgments of God, for the sins of the people. SECT. V. Treating of Holie Things. HOlie Things, were either Common, as Oil; or Proper; and these again were either Principal, or less Principal. The Principal things were Sacrifices; the requisites whereof were three: viz. fire, salt, and fat: the kindes of Sacrifices were six; viz. 1. A whole-burnt-offering. 2. An Oblation or Meat-offering. 3. A Peace-offering. 4. A Sacrifice for sin of Ignorance, or Error. 5. A Sacrifice for wilful wickedness. 6. A Sacrifice of Consecration. The less principal things
perteined either to all in general, as First-fruits, tenths, vows, &c, Or to the Priest peculiarly; as, Incens, Holie-water, Trumpets. The application of these is thus. 1. Oil is said to bee a most holie thing, becaus use was made of it in the consecration of the Tabernacles, Priests, and People. It sigured out the oil of Gladness, that is, the gifts of the Holie Ghost, which Christ received without mea∣sure; and after that, by him, all the parts of the Church, both Pastors and all Christians; for all and onely such are annoin∣ted with the Oil of Gladness. Now this Oil was so made up of most pretious things, and the confection thereof by none to bee imitated, as might best set forth, that reprobates are not consecrated with the annointing of God's children. 2. The sire that came down from heaven, and was to bee con∣tinually kept alive signified four things. 1. The fire of God's wrath kindled and kept in by our sins. 2. The fire of God's favor, whereby our sins are consumed in Christ. 3. The fire of the Holie Spirit's operation upon all believers; but especially upon the Apostles and their successors. 4. Lastly, the fire of tribulation, which causseth us to asspire towards heaven. 3. The Salt of the Covenant was a symbol of incorrupti∣on; that is, of perpetual continuance in the Covenant of God: And so it signified, that everie faithful Christian is so confir∣med in the Covenant of God by Faith, that, by the salt of af∣fliction, hee is preserved against temptations and assaults of all sorts. 4. The Fat of the Sacrifices was holie to God alone: and hereby was signified, that wee ought to consecrate our choicest things to God; that so wee may obtein the fatness and sweet∣ness both of Grace and Glorie laid up for us in Christ. 5. A Rite common to all Sacrifices offered up of living creatures, was, the sprinkling of the blood by the Priest upon the Altar. Hereby was signified the blood of Christ, who, is both our Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice. Those great drops of his blood, I saie, are hereby signified, wherewith believer's hearts (which also are so manie altars) are sprinkled. 6. The whole-burnt-Sacrifice was an Offering whereby the Sacrificer testified that hee gave himself up wholly to Christ; and that hee believed, that Christ was his with all his benefits;
as also, that hee was all of a light flame with the fire of Charitie. 7. In the Meat-offering, it was not lawful to offer leaven, or anie thing that leaveneth, as honie: whereby was signified, that corruption both in Doctrine, Life, and Discipline, is to hee put far away, if wee would offer up our selves to God. 8. In Peace-offerings, leavened bread also was made use of: that together with our chearful praising of God, wee may re∣member our afflictions, the propertie whereof is to leaven the heart. Psalm 73.21. 9. The Waving of som part of the Sacrifice in Meat-offer∣ings and Peace-offerings, signified, the continual motion of our lips in Praiers and Praises. 10. The Sacrifice for Errors and infirmities signified, that all our sins are mortal, and cannot bee pardoned, but through Christ alone. 11. The Sacrifice of Consecration shewed the difference between the Levitical Priests and Christ: viz. that they had need to offer for their own sins; but hee, for the sins of his people onely. And these are the Cerimonial Sacrifices: all which signified the sacrifice of Christ, and the sacrifices of Christians; (such as are all their Moral works proceeding from Faith: viz. a contrite Spirit, Alms, Praier, &c.) And lastly, that offering up of the Gentiles mentioned by the Apostle. Rom. 15.16. Furthermore, in all Sacrifices, clean things onely were to bee offered: whereby was signified the puritie of Christ and of all his members. Like as the offering of Doves signified, that dove-like simplicitie of Christ and his people: which simpli∣citie proceedeth from the Holie Ghost, who is also represented by the Dove. 12. First-fruits were holie to God: and thereby, all a man's substance also was made holie. This signified 1. that the ho∣liness of Christ was the holiness of the whole Chruch. 2. That the children of believing parents are holie. 13. Tithes, by Divine Cerimonial right, belonged to the Priests for their maintenance: but by Moral right they were holie to God; who by this means required to bee ac∣knowledged the owner and giver of all good things. In the New Testament, Tithes, though they bee not
of necessitie, yet are they of perpetual equitie, as to the main∣tenance of the Ministerie. 14. The tenth of the Tithes (which the Levites out of their Tithes offered to the High-priest) signified the Prerogative of Christ; in whom wee are all tithed. 15. The Cerimonial Vow, and the Redemption thereof, was part of the Worship of God: yet without opinion of Sa∣tisfaction and Merit: this then make's nothing at all for those that now adaies impose upon the people laws of Vows, and Redemption of Vows, with an opinion of Necessitie▪ Satis∣faction, and Merit. Vows are a service pleasing to God, so they bee made and used freely; as, exercises of Pietie, and as helps thereunto. The same may bee said of things devoted. 16. Novals, were the fruits of trees, which for the three first years beeing accounted as uncircumcised, were in the fourth year offered up to the Lord: to teach us, that all our food is uncircumcised unto us by reason of sin, but is circumcised by Faith in Christ; beeing received with Praying, and Thanks∣giving. 17. The holie Perfume figured the grace of the Holy Ghost, wherewith the services of the Saints are sanctified. 17. The holie water of Attonement was a figure of that blessed fountain of Christs blood, ever running for the wash∣ing away of the filth of sin. 19. The burning of the Sacrifices, signified Christ burnt in the fire of his Father's wrath for our sins: but the burning of the garbage and excrements, shadowed out the crucifying of the old man. Lastly, those things that were not to bee burnt, noted the victorie of Christ, and of our faith. 20. The two Trumpets of silver were used by the Priest for causses Ecclesiastical and Civil. As to the former, they blew to call an Assemblie, and to rejoice spiritually; and this they did without an alarm. As to the later, they sounded to go forward, or to go forth to battle; and this was don with an alarm. By all which was signified, the glorious instancie and efficacie of God's faithful Ministers in reproving of sin, in preaching the glad tiding of salvation, and in stirring men up to the spiritual warfare.
SECT. VI. Of Holie Persons. HOlie Persons are considered either in general or more particular. That which is to bee taken notice of in the general, is, that God would not approve of anie work but what was don by a sacred person. To teach us, that good works pleas not God, unless the man that doth them bee first justified. More particularly; Holie Persons were either those that ser∣ved at the Altar, or other holie Ones: Those that served at the Altar, were the High-priest, the rest of the Priests, and the Levites. Those other holie Ones were the Nazarites, and clean persons. et us view them severally. 1. The office of the Priest was to offer Sacrifice, and to praie for the people: hereby was signified the Merit and Interces∣sion of Jesus Christ. 2. The Consecration of the Priests, and their freedom from all bodily blemish, signified the holiness of Christ, both habitual and actual. 3. The holie Garments, and their stately braverie signi∣fied the beautie and braverie of Christ and his Church. Psalm 45. 4. The Annointing of the High-priest signified the an∣nointing and appointing of Christ to his office of Mediator. 5. The holie Abstinence of the Priests signified the actual holiness of Christ. 6. The High-priest was a lively type of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle excellently set's forth in his Epistle to the Hebrews. The other Priests represented our dignitie in Christ, and our dutie toward him. 1 Pet. 2. Apoc. 1.5, 6. The High-priest sha∣dowed out both the Person and the Office of Christ. His Person, as hee was a man like unto other men, and yet superi∣or to them in Office and Ornaments: which Ornaments did thus represent the three-fold Office of Christ. The bells and pomegranates hanging at the hem of his garment signified the Prophetical Office of Christ. The Plate of Gold, where∣upon was engraven HOLINES TO THE LORD, signified his
Priestlie Office. The Bonnet, Mytre, upon the High-priest's head, typified his Kinglie Office. Other ornaments common to the High-priest, with the rest of the Priests, signified, part∣ly the gifts of Grace, and partly the Christian Armor, which the Apostle describeth. Ephes. 6. as consisting in the girdle of truth, the brest-plate of righteousness, &c. 7. Those twelv pretious stones in the Breast-plate, were a type of the old and new Church; that consisting of twelv Tribes, and this collected by twelv Apostles. Those two pre∣tious stones in the shoulder-piece, figured likewise those two Churches, as they have the two Testaments. Those two pre∣tious stones in the Breast-plate of Judgment, the Ʋrim and Thummim were a type of Christ, who is our onely Light and Perfection. 8. There was but One High-priest: there is but One Media∣tor betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. 9. The Priests onely did partake of the Sacrifices; so Chri∣stians onely have communion with Christ. 10. Aaron bore the Names of the Children of Israel before the Lord: So doth Christ his Church, and all the members thereof; for whom hee continually appear's in heaven. 11. The binding of woven work strengthened the robe that it might not rent: This signified the righteousness and strength of Christ for the salvation of his people, and subver∣sion of his enemies. 12. When Aaron entered into the holie Places, his bells gave a sound: Hereby was signified Christ's Intercession for us, the Spirits making request in us, and the dutie and propertie of all faithful Pastors. 13. The High-priest might not marrie anie but a virgin, from among his own people: This figured, that the Church was to bee presented unto Christ as a pure virgin. 14. The High-priest was forbidden to lament or to rent his garments: So Christ, after his Resurrection obteined Glorie and Joie, without anie mixture of grief or ignominie. 15. The Priests and Levites that served at the Tabernacle, figured the Ecclesiastical Hierarchie; as it admit's of divers Or∣ders and Degrees. 16. The Nazarite's Vow was, to separate himself unto the Lord by a special holiness: Hereby was signified the
puritie of Christ, and withal his countrie of Nazareth, by an allusion of name. 17. Those that were Legally unclean (either by meats, or carcasses of men, or leprosie) were first separated, and then cleansed. In like sort, all our sins of what size soever, do se∣parate us from God, and som of them from his Church also; beeing all expiated in, and by Christ alone. 17. The uncleanness of childe-bearing-women, set forth the filth of natural corruption. 19. The casting of Lepers out of the Camp, was a figure of Excommunication. 20. The hous and all the goods of Lepers were unclean, and therefore either burned or destroied: To teach us to abolish all instruments of Idolatrie. 21. Lepers, after they were cleansed, shewed themselvs to the Priest, who was to pronounce them clean: This was a type of Church-Absolution. 22. The Leper beeing cleansed was to offer two little Birds; whereof the one was killed, the other was let go free. Hereby was figured the death of Christ, and the power of his God∣head, in his Resurrection and Asscension. 23. Unclean meats were a part of the Jewish Pedagogie; and signified, that there is a mixture of clean and unclean per∣sons in the Church. It further figured that distinction of Jews from Gentiles; which distinction is now taken away by Christ. Acts 10. And hitherto Alstedius. Now let us proceed and go on where wee left, in explaining the Text. Ver. 18. They removed, &c.] viz. From the hill-foot where they stood and trembled. Deut. 4.11. They feared and fled. Man is , a creature that would fain live. Ver. 19. Aristot. Speak thou with us] See here what a mercie it is to have the minde of God made known by men like our selvs; that may saie unto unto us as Elihu did to Job, Behold, I am according to thy wish: I also am cut out of the claie: Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand bee beavie upon thee. Job 33.6, 7. Ver. 20. Fear not] And yet fear. Fear not this glorious appearance so much: but let it bring your cogitations to his future fearful appearance.
Ver. 21. stood afar off] Yea, God (tendering their infirmi∣tie) gave them leav to go home to their tents. Deut. 5.30, 31. Ver. 22. From heaven] For wheresoever God is, heaven is: as where the King is, there's the Court. Ver. 23. Yee shall not make with mee gods] Saie wee of such pettie Deities, as that Heathen did, Contemno minutulos istos de∣os, modò Jovem (Jehovam) mihi propitium habeam. I slight them all. Ver. 24. An Altar of earth] In opposition to the costlie shrines and services of those dunghil Deities. God care's not for outward pomp: Poperie is all for it, and scoff's at our sim∣plicitie. The God of the Protestants (saith a blasphemous Popeling) is the most uncivil and unmanner'd God, Jo Hnt in his Appeal to K. James cap. 6 of all those that have born the names of Gods upon earth; yea, wors then Pan the God of the Clowns; which can endure no cerimonies, nor good manners at all. Ver. 25. Thou hast polluted] Not polished it. So in preach∣ing. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Epistolae ornamentum est ornamentis carere: Politian. Plainnness commend's an Epistle. Nimio mundo studentes, Col. rus. ab im∣mundo propiùs absunt. Som mar all by over-doing. Ver. 26. That thy Nakedness] Wee blush, when taken naked; Nos, pudore pulso, stamus coleis aertis, ad publicos concbitus. as if the the blood would run forth to cover us; what beasts then were those Priests of Priapus, and those base Bacchanalists, that ran down naked? CHAP. XXI. Ver. 1. Now these are the judgments] i. e. THe Judicial Laws, fitly annexed to the Decalogue, where∣of the Civil Magistrate is the Lord-keeper. It was writ∣ten upon the sword of Charls the Great, Decem praeceptorum custos Carolus. Ver. 2. In the seventh year] No longer might they serv, be∣caus they were God's servants. Lev. 25.25. whose privilege see Isa. 65.13, 14. Christ's free-men. 1 Cor. 2.27. Ver. 3. If hee com in by himself] without a second-self, a yoke-fellow, standing on even-ground with himself, though drawing on the left side.
Ver. 4. Have given him a wife] viz. One of his Heathen hand-maids, whom to part with was no great punishment, becaus an unlawful couple. Ver. 5. I love my master] A little better then hee in Plautus that said, Ego non servio libenter; herus meus me non habet libenter, tamen utitur me ut lippis oculis. Ver. 6. And shee shall serv him] Beeing , as Aristotle hath it, the master's instrument, under∣ling, and wholly his. Hee doth his own and not his master's will, that doth no more then himself will: this is a holie∣daie servant as they saie. Ver. 7. Shee shall not go out] But upon better terms. Hee that was to come in the shape of a servant, il. 2. see what care hee take's of poor servant's welfare. Lawyers seldom speak but for great men, or when they may have great gifts. Christ is not of that humor. Ver. 8. Hee hath dealt deceitfully with her] By not answering her expectation. This God tolerated for the hardness of their hearts, but approved not. Ver. 9. After the manner of daughters] Not put her off (as they saie they do their daughters in Hungarie) without a por∣tion, onely with a new coat at their wedding: much less, set her to sale as the Thracians did their young brides; Quae non moribus nubebant sed praemiis. Solin. cap. 15. Ver. 10. Her dutie of marriage] See 1 Cor. 7. with the Note there. Ver. 11. And if hee do not anie of these three] Picus est imago ingrati mariti, Me anththon. quia sub autumnum ejicit conjugem nè cogatur per hye∣mem nutrire: postea sub vernum tempus eam ad se blandè revocat, ac in consortium recipit. Ver. 12. Shall bee surely put to death] See the Note on Gen. 9.6. Ver. 13. But God deliver him] Who is the Lord of our lives, and to whom wee have frequently forfeited them; so that it is his mercie that wee are not consumed. Lam. 3. That wee are not cut off from the land of the living. Ver. 14. Thou shalt take him, &c. A man that doth violence to the blood of anie person shall flee to the pit, let none staie him. Pro. 28.17. Where the word Adam rendered Man hath in the original a little d: to shew that a murtherer is not wor∣thie
to bee called a man; hee is to bee drawn from the Al∣tar to the slaughter. Ver. 15. Hee that smiteth] By the law of God, of Nature, and of Nations, such a man should die. And herein, I think our laws are defective: albeit, I am not of Carolostadius his minde, who (if Melanchthon misreport him not) held, that these Judicial Laws set down by Moses should bee still of force (and these onely) in Christian Common-wealths, and all other Civil and Municipal Laws abolished. Ver. 16. Hee that stealeth a man] A kin to these are they that steal other men's books, and father them; setting them out in their own names. Diagoras was so served by a Plagiarie, which when hee saw, and that the thief was not presently struck with a thunder-bolt, hee out of stomach turned Atheïst. Thus of late Fabricius stole Tremelius his Syriack Translation. Villavincentius stole Hyperius his Treatis De ratione studii Theolo∣gici. And Possevinus stole Dr. James his Cyprianus redivivus. Ver. 17. And hee that curseth] See the Note on Vers 15. and on Mat. 15.4. Ver. 18. If men strive together] This is counted man-hood, when indeed it is dog-hood rather: Heathens condemned it, Immane verbum est ultio. Seneca Qui ulciscitu, excusatiùs peccat. Sen. and yet Navarrus a Popish Calvist, Caedem rectè admitti putat, ut alapa vitetur, & ad honorem recuperandum. Ver. 20. Hee shall bee surely punished] At the discretion of the Magistrate, who is the revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evil. Rom. 13.4. Ver. 21. For hee is his monie] And therefore hee hath power over his flesh. Col. 3.22. Yet hide not thine eies from thine own flesh, saith the Prophet. Isa. 58.7. Ver. 22. And no mischief follow] i. e. No life bee lost. There is a time then, when the embryo is not alive; therefore the soul is not begotten, but infused after a time by God. Infun∣dendo creatur, & creando infunditur, saith Aug. who at first doubt∣ed, till overcom by Hierom's arguments. Augustin. Ver. 24. Eie for eie] How the Pharisees had wrested that Text, See the Note on Mat. 5.39. This kinde of law (in use among Heathens also) Aristotle call's , and was given against private revenge. Ver. 28. Then the ox shall bee surely stoned] God requiring man's blood even of beasts. Gen. 9.5. See the Note there.
Ver. 29. Hee hath killed a man, &c.] Since the fall, all crea∣tures are armed against us; as that sword which Hector gave Ajax; which so long as hee used against men (his enemies) ser∣ved for help and defence: but after hee began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtless beasts, it turned into his own bowels. Ver. 32. Thirtie shekels] This same was that goodly price, that our Lord Christ was valued at by the vile Jews. Zach. 11.12, 13. Mat. 26.15. Ver. 33. And an ox or an ass] Wee can hardly open the deep pit of God's bottomless, boundless mercie, but som sillie beast will bee falling thereinto; stumbling at the Word, beeing disobedi∣ent, whereunto also they were appointed. 1 Pet. 2.8. Ver. 36. Ox for ox] These where those right judgments, true laws, good statutes, &c. Neh. 9.13. CHAP. XXII. Ver. 1. When a man shall steal, &c.] THe Persians at this daie punish theft and man-slaughter so severely, The Preachers Travels by Cartwright. that in an age a man shall hardly hear either of the one or the other. The Turk's justice will rather cut off two innocent men, then let on thief escape. Ver. 2. If a thief bee found] So if an adulteress bee taken, as shee was. John 8.4. , in the verie theft. Ver. 3. If the sun bee risen] Chaldee hath it, If the eie of witnesses: if hee can rais the town, and call in aid. Ver. 4. Hee shall restore double] In Solomon's time it was seven-fold. Prov. 6.31. Ver. 5. To bee eaten] By unadvised turning in of his cattle, through mistake or neglect. Ver. 6. Or the field] The stubble. Ver. 7. Or stuff] Heb. Vessels, instruments, ornaments, ap∣parel, furniture, weapons, &c. Ver. 8. To see whether] sc. by putting him to his oath Ver. 11. Som think that a private oath may bee in such a case as this lawfully taken for the satisfaction of another, if hee will not otherwise bee satisfied. Ver. 9. Before the Judges] Heb. the Gods: So Judges are
called, if good especially. Psal. 82.6. And the seat of Judica∣ture is called the holie place. Eccles. 8.10. Ver. 10. Or anie beast to keep] As Jacob kept Laban's cattle. Gen. 31.39. Ver. 11. An oath of the Lord] Who is called in, as a witness and as an avenger: how hateful then is that Popish proverb and practise, Mercatorum est, non regum, stare juramentis? Ver. 13. Let him bring it] A leg, or a limb of it, as Amos 3.12. Ver. 14. And if a man borrow] God hath so ordered humane condition that one man must bee beholden to another. Ver. 15. It came for his hire] q. d. Hee shall paie the hire onely and no more, though the owner bee not by, when it miscarrieth. Ver. 16. Entice a maid] Heb. Over-perswade with her, by fair words, which make fools fain. Ver. 17. Hee shall paie] No mulct is laid upon her, becaus shee had nothing of her own; and shee had lost her honor, in losing her virginitie. 1 Thes. 4.4. See the Note there. Ver. 18. A witch] An enchantress, sorceress, whose help was somtimes sought, in inticing young maids to follie. The man-witch also is here meant, Vatab. but the woman-witch mentio∣ned; both becaus women are more inclinable to that sin; and also becaus the weaker sex is not to bee spared for this fault. Junius. Ver. 19. Bee put to death] Heb. Put him to die. Gr. kill him with death, as God threatneth to do Jezabel's children. Rev. 2.23. Ver. 20. Hee shall bee utterly destroied] As an execrable and accursed creature. Ver. 21. Thou shalt not vex a stranger] The right of strangers is so holie (saith one) that there was never nation so barbarous that would violate the same. When Stephen Gardner had in his power the renowned Divine Peter Martyr, Acts and Mon fol. 1783. then teaching at Ox∣ford, hee would not keep him to punish him; but when hee should go his waie, gave him wherewith to bear his charges. Ver. 22. Or fatherless childe] With God the fatherless fin∣deth mercie. Hos. 14.3. Widdows and orphans are God's cli∣ents taken into his protection. Ver. 23. And they crie at all unto mee] A vine, whose root is uncovered, thrive's not: so a widdow, whose covering of eies
is taken away, Mercer. in Proverb. joie's not. In Hebrew shee is called Almanach of Alam to bee dumb; becaus shee hath none to speak for her. But if shee call and crie to God, hee will speak for her in the hearts of her oppressors. Ver. 24. Your wives shall bee widdows] God delight's to pu∣nish crueltie in kinde, as hee did in Agag. 1 Sam. 15.33. Ver. 25. Thou shalt not bee to him as an usurer] Heb. as an exacting creditor, Qui nullum diem gratìs occidere creditori permittit. The usurer's monie is to necessitie, like cold water to a hot ague, that for a time refresheth, but prolongeth the diseas. [Laie upon him usurie] Heb. Biting usurie. Usurers are men-eaters. Psalm 14.4. Like pickrels in a pond, or sharks in the sea that devour the lesser fishes. These ostriches can digest anie metal, especially monie. Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 1. Aristotle in one page condemneth the usurer and the dicer; and yet som Christians blush at neither. Ver. 28. Thou shalt not revile the Gods] Blaspheme dignities. This is blasphemie in the second Table. Jude 8. Ver. 29. Thou shalt not delaie] True obedience is prompt and present, readie and speedie, without demur and consults, Zech. 5.9. wings and winde in their wings. [On the eighth daie] When a Sabbath had once gon over it, saie the Hebrews. Ver. 30. Holie men] Heb. Men of holiness, which should run through our whole lives, as the woof doth through the web. CHAP. XXIII. Ver. 1. Thou shalt not rais] NEither rais nor receiv it; neither bee the tale-bearer, nor tale-hearer: the one carrie's the divel in his tongue, the other in his ear. Not onely those that make a lie, but those that love it when it is made to their hands, are shut out of hea∣ven. Rev. 22.15. Solomon make's it an ill sign of a graceless man, to bee apt to beleev scandalous reports of godlie persons. Prov. 17.4. Ver. 2. Thou shalt not follow a multitude] The waie to hell is broad and well-beaten. Per viam publicam nè ingredere, was one of Pythagoras his precepts: Do not as the most do, lest thou bee
undon for ever. Argumentum turpissimum est turba, saith Seneca. To live according to the cours of the world is to bee acted by the divel. Ephes. 2.2. Ver. 3. Neither shalt thou countenance] Spare not the great for their might, nor the mean for their miserie. Ver. 4. Ox, or his ass going astraie] How much more his soul? See the Notes on Jam. 5.20. Jude 22, 23. Ver. 5. Thou shalt surely help with him] So the Spirit help's with us; or list's over against us. Rom. 8.26. . Hee look's ut acti agamus. Ver. 6. The judgment of the poor] I have seen (saith one) the King of Persia manie times to alight from his hors, The Preachers Travels by J. Cartwright. onely to do justice to a poor bodie. Causses are to bee heard and not persons: the Athenian Judges passed sentence in the dark. Ver. 7. Keep thee from a fals matter] Stand aloof of, keep at a distance. See Isa. 33.15. A publike man should bee above all price or sale: and everie man should carefully keep himself from the occasions of sin. A good man dare not com near the train, though hee bee far off the blow. Ver. 8. And thou shalt take no gift] Rain is good, and ground is good; yet Ex eorum conjunctione fit lutum, saith Stapleton: So giving is kinde, and taking is courteous, yet the mixing of them make's the smooth paths of Justice foul and uneven. Ver. 9. Thou shalt not oppress, &c.] See the Note on Exod. 22.21. Ver. 10. Thou shalt sow thy land] Here the wise man's coun∣sel would bee remembered, Laudato ingentia rura, exiguum colito. To bee called a good husbandman, was of old an high prais. Ver. 11. But the seventh year] That they might learn to live by faith, and bee at good leisure to wait upon God. Deut. 31.10, 11, 12. Let everie of us keep a spiritual Sabbath, saith Ignatius, , Ep. 3. ad Magnes. Better apaid of the meditation of the Law, then of the relaxation and rest from labor. Ver. 12. Six daies] See the Note on Chap. 20.8. Ver. 13. Bee circumspect] Or warie, keep you close to the rule, and up to your principles. See the Note on Ephes. 5.15. [Of the names of other Gods] sc. Without dislike. The Pri∣mitive Christians would not call their daies of the week, Dies Martis, Mercurii, &c. as Mercurius Trismegistus had named them; but the first, second, third, &c. daie of the week, Deastrorum
nomina nè nota quidem esse voluerunt inter Christi cultores, saith one. They desired that Christians should spit out of their mouths those dunghill-deïties with utmost contempt, as David did. Psalm 16.4. Ver. 15. Thou shalt keep the feast] Let us also keep the feast, or Holie-daie. 1 Cor. 5.8. See the Note there. Ver. 16. And the feast of harvest] Pentecost, when their wheat-harvest came in. [In the end of the year] See the reason of this law. Deut. 11.12. It was a land which the Lord cared for: the eies of the Lord were alwaies upon it from the begin∣ing of the year, even unto the end of the year. Ver. 17. All thy males] The female are not required to ap∣pear, becaus they were weak, and not so fit for travel: they were also the hous-keepers, and sanctified in their husbands. Howbeit manie of them came up to these feasts, as Hannah. 1 Sam. 2.19. And the virgin Marie. Luke 2.41. And this was well accepted as a Free-will-offering. Ver. 18. Of my sacrifice] Especially of the Passover. See Exod. 34.25. Lev. 2.1, 2, 3. Ver. 19. The first of the first-fruits] The best of the best is not to bee held too good for God. His soul hath desired the first ripe fruits. Jer. 2.2. [Thou shalt not seeth a kid] Hereby seemeth to bee forbidden either crueltie, or curiositie to pleas the palat. See my Common-place of Abstinence. Ver. 20. Behold, I send an Angel] i. e. Christ. Immediately after God had given the Law (by the rule and threats whereof God the Father in his government was to proceed, Mr. Th. Good∣win. saith a Di∣vine) and after they had transgressed it. Exod. 33.2, 3, 4. hee could not go along with them, for hee should destroie them: but his Angel, that is, his Son, hee would send with them; who also would destroie them, if they turned not, nor repented according to the rules of his Law, the Gospel. Ver. 21. My name is in him] i. e. Hee is of the same nature with my self. See Phil. 2.6. Heb. 1.3. with the Notes there. Ver. 22. An enemie to thine enemies] There is a Covenant offensive and defensive betwixt God and his people. Tua caussa erit mea caussa, said that Emperor to his wronged friend: So saith God to his. Ver. 23. For mine Angel] Heb. Malachi, which is by trans∣position of letters Michael, as som Rabbins have observed.
Ver. 24. Thou shalt utterly overthrow them] As Hen. 8. began here to do in demolishing the Monasteries, and saying, Corvo∣rum nidos esse penitùs disturbandos nè iterùm ad habitandum convo∣lent. This Sanders relateth and exagitateth. Schism. Angl. lib. 1. Ver. 25. Bless thy bread] God's blessing is the staff of bread and strength of water. See the Note on Mat. 4.4. Ver. 26. The number of thy daies] Thou shalt die; as Abraham did, with a good hoar head: bee satur dierum as Job, fall as a full-ripe-apple into the hands of God the gatherer. Ver. 27. My fear before thee] Strike a panick fear into the hearts of thine enemies, so that they shall flee at the nois of a driven leaf, they shall bee made à corde suo fugitivi, as Tertul∣lian hath it. Ver. 28. Hornets before thee] Understand it either literally as Josh. 24.12. or figuratively, of the stinging terrors of their self-condemning consciences. Ver. 29. In one year] God's time is best: and to prescribe to him is to set the sun by our dial. His help seem's long, becaus wee are short. Wait upon him, who wait's to shew us mercie. Isa 30.18. Ver. 30. By little and little] God crumble's his mercies to us; wee have his blessing by retail. So the cloud emptie's not it self at a sudden burst, but dissolv's upon the earth drop after drop. Ver. 31. The sea of the Philistims] i. e. the Mediterranean. Ver. 32. No covenant with them] becaus devoted to destructi∣on; and they will bee drawing thee to Idolarrie, as it also fell out, Judg. 1. & 2. CHAP. XXIIII. Ver. 1. Worship yee afar off] THus under the Law, but now by grace wee draw nigh with boldness, and have access with confidence by the faith of Christ. Ephes. 3.12. See the Note there. Ver. 2. But they shall not com nigh] But half-waie onely. Vers 19. See the Note on Chap. 19.12. Ver. 3. And told the people] So hee became a Mediator.
Gal. 3.19. Non redemptionis sed relationis. [Will wee do] God's people are willing. Psalm 110.3. But weak through the flesh. Rom. 8.3. See the Note on Heb. 13.18. Ver. 4. An Altar] Representing God on the one partie, as the twelv pillars did the people on the other partie. So here was a formal covenant. Ver. 5. Young men] The first-born of the families. Exod. 19.12. Ver. 6. Half of the blood] Having mingled it first with wa∣ter. Heb. 9.19. See 1 John 5.6. with the Note. Ver. 7. Will wee do, and bee obedient] Christ will enjoie his spouses love, by a willing contract, not by a ravishment. Ver. 8. On the people] The representative people, the elders: or, as others will, the twelv pillars. See Vers 4. Ver. 9. And seventie of the elders] See Vers 2. Ver. 10. And they saw God] A glimps of his glorie. See the Note on 1 Tim. 6.16. Ver. 11. Hee laid not his hand] i. e. They came off without hurt, which is reckoned as a great mercie: sith no man (ordi∣narily) can see God and live: besides the infinite distance that is betwixt God, and the greatest Nobles. [And did eat and drink] i. e. They were much acheared and made merrie in the Lord. Others sens it thus: Though they had seen God, yet they turned again to temporal pleasures; they soon after ate & drunk at that idolatrous feast of the golden calf, and rose up to plaie. It is set as an aggravation of Solomon's sin that hee de∣parted from God that appeared to unto him twice. 1 King. 11.9. Ver. 12. Tables of stone] To shew 1. the stonie-hardness of the people's hearts. 2. The lastingness of the Law. Ver. 13. And Moses went up] Joshua staid the while in som convenient place. Ver. 14. And Hur] See the Note on Chap. 17.10. Ver. 16. Six daies] The people had but three daies of pre∣paration to receiv the Law; Moses hath six. Singular holiness is required of Ministers: the measures of the Sanctuarie were double to the ordinarie; as the shekel, cubit, &c. Ministers had need wish, as Elisha did, a doubled and trebled spirit, that they may save themselvs, and those that hear them. Ver. 17. Was like devouring fire] So it is still. Heb. 12.29. which so terrisieth the sinners in Sion, that they run away with these words in their mouths, Who among us shall dwell
with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. Ver. 18. Fortie daies] All which time hee neither ate nor drank. Deut. 9.9. and so better merited the sirname of Nesteu∣tes the Faster, then that proud Prelate John Bishop of Con∣stantinople. CHAP. XXV. Ver. 2. That giveth it willingly] VIrtus nolentium nulla est; God strain's upon no man. If yee consent and obeie, &c. If there bee a willing minde, God accepteth, &c. 2 Cor. 8.11, 12. Si desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas: Ovid. Hác ego contentos auguror esse Deos. Ver. 3. Gold, and silver, and brass] No mention of iron: Confer 1 King. 6.7. & 8.51. Ver. 4. And blue, and purple, and scarlet] i. e. Wool died with these colors. Heb. 9.19. To teach the Church, that both themselvs and their actions should bee washed and died in the bloud of Christ. Ver. 5. Shittim wood] A kinde of cedar, that rotteth not. Gal. lib. 1. Antidit. Ver. 6. Spices] As cinnamom, which in Galen's time was verie rare, and hard to bee found but in Prince's store-houses. Ver. 8. That I may dwell amongst them] But will God in verie deed dwell with men upon earth? 2 Chron. 6.18. What can hee do more to make them happie? As hee in Plutarch said of the Scythians, that although they had no musick nor vines amongst them, yet (as a better thing) they had Gods: and as the Philosopher having little els in his hous, yet could saie of it, , Here bee Gods: so may everie good man boast of his hous, and of his heart, Heb. 3.6.2 Cor. 6.16. Gen. 28.17. This is the habitation of the most High. As for the publick assemblie of Saints, This is the hous of God, this is the gate of Heaven. Ver. 10. An Ark] Chest, or Cabinet, wherein to keep the two Tables of the Law; signifying thereby that Christ is the end of the Law, covering the imperfection of our works. Ver. 11. A crown of gold] To set forth the Majestie of
Christ's kingdom, or the eternitie of his Deïtie; which, as a crown, or circle, had neither begining nor end. Ver. 14. That the Ark may bee born with them] The Ark was transportative, till settled in Solomon's Temple: so till wee com to heaven shall wee bee in a continual motion: Ver. 15. The staves shall bee, &c.] That they might not touch it, for reverence sake, it beeing a visible sign of God himself amongst them. Ver. 16. The Testimonie] Those tables of the Testimonie. Exod. 31.18. That testified what God required of them; and would bee a testimonie against them, if disobedient. Deut. 31.26. Ver. 17. A Mercie-seat] Heb. A Covering, or coffering up of men's sins, the appeasing of an angrie God. (Confer Gen. 38.20.) By Christ who is our propitiation or Mercie-seat. Rom 3.25.1 John 2.2. [Two cubits and a half, &c.] Just so big everie waie as the Ark. Vers 10. Get into Covenant with God (saith one) for as the Mercie-seat was no larger then the Ark, so neither is the grace of God then the Covenant. And as the Ark and Mercie-seat were not asunder; so God is near to all that call upon him in truth. Ver. 18. And thou shalt make two Cherubims] Golden winged images, made by God's special appointment, and set out of sight: Hence then is no warrant for the use of images in Chur∣ches. These here were to represent the holie Angels attendent upon God, looking intently into the mysterie of Christ, as the Cherubims did into the Propitiatorie. 1 Pet. 1.12. and joined to the societie of Saints. Ver. 19. Even of the Mercie-seat] Of the matter of it: to shew that the verie Angels have their establishment in, and by Christ: and that, if they need mereie, how much more do wee? Angels also are under Christ as a head of Government, of In∣fluence, of Confirmation, though not of Redemption. Ver. 20. Toward the Mercie-seat shall the faces, &c.] Angels in the Syriack are called  of the face; becaus they look ever on the face of God, waiting his commands. Ver. 21. Above upon the Ark] The Ark covering the Law within it, the Mercie-seat upon it, and over them two Cheru∣bims covering one another, did typifie Christ covering the curses of the Law, in whom is the ground of all Mercie;
which things the Angels desire to prie into, as into the pattern of God's deep wisdoms. Ver. 22. From between the two Cherubims] which covered the place from whence the Lord spake, to restrain curiositie. Ver. 23. Of Shittim wood] Which corrupteth not. Isa. 41.19. Christ's bodie could not putrefie in the grave. Ver. 24. Pure gold] Pointing to the glorie of Christ's Deïtie, and the Majestie of his Kingdom. Ver. 25. A golden crown] To hide the joints, and for or∣nament. Christ also is said to have manie crowns. Rev. 19.12. Ver. 30. Shew-bread] See the Note on Mat. 12.4. Ver. 31. And thou shalt make a candlestick] called the candle∣stick of light. Exod. 35.14. A Type of Christ, who is  light essential, and giveth light to everie man that cometh into the world. John 1.9. See the Note there. Ver. 37. Seven lamps] Signifying the manifold graces and diversitie of gifts in the Church. Zech. 4.2. Ver. 38. And the tongs] All of gold; betokening the puritie of Doctrine and Discipline in the Church. CHAP. XXVI. Ver. 1. Thou shalt make the Tabernacle] AType of Christ who dwelt among us, full of Graces and Truth. John 1.14.2. Of the Church built by Christ. 1 Cor. 3.9.3. Of everie true Christian. Ephes. 2.10. Ver. . Shall bee coupled together] These curtains were cou∣pled with loops, so should Christians by love. My dove is but one: the daughters saw her and blessed her. Cant. 6.9. See Ephes. 2.21, 22. & 4.16. Ver. 6. With the taches] So is the unitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Ephes. 4.3. [Shall bee one Tabernacle] See those manie Ones. Ephes. 4.3, 4, 5. with the Notes there. Ver. 7. Of goat's-half] The Tabernacle was goat's hair with∣out, and gold within. God hid his Son under the Carpenter's son: The King's daughter is all glorious within. Psalm 45.13. And all her sons are Princes in all lands. Vers 16. Howbeit they must bee content to pass to heaven as Christ their Head
did, as concealed men. Therefore the world know's us not, be∣caus it knew not him. John 3.1. Our life is hid with Christ, Col. 3.4. as the life of flowers in winter is hid in the root. Ver. 14. A covering for the tent] Shadowing out God's pro∣tecting his people. Isa. 4.6. and 25.4. Psalm 27.5. as these ram's-skins covered the Ark from the violence of winde and weather. Ver. 31. With Cherubims] To note the special presence and attendence of the holie Angels in the assemblies of the Saints. Luke 1.11. John 1.51. Ver. 36. An hanging for the door] This shadowed him that said of himself, I am the door. The Cerimonial Law was the Jews Gospel, for it was Christ in figure; and to him it led them. CHAP. XXVII. Ver. 1. Five cubits long] SOlomon's Altar was four times as big as this: to teach, that as our peace and prosperitie is more then others, so should our service in a due proportion. Ver. 2. Horns of it] To binde the beasts unto that were to bee slain in sacrifice. Psalm 118.27. And to signifie the power of Christ's Priest-hood. Hab. 3.4. [Thou shalt over-laie it with brass] The brass kept the wood, so did the Deïtie of Christ keep his humanitie from beeing consumed by the fire of God's wrath, wherein it was rosted. Ver. 3. His shovels and his basins.] These several instruments figured the Ministerie of the word, saie som; the sundrie cal∣lings that Christ hath in his Church, saie others, for her edification. Ver. 4. A. grate] which served for an hearth, and represen∣ted Christ, bearing the fire of his Father's displeasure. Ver. 7. And the staves shall bee] As ever readie to remove. Here wee have no assured settlement. Ver. 9. The court of the Tabernacle] This outer court signi∣fied the visible Church; where hypocrites also com to the ex∣ternal worships. Doeg may set his foot as far as David.
Ver. 10. And the twentie pillars] In allusion whereunto, the Church is called the pillar and staie of truth. 1 Tim. 3.15. Ver. 20. Pure oil olive] Signifying the pretious gifts and graces of the Spirit in godlie Ministers, whose lips must both preserv knowledg, and present it to the people. CHAP. XXVIII. Ver. 1. Take thou unto thee] CHrist also was taken from amongst men. Heb. 5.1. to me∣diate and negotiate man's caus with God: And this ho∣nor hee assumed not up to himself, but it was given him from above. Vers. 5. Ver. 2. For glorie and for beautie] Prodit Aäron à capite ad cal∣cem, os humerósque Deo similis. The High-priest was gloriously apparelled, to strike a religious reverence into the eies and hearts of the beholders; and to set forth the beautie and braverie of Christ and his Church. Ver. 3. That they may make, &c.] Vides, in Sacerdotibus nîl plebeium reperiri, nîl populare, saith Ambrose. Nothing in the Priests but what was above the ordinarie. The verie work-men are to bee filled with the Spirit of Wisdom, to make their attire. Ver. 5. And they shall take gold and blue, &c.] That cloke of Alcisthenes the Sybarite (sold for 1 20. talents) that Parliament-robe of Demetrius King of Macedonie, Athenaeus. (which no Prince after him would put on propter invidiosam impendii magnificentiam, sot it's stately costliness) were but rags to Aaron's raiment. Ver. 6. The ephod of gold] This the High-priest onely might wear, neither might anie imitate it; for that was the fall of Gideon's hous. Judg. 8.26, 27. Ver. 12. And Aaron shall bear their names] To set forth Christ's uncessant intercession for all God's Israël, even when his back seem's turned upon them. Ver. 14. Fasten the wreathen chains] These chains wherewith the breast-plate and humeral were tied, Moses unvail. signified (saith one) the perfect contexture of all heavenlie virtues, adorning Christ's humanitie: as also that true saith, whereby wee are girt unto him.
Ver. 15. The breast plate of judgment] So called, becaus the Priest was to put it on, when hee was to enquire and give sen∣tence as from God. Num. 27.21. Ver. 17. Four rows of stones] According to the number and order of the twelv Tribes encamping about God's Tabernacle. In all which rows, Dr. Tailor. a verie Reverend Writer hath well obser∣ved eight things: 1. The shining of the stones; pointing to the puritie of Christ and his Church. 2. Their price; of great value and worth: signifying what a price Christ valued his Church at. 3. Their place or situation; they are set in the pectoral, and Aaron must carrie them on his heart, signifying that Christ hath as much care of his Church, as if it were in∣closed in his heart; let's out his blood to make room in his heart for them. 4. Their number; twelv; noting, that with Christ is plentiful redemption. 5. Their order; they stood in a comlie quadrangle. Christ hath stablished a comlie order in his Church; and wee must keep our ranks. 6. The figure; the four-square; signifying the stabilitie and firmness of the Church. Satan and all deceivers shall not pick one stone out of Christ's pectoral. Their use; that Aaron must bear them on his heart; signifying Christ's ardent affection to his, and constant inter∣cession for them. 8. The quantitie: As all the names of Israël were gathered into a narrow compass; so Christ shall gather together into one all the dispersed sons of God, and present them before God as the most beautiful and pretious parts of the world. John 11.52. Ver. 30. The Ʋrim and the Thummim] A distinct thing from the stones and chains; made it was not by the Artificers, but given by God to Moses (as were the two Tables) and by him put into the breast-plate. The verie names of Ʋrim and Thum∣mim, i. e. Lights and perfections lead us to Christ, in whom is all fulness. [When hee goeth in before the Lord] sc. to consult with God, who answered the Priest by voice. Num. 7.89. Ver. 31. The robe of the ephod] Which signified the roial robe of Christ's righteousness, reaching down to the feet, large enough to cover all our imperfections. Ver. 32. That it bee not rent] To shew that there should bee no rents or schisms in the Church. 1 Cor. 1.10, 13.1 Tim. 1.3. Ver. 34. A golden bell, and a pomegranate] Shadowing out 1. The Prophetical office of Christ here, and his perpetual in∣tercession
in heaven. 2. The dutie of Ministers; which is, Vivere concionibus, concionari moribus: to live sermons, to bee fruitful as well as painful teachers: Not like him of whom it was said, that when hee was out of the pulpit, it was pitie hee should ever go into it: and when hee was in the pulpit, it was pitie hee should ever com out of it. Ver. 35. And his sound shall bee heard] Necesse erat ut Pontifex totus vocalis ingrederetur sanctuarium, nè fortè non audito sonitu, morte lueret silentium. A dumb dog is a childe of death. Isa. 56.10. Ministers must bee both able and apt to teach upon all oc∣casions. Ver. 36. Holiness to the Lord] Hence it was not lawful for the High-priest (saie the Jews) to put off his bonnet to whom∣soever hee met, were hee never so great a man; lest the Name and Glorie of God (whose person hee susteined) should seem to submit to anie man. Ver. 37. Ʋpon the mitre] Which had an holie crown with it. Chap. 29.6. signifying the Deïtie and Dignitie of Christ. Ver. 38. The iniquitie of the holie things] Get the people's pardon. This Christ did indeed for all his. 1 John 2.1, 2. Ver. 39. Embroider the coat] Rev. 1.13. Christ is clothed with such a robe, as King and Counsellor of his Church. Ver. 40. Coats] Linnen garments for innocencie. 2. Girdles for constancie and stabilitie. 3. Bonnets, for safetie from the rage of Satan and his instruments. 4. Breeches, for comlie re∣verence in God's service. CHAP. XXVI. Ver. 1. Take one young bullock] ALL sorts of Sacrifices (Sin-offerings, Burnt-offerings, Peace-offerings) were to bee offered for the Priests, be∣caus of the special holiness and honor of their calling. Ver. 2. And unleavened bread] See 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. with the Notes there. Ver. 4. Wash them with water] A type of Christ's Baptism, Matth. 3. Ver. 6. The holie crown] See the Note on Chap. 28.37.
Ver. 7. The annointing oil] Typing out that abundance of the holie Spirit powred upon Christ. Isa. 61.1. and upon Christians. 1 John 2.27. Psalm. 133.2. Ver. 8. Coats, &c.] See the Note on Chap. 28.40. Ver. 9. Consecrate] Heb. Fill their hands, se. with sacrifices: they were not to fill their own hands, as Jeroboam's Priests did. 1 King. 13.31. See Heb. 5.5. Ver. 10. Shall put their hands] As transferring the guilt of their sins upon Christ. Isa. 53.6. Ver. 11. By the door] Pointing to Christ, the door into heaven. Heb. 10.20. Ver. 12. The blood of the bullock] For without blood, there was no remission of sin. [Beside the bottom of the Altar] To signifie the plenteous Redemption wrought by Christ. Ver. 13. All the fat that covereth] God must have the verie best of the best; sith Christ offered himself, and the best parts hee had. Ver. 14. Without the camp] See the Note on Heb. 13.12. and on Heb. 7.27, 28. Ver. 15. Thou shalt also take] After the Sin-offering, other offerings: till sin bee expiated, no service is accepted. Ver. 16. Sprinkle it] See 1 Pet. 1.2. Ver. 17. Wash the inwards of him] This signified that intire holiness, that through sanctification. 1 Thes. 5.23. Ver. 18. The whole ram] Rom. 1.1. with the Note. Ver. 19. Put their hands] Both their hands between the horns of the ram. Ver. 20. Ʋpon the tip of the right ear] To set forth the holie obedience required of them in all their senses, actions and mo∣tions. Iohn 13.5, 6, 9. Ver. 21. Of the blood, and of the annointing oil] Signifying Christ's Merit and Spirit. Ver. 22. A ram of the consecration] A Thank-offering to God for advancing Aaron to the Priest-hood. See the like in S. Paul. 1 Tim. 1.12. Ver. 23. Ʋnleavened bread] See 1 Cor. 5, 7, 8. with the Notes there. Ver. 24. And shalt wave them] As acknowledging God's Omnipresence: and that manie should com from East, West, North, and South, to partake of the Merits & Benefits of Christ, our true sacrifice.
Ver. 25. It is an offering made by fire] Christ in like sort ha∣ving offered himself for a Burnt-offering, for a sweet savor be∣fore the Lord, asscended up into heaven, and gave gifts unto men. Ver. 26. It shall bee thy part] Becaus hee did for this time extraordinarily execute the Priest's office. Ver. 27. The breast of the Wave-offering and shoulder] To teach the Priests to serv the Lord with all their hearts, and with all their strength. Ver. 28. A Heav-offering] Signifying the heaving of Christ upon the Cross, and the heaving up of our hearts to God for so great benefits. Ver. 29. Shall bee his sons after him] His garments remai∣ned for ever, so doth the robe of Christ's righteousness. Isa. 61.10. Ver. 30. And that son] There were garments but for one: there is but one Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus. Ver. 31. And thou shalt take the ram] i. e. The remnant of him. Ver. 33. And they shall eat those things] Applie Christ's death by faith to their own souls. John 6.51. Ver. 34. Thou shalt burn the remainder] The Thank-offer∣ing was not to bee kept till the morrow, to teach us to bee prompt and present in praising God, and applying Christ. Ver. 35. Seven daies] To teach the Priest's to consecrate their whole lives to God's service. Ver. 36. Cleans the Altar] Which as well as the creatures, may bee defiled by man's sin. Lev. 16.16. Ver. 37. Whatsoever toucheth the Altar] See Matth. 23.19. with the Note there. Ver. 38. Daie by daie continually] When this dailie sacrifice was intermitted (as in the daies of Antiochus that little Anti-Christ) they counted it an abomination of desolation. Ver. 39. Thou shalt offer in the morning] These two lambs were types of the Lamb of God, taking away the sins of the world, with a commemoration of whose benefits the daie was begun and ended. Wherefore, also from David's daies, and forwards, they sang the 22 Psalm at the Morning Sacrifice, and the 136 Psalm at the Evening. Ver. 45. And I will dwell] See the Note on 2 Cor. 6.16.
CHAP. XXX. Ver. I. An Altar to burn incens in] SHadowing Christ, as perfuming and presenting the Praiers of Saints. Rev. 8.3. and 5.8. and obteining answer thereto from the four horns of the golden Altar. Rev. 9.13. Ver. 2. A cubit shall bee the length] That in Ezekiel, Chap. 41.22. is much larger, as setting forth the service of God under the Gospel. Ver. 3. Overlaie it with pure gold] Shadowing Christ's Deï∣tie, yielding glorie to his humanitie. [A crown of gold round about] To shew, that Devotion is a rich roial virtue, best be∣seeming the best Princes. Ver. 6. Where I will meet with thee] To give oracles and an∣swers of Mercie. God still meeteth him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness. Isa. 64.5. Ver. 7. Shall burn thereon sweet incens] Facium & vespae favos. The Heathens had the like custom; Verbenásque adole pingues, Virgil. & mascula thura. Ver. 8. And when Aaron lighteth the lamps] To shew, that our praiers must bee made according to the light and direction of God's Word, lest wee ask wee know not what, and wor∣ship wee know not how. Ver. 10. An attonement upon the horns of it] Pardon must bee sought for the defects found in praiers; as Nehemiah craved mer∣cie for his Reformations. Ver. 12. That there bee no plague] David in numbering the people, neglected this dutie: thence the plague. Ver. 13. half a shekel] Towards the making of the Taber∣nacle; and as an amercing himself for his sin, that subjected him to utter destruction. Vers 15. Ver. 15. The rich shall not give more] They are both of a price, becaus in spirituals they are equal. 2 Pet. 1.1. Ver. 16. That it may bee a memorial] A perpetual poll-monie, in token of homage and subjection to the Almightie. Ver. 18. Between the Tabernacle and the Altar] The laver and Altar situated in the same court, signified the same; as the water and blood issuing out of Christ's side; viz. the
necessarie concurrence of Justification and Sanctification in all that shall bee saved. Ver. 19. For Aaron and his sons] Here they were to wash, be∣fore they praied for the people. Heb. 10.22. Wee must first make our own peace with God before wee take upon us to intercede for others. So did David. Psalm 25.22. and Psalm 51.18, 19. So wee are advised to do. Lam. 3.39, 40. Ver. 21. That they die not] Com not to an untimelie end, as they did. Lev. 10.1, 2. Ver. 26. And thou shalt annoïnt the Tabernacle] So to con∣secrate the same to God's service, and to set forth how joifully and gladly men should serv the Lord. Ver. 29. Whatsoever toucheth them] So are all those annoin∣ted holie, that by a lively faith touch the Lord Christ. Ver. 30. Aaron and his sons] Those onely that succeeded him in the office of High-priest. Lev. 4.3, 5, 16. and 16.32. Ver. 32. Ʋpon man's flesh] A Latine Postiller hence in∣fer's, in an hyperbolical sens, that Priests are Angels, not ha∣ving humane flesh. Ver. 33. Whosoever compoundeth anie thing like it] Holie things must not bee profaned on pain of death. No people so abuse Scripture to common and ordinarie use as the Jews do. CHAP. XXXI. Ver. 3. And I have filled him] GOd gift's whomsoever hee call's to anie emploiment. Ver. 4. To devise cunning works] All skill in lawful callings, whether manual or mental, is of God. Isa. 28.26. Ver. 5. And in cutting of stones] Moses might well doubt where hee should finde fit work-men among those brick-makers for Egypt. Ver. 6. I have given with him] Two is better then one; four eies see more then two: God usually therefore coupleth his agents. See the Note on Mat. 10.2, 3. Luke 10.1. Ver. 13. Verily my sabbaths yee shall keep] q. d. Though this Sanctuarie-work is to bee don, yet it shall bee no Sab∣bath's-daies work. The good women in the Gospel forbare
on the Sabbath to annoint the dead bodie of our Saviour, rest∣ing according to the Commandement. [For it is a sign] And withal an effectual means to conveigh holiness into the heart. Ver. 14. For it is holie unto you] Hence the Hebrews gather (but falsly) that onely Israël was charged with the Sabbath-daie, and not the nations of the world. But the Sabbath was kept before Israël was born. Ver. 15. Whosoever doth anie work] A certain Indian that had been taught by the English, coming by, and seeing one of the English profaning the Lord's daie, by felling of a tree, said to him, New-Eng∣land's first-fruits. Do ye not know that this is the Lord's daie in Massa∣qusets (one of the English Plantations) much machet man, that is, verie wicked man, why break you God's daie? Ver. 18. Written with the finger of God] Of the Decalogue, above all other holie Writ, God seem's to saie as Paul, Philem. 19. Behold, I have written it with mine own hand: i. e. by mine own power and operation. CHAP. XXXII. Ver. 1. Ʋp, Make us Gods] A Aron might make a Calf, but the people made it a God, by adoring it. Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus Martial. Non facit ille Deos; qui rogat, iste facit. Ver. 2. Break off your golden ear-rings] Hereby hee hoped to break their design: but all in vain: for they were mad upon their Idols. Jer. 59.38. Ver. 3. Brake off the golden ear-rings] which they had got of the Egyptians. Exod. 12.35. To make use of Heathen Autors for ostentation, is to make a Calf of the treasure gotten out of Egypt. Ver. 4. A molten Calf] In imitation of the Egyptian Idol Apis, a Pied-bullock. A man may pass through Ethiopia un∣changed; but hee cannot dwel there, and not bee discolored. Ver. 5. A feast to Jehovah] Whom these Idolaters pretended to worship in the golden Calf, as did also Jehu. 2 King. 10.16, 29. 2 Chron. 11.15. and as the Papists at this daie: but with
what face can som of their Rabbins excuse this people from Idolatrie? Ver. 6. Rose up to plaie] To dance about the Calf. Now, if they were so cheared and strengthned by those baneful bits, those murthering morsels; should not wee much more by God's spiritual provisions, to dance as David did, to do his work with all our might? Ver. 7. For thy people which thou broughtest] God will own them no longer; they are now dis-covenanted. The Saints by gross sins may lose their jus aptitudinale, non jus haereditarium, their fitness for God's Kingdom; they may sin away all their comfortables. Ver. 8. They have turned aside quickly] Moses's back was but newly turned, as it were. I marvel that you are so soon removed, &c. Gal. 1.6. See the Note there. When wee have spent all our winde on our people, their hearts will bee still apt to bee carried away with every winde of doctrine. Ver. 9. A stiff-necked people] And so they are still to this ve∣rie daie. Hierom complain's that in his time they thrice a daie cursed Christ in their Synagogue, Hieron. in Isa. lib. 12. cap 49. tom. 5. & lib. 14 cap. 42. and closed up their praiers with Maledic Domine Nazaraeis. They are thought to advise most of that mischief, which the Turk put's in execution against Christians. They counterfeit Christianitie in Portugal even to the degree of Priesthood, and think they may do it, ei∣ther for the avoiding of danger, or increasing their substance. There are verie few of them that turn Christians in good ear∣nest: Adeò in cordibus eorum radices fixit pertinacitas, River. Jesuita Vapul. 322. So stubborn they are to this daie, and stiff-necked, their necks are wholly possest with an iron sinew. Ver. 10 Let mee alone] God is fain to bespeak his own free∣dom: As if Moses his devotion were stronger then God's in∣dignation. Great is the power of Praier; able, after a sort, to transfuse a dead Palsie into the hand of Omnipotencie. Ver. 11. Lord, why doth thy wrath] God offered Moses a great fortune. Ver. 10. Hee tendering God's glorie refused, and make's request for the people. It is the ingenuitie of Saints to studie God's ends more then their own, and drown all self-respects in his glorie.
Ver. 12. Repent of this evil] God's repenting is mutatio rei,non Dei; effects, non affectùs; facti, non consilii; not a charge of his will, but of his work. Ver. 13. Remember Abraham] Here Moses neither invoca∣teth the Patriarchs, nor allegeth their merits, but mind's God of his promise to them, and presseth the performance. In the want of other Rhethorick, let Christians in their praiers urge this with repetition, Lord thou hast promised, thou hast pro∣mised. Put the promises into suit, and you may have any thing. God cannot denie himself. Ver. 14. And the Lord repented] See ver. 12. Moses here had a hard pull, but hee carried it. Ver. 15. Written on both their sides] See the like in other my∣stical books. Ezek. 2.10. Rev. 5.1. Ver. 16. The work of God] The greater was the peoples loss, brought upon them by their sin. Ver. 17. And when Ioshua] who had waited in som part of the Mount, the return of his Master. Ver. 19. And Moses's anger waxed hot] Meekness in this case had been no better then mopishness. How blessedly blown up was Moses here. [Hee saw the Calf, and the dancing] One Calf about another. It was a custom among Papists, that men should run to the Image of St Vitus, Joh. Manli. loc. com. 187. and there they should dance all daie, usque ad animae deliquium, till they fainted and fell into a swoun. Ver. 20. And hee took the Calf] Wee may all wish still as Ferus did, that wee had som Moses to take away the evils of our times: Nam non unum tantùm vitulum, sed multoshabemus, Wee have not one, but many such Calvs. Ver. 21. What did this people unto thee] The people sinned by precipitancie; Aaron by popularitie. Ver. 22. That they are set on mischief] The whole world is so. 1 Ioh. 2.16. and 5.19. Quomodo Plautus, In fermento tota ja∣cet uxor. Ver. 23. Wee wot not what, &c.] See the danger of non∣residencie. Ver. 24. There came out this Calf] A verie poor excuse. Som∣thing hee would have said if hee had known what. Here hee hid his sin as Adam. Iob 31.33. beeing too much his childe. Ver. 25. Aaron bad made them naked] As Aaron's ingraving
instrument write's down his sin: so the Confession of other more ingenious Jews proclaim's the Israëlites, saying that No punishment befalleth thee, O Israël, Mos. Gerund. in which there is not an ounce of this Calf. Ver. 26. Let him com] This word through haste and ear∣nestness Moses omitteth. The Chaldee and Greek versions sup∣plie it. Ver. 27. Slaie evere man his brother] Not all that they met with, (for so they might have slain the innocent) but all that were chief in the transgression. In the war against the Walden∣ses in France, the Pope's great Armie took one populous Citie and put to the sword sixtie thousand, among whom were manie of their own Catholicks. For Arnoldus the Cistercian Abbat (beeing the Pope's Legat in this great war) commanded the souldiers saying, Caedite eos: novit enim Dominus qui sunt ejus: Caesar. Heister∣buchensis hist. lib. 5. cap. 2. Kill them one with another: for the Lord knoweth who are his. This was fine Popish Justice. Ner. 28. About three thousand] Chieftains and ring-leaders. Ver. 29. Consecrate your selvs] Regain that blessing which your father Levi lost. Gen. 49.5, 7. Ver. 30. And now I will go up unto the Lord] As angrie as hee was, hee could praie for them: As when our children, through their own fault have got som sickness, for all our angrie speeches wee go to the Physician for them. Ver. 31. Made them gods of gold] Sin must not bee confes∣sed in the lump onely, and by whole sale, but wee must instance the particulars. Ver. 32. Blot mee I praie thee] God never revealed his love to Moses more, then when hee thus earnestly praied for God's people. Joab never pleased David better, then when hee made intercession for Absolom. Ver. 33. Blot out] Cut him out of the roll of the living. Ver. 34. I will visit] I will paie them home for the new and the old. Ver. 35. They made] See the Note on Vers 1.
CHAP. XXXIII. Ver. 1. Which thou hast brought] SEE the Note on Chap. 32.7. Ver. 3. I will not go up] sc. By those visible signs of my gratious presence, Hos. 9.11. as heretofore. Ver. 4. They mourned] As good caus they had: for wo bee unto thee when I depart from thee. Ver. 5. And consume thee] God's threatnings are cordial, but conditional. Minatur Deus ut non puniat. Furie is not in mee, Isa. 27.4. Hee punisheth not till there bee no other remedie. 2 Chron. 36.16. as the bee stin'gs not till provoked. Ver. 6. Stript themselvs] As in a daie of restraint. Ver. 7. Afar off from the camp] In token of God's deep displeasure, and departure from them. Ver. 8. And looked after Moses] To see what success, what accepta: as David looked up after his praier, to see how it sped. Psalm. 5.3. Ver. 10. Rose up and worshipped] Though obnoxious; they would not despair of mercie. See 1 Sam. 12.20, 21, 22. Ver. 12. See, thou saiest unto mee] See (saith one) how Mo∣ses here encroacheth upon God. Mr. Bur. God had don much for him, hee must have more. Vers 13. Shew mee now thy waie, &c. This God grant's him. Vers 14. This serv's not the turn, hee must have more yet. Vers 16. Well, hee hath it. Vers 17. Is hee said? No, hee must yet have more. Vers 18. I beseech thee shew mee thy glorie. It's don. Vers 19. Is hee satisfied yet? No. Chap. 34.9. God must pardon the sin of his people too; and take them and him for his inheritance: This fruit of his favor hee must needs bee intreated to add to the rest, &c. Ver. 13. That I may know thee] Moses knew more of God then anie man; hee was but newly com down from the Mount, and at the Tabernacle door God spake with Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. Vers 11. The more a man know's of God, the more desirous hee is to know him. Ver. 14. I will give thee rest] Full content of minde in the sens of my presence, and light of my countenance. Ver. 15. If thy presence go not with mee] What is it to have
the air without light? What was all Mordecai's honor to him, when the King frowned upon him? Ver. 16. So shall wee bee separated] Heb. Marvellously separa∣ted. The separation of the Saints is a wonderful separation. See Deut. 4.7. Isa. 20.6. where Judea is for this caus called an Isle. Ver. 17. I know thee by name] As Princes do their favorites, who easily forget others, as Saul did David. 1 Sam. 17.55. Ver. 18. Shew mee thy glorie] None ever knew God's glorie; our cockle-shell can never comprehend this sea, yet it may bee apprehended that it is incomprehensible. Ver. 19. I will make all my goodness] My glorious goodness. Thus Moses may have what hee will of God. The King is not hee that can do anie thing against you, said Zedekiah to his Courtiers. Jer. 38.5. Ver. 20. Thou canst not see my face] Otherwise then in his words and works. Rom. 1.20. As wee cannot see the Sun in rota, in the circle, but in the beams. Rab. Maimon. Som have been Mercabah velo harocheb (as the Hebrew's speak) the charret in which God rode, but not the rider in it: they saw som created Image, Glo∣rie, whereby hee testified his more immediate presence, but not himself. [No man shall see mee and live] But bee opprest and swallowed up with Majestie: as the sight of the eie is dazled with the sun; or a crystal-glass broken with the fire. CHAP. XXXIV. Ver. 1. Which thou brakest] NOt without a tincture of passionate infirmitie, Dr. Hall. as som con∣ceiv. Hee that was the meekest upon earth (saith one) in a sudden indignation abandon's that which hee would in cold blood have held faster then his life. But Austin crie's out, O ira Prophetica, & animus non perturbatus, sed illuminatus! Ver. 2. In the morning] A sign of mercie. Psalm 90.14. and 30.6. and 5.4. Ver. 3. Neither let anie man bee seen] See the Note on Exod. 19.12. Ver. 4. And hee hewed two Tables] Moses hewed them. The
first Tables were hewen out of the Saphir of the Throne of God's Glorie, saie the Jewish Doctors. Ver. 6. The Lord, the Lord God, &c] These glorious titles and attributes are those back-parts of God. Chap. 33.23. None can see more then these and live: and wee need see no more then these, that wee may live. [Long-suffering] Heb. Wide of no∣strils; not apt to snuff at small matters, but bearing with men's evil manners. This Averroës the Atheïst made use of as an ar∣gument against the Providence of God, and to prove that hee medleth with nothing below the Moon, becaus of his slow∣ness to anger. [In goodness and truth] God's goodness, though great, yet here and elswhere it go's bounded with his truth. Ver. 7. Forgiving iniquitie, transgression, and sin] i. e. All sorts of sins. 'Tis natural to him, as here. None like him for this. Micah 7.18. It is the comfort of Saints, that they have to do with a forgiving God. Neh. 9.31. that can multiplie pardons, Nun rabbathi Masor. as they multiplie sins. Isa. 55.7. [Keeping mercie for thousands] The Hebrew word here rendred Keeping, is written with a greaten letter then ordinarie, to note the extraordinarie greatness of God's promise to his people and their posteritie▪ Psalm 25.10. [Clear the guiltie] This last letter in God's Name must still bee remembred. Ver. 8. And Moses made haste] It was time for him. The more anie man see's of God, the lower hee fall's in his own eies: as hee that hath looked intently upon the sun, see's little when hee look's down again. Ver. 9. Let my Lord, I praie thee] See the Note on Cha. 33 12. Ver. 10. Behold, I make a covenant] i. e. I re-establish it with this back-sliding people. God receiveth returning sinners with much sweetness: Hee reteineth not his anger for ever, becaus mercie pleaseth him. His mercie (to us) is greater then his ju∣stice, though in themselvs they are equal, yea, the same. [I will do marvels] See this fulfilled and recorded. Josh. 10.12, 13. Ver. 11. Observ thou] This is the condition of the cove∣nant on man's part to bee performed. With others God make's a single covenant onely, that they shall observ that which hee command's them: but with his Elect hee make's a double covenant; to perform both parts to work all their works in them, and for them, to put his fear into their
hearts, and to caus them to keep his Commandements. Ver. 12. With the inhabitants] They were devoted to destru∣ction, as having filled the land from one end to another with their uncleanness. Ezra 9.11. Ver. 13. Break their images] The Popish Historians have blurred and blasted those zealous Emperors, Zeno and others, that were Iconomachi and Iconoclastai, as Sacrilegious. Berne was the first Town that after the Reformation was purged of Images; which Augustin saith cannot bee placed in Churches Sine praesentissimo idololatriae periculo: Aug. in Psal. 114. without extreme danger of Idolatrie. Ephiphanius saith, It is utterly unlawful and abomi∣nable, to set up Images in the Churches of Christians. Irenaeus reproveth the Gnosticks, for that they carried about the picture of Christ in Pilate's time, after his own proportion: using also, for declaration of their affection toward it, to set garlands up∣on the head of it. Ver. 14. No other God] In the Hebrew word Acher rendred Other, there is a great R. to shew the greatness of the sin of ser∣ving anie other God. Ver. 15. And one call thee] Anie one of the Idolatrous root, if hee do but hold up his finger to thee, thou wilt easily follow him. Cereus in vitium flecii. Horat. Ver. 16. And they make thy sons] Satan still work's upon Adam by Eve. Omnes haereses ex gyneciis. It is the guis of Here∣ticks to abuse the help of women to spread their poisonful opinions. Satan per costam, tanquam per scalam ad cor asscendit. Greg. Satan climbe's up by the rib to the heart. Ver. 17. No molten gods] As the golden calf was. Goodlie gods that are molten: Olim truncus eram. Horat. Ver. 18. In the moneth Abi] So called from the new fruits, or ears of corn, then first appearing. See Exod. 12.1. & 13.4. God here repeteth divers Laws; It was a token of reconci∣liation to the people after their Apostacie, in that hee treat's with them again (after their repentance) about his solemn worships. So, for a testimonie of his reconciliation to Peter after his foul fall, hee set's him a work in the Ministerie. John 21.15. So hee commendeth his Sponsaresh, after her drowsie decaies, everie whit as amiable as shee was before he fall. Cant. 6.5. with Chap. 5.10, 11, &c.
Ver. 21. In earing-time and harvest] Though most busie times, you may not make bold with God. Ver. 24. Neither shall anie man desire] A wonderful pro∣vidence, sith Judea was compassed about with such warlike ad∣versaries; that they should not watch and catch at such oppor∣tunities. Pompey besieging Jerusalem, made his strongest batte∣ries on the Sabbath-daie (whereon hee knew the superstitious Jews would not make their defence) and took it. Dio. Cass. Ver. 27. I have made a covenant] Wee also have the Cove∣nant, the Seals, Ministers, &c. But, alas! are not these bles∣sings amongst us as the Ark was amongst the Philistims, rather as prisoners then as privileges? rather in testimonium & ruinam quàm in salutem? Rather for our ruine, then reformation. Ver. 28. Fortie daies and fortie nights] Moses, Elias, and Christ, (those three great Fathers) met glorious in Mount Tahor. Ab∣stinence merit's not; but prepare's the best for good duties. [Hee wrote] That is, Weems Exer. God wrote, as som will have it. Ver. 29. The skin of his face shone] God hereby assuring the people, that hee had inwardly inlightned him for their better instruction. Ver. 30. And they were afraid] This was another manner of Brightness and Majestie then that which sate in the eies of Augustus and of Tamerlan; whose eies so shone, as that a man could hardly endure to behold them without closing of his own: and manie in talking with them, and often beholding of them became dumb: which caussed them oft-times with a comlie modestie to abstein from looking too earnestly upon such as spake unto them, Turk. hist fol. 236. or discoursed with them. Ver. 33. Hee put a veil on his face] And had more glorie by his veil, then by his face. How far are those spirits from this Christian modestie, which care onely to bee seen, and wish one∣ly to dazle others eies with admiration, not caring for un∣known riches? This veil signified the Laws obscuritie, and our infidelitie. Ver. 34. But when Moses went in] Hypocrites on the contrarie shew their best to men, their worst to God; God see's both their veil; and their face; and I know not whether hee hate's more their veil of dissimulation, or face of wickedness.
CHAP. XXXV. Ver. 1. And said unto them, These, &c.] HEE often go's over the same things, as the knife doth the whetstone. Good things must bee repeted, sicut in acu∣endo. 'Tis Moses his own metaphor. Deut. 6.7. Ver. Six daies shall work bee don] This dutie is so oft in∣culcated, to shew the necessitie, excellencie, difficultie of well doing it. Ver. Yee shall kindle no fire] sc. For the furtherance of the work of the Tabernacle: or at least, that is not of abso∣lute necessitie. It might also signifie, that in the kingdom of heaven wee shall bee set free from all the fire and scorch∣ing heat of affliction. Ver. 22. And brought bracelets] Glad they had anie thing of price to dedicate to God, and to seal up their thankfulness for this re-admittance into his love and favor. See the Note on Matth. 9.10. Nazianzen put this price upon his Athenian learning (wherein hee was verie famous) that hee had som∣thing of value, to part with for Christ. Ver. 32. And to devise curious works] This also cometh forth from the Lord of Hosts, Lib. 23. who is wonderful in coun∣sel, and excellent in working. Isa. 28.29. Plinie make's mention of som famous Painters, whose rare pieces were Oppidorum opibus venditae: Sold for so manie Towns-wealth. A certain artificer set a watch-clock upon a ring that Charls the Fifth wore upon his finger. Sphinx philos. pag. 90. King Ferdinand sent to Solyman the Turk, for a present, a wonderful globe of silver, of most rare and curious device; daily expressing the hourly passing of the Time, the motions of the Planets, Turk. Hist. fol. 713. the change and full of the Moon; lively exepressing the wonderful conversions of the Celestial frame. To which, I may well add that admirable invention of Printing, a special blessing of God to mankinde.
CHAP. XXXVI, XXXVII, &c. Ver. 2. And Moses called Bezaleel] GOd qualified them, Mses called them. Ministers also must have an outward calling too. See Acts 13.1, 2, 3. Heb. 5.4. and bee sent ere they preach. Rom. 10.15. And whereas 1 Cor. 14.31. It is said, Yee may all prophecie, the meaning is, All yee that are Prophets, may. But are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12.29. Ver. 7. And too much] Thus in outward ordinances of service, and for the making of a worldlie sanctuarie. Heb. 9.1. they could do and over-do. So John 6.28. They said un∣to him, What shall wee do that wee may work the works of God? Men would fain have heaven as a purchase. I would swim through a sea of brimstone (said one) that I might com to heaven at last. But what said our Saviour to those questionists. John 6? This is the work of God that yee believ on him whom hee hath sent. And what said Luther, Walk in the Heaven of the Promiss, but in the Earth of the Law; that in respect of Believing, this of Working? Manie poor souls can think of nothing but working themselvs to life. Do wee must all righteousness, but rest in none but Christ's. Ver. 8. And everie wise-hearted man] Let no man look up∣on this and the following Chapter, as an idle repetition; nor saie as one said once, Did wee not know that all Scripture was divinely inspired, wee should bee readie to sae, Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. But know that here is see forth a Table, Index, or Inventorie, of what Moses and the workmen did in obedience to God's command, for everie particular about the Sanctuarie. This Inventorie was taken by Ithamar, at the commandement of Moses, Et sic in archivum Ecclesiae relatum, and so laid up in the charter-hous of the Church, for the use of posteritie. See the Notes on Exod. 26. and consider that saying of an antient. Prosper. Epist. ad Augustin. Necessarium & utile est etiam quae scripta sunt scribere, nè leve existimetur quod non frequenter arguitur.
CHAP. XL. Ver. 36. The Children of Israël went] THe Jews conceiv that this Cloud that led Israël through the wilderness, levelled mountains, raised val∣lies, and laid all aflat: that it burnt up bushes, and smoothed rocks, and made all plain, &c. See Luke 3.5, Isa. 4.5.
A COMMENTARIE OR EXPOSITION UPON THE Third BOOK of Moses, called LEVITICƲS. CHAP. I. Vers. 1 And the Lord called] A Continuation of the former Historie, from the rearing of the Tabernacle, to the numbering of the people; beeing the historie of one moneth onely. Ver. 2. Bring an offering] Whereby they were led to Christ; as the Apostle sheweth in that excellent Epi∣stle to the Hebrews; which is a just Commentarie upon this Book. Ver 3. Burnt sacrifice] A whole-burnt-offring. Heb 10.6. purporting whole Chri, uffering for us Isa. 53 12 and our sa∣crificing our whole selvs to him, s a reasonable service. Rom. 12.1
Ver. 4. And hee shall put his hand] As acknowledging his own guilt, and transferring the same upon Christ, resting up∣on him with full assurance of faith, handfasting us unto him. Ver. 5. And bee shall kill the bullock] The Priest shall kill it: for it was death for anie man to offer his own sacrifice; so it is still for anie to com to God, otherwise then in, and by Christ. Ver. 6. And hee shall flaie the burnt-offering] To shew the grievousness of our Saviour's sufferings; the cruel usage of his suffering Saints. Micah 3.3. Heb. 11.35. and the dutie of all that have benefit by him, to flea off the old man with his deceitful lusts. Ephes. 4.22. dealing thereby as the Turk dealt by him that betraied the Rhodes. Lunclav. Hee presented unto him his promised wife and portion: but withal told him, that hee would not have a Christian to bee his son-in-law: and there∣fore caussed his Baptized skin (as hee called it) to bee flaied off, and him to bee cast into a bed strawed with salt, that hee might get a new skin. See Mark 9.49. Ver. 7. Fire upon the Altar] That sire from heaven. Lev. 9.24. (which the Heathens apishly imitated in their Vestal fire.) Typing either the scorching wrath of God seising upon Christ, or the ardent love of Christ to his, and their zeal for him. Ver. 8. In order upon the wood] Shewing, that Ministers must rightly divide, and dispose the Word of God. 2 Tim. 2.15. and evidently set forth Christ crucified. Gal. 3.1. Ver. 9. Shall hee wash] Shadowing Christ's perfect puritie. Heb. 7. and our intire sanctification. Ezek. 26.35. Heb. 10.22. [Of a sweet savor unto the Lord] The burning and broiling of the beasts could yield no sweet savor; but thereto was added wine, oil, and incens, by God's appointment, and then there was a savor of rest in it. Our praiers, as from us, would ne∣ver pleas; but as indited by the Spirit, and presented by Christ, they are highly accepted in heaven. Ver. 10. A male without blemish] But cursed bee that cose∣ner that hath in his flock a male, and sacrificeth unto God a corrupt thing. Mal. 1.14. Ver. 11. On the side of the Altar, northward] Not Eastward as the Heathen sacrifices: or to note the obscuritie of the Legal Ce∣timonies.
Ver. 12. In order] See the Note on Vers 8. Ver. 13. Hee shall wash] See the Note on Vers 9. Ver. 14. Turtle doves, or young pigeons] Old turtles and young pigeons are the best: God must have the verie best of the best, as beeing best-worthie. Ver. 15. Wring off his head] Or, pinch it with his nail, that the blood might go out, without separating it from the rest of the bodie. This figured the death of Christ, without either breaking a bone, or dividing the God-head from the man∣hood. As also the skill that should bee in Ministers, to cut or divide aright the word of truth. Ver. 16. His crop with his feathers] Or the maw with the filth thereof (that is, the guts which receiv the filth sent unto them from the maw) was pluckt out, and the blood strained at the side of the Altar: this signified those clods of blood wrung from our Saviour, before his oblation upon the Cross. Ver. 17. Ad hee shall cleav it] That the inward part might bee laid on the fire. See Psal. 51.18, 19. Mark 12.33. CHAP. II. Ver. 1. Of fine flour] NO quantitie is here prescribed, becaus it was a Free-will-offering: onely it must bee fine, no bran in it: to shew the puritie of Christ's sacrifice. Heb. 7.26. and of our services through him. Mal. 3.11. By means of the oil of his Spirit, and incens of his Intercession. Ver. 2. Shall burn the memorial of it] Whereby God was in∣minded (as it were) of the partie offering, and acknowledging all his store to bee from God. Ver. 3. Shall bee Aaron's and his sons] As meat for them: hence it was called a Meat-offering; and sent them to Christ, the meat that endureth unto life everlasting. John 6.27. Ver. 4. Ʋnleavened cake, mingled with oil] Sinceritie is the mother of serenitie; Truth, of tranquillitie. Ver. 5. Baken in a pan] Afterwards parted in pieces, and oil powred upon it: signified the graces of God's Spirit wherewith
Christ was fully annointed within and without. Psalm 45.8. and wherewith wee should bee tempered and annointed. 1 John 2.27. 2 Cor. 1.21. Ver. 6. And pour oil thereon] Jacob was the first wee read of that consecrated his offerings with oil. Gen. 28.18. Proba∣bly hee had it from his predecessors. Ver. 7. Baken in the frying-pan] So, My heart is frying of a good matter, saith David. Psalm 45.1. Ver. 8. Hee shall bring it unto the Altar] God would have all their offerings brought to one Altar; both to figure out the one onely all-sufficient-sacrifice of Christ, and to teach all the faithful to consent in one and the same truth of the Gospel. Ver. 9. Amemorial thereof] Signifying the perpetual benefit of Christ's death to all believers. Ver. 10. Shall be Aaron's and his son's] Ministers maintenence. Ver. 11. Nor anie honie] Which hath a leavening virtue in it. Sweet sins are to bee abandoned: there will bee bitterness in the end. Prov. 26.26, 27. Ver. 12. Yee shall offer them] i. e. With the first-fruits yee shall offer both leven. Lev. 23.17. and honie. 2 Chron. 31.5. Both which are somtimes taken in the better part. Mat. 13.33. Cant. 4.11. Ver. 13. Shalt thou season with salt] Called here the salt of Gods's covenant; as signifying the covenant of God, made with us in Christ, who seasoneth us, and make's all our services savorie. See the Note on Mark 9.49, 50. Ver. 14. Green ears of corn] To signifie that God should bee served with the first-fruits of our age, the primrose of our childe-hood. CHAP. III. Ver. 1. Whether it bee male or female] IN Christ, there is neither male nor female, but all one. Gal. 3, 28. Souls have no sexes. In Thank-offerings, the female also might pass: to teach, that God look's not so much to the worth of the gift, as the honestie of the heart that offer's it. Leavened bread also in this case was accepted. Lev. 7.13.
Ver. 2. Ʋpon the Altar round about] This signified that plen∣teous redemption by the blood of sprinkling. Ver. 3. The fat that covereth the inwards] Heartie thanks must bee given to God; such as cometh not from the roof of the mouth, but the root of the heart. An aërie, God bee thanked, profiteth not. Sing with grace in your hearts, is the best tune to anie Psalm. The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet as that which com's from the depth of the breast. Ver. 4. With the kidnies] Those seats of Lusts. Earth lie mem∣bers must bee mortified by the thankful. Ver. 5. Ʋpon the burnt-sacrifice] Which was first offered; to teach us, that sin must bee pardoned ere our Thank-offerings can bee accepted. It is therefore (ordinarily) best to begin our praiers with confession of sin, and petitions for pardon through Christ. Ver. 8. Laie his hand] See the Note on Chap. 1. v. 4. Ver. 9. The whole ump.] Which in those countrie-sheep is verie large yet not so large as those in America, The world en∣compassed. mentioned by Sr. Francis Drake, as big as kine, and supplying the room of horses for burthen, or travel. Ver. 11. It is the food] That whereupon God himself seem∣eth to feed. Psalm 50.13. Ver. 12. That yee neither eat fat, nor blood] Neither bee car∣nal nor cruel, but let your souls delight in the fatness and sweetness of God's ordinances. CHAP. IIII. Ver. 2. Shall sin through ignorance] OR infirmitie; beeing suddenly surprised, preoccupated Gal. 6.1. See the Note there, and on Heb 5.2. Ver. 3. A young bullock] The same sacrifice that should bee offered for the sin of the whole people. Vers 14. To note the hainousness of the Priest's sin above others. The sins of Teach∣ers, are the Teachers of sins. Ver. 4. Shall laie his hand] Confessing his sin. Lev. 5.5. and professing his faith in Christ the true sin-offering. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Ver. 5. Shall take of the bullocks blood] See Heb. 5.2, 3. and 7.26, 27, 28. with the Notes there. Ver. 6. Seven times before the Lord] Becaus in this case, there was need of much and great purgation. Ver. 7. Ʋpon the borns of the Altar] To signifie (saith one) that the preaching of the Gospel concerning the blood of Christ, should bee published and proclaimed to the four cor∣ners of the earth. To shew (saith another) that by faith in the bloud of Christ, our praiers are acceptable unto God, and our infirmities pardoned and purged. Ver. 8. All the fat] Becaus (among other things) it signified hard-heartedness and insensibleness of sin and danger. Psal. 119.70. Dionysius the Heracleot felt not needles thrust into his fat bellie, saith the historie. Ver. 9. With the kidnies] See Chap 3.4. Ver. 11. And the skin, &c.] See the Note on Chap. 1.9. Ver. 12. Shall hee carrie forth] Heb. 13.11, 12. See the Notes. Ver. 13. And of the whole congregation] Particular congre∣gations then may err for a season; though not finally, funda∣mentally, if they bee the congregation of Saints. Psal. 89.5. and not of Hypocrites. Job 15.34. the Church malignant. [And they have don somwhat] Either by transgression or disobe∣dience. Hel. 2.2. on ion or commission. Ver. 14. When the sin is known] Sin may sleep a long time like a sleeping dbt, not called for of manie years: but Nul∣lum tempus occurrit Regi, God may send out a summons for sleep∣ers, and punish our by-gon or secret sins. Ver. 15. And the Elders] These as the representative con∣gregation, took upon them the guilt of their common errors, as those did. 2 Chron. 29 23. Ver. 16. And the Priest that is annointed] i. e. The High-priest a type of Christ, who was annointed, not with material oil, as they, but with the Spirit, that oil of gladness both above, and for his fellow-brethren. Psal. 45. Heb. 1. See 1 John 2.27. and 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Howbeit his oil shine's brightest, and swim's a-loft above all others. Ver. 17. Seven times A number of perfection; to note the most absolute sufficiencie of Christ's death to purge and re∣concile us to God; . and that hee is able to save such to the ut∣termost that com unto God by him. Heb. 7.25.
Ver. 18. Ʋpon the borns] See the Note on Vers 7. [At the bottom of the Altar] To set forth the plentie and sufficiencie of Grace and Merit in Christ's death, for manie more then are actually saved by it. Ver. 19. And hee shall take all his fat] Christ offered himself and the best parts  had; suffering in soul and bodie. Ver. 20. As hee did with the bullock] For even ignorance and infirmities are deadlie sins, direct fruits of the flesh. John 3.6. and such as for which Christ laid down his life, . even for the not∣knowings of the people. Heb. 9.7. Ver 21. Without the camp] Pointing to Christ, who carried our sins out of God's light. See Heb. 13.12. with the Note. Ver. 22. When a ruler hath sinned] Great men's sins do more hurt, 1. By imitation, for Vita principis censura est, imò Cynosura, according to these glasses most men dress themselvs. 2. impu∣tation; for plectuntur Achivi, the poor people paie for it; as they did for David's, whether ignorance or infirmitie, in omitting that dutie enjoined Exod. 30.12, 13, 14, 15. thence the plague. 2 Sam. 24. Ver. 23. Com to his knowledg] As David's did. 2 Sam. 24. who saw such volumes of infirmities, and so manie Errata's in all that hee did, that hee once cried out, Who knoweth the errors of his life? Oh cleans mee from secret sins. Psal. 19.12. This hee knew was the import of all these Levitical cleansings. Ver. 24. Laie his hand] See the Note on Vers 4. Ver. 25. At the bottom] See Vers 18. Ver. 26. All his fat] See Vers 19. The fat was burnt (saith one) becaus (among other things) it signified duricordium, hard∣heartedness. Psal. 119.70. Ver. 27. And if a soul sin] As there is none that liveth and sinneth not. 2 King. 8.46. Triste mortalitatis privilegium est licere aliquando peccare. Ephor. Augu∣sta nimis res est, & nulli morta∣lium concessa nuspiam errare. Amana. Ver. 28. Com to his knowledg] By the check of his own conscience, awakened by the word or rod of God. Ver. 29. And slaie the Sin-offering] That is, the Priest shall: for no man might offer his own sacrifice upon pain of death; as is afore noted. Ver. 31. For a sweet savor] See the Note on Chap. 1. vers 9. The death of Christ is ever in the fight of his heaven he
father: and hence it was, that those typical sacrifices, and all our performances are ill accepted. CHAP. V. Ver. 1. Hee shall bear his iniquitie] i. e. HEe shall suffer for his sinfull silence; becaus hee could, but would not help the truth in necessiti, but stand as it hee were gag'd by Satan, possest with a dumb divel. Ver. 2. And if it bee hidden from him] Debt is debt whether a man know of it, or not. Ver. 3 Then hee shall bee guiltie] Guiltie hee was before ver. 2. but now hee shall see him o, and bee readie to saie as Prov 5 14. I was almost in all evil, in the midst of the congregation and the assem∣blie By the law is the knowledg of sin. Rom 3.20. Ver. 4. And it bee hid fom him] As is usual with your com∣mon swearers, who will swear that they swear not. If men had such distemper of bodie, as their excrements came from them when they knew not of it, it would trouble them; but they swear, and let go much filth, and it is hid from them. To do evil] As David did to slaie Nabal 1 Sam. 25.22. Or to do good] As the same David did to do good to Mephibo∣sheth and yet hee was not o good as his oath. Ver. 5. Hee shall confess] Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. Man confesseth, and God pardoneth. In the courts of men it is the safest plea to saie, Non feci (quoth Quintilian) I am not guil∣tie: not so here; but ego feci, miserere, I did it, have mercie upon mee. Per miserere mei tollitur ira Dei. Ver. 6. For his sin which hee hath sinned] Bending his thoughts upon that particular sin, it is charged upon Iraël, Ezek. 16.22. that they remembred not that they laie in their blood Ver. 7. Two turtle Doves] See the Note on Chap. 114. Ver. 8. For the sin-offering first] For till un bee expited, no sacrifice or service can bee accepted. Therefore Isa. 1. Wash you, ans you, and then com and let us reason.
Ver. 9. Ʋpon the side of the Altar] The North-side, and not upon the East: 1. that Israël might not symbolize with the Heathens, who worshipped toward the East: 2. to signifie that they had no more under the Law then dark shadows of good things to com. Heb. 10.1. until the time of reformation. Heb. 9.10. Ver. 10. According to the manner.] That is, the forms and rites prescribed. So Amos 8.14. The manner of Beersheba, i.e. the forms and rites of worshipping in Beersheba, as the Caldee paraphraseth it. Ver. 11. But if hee bee not able] So low doth the most High stoop to man's meanness, that hee will accept of a verie small present from him that would bring a better, if it were in the power of his hand. Lycurgus enjoyned his Lacedemonians to of∣fer small sacrifices, For God (said hee) respecteth more the in∣ternal devotion, then the external oblation. Ver. 12. Even a memorial] This is spoken after the manner of men who have need of remembrancers. God somtimes seem's to lose his mercie, and then wee must finde it for him, as they Isa. 63.15. somtimes to forget, sleep, delaie, &c. and then wee must in-minde, awaken, quicken him. Isa. 62.7. Ver. 13. And it shall bee forgiven him] See a like promiss made to our Ministerie. Jam. 5.15. Ver. 15. In the bolie things of the Lord] Things consecrate to him, by robbing and wronging of God and his Priests; bee it but through ignorance or error. Sacrum qui cle∣pserit, rapserit∣ve, parricida este. For to do such a thing pre∣sumptuously was death. Numb. 15.30. and by the laws of the twelv Tables in Rome, such were to bee punished as par∣ricides. Ver. 16. And hee shall make amends] No remission without restitution. God abhors holocaustum ex rapina. Latimer's Sex. And if yee make no restitution, ye shall cough in hell, said father Latimer. Ver. 17. Though hee wist not] Ignorance, though invincible and unavoidable, well may excuse à tanto, but not à toto. Luke 12.48.
CHAP. VI. Ver. 2. Against the Lord] AS David in defiling his neighbours wise, and afterwards killing him, is said to have despised the commandment of the Lord, and to have don evil in his sight. 2 Sam. 12.9. which al∣so hee penitently acknowledgeth. Psal. 51.4. Sin is properly against none but God, Godw. Heb. Antiq. p. 98. beeing a transgression of his law. Hence the manslaier was confined to the Citie of refuge as to a prison, during the life of the high-Priest; as beeing (saith one) the chief God on earth. That was a true position of the Pelagians, Omne peccatum est contemptus Dei, that everie sin is a contempt of God. Prov. 18.3. In fellowship] Heb. Job 8.20. Dextram con∣jungere dex∣trâ. Quid non mortalia pe∣ctora cogit. Auri sacra fa∣mes? . Heb. In putting of the hand. It is said in Iob, that God will not take a wicked man by the hand, i. e. hee will have no fellowship with him. Ver. 3. And lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsty] Thorough inordinate love of money, that root of all evil; but such monie shall perish with them. Zech. 5.2. Ver. 4. And is guiltie] Found guiltie by a self-condemning conscience; which now like Samson's wife conceal's not the rid∣dle, but tel's all, as shee said of our Saviour. Iohn 4. Ver. 5. In the daie of his trespass offering] Before hee compass God's altar. Mat. 5.23. with the Note there. Ver. 6. With thy estimation] i. e. as thou shalt rate it. Moses did the Priests office for present. Hee was likewise a Prophet. Deut. 18.15. and King in Ieshurun. Deut. 33.5. and so became a type of Christ that true Trismegist, the Priest, Prophet and Prince. Dan. 9.25. Ver. 7. Shall make an attonement] Thorough the sacrifice of Christ. Heb. 10.1, 4, 10, 14. Ver. 9. All night until the morning] God must bee thought upon in the night season. Psal. 4.4. David willingly brake his sleep to do it. Psal. 119.62. The daie is thine, the night also is thine, saith hee. Psal. 74.16. Ver. 10. Besides the altar] On the East-side, furthest from the Sanctuarie. Levit. 1.16. in reverence of the divine majestie. Ver. 11. In a clean place] Becaus they came from the Lord's
holie hous. See the contrarie commanded concerning the stones and dust of a leprous hous. Levit. 14.40. Ver. 12. It shall not bee put out] No more should our faith, love, zeal, (that flame of God as Solomon cal's it. Cant. 8.6.) that should never go out; the waters should not quench it, nor the ashes cover it. Cant. 8.10. 2 Tim. 1.6. Ver. 13. The fire shall ever bee burning] The Gentiles (by an apish imitation hereof) had their vestal fire, salted meal, and manie other sacred rites. Basil chargeth the divel as a thief of the truth, in that hee had decked his crows with her fethers. Ver. 14. The law of the meat-offering] Besides what is set down: chap. 2.1, 2. Thus one text explain's another; as the diamond is brightened with its own dust. Ver. 15. Even the memorial] See the Note on Levit. 2.2. Ver. 16. Shall Aaron and his sons eat] See 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. with the Note there. Ver. 17. It shall not bee baken with leaven] Which is, 1. sour∣ing; 2. swelling; 3. spreading; 4. impuring. Ver. 18. Shall bee holie] God will bee sanctified in all that draw near unto him—procul binc procul este profani. Ver. 20. When hee is anointed] i. e. When anie high-priest: for hee onely was anointed. Exod. 29.7. on the head at least. Ver. 21. In a pan] Figuring out the sufferings of Christ, who was so parched with the fire of afflictions for our sins. Ver. 23. It shall not bee eaten] To teach the high-priest to look or salvation out of himself. Ver. 25. In the place] i. e. at the North-side of the altar. And why, see the Note on Chap. 5.9. Ver. 26. Shall eat it] Except in that case. vers 30. Ver. 27. Shall bee holie] This taught an holie use of the mysterie of our redemption: for the sin-offering in special sort figured Christ. Ver. 28. But the earthen vessel] So contagious a thing is sin, that it defileth the verie visible heaven and earth: which there∣fore must bee likewise purged by the last fire, as the earthen pot which held the sin-offering was broken, and the brasen scour∣ed and rinsed in water. Ver. 30. And no sin-offering] Here the ordinarie gloss make's this observation, Remissionem dare, Dei solius est, qui per ignem significatur: That to pardon sin belong's to God alone, who is
a consuming fire. The Rhemists tell us of a man that could re∣move mountains: Rhem. Annot. in Jo. 20. Sect. 3. which they may assoon perswade us, as that their Priests have as full power to pardon sins, as Christ had. One of their Priests meeting with a man troubled in minde, told him that their religion afforded more comfort to the con∣science then ours; and that becaus it had, and exercised a pow∣er to pardon sin; M. Ley his pat∣ten of pietie. p. 145. which our Ministers neither did, nor durst assume to themselvs. CHAP. VII. Ver. 1. Of the trespass-offering] Heb. A Sham, Piaculum, quo peccatum expiabatur. How it differed from the sin-offering is hard to determine. Ver. 2. In the place] See the Note on Chap. 1.11. Ver. 3. That covereth the inwards▪] My son give mee thy heart. See Psal. 51.6. Jer. 4 14. Ver. 4. And the two kidneys] See the Note on Lev. 3.4. Ver. 7. As the sin-offering is] They were distinct then. See vers 1. Ver. 8. The Priest shall have to himself] It is a sign of gasping devotion, when men are so streight-handed to their Ministers, who should have part of all. Gal. 6.6. Ver 9. And all the meat-offering] Which seem's to bee so cal∣led, partly becaus it went as meat unto the Priest (the labor∣er is surely worthie of his meat. Mat. 10.10.) but principally as leading to Christ, whose flesh is meat indeed. John 6. Ver. 10. Have one as much as another] In their father's hous was bread enough. Put mee, I praie thee into one of the Priests offices, that I may cat a piece of bread. 1 Sam. 2.36. This the Tirshata would not suffer those turn-coats to do. Ezra 2.63. But how hard put toot was that poor Priest, that answer'd young Pareüs, Vita Parei per Philipp: filtum, primo oper: tom praefixa. asking him an alms (according to the custom of those times) Nos pauperi fratres, nos nihil habemus, an pisci∣mus, an caro, an panis, an misericordia babemus? Ver. 11. Sacrifice of peace-offering] Or, Paie-offering. See Psal. 116.14. I will paie, or, I will perfect. Fitly: for a vow, till paid is an imperfect thing.
Ver. 12. Ʋnlevened cakes] There must bee sinceritie in all our services: for els God will not once look at them. Ver. 13. Levened bread] Lo, levened bread will pass in a peace-offering: God for Christs sake reject's not the services of his Saints, though tainted with corruption. August. Peccata nobis non nocent, si non placent. Wine is not thrown awaie for the dregs, nor gold for the dirt, that cleav's unto it. Ver. 14. For an heav-offering] So called, becaus it was hea∣ved and lifted up before the Lord, in token that they received all from him, and did acknowledg all to be due to him. Ver. 15. Eaten the same daie] Thanks must bee returned whiles mercies are fresh; lest, as fish, they putrefie with keep∣ing. Eaten bread is soon forgotten. Hezekiah wrote his song the third daie after his recoverie. Jehosuphat gave thanks, first upon the ground where hee had the victorie, calling it Bera∣chah; and three daies after again at Jerusalem, 2 Chron. 20. See David's Now, Now, Now, I will paie my vows. Psalm 116.14, 15. Ver. 17. On the third daie] Foreshadowing the resurrection of Christ on the third daie, whereby all legal Cerimonies were abolishd, and had no use in the Church, but by accident; as hee who buildeth a vault, letteth the centrels stand till hee put in the kei-stone, and then pulleth them awaie. Ver. 18. It shall bee an abomination] Kept beyond the time; and so uneatable, unsacrificeable, prophane, stinking. Ver. 19. Shall not bee eaten] Becaus not fit to represent Christ. Ver. 20. Having his uncleanness upon him] To the unclean all things are unclean. &c. Tit. 1.15. See the Note. Ver. 21. Cut off from his people] Confer 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29. Ver. 22. And the Lord spae unto Moses] This is ost repeted to draw attention and get autoritie. See 1 Thes. 2.13. Ver. 23. No manner fat] See the Note on Levit 3.12. Ver. 24. Ʋsed in anie other use] Though not in Sacrifice. Mudwals may bee made up of any refuse matter: not so, the wals of a Church or Palace. Ver. 25. Shall bee cut off] i. e. Shall bee liable to God's judgments. Ver. 26. Yee shall eat no manner of blood]. This signified.
1. That wee should learn to honor holie things, and not to make a mock of them by employing them to common use. 2. That wee should bee most careful not to shed man's blood, for the satisfying of our lust. See Levit. 17.11, 12. with Gen. 9.4, 5. and Deut. 12.13. Ver. 29. Ʋnto the Lord] Not kill it in the Camp, though there they might eat it. Ver. 30. His own hands] Teaching them that they must live by their own faith. Hab. 2.5. May bee waved] Or, Shaken to and fro; which signified the shaking of our lips, in giving thanks to God. Hos. 14.2. Heb. 13.15, 16. which yet must bee fetcht lower then the lips, even from the bottom of the heart; the deeper the sweeter. The voice that is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet, as that which com's from the depth of the brest. Ver. 31, 32. The brest shall bee Aarons, and the right shoulder] To note, that men must give their brests and shoulders, affe∣ctions and actions, even their whole selvs; first to the Lord, and then to us Ministers by the will of God, as those famous Ma∣cedonians did. 2 Cor. 8.5. that so they may bee sani in doctrina & sancti in vita, sound in doctrine, and holie in life. Ver. 34. For the wave brest, and the right shoulder] This might further signifie (saith one) that Christ Jesus heaved up for us both brest and shoulder, that is, wisdom and strength to all his elect Priesthood, whose portion hee is. 1 Cor. 1 30. Or it might note (saith another) that Ministers should both take care (figured by the brest) and pains (signified by the shoul∣der.) And therefore the high-priest did to that end wear the names of the Tribes upon his shoulders, and upon his brest. Ver. 35. This is the portion of the anointing] That is, of the anointed Priests; and that becaus they were anointed to the office. Here Origen (according to his manner) turn's all into allegories and mysteries, and tel's us of a three-fold sens of Scripture, 1. Literal. 2. Moral. 3. Mystical; comparing them to the gridiron, frying-pan, and oven, used in dressing the meat-offering, Allegorias spumam scri∣prurae vocat. Luth. in Gen. 3. p. 67. vers 9. of this Chapter. But this itch of all allego∣rizing dark and difficult texts hath no small danger in it. And I may doubt of Origen, as one doth of Hierom, Ʋtrùm plus boni peritiâ lingarum, quâ excelluit, an mali suis allegoriis, in quibus
dominatus fuit, Ecclesiae Dei attulerit; Amama Antbatb. whether hee did more hurt or good to the Church. CHAP. VIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] SEE the Note on Lev. 7.22. And for the rest of the Chap∣ter, read the Notes on Exod. 28. & 29. & 30. Ver. 3. And gather thou all the congregation] Ministers are to bee ordeined in the publick Assemblie. Acts 14.22. that the people may shew their approbation, profess their purpose of obedience, and praie for God's Spirit to bee poured up∣on them. Ver. 7. And Moses brought Aaron] They did not intrude themselvs. See the Note on Heb. 5.4. Ver. 8. Hee put in the brest-plate the Ʋrim, &c.] Hence (it may bee) God appointed the brest-plate to bee made double, that the Urim and Thummim might bee put within, and lie hid on everie side. This Urim and Thummim signified (saith one) that in Christ are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledg. Col. 2.3. and that hee hath all secret things most perfectly known and numbred out before him, which hee re∣vealeth continually to his Church and chosen, as need requi∣reth, by such means as himself hath sanctified. Psal. 25.14, John 14.21, 26. & 17.14, 17, 26. CHAP. IX. Ver. 1. On the eighth daie] THe verie next daie after the Priest's consecration, that no time might bee lost. I made haste and delaied not, &c. Psalm 119.16. Then said I, lo I com: in the volume of the book it is writ∣ten of mee, &c. Psalm. 40.7. Live, live, live, (saith one) quick∣ly, much, long: let no water go by, no daie bee lost, &c. Preach, preach, bee instant, quick at work, &c. Praecipitat tempus, mors atra impendet agenti.
Ver. 2. Take thee alyoung calf] In remembrance, and sor the remis∣sion of Aaron's sin about the golden calf; as som Hebrews are of opinion. Ver. 3. Take yee a kid of the goats for a Sin-offering] Quia gra∣vis odor peccati, The smell of sin is grievous; it offendeth all God's senses, yea, his verie soul. Isa. 1.12, 13. &c. Ver. 4. For to daie the Lord will appear unto you] And hee may not sinde you emptie-handed, unprepared. See the Notes on Fxod. 19.10. Ver. 6. And the glorie of the Lord shall appear unto you] so shall it one daie to us: yea, wee shall bee like him, and appear with him in glorie; and must therefore purifie our selvs, as God is pure. 1 John 3.2, 3. Ver. 7. Make attonement for thy self] See Heb. 5.3. & 7.27, 28. with the Notes there. Ver. 8. Went unto the Altar] i. e. The brasen Altar; for hee had not yet access to the Altar of Incens. Wee must staie our corruptions, before wee present our supplications; wash our hearts from wickedness, and then compass God's Altar. Ver. 22. Lift up his hands] Hee put the blessing upon them. A type of Christ. Luke 24.50. with Acts 3.26. Ephes. 1.3. Ver. 24. They shouted, and fell on their faces] The considera∣tion of God's gracious acceptation of us in Christ, should make us to lift manie an humble, joiful, and thankful heart to God. CHAP. X. Ver. 1. And Nadab and Abihu] THese jollie young Priests, over-joied haply of their new emploiment, and over-warmed with wine (as som gather out of Vers 9.) over-shoot themselvs the verie daie of their service. Vers 19. and are suddenly surprised by a doleful death. So was that inconsiderate Priest o Naples, Anno Dom. 1457. of whom Wolphius report's, Wolph. Mc∣morab. Lect. C. 15. that when the hill Vesuvius had sent huge flames, and don great spoil; hee, to make proof of his pietie, read a Mass, and would need's go up the hill to finde out the caus of such a calamitie. But for a reward of his fool∣hardiness,
hee perished in the flames, and was never heard of anie more. Ver. 2. And there went out fire] By fire they sinned; and by fire they perished. Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur & ipse: Nestorii lingua vermibus exesa est. Evag. lib, 1. So Archbishop Arundel's tongue rotted in his head. The Archbishop of Tours in France made suit for the erection of a Court called Chambre Ardent, wherein to condemn the Protestants to the fire. Hee was after∣wards stricken with a diseas called the fire of God, Act. and Mon. fol. 1911. which began at his feet and so asscended upward, that hee caussed one member after another to be cut off, and so hee died miserably. Ver. 3. This is that the Lord spake] Where? and when? Lev. 8.35. Exod. 19.22. Or perhaps no where written, but at som other time spoken by God. Moses might but set down the short Notes of his discourses, as the Prophets used to do. [I will bee sanctified] Either actively or passively, Aut à nobis, aut in nos, either in us or upon us; sure it is, that hee will bee no loser by us. Sanctified hee will bee, either in the sinceritie of men's con∣versation, or els in the severitie of their condemnation. Sin∣gular things are exspected of all that draw nigh to God in anie dutie, but especially in the office of the Ministerie. Those that stand in the presence of Princes must bee exact in their carri∣ages. God appointed both the weights and measures of the Sanctuarie to bee twice as large as those of the Common∣wealth; to shew, that hee exspect's much more of those that serv him there, then hee doth of others. The souls of Priests must bee purer then the sun-beams saith Chrysostom. D. Hakw. on Psalm 101. [And Aaron held his peace] Hee bridled his passions, and submitted to the divine Justice. The like did David. Psalm 39.9. which words were taken up by Du-plessis in the loss of his onely son. Ver. 5. In their coats] These were not burnt, as neither were their bodies: the fire, Tostat. beeing of a celestial and subtile na∣ture, might pierce their inward parts, not touching their out∣ward: as the lightning kill's by piercing, not by burning. Ver. 6. And Moses said unto Aaron] Philo reporteth, that the High-priest of the Jews, to keep alwaies his soul pure, ne∣ver saw anie mournful object. Tiberius, counterfeiting grief at the funeral of Drusus, had a veil laid betwixt the dead and him, that hee might not see the bodie, becaus hee was (as the rest of the Emperors also were) Pontifex Maximus, or the High-priest;
and therefore a sacred person. Mourning in Aaron might have seemed murmuring: hee is therefore forbidden it, and accord∣ingly hee forbear's. Manlii Loc. com. p. 215. So did Luther when hee buried his daugh∣ter, hee was not seen to shed a tear. No more did reverend Mr. William Whatelie late Pastor of Banburie, when after hee had preached his own childe's Funeral upon this Text, The will of the Lord bee don: hee and his wise laid the childe in the grave with their own hands. [Bewail the burning] It's fit enough (ordinarily) that the bodie, when sown in corruption, bee wa∣tered by the tears of those that plant it in the earth. Ver. 7. For the annointing oil of the Lord is upon you] This is everie true Christian's case, who should therefore carrie him∣self accordingly. There is a , a seemlie carriage be∣long's to everie calling. You have an unction, &c. 1 John 2. Ver. 9. Do not drink wine, nor strong drink] As som are of opinion Nadab and Abihu had don; Ex malis mori∣bus honae leges. which miscarriage of theirs occasioned this precept. The perpetual equitie whereof is, that Ministers bee no wine-blbbers or Alestakes. 1 Tim. 3.3. Why should it bee said as of old, They have erred becaus of wine, and have gon out of the waie becaus of strong drink, even the Priest and the Prophet? Isa. 28.7. Drunkenness is a crime in all, but it's a kinde of Sacrilege in Ministers. And if other drunkards deserv double punishments for their misdemeanours, (as Aristotle judgeth) first for their drunkenness, . Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. c. 5 and then for the sin committed in, and by their drunkenness; what do drun∣ken Priests? Isa. 56.12. Ver. 10. And that yee may put difference] Drunkenness take's away the heart. Hos. 4.11. besot's and infatuate's; rob's a man of himself, and laie's a beast in his room. Ver. 11. And that yee may teach] The Priest's lips should both preserv knowledg and present it to the people; even all the counsel of God. Mal. 2.7. Acts 20.27. To give the knowledg of salvation by the remission of sins. Luke 1.77. Ver. 12. Take the Meat-offering] q. d. Think not that God hath cashiered you, becaus hee hath corrected you; neither re∣fuse your meat out of a sullen sowrness; but fall to your Meat-offering, and take better heed another time. Onely, eat before the Lord. Deut. 12.18. Ver. 16. And behold it was burnt] Passion for their dead friends had so transported the Priests, that they knew not well
what they did. Wee use to saie, Res est ingeniosa dolor; but then it must not bee excessive as here, and as 2 Sam. 18.33. Ver. 17. To bear the iniquitie] This the sinner doth subjective∣ly, the Priest typically, the Lord Christ really. Ver. 19. Should it have been accepted] God love's a cheerfull server. Deut. 12.7. and 26.14. Mourners bread is polluted bread. Hos. 9.4. And Mal. 2.13. those unkinde husbands are blamed for caussing their wives, when they should have been chearfull in God's service, to cover the Lords altar with tears, with weeping and with crying out, so that hee regarded not the offering anie more. This Aaron knew, and allegeth for himself. CHAP. XI. Ver. 1. Ʋnto Moses and to Aaron] MAgistrate and Minister must jointly see that God's laws bee duly executed. Queen Elisabeth once in her pro∣gress visiting the Countie of Suffolk, all the Justices of Peace in that Countie met her Majestie; having everie one his Mini∣ster next to his bodie; which the Queen took special notice of, and thereupon uttered this speech, that shee had often demanded of her Privie Councel, why her Countie of Suffolk was better governed then anie other Countie? and could never understand the reason thereof; but now shee her self perceived the reason. It must needs be so, said shee, where Moses and Aaron, the Word and the Sword go together. Ver. 2. These are the beasts which yee shall eat] These, and these onely; 1. That yee may bee at mine appointment for your verie meat, as who am chief Lord of all. 2. That there may bee a difference betwlxt you and all other people. 3. That yee may bee taught to studie puritie, and know that the verie creatures are defiled by man's sin: 4. That yee may have these things as a shadow of things to com. Col. 2.16, 17. Ver. 3. Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and cheweth the cud] To teach them to think upon God's commandments to do them. Psal. 103.18. cleansing themselvs from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Ver. 4. The camel] The foolish Jews when they saw Maho∣met arising in such power, D. Hall's Peace-maker. were straight readie to crie him up for their Messiah. But when they saw him eat of a Camel (saith mine Autor) they were as blank as when they saw the hoped issue of their late Jewish Virgin, turn'd to a daughter. Ver. 5. And the conie] Which hath his name in Hebrew from hiding himself in holes. A weak, but a wise creature. Pro. 30.26. And wisdom is better then strength. Eccles. 9.15. The Hare that trust's to the swiftness of her legs, is at length taken and torn in pieces. When the Conie that fleets to the rocks doth easily avoid the dogs that pursue her. See Isa. 40.30, 31. Ver. 6. Becaus hee cheweth the cud, but divideth not] Medita∣tion must end in practice: as lessons of musick must bee practi∣sed, and a copie not read onely, but written after. Ver. 7. And the Swine] Anima sui data pro sale, nè carnes putre∣scant, said Cleanthes. The Swine hath his soul for salt onely, so hath the drunkard. Ver. 8. Of their flesh, yee shall not eat] Not above the quanti∣tie of an Olive, saie the Jew-Doctors, who will need's bee men∣ding magnificat, adding to the Law. Ver. 9. Whatsoever hath fins and scales] The fins of the fish are for steering of their motion, the scales for smoothness of passage, Serm. 1. in die 8. And. for safegard, for ornament. Those onely are clean in the sight of God, Qui squamas & loricam habent patientiae, & pin∣nulas hilaritatis, saith Bernard. Ver. 10. Of all that move in the waters] And yet swim also in the aër. Like to these is the temporarie believer: for that seeming to mount up in spiritual joies, yet hee withall swimmeth, yea batheth himself in the waters of sensual delights. Ver. 11. They shall bee even an abomination] To teach us, that nothing is lawfull, no not for our common use, un∣less it bee sanctified by the word of God and praier. 1 Tim. 4.5. Acts 10.35. Ver. 13. The Eagle] Which yet is counted and called the king of birds, and delight's in high flying. That which is high∣ly esteemed amongst men is abomination before God. Lu. 16.15. Ver. 14. And the vulture and the kite] That feed upon carri∣on and dead carcasses, and are emblems of greedie gripers and oppressors.
Ver. 15. Everie raven] Unnatural to his young, whom God himself heareth and feedeth. Psal. 147.9. though they crie with a harsh note, and crie to God by implication; and though the raven bee an inauspicate bird, and a sign both of man's punishment and God's curs. Isa. 34.11. Ver. 16. And the owl, and the night-raven] Night-birds that hate the light, or flie against it, as bats do, are an abomination. Deeds of darkness are out of date, now in the daies of the Go∣spel especially. Rom. 13.12, 13. Ver. 17. And the cormorant] An unsatisfiable bird, that fitly resembleth the divel, who daily devour's souls, and yet enlarg∣eth his desires as hell. Ver. 18. And the Swan] Whose white fethers, but black skin under them, might serv to set forth the hatefulness of hypo∣crisie. Ver. 19. And the Stork] Which build's high. Psal. 104.17. but feed's low on fishes, frogs and snakes; and so might bee the rather rejected, as unfit for food. And the lapwing] Which is worthily made an hieroglyphick of infelicitie; becaus it hath as a coronet upon the head, and yet feed's upon the worst of excrements. It is pittie that the Saints that are brought up in scarlet should embrace the dunghill. Lam. 4.5. that anie one that is wash't in Christ's blood, should bedabble his robe in the stinking puddle of the world. And the Bat] Cast awaie either thy wings or thy teeth (saith one to a neuter) and loathing this Bat-like nature, D. Hall epist. to W. L. bee what thou art, either a bird or a beast. Ver. 20. All fowls that creep] So all mongrels in religion, that (like the planet Mercurie) can bee good in conjunction with good, and bad with bad; that have religionem Ephemeram, Hilar. fidem menstruam. Ver. 22. The Locust, &c.] All creeping fowls that go upon all four might not bee eaten, except Arbe, Soleam, Chargol and Char∣gab, names to us unknown. Ver. 24. Whosoever toucheth the carcass] This and the like signified, that all, even the least sins are to bee purged through Christ, and carefully cast away. Ver. 28. Shall wash his clothes] As having committed a greater sin, then hee that to ucheth a carcass onely. All sin defi∣leth not alike.
Ver. 29. And the Tortois] Which hath it's name in Hebrew of a Coach or Wagon: The thick shell wherewith it is cover∣ed, is said to bee so hard, that a loaden Waggon may go over it, and not break it. And such is a hard heart, that cannot re∣pent, or relent never so little. Ver. 30. The Chamaeleon] A verie fearfull creature, and therefore easily turning himself into sundrie colours. Carnal fear put's men upon unwarrancable shifts. See Zeph. 3.13. Ver. 31. Touch them when they bee dead] There is no kinde of living creature that is defiled whiles it is alive, or that defileth whiles it is alive, save man onely, saith Maimonie. Ver. 36. Nevertheless a fountain] Becaus it would cleans it self, and work out the uncleanness. So will Faith. Ver. 37. It shall bee clean] Becaus of necessitie. Ver. 39. Of which yee may] Confer Psalm 49.12. pecoribus mor∣ticinis. Tremel. Ver. 40. Shall wash his clothes] To teach them to hate, even the garment spotted by the flesh. Jude 23. all provocations and instruments of sin. Ver. 44. Yee shall bee holie, for I am holie] Great men look to bee served like themselvs: so the great God. Ver. 45. That bringeth you up] This is often inculcated. God's blessings are binders; and everie new deliverance cal's for new obedience. Ver. 47. To make a difference] Ministers also in their dis∣courses should put a difference, and take out the pretious from the vile. Jer. 15.19. as did Zuinglius; who when hee inveighed most vehemently against sin, would usually com in with this claus, Probe vir, haec nihil ad te. This is not intended to thee, thou godlie man. CHAP. XII. Ver. 2. If a woman have conceived seed] OR yielded seed, Amam. Anti∣barbar. 575. as Gen. 1.11. Ʋrgendum hoc adversùs Anaba∣ptistas; qui, ut suos de humanae Christi naturae origine errores sta∣biliunt, foeminas semen habere praefractè negant. Then shee shall bee unclean] This signified that corruption of
man's nature, wherein hee is conceived. Augustin. Psal. 51.5. (being con∣demned assoon as conceived, Damnatus antequam natus) and the remedie wee have in Christ. Ver. 3. And in the eighth daie] See the Note on Gen. 17.13, 14. Ver. 4. Shee shall touch no hallowed thing] Preparation must go before participation of holie ordinances. Hag. 2.13. Ver. 5. But if shee bear a maid-childe] To intimate, it may bee, the womans beeing first in the transgression. 1 Tim. 2.14. Vers 6. And when the daies of her purifying] The Virgin Ma∣rie also observed this Law. Luke 2.21. not in conscience of a∣nie particular sin, which in the conception of our Saviour, shee was free from; nor in shew, to satisfie the law; much less upon hypocrisie; but in conscience of her natural corruption; which by this oblation, according to the Law, shee did confess holily and religiously before God and his Congregation, as one well observeth. Ver. 7. And make an attonement] Whereby her faith was con∣firmed, that by Christ her sin was remitted, and the curs remo∣ved. 1 Tim. 2.15. Ver. 8. And if shee bee not able] As the blessed Virgin was not. Luke 2.22, 24. who now can despise anie one for want, when the mother of our Lord was not rich enough to bring a Lamb for her purification? Wee may bee as happie in russet, as in tissue. CHAP. XIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] SEE the Note on Levit. 7.22. Ver. 2. Like the plague of leprosie] Leprosie is both an ef∣fect and type of sin; which is such a sickness of the soul, as those are of the bodie, which Physicians saie are Corruptio totius sub∣stantia, universal diseases, tending to the issues of death. It drie's up and draw's out the verie vital blood and life of the soul. Ver. 3. The plague in the skin of the flesh] That is, the white, bright spot, vers 2. Confer Exod. 4.6. Numb. 12.10. Is turned white] This might note such as have continu∣ed
long, and are aged in anie wickedness. Bee deeper then the skin of his flesh] Compare Numb. 12.12. 2 Kings 5.14. Such are they, whose wickedness is not onely acted by their hands, but seated in their hearts, and sunk into their spirits: like the spots of the leopard, which no art can cure, no water wash off, becaus they are not in the skin, but in the flesh and bones, in the sinews and most inner parts. In∣grained diseases are not easily stirred, much less destroied. Ver. 4. Shall shut him up] For further trial of truth, that daughter of time. Wee may not precipitate a censure, but bee slow to speak, slow to wrath. The leper must bee shut up from week to week, till the thing were certain: So till mens per∣versness bee made manifest. 2 Tim. 3.9. wee must suspend our censures. Manie are like candles whose tallow is mixt with brine; no sooner lighted, but they spit up and down the room. Ver. 5. Spred not in the skin] So if men mend by admoni∣tion, and take up in time; if they refuse not to bee reformed, hate not to bee healed, as Babylon. Jer. 51.9. as Ephraïm. Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed Ephraïm, then the iniquitie of Ephraïm was discovered, or brake out as a leprosie in his fore-head. See Ezekiel 24.13. Ver. 6. It is but a scab] Such as may bee the spot of God's children. Deut. 32.5. Sin make's wicked men the object of Gods hatred, the Saints of his pitie; as wee hate poison in a toad, but wee pitie it in a man. And hee shall wash his clothes] The best cannot wash in inno∣cencie, hee must therefore wash in tears. Isa. 1.16. God also will set in and wash such with the blood of his son. Ver. 7. But if the scab spread] So if sin bee gaining and grow∣ing still upon the sinner, even after admonition; or is scatter∣ed and spread to the infecting of others, it is a verie ill sign. Ver. 9. Hee shall bee brought unto the Priest] Who was to di∣scern it by the law of leprosie: Rom. 3.20. & 7.7. so must wee finde out our sins by the moral law. Rom. 3. The works of the flesh are manifest. Gal. 5. Neither need wee half so much caution or curiositie to bee per∣suaded of our spiritual leprosie, which is too too apparent: onely those manie cerimonies (as one well noteth) may put us in minde how much more exquisite our diligence ought to bee in finding and ferreting out our special sins.
Ver. 10. And there bee quick raw flesh] It is one of the most remarkable things in all this law (saith a learned Divine) that quick or sound flesh in the sore should bee judged leprosie, and the man unclean: whereas if the leprosie covered all his flesh, hee was pronounced clean, vers 13. Hereby, 1. May bee meant such as justifie themselvs and their wickedness, as Jonas did his anger; whereas hee was judged himself, is like him who had the leprosie all over, and might bee declared clean. Or, 2. Such who sin against the light of knowledg, and the quick∣ning, yea rawness of a galled conscience. Ver. 12. And if a leprosie] So called, becaus so counted at first: but it prove's no more then a kinde of scurf or scab. Ver. 13. Hee shall pronounce him clean] i. e. not infectiously or incurably unclean. Ver. 14. But when raw flesh] Becaus it shew'd that there were still corrupt and poisoned humors in the bodie, not easie to bee expelled till death. Ver. 15. It is a leprosie] Properly so called, a fretting sore∣ness or scabbedness. The Greeks call it Elephas or Elephantiasis, when the skin grow's hard as the Elephant's skin. This the Is∣raëlites brought (likely) out of Aegypt; for it was bred one∣ly about Nilus, and is therefore called the botch of Aegypt. Deut. 28.27. Ver. 16. Turn again] Viz. to bee white like the rest of the bodie: so if a sinner stop or step back, &c. Ver. 18. Was a bile and is healed] Seemed to bee healed, as apostates to have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledg of Christ. 2 Pet. 2.20. and to have known the waie of righteousness, vers 21. and yet the later end is wors with them then the begining. They becom altogether filthie. Psalm 53.3. Forsakers of the Covenant, yea, wicked doers a∣gainst the Covenant. Dan. 11.30, 32. These sin not common sins, as Core and his companie died not common deaths. Ver. 22. And if it spread much abroad] So, if sin reign there is no pardon: rebel it may, reign it must not. Ver. 23. But if the bright spot staie] Sin, if it reign not is not imputed; for wee are not under the law, but under grace. Rom. 6.12, 14. Ver. 25. A leprosie broken out of the burning] Seldom do passi∣ons
burn, but there is a leprosie breaking out of that burning; such as causseth the climate where such lepers live to be like the torrid Zone, too hot for anie to live neer them. Ver. 30. A yellow thin hair] Which is a true sign of a skall. Ver. 34. Hee shall wash his clothes] See the Note on ver. 6. Ver. 35. After his cleansing] See the Note on ver. 18. Ver. 37. Black hair] A sign of soundness. Quod sanitas in corpore, id sanctitas in corde, saith Bernard. Ver 39. A freckled spot] Or white-morphew. This made not a man unclean: no more do meer infirmities make God abhor us. Ver. 44. His plague is in his head] Such a leper is everie ig∣norant man; how much more the man that is an heretick? whom therefore after the first and second admonition wee must reject. Titus 3.10. yea from such stand off. 1 Tim. 6.5. Keep aloof as from lepers, Purchas Pilgr. their verie breath is infectious; and like the dogs of Congo, they bite, though they bark not. Ver. 45. His clothes shall bee rent] To shew his sorrow for sin, the caus of his calamitie. And his head bare] That men might not mistake him; and further to shew his humilitie, whereof this also was a ce∣rimonie. A covering upon his upper lip] His Moucbaches, that by his breath hee might not insect others: and to shew that God will not hear a good motion from an ill mouth. Ʋnclean, unclean] Saie wee the same in our humblest acknow∣ledgments; but withall add that of the leper in the Gospel, Yet Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make mee clean. Ver. 46. Without the Camp] And that utterly, if incurable, as Ʋzzias. A livelie type of Excommunication, which the Apo∣stle describeth. 2 Cor. 5.11, 12. and our Saviour. Mat. 18.17. Ver. 47. The garment also] A plague not anie where els read or heard of: beeing nothing like clothes now-adaies infected with the plague, but far more strange and dangerous, whether it did spread or fret inward, the garment was to bee burnt with fire. This signified that all instruments of idolatrie, or of anie other sin are to bee destroied, and made awaie. As the Law commandeth, The graven images of their gods shall yee burn with fire. Deut. 7.25, 26. And Jude alludeth to it, when hee biddeth us
save som with fear, pulling them out of the fire, bating even the gar∣ment spotted by the flesh. Jude 23. See Isa. 30.22. Acts 19.19. Justiciaries also shall one daie finde, that though to the world∣ward they wash themselvs with snow-water, and make their hands ne∣ver so clean, yet God will plunge them in the ditch, and their own clothes shall make them to bee abhorred. Job 9.30, 31. CHAP. XIIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake unto Moses] ANd to Aaron also though not here mentioned, as hee is, vers 33. Ver. 2. Hee shall bee brought unto the Priest] To teach us to go to Jesus Christ the high-Priest of our profession, who healeth all our diseases. Psalm 103.3. He cured the leprosie (to others altogether incurable) by a touch of his hand onely. Mark 1.41. Yea hee sent his word and healed them. Psalm 107.20. and so hee doth the souls of sinners that com unto him. Ver. 3. If the plague of leprosie bee healed] As it was in Simon the leper that entertained Christ. Jealousie, Phren∣sie and Heresie are counted incurable diseases: not so le∣prosie; though the most carried it to their death, as Gehazi, Azariah, &c. Ver. 4. Command to take] That the leper might shew his thankfulness to Jehovah his Physician, as hee is called. Exod. 15.26. See Mat. 8.4. Men praie and paie Physicians of their bo∣dies, who yet do but officiosè occidere manie times. And shall God have nothing? Must hee ask as once, Where are the other nine? Shall wee not turn again with Naaman now cleansed, and offer our service, renounce our idols, dedicate all wee are and have to the God of Israël? Two birds] Or sparrows, whereof two were sold for a farthing: to shew how lightly set by Christ is in the world, whose blood nevertheless is more worth then a thousand worlds. Ver. 5. Over running water] Heb. Living water. Life con∣sist's in motion, in action: hence waters that spring and run are, for their continual motion, called living waters. O Lord,
saith Hezekiah, By these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit. Isa. 38.16. Ver. 6. That was killed over the running water] Pointing at Christ, who came not by water onely, but by water and blood. 1 John 5.6. See the Note there, and on 1 Cor. 6.11. Ver. 7. And hee shall sprinkle] This led them to that blood of sprinkling. Heb. 12.23. applied unto them by that hysop∣bunch of faith, whereby the heart is purified. And shall let the living bird loos] This figured (sale som) that neither Christ's deïtie without the shedding of his blood, nor Christ's blood (but for the quickning life of the God-head, personally dwelling in him) could have been available for the purging of sin. Both which himself declareth. John 6.53, with 63. And hither belongeth 2 Cor. 5.19. Acts 20.28. More∣over it figured, that Christ by his death conquered him that had the power of death. Heb. 2.15. whilest hee fled as a bird to the everlasting mountains, from the jaws of death to the joies of heaven. Heb. 7.26. Ver. 8. Shall wash his clothes and shave] This the leper was to do the first daie of his cleansing; 1 Tim. 6.18. to teach men to bee thorough in the practice of mortification, at the first conversion: laying a good foundation for the time to com, that they may laie hold on eternal life. And shall tarrie abroad] Men must not bee too hastie at first to catch at comfort; but let humiliation have her perfect work, and our sorrows bee sutable to our sins. Ver. 9. Ezra 10.13. Even all his hair hee shall shave off] To shew that re∣pentance and mortification is not the work of a daie (as hee said in another case) but of a man's whole life. There must bee a dailie shaving and paring of lusts and superfluities; which are to the soul as excrements are to the bodie. Yea, the more a sin∣ner is exercised in mortification, the more hee searcheth out his corruptions. Now hee shaveth off the hair not of his head one∣ly, but of his beard and eie-brows. Ver. 10. Hee shall take two hee-lambs] That by these sacrifices hee might bee taught to seek for the cleansing of his soul, toge∣ther with the healing of his bodie; that there might bee mens sana in corpore sano, a cure don on both inside and outside too. Ver. 11. At the door of the tabernacle] There God is to bee
found, viz. in the publick assemblies, and that wee are in∣deed (saith one) when wee are at the door of the Taber∣nacle. Ver. 12. And wave them] This may note, 1. Christ's ex∣treme sufferings. 2. The waving of Christ in the preaching of the Gospel. 3. The motion of the sinner's lips in confession and supplication. Ver. 13. It is most holie] The waie of holiness, in and by Christ is an absolute waie, as ever was devised. Ver. 14. Ʋpon the tip of the right ear] To signifie that all Christ's sanctified ones have a hearing ear, an active hand, a nimble foot, to walk in the waie that is called holie. Ver. 15. Som of the log] Christ's comforts must bee warily propounded to men, and with good discretion. Ver. 16. Seven times] This might note the perfection of the joies God hath for his, and our imperfection in believing it, in that it was so manie times sprinkled. Ver. 17. Ʋpon the tip of the right ear] To assure him of com∣fort, in hearing, doing, persevering. Ver. 18. Ʋpon the head] Everlasting joie shall bee upon the heads of Christ's ransomed ones. Isa. 35. ult. Ver. 19. And afterwards the burnt-offering] Wee must bee reconciled by Christ (our sin-offering) before the sacrifi∣cing of our selvs (which is our reasonable service) can bee accepted. Ver. 20. And the meat-offering] The meat-offering annexed to the burnt-offering shew's (saith one) either that Christi∣ans grow marvellously in this life, Bifield on 1 Pet. 1.22. after they have full assurance of pardon of sin: or els that Christ will bee their eternal food in heaven. Ver. 21. And if hee bee poor] Here's a proviso for poor people: God make's no difference, but accept's of a little where much is not to bee had. Ver. 32. Whose hand is not able to get] This is often urged, to shew, that the best can bee got must not bee thought too good for God: and that if through carelesness or niggardice men do not their utmost, that's a just exception. Ver. 34. Plague of leprosie in a hous] Such is the contagion of sin, that it will infect the verie hous wee dwell in, the gar∣ments wee wear, even all the creatures wee use, so as all things
are to us impure. Titus 1.13. even the hous of God also. Levit. 16.16. and his holie ordinances. The Canaanites had defiled the land from one end to another with their uncleannesses. Ezra 9.11. and so infected the air. This Law taught men; 1. Upon all occasions to shew their utter detestation of sin, but especially of idolatrie. 2. To take heed of despising admonition, lest they bee utterly ruined, and that without remedie. Prov. 29.1. CHAP. XXV. Ver. 2. Arunning issue] AN involuntarie flux of seed, such as David imprecateth upon Joab, 2 Sam. 3.29. Ver. 3. It is his uncleanness] Hereby they were taught the tur∣pitude of sin, of original sin especially, that peccatum peccans, as the Scholes call it; that sinfull sin, as S. Paul. Rom. 7.13. for so filthie it is, that hee can call it no wors then by it's own name, as wanting a fitter Epithite. Ver. 4. Everie bed] Sin is more catching then anie plague, and more defiling then anie jakes. Mark 7.23. Paul found it as noisom to his soul, as a dead bodie to his sens. Rom. 7.24. or as the sanies of a plague-sore to a rich robe. Job ab∣hor's himself for it in dust and ashes. Chap. 40.4. And Isai∣ah look's upon himself as an undon man, by reason of it, Chap. 6.5. Ver. 8. Spit upon him] Noting the pollution that com's to men's souls by those that spit heresies, and belch out blas∣phemies. Ver. 13. Bathe his flesh] This taught them to run to that open fountain, that Kings-bath. Zech. 13.1. with Ezekiel 36.29. Ver. 15. And the Priest shall offer them] This Priest, and these sacrifices led them to Christ who bore our sicknesses, and expi∣ated our sins. Seest thou then the bloodie issue of thy corru∣ptions alwaie running, and gushing out at thine eies, ears, month, flesh? the issue of blood and water opened in Christ's side run's alwaie for washing it awaie. Ver. 16. Seminifluus. Go out from him] By nocturnal pollutions, filthie dreams, &c.
Ver. 18. With seed of copulation] Though lawfull in it self, as beeing the ordinance of God. Gen. 2.24. Sin is like copres, which will turn wine, or milk into ink; or leaven which turn's a verie paseover into pollution. Ver. 24. And if anie man lie with her] Unawares, or scecretly. For to do it presumptuously, and upon publick notice, it was death. Levit. 20.18. Ezek. 22.10. And God often punisheth such unclean copulations now-a-daies, with monstrous, de∣formed, or diseased births. Ver. 25. Have an issue] As shee had. Mark. 5.25. Ver. 31. That they die not] Which is wors then to die in a ditch. CHAP. XVI. Ver. 1. After the death] THat others might bee warned. Lege historiam, ne fias histo∣ria, saith one. When they offered before the Lord] A little strange sire might seem a small matter in the eies of indifferencie: and yet it was such a sin, as made all Israël guiltie, as appear's by the sacrifices offered for that sin, set down in this Chapter. Ver. 2. That hee com not at all times] Whensoever hee plea∣seth, but when I appoint him, i.e. once a year onely. Exodus 30.10. and then also with reverence and godlie fear. God, as hee lov's to bee acquainted with men in the walks of their o∣bedience, so hee tak's ate upon him in his ordinances, and will bee trembled at in his judgments. Ver. 3. For a sin-offering] viz. For himself, and his familie, ver. 6. and 11. See the Note on Chap. 14.3. Ver. 4. Therefore shall hee wash] As wee must bee alwaies holie, so then most, when wee present our selvs to the holie eies of our Creätor. We wash our hands everie daie: but when wee are to sit with som great person, wee scour them with bals. See vers 24. Ver. 5. Two kids of the goats] Both of them types of Christ: who though hee died not for wicked goats, yet hee seemed re∣jected of God, and was reckoned among malefactors, Isa. 53.
Ver.6. And for his hous] Whereof a Minister must bee mainly carefull. 1 Tim. 3.4. lest (as Augustus doing justice on others) hee bee hit in the teeth with his own disordered familie. Aaron had lately smarted in his two eldest. Ver. 8. Shall cast lots] To shew that nothing was don for us by Christ, but what God's hand and his counsel had determi∣ned, Acts 4.28. 1 Pet. 1.20. See the Note. [For the scape goat] Which beeing a piacular or purging oblation, carried the peo∣ples curs with it: as did likewise those Obominales among the Grecians; who, from this custom of the Hebrews, borrowed their yearlie expiation of their cities: the manner whereof (somwhat like unto this) See in the Note on 1 Cor. 4.13. Ver. 9. The goat] A type of Christ's mortal humanitie (saie som) as the scape-goat of his immortal deïtie: Or the one of his death, the other of his resurrection. Others are of opini∣on that hereby was signified, that the Deïtie of Christ dwel∣ling in light inaccessible, gave to his humanitie sufficient strength for the induring of those things, which no other creature could have com near, for the full expiating of our sins. So hee telleth the Jews first, and (after) his disciples, Where I shall bee, you cannot com. Ver. 22. Ver. 11. An attonement for himself] That having first made his own peace, hee may be in case to attone for the people. This was David's method. Psal. 25. & 51. Ver. 12. And bring it within the veil] So to prepare the waie into the holie place. This incens smal-beaten might figure Christ in his Agonie, praying more earnestly, before hee en∣tred with his own blood into the most holie place of heaven. Ver. 13. May cover the mercie-seat] And so bee as a skreen betwixt the Priest and those everlasting burnings: or as a cloud to darken the glorie of their shining, for the high-priest's safetie. Ver. 14. Ʋpon the mercie-seat eastward] This and the fol∣lowing verses signifie (saith one) that even heaven it self is defiled unto us by our sins; until it bee made clean by the blood and obedience of Christ; who is entred thither, not by the blood of goats and calvs, but by his own blood, and thereby hath purified the heavenlie things themselvs. . Heb. 9.12, 23. Ver. 16. In the midst of their uncleanness] Which did cleav to the Tabernacle, as the sins of spiritual Babylon are said to bee glewed to heaven. Revel. 18.5.
Ver. 17. And there shall bee no man] Christ will have no part∣ner, and hee need's no co-adjutor. Heb. 7.25. Isa. 63.3. Ver. 18. And hee shall go unto the Altar] This signified (saith one) that everie Church-assemblie is acceptable to God, onely through the blood of Christ, by the remission of all their sins. Ver. 21. All their transgressions, in all their sins] i.e. In their several circumstances and aggravations: laying open how ma∣nie transgressions were wrapped up in their several sins. This was to bring out their sins (as they took the vessels of the tem∣ple. Ezra 8.34.) by number and by weight. Ver. 22. Shall let go the goat] The Hebrews saie, that hee was to throw it down the rock, and so it died. The Greci∣ans had a like custom in their solemn expiations of their cities. They tumbled the persons devoted from som rock, into the sea; Suidas. Aemulus Dei diabolus. sacrificing them to Neptune, saying, Bee thou a propitiation for us. Ver. 24. Hee shall wash his flesh] See what this taught them and us. Heb. 10.22. That Epistle to the Hebrews is an excellent Commentarie upon this book of Leviticus. Ver. 26. Shall wash his clothes] To shew, 1. That it was for our sins that Christ suffered. 2. That all that partake of his benefits must wash their hearts from wickedness. Jer. 4.14. 2 Cor. 5.15. and 7.1. Ver. 29. Yee shall afflict your souls] With voluntarie sor∣rows for your sins, as David did. Psal. 35.13. and Daniel. Cha. 10.3, 12. and so dispose your selvs to obtein pardon and re∣conciliation. The Lord's Supper is with us a daie of attonement; at which time both the Scape-goat was let go, and affliction of soul was called for. This Passover must bee eaten with sour herbs. Ver. 31. It shall bee a Sabbath of rest] An exact and caresull rest, such as is described. Isa. 58.13. which place of the Pro∣phet som understand of this daie of attonement, and yearlie fast, spoken of in the begining of that Chapter. Ver. 33. For the holie Sanctuarie] For all the sins of your holie services; it beeing the manner that either make's, or mar's an action. Ver 34. For all their sins once a year] For whereas in their private sacrifices they durst not confess their capital sins for fear of death, due to them by the Law. God gratiously
provided and instituted this yearlie Sacrifice of attonement for the sins of the whole people, without particular acknow∣ledgment of anie. CHAP. XVII. Ver. 2. This is the thing which the Lord] WHo must bee readily obeied without tergiversation, or sciscitation. Ver. 3. What man soever] Whether Israëlite or proselyte. Vers 8. unless by special dispensation from the Law-giver, as 1 Sam. 7.9. and 11.15. 2 Sam. 24.18. 1 Kings 18.22. and then they were to offer upon altars of earth, or rough stone, that might bee soon and easily thrown down. Exodus 20.24, 25. Ver. 4. And bringeth it not unto the door] To teach, that in the Church alone, and by Christ alone, that is, by faith in him, acceptable service can bee performed to God. Christ is the door of the sheep. Iohn 10.7, 9. by whom wee com to the Father. Iob. 14.6. and may everie where list up pure hands, without wrath, without doubting. Ver. 5. Synesius saith the divel is, , an Idol-lover. Ʋnto the Priest] No man might offer his own sacrifice, though never so good, but must bring it to the Priest; and the Priest was to offer as well the poor man's lamb, as the rich man's ox. Ver 7. Ʋnto divels] As they had don in Aegypt. Ezek. 23.8. Deut 32.17. And as both Pagans and Papagans do. 1 Cor. 10.20. Revel. 9.20. The word here rendred divels, signifieth rough ones, Satyrs. Isa. 34.14. Satan is a rough, rug∣ged, harsh spirit: and such also are his imps, as Esau, Ismaël, &c. Ver. 9. Shall bee cut off] i.e. Destroied, not excommunicated onely, as som do sens it. Ver. 10. That eateth anie manner of blood] See the Note on Gen. 9.4. Ver. 11. And I have given it you] I have set it apart for a sa∣cred use: therefore you may not make food of that which is a figure of Christ.
Ver. 13. Which hunteth] Though hee bee as hungrie as a hunter. See 1 Sam. 14.32, 33, 34. CHAP. XVIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] SEE the Note on Levit. 7.22. Ver. 2. I am the Lord your God] Your Maker and Master. Ver. 3. After the doings of the Land of Aegypt] Where, and in Canaan these hainous sins are counted peccadillo's; as at this daie also they are in Spain, Italie, Turkie, where their Catamites are their serious loves, Sodomie is hardly held a vice, bestialitie was boasted of by Mahomet their prophet. In their ordinances] The Aegyptians made it lawfull (so did the Persians) for brother and sister to couple together in mar∣riage. Of this and the like ordinances it might bee rightly said, as once it was of the cerimonial Law, that they were statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live. Ezek. 20.25. Ver. 4. To walk therein] Not to halt therein, nor to take a turn or two, or for awhile, as Samson went with his parents, till hee met with an honie-comb; but indesinenter ambulabo, Psal. 1 16.9. 1 Cor. 9.24. as David saith, Walk, and not bee wearie; Run, and not faint, as those Isa. 40. ult. So run, that yee may obtein, saith the A∣postle. Ver. 5. Hee shall live in them] As the flame live's in the oil, as the creature by his food, so the spiritual life is mainteined by an evangelical keeping of God's commandments. As on the contrarie, everie motion of the soul out of this waie, tend's to death; beeing as the motion of the fish out of his element. Ver. 6. None of you shall approach] viz. To couple carnal∣ly with them. Ezek. 18.6. Isa. 8.3. Yea though it bee under a pretext of marriage: for by marriage they seem to justifie their incest, which make's it the wors, saith Tostatus; whose rea∣son here I better like then that of Cardinal Campeius, though it sound somwhat like. If comparison should bee made (said this carnal Cardinal) much greater offens it is, a Priest to
have a wife, then to have and keep at home manie harlots. For they that keep harlots (said hee) as it is nought that they do, Act. and Mon. fol. 790. so do they acknowledg their sin: the other persuade themselvs to do well, and so persist without repentance or conscience of their fact. Ver. 7. Shee is thy mother] And so it is against nature to lie carnally with her. Aristotle tel's of a Camel that killed his keeper for caussing him to cover his dam, and of an hors that cast himself down head-long after hee had don the like. Hist. animal. l. 9 cap 47. Ver. 8. It is thy father's nakedness] For the wife hath not power over her own bodie, but the husband: and when her chastitie is assaulted, shee should saie (saith Chrysostom) Non est corpus meum, sed mariti, My bodie is not mine, but my hus∣band's. Ver. 9. Or born abroad] i.e. base-born, which our English laws call natural children, The Hebrews call them brambles, and Mamzerim, spots abroad, and Shatukim, such as must saie nothing when others are praising their parents. The Greeks call bastards, , becaus they are their father's reproach, and are subject to contempt and contumelies of others. Ver. 10. For their's is thine own nakedness] Children are but the father multiplied; the father of another edition. Ver. 14. Of thy father's brother] The nakedness of whose wife is called his nakedness, becaus man and wife are one flesh. Mat. 19.6. See the Note there. Ver. 17. It is wiokedness] Wickedness with a witness, and yet avowed for lawfull by som odious upstart Sectaries, Hist. Davidis Georg p.28, 29. Little non∣such, p. 5, 6, 7. who teach, that those marriages are most laudable that are betwixt persons nearest in blood, brother and sister, father and daugh∣ter, mother and son, &c. This they shame not to set forth in print. Ver. 18. A wife to her sister] i. e. Anie two women toge∣then: Compare Ezekiel 1.9. Here Polygamie is flatly forbid∣den. In which sin manie of the Patriarchs lived and died; not through anie impietie, the Lord testifying that their hearts were upright, but meerly through the mistaking of this text (as it may seem) taking the word [sister] for one so by blood, which was spoken of a sister by nation, as those clauses, to vex her, and during her life, do evince.
Ver. 19. Ʋnto a woman] See the Note on Chap. 15.24. Ver. 20. To defile thy self] As David, how did hee moil him∣self with Bathsheba, and chased away that pure spirit. Psal. 51.10, 11, 12. Casta Deus mens est. Ver. 21. Pass thorough the fire] Either to bee burned to death in honor of that abominable idol; or to bee consecrated there∣to, by passing between two fires, which scorched them. See the Note on Mat. 5.22. [Neither shalt thou prophane the name] i. e. Caus it to bee prophaned and blasphemed by others, as Pro. 30. 9. & 1 Tim. 1.20. with the Note there. Ver. 22. Thou shalt not lie with mankinde] The Sodomites sin. Gen. 19.5. See the Note there. This, saie the Hebrews, was Is∣maël's sporting with Isaac: and this, saie others, was the sin of Joseph's brethren, the evil report whereof hee brought to his father. A sad report it was surely to our king Henrie the first, that was brought him concerning his eldest son William, who crossing the seas from France to England, was with manie other Gallants cast away by shipwrack, being Sodomiticâ labe infecti fe∣rè omnes, saith Guliel. Parisiensis, almost all of them infected with this abomination of going after strange flesh. Jude 7, 8. Ver. 23. . 2. mag. mor. cap. 5. Neither shalt thou lie with anie beast] See what a foul sink of sin man's nature is; who would think that anie such surpassing wickedness (so Aristotle cal's bestialitie) should ever enter into man's heart? but there (as in the sea) is that Levia∣than the divel, and there are creeping things (abominable and ug∣lie lusts) innumerable. Ver. 24. The nations are defiled] And yet are not the Scri∣ptures defiled, by providing against such filthinesses, no more then the Sun-beams are by shining upon a stinking lake. Ver. 25. And the land is defiled] From one end thereof to the other. Ezr. 9.11. as the face of the old world was grown so foul, that God was fain to wash it with a flood. Ver. 25. Yee shall therefore keep] Unless yee bee ambitious of a like destruction. Luke 13.3. Ver. 28. That the land spue not you out] It is wisely said by He∣rodotus, That the destruction of Troie is a fit example of the rule, that great sins bring great plagues.
CHAP. XIX. Ver. 2. Yee shall bee holie] RItually and really. See the Notes on Levit. 11.44. Mat. 5. ult. 1 Pet. 1.16. 1 John 3.3. Ver. 3. Yee shall fear everie man his mother] The mother is set first, becaus usually most slighted. The daies of mourning for my father are at hand, then will I slaie my brother Jacob, said that prophane losel. Gen. 27.41. As for his mother hee make's no reckoning of her, hee cared not to griev her. [And keep my Sabbaths] To the which the honoring of good governors (who are to see the Sabbath sanctified by all under their roof) doth verie much conduce. Ver. 4. Turn yee not unto idols] Heb. Elilim deunculi, deastri, Pettie-gods, dunghill-deities, of all which wee should saie, as hee did once, Contemno minutulos istos Deos, modò Jovem (Jeho∣vam) mihi propitium habeam, I care for the favor of no god, but of the great God of Gods. Ver. 5. At your own will] Or, For your favorable acceptation, that God may graciously accept you. Ver. 6. It shall bee eaten the same daie] See the Note on Chap. 7.15, 17, 18, 19. Ver. 9. And when yee reap] See what provision the Lord ma∣keth for his poor, commanding that the fuller cups of the rich∣er sort may overflow into their emptie dishes: besides that  (as Hierom cal's it) that poor man's tith appointed. Deut. 15.11. Iames the sift of Scotland was for his charitie cal∣led, The poor man's King; much more may God. Ver. 11. Yee shall not steal] See the Notes on Ephes. 4.28. and 25. and on Exod. 20.15. Levit. 6.3. Ver. 12. Neither shalt thou prophane the name] By presuming rashly and lightly to blurt out this reverend name in an oath, or otherwise. The Grecians (as Suidas observ's) when they would swear by their Iupiter, out of the meer dread and reve∣rence of his name forbear to mention him, breaking off their oath with a , as those that onely dare to ow the rest to their thoughts. And Clinias the Pythagorean, out of this regard, would rather undergo a mulct of three talents then swear.
Ver. 13. The wages of him that is hired] This is a crying sin. Iam. 5.3. condemned by the verie light of nature. Lib. 10. de legi∣bus. Plato would have him double paid, that is not paid in due time. Ver. 14. Thou shalt not curs the deaf] So by analogie, the absent that cannot speak for themselvs, or the dead. Of all fowl wee most hate and detest the Crows; and of all beasts the Jackals (a kinde of foxes in Barbarie) becaus the one dig's up the graves and devour's the flesh, the other pick's out the eies of the dead. [But shalt fear thy God] Who both hear's and see's all thy miscarriages, and will reckon with thee for all. Deo obscura clarent, muta respondent, silentium confitetur, saith an Anti∣ent. Night will convert it self into noon before God, and si∣lence prove a speaking evidence. Ver. 15. Thou shall not respect] Spare not the great for their might, nor the mean for their miserie. Causses must bee heard, and not persons. Ver. 16. Ʋp and down as a tale-bearer] Heb. As a pedlar that first fil's his pack with reports and rumors, and then go's ped∣ling up and down, dropping a tale here, and another there, to the taking away of the good name, and somtimes of the life of another. Hence it follow's here, Neither shalt thou stand against the life of thy brother. And agreeable hereunto is that of Ezekiel 22.9. In thee are men that carrie tales to shed blood. Such a wretched pedlar was Doeg: and such is that backbiter spoken of. Psal. 15.3. The word there used doth in the Hebrew pro∣perly signifie such an one as footeth and trotteth it up and down, prying, and spying, and carrying tales and rumors. 2 Sam. 19.21. Ver. 17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother] Most unkindenes∣ses that fall out among friends grow upon mistakes and misun∣derstandings. Now, a friendlie reasoning the case, or, if need bee, a godly reproof cure's both the reprover, and the repro∣ved; whereas the neglect of this dutie breed's dwelling suspici∣ons: suspicions breed a verie habit of mis-interpretation: this breed's a lothness to com to the light to shew the reasons of our dislike: this lothness beget's a verie separation in heart, which at length turn's to down right hatred in heart. All which might have been better prevented by a seasonable venting our mindes in a reproof or admonition. [Thou shalt in anie wise re∣buke thy neighbour] Neither is this anie argument of hatred, but
an office of love. Friends (as Bees) are killed with the ho∣nie of flatterie, but quickened with the vineger of reproof. The Eagle though shee loveth her young ones dearly, yet shee pricketh and beateth them out of the nest. Exigne gehen∣nali. Hier. [And shalt not suffer sin upon him] But save him with fear, pulling him out of the fire. Jude 23. Out of the fire of hell, as Hierom interpret's it, which sin suffered will bring him unto. Others read it thus, Lest thou suffer for his sin; which, by not opposing, thou ma∣kest to becom thine own. To withstand evil in thy brother, is the best waie to do him good, and thy self too. Others ren∣der it thus, Thou shalt not lift up his sin over him, as an ensign, by blabbing or blazing it abroad, to his just grief and disgrace; but clap a plaster of reproof upon the sore, and then (as Chi∣rurgeons use to do) cover it with thy hand, that the world may bee never the wiser. Ver. 18. Nor bear anie grudg] Heb. Nor keep. There is no∣thing that a man is more readie to keep then his wrath. There∣fore the Hebrews both here and Jer. 3.5. Psal. 103.9. put ser∣vare for servare iram; but wee must neither revenge nor remem∣ber; wee must not throw awaie the dagger, and keep the sheath, but both forgive and forget. [But shalt love thy neighbour] See the Notes on Mat. 22.37-40. and on Rom. 13.9. Ver. 19. Yee shall keep my statutes] Even these next follow∣ing, though they may seem to bee but minutula legis, not worth keeping. [Thou shalt not let thy cattle] The Doctors of Doway, upon this Text, Here all participation (saie they) with here∣ticks and schismaticks is forbidden. Philip of Spain said, hee had rather have no subjects, Act. and mon. fol. 1189. then subjects of a divers religion. Our King Edward the sixth told the Popish rebels of Devonshire, who fought for libertie of Conscience (as they call it) that rather then hee would yield to them, hee would spend his own roy∣al person, his Crown, Treasure, Realm, and whole estate; whereof wee assure you, said hee, of our high honor. But now (alas) what secret and subtile projects and practices are there amongst us of this Nation to bring in an universal, boundless, lawless, abominable and intolerable Toleration, which (as the London-Ministers affirm in their Testimonie to the Truth of Jesus Christ, now newly published to the singular prais of their exemplarie and seasonable zeal for God) will prove an hideous and complexive evil of most dangerous and mis∣chievous
consequence, if ever (which God forbid) it shall bee consented to by Autoritie. England shall bee swallowed up with Sects, Schisms, Divisions, Disorders, Contentions and Confusions, and becom an odious sink and common recepta∣cle of all the prodigious errors, lies, heresies, blasphemies, libertinism and prophanenesses in the world: so that Rome it self shall not bee a more odious puddle and cage of all abomi∣nation and uncleanness. The godlie shall sit down and lament us. The wicked shall rise up and insult over us. All the Na∣tions about us shall bee amazed at us. All the reformed Chur∣ches shall bee ashamed to own us. Thus, and much more to this purpose write those worthie Zealots, The London Ministers Te∣stimonie, &c. attested. whose Testimonial to the Truth coming by a providence to my hand, even whilst I was writing upon this Chapter, I could not but here set my seal to it, and here insert this part of it, the whole beeing such as deserv's to bee written in letters of gold upon a table of marble, for the use of all posteritie. Ver. 20. Shee shall bee scourged] Thus still (saith a grave In∣terpreter) the Lord debaseth bond-servants, to teach his chil∣dren to hate the bondage of sin. Ver. 22. Shall bee forgiven] sc. By faith in Christ, whom these sacrifices did shadow and set forth. Ver. 23. Three years shall it bee as uncircumcised] And so to bee cast away, as the fore-skin of the flesh was. The fourth year it was to bee separate, to bee offered to the Lord in sign of Thanksgiving: And then the fifth year to bee eaten. This was to shew, that the verie fruits of the earth are, after a sort, polluted by man's sin, till purged by a new kinde of blessing. 1 Tim. 4.5. Hereby also God would separate his own people from other Nations: and shew that they might with a better conscience feed upon the fruits of the earth, then others could. There are that set this mystical sens upon the Text. Christ for three years space planted the Gospel in Judaea; but the foreskins were cast away for that time, that is, the Gospel was not preached yet to the uncircumcised Gentiles. In the fourth year these fruits were consecrated to God; that is, Christ in the fourth year of his Ministerie died for the sins of the world, rose again, asscended, and sent down the holie Ghost, whereby the Apostles and others were sanctified, beeing,
as it were, the first fruits of the promised Land. In the fist year, the fruits of the Gospel planted by Christ began to bee common, preached to the Gentiles, believed in the world. 1 Tim. 3.16. Ver. 26. Neither shall you use enchantment] Or, observ for∣tune's conjecture by signs of good or evil luck, as som ren∣der it. Ver. 27. Yee shall not round] Becaus the Arabians their neigh∣bors did so, Herod. in Tbal. and they should not bee conformed to idolaters. Oleaster a Popish Interpreter understandeth such a shaving here, as their Priests use to bear. But shaving is so bald a Cerimo∣nie, that som Priests in France are ashamed of the mark, and few of them have it that can handsomly avoid it. Ver. 28. Yee shall not make anie cuttings] Another Heathen∣ish custom, Consol. ad Apol. of such as mourned without hope. Plutarch tel's os som Barbarians that did tear their hair, rent their flesh, slit their ears and nose for the dead. Jer. 16 6. Ver. 29. Do not prostitute thy daughter] As som of the Hea∣thens did in honor of their gods. As the Papists do at this daie, Martin. Vival. in Candelabro cap. de confes∣sione. in their Stews and Brothel-houses. Their Casuists complain of som harlots there so boldly lascivious, as to soli∣cite others, so as to prostitute themselvs to all comers; yea in som Spanish Stews, to an unnatural filthiness. But what a shamefull thing is that which Espencaeus a Papist report's with detestation, that in Rome a Jewish maid might not bee admit∣ted into the Stews of whoredom, unless shee would bee first baptized. Espene.' de continent. lib. 3. cap. 4. Dici nequit, saith hee, quàm incredibili Christiano∣rum tum pudore, tum etiam eorum qui verè tales sunt, cordolio, ut Judae filiae scortari non liceat, Dei filiae liceat. What a shame∣full and sad thing is this that a Jewess, unless shee turn Chri∣stian, &c. Ver. 30. Yee shall keep my Sabbaths] Twice in this Chapter is this commanded, that it may bee the better remembred: and that men may know that it is not enough to rest on that daie, but that rest must bee sanctified by a reverent resorting to the Sanctuarie, and not prophaned by runing into whore-hous∣es and tipling-houses, as in Germanie; where Alsted complain's and saie's, that if the Sabbath-daie should bee named accord∣ing to manie mens observing of it, Alsted. Enyc. Daemoniacus potiùs quàm Dominicus vocaretur. [And reverence my Sanctuarie] Com wee
must into the places of God's worship, with an inward aw and fear of his presence, and not as into a dancing-school, Hom. 36. 2d 1 Cor. 4. as som do. How fearfull is this place, saith Iacob? It is the place of Angels and Archangels, the kingdom of God, it is heaven it self, saith Chrysostom. Away then with all careless negligence and carnal securitie. Ver. 31. I am the Lord your God] What need you then run to the divel for direction? Is it becaus there is no God in Isra∣ël? Everie one that consult's with Satan, worship's him, though hee bow not: neither doth that evil spirit desire anie other re∣verence, then to bee sought unto. Ver. 32. Thou shalt rise up] Cognata sunt , old age and honor are near a kin in the Greek tongue, ut . See Prov. 20.29. Lam. 5.12. Ver. 33. And if a stranger] See the Note on Exod. 22 21. Ver. 37. And do them] For they are verba vivenda, non legen∣da. Words not so much to bee read as lived. CHAP. XX. Ver. 2. That giveth anie of his seed to Moloch] SEE the Note on Chap. 18.21. Lactantius report's out of Pescennius Festus, that the Carthaginians beeing overcom by Agathocles King of Sicilie, and fearing lest their slackness in the service of Saturn (who is thought to bee the same with Mo∣loch) was the caus, offered unto him for a sacrifice no fewer then four hundred young Gentlemen at once. Ver. 3. To defile my Sanctuarie] Great sins do greatly pol∣lute. See Lev. 18.21. Ver. 5. I will set my face against that man] See the reason. Ezek. 16.20, 21. Is this of thy whoredom a small matter, that thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to pass thorough the fire for them? This was an enraging sin; such as God is absolute in threatning, and will bee as resolute in punishing. Ver. 6. I will cut him off] Nemo cum serpente securus ludit, Chrysolog. Serm. 155. nemo cum diabolo jocatur impuné. Ver. 7. For I am the Lord your God] And God that is holie should bee sanctified in righteousness. Isa. 5.16.
Ver. 8. I am the Lord that sanctifie you] Ʋt acti agatis, that yee may trade with your talents, sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts and lives, and walk up to your principles. Ver. 9. For everie one that curseth] See the Note on Mat. 15.4. and on Exod. 21.17. Ver. 10. Shall surely bee put to death] Adulterie was death long before this Law. Gen. 26.11. and 38.24. So it was after∣wards among the Greeks, Romans, and manie other Nations. Jer. 29.22, 23. Ver. 15. Yee shall slaie the beast] Though innocent: this shew's the hainousness of the sin. See Chap. 18.9. Ver. 17. And see her nakedness] In the Pope's war against the Albigenses (those antient French Protestants) when the Bi∣shops had taken a great Town yielded to them, they comman∣ded the inhabitants both men and women to depart stark na∣ked, Jesuita vapu∣lans. p. 331. Partibus illis, quae honestè nominari non possunt, sanctorum il∣lorum cruciatorum oculis expositis, saith Rivet, not suffering them to hide from the impure eies of those Pope holie fathers, those parts that nature would have covered. David that had faulted in looking lustfully on bathing Bathshedba, praie's hard, after hee had smarted for it, Turn away mine eies from beholding vani∣tie, Ovid. &c.  Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina feci?  See Hab. 2.15. Of looking com's lusting, especially when they do  (which is the Apostle's word. 2 Cor. 4.14.) so look, as the archer at the mark. Ver. 21. They shall bee childeless] Either barren or bereft; for this is a sin, saith Iob, that root's out all a man's increas. Chap. 31.12. Hence that of Hosea, They shall commit whoredom, ve∣lo iipparedu, they shall not increas. Pered is a mule, which is a beast verie libidinous, but begetting nothing. Solomon had manie concubines, yet but one son and two daughters. So had our Henrie 8. Hee had uncovered his brother's nakedness, and was well-nigh childless by her. Afterwards hee married manie wives, and was blame-worthie for women, but left no more children then Solomon did. More happie hee was in them then Solomon; for hee had Rehoboam a man neither wise nor fortunate, as they call it: his daughters but obscure, and both of them subjects. But Henrie had a Peerless Prince to his son (viz. Edward 6.) and his two daughters were both Soveraigns of an imperial Crown.
Ver. 24. Separated you] With a wonderfull separation, such as was that of light from darkness at the Creätion. Ver. 25. Between clean beasts] How much more then shall you abstein from those unlawfull copulations, whereby men put off all manhood, degenerate into dogs? Rom. 1.27. Deut. 23.18. 2 Sam. 3.8. Ver. 27. That hath a familiar spirit] As Paracelsus had one confined to the pummel of his sword, or els Erastus be∣lie's him. CHAP. XXI. Ver. 1. There shall none bee defiled for the dead] THis holie abstinence of the Priests in matter of mourning, marriage, &c. figured the transscendent holiness of Christ: The divels could call him that holie One of God. Mark 1.24. It taught also both Ministers and people (who are a Kingdom of Priests) 1. Well to govern their passions, and to bee pa∣terns of patience. 2. Ever to keep such a Sabbath of Spirit, that by no dead works, or persons dead in trespasses and sins, they bee hindered in the discharge of the duties of either calling. Ver. 2. And for his brother] The high-priest might not for anie of these, ver. 10, 11. nor might Eleazar and Ithamar for their dead brethren Nadab and Abihu. Levit. 10.6. becaus in that case, mourning might have seemed murmuring. Ver. 3. And for his sister] What? and not for his wife? Yes surely (though shee bee not mentioned) becaus shee is nearer then either daughter or sister. See Ezek. 24.16. hee was a Priest; but that was an exempt case, an exception from what was ordi∣narily don. Ver. 4. Beeing a chief man] A vir gregis, all whose actions were exemplarie, and have not an impulsive onely, but a com∣pulsive power and propertie. Gal. 2.14. Why compellest thou the Gentiles? His example was a compulsion. Ver. 5. They shall not make baldness, &c.] So Chap. 19.27. Howbeit in humiliation for sin the Lord God of hosts called them all, both Priests and people, to weeping and mourning.
Jeel 2.17. yea to baldness and sackcloth. Isa. 22.12. Here wee cannot easily over-do. Ver. 6. They shall bee holie] Heb. Holiness, i.e. all holie, even as ho∣liness it self, meerly spiritual. [Not prophane the Name of their God] Not do anie thing unworthie the majestie of the Ministerie: but suffer the dead to burie their dead. Mat. 8.22. Ver. 7. They shall not take a wife] Lest his function bee dis∣graced. That which Hosea was commanded to do against this prohibition. Chap. 1.2. was but visional. [Or prophane] de∣floured, ravished. [Put away from her husband] Becaus of evil report. Ver. 8. Thou shalt sanctifie him] i. e. Thou Moses shalt com∣mand him to bee sanctified, as Exod. 19.10. Ver. 9. Shee shall bee burnt with fire] A peculiar plague, to shew the hatefulness of the sin. Ver. 10. Shall not uncover his head] So neither doth the Mufti among the Turks, nor the Pope of Rome uncover to anie man: but this is their pride and stateliness. Ver. 11. Nor defie himself] But appear impassionate, as it were, and more than a man. Ver. 12. For the crown of the anointing] Noting thereby, that Christ now risen is crowned with glorie and honor. Heb. 2.7. Zach. 6.12. and so shall wee with him. Heb. 2.9, 10.1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. Ver. 13. In her virginitie] Such is Christ's wife. 2 Cor. 11.2. Revel. 14.4. Mat. 25. not giving her love, or his worship to anie other. Ver. 14. Of his own people] A Jewess of anie Tribe. Ezek. 44.22. 2 Chron. 22.11. Ver. 15. Prophane his seed] Disable them for the Priesthood by marrying such a wife as was forbidden him. Ver. 17. That hath anie blemish] Christ was without blemish, so should all the Saints bee, but especially Ministers, of whom it should bee said as of Absalom, that from top to toe there was no blemish in him. 2 Sam 14.25. Ver. 18. Hee shall not approach] Lest his Ministerie bee sleigh∣ted for his personal defects and deformities: how much more for his ignorance, envie, indirect aims, uneven walking, injudi∣ciousness, unheavenlie mindedness, &c. purported by these bo∣dilie imperfections?
Ver. 22. Hee shall eat the bread] So might not the unclean Priests. Levit. 22.3. Our involuntarie weaknesses shall not de∣bar us from benefit by Christ. CHAP. XXII. Ver. 2. That they separate] THough Priests, yet they may not hold themselvs privi∣leged above others to commit sin, but are the rather ob∣liged to dutie. Why should anie Chrysostom have caus to saie? Non arbitror inter sacerdotes multos esse qui salvi fiant; I do not think that manie of our Ministers can bee saved: 'tis well if anie? Or anie Campian to exclaim? Ministris eorum nihil vilius. Ver. 6. Ʋnless hee wash his flesh with water] Whereby hee was led to the laver of Christ's blood, which is opposed to legal washings. Heb. 9.9. Run wee to that open fountain. Zach. 13.1. and bee everie daie washing and cleansing our selvs therein from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Everie Jew had his water-pots for dailie purification. John 2.6. Wee have a far better Bath. Ver. 7. Becaus it is his food] Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est, and must bee preserved by food. Ver. 9. And die therefore] It is no dallying with God. Either do it wee must, or die for it. Ver. 10. There shall no stranger] The equitie of all this was, that Ministers should have a comfortable subsistence for them and theirs: and that the things that are appointed to that purpose should not bee converted to other uses. 1 Cor. 9.13. It is certainly a sad complaint that Luther make's. Nisi superesset spolium Aegypti quod rapuimus Papae, Luther. in Gen. 47. omnibus Mi∣nistris verbi fame pereundum esset, &c. Were it not for such spoils of Aegypt as wee have won from the Pope, God's Ministers might starve and perish. And if ever it com to that, that they must bee mainteined by the people's benevolence, a miserable maintenance they are like to have of it. That little that wee have now diripitur à Magistratu is got from
us by the great Ones, who rob our Churches and Schools, as if they meant to make an end of us with hard hunger. Thus hee. See Hag. 2.14. All the water in Jordan, and the Cerimo∣nies in Leviticus, cannot cleans a man so long as the polluted thing remain's in his hand. Ver. 16. Or suffer them] From my other men's sins, Good Lord deliver mee, said One: Have wee not enough of our own to an∣swer for? See 1 Tim. 5.22. wich the Note. That cannot bee wholsom meat, that is sauced with the blood of souls, and spi∣ced with the wrath of God. Ver. 20. It shall not bee acceptable] Nay, it shall bee abomina∣ble. Mal. 1.7. God require's the best of the best, fine flour without bran. Levit. 2.1, &c. and curseth that cousener, that having a sound or a fat male in his flock, bringeth to him a corrupt carrion, or a lean starvling for Sacrifice. Vers 14. Ver. 23. That maiest thou offer] Though it have som kinde of defect, yet (in free-will offerings) it might pass. This was to signifie, that our imperfect obedience after that wee are once in Christ, is accepted by Christ, who is without all blame and blemish. Ver. 24. Neither shall you make anie offering] No not a free∣will offering. Religion love's to lie clean. God will take up with a poor, but it must bee a pure sacrifice. Ver. 25. Their corruption is in them] As not having their hearts purified by faith; and therefore not in case to pleas God. Ver. 27. It shall bee seven daies] As not beeing man's meat, till then: but legally impure, and in their blood, as were like∣wise infants. Ver. 28. Yee shall not kill it and her young] Becaus it bear's a shew of crueltie, and of adding affliction to the afflicted. See Gen 32.11. Hos. 10.14. Ver. 29. Offer it at your own will] God strain's upon no man. Virtus nolentium nullaest. Ver. 30. On the same daie] See the Note on Chap. 7.15. Ver. 31. I am the Lord] Your rightfull Lord, and my reward is with mee, to give unto everie man according to his works.
Ver. 32. My holie name▪] Holie, and therefore reverend. Psal. 111.9. Holiness hath honor. CHAP. XXIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] SEE the Note on chap. 7.22. Ver. 2. To bee holie convocations] Not bare rests: . 2. de legib. as Plato said, that the Gods, pittying men's labor, appointed their festivals to bee a remission of their labor. See the Notes on Exod. 20.8, 9, 10, 11. Ver. 3. Yee shall do no work therein] Save onely works of pietie, charitie and necessitie. These are allowed by our Sa∣viour. Mark 2.29. and 3.4. and 3.27. The Jews supersti∣tiously hold, that it is not lawfull for a blinde man to lean upon a staff on a Sabbath-daie, as the lame may: That if a Flea bite a man on that daie, hee may take it, but not kill it: that if a thorn prick him in the foot on that daie, hee may not pull it out: That a Tailor may not carrie a needle, much less a sword; that a man may not spet, or bee taken out of a jakes, Ranulph. lib. 7 c. 37. as that Jew of Tewksburie, who said, Sabbata sancto colo, de stercore surgere nolo. Whereunto the Earl of Glocester replied, Sabbata nostra quidem (Solomon) celebrabis ibidem. Sir, reverence of the Sabbath keep's mee here: And you Sir, reverence shall our Sabbath there. In all your dwellings] Where you are to sanctifie this rest, and to repair to your Synagogues. Act. 15.21. Ver. 5. In the fourteenth daie] See the Notes on Exodus 12.18. Ver. 11. And hee shall wave the sheaf] This signified that they and theirs were accepted of God through Christ. [On the morrow after the Sabbath] Here the Lord's daie was prefigured (saith one) therefore prescribed, and instituted of God. This shake-daie-sheaf was a pregnant type of Christ's rising again, the first-fruits from the dead. It was fulfilled in Christ's resurrection, the daie after the Sabbath: And becaus this Sab∣bath
bath was chiefly meant of the Passover (which was an high Sabbath) it was a double Sabbath, wherein Christ rested in the grave. The verie next morning was Christ waved before the Lord; when, in the earth-quake, hee rose from the dead (the first fruits of them that sleep) and there-hence entered the everlasting gates as a King of glorie. Psal. 24.7. which Psalm is in the Greek called, A Psalm of David of the first daie of the week. Ver. 15. Seven Sabbaths] That is seven weeks; The Sabbath is queen of all the daies of the week; and therefore carrie's the name of the whole week. Ver. 17. Out of your habitations] That is, out of the new corn (growing of the same land which God gave them to in∣herit) not orrein. [The first fruits] viz. of their wheat∣harvest, as the shake-sheaf, vers 10. was of their barlie-har∣vest. Thus were they to express their thankfulness to God for those pretious fruits of the earth. Jam. 5.7. Ver. 22. And when yee reap] See Chap. 19.9. In these wee entertain Christum convivam, Christ a guest, saith Hierom. Ver. 24. Of blowing of trumpets] This feast signified the spiri∣tual joie and gladness of the Saints, that are redeemed by Christ, all their life long. Isa. 33.10. Ver. 27. Also on the tenth daie] See the Note on Chap. 16.31. Thus they were kept in sorrow five daies, before they might keep their feast of joie. vers 34. Ver. 34. The feast of tabernacles] It signified (the Prophet Za∣charie beeing interpreter, Chap. 14.16, 17, 18, 19.) that the re∣membrance of our redemption by Christ should bee perpetuated with all spiritual gladness. Ver. 42. Yee shall dwell in booths] The siege of Jerusalem by the Romans lasted six moneths. It began at the Passover, and ended at this feast of Tabernacles: Ità festum illud fuit finis istius politiae.
CHAP. XXIIII. Ver. 2. Beaten for the light] MInisters must beat their brains, and bend their utmost in∣deavors to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guid their feet into the waie of peace: as that burning and shining light, the Baptist did. Luk. 1.79. Ver. 3. From the evening unto the morning] In the morning it went out. 1 Sam. 3.3. Ver. 4. Ʋpon the pure candle-stick] Pure, becaus daily purified by the Priests: so must our consciences bee from dead works by dailie repentance. Ver. 5. Twelv Cakes] See the Note on Mat. 12.4. Ver. 6. Six on a row] One by another, not one upon another, as they are commonly painted. Ver. 8. Everie Sabbath] So must the bread of life bee everie Sabbath at least set before the Saints. Ver. 10. Whose father was an Aegyptian] His mother taught him to speak, his father to blaspheme. [Strove together] In the heat of contention, what will not men saie or do? —qui non moderabitur irae Indictum velit esse, dolor quod suaserit, & mens. Ver. 11. Blasphemed the name, &c.] Heb. bored it thorough, go∣red it, pierced it, as did those Syrians, Isa. 36.6. Turk. Hist. 423. slain by the fall of the wall of Apek, Rabshakeh that dead dog, Julian the Apostate, Chosroes the Persian, the raging Turk at the siege of Seodra, that foul-mouthed Papist that durst saie, The God of the Protestants is wors then Pan god of clowns, which can indure no cerimonies nor good manners at all. To these add Paul Best, Sheldon's Mark of the beast. Ep. ded. who hath lately publi∣shed blasphemous verses against the Trinitie. See the Lon∣don Minister's Testimonial to the Truth of Jesus Christ. Ver. 14. And let all that heard him] The Jews at this daie ab∣hor the blasphemies of Christians, so openly and ordinarily darted up with hellish mouths against God. The Turks pu∣nish their prisoners sorely, when as, Spec. Europ. through impatience or de∣sperateness, they break out into them. Ver. 16. And hee that blasphemeth] Swearers and blasphemers
toss God's name to & fro with such impietie and prophaneness, as if their speech could have no grace, but in his disgrace: as if Augustus Caesar were dealing with som god Neptune; or the three sons trying their archerie at their father's heart, Lonicer. theat. hist. to see who can shoot nighest. [Shall bee surely put to death] Though hee bee never so much provoked by others, as this blasphemer was; that shall no whit excuse him. Ver. 17. And bee that killeth anie man] Though in hot blood; Scripture make's no difference between murder and man∣slaughter. See the Note on Gen. 9.6. Ver. 19. As hee hath don] God love's to retaliate; it is his usual manner of proceeding in punishing. CHAP. XXV. Ver. 2. Then shall the Land keep a Sabbath] BY their weeklie Sabbath they professed that themselvs be∣longed to God (though Seneca jeer them for it, as those that cast awaie the seventh part of their time) by this seventh year Sabbath, they professed, That their Land belonged to God, and that they were onely his hindes, his tenants, and tith-men. Hence it is called, the Lord's land. Hos. 9.3. and Immanuels. Isa. 8.8. Ver. 4. A Sabbath of rest unto the Land] This and the Jubilee year shadowed our eternal rest. Col. 2.16, 17. Heb. 4.9. 1. E∣verie seventh-daie they rested from their labors. 2. Everie se∣venth year the ground rested. Everie seventh seventh (as som reckon it) was the Jubilean Sabbath: at which time all debts were remitted, prisoners released, morgages restored to the right inheritors. The great and eternal Sabbath comprehend's all these. How then should wee breath after it, and even go forth to meet it (as the Jews do their weeklie Sabbath) begining it an hour sooner then the Law required; and this they called their Sabbatulum, or little Sabbath? Ver. 6. Shall bee meat for you] Thus God taught and inured them to depend upon his providence, and to feed on faith, as som read that text. Psal. 37.3. For though the owner of the field might gather, even on that year, for the maintenence of
himself and familie, yet hee was neither to sowe his field, there∣by to greaten his harvest, nor to hedg his field, or lock up his vineyard, &c. Ver. 9. In the daie of attonement] Here began the Jubilee: this feast was founded in a fast. They that sowe in tears shall reap in joie: neither is there anie such comfort as theirs, that have soundly soaked themselvs in godlie sorrow. Ver. 10. And proclame libertie] See this expounded by the Prophet Isaiah. Cap. 61.1, 2, with Luk. 4.21. A most joifull Jubilee indeed. In the year of Christ, 1617, the Pope pro∣clamed a Jubilee for the peace of Italie and Austria. The Pro∣testants also of Germanie did the like, in honor of God, and for joie of the Reformation begun by Luther in Germanie, a just hundred of years before. Ver. 12. Out of the field] See the Note on ver. 6. Ver. 14. Yee shall not oppress] But proceed by that golden rule, What ever yee would that men should do to you, even so do yee to them. Ver. 17. But thou shalt fear thy God] And so depart from this evil also. Gen. 42.18. Joseph said to his brethren (who feared hee would roul himself upon them) This do and live, for I fear God. q. d. I dare do you no hurt, though yee bee fallen into my danger. So his grand-father Isaac, seeing that hee had don unwilling justice, durst not revers the blessing, though hee had som minde to it, for God had overawed him. Gen. 27.33. And ought yee not to have walked in the fear of the Lord, said good Nehemiah to those mercieless griping Usurers? Cha. 5.9. Ver. 20. And if yee shall saie] A clear answer to a carnal objecti∣on. Usually God conceal's the objection in Scripture, and meet's it with an answer, which is an act of grace. Ver. 21. Command my blessing] Now if God send his Manda∣mus, who shall gainst and it? Ver. 23. The Land is mine] See Vers 2. Ver. 25. And if anie of his kin] Christ is our near kinsman, and so by propinquitie (as a man) had the right of redemption. Ruth 2.20. and 3.9, 11, 13. Ver. 34. May not bee sold] This Law lasted but during the paedagogie: for Joses a Levite sold his land, and brought the monie, and laid it at the Apostle's feet. Act. 4.36, 37. Ver. 35. That hee may live with thee] i. e. Live in good fa∣shion;
for a necessitous life is a lifeless life. Thus shall yee saie to him that liveth. 1 Sam. 25.6. So Joh. 4.50. thy daughter liveth. Ver. 36. Take thou no usurie] God dispenseth with no usu∣rie, but condemn's both Neshec the biting, and Tarbith the toothless. In Rome at this daie, all usurers are excommunica∣ted monethly. The Jews indeed are permitted to strain up their usurie to eighteen in the hundred upon the Christian (for a∣mong themselvs they no where use it) which causseth manie of the unconscionable Christians to use these Jews under hand in improving their unlawfull rents to the utmost proportion. Ver. 43. Rule over him with rigor] As the Aegyptians did over the Israëlites. Exod. 1.13. Thy servant is made of the same earth with thee, and hath right to the same heaven with thee. See Gal. 3.28. The servant paid the half shekel as well as the master. Stand not therefore on terms of inequalitie: but know that your selvs also have a master in heaven. Do therefore to them that which is right and equal. Col. 4. CHAP. XXVI. Ver. 1. Yee shall make you no idols] SEE the Notes on Exod. 20.4, 5. God knew the people's prone∣ness to idolatrie. Ver. 2. Yee shall keep] See the Note on Chap. 19.30. Ver. 4. Rain in due season] The best Almanack wee should relie upon for seasonable weather, is our obedience to God, love to our neighbour, care of our selvs. Ver. 5. Dwell in your land safely] Confidently, fiducially, as boldly relying upon God's protection. Ver. 6. Neither shall the sword] To devour and desolate it, to eat flesh and drink blood, without measure or satietie. A fire it is that feed's upon the people. Isa. 9.19. a hungrie Wolf that snatcheth on both hands. Ver. 20. Ver. 7. And yee shall chase your enemies] If forreiners invade you, you shall bee able to quel and quiet them quickly. Ver. 8. And five of you] God strengthen's or weaken's the arm of either partie. 2 Chron. 7.6. Ezek. 30.24. strike's a Panick terror oft, as
into those Aramites that heard an hurrie-nois in the aër (made by the Angels likely) and fled. Ver. 9. And establish my Covenant with you] This is more then all the rest. So Gen. 17.30, 21. I have blessed Ismaël; twelv princes shall hee leget, but my Covenant will I establish with Isaac. Ver. 11. I will set my tabernacle] The Philosopher could com∣fort himself, that though hee had little els to trust to, yet , here are the gods with me, meaning his houshold∣gods. And hee in Plutarch said of the Scythians, That though they had no musick, nor vines amongst them, yet they had gods. Aug. How much more may the Saints glorie in God's presence? Ha∣bent omnia qui habent habentem omnia. Ver. 12. And I will walk] See the Note on 2 Cor. 6.16. Ver. 13. Which brought you forth] This they often hear of, not by waie of exprobration. Jam. 1.5. but to incite them to thank∣ful obedience Deut. 8 11. Josh. 24. Servati sumus, ut serviamus. Ver. 14. But if yee will not hearken] Here wee may observ twice so manie threatnings as promisses; which serv's to set forth the baseness of our natures, that will do more for fear then love. Ver. 16. I will even appoint] Put them in commission, send them with such autoritie as shall bee irresistible. [Terror, Sennert. de fe∣brib. l. 4. c. 15. Coepit Anno 1486. Life of K. Ed. 6. by Sir John Heyw. con∣sumption, and the burning ague] i. e. terrible sicknesses of all sorts, such as was the sweating sickness, called, Sudor Anglicus, quia An∣glis perpetuum malum. It reigned here som fortie years together, and slew so manie, that strangers wondered how this Island could bee so populous to bear and burie such incredible multi∣tudes. No stranger in England was touched with this diseas, and yet the English were chased therewith, not onely in England, but in other countries abroad: which made them like tyrants, both feared and avoided, wherever they came. Ver. 17. They that hate you] A heavie curs to anie people, to have mischievous malitious Princes set over them: odious to God, malignant to the people. Cic. 3. Tusc. quae. Ver. 18. Seven times more] God will have the better of us, and good reason: for is it fit that hee should cast down the bucklers first? Illud quidem sic habeto, said the Orator, nisi sanatus animus sit, quod sine Philosophia fieri non potest, finem miseriarum nul∣lum fore. Bee sure of this; if thy minde mend not, there will bee no end of thy miserie. Ver. 19. Your heaven as iron] Hard hearts make hard times.
En quia jam nobis sint ferrea pectora, reddit Coelum etiam nobis durius aere Deus. Et quia jam nummos gignant pro foenore nnmmi: Antè serax tellus desinit esse ferax. Ver. 20. Bill. Anthol. lb. 2. Your land shall not yield] See this fulfilled. Jer. 14.1, 2, &c. and Joel 1.12. Jer. 8 13. And yet their countrie was called, Sumen totius orbis, Cornelius Tacitus yield's it to bee a fruitfull countrie. So did Rabshakeh long before. 2 King. 18.32. Ver. 21. Contrarie unto mee] Or, Carelesly before mee, as our un∣girt Christians. Profligate Professors do. [Seven times more plagues] God cannot bee exhausted, neither need wee fear as hee did of his Jupiter, Si quoties peccent homines sua fulmina mittat Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit. Ver. 22. I will also send wilde beasts] As hee did, Num. 21.6. 2 King. 17.25. 2 King. 2.24. See Isa. 13.21. Jer. 5.6. Ver. 23. Yee will not bee reformed] Or, Chastised. God will master us, but the wicked refuse to receiv corrections: like naughtie boies they prove more stubborn or more stupid: they stout it out, and will not stoop. When God's hand is lifted up, they will not see; bu they shall see, and bee ashamed, &c. Isa. 26.11. Ver. 24. Then wil. I walk contrarie] God will bee as froward as they for the hearts of them. Ps. 18.20. Hee will wrie with them; neither may they look to get anie thing of him by wriggling and wrestling. Ver. 25. I will bring a sword] God make's peace and create's e∣vil. i. e. war, called evil, per Antonomasiam. Whencesoever the sword com's, it is bathed in heaven. Isa 34.5. [The quarrel of my Covenant] For breach whereof Jerusalem is long since laid waste, those seven golden Candlesticks are broken in pieces, Bohemia lie's still a bleeding, which was the seat of the first open and autorizd Reformation. And what may wee think will becom of us all, who like men have transgressed the Covenant. Hos. 6.7. or as Junius read's it, not tanquam homines, but tanquam hominis, &c. Wee have made no more of breaking Covenant (alas! our Na∣tional League and solemn Covenant!) then if therein wee had had to do with dust and ashes like our selvs, and not with the great God; who is therefore whetting his sword, and furbish∣ing it for slaughter, Quod Deus avertat. Ver. 26. And not be satisfied] As sick of a bûlimie, or dog∣like
appetite, common in times of famine, such as was that of Samaria, Saguntum, Jerusalem, Sancerra, &c. Ver. 28. Seven times more for your sins] God will not ceas pur∣suing till Sheba's head bee thrown over the wall. Three times in this Chapter God raiseth his note of threatning, and hee rai∣seth it by sevens, and those are discords in musick. Such sayings will bee heavie songs, and their execution heavie pangs to the wicked. Ver. 29. And yee shall eat] As they did 2 King. 6.29. Lam. 4.19. Pone pretium humanae carni, was once heard openly procla∣med at Rome, in the reign of Honorius the Emperor. A hard case indeed. Here in England, in Edward 2. his time, Alsted. Chron. Anno 1316. there was so terribe a famine, that horses, dogs, yea men and children were stolen for food, and the theeves newly brought into the Gaol were torn in pieces, Speed's Hist. and eaten presently half a∣live, by such as had been longer there. Ver. 30. Ʋpon the carcasses] Or, Stumps and shivers of your idols overturned. Jer. 16.18. Ezek. 4.37. Thus in Ket's conspi∣racie those rebels of Norfolk, Act. and Mon. fol. 1190. that brought with them into the field the Pix under his Canopie in a cart, not without masses, crosses, banners, candlesticks, &c. All which trumperie, toge∣ther with their breaden god was tumbled in the dirt, amidst the carcasses of their late idolatrous worshippers. Ver. 39, 40, &c.] A special text touching the rejection and conversion of the Jews. CHAP. XXVII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake] THis is oft premised and prefaced for autoritie's sake, and that wee may learn to resolv all divine doctrines into Deus dixit. Ver. 2. When a man shall make a singular vow] Votum eximium as Vatablus render's it, a personal, particular, voluntarie vow; which, drawn by som peculiar reason, a man promiseth to God of his own accord; It is a binding of ones self to God by an ho∣ly & religious promise, to do or not to do somthing lawful, pos∣sible, useful for our increas in godliness: As here of persons,
afterwards of things: all which might bee redeemed (under such exception as the Law provideth) by the estimation of the Priest for certain shekels of silver, after the shekel of the San∣ctuarie: this was double to the ordinarie shekel. The alm and intent of these personal vows was (saie som) that the price of their redemtion might bee imploied either for the mainte∣nence of the Priests. Numb. 18.14. or for the repair of the San∣ctuarie. 2 King. 12.4, 5. Neither by such vows do wee cast anie new snares upon our selvs, but rather a new tie to the paiment of an old debt. Ver. 3. Fiftie shekels of silver] This was the greatest rate, be∣caus people are then in their prime; and yet no verie great one, lest they should think much to vow, or perform to the Lord their God. Ver. 4. And if it bee a female] Shee is set at a lower valuati∣on then the male; becaus less able for anie laborious or ratio∣nal imploiment. Ver. 5. From five years old] Childhood and youth is vani∣tie. . There is a bundle of follie in a child's heart. Prov. 22.15. The same Greek word signifieth a fool, and a childe. And Eccles. 11.10. the Hebrew word used to signifie youth, signifieth black∣ness or darkness, Niceph. to note, that youth is a dark and dangerous age. Few Macariusses to bee found, who, for his gravitie in youth, was sir-named , the old young man. Ver. 8. But if hee bee poorer] Indulged hee shall bee, but not exempted. Vows (in things lawfull and possible) must bee performed, as wee can at least. If rashly made, that rashness must bee repented of, but the vow, if otherwise lawfull, must bee kept, without delaie or diminution, to the utmost of our power. Men may not plaie with vows, as Monkies with their collars, which they can slip at pleasure. Eccles. 5.3, 4. Ps. 76.11. To vow is voluntarie, to paie is necessarie. And yet what more common in the world then ship-mens vows? Erasm. Collo. As hee in Erasmus, who in a storm promised his Saint a picture of wax as big as S. Christopher, but when hee came to shore, would not give a tallow candle. Ver. 10. Then it, and the exchange thereof] For a punishment of his instabilitie and lightness. Ver. 28. Notwithstanding no devoted] Hitherto of things consecrate, now of things exsecrate (whereof see a command.
Deut. 13.15, 17. an example. Numb. 21.2.) These could not bee sold, nor redeemed, but must remain with the Priest: if it were a beast, then to bee put to death. Ver. 30. And all the tithe] See here in this Chapter what a liberal maintenence God allowed the Priests: 1. Divers votive oblations, or their redemptions. 2. All the first-born, or their redemtions. 3. Everie devoted thing, unless devoted to som particular use. 4. All the tithes of what kinde soever. Besides first-fruits, oblations, portions of sacrifices, &c. And I see not (saith a reverend man) but that tithes at least, M. Wilkinson his Debt-book. or som better thing should bee due to the Ministers of the Gospel by divine ordinance: and that those that take them from us should give us a better thing, as those here that had a minde to redeem their tithe, were bound by the Law to add to the price everie fifth pennie above the true value. FINIS.
A COMMENTARY or EXPOSITION UPON The Fourth Book of MOSES CALLED NVMBERS. CHAP. I. Vers. 1. In the Wilderness of Sinai] HERE God held his people, well-nigh a twelve-moneth. Here they received the Law, both Morall and Ceremonial: the Morall, drove them to the Ceremoniall, which was then Christ in figure; as it doth now drive us to Christ, in truth. The Ceremoniall Law, saith one, was their Gospell. Wee must also pass by Sinai, to Sion; unless we like rather to be carnally se∣cured, then soundly comforted. See the notes on Exod. 19.1. Vers. 2. Take ye the summe] Hence this Book is named (in the Greek,) Numbers. Vers. 3. All that are able] The people perceiving, how ma∣ny hundred thousand strong they were, might go on, with more courage against their enemies. It is an ancient custome in Scot∣land,
in cases of importance, to command the fire-cross to be car∣ried; Sr. Jo. Hey∣wood in the life of King Edw. 6. that is, two fire-brands to be set in fashion of a cross, and pitched upon the point of a speare, and proclamation is thereup∣on made; that all men, above sixteen years of age, and under sixty, shall come into the field, to advance against the common enemy. Vers. 4. A man of every tribe] These were men of renowne. Vers. 16. To do worthily in Ephrata, is the way to be famous in Bethlebem, Ruth 4.11. It is said of a great States-man, in Queen Elizabeths dayes, Camdens Eli∣sab. that he was in the number of those few, that both lived and dyed with glory. Vers. 16. Princes of the tribes] Thes were those officers over them in Egypt, (saith an Hebrew Dectour,) that had been beaten for them, Exad. 5.14. Now they are raised to great pre∣ferment. Sic per augusta ad angustum, per spinas ad rosas, per mo∣tum ad quietem, per crucemad caelum contendimus. Vers. 17. Which are expressed by their names] And they are all excellent good names, and very significant; hereby is testified to posterity, that they forgat not the Name of their God, when they were in the iron furnace; but could say, as Psal. 44.17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee: Though thou hast sore broken us, in the place of dragons, &c. Vers 19. So he numbred them] See the note on Exod. 30.12. At every generall muster, they paid poll-money; See ib. vers. 16. Such a taxation was first granted, in this kingdome, to Edward the third; Danicls hist. but in the next raign, proved of ill consequence; the exactours receiving from the people no less summes of curses, then of coyn; whereupon, also, followed the first and greatest popular insurrection, that ever was seen in this kingdome. Vers. 47. Were not numbred] Because, by speciall priviledg, enempted from secular and military employments, that they may wholly devote themselves to the service of the Sanctuary. Peter, in like sort, must put up his sword; and Timothy not intangle himself with the affaires of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier, of another nature, 2 Tim. 2.4. But Timothes Herulus that warlike Bishop of Alexandria, Theophilus Alexandriae Episcopus pri∣mus inter Chri∣stiani nominis episcopos, arma tractavit. Socrat. Anno Dom. 467, was a gallant fellow in his generation. And some of Peters pretended successours were, viri biliosi et bellicosi; cast the keyes into Tiber, and took up Saints Pauls sword, and the Impe∣riall habit. So have divers of their dear sons done; as Philip, Bishop of Beau-vi in France; who, being taken in battell, by
Richard the first, in a skirmish, had his armour he was taken in, sent to the Pope, with these words engraven thereon; Vide utru filii tui tunica sit, vel non; See whether this be thy sons coat or not. Vers. 53. Shall pitch round about] As the living creatures; (the Ministers) are between the 24 elders, the congregation of the faithfull, and the throne, Rev. 4. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake] He being the Lord of these Hoasts of Israel, Exod. 12.41. gives order for the marshalling of them, in such good array, and allcomely equipage, as made them as a city, that is compact together; both beautifull as the Moon, and terrible, as an army with banners, Psal. 122.3. Cant. 6.10. This Balaam beheld with admiration, Num. 24.5, 6. Vers. 2. Far off about the Tabernacle] About it: The Empe∣rours tent, is among his Souldiers. Xerxes pitched his tent, not only among, but above his souldiers, that he might look on them, when in fight, for their encouragement. So the Lord; who as he is round about his people, Psal. 125.2. so they are round about the Lord, Psal. 76.12. A people neer unto him, Psal. 148.14. Yet not so neer, but they must know, and keep their just distance; as here, they pitched far off, about the Tabernacle; a mile off, as is gathered from Iosh. 3.4. God, though he loves to be acquainted with men, in the walks of their obedience, yet he takes State up∣on him in his ordinances, and will be trembled at, in our addresses to his Majesty. Vers. 3. And on the East-side] Judah encamped foremost. It was fit the Lion should leade the way. Better an army of Harts, with a Lion to lead them on, &c. This order in their march, she∣wed the principality that should continue in this tribe, till Shiloh came. Judah herein also was a type of Christ, who is the Captain of the Lords Hoasts, Iosh. 5.14. and of our salvation. Heb. 2.10. and goeth before his heavenly armies, Rev. 12.7. Vers. 10. And on the South-side] The order proceedth, from East to South, and so to the West, and North; according to the course of the Sun, and climates of the world, saith one. I may add, according to the course and progress of the Gospell: which
went out of Iudea, (lying East) into Greece, which lyeth South, And from thence passed to the Western parts, the Latine Church, and so to us of the North. And because. Vespera nunc venit, nobiscum Christe maneto: Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam. CHAP. III. OF Aaron and Moses] Of Aaron by nature, of Moses by education, and instruction. See 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19. with the Notes there. So the Jesuites call themselves Padres, and re∣quire of their Novices blinde obedience, which is more then ever Moses did. Vers. 3. Which were anointed] And so should have walked, as became Gods anointed; leaving a sweet smell behind them every where: but they went out in a stench, they fell, as if they had not been anoynted with oyle, 2 Sam. 1 21. Vers. 4. And Nadab and Abihu] Such a cross had David, in his two eldest, Amnon and Absalon. See the Notes on Levit. 10.1, 2. Vers. 9. They are wholly given unto him] Heb. they are given, they are given. So the Ministers of the Gospell, are called gifts, Eph. 4.8, 11. honouraries, such as Christ bestowed upon his Church, at the day of his Coronation, and solemne inauguration into his throne, at his wonderfull Ascention. Vers. 10. And the stranger] Though a Levite, yet if not of Aarons seed, Num. 18.3. Heb. 5.4. Let this be thought upon by our over-bold intruders into the work of the Ministery. Vers. 13. Because all the first-born] So they were from the beginning: but here is noted a continuance of this ordinance; when it is said, that he sanctified the first-born to himself, what time he smote every first-born in Egypt. Now, the first born are said to be Gods, by a singular right, Exod. 13.2. and so they were types, 1. Of Christ, Rom. 8.29. to whom therefore we must give the honour, of his first-birth-right; all our sheaves must veyle and bow to his sheafe. 2. Of Christians; those first-born, whose names are written in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. who are dear to God, as his first born, Exod. 4.22. and so higher then the Kings of the earth, Psal. 89.27. for they are Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6.
to serve him day and night in his temple, Rev. 7.15. CHAP. IIII. Vers. 2. OF the sons of Kohath] Kohath, was not Levies first born, but Gershom: and yet he hath the prehemi∣nence, and chiefe charge; as of the Arke, Table, Candlestick Al∣tars, &c. Num. 3.31. Vers. 3. To do the work] The work of the Ministery, is, not an idle mans occupation, but a labouring even to lassitude; com∣pared therefore to harvest-work, and to that of cleaving wood, digging in mine-pits, rowing with oares, &c. All the comfort is, that God that helped the Levites, to bear the Arke of the Cove∣nant, 1 Chron 15.26. will not be wanting to his weak, but willing servants, that labour in the word and doctrine, 1 Tim. 5.17. Vers. 5. And when the Camp setteth forward] Which was not, till the cloud was taken up from off the Tabernacle, by the Lord. Num. 10.11, 12: who went before them. Semper memento illud Pythagoricum, . Let God lead us, and we cannot miscarry. Boetius. Vers. 8. And cover the same] It is well observed, that only the Ark (representing Christ,) and the Table with shew-bread, (re∣presenting the Church) had three coverings; all the other holy things had but two, for a covert from storm and from rain. Thus, Esay. 4.5, 6. upon all the glory shall be a defence. Vers. 13. The ashes from the Alta] The fire from Heaven, was also carefully kept alive, Lev. 6.12. though nothing be here said of it. Vers. 15. Lest they dye] As Vzzah did, 1 Chron. 13.10. [The burden of the sons of Kohath] Who as they had the honos, so the onus, See vers. 1. Fructus honos oneris, fructus honoris onus. Vers. 16. And to the office of Eleazr] Called therefore Prince of the Princes of the Levites. Num. 3.32. Vers. 18. Cut ye not off] i.e. Cause them not, by your default, to be cut off. Heed must be taken, that we neither give offence carelesly, nor take offence causelesly. Vers. 20. But they shall not go in to see] The men of 'Bethshe∣msh paid for their peeping, 1 Sam. 6.9. Search not into Gods secrets: hìc oportet, non rimari, Dent. 29.29. Remember that
saying of Xenocrates the Philosopher; Nihil interesse, pedesue quisquam, Plutarch. de curiosit. an oculos in aliena domo ponat, It is as great unmanner∣liness, to pry into another mans house, as to press into it. Vers. 30. From thirty yeares] The Greek hath it, from 25 yeares: for then they began to be learners, and probationers; and at 30, they set upon the service: See Num. 8.24. In their old age, they had leave to retire. Vers. 32. By name ye shall reckon] That all might be ready and forth comming, when the Sanctuary was set up again. Christ knoweth and calleth all his by name, Joh. 10.3. not the meanest of them is missing, Ioh. 17.12. Vers. 44. Trhee thousand, and two hundred] By this diversity of number among the Levites families, God sheweth his wise∣dome, saith an Interpreter; in fitting men for the work, where∣unto he hath appointed them, whether it requireth multitude or gifts. For to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of wisdome; to ano∣ther the word of knowledg, by the same Spirit, &c. dividing to every man severally as he will. 1 Cor. 12.8, 12. It is reported, that in Lu∣thers house was found written: Res et verba Philippus, res sine verbis Lutherus, verba sine re Erasmus. Melancthon hath both matter and words; Luther hath matter, but wants words; Eras∣mus hath words, but wants matter. Every one hath his own share: all are not alike gifted. Vers. 48. Eight thousand, &c. What a poor few were these to the other tribes? Gods portion is ever the least. CHAP. V. Vers. 2. PƲt out of the Camp] To shew, that sin unrepented of, throws us out of the communion of Faith, and Saints; shuts us out of the congregation of God, in earth and hea∣ven. No fellowship, place, or reward with them. See Rev. 21.27. with the note there. Vers. 3. Without the Camp shall ye put them] Evill doers are to be suspended, excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5.13. which text sheweth plainly, the truth of this ceremony. Vers. 6. Any sin that men do commit] For what man is he, that liveth and sinneth not? . I am a man, a sinner, saith Peter, Luk. 5.8. not more a man, then a sinner. Our lives are fuller of sin, then
the firmament of stars, or the furnace of sparks: we can as little cease to sin, as the hart to pant, pulse to beate, &c. The devill when he speaks lies, speaks of his own, Ioh. 8.44. so when we do evill, we work of our own, we walk as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. Sins are here called humane fins, as the Greek hath it. Vers. 7. Then they shall confess their sin] So they were bound to do, all their sins, Prov. 28.13. Job 33.27, 28. Confessio peccati est medicina peccati, saith Nazanzen. A sin acknowledged is halfe∣amended.  And he shall recompence his trespass] Restitution must be made of goods unjustly detained; or else you shall cough in hell, said Mr. Latimer. Our King Henry the seventh, in his last will and testament, after the disposition of his soul and body; Speeds hist. sol. 995. he Devised, and willed restitution should be made, of all such moneys, as had unjustly been levyed by his officers. So did Selymus the great Turk, give order at his death, Turk. hist. 767. for the restoring and recom∣pencing of the great treasure he had taken from the Persian mer∣chants. Vers. 8. Ʋnto the Lord, even to the Priest] The Priest is the Lords receiver. So Heb. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. Tithes are due to the Mini∣sters of Christ that lives, because due to him; Sacrdos est vi∣caus et quasi haeres D. and they are in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. Vers. 9. And every offering] So liberally doth the Lord pro∣vide for his Priests. See the Note on Levit. 27.30. And is not the right of lively-hood, as equall and due to the Ministers of the Gospell, whose Ministery is far more glorious? 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. even greater then that of Iohn Baptist, Mat. 11.11. Vers. 12. If a mans wife goe aside] Adalterum, vel ad alterius torum, vnde dicitur adulterium. If as a wanton, she want one, when she hath her own. But what wittals are the Lituanians, who give way to their wives, to have their stallions, (if Maginus belye them not,) and call such connubii adjutores; prizing them, far above all their acquaintances. Vers. 13. And it be hid from the eyes] As Prov. 30.20. Such a privy whore was Livia, the wife of Augustus Caesar; who, (though otherwise very observant of her husband,) yet lived in adultery with Eudemus her Physitian: qui specie artis frequens secretis, saith Tacitus; who, under a shew of curing her, Pliny. corrup∣ted her. So do the Iesuites many dames at this day; being, as one saith of them, Connbisanctifugae, clammeretricitegae The Friers are said to send men, whose wives are barren, in pilgrimage;
to Saint Ioyce, the patroness of fruitfulness, and meane while, to lye with their wives. Vers. 14. And the spirit of jealousy come upon him] In the bathes at upper-Baden, in Helvetia, cernunt viri vxores tractari, cernunt cum alienis loqui, et quidem solam cum solo, saith Munster, and yet are not jealous. But the Italians are so jealous, that how ma∣ny husbands, so many jaylours. And the Turks as far exceed the Italians herein, Blunts voyage into Levant. as the Italians do us. Therefore their women go muffled, all but the eyes: nor are they suffered to go to Church, or so much as look out at their own windows. In Barbary, 'tis death for any an to see one of the Xeriffes concubines: and for them too, if when they see a man, though but through a casement, they do not suddenly screek out. Vers. 15. Barly-meal] Barly, not wheat. She hath done the act of a beast, and her oblation is the meat of a beast, as Sal. Jarchi here noteth. Vers. 16. Set her before the Lord] Whose the judgment was; that, if guilty, she might be scared, from submitting her self to this triall; sith God knows all our thefts. Vers. 17. Holy-water] i.e. Water taken out of the holy la∣ver: Annal. ad an∣num. 44. no warrant for popish lustrall water, and sprinkling of Se∣pulchres: for the ground whereof, Cardinall Baronius fairly re∣ferrs us to Iuvenals sixth Satyre. Vers. 18. Vncover the Womans head] Because she stood, now, upon her justification, and thereupon laid aside, for present, this sign of subjection to the man, 1 Cor. 11.7.  [The offering of me∣moriall] Brought by her husband, vers. 15. who was now sick, of one of those three diseases, that they say are hardly cured; jealousy, frenzy, and heresie. Vers. 21. Thy thigh to rot, and belly to swell] God takes no∣tice of the offending member; as he did in those blasphemers, who gnawed their tongues, Revl. 9. Absoloms hair, Jeroboams hand, the adulterers loyns, Prov. 5.11. Zimri and Cozli, thrust through the belly, Num. 25.8. Charles the 2. King of Navarr: Ioane Queen of Naples, &c. Suffered as they sinned. Vers. 22. Amen, Amen] Twice; to shew the fervency of her zeal, the innocency of her cause, the uprightness of her conscience, and the prity of her heart. Vers. 23. Shall write these curses in a book] To shew, that the word written, should cause the water thus to work, according to
the cleanness, or uncleanness of the party. See 2 Cor. 2.16. with the note there. CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake] Est Venus in vinis: there∣fore after the law, for the privy harlot; here is a law given, for abstinence from wine, and strong drink; which some have called lac Veneris, Rev. 17.4. The whore commth forth with a cup, as with a fit instrument. Vers. 2. To vow a vow] A voluntary vow, a religious pro∣mise made in prayer: hence  a prayer. [To separate themselves unto the Lord] As mirrours of singular sobrie∣ty and sanctimony, Lam. 4.7. (especially required in such, as are separated unto the Gospell of God, Rom. 1.1.) and as types of Christ, that great Votary, true Nazarite, holy, harmless, undefiled, and seperate from sins, Heb. 7.26. that holy thing, Mat. 1.20. that holy of holies, or most holy, Dan. 9.24. Vers. 3. He shall separate himself from wine] Lest he should drink and forget the law, Prov, 31.5. which he was to study di∣ligently: but loaden bellies, make leaden wits; intemperance takes away the heart, Hos. 4.11 overchargeth it, Luk. 21.34. [Moist grapes or dryed] Dryed as raisins, currants, (or grapes of Corinth, whence they come, and are called.) Vers. 4. From the kernels, even to the husk] Nothing that that might occasion, or tempt him to break his vow. All sha∣dows and shewes of evill, must be shunned: quicquid fuerit male coloratum, as Bernard hath it; whatsoever looks but ill-favoured, 1 Thess. 5.22. Iude 23. He that would not eate the meat, must not meddle with the broth. He that would not toll the bell, must not tuggle with the rope. He that would shun the blow, must keep aloof from the train. Vers. 5. There shall no rasor] In opposition to Heathens; Ʋotaries, who nourished their hayr, to offer to their gods. The popish Priests also, cut and shave their hayr, that they may still look neate, and effeminate; which God allowed not in his Naza∣rites, Amos 2.11. Vers. 6. At no dead body] Christ was never defiled, by any person dead in sin, nor by any dead work: no more must we.
Vers. 7. He shall not make himself unclean] In all changes, he must be unchangeable: so was Christ, so must we. Vers. 9. And if any man dye] A figure of the involuntary and unavoidable infirmity of the Saints, which must be bewailed, as direct fruits of the flesh; and for which there is, through Christ, a pardon of course. Vers. 12. And he shall consecrate] He shall begin the world a new: so must we; after some foul fall especially: repent and do thy first works. Revel. 2.5. as the Shulamite did, Cant. 5.2. &c. Vers. 14. And he shall offer his offering] Though he had fulfil∣led his vow in the best manner, yet he must come with his sin∣offering, &c. leading him to Christ, for pardon of failings in the manner; and with his thank-offering, for what he had been ena∣bled to do, before he could be released of his Nazarite-ship. Vers. 18. And put it in the fire] To teach us, that the Lord so loveth his children, that he esteemeth the least hair of their head, as a precious gift. Vers. 19. The sodden shoulder] i.e. The left shoulder; for the right was due unto him raw, Lev. 7.32. This taught the Naza∣rite speciall thankfulness: dignity requires duty. Vers. 20. The Nazarite may drink wine] The Popish Votaries will needs fetch colour and approbation for their superstitious vowes, from this order of Nazarites. But the abolishing of this ordinance is declared, Act. 21.25. and they are so far from the abstinence of Nazarites, that they eate of the best, and drink of the sweetest: the most generous wine in Lovain and Paris, is known by the name of vinum theologicum: the Divines (those Srbonists) do so whiffe it off. Vers. 21. Besides that, that his hand] i.e. Beside his voluntary devotion, according to his ability. This he may do, but that he must do, be he poor, or rich. Vers. 23. Ye shall bless the children of Israel] Praying for them with hands first stretched out to Heaven, Levit. 9.22. and then laid upon the people; so putting the blessing of God upon them. So Christ did upon his Apostles, which was his last action upon earth, Luk. 24.50. And so must all Pastours do, that would do good on it, pray down a blessing on their people. Vers. 24. The Lord bless thee] Here some observe the mystery of the holy Trinity. See it explained, 2 Cor. 13.14.
CHAP. VII. Veas. 2. The Princes of Israel offered] So they did at the making of the Tabernacle, and at the building of the Temple, Exod. 35.27. 1 Chron. 29.6, 7, 8. which was but to give God of his own; as David acknowledgeth with all thankfulness, Vers. 14. . Of thine own we offer unto thee, said Justnian, Cedrenus. when he had offered up, in the Temple of Sophia, at Constantinople, a commu∣nion-table that had in it, (saith the Authour,) all the riches of land and sea. Vers. 8. And four wagons, and eight oxen] Double the num∣ber of what the Gersonites had, because their carriage was heavier; God proportions the burden to the back: none of his shall be op∣pressed, though pressed out of measure, above strength, 2 Cor. 1.8. as Ioseph was, whom the archers hated, and shot at: But his how abode in strength, and the armes of his hands were made strong, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, ever reserved for a dead lift, Gen. 49.23, 24. Mat. 8.17. See the note there. Vers. 9. Bear upon their shoulders] Therefore, when David carted the Ark. (as the Philistims had done before,) God was an∣gry, and made a breach upon Ʋzza, because they sough him not in due order 1 Cor. 15.13. Vers. 11. For the dedicating of the Altar] No warrant, at all, for Popish dedications of Altars, Churches, religious houses built for superstitious uses, as appears in stories: Act. & Mon. as pro remissione & re∣demptione peccatorum; pro remedio et liberatione animae; pro amore caelestis patriae; pro salute regnorum, in honorem gloriosae virginis, &c. Vers. 12. For the tribe of Judah] Ʋt ubique superemineat praero∣gativa Christi a juda oriundi. Vers. 17. And for peace-offerings] Sacrifices of all sorts they brought, whereby, having made their peace, they kept a feast with joy, before the Lord, for his mercy to them through the merits of his son. Vers. 18. On the second day] Their offerings are severally and largely described; to shew how highly accepted in Heaven. Vers. 19. And when Moses was gone in, &c.] Scipio Africanus was wont, before day, to go into the Capitoll; in cellam jovis, and
there to stay a great while, quasi consultans de Rep. cùm Jove, as if he had advised with his god about the publike businesses. Gell. lib. 7. c. 1. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 3. HE lighted the lamps] This Candlestick, on the South∣side of the Tabernable, over against the Table, figur∣ed the Law of God shining in his Church, Prov. 6.23. 2 Pet. 1.19. and the lighting of one lamp from another, shewed the open∣ing of one text by another. The Rabbines have a saying, Nulla est objectio in lege quae non habet solutionem in latere; i. e. there is not any doubt in the law, but may be resolved in the context. Vers. 4. Beaten work] To shew, that Ministers must beat their brains, . to beat out the sense of the Scriptures, as the fowl beats the shell, to get out the fish, with great vehemency. Vers. 7. sprinkle water of purifying, &c.] This taught, that none were meet for the holy Ministery, but by the free favour of Christ, and by the sanctification of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 2.16. Gal. 1.15. Ministers are fullones animarum, their office is to whiten o∣thers; themselves therefore should be as those Nazarites, Lam. 4. whither then snow. [Shave all their flesh] As the Lepers did; Levites are by nature, no better then Lepers: Ministers, men sub∣ject to like passions as others, and liable to more temptations. Vers. 9. The whole assembly] By their Representatives the El∣ders, or the first-born; figuring the Church of Christ, those first∣born which are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. Vers. 10. shall put their lands] Imposition of hands, is an anci∣ent rite at the Ordination of Ministers. Vers. 11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites] Heb: wave the Levites, with might figure ministers miseryes, and afflictions, by Satans sifting them, Jer. 15.10. and wicked mens turmoyling them; as Jeremy that man of contentions. Vers. 12. The one for a sin-offering] The sin-offering for actual sin; the burnt-offering for Original. Vers. 19. As a gift to Aaron]—Clarissima semper Munera sunt, Eph. 4.11. Author quae pretiosa facit; Ministers also are given, as an honourary to the Church. Vers. 24. From twenty five years] See the Note on Chap. 4.30.
CHAP. IX. Vers. 2. KEep the Passeover] This Passeover; for they kept no more but this, till they came into the land of Ca∣naan, (Josh. 5.10. with Exod 12.25.) because of their often and uncertain removes. The feast of Tabernacles, likewise, was for many ages omitted; or at least, not in due manner observed; as by dwelling in boothes, reading the book of the law, &c. Neh. 8.16, 17, 18. which a man would wonder at; but Vexatio dat intel∣lectum: those Jews were newly returned from captivity. Vers. 3. According to all the rites] It was a true saying of So∣crates in Xenophon, Deum eo cultus genere coli velle, quem ipse instituerit, that God must be worshipped in his own way only. Whereunto agreeth that of Cicero, Deum non superstitione coli velle, sed pietate. Vers. 5. And they kept the Passeover] See the Notes on Exod. 12. Vers. 6. They could not keep the Passeover] Because they were to be unclean seven dayes, Numb. 19.11. Demosth. Now among the very Heathen, the Sacrificers were to purifie themselves some dayes before; they had their coena pura the night before, &c. and ha∣ving expiated the company they cryed, ; who is here? to which they made reply, , Atistoph. Many and good are here. Vers. 7. And those men said unto him] Moses, they knew, was a meet man to resolve this Case of Conscience. He was a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness, Job 33.23. a Merchant to sell oyl and balm from Gilead, to cure consciences, Matth. 25.9. Others may write Cases, that is covers of conscience; but resolve none. Con∣science is a Diamond, and will be wrought on by nothing but dust of diamond, such as contrition hath ground it to. Vers. 8. Stand still, and I will hear Moses was but the eccho of Gods voyce; John Baptist the voyce of one crying in the Wil∣dernesse. St. Paul received of the Lord, what he delivered to the Church, 1 Cor. 11.23. and took care, that the faith of his heaters might not be in the wisdome of man, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Unwarranted doctrines come not cum gra∣tia & privilegio.
Vers. 10. Or be in a journey afar off] This rendred a man unfit to partake; because either his head would be so taken up about his business then, or his mind so set upon home, that he would have little leisure or liberty to prepare for the Passe∣over. Vers. 11. With unleavened bread] Teaching them to purge out the old leven, that fusty, swelling, sowring, spreading corrupti∣on of nature and practice. [And bitter herbs] Directing them to true humiliation and bitterness, for sin; without which, there can be no sweetness in the blood of Christ. Vers. 12. They shall leave none] The Lord in his infinite wis∣dome, would hereby prevent all occasions of idolatry; which is easily admitted in the reservations of holy things; as in Popery, at this day. Vers. 17. And when the cloud] This visible sign they had, of Gods presence, for their motion or station by night or by day, through all their pilgrimage. In all thy wayes acknowledge God, and he shall direct thy pathes, Prov. 3.6. When thou sittest in darkness, the Lord shall give thee light, Mic. 7.8. Vers. 19. Kept the charge of the Lord] Or, his watch, viz. to be ready at any hour to remove; so must we alwaies watch and be in readiness; as not knowing whether at Even, or at mid∣night, or cock-crowing, or in the dawning, Christ will come, Mar. 13.35. Vers. 23. At the Commandement of the Lord] This signified, that the Saints are to rest, or go on, at the voyce of Christ, Joh. 10.3, 4. and that whatsoever they do in word or deed, to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, Colos. 3.17. to seek and finde all their perfection and defence in him alone. CHAP. X. Vers. 2. TWo trumpets of silver Signifying, the voyce of the Law and Gospel, in the mouthes of Gods Mini∣sters, Esai. 58.1. Ad ravim usque vocem intendit, nec vinci se à strepitu ullo pas∣su est. Melch. Adam. 114. who must lift up the voyce like a trumpet, with fervour, zeal, and courage; 1. To gather the people, and assemble the Elders, Ioel 2.16. 2. To put them upon their marchings and motions towards the heavenly Canaan; and here, to blow an alarm, —sic clames ut Stentora vincere possis, (as that famous
Farellus did, when the Fryers, to drown his voyce in the Pul∣pit, rang their greatest Bells; but he out-noysed them,) 3. To get them upon their battlements, and there-hence to blow an alarm likewise, upon the approach of spiritual enemies; Suetonius eâ li∣bertate scripfit Imperatorum vitas qua ipsi vixerunt. taking the same liberty, to cry down sin, that men take to commit it; and to descry the Devils stratagems, that are so destructive to mens souls. They must cast away the inverse trumpets of Furi∣us Fulvius, which sounded a retreat, when they should have sounded an alarm: they must faithfully shew Gods people their transgressions, and the house of Iacob their sins, Esay 58.1. yea all their transgressions in all their sins, Levit. 16.21. Lastly, as the Priests were to sound the silver trumpets at their solemn feasts, for a monument of spiritual gladness before the Lord; Psal. 81.4. so must Ministers of the Gospel, publish the glad tydings of the Gospel; Speak to the heart of Ierusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, her sin is pardoned, Esay. 40.2. make the people hear the joyful sound, that they may walk in the sense of Gods presence, and in the light of his countenance; yea, rejoyce in his Name all the day-long, Psal. 89.15, 16. Vers. 7. But when the congregation] Cenalis Bishop of Au∣ranches was hard driven, when, to prove the church of Rome, a true church he makes no mention at all of Ministers, or ordi∣nances, but alledgeth that the Catholikes had bells, to assemble them together, whereas the Lutherans met, by the clap of har∣quebuzes and pistolets: And so he goes on, to triumph in a long Antithesis. The bells, saith he, do sound, the harquebuzes crack: The bells, give a sweet and melodious tune, but the harquebuzes, a foul and terrible noise. Bells open heaven, the other hell. Act. and Mon. fol. 838. Bells chase away clouds and thunder, the other gender clouds, and counterfeit thunder, &c. O the profound arguments of these doting Doctours! [But you shall not sound an alarm] Or, a broken sound; but a continued equall sound, as fittest for their quiet assembling, to the service of God, and hearing of the law. The sound of Gods word, must not be broken or qua∣vering; (Pompall, Tertullian calleth it) but downright and simple. Non oratorum filii sumus, sed piscatorum: Nazianz. ad Libanium. nec verbo∣rum , sed Spiritus , &c. 1 Cor. 2.1, 4. Vers. 8. Shall blow with the trumpets] A trumpeter (as one observeth,) winds his trumpet with his mouth, and holds it up with his hand: so should a Minister, both preach and practise;
vivere concionibus, concionari moribus. Vers. 9. Ye shall be remembred before the Lord] Who will arise, as it were awakened, by this sound of the trumpet. See 2 Chron. 13.12. with Isa. 51.9. That is, by the prayer of faith; such as were the prayers of the Ministers of Angrogne in France, wherewith their enemies cryed out, they were so bewitched, that they could not fight. It was the custome of these poor persecuted Protestants, Act. & Mon. fol. 883. so soon as they saw the enemy approach, to cry all together, for aid and succour, to the Lord; and when the combate was ended, constantly to give him thanks, for the good success he had sent them. So at the siege of Mountabone, the people of God, using daily humiliation, as their service would permit, did sing a psalme after it, immediately before their sallying forth: with this practice, the enemy comming acquain∣ted, ever upon the singing of the Psalme, (after which, they expected a sally;) they would so quake and tremble, saying, they come, they come, as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon them. Vers. 10. For a memoriall] Or a sacred sign, to minde and assure them, that God will hear their suits, and accept of their services thus performed with joy of faith. Vers. 12. Out of the wilderness of Sinai] Where they had dwelt long enough, Deut. 1.6, 7, 8. It being a place of bondage, by reason of the law there given, Gal 4.24, 25. The law is a yoke of bondage, as Jerome calls it; and they who look for righteousness from thence, are like oxen, who toyl and draw, and when they have done their labour, are fatted for slaughter. Vers. 25. The rereward of all the Camp] Called the gathering Host, Iosh. 6.9. Because to their charge was committed the care of gathering together the lame, faint, and feeble, and to look that nothing was lost, or left behinde. And to this David seems to allude, Psal. 27.10. Confer Isai. 58.8. & 52.12. Vers. 29. And Moses said] Or, Moses had said, viz. Exod, 18.1, 2. [For the Lord hath spoken good] And Gods promises he knew to be good sure-hold. Seneca. Vers. 30. To mine own land] Patriam quisque amat, non quia pulchram sed quia suam. Ovid. Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cun∣ctos du it, et immemores non sinit esse sui. Vers. 31. Instead of eyes] To descry unto us the commodi∣ties, and discommodities of the country, which is well known
to thee. Herein thou maiest be of singular use unto us, though we have God, going visibly before us. Gaudentius, Casaubon. The Iewes had a kinde of officers, at their feasts, called , the eyes of the feast, & praefecti morum. Vers. 33. Three dayes journey] Three dayes together with∣out resting: this made them murmure, Chap. 11.1. non quia dura, sed quia molles patimur. Sen. [Went before them] And, as the Iewes conceive, for the facilitating of their march, the cloud levelled mountains, raised vallies, and laid all of a flat; that is, burnt up bushes, smoothed rocks, and made all plain, &c. Vers. 35. Rise up Lord] Commanders must pray, as well as lead on their forces; as did Charles the great, and that late brave King of Sweden, more addict to prayer, then to fight. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. ANd when the people complained] Or, were as it were complainers: they did inwardly and secret∣ly repine and mutter, at their three dayes march, without inter∣mission; like those horses that disgest their choller, by biting the bridle. [Consumed them that were in the uttermost parts] There, it seems, the sin began amongst those that were faint and weary with travell, as Deut. 25.18. Vers. 2. And the people cryed to Moses] That Lord Chan∣cellour of Heaven, (as one calleth him,) that could rule with God, and over-rule. Of Moses it might be said, as once of Luther. Iste vir potuit apud deum quod voluit, he might have whatsoever he would of God. Vers. 3. The name of the place Taberah] So to perpetuate the memory of the peoples sin, and Gods judgment. Alterius perditio, tua sit cautio. Vers. 4. And the mix multitude] See the Note on Exod. 12.38. Observe the danger of ill company. Fish retains their sweetness in the salt sea. The river Dee in Merioneth-shire, run∣ning through Pimble-meere, remaines entire, and mingles not her streames, with the waters of the lake. The rivers of Peru, af∣ter they have run some miles into the sea, retain their sweetness, as writers report. But to converse with the ungodly, and not to learn their manners, is marvellous, rare, and difficult, A
man may pass through Ethiopia unchanged; but he cannot dwell there, and not be discoloured. Vers. 5. We remember the fish] They forgat their servitude. Discontent is ever harping upon wants, and enjoyes nothing; no more then Haman did his honour, or Alab his kingdome, when he longed for a sallet, out of Naboths garden. Vers. 6. There is nothing at all besides] The wheat of hea∣ven was held a light meat, because lightly come by; Citò parta vilescunt. How are many queasie stomacks even nauseated with the bread of life! it makes not to their dainty palates 3▪ plain preaching is dis-rellished. Vers. 7. And the Manna] See the Note on Exod. 16.14, 31. There was therefore no such cause, they should so loath it. Was as Coriander seed] Small, but full of sweetness and nou∣rishment. Deut. 34.7. This might be some cause of Moses his undecayed∣ness [As the colour of Bdellium] A kinde of transparent and precious gumme. Vers. 8. And the people went about] Or, went to and fro, as men ought still to encrease knowledg, Dan. 12.4. labouring for the meat that endureth to eternall life, Joh. 6.27. God might have saved them this labour, by rayning Manna into their mouthes; but he would not, for the tryall of their dili∣gence; and that they might not think that worth nothing, that cost them nothing [And ground it in mills] So was Jesus Christ ground and pounded with passion, baked and dryed up in the oven of his fathers displeasure, before he became fit food, and a Saviour to his Church. [As the taste of fresh oyle] Or wafers baked with honey, Exod. 16.31. The sweet promises of grace, are sweeter then honey, Psal. 19.10. No fresh and sweet oyle can so cherish the face, as they do the heart of a believer. Vers. 9. And when the dew fell] As Manna fell in the dew, so doth the Spirit descend, in and by the word preached, Gal. 3.2. [In the night] Figuring that hidden Manna, laid up and prepared for the Saints, Revel. 2.17. Vers. 10. Weep throughout their families] Generally and openly they mutinied and murmured; though so lately they had smarted at Taberah. And this they did, not once or twise, but ten times over: whereby it appeares, that God chose this un∣thankfull people, not for their merits; sedex mera et mira mi∣sericordia,
he chose them for his love, and loved them for his choyse. Vers. 11. Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant] Antoni∣nus the Emperour, said often, Imperium Oceanum esse malorum, that to be a governour of others, is to be plunged into an Ocean of miseries. Pope Adrian caused to be engraven upon his own tomb, Foelix si non imperitasset. Melancthon said, the three sorest labours of all, were, Docentis, imperantis, parturientis, the labours of Ministers, Magistrates, and of travelling women. Vers. 12. As a nursing father beareth, &c.] Lovingly, mildly, gently. A Magistrate should carry himself as a Pater patriae. Cambdens Elisab. Queen Elizabeth would many times say, That she could believe nothing of her people, that parents would not believe of their children. Vers. 13. Whence should I have flesh] Lust is unsatisfiable; to go about it, is to go about an endless piece of work; it is to cast oyl into the fire to quench it. Vers. 14. It is too heavy for me] Crowns have their cares; seats are uneasie, many a cumber attends honour. Beatus ille qui procul negotiis. Horat. Vers. 15. And if thou deal thus with me] Here the word, Thou, spoken to God, is of the feminine gender, At, for Atta, ex magna perturbatione, saith a Rabbine. Moses was so exceed∣ingly moved with anger and grief; these passions did so over∣carry him, that he could not complere vocem, utter his whole speech; as he that groaneth, or gapeth, in the beginning of his sentence, cannot make up his breath, to speak what he in∣tended. Vers. 16. Gather unto me seventy men] Here, say some, be∣gan the Sanhedrim, that is, the great Counsel of the Jews, con∣sisting of seventy Seniours, and one President. It continued till the time of Herod the Great, who took it away, and changed the form of it. Vers. 17. And I will take of the spirit] i. e. I will bestow the same Spirit upon them, as upon thee; and this shall be no∣thing at all to thy loss, or disadvantage. Habet Hispania mon∣tem ex sale magnum, de quo quantum demas, tantum accrescit. shall bear the burden of the people] Who are in nothing more a burden then in this, that with them ; Thucyd. Prae∣sens imperium semper grave; they are ever grumbling at the pre∣sent
government, though never so gentle. Alleva jugum, Ease the yoke that thy father put upon us, 1 King. 12.4. said they to Rehoboam; forgetting the golden age they had lived in, under his father So∣lomon. Vers. 18. Sanctifie your selves] Ironicè dictum, or sanctifie, that is, prepare your selves for the day of slaughter, as Jer. 12.3. For you have wept in the ears] Tears (of what sort soever) have a voyce in them, Psal. 39.12. as blood hath, Gen. 4. For it was well with us in Egypt] Such is the murmuring of those malecontents, that say, It was a merry world before there was so much preaching and teaching. In terris mandu∣cant quod apud inferos digerant. Aug. [And ye shall eat] Flesh with a vengeance; which ye shall eat on earth, but disgest in hell. Vers. 20. But even a whole moneth] Deus saepè dat iratus quod negat propitius. Patientia Dei quo diuturnior, eò minacior. Poena venit gravior quò magis sera venit: Gods forbearance is no quittance: fatted beasts are but fitted for the slaughter; wick∣ed men are killed with kindnesses, Ease slayeth the foolish, Prov. 1.32. Vers. 21. Six hundred thousand foot-men] In the conquest of Canaan, there is no mention of horsemen. The adversaries, both Egyptians and Canaanites, had horses and chariots, not so this people of Israel. See Psal. 33.17. Vers. 22. Or shall all the fish of the Sea] Moses forgat (be∣like) the fowls of the ayr; but God sent them such a drift of quailes, as Moses dream't not of: he fed them with meat of Kings, bread of Angels. Vers. 23. And the Lord said unto Moses] God bears with Moses here; which afterwards he did not, Num. 20.12. because then he shewed his distrust before the people. God will not pass by the scandalous practices of his own people, without a sensible check. Vers. 24. And set them round about the Tabernacle] That the fear of the Lord might be upon them, &c. 2 Chron. 19.6, 7. and that they might carry themselves worthy of God, who had set them in place of Judicature. To the company of the Areo∣pagites, (Judges in Athens) none were admitted, but wise, weal∣thy, and noble men; famous for good life and innocency. Nay, men, . whose behaviour was intolerable; after they were chosen into the Colledg of the Areopagites, abhorring and blushing at
their former disposition, changed their natures, and embraced vertue. Vers. 25. Took of the spirit] See the Note on vers. 17. They prophesied] Nec praedicendo, nec praedicando, but by ut∣tering grave and wise sentences, Apophthegmes, or counsels (as Moses did) concerning the publike affairs of Israel: by politi∣call and prudential speaking of things appertaining to govern∣ment. Vers. 26. But there remained two of the men] Being stayed by some lawful occasion, as 1 Sam. 20.26. Jer. 36.5. or haply, out of sense of their own insufficiency; as 1 Sam. 10.22. How∣soever, hereby it appeared to all the people, that these seventy Seniours were set apart by God for the service. Vers. 27. And there ran a young man] Three manner of per∣sons, said Mr. Latimer, can make no credible information: 1. Adversaries and enemies. 2. Ignorant persons, and without judgment. 3. Whisperers, and blowers in mens ears, that will utter in hugger-mugger, more then they dare avow openly. Vers. 18. My Lord Moses forbid] Thus, the spirit that is in us lusteth to envy, Jam. 4.5. Nero omnium erat aemulus, qui quoquo modo animum vulgi moverint. Nero envyed every man that excelled. Vers. 29. That all the Lords people] This is not meant of a salvificall teaching others, but a political discoursing unto others. See the Note on ver. 25. Vers. 32. And they spread them] They fed without fear, Jude 12. though foretold, they should pay dear for these mur∣thering morsels, ver. 20. that which they eat being saweed, and that which they drank, being spiced with the bitter wrath of God, Job 20.23. Vers. 34. They buried the people] Who by a hasty testament, bequeathed this new name to the place they lay buried in. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. ANd Miriam and Aaron spake] She is set first, be∣cause chief in the transgression: Her discontent might arise from this, that being a Prophetess, she was not one of those seventy that were chosen to be helps in government,
Chap. 11. According to her name, Miriam would be exalted: Ambition rides without reins. Because of the Ethiopian woman] Zipporah the Midianitesse, (see Habac. 3.7.) to whom he had been married many years be∣fore; but they were resolved to pick a hole in Moses's coat. An ungodly man diggeth up evil, Prov. 16.27. but for Moses to be thus used by his own brother and sister, was some triall of his patience. To be derided by Egyptians, is threatned as a misery, Hos. 7.16. but to be reproached by professors, is very grievous. Zedekiah feared more to be mocked by the Jews, then by the Chaldees, Jer. 38.19. [For he had married an Ethiopian] That was an old fault, if any; and should have been buried in oblivion. Luther married a wife unseasonably, when all Ger∣many was now embroyled, and embrewed in the blood of the Bores; and when all Saxony was in heaviness for the death of their good Prince Elector Frederick. This, his best friends disli∣ked and bewailed. Mel. Epist. ad Camerar. As for Melancthon, Quoniam vero, inquit, ipsum Lutherum qudammodò tristiorem esse cerno, & perturba∣tum ob vitae mutationem, omni studio & benevolentia consolari eum conor; Because I see him somewhat cast down, saith He, at the late change of his condition, I strive all I can to comfort him. Vers. 2. Hath the Lord spoken only by Moses?] Every man would be something at home; and many care not to raise them∣selves upon other mens ruines. Self-love teacheth such to turn the glass, to see themselves bigger, others lesser then they are. That man hath true light, that can be content to be a candle be∣fore the Sun of others. And the Lord heard it] Without any delation of Moses. But while Moses is dumb, God speaks; while he is deaf, God hears and stirres. The more silent the patient is, the more shrill his wrong will be. Vers. 3. Now the man Moses was very meek] So free from passions, (if Josephus may be believed) that he knew no such thing in his own soul; he only knew the names of such things, and saw them in others, rather then in himself. Of Beza it is said, quòd sine felle vixerit, that he was without gall or guile; and he lived to a great age as Moses did, and as Mr. Dod did; their meekness preserved them. [Above all the men] And yet Moses could be angry enough when there was cause, Exod. 11.8.
& 16.20. Levit. 1.16. Numb. 16.15, &c. Yea, how blessedly blown up was he, with a zeal for God, Exod. 32.19. and what a stomack shews he in that case? Nazianzen saith of Athanasius, that he was Magnes & Adamas, a Load-stone in his sweet gentle drawing nature, and yet an Adamant in his resolute stout carriage against those that were evil. Vers. 4. And the Lord spake suddenly] God takes his part ever, that fights not for himself. Christ that said, I seek not mine own glory, adds, But there is one that seeks is, and judgeth. Here he appears as a swift witness, Mal. 3.5, &c. a sharp re∣venger of his servants injuries. The rule is, Injuria illata legato redundat in legantem; Wrong done to a messenger, reflects on him that sent him. Vers. 7. My servant Moses is not so] God had never so much magnified Moses to them, but for their envy. We can∣not devise to pleasure Gods servants so much, as by despiting them. Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae, saith Augustine, He that willingly detracteth from mine honour, doth, though against his will, adde to my re∣ward. Vers. 8. And the similitude] See the Note on Exod. 33.20. Vers. 9. And he departed] Yea wo also to them, when I de∣part from them, Hos. 9.12. then all evills come in as by a sluce; the final absence of God, is hell it self. Vers. 10. Miriam became leprous] How scaped Aaron? , Hom. 3. ad Coloss. for the dignity of the Priesthoost he was spared, saith Chrysostom. Rather, he met God by repentance, and so disarmed his indigna∣tion, and redeemed his own sorrow. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. ANd the Lord spake] Yeelding to the peoples im∣portunity, and winking at their infidelity; for he had before spyed out the land for them, Ezek. 20.6. and search∣ed it out, Deut. 1.33. but that satisfied them not; seeing was (with them) believing. See Deut. 1.22. Vers. 2. Every one a ruler amongst them] That might be (as
Vriah and Zachariah, Isai. 8.2.) Faithfull witnesses, for, lying lips become not a Prince, Prov. 17.7. Vers. 3. By the commandement of the Lord] That is, by his permission; See the Note on vers. 1. Gods command was, that they should forthwith (without any further search,) go up and possesse the land, Deut. 1.21. Now wicked men are esteemed un∣just, because they act against Gods command, though according to his decree; like as believers are esteemed just, not because they obey Gods decree, but his command. Vers. 6. Caleb] A hearty man, according to his name; as Bishop Hooper Martyr, was called hearty Hooper; and as one of our Richards, was called Coeur Delion. Vers. 16. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun, Jehoshua] His name was now changed, from, save us O God, to, God shall save us: Under the law which brings us, as it were, into a wilder∣ness, we may desire, wish and pray, that there were a Saviour: but under the Gospell, we are sure of salvation, and that our Ie∣hoshuah hath bound himself, to fulfill all righteousness for us. Vers. 17. Go up into the mountain] This was the great moun∣tain of Seir, which incloseth Palestine on that side. Vers. 22. Was built seven years before Zoan] And so was one of the ancientest cityes of the world, seeing it did contend, with the Ancientest and chiefest city of Egypt, Isai. 19.11. He∣bron signifies an association: there lay buried, those three reve∣rend couples, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Leah, Gen. 39.41. Here David began his raign over Israel, 2 Sam. 2.1. and hither came Mary, to visit Elizabeth, Luk. 1.39. Vers. 23. And they bare it between two] Christum utrique portamus, (ut botrum Israelitae) tum illi qui adventum Christi antecesserunt, tum nos, &c. So Christ is born between the be∣lievers of both Testaments. Vers. 27. In vita. Camilli. And this is the fruit of it] Plutarch tells of the Gaules, that after they had once a taste of the sweet wine of the grapes that grew in Italy, they enquired in what country such sweet wine was: And after they had understood where such grapes grew, they would never be at rest, till they had got that country. Sextus Rufus, writing of Cyprus, saith, Cyprus famosa divitiis, paupertatem populi Rom: ut occuparetur, solicita∣vit.
Cyprus by her wealth, tempted the Romans to sieze it in∣to their hands. The pearles usually cast out with the floud, In vita Caesar. and gathered with the ebbe, drew Caesars affection, for the con∣quest of Britain, as Suetonius saith: God hath given us here, a grape of the heavenly Canaan, to edge our desires. Vers. 28. Nevertheless the people be strong] Thus many amongst us, wish very well to Heaven, speak glorious things of it, and could gladly go to it; but there is a lyon in the way: they complain, with these Male-contents, of the strength of the Anakims, and the impossibility of the conquest. It is a hard thing, doubtless, to watch continually against a Spirituall enemy, to keep up the banks against the sea of lusts, and passi∣ons; to bear daily crosses without stooping, to carry the cup of prosperity, without spilling; to climb the hill of good duties, without fainting; to go against the croud, without sweating; to bear the reproach of Christ, without buckling, &c. But hard though it be, should we be discouraged? The sweetness of the honey makes the beares break in upon the hives, contemning the stings. The Merchant refuseth no adventure, for hope of gain: the hunter shrinketh at no weather, for love of game: the soul∣dier declineth no danger, for desire of spoil. The sweetness of Gods face, though to be seen only in the dark glass of the cere∣monies, cheared up those good souls, in their hard and tedious travell to Zion, Psal. 84.6. &c. CHAP. XIIII. Vers. 3. VVere it not better for us to return into Egypt] How could that be better? It is our wisest way, to crush the very first insurrections of unruly passions; (do not great stormes rise out of little gusts?) to smoother the smoke thereof, which else will fume up into the head, and ga∣ther into so thick a cloud, as we shall soon lose the sight of our selves, and what is best to be done. Vers. 4. Let us make a Captain] Thus they proceed from bad to worse. Passions, like heavy bodies down steep hills, once in mo∣tion move themselves, and know no ground but the bottome. Whether this people did make them such a Captain, for such a purpose, is uncertain; but howsoever, their very intention of do∣ing
it, is charged upon them, as if they had done it, Neh. 9.16, 17. Vers. 9. They are bread for us] q.d. We shall make but a breakfast of them. So that valiant Prince of Orange, told his souldiers at the battell of Newport, (when they had the sea on the one side, and the Spaniards on the other;) that they must either eate up those Spaniards, or drink up that sea. Vers. 10. But all the congregation bad stone them] This is mer∣ces mundi. this is the fruit of Ochloeratie, that rule of rascality, as one calls it. Vers. 11. Ere they believe me] Vnbeliefe is the root of rebel∣lion and Apostacy, Heb. 3.12. Vers. 12. And I will make of thee, a greater nation] Here God offered Moses, a private fortune, which he prudently re∣fuseth; because God should be a loser by it. And surely (saith a Divine.) as God was displeased with Balaam for going, though he bad him go: so the Lord would not have taken it so kindly of Moses, if he had taken him upon the offer he made in a time of his heate, against his people. Vers. 13. Then the Egyptiuns shall hear it] And they will soon make comedyes, out of the Churches tragedies. Vers. 14. And they will tell it] The proverb is, Oculus & fama non patiuntur jocos. A mans eye and his good name, can bear no jsts. And he was no fool that said, negligere quid de se quisque dicat, Cicero. non solum arrogantis est, sed et dissoluti. He shall pass for a proud fool, that makes no matter, what men say of him. God is most tender of his glory; and we must take heed, how we cast any slur upon it, for we quarter armes, as it were, with God. Vers. 15. Kill all this people as one man] As he can quickly do, with a turn of his hand, with a nod of his head, Psal. 80.16. with a breath of his nostrils, Iob 4.9. he can as soon do it, as bid it be done, whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only, Iob 34.29. Vers. 17. Let the power of my Lord be great] In multiplying pardons, Isai. 55.8. in passing by the many and bony, or mighty sins of this people; Amos 5.12. Fortia peccata Heb. bony sins. such sins as none else, could or would pardon: for who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth such iniquity, &c? Mic. 7.18. Hebricians have observed, that in the word jigdall here used; in the originall, text there is a great Iod, (which in num∣bering
is ten,) to shew, that if the people should murmure, ten times more, against God then they had done, yet out of tender respect to his own great name, (which would otherwise be base∣ly blasphemed, he should pardon and spare them. Vers 18. And by no meanes clearing the guilty] This last let∣ter in Gods dreadfull Name, ought much to be marked. God may pardon mens sins, and yet lay it on upon the skin, to hum∣ble themselves, and to warne others. Thou forgavest them; though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions, Psal. 99.8. Vers. 20. I have pardoned them] viz. So as not utterly and at once, to extirpe them. I will be as a moth unto them, and not as a devouring lyon, Hos. 5.12, 14. Vers. 21. But as truly as I live] This is an oath; as ap∣peares by comparing herewith, Psal. 95.11. To blame there∣fore are they, that use it so often. [All the earth shall be fil∣led] I will make me a great name abroad; and even of those maid-servants, (the heathens) which thou hast spoken of, shall I be had in honour, as he said in another case, 2 Sam. 6.22. Vers. 24. Veni, Vidi, Viti. Because he had another Spirit] Let us go up and possesse it, saith he, Chap. 13, 30. As if it were no more, then to go and see, and conquer. A free spirit is ikindled with that, which quencheth others: as when a bowl runs down-hill, Implevit post me. every rub, quickens it; whereas if up-hill, it would slug it.] And hath followed me fully] Heb. hath fulfilled after me. A Metaphor from a ship under sayl, carried strongly with the winde, as fea∣ring neither rocks nor sands. [And his seed] Personall good∣ness, is profitable to posterity. Who would not serve such a Lord? Vers. 25. Now the Amalekites] There was but a mountain betwixt: so they were hard by the promised land, and yet could not enter, because of unbelief. Thou art not far from Gods Kingdome; the greater is thine unhappiness, that fallest from so high hopes. [By the way of the red sea] Sith you have such a minde to it, you shall have enough of it. The back∣slider in heart, shall be filled with his own wayes, Prov. 14.14. Vers. 28. So will I do to you] God took them at their words▪ so he may well do our desperate swearers; sith the mercy they desire God to shew, is to damne them. Vers. 29. Your carcasses shall fall] Cadaver a cadendo, . Who knows whether God purpose not, to
weare out this generation, that hath been defiled with the su∣perstitions of the land we live in; that we may not see the good that he will bring upon this Church. Vers. 34. My breach of promise] i e. Ye shall finde to your cost, what it is to charge me with breach of promise, through unbelief. Vers. 39. Mourned greatly] God gave them somewhat to cry for. Vers. 40. We have sinned] Here was confession of sin, with∣out confusion of sin. So was that of Saul, 1 Sam. 15.30. Vers. 45. And smote them] To be out of Gods precincts, is to be out of his protection. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 2. VVHen ye be come into the land] God, (who in the middest of judgment remembreth mercy, and suffereth not his whole wrath to arise;) seales up his love again, to these late revolters: And although he led them in and out, backward and forward, in that terrible wilderness, as if he had been treading a maze; yet he here gives them new di∣rections what to do, when they (that is, their children,) came into the land of Canaan. Yea he further tells them, that he will smell a sweet savour of the herd, and of the flock; and is pleased to enlargeand explain some laws formerly delivered, in token of is reconciliation to them. So he renued his favour to his relapsed spouse, now returning unto him, Cant. 5.3. with Chap. 6.4, 5, &c. and to his disciples, (that had basely forsaken him) by giving them a new commission to execute the ministeriall function, Ioh. 20.21. Vers. 4. Bring a meat-offering] As an Appendix to the other sacrifices. Vers. 5. For a drink-offering] These drink offerings of wine signified that the Saints must be most ready and chearfull to offer themselves up to God in Martyrdome (as a drink-offering,) for the testimony of their faith, and for the service and Ministe∣ry of the Church, as Paul, Phil. 2.17. 2 Tim. 4.6. And ma∣ny Martyrs, who went as willingly to dye, as to dine. One of them called is his wedding-day, and invited his friends thereunto:
Others, filled with the Holy Ghost, so rejoyced, that they were misjudged by their adversaries, to be drunk with wine, Act. and Mon. fol. 1653. wherein is excess; as Morgan falsely objected to Mr. Philpot, in a con∣ference. Vers. 20. Ye shall offer up a cake] As an homage-penny, as ac∣knowledging God, the chief Lord of all; and as craving his leave to partake of his creatures. Vers. 22. And if ye have erred, and not observed] Not ser∣ving of God, not sacrificing is a sin, Mal. .18. Eccles. 9.2. Not robbing only, but the not relieving of the poor, was the rich mans ruine, Luk. 16. Omission of diet breeds diseases, so doth omission of duty: and makes work for hell, or for the Physiti∣an of our souls. Vers. 24. By ignorance] Or infirmity, incogitancy, inadver∣tency; for such there is a pardon, of course, ready sealed by God in Christ: else we might dye in our sins, while the pardon is pro∣viding. Vers. 30. But the soul that doth ought presumptuously] When the heart at any time deliberates, (saith a learned Divine;) and yet that word is not sufficient, to express it; D. Preston of Gods Alsuff. but when the heart works according to its own proper inclination; and then wilfully disobeyes the Lord, in any commandement; certainly then it casts God away. And this is that great offence, Psal. 19.11. [The same reproacheth the Lord] As if he wanted, either wisdome to observe, or power to punish, such as take themselves to be out of the reach of his rod, See Ezek. 20.27. Vers. 31. That gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day] This he did with an high hand (as vers. 30) in contempt of God and his Law. Mr. Abbots his sermons. The baser sort of people in Swethland do alwaies break the sabbath, saying, that 'tis only for gentlemen to keep that day: How much better that poor Indian in new-England, who comming by, and seeing one of the English profaning of the Lords day, by felling of a tree, said unto him, New-Engl. first-fruites. pag. 4. do you not know, that this is the Lords day? Much machet man, i.e. Ve∣ry wicked man, what, break you Gods day? The best and weal∣thieft of the Iewes, (to prevent servile work on the Sabbath day,) with their own hands chop the hearbs, sweep the house, Buxtorf. Synagog. cleave wood, kindle fire, &c. on the day before. Vers. 38. That they may make them fringes] See the Note on Mat. 23.5. [Aribband of blue] This sky-colourd rib∣band
band taught them, that though their commoration was on earth, their conversation should be in Heaven, Philip. 3.20. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. THe son of Izhar] And so couzen german to Mo∣ses and Aaron; for Izhar was brother to Am∣ram their father, Exod. 6.18. [Sons of Reuben] Who be∣ing next neighbours to Korah in the Camp, were the sooner cor∣rupted by him. Vvaque corrupta livorem ducit ab a. Juven. Vers. 2. Princes of the Assembly] A very dangerous conspi∣racy: For as in a beast, the body followes the head; so in that bellua multorum capitum, the multitude. Great men are the looking-glasses of the Country; according to which, most men dress themselves: their sins do as seldom go unattended, as their persons: Height of place ever adds two wings to sin, Example, and Scandal, whereby it soares higher, and flyes much fur∣ther. Vers. 3. Against Moses, and against Aaron] They were against both Magistracy and Ministery, (as our late Levellers,) and would have brought in Anarchy, that every man might of∣fer his own sacrific and do that which is good in his own eyes: Regnum Cyclopicum. Vers. 4. He fell upon his face] As a suppliant to them, not to proceed in their rebellion; or rather to God, not to proceed against them for their sin. Vers. 5. And he spake unto Korah] By the instinct of the Spirit, who had given into his heart a present answer to his pray∣er, and furnished him with this answer. Vers. 7. Ye take too much upon you] He retorts that upon them, that they had falsly charged upon him and Aaon: So doth Elias upon Ahab, 1 King. 18.17.18. So do we worthily upon Popery, the charge of novelty: When a Papist taunting∣ly demanded of a Protestant, Where was your Religion before Lu∣ther? he was answered, In the Bible, where yours never was. Vers. 8. ye sons of Levi] He took these to task apart; as hoping, haply, to withdraw them from their purpose, and to hide
pride from them, Job 33.17. but they proved uncounsellable, in∣corrigible. Vers. 9. Seemeth it but a small thing] Whiles these ambiti∣ous Levites would be looking up to the Priests, Moses sends down their eyes to the people. The way not to repine at those above us, is to look at those below us. Vers. 10. And seek ye the Priesthood also] Ambition is restless and unsatisfiable; for, like the Crocodile, it grows as long as it lives. Vers. 11. And what is Aaron] q. d. Is it not God, whom ye wound through Aaron's sides? Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. Vers. 12. We will not come up] Sturdy rebels, ripe for de∣struction. See Prov. 29.1. with the Note there. One perhaps had knockt off, and is therefore no more mentioned. Satius est recurrere, quam male currere, as that Emperour said, Better stop, or step back, then run on to utter ruine. Vers. 13. That floweth with milk and honey] So they falsly, and maliciously speak of the land of Egypt, in derision of the land of Canaan, whereunto that praise properly belonged. Those that were born in hell, know no other heaven. Altogether a Prince over us] So their quarrel was against Moses his principality, though they pretended the Priesthood only at first. If the Ministery once be taken away, let the Ma∣gistate see to himself; hee's next. Vers. 14. We will not come up] Sc. to the place of judgment; so they add rebellion to sin, and justifie their treasonful practices; as did Ravilliac, Faux, Saunders, others. Vers. 15. And Moses was very wroth] Or, very sore grieved. He might have said, as One once did, Felix essem si non imperi∣tassem; Happy had I been, if I had never been in place of autho∣rity. Egypt is said, by Seneca, to have been loquax & ingeniosa in contumeliam praefectorum provincia, in qua qui vitaverit cul∣pam non effugit infamiam, a Province apt to find fault with, and to speak hardly of their Rulers, though never so innocent. These rebels had, haply, learned those Egyptian manners, by living so long amongst them. [I have not taken one asse from them] Moses was not of them, that follow the administration of ju∣stice as a trade only, with an unquenchable and unconscionable desire of gain. This is but robbery with authority, and justifies
the common resemblance of the Courts of justice to the Bush: whereto while the sheep flyes for defence, in weather, he is sure to lose part of his fleece. Vers. 16. Thy company] Or, thy congregation, thy faction, or Church-Malignant, as Psal. 26.5. Act. 19.32, 40. Vers. 17. And take every man his censer] Which they had ready provided, when first they combined to thrust themselves into the Priests office. Vers. 18. And stood in the door] Such an impudency had sin oaded in their faces, that they stood stouting it out before the Lord; and made open profession of their wickedness: there was no need to dig, to find it out, Jer. 2.34. for they set it, as it were, upon the cliff of the rock, Ezek. 24.7. Vers. 19. All the Congregation] Not his own company one∣ly▪ for the whole multitude was too ready to favour his at∣tempt, as he perswaded them God also would: his design being to introduce an equal popularity, an ochlocratie, that Rule of rascality, as One calleth it. Vers. 21. Separate your selves] Good men are taken away from the evill to come. When God pulls away the pillars, what will become of the building? Lot was no sooner taken out of Sodome, but Sodome was taken out of the world. Vers. 22. The God of the Spirits] The Former and Father of Spirits, Zech. 12.1. Heb. 12.9. that giveth to all , life and breath, Act. 17.25. in whose hand is the soul of all living, and the spirit of all flesh, Job 12.10. Vers. 24. Get you up from about] Save your selves from this untoward generation, Act. 2.40. force your selves from them, stave them off, . as the word signifies, 2 Thess. 3.6. and we charge you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to do so; ut scias quàm aegrè divellimur, saith One. Vers. 26. Lest ye be consumed] See vers. 24. and the Note on Revel. 18.4. Hamath fares the worse, for lying so neer Da∣mascus, Zech. 9.2. St. John sprang out of the Bath, where he found Cerinthus the heretick. Vers. 27. Came out and stood] As out-facing Moses, and scorning the judgment threatned. Deus quem destruit dementat; Hardened sinners make no more of Gods dreadful threatnings, then Behemoth doth of iron weapons, which he esteemeth as strawes.
Vers. 28. Hereby ye shall know] Thus he engageth the truth and honour of his office upon a miracle. But now he that ex∣pects a miracle, is himself a miracle, saith Augustine. Let Papists brag of their lying wonders, 2 Thess. 2.9. We dislike not alto∣gether that observation of Gretser the Jesuite, Tam sterilis & deserta est Lutherana & Calviniana secta, ut diabolus ne digne∣tur quidem per eam aliquid fallacium & umbratilium prodigio∣rum aggredi, saltem frequenter & palam. So dull and dry is the Lutheran and Calvinian Sect, that the devil daynes not to work any, or not many miracles, amongst them, as he doth among the Catholikes. Vers. 29. The common death of all men] Ne quisquam sua more defunctus est, said Suetonius of Caesar's murtherers; So may we say of our powder-plotters, your sin will finde you out. Vers. 30. Quick unto the pit] Not into hell, as the Papists conclude from this text; for how could their houses and goods go down to hell, vers. 32? and who would not hope that some of them were innocent, some penitent? The punishment they suffered in being buried alive, was very miserable; and so ac∣counted by the Heathens, who served their vestall virgins in this sort, that had been defloured. Vers. 31. As he bad made an end of speaking] Dictum factum, So it is still, Joh. 20.23. Vengeance is every whit as ready in Gods hands, as in his Ministers mouthes, 2 Cor. 10.6. Vers. 32. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up] So it did a great part of Antioch, by a horrible earth∣quake, Anno, 527. for their horrible heresies and blasphemies there broached, by the Bishops, and defended by the people. So lately, Pleurs in Italy. Vers. 33. And they perished from among] So the powder∣plotters here; and before them the Northern rebels. That re∣bellion, saith One, like the bubbles which children blow up into the ayr, was no sooner blown up, then blown out, and fell into the eyes of those, which with blasts of ambition and superstition, held it up. Vers. 34. Lest the earth swallow us up also] Let the destructi∣on of others, be a terrour to us; that we may wash our feet in the blood of the wicked, Psal. 52.6. But he that is swallowed up with earth, (as Krah) his ears stopped, his heart stuffed
with earth, shall have earth enough when he dyes, but of heaven little enough. Vers. 35. And there came out a fire] By fire they sinned, and by a fire they suffer: Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur & ipse. Vers. 37. For they are hallowed] And therefore may not be turned to any other use. Vers. 38. These sinners against their own souls] So are all such, as spend the span of this transitory life, after the wayes of their own hearts, and thereby perish for ever. Sin is the souls poy∣son; yet how heartily do men feed upon it, as Tartarians do upon dead horses; as the maid, in Pliny, did upon Spiders; as the Turkish gally-slaves do upon Opiuns, an ounce whereof they will eat at once, as if it were bread. Vers. 40. To be a memorial] God cannot abide to be for∣gotten; and they are worthily made examples, that will not take them; as that second Captain, 2 King. 1. Vers. 41. But on the morrow] That after conviction, they should so soon again rebell, and run away with the bit in their mouthes, was prodigious contumacy. Vers. 42. And behold the cloud] Deus , God, as out of an Engine, appears for his distressed servants. Vers. 46. For there is wrath] Moses is quick-sighted, and spies it at first setting out. By how much more faithful and fa∣miliar men are with God, so much earlier do they discern his wrath. Vers. 47. The plague] Which ran as a fire in a corn∣field. Vers. 48. And he stood between] A cleer type of Christ. CHAP. XVII. Vers. 2. TAke of every one of them a rd] Or, staffe; the ensign of their honour, Num. 21.18. and of their civil authority, Psal. 110.2. Jer. 48.16, 17. a sufficient witnesse against them, that the Priesthood belonged not to them. Ʋzziah smarted for invading it. George Prince of Anhalt, was a singu∣lar example, Mlh, Adam. qui primus & unus ex omni Principum Germano∣rum numer, subdis suos ipse & viva voce & scriptis editis de
via salutis erudiret, who was the first, and the only German Prince, that both by preaching and writing, taught his Sub∣jects. Vers. 5. And I will make to cease] But then he must do more then work miracles. For such is the habitual hardness of mens hearts, as neither Minister, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy, can possibly mollifie. Nothing can do it, but an extraor∣dinary touch from the hand of heaven. Vers. 8. And bloomed blossomes] 1. For a testimony of Aarons calling from God, to the honour of the Priesthood. 2. For a type of Christ the branch, growing out of the stem of Jesse, Esai. 11.1. 3. For a figure of the Ministery of the Gospel, which although to profane persons, it seem a dry, barren, and vanishing voyce, yet it bloometh and flourisheth in the hearts of Gods Elect. And surely, fruitfulness is the best argument of our election, and that we are called of God. For not only all the plants of his setting, but the very boughes cut off from the body of them, will flourish. 4. For a lively representation of a glorious resurrection. At the French massacre, Aug. 25.1572. in the Church-yard of St. Innocent at Paris, a certain bush sud∣denly bloomed about the middle time of that bloody day, at an unusual time of the year: The Papists boasted, Epitome hist. Gallicae. p. 149. that God by that miracle, shewed his good liking of that massacre they had made. But the Protestants took it for a confirmation of their religion, and a testimony of their innocency. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. SHall bear the iniquity] i.e. the punishment of what∣soever iniquity is done in the Sanctuary: Sin and punishment come under one name, as being tyed together with chains of adamant: where the one dines, the other will sup; where the one is in the saddle, the other will be upon the crup∣per. Nemo crimen gerit in pectore qui non idem Nemesin in ter∣go; Sin doth as naturally draw and suck judgments to it, as the loadstone doth iron, or Turpentine fire. The iniquity of your Priesthood] Priests then are not Angels, free from sin, as that Popish Postiller dream't and drew from Exod. 30.31, 32. Cajetan confesseth of the Popish Prelates, that
whereas by their places, they should have been the salt of the earth, Comment. in Matth. they had lost their favour, and were good for little else, but looking after the rites and revenues of the Church. John Hus complains of the Priests of his age, Bellum Hussi∣ticum, pag. 9. that Multa quae ii or∣dinem dicunt, omntum rerum in Christianismo confusionem pari∣unt, Many things that they call order, bring all into confuon. Non arbitror inter Sacerdotes multos esse qui salvi fiant, Hom. 3. in Act. I be∣lieve few of our Priests will be saved, saith Chrysostome, of those of his time. And from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is prophaneness gone forth into all the land, saith Jeremy, Chap 23.15. Vers. 3. And you also dye For your other-mens sins which you have not prevented, or prohibited. Qui non, cum potest pro∣hibet. jubet. Vers. 7. As a service of gift] So our Saviour counts and calls his work a gift, Ioh. 17.4. I have finished the work which thou ga∣vest me to do. Any employment for, and about God, is a special favour, a high honour. Vers. 9. Which they shall render unto me] As a recompence for some trespass against me, Numb. 5.8. Levit. 6.6. Vers. 10. In the most holy place] i.e. In the Priests Court. Vers. 12. All the best of the oyl] Heb. the fat. God can af∣ford the Ministers the best of the best; though the most now∣adayes, think the worst too good for them Which they shall offer] Not appointing them how much, but leaving that to the peoples liberality. And what that was, let Philo the Jew speak, who well knew the customes of his own nation, and tells us, that all things due to the Priests, were paid very freely, Philo lib. de sacerdot. honor. and most cheerfully. At haec gens debitam pecuniam lubens gaudensque depromit, saith He; This people willingly, and with rejoycing, draw out their money for the Priests, not as if they gave, but received rather, adding happy ominations and gratulations. Vers. 13. And whatsoever is first. ripe] See what an honour∣able maintenance, and liberal entertainment God himself assign∣eth to the Levitical Priesthood; and shall the Ministers of the Gospel be held to hard allowance? Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.7, 9. Ad te∣nuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia Sacerdotum. Panormit. Vers. 14. Every thing devoted] Unless devoted to some par∣ticular use, Levit. 27.28, 29. Vers. 18. And the flesh of them shall be thine] And besides
these here touched, they had other revenues of no small value, as their cities, Suburbs, glebe, Num. 35. &c. that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, 2 Chr. 31.9. Vers. 19. It is a covenant of salt] So 2 Chron. 13.5. that is, inviolable, i corruptible, non computrescens vetustate, saith Flaci∣us, Pierius also tells us, that amity and friendship was symboli∣zed by salt, corpora enim solidiora facit, & diutissime conservat, for it's consolidating and conserving property. Vers. 21. For their service which they serve] No man did so much as shut the doors of Gods Sanctuary, or kindle a fire on his altar, for nought, Mal. 1.10. Vers. 22. Neither must the children] But only Gods Kins∣men, (the I riests and Levites) as they are called, Levit. 10.3. ac∣cording to some translations, or his nigh-Ones. Vers. 31. For it is your reward] Or, wages, which you dear∣ly carn, and may justly call for. So Luk. 10.7. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 2. THis is the ordinance of the law, which] An ordi∣nance, a law, a commanded law: All this, to shew the peremptoriness of the Lord in this point; that unless we lay hold upon the blood of Christ prefigured by this red heifer, we cannot escape the damnation of hell. [That they bring thee] At a common charge; because for a common good. All the Congregation must get them a bloody Saviour. A red heifer] Typing out Christum cruentatum, Christ co∣vered with his own blood: See Esay 63.1, 2. white and ruddy, Cant. 5. as the Church sayes of him; Tam recens mihi Christus crucifixus, ac si jam fudisset sanguinem: Luther. The pressure of his sufferings made him sweat great drops, or rather clods of blood, in a cold night; besides what afterwards issued from his many wounds in his head and body. [Never came yoke] Christ never bore the yoke either of sin or servitude. He laid down his life of himself, Joh. 10.17, 18. See Heb. 9.13, 14. he was not subject to any com∣mand of man, Luk. 2.44. Ioh. 2.4. Vers. 3. To Eleazar the Priest] To assure him of the successi∣on of the Priesthood. Besides, it was fitter he should be defiled, then his Father, vers. 7. Hereby, also, might, haply, be foretold,
that the Priests should kill Christ: but they were but our work∣men; we should look upon him whom we have pierced, and mourn over him, Zech, 12.10. that the fountain opened for sin, and for separation from uncleanness, (see ver. 9. of this chapter,) may be free to us, the Kings-Bath of Christs blood, Zech. 13.1. without the Camp] Signifying, that Christ should be taken from all earthly comforts, and crucified without the gate, Heb. 13.12. [Before his face] So was Christ, before Gods face; yea his Father laid upon him with his own hand; and let loose all the powers of darkness at him. Vers. 4. Shall take of the blood with his finger] Not with his whole hand. Christ's blood must be touched, or applyed, with great discretion and reverence; our practice also must be dyed in Christs blood, Vers. 5. Shall he burn] To set forth Christs ardent love, and bitter sufferings. Love it self is a passion; and delights to ex∣press it self, by suffering for the party beloved. Vers. 6. Cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet] Hereby was signified, that Christ howsoever in respect of our sins he was burnt up with the fire of his Fathers wrath; yet by the everlast∣ing Spirit, whereby he offered up himself, without spot, to God; and by the gift and graces of it, he was a full sacrifice of a sweet∣smelling favour to God, to purge offences, Heb. 9.14. Psal. 51.9. Vers. 7. The Priest shall wash his clothes] To shew the con∣tagion and pollution of sin, 2 Cor. 7.1. and imperfection of the legal Priesthood. [unclean untill the Evening] So vers. 8. and 10. We had need take time till the Evening, to humble our souls, and bewail our unworthiness of the blood of Christ. Vers. 9. And a man that is clean] Hereby is meant, the Gen∣tile purified by faith, (as One well observeth,) the gathering of the ashes, is the applying of the merits of Christ, and laying hold of the mysterìes of his Kingdom. The laying up of the ashes imports, that the Christian accounts Christ's merits his chief treasure. The clean place, is the clean heart: Without the Camp, notes, that the Gentiles were strangers from the Common∣wealth of Israel, &c. These ashes kept for the Congregation, shew the fulness of Christs merits for all his people; when he saith, it is to make a water of separation, it notes, that our sins separate betwixt us and our God. But now in Christ Jesus, we
who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by his blood, Ephes. 2.13. Vers. 10. Shall wash his clothes] To note, that even the nearer a Christian comes to the merits of Christ, the more he is affected with the sense of his own uncleanness; yea he retains it till Bven, that is, till death. Vers. 11. He that toucheth] To teach them to observe Gods cuse in death, and to avoid the society of sinful men. Vers. 17. And running water] Signifying the ashes of Christs merit, and the water of his Spirit. See 1 Cor. 6.11. Ioh. 7.38, 39. Vers. 18. Shall take hyssop] No benefit by Christ, without mortification of sin. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. I In the first moneth] To wit, of their fortieth year, after they came out of Egypt. For from this Chapter, to the end of Deuteronomy, are described the passages of the last year, only of their journeying in the wilderness: lit∣tle being regarded, of the thirty eight years, since the Spies re∣port. [And Miriam dyed there] A good woman, and of great use to the people in their travells, Mic. 6.4. But once she raised a great storme, against her brothers wife, Chap. 12.1. about precedency, probably: as did likewise in this kingdome, Anne Stanhop Dutchesse of Sommerset, against Katherine Parre, Life of Edw. 6. pag. 81. Camb. Elis. fol. 356. Queen Dowager, wife to her husbands brother, the Lord Admi∣rall, in the dayes of King Edward the sixth. This Anne dyed Anno Dom. 1587, being 99 yeares of age. Miriam could be no less, likely, then 130; taking her to be the same, that was set to watch what would become of Moses, when he was laid out in an Ark of bulrushes, Exod. 2.4. Ver 3. And the people chod] Wanting both water and pati∣ence, they broke the peace with their Superiours. See the Note on Chap. 15. vers. 15. Vers. 4. And why have ye brought up] See how this new ge∣neration doth patrissare: this is but the old coccysmus of those ancient Malecontents, Exod. 17.2. So much the worse in these, because they made no better use of Gods dealing with their fa∣thers, Dan. 5.22.
Vers. 5. Neither is there any water to drink] Thirst, a most eager appetite, eneagreth their affections, and makes them thus hot with Moses. Vers. 8. Take the rod] God puts up their rebellion, and sa∣tisfies their thirst by a miracle. [Speak unto the rock] He is not bidden now to smite it; as once, Exod. 17.6. which because he did unbidden, God was deeply displeased, as some are of opi∣nion. Vers. 9. And Moses took the rod] The same rod, that once smote the river, to destroy the Egyptians. The same word, is a savour of life to believers, 2 Cor. 2.16. and of death to unbelievers. Vers. 10. Hear now ye rebels] They could hardly hear; for the belly hath no eares; and their tongues scarce knew, to utter any language, but that of Sampson; Give me water, or I dye, Jud. 15.18. But why did Mosos speak to them, when he should have spoken to the rock only? vers. 8. This was ill; but worse to speak so unadvisedly: He struck at the rock, and, as ready al∣most to split against it, he makes two arguments against it. 1. Hear now ye rebels. q.d. Will the Lord ever give water to such rebels? 2. Shall we give you water out of the rock? will that ever be done? To fetch fire out of a flinty rock, is far more likely; but to distill water out of it, how can that be done? Loe Moses is staggered, Bucolc. and now at a stand. Ade nihil est in nobis magnum, quod non queat minui; the strongest faith, much assailed, may flag, and hang the wing. The best carry their trea∣sure, but in earthen vessels; which dashing against the rock of unbeliefe, miseras rimas ducunt, &c. leake pittifully. Vers. 11. He smote the rock twice] In a great heate, and pang of passion. Horat. — qui non moderabitur irae, Infectum velit esse dolor quod suaserit, et mens. Sometimes both grace and wit, are asleep in the holiest and wa∣riest breasts. The best may be mis-carried by their passions, to their cost. And the water came out abundantly] This cleaving of the hard rock, was a work of Omnipotency, Psal. 78.15. The works of God are, Luther. in contrariis mediis. This rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. fitly compared to a rock. 1. For despica∣ble appearance, Isai. 53.2, 3. 2. Next, for exaltation, and ad∣vancement. 3. For firmness and stability, Mat. 16.18. 4. For scandall, and offence to the wicked, Rou. 9.32. 5. For
weight and danger, Mat. 21.44. [And their beasts also] The wicked, in like sort, comming to the Lords Supper, do re∣ceive there panem Domini, not panem Dominum. Vers. 12. Because ye believed me not] Ye could not conceive, and were not very willing, that I should shew such favour to so undeserving a people: so measuring my thoughts, by your thoughts, and my wayes, by your wayes, Isai. 55.8. casting me into a dis∣honourable mould, as it were; and this publikely, before all the people. [Therefore ye shall not bring] So God was unto them, a God that forgiveth, and taketh vengeance of their practices, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 99.8. Repentance may come too late, in regard of temporall chastisement, as here it did, Deut. 3.24, 25. Vers. 13. And he was sanctified in them] By overcomming their evill with good; striking the rock for them, when he might justly have stricken them, with utter destruction. Mans badness interrupteth not the course of Gods goodness; his unbelief ma∣keth not the faith of God without effect, Rom. 3.3. Vers. 14. Thus saith thy brother] A brother is born for ad∣versity, Prov. 17.17. and good blood will not bely it self. But a brother offended is harder to be wonne, then a strong city: and their contentions, are like the barrs of a castle, Prov. 18.19. Vers. 16. Sent an Angell] This was Christ: or, (as some would have it) Moses: like as Phineas is thought, to be that Angell at Bochim, udg. 2.1. Vers. 17. We will not pass] So should a Christian bespeak the world: Let us pass through thy country; we will neither touch nor tast of thy cates, but go by the Kings high-way; that good old way, that God hath scored out unto us; untill we arrive at the key of Canaan, at the Kingdome of Heaven. Vers. 18. Thou shalt not pass] As fearing what so great an army once got in might do; they are not usually so easily remo∣ved. It was therefore great injustice in Pope Iulius, to excom∣municate and depose John, King of Navarre, as an heretike, and publike enemy to the See Apostolike, because being himself a Peere of the Realm of France, and having a great part of his patrimony in that country, he would not suffer the Spaniard (the Popes Champion,) to leade an army through his country, Guicciard. lib. 2. against the French, (his Leige-Lord) and deliver to him three of the strongest castles, he had in his kingdome.
CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. ANd took some of them prisoners] . sore affliction, worse then any of those outward crosses that Iob suffered, whose captivity therefore, (as that which comprehended all the rest;) God is said to have turned, Chap. 42.10. Barbarossa the Turkish Generall, returned from Tunes, Turk. hist. fol. 750. towards Constantinople, with such a multitude of poor Christian captives, shut up so close under hatches, among the excrements of nature, that all the way as he went, almost every hour, some of them were cast dead over-board. The late Duke D'Alva, Grimst. hist. of Netherl. Governour of Flanders, roasted some of his prisoners to death, starved others, and that even after quarter; saying, though he promised to give them their lives, he did not promise to finde them meat. In our late troubles, it was a like difficult thing, to finde among our enemies, a wicked man in their pri∣sons, or a godly man out of them: where some were little bet∣ter used, then those that are taken by the American Canibals, and are eaten up alive, and by degrees, to the unutterable aggra∣vation of their horrour and torment. Vers. 2. And Israel vowed a vow] This is the way to pre∣vail with God, as Iacob found it, Gen. 28.36. Who is therefore called, the father of vowes. Concerning vowes, See the Note on that text, Gen. 28.20. Vers 3. Delivered up the Canaanites] This King Arab, hear∣tened with his former success, might (as Guicciardine saith of Charles the eight of France, Guicciard. in his expedition against Naples;) come into the field like thunder and lightning, but go out like a snuffe: more then a man at first, less then a woman at last. Vers. 4. Discouraged because of the way] So are many in their voyage towards Heaven, which is an afflicted way, Mat. 7.14. strawed with crosses, Act. 14.22. Indeed, if men could go to heaven in a fether-bed, or pass è coeno in coelum▪ à deliciis ad delicias, . feed on manchet, tread on roses, fly to heaven with pleasant wings, none should be so forward as they. But to goe through fire and through water, Psal. 66.12. to run with pti∣ence, the race that is set before them, Heb. 12.1 and through ma∣ny tribulations, to enter into Heaven, this they like not. Theo∣timus
in Ambrose, would rather lose his sight, then his sin: Va∣le lumen amicum, said he, when forbidden wine, as naught for his eyes. Beetles love dunghills better then oyntments; and swine love mud, better then a garden: so do swinish Epicures prefer earth to heaven, &c. Vers. 5. This light bread] See the Note on Chap. 11.6. Vers. 6. Fiery Serpents] Heb. Seraphin, from their burning heat, whereby these ingratefull Israelites, that causelesly cryed out of thirst, had somewhat given them to cry for. Their tongues so full of deadly poison, and set on fire from hell, are now parched and scorched with venemous heate and torments, the likest hell of any other. These serpents are here called Se∣raphims: that old serpent the divell, can transforme himself into an Angell of light. Vers. 7. Pray unto the Lord] Prayer is the best lever at a dead lift. Vers. 8. Make thee a fiery serpent] i.e. The similitude of such a one; an unlikely meanes to effect such a cure. Yea some write, that it is deadly for those that are stung with a serpent, to look upon brass. Certain it is, that this cure was not wrought by any thing in the nature of the brazen serpent, but by the in∣stitution and ordination of God, to be also a type of Christ; a noble and notable figure of Christ lifted up on the cross, Ioh. 3.16. or rather in his ordinances, Gal. 3.1. They that looked upon their sores, and not upon the sign, dyed for it: As those that looked on the sign, though but with one eye, though but with a squint eye, or but with halfe an eye, they were healed presently: So they, that fix their eyes upon their sins on∣ly, and not upon their Saviour, despaire and dye; but those that look to Christ, being faithfull in weakness, though weak in faith, are sure to be saved: It is, but, look up and live. Only look up, (as they did that were wounded,) weepingly, wishly, pitti∣fully, cravingly: See and sigh, look upon him whom you have pierced; let your sins be, as so many Hazaels, to you; and your hearts, as so many Hadadrimmons, Zech. 12.10, 11. Vers. 14. In the book of the warrs of the Lord] This book here cited by Moses, is now either lost, or at least latent. It was not any part of the Canon, (for God hath provided, that not one hair of that sacred head is diminished;) but as the Chroni∣cles of England, or some famous Poem.
Vers. 16 And I will give them water] Now that they murmured not, they might have any thing, Psal. 34.10. Onely we must be content to wait Gods time; (Is it fit to send for the Prince by a post?) or to want that particular mercy, if God see it meet; being content that God be glorified, though we be not gratified. Surely if God saw us thus studying his share more then our own, we might have what we would, and God even think himself beholding to us; as one phraseth it. Vers. 17. Then Israel sang this song] A sign of that Chri∣stian joy, Isai. 12.3, 4. Vers. 18. The Prince digged the well] Called there-hence Beer-elim, Plin. i.e. the Well of the mighty ones, Isai. 15.8. Nunquam vilior erat annona Romae, quam cum terram colerent iidem qui remp. regerent: quasi ganderet terra laureato vomere scilicet, et aratore triumphali. [With their staves] Those Ensignes of their honour, they made to be instruments of the common good. See the Epist. dedicat. set before my Notes upon Iohn. Vers. 22. Let me pass] See the Note on Chap. 20.17. Vers. 23. And Sihon would not] He durst not trust them: Deut. 2.30. Men muse as they use: God had also hardened his heart, that he might come forth, to fetch his own destruction. Iudgment need not go to find wicked men out, they run to meet their bane. Vers. 27. Wherefore they that speak in proverbs] Or by-words, by way of derision, as Deut. 28.17. Habac. 2.6. ballad-makers, Poetasters, that penned popular songs, such as this was. Vers. 30. We have shot at them] Great swelling words of va∣nity, uttered by the conquering Amorites: How much better our Henry the fift, who after his victory at Agincourt, gave straight order, Dan. hist. pag. 101. that no ballad or song should be made or sung, more then of thanksgiving to God, for his happy victory: and that nothing that might tend to ostentation, or boasting of the valiant, or cowardly act of any, should be set forth. CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. IN the Plaines of Moab] Once of Moab, then of the Amorites, now of the Israelites.] Lands and Lordships often change masters; adeò nihil certi est in rebus hu∣manis, &c. In the greatness of the Turkish Empire is at this
day swallowed up the name and Empire of the Saracens, the most glorious Empire of the Greeks, the renowned Kingdoms of Macedonia, Peloponnesus, Epirus, Bulgaria, Servia, Bosnia, Ar∣menia, Cyprus, Syria, Egypt, Judaea, Tunes, Argeirs, Media, Turk hist. Preface. Mesopotamia, with a great part of Hungary, as also of the Persian Kingdom; and (besides all those famous Churches spo∣ken of in Scripture) so much in Christendom, as far exceedeth that which is thereof at this day left; yet, no doubt, Time shall triumph over this so great a Monarchy, when it shall but then live by fame, as others now do. It laboureth with nothing more already, then with the weightinesse of it self. Vers. 3. And Moab was distressed] Or, was irked, fret∣ted, vexed: And yet Moab was allied to Israel, eased by them of a troublesome incroaching neighbour Sihon, and assured by them, that they would not meddle, or molest them. But being of a different religion, they were carried with Satanical malice against Gods people, and sought their ruine. This is the guise of graceless and absurd men, acted and agitated by the Devil. Vers. 4. Ʋnto the Elders of Midian] Their neighbours and confederates. These are called the Dukes of Sihon, as having been subdued by his tyranny, whereof Israel had now freed them, and meant them no hurt, Num. 31.8. with Josh. 13.21. And Balac the son of Zippor] A politick and potent Prince, Mic. 6.5. not more valiant, then vigilant, ingeniose nequam, wittily wicked. Vers. 5. Balaam the son of Beor] The Devils Spel-man, as one calls him, a sooth-sayer, or sorcerer, called a Prophet, 2 Pet. 2.16. as false-prophets are called Diviners, Jer. 27.9. Vers. 6. Peradventure I shall prevail] Hence he is said to have warred against Israel, Josh. 24.9. He did not, because he durst not. Sed fieri dicitur, quod tentatur, aut intenditur, saith Ribera, on Amos 9.5. Vers. 7. With the rewards of divination] Which Jude calls, Jude 11. 2 Pet. 2.15. the wages of wickednesse. The Athenians complained▪ that Phi∣lip, by his gold, had corrupted the Oracle of Apollo, which now did . Vers. 8. As the Lord shall speak unto me] Good words and wishes, may be found in hells-mouth; as wholsome sugar may be found in a poisoned cane; and a stone of great vertue in the
head of a toad. The French have a berry, which they name, Ʋve de Spine, The grape of a thorn. Vers. 9. And God came to Balaam] So he came to Abime∣lech, to Laban, &c. he never concredited his word to these, as he did to the holy Prophets, of whom it is said, The Word of the Lord came to them. Vers. 13. For the Lord refuseth] Like a mercenary, and one that had a moneths-mind to the money, he hides from them that part of the answer, that might have kept them off from coming again to him, viz. Thou shalt not curse the people, for they are blessed; Auri sacra fames, &c. Vers. 15. And Balac sent yet again] So unweariable are wick∣ed men, in pursuing and practising their evil designs. This is check to our dulness for the good of our souls: Oh how soon said and sated are we! Felix trembles, and yet at the same instant, covets and expects a bribe from Paul, who had some occasion to expect repentance of Felix. Vers. 17. For I will promote thee] Thus Satan tempted our Saviour, Matth. 4.8, 9. and the Pope Luther, offering him a Cardinalship, to hold his tongue; and proposing unto him the example of Aeneas Sylvius, who casting away his opinions, be∣came Pope; and of Bessarion of Nice, who of a poor Calover of Trapezond, Hist. of Coun. of Trent. 73. became a great renowned Cardinal, and wanted not much of being Pope. But Luther answered the messenger, Contemptus est a me Romanus & favor & furor; I care not for the Popes proffers of any preferment. And when one counselled to try him with mony, another more wise answered, Hem, Ger∣mana illa bestia non curat aurum, That Dutch-beast cares not for gold. But Balaam was not a man of Luthers make. Vers. 18. I cannot go beyond] Intùs Nero, foris Cato: loquitur hic ut Piso, vivit ut Gallonius: Audi, nemo melius; specta, nemo pejus. A preacher (as Quintillian saith of an Oratour) should be Vir bonus dicendi peritus. A well-spoken and well-deeded person. Vers 19. Tarry also now this night, &c.] Very loth he was, to forgo so fat a morsel. His mouth even watered, his fingers itcht to be dealing with Balac. He therefore detains the mes∣senger, and will try again what may be done for them. Vers. 20. Rise up and go] God answers him according to the idols of his heart; bids him go, (sith he was set upon't) but at
his utmost peril: lik as Solomon bids the young man follow the wayes of his own heart; Eccles. 11.9. but then followes that stinging But. Vers. 21. And sadled his asse] Which never runs fast enough after preferment, till horse and man and all to the Devil. Vers. 22. And Gods anger] Deus saepè dat iratus quod negat propitius.  [And his two servants were with him] This false Prophet rides not without two men. Gods Levite had one man, Judg. 19.11. O let not Ministers of the Gospel be slaves to others, servants to themselves! Vers. 23. And the asse saw the Angel] Which Balaam saw not; his eyes were put out with the dust of covetousness, or dazeled at least with the glittering of the promised promoti∣ons. Vers. 24. But the Angel] If an Angel stand in the way of a sorcerer's sin, how much more ready are all those heavenly Spi∣rits to stop the miscarriages of Gods dear children! Surely, as our good endeavours are oft hindered by Satan; so are our evil, by good Angels: else were not our protection equal to our dan∣ger, and we could neither stand nor rise. Vers. 27. She fell down under Balaam] And so condemned her masters madness, 2 Pet. 2.16. Polybius in his history saith, Whereas Man is held the wisest of all sublunary creatures, to me he seemeth the most foolish of all other. For whereas other creatures, when they have once smarted, will come no more there: (as the Fox returns not rashly to the snare, the Woolf to the pit-fal, the dog to the cudgel, the horse to the hole where he hath been stalked, &c.) solus homo ab aevo ad aevum peccat, ferè in iisdem; Man only falls into the same offence and mischief from day to day, and will not be warned, till he be utterly ruin∣ed, as it befell Balaam. Vers. 28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the asse] Fear not therefore thine own inability and rudeness to reply in a good cause. There is no mouth, into which God cannot put words; and how oft doth he chuse the weak to confound the wise?  [And she said unto Balaam] The Angel (some think) did speak in the Asse, as the Devil had done to Eve in the garden. Vers. 29. I would there were a sword] Pity, but a mad-man should have a sword; how much fitter for him were that rod
that Solomon speaks of, Prov. 26.3. Vrs. 32. Because thy way is perverse] Thou art resolved to curse howsoever, and not to lose so fair a preferment; which he must needs buy at a dear rate, that payes his honesty for it. Better a great deal lye in the dust, then rise by such ill principles. I shall shut up with that excellent prayer of Zuinglius: Deum Opt. Max. precor, ut vias nostras dirigat: ac sicubi simus Bileami in morem, veritati pertinaciter oblucatri, agelum su∣um opponat, Zuing. epist. lib. tertio. qui machae,  suoe minis  asinum (insciamt au∣daciam dico nostram) sic ad macriam assligat, ut fraclum pedem, hoc est, impurum illicitumque carnis sensum, auferamus▪ ne ultra blasphememus nomen Domini Dei nostri. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 1. BƲild me here seven altars] Here in Baals high-places, Chap. 22.41. A sinfull mixture; such as was that of those Mongrels, 2 King. 17.28, 29. and their natu∣rall Nephews, the Samaritans, Ioh. 4. Ambodexters in their re∣ligion, which being grosser at first, was afterward refined by Ma∣nasseh a Iew-Priest, (such another as Balaam,) that in Alexan∣ders time, made a defection to them, and brought many Iewes with him. Of Constantinus Copronymus it is said, (how truly I know not,) that he was neither Iew, Heathen, nor Christian, sed colluviem quandam impietatis, but a hodg-podg of wicked∣ness. And of Redwald King of the East-Saxons (the first that was baptized) Camden reports, that he had in the same Church, one Altar for Christian Religion, and another for sacrificing to devills: And a loafe of the same leaven, was that resolute Ru∣fus, that painted God on the one side of his shield, and the de∣vill on the other, with this desperate inscription; In trumque paratus; Ready for either, catch as catch may. Vers. 2. And Balak did] Ready to conform to any religion, so he might obtain his purposes. So did Henry the fourth of France; but it was his ruine: whiles he sought the love of all parties, aequè malo ac bono reconciliabilis, (as one saith of him,) he lost all: Whiles he stood to the true religion, he was Bonus Orbi, (as one wittily anagrammatized his name Borbonius,) but when he fell from it, Orbus boni. And surely, he was not like
to stand long to the truth, who at his best had told Beza, Pelagose non ita commissurus esset, quin quando liberct, pedem re∣ferre posset. that he would launch no further into the sea, then he might be sure to re∣turn safe to the haven: some countenance he would shew to re∣ligion, but yet so, as he would be sure to save himself. God ab∣hors these luke-warme Neuter-passives, that are inter coelum ter∣ramque penduli, that halt between two, that commit Idolatry, between the porch and the altar, with those five and twenty miscre∣ants, Ezek. 8.16. Vers. 4. I have prepared seven Altars] He boasts of his devo∣tions, and so thinks to demerit Gods favour: So those hypo∣crites in Esay, Chap. 58.3. Non sic deos coluimus, ut ille nos vin∣ceret; we have not so served the gods, as that the enemy should have the better of us, said the Emperour Antoninus, the Philoso∣pher. Vers. 5. And the Lord put a word in Balaams mouth] The words thus put into his mouth, do but pass from him, they are not polluted by him, because they are not his: as the Trunk through which a man speaks, is not more eloquent, for the speech uttered through it: Balaam did not eate Gods word, as Ieremy did, Chap. 15.16. nor believe what he had spoken, as David, and after him Saint Paul did, Psal. 116.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. No more did Plato, Seneca, and other Heathens, in their divine sentences, Vers. 7. And he took up his parable] Or, pithy and power∣full speech, uttered in numerous and sententious tearms; and ta∣ken among the Heathen, for prophecyes, or oracles: poëmata pro vaticiniis, &c. Poets were taken for Prophets, Tit. 1.2. and Poems, for prophecyes. Hence their , wherein, ope∣ning a book of Homer, Hesiod, &c. they took upon them, by the first verse they lighted upon, to divine. Tragedians also, for their prables, or Master-sentences, were highly esteemed of old; insomuch as, after the discomfit of the Athenians in Sicily, they were releeved, who could repeat somewhat of Euripides. Out of Aram] Aram Naharim, or Mesopotamia; so called, because it is scituate betwixt those two rivers of paradise, Tigris and Euphrates: This was Abrahams country; where, whiles he was it it, he served strange gods, Iosh. 24.2. Vers. 8. How shall I curse] He had a good minde to it; but did not, because he durst not: God stood over him with a whip, as it were; the Angell, with a sword in his hand, could
not be forgotten by him. Virtus nolentium nulla est. Vers. 9. From the top of the rocks I see him] And have no power to hurt him. She heard me without daunting; I depar∣ted not without terrour, Camb. Elis. when I opened the conspiracy against her life; howbeit, cloathed with the best art I could, said Parry the traytour, concerning Queen Elizabeth: Achilles was said to be Styge armatus, but Israel was deo armatus, and therefore extra jatum. Lo the people shall dwell alone] That they might have no med∣ling with the heathen. God would not have them lye neer the sea-coasts, (for the Philistims lay between them and the sea,) let they should by commerce wax prouder, as Tyrus did, Ezek 27.28. and learn forrein fashions. See Esther. 3.8. Hence Iudae, (though part of the continent,) is called an Island, Isai. 20.6. Vers. 10. Let me dye the death] But he was so far from li∣ving the life of the righteous, that he gave pestilent counsell against the lives of Gods Israel: and though here in a fit of companction, Chap. 31.8. he seem a friend; yet he was afterward slain, by the sword of Israel, whose happiness he admireth, and desires to share in. Bern. Carnales non curant quaerere, quem tamen desiderant invenire, cupieuses consequi, sed non et sequi. Carnall men care not to seek that which they would gladly finde, &c. some faint desires, and short-winded wishes, may be sometimes found in them; but the mischief is, they would break Gods chain, sunder happiness from holiness, salvation from sanctisication, the end from the meanes; they would dance with the devill all day, and then sup with Christ at night: live all their lives-long in Dali∣lah's lap, and then go to Abrahams bosome, when they dye. The Papists have a saying, that a man would desire to live in Ita∣ly (a place of great pleasure,) but to dye in Spain; because there the Catholike religion (as they call it,) is so sincerely professed. And a heathen being asked, whether he would rather be Socrates, a painfull Philosopher, or, Croesus, a wealthy king? answered, that for this life he would be Croesus, but for the life to come, So∣crates. Thus all men wish well to Heavens happiness: but bad men finde no more comfort of it, then a man doth of the Sun, when it shines not in his own Horizon. Balaam might here be compared to a stranger, that travelling a far country, seeth the state and magnificence of the court, and is admitted
into the presence-chamber, which greatly doth affect him, though himself have no part or interest in the King. See the Note on Chap. 24.5. Vers. 11. What hast thou done unto me?] Hereby it appeares, that Balac in serving of God, by building Altars, and offering sacrifices, did but serve himself upon God; as Ephraim bore fruit to himself, Hos. 10.1. and did ye fast to me, even to me? Zech. 7.5. Vers. 12. Must I not take heed to speak] See how these hypo∣crites mock one with another. Potest Augur Augurem videre, Cic. de Divinat. lib. 2. & non ridere? said Cato. V. 13. From Whence thou maist see them] And over-look them, as they say, witches do. : quasi : Nescio quis teneros, &c. In Hebrew the same word signifies, both an eye and a fountain; to shew, that from the eye, as a fountain, flows both both sin and misery. Vers. 16. Put a Word] See the Note on vers. 5. Vers. 18. Rise up Balac] The greatest potentate, must re∣verently attend to the word of God. Ehud, (though a fat un∣weldy man,) stood up to hear a message from God, Iud. 3.20. Euseb. Act. and Mon. So did Constantine the great, and our Edward the sixth hear sermons standing, and usually uncovered. Vers. 19. That he should repent] When at any time God is said to repent, it is Mutatio rei, non dei, effectus non affectus, facti non consilii, it is not a change of his will, but of his work. Vers. 20. Behold, I have, &c.] A bad man, may bless by command from God, and he say Amen to it. The precious stone Lyncurie, may issue out of the body of the Lynx, an unclean and spotted beast. Vers. 21. He hath not beheld iniquity] Of this place of Scripture, we may say as we did of another: This verse had been easie, had not Commentatours made it so knotty. The sence I like best is, that at this time, when Balac hired Balaam, there was no peecatum flagrans, no foul sin of that people, flaming in the eyes of God, or stinking in his nostrils; and therefore there could be no inchantment against them, vers. 23. Whence that devillish counsell of his to Balak, to set fair women a fore them, to entice them to adultery and Idolatry, and so to put them under Gods displeasure. But what strange inferences are those from this text, that God sees no sin in his elect; that the
very being of their sins, is abolished out of his sight; that God is never displeased with his people, though they fall into adulte∣ry, or the like sin, no not with a fatherly displeasure? &c. CHAP. XXIIII. Vers. 1. HE went not as at other times] As being resolved to curse howsoever, and without Gods leave; yea al despito di Dio (as that mouth of blasphemy Pope Julis the third, Act. & Mon. fol. 1417. once said in another case) to take his own course, whatever came of it. He set his face] As fully bent to doe it, and nothing should hinder him; . So our Saviour Christ stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, Luk. 9.51. He steeled his forehead against all oppositions. Vers. 2. And the spirit of God came upon him] A common spirit, Mat. 7. a spirit of Prophecy: have not we Prophesied in thy name; said those cast-awayes. In impiis quandoque sunt dona Dei, sine Deo. Psal. 68.18. God gives gifts to men, yea to the rebellious, for the use of his Church. A blind man may beare a torch in his hand, whereby others may receive benefit, though himself receive none, so here. Vers. 3. VVhose eyes are open] And therefore can speak it of a certainty: for what is more sure then sight? q.d. Israel shall be blessed, and I will stand to it. He is blessed, yea and he shall be blessed, Gen. 28.33. Vers. 4. Falling into a trance] As was usuall with the Pro∣phets, Gen. 15. Dan. 8.17, &c. 2 Pet. 1.21. See the Note there; they were carried out of, and beyond themselves. And still Amor Dei est ecstaticus, neque juris Se sinit esse sui.— Vers. 5. How goodly are thy tents] It fareth with an hypo∣crite, as with a surveyor of lands, that taketh an exact compass of other mens grounds, of which he shall never enjoy a foot. See Chap. 23.10. Vers. 6. As the trees of lign-aloes] An odoriferous sweet-smelling tree, growing in Arabia, which is said to be a country so sweet, that swine cannot live in it. Vers. 7. His seed shall be in many waters] He shall sow in locis irriguis, (as men are bid to cast their bread, their almes
upon the Waters, upon the poor, as) upon a well-watered soyl▪ (Eccles. 11.1.) such as is the land of Egypt, watered by ; which makes the ground so fruitful, that they do but throw in the seed, and have four rich harvests in less the , Bunt's voy∣age into Le∣t. saith One that had been there. [He shall  King of the Amalekites, who was then  of those parts; and did, haply, think as  that proud Prince of Tyre, Ezek. 28. or, as the great  of taia; of whom it is reported, that every day, after health , he causeth the trumpets to be sounded; by that sign giving leave to other Princes of the earth, to go to dinner. Vers. 8. God brought him forth out of Egypt] This he tells Balac, in answer to that complaint of his, Chap. 22.5. Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt, q.d. Come they , but not of themselves, but by God; who said, Out of  have I called my son. Vers. 9. He lay down as a Lion] See the Note on Gen. 49.9. And cursed is he] Here the sorcerer pronounceth a curse upon himself; for he desired to curse Israel, and therefore in Gods account he did it. Qui, quia non licuit, non facit, ille facit. Ovid. Vers. 10. And he smote his hands together] So doth God at the covetous person, such as Balaam was, Ezek. 22.13. Behold, I have smitten my hands at thy dishonest gain, which thou hast made, &c. Vers. 13. I cannot go beyond] Here was coloured covetous∣nesse, or a cloke of covetousness, 1 Thess. 2.5. See the Note there. God lets out the tedder to wicked men for a time, and then calls them back with shame enough to their task; lets them have the ball on the foot, till they come almost to the goal, and then defeats them of their great hopes; as he did this sinful cou∣ple. Balac had not his will, nor Balaam his wages; God fool∣ed them both; pulling the morsel out of their mouthes, that they had well-nigh devured. Vers. 14. I will advertise thee] viz. what to do, as he did, Num. 31.16. Parasites propound to Princes, suavia potis quam sana consilia, pleasing but pestilent counsel, and so do officiously mischieve them; as the dragon is said to bite the Elephants ear, and there-hence to suck his blood; that being the only place, that he cannot reach with his trunk to defend.
Vers. 16. And knew the knowledg of the most High] The eye may be clear, while the hand is palsied. Balaam's great knowledg was but intuitiva, standing in speculation; it was not directiva vitae: he knew but by hear-say, as a blind man knows colours; his light served but to light him into utter dakness. Neronis Quantus artifex pereo quadrabit in te peritum, & periturum. Vers. 17. I shall see him] So shall every eye, and those also that pierced him, Rev. 1.17. but not as Abraham saw him, and rejoyced; nor as Job, Chap. 19.25, 27. The pure in heart, only, shall see him to their comfort; as pure glass or Chrystal lets in the light of the Sun. Some wicked have greater common gifts then the godly; as many metals are brighter and more orient then the heavens; yet as those metals are not so fit, either to re∣ceive, or convey the light of the Sun; so neither are the wicked so fit, either to take, or give toothers, the knowledg of salva∣tionby the remission of their sins. A starre out of Jacob] Jesus Christ the true Morning-Starr, Revel. 22.16. Joh. 1.9. that those Wise-men, Matth. 2. had heard of, (probably) either from the Chaldaean Sibyll, or from the Iews in the Babylonish captivity; or from this Prophecy of Balaam: for he was an East-country-man, and uttereth here a very clear and comfortable Prophecy of the Messiah, by whom himself received no benefit. Cant. 4.12. Thus the Church (Christs garden enclosed) may be watered thorow a woodden gutter, the Sun give comfortable light thorough a sluttish window; the field may be well sowed with a dirty hand; the bell call us to the Church, though it never enter it self, but by the sound; the Well may yeeld excellent water, though it have much mnd, &c. And destroy all the children of Seth] Heb. unwall; that is, conquer and subdue. Christ, by those rams-horns, by the fool∣ishness of preaching, pulls down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Vers. 18. And Edom shall be a possession] This was, literally, fulfilled in David, 1 Chron. 18.13. Psal. 60.8. but spiritually, and especially in Christ, Esay 63.1, 2, &c. who shall shortly subdue the Romish Edomite, 2 Thess. 2.8. Vers. 19. And shall destroy him] David in the history, 1 King. 11.15, 16. Christ in the mystery, Obad. 18. even all the Anti∣christian rout and rabble, Revel. 19.21. Vers. 20. First of the Nations] Or, principal; see vers. 7. Vers. 21. The Kenites] i. e. The Midianites, Judg. 1.16.
& 4.11. mingled among the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 15.6, for whom they are, and fare the worse; as Hamath did for Damascus, Zech. 9.2. Vers. 22. Ʋntill Ashur] Who, together with the Jews, carried captive all the neighbour Nations, Ier. 25.9. Vers. 23. Who shall live when, &c.] The Assyrian (that rod of Gods wrath, that over-flowing scourge,) shall take all afore him, shall bereave millions of their lives; as Caesar is said to have done: and of Mahomet the first, Emperour of the Turks, Turk, hist. it is storied, that he had been, in his time, the death of 800000 men. Vers. 24. From the coast of Chittim] From Greoce and Ita∣ly. Those four great Monarchs had their times and their turns; their ruines as well as their rise. Vers. 25. Returned to his place] Homewards he went; but staid amongst the Midianites, and soon after came back to them, to receive money of them, saith Chazkuni; when he heard say of the plague, which had been in Israel, by his counsel: But as Shi∣mei sought his servants, and lost his life; so Balaam, &c. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. TO commit whoredom] By the wicked counsel of Balaam, who knew well, that no one means hath more enriched hell, then beautiful faces; and therefore taught Balac to lay this stumbling block before the children of Israel; and is therein held, by some, to have sinned against the Holy Ghost. Howsoever, he goes out in a stench, as it is usually said of his Master, the Devil. Vers. 2. Ʋnto the sacrifices of their gods] Unto their idol∣feasts; for Sne Cerere & Libero friget Venus; Gluttony is the gallery that leachery walketh thorough. [And bowed down to their gods] Nemo repentè sit turpissimus, by degrees, they were drawn to open idolatry. If a mans foot slip into hell-mouth, it is a miracle if he stop ere he come to the bottom. Prin∣cipiis obsta dally not with the Devil; sin is very insinuative; and the old Serpent, if he once get in his head, will quickly winde in his whole body. Vers. 3. joyned himself to Baal-Peor] Separated himself to
that shame, Hos. 9.10. that abominable and shameless service of Priapus, (as Hierome and Isidore understand it) as Maachah the mother of Asa, seems to have done, 1 King. 15. and other filthy persons, whose fashion was, assoon as their sacrifice was ended, to step aside into the grove of their god, and there, like bruit beasts, promiscuously to satisfie their lusts, &c. Vah scelus infandum! Vers. 4. Take all the heads] The chieftains; their greatness might not bear them out. Potentes potenter torquebuntur. Hell is paved, said One of old, with the bald-pates of shavelings, and with the crests of great Commanders; who had ever opposed with crest and breast whatsoever stood in the way of their sins and lusts. Vers. 5. Ʋnto the Judges of Israel] Those of them that had not defiled themselves; else with what face could they punish others? or look upon those, that before their faces had been hanged up against the Sun, whose destruction was for ever to be remembred, Mic. 6.5. Vers. 6. In the sight of Moses] This mans face was hatcht over with detestable impudence; he thought, it may be, that being so great a man, Plin. lib. 7. none durst meddle with him. Pliny re∣ports of Proculus Caesar, that by him, viginti virgines intra dies quindecim foetum conceperunt. Lewis the 11. of France, inviting our Edward 4. to the French Court, Rectè erit cognate, saith He, Comineus, l. 6. jucundi vivemus & suaviter, teque oblectabis cum lectissi∣mis foeminis, &c. (He should have added, But know, that for all these things, thou must come to Judgment: that would have, haply, Eccles. 11. allayed his lust, cooled his courage. And not have come in with his) Adhibebo tibi Cardinalem Borbonium; is, quicquid peccaris, pro ea quam habet potestate, facilè expiabit, Thou shalt take thy full pleasure, and then my Cardinal shall give thee full pardon. Vers. 7. He rose up] An heroical act, by an extraordinary motion; as was also that of Ehud: and therefore is not to be made a rule of practice; as Burchet conceited; when by this example, he held himself warranted, to kill a great personage in this Kingdom, whom he took to be a vitious man, and Gods enemy. Vers. 8. And thrust both of them thorow] So they dyed in the flagrancy of their lust: as did likewise One of the Popes, ta∣ken
in the act, and slain together with his harlot, by the husband of the adulteress. Mention is likewise made, by William Malms∣bury, of one Walter Bishop of Hereford, Anno 1060. his offer∣ing to force his Sempster. She resisted what she might, Godw. Catal. but find∣ing him too strong for her, thrust her sheers into his belly, and gave him his deaths-wound. Vers. 9. Twenty and four thousand] Twenty and three thou∣sand, saith S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.8. insisting only in the special pun∣ishment of the people, who were provoked to sin by that other thousand, their Princes, as ver. 4. And all to shew, Jun. Parallell. quàm frigida & jejuna sit eorum defensio, &c. saith Junius, how poorly they plead for themselves, that think to excuse their sins, by alledging the examples of their superiours. Vers. 13. Because he was zealous for his God] Enraged (as a jealous man) with a holy hatred of sin, and inflamed with love to God, quem aliter amare non didicerat, as Chrysostome speaks of Basil. Non amat, qui non Zelat, saith Augustine, Contra Ada∣mant. c. 13. He is no friend to God, that is not zealous for him. To one that de∣sired to know what kind of man Basil was, there was presented in a dream, (saith the history) a pillar of fire, with this Motto, Talis est Basilius, Basil is such a one; all on a light fire for God. Vers. 14. A Prince of a chief house] Whom yet Phineas spa∣red not; as neither did John Baptist spare Herod; nor Nathan, David; nor Bishop Lambert, King Pippin, Epitome hist. Gall. pag. 30. whom he freely re∣proved to his face for his adultery, Anno 798. though he were afterwards therefore slain by the harlots brother. Odo Severus the 22. Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 934. dealt like plainly with King Edwin, excommunicated his Concubines, and caused one of them, on whom the King doted unreasonable, Godw. Catal.  to be fetcht out of the court by violence, burnt her in the forehead with a hot iron, and banished her into Ireland. Vers. 17. Vex the Midianites] As more malicious and mis∣chievous then the Moabites; as appears, 1. By their detain∣ing of 'Balaam, when the Moabites dismissed him in great dis∣pleasure. 2. By the wickedness of their women, who by Cozbi, may seem to have been meretrices meretricissimae, Lib. 2. tum. such as after∣wards was Julia. Messalina, and that Romish Lucretia, Con∣cubine to Pope Alexander 6. of whom Pontanus,
Hoc tumulo dormit Lucretia nomine, sedre Thais Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus, Vers. 18. For they vex you with their wiles] Not with their wars; they out-wit you, over-reach you by counterfeit courte∣sie, cut-throat kindness; they have deceived you into those sister∣sins, fornication and idolatry, which God hath so severely pun∣ished. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 2. FRom twenty] See the note on Chap. 1.3. Vers. 9. Which were famous] But for no good∣ness. Tubulus (who was the Romane Praetor, a little afore Tullies time) was homo tam projectè improbus, Lips. Antiq. lection. ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitii esse videretur, so wicked a wretch, that he seem∣ed to be wickedness it self. Portius Latro calleth Catiline, sacra∣rium libidinum, portentum scelerum, gurgitem & sentinam flagi∣tiorum, &c. a sink of sinfulness. And Josephus saith of Anti∣pater, that his life was no better then a mystery of iniquity. These men were famous, or rather infamous, for their slagitious practices, notoriously naught, signally sinful. Vers. 10. And they became a sign] An example of that Rule, that Great sins bring great plagues; as Herodotus hath it, speak∣ing of the destruction of Troy, Aliorum perditio, tua sit cautio, Enjoy other mens madness. Discite justitiam moniti, &c. Let all that behold me, beware; this was written upon the statue of Sennacherib, as saith Herodotus. Vers. 11. The children of Korah dyed not] As being either innocent or penitent; for, Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum, Luk. 13.3. Vers. 44. The family of the Jesuites] Serrarius will needs derive the name (Jesuites) from the 24. verse of this chapter, (it is wonder how he missed of this plainer text) Jesuites quasi Jashubites: Like as Erasmus found Friers in St. Paul's time, in∣ter falsos fratres, amongst the false brethren. In Salamanca, a Frier would prove, that the name of the Virgin Mary was spo∣ken of, Stella, de modo concionandi, cap. 6. Gen. 1. God called the gathering together of the wa∣ters, Maria. Doctor Poynes writes, that it was foretold in the Old Testament, that the Protestants were a malignant Church,
alledging, 2 Chr. 24.19. Mittebatque prophet as ut reverteren∣tur ad Dominum, quos protestantes illi audire nolebant. Preface to his Book of the Sacrament. We may with far more shew of reason, fetch the name of Protestants (re∣tained also by their Doway translation) from that text, then they can from this, the name of Jesuites, alias Jebusites. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 3. BƲt dyed in his own sin] i. e. By a natural and an ordinary death, not by a special plague, as that Arch-rebel Korah. Death is the just hire of the least sin, Rom. 6. ult. But some evil-doers, God doth not only put to death, but also hangs them up in gibbets, as it were, for publike notice and admonition. Vers. 4. Give unto us therefore a possession] This plea for a part in a land not yet conquered, is a proof of their faith, and could not but encourage others. Such a masculine faith, was that of Mrs. Anne Askew, Martyr, who thus subscribed her confession, Written by me Anne Askew, Act. & Mon. fol. 1128. that neither wisheth for death, nor feareth his might; and as merry as one that is bound for heaven. I will not bid you good night, (said Hellen Stirk, Scotch∣woman, to her husband, at the place where they both suffered Martyrdome,) for we shall suddenly meet in the heavenly Ca∣naan. And was it not by the force of her faith, Ib. 1154. (that substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.) that Crispina gaudebat, cum tenebatur, cum audiebatur, Aug. in Psal. 137. cum dam∣nabatur, cum ducebatur. Vers. 7. And thou shalt cause the inheritance] Let the French defend their Salique law as they can. It was a witty Essay of him, who stiled women, the second Edition of the Epitome of the whole world; witness Artemisia, Zenobia, Blandina, the Lady Jane Gray, (whose excellent beauty, adorn'd with all variety of vertues, as a clear sky with stars, as a Princely Diadem with jew∣els, gave her the stile of Eruditionis, pietatis, & modestiae delicium,) and Queen Elizabeth, in whom, besides her sex, there was no∣thing woman-like, or weak: as if (what Philosophy saith) the souls of those noble creatures, had followed the temperament of their bodies; which consist of a frame of rarer rooms, of a more exact composition then mans doth; and (if place be any
priviledg,) we find theirs built in Paradise, when mans was made out of it. Besides, in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor fe∣male, but all are one, (souls having no sexes;) and whosoever are Christs, are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3.28, 29. Vers. 11. A statute of judgment] A standing law, a standard for all cases of like kinde, in that policy at least; for we cannot consent to Carolostadius, who contended, in foro jus ex Mose di∣cendum esse, that all other national and municipal laws were to be abolished; and that all courts were now to pass sentence ac∣cording to Moses's laws. Hic non intellexit vim & naturam Chri∣stianae libertatis; This man knew not the extent of Christian li∣berty, saith Melancthon. Vers. 12. See the land] It was somewhat, to see; but oh how fain would he have entred the Land, and could not! we shall have in heaven, not only vision, but fruition; we have it already in Capite-tenure, in Christ our head and husband; who will not be long without us: it being part of his heaven, that we shall be where he is, Ioh. 17.24. and enjoy God, which is heaven it self: whence in Scripture, God is called Heaven; I have sinned against heaven. Malim praesente Deo esse in infer∣no, quam abseute Deo, in Coelo. Luth. in Gen. 30. And I had rather be in Hell, and have God present; then in Heaven, and God absent, saith Luther. Vers. 13. Gathered to thy people] To that great Panegyris, the general Assembly and Church of the first-born in heaven, Heb. 12.23. to that glorious Amphitheatre, where the Saints shall see and say, , &c. as Chrysostome hath it; Look, yonder is Peter, and that is Paul, &c. we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob; have communion with them, not only as godly men, but as Abraham, Isaac, and Ja∣cob. Vers. 14. For ye rebelled] Sin may rebel in the Saints, but not raign; neither is it they that rebel, but sin that dwelleth in them; dwelleth, but not domineereth. Vers. 16. The God of the spirits of all flesh] Thou, Lord, that knowest the hearts of all men, Act. 1.24. See the Note there. Ar∣tificers know well the nature and properties of their own work. Deus intimior nobis intimo nostro.
CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 2. MY offering] He is owner of all; and of his own we give him, , said that great Em∣perour. [And my bread] Called their bread for their souls, that is, the bread for their natural sustenance, common bread; when not rightly offered. So Ier. 7.21. God, in scorn, calls their sacrifice, flesh, ordinary flesh, such as is sold in the shambles. So at the Lords Supper, impenitent communicants receive no more then the bare elements; panem Domini; Aug. but not panem Dominum. [In their due season] Which for 38. years they had intermitted. Get a settlement, or Sabbath of spirit; or else God shall be but ill (if at all) served. Vers. 3. This is the offering] See the Note on Exod. 29.38, 39. Vers. 9. And on the Sabbath day] Every day should be a Sabbath to the Saints, in regard of ceasing to do evil, learning to do well: but on the seventh-day-Sabbath our devotion should be doubled. 'Debet totus dies festivus a Christiano expendi in operibus sanctis, said Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, In decalog. praecep. 30. long since. The whole Sabbath should be spent in Gods service, Psal. 92. titled a Psalm for the Sabbath, mentions morning and even∣ing performances, vers. 2. Variety of duties, may very well take up the whole day with delight. Besides, God gives us fix whole dayes. Now to sell by one measure, and buy by another, is the way to a curse. Vers. 11. And in the beginning of your moneths] Thus they had their daily, weekly, monethly, yearly addresses unto God, that they might ever be in communion with him, and conformi∣ty unto him, by this continual intercourse: On the new-Moons they rested, Amos 8.5. feasted, 1 Sam. 20.5. heard the Word, &c. 2 King. 4.29. Vers. 17, 18, 19, &c.] See the Notes on Exod. 12.18. and on Levit. 23.7, &c.
CHAP. XXIX. Vers. 1. ANd in the seventh moneth] This Sabbath-moneth (as it were) had as many feasts in it, as were cele∣brated in all the year besides. So that, as the Sabbath is the Queen of dayes, so was this of moneths. [It is a day of blowing] See the Note on Levit. 23.24. Vers. 7. And ye shall have] See Levit. 16.19. with the Notes. Vers. 12. And on the fifteenth] See Levit. 23.34, 35, &c. with the Notes. There the feasts were prescribed, and here the sa∣crifices belonging to them are described. Vers. 17. And on the second day ye shall offer twelve, &c.] In every of these seven-dayes-sacrifices, one bullock is abated: Here∣by the Holy Ghost might teach them their duty, to grow in grace, and increase in sanctification: that their sins decreasing, the num∣ber of their sacrifices (whereby atonement was made for their sins) should also decrease daily. Or it might signifie a diminish∣ing and wearing away of the legal offerings, &c. as One well observeth; Hac caeremoniâ significabat Deus gratiam suam de die in diem crescere, it a nempe ut minuatur vetus homo, & novus au∣geatur, &c. (saith Alsted) till the very ruines of Satans castles be (as most of our old Castles are) almost brought to ruine. Vers. 18. After the manner] That is, in manner and form aforesaid. The Manner is that that makes or marrs the action; as a good suite may be marred in the making, so a good duty: there may be malum opus in bona materia. Jehu's zeal was re∣warded as an act of justice, quoad substantiam operis; and pun∣ished as an act of policy, quoad modum agendi, for the perverse end. Yea David, for failing in a ceremony only, though with an honest heart, suffered a breach instead of a blessing, 1 Chron. 15.17. Idolaters also went on in their own manner, Amos 8.14. as their idol-Priests prescribed, The manner of Beersheba li∣veth; that is, the form of rites of the worshipping in Beersheba, as the Chaldee paraphraseth.
CHAP. XXX. Vers. 1. ANd Moses spake unto the heads] Because they were in place of judicature; and had power, ei∣ther to bind men to their vowes, or set them at liberty. Vers. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord] God is the pro∣per object of a vow, Psal. 76.11. Papists vow to saints, Relation of West. relig. sect. 4. both themselves (as to Francis, Austin, Dominick, &c.) and other things, as pilgrimages, oblations, &c. Our Lady (as they call her) of Loretto, hath her Churches so stuffed with vowed presents and memories, as they are fain to hang their cloysters and church-yards with them. This is sacriledg, yea it is idolatry. To hind his soul with a bond] Which none ought to do, but such as. 1. Are free, or have the consent of their governours. 2. Such as have knowledg and judgment, to discerne of a vow, or oath, Eccles. 5.3, 5. 3. Are conscientious, as Iacob, Hannah, &c. Not such votaries as Herod, Mat. 14.7. those Assassines, Act. 23.14. those Idolaters, Ier. 44.27. [He shall not break his word] If he do, he will make a great breach in his consci∣ence, and crack his comfort exceedingly: better not vow, then not pay, Eccles. 5.4. It is a sin, as bad or worse then perjury: and God takes it heavily at mens hands, Ier. 34.10, 11. Vers. 4. And her father shall hold his peace] Qui tacet, consen∣tire videtur; a rule in civill law, silence is a kinde of consent. Then all her vows shall stand] Provided, that she vow. 1. Such things as are lawfull, and warrantable by the word; for to vow to doe evill, is an utter abomination, as Act. 23.14. Deut. 23.18. 2. Such things as are possible, and in her power, either naturally, or by the assistance of Gods grace, promised to her: Such is not the popish vowing of virginity, sith, omnes non capiant hoc, all men cannot contain. Their vowes of continency, breed all manner of incontinency in their Clergy. Vers. 5. But if her father disallow her] Those that vow Monasticall obedience, renounce all duty to their parents, and service to their country. Parents are our , as a hea∣then said, our houshold gods, as it were; and have power to dis∣annull, or ratifie the vowes of their children: but the apists are true heires to the Pharisees, who taught not to honour father
or mother, Mat. 15.6. and so do make the Commandement of God, of none effect, by their tradition. Full well have they done it, Mark 7.9. But what cannot they do? The Pope, saith Cardinall Bellarmine; Lib. 4. de Pon∣tif. Rom. potest de injustitia facere justitiam, ex ni∣hilo aliquid, ex virtute vitium: he can make righteousness of unrighteousness, Sleidan. Com. something of nothing, vice of vertue; And it seems so indeed by his practice. For when the Cardinals meet to chuse a Pope, they make a vow, whosoever is chosen, he shall sweare to such articles as they make. And Sleidan saith, the Pope is no sooner chosen, but he breaks them all; and checks their in∣solencies, as if they went about to limit his power, to whom all power is given, both in heaven and earth. Vers. 6. And if she had at all an husband] Hannah's vow, 1 Sam. 1.11. was made, either by the consent of her husband, or else by peculiar instinct from God. Vers. 13. To afflict her soul▪ This is one instance of what she may vow. She may curbe wanton flesh, from the use of things lawfull in themselves, but hurtfull to her; and that by a vow, as did the Rechabites, Ier. 35.8, 9.10. which the devill seeing, will despaire; for vows are as exorcismes, to allay our rebelli∣ous spirits, and as cords to hamper our treacherous hearts, when they would slip the collar, and detrect the yoak. In short, a man may lawfully vow a thing that is either a part of Gods wor∣ship, (as to fast once a moneth before the Sacrament, to pray so many times a day, &c.) or a furtherance thereof; as to found a lecture, build a colledge, school, almes-house, give so much weekly to the poor, &c. CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 2. Avenge the children of Israel] This is called the vengeance of Iehovah, vers. 3. The righteous Iudg will not fail to avenge our unrighteous vexations, if we commit our selves to him in well-doing. 1 Pet. 4.19. Vers. 3. Arme some of your selves unto the war] Lactantius being (according to his name,) a mild and milken man, abhor∣red bloodshed, thought it not lawfull for a just man to be a war∣riour; Instit. lib. 6. cap. 20. whose justice was his warfare. But this was his errour: Patres legendi sunt cum venia; God bids here: Arme your
selves, &c. Indeed it is utterly unlawfull for men, wilfully to thrust themselves into unnecessary warrs: and it is reported, in the life of Saint Angustine, that he would never pray for such. But when God sounds the alarme, as here, Cursed is he, that doth this work of the Lord negligently: Cursed is he, that keepeth back his sword from blood, Ier. 48.10. Vers. 5. Twelve thousand] This was no great army; but they were Deo armati, with whom there is no restraint, to save by many, or by few, 1 Sam. 14.6. How wondrously did God work, by that handfull of Hussites in Bohemia, when all Germany was up in armes against them, by the Popes instigation! And may it not be said of that small remnant, that now fighteth the Lords battels in Ireland? The Lord hath done great things for them, whereof we are glad. Have they not been helped, with a little help indeed? the more is our shame, Dan. 11.34. that send them no more. Vers. 6. Them and Phinehas] Not without Joshua the Ge∣nerall, (though not here mentioned) the mighty conquerour of all Israels enemies, that rose up and resisted them: famours is he for his faithfulness and fortitude; in cognoscendis rebus bellicis perspicax, in agendo solers: noverat optimè insidias facere, proe∣lium committere, victoria uti, Dio in Domi∣tiano. &c. as Dio saith of Decebalus king of the Daci, in Domitians dayes. i.e. Well-skilled in war-like businesses, and diligent in dispatching them; He knew well how to lay an ambush, worst an enemy, use a victory, &c. Vers. 8. And Zur] The father of Cozbi, that noble harlot. Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum in luto. Sdes prima, et vita ima, is but golden rubbish, eminent infamy, noble dishonour. Balaam also the son of Beor] See the Note on Chap. 24.25. O that God would cause the false rophets, and the unclean spirit (for whom they act, and by whom they are acted,) to pass out of our land, according to his promise, Zeph. 13.2. Vers. 9. Took all the women] The Iewes are a nation, Blunt voyage. to this day, noted for effeminate; and yet they hold, that women are of a lower creation, made for the propagation and pleasure of man; Diruendi sunt etiam ipsi cinoni arum,  ne re∣deant, said Zisca Lavat. in Deu∣ter. and therefore they suffer them not to enter their Syna∣gogues, but appoint them a gallery without. Vers. 10. And they burnt all their ciyes] For the same reason, perhaps, that our Henry the eight demolished so many Monasteries, saying, Crvorum nidos esse penitus disturbandos,
ne iterum ad cohabitandum convolent, that the crows-nests were to be utterly destroyed, Sander. Schism. Ar∣glie. lib. 1. See Iudg. 6.1. lest they should make further use of them again another time. Or rather, lest sloth or covetousness shouid draw any of the Israelites, to hide themselves in these nests, and neglect the promised land. Vers. 13. Went forth to meet them] As Melchisedee went forth to meet Abraham, returning with victory, Gen. 14. as Archb. Hubert met our Richard the first, returning from the holy land (as they called it;) both of them first falling to the earth, rose again, Speed hist. fol. 540. ran into each others armes; comforting themselves with mutuall imbraces, and weeping with joy. Vers. 14. And Moses was wroth] For all the joy, he could not but be zealous for the Lord of Hosts, when he saw the train. Zeal is the creame of all the affections. Vers. 15. Have ye saved all the women alive?] By whom ye have so lately sinned, and so lately suffered? Keep thee far from an evill matter, Exod. 23.7. Circa serpentis antrum positus, non eris diu illaesus, saith Isidor. We should take heed, how we play about the hole of the asp, or neer the den of the cockatrice, Isai. 11.8. Sin and temptation come both under our name, in the Lords prayer. To pray, lead us not into temptation, and yet to run upon the occasion of sin, is, to thrust a finger into the fire, and then pray, not be burnt. These Israelites should have said to those Midianitish huswives, as those in Esay did to their Idols, Get you hence, Avaunt; they should have here been as cautelous, as they were in other cases. For being forbidden to make Cove∣nants with the Gentiles, they also abstained from drinking with them; because that was a ceremony, used in striking of covenants; and so it might have drawn them on thereunto. Our dallying with the occasions of sin, doth usually tempt the devill to tempt us. Vers. 18. That have not known a man] As far as they could conjecture by their age. But the way of a man with a maid, is one of Solomons secrets, Prov. 30.19. Of Rebecca it is noted, that she went for a maid, and she was so, Gen. 24.16. But Quar∣tilla the strumpet in Petronius, Petron. Satyr. was not ashamed to say, junonem meam iratam habeam, si unquam me meminerim virginem fuisse. That she could not remember, that ever she was a maid. And what a base slander was that, Rivetti Iesuita vap ulans. cast upon our religion by an impu∣dent Iesuite, Sylvester petrasancta; Puellas plerunque corruptas
nuptui dari in reformato Evangelio; that few maids amongst us, come cleare to marriage. Vers. 19. Whosoever hath killed any person] War, though never so just, is the slaughter-house of mankind, and the hell of this world. Homer brings in Mars the god of battle, as most hated of Jupiter; bellum per antiphrasin, quia minimè bellum. For every battle of the Warriour is with confused noise, and gar∣ments rolled in blood, Isai. 9.5. What a strange man then was Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes; of whom Justin reports, that he took more pleasure in fighting, then in reigning? And what a hard heart had Hannibal, who when he saw a pit full of mans blood, which he had spilt, cryed out, O formosum spectacu∣lum! O brave sight! So, O rem regiam, said Valesus, (i.e. O Kingly act!) when he had slain three hundred persons. And what a strange hell-hag was that Queen, who when she saw some of her Protestant Subjects lying dead, and stripped upon the earth, cryed out, The goodliest tapestry that ever she beheld? God, that he might teach his people not to have feet swift to shed blood, tells them here of a ceremonial uncleanness, con∣tracted by killing, though an enemy, devoted by him to de∣struction. Vers. 23. And all that abideth not the fire] We must deal with every man (saith One from this text) according to his temper; indulge them what lawfully you may. Quod tamen accipiendum est cum grano salis. Vers. 49. And there lacketh not one man of us] A wonderful work of God; a whole Nation cut off with no loss at all. This was the Lords own doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes. Surely, if the Grecians so thankfully acknowledged to their Jupiter, that overthrow they gave to the Persians, by Themistocles, and called him , their Deliverer; how much more might these Israelites celebrate the unparallel'd goodness of their gracious God, in this so unbloody a victory? Vers. 53. For the men of war had taken spoil] And kept what they caught, to themselves. The Turks, when they had taken Constantinople, wondered at the wealth thereof, (which the Ci∣tizens would not be drawn to part with for their own preserva∣tion,) and were so enriched therewith, that it is a proverb a∣mongst them at this day, if any grow suddenly rich, to say, Turk. hist. 347. He hath been at the sacking of Constantinople.
CHAP. XXXII. Vers. 1. A Place for cattle] Fat, and fit for the purpose; like those pastures in Ireland, so fertile and aboun∣ding with sweet grass, that the people are forced to drive their cattle to some other more barren grounds, at some time of the day, lest they should surfeit. See Mic. 7.14. Ier. 50.19. Vers. 5. Let this land be given unto thy servants] An unsavo∣ry and unseasonable motion this might seem at first; and did, even to Moses himself; as appears in the next verse. And surely, it is probable, that they were too much set upon that portion of earth, as Lot was upon the Plain of Sodome, Gen. 13.10. and was therefore, soon after, carried captive by the four Kings; as these in the text are noted to be the first that were carried captives out of their land, 1 Chron. 5.25, 26. Strong af∣fections cause strong afflictions: when God seeth people set up∣on it, to have this or that, have it they may, but with an after∣clap, that shall disweeten it. How was David crossed in his Ab∣solom, Absolom in his Kingdom, Amnon in his Tamar, &c. 1 Sam. 1.5? He loved her, and the Lord made her barren. Vers. 11. They have not] See the Note on Chap. 14.24. Vers. 14. An increase of sinful men] A race of rebels; neither good egge, nor bird; sin runs in a blood, many times; ye seed of serpents, ye generation of vipers, ye fill up the measure of your fa∣thers sins, Dio in vita Neron. Matth. 23.32. Domitius, the father of Nero, foretold the wickedness of his son; for it cannot be, said he, that of me and my wife Agrippina, any good man should be born. When One complained, that never father had so undutiful a child; yes, said his son, (with less grace then truth) My grandfather had. Vers. 16. We will build sheep-folds] This was their intent at first, though Moses mistook them. There may be gross mi∣stakes (and thereupon grievous unkindnesses) betwixt dearest friends. Cyrill, and John, Bishop of Antioch, objected heresie one to another, and proceeded as far as excommunication, postea comperti idem sentire; so did Cyrill and Theodoret. Vers. 23. Be sure your sin will find you out] The guilt will haunt you at heels, as a bloodhound; and the punishment will
overtake you, as it did that Popish Priest in Lancashire, who being followed by one that found his glove, with a desire to re∣store it him, but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, leaps over a hedge, plunges into a Marle-pit behind it, unseen, and un∣thought of, wherein he was drowned. Or as it did that other Priest, who having escaped the fall of Black-Friers, Anno 1623. (where two of his fellow-shavelings, with about a hundred more, Jac. Rev. de vit. Pontific. 312. perished,) and taking water, with purpose to sail into Flanders, was east away, with some others, under London-Bridg, the boat being over-turned. Vers. 38. Their names being changed] Out of detestation of those idols, Baal, Nebo, &c. (See Exod. 23.13. Psal. 16.4.) Isai. 46.1. Absit ut de ore Christiano sonet Jupiter omnipotens, & Mehercule, & Mecastor, & coetera, magis portenta quam numina, saith Hierom. Heathenish gods should not be so far honoured, as to be heard of out of Christian mouthes; nor Popish Idols neither. I my self, saith Latimer, Serm. in 3. Sund. in Advent. have used in mine earnest matters, to say, yea by the Rood, by the Masse, by St. Mary, which indeed is naught. Some simple folk say, they may swear by the masse, because there is now no such thing; and by our Lady, because she is gone out of the Country. CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 2. ANd Moses wrote] Moses was primus in historia, as Martial saith of Salust. Vers. 4. For the Egyptians buried] As iron is very soft, and malleable, whiles in the fire; but soon after, returns to its former hardness: so was it with these Egyptians. Affliction meekneth men: hence affliction and meeknesse grow upon the same Hebrew root. Vers. 29. From Mithcah] Which signifies sweetnesse. And pitched in Chasmonah] Which signifies swiftnesse. We must also, when we have tasted of Gods sweetness, use all pos∣sible swiftness in the wayes of holiness: as Jacob, when he had seen visions of God at Bethel, he lift up his feet, Gen. 29.1. and went on his way lustily, like a generous horse after a bait; or a giant after his wine; the joy of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8.
Vers. 38. And dyed there in the fourtieth year] Nec te tua plu∣rimaPenthe Labentem texît pietas. — The righteous dye as well as the wicked; yea the righteous oft before the wicked: , God sends his servants to bed, when they have done their work; as here he did Aaron: and as within these few dayes, he hath done, (to mine unspeakable loss and grief,) my dearest brother, and most faithful friend, Mr. Thomas Jackson, that able and active instrument of Gods glory, (while he lived) in the work of the Ministery at Glocester; the sad re∣port of whose death, received whilest I was writing these things, made the pen (almost) fall out of my singers; not for my own sake so much, as for my Countrey, whereof he was, I may truly say, Paulin. Nolan. in vita Ambros. the Bul-wark and the Beauty; as Ambrose is said to have been the walls of Italy: , said Theodosius. Ambrose, whiles alive, was the only Minister, (to speak of) that I knew in the whole Countrey: And dilexi virum, qui cum corpore solveretur, magis de Ecclesia∣rum statu, juam de suis periculis angebatur, said the same Em∣perour, of the same Ambrose; I could not but love the man, for that when he dyed, his care was more for the Churches welfare, then for his own. I can safely say the same of the man in speech, (without offence to any be it spoken;) and I greatly fear, lest as the death of Ambrose fore-ran the ruine of Italy; so that it bodes no good to us, that God pulls such props and pillars out of our building. But this by way of digression, to satisfie my great grief for so dear a friend deceased, as David did his, for his bro∣ther Jonathan; and made him an Epitaph, 2 Sam. 1.17. Vers. 52. Destroy all the pictures] Those Balaam's blocks, those excellent instruments of idolatry; such as was the rood of Hailes, and Cockra rood; which if it would not serve to make a god, yet with a pair of horns clapt on his head, might make an excellent Devil; Act. and Mon. 1340. as the Mayor of Doncaster perswaded the men of Cockram, who came to him, to complain of the Joyner that made it, and refused to pay him his money for the making of it. Vers. 55. Shall be pricks in your eyes] The eye is the tenderest part, and soon vexed with the least mote that falls into it. These Jebusites preserved, should be notorious mischifs to them; as the Jesuites, at this day, are to those Christian States that habour them. Shall we suffer those vipers to lodg in our bosomes, till they eat out our hearts? Sic notus Ʋlysses? Jesuites, like bells,
will never be well tuned, till well hanged. Among much change of houses in forraign parts, they have two, famous for the ac∣cordance of their names; the one called the Bow at Nola, the other, the Arrow (la Flesce, given them by Henry 4, whom afterwards they villanously stabbed to death,) in France. Their Apostate Ferrier plaid upon them, in this distich: Arcum Nola dedit, dedit illis alma sagittam Gallia; quis funem, quem meruere, dabit! Nola the bow, and France the shaft did bring; But who shall help them to a hempen-string? CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 2. THis is the land that shall fall] It is God that as∣signs us our quarters, and cuts us out our several conditions; appointing the bounds of our habitation, Act. 17. This should make us rest contented with our lot, and (having God our portion) say howsoever, as David did, The lines are fallen to me in a fair place, Psal. 16.6. It is that our Father sees fit for us. Vers. 3. Then your South-quarter shall be] Judaea was not above 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad; not neer the half of England, by much, but far more fertile, (called therefore Sumen totius orbis:) and yet England is, for good cause, counted the Western granary, the garden of God, whose valleys are like Eden, whose hills are as Lebanon, whose springs are as Pisgah, Speeds hist. whose rivers are as Iordan, whose walls is the Ocean, whose de∣fence is the Lord Jehovah. Vers. 6. The great Sea] Commonly called the Mediterra∣nean Sea; betwixt which and the Jews, lay the Philistims; as now betwixt the Church and the Turk, lies the Pope and his fol∣lowers; Italy being the mark that the Turk shoots at, Loe, a sweet providence of God. Vers. 8. Ʋnto the entrance of Hamath] Called Hamath the Great, Amos 6.8. affecting, haply, to be held the greatest Vil∣lage, as the Hague in Holland doth, and remains therefore un∣walled. Vers. 12. It shall be at the salt-Sea] That is, the Lake of So∣dome, called also, Asphaltites, and the dead Sea. Josephus saith,
that an ox having all his legs bound, will not sink into the water of this sea, it is so thick. Vers. 17. Eleazar the Priest] Pointing to the high Priest of the new Covenant, by whom we have entrance into the promi∣sed inheritance, whither he is gone before, to prepare a place for us, and hath told us, that in his Fathers house are many mansions, room enough. CHAP. XXXV. Vers. 2. SƲburbs] These were for pasture, pleasure, and o∣ther Country-Commodities, not for tillage; for the Levites were to have no such employment, Num. 18.20, 24. Vers. 6. That he may flee thither] All sins then are not equal, as the Stoicks held; neither are all to be alike punished, as by Draco's laws they were, in a manner. Those laws were said to be written, not with black, but with blood; because they punish∣ed every peccadillo almost with death, as idleness, stealing of pot∣herbs, &c. Aristotle gives them this small commendation, that they are not worth remembrance; but only for their great se∣verity. Vers. 7. Shall be fourty and eight cities] Thus the Levites were dispersed throughout the land, for instruction of the peo∣ple; so ought Ministers of the Gospel, who are fily called the salt of the earth, that being sprinkled up and down, may keep the rest (as flesh) from rotting and putrisying. Vers. 8. From them that have many ye shall give] By the equity of this proportion, the richer are bound to give more to the Ministers maintenance, then the poorer. Let this be noted by those that refuse to give any thing to their Ministers, because they have not those things, the tithes whereof the law requires for this purpose. See Gal: 6.6. with the Note there. Vers. 15. Shall be a refuge] Christ is our Asylum, to whom running for refuge, when pursued by the guilt of an evill conscience, we are safe; None can take us out of his hands; If we be in Christ the Rock, temptations, and oppositions as waves dash upon us, but break themselves. Vers. 16. So that he dye] Though he had no intent to kill, yet
because he should have look't better to't, he is a murtherer, he smote him purposely and presumptuously, and the man dyes of it. King James was wont to say, that if God did leave him to kill a man, (though besides his intention,) he should think God did not love him. Vers. 18. The murderer shall surely be put to death] This is jus gentium. The Turks justice, in this case, will rather cut off two innocent men, then let one offender escape. Cartwr. tra∣vels. The Persians punish theft and man-slaughter so severely, that in an age, a man shall hardly hear either of the one, or the other. A severity fit for Italy, where they blaspheme, oftner then swear; Spec. Europ. Purchas. and mur∣ther, more then revile or slander: (like the dogs of Congo, which, they say, bite, but bark not;) And no less fit for France; where, Les ombres des defunde fieurs de Villemor. within ten years, 6000 gentlemen have been slain; as it appears by the Kings pardons. Byron, Lord high-Marshal of France, and Governour of Burgundy, slew a certain Judge, for putting to death a malefactor whom he had commanded to be spared; Epitome hist. Gall. pag. 275. For this he sued for a pardon, and had it: but not long after, he turn∣ed traytor to his Prince that had pardoned him, and was justly executed. Vers. 21. He shall surely be put to death] And yet the Pa∣pists allow wilful murtherers, also, to take sanctuary; who should, as Joab was, be taken from the altar to the slaughter. Their ha∣tred to Protestants is so deadly, that they hold us unworthy to live on Gods ground; fit for nothing but fire and fagot; yea they send us to hell without bail or main-prize, as worse then Turks or Jews. They tell the people, that Geneva is a professed Sanctuary of all roguery; that in England, the people are grown barbarous, and eat young children, that they are as black as De∣vils, &c. Vers. 23. Or with any stone] As at the funeral solemnities of Q. Anne, a scholar was slain by the fall of a letter of stone, thrust down from the battlements of the Earl of Northamptons house, by one that was a spectatour. Vers. 25. Ʋnto the death of the high Priest] Because he was, amongst men, the chief god on earth, and so the offence did most directly strike against him. Or rather, because the high Priest was a type of Christ: and so this release was a shadow of our freedom and redemption by the death of Christ.
CHAP. XXXVI. Vers. 1. ANd spake before Moses] Who was their common Oracle to enquire of, in all doubtful cases. Like as at Rome, C. Scipio Nasica, (whom the Senate, by way of honor, called Optimus,) had a house in the high-street assigned him, at the publike charge, quò faciliùs consuli posset? that any man might go to him for counsel. And surely, as the Romane Gene∣ral never miscarried, so long as he followed the advice of Polybi∣us, his historian; so neither did, or could, this people do amiss, if ruled by Moses, who was the mouth of God, vers. 5. Vers. 6. To whom they think best] See Gen. 24.57, 58. with the Note there. Vers. 7. Shall keep himself to the inheritance] This was an excellent law to cut off quarrels, strifes, and law-suites, and to frustrates those qui latrocinia intra moenia exercent, as Columella said of the Lawyers of his time. Vers. 11. For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, &c.] The names of these virgins, (as one Interpreter elsewhere observeth) seem to be not without mystery. M. Ainsworth. For, Zelophehad, by interpretation, signifieth, the shadow of fear, or of dread: his first daughter, Machlah, Infirmity; the second, Noah, Wandering; the third, Hoglah, Turning about for joy, or Dancing; the fourth Milcah, a Queen; the fifth, Tirzah, Well pleasing, or Acceptable. By these names, we may observe the degrees of our reviving by grace in Christ; for we all are born, as of the shadow of fear, being brought forth in sin; and for fear of death, were all our life-time subject to bondage, Heb, 2.15. This begetteth infirmity, or sick∣ness, grief of heart for our estate. After which, Wandering abroad for help and comfort, we finde it in Christ, by whom our sorrow is turned into joy. He communicates to us of his royal∣ty, making us Kings and Priests unto God his Father; and we shall be presented unto him glorious, and without blemish, Ephes. 5.27. So the Church is beautiful as Tirzh, Cant. 6.3. Deo soli Gloria.
A COMMENTARY or EXPOSITION UPON The Fifth Book of MOSES, CALLED DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. I. Vers. 1. These be the words which Moses spake. ANd surely he spake thick, if he spake (as some cast it up) this whole Book in less then ten dayes space. Certain it is, that he spake here (as ever) most divinely, and like himself, or rather beyond himself; the end of a thing being better (if better may be) then the beginning thereof, Eccles. 7.8. as good wine is best at last; and as the Sun shines most amiably when it is going down. This book of the law it was, that the King was to write out with his own hand, Deut. 17.18, 19. that it might serve as his Manual,
and attend him in his running library. This was that happy book that good Josiah lighting upon, (after it had long layn hid in the Temple) melted at the menaces thereof, and obtained of God, to dye in peace, though he were slain in battle. This onely book was that silver brook, that pretiously-purling current, out of which the Lord Christ, our Champion, chose all those three smooth stones, wherewith he prostrated the Goliah of hell, in that sharp encounter, Mat. 47, 10. And surely, if Tully could call Aristotles Politicks, (for the elegancy of the stile, and for the excellency of the matter) aureum flumen orationis: And if the same Author durst say. that the law of the twelve tables did ex∣ceed all the libraries of Philosophers, both in weight and worth: how much rather is all this true of this second edition of Gods law, with an addition? Vers. 2. There are eleven dyes journey] So many dayes march for a foot army. Triduo confici potuit. But Philo the Jew saith, a horseman might dispatch it in three dayes. Vers. 3. In the eleventh moneth] And in the twelfth moneth of this same year, he dyed; so that this was his swan-like song: Sic ubi fata vocant, &c. Vers. 4. After he had slain Sihon] If Sampson had not turn∣ed aside to see the Lion, that not long before he had slain, he had not found the honey in the carkase, Iudg. 14.8. So if we recog∣nize not our dangers, deliverances, and atchievements, we shall neither taste how sweet the Lord is, nor return him his due prai∣ses. To true thankfulness is required; 1 Recognition. 2. Esti∣mation. 3. Retribution. See them all, Psal. 116.3, 7, 12. Vers. 5. Began Moses to declare] And he was not long about it. See the Note on vers. 1. A ready heart makes riddance of Gods works; for being oyled with the Spirit, it becomes lithe and nimble, quick of dispatch. Vers. 6. Long enough] The law is not for men to continue under, but for a time, till they be fitted for Christ, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18. Humbled they must be, and hammered for a season; sense of misery, goes before sense of mercy. Vers. 8. Go in and possesse it] God was ready, but they were not ripe for such a mercy. So 2 Chron. 20.33. the high places were not taken away; for the people had not yet prepared their hearts for such a reformation: the work was insnarled and retarded
by their unfitness. See Isai. 59.2. Vers. 9. I am not able] Politici & Ecclesiastici labores maxi∣mi sunt, saith Luther. None have so hard a tug of it, as Magi∣strates and Ministers. , said Augustus to his Livia. Had we not businesses, and cares, and feares, Dio Cass. above any private person, we should be equall to the gods. Vers. 11. The Lord God of your fathers] Such holy ejacula∣tion, such sallies of soul, and egression of affection to God and his people, are frequently found in heavenly-minded men. Vers. 12. Bear your cumbrance] A Princes temples, are not so compassed with a crown, as his mind besieged with cares: nor is he so lifted up with the Splendour of his train, as cast down, with the multitude of his feares. See the Note on vers. 9. Saint Paul also had the cumber of the churches, . 2 Cor. 11.28. All care numbred and mustered together, and that with anxie∣ty; with the same sollicitude, that a man hath about his own most important business. Vers. 15. And officers among your tribes] That might put the laws in execution; which is the same to the law, that the clapper is to the bell. There were in good Iosiah's dayes, horrible abo∣minations. And why? by the slackness of under-officers, Zeph. 3.3. Vers. 16. Hear the causes, &c] Hear them out. Vlpian. in orat. Demost. dc fal. legat. In the Fo∣rum of Rome, the accuser had six hours allotted him to accuse; the accused had nine hours to make his answer. [And judg righteously] So upright was the sentence of the Areopagites in Athens, that none could ever say, he was unjustly condemned: . nay both parties, as well those that are cast, as they that cast, are alike contented. Vers. 17. Ye shall not respect persons] God will surely reprove you, saith Iob, if you secretly accept persons, Chap. 13.10. Ae∣quum me utrique parti tam in disceptandis controversiis, quam in tuenda disciplina praebebo, said Justinian; I will hear causes without prejudicate impiety, judiciously examine them without sinister obliquity; and sincerely judg them, without unjust parti∣ality. It was the oath of the heathen Judges, as the Oratour relates, Audiam accusatorem & reum sine affectibus & persona∣rum respectione: I will hear the plaintiffe and defendant, with an equall minde, without affection, and respect of persons. And
agreeable hereunto, is the oath taken by our Circuit-Judg, as it is recorded in the statute of the 18 of Edward the third. You shall not be afraid] For, facilè a justitia deviat, qui in cau∣sis non deum sed homines pertimescit, saith Chrysostome: A faint∣hearted judg, doth easily pervert justice. A man of courage he must be, a Cuer-de-lion, another Cato, à quo nemo unquam rem injustam petere audebat, of whom no man ever durst desire any thing unjust. This, Solomon symbolized by the steps of his throne, adorned with lyons; the Athenian Judges, by sitting in Mars-street. [For the judgment is Gods] whose person ye bear, and in whose seat ye sit; and should therefore sit in as great, though not so slavish a fear of offending, as Olanes in the history, sat upon the flaid skin of his father Silannes, nailed by Cambises on the tribunall: or as a Russian Judg, that feares the boyling caldron; or the Turkish Senate, when they think the great Turk to stand behind the arras, at the dangerous doore. Cave, spectat Cato; take heed, Cato seeth you, was an ancient watch∣word among the Romans, and a great retentive from evil: how much more, amongst us, should, Cave, spectat Dominus; Take heed; the Lord looks on. Vers. 19. That great and terrible wilderness] Abounding with want of all necessaries, Jer. 2.6 and surrounded with ma∣ny, mighty, and malicious enemies. Such is this present evill world, to those that are bound for the Heavenly Canaan. Many miseries and molestations, Heyl. Geog. pag. 802. both satanicall and secular, they are sure to meet with; this world being a place of that nature, that (as it is reported of the straits of Magellan,) which way soe∣ver a man bend his course (if homeward,) he is sure to have the wind against him. Vers. 21. Behold the Lord] See the Note on vers. 8. Vers. 22. We will send men before us] Thus empty man will be wiser then God, (Iob 11.12.) though Man be born like a wild asse-colt. It was unbelief, that prompted them to this practice: for they could not enter, because of unbelief. Carnall policy serves the worldling (as the Ostrich wings,) to make him outrun others upon earth; but helps him never a whit towards Heaven. Vers. 23. Pleased we well] Seeing you were set upon it, and it would be no better. Vers. 25. And brought us word again] Ioshua and Caleb did: for the rest are not here reckoned of; God counts of men, by
the goodness that is in them. Vers. 27. Because the Lord hated us] A gross mistake: Why should it then so greatly grieve us, that our good intentions, are so much misconstrued▪ That is here complain'd of, as an argu∣ment of Gods hatred, that he intended for an instance of his love. Deut. 4.37. & 7.8. In quo dilexistinos, Mal. 1.2. wherein hast thou loved us? said those Male-contents in Malachy, that cast the helve after the hatchet, (as the proverb is:) and like children, because they might not have what they would, grew sullen, and would have nothing. Vers. 31. As a man doth bear his son] Charily and tenderly, as his own bowels: not hating them, as they desperately belyed the Lord, vers. 27. For if a man finde his enemy, will he let him go well away? 1 Sam. 24.19. Will he accommodate him, as God did these murmurers? Never was any Prince served in such state, as they were. Vers. 32. Ye did not believe] Sic surdo plerunque fabulam: there was none within to make answer. Who hath believed our report, &c? We cannot get men to credit us. Vers. 37. The Lord was angry with me] The Saints afflicti∣ons, proceed oft from love displeased, from love offended. Fury is not in God, Isai. 27. Vers. 41. We have sinned, we will go up] Temporaries are set upon sin, in the very confession therof. Unless to the confession of sin, we add confusion of sin, we do nothing, Prov. 28.13. Yet, honour me before the people, said Saul: Give me a bribe, said trembling Felix. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. THen we turned] viz. When we had bought our wit, and had paid for our learning, by our late discomfiture. Vers 3. Turn you North-ward] Thus God word was their directour unto all places, and in all actions: In which respect, these historics of holy Scripture excell all humane histories in the world; as is well observed. That which they tell us of their Dea vibilia, guiding passengers, &c. is a meer fiction. Vers. 4. Which dwell in Seir] To distinguish them from the
Amalekites, Esaus seed too, but devoted to destruction. And they shall be afraid of you] Though worse afraid then hurt. Hic rogo, non furor est, ne moriare, mori? We read of some Iewes, that at the sack of Ierusalem killed themselves, lest they should be taken by the enemy. Vers. 5. Because I have given mount Seir] Thus the Most High, divided to the nations their inheritance, Deut. 32.8. And a man must needs have some right to his inheritance, to his porti∣on, Psal. 17.14. What Ananias had, Act. 5. was his own, whilest he had it, as Peter tells him; yet Satan had filled his heart. It is therefore a rigour, to say, the wicked are usurpers of what they have, and shall be called to account for it. When the King gives a traitour his life, he gives him meat and drink, that may maintain his life. That Duke D' Alva, is worthily taxed for a tyrant, that starved his prisoners, even after quarter; say∣ing, though he promised to give them their lives, he did not promise to finde them meat. Grimston hist. of Nether∣lands. Wicked men have both a civile title to that they have, and a title before God; who will call them to account indeed at last day, not for possessing what they had, but for abusing that possession. Vers. 6. Buy meat of them for money] Money answereth all things, saith Solomon, Eccles. 10.19. Money is the monarch of the world, saith another, and heares most mastery. But that covetous Chaliph of Babylon, taken by Haalon brother to Man∣go the great Cham of Tartary, Turk. hist. fol. 113. and commanded to eat his fill, of that great wealth that he had heaped up together, found ere he dyed, that one mouthfull of meat was more worth then a whole housefull of money. Vers. 7. For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee] viz. With money, to fetch thee in other commodities: It is the blessing of God (when all's done,) that maketh rich: without this, men do but labour in the fire, labour all night and take nothing, trouble themselves to no purpose: all their endeavours, are but Arena sine calce, sand without lime, they will not hold together; but, like untempered morter, fall asunder: there being a curse upon unlawfull practices, though men be never so industrious; as you may see in Iehoachi, Ier. 22. Vers. 9. Because I have given Ar] The royall city, set upon an hill. Num. 21.15, 28. God (as liberall Lord,) gives not some small cottage or annuity, for life, to his elder servants,
great men use to do,) but bountifully provides for them and theirs, to many generations. Who would not serve thee then, O King of nations? Vers. 10. Many and tall are the Anakims] And if God cast out those Emims, or terrible-ones, before the Moabites, will he not much more cast out these Anakims before the Israelites? Nihil unquam ei negasse credendum est, Hieronym: quem ad vituli hortatur esum. Vers. 12. As Israel did unto the land] This and some other parcels, scattered here and there, seem to have been added to Moses his words, (whether by Ioshua, or Ezra, or some other Prophet, it much matters not,) after the conquest of the land of Canaan. Vers. 19. Because I have given it] See the Note on vers, 5. Vers. 20. Zamzummims] 1. Big and boisterous, bearing down all before them; presumptuous wicked ones they were, and yet they called themselves Rephaims, that is, Phisitians, or preservers; such indeed rulers ought to be, Isai. 3.7. The Greeks therefore call a King,  ab  medela, Cornel. a La∣pid. in Isai. 3.7. because he is to be ligator vulnerum, chirurgus, & Reip. medicus, the common∣wealths Surgeon and Physitian. But such were not these Zam∣zummims, more then in name: , &c. As he said of his bow; thy name is life, but thy use is present death. Vers. 23. And the Avims which dwelt in Hazeroth] These are ancient things, as it is said in another case, 1 Chron. 4.22. such, as whereof there is no record but this, extant in the world. Well might that Egyptian Priest say to Solon that wise man of Greece: You Greeks are very babyes; , Diod. Sic. nei∣ther is there an ancient writer amongst you. Vers. 26. With words of peace] So the Romans by their he∣ralds, sent to those that opposed or wronged them, caduceu & hastam, a proffer of peace first: For if we Princes (said our Henry the seventh,) should take every occasion that's offered, the world should never be quiet, but wearied with continuall wars. Cuncta prius tentanda, &c.—truncatur et artus, ut liceat reli∣quis securum vivere membris. Vers. 30. Had hardened his Spirit] Deus quem destruit, de∣mentat, God makes fooles of those, whom he intends to de∣stroy. Vers. 37. Onely unto the land] This kindness these Ammonites
in after-ages very evill requited, Am. 1.13. Ier. 49.1. dealing by them, as that monster Michael Balbus, dealt by the Empe∣rour Leo Armenius, whom he slew the same night that this Prince had pardoned and released him. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. THen we turned How pleasant must the continu∣ation of this holy history needs be to every good heart, out of the mouth of Mosus? Methinks I see the peoples ears linked to his tongue, with golden chains; as the Heathens fable of their Hercules. And surely, if King Alphousus, and some others, of whom the Physitians despaired, did recover health beyond all expectation, Joh. Bodin. de utilitat. histor. . only by reading Livy, Curtius, Aven∣tinus, &c. What may we think may be done by these Wholsome words, these healing histories, if rightly regarded? Vers. 2. Fear him not▪ Though of a formidable stature, vers. 11. The Lion is not so fierce as he is painted, saith the Spanish proverb. God will crack the hairy scalp of his enemies, Psal. 68. Vers. 6. The men, women, and children,] The Hebrew word, ; here rendred Men, written with tsere, signifieth, Dead men: Psal. 39.5. Surely, every man in his best estate, or when best un∣derlaid, is altogether vanity, Selah. Vers. 11. Remained] Sc. in Bashan; The Jews fa∣ble, that he escaped in the flood, by riding astride on the Ark. and he seems to have been of the remnant of those Rephaims, whom Chedorlaomer and his company smote in Ashteroth, Gen. 14.5. with Iosh. 13.12. Is it not in Rabbah] Kept for a monument of so mighty and massie a man. Vers. 13. Land of Giants] Such as are said to be in another land, in another life. For he knoweth not that the Giants are there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell, Prov. 29.18. Vers. 16. Ʋnto the river Jabbok.] Famous for Jacob's wrest∣ling with God, neer unto it, Gen. 32.22. Vers. 21. So shall the Lord] God hath, and therefore God will, is a strong Medium of hope, if not a demonstration of Scripture-Logick.
Vers. 26. Speak no more] Christians must be sober in prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. THe statutes and the judgments] By statutes, we may understand the moral law; by Judgments, the judicial; which was fitted to the Iews: Like as Solon being ask∣ed whether he had given the best laws to the Athenians? an∣swered, The best that they could suffer. As for the ceremonial law, it is called, Statutes that were not good, Mr. Weemse. because they com∣manded neither vertue nor vice, in themselves; as One gives the reason. Vers. 2. Ye shall not add] The Iews have added their Deu∣teroseis, the Turks their Alfurta; the Papists, , Our wise men teach tradi∣tions. Sec 1 Cor. 1.20. their unwritten verities, which they equalize (at least) to the holy Scriptures; and so argue them of insufficiency and imperfection. Vers. 3. Destroyed them] Hanging them up in gibbets, as it were, before your eyes, to warn you. Vers. 4. Are alive] Your innocency prevailed for your safe∣ty; as it usually doth in a common defection. Vers. 6. For this is your wisdome] Omnis sapientia hominis in hoc uno est, (saith Lactantius) ut Deum cognoscat & colat: Lactan. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 30. hoc nostrum dogma haec sententia est: To know and do the Will of God, this is the whole of mans wisdom. The heart of the wise man is at his right hand, Eccles. 10.2. as teaching it to put things in practice, and to prove by experience, what that good, and holy, and acceptable will of God is, Rom. 12.2. A wise and understanding people] The Spaniards are said to seem wise, and are fools; the French to seem fools, and are wise: the Portugals neither to be wise, nor so much as to seem so; the Italians both to seem wise, and to be so. But may not that of the Prophet be fitly applyed to them all, Behold, they have re∣jected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9. Vers. 7. Who hath God so nigh unto them] Yea, this was it that made them so great a nation, who otherwise were but Methemispar, few in number. This made Moses so passionate∣ly cry one, Happy are thou, O Israel! who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the Lord! &c. Deut. 33.29. Vers. 8. So righteous] See the Note on Chap. 1. vers. 1. Vers. 9, Onely take heed] Cavebis autem, si pavebis. Lest thou forget] Eaten bread is soon forgotten. Teach them thy sons] A special help against forgetfulness; yea this is the best art of memory. Of all things, God cannot abide to be forgotten. Vers. 10. Specially the day] An high favour, and most ho∣nourably mentioned, Neh. 9.13. Vers. 12. Ye saw no similitude] Numa, the Romane Law-gi∣ver, would not permit any image, whether painted, or carved, to be placed in their Temples, eò quòd nefas duceret praestantiora deterioribus adsimulare, because he held it unlawful to set forth a better thing by a worse. &c. Hence it was, that the Romane Temples had no pictures in them, for 170 years after the building of that city. Irenaeus reproves the hereticks, called Gnostici, for that they carried about the Image of Christ, made in Pilates time, after his own proportion; for, to whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Esai. 40.18. Vers. 14. Statutes and Judgments] See vers. 1. Vers. 15. Take ye therefore good heed] These many cautions note our proneness to this evil, above others; this appeareth somewhat in children so delighted with pictures, and in that ido∣lomania of these Iews; of the Eastern Churches, and of the Sy∣nagogue of Rome. Vers. 16. The likeness of male or female] As the blinde Ethnicks did; Servius. concluding their petitions with that general, Dii, Deaeque omnes. Vers. 17. The likeness of any beast] Which was a piece of the Egyptian madness. Israel, by being there, had learned to set up one calf; Jeroboam, two. Vers. 18. The likenesse of any fish] As was Dagon the God of the Philistims, whence he had his name. Vers. 19. All the host of heaven] Called the Queen of hea∣ven, Ier. 7.  [should be driven] Or, drawn by the entice∣ment of the Devil, who is , (saith Synesius) a great Image-monger; or by the seduction of others, or of thine own evil heart; for Nemo sibi de suo palpet: quisque sibi Satan est, saith a Father.  [which the Lord thy God hath divided] And shall we fight against God (as Jehn did against Jehoram)
with his own servants, nay with those things which he hath given us for common servants to us all? Vers. 20. But the Lord] Deliverance commands obedience: Servati sumus ut serviamus. Vers. 21. And sware that I should not] So that you have a pri∣viledg above me; only beware how you provoke him (as I did) thorow unbelief. Vers. 22. But I must dye] This was a sore affliction to this good man, and is therefore so often mentioned. Plut. Cato Major also dyed three years before the destruction of Carthage, which he had so vehemently urged, and would so gladly have out∣lived. Vers. 24. For the Lord thy God] And should therefore be served truly, that there be no halting; and totally, that there be no halving, Heb. 12.28, 29. Vers. 25. And shalt have remained long] So that thou think∣est there is no removing thee, thou art so rooted and rivetted. Nicephorus Phocas having built a mighty wall, heard from hea∣ven, Though thou build as high as heaven, , Sin is within, all will be lost. Vers. 28. And there ye shall serve gods] As ye have made a match with mischief, so ye shall have enough of it. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, &c. See Act. 7.42. Vers. 29. But if from thence] Sweet and soure, make the best sauce. Promises and menaces mixt, soonest operate upon the heart. The Sun of righteousness loves not to set in a cloud; nor the God of consolation, to leave his children comfort∣lesse. Vers. 30. Even in the latter dayes] This is, by some, under∣stood of the Messias his dayes, which are the latter times of the world; as Hos. 3.5. 1 Cor. 10.11. and they believe, that here is pointed at, the great and last conversion of the Jews. Vers. 32. For ask now of the dayes] Historiae sunt fidae moni∣trices; great good use is to be made of history; this holy history especially, whereof every word is pure, pretious, and profit∣able. Vers. 37. Therefore he chose] He chose for his love, and then loved for his choyce: After Gods example, deligas quem di∣ligas.
Vers. 39. Empedocles. That the Lord he is God in heaven] A Philosopher could say, that God is a Circle, whose Center is every where, whose circumference is no where; ubi est Deus? quid dixi mi∣ser? sed ubi non est? Where is God? or rather, where is not God? He is higher then heaven, lower then hell, broader then the sea, longer then the earth. Nusquam est & ubique est, quia nec abest ulli, Bernard. nec ullo capitur loco. He is no where, and yet eve∣ry where; far from no place, and yet no contained in any place. Vers. 40. That thou mayst prolong thy dayes] Hence some Lutherans have gathered, that God hath not determined the set period of mans dayes; Heming. & alii. but that it is in mens power to lengthen, or shorten them. But this is against Job, 7.1. & 14.14. Eccles. 2.3. Isa. 38.5, 15. Stat sua cuique dies. Our haires are num∣bred, much more our dayes. Vers. 42. That the slayer] See the Note on Numb. 35.9, 10, &c. Vers. 44. And this is the law] That is, this that followeth in the next chapter, whereunto these verses serve for a pre∣face. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. ANd keep, and do them] The difference between Divinity and other Sciences, is, that it is not e∣nough to learn, but we must keep and do it; as lessons of Mu∣sick must be practised; and a copy not read only, but acted. Man goeth forth to his work, and to his labour, untill the evening, Psal. 104.23. He must arise from the bed of sin, and go forth out of himself, as out of his house, to his work, and to his labour; working out his salvation with fear and trembling, until the even∣ing, till the Sun of his life be set. Vers. 2. God made a Covenant with us] We also have the Co∣venant, the seals, Ministers, &c. But (alass) are not these bles∣sings, amongst us, as the Ark was among the Philistims, rather as prisoners, then as priviledges, rather in testimonium & rui∣nam, quàm salutem? Vers. 3. With our fathers] i. e. With our fathers only. Or;
if it be understood of all the foregoing Patriarches, then it is to be expounded by Gal. 3.17. Vers. 4. Face to face] i. e. Openly, and immediately, by himself, and not by a messenger, or mediatour. Prosper's con∣ceit was, that the Israelites were called Judaei, because they re∣ceived jus Dei. Vers. 5. I stood between the Lord] Sc. after the decalogue delivered by God himself out of the fire. For of that, he might say, as once Joseph did to his brethren; Behold, your eyes see that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you, Gen. 45.12. And as Paul did to Philemon, vers. 19. I Paul, &c. so, I the Lord have writ∣ten it with mine hand, I will require it. Vers. 6. I am the Lord, &c.] See the Notes on Exod. 20. It is well observed by a Reverend Writer, Mr. Ley his Pattern of Pie∣ty. that the two tables of the Law are in their object, answerable to the two natures of Christ. For God is the object of the one; man of the other: And as they meet together in the person of Christ, so must they be united in the affections of a Christian. Vers. 12. Keep the Sabbath-day] In this repetition of the law, some things are transposed, and some words changed: Happly, to confute that superstitious opinion of the Iewes, who were ready to dreame of miraculous mysteries in every let∣ter. Vers. 15. And remember that thou] It being a figure of our redemption by Christ; and so a fit subject for Sabbath-medi∣tations. Vers. 18. Neither shalt thou commit] Or, And thou shalt not commit, &c. and so in the following laws; to teach us, that the law is but one copulative, as the Schooles speak. Lex tota est un copulatioa. For the sanction indeed, it is disjunctive; but for the injunction, it is co∣pulative. The sanction is, either do this, or dye: but the injunction is not, either do this or that, but do this and that too. See Mat. 23.2.3. Ezek. 18.10, 11, 13. Iam. 2.10. Do every thing, as well as any thing: to leave one sin and not another, is (with Benhadad) to recover of one disease, and to dye of another. Vers. 22. These words the Lord spake] If humane laws are , the invention of the gods, as Demosthenes calls them, how much rather this perfect law of God, that needs no alteration or addition? Vers. 23. Even all the heads of your tribes] These are called
all Israel, vers. 1. as being their representatives. Vers. 25. Why should we dye?] But why should they fear to dye, sith they had seen that day, that God doth talk with man, and he liveth? It is answered, that they looked upon their pre∣sent safety, as a wonder; but feared what would follow, upon such an interview, if continued. And indeed it is still the work of the law, to scare men and to drive them to seek for a Me∣diatour. Vers. 27. We will hear it and do it] This is well said, if as well done. Many can think of nothing, but working themselves to life; spinning a thread of their own, to climb up to heaven by. But that will never be. CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. NOw these are the Commandements] Moses ha∣ving repeated the Decalogue, begins here to explain it: and first, the first of the ten, in this present Chapter: that first Commandement being such, Primo praecpto reliquerum om∣nium ob ervan∣tia praecipitur. Luth. as that therein the kee∣ping of all the other nine is enjoyned, as Luther rightly obser∣veth. Vers. 2. That thou mightest fear the Lord] Fear God, and keep his Commandements, Eccles. 12.13. fear the Lord and de∣part from evill, Prov. 16.6. this is the beginning, Prov. 1.7. and end of all, Eccles. 12.13. This is the whole of man, or as some read it, Hoc est enim to∣tus Homo.  This is the whole man. ib. It is a problem in Aristotle; why men are credited, more then any other creatures? The an∣swer is, man alone reverenceth God. Deum siquis parum metu∣it, valdè contemnit: hujus qui non memor at beneficentiam, au∣get injuriam: Fulgentius. Not to fear God, is to slight him; as not to praise him, is to wrong him, saith an Ancient. Vers. 3. That it may be well with thee] Respect may be had to the recompence of reward: We may make it our scope, our ayme, 2 Cor. 4.18. though not our highest ayme; Moses cast an eye, when he was on his journey, Heb. 11.26. he stole a look from glory; and got fresh incouragement. Vers. 4. The Lord our God is one Lord] One in Three, and Three in One. Here are three words, answering the three per∣sons: And the middle word, Our God, deciphering fitly the se∣cond,
who assumed our nature, as Galatinus well observeth. Others take notice, that the last letter of this first word Hear, is extraordinarily great in the Hebrew; as calling for utmost heed and attention: And so is the last letter in the word ren∣dred, One. See the Note on Exod. 34.14. This last letter Da∣leth, which usually stands for four, signifieth (say the Hebrews,) that this one God, shall be worshipped in the four corners of the earth. Vers. 5. And thou shalt love] See the Note on Mat. 22.37. This shewes the impossibility of keeping the law perfectly: Ità ut frustrà sint sophistae, &c. The true Christian counts all that he can do for God, but a little of that much he owes him, and that he could gladly beteem him. But what a wretched Monk was that, that dyed with these words in his mouth; Red∣de mihi aeternam vitam quam debes; Lord, pay me heaven, for thou owest it? Vers. 6. Shall be in thy hears] A bible, men should get stam∣ped in their heads, and another in their hearts, as David had, Psal. 119.11. Knowledg, that swims in the head only, and sinks not down into the heart, does no more good, then rain in the middle region doth; or then the Unicorns horn, in the Uni∣cornes head. Vers. 7. And thou shalt teach them diligently] Heb. Thou shalt whet or sharpen them, as one would sharpen a stake, Shaan acuer & Sanah repe∣tere, affine sunt. when he drives it into the ground: Or, as one would set an edge up∣on a knife, by oft going over the whetstone. A learned Hebri∣cian observes a neer affinity between the word here used, and another word that signifies to repeat, and inculcate the same thing. Innuit studium et diligentiam, qua pueris praecepta dei in∣culcari debent, saith Vatablus. Children should be taught the principles, that they understand not: First, that they might have occasion much to think of the things that are so much and commonly urged. Secondly, that if any extremity should come, they might have certain seeds of comfort and direction, to guide and support them. 3. That their condemnation might be more just, if having these so much in their mouthes, they should not get something of them into their hearts. Vers. 8. And thou shalt binde them] See the Note on Mat. 23.5. Vers. 9. And on thy gates] In a foolish imitation whereof,
the English Iesuites beyond sea have written on their Church and Colledge-doores, in great golden letters, Jesu, Jesu converte Angliam, Fiat, Fiat. Habent et vespae favos. Vers. 11. When thou shalt have eaten and be full] Saturity oft breeds security, fulness forgetfulness. The best, when full fed, are apt to wax wanton, and will be dipping their fingers sometimes in the devills sauce: Platina. ipsis opibus lascivire caepit Ec∣clesia. The Moon never suffers eclipse, but at the full, and that by the earths interposition. The young mulets, when they have suckt, turn up their heeles, and kick at the damme. Vers. 12. Lest thou forget the Lord] Should we with the sed hawk, forget our master? Or, being full with Gods bene∣fits, like the Moon, be then most removed from the Sun, from whom she hath all her light? See Prov. 30.8, 9. Vers. 13. And shalt sweare by his name] An oath rightly ta∣ken, is a peece of our holy service to God; and may well be reckoned amongst our prayers and other pious performances. Vers. 14. Thou shalt not go] See the Note on Exod. 34.14. Vers. 15. A jealous God amongst you] Let the gods of the heathens be good-fellowes; our God will endure no corrivals. He is both a jealous God, and is ever amongst us; so that our faults, our furta's, cannot be hid from his eyes. Now he that dares sin, though he know God looks on, is more impudent in sin∣ning, then was Absolom, when he spred a tent upon the top of the house, and went in to his fathers concubines, in the sight of all Israel, and of the Sun, Vers. 15. Ye shall not tempt the Lord▪ By prescribing to God, and limiting the holy one of Israel; as these men did at Mas∣sah, Psal. 78.41. See the Notes on Mat. 4.7. and on Act. 5.9. and on Exod. 17.2. Vers. 17. You shall diligently keep] So Psal. 119.4. How∣beit, the most that David could do towards it, was to wish well to it, vers. 5. Vers. 20. What mean the testimonies] Here we have a briefe Catechisme; which is a course and practice of singular profit. Luther scorned not to profess himself Discipulum Catechismi: and the Iesuites, by the example of our Churches, do Catechise their novices.
CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. ANd hath cast out many nations] God did all, Psal. 78.55. He cast out the heathen before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, &c. Hence Josephus calls the Common-wealth of Israel, . Sic, Polydor. Vir∣gil. Regnum Angliae, Regnum Dei. Vers. 2. Nor shew mercy unto them] Their iniquity was now full, Gen. 15.16. they filled the land with filthiness, from corner to corner, Ezra 9.11. they were ripe for the sickle, ready for the vintage of Gods wrath; which now came upon them to the utmost. Vers. 3. Neither shalt thou make marriages with them] As neither with any other that were idolaters, Ezra 9.1, 2. Vers. 4. For they will turn away thy son] As the outlandish women did Solomon, 1 King. 11.2, 4. What's the reason the Pope will not dispence in Spain or Italy, if a Papist marry a Pro∣testant, yet here they will, but in hope to draw more to them? The Tyrant Mezentius tyed the living bodies of his captives to the dead; but the dead did not revive by the living; Corpora corpori∣bus jungebat mortua vivis. Virgil. the living rather putrified, by the dead. Vers. 5. And break down their images] Cromwel did notable service here in Henry 8. time, by discovering the knavery of Po∣pish Priests, and pulling down those mawmets and monu∣ments of idolatry, the Rood of grace, the blood of Hales, &c. And in Edw. 6. his dayes; the same day the Popish pictures were publikely burnt at Paul's Cross, Act. & Mon. the great victory was got∣ten by the English at Muscle-borough field in Scotland. Vers. 6. For thou art an holy people] Viz. with a federal ho∣liness; which yet, without an inherent holiness in the heart and life, will profit a man no more then it did Dives in the flames, that Abraham called him Son; or Judas, that Christ called him Friend. An empty title yeelds but an empty comfort at last. Vers. 8. But because he loved you] Loe, he loved you, because he loved you. This may seem, idem per idem, a womans reason. But it excellently shews the ground of Gods love, to be wholly in himself.
Vers. 9. The faithful God] The God of Amen, Psal. 31.6. Amen, the faithful and true Witnesse, Rev. 3.14. that will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips, Psal. 89.33. all his precepts, predictions, promises, menaces, being the issue of a most faithful and righteous Will, void of the least insincerity or falshood. Thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day saith Solomon, in his prayer, 1 King. 8.24. Neither could ever any day or age produce one instance to the contrary. The pro∣mises are ancient, Tit. 1.1, 2. and yet they never failed: nor the menaces, Zeph. 3.5. Vers. 10. He will not be slack] slow he may be, but sure he will be, Val. Man. supplicii tarditatem gravitate compensat, The higher he holds his hand, the heavier he will strike. Aries quo altius erigitur, hoc figit fortius. Arcus quò retrahitur longius, hoc ja∣culatur ulterius. Aqua quae aegre calefit, agrè denuò frigescit, &c. Vers. 13. And he will love thee] So he did before, vers. 8. but so he will continue to doe. See a like expression, 1. Joh. 5.13. These things write I unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. Vers. 14. Thou shalt be blessed] There is a , in Godliness, 1 Tim. 6.6. See the Note there. Vers. Martial. 15. And the Lord] Health is a sweet mercy; Non est vivere, sed valere, vita, A sickly life, is a lifeless life. A healthy body is the reward of piety, Prov. 3.8. Vers. 20. Send the hornet] See the Note on Exod. 23.28. Vers. 21. For the Lord thy God is amongst you] And how many do you reckon him for? as Antigonus said once to his soul∣diers, when they feared their enemies, as more in number. Vers. Aurum Tolo∣sanum. 25. Left thou be snared] Lest it prove as the gold of Tholouse, baneful to all that fingered it; or the sepulchre of Se∣miramis, which they that rifled, expecting to finde treasure, met with a deadly poison.
CHAP. VIII. Vers. 1. ALL the Commandements] All, is but a little word, but of large extent. There are magnalia legis, & minutula legis; Look to both, the greater and the lesser things of the law, Matth. 23.23. Vers 2. To know what was] i.e. To discover and make known to thy self and others. When fire is put to green wood, Tentatut sciat, i. c. ut scire nos faciat. Aug. there comes out abundance of watery stuffe, that afore appeared not. When the pond is empty, the mud, filth, and toades, come to light. The snow-drift covers many a muckhill; so doth pro∣sperity, many a rotten heart. It is easie to wade in a warm bath; and every bird can sing in a Sun-shine-day, &c. Hard weather tryes what health; afflictions try what sap we have, what solidity. Withered leaves soon fall off in windy wea∣ther. Rotten boughes quickly break with heavy weights, &c. Vers. 3. And he humbled thee] Humbled they were, (many of them) but not humble: low, but not lowly. Perdiderunt fructum afflictionum, &c. Aug. [That he might make thee know] We never know so well, how good, sweet, and seasonable the Lord is, as when under the cross. Vexatio dat intellectum. That man doth not live] See the Note on Matth. 4.4. Vers. 4. Thy rayment waxed not old] It was not the worse for wearing, but grew as their bodies did; as some are of opini∣on. They needed not to trouble themselves with those anxious thoughts of Heathens, what they should eat, drink, or put on. Never was Prince served and supplyed in such state, as these Is∣raelites were. Vers. 5. That as a man chasteneth his son] This is reckoned here, as an high favour. So Job accounts it, Chap. 7.17, 18. and Paul describes it, Heb. 12.7, 8. and Jeremy prayes for it, Jer. 10.24. Vers. 6. Therefore thou shalt keep] As good children are the better for beating; and do gather under the wing of a frowning father. Vers. 7. That spring out of vallies] Quantum miraculi sit in admiranda illa fontium perennitate, nemo, credo, Philosophorum
satis explicare hactenus potuit. The perennity of springs is a just wonder, and not far from a miracle. Vers. 8. A land of wheat and barley] Sumen totius orbis. Strabo basely slandereth this fat and fertile country, as dry and barren; but Rabshakeh, 1 King. 18.32. and Tacitus tell us o∣therwise. The testimony here given of it, is above all excep∣tion. Vers. 9. Thou shalt not lack any thing in it] Of the Island Cyprus, it is said, that it sendeth forth great abundance of com∣modities to other Countries; of whom it craveth ho help again. It was anciently called Macaria, Turk. hist. the Blessed. Marcellinus, to shew the fertilty of it, saith, that Cyprus aboundeth with such plenty of all things, that without the help of any other forreign Countrey, it is, of it self, able to build a tall ship, from the keel, to the top sail, and so put it to Sea, furnished of all things need∣ful. Of Egypt also it is reported, that it is so fruitful a Country, ut cunctos mortales pascere, deos ipsos excipere hospitio salvâ re posse gloriaretur. It was anciently called publicum orbis horreum, the worlds great barn; as some forraign Writers have termed our Country, the Court of Queen Ceres, the granary of the Western world, the Fortunate Island, the Paradise of Pleasure, and garden of God. The worst is, that as Aristotle was wont to tax his Athenians, that whereas they were famous for two things, Laert. l. 5. c. 1. the best land, and the best laws, frumentis uterentur, le∣gibus nequaquàm, they abused their plenty, and lived lawlesly; so it may be said of us, that we live in Gods good land, but not by Gods good laws. Vers. 10. Then thou shalt blesse] — rarae fumant foelicibus arae. Solomon's wealth did him more hurt, then ever his wisdom did him good. But that should not have been. Solomons Altar was four times as big as Moses his, Exod. 27.1. to teach us, that as our peace and prosperity is more then others, so should our service, in a due proportion. Vers. 11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord] By casting his words behind thee, Psal. 50.17 and not considering the ope∣ration of his hands, Isai. 5.12. fulness breeds this forgetfulness; laden bodies, leaden minds. Vers. 12. And hast built goodly houses] Haec sut quae nos in∣vitos faciunt mori; These are the things that make us loth to die, said Charles, 5. Emperour, to the Duke of Venice, who had
shewed him the stateliness of his Palace, and Princely furni∣ture. Vers. 13. When thy silver and thy geld] Which what is it else, but white and red mould, the guts and garbage of the earth? wonder it is, surely, that treading upon it, we should so much esteem it. Well; if siver and gold be our happiness, then it is in the earth, and so (which is strange) nearer hell, (which the Scripture placeth in the deep) then heaven, which all know to be aloft; and so nearer the Devil, then God. Vers. 14. Then thy heart be lifted up] The Devil will easily blow up this blab in the rich mans heart; whose usual diseases are earthly-mindedness, and high-mindedness. Prosperity makes men proud, secure, impatient, Ier. 22.21. In rest, they contract much rust. Vers. 15. Who led thee thorow, &c.] Good turns, aggravate unkindnesses; and our offences are increased by our obligati∣ons. Vers. 16. Who fed thee] God will give his people, Tertull. de patient. pluviam scatilem, & petram aquatilem, Psal. 78.20, 24. he will set the flint abroach, and rain corn from heaven, rather then they shall pine and perish. Vers. 17. My power] As that great dragon of Egypt, lying at ease in the swoln waters of his Nilus, saith, Ezek. 29.2. Habac. 1.16. My river is mine own, I have made it for my self. Vers. 19. ye shall surely perish] Idolatry is a land-desolating sin, Judg. 5.8. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. HEar, O Israel] It was all their business, at pre∣sent, to hear; and yet he excites them so to do, by an Oyez, as it were. He knew their dulness, and the din that corruption maketh in the best hearts; how soon sated men are with divine discourses, and how little heed they give to the most wholsome exhortations. Let a child be never so busie about his lesson, if but a bird flie by, he must needs look where he lights; so, &c. Vers. 2. The children of Anak] Hence seems to come the Greek word, , for a King; for these great men were lookt
upon, as so many little Kings. See the Note on Gen. 6 4. Vers. 3. As a consuming fire] The force whereof is violent, and irresistible: Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? Wo unto us; who shall deliver us, &c? said those crest-faln Phi∣listims, at the sight of the Ark, 1 Sam. 4.8. So, The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulnesse hath surprized the hypocrites; Who among us (say they) shall dwell with this devouring fire? (mean∣ing God) who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Esay 33.14. Vers. 4. For my righteousnesse] We are all apt to weave a web of righteousness of our own, to spin a threed of our own, to climbe up to heaven by; to set a price upon our selves above the market, to think great thoughts of our selves, and to seek great things for our selves. Coelum gratis non accipiam, saith One Merit-monger, I will not have heaven for nothing; and Redde mihi aeternam vitam quam debes, saith Another; Give me heaven, for thou owest it me. How blasphemous is that directi∣on of the Papists to dying men, Conjunge, Domine, obsequium meum, cum omnibus quae Christus passus est pro me; Joyn, Lord, my righteousness with Christs righteousness? How much better was it with those ancient Papists here in England; to whom, upon their death-beds, the ordinary instruction appointed to be given was, that they should look to come to glory, not by their own merits, but alone by the vertue and merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: D. Vshier serm. on Eph. 4.13. that they should place their whole confi∣dence in his death only, and in no other thing, &c. Those Justi∣ciaries, that seek to be saved by their works, Luther fitly calls the devils Martys; they suffer much, and take much pains to go to hell; and by their much boasting, haec ego feci, haec ego feci, they become no better then Faecès, saith he wittily. It is a good observation of a reverend Divine, Mr. Cotton on Cantic. p. 217. that the Church in the Can∣ticles is no where described, by the beauty of her hands or fin∣gers: Christ concealeth the mention of her hands, that is of her works. 1. Because he had rather his Church should abound in good works in silence, then boast of them (especially when they are wanting,) as Rome doth. 2. Because it is he alone, that worketh all our works for us, Isai. 26.12. Hos. 14.8. Vers. 6. Ʋnderstand therefore] We are wondrous apt to wind our selves into the fooles-paradice of a sublime dotage, upon our own worth and righteousness; otherwise, what need▪ so
many words here, to one and the same purpose. The Scripture doth not use to kill flies with beetles, to cleave straws with wed∣ges of iron, to spend many words where's no need. Vers. 7. Ye have been rebellious against the Lord] Nothing is so hard, as to be humbled; for man is a proud cross creature, that would be something at home, whatever he is abroad; and comes not down, without a great deal of difficulty. Hence it is, that Moses so sets it on here, and with one knock after ano∣ther, drives this naile home to the head, that he might cripple their iron sinewes, bring their stiffe necks to the yoke of Gods obedience, and make them know that he was Iehovah, when he had wrought with them for his Name sake; not according to their wicked wayes, nor according to their corrupt doings, Ezek. 20.43, 44, and 36.31, 32. Vers. 8. The Lord was angry] God is said to be angry, when he doth as an angry man useth to do; viz. 1. Chide. 2. Smite: revenge being the next effect of anger. Vers. 9. When I was gone up into the Mount] Sins are much aggravated by the circumstances: and every sin should swell as a toad in our eyes; we should bring them out, as they took the vessels of the Temple, Ezra 8.34. by number, and by weight. See Lev. 16.21. all their transgressions in all their sins. Vers. 10. See the Note on Exod. 31.18. Vers. 12. Arise] From off thy knees, the petitioners po∣sture: Saint Iames, they say, had knees as hard as cammels knees, with continuall kneeling: Euseb. Hieron. Act. & Mon. fol. 1579. and Hilarion was found dead in his Oratory, with knees bent, eyes and hands lift up. Father La∣timer, during his imprisonment, was so constant and instant in prayer, that oft-times he was not able to arise without help. Vers. 14. Let me alone] See the Note on Exod. 32.10. Vers. 15. So I returned] Yet not till he had first prayed, and prevailed, Exod. 32.1, 14. Vers. 16. Ye had turned aside quickly] Levitate prorsus de∣sultoria: Apostates have religionem ephemeram; being con∣stant in nothing, but in their inconstancy. Vers. 17. And cast them] See the Note on Exod. 32.19. Vers. 19. For I was afraid] Moses was more troubled for the people, then the people were for themselves: so was Dauiel for Nebuchadnezzar, Chap. 4.19. and Nahum for the Caldeans, Chap. 3.16.
Vers. 22. And at Taberah] Catalogues should be kept of our sins, and oft perused; yea though they be pardoned; that we may renew our repentance, and keep our souls humble, sup∣ple, and soluble. Vers. 24. You have been rebellious] Here he repeats the for∣mer charge, vers. 7. which now he had sufficiently proved against them: We must object no more against any man, then we are able to make good. If Erasmus had lived to these dayes, Erasmus. epist. ad Bilibld. very shame would have cram'd those words of his, down his throat; Ʋbicunqu eregnat Lutherus, ibi literarum est in∣teritus: duo tantum quaerunt, censum, & vxorem; Where∣soever Luthers doctrine takes place, learning is little set by: all the care is for a wife, and for wealth. Os durum. Vers. 25. Thus I fell down] The three former verses, come in by a parenthesis. Here he returns again to the history of his interceding for them, the second time. Vers. 26. I prayed] And he had a hard tug of it: but prayer is the best lever at a dead lift. CHAP. X. Vers. 1. LIke unto the first] Which Moses had broken: to shew, how we in our nature, had broken the law, and could not be saved by the keeping of it. This, Christ our true Moses, repaires again: writing the law, not in tables of stone, but in the heart of unbelievers; and enabling them, in some good measure to keep it, Iob. 1.17. walking (as Luther phra∣seth it,) in the heaven of the promise, but in the earth of the law; that, in respect of believing, this of obeying. Vers. 2. Which thou breakest] See the Note on Exod. 34.1. Vers. 3. And I made an Ark] In its use, far beyond that Persian casket imbroydered with gold and pearle; which Alex∣ander reserved for Homers Iads. Vers. 4. Out of the midst of the fire] The law was given in fire; it is a law of fire, Deut. 33.2. given by God, who is a con∣suming fire, Heb. 12.29. and hath a tribunall of fire, Ezek. 1.27. and shall plead with transgressours in flames of fire, Isai. 66.15, 16. the triall of our works shall be by fire, 1 Cor. 3, 13. Let us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God accep∣tably,
with reverence and godly fear. It is the Apostles use, Heb. 12.28. Vers. 5. And put the tables in the Ark] Which was thence∣forth called, the Ark of the Testimony. Vers. 6. And the children of Israel] Here are some seeming contradictions, betwixt this place, and that, Num. 33.31, 32. But, though they seem to be, as the accusers of Christ, never a one speaking like the other; yet if we well observe the text, and consult with interpreters, we shall finde them like Nathan and Bathsheba, both speaking the same things. Vers. 7. A land of rivers of water] A rare thing in a dry desart. Lysimachus sold his crown for a less matter. Vers. 8. At that time] viz. Whiles they were yet at mount Sinai; for the two former verses are inserted by a parenthesis. The Lord seperated the tribe of Levi] This setting up of the Ministery amongst them, is reckoned as a sign of Gods singular love to them. And so it is to us, no doubt, albeit a late pamph∣leter, makes that sacred and tremend function of the Ministery, The Compas. Samaritan. to be as meer an imposture, as very a mystery of iniquity, as arrant a juggle, as the papacy it self. Now the Lord rebuke thee Satan. [To stand before the Lord] As also the Angels do, Luk. 1.19. Vers. 12. What doth the Lord thy God require of thee] Bene∣ficium postulat officium: Mercy calls for duty. But to fear the Lord] This is the totum hominis, Eccles. 12.13. the bonum hominis, Mic. 6.8. the unum necessarium, Luk. 10.42. the primum quarendum, Mat. 6.33. Vers. 14. Behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens] Not the ayre and sky only, the visible heaven, but the third heaven, whereof no naturall knowledg can be had, nor any help by hu∣mane arts, Geometry, Opticks, &c. For it is neither aspectable, nor moveable. [The earth also] So that there was no ne∣cessity of pitching upon thee, for his peculiar; fith he had choyce enough before him. Vers. 15. To love them] Because he loved them, as Chap. 7.7, 8. See the Note there. Vers. 16. Circumcise therefore] Deus jubendo juvat. Set about this work in Gods strength, and pray, that the heaven may answer the earth, Hos. 2.21. For it is a work that must be done without hands, Col. 2.11. Beg of God to thrust his holy
hand into our bosome, Aug. in Exod. quaest. 55. and to pull off that filthy foreskin; urge him with his promise, Deut. 30.6. doubt not of his power, lex jubet, gratia juvat, &c. Vers. 17. Is God of Gods] And will be served like himself. Vers. 19. Love ye therefore the stranger] And so shew your selves the friends of God. Cicero. For idem velle & idem nolle, ea de∣mum vera amicitia est. Friends are like-minded. Vers. 21. He is thy praise] Thy praised one, Psal. 18.3. or, thy praise-worthy one. He is also thy chief glory, and praise amongst all nations; who shall admire thy happiness in such a God! CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. THerefore thou shalt love the Lord] Cos amoris amor. Ama amorem illius, saith Bernard: Not to love them that so loved us, is to be worse then a Publicane; more hard∣hearted then a Jew. Matth. 5.46. That the three children burnt not in the furnace, Dan. 3.25. was a miracle; so it is that men so favoured, love not God. Vers. 2. And which have not seen] Segniùs irritant animos demissa per aures, Horat. Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus: He speaks unto them, as to eye-witnesses; and those that have such evidence and self-experience, are usually more affected, then those that have things by hear-say only. Mine eye affects my heart, Lam, 3.51. Vers. 4. Hath destroyed them unto this day] i. e. Hath so de∣stroyed and dismaid them, that to this day we hear no more of them: As the Romanes so quailed and quelled King Aitalus, that he made a law, that none of his successours should make war with that State for ever. Vers. 5. And what he did unto you] A Diary should be dili∣gently kept of what God does for us, Psal. 102.18. for the help of our slippery memories, and the firing up of our dull hearts to a contention in godliness. Vers. 9. And that ye may prolong] See the Note on Chap. 4.40. Vers. 10. And wateredst it with thy foot] Fetching and carry∣ing water, called therefore the water of their feet, as our life is
called, the life of our hands, Esay 57.10. because maintained with the labour of our hands. Vers. 11. And drinketh water of the rain of heaven] God crowning the year with his goodness, and his pathes dropping fatness, Psal. 5.10 11, 12. In the Hebrew it is, thy chariot-wheel-tracks; for the clouds are Gods chariots, Psal. 104.3. in which water is bound, Job 26.8. How they are upheld, and why they fall here and now, we know not, and wonder. The Egyptians used, in a prophane mockery, to tell other nations, that if God should forget to rain, they might chance to starve for it; they thought the rain was of God, but not their river Nilus. See Ezek. 29.3, 9. Isai. 19.5, 6. Vers. 12. Which the Lord thy God careth for] Deus sic curat universa, quasi singula; sic singula, quasi sola. Aug. From the beginning of the year] How easie were it for God to starve us all, by denying us a harvest or two! Vers. 13. And it shall come to passe This passage of Scripture following, the Jews read daily in their families, as Maimonides reporteth. Vers. 14. That I will give you the rain] Rain, God gives to all by a providence, Act. 14.17. Job 38.26. but to his Israel, by vertue of a promise; whereby the might live, not as by bread only, but as by every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God. Vers. 16. That your heart be not deceived] Having first decei∣ved it self; for the heart is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9. &c. and may say to many, as the heart of Apollonius, the Tyrant, seemed to say to him; who dreamed one night, that he was fleaed by the Scythians, and boyled in a Caldron, and that his heart spake to him out of the kettle, and said, , Plut. It is I that have drawn thee to all this. Those in hell cry so. Vers. 17. And he shut up the heaven] The keys of heaven, of the heart, of the womb, and of the grave, God keeps and carries under his own girdle, as we may say. Vers. 18. In your heart] Yea upon your heart, Esay 47.7. & 57.11. so as they may sink thereinto, Luk. 9.44. as the best balm cast into water, sinks to the bottom. Vers. 19. Teach them your children] See the Note on Chap. 6.7. Vers. 21. As the dayes of heaven] i. e. As long as the world
standeth. Hence, haply, we may conceive hope of the repent∣ance of the Jews, and their re-establishment in this promised land. Vers. 26. A blessing and a curse] With the way to either; that if ye miscarry, ye may have none to blame but your selves. For oft it falls out, that whereas the foolishness of man pervert∣eth his way, his heart fretteth against the Lord, Prov. 19.3. Vers. 29. Put the blessing upon Mount Gerizim] That is, pro∣nounce it there. See Josh. 8.33. Hence the Samaritans built their Temple on this mount, as a blessed place, and there worship∣ed they knew not what, Joh. 4.20, 22. calling themselves, Those that belong to the blessed Mount. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. THese are the Statutes] Here Moses begins to comment upon the second Commandement of the law. See the Note on Chap. 6.1. Vers. 2. Ye shall vtterly destroy] This clause of this law is judiciall, peculiar onely to the Jewes, saith a grave Interpreter; as being cheifly intended to prevent their worshipping God in any other place, then that one that he had appointed, to which we in the dayes of the Gospell are not tied. See Vers. 5, 6. It was a temporary Ordinance, saith another, and a part of Moses politie, now abrogate. Vers. 3, And you shall hew downe] As was here done notably in King Edward the sixths dayes, notwithstanding the with∣standings of the rude rabble, Life of Edw. 6. by Sir Joh. Heyw. which more regarded commotio∣ners then Commissioners, and were more guided by rage then by right, &c. So that as one Master Body, a Commissioner, was pulling down images in Cornwall, he was suddenly stabbed into the body, by a Priest, with a knife. Vers. 4. Ye shall not do so] As wicked Ahaz did, 2 Chron. 27.24. by the advice and help of Ʋriah, that turn-coat, 2 King. 16. who had once passed for a faithful witness, Isai. 7.2. but afterwards proved a factour for the Devil. Vers. 5. And thither shalt thou come] In token of an holy communion with God. Vers. 6, Heave-offerings of your hand] For none might ap∣pear
empty-handed before the Lord. Vers. 7. And there ye shall eat before the Lord] Loe this ye shall have of Gods hand, as a recompence of all your charge and pains; ye shall feast before him with joy. This made those good souls go bodily on from strength to strength; though they took many a weary step, yet their comfort was, that they should every one of them in Zion appear before the Lord, Psal. 84.7. This was the sweet-meats of that feast; other dainty dishes there might be, but this was the banquet. Vers. 9. For ye are not as yet come to the rest] No more are any of us indeed, till we come to that rest which remaineth for the people of God, Heb. 4.3, 8, 9, 10. The Ark was transporta∣tive, till setled in Solomons temple; so till we come to heaven, are we in continual unrest. Vers. 10. So that ye dwell in safety] Having peace both ex∣ternal and internl, of country and of conscience. Regionis & Re∣ligionis. Vers. 12. And ye shall rejoyce] No one duty is more pressed in both the Testaments, then this of rejoycing in the Lord al∣waies, but specially in his immediate services. And the contrary is complained of, Mal. 2.13. and sorely threatned, Deut. 28.47. Vers. 14. But in the place] This taught them unity and uni∣formity in divine worship; as also that there was but one only way to obtain pardon of their sin, and acceptance of their services, viz. by Jesus Christ, of whom their Tabernacle and Temple was a type. Vers. 15. According to the blessing] God allowes his not only a sufficiency, but an honest affluency, so they keep within the bounds of their ability. Vers. 16. Only ye shall not eat] See the Note on Gen. 9.4. Vers. 19. That thou forsake not the Levite] But look to his livelihood; sith, Panormitar. Ad tenuitatem beneficiorum necessariò sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum; small allowances make either ignorant or negligent Ministers. Vers. 20. Thou mayst eat flesh] Only it is noted as a fault, to feed without fear, Jude 12. And flesh-mongers are taxed by Solomon. Nos etiam animas incarnavimus, saith an Ancient, complaining of the surquedry of his times. Vers. 22. Even as the roe-buck] i. e. as common and pro∣phane
meats; for these creatures were rejected for sacrifice. Vers. 25. Thou shalt not eat it] Who can ever think any commandement of God to be light or little, when this of not eating the blood, is charged with so much strictness? The Mi∣nutula of the law, as well as the Magnalia, must be carefully heeded and practised. Vers. 26. Go unto the place] Far off though it be, yet go thou must thither with thy sacrifices; though at home thou mayst kill and eat for thine own repast and refreshing. Vers. 28. And with thy children after thee] Whose comfort they that seek not, Bern. Epist. 111. are peremptores potiùs quam parentes, rather parricides, then parents. Vers. 32. Thou shalt not adde thereto] To adde any thing to the Word of God, saith Theodoret, is bold madness; but to open those things by the Word, that in the Word are more darkly de∣livered, is both lawful, and laudable. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. IF there arise among you a Prophet] A publike De∣ceiver, that shall boldly obtrude upon you his erro∣neous opinions for divine oracles; seeking to drag disciples after him, Act. 20.20. Such as of late times were Servetus, Socinus, Arminius, Vorstius, Pelargus the first Anabaptist, Islelius Agri∣cola, the first Antinomian: H. N. that is, Henry Nicolai of Lei∣den, the first Familist. Howbeit, Gerson tells us of a woman, one Maria de Valentiana, that had, lately, before his relation, written a book with incredible subtilty, concerning the preroga∣tive and eminence of divine love; to the which, whatever soul had attained, is (according to her) let loose from all the law of Gods Commandements. Vers. 2. And the sign or the wonder come to passe] For so it may fall out by Divine permission, for the patefaction and pu∣defaction of hypocrites; Exod. 7.22. as when Jannes and Jambres turned wa∣ter into blood, or at least, seemed to do so. Vers. 3. Thou shalt not hearken] Hereticks have their pithano∣logy, their good words and fair speeches, wherein they can vent a spittle of diseased opinions, and whereby they deceive the hearts of the simple, Rom. 16.18. It is not safe therefore to hear them,
or hold discourse with such; lest they insinuate and infect us, as the Montanists did Tertullian; as the Valentinians did divers well-affected Christians; as Acacius the heretick, did Anastasius, 2 Bishop of Rome, Anno 497. who sought to rectifie him. It is reported of Placilla, the good Empress, that when Theodosius Seniour desired to confer with Eunomius, Sozomen. l. 7. cap. 7. she disswaded her husband very earnestly; lest, being perverted by his speeches, he might fall into heresie. Keep thee far from an evil matter, saith Solomon. Mark those that make divisions, and avoid them, Rom. 16.18. saith Paul. And again, There are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers—whose mouthes must be stopped, &c. Tit. 1.11. Vers. 4. Ye shall walk after the Lord] A special Antidote a∣gainst Apostacy from the truth, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. whereas those that have put away a good conscience, do, as concerning faith, 1 Tim. 1.19. easily make shipwrack. Vers. 5. Shall be put to death] This power is still in the Chri∣stian magistrate, to inflict capital punishment on gross hereticks; such as was Servetus at Geneva, and Campian here; who spider∣like, was swept down by the hand of justice, and drew his last threed in the triangle of Tiburn, Speeds hist. of Engl. 1176. as the Historian wittily phraseth it. Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? was a question moved by the old Donatists. Libertas prophetandi, is much challenged by the Arminians, and other Sectaries. But if in matter of religi∣on, every man should think what he lists, and utter what he thinks, and defend what he utters, and publish what he defends, and gather disciples to what he publisheth, this liberty, or licenti∣ousness rather, would soon be the bane of any Church. Vers. 6. Thy friend, which is as thine own soul] Amicitia fit tantùm inter binos qui sunt veri, & bonos qui sunt pauci. Entice thee secretly, saying] Christ found the Devil in Peter, perswading him to spare himself. Cassianus reports of a young man, that had given himself up to a Christian life; and his parents misliking that way, wrote letters to him, to disswade him; which when he knew, he would not once open them, but threw them in the fire. Mention is also made in Ecclesiastical history, of one Phileas, a Noble-man, and constant Martyr, who going to exe∣cution, seemed as one deaf at the perswasions, and blind at the tears of his dearest friends: As the waters use to break them∣selves on a rock, so was he inflexible. Vers. 9. Kill him] i. e. Deliver him up to the Magistrate, to
be killed; for he bears not the sword in vain, like S. Paul in a glass-window, or George on a sign-post. Vers. 10. To thrust thee away] By force, not of arms, but of arguments, Tertull. as the Valentinians, qui priùs persuadebant quam do∣cebant. Thus Jeroboam is said to have driven Israel from follow∣ing the Lord, 2 King. 17.21. Vers. 12. If thou shalt hear say] Rumours are not alwaies to be credited, nor alwaies to be contemned. Vers. 13. Childron of Belial] Renegadoes are the worst of men. 1 Joh. 2.19. Rabshakeh is held such a one; so Bertius, Tilenus, Sta∣phylus, &c. CHAP. XIV. Vers. 1. YE are the children of the Lord] Ye should there∣fore do nothing unworthy of such a Father. An∣tigonus being invited to a place, where a notable harlot was to be present, asked counsel of Menedemus, what he should do? He bad him only remember, Plut. that he was a Kings son, and do ac∣cordingly. [ye shall not cut] See the Note on Levit. 19.28. Vers. 2. For thou art] See the Note on Chap. 7.6. And the Lord hath chosen thee] Hence all thy holiness. The maids were first purified, before Ahasuerosh chose one; but here it is otherwise, Ephes. 5.25, 26. Vers. 3. Thou shalt not eat any abominable] See the Notes on Levit. 11. This law taught them to abstain from communion with wicked men, in whom are found the malignities and evil properties of all other creatures, Act. 10.13, 17, 20, 28. They feed hard on sin, the Devils excrement; as the Tartarians eat the carrion, carkases of horses, camels, asses, cats, dogs, yea when they stink, and are full of magots, and hold them as dainty, as we do venison. Vers. 5. The Hart, and the roe-buck] These were dainties fit for a King, 1 King. 4.23. Rice and mutton is the cheer where∣with the great Turk entertaineth forraign Ambassadours; and that so plainly and sparingly dressed, as if they would give check to our gourmandize and excess.
Vers. 6. That parteth the hoof] See the Note on Levit. 11.3. Vers. 21. Thou shalt not seethe] See the Note on Exod. 23.19. Vers. 22. Thou shalt truly tithe] He seems to mean that second tithe, wherewith they were to feast before the Lord; and not the tithe given to the Levites, Num. 18.24. Vers. 23. That thou mayst learn] A man cannot converse with God, but he shall learn something. Semper a te doctior redeo, said He to his friend. Moses came from the Mount with his face shining. Confer Eccles. 81. Vers. 29. That the Lord thy God, &c.] Not getting, but gi∣ving, is the way to thrive in the world. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. AT the end of every] This Sabbatical year signified the year of grace, the Kingdom of Christ, where∣in all Israelites indeed, are discharged of their debts, Matth. 6.12. See the Note there. Vers. 2. He shall not exact it] For that seventh year at least; because there was neither sowing, nor reaping, that year: how then could the poor pay their debts? We must all put on bow∣els of mercy, forbearing one another, and forgiving one ano∣ther, &c. Col. 3.12, 13. Vers. 3. Of a forraigner] To shew, that none that are aliena∣ted from the life of God, (or a godly life) have remission of sin by Christ: He sanctifies all whom he justifies, Compare Rom. 11.26. with Isai. 59.20. Vers. 4. Save when there shall be no poor] Here (as in sundry other places of the new Translation) the margin is better then the text; as giving a good reason of the former law; To the end, that there be no poor amongst you, that is, extream poor by your exactions. Of a cruel creditour it is said, Psal. 10.9. that he lyeth in wait to catch the poor; he doth catch the poor, when he draws him into his net, that is, into bonds, debts, morgages, as Chrysostome expounds it. Vers. 7. Thou shalt not harden thy heart] But draw out thy soul to the hungry, Esay 58. Many have iron-bowels, and wi∣thered
hands. See my common-place of Almes. Vers. 8. Thou shalt surely lend him] See the Note on Matth. 5.42. Vers. 9. And he cry unto the Lord] Who is the poor mans King, as James the fifth, of Scotland, was tearmed, for his cha∣rity. Vers. 10. Thine heart shall not be grieved] See the Note on 2 Cor. 9.7. The Lord thy God shall blesse thee] See Prov. 19.17. and Almes, ubi supra. Vers. 11. For the poor] See the Note on Matth. 26.11. Aged and impotent poor, whose misery moves compassion, without an Oratour, called here our poor, as well as our brethren. Vers. 12. In the seventh year] Viz. Since he was sold unto thee. Vers. 16. Then thou shalt take an awle] Ʋt si non horreret ser∣vitudinem, horreret saltem ignominiam publicam: If we can bear reproach for Christ, its an argument we mean to stick to him, as this bored servant, to his master. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. ANd keep the Passeover] Every man that seeth an∣other striken, and himself spared, is still to keep a Passeover for himself. Vers. 3. Even the bread of affliction] Or, of poverty; as who should say, poor folks bread, ill-leavened, ill-prepared. Vers. 4. And thee shall be] See the Notes on Exod. 12. Vers. 10. With a tribute of a free-will offering] Over and be∣sides the sacrifice appointed for the feast-day, Numb. 18.27, 31. and the two loaves with their sacrifices commanded, Levit. 23.17, 20. so good-cheap is Gods service to us, over what it was to them. Vers. 12. And thou shalt remember] It is very good to look back, and recognize our former worse condition. Agathocles, King of Sicily, being a potters son, would be served only in ear∣then vessels. Willigis, Archbishop of Ments, a Wheel-wrights son, hang'd wheels, and the tools wherewith they were made, round about his bed-chamber, and had these words written up∣on
the walls, in very fair Characters, Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris, Remember whence thou camest. Vers. 13. Thou shalt observe] See the Notes on Exod. 23.16. Vers. 15. Thou shalt surely rejoyce] See the Notes on Chap. 12.12. Vers. 18. With just judgment] Heb. with judgment of justice. Ʋt fiat justitia, ruat coelum. Let heaven and earth be blended together, rather then Magistrates be drawn to deal basely. It is reported by a late traveller, that in Zant, over the place of judg∣ment, these two Latine verses are written on the wall, in letters of gold, Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat, Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos. Vers. 19. Neither take a gift] Rain is good, and ground is good; yet, ex eorum conjunctione fit lutum, by the mixture of those two, is made dirt; so giving is kind, and taking is courte∣ous; yet the mixing of them, makes the smooth pathes of justice, foul, and uneven. Vers. 20. That which is altogether just] Heb. justice, justice; that is, let pure justice, without mud, run down; let all self-ish affections be strain'd out. CHAP. XVII. Vers. 1. THou shalt not sacrifice] See the Note on Levit. 22.20. Vers. 2. That hath wrought wickednesse] Idolatry is wicked∣ness with a witness. Such was the venome of the Israelitish Ido∣latry, that the brazen Serpent stung worse then the fiery. Oh that the Lord as he hath revealed that Wirked one, so that he would at length, consume him with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thess. 2.8. and dung his Vineyard with the dead carcase of that wild boar of the forrest! He can as easily blast an oak, as trample a mushrome. Fiat, fiat. Vers. 4. And it be told thee] See the Note on Chap, 13.12. And enquired diligently] Men must be swift to hear, slow to speak that is, to censure, or pass sentence. Amongst the Athe∣nians, an inditement of any crime, was but ; the evidence
and conviction, made it, , the sentence . Atha∣nasius passth for a sacrilegious person, a prophane wretch, a bloody persecutour, a blasphemer of God, &c. and was so con∣demned, before he was heard, by fourscore Bishops, in that Pseu∣dosynodus Sadicensis. Sunt quidem in Ecclesia Catholica plurimi mali; sed ex haereicis▪ nullus est bonus, saith Bellarmine; There be many bad men Papists, but not one good to be found among Protestants. Reas. 8. pag. 41. The Catholikes follow the Bible, (saith Hill, in his quartern of Reasons,) but the Protestants force the bible to fol∣low them; yea their condemnation is so expresly set down in their own Bibles, saith another Popeling, and is so cleer to all the world, Gagge of the new Gosp. pref. to Read. that nothing more needs hereto, then that they know to read, and have their eyes in their heads, at the opening of their Bible. By the shooting of which bolt, you may easily guess at the archer. Vers. 7. Thou shalt put the evil] Both person and thing, 1 Cor. 5.13. Vers. 8. Too hard for thee in judgment] i.e. For thee, O Judge, who art thereupon to consult with the Priests; and by them to be informed of the true sense and meaning of Gods law. For apices juris non sunt jus. And the Rabbines have a saying, Nulla est objectio in Lege, quae non habet solutionem in latere. Now the Priests lips should preserve knowledg, and the Law should be sought at his mouth; the high-Priest also, in some cases, was to enquire, and answer after the judgment of Ʋrim, before the Lord, Num. 27.21. This the Pope cannot do; and therefore cannot claim the final determination of all causes and controver∣sies; though his Parasites tell him. Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris habenas: Et meritò in terris diceris esse deus. Vers. 9. And unto the judg] i.e. The councill of judges, the Synedrion, 2 Chron. 19.8. consisting partly of Priests, and partly of civile Magistrates! Amongst the Turks, at this day, their Iudges are ever Ecclesiasticall persons; whereby both orders joyned, Blounts voy∣age. 89. give reputation one to another, and maintenance; for these places of judicature, are the only preferment of the Priest-hood. Vers. 10. According to all that they inform thee] viz. Agree∣able to the sentence of the law, vers. 11. The Iews from this text, foolishly seek footing for their traditions, which they so
much magnifie, Mat. 15.1, 2. Vers. 14. And shalt say, I will set a King] A King then they might chuse, so they did it orderly. Zuinglius in ea fuit senten∣tia, regna omnia esse electiva, nulla propriè successiva & haeredita∣ria. In quo non negamus eum errasse in facto, ut loquuntur. Rivet. Iesuita vap. Psal. 2.6. Vers. 15. Whom the Lord shall chuse] As he did Saul, but especially David, and his progeny, types of Christ. Vers. 16. He shall not multiply horses] Lest he be held as our Henry the third was, Regni dilapidator, the royall spend-thrift. Vers. 17. Silver and gold] Lest his exactours receive from his subjects, no less summs of curses then of coyne; and lest he gather money, the sinews of war; but lose his peoples affection, the joynts of peace; as our King Iohn did. Vers. 18. He shall write him a copy] The Iews say, that if printing had been found out then; yet was the King bound to write two copies of the law with his own hand: one to keep in the treasurie, and another to carry about him. This Book of God was Davids delight, Psal. 119.70. Alphonsus King of Aragon is reported to have read over the Bible fourteen times, with Lyra's notes upon it. Charles the Wise of France, not only caused the Bible to be translated into French, (as our King Alured, translated the Psalter himself into his Saxon tongue,) but was also very studious in the holy Scripture. And that peereless princesse Q. Elizabeth, as she passed in triumphall state through the streetes of London, after her Coronation, when the Bible was presented to her, at the little Conduit in Cheape-side, Speeds hist. she received the same with both her hands, and kissing it, laid it to her breasts, saying; that the same had ever been her chiefest de∣light, and should be the rule, whereby she meant to frame her government. Vers. 19. And it shall be with him] As his Ʋade-mecum, his Manuall, his running library, the man of his counsell. Luther said, he would not live in paradise without the Bible; as with it, Tom. 4. Oper. Latin. p. 424. he could easily live in hell it self. V. 20. That his heart be not lifted up] That his good and his blood rise not together, as that Kings of Tyre did, Ezek. 28.2. and that Lucifer, son of the morning, Isai. 14.12, 13. See my common place of Arrogancy: Of Caligula it is said, that there never was a better servant, or a worse Lord: Vespasian is said to be the only man that became better by the Empire. The most of the
Emperours grew so insolent, that they got nothing by their pre∣ferment; nisi ut citius interficerentur, but to be sooner slain. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. ANd his inheritance] i.e. Whatsoever, by the Law, belonged to the Lord, as decimae deo sacrae, &c. V. 4. Plin. hist. The first fruit also] Pliny lib. 18. tells us, that among the Romans, also, no man might taste of his own corn, wine, or other fruits; priusquam Sacerdotes primitias libassent, till the Priests had offered the first-fruites, and made their use of them. Vers. 6. With all the desire of his minde] To do God better service. A good heart, holds the best he can do, but a little of that much that he could gladly beteem the Lord, and is still devising what to do more, Psal. 116.12. Vers. 8. Besides that] He shall not maintain himself of his own private stock, but live of the Holy things of the Tem∣ple. Vers. 10. That maketh his son] See the Note on Levit. 18.21. Vers. 11. Or a Necromancer] Bellarmine, and other Pa∣pists, play the Necromancers, when they would prove a purgato∣ry, from the apparitions of spirits, that tell of themselves, or others, there tormented. Vers. 13. Thou shalt be perfect] See the Note on Mat. 5.48. Vers. 14. Hath not suffered thee so to do] He hath shew∣ed thee a more excellent way, and kept thee from these devora∣tory evills, as Tertullian calleth them; so ordering the matter, that that evill one toucheth them not with any deadly touch, I Ioh. 5.18. For either he suffers not his to be tempted above strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. Or else, he with-holds the occasion, when temptation hath prevailed to procure consent and purpose, &c. Vers. 15. Like unto me] Both in the participation of nature, and of office: a true man, and a true Mediatour; Similes, they are, but not pares: Christ being worthy of more glory then Moses, and why; See Heb. 3.3. &c. Heb. 7.22. & 9.15. Vers. 18. And he shall speak unto them] Christ is that pal∣moni hammedabbar, Dan. 10. that excellent speaker, that spake
with authority, and so as never man spake; being mighty in word and deed. See my true treas. p. 1. Vers. 22. Thou shalt not be afraid] Though he spake great swelling words of vanity, Camd. Elis. fol. 403. 2 Pet. 2.18. milstones and thunder∣bolts, as Hacket here did. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 3. THou shalt prepare thee a way] A direct, plain, faire high-way: Such a way must Ministers prepare, and pave for their people to Christ (the true Asylum,) by giving them the knowledg of salvation, by the remission of their sins, Luk. 1, 76, 77. Vers. 4. Whom he hated not in time past] There is a passion of hatred. This is a kind of averseness and rising of the heart against a man, when one sees him; so that he cannot away with him, nor speak to him, nor look courteously or peaceably upon him; and by his good will, he would have nothing to do with him. Secondly, there is a habite of hatred; when the heart is so setled in this alienation and estrangement, that it grows to wish, and desire, and seek his hurt. Both these must be mortified. Vers. 5. And live] So he keep within his city of refuge, till the death of the high-priest. See the Note on Num. 35.25. Vers. 6. Whiles his heart is hot] As Nebuchadnezzars oven, viz. with anger and grief, and such like passions; which like heavy bodyes down steep hills, once in motion, move themselves, and know no ground but the bottom. Vers 8. And give thee all the land] From Nilus to Eu∣phrates, Gen. 15.18. which by reason of their sins he never did. Pray we with Jabez, 1 Chron. 4.10. Oh that thou wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, (my heart!) and that thine hand might be with me, &c. When thou shalt have enlarged mine heart, saith David, then will I run the way of thy commandements, Psal. 119.32. Vers. 11. But if any man hate his neighbour] As Cain did Abel, as Esau Jacob, as Absolom Amnon; as Dr. Story did Queen Elizabeth, whom he cursed daily in his grace at board: Anno 1567. Camd. Elisab. as Ti∣rone did the English; therefore strangling some of his own men, for no other reason, but because they fed on english bread;
howbeit he never spake of the Queen, but with honour: yea the profane wretch, Speed. stiled himself Cousin to God, Enemy to all the world, and Friend to the Queen of England. Vers. 12. And fetch him thence] From the altar to the halter, from the pallace to the gallowes, Prov. 28.17. Vers. 14. Thy neighbours land-mark, which they of old, &c.] Erasmus met with an adversary so silly, as to object unto him this text, Erasm. in Ap∣pologiis, pag. 637. against the new Translation of the new Testament. Quasi per terminos, voces intellexisset Spiritus S. atque hujus legis violatae illi postulari possent, qui mutant rerum vocabula. Whereas by termes orland-marks, here are cleerly meant bounds, borders, limits, whereby every mans inheritance was fevered. Vers. 15. One witness shall not rise up] Yet if this One be a faithfull witness, Arist. Rhetor. lib. 2. , saith Aristotle; one faithfull witness, in some case, may suffice; in private offen∣ces, howsoever: And that our Saviour speaketh of such, Mat. 18.19. Basil and others are of opinion. If thy brother (a Iew,) shall trespass against thee being a Iew, right thy self by degrees. First, deal with him fraternally, tell him his fault, be∣twixt thee and him alone, vers. 15. Secondly, deal with him legally, take with thee one or two more, vers. 16. Thirdly, deal with him jewishly; tell the Church, vers. 17. complain to the Sanhedin. Mr. Lights. harmony. pag. 143. Fourthly, if he shall neglect to hear them, deal with him Heathenishly, i.e. Let him be unto thee, as a Heathen, and a Publican; make benefit of Roman Soveraignty, let Caesars justice end the difference between you. Vers. 20. Shall hear and fear] Others woes should be our warnings, others sufferings our sermons, yea standing sermons, 1 Cor. 10.5. to 12. Gods house of correction, is the school of instruction. Vers. 21. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth] See the Note on Mat. 5.38. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. VVHen thou goest out to battle] It is not un∣lawful therefore to go to war, (as Lactan∣tius held, and some others;) whether it be pro religione, vel pro region: Onely because it is easier to stir strife, then to stop and
stint it; (non enim in ejusdem potestate est initium belli, Salust. in Ju∣gurth. jusque finis,) war is not rashly to be undertaken; lest it befall men, as in the battle between the dragon and the elephant. The dra∣gon sucketh out the blood of the elephant, Pli. lib. 8. cap. 12. Possid. in ivt. Aug. and the weight of the falling elephant oppresseth the dragon, and so both perish. Saint Augustin would never pray for such, as had wilfully and voluntarily thrust themselves into unnecessary warrs. For the Lord thy God is with thee] And how many reckonest thou him for? as Antigonus said, to his discouraged souldiers: The Lord is a Man of warre, Exod. 15.3. Or, as the Chaldee there expresseth it; A victour of warrs, 2 Chron. 32.8. Si deus pro nobis, &c. Rom. 8.31. Vers. 2. That the Priest shall approach] For some Priests or∣dinarily went along with the army; not to be Tuba rebellio∣nis, as the Papists said of Zuinglius; nor evangelium flamme∣um praedicare, as they said of Beza; as a common fire-brand, or fomenter of discord: but to blow the holy trumpets, that the people might be remembred before the Lord, and saved from their enemies, Num. 10.8, 9. 2 Chron. 13.12. And to say unto them, as 2 Chron. 19. Deal couragiously, and the Lord shall be with the good. The valour of the Gaules, was admired by the Romans. It proceeded from that instruction of the Druides their Priests, concerning the immortality of the soul, &c. Vers. 4. For the Lord your God is ] Quid metuit homo in sinu dei positus, Deo armatus? Creatures of an inferiour na∣ture, will be couragious in the presence of their masters: And shall not men, when they have God with them? Xerxes was wont to pitch his tent on high, and stand looking on his army when in fight; to encourage them, So God. Vers. 5. And hath not dedicated it] By prayers, hymnes, and other holy solemnities, then usuall, Neh. 12.27. Psal. 30. title; that the house of David might be as God, as the Angell of the Lord before them, Zach. 12.8. Vers. 6. That hath planted a vineyard This priviledg might incourage men to build and plant; which is good and profitable for the common-wealth, as the Apostle speaketh in a like case, Tit. 3.8. Vers. 7. That hath betrothed a wife] A commendable custome, even among Heathens also: Placuit, despondi; nuptiis hic dictus est dies, said he in Terence.
Vers. 8. That is fearfull and faint-hearted] This cowardly passion dis-pirits a man, expectorates his manliness, and exposeth him to the cruell mercy of an enemy. Better be temerarious, then timorous: Ye fugitives of Ephraim, is no small brand of dishonor, Iudg. 12.4. besides that, melting and trying judg∣ments follow such at heeles, as account one pair of heeles, worth two pair of hands, Ier. 9.3, 7. The French fled so fast before the English, Paul. Ivius. at the battle of Terrim, that it was called the battle of Spures. [Lest his brethrens hearts] Cowardice is catching, and shews that men, like stags, have great horns, but want hearts. Vers. 9. Captains of the armies, to lead the people] As Han∣niball did, Deead. 3. lib. 1. of whom Livy reports, that princeps proelium inibat, vltimus, conserto proelio, excedebat; he was first in the battell, and last out: And the same is storied of Albert, Marquess of Brandenburg: Buchole. In congressibus prior pugnam iniit, victor à proe∣lio excessit vltimus. Vers. 10. Then proclaime peace unto it] Heb. Shalt call unto it for peace: This hath been the practice of most nations. The Romans sent their caduceum et hastam: the Herald was com∣manded, Gel. lib. 16. cap. 4. to throw his weapons on the enemies ground, with this speech: Ego, populusque Rom. hoinibus Hermundulis bel∣lum dico facioque: I and the people of Rome, bid battell to the Hermunduli. Alexander the great, when he besieged any city, would send his Herald into it, with a burning torch in his hand, to proclaim, that if any man would repair and submit himself unto him, while that torch continued burning, he should be safe: otherwise, Turk. hist. they should expect nothing, but fire and sword. Ta∣merlain, when he came against any place, first, he hanged out a white flag of grace, then a red, and lastly, a black flag; to shew, that now there was no hope of mercy for them: ; God loves to give warning, saith Herodotus, a heathen. And the Turks are of opinion, b. 344. that God would not prosper them, in their assaults, except they first make to their enemies some offer of peace, how unreasonable soever, it forceth not. So they did, at the last fatall siege of Constantinople. Vers. 11. And open unto thee] As Tournay in France did, to our Henry the eight, with ten thousand pound sterling, for the Citizens redemption; yet was it never till then counted so in∣vincible, that this sentence was engraven over one of the gates;
Iannes ton me a perdu ton pucellage, Speeds hist. of Engl. 1001. thou hast never lost thy maiden-head. Vers. 13. Thou shalt smite every male thereof] Let them pay for their pervicacy. So Caesar answered the Adviatici, Si priusqum aries murum at∣tigisset se de dis∣sent. Caes. 2. Gal∣lic. Connestab. 6. that he would have spared their city, if they had yielded, before he had assaulted. And so the Duke D' Alva, much blamed Prosper Columnus, for receiving a castle upon condition, after he had beaten it with the cannon. Howbeit, in the L. Protectours ex∣pedition into Scotland, in the raign of Edward the 6. one castle, when they understood they were not able to hold out: and that their obstinacy had excluded all hope of pardon, they made pe∣tition, that they might not presently be slain, but have some time to recommend their souls to God, and afterwards be hanged. Life of Edw. 6. by Sr. Jo. Heywood. This respite being first obtained, their pardon did the more easily ensue, Vers. 17. The Hivites and the Ibusites] The Gergashites are not reckoned among the rest, as neither are they, Ish. 9.1. happy, because they accepted of conditions of peace. Vers. 19. Thou shalt not cut them down] Fruit-trees might not be destroyed: doth God take care for trees? It was to teach us, that if we bring forth fruit fit for Gods taste and rellish, sanctifying God and Christ in our hearts, we shall not be de∣stroyed. Oakes bring forth apples, such as they are, and acorns, but not fit for meat. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. IN the field] Or elsewhere; the field is instanced, be∣cause in places more frequented, murders are not so easily concealed, or so commonly committed. Vers. 2. Then thy Elders] Some of the Sanhedrin. Vers. 3. Shall take an heifer] Signifying Christ, who is the propitiation for his peoples sins, 1 Joh. 2.2. Vers. 4. Which is neither eared nor sown] That is, that after∣wards should neither be tilled nor sown, for horrour and hatred of the innocent blood there spilled. So the mountains of Gil∣boah, 2 am.1. Vers. 5. And by their word] i. e. According to that expositi∣on that they shall give of Gods Word, and not by any absolute
or arbitrary power of their own. Vers. 6. Shall wash their hands] An old ceremony, used in this case, by the Gentiles also, as the Scholiast upon Sophocles, shew∣eth. See the Note on Matth. 27.24. Vers. 27. And they shall answer] To the Priests examining them, and, in Gods name, making inquisition for blood. Vers. 8. And the blood shall be forgiven] The fault of not well watching and guarding the place where the murther was com∣mitted. Our King Alfred was the first that divided this King∣dome into Shires: He ordained also, that his Subjects should be divided into tens or tithings; every of which, severally, should give bond for the good abearing of each other. By this course men were not only careful of their own actions, but each had an eye to all the nine, for which he stood bound, as the nine had over him. Insomuch, that a poor girle might travel safely with a bag of gold in her hand, and none durst meddle with her. The ancientest of these men, were called the Tithingmen. Vers. 11. And hast a desire unto her] This was permitted them, as divorce was, ob duricordiam. But that is a base passage in the Turks Alchoran, that God did not give men such appetites, to have them frustrate, but enjoyed; as made for the gust of man, not for his torment, wherein his Creatour delights not; and therefore they hold it lawful, for a man to marry as many wives, as he is able to maintain. Vers. 12. And she shall shave her head] In token, that she must renounce her heathenism, and lead a new and holy life. And if she thus consented to marry, she saved her life by it; so do those their souls, that consent to Christ; casting away their transgres∣sions, and paring off their superfluities, by the constant practice of mortification. Vers. 13. A full moneth] Worldly sorrow, like a land-flood, is for the present, impetuous and violent, but time wears it out; Not so, godly sorrow. Vers. 14. Because thou hast humbled her] This expression shews, that God approved not of his fact, which yet he tole∣rated. Vers. 15. And another hated] i. e. Less loved; as Gen. 29.31. See the Note there. Vers. 17. A double portion] According to this phrase, Elisha, 2 King. 2.9. doth not desire a greater measure of the spirit, then
rested upon his master; but only to excel the other children of the Prophets, by a right of primogeniture. Vers. 20. He is a glutton] The same word is used for a vile person, Jer. 15 19. And indeed, belly-gods, Philip. 3.19. are dungy-gods, Hab. 2.18 with Ezek. 4.17, 18. A scavenger, whose office is to empty, is to be preferred before him that liveth but to fill privies. Vers. 21. Shall hear and fear] See the Note on Chap. 19.20. Vers. 23. For he that is hanged] See the Note on Gal. 3.13. CHAP. XXII. Vers. 1. THou shalt not see thy brothers] No not thine ene∣mies, Exod. 23.4. for, have we not all one father? Mal. 2.10. See the Note on Matth. 5.44. Vers. 5. The woman shall not wear] Because it is against both natural and civil honesty. Neither shall a man put on] That is, (say Stage-Players, and those that plead for them,) a man shall not wear womens ap∣parel ordinarily and daily, so as women use to do. But the word is, Put on, and so they do; The same word is used of Davids putting on Sauls armour, which yet he put off again presently. So full (saith One hereupon) are our hearts of distinctions and shifts, odia restringere, ampliare favores, to restrain hatreds, (as they call them) that is, the Commandements that make against them. Vers. 7. And that thou mayst prolong, &c.] They were com∣manded to spare the damme, because she represented the pa∣rents, in bringing up of her young ones: and if their dayes should be for that prolonged, much more for this. The Hebrews reck∣on this commandement, for the least of all in Moses law; and yet such a promise is annexed thereunto. Vers. 9. And the fruit of thy vineyard be defiled] Heb. be sanctified, per antiphrasin; as Auri sacra fames; and Anthony's fire is, ignis sacer. So a whore is called in Hebrew, Kedesha, of
Kadash, i. e. Holiness, Deut. 23.17. by a contrary meaning, as most unholy, and unchaste. Vers. 10. Thou shalt not plough] These laws were made, to set forth how God abhorreth all mixtures in religion; and how carefully men should keep their minds from being corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. 11.3. Vers. 12. Wherewith thou coverest thy self] Ne in motu li∣quid indecerum appareat; Lust and malice are sharp-sighted, 2 Sam. 11.2. 2 Sam. 6.20. Vers. 14. I found her not a maid] Silvester Petra-sancta Je∣suita calumniatur puellas plerunque corruptas nuptui dari in Re∣formato Evangelio: Jesuita Vapu∣lans. pag. 146. Quod de Evangelio Romano (ait Rivettus noster) potiùs dici posset; postquàm puellae dementarunt a vobis se∣ducta, & sub vestibus cordulis nodosis spurcis vestris manibus fuerunt ligatae. Papists falsly affirm, that few maids amongst us come clear to marriage: cujus contrarium verum est. Vers. 15. Then shall the father of the damosel] Whose house, hereby, was dishonested, and by whom his daughters honour was to be defended; especially, since childrens miscarriages reflect upon the parents; and the daughters sin, is the fathers shame. Vers. 16. And he hateth her] Which is a monster in nature Ephes. 5.28, 29, Vers. 17. These are the tokens] Which in those countries sel∣dome or never failed. Vers. 19. He hath brought up an evil name] Which is a kind of murther, Ezek. 22.9. God shall clear the innocency of his slandered servants, Psal. 37.6. Isai. 54.17. As the eclipsed Moon, by keeping her motion, wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendour; so shall it be with such. Vers. 20. And the tokens] Nor any natural impediment can be proved; as the Hebrews explain it. Vers. 22. With a woman married] Adultery was punished with death; because society, and the purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men. Vers. 24. Humbled his neighbours wife] So called, because betrothed, quià nuptias facit consensus, non concubitus, as the Lawyers determine it. Vers. 25. And the man force her, and lie with her] It was a speech of Charles 5. Emperour, If that impure fellow, Farnesins, (who being the Popes General, had forced many fair Ladies,)
were here present, I would kill him with mine own hand. Nec vocem iracundiorem unquam ex Carolo auditam ferunt. Parei hist. prof. medulla. Never was he heard to speak so angerly. The Lacedaemonian Com∣mon wealth was utterly ruined by a rape committed on the two daughters of Scedasus at Leuctra. Vers. 29. She shall be his wife] Howbeit, he must be humbled before the Lord, for entring into his ordinance thorough the De∣vils portal. CHAP. XXIII. Vers. 1. OR hath his privy member cut off] As it is a barba∣rous custome at this day among the Turks, to de∣prive divers Christian children of their privities; supplying the uses of nature with a silver quill. Turk. hist. This was first brought in amongst them by Selymus the second, out of jealousie, lest his Eunuches were not so chaste as they should have been, in keeping their Ladies beds. Such are usually effeminate, and unfit to bear office.  [Shall not enter into the Congregation] i. e. Shall not go in and out before the people as a publike Officer. Sith such should be drained from the dregges, and sifted from the brannes of the vulgar; they should be eminent and eximious per∣sons, higher then the rest, as Saul, by head and shoulders. Vers. 2. A bastard shall not enter] Utpote qui nai sunt ex prosti∣bulo, plaè iu∣certo patre, sed certissima infa∣mia. 1 Sam. 20.30. Lest the reproach of his birth render him contemptible, or lesse courageous: lest some son of Belial set upon him, as Saul did upon his son Jonathan, and say, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman; (so, of the base and beastly woman) doe not I know that thou hast done this to the confusion of thy mothers nakednesse? The mu∣tinous Janizaries called their Emperour Bajazet the second, drunkard, beast, rascal, bastard, Bengi, that is, Batchelour, Turk, hist. or Scholler; and told him moreover, that they would teach him to use his great place and calling, with more sobriety and discretion. The English slighted and scorned their William the Conquerour, because a bastard. In spite also to whom, and disgrace to his mother Arlet, they called all whores, Harlets. The Jews at this day, amongst other opprobrious words, wherewith they spite∣fully load us, they call all Christians, Mamzer Goi, that is, Hea∣then bastards: Our Saviour, upon better grounds, called them
long since, a bastardly brood, Matth. 12.39. And their own Pro∣phet Esay did the same thing long before, Chap. 57. vers. 3, 4, and that, for their prophane scoffing at the truth, and the Pro∣fessours thereof. Yet who so forward as they, to say, We are not born of fornication, no bastards? Joh. 8.41. Vers. 3. For ever] i. e. This law is perpetual, and indispen∣sable; so highly displeasing are many meer omissions of duty. Omission of diet breeds diseases, brings death: so here. Vers. 4. Because they met you not] As God takes notice of the least courtesie shewed to his people, even to a cup of cold water, to requite it; so he doth of the least discourtesie, even to a frown or a frump, (Gen. 4.6. See the Note there) to revenge it.  [And because they bired, &c.] See the Note on Num. 22.3, 6. Vers. 5. Nevertheless the Lord, &c.]▪ q.d. No thank to the wicked Moabites, that Balaam blasted thee not; as neither to Balaam, whose tongue was meerly over-ruled by the Almighty, and made to bless those whom he would gladly have cursed. And thus still the Lord orders the worlds disorders; turning dross into gold, by a stupendious Alchymy, and directing mens evill actions to a good end. Hence it is that they fulfill (though they intend no such thing, but the satisfying of their own lusts, Esay 10.5, 6, 7.) neither more nor less, then what the hand and coun∣sel of God hath determined, Act. 4.28. & 3.27. Howbeit, the hands that nailed Christ to the Cross, were wicked hands, Act. 2.23. And Juds the traitour, received strangling and shedding of bowels, as a reward of his iniquity, for being guide to them that took Jesus, Act. 1.16, 17, 18. It was not without God, that the Kingdom was rent from Rehoboam, 2 King. 12. and yet he flatly renounceth it, (as well he might, all the evil that was in it) Hosea. 8.4. Vers. 6. Thou shalt not seek their peace] Or, enter into confe∣deracy with them; which when David did, 2 Sam. 10.1, 2. he was basely abused in his Embassadours. Hannibals hatred to the Romanes, Cambd. Elisab. is well known. Tirone, 1 567. so boyled in ha∣tred against the English, that he named a Castle that he built, Feoghnegal, that is, the hatred of the English. Among those wilde Irish, the Fathers are said to inflict an heavy curse on all their posterity, if ever they should sow corn, build houses, or learn the English tongue.
Vers. 7. For he is thy brother] And therefore to be born with, though unkind and injurious. Howbeit, fratrum concordia rara est: A brother offended, is harder to be won, saith the Wise-man, then a strong city; and their contentions are like the barrs of a Ca∣stle, Prov. 18.19. The dissention between England and Scotland, Daniels hist. 192. consumed more Christian blood, wrought more spoyl and de∣struction, and continued longer, then ever quarrel we read of, did, between any two people of the world. The God of Peace prevent the like bloody dissentions again, now mightily endea∣voured by the Boutefeaus of both nations. Si collidimur, fran∣gimur, If we clash, we perish: dissention is the mother of disso∣lution, of desolation. [Thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian] But learn of him to return one good turn for another. Egyptii dicuntur, praeter alias nationes, erga benè meritos de se grati; Existimant enim magnum vitae subsidum esse, Diod. Sic. lib. 2. gratia retributio∣nem, saith Diodorus: The Egyptians are said to be, above all others, a thankful people; and to look upon thankfulness, as a main support of mans life. Because thou wast a stranger in his land] Where, though thou mettest with much hardship, yet thou hadst kind entertainment at first, and after that, a subsistance, such as it was. Our Henry 6. is said to have been of that happy memory, that he never for∣gat any thing but injuries. Elisha, by a noble revenge, bad set bread and water before the Syrians that came to surprize him. Vers. 8. In their third generation] The Edomites for their consanguinity, (it is some priviledg to be allied to the Saints, Colos. 4. to be Barnabas his sisters son,) the Egyptians for their hospitality to Gods first-born Israel. God is not unrighteous, &c. Heb. 6.10. See the Note there. Vers. 9. Then keep thee from every wicked thing] Walk ac∣curately, as carrying thy life in thy hand; for the sword devour∣eth one, as well as another, 2 Sam. 11.25. it spares neither lord nor losel, as they say. Every souldier, therefore, should be a Saint, ready prest to meet the Lord; who hath said, I will be sanctified in all them that draw neer unto me, Levit. 10.3. Vers. 10. Then shall he go abroad] Go voluntarily, though he be not excluded, as lepers, and the like, were. Arcta minùs obe∣dientia est, ad legem solummodè justum esse, saith One; God likes a free-will offering.
Vers. 11. He shall wash himself with water] See Levit. 15. with the Notes. The Turks, at this day, pertinaciously & superstitiously re∣tain this ceremony. Before prayers, they wash both face & hands; sometimes the head, and other parts: Yea some report of them, that every time they make water, or other unclean excercise of nature, Blunts voy∣age. they wash, little regarding who stands by: If a dog do but chance to touch their hands, they wash presently, &c. Vers. 12. And shalt turn back and cover] How much more curious should they be of soul-defilements? Sin is the souls ex∣crement, and defiles a man worse then any jakes, Matth. 7.15, 20, 23. Vers. 13. Thy God walketh in the midst of thy Camp] Where he is both Van and Rear, Isai. 52.12. And to give up thine enemies] Hence the Philistims were so frighted at the sight of the Ark. Let us flee from the face of Is∣rael, for the Lord fighteth for them, said those Egyptians, Exod. 14.25. And the same, said a great Commander for the King, at the dissolution of the siege at Plimouth, 1645. That he see no unclean thing] Hereby God taught his people holy conversation, that they should keep themselves from their iniquity, as David did, Psal. 18.23. that is, from such sins, as either by their constitution, calling, company, or custome, they are most prone to. Vers. 15. The servant that is escaped] A heathe servant, that flyes for religion, and desires to joyn himself to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servant; such must have no cause given them to say, The Lord hath utterly se∣parated me from his people, Isai. 56.2, 6. Vers. 17. There shall be no whore] And what a stinking shame is that, that stews and brothel-houses are licensed by the Pope, who reaps no small profit by them? The Papists themselves write, with detestation, that at Rome, a Jewish maid might not be admitted into the stews of whoredome, unless she would be first baptized; Espeacaeus de∣contin. l. 3. c. 4. ut Judae filiae scortari non liceat, Dei filiae liceat: Imò Israelis filiae meretricari non aliter arte possit quàm facta per baptismum sanctum Christi soror & filia. Nor a Sodomite of the sons of Israel] See the Note on Gen. 19.5. Pythagoras his precept, , was intended against this kind of horrid and unnatural uncleanness; , sig∣nifying somewhat else besides beans: But what a beast was Pope
Sixtus Quintus, qui lupanar utriusque Veneris Roma condidit, as Agrippa reporteth? Vers. 18. Nor the price of a dog] Plutarch tells us, that it was not permitted to a dog, . Plut. . to enter into the chief tower or Temple, at Athens, for his heat in Venery, and ill savour. The Hebrews understand this text literally, according to Esay 66 3. Others metaphorically, as Rev. 22.15. either of imp∣dent Cynicks, (such as Antisthenes) that shame not to commit uncleanness in the sight of others; these are worse then Abso∣lom, 2 Sam. 16.22. Or else of Sodomites, buggerers, Meritorii, as they call them, men that have put off all manhood, and are become dogs, worse then dogs. Am I a dogs head? said Abner to Ishbosheth, 2 Sam. 3.8. that is, shamelesly libidinous. Vers. 19. Thou shalt not lend upon usury] Heb. upon biting usury. It must needs bite at length, that licks so clean. Amaleck, the licking people, I mean, the nation of Usurers, and their factours, as Cormorants, fall upon the poor borrower, and with open mouth devour him. . Foenus a multiplici foetu, ut . In the year, 1235. Speed. there were spred thorough England, certain Romane Usurers, call∣ed Caursini, quasi capientes Ʋrsi, devouring bears, saith Matthew Paris. These bite to purpose: Others are more cunning, and close in their conveyance; like Serpents, they can sting without hissing; like our-dogs, suck your blood only with licking, and in the end, kill you, and cut your throats without biting. For as much as all Ʋsury, being forbidden by the law of God, is a sin, and detestable, &c. saith the statute, 13. Elisab. Chap. 8. And, Ve∣rily, so many as increase themselves by usury, &c. they have their goods of the 'Devils gift. Homil. of the Church of England, Vol. 2. Hom. 17. pag. 2. Aristotle, by the dim light of nature, Arist. Eth. l. 4. cap. 1. saw the evil of it; condemning in one page, the Usurer and the Di∣cer. And Agis, General of the Athenians, so hated Usury, that he made a bonefire of all the Usurers bills and bonds, Plut. in So∣lone. in the mar∣ket place; and then said, that he never saw a finer fire then that, in all his life. Vers. 20. Ʋnto a stranger thou mayst] And they do it to pur∣pose, at this day, in forraign parts where they live; straining up their Usury to eighteen in the hundred, upon the Christian. This is their chief trade; and this is yeelded, by some, as a reason why
the Iews do so stink; quòd plerique omnes mensarii sint, faenera∣toriam exercentes, et ita nullis exercitati laboribus, i.e. Because most of them are usurers, lead sedentary lives, and use no bodily exercise. It was the saying of a merry fellow, that in Christen∣dom, there were neither schollers enough, gentlemen enough, nor Iewes enough. Heyl. Geog. If the first, so many would not be uralists; If the second, so many Pesants would not be reckoned among the Gentry; If the third, not so many Usurers. Vers. 21. Thou shalt not slack to pray] Come off with it roundly and readily, as those, Zech. 5.9. that had wings, and wind in their wings. Habent aulae suum citò, citè. God loves a cheerefull giver. Vers. 22. It shall be no sin in thee] i.e. No such great sin, as Ioh. 9.41. lib. 2. de Mo∣nach. cap. 16. Alphons. de castro. So Iob. 15.22, 24. Jam. 4.17. See Eccles. 5.5. Vovere nusquam est prceptum, saith Bellarmine: We are no where in Scripture commanded to vow. And, Fateor quod deus non prae∣cipit, sed tantùm consulit nobis ut aliquid illi voveamus, saith another Popish writer. I confess, God no where commandeth, but only counselleth us to make vows: But what will they say to Psal. 76.11. Vow, and perform to the Lord your God, bring presents, &c? And are not the nine lepers condemned by Christ, for their negligence and unthankfulness, Luk. 17.17, 18. Vers. 24. When thou comest, &c.] As a passenger, Mat. 12.1, 2. (how much more as a labourer, 1 Cor. 9.7.) thou maist take what thou wilt for necessity, but not for superfluity. Vers. 25. But thou shalt not move  sickle] Here God reser∣veth the right and property of the owner, which no man might invade or infringe. CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 1. BEcause he hath found some uncleanness] He is dis∣pleased with some defect, which he hath found either in her body, or behaviour: as our Henry the eight pre∣tended at least, to do in his Anne of Cleeve, sister to William Duke of Cleeve, whose other sister Frederike Duke of Saxony (Luthers Patrone and protectour) had espoused. This Lady, being snt into England (against Fredericks liking,) and married to King Henry, seemed nothing pleasing in his eye,
and was therefore (sed quo jure?) soon after divorced. This, Steven Gardiner, thought a fit subject for him to work upon, Speeds hist. fol. 1042. against the Lord Cromwell, who had made the match, and now opposed the divorce, and was therefore put to death; which he suffered right christianly, and cheerfully. Let him write her a bill of divorcement Heb. he shall write her a bill of divorcement. God permitteth, he commandeth not the Jews thus to do; as they mistook the matter, Math. 19.7. and were better informed by our Saviour, vers. 8. See the Notes there. Vers. 3. And if the latter husband ha her] As many Nabals now-a-dayes do: Job was not more weary of his boyls, then they are of their bed-fellows; cursing their wedding-day as much, as he did his birth-day; and thirsting after a divorte, as he did after death: Which because it cannot be had, their lives prove like the sojourning of Israel in Marah; where almost nothing could be heard, but mourning, conjuring, and complain∣ing. Vers. 4. After that she is defiled] Or, caused to be defiled, to wit, by her husband, who put her away first, he being her only lawful husband, Marth. 5.32. Vers. 5. Shall chear up his wife] For the better knitting of their affections; which if well done at first, will continue the more firm ever after; as a broken bone well set, or as two boards well glewed together, will sooner break in a new place, then there. Vers. 6. A mans life] That is, his livelihood. A poor man in his house, is like a ail in his shell; crush that, and you kill him. See Luk. 8.43. Mark 12.44. all her life, that is, . all her living. Vers. 7. And maketh merchandise of him] What then shall be done to those seducers, that creeping, or shooting themselves in∣to houses, lend taptive silly women, 2 Tim. 3.6. and simple men, Rom. 16.18. take them prisoners, and then make prize of them? 2 Pet. 2.3. Of which sort of soul-merchants, there are now a∣dayes found not a few. See Rev. 18.13. Vers. 8, The Levites shall teach you] Not the history only, but the mystery too. See the Notes on Levit. 13. Vers. 9. Did unto Miriam] When he spate in her face, and spared her not, though a Prophetess, and a Conductress of Gods
people to Canaan, Mic. 6.4. God will not pass by the sins of his Saints, (if scandalous especially,) without a sensible check. Vers. 10. To fetch his pledg] To see, quàm sit curta supellex and to pick and chuse what pledg thou pleasest. Vers. 12. Thou shalt not sleep with his pledg] As those cruel crafties did, Amos 2.8. that sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shooes, vers. 6. Vers. 13. May blesse thee] Saying, as St. Paul brings in the relieved poor Christian, 2 Cor. 9.15. Thanks be unto God, for his unspeakable gift. God will surely bless thee for such a blessing. And it shall be righteousnesse unto thee] God will reckon it for a good work; and graciously reward it: he will turn pay∣master to thee; thy righteousness (and thy riches too) shall en∣dure for ever, Psal. 11 2.3. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 1. IF there be a controversie] Among the Mahometans there are very few law-suites; and the reason is given, quòd temerè litigantes publicè flagellis ceduntur, because they that sue others without just cause, Caesar. Com. are whipped publikely. Once it was counted ominous, to commence actions, and follow suites. Of our common-barretters, we may well say, as the Historian doth of Mathematicians, Tac. lib. 1. c. 7. Genus hominum quod in rep: nostra & vetabitur semper & retinebitur. Vers. 2. To be beaten before his face] The Turks, when cru∣elly lashed, are compelled to return to the Judge that command∣ed it, to kiss his hand, to give him thanks, and to pay the officer that whipped them. Vers. 3. Should seem vile unto thee] There is an honour due to all men, 1 Pet. 2.17. and though we must hate the sin, yet not the sinner. Vers. 4. That treadeth out the Corn] Which was the manner of that country: Whereunto, also, the Prophet alludeth, Hos. 10.11. Ephraim is a heifer, that loveth to tread out the corn, (be∣cause, while it treads, it feeds on the corn) but not to plow, be∣cause no refreshing, till the work was done. Vers. 5. Her husbands brother] This was a special exception
from that general law, Levit. 18.16. but yet gave no liberty un∣der this pretext, to have more wives then one at once. See the Note on Matth. 22.23. Vers. 6. The first-born] Provided, that he be a son; as ap∣pears by the reason here given, that his name be not put out of Israel. It signified the birth-right of Christ, that should never dye. He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his dayes, Isai. 53.10. Filiabitur nomine ejus, Psal. 72.17. The name of Christ shall endure for ever; it shall be begotten, as one generation is begotten of another, there shall be a succession of Christs name. Vers. 9. And loose his shooe] To shew, that he was worthy to go bare-foot, and had no right (howsoever,) to tread upon that ground, as any part of his estate. See Ruth 4.7. The Turks have a ceremony somewhat like this: The woman may sue a divorce, when her husband would abuse her against nature; Blunts voy. which she doth, by taking off his or her shooe before the judg, and holding it, the sole upward, but speaking nothing, for the uncleanness of the fact. [And spit in his face] As unwor∣thy to shew his face amongst his brethren. See Num. 12.14. Isai. 50.6. [That will not build up his brothers house] See the Note on Exod. 1.21. Vers. 12. Cut off her hand] The instrument of her sin: thus Cranmer thrust his hand (wherewith he had subscribed a recan∣tation,) first into the fire, crying out, thou unworthy right hand. An act of Parliament was here made, in the raign of Philip and Mary; that the authours and sowers of seditious writings, should lose their right hands: By vertue whereof John Stubbes and William Page, had their right hands cut off, with a cleaver driven through the wrist, with the force of a beetle, in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth, for a book written against the mar∣riage with the Duke of Anjou, entituled the Gulf, Camb. Elisab. fol. 239. wherein Eng∣land will be swallowed up, by the French marriage, &c. which most men presaged, would (if it had gone one,) have been the ruine of religion.
Vers. 13. Divers weights, a great and a small] As they have that weigh not out a whole seventh day to God, who hath gi∣ven men six whole dayes to labour in: these sell by one mea∣sure, and buy by another. It was an errour doubtless, for want of due light and better information, in that pious Prince Ed∣wardthe sixth, Life of Edw. 6. by Sr. I. H. pag. 147. to give order to his Councell, that upon Sundayes, they should intend publique affaires of the realm, dispatch an∣swers to letters, and make full dispatches of all things, conclu∣ded in the week before: provided, that they be present at com∣mon-prayer. Vers. 18. How he met thee by the way] Not with bread and wa∣ter, but with fire and sword. See Exod. 17.8. And he feared not God] Who had so powerfully brought his Israel out of Egypt. See Iob 6.14. Gen. 20.11. with the note there. Vers. 19. Thou shalt not forget it] Neither did they: Saul should have utterly destroyed them, 1 Sam. 15. But wherein he failed, God stirred up the Simeonites in Hezekiah's dayes, to smite the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, 1 Chron. 4.42, 43. It is ill angring the ancient of days. His wrath lasts longer then hot coales of juniper, Psal. 120.4. his judgments are severe and durable: As we use to say of winter, they never rot in the skie; but shall fall, if late, yet surely, yet seasonably. Gods forbearance is no quittance. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 2. THat thou shalt take of the first, &c.] In token of homage, or as a chiefe rent due to God the true proprietary, of whom they held all. Vers. 5. A Syrian ready to perish] Jacob, whose originall was from Haran in Syria, Gen. 11.31. and whose abode had been with Laban the Syrian, in much poverty, affliction, and misery, Hos. 12.12. [And became there a nation] Consider we likewise what we were by nature, and should have been; what we are by grace, and shall be: and then take we up that most modest speech of that noble Athenian Captain Iphicrates, in the midst of all his glory, ; from how great base∣ness and misery, Aristot. Rheto∣ric. l. 5. c. 9. to what great blessedness and glory, are we ad∣vanced; being raised up together, and made to sit together in hea∣venly places in Christ Jesus? Eph. 2.6. See vers. 11.12, 13. with the notes. What was there in us (said Tamerlian to Baja∣zet the great Turk, Leionclav. Annal. Turc. now his prisoner;) that God should set us over two great Empires, of Turks and Tartars, to command many
more worthy then our selves; you being blind of one eye, and I lame of a leg, &c? Peter Martyr told Queen Elizabeth in an epistle, that Princes must be double thankfull to God. 1. As men. 2. As eminent men, exalted above others: so must all Gods servants; who being his first-born, are in that respect, higher then the Kings of the earth, Psal. 89.27. and being the first fruits of his revenue, are therefore holiness to the Lord, Ier. 2.3. Vers. 12. The stranger, the fatherless] Thus God doth not only plead the poor mans cause, Chap. 15.10, 11. but he allots a portion, of the third-yeares tyth, not only to the Levite, (who is never excluded,) but to the stranger, fatherless, and widdow; as Hierom observeth, and calleth it ; the poor mans tyth. Vers. 13. I have not transgressed] This is spoken, not by way of Pharisaicall boasting, or opinion of merit, but publike testifi∣cation of entire obedience. Vers. 14. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning] All Gods worships, were to be celebrated with joy, Deut. 12.7. Sacrifi∣ces offered with mourning, were abominated, Hos. 9.4. yea accur∣sed, Deut. 28.47. None might come to the court of Persia, in mourning weeds, Esth. 4.2. [For any unclean use] Or common profane use. Common and unclean, is one and the same, in sundry languages: to teach us, that it is hard to deal in common businesses, and not defile our selves; and that those that come to holy things, with common affections and carria∣ges, profane them. [Nor given ought thereof for the dead] To bury them, or buy provision for the funerall feast, Ier. 16.7. Ezek. 24.7. Hos. 9.4. [Ye have done according, &c.] It is a witty expression of Luther. By mens boasting of what they have done, sayes he, Haec ego feci, haec ego feci; they become no∣thing else but Faeces, dregs. But so did not these. See the note on vers. 13. Vers. 17. Thou hast avouched] This we do, when with highest estimation, most vigorous affections, and utmost indea∣vours we bestow our selves upon God; giving up our names and hearts, to the profession of truth. And this our chusing God for our God, Psal. 73 25. is a sign, he first chose us, 1 Ioh. 4.19. Mary answers not Rabboni, till Christ said Mary to her. It is he that brings us into the bonds of the Covenant, Ezek. 20.37.
He first cryes out, who is on my side? Who? and then gives us to answer, as Esay 44.6. One sayes, I am the Lords; another calls himself by the name of Jacob, another subscribes, &c. Vers. 19. And to make thee high] Assyria is the work of Gods hand, but Israel is his inheritance, Isa. 19.25. & 43.3. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 2. ANd plaister them with plaister] That they might have it in white and black. Vers. 4. In mount Ebal] Where the curse was denounced, vers. 13. to signifie, that those that sought salvation in the law, must needs be left under the curse. The law is a yoke of bon∣dage, as Hierom calls it: and they who look for righteousness from thence, are like oxen, who toyle and draw; and when they have done their labour, are fatted for slaughter. Vers. 5. Thou shalt build an altar] For burnt offerings, &c. Vers. 6.7. God teacheth them thereby, that righteousness (im∣possible to the law,) was to be sought in Christ, figured by that altar, and those sacrifices. Thus the morall law, drove the Iewes to the ceremoniall, (which was their Gospell;) as it doth now drive us to Christ, who is indeed the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believeth, Rom. 10.4. Vers. 8. All the words of this law very plainly] Therefore, it could not be all Deuteronomy; much less all Moses books, as some have thought; for what stones could suffiee for such a work? Unless they could write as close, (but how then could it be very plainly?) as he did, who set forth the whole history of our Saviours passion very lively, In canicular. colloq. (both things, and acts, and persons,) on the nailes of his own hands, as Maiolus repor∣teth. Vers. 15. Cursed be he, &c.] The blessings are not mentio∣ned by Moses, that we might learn to look for them, by the Messiah only, Act. 3.26. Vers. 16. That setteth light] That vilipendeth, undervalu∣eth, not only that curseth, as, Exod. 21.17. Vers. 24. That smiteth] Either with violent hand, or viru∣lent tongue, Ier. 28.18. Vers. 26. Cursed] Aut faciendum, ant patiendum. Men must
either have the direction of the law, or the correction. CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 1. IF thou shalt hearken diligently] Heb. If hearkening thou shalt hearken; If when Gods speaks once, thou shalt hear it twice; as David did, Psal. 62.11. by a blessed rebound of meditation and practice. [Will set thee on high] Thou shalt ride upon the high places of the earth, Isai 58.14. There thou shalt have thy commoration, but in heaven thy con∣versation, Philip. 3.20. being an high and holy people, Deut. 26.19. high in worth, and humble in heart, Nazian. as one saith of Atha∣nasius. Vers. 2. And overtake thee] Unexpectedly befall thee. Sure∣ly, goodness and mercy shall follow thee, Psal. 23.6. as the eve∣ning Sun-beames follow the passenger, as the rock-water follow∣ed the Israelites in the wilderness, and overtook them at their stations, 1 Cor. 10.4. O continue, or, draw out to the length thy lo∣ving kindness, unto them that know thee, Psal. 36.11, There will be a continued Series, a connexion between them, to all such. Vers. 3. Blessed shalt thou be] What blessedness is, See the Note on Mat. 5.3. Vers. 4. The fruit of thy body] Which is thy chief possession; Dulcis acerbitas amarissima vo∣luptas. Tertull. but without my blessing, will be bitter sweets. Blessed is the man, that hath his quiver full of such, as are as the arrowes of a strong man; Psal. 128 4. the knottiness of whose nature is refined and re∣formed, and made smooth by grace. Arrowes be not arrowes by growth, but by art: what can better preserve Iacob from confusion, or his face from waxing pale, then, when he shall see his children, the work of Gods hands, framed and fitted by the word in regeneration, and the duties of new obedience. This will make him to sanctifie God, even to sanctifie the Holy One, and with singular incouragement from the God of Israel. Isai. 29.22, 23. Vers. 7. The Lord shall cause thine enemies] Mr. Fox ob∣serves, that in King Edward the sixth's time, the English put to flight their enemies, in Muscleborough field, the self-same day, and hour, wherein the reformation enjoyned by Parliament, Act. & Mon was put in execution at London, by burning of Idolatrous images.
Such a dependance hath our success, upon our obedience. And flee before thee seven wayes] In the fore-mentioned fight, many so strained themselves in their race, that they fell down breathless and dead; whereby they seemed in running from their deaths, to run through it: 2000 lying all day as dead, got away in the night. The Irish were so galled, or sca∣red with the English ordnance, Life of Edw. 6 by Sr. Io. H. that they had neither good hearts to go forward, nor good liking to stand still, nor good assurance to run away, saith the Historian. Vers. 8. The Lord shall command the blessing] Now if he send his Mandamus, who shall withstand it? Vers. 10. And they shall be afraid of thee] Naturall consci∣ence cannot but do homage to the image of God, stamped upon the natures, and works of the godly. When they see in them, that which is above the ordinary nature of men, or their expecta∣tion, they are afraid of the Name of God, whereby they are called; their very hearts ake, and quake within them; as is to be seen in Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, Herod, Dioclesian, who was so amazed at the singular piety, and invincible patience of the primitive Christians, that he laid down the Empire in a hu∣mour, Bucholcer. quod christi nomen se deleturum, uti cupiverat, desperasset; because, that when he sought to root out religion, he saw he could do no good on't. Vers. 12. And thou shalt lend] This was our condition, in the happy dayes of that incomparable Elizabeth, not to be pas∣sed over slightly, without one sigh breathed forth, now after 40 years, in her sacred memory. What a deal, both of men and moneys, did she lend the French, the Hollanders, &c? Vers. 13. And the Lord shall make thee] See a parallel place, Hos. 13.1. When Ephraim spake, there was trembling; he ex∣alted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he dyed. Before, none durst budg against the name of Ephraim; but after he offended in Baal, every paltry adversary trampled upon him, as a dead man. So they did, likewise, upon Henry 4. of France, ever victorious, till he changed his religion; till then, Bonus orbi; but after that, Orbus boni, as One wittily anagrammatized his name, Borbonius. Vers. 15. All these ourses shall come] Far more curses are men∣tioned, then blessings. Such is the baseness of our natures, that we are sooner terrified with menaces, then moved with mercies.
See we may here, how the curse of God haunts the wicked (as it were a fury) in all his wayes. In the City it attends him, in the Country it hovers over him: Coming in, it accompanies him; going forth, it followes him; and in travel, it is his Com∣morade. If it distaste not his dough, or empty his basket, ye will it fill his store with strife, or mingle the wrath of God with his sweetest morsels. It is a moth in his wardrobe, murrain among his cattle, mildew in his field, rot among his sheep, and oft-times makes the fruit of his loyns his greatest beart-break; so that he is ready to wish with Augustus, Ʋtinàm aut coelebs vixissem, aut orbus periissem; O that I had either never married, or ded childless▪ Vers. 21. The Lord shall make the pestilence] Which Hipo∣crates calls, , as the falling sickness is called Morbus sacer, as more immediately sent of God. Vers. 22. The Lord shall smite thee, &c.] See the Note on Levit. 26.16. Vers. 24. Powder and dust] Which the wind, and other things, raise in times of drought. Vers. 27. With the botch of Egypt] i. e. with the leprosie, called Elephantiasis, when the skin grows hard as the Elephants skin. This, saith One, was bred only about Nilus the river of Egypt. Vers. 28. With madness and blindness] Spiritual especially; such as befel the Jews of old, Rom. 11.18. 2 Cor. 3.14. the chief Priests and Scribes especially, who being questioned by Herod, about the King of the Jews, Matth. 2.4, 5. could answer directly out of the Scriptures, and give such signs of the Messias, as did evidently agree to Jesus Christ. And yet, because they discerned not their day of grace, but winked hard with their eyes, and shut the windows, lest the light should come in, they were, by a special judgment, so besotted and infatuated, that when God shews them the man, to whom their own signs agree, they can∣not allow of him, nor will yield to be saved by him, upon any tearms. How shamefully they were deluded by Barchocab, is notoriously known: And after this, when they saw Mahomet arising in such power, they were straight ready to cry him up for their Messiah. But when they saw him eat of a camel, they were as blanck, as when they saw the hoped issue of their late Jewish virgin turned to a daughter. They are generally light, aerial, and
fanatical brains, apt to work themselves into the fools Paradise of a sublime dotage. Howbeit, God, we trust, will, at length, cure them of this spiritual ophthalmy and phrensie. Their dispersion for this 1600 years is such, as that one of their own Rabbines concludes from thence, that their Messiah must needs be come, and they must needs suffer so much, for killing him. Oh that the salvation of Israel were once come out of Sion! When the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoyce, and Israel be glad, Psal. 14.7. Vers. 29. And thou shalt be only oppressed] As the Thebanes, ever till then victorious, were, after the death of Epaminondas, famous only for their overthrows: As Rome, since Antichristian, was never besieged by an enemy, but it was taken and plundered: as the Jews, since Christs death, never attempted any thing, but miscarried. An evil, an only evil, &c. Ezek. 7.5. Vers. 30. Thou shalt build an house, &c.] A great aggrava∣tion of a mans misery it is, to fall from high hopes, to fail of large expectations, as Haman did, and Absolom, and Alexan∣der the Great, and Tamerlan; who preparing to perfect his con∣quest of the Greek Empire; and having given a good beginning thereunto, in the midst of his high hopes, and greatest power, died of an ague, Turk. hist. Jan. 27. 1462. Many men spend their strength, and waste their wits, in getting these outward things, and in learning how to put them to their delightfullest use: and then (when to possess them, might seem a happiness,) either they die, or are otherwise deprived of all the sweet they have labour∣ed for. Vers. 32. And thine eyes shall look] A sad sight, to see our children butchered before our eyes, as Mauricius the Emperour did; or otherwise misused by a merciless enemy. Doves some∣times sit in their dove-cotes, and see their nests destroyed, their young ones taken away, and killed before their eyes; neither do they ever offer to rescue or revenge, as all other creatures either do, or desire to do. [And fail with looking] As Sisera's mothers did, Judg. 5.28. Vers. 33. The fruit of thy land, &c.] So Ezek. 25.4. They shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk. See Ier. 5.17. & 1.7. Vers. 34, 35. So that thou shalt be mad, &c.] As Bajazet was in his iron cage; as Pope Boniface 8. was, when shut up in
St. Angelo, by Sara Columnus his mortal enemy; Turk. hist. Ibid. 126. renting him∣self with his teeth, and devouring his own fingers. Philip the Spanish King, is said to have born patiently, the defeat given to hs invincible Armado, in the year 88; but ten years after, Cambd. Elisab. he dyed of a very loathsome and incureable disease; a sore botch that seized upon him from the sole of his foot, unto the top of his head; as is to be seen set down by Carol. Scribanius, Instit. Princip. cap. 20. Vers. 47. For the abundance of all things] Aristotle was wont to tax his Athenians, quòd cùm duas res invenissent, Laert. l. 5. c. 1. fru∣menta ac leges, frumentis uterentur, legibus nequaquàm; imò moribus suis quàm legibus uti mallent, as Valerius Maximus addeth. Sure it is, that as these Jews of old, so we, to this day, are much to be blamed, for that we live in Gods good land, but not by Gods good laws. Vers. 53. And thou shalt eat] See the Note on Levit. 26.29. Vers. 56. The tender and delicate] These threatnings were tanquam in speculo conspicuae, literally and punctually fulfilled upon the Jews, at the last destruction of Jerusalem; at which time, wrath came upon them to the utmost, 2 Thess. 2. Vers. 58. This glorious and fearful Name] That Nomen ma∣jestativum, as Bernard calleth it. The wiser sort of Heathens ac∣knowledged, augustius esse de Deo sentiendum, Hinc Pythage∣ricum illud, . quàm ut nomen & imaginem ejus passim ac temerè usurpemus, that higher thoughts must be taken of God, then lightly and prophanely to make use of his name; which no man may presume in a sudden unmanner∣liness to blurt out. When they would swear by their Jupiter, they would break off their oath with a , Suidas. as those that only durst to owe the rest to their thoughts. Vers. 63. So the Lord will rejoyce over you] See here the ve∣nemous nature of sin, so far forth offensive to Almighty God, as to cause him, (who otherwise afflicts not willingly, Lam. 3.33. but delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18.) to rejoyce in the ruine of his creatures, as here, to laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear cometh, Prov. 1.26. to take as much pleasure therein, as a man would do in a cup of generous wine, Rev. 16.19. and to be as much eased thereby, as one over-gorged would be, in ridding his stomach of that that oppressed it, Rev. 3.16. Vers. 65. A trembling heart] Juvenal, by a jeer, calls them
Judaeos trementes, trembling Jews, Sat. 6. It seems they had Cains curse upon them. Vers. 66. And thy life shall hang in doubt] Semper & indesi∣nenter desperabis de vita; thou shalt live in continual expectati∣on of death; as Tiberius caused such to do, as he most hated, for a singular punishment. Vers. 68. And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt] This is the last and greatest curse here threatned. Oh pray, pray, said that Dutch Divine, upon his death-bed, Pontifex enim Romanus, & concilium Tridentiaum mira moliuntur, for the Pope and his Council, are seeking to bring us all back into spirituall E∣gypt. Ah ne diem illum posteri Vivant mei, quo pristinum Vertantur in lutum aurea Qua nos beârunt soecula! What long hath been the opinion and fear of some, not uncon∣siderable Divines, Mr. Baylie his Anabaptis. un∣sealed, &c. pref. that Antichrist, before his abolition, shall once again overflow the whole face of the West, and suppresse the whole Protestant Churches; I pray God to avert. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 1. BEside the covenant] Which yet was also a covenant of grace, and the same with this in substance; only that at Horeb was made and delivered in a more legal manner: this in a more Evangelical, as appears in the following Chap∣ter. Vers. 4. Yet the Lord hath not given you] Nor is he bound to do; but on whom he will, he sheweth mercy, and whom he will, he hardeneth; i.e. he softneth not. Till when, a man stands in the midst of means, as a stake in the midst of streams, unmove∣able; yea the more God forbids a sin, the more he bids for it, Rom. 7.8. See the Notes on Matth. 13.11, 13, 14. Vers. 5. Your clothes] See the Note on Chap. 8.4. Vers. 6. ye have not eaten bread] Viz. ordinarily, (see Deut. 2.6.) but Manna; & beneficium postulat officium. Vers. 11. From the hewer of thy wood] The meanest amongst you, such as afterwards were the Gibeonites; who also, by faith,
became Covenanters, and are called Nethinims in Ezra and Ne∣hemiah. They were made drawers of water to the Temple, as a kind of punishment; God made it a mercy; for the nearer they were to the Church, the nearer they became to God. Vers. 16. How we have dwelt] And how hard is it to passe thorow Ethiopia, (how much more to dwell there?) and not to be discoloured? Sin is catching; and by the senses (those cinque-ports of the soul) that old serpent oft winds himself into the heart. Ye have seen their abominations; (oh that you would say, Satis est vidisse, &c.) Now therefore, lest there should be, &c. vers. 18. Vers. 17. A root that beareth gall] An evill heart of unbe∣liefe, Heb. 3.12. a deceitfull and deceived heart, Ier. 17.9. Isai. 44.20 that is ever either weaving spiders webbes. (i e. loving va∣nity, seeking after leasing, Psal 4.2.) or, hatching cockatrice eggs, that is, acting mischief, Esay, 59.5. . As in that first Chaos were the seeds of all creatures; so in mans heart, (here therefore fit∣ly called a root of rottenness) of all sins. Holy Bradford would never look upon any ones leud life with one eye, but presently re∣flect upon himself with the other, and say, In this my vile heart remains that sin, which, without Gods speciall grace, I should have committed as well as he. Vers. 19. When be heareth the words] But feareth them no more, then Behemoth doth the iron weapons, which are esteemed by him as straws. The presumptuous sinner (saith one,) makes God a God of cloutes: one that howsoever he speaks heavy words, will not do as he saith. Words are but wind, say they in Ieremy, Chap. 5.13. God forbid, say they in the Gospell, Luk. 20.16. These things are but spoken in terrorem, thinks the prac∣ticall Athiest; bug-beare words devised on purpose to affright silly people, &c. Ahab. (after he was threatned with utter roo∣ting out,) begat fifty sons, as it were to cross God, and to try it out with him. So Thrasonicall Lamech brags, and goes on to out-dare God himself; If Cain be avenged, &c. Gen. 4.23. The old Italians were wont in time of thunder, to shoot off their greatest ordnance, and to ring their greatest bells, to drown the noise of the heavens: like unto these, are many front∣less and flagitious persons. But shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger, (it is not more a prayer, then a prophecy;) cast down the people, O God, Psal. 56.7.
To add drunkenness to thirst] To add rebellion to sin, Iob 34.37. To drink iniquity, like water. Vers. 7. His sin and his re∣pentance run in a circle; as drankenness and thirst do. He sins, and cryes God mercy, and sayes he will sin no more, and yet does it again the next day; till his heart be so heardened by the de∣ceitfulness of sin, that at length he looseth all passive power, of recovering himself out of the snare of the devill, by whom he is taken alive, at his pleasure, 2 Tim. 2.26. Vers. 20. The Lord will not spare him] God cannot satisfie himself, in threatning this heynous sin; as if the very naming of it had inraged his jealousie. Yea when he threatneth it, he useth here no qualifications, (as he doth in other cases) but is absolute in threatning, to shew, that he will be resolute in punishing. See the like, Esay 22.12, 13, 14. Ezek. 24 1. It is better, there∣fore, to have a sore, then a seared conscience; as a burning fea∣ver is more hopeful then a lethargy. Vers. 22. When they see the plagues] A presumptuous offen∣der is a traytour to the State; and one sinner destroyeth much good, Eccles. 9.18. Vers. 23. And beareth not any grasse] As they say, no ground doth, where the great Turk hath once set his foot; such waste he makes, and such desolation he leaves behinde him. Like the overthrow of Sodome and Gomorrah] See the Notes on Gen. 19.24, 25.  [Admah and Zeboim] Which two Cities bordering on Sodome and Gomorrah, were the worse, and fared the worse for their neighbourhood; as Hamath did for Damascus, Zech. 9.2. God overthrew them, and repented not; Ier. 20.16. Vers. 26. And whom he had not given unto them] Or, who had not given to them any portion. For, Can the vanities of the Gen∣tiles give rain? or can the heavens give showers? Jer. 14.22. As Saul said, 1 Sam. 22.7. Can the son of Jesse give you vineyards, and olive-yards, &c? so may God say to Apostates, Can the world do for you, as I can? Vers. 28. And cast them into another land] Cast them with a violence, with a vengeance, (in the Hebrew the word [cast] hath an extraordinary great letter (sling them out, 1 Sam. 25.29. as out of a sling. Vers. 29. The secret things belong] This is one of those six∣teen places, which in the Hebrew, are marked with a special
note of regard. Eorum quaescire nec datur, nec fas est, docta est ignorantia, scientiae appetentia, insaniae species, saith Calvin, out of Austine. CHAP. XXX. Vers. 1. THe blessing and the curse] When thou hast made trial of both, and hast bought thy wit: as feeling by woful experience, what an evil and a bitter thing sin i▪ and how easily thou mightest have redeemed thine own sorrowes, by better obedience. Vers. 2. And shalt return to the Lord] By sin, we run away from God; by repentance, we return to him. Vers. 3. That then the Lord thy God] Conversie Judaeorum magnisicè hic promittitur, saith One. Here's a stately promise of the conversion of the Jews; concerning which, see the Notes on Rom. 11.25, &c. Vers. 4. If any of thine be driven] The Jews have been for this 1600 years and upward, a disjected and despised people, hated and cast out, by a common consent of all nations, for their unexpiable guilt, in murthering the Messiah; which they now begin to be somewhat sensible of, and will be so more and more. See the Note on Chap. 28.28. Vers. 6. And the Lord thy God] See Chap. 10.16. Vers. 7. Will put all these curses upon thine enemies] God will recompence tribulation to them that have troubled you, 2 Thess. 1.6. he will spoyl the spoylers, Esay 33.1. deliver the just out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his stead, Prov. 11.8. Isa. 65.13, 14. It seemeth to the Churches enemies, an incredible paradox, and a news by far more admirable then acceptable, that there should be such a transmutation of con∣ditions on both sides, to contraries; but so it will be, as sure as the coat is on their backs, or the heart in their bodies. See Lam. 4.21. Vers. 9. And in the fruit of thy land, for good] God will pro∣vide, that thou shalt not be the worse for thine outward abund∣ance; that fulness shall not breed forgetfulness. It is as hard to bear prosperity, as to drink much wine, and not be giddy; or as to drink strong waters, and not weaken the brain thereby. The
parable of the Sun and Wind is well known. Some of those, in Queen Maries dayes, who kept their garments close about them, wore them afterwards more loosely, when they came to prosperity, and preferment. It is a marvellous great mercy to have outward comforts and contentments, for good. Bonus Deus Constantinum Magnum tantis terrenis implevit muneribus, De civ. dei, lib. 5. cap. 25. quanta optare nullus auderet, saith Augustine, God of his good∣ness, heaped all good things upon Constantine. Vers. 11. For this commandement] This word of faith, Rom. 10.8. that teacheth the righteousness of faith, vers. 6. and speaketh on this wise; the doctrine of salvation by faith, that works by love: this is cleerly enough revealed in both testa∣ments; so that none can reasonably plead ignorance, and think to be excused by it. Vers. 12. Who shall go up for us to heaven] And yet to know heavenly things, is to ascend into heaven, Prov. 30.4. Vers. 13. Neither is it beyond the sea] Beyong the sea it was to us, till blessed Luthers books were brought hither, together with Tindals translation, and other good mens writings. Some Papists jeare us, and say, that Turkies, hops, and heresy, came into this kingdom in one bottom. Howbeit, long before this, the Lady Anne, wife to King Richard the second, siller to Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, by living here, was made acquainted with the Gospell: whence also many Bohemians comming hither, con∣vey'd Wickliffes books into Bohemia, whereby a good founda∣tion was laid for the ensuing reformation, Anno 1417, by the help of another good Queen there, called Sophia. The writings also of Iohn Husse brought thence, wrought much good in this kingdome, a hundred years before Luthers time. Vers. 19. Therefore chuse life] Which yet man (of himself,) can as little do, as a dead carcase can fly aloft. It was therefore an unsound and unsavory speech of him that said, quod vivamus, dei munus est; quod benè vivamus, nostrum: That we live, it is of God; but that we live well, it is of our selves. See the con∣trary, Isai. 26.12. Hos. 14.8. Ioh. 15.5.
CHAP. XXXI. Vers. 2. I am an hundred and twenty, &c.] And so might well bespeak them, as Augustus once did his army, and pacified them thereby, when they were in a mutiny; Sueton. Audite senem juvenes, quem jvenem senes and erunt. Vers. 6. He will not fail thee] Five times, in holy Scriptures, is this precious promise repeated; and Heb. 13.5. made common to all believers, with a very deep asseveration. Vers. 9. Ʋnto the Priests] Gods library-keepers, his deposi∣taries.  [Ʋnto all the elders of Israel] As to the Keepers of both Tables. Vers. 11. Thou shalt read this law] Which was nevertheless read in their synagogues every Sabbath-day, Act. 15. And by this reading, at the feast of Tabernacles, every seventh year, the originall copy written by Moses; Mr. Burton against Cou∣zens. they might perceive that those copyes that they had amongst them, were right and au∣thentick. It was ill ordered, in our english bibles of the new translation, that between the Printers haste, and Correctours over-sight, such foul escapes have been lately committed; as Iu∣das printed for Iesus, in the great Bible, Lightf. Miscel. The Turkish Alcoran is written, and to be read in Arabick▪ under pain of death not to mistake a letter, which is as easily done in this tongue, as in any. Vers. 17. And many evils and troubles] As it befell Sampson and Saul, when God was gone: , all mi∣series came trooping and treading one in the heeles of another. So Ezek. 9.10, 11. God makes many removes: and as he goes out, some judgment comes in upon the land. Vers. 19. Put it in their mouths] That out of their own mouthes I may judg them: things made up in meeter, are better remembred. Before the knowledg of letters and writing, among the ancients, it was a custome to sing their laws, lest they might forget them; used in the days of Aristotle, by the Agathyrsi, a people neer to the Scythians. Vers. 21. For I know their imagination] As a man that knows what rootes he hath in his garden; thought here be not a flower ap∣peares, yet he can say, when the spring comes, this and this will
come up; because he knows the garden, and knows what roots are there: So the Lord knows our thoughts afarr off; because he knows the principles that are within, and knows what they will do, when occasion serves: he is privy to that root, that beareth gall and wormwood, Chap. 29.18. Vers. 26. In the side of the Ark] That it might be heard, and regarded, as the very law of God, though penned by Mo∣ses. And indeed the Iewes at this day, shew exceeding great respect to the law: No man may touch it, but with the right hand, and without a kiss of reverence; Schicard. nor carry it behinde him, but lay it next to his heart in his travell: If it but fall to the ground, they institute a fast for it, Weemse. &c. The very Turks have so high an esteem of Moses, that if they finde any peece of his writings, (be it but a torn paper) lying on the ground, Pareus prol. in Genes. they presently take it up, and kiss it. [That it may be there for a witness] Hence haply the Ark was called, the Ark of the testimony; the law might be called the doomes day book such a book there is in our common-law, so called, saith Mathew Paris, because it spares no man. Vers. 29. To provoke him to anger] Which is the greatest fol∣ly that can be, for, are we stronger then he? can we imagine to make our party good with him? Surely, as Ʋlysses his compani∣ons told him, when he would needs provoke Polydamus; ; May not we much more say so to them, that will needs pro∣voke the Lord? It is good for men, to meddle with their mat∣ches, and not contend with him that is mightier then they. CHAP. XXXII. V. 1. GIve eare O ye heavens] q. d. Such is this peoples stu∣pidity and obstinacy, that I may as soon gain audience of these inanimate creatures, as of them. See Isai. 1.2. Iosh. 24.27. Ier. 22.29. We may cry, till we are hoarse; speake, till we spit forth our lungs, and to no more purpose, then Bede did, when he prea∣ched to an heape of stones. Holy Melanchthon, being himself newly converted, thought it impossible for his hearers, to with∣stand the evidence of the Gospell. But after he had been a Preacher a while, 'tis said he complained, that old Adam, was too
hard for young Melanchthon. Vers. 2. My doctrine] Heb. My taking, or winning doctrine: according to that▪ Prov. 1.30. He that winneth. (Heb. taketh) souls, (as fowlers do birds) is wise. [Shall drop as the rain] Drop, not dash; and as the rain, not as the storme, or as the spout, as they call it at sea. Evangelizatum non maledictum missus es, said Oecolampadius, to Facellus, an excellent, but an over earnest Preacher. And such a one, say some, was Mr. Perkins in his younger time; able almost to make his hearers hearts fall down, and their haires to stand upright. The word Damne, he would pronounce with such an emphasis, as left a dolefull Eccho in his auditours eares, a good while after. True it is, that Preachers should take the same liberty, to cry down sins, that men take to commit them. Peccata tantâ severitate arguebat, (saith one of Chrysostom,) acsi ipse etiam per injuriam laesus esset: But yet moderation must be used, and instruction drop∣meale distilled, that it may soak and sink; and so soften the heart, that all grace may abound, &c. Such sweet drops were Mr. Bradford, Mr. Dod. Dr. Sibbes, Vers. 3. Ascribe ye greatness] i.e. Tremble at his word, and take it to heart. See 1 Thess. 2.13. Vers. 4. He is the Rock] A firme and everlasting refuge, a rock of Ages, Isai. 26.4. One age passeth away, and another, and a third, &c. but the rock remaines. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, Prov. 18.10. munition of rocks, Isai. 33.16. Rocks so deep, no pioner can undermine them; so thick, no Can∣non can pierce them; so high, no ladder can scale them. Vers. 5. Their spot is not the spot] Saints also have their spots, but not ingraven, not Leopards spots, that are not in the skin on∣ly, but the flesh and bones, in the sinewes, and the most inner parts; and so cannot be cured by any art, or, washed away with any water. It is of incogitancy, that the Saints fall; put them in minde, and they mend all: It is of passion, and passi∣ons last not long. They are preoccupated, taken at unawares, &c. Gal. 6.1. They have ever God for their chief end, and will not forgoe him upon any termes: Only they erre in the way, as thinking they may fulfill such a lust, and keep God too: but there is no way of wickedness found in them. Though shaken, yet they are rooted as trees; and, though they wag up and down,
yet they remove not, as a ship at anchour. Sin stings the wicked, as the fiery serpents did the Israelites: the sins of the saints, are but like the viper on Pauls hand, that hurt him not. Sin makes wicked men the object of God hatred, the Saints, of his pity: as we hate poison in a toade, but we pity it in a man; in the one, it is their nature; in the other, their disease. Vers. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord] Good turns aggra∣vate unkindnesses; and our guilt is increased by our obligations. Solomons idolatry was far worse then that of his wives: he had been better bred, and God had appeared to him twice. It is the ingratitude, that makes the godly mans sin so hainous; which otherwise, would be far less then other mens: sith his temptati∣ons are stronger, and his resistance greater. Hebricians observe, that in Halaihovah, there is in the text, one  greater then ordina∣ry; to shew, that the wonder was the greater, that they should so evill requite such a Lord. Father, Redeemer, Maker, and Go∣vernour, by being so corrupt, perverse, crooked foolish, and unwise: five opposed to live:  being used for the number of five. Vers. 8. He set the bounds of the people] Of the seventy nati∣ons reckoned, Gen. 10. and the seventy souls of Israel, Gen. 46.27. Deut. 10.22. The Iewes have a saying, that those seventy souls were as much, as all the seventy nations of the world; as being the Lords portion, for whom he espyed out the land of Canaan, which is the glory of all lands, Ezek. 20.6. Vers. 9. For the Lords portion] Dear to God, though de∣spised of the world. They are the Lords inheritance, Isai 19.25. peculiar ones, Exod. 19.5. the people of his purchase, that comprehended all his gettings, 1 Pet. 2.9. his glory, Isai. 46.13. his ornament, Ezek. 7.20. his throne, Ier. 4.21. his diadem, Isai. 62.3. heires of the kingdome, saith Saint Iames, heads de∣stinated to the diadem, Jam. 2.5. saith Tertullian, Vers. 10. And in the waste howling wilderness] A figure of the cryes of a thirsty and troubled conscience, and of infernall horrours. See Ezek 16.4. &c. [He instructed him] Both by his word and works, both of mercy and justice: for Gods rods also are vocall, Mic. 6.9. his house of correction, is his school of instruction. [He kept him as the apple of his eye] The tenderest peece of the tenderest part: The chrystall hu∣mour, as the Philosophers call it. Heb. Ishon, of Ish; as Pupilla of Pupa; because therein appeares the likeness of a little man:
Or, because a man is to be prized above all other creatures; so God esteemeth his people, above all the world. Vers. 11. As an eagle stirreth up her nest] So doth God stirr up his people, by his word of promise. [Fluttereth over them] By the motions of his Spirit, as Gen. 1.2 [Spreadeth abroad her wings] Hovereth and covereth them with his pro∣tection, Mat. 23.37. [Taketh them] With much ten∣derness, but nothing comparable to that of God. [Beareth them on her wings] Aquilae pullos suos in alis portant, alites re∣liqui inter pedes, saith Munster here, out of Rabbi Solomon. See the Note on Exod. 19.4. Vers. 12. And there was no strange god with him] Why then should any share with him in his service? Be the gods of the heathen good-fellows, saith One? the true God will endure no corrival. Vers. 13. To suck honey out of the rock] Water, as sweet as honey, in that necessity; So doth every worthy Receiver by faith, at the Sacrament: Whereas, who so comes thereunto, without faith, is like a man, saith Mr. Tindal, that thinks to quench his thirst, by sucking the Ale-powl. Vers. 14. With the fat of kidneys of wheat] With the very Best of the Best; figuring heavenly dainties, that full feast, Isai. 25. Judaea, for its admirable fertilty, is called Sumen totius or∣bis: how basely soever Strabo speaks of it, as of a dry barren Country; wherein he shews less ingenuity, then railing Rabsha∣keh did. Vers. 15. But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked] Jeshurun, h est Integellus, saith One, as Shimshon, or Sampson, Solilus, a lit∣tle Sun, but a type of the Sun of righteousness, that hath health in his wings, that is, in his beams. Israel should have been Je∣shurun, that is, Righteous, or upright before the Lord, Israelites indeed; but were nothing less. If ever they had been better in the time of their espousals, when they went after God in the Wil∣derness, in a land that was not sowen, Jer. 2.2. yet now that they were full fed, they kicked; as young mulets, when they have sucked, matrem calcibus petunt, kick the dammes dugs. Fulnesse breeds forgetfulness; and the best are but too prone to surfet of the things of this life; which, by our corruption, oft-times, prove a snare to our souls. I will lay a stumbling block. Ezek. 3.20. Vatablus his note there, is, Faciam, ut omnia habeant prospera; ca∣lamitatibus
us eum a peccato non revocabo; I will prosper him in all things, and not by affliction, restrain him from sin. The most poisonous flics are bred in the sweetest fruit trees: how apt are the holiest to be proud and secure: even as worms and waspes eat the sweetest apples and fruits! Salvian. lib. 1. ad Eccles. Catholic. In Benedict 4. Repugnante contra temet ipsam tua foelicitate▪ saith Salvian, to the Church in his time; thy pro∣sperity is thy bane: And, cum ipsis opibus lascivre coepit Eccle∣sia, saith Platina; The Church began to be rich and wanton at once. Religio peperit divitias, & silia devoravit matrem: Reli∣gion brought forth riches, and the daughter soon devoured the mother, saith Augustie. The much wool on the sheeps back, is oft-times his ruine; he is caught in the thorns, and famished. The fatter the ox, the sooner to the slaughter. When the Pro∣testants of France began to grow wanton of their prosperity, and to affect a vain frothy way of preaching, then came the cruel massacre upon them. The good Lord keep this Church of England from the like mischief, much threatned by the Malig∣nant party, who even wish with big-swoln Balaam, I would there were a sword in mine hand; for now would I kill thee, Num. 22.29. A sword they have lately gotten again into their hand in Wales, but with evil success, Blessed be the Lord our strength, which teacheth our hands to war, and our fingers to fight, Psal. 144.1. Surely, he that, in so ill a cause, killeth with the sword, must be killed with the sword, Rev. 13.10. Those sworn swordmen of Satan, shall fall by the sword; they shall be a portion for foxes, Psal. 63.10. They shall be so, no doubt, if we hinder not our own happiness by an unworthy kicking against the tenderest bowels of Gods Fatherly compassions, ever earning toward us. Should we, with the fed hawk, forget our master? Or being full with Gods benefits, like the full-Moon, then get furthest off from the Sun; and by an interposition of earthly desires, be∣come dark? The cords of love, are called the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4. To sin against mercy, is to sin against humanity; it is bestial, nay it is worse. To render good for evil, is Divine; to render good for good, is humane; to render evil for evil, is brui∣tish; but to render evil for good, is devillish, as a Reverend man hath well observed. [Then he forsook God] Here Moses, weary of speaking any longer to a gain-saying and disobedient people, turneth his speech to the heaven and earth, whom he had called in to bear witness, vers. 1. So, when a certain people of
Italy had commanded the Romane Embassadour, ad quercum dicr, se interim alia acturos, to deliver his Ambassage to the great oak; for they had somewhat else to do, Liv. then to give him audience; he at swered, Et haec sacrata quercus audiat foedus esse a vob violatum, I will, indeed, direct my speech to the Oke, and tell it in your hearing that you have basely broken co∣venant, and shall dearly answer it. Vers. 16. They provoked him to jealousie] See the Note on Chap. 31.29. Vers. 17. They sacrificed unto Devils] See the Note on Le∣vit. 17.7. [To new gods that came newly up] Such as are all Popish He-Saints, and She-Saints; concerning whom, Bellar∣mine himself cannt but yeeld, that, Bell. de cultu sanct. cap. 9. Cumscriberentur Scriptu∣rae, nondum coeperat usus vovendi Sanctis, There was no vowing (or bowing either) to Saints departed, when the Scriptures were written. And a loaf of the like leaven are those New∣lights, and all subtleties, whereby our Sectaries would distinguish themselves from Brownists. Are they not all, or most of them, borrowed out of Mr. H. Jacobs books, who was but of yesterday? The Antinomians usually call upon their hearers to mark; it may be they shall hear some new truth, that they ne∣ver heard before: when the thing is either false, or (if true) no more then ordinarily is taught by others. Vers. 18. And hast forgotten God that formed thee] Or, that brought thee forth. Here God is compared to a mother, as in the former clause, to a father. So, Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us, , He brought us forth, and did the office of a mo∣ther to us; which doth notably set forth his love, and the work of his grace. Vers. 19. Of his sons, and of his daughters] Titular at least; wherefore their sin was the greater. What? Thou, . my son Bru∣tus? This cut Caesar to the heart. Vers. 20. I will see what their end shall be] This is spoken af∣ter the manner of men; as likewise that, vers. 27. [In whom is no faith] i. e. fidelity; as Matth. 23.23. there's no trusting them, or taking their words. Vers. 21. And I will move them to jealousie] Thus God de∣lights to retaliate and proportion jealousie to jealousie, provo∣cation to provocation; So, frowardness to frowardness, Psal. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety, Levit. 28.18, 21, &c.
With a foolish nation] With the conversion of the Gentiles, Rom. 10.19. which the good Jews could not easily yeeld to at first, Act. 11.2, 3. And the rest could never endure to hear of it. See 1 Thess. 2.15, 16. At this day they solemnly curse the Christians thrice a day in their Synagogues, with a, Maledic Domine Na∣zarais. They have a saying in their Tulmud, Optimus qui inter gentes est dignus cui caput conteretur, tanquam serpenti; The best among the Gentiles is worthy to have his head broke, as the Serpent had. Yea they think they may kill any Idolaters: There∣fore Tacitus saith of them, There was misericordia in promptu apud suos, sed contra omnes alios hostile odium, mercy enough toward their own, but against all others they bare a deadly hatred. Vers. 22. For a fire] See the Note on Chap. 10.4. Vers. 23. I will spend mine arrowes] Which yet cannot be all spent up, as he feared of his Jupiter, Si quoties peccent homi∣nes, &c. Vers. 24. Burnt with hunger] Which makes mens visages blacker then a coal, Lam. 4.8. [with burning heat] i. e. With the burning carbuncle, or plague-sore. See Haba. 3.5. Vers. 25. And terrour within] Warring times are terrible times. By the civil dissentions here in King Iohn's time, all the Kingdom became like a general shambles, or place of infernal terrours and tortures. War, saith One, is a misery which all words (how wide soever) want compass to express. It is saith Another, the slaughter-house of mankind, and the hell of this present world. See the Note on Gen. 14 2. Vers 27. Were it not that I feared] See vers. 20. Lest their adversaries] This is that (likely) that moves the Lord, hitherto, to spare England. God hath dealt with us, not according to his ordinary rule, but according to his prerogative. England (if it may be so spoke with reverence) is a paradox to the Bible. Pererius, the Jesuite, commenting upon Gen. 15.16. If any marvel, saith He, why England continueth to flourish, not∣withstanding the cruel persecution (just execution he should have said) of Catholikes there: I answer, Because their sin is not yet full. Sed veniet tandem iniquitatis complementum, &c. We hope better, though we deserve the worst that can be▪ But somewhat God will do for his own great Name; and lest the
enemy exalt himself, Psal. 140.8. and say, Our hand is high, the Lord hath not done this. Vers. 28. For they are a nation] See the Note on Chap. 4.6. It was Chrysippus that offered that strict and tetrical division to the world, Aut mentem, aut restim comparandum. Vers. 29. Oh that this people were wise] Sapiens est, cui res sapiunt prout sunt, saith Bernard. [That they would con∣sider their latter end] This is a high point of heavenly wisdome. Moses himself desires to learn it. Psal. 90.12. David also would fain be taught it, Psal. 39.4. Solomon sets a Bet∣ter upon it, Eccles. 7.2. Ierusalems filthiness was in her skirts, because she remembred not her latter end; therefore also she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9, The kite, by the turning of his tail, directs and winds about all his body. Consideratio fini tanquam caudae, ad vitam optimè regendam confert, Mr. Ward's Sermons. saith Berchorius. I meet with a story of one that gave a prodigal a ring, with a deaths-head, with this condition, that she should one hour daily, for seven dayes together, look and think upon it; which bred a strange alteration in his life; like that of The∣sposius in Plutarch; or that more remarkable, of Waldus, the rich Merchant of Lions, &c. Vers. 30. How should one chase a thousand] i.e. Howshould one of the enemies chase a thousand Israelites, (who had a pro∣mise of better things, Levit. 26.8.) but that having first sold themselves for nought, Isai. 52.3. they were now sold by God; who would own them no longer, Psal. 31.7, 8. Vers. 31. For their Rock is not as our Rock] We may well say, who is a God like unto thee? Mic. 7.18. Contemno minutu∣los istos deos, modo jovem (Jehovam) mihi propitiumc habeam; I care not for those dunghill-Deities, so I may hav the true God to favour me. [Even our enemies] Exod. 14.25. Num. 23.8, 12. 1 Sam. 4.8. Vers. 32. For their vine is of the vine] Vitis non vinifera, sed venenifera. The vine is the wicked nature, the grapes are the evill works. So Isai. 59.5. They hatch cockatrice egges, and weave the spiders web; (vanity or villany, is their whole trade;) he that eateth of their egges, dyeth, &c. Look how the bird that sitteth on the serpents egges, by breaking and hatching them, brings forth a perilous brood to her own destruction: so do those that are yet in the state of Nature; being the heires
of Original, and the fathers of Actual sins; which when they are finished, bring forth death, Jam. 1.15. Vers. 33. Their wine] i. e. Their works, yea their best works prove pernitious to them; not their own table only, but Gods Table becomes a snare to the unprepared communicant; he sucks there the poyson of aspes, &c. Iob 20 16. he eats his bane, and drinks his poyson: as Henry 7. Emperour, was poysoned in the Sacramental bread by a Monk; Pope Victor 2. by his Sub-dea∣con in his challice, and one of our Bishops of York, by poison put into the wine at the Eucharist. Vers. 34. Is not this laid up in store] To wit, for just punish∣ment, though for a while I forbear them. The wicked man is like a thief, which having stollen a horse, rides away well moun∣ted, till overtaken by hue and cry, he is apprehended, sentenced, and executed. Your sin will find you out, as a blood-hound; et patientia Dei erga impios quò diuturnior, Hioron. in Jerem. eò minacior. Morae dispendium foenoris duplo pensatur; the longer God forbeareth, the heavier he punisheth. Vers. 35. To me belongeth vengeance and recompence] The Hebrew word for vengeance, signifies comfort also; for God will be comforted in the execution of his wrath, Ezek. 5.13. See the Note on Chap. 28.63. He shew; such severity sometimes, as if he had blotted that out of his title, Exod. 34.6. and now took up that Emperours Motto, Fiat justitia, pereat mundus. Their foot shall slide in due time] They are set in slippery pla∣ces, Psal. 73.18. they ever walk as upon a mine of gun powder, ready to be blown up: Nemo crimen gerit in Pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. Nemesis dicitur, , quòd . Gods wrath is such, as none can avert or avoid. Vers. 36. And repent himself for his servants] Thus God ming∣leth and allayeth the rigour of his justice, with the vigour of his mercy. Vers. 37. And he shall say] i. e. He shall upbraid them with the inability of their idols to do for them. Vers. 39. I, even I am he] I, is emphatical and exclusive. Vers. 41. If I whet my glittering sword] God first whets, be∣fore he smites; and first takes hold on judgement, before his judgments take hold on men. Est piger ad poenas, ad proemia ve∣lox. See the like, Psal. 7.12. God was but six dayes in making
the whole world, yet was he seven dayes in destroying that one city of Iericho, as Chrysostome observeth. Fury is not in me, Esay 27.4. As a bee stings not, till provoked; so God punish∣eth not, till there be no other remedy, 2 Chron. 36.16. Vers. 43. Rejoyce, O ye Nations] Give God the glory of his just severity, which is no less commendable in a Judge, then sea∣sonable clemency. Vers. 47. For it is not a vain thing] Gods favour is no empty favour; it is not like the Winter-Sun, that casts a goodly coun∣tenance when it shines, but gives little comfort and heat. CHAP. XXXIII. Vers. 1. BEfore his death] The words of dying men, are li∣ving oracles; they should therefore be pious and ponderous. Vers. 2. Went a fiery law for them] This fire, wherein the law was given, and shall be required, is still in it, and will never out: hence are those terrours which it slasheth in every conscience that hath felt remorse of sin. Every mans heart is a Sinai, and re∣sembles to him both heaven and hell. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. Vers. 3. Yea, he loved the people] With a general love, with a common Philanthropie. But the love of God in Christ is that we must all labour after; such a love, as doth better for a man, then restore him to sight, or raise him when bowed down, Psal. 146.8. [Are in thy hand] And so in a safe hand, Ioh. 10.29. [And they sate down at thy feet] As attentive, and tractable Disciples. See Act. 22.3. Luk. 10.39 & 2 King. 2.5. Knowest thou not, that the Lord will take thy master from thy head? A phrase taken from their manner of sitting, at the feet of their Teachers. Vers. 4. Moses commanded us a law] These are the words of those Saints above-mentioned, expressing their good affecti∣on to the law, and to Moses, by whose mediation they received it. [Even the inheritance] For perpetual use to us and our posterity. Indeed the law lyes not upon the righteous, (, 1 Tim. 1.9.) nor urgeth them, as it doth upon the wicked. To those, the law is as chains and shackles; to those, as girdles and
garters, which gird up their loyns, and expedite their course the better. It confines them to live in that element where they would live; as if one should be confined to paradise, where he would be, though there were no such law. Vers. 5. And he was King in Jesharu] An herrick King, raigning by vertue and justice only, not by force and violence: One that said not, , but ; This I can do, but This is fit for me to do. [When the heads of the people, and the tribes] Here was a government made up of King, Lords, and Com∣mons. The best of governments, doubtless, so that the boam be kept right betwixt Soveraignty and subjection. The contenti∣on (now again flagrant in England) between Prince and peo∣ple, about command and obedience, ceased not, till the Magna Charta (first obtained of King John; after, of his son Henry 3. though observed truly of neither,) was, in the maturity of a ju∣dicial Prince, Edward the first, freely ratified, after fourscore years. Vers. 6. Let Reuben live, and not dye] Let him have a nail, and a name in Gods house, notwithstanding the hainousness of his sin, and the severity of Iacobs sentence, Gen. 49.4. See the Note there. Vers. 7. And this is the blessing] Simeon is not mentioned, but implyed in Iudah's blessing; in the midst of whose inheri∣tance, lay his portion, Josh. 19.1. Besides, that tribe was ex∣ceedingly defiled with fornication, spiritual and corporal; and by that means much decayed and diminished, Numb, 26.14. [Hear, Lord, the voyce of Judah] Putting thy promises, Gen. 8.9, 10, 11. into suit by his prayers, and pressing thee for a performance. Vers. 8. Let thy Thummim and thy Ʋrim] Sincerity of life, and soundness of doctrine. See the Note on Exod. 28.30. There is great cause, That Ministers, of all men, should be much pray'd for. Vers. 9. Who said unto his father] In that heroical fact, Ezod. 32.26, 29. Not to be wryed or biassed by respect to carnal friends, is a high and hard point of self-denial. Mark was Barnabas his sisters son; hence he stood so stiffe for him against Paul, his faithfull fellow-traveller, Act. 15.37. Colos. 4.10. Moses to please Zipporah, displeased God, and it went hard
with him, Exod. 4.24. Eli was too indulgent to his wicked sons; and so perhaps was Samuel too, 1 Sam. 8.1, 3. Vers. 10. They shall teach Jacob] Apt and able to teach must all Ministers be, as Paul, Act. 20. Praedicationis officium susci∣pit, quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, saith Gregory: Hee's no Mi∣nister, that's no teacher. Aidanus the first Bishop of Durham, Anno Dom. 636. neglected no duty of a good Pastour, travel∣ling up and down the country, even on foot, Godw. Catalog. to preach the Gos∣pell; giving whatsoever he could get, unto the poor; and by the example of his own vertues instructing, as well as by word and doctrine. Amongst the Greeks, Tragedians and Comedians were said, , to labour in tea∣ching the people: What should Ministers then do? They shall put incense before thee] i.e. Pray for the people, as well as preach to them. So Act, 6.4. Austins wish was, that Christ when he came, might find him, aut precantem aut praedi∣cantem, praying or preaching. Benè orasse est benè studuisse, saith Luther. Vers. 11. And of them that hate him] Ministers shall be sure of many enemies: They hate him, that reproveth in the gate. Ʋeritas odium parit; praedicare nihil aliud est quam derivare in se furorem mundi, said Luther, to preach, is to get the worlds ill-will. Ye are the light, saith our Saviour, which is offensive to sore eyes: ye are the salt of the earth, which is bitter to wounds, and causeth pain to exulcerate parts. Vers. 12. The beloved of the Lord] The Lords corculum, deli∣ciae, darling, as their father Benjamin was old Iacobs, Gen. 42.4. And he shall dwell between his shoulders] These shoulders are those two holy hills, Moriah and Zion; whereon the Temple was built, four hundred and forty yeares after this prophecy. Vers. 13. And of Ioseph] See the Note on Gen. 49.2. Vers. 14. And for the precious fruits] So Saint Iames calleth them, the precious fruits of the earth, Iames 5.7. Diogenes justly taxed the folly of his countrymen, quòd res pretiosas mi∣nimo emerent, venderent que vilissimas▪ lurimo, because they bought pretious things, (as corn) very cheape; but sold the basest things, (as pictures, statues, &c.) extream dear; fifty pounds or more a peece: though the life of man had no need of a statue, but could not subsist without corn. May not we more justly tax men, for undervaluing the bread of life, and spending
money for that which is not bread? Isai. 55.2. Vers. 15. And for the chiefe things] Metalls and Minerals usually dig'd out of mountains, which are here called ancient and lasting, because they have been from the beginning, and were not first cast up, (as some have held) by Noahs flood, Psal. 90.2. Vers. 16. And for the good will of him, &c.] See the Note on Exod. 3.2. The burning bush, (the persecuted Church) was not consumed, because the good-will of God (whereof David speaks, Psal. 106.4.) was in the bush. So it is still with his in the fiery triall, in any affliction, Isai. 43.1. [That was se∣parated from his brethren] To be a choise and chief man amongst them. De doct. Christ l. 4. c. 6. Nobilis fuit inter fratres (saith Augustine) vel in malis, quae pendit, vel in bonis quae rependit. Vers. 17. Advers. Tryph. Tertul. advers. Judaeos, cap. 10. Ambrose de benedict. Pat. His hornes are like the hornes of Vnicorns] Iustin Martyr, and some other of the Ancients, have strangely rack∣ed and wrested this text, to wring out of it the sign of the cross, resembled and represented by the horns of an Vnicorn. At nihil hic de Christo, nihil de cruce. [He shall push the peo∣ple together] As Generall Joshua (of this tribe,) did notably; so that, Phaenicians ran away into a far country, and renow∣ned his valour by a monument, set up in Africk. Howbeit, gratius ei fuit nomen pietatis, quam potestatis, as Tertullian saith of Augustus; he is more famous for his piety, then for his prowesse. V. 18. In thy going out] To trade and traffique by sea, Gen. 49 13. Peterent coelum navibus Belgae, si navibus peti posset, saith one. The low-country men are said to grow rich by warr; 'tis sure they do by trade at sea. [And Issachar in thy tents] i.e. In thy quiet life, Virgil. and country imployments. O fortunatos nimium, &c. Regum aequabat opes animis, seraque reversus Nacte domum, dapibus mcrsas onerabat inemptis: saith the Poet, of a well contented country-man. Vers. 19. They shall call the people to the mount] i.e. To Gods house, scituate on mount Zion. Though they be Littorales, men dwelling by the sea-shore, which are noted to be, duri, hor∣ridi, immanes, omnium denique pessimi, the worst kind of people; and though they dwell further from the Temple, yet are they not farthest from God; but ready with their sacrifice of righte∣ousness, as those that have sucked of the abundance of the sea,
and of treasures hid in the sand; which though of it self it yield no crop, yet brings in great revenues, by reason of sea∣trading. Vers. 20. He dwelleth as a Lyon] That should make his partie good with the enemy, upon whom he bordereth, and by whom he is often invaded. See Gen. 49.19. Iudg. 11. & 1 Chron. 12.8. Vers. 21. In à portion of the law-givers] That portion that Moses the Law-giver assigned him, on the other side Iordan, Num. 32.33. [He executed the justice of the Lord] viz. Upon the Canaanites; which is so noble an act, that even the good Angels refuse not to be executioners of Gods judgments, upon obstinate Malefactours. Vers. 22. He shall leap from Bashan] i.e. He shall suddenly set upon his enemies; as Achitophel counselled Absolom, 2 Sam. 17.1, 2. (and this is called good counsell, vers. 14.) and as Cae∣sar served Pompey—Caesar in omnia praeceps, nil actum credens, Lucan. dum quid superesset agendum, Fertur atrox— Vers. 23. Satisfied with favour, and full, &c.] Fulness of blessing is then only a mercy, when the soul of a man is satisfi∣ed with favour: when from a full table, and a cup running over, a man can comfortably infer, with David: Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow me all the dayes of my life, and I shall dwel in the house of the Lord for ever, Psal. 23.6. One may have out∣ward things by Gods providence, and not out of his favour. Esau had the like blessing as Iacob, but not with a God give thee the dew of heaven, as he, Gen. 27.28. Or, God may give tem∣porals to wicked men, to furnish their inditement out of them: as Ioseph put his cup into their sack, to pick a quarrell with them, and to lay theft to them. Vers. 24. Let Ashur be blessed with children] Let his wife be as the vine, and his children as olive-plants, Psal. 128.3. two of the best fruits; the one for chearing the heart, the other for clearing the face, Psal. 104.15. the one for sweetness, the other for fatness, Judg. 9.13. [Let him dip his foot in oyle] Like that of Iob, Chap. 29.6. Confer Gen. 49.20. See the Note. Vers. 25. Thy shooes] Thou shalt have store of mines. [And as thy dayes, shall thy strength be] i. e. Thou shalt (as Eliphaz speaketh, Iob 5.26.) Come  lusty old age to the grave. This the Greesk call, : And the Hebrews made a feast, when they were past sixty, if any whit healthy.
Vers. 26. Who rideth upon the heaven] Having the celestial creatures for his Cavalry; and the terrestrial for his Infantry: how then can his want help? Vers. 27. The Eternal God] Heb. The God of Antiquity, that Ancient of dayes, that Rock of ages, who is before all things, and by whom all things consist, Col. 1.17. who is the first, and the last; and besides whom, there is no God, Esay 44.6. And underneath are the everlasting armes] A Saint cannot fall so far, as to fall beneath the supporting armes of God, Cant. 2.6. his hand is reserved for a dead lift. Vers. 28. Israel then shall dwell, &c.] See the Note on Num. 23.9. [The fountain of Jacob] Or, as some read it, The eye of Jacob. The same word signifies both an eye, and a foun∣tain. He that, with Mary Magdalen, can make his eye a foun∣tain to wash Christs feet in, shall be sure to have that fountain of Christs blood opened, to wash his soul in, Zech. 13.1. Vers. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel] Or, Oh the happinesses of thee, O Israel! the , the heaped up happiness! Who is like unto thee?] The Saints are the worlds Paragons, yea such, as the world is not worthy of, Heb. 11. that is, saith Chry∣sostome, Take all the men of the world, they are not worth one of the people of God, though never so mean, in regard of out∣wards. [Shall be found liers] Shall feign to be friends, for fear, and shall yeeld a forced obedience. See Psal. 18.45. CHAP. XXXIV. Vers. 1. ANd Moses went up] With as good a will to die, as ever he did to dine; for it was but (as that Martyr said) winking a little, & he was in heaven immediately. Vers. 2. Ʋnto the utmost sea] The Mediterranean. Vers. 3. The City of palm-trees] So called, even by Heathen-Authours also. Vers. 4. I have caused thee to see it] By an extraordinary power; for in an ordinary way, Moses could never have taken so large a prospect at once. Faith puts a mans head into heaven, and gives him a view of far better things; neither vision only, but fruition also, which Moses had not. Vers. 5. So Moses the servant of the Lord dyed] It was no
more betwixt God and Moses, but, Go up and dye; he changed indeed his place, but not his company; death was to him but the day-break of eternal brightnesse. Vers. 6. And he uried him] Either the Lord, or Michael, Jude. 9. There lyes the body of Moses, as in a chamber of rest, or bed of down, Isa 57.2. His very du being precious; for Christ is not perfect without it. Ephes. 1.2. [But no man know∣eth of his sepulchre] Though the Devil made much adoe about it, Iude. 9. as desirous thereby, to set up himself in the hearts of the living. Vers. 7. Nor his natural force abated] Hierome reads it, gena, maxilla. Nor his teeth loosed. And the use of Manna might be some reason; it being an exquisitely pure kind of food, of an aereal, and not ve∣ry corruptible substance. Vers. 8. And the children of Israel wept] And were ready to wish, (likely) as the Romanes did of Augustus, that either he had never been born, or never dyed. Vers. 9. And Ioshua the son of Nun] Sic uno avulso, non de∣ficit alter Aureus. The Duke of Florence gave for his Ensign, Pintus in Dan. 4. a great Tree, with many spreading boughes, one of them being cut off, with this above-said Poesie: As one is broke off, another riseth up in the room. Vers. 10. And there arose not] This testimony, and indeed this whole Chapter is thought to have been added by Joshua, or Eleazar, being Divinely inspired, for the compleating of the history, famous throughout the world; approved and expound∣ed by all the holy Prophets, and Apostles; who out of this foun∣tain, or rather, Occan of Divinity, (as Theodoret calleth Moses,) Theodoretus Mosem appellat; . have watered their several gardens: yea in pressing moral duties, what do they else but explain the Pentetench? What do they but unfold, and draw out that Arras, which was folded together before? Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
