V579 E1070_2 99867158 119450
THE ANSWER OF The Corporation of Moniers in the Mint, at the Tower of London, to two false and scandalous Libells printed at London, and lately come forth without date. THE FIRST INTITULED, The humble Representation of Peter Blondeau, as a warning touching severall disorders hapning by Money ill-favouredly coyned, and the only means to prevent them. THE SECOND INTITULED, A most humble Memorandum from Peter Blondeau. Which not only intends maliciously to sandall Us the Corporation of Moniers, of the Common-Wealth of England: But also most falsly to imprint in the hearts and mindes of all People in Christendome, and more especially the good People under the obedience of the Parliament of England; That (by Us the Cor∣poration of Moniers) the Moneys of this Common-Wealth, both for Gold and Silver, are not justly made, according to Our Indenture. Set forth to undeceive all the good People that have seen or read the said Peter Blondeau's false and scandalous Libells. PRINTED for the Corporation of Moniers. 1653.
A Letter from Master Thomas Violet, to Master John Benfeild, Clearke of the Corporation of Moniers in the Tower of London. SIR, THIS day came unto my hands a false and scandalous Libell put in print, against the Moniers and Of∣ficers in the Mint; Truly, if you value your good names, and to bee esteemed honest men, these Pam∣phlets must have a Replie: I am privie to all the transaction of this businesse, and know there are more lies then lines in his Libells. I was desired by Sir James Harington and the Committee of the Mint, to attend them in the management of the tryall be∣tween M. David Ramidg and this Blondeau, I never met with so impudent a lying fellow in my life as this frenchman is; I told the master of the Mint, Doctor Gourdon this day at Westminster, that it was a shame to all the officers that such a fellow should be suffered to proceed as he did, and no legall course be taken with him. If this businesse be looked into seriously, it strikes at the reputation of greater men then any officers of the Mint (even against the State:) For, if what the French-man asserts prove true, then he seemes to charge the State with neglect of Justice up∣on
the officers of the Mint who (without dispute) are in a Premunire by the law of this Nation: If it prove false; then his designe is, To blast and disho∣nor the Common-wealth's-Mint, now in this con∣juncture of time when he sees there is likely to bee great quantities of silver coyned. Truly M. John Benfeild, it hath been, and is, by my meanes that your Mint now goes, otherwise your Irons might still have continued rusty: I am confident there is abundance of malice in blasting and abusing the States Mint at this time, therefore I pray make the Provost and the rest of your fellowes acquainted with this Letter; I love you all so well, that if you desire this Mounsieur should receive an Answere to his Libell (as I conceive you are necessitated to it) I shall doe you the best service I may; and doe at pre∣sent hold fit that you make your humble addresses to the Councell of State for liberty to repaire your Inte∣grity and Honor, by the just rule of the Common-Law; for doubtlesse these Pamphlets, disperst into the hands of the ignorant multitude, must needs possesse them, according to his suggestion, That the Parliaments money coyned in the Tower, is not so fine nor so weighty as formerly in King James's and King Charles's times, they not knowing how exactly the Mint is ruled, both for the Fineness, and just weight of the monies: These truths appearing to a Jury (which are most obvious to all Artists & divers others) doubtlesse they will give you ample Repara∣tion: All this (well known to me) I shall make as ap∣parent to the world; as freely as formerly I have a∣cted any thing for you, which was ever gratis; though to my vast expence both of money and time: And if I shall for my services done receive no satisfaction from the State, I shall never expect any from any of you, but Remaine your loving Frend THO. VIOLET. Jan. 25. 1652.
The Corporation of Moniers Answer. MAster Tho. Violett, our Company of Moniers thanke you for your Letter dated the 25 of January 1652. Wee desire you to bee pleased to give an Answer to Blundue the Frenchmans scandalous Libells con∣cerning the Moniers, and on their behalfe to vindicate our just Cause to the Common-wealth, against those scandalous lying pamphlets, and in so doing you will very much obliege your ve∣ry loving freinds, and servants. Symon Corbet. Prov Michaell Garnett. John Benfeild. Henry Perin. Daniell Benfeild. Walter Taylor. Ric. Warner. John Taverner. Abram Hunt. David Rammag. John Warner. Nathan Marsh. Simon Corbitt. Garnett Corbit. Vall. Nicholson. Hen. Lewis. John Butterfield. Edmond Dawson. Nic. Hares. John Shoute. William Dawson. Robert Gascoyne. George Taverner. Richard Johnson. Stephen Holton. Edward Heward. James Boone. Richard Sternell. Sir, here are all our fellowes that are at present in the Mint, But the rest (being in the Country) shall give you hearty thanks and ever acknowledg themselves bound unto you for your favor and great pains in this particular, to our Corporation, in sta∣ting the whol proceedings in this businesse to the World which we had for severall dayes before the right honorable The Committee of Councell of State for the Mint, you attending that businesse by Order of the said Committee. John Benfeild Clearke. Jan. 27. 1652.
The humble Representation of Peter Blondeau, as a War∣ning, touching severall disorders happening by Monie ill∣favoredly Coined, and the only meanes to prevent them. THE Coin which is unequall in big∣ness and unhandsomly don, is easi∣ly clipped, and not perceived to be so: Most part of that which is cur∣rant now is clipped, and will bee yet more and more; and your Honors will perceiv what wrong it doth to the State and Publick, when you shall go about to remedy it; Such a man shall have a 100l. sterl. in so manie pieces, who yet will finde but 70 or 80 by the weight; and the longer you defer the re∣medie, the wors the diseas will bee, as it was seen in France, when almost half was lost upon the Coin. That disorder is grown to such a height, that even in that Mint, as things are now carried there, they do coin the monie with such inequalitie in the weight, that I can exhibit som shillings which weigh not full five pence, and others that weigh near upon eighteen pence, and have been so coined. And that is the caus why som men do pick out the heaviest pieces to trans∣port out of the Land, and do give som what per cent. to cull out the heaviest Coine from among the rest. And I have been informed that som Officers & Workmen of the Mint have followed that way, as som of them have even confessed before the Committee for the Mint: and that was the caus why they made it so unequal, not onely on pretence for a quicker expedi∣tion, but also that they might reap a double profit, to the prejudice of the Publick. Likewise there be som Goldsmiths, Refiners, Gold and Silver Wyer-drawers, and Gold-laiers, and other people, who do pick our the heaviest coin to melt it, so that it remaineth onely
within the State for Commerce, the counterfeited, clipped or lightest monie. The common people, specially who do spend their monie little by little, when they have som fals coin or light, they cannot put it out, but are forced to sell them to their loss to the Goldsmiths or others, and often those that buie them do pass them among o∣thers, in payment of greater sums, so that they return again to the people, who bear all the loss and trouble, which is worthy of consideration and compassion. Som do answer, that if there be any fals coiners or clippers of monie, they ought to bee hanged: but I saie, first they must bee known and taken; and yet when all is don, such as have lost by the fals or clipped coin, are not reimbursed of their loss. For avoiding these disorders, the monie ought to bee adjusted piece by piece, equal in bigness and weight, so that the number requisite bee also found in the pound both of gold and silver. And for that end it is requisite that an Officer bee appointed in the Mint, whose charge bee to weigh the monie piece af∣ter piece, when it is finished, and in case hee finde's anie unequal or unhandsomly made, he might reject it, and give it to bee melted again upon the charges of the Undertaker of the Mint, thereby to oblige him to bee so much the more careful. And for to hinder the connivence of the Officer appointed for to weigh the said pieces, who might happen to juggle with the Undertaker, another Officer shall bee appointed, to whom anie of the people that shall finde anie of the new coined pieces lighter then they should be, might repair within convenient time, who shall change the said light pieces, but shall give a pence more for each piece so brought to him as a reward to the bringer, all which shall bee put to account to the said Officer appointed for the weighing. But that cannot bee don except the monie bee coined after my
way, that is, marked on both sides, and upon the brims, els the Weigher might pretend it had been clipped and made light since it went out of his hand. And the monie being so coined after my way, be∣sides the removing of the aforesaid inconveniences, it would rais or increas the Exchange by about 10 per Cent. to the advantage of this Common-wealth. It is also requisite to maintein the standart or goodnesse of the Coyn, that it be permitted to any Goldsmith, Refiner, or other whomsoever, to make essay of the currant monie: and in case it be not found of the due standart or goodness, they shall be allowed to bring back to an appointed Officer the essaie and the rest of the piece, to be there tried again before the Commissioners and the Trier of the Mint; and if it be found, that the said Coyn be not of the due goodness, the Discoverer shall be rewarded at the charges of the Trier, that he may have a due care, that no Coin com out of his hands, but such as shall be of a due value, and according to the order of the STATE. An answer to several objections formerly made against Peter Blondeau his waie of Coining the monie. I Have affirmed in my Proposition, that my inven∣tion will prevent the counterfeiting, moulding, clipping, or any way altering the monie, which I do yet offer to maintein and make good. And whereas som men do object, that as soon as the waie I use shall be made publick, then it may be counterfeited. To that I answer, first, That the Inven∣tion needs not to be made publick; But if it be the pleasure of the State, the Engines wherewith the brims are marked, may be kept secret among few men, who shall be sworn to keep it, and not to reveal it to anie. Secondly, I answer, That though they be made
publick, the Engines that are used therein are so big and heavie, being between 1 and 2000 l. weight, and so difficult to be made, and afore they are perfected ought to goe through so many hands, that the great expences requisite thereunto, will dissuade any one to undertake, the rich not being willing, and the poor being unable to laie out so much monie for an uncertain profit; besides the hazard of being discover∣ed by the privity of so many men, through whose hands the Engines ought to passe before they are ser∣viceable. Which affords me a third answer, That the Engines imploied being so great as aforesaid, they do require a very large room, and a great number of men to work about them, & consequently no private man can undertake the same without being instantly dis∣covered. Whereas the monie that is Coined with the hammer, requiring but an hammer and two stamps, which can easily be hidden and carried in a mans pocket, it is most easie to counterfeit the same, and that secretly, yea any man that can grave can make himself with very little cost whatsoever is requisite to Coin with the hammer: all which is prevented, as aforesaid, by my invention. Som do replie to that, That the monie Coined by the hammer cannot be easily counterfeited, becaus of the nois that ought to be made in the stamping, which doth not happen in the press or mill. I answer, That every Gun-smith or Lock-smith, or any other that makes use of som big Vice, can with two smal stamps Coin the monie in the said Vice without any nois, by pressing the same at several times: but if they were put to mark all the pieces at one stroke, as in the said Blondeau's invention it ought to be, then it is impossible to doe it without strong and heavie En∣gines, as aforesaid. Som do object that it can be moulded: but to this I return no answer, for it is a thing known to all un∣derstanding
men in the way of moulding, that it is absolutely prevented by my invention. To object that it can be clipped, is no less absurd then to say, the sun is dark, or the fire cold; and therefore I pass over that objection, becaus it cannot be clipped without taking away the letters or marks that are about the brim, which would easily bee discerned. Som do object, That it can be washed or other∣wise altered: To this I answer, That I have diligently inquired and studied with great expences all the waies of washing, and made severall experiments of them, I can boldly saie, I know as much therein as any man, and can wash both gold and silver severall waies with an extreme dexteritie, and therefore I may certainly affirm, that it is impossible to take ne∣ver so little from a piece so coined by washing, but will take away its lustre and polishing, and spoil the work, which is most neat and delicate, so that the grossest man, and most unskilful, can easily perceiv, that it looks as if it had been moulded; besides, that the ingredients that are requisite, and the charge ne∣cessarie to bring again together the gold or silver, will cost more, or as much at least, as the profit of wash∣ing may come unto; Therefore I do conclude that no bodie will undertake it. The monie coined meerly at the Mill can bee made with very small Engines, but that which is propounded by the said Blondeau, cannot bee coined without a great many big and heavie Engines. Lastly, whereas som have objected that several persons afore mee have bragged of their invention to make very handsom coyn: and yet having put the State to above 15 or 1800. l. charges, could not suc∣ceed. For removing of that scruple, I do offer to make upon my own charge as many Engins and In∣struments as will coin weekly 1500 or 2000 l. Pro∣vided
I may have also the use of such Engines as are already made; whereby it shall appear that I can do what I offer. I do not desire to have the Bullion in my custody or disposal, but I will onely meddle with the work∣ing of the gold and silver as it shall bee delivered un∣to mee by the Melter, approved of by the Essayers, and put in the hands of the workmen, who shall bee such as the State might intrust them; and shall bee preferred by the Commissioners of the Mint, whom I shall teach my way of working, and shall reasona∣bly pay them. Among the opposers of my way of coyning are the Master of the Mint, the Officers and the Work∣men of the same, and their friends; as also som Gold-smiths and others, who somtimes use to bring Bullion into the Mint to be coyned: Som of them having told mee, that there would bee no encou∣ragement for those that should bring their Bullion into the Mint, if it was coyned exactly equal in the weight: meaning by that encouragement the chois of the heaviest pieces to melt them again, which doth bring them a very great profit▪ it beeing observable, that as the coyning goes now, instead of 62 shelings that are to be coyned in each pound weight of silver, they coyne usually 64 or 65 shillings, which comes to the benefit of those that bring the Bullion, and turneth to the prejudice of the Publik: And as a∣foresaid, it is that which they call the incourage∣ment. Above two years since, the honorable Council of State beeing desirous to remedie all the disorders in the Mint, thought good I should repair into England. Since that time the Officers and Workmen of the Mint have made their utmost endeavors to finde out my Invention, which they could not attain unto, al∣though the Master of the Mint hath had in his hands
my Patterns above nine moneths together: Besides that the workemen of the Mint intreated the Com∣mittee, that I should bee commanded to make a new tryal here, hoping they should bee able to discover my secret; Accordingly I did it, but they could not come to their end, only they made som few pieces af∣ter the old manner, which is not ready and expedi∣tious, nor fit for the Mint, as themselves have con∣fessed before the said Committee for the Mint: And therefore a further time was granted them to indea∣vor the finding out of the invention, and to make their Proposition; But all this while they could do no other thing but to bring every day new tales to a∣muse the State. The Master and som Officers and Workmen of the Mint, and som other persons have told mee, that the State paies 14 pence for the coyning of a pound weight of silver, after the way hitherto used in the Tower, and 8 shillings for the pound weight of gold; and paieth besides the graving of the Stamps. But I do offer to make the mony after my way; viz. marked on both sides, and upon the edg or thicknesse of the brim, according unto the Patterns I have made here lately by Order, which are in Sir James Harington's hands, for the same price of 8 shil∣lings for the pound weight of Gold, and for 16 pence for the pound weight of Silver. The State af∣fording to mee and paying likewise for the melting or casting into Plate the gold and silver, and the gra∣ving of the Stamps. And I shall oblige my self not onely to pay the Workmen, but also to maintein at my own charges all the Engins and Instruments; to bear the charge of the second melting and the waste of the clippings: and generally all other expenses a∣bout the Coin.
A most Humble MEMORANDUM from Peter Blondeau. Concerning the offers by him made to this Common-wealth for the coyning of the Monie, by a new Invention, not yet practised in any State of the World; the which will prevent counterfeiting, casting, washing and clipping of the same. Which Coyn shall bee marked on both the flat sides, and about the thickness or the edge; of a like bigness and largness, as the ordinary coyn is: and will cost no more then the ordinarie unequall Coyn, which is used now. SInce it hath been the pleasure of the Par¦liament and of the Council of State, to pass som Orders in relation to the preventing of the counterfeited and clipped money, now dispersed in England, Scotland and Ireland, hee mak's bold, yet with submission, to present the fol∣lowing particulars, conteining, besides the said of∣fers, First, the reason why the coyn of this Com∣mon-wealth is clipped and light, so that few pieces are to bee found weighing their true weight; As al∣so the reason why so much fals coyn is now disper∣sed. And secondly, the only way to remedy the said inconveniences, and to settle a good and constant order in the Mint. As to the first, the reason of the said abuses is be∣caus the mony coyned with the hammer is so easy to bee counterfeited, and with so few Engines and so little expences, that therby the fals coyners are en∣couraged and their number increased. And the daily experience to this day shewed, that seldom or never
any fals coyners have been discovered by the nois of the hammer. Another reason is, becaus the mony coyned with the hammer, cannot bee made exactly round, nor e∣qual in weight and bigness, and is often grossly marked, and hath many other faults, which giv's a great facility to the fals Coyners to counterfeit and mould it; as also to the Clippers to clip it: It being very hard to discern between a clipped piece, and one not clipped. Besides, abundance of coyn is made too light even at the Mint: The said Blondeau him∣self hath received som shillings (which hee shewed to the Committee for the Mint) which weighed som five, som six, and som seven pence only; as to the contrary, hee received som that weighed seventeen, yea and eighteen pence, both of them made so at the Mint: Which inequality occasions several Gold-smiths and others, who receiv the mony from the Mint, to cull or pick out the heaviest pieces to melt them; and after them, others do again cull or pick out the heaviest of them that are left, to transport them be∣yond Seas; so that only the light, the fals and the clipped monie remain's within the State, which turn's to the great ruine and destruction of Com∣merce, and undoeth those poor people, who spend their mony little by little; for having som counter∣feited or clipped pieces, they cannot put them off, but are forced to sell them, with loss, unto the gold∣smiths and others who can spend them among other monies, or trade therein, and sell them again to the Cash-keepers of the Treasurers, Bankiers, Merchants and others, who make them pass afterwards among other monies; so that they return again into the hands of the poor. The reason why the workmen of the Mint do make the coyn thus unequal in weight, and do not keep the true weight, is becaus it is sooner don. Be∣sides,
the said workmen may coyn sometimes their own silver, or may treat with those that bring their Bullion to be coyned, becaus they do not render the coyn by tale, but by the pound, and so still there be more pieces in number then there should be in a pound. And the monie so coyned being distributed out of the Mint, the officers themselves, and the workmen of the Mint do cull or pick out the hea∣viest pieces to melt them again, as they themselves have confessed before the said Committee for the Mint. And that is the thing which among themselves they call the mystery or secret of the Mint, and which is the caus, that by themselves and by their friends, they make use of all their joynt power and credit, and will lay out all their estate, and leav no stone unmooved to hinder the changing of the way of coyning the mony. As to the way of remedying those inconveniences, and setling a good and constant order in the Mint, it cannot be done but by the way propounded by the said Blondeau, by marking the coyn, not only on both the flat sides, but also upon the thickness or the edges. The coyn made after that way, cannot be clipped without taking away the marks that are about the thickness, the which would be easily perceived. Be∣sides, the pieces will be of an equal bigness and largeness; the half-crown of the ordinary weight and bigness, the shilling and other pieces according∣ly; and so equall among themselves, that it will bee impossible to take the less thing from any of them, but it will shew less then the rest, and so will be∣come not currant. They cannot be altered by wash∣ing or any other way, but they will lose their bigness and glass, so that a blindman will easily feel it. The ordinarie coyn marked onely on both the flat sides, can be moulded, as the experience do shew by
the great quantity of fals coyn moulded, which is currant now: but when it is marked on the thick∣ness or edges, the marks about the said edges can no way be moulded. And though they could, yet in that case they ought to be fyled after round about, specially in the place where it hath been cast, to take away the superfluous metal; which fyling cannot be don without spoyling and taking away the said marks about the edges, and consequently made ea∣sily known not to be currant. The monie ought to be adjusted piece after piece, equal in weight, both Gold and Silver. And for that end, it is requisite that an Officer be appointed in the Mint, whose charge should be to weigh the monie piece after piece when it is finished; and in case he findes any piece unequal or unhandsomly made, he ought to reject it and give it to be melted again, upon the charges of the undertaker of the Mint, thereby to oblige him to be so much the more careful. And for to hinder the connivence of the Officer appointed to weigh the said pieces, who might happen to juggle with the Undertaker; ano∣ther Officer may be appointed, to whom any of the people that shall finde any of the new coyned pieces lighter then it should be, might repair within a con∣venient time, who shall change the said light pieces, all which shall be put to account to the said Officer appointed for the weighing: But that cannot be don except the monie bee coyned after the said Peter Blondeau's way, that is, marked on both sides, and upon the edges; els the Weigher might pretend it had been clipped and made light since it went out of his hand. And the monie being coyned after the said way, besides the hindring or removing the a∣foresaid inconveniences, it will rais or encreas the Exchange by about ten per centum, to the advantage of this Common-wealth.
It is also requisite, to maintein the standard or goodness of the coyn, that any Goldsmith, Refiner, or other whomsoever be permitted to make essay of the currant monie; and in case it be not found of the standard or goodness, they might be allowed to bring back to an appointed Officer, the essay and the rest of the pieces by them tried, to be there tried a∣gain before the Commissioners, and the Trier of the Mint; and if it be found that the said coyn be not of the due goodness, the discoverer shall be rewarded at the charges of the Trier, that he may have a due care, that no coyn comes out of the Mint but such as shall be of a due value, and according to the or∣der of the State. The Council of State being willing to prevent the said disorders, was desirous to have the monie of this Common-wealth well coyned; and therefore ha∣ving seen the patterns of coyn made after a new In∣vention by the said Blondeau, and having treated by Letters about the quantitie of pieces that could be coyned in a week, and what they might cost; the said Council caused the said Blondeau, the Inventor of that way of coyning, to come to London, to treat with him by word of mouth, and to agree about the price of coyning the money of this Common-wealth after his way. He being then arrived at London the 3. of Septemb. 1649. the said Council bestowed on him 40. l. sterling, and the late Mr. Frost, then Secretary to the said Council, told him before witnesses, that if the State could not agree with him about the price, and that therefore he should be necessitated to retire himself, the State would indamnifie him for his jour∣nie, both coming and returning, and for the time he should have lost, and would bestow on him such a present, that he would return satisfied. A while after the said Council of State ordered the Committee of the Council of State for the Mint to hear the said
Blondeau's Proposition, and report it to the said Council. The Committee for the Mint accordingly took into consideration, whether the said Blondeau should be admitted to coyn the monie of this Common∣wealth; and having debated it, they resolved and approoved that he should be admitted thereunto, provided his coyn and his Proposition should be ad∣vantagious to the State. Afterwards the said Committee having seriously considered and examined all the circumstances of the way of coyning propounded by the said Blondeau, and having heard all the objections that could be alledg∣ed against it, both by the Master, Officers and Work∣men of the Mint, or by any other of those who ap∣peared in the business; upon debate of the whole, the said Committee concluded and Voted, that the said way of coyning propounded by the said Blon∣deau, was better, more advantagious and more ho∣norable for the State, then that which is used now in this Common-wealth. The Master, the Officers and the workmen of the Mint told the Committee, it was not likely the said Blondeau had don himself, the pieces sent by him to the Council of State. Besides, that it was an old In∣vention, which they knew themselvs, and that such pieces were onely made for curiosity, with very long time and great expence, and that it was impossible, that that way might bee used about the ordinary coyn, which is thin. They desired that the said Blon∣deau might bee commanded to make a trial of his skill by making som other pieces, and that they would do as much as the said Blondeau. Therefore the said Committee ordered both the said Blondeau and the said workmen to make their patterns and propositi∣ons respectively; and that hee that would make it with most advantage to the State, should have the Imployment.
At the time appointed the workmen brought to the Committee som pieces made after the old way, which is known to them, and som big pieces of sil∣ver stuffed within with copper; but they had drawn on Propositions. Likewise the said Blondeau brought in about 300 pieces, som half-crowns of the ordinary weight and bigness, som shillings, sixpences, and som Gold pieces, and presented his Proposition, which having been reformed according to the pleasure of the said Committee, it was received and accepted of by the whol Committee, who ordered it to bee reported to the Council of State, according to the order of the said Council. The said Cōmittee having then taken into conside∣ration the big pieces of Silver at the outside, and stuf∣fed within with copper (made with the Engins that are at the Tower) and well understood that the said pieces, becaus they are made of several pieces at the top one of another, will give no sound, so that a blinde man can easily discern that they are fals; and having weighed the long time and great cost requi∣red for coyning of each piece; becaus they are made of 4 pieces, namely one of copper and one of silver, at the top, another underneath and one about, the which ought to bee adjusted and sodered together, besides several other fashions, which cost more then the price of the lawful pieces; having also considered the great and heavie Engins, and great number of tools and of men required for making of one piece, the great charges for the Engins and tools and several other things required for making of those counterfei∣ted pieces, they acknowledged that it would bee e∣nough to disswade any one from undertaking it; the rich not beeing willing, and the poor beeing unable, and that though they should undertake it they could not do it without beeing discovered. Besides, that
the mony coyned after the way of the said Blondeau, was so thin, that it cannot bee so counterfeited. Whereupon it is observable, that the said work∣men of the Mint, although they made use of the great and heavie Engins, that are in the Tower, yet for making of som Tools they had need of, and for the other charges of coyning about a dozen of pieces, they made then for a pattern, have spent 100 l. st. as hee that pretends to have laid out the money hath said before witnesses. Afterwards, another Order was given by the said Committee, and som time limited to the said work∣men, to draw and present their Proposition for coyning of the monie marked upon the thickness or edge, as that of the said Blondeau is; But after the exspiration of the long time demanded by them, they brought such a Proposition, that the said Com∣mittee having read it over and over, could not un∣derstand it, nor the sens of it; and even those that brought it could not explain it; whereby it was ap∣parent to the said Committee, that they were not a∣ble to make their Proposition good, much less to coyn the mony after that way; which they avowed themselves before the said Committee. Yet they in∣treated the Committee to allow them the time of som months more to finde, if possible, the new inventi∣on, and that the said Blondeau's Proposition should bee communicated unto them, upon which they might frame their own. They further demanded that the said Blondeau and the Graver, should have order to bring in all the pieces made by the said Blondeau for a tryal, with the stamps or dices used for making of them: All which was granted them, upon that condition, that if within the time allowed them, they could finde out the means to coyn the monie after the said Blondeau's way, and that thereupon he should be sent back, he should be indamnified,
which was agreed by all. But they could never finde out the said new Invention for coyning the thin and weak pieces after that way with expedition requi∣site. Yet for all that, they made their Propositions, which are in the hands of the Chair-man of the Committee, as are also the said Blondeau's Propositi∣on and patterns, about a year and a half since, to be reported by him to the Council of State. The Workmen of the Mint have given to under∣stand that they are 200 poor families, which are maintained by the work of the Mint; which is be∣sides truth. For som Officers of the Mint have told before witnesses, that formerly their Corporation was at the most of 40 Masters, and that at this time they are hardly 30 Masters, who are all rich, have lands or houses, and other waies of maintenance, without the work of the Mint. And that when they had much monie to coyn, they were wonted to hire som journie-men, giving to som 18 pence, to som 15 to som 12 for half a dayes work. Besides, in case the State admits of the said Blondeau to coyn the monie after his way, and the workmen be willing to work after the said way, he will oblige himself to teach them and pay them a reasonable price. The said Blondeau doth not intend to have the Gold nor the Silver in his custodie, but onely the charge of working the same, by such persons as the State shall be pleased to admit thereunto. He shall not have the power to admit any one to the work of the Mint, without the consent and ap∣probation of the State. Nor will not have the keeping of the dices or stamps, but they shall be intrusted in the hands of such as the State shall admit to work. In a word he doth generally submit to whatsoever the State shall think reasonable. Onely he prays to consider, that
1. The exact equalitie that will be effected by this waie and invention of the said Blondeau, will hinder and avoid all the known corrupt Practices about coyning. 2. The charge of the State concerning the same, considering all circumstances, will be less then in the old way; and the honor of this Common-wealth much the greater, in having their monies coyned in perfection, above, or beyond any other State now known. 3. The said Blondeau came to London about 3 years and a half since, and hath no other imployment here, but to attend the pleasure of the State. VVhite-Hall the 14. June 1651. Mr. DAVID RAMADGE, THese are to authorize you, to make some patterns as broad as a shilling, a half-crown, a twenty shillings peece of gold, in a mill; and if you can doe it with letters about the edge, or other wayes, according to Queen Eli∣zabeths patterns of mill-money, or any other modells or peeces you are to make, That so the Committee of the Mint may see your severall peeces, and thereupon consider what is fittest to present to the Councell of State, for the more handsome making of the monies for the honor of this Common-Wealth. James Harington. Tho. Chaloner. IN obedience to this Warrant from the abovesaid Right honorable Gentlemen of the Committee for removing the Obstructions of the Mint; David Rammage, our fellow monier, (by order of our whol Corpora∣tion of Moniers) did make his Trial of skill, who should best work a Patern or Modell, according to
the warrant aforesaid, whether wee the Corporation of Moniers, or the said Peter Blondeau. And whereas the said Peter Blondeau had falsly af∣firmed to many people, That his severall pieces of coyn presented by him to the Committee for the Mint no man in the world could make the like but himself; David Rammage, at the request of our Cor∣poration, did make severall Peeces and Modells with∣in the Mint of the Tower of London more exactly with Letters about the edg, then any peeces which Peter Blondeau presented to the Committee, which Peeces are still remayning to bee seen and judged in the hands of the right honorable Sir James Harrington Chair-man of that Committee; And whereas Blon∣deau the french man vapored and stood so much up∣on the gloss and tincture of his Monies, viz. half∣crowns, shillings and sixpences, which the said Pe∣ter Blondeau did falsly and traiterously make out of the Mint, of the just weight and motto of the Common∣wealths money, contrary to the Lawes and Statutes of this Nation, having fraudulently silvered over the said Plates with fine silver to abuse ignorant people; the said cheat was discovered by the most knowing and right honorable gentlemen Master Allen, and Master Cornelius Holland, formerly Warden of the States Mint, and both of them now of the Councel of State; and at that very time wee made it our most humble Request to the right honorable the Commit∣tee of the Mint to take notice, That the said Pet. Blon∣deau had committed Treason, in traiterously making half-crown peeces, shillings and six-pences of the coin of the Common-wealth of England, in a private house in the Strand, contrary to the lawes and statutes of this Nation, out of the Mint, not having an Act of Par∣liament or a Cōmission under the great seale of Eng∣land to do it; for which fact the said Peter Blondeau ought to suffer as a Traytor by being hanged drawn
and quartered: Whereupon the right honorable the Committee of the Mint presently sent Messengers and seized on all the said Peter Blondeaus Instruments and Tooles, in the Strand, and sent them to the Tower, where they remaine at this day, in safe custody, with us in the Mint. Now followeth the severall Proceedings before the hono∣rable Committee for the Mint, viz. To the right Honorable Sir James Harring∣ton, one of the Councell of State, Chair∣man for the Committee of the Mint. The humble Proposition of the Provost and Moniers of the States Mint in the Tower of London. 1. THat whereas some people desire to have the monies made by the mill for the fu∣ture, and that your Honors did bid David Rammage, one of our fellowes, to set down the lowest rate that we could aford to make the monies of gold and silver of this Common-wealth, as fair and beau∣tifull as the present Lewis and Cardeques, and all o∣ther coynes of the French Nation are at this day made. 2. Whereas we have 9. d. per pound weight Troy, for working the present monie by the hammer, Wee doe undertake, for our selves and our Company, to make fair mill-monie for 12. d. the pound weight Troy, and to make it as fair as any monies currant in Christendome. 3. Whereas we have 2. s. 5. d. for the making of one pound weight Troy of gold, and the State hath 15. s. for the coynage; We will undertake for our
Company, to make fair mill-gold, as fair as the gold coynes in France for 5. s. the pound weight, if it be the States pleasure that they will have it so made. 4. That whereas we are an antient Corporation and Company, setled by charter for many hundred yeares, and in all ages faithfully discharged our trust, and never any blot lay upon us eyther for emba∣sing the coynes, or for not accompting to the State for every grain of gold and silver that ever came un∣der our charge; Wee do humbly hope to have so much Justice that wee shall still bee imployed in the service of the State, in regard it is the livelyhood and subsistence of above two hundred Families, when the Mint is full of work, and in regard wee under∣take to do it as exactly as any French-man in the world, and at a cheaper price then the French man hath offered, and you may be assured that we shall discharge all or any trust that shall be put into our hands, by the just dealing you have in all ages recei∣ved from us. Wee having since this Parliament many times in our own custody two or three hundred thousand pounds, and have accompted for it to a penny, to the State. Sir, we value the keeping of our Reputation in this point, as much as we doe our lives; & therfore hum∣bly hope our fidelitie and sufficiencie to doe what we undertake, shall not be put into the scale with a French-man, wee being willing and desirous to put it to the tryall between David Rammage our fellow Monier and the French man, if the State please to command us. Symon Corbet, Michael Garnet, Tho. Brooke, John Benfeild, Henry Perryn, Hen. Rowe, Richard John∣son, Will. Dawson, Will. Tavernor, Tho. Younge, David Rammage, John Corbett, Walter Taylor, Nath. Marsh. 28. Febr. 1650.
THe eight of May 1651. The right Honorable the Committee for the Mint did order us the Moniers to make our tryall the States Arms as upon 20. s. piece, the motto about the edges, Truth and Peace; the same in silver for a half crown, the mot∣to about the edges, Truth and Peace, and some of the same peeces to have a graining about the edges with∣out motto, and to present them the third of July 1651. to the right Honorable Sir James Harrington, being Chair-man for that Committee. In obedience to this order, wee the Provost and Moniers were at about sixty pounds charge in the making the tryall, for which we are humble suitors for our satisfaction, and the said peeces remain in the custody of the Honora∣ble Committee of the Mint; And we humbly leave it to the judgement of the Honorable Committee, whether the letters about the edges of gold and silver peeces, presented for and in the behalf of us the Provost and Moniers of the Mint, did not farr ex∣ceed the Frenchmans; (the peeces are still to be seen.) And before any determination of what the State would conclude on; Peter Blondeau a French man hath dispersed a false and scandalous Paper both at Westminster and at the Exchange in London and be∣yond Seas, in dishonor of the monies of the Nation; and charging the Officers and Moniers of the Mint with making monie contrary to their Indenture; a charge so false and scandalous, that hath inforced us the Provost and Moniers to reprint the said Blondeau's Paper, and to give a short answer to the untruths and absurdities in it: And we humbly submit what we say to all Artists and knowing men in Mint bu∣sinesse, whether the French man hath not declared in his printed Paper a great many untruths, with a great deal of impudence and ignorance. And we most humbly desire what we here say, to have the truth of it examined by the right Honorable the
Committee for the Mint, and that their Honours would be pleased to give us such reparation as shall be by their great wisdomes thought fit, And it shall oblige us ever to pray for their Honors, if they will give us leave to vindicate our selves in such a way as is agreeable to the Common-Law of this Nation. The Provost and Moniers Answere to the Objections of Peter Blondeau is, THat the Monies made by the Moniers are upon their delivery out of their Office view∣ed by the Warden, Master-worker and the Controler and the Assay-master, and both weighed, assayed for weight and fineness of all the monies, and examined by them, and severall peeces taken out of every journey of silver, which is 30. l. weight, and a journey of gold 15. l. weight, which peeces are put into a Box sealed with severall Seales, commonly called the Pix-Box, and formerly once every yeare, and now, when the State please, examined both in the say and fineness and in the weight, that it all bee made equall; and this is done upon the oaths of twenty foure men, that are Artists; (formerly in the Star-chamber) And if the moneys do not fall out to bee good and just, both in fineness and weight, then wee and all the Officers of the Mint are in a premunire. And this tryal hath ever been held; and (under favor of our superiors) wee humbly conceive, is the stri∣ctest and exactest of any Mint in Christendome. And wee do with all humility justify and affirm the mony of gold and silver delivered out of the Tower of Lon∣don, the most exact for the weight and fineness in the world. And of the truth of this, for the honour of sterling moneys of England, all the great Merchants both English and Strangers of London can certify
what wee say to the State, in this particular, to bee true. That it is true, much clipped English moneys are passed in payment, which hath much encreased si∣thence these wars, which if there were a Law to have it cut in peices, the abuses practised by some men would for the future bee prevented. And whereas much light moneys pass abroad, and the weightiest is melted, this comes not through any fault of the moniers, for they are bound to make all their mo∣neyes at sixty two shillings the pound weight, with the remedy of 6. d. the pound weight under or over. Now when sterling sylver is as it hath been at 3. l. 3. s. the pound Troy, some people wee conceive have mel∣ted down the currant coynes of this Nation; which ought strictly to bee prevented; For if the Market will give more for silver then the monie is coyned at in the Tower, till that bee prevented, and the Lawes revived against it, and to set the price of sil∣ver, as it is in other countries, as you may see in Mr. Thomas Violet's book, the rule for all the great Mints in Christendome, not to exceed their Mints: While this be done the monies will be culled and weighed, and the Mint will bee obstructed; for if the State allowe the Mint to give but three pounds for sterling the pound weight Troy, and no more, and to coyn it and deliver sterling in money at three pounds two shillings the pound weight Troy, and there shall be a market amongst severall people in this Nation that will give three pound foure shillings, and three pound three shillings, and three pound two shil∣lings six pence sterling, the Mint will not bee set on worke, but also your owne current coyne will bee culled and melted, as wee humbly conceive hath beene, and so the stock of this Nation will bee wa∣sted and decayed. And this abuse comes not by the unevenness of the coyning of the money, as this
most ignorant fellow Peter Blondeau affirmes, but by the unevenness of the raising of the price of siluer for particular mens gains, to the dammage of publique; and this is the true reason why the Mint doth not go, and is humbly presented by us to the honorable Committee of the Mint, to rectifie. There is one great and scandalous falshood by Peter Blondeau charged upon the moniers of the Mint, That whereas we ought by our Indenture to coyn the monie at sixty two shillings the pound, we coyn it at sixty four shillings or sixty five shillings, And this is that the Goldsmiths and other Traders into the Mint call their encouragement, as Blondeau in his Paper doth falsly allege. Truly this sheweth the ignorance and impudence of Blondeau: He may have skill in making a Jack for a Kitchin, but none in Mint businesse. We have ser∣ved the State from our infancy, and every year had our tryalls made in the strictest manner before the Lords of the Councell, and upon the oath of a Jury of twenty four men, cleared every year in the Star-Chamber; And in the compasse of five years, for this Parliament, coyned this Common-wealth about six millions of silver from 1640. to 1645. And upon our tryalls afore severall Committees of Parliament, by a Jury of Artists, all cleared, That our monie was good according to our Indenture, both for the weight and finenesse, and we have cleared our ac∣compt to a penny for about twenty five millions to the State within thirty years; which we humbly hope the right Honorable Committee of the Mint will consider, and value us at such a rate, as, under favour, our just dealing hath deserved. Whereas Blondeau saith, That the Officers and Workmen of the Mint have made their uttermost en∣deavors to finde out this Invention, which they could not attain unto, and every day brought new
tales to amuse the State, and made some few pieces after the old manner, and doth boldly and traiterous∣ly affirm, he the said Blondeau can wash both gold and silver severall wayes with great dexterity; And that he hath diligently studied, with great expences, the wayes of washing coyn. Truly we the Provost and Moniers of the Mint wonder at his impudence that he dares say so, know∣ing how penall the Law is in England, brag of such a Mistery, that in all Countries to put it in practise is death: It may be for that reason of his skill, in wash∣ing coynes, Peter Blondeau run out of France into Eng∣land. If he confesse he studied this rare Art to wash coyn with extream dexterity, and made severall ex∣periments in England, by his own confession: Then we humbly say, he is fitter for Newgate then to be imployed in the Mint of this Nation. We are humble suitors to the Honorable Com∣mittee of the Mint, for to take these our humble Pro∣positions into consideration. We have made the monies both gold and silver with letters about the edge; And the letters about the edges of the peeces we made, are more fair and exacter then Blondeau's peeces. Blondeau by his first Proposition to the Coun∣cell of State did demand fourteen shillings the pound weight for gold, and twenty pence the pound weight for silver. Our patterns are in the right Ho∣norable Sir James Harrington's hands. We have deli∣vered in severall patterns of coyns with a double graining, and to be exactly rounded; which we can afford for ten pence the pound weight silver, and three shillings the pound weight gold by the way of the hammer; And we have delivered in a Proposi∣tion, to bear all charges, saving for coyning Irons, at fourteen pence for silver, and four shillings for gold, by the hammer. We are humble suitors to the right Honorable the
Committee of the Mint, That their Honours would speedily enquire out the obstructions of the Mint, provide remedies by good Lawes, and imploy such in trust as have skill and will to finde out the offen∣ders; If this bee done the Mint will flourish again, and till this bee done, in all humility wee say, the State will have little or no silver or gold coyned in the Mint; If men can make more of it to sell it to transport then to make it in coyne, experience shews private men will dispose of their gold and silver at their best market, for their privat profits, though it bee to the losse of the Common-wealth. All which wee, with all humility, submit to the right honora∣ble the Committee of the Mint, to settle such rules in the Mint as may bee most advantageous for the Nation. And wee shall pray, &c. 18 Novemb. 1651. Symon Corbet. Prov. John Benfeild. Henry Perrin. John Warner. David Rammage. John Corbet. Abram Hunt. Vall. Nicholson. Nathaniel Marsh. William Taverner. Walter Taylor. William Maynard. Andrew Colman. Symon Corbet Jun. Daniel Benfeild. John Butterfild. Edward Hawerd. Thomas Garnett. William Shanbrooke. Richard Johnson. Michael Garnet. John Pollard. Robert Gascoyne. Joseph Sanders. James Boone. Thomas Young. Richard Collard. George Collard. Thomas Russell. Thomas Brooke. Richard Nicholls. Hen. Lewis. Edmond Dawson. Steven Hauton. John Weatherly. Hen. Rome. Tobias Maynard.
THIS is a true and perfect accompt of every dayes proceedings before the right honorable the Committee of the Councell of State, as will appeare by our originall Papers left in the hands of the right honorable sir James Harington, chair-man for the Committee of the Mint. Since which time, that is to say, about the moneth of January 1652. the before named Peter Blondeau, seeing he escaped so long with∣out punishment, and without our calling him to a legall accompt, both for his first libell and for his counterfeiting of shillings, sixpences and half∣crowns which the said Peter Blondeau falsly and trai∣terously caused to be made at a private house in the Strand, contrary to the known Laws and Statutes of this Nation, not having a Commission under the Great Seal of England: For which offences wee hum∣bly desire the State, that we may file an Inditement against the said Peter Blondeau; or that we may have the said Peter Blondeau to run the gauntlet once about the Mint; where if he ever could run it twice we would give him leave to libell against us all the dayes of his life after: Or that we may have leave to commence our suit at the common Law against the said Blondeau for both his libells. This last libell of his which appeared to the world in January 1652 be∣ing the most impudent nonsense and lies that ever was printed in English, is almost all answered by what hath been said before; yet somthing must be said. We begin with Blondeau's first reason of the abuses in the Mint. He sayth it is by reason the monie is coyned by the hammer, that thereby the false Coyners are incouraged and their number in∣creased; whereas we will make infallible proof, that if the State make their monie in a mill, we will make such an Engine that a Porter shall carrie it about the streets under his arm, and coyn monie as he goes
along, and no body shall hear him. And we must put in remembrance Peter Blondeau what became of the Coyner that made mill-monie in Queen Eliza∣beths time: The Queen and her Councell liked very well the way of making mill-monie within her Mint in the Tower of London: But when she knew, and had it proved, that this Mounsieur that coyned her mill-monie in the Mint, did also at the same time counterfeit and make mill-monie out of the Mint, all his friends in Court could not save him, though he had many, as Blondeau may have; but according to the strict rules of the Laws of this Na∣tion, he was condemned to death, and did suffer ex∣ecution as a false traytor, by being hanged, drawn and quartered, and his quarters parboyled. Good mounsieur Peter Blondeau, if you should be so served your french carkass would make more Ramish broth then a Goat: Have a care, for you will come under the consultation of your twelve God-fathers for what you have done already. 2. The next false and scandalous lie is, That the said Peter Blondeau himself hath received some shil∣lings which weighed some five pence, some six pence and some seven pence onely. We say that may very well be; for those that hide can finde: He hath counterfeited the currant monie of this Nation. And by his own confession, That he hath diligently in∣quired and studied, with great expences, all the wayes of wash∣ing of coynes, and made severall experiences of them, he the said Peter Blondeau can boldly say, he knowes as much therein as any man, and can wash both gold and silver seve∣rall wayes with an extream dexterity. These are Peter Blon∣deau's own words: A gallant character for the great∣est vilain and traitorly false Coyner in the world: He cannot take up a higher title of being a perfect Rogue, then this Peter Blondeau hath taken upon him∣self in his own printed Papers: And if he will doe
the favour to shew us any such five pennie, six pen∣nie or seven pennie shillings, we will lay him in Newgate till he discover the Coyners; for we disclaim ever making any such monie: We doe not know what Peter Blondeau hath done where he hath coun∣terfeited monie in the Strand: he may as lawfully make light shillings there as weighty. And that's our answer to this false scandall. Thirdly, Wee further say, If any Goldsmith furnish to transport, money, either gold or silver, cull and adulterate the money, as no doubt but som daily do, it is a shame that a Law for the discovery and pu∣nishing of them is not passed the house of Parliament Wee are sure of it that there was a certificate some years past to the Parliament and Councell of State, under the hands of Master St. Johns warden of the Mint, Sir Robert Harlow ma∣ster worker, and master Cogan Controler, 20 Decem. 1652. after several daies consideration, presented to the honorable Committee of the Navie; and then our head officers could do no more, it was not in their power to make the Law, they could but inform the Parliament as wee now do. Wee understand the Bill hath been twice read in the House, and is kept as yet from being made an Act; if it were passed the House, the deceits and knaveries of some Merchants, gold-smiths and others, would come to the view of the world, the Mint in the Tower of London would flourish, and transporting Treasure would bee stop∣ped; and till this Act bee passed, the stock of Treasure in this Nation will bee wasted, and insensibly de∣stroyed. Wee could say more, but refer you to a Letter in this booke that sets forth all the abuses and dammages the Common-wealth suffers by transport∣ing and culling gold and silver. Wee humbly desire that after 13 yeares soliciting the Parliament, this good Act may passe the House, the Nation hath lost
millions of Treasure in not passing this Act, wee know what wee say to bee true, and some ought to bee called to an account for hindring it so long. The Officers of the Mint in the Tower of London, whose names are hereunder written, in pursuance of the directions of the Honorable Committee of the Navie, in relation to their Order dated the third of December present, do hum∣bly conceive, and Certify as followeth. THat to prevent great abuses practised upon the coyn and bullion of the Nation, which is transported out of the Nation; as also to pre∣vent the culling and melting down the currant Mo∣ny of the Nation, and for the discovering of such as have offended, to bee brought to Justice, to deter o∣thers from acting the like abuses for the future, do humbly conceive, That according to the President of the 14 Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission bee granted to make inquiry through the Realm, of such as had conveied the mo∣nies of England out of the Nation, and to make en∣quirie after all such as melt and cull out the heavie currant monie, contrarie to the Statute of the 4 Hen. 4. cap. 10. none to melt the currant silver coyns of the Nation, upon pain of forfeiture four times the value. That 2 Hen. 6. cap. 12. It is ordeined, that neither the Master-worker of the Mint, nor the Changer for the time being, neither sell nor cause to be sold, nor alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to coyn according to the tenor of the Indenture of the Mint, made between the Kings Majestie and the Mint, to declare by Ordinance, That what Gold-smith or Changer shall buy gold or silver, and convert it to any use to transport, shall forfeit the value. To declare by Ordinance, that according to the 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. an Act touching the exchange
of gold and silver, That whosoever gives more for gold and silver then it is or shall be declared, shall suffer Imprisonment by the space of a year, and make fine at the pleasure of the State. The Mint cannot be imployed, nor the transporting treasure stopped, if some course be not speedily taken to discover these great abuses. And already, almost all the gold is transported out of the Nation, and the silver follow∣eth it apace, as is prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citizens of London to both houses of Parliament. Wee humbly conceiv, that the making of this discovery throughout the Nation, of such as have, or shall transport gold and silver into parts beyond the Seas, and of such as have or shall melt down the currant gold and silver coyns of the Nation; or have, or shall buy gold and silver at above the price of the Mint: (the practise of which abuses, if not timely prevented, is likely to bring speedy destruction to the Trade of this Kingdom; which is presidented anno 4 Rich. 2. c. 2. when the Nation found the same mischief as we now suffer under, by transporting of treasure. And anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 19. by giving for gold and silver above the price of the Mint.) As it will be a service of great im∣portance to the Publick affairs, and bring great ad∣vantage to the Trade of this Nation, so it will draw with it a very great charge. Which if Master Watkins will undertake, he will deserve highly to be encouraged: nevertheless, we humbly submit the premisses to the Wisdoms of this Honorable Committee. John St. John, Warden. Robert Harlow, Master. Henrie Cogan, Comptr. December 20. 1647.
Fourthly, the said Peter Blondeau hath charged us that wee the moniers of the Mint may somtimes coyne our own silver, or may treat with those that bring their bullion to be coyned, and so make more peeces in number then there should bee in a pound, and that the workmen of the Mint do cull and pick out the heaviest peeces to melt again, as themselves have confessed before the said Cōmittee of the Mint, and that is the thing which amongst themselves they call the mistery or secret of the Mint. To this wee say, master Peter Blondeau, you will gallop so fast that in the end wee beleeve you will knock your head against the gallowes; Wee do all of us joyntly and severally say, That never any of us, the corporation of moniers, ever coyned any of our own monies eyther gold or silver, or ever had any treaty with any manner of person either Merchants or Goldsmiths that ever brought in gold or silver into the Mint, to make more peeces in number then there ought or should bee in the pound weight, according to the strict rules of our Indenture, & we do appeal to all the Gold-smiths, and others now living, who have been yearely of the Jury for the tryal of the Pickes of the moneys both gold or silver, in the Star-chamber, whether ever we were charged, or any of the said Jury ever imagined upon any one or all their tryalls of the monies of this nation, that such things were ever acted or done by us the Moniers of the Mint, or any one of us; and we are all severally ready to depose every one for himself, that such things never entred into the heart or imagination of any of us, to act or doe, much lesse for any one of us, to confesse before the right Honorable the Committee of the Mint, that ever any such vilanie was ever done or acted by any of our fellow Moniers. And we most humbly desire the right Honorable Committee for the Mint, or any one of them, to give either all of us, or any
one of us a charge (if this which Peter Blondeau the french man saith we confessed before the Cōmittee to be true) if the said right honorable Committee clear us; then we humblie desire, we may have li∣berty to commence our suit at Common Law against this Peter Blondeau, and wee make no question, but a Jury will give us full reparation. Fifthly, Whereas Peter Blondeau saith, The monie ought to be ajusted peece by peece when it is finish∣ed: This ignorant fellow ought to know every jour∣ny of gold and silver is examined by the sworn Offi∣cers, the Warden, the Master, the Controler, the Assay-Master, & out of every journy of gold or silver, there are severall peeces taken and put into the pix box for a years tryall; and the monie both gold and silver both for fineness and weight exactly tryed to see that it be according to our Indenture before the monie either gold or silver is payed forth to the subjects; And that this is true all people that ever traded in the Mint know; and it is the most perfect and ex∣actest tryall of any Mint in Christendom: And this we doe justifie to all the world to be a certain truth. Sixthly, That whereas the said Peter Blondeau saith, That he made some three hundred peeces, some half crowns of the ordinary weight and bigness, some shillings, six pences, and some gold peeces, and pre∣sented his Proposition, which having been reformed according to the pleasure of the Committee, it was received and accepted of by the whole Committee, who ordered it to be reported to the Councell of State: We answer, that we never knew any such order, nor never heard any of the right honorable Committee say so much as the said Blondeau falsly affirms; But at the same time, upon our humble Petition of setting forth the treasonable action of the said Peter Blondeau in presuming traiterously to coyn the currant monies
of the Nation in a private house in the Strand, the said Committee ordered presently, That all his coyn∣ing tools and irons then remaning in the Strand, should be presently secured and seized, and sent into the Mint in the Tower; which was done according∣ly, and there they remain at this day. We humblie desire as aforesaid, to have leave to indict the said Peter Blondeau, as we have formerly said, for his trea∣sonable coyning of monie out of the Mint, he not having an act of Parliament or Commission under the great seal of England for the doing of the same. Seventhly, whereas the said Blondeau hath printed, That for the making of some tooles for the coyning of about one dozen peeces for a pattern, they have put the State to one hundred pound sterling charge; Wee answere, That wee followed the strict Letter of our Warrant from the honorable Committee of the Mint, both for the motto and weight; and though wee presented but a dozen peeces, yet with those tooles wee made (if commanded) wee can print ma∣ny thousands, and for truth of the premisses view our Accompt following attested under our hands. The Accompt of the Moniers of the Commonwealths Mint, upon the tryall with Peter Blondeau the Frenchman, about the making of Monies in July, August and September, one thousand six hundred fifty one. Inprimis in fitting of tooles and instruments for the work 50. l. o. s. o. d. In Gold and Silver for making of the tryall 11. 04. 03. Expended by the Moniers at se¦verall times, when they wai∣ted upon the Committee of the Mint in the tryall 26. 14. 02. In all 87. 18. 05.
And the honorable Commit∣tee for the Mint promised the Moniers for their exact working of the silver mo∣nie, after six moneths, for the silver a penny upon the pound weight, which coms to 12. l 16. s. 7. d. And for gold six pence upon the pound weight, which comes to 06. 09. 00. totall 107. 04. 00. Mr. THO. VIOLET, WEE doe desire you on behalf of the Moniers to prefer our petition to the right honorable the Committee for the Mint, for allowance for our tryall with the frenchman, and for an allowance for a pennie in the pound weight for silver, and six pence in the pound weight for gold, as their Honors promised us after six moneths, and in so doing you will very much ob∣lige your very loving friends to serve you; the 8. of Decemb. 1652. Symon Corbet. John Benfeild. Val. Nicholson. Richard Johnson. Walter Taylor. Henry Perrin. Robert Grave. Eightly, Whereas Peter Blondeau saith, That the Committee having read over all our Propositions, could not understand them or the sense of them; and even those that brought them could not explain them; whereby it was apparent we were not able to make our Propositions good. To answer this great untruth, we are now necessitated to print all the Pa∣pers we humblie presented to the right honorable Committee, and leave it to the world to judge; and
we with all humility humbly leave it to the right ho∣norable Sir James Harrington the Chair-man of the Committee, to examine whether he had not all these Papers now printed, delivered unto him according to the severall dates put down by us the Corporation of Moniers in the States Mint, about two years since. Ninthly, Whereas Peter Blondeau saith, That our Corporation is now but of thirty Fellowes or Ma∣sters, who are all rich and have lands or houses and other waies of maintenance without the work of the Mint; and when the State hath much monie to coyn they were wont to hire some journy-men at 18. d. 15. d. and 12. d. for half a dayes work. To answer to this great untruth, Wee can speak it with a great deal of grief, that almost twenty of our Fellows are fallen to so great decay, that both themselves and families are brought to great distress and poverty for want of imployment in the Mint, they all of them having been bound Apprentices for the least seven years to this Trade, and having no other calling or way to get their living but only upon the mistery and way of making of monies: many of them that are fellow Moniers having no other subsistence then what we of the Corporation amongst our selves col∣lect for them, to keep them from starving: And that this is true, we can produce hundreds of witnesses; and many of us finde it to our insupportable charge, we thinking our selves bound in conscience not to see any of our fellow Moniers perish for want of food and clothes. Here follows the true list of Fellows and Work∣men and Laborers imployed in the Mint 27. Jan. 1652. and some times we imploy four times as many Laborers, viz.
The names of the fellow-Moniers belonging to the Common-Wealth of Englands Mint, in the Tower of London, the 27. January 1652. 1 Symon Corbet Provost. 2 Tho. Robinson senior. 3 Mich. Garnet. 4 Tho. Brookes sen. 5 Tho. Garnet. 6 John Benfeild. 7 Henry Lewis. 8 John Pollard. 9 John Butterfeild. 10 Andrew Coleman. 11 Chr. Wilson, 12 Nic. Harris. 13 John Shoncke. 14 Edw. Dawson. 15 Hen. Rowe. 16 Hen. Perrin. 17 Valen. Nicholson. 18 Stephen Hawten. 19 Wm. Dawson. 20 Gabriel Benfeild 21 Tho. Robinson jun. 22 Rich. Nichols. 23 Edw. Maynard. 24 Rich. Collard. 25 Robert Gascoign. 26 James Clay. 27 John Weatherly. 28 John Warner. 29 Ja. Boone. 30 Wm. Taverner. 31 Wm. Shambrooke. 32 Tho. Young. 33 Rich. Johnson. 34 Walter Taylor. 35 John Corbet. 36 Edw. Heward. 37 Geo. Taverner. 38 Garnet Corbet. 39 Nathaniel Marsh. 40 Wm. Serby.
41 Joseph Sanders. 42 Wm. Maynard. 43 Robert Graves. 44 David Ramage. 45 Edw. Worldly. 46 Symon Corbet Jun. 47 Geo. Callard. 48 Daniel Robinson. 49 Daniel Benseild. 50 Rob. Aspe. 51 Abram Hunt. 52 Wm. Younge. 53 Toby Maynard. 54 Tho. Brooks Jun. 55 Tho. Russell. 56 Tho. Anderson. 57 Rich. Warner. 58 Rich. Sternell. 59 John Taverner.
The names of the Labo∣rers belonging to the Cōmon-wealths Mint in the Tower of Lon∣don, the 27. Jan. 1652. and at work, and all in the Moniers pay. 1 Nicholas Muriel. 2 John Mathewes. 3 Jo. Lucke. 4 Wm. Smyth. 5 Jo. Prince. 6 Ja. Sparks. 7 Rob. Baldwin. 8 Ja. Bernald. 9 Tho. Fulham. 10 Jeffry Tedsell. 11 Henry Freeman. 12 Samuell Freeman. 13 Robert Watts. 14 Geo. Ellet. 15 Edw. Thede. 16 Hen. Peacocke. 17 Joseph Rowland. 18 Edw. Aires. 19 Isaac Taylor. 20 Philip Anderkin. 21 John Feild. 22 Wm. Gunn. 23 John Gable. 24 Edw. Jones. 25 Tho. Browne. 26 Jo. Langly. 27 Fran. Cave. 28 Wm. Page. 29 Tho. Emes. 30 Tho. Blunt. 31 Wm. East. 32 John Pookey. 33 John Michell. 34 John Ramzy. 35 Wm. Ludlow. 36 Tho. Horton. 37 Rich. Hopkins. 38 Rob. Wilkinson. 39 Wm. Pryce. 40 John Shelley.
41 Tho. Floyd. 42 Wm. Blaygrave. 43 Rich. Cletherwell. 44 Rob. Cave. 45 Wm. Hazelwood. 46 Edw. Darby. 47 Fran. White. 48 Rob. Finch. 49 Tho. Collumer. 50 Wm. Atkins. 51 Wm. Hall.
