P3491A R224470 [ocm]64551600 184723
The Princely Scuffle: Or, An Account of the Late Famous Duel, which happen'd betwixt the Prince of Wales, and the Young Duke of Berry, one of the French King's Grand sons. 26. Jan. 1690/1 depiction of the fistfight between the Prince of Wales and the Duke of Berry depiction of the French king Don't Bank 'em; Let 'em Fight. depiction of the English queen O! the Prince! Part 'em. depiction of the Prince of Wales You French Dog. depiction of the Duke of Berry You English Bastard. ALL you that pass by, I pray you draw nigh, Attend to my Song, without ever a Lye; There chanc'd t'other day, a most Tragical Fray Between Two Young Princes, as they were at play In a Garden. The One he was bold, being Four Years old, And scorn'd by a Tyer for to be Controul'd; Yet tho' he was Young, he could handle his Tongue, And call'd his VVelsh-Highness i'th' midst of a Throng, English Bastard. The Other so Wise, did the Dauphin despise, His Countenance shew'd, his Flesh at him did rise; Quoth he, How I Itch, to have a Sound Twitch At that French Sawcy Son of a Bitch. The Young Dauphine. DUPHINE. Begar, dost dou come, to beat me at Home; Nay, if it be so, den have at dy Bum, That none may e're say, of me another day, I dishonour'd my self, in Running away From a Tyler. P. of WALES. French Dog, dost thou think, I ever will shrink? No, e're I have done, thy French Hide it shall stink: Then do not suppose, I am one of those, That will run away for one Bloody Nose; No, I Scorn it. Tho' my Rigid Fate, has expos'd me to hate, And am, like an Old Almanack, quite out of date; Yet still there remains, English Blood in my Veins; Then hold your French Tongue, or I'll beat out your Brains, You Young Vrchin. At this Dauphine Hist, and up with his Fist; But the Prince he drew back, and the Dauphine he mist: And the Prince to repay, his kindness, they say, Knock'd the Young Dauphin down, and there the Rogue lay For an Hour. But being Reviv'd, together they striv'd, And e'er they had done, the late Queen she arriv'd; Who seeing the Battle, fought on with such mettle, She set up her Notes, and made the Air rattle Like Thunder. Pray part them, she cry'd: The French King reply'd, I cannot tell which has the best on his side: Then part not the Chits; you Rogues, look to your Hits; At which, the late Queen, she fell into Fits. And no wonder. For such a sad Maul, there never did fall, Since Iames, for not Fighting, she beat at VVhite-hall; And so these Young Sparks, did Fight like two Sharks, That on both their Bodies, you might see the Marks A Month after. The French King did say, They shall have fair play; This is not diversion, I have e'y day; With that they did Fight, in Earnest out-right, And the Welsh Prince he Worsted the Young Dauphine quite, That he Cryed. And then the Late Queen, who the Duel had seen, And saw her Son's Nose bleed, so raised her Spleen, That she stept to the Dauphine, who was crying and coughing, Quoth she, You Young Bastard, your Grand-fathers huffing Shant daunt me. Without any delay, she began a new Fray, And flew at Old Lewis, and beat him they say, That h Roul'd in his Gore, and his Flesh it was sore; Besides it is said, She in Fury Tore Off his VVhiskers. But a great English Peer. who chanc'd to be near, And so this Confusion he Fortun'd to hear, Stept in to make Peace, which they all did Imbrace, And the Queen gave Old Lewis a Plaster for's Face, So they Parted. FINIS. Translated from the Orignal, Printed at AMSTERDAM.
