P3062A [ocm]10599384 204731
GOOD NEWES FROM MVNSTER: BEING, An Exact and true Relation of certain Passages of Intelligence from the Province of Munster in Ireland. As of taking of Ballincolly Castle near Cork, and cutting off of many Irish Rebels that were sheltred there; and stopt the passage between Cork and Bandon. And likewife of the relieving of the Kings Castle of Limrick by Captain Cole, with the Kings Pinnasse; who in her return took a Dunkirker richly laden with Ammunition; FAITHFVLLY COLLECTED, (From the mouth of a Gentlman of good rank and credit, Peter Courtup Esquire, sometimes High-Sheriff of the Countie of Cork, lately landed at Mmd from Cork in Mun∣ster.) By JOHN POVVELL, Preacher of God Word, Vicar and Pastor of Newmarket in Munster, untill the Irish Rebellious Wolves scattered his flock, and scared their Shepheard, who lost by this Rebellion 400. l. in Temporalties, besides his Spirituall means of 150. l.per annum. WITH A Letter sent from Amsterdam, and read in both Houses of Parliament, the 11. of this present June, 1642. Discovering what courses are there taken for the raising of Ammunition to be sent to the North. With a List containing the particular number of the said Ammunition. Die Lunae, 13. Iunii, 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That these Letters and list of Am∣munition be forthwith printed and published. I. Brown Cler. Parl. Iune 14. LONDON, printed for Andrew Coe. 1642.
From Amsterdam. Iune 12 New stile, Iune 2 old stile. To Iohn Beauchamp Merchant of London. For the Cloath Trade at present, I would advise you to write to hic whollyy not to boy in a piece at present, although he pre∣tends losing his workemen or the like: for losing his workmen, I doubt at this time money is not so riese in that Country, and men so forward to buy, that I thinke little feare, but that if he Turnes off or leave buying, his workemen will be glad to come againe at more settled tmes; And it may be, sell better cheape. Therefore abovt all excuses, as the state stands write him absolutely not to take off any untiel further advise for if things go badly there, and come to pilag∣ing or destruction, you should have all the cloth he had in the house to be reckoned to bee your cloth. I feare a storme to arise the North, and I see it dayly growe blacker and darker, for store of monyes is made over to pe sent thither, witnesse the risinn of the exchange here so suddenly; And at bresent here is Order to buy store of pistoles for Horsmen and powder, and neere upon 20. brasse pieces to bee sent for the North parts, but the Order is not from the Parliament.
Newes from Ireland, reported by Peter Courtup Esquire, sometimes High She∣riffe of the County of Corke in the Pro∣vince of Munster, lately landed at Mine-head, from thence. SIR William St. Leger Lord Presi∣dent and General of Munster finding the passage betweene Corke and Bau∣don Bridge pesterd with Irish Rebels that were sheltered and succoured in a Castle somewhat adjacent unto the said roade, gave order that forthwith a considerable force of Horse and foot should issue forth against the said Castle, called by the name of Ballencholly Castle, and that Captaine Chidley should goe Commander of the said Force; withall, that a Basilisco should be taken forth of the Fort of Cork
for the better expediting of their De∣signes against the said Rebels in Ballin∣cally Castle, which accordingly was ef∣fected, there were of Horse 100. of Foot 200. and after their comming to the said Castle, and demanding the said Castle to be rendred up to them for his Majesties use, and they refusing of it, they with the piece of Ordnance made a breach for entrance, and with the losse of some 4. or 5. men, entred the Castle, and put to death neere about 80. men; after this Exploit they cause the breach to be made up againe, and left 40. of their men in the said Castle: All this while the Lord of Muskrey being in view of the said Forces with 7. or 8000. men, durst not advance against our Forces to relieve the said Ca∣stle, such is the spirit of feare and co∣wardice that God hath possest the Irish Rebels hearts with in vengeance, that were here a sudden, considerable, well-provided Aide sent over into Munster, our English there would quickly (by the help of God, who hath wonderfully of
late stretched out his arme of mercy to∣wards the Protestants there) be not only Masters of the field, but Commanders of all the Cities and Castles, Forts, and Forts of Munster, but before Captaine Chidley and his Forces left the said Castle, hee charged the Souldiers to whom he com∣mitted the custody and command of the said Castle, that they should have an espe∣ciall care to have a strong and faithfull sentinell for feare there should be any more men in the Castle in any secret place that they had not discovered, for that in warres before this, Captain Ban∣ret an Irish man pretending to be true to the Queenes Majesty, repaired unto the Lord President Carew, to have some Mus∣keteers to guard this Castle being then his, otherwise he should be made a prey unto his Country-men that were in Re∣bellion, whereupon the Lord President allowed him 24. Musketiers, of whom the said Barnet promis'd to be chary of as of his owne life, but he within three dayes after at supper, caused all thse men
to be slain by 80. Armed men that issued out of a Vault under ground in the same Castle giving them this watch word that when they heard him offer to drinke to them, saying, Here's is to you all Gentle∣men Souldiers in a cup of red Wine, they shuld presently surprize them & cut them off, which accordingly they did, so dan∣gerous a thing it is to trust Protestants under the command of Papists, notwith∣standing their deep Protestations, oathes pretended love and loyalty; the sad Tra∣gedy of these 24. made the 40. men left in the said Castle more vigilant, and loo∣king about under the hutch, they found a boy, to whom they promist his life, if he would discover unto them the way to the Vault, but refusing to doe, after some torture they inflicted on him, they put him to death; not long after, a hand∣some Irish woman came up out of the Vault, and hung about one of the Soul∣diers necks, and kist him, desiring him to save her life and oe what he would with her, but he answering her, that it
was not in his power, left her, and ano∣ther Souldier cleft her head into two pieces; and then the Souldiers betooke themselves to the further discovery of the said Vault, which they found out by her comming forth, and presenly cast in such abundance of moist Hay fired, that with the smother thereof, enforced Armed men that were there to come up, there were 17. which our men cut off, and now keepe the Castle quietly, and thereby have cleared the way betweene Cork and Bandon-bridge. Likewise, that the Kings Castle of Limrick, under the command of Captain George Courtney, was relieved upon intel∣ligence sent unto the Lord President of Munster from the said Captain Courtney of his great want both with provision and Ammunition, by the Kings Pinace under the Command of Captaine Cole, and up∣on the returne of the said Pinace, there did appeare at the mouth of the Harbour of Limrick, two Dunkirks, thereupon the Pinace having eight brasse Pieces, besides
Murtherers and Fire-workes, let flye at them both, but the one escapt, and the other the Kings Pinace tooke in, which Vessell being neere about an hundred Tun they found an Irish Merchant of Limrick, worth before these warres there, 1500. pound per annum in Lands, besides his other stocke of Merchandise, foure score Barrels of Powder, 700. Muskets, besides abundance of Swords and Match, and the very Ballast was all Ordinances, which Captaine Cole hath brought about to, Corke, God send us more such good puchases that may hinder the Rebels and help our Friends. A list of the Ammunition, as followeth: FOure pieces of Battery of 18 pound Bullet. One piece carrying 12. pound bullet. Two Culverings carrying 8. pound bullet. Six Field pieces carrying 6. pound bullet. Two Mortar pieces. For Granado's sixteene. An hundred barrells of pouder. Two thousand paire of Pistols ready prev. A thousand Carabines. Three thousand Saddles. Bullets. Ladles. Sponges. Carriages. Harnesse for Dr Horses. The Mortar pieces are a foot and a hale in  the mouth mettall and all. Shooting Granado's of 11 or 12 inches. FINJS.
