11166 99856219 21748
MVSICKE OF SVNDRIE KINDES, Set forth in two Bookes. THE FIRST WHEREOF ARE, Aries for 4. Voices to the Lute, Orphorion, or Basse-Viol, with a Dialogue for two Voices, and two Basse Viols in parts, tunde the Lute way. THE SECOND ARE Pauens, Galiards, Almaines, Toies, Iigges, Thumpes and such like, for two Basse-Viols, the Liers way, so made as the greatest number may serue to play alone, very easie to be performde. Composed by THOMAS FORD. Imprinted at London by IOHN WINDET at the Assignes of WILLAM BARLET and are to be sold by IOHN BROVVNE in Saint Dunstons church yard in Fleet street 1607.
A Table of the Songs contained in this booke. 1 Notfull twelue yeares 2 VVhat then is loue 3 Vnto the temple. 4 Now I see thy lookes were fained. 5 Goe passions. 6 Come phillis. 7 Faire, sweet, cruell. 8 Since first I saw your face. 9 There is a Ladie. 10 How shall I then. 11 A Dialogue. When you sing alone to the Basse, such no  as are broken or de∣uided by reason o the wo  the  or plaide in one stroke accord  Direction
TO THE WORTHIE and vertuuos Knight, SIR RICHARD WESTON. SIR albeit musicke may instly chalenge an interest in the best parte of my education, I could be content for manie reasons to conceale my defects from the censure of sharper iudgementes, but the per∣swasion of some priuate friendes, together with the general good of such as take delight therein, hath encouragde me to vndergoe this hazard, which stands vpon the tickle point of liking, being in nothing more variable then in musicke: I shall not neede to make an Apologie in defence of these musickes, since none are so much in request nor more gene∣ receiued then of these kindes, which with all hartie affection I offer to your rable iudgement not as a worke whose merit or worth deserues so iudicious a patron, but a manifestation of my worthlesse affection bound vnto you by ma∣ny particular fauours: nor dare I vpon mine owne iudgement make expecta∣tion great with fair promises, yet thus much I dare presume, you shal find variety, and sith some of them hath beene gracd with your speciall fauour and liking, I doubt not they may also giue contentment to those that seekes delight, more then fautes, to whose kind acceptance vnder your worthie protection, I com mend these first fruites of my studies. Your Worships humbly deuoted THOMAS FORDE.
CANTVS I.  NOtfull twelue yeeres twice tolde A wearie breath I haue exchangde for   A wished death, my course was short the longer is my rest, God takes them soonest whom he loueth   best for he thats borne to day and, dies to morrow loseth some dayes imirth    but month of sorrow. Why feare we  deth that  cures o   our sick-n esse Author of rest and ende of all distresses. ten come to grieue vs deth strikes but o nce and that stroke doth relieue vs.
ALTVS. I  NOt full twelue yeares twise tolde, A wearie breath I haue exchangde, for a wished death, my  course was short, the longer is my rest, God takes them soonest whome he loueth best, for he thats  borne to day, and dies to morrow, loseth some dayes of mirth, but months of sorrow of sorrow, why  feare wee death that cures our sicknes-ses, that cures our sicknes-ses au-thor of rest & end of all there mis-for-tunes oft-comes to grieue vs oft- ten comes to greue vs, deth strikes but once & that stroke doth  distresses. relieue vs. BASSVS. I.  NOtfull twelue yeres twise told, a wearie breath  I haue exchangde for a wished death, my course was short  the longer is my rest, God takes them soonest whome  he loueth hest for he thats borne to day and dies to  morrow  somedayes of mirth looseth some daies of  mirth, but moneths of sorrow, why feare we death that O there misfor-tunes  cures our sicknesses, author of rest, and end of all oft comes to grieue vs doth strikes but one & that strok doth  distresses. relieue vs. TENOR. I.  NOtfull twelue yeares twise tolde, a wearie breath I haue exchangde for a wished death, my  course was short the longer is my rest, God takes them soonest whome he loueth best, for hee th  borne to day and dies to morrow, looseth some dayes of mirth, dayes of mirth, but months of sorrow:  Why feare we deth that cures our sicknesses our sicknesses au- thor of rest, and end of all O there mis-for- tunes of- ten comes to grieu vs to grieue vs, deth strikes but once & that stroke doth  distresses, distresses, relieue vs, relieue vs.
CANTVS. II.  WHat then is loue sings Cori- don since Phillida is growne so coy A flattring glasse to gaze vp- pon a busieiest A seri-ous ty.   A flowre stil budding ne- uer blown A scanti darth in fullest store yeelding least fruite where   most is sowne my dalie note shal be therefore heigh ho heigh ho chill ▪   no more heigh ho, heigh ho, chil loue no more. Tis like a morning dewi rose Spread fairely to the suns arise, But when his bees he doth disclose, That which then flourisht quickly dies. It is a selfe fed dying pe A proe blisse▪ a esse sore, An aimelesse mark, n erring scope, My dilie note shall b therefore, Heigh o, &c, Tis like a Lampe shining to all, Whilst in it selfe it doth decay, It seemes to free  it doth thrall, And leades our  thoughts , It is the spring of wintred har, Parcht by the sers heate before, Ft hop kindly warh conerts, My daily not shall be therefore Heigh ho.
ALTVS. II.  WHat then is loue sings Coridon, since Phillida is growne so coy, A flattring glasse to gaze vp-pon a busie iest a seri-ous toy, a flowre stil budding, neuer  blowne, A scantie dearth in fullest store, yeelding lest fruit, where most is sowne, my daily note shal be  therefore, heigh ho, chil loue no more, heigh ho chill loue no more. BASSVS. II.  WHat then is lo ings Coridoe philida A flattring glasse to gaze vpon a busie t,  is grownso coy a seri-ous toy. A flowre still budding neuer blowne  A scantie dth in fullest store, yeelding let fruit where  most , my dily note shall be therefore, heigh ho  heigh h,  no ore, heigh ho, ii chill loue no more TENOR II  WHat then is loue sings Coridon, since phillida is growneso oy A flattring glasse to gaze vpon, a busie iest, a seri-ous toy, A flower still budding  neuer blowne, A scanti dearth in fullest store, yeelding east  where most is sown, my daily note shall  be therefore▪ heigh ho, heigh ho, chil loue no more, heigh ho chill loue no more, no more.
CANTVS. III.  VNto the temple of thy beauty & to the tombe where pittie lie pilgrime clad with zeale & deuty do offer vppe my hart min eyes,   my ha loe in the quenc- lesse fire on loue burning alter lies conducted thither   by desire to be  sacrifice. But pitty on thy sabl herse, mine eyes the teares of sorrow shed What though teares cannot ate reuers, Yet are they  to the ded, O stresse in thy sanctuarie, why wouldst thou suffer cold disdaine, To vse his frozen crueltie, and gentle pitty to be slaine. Pittie that to thy beautie fled, and with thy beauie should ue liu'de, Ah i thy hart lies bried, and neuer more may be reuiu'de, Y th lst  exted, to accept these vowes, these teares I shed Duties which I thy pilgrime send, to by liuing piy dead.
ALTVS. III.  _Nto th ple of thy beauty, and to the e where pie li, I pilgad with zeale & deuty do offer vp my hart, mine eyes my hart lo in the   ues burning altlies. Conducted thier by desire, to bee beauties sacrice. BASSVS. III.  VNto the temple of thy beau-tie, and I pilgrim  zeale & uty do  to the  where pitty lies offer vpp my  ies▪ my hart lo in the   on loues buing aar lie, co▪ du cted  thi-ther by  be beauties sa-cri▪ fice. TENOR III  VNto the temple of thy beautie, and to the tome where pitty lies I pilgrime clad with zeale & duty do offer vppe my hart my eyes.  my hart lo in the quenchlee fire on loues burning altar lies, Condcted ther by desire to bee  beauties sacrifice.
CANTVS. IIII.  _Ow I se th loo w ed quily lost and quickly ged  of wether hart vn-constant light as feathers,   tongue vntrusty subtle ghted wan will with cnge delighted Syren pleasant   oe to reason, Cpid gue thee for thy Of thine eye I made my mirror, From thy beauty came my error, All thy wor  counted witty, All thy  med ptty, Thy se  at  agued, First of all my trust deceaued, Syren. acptance when I ed, Louely words  cning sked, Holy  es but hart vnholy, an my trust wa olly, Lilly white, and prety winking, Soll vowes, but soie thinking▪ Syren. Now I see O seemely cruell, Others warme them at my fuell, Wit shall guide me in this durance Since in loue is no assurance, Change thy pasture, take thy pleasure, Beauty is a fading treasure. Syren. Prie youth lasts not age will follow, And  those tre yell, Wrinckled face for looke deghtfull, Shall acquai the dame despitefull, And when time shall date thy glorie Then to late thou wilt be sorry, Syren.
ALTVS. IIII  NOw I see thy lookes were , quickly lost and quickly gained Soft thy skin like wool of wethers hart vnconstant light as  Tong vntrue, subtle  ighted, wanton will with  delighted, syren  to re  plag th   trson. BASSVS IIII  NO I  lookes w ined, quickly lost & quickly gained, Sof thy skin like wool , hart vnconstāt  light as fethe, Tong vntru, sube sighted, wa-  ton will with change delighted, syren pleasant  t  reason, Cupi lague thee for thy treason, TENOR. IIII.  NOw I see thy lookes were ained, quickly lost and quickly gained Soft thy skin like wooll of wethers hart vnconstant light as fethers. Tongue vn-  trustie, subtle sighed, wanon will with change delighted, Syren pleasant oe to reason  Cupid plague thee for thy treason.
CANTVS. V.  GOe passions to the cr  sorrow r   ceasing, Tell her those smiles, those smiles are emptie ayre growing hopes but   not en creasing hasting wasting with swift pace  of ioy in dull disgrace. Vrge her (but gently I request) With breach of faith and wracke of vowes, Say that my griefe, and minds vnrest, Liues in the shadow of her browes, Plying, ying,  to die, In  and iserie. Importune pittie at the last (pittie in thse eyes should her,) Recount my sigh and to nts past, As Annals of a constan ouer Spending, ending many dayes, Ofblasted hopes and slacke delayes.
ALTVS. V.  GOe passions to the cruell faire, pleade my sorrowes neuer cea. sing, Tell her those  smiles are emptie, ayre growing hopes but not encreasing, hasting, wasting with swift pace, date of  ioy in dull disgrace. BASSVS: V.  GOe passions to the cru- ell faire, pleade  my sorrowes neuer ceasing, neuer ceasing, tell her those  smiles are emp- tie, air growing hopes but not en-  creasing, hasting, wasting with swift pace, date of ioy in  dull disgrace. TENOR V  GOe passions to the crul faire, the cruell faire and pleade my sorrowes neuer cea. sing,  tell her those smiles are emptie ayre, growing hopes but not encreasing, hasting, wasting with swift  pace, date of ioy in dull disgrace.
CANTVS. VI.  COme Phillis come into these bowe, here shelter is from sharpest   showers, Coole gales of wind breaths in these shades daunger none this place enuades   here sit and note the chirping birdes, pleading my loue, pleading my loue in   silent wordes. Come Phillis, come bright heauens eye, Cannot vpon thy betie prie, Glad Eccho in distinguisht voyce, Naming thee will here reioyce. Then come and heare her mercy layes Crowning thy ne with lasting prayse.
ALTVS. VI  COme Phillis come into these bowres, here shelter is from sharpest showres, Coole  gales of wind breathes in these shades, danger none this place enuades, here sit and note the chirping birds  pleading my loue, ii. in si- lent words. BASSVS VI.  COme Phillis come into these bowres, here  shelter is from sharpest showers, coole gales of wind  breathes in these shades danger none this place en  uades, here sit and note the chirping birds, pleading  my loue, pleading my loue in silent words. TENOR. VI.  COme Phillis come into these bowres, hee shelter is from shar-pest, sho, coole  gales of winde, breathes in these shades danger none this place enuades, here sit and note the chir-  ping birdes, pleading my loue, ii. in si- lent words.
CANTVS. VII.  EAire, sweet cruell, why doest thou fliemee, why dost thou flie me   onot goe not, oh goe not from thy deerest, though thou doest hasten I am   niethee when thou see st fre then  I neerest, Tarrie then   Tarrie then Oh tarrie, Oh tarrie then and take me with you. Fie, , sweetest here is no danger, ii, Flie not, flie not, oh flie not loue pursues thee, I am no foe, nor forraine stranger, Thy scornes with fresher hope renewes me, Tarrie then, &c.
ALTVS. VII.  FAire, sweete, cruell, why dost thou flie me, why dost thou flie me, oh goē not from thy deerest'  though thou doest hasten, I am nie thee, when thou seemest far, then am I neerest, Tarrie then  ii- ii. and take me with you, oh tarrie then and take me with you. BASSVS. VII.  FAire sweete, cruell, why dost thou flie me,  why dost thou flie me, goe not, oh goe not, from thy  derest, though thou dost hasten, I am nie thee, when  thou seem e farre, then am I neerest, Tarrie then  Oh tarrie, oh tarrie then and take me with you. TENOR VII  FAire, sweet, cruell. why dost thou flie me, why dost thou flie me, go not from thy  deerest, though thou dost hasten, I am nigh thee, when thou seemest far then am I neerest, Tarrie then  ii- Oh tarrie, tarrie then, oh tarrie, oh tarrie then and take me with you.
CANTVS. VIII.  SInce first I saw your face I resolude to honour & r nowne yee, If now I be dis▪ dayned I wishe my hart had neuer knowne yee,   What I that lou'de and you that likte shal wee beginne to wrangle No, No,   no, my hart is fast and cannot disentan- gle. If I admire o prayse you too much, that fault you may forgiue mee, Or if my hands had stray'd but a touch, then iustly might you leaue , I askt you leaue, you bad m loue▪ ist now a time to cideme? No, no, no, ile loue you still, what  bide me. The Sunne whose bees most glorious are,  no heholder, And your sweet , made my poore eye the boulder, Where beautie mous, and wit delights, and signes of kindnes bind me There, O  where  I go, ile leaue my hart behinde e.
ALTVS. VIII  SInce first I saw your face, I resolude to honour and renowne ye, What I that lou'de, and If now I bee dis-dayned I wishe my hart had ne-uer known ye  you that likte, shall wee beginne to wrangle, no, no, no, my hart is fast and cannot disentangle. BASSVS VIII.  SInce first I saw your face, I resolude to If now I bee dis dai-ned I wish my  honour and renowne yee, What I that lou'de, and hart had ne-uer known ye,  you that lik shall wee begin to wrangle, no, no, no, my  hart is fast and cannot dis- entangle. TENOR. VII.  SInce first I saw your face, I resolude to honour and renowne ye, What I that lou'de If now I bee dis-day-ned I wishe my hart had neuer known ye.  and you that likte shall wee beginne to wrangle, no, no, no, my hart is fast, and cannot dis- entangle.
CANTVS. IX.  THere is a Ladie sweet & kind was neuer face so pleasde my   mind I did but see her passing by and yet I loue her till I die. H iestre, tion and er , Her wit, her voyce▪ my hart beguils, eguiles my hart. I know not why, And yet I loue her till I die. Her free behour winning lookes, Will make a Lawyer burne  bookes I toucht her not, alas not I, And yet I loue her till I die. Had I her fast betwixt mine aes, Iudge you that thinke such sports were harmes, Wert any ha? no, no, fi, fi, For I will loue her till I die. Should I remaine coined there, So long as Phebus in his spher, I to request shee to deni▪ Yet would I loue her till I die. Cupid is wiged and doth rage, Her countrie my le doth change, But change she arth, or change she kie, Yet will I loue her till I die.
ALTVS. IX  THere is a Lady sweet and kind, was neuer face so pleasde my minde, I did but see her  passing by,  I  her till I die. BASSVS IX.  THere is a Lady sweet and kinde, was  neuer face so pleasde my mind, I did butse her  passing by, and yet I loue her till I die. TENOR. IX.  THere is a Lady sweet and kind, was neuer face so pleasde my mind, I did but see her  passing by, and yet I loue her till I die.
CANTVS. X.  HOw shall I then dis- cribe my loue, when all mens skilfull arte is   Far inferior to her worth, to prayse thu'n worthiest parte, shee's chaste in looks mild in her   speech in actions all dis▪ creet of nature louing pleasing most in vertue all compleae. And for her voyce a Philo e, her lip may all lips skorne, No sunne more cleare then is her eye, in brightest Summer A mind wherein all vertes rest, and takes delight to be And where all vertues graft themselues in that most fruitfull tree. A tree that India doth not yeeld, nor euer yet was seene, Where buds of vertue alwaies springes, and all the yeere growes greene, That countries bst wherein she growes, and happie is that rocke, From whence she springes▪ but happiest he that grafts in such a stocke.
ALTVS. X.  HOw shall I then discribe my loue, when all mens skilfull art is farre inferior to her worth, to  prayse the vnworthiest part, shees chast in lookes, mild in her speech, in actions all discreet, of nature louing  pleasing most, in vertue all compleate. BASSVS. X.  HOw shall I then discribe my loue, when all  mens skilfull arte is farre inferior to her worth to  praise thunw orthiest part, shees chaste in looke, milde  in her speech, in actions all discreet, of nature, louing  plea- sing most in ver- tue all com-pleate, TENOR X  HOw shall I then discribe my loue, when all mens skilfull art is farre inferior to her worth, to  praise thu'n worthiest, parte, shees chast in lookes, milde in her speech, in actions all discreet, of  nature louing, pleasing most, in vertue all compleate.
S Hut not, shut not sweet brest   to see me all of fire,   Thy snow in- flames these flames of my de. sire, Thy snow ni'll hurt me   This cold wil coole me Take ths chast fire to that pure virgin snow.   Thou giust more blisse th mortall harts may know,   Let one griefe harme vs, and one ioy fill vs, let one loue warme vs, &   one deth kill vs, and one death kill vs.
A Dialogue F   Flie not, Flie not, flie not deer hart to find me all of snow,   and I de-sire de- sire sweet flames to know. Nor thy fire wil harm me   and this heate will warm me, be-   ing now thus warmd ile neuer seeke other fire. more blisse I   take then Angels can desire. Let one griefe harme vs and one ioy fill vs, let one loue   warm vs & one death kill vs. & one death kill vs.
A Table of the Lessons contained in this booke. 1 A Pauen. 2 The Galliard. 3 An Almaine. 4 A Pauen. 5 The Galliard. 6 Forget me not. 7 A Pauen. 8 An Almaine. 9 The wild goose chase. 10 What you will. 11 And if you do touch me Ile crie. 12 The Bag-pipes. 13 Why not here. 14 Chang of Aire 15 VVhip it and Trip it. 16 Cate of Bardie 17 A snatch and away. 18 A pill to purge Malancholie.
TO THE VVORTHY and vertuous knight Sir RICHARD TICHBORNE SIr hauing so contriued these Musickes as their seuerall natures requires a diuision I could not amongst manie friendes thinke vpon two more worthy to bee ioynde in this Dedication then your selues, aswell for your neere alliance in blood, loue and fauour to Musicke, which neuer goes vnaccompanied with other vertues, as also the many particular fauours I haue receiued frō you both, hauing no gratification or token of my loue and thankefulnes, but these issues of my braine, which I intreate you to accept & take in good part, my cheifest labor in setting thē forh hath bin to expresse my inuention with as much facility and ease as possibly I could to the end (since it is a Musicke so generally pleasing) they who bestaffect it, may with little labour be actors of their owne delightes. If you find in them any matter of worth I haue my rewarde, if any matter of content I haue my end, which is nothing else then by some agreeable testimony, to leaue in you both, an impression of my thankefull remem∣rance of your loue and fauors. Your Worships humbly deuoted THO. FORDE.
PRIMA PARS. 1.  A Pauen.      M. Southcotes Pauen.
SECVNDA PARS 1.  _ Pauin.      M. Southcotes Pauin.
PRIMA PARS. II.  THe Galiard. III  _ Almaine,   M. Westouers farewell. This part to be plaide alone.
SECVNDA PARS II  THe Galiard. III.  AN Almayne.   M. Westouers fare well,
PRIMA PARS. IIII.  A Pauin.      M. Maines Choice.
SECVNDA PARS IIII  A Pauen.      M. Maines Choice.
PRIMA PARS. V.  THe Galiard. VI.  FOrgetme not,  To play alone.
SECVNDA PARS V  THe Galiard. VI.  FOrget me not.
PRIMA PARS. VII. APauen.       Sir Richard Westons delight
SECVNDA PARS VII APauin.       Sir Richard Wons delight
PRIMA PARS. VIII. AN Almaine.      Mounsieur Lullere his choice. IX. THe wild goose chase.    Sir Iohn Philpots delight.
SECVNDA PARS VIII AN Almaine.      Mounsieur Lullere his choice. IX. THe wilde goose chase.    Sir Iohn Philpots delight.
PRIMA PARS. X. WHat you will. XI. ANd if you do touch ile cri.   Sir Richard Ticnce . This to be plaide alon, od so from hence in this part to the d. Note by the way where you find letters thus markte. Thumpe them with the first and se∣cond finger of the let hand accor∣ding to the direction of the pricks.
SECVNDA PARS X. WHat you will. XI. ANd if you do touch me ile crie.   Sir Richard Tichbornes toy. where you find letters thus markte. Thumpe them with the first and se∣cond finger of the let hand accor∣ding to the direction of the pricks.
PRIMA PARS. XII. THe Baggepipes.    Sir Charles Howards delight XIII. WHy not here      M. Crosse his choice.
SECVNDA PARS XII. THe Baggepipes.    Sir Charles Howards delight XIII. WHy not here.      M. Crosse his choice.
PRIMA PARS. XIIII. CHange of Ayre▪ XV. WHipit and Tripit.     M. Southcotes Iig.
SECVNDA PARS XIIII. CHange of Ayre▪ XV. WHipit and Tripit.     M. Socotes Iig.
PRIMA PARS. XVI. CAte of Bardie.           The Queenes Iig.
SECVNDA PARS XVI. CAte of Bardie.           The Queenes Iig.
PRIMA PARS. XVII. ASnatch and away.   Sir Iohn Paulets toy. XVIII. APill to purge Melancholie.   M. Richard Martins Thumpe. SECVNDA PARS. XVII. ASn and away.   Sir Iohn Paulets toy. XVIII. APill to purge Melancholie.   M. Richard Martins Thumpe.
