1180 99846288 11248
This Boke doth treate all of the beste waters Artyfycialles / and the ver∣tues and properties of the same / moche profytable for the poore sycke, set forth, by syr Roger Becon Freere.
THe whiche treatyse I haue wylled to wryte or a good & a louyng zele pytie and compassyon of godly dysposicion wolde that euery persone beynge dyseased / by the grace of god and of suche me∣dicines as herafter in this lytell tre¦atyse more playnely shalbe declared, may the soner fynde remedy to be cu¦red and heled of all bodely infyrmi∣tyes and syckenesses trustynge than that al those ī this wyse recoueryng theyr helth shall purchase such force and strength spiritual that they shal daylye augmente theyr meryte and vertue to the laude & prayse of God, where thorowe at theyr departynge theyr soules may be excepte to be of the nombre of those yt shalbe saued / nowe praye I vnto almyghtie God, that he gyue me grace well to wryte and to compyle this lytell treatise, & that it may be executed after a good
purpose, and so may appere. And for asmoche that Golde is the most no∣ble metall that is, I shall begyn fyrst to aduyse vnto ye water of Golde, the which is made after the maner that hereafter foloweth. ¶In nomine dei Amen. TAke wedges of fyne golde, well warmed in the Fyre, and quen∣che it .xlii. tymes within the water of a good welle or Fountayne. And the water strayned and kepte clenly in a vyoll of glasse, & let the dyseased per¦son drynke it with wyne or good ale after as the pacient it requyreth, the vertue & propertie of that water of golde is suche that it is good vnto ye people that be hoole, and also for thē that be sycke of the syckenes, that mē called, cardia pastio, for it exalteth & comforteth the herte merueylously it illumineth the spirites, and consu¦meth ye superfluyte, and comforteth the vertue conteyned in all the mem¦bres
within forth, & moche it auay∣leth vnto the fluxe of the wōbe, more than the water wherin yron is put, it auaileth moch vnto the leprous, & vnto them the whiche ben yll dyspo∣sed. Men make this water of golde, by science of Arquimie. But I put it not here for that, but that maner of makyng is moche harder, but I wyl speake nomore of it at this tyme. ¶The water of the Floures of Rosemarye. This water is of great, & meruey∣louse vertue and hath many greate properties in bodyes humaines and sycknesses colde? it ratifieth the appe¦tite and recomforteth the spirite and the hete natural, bycause of her good odour, wherin the soule taketh plea∣sure and gathereth the vertue of the membres togither, it comforteth spe¦cially the brayne, and all the mem∣bres synewed, and yf a man wasshe his face with it, it maketh it fayre, &
yf a mā washe his heres it reteyneth them and kepeth them from fallyng and multiplyeth them, and the conti¦nuaunce and vse of this water pre∣serueth a man from the botche, and from all yll syckenesse it comforteth the substaunce of the herte, and also consumeth the fleume, & melancoly, & maketh youth to pourge, & who so shal continue this water wtinforth & wtoutforth he shalbe preserued long withoute corrupcyon, and to wasshe his mouth oftē with water ratifyeth the teth and the gūmes? it heleth the Cāker, and of the fystures and ratify¦eth the yll woundes and dryeth thē, it vaileth vnto the Cardiacle passion that is to say, tremblyng of the hert and prohibiteth the vomytynge, & it is good vnto the fluxe of the wombe & vnto those yt be benōmed, as vnto people the whiche tremble in theyr body, & vnto relexacion of wormes, & dryueth away all venom, as tryacle
and also aydeth vnto the mother of the belly of women and them preser∣ueth of their Floures, and the bayne aydeth moche to consceyue, and who so baineth him ryght often in the de¦cocktion of this floure, he reneweth his youth as an aygler yt is a thyng ryght secrete & ryght meruaylous, & who so shall make it in the maner and fasshyon the whiche foloweth. Fyll ye a great vyoll or glasse of the Floures of Rosemarye and stop it a∣boue & afterwarde bery it depe with in the banke of the see, and let it lye therby halfe a yere in the season & ty¦me the whether is most hotest, and a¦byde there the space of a month, and afterwarde it shall be tourned in to water the which water must be strōg¦ly strayned, & put in to another vyoll in the sonne, by the tyme or space of xl. daies, this water shall sprinkle & haue the scence as baulme, it auayl∣leth moche to comfort the herte, and
the brayne and all the body, vayleth agayne the dibilyte and wekenes of the synewes & taketh away the spot¦tes of the vysage and kepeth the mā in good state of youth and auayleth agaynst the syckenes & teares of the eyes to put within them .ii. droppes at a tyme, it ratyfyeth the membre slepy & benommed, and also it heleth of the Fystula, & also of the Canker where the other remedyes profyteth nothynge, and who so shuld make of the water brennynge of wyne of the decocktion with these floures yt shuld be a ryght excellente thynge for the syckenesses abouesayde. ¶The water of red Roses. This water comforteth the hert and all the membres to dyssolue, and they well dyssolued, it restoreth them and bycause of her good odoure aro¦matyque, & specially it cōforteth the spirites, & the hete naturall it prohy¦byteth the putrifaction in dyssentery
and lyentery the which ben fluxes of the wombe bledyng, it comforteth ye vertue retentyue and it is good vnto the feblenesse of the herte and vome∣tynge and agayne the swete dyafor∣ti{que}, it maketh swete and comforteth the gōmes and maketh to haue good odour in the mouthe and maketh to haue ferme Flesshe who so wassheth hym often with it, and putteth it wt in his eyes with a lytell wyne for ye mondyfyeth and dryeth, it comfor∣teth the humodyte, and moystnes su¦perflue of the eyes, and in especyall whan a man putteth therin a lytell of thuthie p̄pared or a lytell of aloes and fyne suger, yet the sayde water with Suger Candye put within the eyes clenseth and mondifieth the sub¦staunce without payne. ¶The water of Betayne. This hath many great properties for it breketh the stone in the bledder and in the raynes, it mondifyeth the
breste and the lyghtes, and heleth of the Epylence, and dryueth away the venom, & auayleth vnto the bytynge of a beast venemous, it auayleth vn∣to the strangulyon, and purgeth the fleume of the stomacke downewarde or by vometynge, and it auayleth to the eructacyon ayger, it prouoketh ye vryne and looseth the wombe, it hel∣peth moche the payne of the mylte, it comforteth the stomacke and aydeth vnto ye dysgestion, & vayleth agaynst the encreasynge of the blode, and a∣gaynste the payne of the Chynke, and of the raines, and also of the bledder & agaynst the cold dropsye, it is good to clense the woundes of the hede, & to drawe the bones broken out of the woundes, it is good for the payne of the teeth, and for the darknes of the eyes corcosyue, and vnto the difficult of chyldren, it kepeth frō dronkenes and taketh away the fātasyes of the people the whiche sourdeth of sycke∣nes,
it is good for the payne of the wombe, and for the payne podagre, & taketh awaye the venom of Dogges enraged, it is good for the payne of the eares, & for people that be deafe in what maner so euer it be, and for ronning eyes, & for the fluxe of blode of vaines, and vnto people the which sythē for the sycknes of the stomacke for vometynge, & for the payne of the stomacke and bytyng{is}, and auayleth to drynke vnto people wery of the fe¦uer quarteine, it is good for the para¦lysye sownynge, and tremblynge of the membres, and auayleth moche vnto the paine of the wombe, and for the swellynge. ¶The water of plantayne This water is moche abster, drye and incarnatyue, and it is very good for woundes corrosyues, it is good for the stoppynge, it is good for the ronnynge out of the belly and fleyng of the guttes in drynkynge, it wor∣keth
the opylacions of the lyuer & of the mylt makynge clene and kylleth the inflamacion of the blode and in∣carneth the Fistules & the other woū¦des, and preserueth from emoroides and it is good vnto the vlceracion of the mouth and vnto the payne of the teeth vnto the bytynge of a dogge & vnto the brennynge of the Fyre, and of hote water for the vlceratiō of the lyghtes and vnto the spyttynge and vnto the feuer tarcian. ¶The water of lettys and of Endyue. This water is aparatiue of vay¦nes, and comforteth the lyuer, and maketh warme, and in especiall it is good for the hote Apostumes, and vn¦to flumes & maketh a man to slepe & it is good for ye pollucion ī the nyght it is good for the Iaundes, and vnto the opelacion of the lunges, and the mylke of Endyue maketh cleane the woūdes that ben in the raines of the
backe it auayleth moche agaynst the colere ye which is within ye stomacke ¶The water of Fumetory. This water fortifieth the stomacke and it mondifieth and prouoketh the vrine and auayleth agaynst the scab and infection, it pourgeth the colere and mondyfyeth the blode of the hu∣mours adustes. ¶The water of balme. This water is verye good for the somake colde and moyst and aydeth vnto the digestion and disgesteth the mete, it comforteth the herte and the braine & taketh away the yll though¦tes and pouxes the which procedeth of melancolie and humours adustes and auayleth against the bytynge of a dogge and Scorpion, and is good for the ache of the teeth, and suffoca¦cion in dreames and vnto extorcion of the belly, & resolueth the lunges. ¶The water of Elder. The water of the leues, floures and
rotes of elder altogither comforteth the herte of the man, and merueylous¦lye it mondifieth & maketh clene the blode and taketh away the melanco¦ly, and it heleth the braine the which is infect of humours melancolyes, & it endureth and heleth the foles enra¦ged in the contynuaunce & it is good to hele the scab and of the lepre. ¶The water of Elder and of Buglose. The water of Elder and of buglose made by egall parties is moche mer¦ueylouse vnto people melancolyous and vnto people the whiche hath trē¦blynge of the hert and the brennyng of the geder, it taketh awaye the he∣uynes and gyueth gladnes and ma∣keth the man to be of good reason & of good vnderstandyng, but in this cause he shulde put the floures of bu¦glose and of elder, and red roses, myn¦gled togyther, asmoch of the one as of the other.
¶The water of Garlyke. This water openeth the opelacy∣ons of the lyuer, and of the mylt, and of the raines, and preserueth the mā from the passyon colleryke and ven∣touse it taketh awaye the blakynge of the stomacke and ratifyeth the dis¦gestion, it encreseth the dede vnto no¦rysshes, and taketh awaye the payne of the raynes, caused of Uentosytie, and purgeth the grauel, and maketh the payne sodenly to cease, and it ma¦keth good coloure vnto those that doeth vse it. ¶The water of red soddes cal∣led Archangell moun∣tayne. This water hath many great pro¦perties to prouoke the man, and to mondifie and make clene the raynes and the bledder of the grauel, and it auaileth vnto the vlceracions of the raynes, vnto people the whiche pysse blode.
¶The water of hertes tonge cycore endyue, all togyther by egall por∣cions with the roote of peccylle. This water is moche marueylous vnto the opelacion of the lyuer, and of the mylt, and heleth the iaunders whan a man wyll dryncke of it, hym behoueth to put therto of fyne suger and it may be droncke with wyne at his repastes, and it is proued. ¶The water of Fenell. The water of Fenell is gyuen vnto the obscurite and darknes of the eyes vnto the dropsye, and vnto the lytar∣ge, and it auayleth against venom, & purgeth the raynes and the bledder of grauell, it prouoketh the man and maketh the flour{is} come vnto the wo¦man, it subtilieth the fat humors, & prouoketh the dede vnto women, and vnto man the sperme, and also it ta∣keth awaye the wyll to vomete, and helpeth the stomacke.
¶The water of Cuffrurie montayne. This water is meruaylouse good, to comforte the syght and to recouer it yf it be possyble and in especiall vn¦to people flumatyques, & vnto aged people, the which it shall compose to¦gither with Ueruene, Rewe, Roses, and Celydoyne. This shalbe a ryght merueilouse good water, to conserue to comfort, and to repaire the syght. ¶The water of Ysop drye. The water of Ysop drye maketh cleane the raynes, and the breaste, and the longes of the matter grosse Fleumatyque, and vystose is moche good vnto the coughe the which pro¦cedeth of the coldenes, and of moyst¦nes, it clarifieth the voyce, and auay¦leth moche vnto those the which fal∣leth of the fallyng euyl, and it is cal¦led in latyn aperylentia. ¶The water of horuid. This water heleth of the strangu∣rye,
and profyteth moche for to gen∣dre, and multyplye the people. ¶The water of sauge. This water is good vnto all sycke¦nesses colde, of the synewes, as ben the Palsey, the tremblyng of the mē¦bres swolunynge, epilensye and such lyke sycknesses, & it is good vnto the Reuolucion of the gommes, and of the paine of the teth, and whan they chellen, and it is good vnto the syck¦nes of the stomacke colde, and vnto the mother of ye wombe, as is suffo¦cacion of the mother, and also this water maye be vsed within forth in drinking, & without forth ī washyng & by other maners the which ben af¦ter the dyscrecion of hym, or of her, the whiche doth vse it. ¶The water of the rootes and leues of Bresyll and of fyre. This water lowseth the wombe and openeth the opylacions of the mylte and heleth the dropsye, yposar¦que
and taketh away the swellynge of the feete. ¶The water stronge is in laten inchium. This water stronge is of ryghte greate and meruaylous vertue, ex∣cellentlye aboue all the other. For it kylleth the wormes & dyssolueth the worke, cōsumeth the rotten humors within the body, in the places and cō¦duites secretes, and bicause of some vertue wrytten, it comforteth where ben the rotonesses, and it is openyng and comfortynge the stomacke, and it clenseth the ordures, and openeth the opylacions of the mylte and of the lyuer, and it auayleth to recouer the speche, and agaynst the venom, it comforteth the syghte, warmeth the stomacke, and refresheth the lyuer it prouoketh the vryne, and the floures vnto women, and resysteth vnto the venym of oputhe bayci, and of ius∣quiauim, and of all other of this na∣ture,
and it is good vnto people deth woūed whā the surgiens wassheth theyr woundes they kepe it for enfe∣strynge and engendring of yll flesshe it auayleth agaynst the epydymye, & agaynst eyres pestilencial it taketh a¦waye the wyll to vomet, and auay∣leth vnto swellynges, and paynes of the membres, and vnto the palsye, & taketh away the fleellynge from the tonge, and delyuereth in makynge gargarisme. ¶The water of Quyns Appels and of red Roses. This water dronke with good red wyne comforteth the stomacke affir∣meth the wombe. ¶The water of Malous. This water of colde and moyste, & maketh soft the wombe and is alte∣ratyue of these opostumes hote, and it maketh softe the durter, it prouo∣keth the fluxe vnto women. ¶The water of Scabiouse.
This water is cōsumptyue and dis¦solutyue, & is good vnto the scab, or brekynge out, or lepre, and serpigine impectigne, and vnto the dredefull & vnto the amoureus. ¶The water of Saxifrage. This water breketh the stone in the raynes and in the bledder, and prouo¦keth the vrine, and is good vnto pen∣syfenes and thought. ¶The water of myntes. This water is moche consumpty∣ue dyssolutyue, and comfortatyue, & auayleth moche against the opylaci∣ons of the lyuer, and of the mylt, and of the conduytes of the vryne, and vn¦to the stynkynge of the mouthe, and of the gommes and prycketh the ap∣petite to eate & to vomet and is good vnto the faylyng of the herte, it mon¦dyfyeth the mother of the wombe, & it dissolueth the mylke quayled in the brestes, it auayleth agaynst the venō and sleyth the wormes, and is good
agaynst the coughe, the muries colde and tenme colde, it prouoketh the v∣ryne, and prohybyteth the colde of ¦entes droukē one houre before with good tryacle. ¶The water of Radesshe. This water is subtylatyue, apper∣tyue, abstersyue mondyfycatyue, and prouocatyue of the vryne, and auay∣leth agaynst the storgyne, ympecty∣giue, and taketh away the humoure from the membres, modyfyed of the brest, and maketh clere the voyce and subtyleth ye grosse humours the whi∣che ben in the breste, and in the lon∣ges, it is good vnto the bityng of the Scorpion, and sleeth the Scorpions and auayleth vnto Feuer quartayne and vnto the Dropsye, and vnto the Iaundes, it breketh the stone, and a∣uayleth agaynste the bytynge vene∣mous, resolueth the humoures, the whiche ben in the corner of the eye, and taketh away the pympylles frō
the bysage, it resolueth les quantytie and the syuellynge of the mylt, it pro¦uoketh the floures vnto women, and is good vnto them the whiche hathe eaten fruytes venymous. The water of purslane. This water is vyscose and contrac¦tyue of the flux of the belly, it taketh away the styngynge of the teeth and auayleth vnto the stynkinge blode, & apostumes hoote, and vnto the bur∣nynge of the stomacke, and vpon the calefacion of the lyuer, and of the al∣teracion of the guttes, and vnto the flux of the mother, it weketh ye syght and lettynges aboue the heade, and prohibyteth the frenasye. The water of howsleke. This water is moche colde and repercustiue of apostumes hote of a∣bulatyues, it swageth the payne of the podagre hote, & auayleth moche vnto the brennynge of fyre with oyle
rosat, and vnto the payne of the heed and sleyeth the nyttes, and is moche good vnto the flux of the wombe and vnto the vlceracions of the guttes, & prohybyteth the frenasye. ¶The water of Bursa pastoris. This water is stytyque, and reper∣cusyue, and auayleth moche vnto a∣postumes hote at the begynnynge, it consolydeth, and incarneth the woū∣des fresshe and bledynge, and it a∣uayleth moche vnto the payne of the eares, and dryeth the fylth of the ea∣res, and auayleth moche vnto the vl¦ceracions of the guttes, and vnto the flux of the neze, & to the flux of blode of what place soeuer it springeth out it prohybyteth the frenasye. ¶The water of the flourdelyce and of the leaues. This water is moch aftersie, and moche mondificatyue, and auayleth moche vnto serpygne, and ymperty∣gyne
melled with honye, and it ma∣keth the vysage fayre and clere, and handes in washyng them, it maketh also the vysage moche roddy, and ta¦keth awaye the spottes from the vy∣sage, it prouoketh ye fleures vnto the women, and taketh awaye the hard¦nes of the mother from the bellye, it incarneth the woūdes that ben rotte and auayleth vnto the brennynge of the fyre, and bytynge venymous. ¶The water of Lylyes. This water ereuoketh the sleepe and consumeth the shakynges, and dybylytie of the membres, and was∣teth, and taketh away the polucions noctournes, and is good for the cou∣ghe, and weepynge eyes, it maketh softe the wombe and auayleth vnto the Fluxe of the wombe ancyan, and vnto the vlceracions of the guttes, it resolueth the Apostumes of the mylte and auayleth moche vnto no∣su whyghte.
This is all one. This water is dyssolutyue, and sub¦tylatyue, and auayleth moche vnto ye scalle and scab of the heade, and ke∣peth the heeres from fallynge, it ma¦keth clene the breste, and the lyghtes, from great humors, and breketh the stone, and is good for the Iaundyse, and it dyssolueth the estrophules and maketh cleane the stomacke, and gut¦tes of the superfluytes, & colerykes. The water for the Goute. Take the flesshe of a foxe, and cut it ryght small, & dystylle it in a stylle∣tory, and rubbe ye the sycke body ther with, for it is a souerayne remedy. The water of the grayne of Geneper. This water is moche subtylaty∣ue apertiue, and mondyfycatiue, and auayleth moche to make cleane the vlcers sordibus, it prouoketh the v∣ryne, and the fleures vnto women, & maketh the enfante dede within the
wombe of the mother, to auoyde out and chaseth awaye the venome, and the beaste venemous, bayneth them in the decockcion of ye seede of brome it auayleth moche vnto the payne of the mother of the wombe and atrici¦on of wormes. ¶For to please, and for to make these women to seme more fayrer, & yonger vnto theyr husbandes, and for to kepe theym from goynge in to fornycacion, and aduoutre, it is suf∣fred to vse of some waters the which maketh the vysage fayre and whyte, and of these waters, I shal put here the which ben called symples and of other composed and made. These symple waters ben of the oures of bees, waters of the seede of melos, waters of the floure of el∣der, water of the floure delyce, water of the rote of Yris, & of Dragontyne and of the rote of sygilon salmonis. ¶Thus endeth these waters.
¶The Table of this pre∣sent Booke. The Prologue. primo. In nomme dei. Amen. ii. ¶The water of the floures of Roosemarye. iii. ¶The water of red rooses. iiii. ¶The water of Betayne. v. ¶The water of Plantayne. vi. ¶The water of lettis & endiue. vii. ¶The water of Fumetory. viii. ¶The water of Balme. ix. ¶The water of Elder. x. ¶The water of elder & buglose. xi. ¶The water of Garlyke. xii. ¶The water of red soddes called ar¦changell mountayne. xiii. ¶The water of hartes tonge cyco∣re Endyue all togyther by egall por¦cions wt the rote of percylle. xiiii. ¶The water of Fenell. xv. The wa. of cuffrurie moūtayne. xvi. ¶The water of Ysop drye. xvii.
¶The water of Horuid. xviii. ¶The water of Sauge. xix. ¶The water of the rotes and leues of Bresyll and offyrre. xx. ¶The water stronge is in latyn inchium. xxi. ¶The water of Quyns Apples and of red Rooses. xxij. ¶The water of Malous. xxiii. ¶The water of scabyoule. xxiiii. ¶The water of Saxifrage. xxv. ¶The water of Myntes. xxvi. ¶The water of Radesshe. xxvii. ¶The water of purslane. xxviii. ¶The water of howselyke. xxix. ¶The water of bursa pastor{is}. xxx. ¶The water of ye flourdelyce. xxxi. ¶The water of Lylyes. xxxii. ¶The water for the goute. xxxiii. ¶The water of the grayne of Ge∣neper. xxxiiii. ¶Thus endeth the xxxiiii. waters Artificials. ¶Imprinted by me Robert r
