11993 99838971 3364
POEMS BY Robert Gomersall. LONDON. Printed by M. F. for Iohn Marriot. M DCXXXIII.
The Booke-seller, to the READER. TO praise the worke, were to set my selfe to sale, since the greater its worth is, the more is my benefit, & not the Authors: He good man may have an Ayery, but I a reall profit. An Ayery one, I terme it, for I judge others by my selfe, who cannot feed by praises. But thus much I must needs say of it, that if ever it were worthy the reading, now the worth of it is mul∣tiplied, the whole being perused by the Author, and some, not deformed peices added, which as they mend the bulke, so they take nothing from the Dignity of the Poem. But for this I put my selfe upon my Countrey. Thus farre the Authour thought it not unfit, to please thee and his youth: from hence forward, you must expect
nothing from him, but what shall relish of a bearded and austere Devotion. And this, I trust will be no small incitement to thy approbatiō of the worke since it is the last: All men we know, delight in Benjamin. One thing I must not forget to acquaint thee with; Some men, (that would be wise without booke,) have excepted against a passage in Sforza, concerning Gale∣azzoes revealing his wives counsells to his e∣nemy, as a thing beyond Probability, or Poetry: but it shewes that they are short of History, for let them read almost the first leafe of Guicci∣ardin, or the eighth book of Comminés, they shall there find what they carpe at here, and that this fond opennesse, was Galeazzo's, and not the Authors weaknesse: I would say somewhat of the Levite too, but it needs not, seeing the Authours blasphemy is turned into the Calum∣ny of the ignorant Detractor. But I beginne to talke rather like a Maker, then a seller of Bookes: I have nothing now more to adde, but this, love the Authour, and me for bringing you acquainted. Thine Iohn Marriot.
An Elegy upon the death of Mris. ANNE KING. I Dare not say that Death in heav'n hath powre, Or that we have a second fatall howre: 'Tis impious to beleeve that soules doe range, Or that they can affect that foolish change Of happinesse, for Earth, (as if they thought Gadding to be felicity, or sought, A moderation of their joyes) that heav'n, The roomes being empty which she first had giv'n, Strives to make good afresh, that this should be The cause, deare Ghost, why we are robb'd, of thee. Yet pardon Heav'n, if I am bold to dare A question: you doe know how few they are That sucke your Ayre and goodnesse, how the earth Lookes like the errour of a monstrous birth, With scarce one perfect member, and will you Robbe us of our one peice, and make the few No number? Pardon then if for this wrong We leave your precepts, to live ill, and long. Be we once good, we shall not be at all; Vertue does onely hast a funerall. If that a mortall may but give advice, Teach not the world sinne by your Avarice; Spare us a while that little which we have, Let  finde somewhat besides a Grave;
You first command us to be good, and then You take away the goodnesse with the men, Will not the bad say, Iustice here is scant, To take our store, and punish us for want? But you are just, and wise, nor will acquaint Man with your reasons: Why an Embryon Saint Suddenly droppes into the Earth, which he, Had he liv'd long, would but have liv'd to see, And not affect, does pose all earth, and so Now we may weepe, because we cannot know: Now I but weep, that we have lost the wife That Overbury would have fain'd, my strife About your Iustice I disclaime; for I Know it is just that what was borne must dye. Yet without touch at your prerogative, I may summe up my losse, and dare to grieve With a full sorrow, I may say there dy'd One that was Heav'ns, as well as Henries bride; One that was match'd unto the Church, that she Might learne a Marriage with the Deity. Sure there were Velvet-cloakes that woo'd, & those That could weare Scarlet for a need, and close Which Ladyes out of play bookes, that could earne A Mistris with a congy, and could learne How many sighes must carry her, which she By her wise choyce, left them to multiply. And would they onely griev'd, would I could raise Their teares a fresh, by adding to her dayes More yeares with Henry, that their envy might Cause them to burst, and dye for her in spight, Such funeralls were fit: but since that Heav'n Has harshly snatch'd what it had kindly giv'n; And thou must be the Sacrifice, and he Must have thy sorrow that erewhile had thee,
Ile spare my teares which must of force cause his: 'Tis rudenesse when we cannot restore blisse To adde more to unhappinesse (then thou Sometime the happy choice of her, and now The sad survivor) pardon if my strife To grieve enough, give thee a griefe, not wife. If that my sighes could her to life repreeve, I would create aswell as now I grieve, In obitum Serenissimi Regis Jacobi. SVperbe tene as consciam vermis gulam; Agnosce tandem regias satur dapes, Quae cultui sacrantur, & non esui: Iacobus hic est, abstine, Iacobus est, Qui cum relictas senserit partus moras Vagivit infans Caesar, ut faceret fidem, Quod non Mariae natus, at Monarchiae, Foret estimandus, crederes genitum Deum Simulàc Monarcham, quisque certe liberum Putare mortis potuit humanae jugo Aeque acremota vulgo erat nativitas. At hic fidelis vermibus, praestat dapes Non vendicatas, obstupent tali cibo Fati helluones, parciusque urgent famem: Ipso cibantur tutiùs miraculo, Eheu verendum sentio maestus caput I am jam minatum: siste, quisquis impium Audere morsum fortis, agnoscas caput Quo velsepulchri doctiùs moles tumet Minusque hebescit terra. Iacobum tegens
Sapit ille pulvis, qui suo gaudens hero Tumulum negat sibi & asserit palatium, Semesa facies regis, & lacerae genae (Discriminandae jam fere vix vermibus Antiquiori à pabulo) quod non suo Horrori adaptant corpus? ut tandem miser Sit quod queratur: qui do let leviùs, stupe Mala non fatetur ni suis addat malis Et causa fiat luctus, & lugens simul. Aliud. Vnde nova haec macies? quae quadragesima vera est Cum carnibus Regem negans? Num superi efficerent magis ut jeiunia constent? Luctumque paenitentiam? To the Deane, from Flower in Northampton¦shire 1625. now the worthy Bishop of Norwich. STill to be silent, or to write in Prose Were a like sloath, such as I leave to those, Who either want the grace of wit, or have Vntoward arguments: like him that gave Life to the flea, or who without a guest Would prove that famine was the onely feast: Selfe tyrants, who their braines doubly torment Both for their matter, and their ornament. If these doe stutter sometimes, and confesse That they are tyr'd, wee could expect no lesse. But when my matter is prepar'd and fit, When nothing's wanting but an equall wit, I need no Muses help to ayde me on, Since that my subject is my Helicon, And such are you: ô give me leave, deare Sir (He that is thankfull, is no flatterer)
To speake full truth: where ever I finde worth I shew I have it, if I set it forth: You reade your selfe in these, here you may see A ruder draught of Corbets infancy, For I professe if ever I had thought Needed not blush if publish'd, were there ought Which was call'd mine, durst beare a Criticks view, I was the instrument, but the Author you. I need not tell you of our health, which here Must be presum'd, nor yet shall our good cheare Swell up my paper, as it hath done me, Or as the May'rs feast does Stowes History, Without an early bell to make us rise, Health calls us up, and Novelty; our eyes Have divers objects still on the same ground, As if the earth had each night walk'd her round To bring her best things hither: tis a place Not more the Pride of Shires then the Disgrace. Which Ide not leave had I my Deane to boot, For the large offers of the cloven-foot Vnto our Saviour, but you being not here, Tis to me though a rare one but a Shire, A place of good earth, if compar'd with worse, Which hath a lesser part in Adams curse. Or for to draw a simily from the Hig'st Tis like unto Salvation without Christ, A fairely situate Prison: When againe, Shall I injoy that frendship, and that braine: When shall I once more heare in a few words What all the learning of past-times affords, Austin epitomiz'd, and him that can To make him cleare contract Tertullian, But I detaine you from them: Sir adjeu You reade their workes, but let me study you.
To Mr. Holiday Archdeacon of Oxon: from Flower 1625. NOw that you dare receive a messenger, Now that the tyr'd-out plague begins to weare It selfe away, not people: when the street Begins a new acquaintance with the feet Of lowd coach-horses and the bells high call Is for Devotion more then Buriall, Now you dare read, accept what I here send A poore remembrance of an healthy friend. Trust me (deare Sir) I linger, and the day Though by the method of the yeare hee may Truly be said to shorten, and to slight Former conceits, make Britaines know a night Long, unto tediousnesse, yet to me Seemes like Alcides night lengthen'd to three, Whilst I want you: Yet doe not misconceive The earnest of your friend, as if to leave My former company I were so faine; I would have them, and you: if I complaine Hotly of times delay, expound that fire Not to have flames of anger, but desire. To see the poverty of man! he still Receives but curtall'd happinesse, his skill Makes him not capable of a full store, But if he have some, he must want the more. How could I prize myselfe lesse then a marke For an high envy, when (as in the arke Onely poore eight were rescu'd from the waves, And that which drowns the world, their vessel saves, The depth of the devourer) not uneven In Fortune, though in Number, not past seven,
Our preservation lasts unto this hower From the fierce plague in the dry arke of Flower? When that I had the daily happinesse Of conversation with my Deane, when lesse Then Heaven I could not thinke on, when I saw A face, that might heav'n to affection draw, When I injoy'd beauty, and wit, to trye Which could be more delighted eare, or eye; Yet I was not delighted, not that ought Was wanting, which Ide covet to be bought; Nor what was bought was envi'd me; tis true, Yet I had a neer want, the want of you. But had I wanted them had I liv'd still With my deare Holiday; had there to my will Beene an agreeing lucke, I can conceive Happly I might have wish'd those, whom I leave. Nor is this accusation: fancy not That I am changeable: if in the hot Rage of the dogge, I goe but thinly clad, And in the winters other rage am glad To beare a fire too in my cloathes, theres none Will call this Lightnesse, but Discretion. Nor is it Fond, which I professe my suite, To wish the good of which I'm destitute, He cannot be accus'd like to the weather, Who'd have by parts, what he must want together. You are that part now: whom if I injoy, No thwarting chance shall possibly destroy My blisse: the other want strikes not my soule, Ile sweare this halfe does comprehend the whole.
Vpon the death of his worthy friend Mr. Iohn Deane of New-Colledge. NAture, will it ever be That we must complaine of thee? Shall then all our search ne'r finde Age at least to worth assign'd? Must this constant truth be knowne Vertue dead as soone as Growne? Happy Deane then, who may'st call Thirty, Climactericall, And in spite of Envies sport Prove thy good life by thy short, Thus when others that doe dye Old or in their Infancy, Must (if our Divines say true) Be transform'd and shap'd a new, That at length they may appeare Much about our Saviours yeare (For in Heav'n there never shall Enter either Old or Small Since that these can ne'r agree Weakenesse and Aeternity,) Thou, deare shadow, needst not have Any wonder in the grave, Done for thee, nor thinke upon Future augmentation Reader, he that herein lies Dy'd as old as he shall rise.
To his Detractors. DEane, (then which no other name Is of better, of more Fame) Sleepe in quiet: if there be Tongues of that Malignity, That will dare to wound thy grave And not suffer thee to have Slumber here, Ile say no more; May they when they have plai'd ore All their scenes of life, but know The same Rigor, that they shew That 'tis not generous, nor scarcely safe To make a Libell, for an Epitaph. A Song for the Musicke lecture. STrike againe; ô no, no more I implore, Such another touch would be My destiny. What bewitching soundes are these Which so please; As that we beginne to feare What we heare: Sound yet lowder, raise a Tone Which to owne, The caelestiall Quire would be Suitorst' yee, Sound yet lowder, that if Fate Make this date To my yeares, I yet may dye Speedily,
And that this Ditty sweetly strong May be my Death and Fun'rall song. An Elegie upon the Noble Merchant Mr. FISHBORNE. DOe they walke London still, and can we meet With any now but mourners in the street? Such a stupidity exceeds beleefe, To have so great a cause, so small a griefe: The kinder Marble weepes against a shower, And can these more then Marble-hearts not poure One teare for Fishborne? shall that VVorthy lie, Like vulgar trophees of mortality, Vnwept, and unremembred? or at best Have common showers, such as become the rest, Vassalls of death? who never thinking why They were plac'd her, doe onely live, and die, Who by no worthy act ayding their Name, Perish at once in person and in Fame. Where are our Cataracts? where is the eye That strives for sorrowfull praecedency? That Poet now shall be accounted chiefe Whose wit is not the highest, but whose griefe: And he is most officious to this hearse, Who flowes more in his eye, then in his verse. Fishborne is dead, alas that Fishborne can Onely in goodnesse be above a man And not in lasting! that such men should have For all their worth, but a more noted grave, A sigh in earnest! Piety we see Will not afford us an Aeternity, And hence we may collect the reason why So few are studious of Piety,
So few are like to him: whom shall we see His holy rivall in Virginity? Whom shall we finde, that in an active life Like his, injoy'd the meanes, without the wife? Nay I may aske how few there are that shunne Like him, the sinne in the occasion? How few there are that looser thoughts defie! And onely in good deeds doe multiply. Him no deformity, no want of Fire, Of lively blood did tame in the desire Forc't to cold goodnesse, but his minde, as free From the tyrannicall necessity, As from the vice; he therefore liv'd not well Because he did not know the way to Hell, Chast out of weaknesse, no, he might have beene A strong delinquent, powerfull in sinne, He might have made, had he but heard his sense, His lust as famous as his continence, As was his friendship: which none can expresse So full, but that the prayse will be the lesse. How like unto a fable we esteeme, What heretofore did most Heroicke seeme, The Graecian frendships, when that we doe crowne Our happy thoughts with Fishborne and his Browne? His belov'd Browne, with whom he joyn'd in all Which Avarice would it's particular call, Cares, pleasures, hopes, and feares, nay they goe on Heavenly in a combin'd devotion, That they appeare, when ever we would scanne Which were the kinder or the better man, Aequall in all, their charity the same, Their continency too, all but the Name, So ready unto good, to bad so loth, They one another, love, but Heav'n loves both.
O what an heate! what constancy was there! How did their love teach them how to persevere In holy duties! as if they had ment By such an exquisite astonishment To shew there was no difference in effect Betweene the Friendly man and the Elect; How were they ne're asunder but to meet! How all their parting was to make more sweet Their next embraces! nothing had the power, Deare Shade, to make thee feare thy latest how'r But a divorce from him, from his lov'd sight, That thou shouldst thy Browne too with the light. Add yet it was a kinde of friendship too That thou so rare a courtesie wouldst doe, To lead the way to death, in which alone Thou couldst not wish him thy companion. But is he dead? and does that harsher bell Toll with such horrour noble Fishbornes knell, Sure here's no funerall, or if there be, It is a Funerall of Poverty. Where are the preparations, the rich dresse Of Death, the gawdy tyre of Rottennesse? Where are the Hearlds? those great gods of earth, Who can bestow on man a second birth? And make him stand upon his honour now, Who yesterday did leane upon the Plow? Those grand Logicians, who exactly just Can shew the punctuall difference of each dust, And satisfie the most ambitious Dame Discreetly, from what noble worme she came? No, none of these does he vouchsafe to hire, Who onely make a well-clad Gull admire At his full vanity, which fill our minde With pride, I feare, farre higher then our kinde,
Then our progenitors ere knew: but he Chooseth the Heralds of that Majesty, Who swaies the world, those men who heav'nly wise Instruct us to below in our owne eyes; Who shew us that the way to the most High Is by dejection and humility, Which blazon to us our Originall, The lowly earth, and then our baser fall Beneath that lownesse, unto these he payes A tribute after he hath spent his dayes: When natures due was pai'd, his wealth is theirs, Whose life did call thē fathers, whose death, heyres, By his wise zeale the Churches the Priests are, And they have now the meanes, who had the care▪ Nor doe they longer finde, to breed despaires, The tythe another's, when the Pulpit's theirs. I have no Art of wonder, nor no skill To make an action greater by my quill, Yet thus much truly can say without the ayde Of figure, Twas an act fit for a maid, For him, who leads us in the way he trod, Bringing himselfe, then others unto God; That if the world have such another birth, Our Saviour comming, may finde faith on earth▪ It would be injury after this to call Him the true Surgion of the Hospitall, Which he hath so releiv'd, that there are found Some, who are sorry that they want a wound, That they have no defect in any limme, Which they should venture to be cur'd by him. Thus when the greater sort after much care, Much watchfulnesse, much cos'nage too, who dare,
So they may raise their states, ransacke the Seas And after all their toyle cannot appease, Their endlesse thirst of gaine, although they mine So deepe in earth, Hell hath some hope to shine, And all this onely but to change a sinne, That what in covetousnesse did beginne Might end in riot, that to mocke their paines Their spending might be worse then were their gaines: Thou gatherst with much conscience, and then With greater goodnesse do'st disperse agen, That this praise to thy memory may be giv'n Here lies the merchant which hath purchas'd heav'n. Vpon a vertuous Magistrate. SLeepe lov'd soule, and let those eyes Which to rest were enemies Be atton'd at last, and lye Quiet to Aeternity, Lie they quiet, but let ours Earnestly distill salt showers, And though they doe see the lesse Make a mourning businesse: 'Twere an act too neere to hate Him in rest to imitate? Howle ye Poore, now he is gone Who shall stop oppression? Who shall make the wary Law Speake uprightly, and not draw
Specious colours, to indeare What were foule if it were cleare? Now ther's none your cause indures, Not because 'tis naught, but yours, Who will make the rich to see That unto an injury They are poore themselves? and find All their sinnes within their mind. For his wisedome did provide That they should hurt none beside. But now all the world may doe What they are addicted to: Lye, dissemble, cogge, and cheate, Make the easie poore their meate, And when they have raged thus Still be counted vertuous, Have the name, which he deserv'd And be prais'd though they have swerv'd. This in publike. But his life Did maintaine a glorious strife VVhich should be commended most, VVhether we might trulier boast Close, or open acts: If we Looke on that, which we can see That is thought the best, but then VVhat we heare excells agen; So that which to trust we feare, If our eye, or else our eare, And there is no meane debate Twixt the Man, and Magistrate. But I interrupt the rest, Thou, who now amongst the blest
Lookst on thy Creators face, Countst our praise a kind disgrace; And dost feare those acts were bad, VVhich no better praisers had. Sleepe then still, and let those eyes, VVhich to rest were enemies, Be atton'd at last, and lye Seal'd up to Aeternity.
THE EXPLANATION of the Frontispice. IT was when Industry did sleepe The Wolfe was Tutor to the Sheepe, And to amaze a plainer man, The thiefe was made the guardian. But can a Wolfe forget to prey? Can Night be lightened into Day? Without respect of lawes or blood, His charge he makes to be his food. With that triumphant he sits downe, Opprest, not honour'd with a Crowne, And on the lesser beasts does try A most Authenticke Tyranny: This the French Lyon heares, and when He's thought fast sleeping in his denne, Vengeance and He at once doe wake, And on the Wolfe their fury flake. Bad acts may bloome somtimes, but n'er grow high, Nor doe they live so sure, as they shall dye.
SFORZA by Rob: Gomersall. London Printed for Iohn Marriott. Tho: Cecill. sculp.
THE TRAGEDIE OF LODOVICK SFORZA DVKE OF MILLAN. By Robert Gomersall. The second Edition. Printed at LONDON in the yeare M DCXXXIII.
TO HIS MOST VVOR∣THIE FRIEND Mr. FRANCIS HIDE PROCTOR OF OXFORD. HAving resolved what to print, I could not belong doubtfull unto whom: it had been an unfriendly absurdity not to have intit'led him to my second, who might not unjustly have chal∣lenged the patronage of my first Labour. But if un∣till this time I had had no reason for such a dedica∣tion, if the same most fruitfull Colledge had not for these many yeares knowne us of the same time and friendship, if in all offices of life I had not still found you most inseparably one with me: yet this Worke at this time could not offer it selfe to any so justly as to you. It is to your name that I owe what ever fruits of my spent time shall be preserved, it is to your name that I owe what ever fruits of my former time, being unhappily lost, may have a possi∣bilitie of recovery. And could I dedicate any of my remaining Labours with more justice unto any, then to him, by whose friendly care, I dare almost assure
my selfe of them which are remaining? But some perhaps may say for this, that it had beene better if it had beene lost, or at least that these kinde of La∣bours are more judiciously supprest then published. Sermons had beene fitter for my setting forth, and to preach more proper then to write. But is not this to preach? I have heard divers speake an houre, who preach not, and there are many, who effectually preach, that are more sparing of their breath. If I make the ambitious see that he climbes but to a fall, the usurper to acknowledge, that blood is but a slip∣pery foundation of power, all men in generall to con∣fesse that the most glorious is not the most safe place: is not this to cry downe Ambition and Vsurpa∣tion? or is it lesse to shew, then to threaten? and are not men so much moved with the event it selfe, as with the commination of the event? And yet in this age, wherein onely Heresie or Sedition preferre a Boooke, wherein Contradiction is called Learning, and Zeale wonders that she is become Faction, I can expect but a few Readers, whose small number shall be no discouragement at all to me, if that your judg∣ment shall counterpoise them, which is the onely de∣sired crowne of Your true friend, R. G.
The Argument. LOdovicke Sforza, after he had cun∣ningly supplanted the Duchesse from the wardship of her sonne Galeazzo, as cunningly practizeth to bee the murtherer of him, of whom he would seeme to be the Protector. To this end he was to remove this impediment. Isabella daughter to the Prince of Calabria, and Grand-childe unto Ferdinand King of Naples, was wife to Galeazzo. A woman of a spirit as high as her birth, & equall to Sforza in all things but the sex: she perceiving the stupidity of her husband, & how that whatsoever she projected for his safety, he discovered to his vncle, for his overthrow, makes her father secretly acquain∣ted with all the passages, desiring him to vindi∣cate his sonne in law from the usurpation of his Protector. This could not bee so privately dis∣patched, but that Sforza had an incling of it, whether out of his owne reach he guessed it: or by his Nephewes sottishnesse he understood it. To prevent then his owne ruine, whilst hee in∣tends his Nephewes, hee ventures on those re∣medies which the height of feare rather rusheth on, then chuseth, which more expresse and ex∣change, then remove, or avoyde a danger. He
knew the French claime to Naples, to the prose∣cution of which hee sollicites the young King; whom either his right, or inconsideratenesse quickly armes unto the action. But before his comming, he by continuall messengers deludes the old King, and makes him beleeve that there was no purpose of his comming, and that the French journey unto Naples, as it was onely the childe of rumor, and had no being but from fame, so in a very short space, in the age of a wonder it would vanish and expire. Thus was Ferdinand perswaded from his necessary de∣fence, till having certainly understood that all de∣fence would be too late, the French being alrea∣dy very strong upon his frontires, cheated, not conquered, he dies, and leaves his sonne Al∣phonso heire of his kingdome, and his troubles. The French king being now entred in person into Italy, Galeazzo dyes of a poyson at Pavia, when Sforza has brought this worse poyson into his Country. But the French growing prodigiously victorious, and almost by the very seeing over∣comming their opposites, Sforza begins to be apprehensive of his owne danger, and strives to rid himselfe of these incumbrances, in the which a too much providence had intangled him. A consideration without doubt necessary, but al∣most past the season, it being near unto an impos∣sibility to expell him now, whom it was farre
from any difficulty at the first not to admit. So that this second resolution did onely proclaime the folly of the first, which either in wisedome he should not have ventured on, or, in honesty not have altred. But howsoever, he enters into a new league with the Venetians, and gives the French after their victorious returne from Na∣ples halfe an overthrow at Taro. And now when he thinkes himselfe confirm'd in his Dukedome, when hee as little fear'd ruine, and he deserv'd preservation; the French King dyes suddenly, to whom Lewis, the true Duke of Orleans, and ti∣tular Duke of Millan, succeeded: with him Sfor∣zaes late friend, the Venetians, conclude a league. Thus Sforza being left alone, raiseth two armies under the conduct of the two Sanseverines, men, whom he had highly favour'd and advanced. But it is scarce seene, that a faithlesse Master should have a trusty servant, and he that hath no respect to his owne word, shall in the extremest of his necessities, finde all others promises but words. The elder revolts, and the younger, with∣out the least shew of resistance, flyes; and Sforza himselfe is so closely pursued, that he can scarce get away safe into Germany. The French abusing their late victory, the Millanesi with a generall consent, recall Sforza; who, like a melting snow, overflowes all before him, and recovers most of his Duchy, with the same easinesse that he had
lost it. The strength of his Army consisted especi∣ally of Swizzers, whom the late overthrow of the warlike Duke of of Burgundy, and these Ita∣lian wars, had raised to the height of admiration. But to be valiant is not to have all vertues: these were as strong in trechery, as in battle, they lead Sforza in the habit of a Swizzer into the French campe, through which in the same habit they had promised to conduct him. Thus having beene twice betrayd, and now a prisoner, after a ten yeares harsh confining he dyes in France, having liv'd in his misery, longer then in his Duchy, and leaving instruction to succeeding Princes that height should not be their ayme, but integrity; and that they would not (that I may vse the words of our Poet) tempt their starres beyond their light.
The names of the Actors. GIovanni Galeazzo the yong Duke. Lodovick Sforza His Protector, after∣ward Duke. Galeazzo Count Caiazzo two brothers of the house of Sanseverin, Sforza's favourites. Lucio Malvezzo Carlo Burbiano Count Belgiosa two of the Nobility. Iuliano Picinino two old Courtiers. Vitellio Malatesta Poysoners. Ascanio Sforza's brother, a Cardinall. Triulcio The French Generall. The Captaine of the Swizzers. Isabella Galeazzo's wife. Iulia. Bettrice wife to Sforza. Embassadors, Souldiers, Servants.
The Prologue. CAn horror have an auditory? can Man love the spectacle of ruin'd man? We fear'd we should have beene alone, that hence, The Actors should have beene the Audience. Are you not frighted yet? doe you not rise? Can that invite, which should dismay your eyes! We shew neer murthers, and in that degree Where Mariage is unlawfull, then, the free Progresse of crimes, by nimble Iustice met, Aequally horrid, this we shew, but yet Vnlesse your Courtesie, your Iudgement sway, We suffer a worse torture, then we play.
Actus primi Scena prima. Galeazzo Duke of Millane, Isabella his Wife. Gal. WHy weeps my Deare? Isab. Aske why I do not weep▪ (Poore Isabella are thy teares deni'd thee?) Aske why thus long such a succession Of sorrow clogs my bosome, and does rob So much of Woman from me, as complaints. Aske why I doe not rave, teare my haire, thus, Create a griefe, whieh Fate would spare me, then Cloud the sad Ayre with sighes, and at the last, With a bold stab take from insulting Fortune The miserable object of her sport: Aske why I do not this, not, why I weepe. Gal. Or stint thy teares, or mingle them with mine By a relation of their cause: these eyes, Trust me, my Isabella, are not dry, Nor has strong sorrow ere exhausted them, To make them banckrout of a friendly teare, Doe thou but prove it once a friendly tear And not a fond one. Why, my Isabella, Why dost thou hasten those that come too fast,
Sorrow, and Age? If it be true, I heard Of Sforza, my deare Sforza, ther's no joy But either past, or fleeting, and poore man Growes up but to the experience of Griefe, And then is truly past minority When he is past all happinesse: Isab. My Lord, My sorrow dares not argue with your love, This smile expels it. Gal. Be it banisht farre, Aeternally, or to the yeares of Age. I, these unclouded lookes become my deare, And give me joy too. I must hunt to day With my deare vncle: O he is a man That alters all those fond relations, Which Nature gives, who in an vncles name Out loves a Father: I could praise him still, But that I stay too long from him: farewell. Exit. Isab. O Galeazzo! O not Galeazzo! How has Man fled thee! how thy soule has fled thee! Only thy lineaments bely a Man. Thou hunt? alas poore Prince, thou art the Game: Thy vncle hunts: and yet he does not neither, But stands a glad, and idle looker on, Whilst thou insnar'st thy selfe, sinfully fool'd, Flattering thy Executioner, and so Dost nor prevent thy misery, nor yet know. Enter Galeaz. Gal. I am return'd once more, before I'm gone, To see if thy fond griefe be not return'd; What joy is there in a forbidden griefe? What comfort in the eyes sad flux? once more Is it my fault gives you these teares? Isab. My faults;
For which so strange a sadnesse seizes me▪ That it increaseth when I strive with it, And makes my face rebellious to my Lord, When my heart yeelds Gal. Then once againe, adieu, Forsake your griefe, or griefe will forsake you. Ex. Isab. Forsake my griefe—O bid me forsake heav'n, My reason, and mine honor: onely sighes Doe keepe me in opinion of Beeing, And without them I were a stupid coarse. Shall I obey impossibilities? Forsake the sorrow, and retaine the cause? How can I thinke that yet the untyr'd Sunne Has journy'd but a twelve-month, since I was In Ferdinando's Court, the Paragon Of happy Naples, when his Palace seem'd Guarded whith Princely sutors, and mine eye, Caught with so many rarities of men, Taught me that too much choice did hinder choice, That Galeazzo then must cary me? This Galeazzo, neither Prince, nor Man, Fool'd out of both by Sforza, his deare vncle. Can I thinke this, and thinke of joy againe? Can I thinke this, and dare to thinke againe? Why should some toyes of after-torment fright A resolution of easing me From present ones? O tis the curse of man To be unhappy at arbiterment, Enter Iulia. Till heav'n please to relent▪ My Iulia, Breath's Naples any comfort? quickly speake. Iul. None, Madam, and your courteous Grandfather In steed of Armies sends you Patience. Isab. VVhat? patience? he should have sent me rage, Ayded my anger, if nor my revenge:
Patience? O God! can griefe be patient? Can Thunder whisper? or chaf'd seas not roare? In me is Sea and thunder, I will be A patterne of Revenge not misery. Scena secunda. Sforza. SForza, as yet thou but beginst to act, And yet beginst to stagger: wert thou not A Princes sonne? why art thou not a Prince? Protectors are but subjects, and this staffe But shewes me under whose command I am. Is this our hindrance that our mother first Swell'd with another? what her wombe denyde Our head shall give, or we will lose our head. What was her labour to a Crowne? Perhaps A monster might have fill'd her first, a thing Of royall prodigy, and should this thing Grow to be hooted to a crowne before us? Or if that crownes be due to the most yeares, Why should the Nephew be the Vncles Lord? And Lawes of Nations conquer those of Nature? Nature intended Sov'raignty to them Of soveraigne understanding; to the rest, How ever aged, but subjection, Which Isabella would detaine us in: And whilst she trusts to Naples, our sad brow May sooner weare willow, then Diadems. Enter Belgiosa. Return'd so soone, my Belgiosa? thankes, Before I heare thy message, for thy hast,
Bel. My Lord, our sudden comming into France, Left fame behind us, where ariv'd, we crav'd A private audience. Sf. But had you it? Did not our enemies sharpe espies descry The depth of our hid counsells? Bel. They might first Descry the subtill path of a swift ship, The voyage of a bullet, or of thought, Before your more mysterious purposes? Sf. Then since we are alone, and in a place Free from the bold intrusion of an eye, Feigne Vs the Prince to whom we sent you forth, And speake our Embassy unto our selfe. Bel. Great Prince, to have the offer of a Crowne Is rare, and your felicity: my Lord, Millans Protector, but your servant, knowing The ancient right your predecessors had In usurpt Naples, by us wooes your Grace (Consider unto what he wooes your Grace) Not to maintaine his pow'r, but make your owne, To take a Kingdome that e'n sighes for you. So shall the infamy of a lost crowne Rot in the earth with your dead Ancestors, And the recovery revive their names To waite upon your tryumph with your foes: For so much justice needs no other power, And yet such is your pow'r, that it is able To make what ever you should fancy, just: But that your vertue is above that pow'r. I will not call you usurer of Fame, By this large act, when the astonisht world Now fifty Ages off from us, shall reade Not in the boastings of a painted tombe
(The flatteries of great rottennesse) but your name Writ in Aeternities true Characters, For making conquer'd Crownes the rudiments Of your victorious infancy in armes, When France shall know no other Charlemaigne Sf. But should we faile in the attempt? what then? Belg. Can Heav'n faile Iustice? or those pow'rs cōmit Sinnes which they punish? O my gracious Lord Sin not with that weak thought: but if they should, Sforza will never: Sf. He is alwaies noble, But hee'l undoe us with a benefit, To give a kingdome is above requitall. Belg. His hopes are but the praise of honest deeds, If in the rereward of your spreading Fame, That fils all mouthes, some happy tongue may glance At him, as a poore engine of your glory, That could impart, but not possesse a Fame. Sf. Excellent man! if to this welcome speech Thou giu'st as faire an answer. Bel. This in briefe After some scruple, and a little pause He whisper'd he would come. Sf. Exactly done. But leave us now, my noble Belgiosa, Till we may study a reward for thee. Ex. Belg. The twilight hastens, when Vitellio And Malatesta one of an high trust Ent. Vitell. & Ma. with our fond Nephew promised cōferēce. And here they are. Is it decreed brave friends? Shall it be swiftly done? nay, tis no matter, Your colour sayes you dare not, Vit. It lyes then: If that my colour shew me disobedient
To my good Lord, be I for ever pale: But when shall Galeazzoes wish'd-for death Shew we dare somewhat? Sf. VVe would gladly have A poyson teach him linger to his death, And a month hence we shall expect his knell. Ex. Now are we entred, and now to retire VVere the worse treason: like an inrag'd fire The more we are oppos'd, the more wee'l spred And make our foes our fewell: to be head VVee'l cut off any member, and condemne Vertue of folly for a Diadem, Banish Religion, and make blood as cheape As when two Armies turn'd into one heape Of carcasses, lye grov'ling, what care we For the slight tainture of disloyalty? None will commend the race till it be run, And these are deeds not prais'd till they are done. Scena tertia Iuliano, Picinino. Iul. MY Picinino, holds this sad newes true? Pici. My Iuliano, yes; tis in each voyce That some perswasion flatt'ring Ferdinand, That the French journey was but a report, Made him revoke Alphonso, his brave sonne VVho with an Army had indanger'd us: For the wise old man fearing, a deepe feare Might arme an enemy, else too weake for him, And make us hasten the French warre, gave o're
His warre with us: but when he understands That all this quiet does not purchase peace, The coozen'd Prince seeks the sure peace of death, And leaves his ruine to destroy his sonne. Iul. Will the French come? then prethee, Death, come too. Why should our eyes dull'd to all other sights By Age and sorrow, be reserv'd for sight Of warre and sorrow? ô discourteous heav'ns! Why have you dally'd with us to white hayres? Why kept till this time, must we perish now? O wherefore are we come so neere the grave And are not in it yet? yet pardon me Good heav'n, your acts are above question: Yet I may shed these teares for Italy; Slave of that world, which once, her valour slav'd, Restoring backe her triumph's with her spoyle, Distracted in herselfe, and onely fit To make a bankrout Poet heale his credit With matter for fresh Tragedies. Pic. Good heav'n! Is this to ease misfortune, or increase it? If Passion could whine out felicity, Or plentious teares could drowne unhappinesse, I have eyes too, and they containe their showers, Nor would I ere be niggard of a Griefe. But teares being onely teares, an easie dew Of childish eyes, and all the rest of Griefe Commanding smiles, more then Compassion, I thanke my Genius I am resolute To laugh at Fortune when she is most angry. Iul▪ Such laughter may have little mirth in it, And I shall have more comfort in a teare. Pic. You may, good Fountaine, yes, droppe on, to see, If so much moysture will revive thy cheekes
Whilst Ile be yong with laughter. I am he That feares a sorrow, more then misery. Scena quarta. Vitellio. THis is the place, & this the time: good heav'n! What an odd place, and what an uncouth time? Had I beene hyr'd to murther Sforza here, Hell could not prompt more fit occasion. I like nor it, nor him: but here he comes. Ent. Sfor. Sf. Welcome Vitellio, thy hast is welcome: Nay complement with him, whō thou wouldst kill, Be free to us as we doe know thee true. Speak, yet I need not bid thee, for thine eye Sparkles a joyfull answer. Is it done? Vit. Tis done my Lord, and now my Lord, 'tis told (That Galeazzo is no more a man) And with an even scruple, for to me The act's as easie as relation. Sf. Thou speak'st true manhood: 'tis thy art alone That gives us certaine honour: there are some Strive for Aeternity with losse of life, At least with hazard of the losse of it, And think they are reveng'd when they are kill'd; These are our valiant duellists, and these Do bleed whilst we do cōquer; heale their wounds, Whilst we receive none: then, at last, unfold (Man of deepe Art, that canst prevent the Fates, And cut a thread, which they had thought to spun Forty yeares longer) thy wise mysteries.
Thy constant, never failing stratagems, Which cause a death, without a feare of death, Vit. Here are some drugs, but of these some, not one But can command a life where ere it is, And ruinate the strongest workemanship That Heav'n ere brag'd to have compos'd of earth, Powders of speedy Fate, but above all The instruments, which make me neere to death Of such indear'd familiarity, This glasse has nimblest operation: Whose liquor cast upon the face of man Straight dulls him to an everlasting sleepe. Sf▪ Is this the liquor of Aeternitie?Vitellio fals as dead. Ent. Ma. Then take thy Lethe, & goe sleep for ever. Mal. I am deceiv'd, or else this is the place, Which Sforza chooseth when he is alone. Yes, this is it. Sf. What Malatesta come? What Devill brought him hither? O crosse stars! Be sudden, Sforza, now, or thou art lost: He must beleeve our guilt was accidēt. He fals upō Vitellio. Speake my Vitellio, O tune thy lips. But to one syllable, but to one groane And I am satisfi'd, Mal. What sight is here? Vitellio dead, & Sforza turn'd a Mourner? Sf. Should thou die thus, how would thy name be soyld! For though I am as guiltlesse of thy death, As Innocence, or if there be a name That hath lesse being: yet the envious world Will quit curst Fortune of so great a crime, And give it me: yet speake. Mal. I'me bold my Lord, To aske your Honor when this dismall chance
First frighted Heav'n? Sf. Now, Malatesta, now: When could unhappinesse raigne so, but now? As if he meant to be before his Lord, He had no sooner told the Prince must die, Bul he straight dy'd. Mal. Then courage, my good Lord, Since it is thus, make the best use of it: For now you need not feare to be reveal'd, When one mouth's stopt, & th'other is your owne. But since your last retyrement, we have beene Instructed by the speed of frequent Poasts, Of the arrivall of the King of France. Sf. With thanks, a while, my Malatesta, leave us. Ex. Why should we longer thinke of other pow'rs, And not bring offerings now to our owne braine? VVhich gives us Agents of all kinds of men, And Kings aswell as poys'ners: this wise King Must trouble Naples, who would trouble us, Divert invasions which are yet not made, And thus our ends are cheapely brought about, VVe onely at the charge of plott: they fight, And Galeazzo dyes, whom either King VVere they not thus intangled, would preserve: VVe shall be conquerors without fighting, thus, And their poore swords shal cut a way for us. Surg. Vitellio. I'me for you France. Vit. And I am for you, Sforza, Not poyson'd yet, unlesse t'were by thy teares. The other liquor had an Antidote. Happy suspect! had I beene credulous And thought his love as free as it would seeme I had not beene, distrust has ransom'd me. But Malatesta is intrapp'd, I know
Sforza for nothing did not aske the skill: My equall villaine perishes, and I Thus being accessary to his death May sinne to Innocence, by poasting off The Princes fate to him: whilst a disguise Shall keepe alive the fame that I am dead. And thus halfe truth shall come to light, and I, Be wisely cleer'd by double villany. Scena quinta. Caiazzo, Sanseverin, Malvezzo; Sans. AS I am noble, 'twas a glorious sight, To see two Princes, in their State at once▪ As if two Sunnes had harmlesly conspir'd To beautifie, and not to fright the Heav'ns. Why should the formall nicety of State Debarre these often enterviewes? I thinke They would be medicine against Tyranny: For, when a Prince sees all things under him, Heads of eternall nakednesse, and men That make their glory of their servitude, He thinkes hee's uncontroulable, that none Without a saucy imputation Dares warne him to his duty: but suppofe An equall Majesty should once become His usuall object, one, whose uncheck't blood Runnes full as high as his, then he does learne, That ther's a Common wealth of Princes too, Not one sole Monarch. Cai. Yet, Sanseverin, If you observ'd, some clouds obscur'd both Sunnes
For, when they smil'd most freely, and exprest Their neerest friendship by a strict embrace, They lookt so jealously, as if they fear'd A closer stab: and then the King tooke leave With that excesse of hast, that one would thinke (After this eager preparation,) He did intend his journey to leave us, Not to winne Naples Mal. 'Tis a dangerous time, (And yet I seeme to crosse the truth I speake When I not feare to call't a dangerous time) Sforza is over-wise, and so attempts Vpon the confidence of his owne braine (A braine, though wise, yet I may safely say, Within the possibilitie of error) Things, that can onely hap by miracle To any good. Sans. Why, what can happen ill? Feare you a warre? and what's to be fear'd there? Least that a mortall dy, least that the life Due to a knotty gout, or grating stone, Have a more easie period by the sword, Let them feare warre, who feare to see their gold, Lest that the Sunne should have a sight with them, Holding so much of Earth, th'are turn'd to it, Who have no more life then their durty acres, Men, I may say, in the worst part of men. And why like these runne we an idle race Of threescore yeares, and then sneake to a Death▪ Whilst souldiers master their mortality And dye by men, if that at all they dye. Malvezzo know, when all things fifted are, Peace onely pleaseth them that ne'r knew warre.
Actus secundi Scena prima. Iuliano, Picinino. Iul. HEard you the generall whisp'ring? Pic. No, what ist? Iul. The Duke is ill.— Pic. And doe they whisper that? Iul Yes: and they say he has strange fits. Pic. How? strange? Is poyson strange in Italy? why, know, As Princes live above the vulgar, so Their death has a Prerogative: meane men May dreame away their time to fourescore yeares, And when their rotten joynts drop to their dust, Onely some triviall infirmity, A Palsie, or an Ague beares the blame: But'tis not State for Princes to be old, And yet they must not be suppos'd to dye By the respectlesse treason of disease, But by some strange unheard of accident That Fate did never dreame of: but no more, You know Vitellio, and the hight of grace Sforza has shew'd him, 'tis suspitious VVhen wisedome flatters villany: then come, Let us be private, and discourse some treason.
Enter, after solemne Musick, Sforza, Sanseverin, Cajazzo, and Souldiers. hen after some pri∣vate whisp'ring they depart severall waies. Iul. But stay, my Picinino, who are here? Pic. O the grand favorite, Sanseverine, A most full bubble, valiant vanity: That in high termes can sweare downe fortresses, Blow away Armies with a pow'rfull breath, And spoyle the enemy before he sees him: But when he comes to action, lye as still, As in the tale, that lumpish King of Frogs, Which Iove did give them in his merriment▪ Were tilting, valour, I ne're knew a man Of larger worth: could he but breake the rankes Of enemies aswell as he does speares, Millan ne're saw a braver Generall. But there's his brother too. Iul. I, thats the man. Pic. (Tis wonder we can know so much of him) He that can sound the depth of that sly braine Has a large plummet, trust me Iulia, An hundred Lawyers make up that one head, And scarcely too: quicke Proteus to him, To this Cajazzo was an Ideot, A plaine flat Ideot, I tell thee man, Meander never knew so many windings; If, as they say, an Aemulation Is bred by likenesse, I do wonder much How Sforza is induc'd to imploy him, Who has more Devill in him, then himselfe. Iul. But why is this imployment? why these Armes?
When all but Naples are our friends, and they Not able now to shew themselves our foes, Ingag'd, and almost lost in the French warre. Pic. Trickes, Iuliano, Statists call them Arts. Not to be fadom'd by a vulgar reach: But though I want the villany to know, Yet I have so much spleene to laugh at them, And take a comfort in this plainer sense, No subtilty can coozen Providence. Scena secunda. Ascanio, Galeazzo, Isabella, Iulia. Asc. HOw rests the Prince? Isab. O my good Lord, he rests, But 'tis a quiet, such as the Seas have, When that the winds have spent their violence, And out of impotence bestow a calme: 'Tis more a death, then slumber, you may see His senses rather weary, then at rest. Asc. Are then his fits so raging? Isab. Nothing else, Should he but wake, youd think two Armies met, And strove together for the loudest shout. Disease has spred herselfe ore all his parts, And onely spar'd his tongue, as if some starre Not knowing otherwise to cleare itselfe From imputation of tyranny, For such exact plaguing of Innocence
Had left him that to curse withall, that so To all that heard his fury, he might seeme To be thus tortur'd for his Blasphemy. Gal. Water, some water. Isab. Now the fit beginnes: Gal. Some of my slaves runne, and exhaust the Po, Charge him no more to vent his idle streames Into the glutted Maine, but rather poure All his moyst mouths on me: d'ye stare, begone, Vse not your eyes at all, unlesse to weepe: And that, not teares of sorrow, but of helpe, Such as may coole me. Asc. Patience, sweet Prince, Adde not unto the fire of your disease, The heat of passion, Gal. What red thing is this? Ha, Isabella, tell me. Is. 'Tis your vncle The noble Prince, Ascanio. Gal. 'Tis false; He is nor Prince, nor noble: hearke you friends, He talkes of Passion, and of Patience, Let him discourse of Aetna, or Vesuvius, Or of a greater heat then I doe feele, And I will answer him: Patience to me? Goe bid rough seas be patient. As. He growes worse, And opposition does inflame him more: Me thinkes I see his eye-lids faintly strive Against Deaths closing. Gal. O! my joynts are fire. Why does not heav'n shed Cataracts, and lowre Once to my comfort? are they hot as I, Have they no moysture, for a Suppliant?
Thē, though hot heav'n oppose, whē once my breath Hath left this corps, Ile have a cold by death. Mor, Is. Heard you that grone my Lord—ô he is dead; Cracke then ye tardy heart strings, quickly cracke, And give me leave to over-take the flight Of my dead husband. Asc. What is past our helpe, Let it be past our griefe: tis fortitude To suffer chances counterbuffes as one That by his expectation had deceiv'd All her faint threatnings: till this sadder time Your life has had one constant scene of joy, Which here is interrupted: you should thanke The heav'ns because they were not tedious In their delights: for this variety. As hunger praiseth feasts, so it may be Youle love joy better for this misery. Scena tertia. Sforza, Beatrice. Sf. HOw covetous thou art to learne mishap? Beatrice the answer kills thee. Beat. Kill me then, But not deny me Sf. Dearest, I am lost, And in my ruine, thou. Beat. I would be so, Safety were ruine were it otherwise, Yet tell me Sforza, how are you so lost? Sf. O what a busie torture woman is! I must say somewhat, but the maine is silence, Vitellioes losse, yes, that hath lost me too:
No sooner kill'd then lost, so strangely gone, As if the dead had learnt a motion So to convey themselves unto the grave. Beat. Will you be still vnkind? Sf. Thou shalt heare all. The French have cōquer'd Naples, & wch drawes Blood from our soule, without a drop of blood: When thus we plotted it, that when both Kings Had wearied out themselves with equal slaughter, And here Alphonso totter'd, and there Charles; When losse had seiz'd the conqueror, then we Would have amaz'd the conqueror afresh With new alarmes: when by the flattery Of chance, France gets a kingdom without blood, And by dry victory has undone a plot Worth many Kingdomes: I presum'd on this, Naples had souldiers enough to last Killing a yeare, in which space, we resolv'd To arme all Italy against the French, And cunningly drive out, whom we call'd in: Which, ere we could accomplish, is disclos'd, And conqu'ring France intends to hinder it, By our invasion: ô my policy! Must I be wounded with the sword I gave? And find those enemies, whom onely I Enabled to my injury? well; heav'n, Your kindnesse is a miracle sometime, Beyond all reason, but your curse is wit, Enter Ascan. My fault is my faults punisher. Asc. Long life, And happy to our Duke. Sf. How my Ascanio? Recall thy selfe, good Cardinall, what Duke Whilst Galeazzo lives?
Asc. Most truly Duke, Sf. For Galeazzo's dead. Alas poore child, I could have wish'd thee longer life, but since Heav'ns will is otherwise, twere blasphemy To storme at that which is the will of heav'n. I hate that impotent rebellion. Enter Sansev. Sans. My Lord, so crosse was Fortune, that you were Made almost banqu'rout by a too much thrift: For whē you had discharg'd those numerous troops Whose charges lay as hard upon the State As an invasion could, then Orleance mov'd And stole Navarra, which disastrous newes So heated the remainder of your troopes (As if you had added to their valour more, When you abated from their multitudes) That by a nimble victory, they made His conquest be his prison. Sf. Noble friend Stand thou, and our State stands: ô why doe men Cry out on Age, on eating Age? as though Our many griefes were from our many yeares, And the last times were worst: we rather find That nothing is so dangerous to Kings As a yong Principality: for tis With them almost as with yong plants, which yeeld Vnto the least intreaty of the wind, And need no stronger blast; but gaining Age Scarce stoope to thunder: may we once arise Vnto this happy firmenesse of estate, This blest maturity of Prince, we stand Fearelesse of fall, but if heaven envy us And have decreed our ruine with our rising, Yet such weele have it voyde of all base feares Our foes shall grieve our ruine was not theirs.
Scena quarta. Cajazzo, Belgiosa, Malvezzo. Mal. MY Lords, since we are met so happily, (If you esteeme me not too bold, to aske The story of your high-fam'd actions) Blesse me with the Relation. Caj. I much feare Mine are not worthy your attention: Yet if it please you, noble Belgiosa, (Because my story will depend on that) To shew the reason why the giddy French, So strangely left their conquest: such your pow'r, Such a full conquest have you of your friend, I'le shame my selfe for your content. Bel. Then, thus: From us France hurry'd thorow Lumbardy And fled to conquer, who had seene that hast Would easily suppos'd it to have beene Rather a flight then an invasion. The Pope quakes at the progresse, and admits Yong Ferd'nand into Rome, that if the French Should dare a fight, they might find Naples there. France slights that fainter opposition, And speakes his scorne in thunder, Naples flyes, And all his army hath no other use Then to become unwilling harbingers To shew their lodgings to the conqu'ring French, Who like fierce winds that sweep away their lets, Or like incroaching tydes, take swiftly in The offer'd Countries, not defended: now Saint German yeelds, and sawcy Capua
That dar'd a competition once with Rome, Aversa takes the president, and now The King of Naples finds home foes, and such As durst be valiant against their Prince, And use their fond armes in a mutiny, Which were not safe enough for a defence. He taking the advantage of their crime Vnconquer'd by the French, to these he yeelds, And chuseth rather to become no Prince The keep the Crown, which they would take away. Mal. What was the issue? Bel. Strangely pittifull: He that had Navies yesterday, has now Scarce a barke left him, scarce a planke or two, To trust him to the mercy of the Seas, The Seas more courteous then the multitude: In which he makes for Ischia, and leaves His enemy his successor. Cai. And he (As I have seene some wav'ring amorist) Neglects his conquest for the easinesse, For when twas certaine Ferdinand was fled, Whilst they might justly yet feare his returne, The French returne, as if they meant to try Which would be soonest weary of the hast, Who had the swifter pace to runne away: Bel. That is no new act of new governors, Such stories are as ancient as the world. Till they doe try what they can doe, they thinke They may doe all things, their first act is warre (As if they meant rather to kill then raigne) It matters not upon what ground: there is Pretence enough to quit a conqueror From the least shew of injury: but then
When they have felt the least of warres extremes They rave, they faint, they crosse what they first did And are e'en weary of a victory. Cai. France made this certain truth, who in his brags Had sworne the fall of Mahomet: but now When he might heare the groanes of Graecia Deliver'd by the ecchoes of their sea, To make them more, he thinkes on a retreate, And chuseth home before a victory. It was a vally, where our Taro laves The root of Apennine, and a large plaine Spheard with a row of swelling Earth, makes warre A spatious Amphitheater: where we Stayd for their comming; when mature advice That crownes most actions, strangely injur'd us For rashnesse would have stole a victory Which tedious consultation gave away, Successe had smil'd on our temerity Had we assaulted them upon the hills And added to the mountaines with the French. But I am tedious: onely our vanne fought, And twas the Frenchmens victory to resist: Both were o'recome, both conquerors, for they Still kept the field, and we still kept the prey. Bel. O what is valour joyn'd with Modesty! This conquers both our Fortune and your skill. Should you but write a story, and professe That purenesse from al passion which y'aue shown, You would be credited, though twere your owne. But what reward is't to be but beleev'd? You shall be ever prays'd: what you have done Feares neither envy, nor oblivion: And for this act succession shall see Cajazzo as long-liv'd as Italy.
Scena quinta. Vitellio disguised. I Wonder Malatesta still survives: Sure Sforza has forgot himselfe; my death Does but halfe cleare him, and if the other live, He cannot looke for a full innocence. It is not mercy, certainly: ô, no, Mercy with him is folly: but t'may be He feares that had he kild us both at once Rumor would be too busie, and all mouths Would cry, that Chance had too much project in't. This is the place of Destiny, 'tis here Sforza does actuate his bloody arts, Mistaking privacy for innocence, And thinkes hee's good, because he is not seene. Here must I wayte for a discovery. Enter Sforza. Sf. I must once more be cruell, yet not I, This is the murther of Necessity: But what has he deserv'd, who has done nought But what we charg'd, & so perform'd our thought? Is Death due to Obedience? can this hand Yeeld to his Fate, that seal'd to his command? Yet he, or I must perish: shall I see My life, my honor, my Aeternity, Lye at his mercy, and be safe, so long As he is pleas'd to temper his rude tongue? Till he be drunke, or treacherous? Ile first Study amongst all actions, which is worst And over-act it: though our former deed Was from ambition, this is yet from need:
Death is too good reward for such a slave, Enter Mal. And sure there is no blabbing in the grave. But here he comes: why are thy looks so grim? Why Malatesta, in thy furrow'd face See I the signes of Anger, or of Griefe? Command thy face to a more smiling forme, That I may think thee pleas'd when thou dost tell What does displease thee. Mal. 'Twas a foolish dreame, That stole my colour from my paler cheekes. Last night I saw Vitellio. Sf. And what? Canst thou feare shadowes? Mal. Yes if shadowes speake, If that their threatnings be substantiall. From such a paper as your Highnesse holds, He forc't me breath in Death. Sf. This Paper holds A strange perfume, of such a cunning vertue, That at a distance it scarce smels at all. And at the nose it gives the best of sents. Make the experiment: Mal. O! I am slaine. Sf. Heavens what a stilnesse here is? what a death Of the whole man at once? the wandring eye Now findes a station, and the busie pulse Is now for ever idle: where's the tongue That but ev'n now could say as much as this, When that the soule could prompt it? but e'en now Here was a thing could speake, and poyson too, That knew more wayes to kill, then ever Heav'n Did to make man: and could his subtlety, That could give death, not know to keep out death? Fye, what a bulke it is, what a great lumpe
Of nothing, that shall lose that nothing too? What a dead toy is Man, when his thin breath Flyes to its kindred Ayre? ô why at all Did Heav'n bestow, or why at all bereave Man of this Vapour of Eternity? And must we one day be a stocke like this, Fit onely to inrich the greedy Earth, And fill an house of Death, perhaps before We see the Issue of another Plot? Must we lie subject to be trampled on, By some, perhaps not Politicians? Where's then our Wisedome? our deepe Provi∣dence? Are they durt too? ô heav'ns! but if they are Enter some Negroes to cary away the body. Or durt, or nothing, Ile enjoy my fame. And rottennesse shall seize me, not my name. Vit' Are those the Instruments? well my black friends, I eas'd you of a labour: all succeeds According to the flatt'ry of my wish, And my suspition turnes to prophecy. But my so bloody, and so wary Sforza, Your Agent's dead, but not your crime: 'twill out, And by this carcasse: I will flye to France, Divulge loud papers,—they are writ already,— And here they are, these I will sweare were found In the dead pois'ners pockets: by this meanes Sforza's proclaim'd a murtherer, I'me freed, And make it be his guilt, which was my deed. Vitellio going forth meets with Isabella.
Scena quinta. Vitellio, Isabella, Iulia. MAdame I have some newes of that import, That (if you please to command privacy) Will both desire, and fright your patience Is. Be briefe Vit. First know I am Vitellio. Is. Thou art a villaine, and a pois'ner then, Hast thou a drugge for us? Vit. Yes such an one Shall make you love a poyson: reade, & wonder. Is. I doe: and more, how thou could purchase this Without a guilt. Vit. I did peruse the spoyles Of Malatesta's carcasse, whom I found Most strangely guilty, and as strangely dead, Whose pockets furnisht me with these instructions Is. Thus we learne Murther from thy Felony: But what should make me trust a confest rogue? Vit. My villany: my credit is my crime: Had not I stole, you had not understood. Is. I must beleev't: but darst thou poison well? Commit a crime, which thou maist glory of? Vit. On whom deare Lady? Is. Nay I care not whom. But I can give reward to a wise crime. Vit. My quicke dispatch shall make you gladly know I understand, what you desire, and hide. Exit. Is. Now should he poison Sforza. O fond hope! That mak'st us thinke all true that we desire. Should he betray us now? for what? that we
Intreated him to kill, we knew not whom. By this expression thus much I have wonne: I may be made, but cannot be undone. Scena sexta. Picinino. FOrtune is merry, and the heav'n dispos'd To play with me, I am turn'd Favourite. Me thinkes my haires asham'd of their white hue Should blush to youth: O how I could looke big, Take Gyant strides, doat on my lovely selfe, And talke as fillily as any Lord. To see the prettinesse of action, Of State imployment: Sforza's to be crown'd, And I must winne the popular suffrages. Good Heav'ns! was ever such a merry load Impos'd on Man: some cry the times are ill, Others could wish them better, and a third Knowes how to make all well, but tells not how, And, cause that he is silent, would be wise. But in conclusion I doe finde them ready (On supposition of no more expence, And that their voice is su'd for, not their purse) To give a lusty acclamation.
Sforza, 3 Ambassadors, Cajazzo, Sanseverin, Malvezzo, as in procession, they offer up the French Banners at the Altar, whilst this is sung. Song. Io, Io, gladly sing, Till the Heav'n with wonder ring. He is fled, let Millan say Once more, he is fled, the day Cleares againe, and makes us see A braver light of victory. Io, Io, &c. Yet he had before he fought (By the speedy warre of thought) Conquer'd Italy, and so Has hasten'd his owne overthrow. Io, Io, &c. Henceforth let them learne to live In the peace, that home doth give, Nor againe so fondly rave, To travell for a forren grave. Io, Io, &c. Sf. First we thank Heav'n, by whose most gracious aid We have the meanes, and reason to thanke you. Now we beginne to lift up our faint heads, And entertaine, though scarce beleeve a peace: Now Italy at length has lost her yoake, Which she was wont to give, but never beare, And therefore wondred at the strangenesse more
Then at the weight of't: in this noble act Sforza claimes nothing but the happinesse, Which he acknowledges receiv'd from you. 1 Amb. Sforza's deserts exceed the height of praise. 2 Amb. He has slav'd Italy by freeing it. 3 Amb. Millan must know him for her Romulus. Sf. VVe know our selfe so underneath this praise, That could we but suspect untruth in you, VVee'd call all this but mockery. Pic. D'yee doubt? Make you a question of the name of it? VVhy call it as it is, plaine flattery. Cajaz. VVe wondred lately at the prouder French, And gave too high a valew to their acts: VVhen in a serious estimation, Their chiefest victory was of the miles, And more a journey then a warre: if they Could gaine a fame by nimble travelling, How shall we reare a trophee to his name, That made them goe farre faster then they came? For my part (though I know his Modesty, VVhich will refuse the honours he deserves) I'de have him forc'd unto the government, To rule that happy land which he hath sav'd. Omnes. A Sforza a Sforza.Ascanio crowns him. Sf. Sforza will ne'r gainesay the gen'rall voice, Your love I like beyond your gift: kind Heav'ns Shew by my governments integrity You were the peoples prompter, and I'le shew (If you but actuate my just desires) I onely am their Duke in goodnesse: since Millan hath chose, it shall applaud her Prince.
Actus tertii Scena prima. Umbra Galeatii. NO rest in death? why then I see they erre That give a quiet to a sepulcher. 'Tis our hard fate, nor can Man chuse but die, But where Griefe is, is Immortality. This drawes our juicelesse bones to a new day, From Lethes banks, where we have learnt the way, (An easie learning) to returne our woes, And laugh at our misfortunes in our foes. Wee'll draw felicity out of our fall, And make our ghost reuenge our Funerall. That our dim Eyes, & with pale death benighted, May by revenge be clear'd, and we be righted (If other punishment should come too slow) By the exacter justice of our foe. When being betray'd by them he trusted most, He shall be pris'ner in a forren coast, When wanting sustenance, his teeth shall chaw His armes for food, and their once feeders gnaw. When Hell shall have but part of him, when he That now triumphs shall be lesse ghost then we.
Scena secunda. Sforza. Ascanio. Asc. SForza, you are undone. Sf. Why my Ascanio? Fortune is fearefull of so foule a crime. Asc. You durst be bad, and yet improvident, And so it is not Fortunes, but your crime. Which shall I first beginne to blame? your fault Or (pardon if I call it) Foolishnesse: I faint to thinke, that you are past excuse, Both with the honest and the Politicke. Sf. Come neerer, my deare Cardinall, and tell In easier termes what tis that troubles you: Is Galeazzo's death divulg'd? Asc. It is: The time, the manner, and the murtherer, Nor am I free from th' imputation. Sf. You speake what you suspect, not what is true, Dos speech come frō the dead? can their dry'd nerves Borrow a tongue for accusation? This is no other then the voice of Guilt, The speech of our home-executioner: And yet I feare— and yet what should I feare? Bloud hath strange organs to discourse withall, It is a clamorous Oratour, and then Enter Sanse∣verin, Hal∣berdeers & Vit. Even nature wil exceed her self to tell A crime so thwarting Nature Sans. My good Lord, Pardon the zeale of my intrusion, I bring hid danger with me: 'twas my chance As I was passing to the bedchamber,
Iust at the doore to finde this muffled man, Waiting some trecherous opportunity. Each circumstance swell'd with suspition, The place, the time, the person, all did seeme To beare a danger worthy of your feare, At least your wiser disquisition. Sf. Thou art all goodnesse, and deserv'st of us Beyond the niggardly reward of thankes: But what are you that thus becloud your face, Who not unlike that over-bashfull fowle, He dis∣covers himselfe Delight in darknesse? Ha! Vitellio! The wonder is resolv'd by a new wonder. Ex. San. Vit. Sforza I live: doe ye stare? I live: these words Are not the fond delusions of the Ayre, As you officiously would gull your selfe; But from a solid substance, had not we Ent. Sans. with 2 Negroes. Bin by your diligēt spy too soon surpriz'd, Before our projects full maturity. Thy death more fully should have prov'd my life Sf. Foole that I was, who thought to take thy life By that which nourisht it: there's none so mad Would poyson Serpents, Ile worke surely now. Once more Iletry your immortality. Strangle the Monster. Vit. 'Twas a doubtfull chance within this houre who first should own those words But, Tyrant, weary thy invention To finde variety of punishment, Yet all that thou canst doe, exceeds not this A pinne could doe as much: weake, silly Sforza. All thou canst doe to me exceeds not that Which I did on the person of thy Prince: Disease would prove a better murtherer. Sf. Stop that malignant throat. — O my Ascanio,
Thus must they toyle wch work an hight by bloud, How I could wish an innocent descent To new subjection? how I hate that wish! How scorne all thoughts that have not danger in them! Get us more Remora's, sweet Cardinall, Or rather then to droope to Idlenesse, Wee'll worke to be no Prince, our selfe re-calling: In rising, most, some wit there is in falling. Scena tertia. Cajazzo. ASsist me, Hell, for I intend an Act, Which should your puny fiends but think upon, Would make their blacker cheeks receive a blush, Would give a rednesse which your weaker Fire Had ne're that heating pow'r to worke in them: An act, the Heav'ns did onely then declare They would permit to be perform'd by man When they created Night: for were all Day, Could such a Crime be as well seene as done, Their Immortality might justly feare, Lest all the guilt should be remov'd on them, As Idle, or as Cruell lookers on, Whilst heav'n on Earth did suffer: this blacke night Must Isabella dye, dye, by this hand: This Chappell is her ordinary walke, Discover'd to me by her Iulia, Where when she comes to see her husbands tombe, This hand shall make her fit for such a roome.
Enter Isabella and Julia with two torches, she pla∣ces them at either end of the Tombe, & Exit. I∣sabella drawes towards the Tombe, and speakes. Is. PRince of shades, (for unto me Still thou keep'st thy Majesty) If thou art not wholly lost, And there's something in a Ghost: Heare thy Isabella's vow: If hereafter I allow Of a second match, or know Any man, but for a foe, Saving him that shall ingage His revenge unto my rage: (Heare just heav'ns) may I then be Made another Ghost like thee, May I dye, and never have What I visit now, a Grave. Caj. O doe not heare her Heav'n, & kill me straight If I dare touch her: he that sees those eyes And dares attempt to make those eyes not see, Has a blinde soule: burne clearer, you kind lights O doe not envy me the sight of her: But what's there in a sight? I must be briefe, If not for love, yet for ambition: Her Mariage makes me greater then her Death, And she has taught me the condition. Pardon, bright Angell, and returne the sword, Which Sforza made me sweare to sheath in you, Into my bosome Is. No, obey your Prince,
If you have goodnesse in you keepe your oath, Murther is nothing unto perjury. Caj. By this faire hand you injure me, and more Then ever Sforza did: can you suppose (Though you had heard the vowes he forc't me to) I meant what I protested? that this hand Which ever yet has us'd a sword for you, Would use it now for your destruction. Revoke that thought, deare Lady, that harsh thought, And let not so much sweeter innocence Make it selfe guilty by suspition, Suspition of impossibilities. Rather command, and you shall quickly see That he, who would have arm'd me against you, Shall finde in his owne entrailes the just steele. Is. aside. What traps are these to catch the Innocent? Sforza I smell your project, 'tis too ranke. My Lord, no more: your speech is dangerous, I must not heare it. Caj You shall see it then: Doe not beleeve me Madam till I've done, Till I doe bring my credit in my armes, The Traitors head, and when you see that time, Confesse you owe your life unto my crime. Scena quarta. Picinino, Iuliano. Iul. WHat will become of this declining State? Can we beleeve that the yet patient heav'n Will any longer suffer? and not give Destruction as notorious as our crimes. Awake, sterne Iustice, and unsheath thy sword.
The Scabberd will not heale us, but the edge, Nor is't enough to brandish, but to strike: Let then thy terrour give us innocence, That mildnesse may no longer injure man. Pic. Why, thou perpetuall Murmurer, thou sea Tost with eternall tempest, thou darke sky VVith everlasting clouds, thou—any thing, VVhom, being angry I can call no more: Thinke better of those acts thou canst not mend. VVill Sforza be lesse bad, because thou whin'st? Or dost thou thinke thy pittifull complaints Can beg a goodnesse of Ascanio? I never knew that mighty use of teares, That they could wash away anothers fault: VVhen thou shalt want a teare for a fit griefe, Sanseverin will be a Coward still: And when thy groanes are turn'd to thy last gaspe, Cajazzo will not be lesse trecherous. Enter Sanseverin, with divers suitors following him, some of whose bils he teares, others laughs at, others puts up.Exit. Iul. Now for thy thunder, heav'n, now now for a piece Of thy most eminent Artillery. Are you still silent? see, he teares their papers, Papers, perhaps, wherein they worship him, Give him more titles, then they give their God; And yet he teares them. O vast Favourite! Swell'd by the airy favour of thy Prince, Till thou hast dimm'd the light that made thee shine, Till Sforza's lesse then his Sanseverin. Tell me, good Picinino, does the Sunne Spend all his rayes upon one Continent? Or have you ever seene the partiall Heav'ns Vpon one Acre lavish all her showres
While the rest moulder with dry barrennesse? Pic. I have not, Iuliano, but what then? Iul. Are you to seeke for the collection? Why, has not Sforza made himselfe our Sunne? Are not his favours our refreshing showers? Why should one suck up what is due to all? Why is the Prince made a Monopoly? Pic. Thou mak'st me laugh at thy fond question: What? are not Princes men; of the same mould, Of the same passions with inferiours? Doe not they feare, desire, and hate (as we) And shall we onely hinder them from love? Coblers may have their friends, & why not Kings? Because th'are higher then the rest of men, Shall they be therefore worse? and therefore want The Benefits, because they have the Rule? O hard condition of Majesty! The former accusation of Kings Has beene their cruelty, that they did hate The people they should governe: O hard plight! O strange perversnesse! shall their love at length, Their frindship be imputed as their fault? Would Heav'n our Sforza had no worse a crime. Enter Sanseverin againe with his traine of Suitors. Iul. You are a worthy Advocate, and here Comes your great Patron: goe and aske your fee. Sans. This is a sawcy importunity: You have your answer. 1 Sutor. O my gracious Lord, Looke on these scarres I gain'd in the French war, Where I have lost my Fortunes, 2 Sutor. So have I,
Scarce left alive to tell my misery. Sans. You have bin drunk, and quarrell'd—must the State Find plaisters for your broken heads? — no more — Nay if you'll take no answer, I must call Them that will drive you hence. O my tir'd eares! Henceforth I vow to stoppe them at your suites, And be as Deafe, as you are Impudent. Exit. Iul. Yes, do, good Aeolus—how he blowes thē hence! How cleares his passage with a lusty frowne! And yet it may be that despised wretch Worne out of cloathes, and flesh, whom his high scorne Would not vouchsafe once more to looke upon, Durst in the field doe more, then he durst see, Then he would there vouchsafe to looke upon, Pic. As if that Valour were the onely praise, And none were to be lov'd, but they that fight: Where were we then? what would become of us? Thou think'st it paradox, but is most true, A Souldier is the greatest enemy, Of whom the Common-wealth can be afraid, Preferre you which you please; yet unto them Which are the sole Physitians of State, Who with the teeming of a pregnant braine, Search the diseases and the remedies, Valour is nothing but a desp'rate vice, And there's no safety, but in cowardice. Scena quinta. Sforza, Ascanio, Malvezzo. Sf. WE are not man, for such an empty thing Could not have this solidity of joy:
Say the French King is dead, and say withall We are immortall, and ones happy truth Shall expiate for the others flattery. But speake the maner too as well, as death. Asc. When now his gadding thoughts had won the world, And Italy was to be taken in But onely as an easie seat, from whence He might derive his further victories; Ottoman quak'd, & 'twas in chance, if now New Rome, should be new French, and the proud Turks Be brought to know what their beginnings were: When Fortune had advanc'd him to that height, That growne forgetfull of a lowly tombe, He rear'd huge Pyramides, and troubled Art To match his fancy with magnificence Fit for a conqu'ring builder, who had learnt To ruine first, and then to build a City, When Marbles were to be inricht with wounds, And cut for their advancement: thē, Heav'ns sport, He rais'd competitors to dare the Heav'ns: Nor dreames his owne descent into low Earth. Sf. Ascanio, you make him live too long, Tell how he di'd, without more circumstance. Asc. He went (such was his use) to see the play At Tennis court, when by his trembling Queene He sanke into halfe-death: thence he's convey'd To the next roome, where on a couch of straw, As if a downe-bed were too soft for him, Whom rottennesse attended, and the grave, That harder lodging of Mortality, A King, a conqu'ring youthfull King expires. Thrice from deaths slumbers he awak't to speake, Thrice did he cry to heav'n, unto deafe heav'n,
And after nine houres death he dy'd. Sf. I find A certaine grumbling against Fortune here: Which that I may whet to a lively rage, Repeat Malvezzo her last trechery Against the French, and Neapolitan. Mal. Naples now wonne, and the unstable French (As if they were afraid of their owne lucke) Ridiculously leaving what th'ad wonne; The Deputy was Mompenseer, a man Of an high birth, but of unequall deeds. For when yong Ferdinand with some few boates (Which onely feare might make a Navy of, And nothing but the strength of cowardize Could possibly judge strong) approacht the shoare, As if the poore Prince once more had desier'd Onely to see his ancient government, And therefore had adventur'd to the Sea, The Sea was in the City, for ne're was Such a confusion in the vulgar waves, All cry a Ferdinand, a Ferdinand, Ev'n those who latley banisht Ferdinand: Part ope the gates to him, and part shut up The French into the Cattadells, where he Besiegeth his once Conquerors. Sf. Tis true Not the world onely, but a man's a ball, VVill Fortune never leave her tossing him? Mal. VVhether their owne neglect forc'd them to want, Or want to yeeld, 'tis doubted: but they yeeld: Thus as in triviall sports we oft have seene After too tedious inconstancy, The Corke returne to him that strucke it first, So in this fatall revolution,
Fortune gives Naples unto him againe, Whom she first injur'd in the taking it. Sf. VVho hearing this would not erect his soule To a contempt of Fortune! that blind wretch VVhom onely sottishnesse hath deifi'd? Man hath a nobler Godhead in himselfe, His vertue and his wisedome, unto these Bend all our knees, let us still honour these: And count it comfort in our lest state, He that is wise, would not be fortunate Exit. Actus quarti Scena prima. Sforza, Ascanio, Cajazzo, Sanseverin, a Boy. Sf. WE leave it to your care, Sāseverin; But see, the night grows old, good rest my Lords, Ex. VVhy stayst thou, my Aurelio? good boy Ile see no bed to night; then goe, yet stay, If they have not escap'd thy memory Sing me those verses which you made to sleepe. Song. HOw I laugh at their fond wish whose desire aymes no higher Then the bayts of Midas dish? VVhat is Gold but yellow durt? which th' unkind heavens refin'd
VVhen they made us love our hurt. VVould to heav'n that I might steepe my faint eyes in the wise, In the gentle dew of sleepe? VVhose effects doe pose us so, that we deeme it does seeme Both Deathes brother and his foe. This does alwayes with us keepe, and being dead that's not fled, Death is but a longer sleepe. Sf. Pretty Philosophy! goe boy, goe sleepe, Ex. Enjoy the good thou sing'st—this boy can sleepe, Sleepe quietly, and sing himselfe a sleepe: Making that gentle Rest unto his Song. But Ile goe read: what have we here? a Map? VVelcome thou lively picture of the world: Now Ile peruse my large Dominions, VVhat a vast compasse they doe fill in thee? How Poe is wearied with his tedious course, But running onely through our Continent? Ha! where is Poe? which is our Continent? If that my eyes deceive me not, I see My Empire is compriz'd within my nayle: VVhat a poore point Ime Master of? a blot Made by the swiftest tincture of the Inke? But what did this point cost me? this small blot? My innocence, my conscience, my soule; I kill'd a Nephew, to obtaine this blot? O horrid purchace! all this toyle, this guilt For so despis'd a Nothing? let me see,
Here is no roome to sit, to walke, to stand, In all my land I cannot place my selfe, Nor be at all, where I would be the Duke, But the sad tapers doe deny their light, And stranger fire supplyes an horrid day Of Lightning: help us, heav'n, make us cōfess, There is a Power in your Mercy too. Ascendit Umb. Gale. Umb. Is then a time, when all our time is spent That thou of us shouldst feare a punishment? O happy purchas'd privacy! to have The free possession of an humble grave, VVu't poyson us from that? why startst thou so? VVe doe not shunne a kinsman, but a foe: Beleeve it Sforza, I am a neer ghost, Nor is our kindred by thy murther lost: Rayse thy cheer'd looke, see Galeazzo here: Traitor, and coward, does thy faint breast feare The shadow, which is made? or is a soule Vncloath'd of Earth, more abled to controle Him that uncloath'd it! Then I see to dye Is more to right then suffer injury. Know I am still thy prince, and if that man In such a Miracle of villaine can At last be found, in this thy manhood show That thou darst heare thy doome of overthrow. Sf. Villaine be dumbe: we are too tamely mild That dead men dare affront us, assume flesh, And we will make a second ghost of thee. Umb. Thy threats are Ayre, like us: but to goe on: In curse; now that thy wisedome hopes upon A joy in unmolested royalty, Now shalt thou have onely a certainty Of high unhappinesse, and be undone,
Losing thy rule no better then twas wonne. Fetters shall bind thy legs, not Crownes thy head, And as a curst beast is prohibited From common shew, so thou, of beasts the worst, Must die imprison'd, and, what's most accurst, Obey to death, all comforts tane away, Rob'd of the light, and the sweet heav'n of day: Then flatter not thy miseries, to know Is not to hinder Fate, fall shalt thou low, Sinke to despaire, despaire to nought, and dye, Then lower fall, and then as low as I. Discen. Umb. Sf. Sinke into earth, and doe not reach thy hell, Propheticke bubble: might thy threats prove true, For we could wish the death that thou foretell'st That our feirce shadow might pursue thee still, To fright thy Ghost to nothing: O weake Heav'n! VVas this a terror for a man? to send A Bug-beare, fram'd out of the empty Ayre. This does confirme, not fright us: this might be A terror to my picture, not to me. Scena secunda. Cajazzo. Cai. IT must succeed: Fortune may shew her spite, Her pow'r she cannot, in the houre I'me made A Princes Lord, or murtherer: I've plac'd Close at the outward doore, Sanseverin, That if successe doe crowne my hopes, his cares May give me safety, with my happinesse, That I be not surpris'd: but if I faile I have injoyn'd him on the noyse he heares, Straight to go call the Duke, & enter hither. Ent. Is. Madame, tis done: and now the guilty head
(VVhich whilst it stood, made all to feare their heads, VVho durst affirme it did usurp a crown,) Most humbly bends, and offers it to you. Is. VVhich I accept: but for no other end Then to revenge his death, base wretch on thee: If that head be not planted there, 't shall off: You shall injoy your Masters death Caj. How's this? Is this a love tricke, Lady? I had thought After your thankes parted twixt heav'n and me, You would with greedinesse have giv'n you selfe To him that gave you your desires: Is. Fond thought! Dost thinke Ide love a man that kils a man? Make him my Prince, who hath dispatch this owne? VVas Treason euer Preface unto love? Hadst thou monopoliz'd perfection, And shar'd a thousand Cupids in each eye: I would contemne the proudest of their shafts, And give thee onely what is due, Disdaine. Caj. Youle urge me to just vengeance; doe you heare Madam ingratitude, quickly professe That this harsh language was but a wise baite, To make him faster, who was sure before, Or I professe Ile joyne your death with his VVith thy loath'd Sfroza. Is. I beleeve thee now And trust me, so beleeve, that I could thanke thee, I love thy cruelty, though not thy person. Caj. Hath death so little horror? well Ile doe VVhat shall inforce you to desire a death. This ponyards point shall naile thee to the earth Strucke through thy armes: where doe not hope upon A noble ravisher, my swarty slaves,
Slaves hated of their fellow-Black a mores, Shall on thy Honors ruine tyre their Lust, And kill thee in thy loathfull suffering. Ent. Sforz. Sanseverin. Belgiosa. What dare you struggle? Is. A rape, a rape. Caj. O my good Lord, you come in such a time As I could wish for, for this houre or more This wicked woman hath beene wooing me, To murther your most sacred Majesty, And for reward hath promis'd me herselfe, Together with the Duchy: my good Lord, In detestation of such trechery, I gave her some harsh answers, with which mov'd, She us'd a womans craft, and cry'd a Rape. Sf. Is this truth, Isabella? see, shee's dumbe: Have I then liv'd to have you seeke my death? A Cosin-Traitor? yet you shall not dy, Nor know another prison then my Court, I love to see my Murtherer: O heav'ns! Why, should I feare to kill her? yet tis reason: Who is no true Prince, can ne'er punish treason. Caj. And I shall take you at your word, deare Sf.Ex. Scena tertia. Iuliano, Picinino. Pic. IT cannot be, good Iulian, no more: I doe not love these over-earnest dreames. The French invade us? when their jolly King With limber staves does onely mocke a warre, VVhich like so many reeds against a stone,
Punish their owne attempt with their owne ruine, Breaking themselves, not armors: when we know The Court is lost in Maskes, reality Is so farre fled since the last victory, That we may thinke the Court it selfe a maske. Aeternall Musicke, revells without end Tire the too-much delighted souldier, Whose armes have now forgot their ancient use, His spirits onely active in his heeles, And canst thou thinke theyle dance to Italy? Iul, I've heard some tell that a great City once Was built by Musicke: would we might not find Our Country to be ruin'd by a dance: O feare the toying of an enemy. Pic. What cannot be beleev'd, cannot be fear'd, Iul. Youle not beleeve, not you, till the French swords Dive to the bottome of your doubting heart, Till that th'unkinder newes is brought so neere, You cannot have the power to beleeve it. Ent. San∣sever. with sould. Can you beleeve this is a drum that beates? That this is the couragious Generall Can you beleeve, that he beleevs 'tis true? Pic. But who assists us in this dreadfull time? Iul. As many as we have deserv'd: not one: Sforza has too much wisedome to have friends. Pic. And we have too much—I said nothing, did I? I did not speake against the State, I hope? Nor said that we had too much patience? Iul. Is Picinino then ore come at last, Now I could change my sorrow for a smile. Pic. I must confesse an anger though not griefe: O how I love to fit me to mischance! And whē that has no reason, thē I'me mad. Why should our Millan blood staine the French swords
Vnto a glory? Sforza does offend, Deny's the heav'nly pow'rs, or names them then, When he does dare them with bold perjury, Loades his blacke soule with murther of a man That could have made his execution, justice. This Sforza does, but what is this to me? Why shall this throat be cut for his? why thine? Why shall our Countryes ruine fill his penance? The heav'ns doe know no meane, but either wast Their benefits on dull ingratitude Or throw away their thunder, so it hit, So it not faile, they care not whom it strike, Whether the guilty, or the innocent. Iul. This is a griefe of higher fault then mine, You make a warre with them you should appease, And vrge the heav'ns to our calamities. First we were punisht with, and now for Sforza, Could any justice have more method in't. Pic. Well Iulian, I'm sorry for my griefe, And so perswade thee to that holy truth, I now could rave against my selfe, not heav'n, But tis as fruitlesse, as to wish good lucke: Then let the French presse upon victory, Let them amaze the Ayre with stranger fire, Rais'd by our Cities flaming Funeralls, Swell they the Poe with blood, act o'r, what ere Has beene the brag of royall murtherers, Yet our defence is here: Fortune may faile But our true soules shall never, we may lose An aged life, but not Aeternity: And with this strength the field must needs be ours Who doe not feare, doe beate the Conquerors.
Scena quarta. Sforza. Ascanio. A Guard. Sf. WHat noyse is this that from a forraign foe Recalls our anger? yet our purer hands Know not the dy of blood: we should be loath To learne a valour on our subjects first. 1 Nunc. The people now have rav'd to quietnesse: But till that Landriano, whom you us'd About the last taxation, was become Their rages sacrifice, I durst have sworne The French were in the City. 2 Nun. This sad houre (I'me sorry that you heare this truth from me) Your Duchesse is departed. Sf. VVhither villaine? 2 Nun. To that free Crown, where she shall feare no French, To Heav'n. Sf. O envious heav'n! why doe you give Men such hard precepts of mortality, And take them hence before that they can learne? Must not she live, because she liv'd too well? Alas my wife! Asc. Alas my sister, ô! Sf. VVho dar'd that groane? good Cardinall, no more, I know not what I could deny to thee: Take to thee all for what the French so toyle, But kindly leave my griefe unto my selfe, 3 Nun. Pardon, my Lord, ill Fortunes eloquence, Vnlesse you heare you cannot cure your harmes, The French, now enter'd Lombardy, sat downe Before Valenza: where the mouth of Death,
The thundring Canon being scarcely brought, But just presented to the yet sound wall, Discovered there was some what more unsound: For Rattagnino, the false Governour Entreats a Parly, gives away the strength, Sweares the towne French, and gives the key to them, VVith which they open Lombardy. Sf. My fact; None can be guilty of this crime, but I: That after Treason durst againe trust treason. This very man, whose easie heart relents At a French death, and wisely is afraid His manners might be call'd in question, If he should put them off to sue againe, To aske the second time, for what he held: Out of his zeale to vertue, and good lucke, Did the like act for us, & gave a strength Ent Mal. wounded Wch al our Duchy never could have forc't. VVhat more revolting yet? Mal. O my good Lood! I feare this is beyond Addition. O my blood failes me, but my tongue does more, Fearing the story that it must relate. Your Army being parted, and this halfe Cajazzo leading, that Sanseverin, My troops did fall amongst the French mens scouts; From whom we learn't their numbers, & intents, To march with speed for Millan: this sad newes VVe sent to Count Cajazzo, with advice, That he would instantly rejoyne with us, To stop their further entrance: he pretends That the Venetians hemming in his campe Have made his danger greater: yet he moves, Makes to the river, and when now our thoughts
Had left their wav'ring, and did seeme assur'd His actions would be better then his words, I saw, O misery that ere I saw! That crossing o'r the Po he did embrace Those men which he in duty should have kill'd: (O tis this kils me, not my want of blood) I in just anger set upon the Reare, And after many vaine attempts, have brought My carkasse, to intreat for my revenge. Sf. This is conspiracy: Cajazzo false? Tell me that contradictions then are true, Tell me the heav'ns no more doe travell now Being growne inconstant to their motion: Or that the Earth pursie with too long ease Would with a walke at length refresh her selfe: Tell me that Princes may be fortunate, Those that like me are credulous: or if You'd speake of things more hard to be beleev'd, Tell me, there are, that birth of feare, call'd Gods, And if they be, that they doe thinke of Man: Tell me, O prethee tell me somewhat else, Or I shall thinke thee false, and not Cajazzo, But I do know thee true, know thy wounds true. And must conclude Cajazzo is most fals. Ent. San. Sans. To be o'recome, my Lord, is wretched chance. But not to fight at all will be thought crime, I n're durst thinke so to surviue ill lucke As to become the fatall messenger But I must say, I durst not fight, and more, I must intreat your cowardize, your foes Are strengthned with your Army (ô pardon me Let me not tell you (how) and all our troopes Have no pow'r left us but for a safe flight. Sf. I did expect this: was not man at first
Plac'd on this curious Theater, to see How he could act all parts: doe we not know What we can feare is nothing? providence Long since hath spent our feare; for a wise man, When he does found his happinesse, forecasts Mischiefs, that Fate had never practiz'd yet, Which if they happen, if they prove too true, They meet, not overtake him, and so find A scorne, because a preparation. I knew it might be thus, though I not fear'd, And know it may be better, though not hope: Yet let us ne'r despaire, nor by low thoughts Excuse Fate for her present injury, And when once more her favours we shall feele, Then say, that Fortune has no standing wheele. Scena quinta. Enter at one doore, Triulcio, Aubeny, Cajazzo: at the other, some Senators of Millan, who deli∣ver the keyes of the City. Sen. WE here presēt you with our keys, great Lords, Yet doe not thinke us cowards, who doe part So easily with that, which if we pleas'd We might, in spight of force, as easily keepe: We know your right, justice does ope these gates, And not your swords, nor our disloyalty; We leave a Traytor that hath first left us, And now are glad to entertaine our Prince. Triu. Is he fled then? O our unhappy sloath! Why ranne we not as well as we did fight? Are Cowards swifter then their Conquerors.
Above as in the Cittadell appear Isabella, and Iulia. Is. Doe not disswade me, Iulia, 'tis true I may escape, but whither? all is lost, In Naples we find France, as well as here. O who'od indure the tyranny of hope, That could so quickly gaine a liberty? If I but fall I'm free; ô Iulia, The greatest distance twixt my blisse, and me, Reacheth no farther then to the next earth. Can I behold in a perplexed flight (Of which I know no comfort, and no end) This my sweet infant crying for the food, VVhich I'me uncertaine where to beg for him? No, Ile descend, and if the greedy French VVill have our blood with our dominiōs, She comes down with some souldiers. Yet I shall joy to have a speedy end And call a nimble enemy, a friend. Tri. VVhat answer from the Cittadel? once more Give them a summons, if they yeeld not then Ent. Isabella Give an assault. Is. You shall not need my Lords, VVhat you could wish you have, most cheapely have The conquest of a woman; and a child. I'me Isabella, (let not that sad name Be ominous to conquerors,) and this This Pretty Infant, is my lucklesse child, Borne Prince of that, which you have made your prey. VVhy doe you one consult anothers face, As you would see, who could be cruell first? Be not at all, or if at all, to me. O doe not warre with infants! can these hands Deserve your feare or anger? these weake hands That cannot reach themselves unto their teat?
Who have so much of yong infirmity, They cannot lift themselves to ask you mercy? O let them have, because they cannot aske. How many dismall accidents may chance To take him hence, before he grow to man, And so excuse, and yet fulfill your purpose? O let disease be cruell, and not you. Tri. Madam, you shall be honourably us'd, You, and your faire sonne: take your liberty To chuse your owne free course: for this yong Lord, He must to France with us, where he shall learne The good of royall education: Where he shall know the happy difference Betweene a petty, and a kingly Court. Some waite upon the princesse. Is. O my starres! What have I done? ay me. I have betrayd, What Tyranny had left me, my sweet boy, For whom I never knew a griefe; till now; I brought him forth with pleasure, when I thinke Vpon this paine of parting: my deare child, O too too like thy mother; if thou chance To draw thy self unto that hated length, That thou arrive to the discretion To know, what by my folly, thou hast lost, Call it no more, ô doe not call it crime, No mother willingly would lose a sonne: Whilst in some darker cell I will intombe Thy ruines cause, where whatsoever teare Sorrow did once force, now devotion shall: That my new name unto the heav'ns may reach Whom misery the way to blisse did teach. Exit. Tri. Never till now had we the victory, And now no single one, this happy houre
Has gain'd a conquest for Posterity. They may be idle now, now the French youth May grow up without wounds, & at their homes, Steale to a private grave, no more being forc't To death, though by a glory; nay this Land May thanke us, for our thrift of victory, For lighting on this blest occasion, Which makes us need no more to conquer them: If heav'n continue us this kindnesse still, Wee'll measure out our conquests by our will▪ Actus Quinti Scena prima. Sforza, Ascanio, Sanseverin. Sf. O What is man? and all that happinesse That puffes him to security? to day One acts a Prince, and swell'd with Majesty Fills a proud throne, from whence the Multitude Thinkes he rules Fortune too, as well as them, Whilst she in just esteeme of her owne name, Makes him forgot, or odious, that none Can be so miserably fool'd, to wish His well-apparell'd misery: thus we That did enjoy beyond a Crowne, a braine Able to meet, or challenge the worst chance: Yet in the space of a few dayes, a space Of too short lasting to expell a man (By the most subtle fetches of the Law) Out of a false inheritance: we lost, We were expell'd out of a Monarchy; But does Fate make a stand at this? O no, She is not constant, no not in her curse, But giving most againe, which once was mine
She gives me too the capability Of a new curse. Asc. Of a new joy: for shame Give thankes at least for your felicity: Can you repine being cramm'd, and so deserve A bountifull unhappinesse? I've knowne Some that have long endur'd a tedious siege, Or a more tedious sicknesse, who have beene Forst to a lasting Lent, when they have come Or to their health, or to their liberty, Not dare to take the nourishment they might, Making themselves their sicknesse, and their foe: Is not my Sforza one of these? you grieve Because you have no longer cause to grieve. Sans. O I doe feare your griefe, that it does glance With a most undeserv'd disgrace at me; As if I were a-kinne unto the fault Of my false brother: O repeate that thought, It is no great thing I request you to, But trust unto the faith that you have found. Would I betray, and follow you? d'yee thinke, I'de be so mad to buy my banishment? No man would be unprofitably false, Nor I for any profit: speake your selfe If I have left you, when your Fortune did? Nay, then my love was greatest, when you least, I was your subject, when you were no Prince. Sf. Sanseverin, thy feare is too too fond, And like the people, the Authoritie, Who make an impious confusion Of an high birth, and of an higher crime: Who in a sawcy thwarting to their Prince, Count him still worst, whom he has made the best, As if we gave him, with his honors, crimes,
And made him vicious, when fortunate. No, let them spend their breath in idle talke, Count thee or trecherous, or cowardly; Whilst to thy Sforza thou art still the same, Most valiant, and with thy valour, wise, That by thy abstinence a while from warre, Hast sav'd us forces for a victory. Sans. The Subjects life lies in the Princes voice: Now you have cleer'd me I dare hasten warre, And wish more enemies, then cowards feare: That you may see, by my neglect of blood, (Which I shall onely love when shed for you) How slaunder was my most fear'd enemy. Sf. No more, my dearest frend: we lose all time Which we do save from fight; still there does flocke New forces to our Army, and the French Are now as much amaz'd, as proud before: We lately tooke the Swizzers into pay, Those that dare sell their lives to any cause, Whom Gold hath arm'd for me: if they proceed In their first heat, we winne: but if they faile We cannot be more wretched then we were: The vilest chance of lucke can make us know But an Addition to an Overthrow. Scena secunda. The Captaine of the Swizzers, with a Souldier, as a fugitive from the French. Soul. NOw w'are alone I dare reveale my selfe, I am not what I seeme, a Fugitive, But one that from Triulcio doe bring
Letters that much concerne you. Capt. What? to me? Letters unto his enemy? let's see:Ex. Soul. Expect an answer in my Tent.—What's here? Letter. THou Man of Action, whom th' Italians Feele their Achilles, both to wound & heale: Triulcio salutes thee: what is past, As past recall he will not mention, But for the future this; you ayd a man, From whom you cannot any way expect Reward, or Honour, such his poverty Both in desert, and meanes; but against whom? I will not urge they are your Countrymen, Partakers of the same sweet soyle with you, Who onely differ in their better choice: Yet so farre doe I prize your worth, to thinke, You have not put off Nature, nor have chang'd With your home-ayre your home-affections, That you are still a Swizzer: thinke of this, And that at other times twere shame to flye, Now onely flight shewes Magnanimity. Triulcio. What shall I doe? O I am lost in doubt, Nor know, what to refuse, or what to grant. Shall then the Swizzers to their valour adde A tainture of disloyaltie? to whom? Who can accuse us for our trechery? One that has patroniz'd it by his act: That hath betraied his Nephew: shall a man Be counted trecherous; that betrayes vice? It was a crime to aide him, can it be A crime to leave him too? O paradox!
Resolve me Goodnesse what tis best to doe: And that does whisper a dislike: for what, What goodnesse can there be in civill warre? When we shall kill them that were borne with us, When we shall make the Father dye his sword In the sonnes bloud, and strangely give a death To him, to whom he kindly gave a life, When the mixt bloud of the same Family Shall make a cruell incest: this we doe If we are honest: Ile learne treason first, And the most accurate sinne. Triulcio, Our Country calls us, and not thou, To be Dishonest then is the best honesty. Ex. Scena tertia. Picinino in his study, with a Deaths head & a Watch. Pic. THis is the summe, I can but be like this. After the prouder threatning of the French, After the sure impression of Diseases I can but be like this: then let me thinke What losse I have when I am made like this: This feares no French: a peece of ordinance Can breake, but not astonish this, no force Can draw a teare, no not a sigh from hence: And can it be a losse to be like this? O Death why art thou fear'd? why doe we thinke Tis such a horrid terror Not to Be? Why, not to be, is, not to be a wretch, Why? not to be, is, to be like the heav'ns, Not to be subject to the pow'r of Fate: O there's no happines but not to be. to the Watch.
But thou discloser of the stealth of Time, Let me inquire how much is worne away Of this sad houre: the halfe? O speedy time! That makst us feele, ere we can thinke of Age, Ere we can take an order for the Grave. Ent. Iul. Iul. What? deepe in meditation, noble friend? So studious of your Watch? alas good man, Thou needst not this faint helpe to guesse at Fate, These silver haires are watch enough for thee. Pic. I onely looke how many minutes hence Millan expires. Iul. O swift Arithmeticke, To summe by minutes our sad Duchies age. Pic. This Watch doth teach reall Philosophy, There is no tutor to this active brasse: What is a Kingdome, but a larger watch? Wound up by Fate unto some scores of yeares, And then it falls: good Iuliano list, Harke how it beats, how strongly and how fast, Beyond the motion of a nimble pulse. Who would not thinke this were a lasting noise? And yet it endes: after some date of houres The watch will be as silent as the head. O tis our folly, folly my deare friend, Because we see th' activity of States, To flatter them with false Eternity: Why longer then the dweller lasts the house? Why should the world be alwayes, and not man? Sure Kingdomes are as mortall as their Kings, And stay but longer for their period, Iul. I feare our Climactericall is now: When all professions turne to souldier, To that curst Art that thrives by Destiny. The sithes are straighted into swords▪ and th' Earth
Being not wounded is undone, where once Stood buildings, which an humble Poetry VVithout too bold a swelling might give Kings: VVhole Mines undone to beautifie one roofe, Now onely Desolation dwels: weake griefe, To say Corne growes, where once a City stood, That sustenance is there where no men are, This is a trifling, and halfe misery: Our Lands now onely furnish us with Graves, Can hide us, but not feed us; we would thinke Our Cities standing, though the buildings fell, If we had no griefe, but Fertility. Pic. But on what strength does Sforza still subsist Against so powerfull foes? Iul. The Emperor Has sold him some few Almaines, but his hopes Chiefly depend upon the valiant Swizze, VVho were the chiefe in his depression. Pic. Has his grosse braine not learnt the danger yet Of bringing strangers into Italy? He call'd the French to Naples, who have now Found Millan too: O what's the difference Betwixt a mercenary and a foe, But that we kill one for his outrages, And hyre the other? Iuliano, I May feele misfortune, but will never buy. Ex. Scena quarta. Sforza, Sanseverin. Sans. THe French are mighty, and portentously Rise by their fall: strong shame begets a rage, And a disdaine, that you whom they expell'd
Should hazard their expulsiō, makes them hazard, What ere being ventur'd, addes a fame to Man, And gives a glory to his misery. They are so farre from the base feare of death, That they embrac't, and like those fiercer curres, That spend their anger on the senselesse stone Not daring to attempt on him that threw, They with a senselesse anger breake the darts That naile them to the Earth, as if they scorn'd Their killer should survive them: other lets, As heat, or hunger are their exercise: That one would thinke they'd lost all part of man When they did meane to shew the best: my Lord, I wish a swift, but love a certaine conquest: I thinke twere wisdōe to protract the fight. know, Sf. I know thou speakst what thou thinkst best: but Tis wisedome to delay on equall fame: But when a foe has wonne opinion, Which drawes all eyes, and hearts to him, O then A valiant desperation fits a man: For victory is not impossible, And honour necessary: my best friend, Call forth our Swizzers, and if happy swords Though few, may cut a way to glory, come:Ent. Capt with Swiz. The purchase is above the pains: but here Come they that shall fill histories: brave friends Now is the time we shall imploy your swords, And teach the world your valour. Capt You may faile: 'Tis better to be wise: Sforza, I'm come To take my leave of you, nor shall much breath Be spent in ceremoniall complement, I am the French Kings souldier. Sf. Speake low,
Let not the ayre feele such a treason, know There is a pow'r above us, and that pow'r Thunders sometimes, I know, thou darst not stand In contestation with the pow'r of heav'n: Revoke thy words. Capt, Ile doe no miracles: My voice and faith are past. Sf. Yes they are past: Thou art made up all of disloyalty, Reason hath nothing of thee: yet relate (If thou hast any reliques left of sense, Ile not conjure thee by strange Honesty) Why dost thou leave the heav'ns, and us, and so For nothing dost commit a double Treason? Cap. Ile satisfie you thus, you see I do't: Srike up a march. Sf. Yet stay: what is the price That makes thee trecherous, Ile turne prodigall To buy thee to a vertue: stay: be rich, Without a curse, without a fault. Cap. Tis vaine, I'me deafe to Rhetoricke: yet say th'ast met With a good perjurer, my word is past, And to be twice a traytor, is a fault No sorrow can attone for: yet thus farre Ile straine my selfe to please thee, tis well knowne, Vnlesse you get unto Ascanio, Your hopes are at the last, but betweene you And him, the French have interpos'd themselves, Nothing remaines but that you trust to me, And in a Swizzers coat disguise your selfe, That you may passe their Army. Sf. O hard strait, Must Sforza impotently hide himselfe?
Or can a Prince be hid? I have oft heard Sparkes of Divinity adorne his face, To cleare him from the multitude: why then, Then being a Prince will make us be no Prince, We being betray'd by our owne Majesty. Yet off, ye envy'd roabes, fall to the Earth, O fall so low, that henceforth Man may scorne The labour of descent to take you up: On, on, ye happy roabes, that like good clouds Doe not obscure, but for a time defend The threatned Sunne, that he may after shine With higher vigour: I have heard of some, That weare their flesh with haire cloth for their crimes, As thinking to be good if they were rough, By such a wilde repentance: be it so; Ent. Triul. with the French. These robes offēded, thē there is an hope These ragges may expiate heav'n Tri. Brave souldiers, How we rejoyce we may embrace at last, Not with arm'd hands, without the guilt & shame Of civill murther▪ but are these the troupes That now must learne to use their valour well, To give a death without a prodigy? A conqu'ring cheerfulnesse adornes their face. These are not common souldiers: looke you pale? Then I must know the mystery. Cap. I'me betrayd. Tri. Yea I know all, but yet from thy forc'd tongue Will I extract confession; fetch a racke, To make him howle the truth he will not speake Cap. I can dare torments for wise honesty, But when you know as much as I can tell. Should I conceale't, all policy would judge, I did deserve the worst that I endur'd:
Who told you this was Sforza? Sf. O my braine! Must subtletie perish by subtlety? And our high wisedome finde a Conqueror? Make an end Nature, the great worke is done, Sforza is over-reacht—weake, childish rage: Is this to lessen, or make misery: Can passion loose us, or a courteous teare Wash off our fetters? if it can, poure eyes, Poure out wet comfort; if it can, refuse The curse of slumber, but it cannot, then Covet a slumber everlastingly, And be like me, imprison'd in your lids. Convey us quickly hence, kind friends, you know Sforza can never be a prisoner here, Convey us thither where we are no Prince. And must we wooe our Ruine? never man Is a true wretch, but when he loseth all, And wants the sad Election of his fall. Scena ultima. Iuliano, Picinino. Iul. I'Me lost in this confusion: one reports We have lost all, another instantly Kils all the French at once: thus ev'ry street Is filld with wondring people, some cry, Arme, Others runne crying, to perswade a flight: All have an earnest bus'nesse in the stirre, But in the helpe not any. Pic. These are they That if an happy messenger should come
With Sforza's victory, would pretend at least To be orecome with joy: the gorgeous wals Should shine with painted triumphs, & the French Should be againe vanquisht in pageant But if his fortune yeeld to the French force, What obloquy's will be enough for him? Disgrace will then be wit, and any braine Will venture on a Libell. Iul, 'Tis the use, The popular folly to admire events. And those low souls thinke that the sword is just, Proportioning the reason, by the end, Of the chiefe acts, of the best enterprize, And so by folly runne into a crime. Pic. No matter for their wisedome, were they good: O why are such term'd Innocents? but friend, What is our ayme? a flight our age denyes, And whither should we flye, but to the grave? O I have so much people in me too. Enter Mal∣vezzo. That I could wish thy company Mal. Good Heav'ns! Am I escap'd? may I stay safely here? My feare has left such neere impressions, I scarce dare thinke that this is Liberty. Pic. Noble Malvezzo, is there any hope? Mal. As much as in despaire: we are betraid, Sforza is made a prisoner, all's lost, And Millan, without blowes, is once more French, Pic. Now I remember what I dream't last night, (If it be safe to call a vision, Dreame,) I saw our Sforza in so pale a shape, That Envy never was describ'd more wan, Who frighted me with this relation.
STart not astonisht mortall: let no feare Chill thee to my pale image, but fixe here: Let thy once Prince be thy now spectacle, Whilst I the direst Tragedy shall tell That ever challeng'd wonder: briefly then I was betraid, betraid, and by those men By whom I conquer'd: tis an happy end To perish for, but never by a friend, This our first death: but then — O could curst Time Dare ever such a Minute, such a Crime? Then was I pinion'd, then these royall hands Were forc'd obedient to the base commands Of an insulting Conqueror, and knit Vnto a hated union; t'were fit If ever Heav'n shed teares, then to distill Mournings Elixar, though th' expence should kill The hopes of after Ages: but Heav'n smil'd Nor any courteous clouds were wisely pil'd Over the Suns sharpe beames, but they gaz'd on With the same visage of compassion As did my torturers, by whom I'me brought Vnto a place the which some shallower thought Has faint by term'd a prison, but to tell The truth of horror, t'was on Earth, an Hell: Darknesse so dwelt there, that I might be wonne To wish the cruell comfort of the Sunne, Which earst I rav'dat: twas a narrow cave, Form'd to the modell of a lesser grave, Or straitned Coffin, all was length, for they Left not the hight that I might kneele to pray, Was ever such a bed? could ever yet Cruelty boast of such a subtle wit To bury so! some that have entred Earth Alive, like me, yet by the usuall mirth
Of justice had their buriall with meat, As if't should be their punishment to eate, From which Ime barr'd, I had no food, but me, And yet a guest of famine; Courtesie At last ceiz'd heav'n, I dy'd, and so though late, I both appeas'd and triumpht over Fate. But where am I? what extasie was this? Iul How quickely we learne misery? no ghost Would have so courteosly relinquisht Hell To teach us happinesse: if a kind starre Had cast a Fortune on us beyond wish, We might expect the story from the starre Assoone as the deare benefit: but when griefe That against which we would seale up our eares, When that is meant us, we shall surely heare, Though heav'n doe straine for a new Miracle, So to amaze us to a certainty: Though rotten carkasses regaine a voice, And hell is bounteous of intelligence, To give us teares. Pic. Why, then an end to teares, Let's scorne the sorrow, which we owe to hell: How learne we the prodigious effects Of wise Ambition: for twere easie justice To ruine foolish usurpation, Heav'n needs not stickle in't: but when those men Who are as accurate, as bad, who can So shape their vice into a vertuous mould, That we repine at the accusers more, Then at the guilty: when that these men fall, Who then will call that wise, which he sees bad? Such wisedome made, and ruin'd him: then ye That dazle with your Majesty, and sit Too neere to thunder, and not feare it, know
Sforza, and learne a wise contempt of wisdome, Frailty attends your best, and strongest tricke, And there's no foole unto the Politicke. The Epilogue. SOme what beyond an end? and can there be Tediousnesse counted an Apology? It was prolixity of speech offended, And can that error by more speech be mended? Your patience stints the wonder: that is it Hath dar'd us to be publike, and to fit These times of tempest, with a blustering scene. If ought doe please, if we have hit the meane, That neither cloyes the Auditor, nor starves, Felicity hath crown'd us; if ought swarves From plausible invention, know 'twas it VVhich we intend, which is in stead of wit. Teares grace a Tragedy and we are glad To have the happy power to make you sad, Continue it, and our applause is high, Not from your Hand so much; as from your eye. To the Ambitious. TEll me, mortalls, if there be Ought beside stupidity Hidden in you at the least, If you are not all one beast
VVherefore doe you cloud your face If you want the chiefest place? VVhy doe you respect? O why? Not how good 'tis, but how high? VVould you all be Kings? ô vaine. This is but to entertaine Such desires, that you may feare, Lest the heav'n should lend an eare, Lest you have what you desir'd, And in your owne bogges be myr'd. Height is basenesse, if it be Level'd by Aquality, And the Earth were a plaine still, If it were but one great hill. VVould you all be Kings? as though Standing poole should wish to flow, Or a river make his plea To exceed into a Sea: As if of the stars not one, But should strive to be the Sun, Or the Larke would partner be In the Eagles soveraignty. VVould you not be mad to see, If a beast, a stone, a tree To the heav'nly powers ran Angry that they were not man? Nay in us consider well To what Monsters we should swell, If but any Part should be Of the Mans infirmity. VVhat should lead, or what be led, If the feet were made the Head? VVhat should speake, or what should see, If this itch of Majesty
Made the mouth, for being nigh, Beg advancement to the eye. Would you all be Kings, poore men! Wish, what you would wish agen, Which within your thoughts dares bide, And's not fearfull to be try'd. What's a King, consider well, But the publike Sentinell? But a Beacon, which we find Highly subject to the wind: And can any still desire To be worse, so he be higher? Are you weary of your sleepe, Can you count it blisse, to creepe, To take paines unto that height, Whence your fall may gaine a weight, Would you all be Kings? you may, Every man hath regall sway, And 'tis this the fault does beare, Not that he commands, but where. Doe thy thoughts rebell? would Pride Have thy worst acts magnifi'd? Does Ambition make thee flee To forbidden Sov'raignty. Know it is a braver way To forbid, then to obey: Know it is a nobler deed, To give over, then to speed. Were this all? would every one But command himselfe alone, But command his owne desire, From the thought of rising higher: It would not be a griefe to see An universall Monarchy. FINIS.
The explanation of the Frontispice. A Levite in his journey goes To wicked Gibeah for repose, VVhich is deny'd, but having found Another lodging then the ground, (Such is th' unkindnesse of their sinne) They make a prison of his Inne. From whence he shall not issue free, But by his wifes Adultery, So when from thence to hast he minds, Her dead before the doore he finds, VVhen to expresse their crime, and make The villaines at their owne guilt quake, Into twelve pieces he divides The body that was once his Brides, Now Gibeah is besieg'd, and though They twice have giv'n the overthrow Unto their betters, yet at length They finde Vice hath no lasting strength: For now their town's as hot as their Desire, And as they burnt in Lust, so that in fire.
THE LEVITES REVENGE. by Robert Gomersall. LONDON. Printed for Iohn Marriott.
THE LEVITES REVENGE: Containing POETICALL MEDITATIONS VPON The 19. and 20. Chapters of JVDGES. By Robert Gomersall. The second Edition. Printed at LONDON in the yeare M DCXXXIII.
TO HIS VVOR∣THILY RESPEC∣TED FRIFND, MASTER BARTEN HOLIDAY ARCH-DEACON OF OXFORD. WOrthy Sir; whilst others are ambiti∣ous of an honourable Dedication, I am thankfull for a friendly one, this in the meane time being mine happy advantage over them, that they expect, but I injoy a Patron. And yet I have not such a scarci∣ty of great names, to whom I might pretend with as good a confidence as the greatest part of VVriters, but that some of the higher ranke (to whom for their frequent courtesie I confesse my selfe an unequall debtor) might have expected, others almost challenged my Dedication: to whom I know no other an∣swer of more respect and satisfaction then this,
that I concluded the worke to bee below their notice, how much more their protection; and that I would have others to take notice more of my Friendship, then of my Ambition: But it may bee that some will conceive an Ambiti∣on in this Friendship, when I of such an infancy in study shall boast the favours of so growne a vertue, and intrude upon his fame. If this be an offence, I must professe I glory in it, this accusa∣tion I confesse and am proud of: such is the am∣bition of him that is enamoured on vertue, of the man who would bee indeared to heaven, whose desires would not be so good, were they not so high, and the Angells might have stood, had they never known another Pride. But not to insist on that (which neverthelesse I can never too much insist on, the remembrance of our friendship) to whom could I more fitly dedi∣cate a Poeme, then to him that hath shewed such excellency? or a Divine Poem, then to him that hath shewed such Religion in his compo∣sures? Of this truth Persius is a witnesse, whom you have taught to speake English with such a grace, that wee can understand when wee heare him, and find no one syllable in his Dialect offen∣sive either to the Elegant, or to the Chast Eare. Of this truth Iuvenall may bee a witnesse, whom though wee doe not yet heare in publike bet∣tering
his expressions by your exact rendring him, yet they that have injoy'd the happi∣nesse of your neerer friendship, confidently and upon the hazzard of their understanding affirme, that hee is farre unworthy of such an imprisonment, that hee should bee obscured by that hand which cleared him. But it is Di∣vinity that is the subject of these verses, and it is Divinity which is the exercise, and glory of your studies, which makes you an inhabi∣tant of the Pulpit, nay which makes every place where you will vouchsafe to discourse, to bee a Pulpit, for such is the bounty of your religious conversation, that howsoever the place may bee changed, the Sermon is perpe∣tuall. Sermons that at the same time make us devout and witty, which by first winning the Preacher, have the easier Conquest of the Auditory: who are never with lesse difficul∣ty intreated to their happinesse, then when they see they doe not goe alone. So that now when I consider what I present, and to whom, I beginne to suspect the lightnesse of my worke, and thinke I have some reason to feare the censure of such a Friend, to whom if I shall bee excus'd, I expect some glory from others, not because the Levite, but be∣cause
He was mine, to whom, having thus farre tryed his patience, I have nothing more to adde but this, that I am his, In all the duties of Affection, ROBERT GOMERSALL.
TO THE READER. REader, I must first intreat thy Patience, afterward thy Ingenuity; thy Patience, that thou wilt read somewhat before my verses: thy Ingenuity, that thou wilt not censure them the worse, because thou shalt finde them censur'd to thy hand. The purpose of this Poem is Religious Delight, which if thou shalt finde in any place wanting, or disjoyned, understand, that it was either not my intent, or mine Error. And yet I dare affirme no man shall be the worse by it, and that if there be any want, it is more of the De∣light then of the Religion: If I intended excuses, I could tell you, and that truely too; that these verses were not now first made, although they are now first published, and the Composure was a younger mans, though the Edition be a Divines. This I could say, if I thought Poetry incompatible with Divinity, if it were a serious truth, that God could bee onely magnified in Prose: But when I consider that Nazi∣anzen could be both a Poet, and a Saint, and that it was heresie that cast Tertullian out of the Church, and not his Verses, I dare acknowledge these for mine owne, and feare not to suffer in that cause, wherein those Worthies were so magnify'd: Especially, since these Essayes (which I feare their weaknesse will too strongly testifie) were not my study, but my Recrea∣tion, when in the vacations having for a time inter∣mitted my more serious affaires, I chose Poetry be∣fore Idlenesse; yet I have not chose Poetry with the
hazard of my Conscience, & so instead of a Divine have writ a superstitious worke; howsoever Malice or Ignorance may wrest a passage unto Popery, I meane that, where Abraham prayes for the victo∣ry of the Israelites: But besides that the Intercessi∣on is generall for the Church, which no judicious Di∣vine but will allow for Orthodox, it is made by him, whom a Popish Divine will deny at that time to bee able to intercede: there was no solliciting of him they saw not, and the holiest of the Patriarchs (as they will tell you) saw not God till after the Resurrecti∣on: I have the more fully exprest my selfe in this, because I would not be esteem'd as one of thē (wher∣of there is too great an harvest) who play the wan∣tons with Religion, that will halt betweene two par∣ties, and in spite of the Prophet, at the same time serve God and Baal, who like not Orthodoxe truth, unlesse delivered in hereticall tearmes, & so by a no∣table new tricke of Iugling, call that Pacification, which is Conspiracy, of whose proficiency in Religi∣on I can speake little; but this I may most confidently affirme, that (perhaps not after the Apostles mind, yet certainely in his words) they goe on from Faith, to Faith. Of this crime, and of the suspition of it, I trust I am sufficiently acquited: for other errors which Malice ond Curiosity will aboundantly mul∣tiply, I onely referre my selfe to the truely Iudici∣ous, who know that a good Poem is as a good Life, not wherein there are none, but wherin there are the fewest faults.
To my learned and high∣ly esteemed Friend, Mr. ROBERT GOMERSALL. HAd such a Labour in this jugling age Sought after Greatnesse for its patronage, Not after Goodnesse, I had then beene free To love thy worke, though not to fancy thee; But thou hast wonne me: since I see thy booke Aymes at a judging eye, no smiling looke. Greatnesse doth well to shelter errours, thou Not having any, fear'st no frowning brow, But wisely crav'st a view of his, that can Not onely praise, but censure of a man. Thou needst not doubt severer eyes, if he Adde but applause unto thy Poety. His workes such monuments of fame doe raise, That none will Censure if he once but Praise. Commend I would, but what? here's nothing knowne Can be call'd thine, when each hath claim'd his owne. Iove-bred-Minerva challengeth the wit. Mercury flyes and sweares he languag'd it. Thy Artes the Muses claime; the History Savours of nothing but Divinity, Transcrib'd from Gods records; then nothing's thine (But griefe for th' Levites sinne) since th' use is mine. But now deare friend, though this sufficient be To raise up Trophees, and eternize thee: Give leave to him that loves thee to desire To serve thee friendlike, though in meane attire.
The glittering starre that darts a glorious light Were lost if not commended by the night? So stands it with thy verse; I writing set Their beauty off, as Christall is by Iett. Nor doth it trouble me; since that my end Is not to be a Poet, but a friend. And yet perhaps these looser lines of mine May prove eternall; cause they usher thine. Midd. Temp. C. L. I. C.
Epitaphium Concubinae. Quae tristis ignes, Gibeah, passa est tuos, Cultrumquè sponsi, cujus amplexum petit Non unus ardor, ecce in amplexu perit, Non una facta victima, & multus rogus. Discant pueliae forma sit quantum Nihil, Virtus venusta est, pulchra mens solus decor. Englished thus. Who suffer'd Gibeahs Lust, and her Lords knife, Whom not one Suitor would have had to wife; By many Suitors perishing, here lyes, A not-one Coarse, and many sacrifice. O who would trust in formes, that houres impaire, Vertue's true shape, and onely Goodnesse fayre.
PSAL. 9.2. I will bee glad and rejoyce in thee, yea my Songs will I make of thy name, O thou most High. FAther of Lights, whose praises to rehearse Would pose the boldnesse of the ablest verse; Who art so far above what we can say, That what we leave is greatest: shew the way To my weake Muse, that being full of thee She judge Devotion the best Poesie, Teach her to shunne those ordinary wayes, Wherein the greater sort seeke shamefull praise By witty sinne, which ill affections stirres, Whose pennes at leastwise are Adulterers. O teach me Modesty: let it not be My care to keepe my verse from harshnes free And not from lightnesse; let me censure thus, That what is Bad, that too is Barbarous. Then shall my soule warm'd with thy sacred fire, Advance her thoughts, and without Pride aspire, Then shall I shew the glory of my King, Then shall I hate the faults which now I Sing,
THE LEVITES REVENGE. Canto. I. The Argument. The Levites Love, her flight, his stay In hope to bring his Runne-away: Gibeahs harsh usage, with the free, Vnlookt for old mans courtesie: Their base attempt, her wretched fate; This song to Time doth consecrate. WHilst Israels government was yet but rude, And Multitudes did sway the Multitude, Whilst all the Nation were so many Kings, Or else but one great Anarchy: Fame sings That there a Levite was (Levites may erre) Who had a Concubine, and doubted her. Durst Lust and Iealousie so high aspire To one that onely knew the Altars fire? Must he feele other Flames? to wanton eyes Must ev'n the Priest be made a sacrifice? Or hath he offerd incense so long time For Iudah's fault, that he hath gain'd their crime?
Appeas'd for sinnes to learne them? in times past Whilst yet the ancient innocence did last, Levi could kill a Ravisher, but now Levies base off-spring does not disavow To be a Ravisher. Perhaps to show His Grandsires bloody rashnesse, who would so Punish that crime, which some years past might be His owne, at least in his Posterity. For so 'twas now: the Levite loves, and more, Suspects at last, whom he did first adore: For Fame speakes hardly of her: but poore man Fame speaks no more thē thou should thinke: for can One that hath broke with honesty, be true To him that made her breake? or else are you The onely Tempter? does there no blood boyle Besides the Levites? can they onely toyle In sinnes, that preach against them? if they can, Yet such as she are made for every man. What none can challenge his, is due to all, Lust should not imitate a Nuptiall. She now suspects her Levites jealousie, And hasts home to her fathers house: ô why To goe or come againe couldst thou dispense, And bring not backe againe, what thou broughtst Was then a Father to be visited When thou wert made a Mother? what hope bred thence? That madnesse in thee, that unto a mild Father, thou shouldst be welcome for a child? But unto whom wouldst thou have welcome beene? A Father? 'tis the nature of thy sinne: To make them doubtfull: they that live like thee, Asham'd of nothing but of modesty, Banish themselves from all, but their deare sinne; And lose at once their vertue, and their kinne.
But when the Levite saw that she was gone, That she was lost, whom he so doted on, Reason almost forsooke him too, to prove Anger can blind a man as well as love: It may be Israel was holy then And sacrifices for the guilty men Came slowly in, this might increase his griefe, And be an accessory, if not chiefe: This might confirme him in his angry sinne, Rob'd of his profit and his concubine. But hee'l not lose her: wilt thou seeke her then That does fly thee? that to an host of men Hath giv'n thy due? as if she meant to try Which were the most unvanquisht luxury Of Priest or people: whom if thou shouldst finde, Thou hast not yet recovered her lost mind, That wanders still, and wilt thou fetch her thence To try, or else to teach thee Patience? Can she teach any vertue? can there be Ought learnt from her besides immodesty? All that this journey can effect, that thou Can'st promise to thy selfe, if thou speed'st now, Is, that shee'l lose the bashfulnesse she had, And onely prove more confidently bad. You now may thinke him neere his journeyes end, Where long before his thoughts had met his friend, Scorning his bodies sluggish company, And now both are arriv'd, where to his eye She first appear'd, for whom alone, I find, He thank'd the heav'n that did not make him blind, For which he should have thank'd them: he had been Then nor a Lover, nor a Priest: no sinne Had crept in with the light, nor ever made In that good Darknesse, an unhallowed shade
But who had seene him when he first descry'd Who'twas that met him, how he slipt beside The wearied beast, and with full speed did run As if he meant to tempt temptation; He would have judg'd that women strongest were, And men object the weakenesse which they are. Thus when he should wisely have understood, And thank'd the kinder heav'ns, who made him good Against his will almost, having remov'd That which did hinder him from being belov'd Of God, and goodnesse, not unlike the Fish Which seemes to be desirous of the dish, (As if for his delivery he did waite, And therefore were ambitious of the baite:) Into a knowne snare, he does gladly run, And foolishly pursues, what he should shun. And is not this, Ide know, the readiest way To make God thinke, we mocke him when we pray? When we pretend desire, that we may be, As from the Fault, so the Temptation free: Whilst (as we had not knowne what we had said, Or hop'd, that God observ'd not how we prai'd) Lest that we should receive our hurt from farre, We both the Tempted, and the Tempters are, And thus the holyest name we take in vaine, Praying as never meaning to obtaine. And now her father comes, who after words As kind and elegant as that place affords, Intreats her pardon: but alas, good Age, Who shall intreat thy pardon, or asswage The Levites passion now? who does averre, That he alone does sinne, who taxes her: With this he smiles on her, and yet does feare Lest she should thinke that this a Pardon were,
Or reconcilement: without much adoe, You might perswade him now he came to wooe, And not to fetch her backe; but by the hast Of carrying her from thence, fearing the wast Of the least minute, she might well descry, What ere his words, his deeds spoke Iealousie. Hardly he condiscends to one nights stay Though 'twere with her: but how he spent the day, How his desires were speedier then the Sunne, (Whom then he thought to creep, and not to runne) Twere tedious to relate, though the old man With all the Art, and all the Cheare he can, Detaines him three daies longer, which appeare As long as fancy can extend a yeare. Minutes are Ages with him, and he deemes He hath out-lingred grave Methusalems Nine hundred yeare by such a stay, and feares That she may once more shunne him for his yeares. Sure such accounts the wise Egyptians made Who added wings to Time, as if he had Mov'd on too slowly, or as if they meant To take his fore-top from him, with intent To make him bald before too, whose records Had very neere as many yeares as words. Making full forty thousand ere the fall, And pu'ny Adam of no age at all. The fifth day dawnes, but ere the rising Sunne Had shew'd the victory which he had wonne Of cloudy night, before the sleepy Cocke Had prov'd himselfe to be the Country Clocke Shewing the mornings houre, when now we might Have spoke no falshood had we call'd it Night: Our Levite for his journey does prepare, And his are drest, ere Phoebus horses are:
To whom the Father comes, and gently chides His earely sonne-in-law, who, forst, abides Till after noone with him, and then he goes Not from the house so fast, as to his woes, Sure the old man did prophecy the harme, Which would insue, when he did seeke to charme Our Levite to a longer stay: but O Tis double misery beforehand to know We shall be miserable! then why hath man That curst ability, that well he can Prognosticate mishapps, when they are neere? And all his knowledge teaches but to feare. Which yet our Levite hath not learnt, who rides Doubting no danger: now the worlds eye glides To his west Inne, when Iebus he espies, Whom he counts his, because Gods enemies. Hearken ye Gallants that will crosse the seas, And are industrious for a new disease, If you will needs be gadding, and despise For forraine toyes, our home-bred rarities, Take this example with you, if you goe Travell not from Religion: why, although You never touch at Rome, or else perchance You scarce see Spaine, and gleane but part of France, You may be weary, thinke your travell great, And spare at once your conscience, and your sweat; You see our Levite though the night draw neere, His love be weary, and no towne appeare Where she may rest her selfe, although the way Were troublesome enough eu'n in the day, Yet he resolves gladly to undergoe More miseries then Night and danger know, Ere he will venture there to make his stay From whence the Idols had drove God away:
O farre unworthy of thy future Fate By this best Action! miserable state Of too great vertue ill-imploy'd! to be Punish't, when he did shunne Iniquitie, As he did Iebus. How he spurs, how rates His tardy beast! how his owne slacknesse hates? Which forc't him by his travelling so late If not to stay, yet to deliberate. Within the Center of the Earth there stands Neere to the fiery streames, and ashy sands, A dreadfull palace, of such uncouth frame, Each part so shap't as if twere built to shame All Architecture, that if one did see The vastnesse of it, and deformity, He would not make the least demurre to tell That 'twas a lodging for the Prince of Hell. What ere does beautifie a house, here wants, The walls are blacke as the Inhabitants, Made out of Iett, into such figures fram'd That Nature dare not owne them, nor be blam'd With so much Monster: we in doubt may call, Whether the trimming, or materiall, Had the more horror. No birds here are heard, But such whose harsher accents would have feard The most resolv'd: they punish in their rimes, And all their ditty does consist of crimes. They sly Praecisian that could gull the eye Of the most sharpe, by close hypocrisie, Whose mischiefes onely he that did, could tell, Who, we may thinke might ev'n have cheated Hell With such dissembling, sees his vices bare, Naked, and foule, as when they acted were: One layes oppression to his charge, another His sisters incest, murther of his brother.
They shew his zeale was onely to contend, And all his reformation not to mend But to confound the State, that his knit brow (Which lookt so sterne as it would disallow The most indifferent act, and like of none But such as did pretend perfection) Was but an easie Vizor, such as Rage Can give it selfe, and must receive from Age. That he did onely know externall Grace, And all his holinesse was in his face. Is goodnes in a wrinkle? can we finde That what does cloud the face, does clense the mind? To me it is a tricke of rarest art That hollow browes should have the soundest heart. These are the sounds, but then the smells are worse, Enough to make that Harmony no Curse. Vnder the walls there runnes a brimstone flood The top of flames, the bottome was of mud: Of such grosse vapour, that to smell was Death, Prisons are sweet, compar'd unto that breath. And to maintaine the fire and stench at once, The fewell is prepar'd of usurers bones, Loose Madams lockes, the fethers of their Fanne, With the foule inside of a Puritan. In this sweet place as sweet a Prince doth dwell, The chiefe of fiends, the Emperor of Hell Grand Lucifer, whom if I should relate In the worst figure that the eye doth hate: I should but faintly his foule selfe expresse, Nor reach unto his unpattern'd uglinesse, Death keepes the entrance, a tall sturdy groome. Who emptying all places fills no roome, But like the fond Idolater of pelfe, Denyes men, what he cannot have himselfe:
Here does this shade send challenges to all, Who would have entrance first to try a fall, They try, and they are throwne; ther's none so great But yeelds to him, who knew but one defeat And that long after, but his prime was now, His bones some marrow had, some grace his brow. No plagues as yet, no famines had beene knowne, The sword was thrifty, making few to groane Vnder his edge. Death yet had lusty thighes, Nor spent himselfe with too much exercise. Here there stand numbers, which exceed all sums (For they refuse none here, who ever comes) The murtherer first, and without much adoe. Sometime he will admit the murtherd too. Then the incontinent, but if that he Be knowne by Incest or Adultery His seat is chiefe: nor have they a low place, Who with an open and alluring face, Delude their trusting friends, till they have wonn Their deeper projects, which they built upon. The rest of lower crimes, whom we may call, Downe-right offenders, such as after all Their time of trespasse, have not gain'd the skill, And onely know the taint, not art of Ill: Have no distinguisht roomes, but venture in As headlong to their paines, as to their sinne, But now some other enter; for a charge Past from the Prince of shadowes, to inlarge Th' imprison'd Crimes, that they might all conferre (Such is his will) with their Lord Lucifer. What noyse there was? what striving at the doore? This would be first, and that would goe before: Pride claimes precedency, and cryes who ere Ventures to make a step before her there
Is impudently foolish, that the place Is hers by due, and onely theirs by grace, When she would yeeld it: unlesse first they would Bring more convincing reasons then she could: For who should to the Prince of Hell first goe To visit him, but she that made him so? And who had made him so, shee'd know, but she, When with his God he claim'd Aequality? Peace, wrath exclaimes, and with so deepe an oath As all those fiends, with Hell to boot, were loath To heare another such, he vowes no more To beare the bravings of that scarlet whore, Hee'l first a Rebell, first a Vertue be, And no more Wrath, but Magnanimity. She smil'd, and bid him be so, but whilst they Were hot in this contention, Envy lay Gnawing her breasts: faine would she have bin higher Had but her spirit equall'd her desire. But since she cannot be reveng'd of them, She useth an unheard of stratagem, Teares her owne haires, and her gimme face beslimes Thus punishing her selfe for others crimes. By this time Idlensse comes in the reare, As proud, thoug not as active, as they were; He scarce would take the paines to speake, but loth To lose his dignity by too much Sloth, He gives them these few words, Why strive you so About the place which all to me doe owe? Doe not ye know, I am the raigning Crime, Most generall, and most lofty of the time? I mak  Lawyer silent, though he see His clyent full; I am beyond a Fee: When Lawes doe not, I make the Preacher dumbe Ev'n when the Tyger, or the Wolfe doe come:
But above all, I in the Court doe grow, Beggers are proud, but Emperors are slow. Drunkennesse could not answere, but does thinke Twas fit that Idlenesse should yeeld to drinke: And reeling to encounter him, does fall Iust in the entrance, and excludes them all. Now is the skirmish hotter then before, Now Pride begins to scratch, and Wrath to roare; Drunkennesse lies unmov'd, and Sloths intent Is to sit still, and to expect th' event. But in this civill broyle, at last comes Craft Of whom no Painter ere could take a draft, He had such change of shapes, who when he saw These tumbling warriours, and that no awe, No feare of Lucifer could teach them peace, Hee'l try his skill to make these broyles to cease, Fie Pride, sayes he, What? give your selfe the fall? And Wrath are you no more discreet withall Then quarrell with a woman? Come agree, If not for feare of Hell, for love of me. But out alas, you doe too well agree, When Wrath is Proud, and Pride will Wrathfull be. Goe hand in hand (thus friendly Craft decides) Onely the upper hand let that be Prides. They enter the great hall, where they doe see The Hellish Monarch in his Majesty, Where having made obeysance, he beginnes, Thus to breake silence▪ and upbraid the sinnes. The reason why I call'd you (not to dwell On an unnecessay praeamble) Is to informe you, that we finde of late You have not beene officious to the State: 'Tis true, you bring me daily what's mine owne▪ And plentifully reape what I have sowne.
In the grosse Heathen you doe hourly cause Vices, which never were forbid by Lawes, Because ne'r thought of? but what's this to me, Whether that Lust or Infidelity Fill Hell with those, nay and oppresse it too, Which must come thither, whatsoere they do? You doe like those, who in the other life Buy their owne lands, and wooe againe their wife. A goodly act, and wherein's danger store, You give me that, which was mine owne before. Whilst Iudah all this while hath me withstood, And dares, when I forbid them, to be good. They honor Parents with a zealous strife, And with their goodnesse doe prolong their life. In them no malice nor no rancor lies, Nor shed they blood, but for a sacrifice: Adultery's scarce heard of in a life, And they're men onely unto their owne wife. In such a lou'd community they live, None need to steale▪ all are so apt to give. While you suppose that highly you deserve If you can say that you have made them swerve From goodnesse that ne'r had it: well y'aue done If that Semiramis once doate upon Her wondring issue, and begin to swell With such a birth, that would pose us to tell How she should call it; and what she did beare If it her daughter, or her granchild were, You have discharged your office, if you make Some bloody Nations their owne issue take And offer unto me; or if you draw Some to the practice of that wicked Law That after fifty they their parents kill, And not that onely, but suppose that ill
To be their duty. O fond thought! and thence Doe estimate their childs obedience. Hence truant Crimes, avant, no more appeare In my dread presence, no more let me heare Those petty actions, if you doe not straight Revenge my wrongs, and ease me of this waight, Which thus oppresseth me, if Israel still Shall dare to crosse what I shall call my will; By Hell Ile doe— but what? I say no more, If you are wise, prevent, if not, deplore. This said he star'd so fiercely that they fear'd He would performe much more then they had heard, Nor know they wel how they their tongues should use, Whether 'twere best to promise or excuse. At last Lust rises, and becalmes him thus, Why doe you loose your wrath, great Prince, on us? Vs your sworne vassals? who nor thinke nor doe But what your will is their command unto. What though w'ave spent our paines not the right way? Yet they were paines, nor can an enemie say But we were active Furies, and have done What lesser fiends durst not have thought upon. And yet (if that I may have leave to tell From your dread grace) preciser Israel Hath not escap'd us wholy, nor hath bin More noted for their Law, then tor their Sinne. Was that a Vertue too, when being led By Gods owne hand, and fill'd with Angels bread, They did, (I joy to caus't, but blush to tell,) They did repine ev'n at that miracle. Fasting and full they murmure, nor are lesse Angry with Manna then with Emptinesse. I could speake more, and truely: but in summe, To prove my past acts by my act to come;
If by your gracious leave, I have the fate To have a joynt commission with Debate, Ile make a fire within their blood to burne, Shall their proud Cities into ashes turne: And they shall know how foolishly they erre, Who are not willing slaves to Lucifer. Lucifer nods, and Lust does swiftly runne With his unlimited Commission: Which with what Art, what mischiefe he did use, Is now the griefe and bus'nesse of my Muse. But now she must to our sad Levite hast Whom we left trav'lling, when the day was past. The sunne sets over Gibeah; when that he Drawes neerer thither ward, but then to see The blush of Heav'n, with what a red it shin'd, (As if the Sun his office had resign'd Vnto those clouds) to all that understood, It would have shew'd that it did figure blood, And now our Levite is arriv'd, but finds The walls more courteous then the peoples minds: For these had gates which let him in, but they Were mercilesse, and rougher then the way: Men that had onely studied to oppresse, Whose mindes were shut against the harbourlesse: And yet he sees large houses, some so high As if they learn't acquaintance with the sky, What ever pleas'd their fathers now growes stale, Their buildings to the hills exalt the vale: And such thicke Palaces the mountaines fill, As if the quarry grew without the hill. Some are of that circumference you'd guesse, They had beene built for him, who had no lesse Then the whole world his Family. But when Our Levite was inquisitive, what men
Fill'd up that Princely dwelling; and if there Might be found hope of rest for them that were But two more then the Family; they tell That two are the whole Family, 'twas well, And stately too (as state is at this day) So might they live at home, and yet away, O the great folly of Magnificence! Houses are little Cities, and from thence Cities are lesser worlds, that man may have Roome enough here that cannot fill a grave. He must have Halls, and Parlors, and beside Chambers invented, but not nam'd by pride: And all this for one man, as if he sought To have a severall lodging for each thought, But none for any stranger: this truth seemes Too certaine to our Levite, who esteemes That pris'ners are in better state then he; Nay, ev'n the pris'ners of mortality, Such as are fast immur'd within the grave Who though they want a life, a lodging have. Inhumane wretches! have you then forgot That you were sometime strangers? Were you not In Egypt once? where the Propheticke land Did justly scourge your basenesse before hand, Knowing you would be barbarous, and so Made you to feele the harshnesse which you show. O cruelly forgetfull! that indure To act, or else out-doe the Epicure, Whilest he feeds on the Ayre; that thinke it meet To lye in Downe, while he lies in the street! An old man thought not thus, but to his house Intreats the strangers: 'tis malicious To lay the imputation upon Age That it is covetous (as if the sage
Haires of the Ancient were therefore white To signifie their silver Appetite.) Peace you blasphemers, see an aged man Covetous onely of a Guest, who can Repay him nothing, but his Prayer, and be Indebted once more for his Piety; But if my Muse have any power o'r time And sinne hath more mortality then rime, Old man thou shalt be ever old, and have No entertainment in the silent grave For this thy entertainment: here a while Let me admire how that a towne so vile, Which we would thinke with strangers had decreed To shut out Vertue too, should rarely breed Such a strange Vertue? quietly we heare Of courtesies in Rome; of kindnesse there Where Greece is nam'd, who counted it a sinne Not to have made each noble house an Inne For worthy strangers: but when one shall fall In commendation of the Canniball, Shall say that they, who on their guests doe gnaw And entertaine their strangers in their maw, Are hospitably minded, that ev'n there May be a mouth which is no Sepulcher: We stand agast, as if we did conspire Not to beleeve the good we did desire. Whence sprung this Singularity? whence came This worth which so deserves and conquers Fame? Our Vertues are not borne with us, and they Which will in noble man till times last day Live after them they make to live, what we Call goodnesse, is the gift of Company, Our study not ou Nature, and could these Teach any other thing besides disease
In manners? it is fit then we confesse Mercy is learn't amongst the mercilesse, And rather then a Levite shall want rest Avarice selfe shall entertaine a Guest. But now the Levite hath forgot that he Had left the hard streets hospitality; He finds such kindnesse, that he does suppose Courtesie wore no other haires then those. To grieve the honest world, who now might feare. That she was hasting to her sepulcher. Into an anticke roome he leads him first, Where one would guesse that Abraham had beene mirst Or a more ancient Patriarch, the walls Compos'd of that which from a wett shooe falls In weeping winter, which a man would thinke Their age had now dry'd up into one Chinke. Yet such a roome one comfort does afford, It was not built to ruine its sad Lord. For who will begge a Cottage? who would make A guilty wretch, that he his rags might take? To that whence nothing comes is no regard: None would be vicious too but for reward. No, let them feare who dwell in arched vaults, Who in much roome doe seeke to hide their faults. Where hundred columnes rise to mate the skie, And mocke their Lords with false Divinity. Envie is proud, nor strikes at what is low, And they shall onely feele who scorne her blow: She on no base advantage will insist, Nor strive with any but that can resist. Now is the table spred, and now the meat Be'ing set, each takes him his appointed seat: No courtship here is shew'd, no carving grace, The entertainment (homely as the place
Spoke onely hearty, and that plaine intent Which greater entertainers complement. So Abraham feasted heav'nly guests, as when He made the Angels eat the bread of men: So on the like guests, hospitable Lot Bestow'd the diet which they wanted not; In this ours differs, nay in this exceeds, That he bestowes his kindnesse where it needs. One would have thought so, when he heard the noise, Of confus'd multitudes, men mixt with boyes. All ages in the cry, as if they meant That now the Babes should not be innocent: Bees doe not murmure so, and angry hounds In their full rage send forth but easy sounds, Compar'd to this: their in land Sea stood still, Wondring to heare him selfe out-roar'd, and till This time, that noise hath such a silence bred, That ever since it hath beene styl'd the Dead. Now they besiege the house, and one would feare That their loud tongues so many engines were To batter it: downe with the Gate, cryes one, Another laughes at that, and with a stone Threatens to force a Gate, and deepely swore To give them entrance, all the House was Doore, But then another that would needs be wise, And counted chiefe in this great enterprise, Exhorts them to a Parley: Why, my friends, Make you such hast, sayes he, to lose your ends? Have you indented with the stones you throw To misse the Levit? Doe you thinke no blow Can fasten on him, or d'ye meane to prove If that the stones are rivalls in your Love? Stones and not men! with that the hands were still, But all the noise, the Hubbub, with an ill
Consent, cries for the Levite, whom they faine Would onely know, and so returne againe. And could you see him in the street so long, As farre from being hid, as this your wrong Shall be from after-Ages, when he had No cover, but the kinder heav'ns, (whose sad Compassion hindred them from shedding teares, Left such a griefe should make th' unkindnes theirs) Had you so full a view of him, and yet Doe you desire to know him? No, forget That ever there was such a one, and then Posterity may thinke that you were men: How will they wonder else, when they shall heare You lov'd him in the house, whom you did feare To bring into your house; that you were mad, In the pursuit of that you might have had? You ai'm'd another, a worse way, and just His answere is, that calls your Knowledge, Lust, But how, were they so long time innocent? How was this Prodigy of Desire ev'n spent Before it was exprest? here we may see In impudence there was some Modesty: They would not sinne at home, the worst abhor'd To be a beast, where he should be a Lord. And it seem'd better to the vilest breast Not to receive, then to abuse a Guest. Now the Old-man not fearing any harme That might ensue, whether he hop'd the warme Lust of their Youth, would by his Age be quelld, And that those flames would to such winter yeeld: Or whether he was then rather addrest To offer up himselfe before his Guest Vnto their Fury, forth he goes: they thought That now they should obtaine what they had sought,
Whom thus he does be speake; Have Patience My friends, I come, not to intreat you hence, But to fulfill your pleasure, onely change The Sex; I have a daughter, and what's strange In this hot towne, a Virgin: at your suite I am content to make her prostitute, So that my stranger may not injur'd be: Nature shall yeeld to Hospitality. O constant goodnesse! O best act, which can Conclude the Vertue, older then the Man! How I could lose my selfe in praysing thee, Man not of Age, but of Aeternity! Who didst respect thy guest beyond thy blood, And knew'st the difference betwixt Fond, and Good. Henceforth scorne all comparisons below, Onely thy Maker, thy Superiour know: Such was his Mercy that he did bestow His onely Sonne a ransome for his Foe; (This was a patterne fit for the most High) Yet next this Mercy, was thy Charitie, Thy Act in this is second to the best, Thou wouldst not spare thy Daughter for thy Guest. But they'l not be prescrib'd in their desire, Who thinke, to alter, were to quench their fire: They must the Levite or his Sister know, (For Sister they interpret her) to show Our sawcy Lay-men how they should expound Their Preachers actions, not to be profound To search their faults, but well and wisely too, Doe what they speake, and not speake what they do, This they exclaime, and this our Levite heares, Who now hath spent his Reason, and his Feares. Such a Confusion he is fallne into, He knowes not what to shunne, nor what to doe.
So in rais'd Seas, when that the angry wind Threatens destruction to that daring kind, Who to a flying house themselves commit, (Seeming at once to flye too from their wit.) The well-stor'd passenger, (when he does find That all this fury of the wave and wind Is for his Treasure) now resolves to dye: (Death is not so much fear'd as Poverty) And now resolves that he will venture on More losse, before that Resolution: He does from this unto that purpose skip, And now his minde more totters then his ship. Till after all this tedious, foolish strife, Which he shall save, his treasure, or his Life, He shall save neither; and thus being loath To hazard either, he does forfeit both And now she shall be Passive. O Fates sport! Hee'l now betray that should defend the Fort, Such Revolution did you ever see? Who earst was Iealous, will a Pander be. O Life thou most desir'd, and wretched thing! Thy love betrayd his love, from thee did spring This Contradiction of crosse Faults, O why Chose he not rather to doe well, and Dye? Why did he so desire to shunne his Friend, And call that Misery, which was an End? The Dead doe feare no Ravisher, no Lust Was ere so hot, to dote upon cold dust, Were he once dead he should feare no crimes then, Neither his owne, nor those of other men: And could he wish a longer life? let those Who doe not know (but by inflicting) woes, Hugg that desire, but he who wisely waighs What many miseries are in many dayes,
Let him not be so mad to wish his feares, And onely prove his Dotage by his Yeares. Never did Morning blush so much as that Which next appear'd; when up our Levite gat, And running nimbly to the doore, he sees His love before the doore with her faire knees Growne to the Earth, so close, that one would feare, She tooke a measure of her Sepulcher, With hands out stretch'd, as if, fearing to faile, She meant to make a Sexton of her naile To dig her grave: or else (for who can tell?) Suspecting by her injuries an Hell Not to be farre, where such sinnes had a birth, She lay so close, to feele if it were Earth. He wonders at the posture, nor knowes why She had not chose to rest more easily, And now he will be satisfy'd, but she Had lost her tongue too, with her Chastity. He thinkes she sleepes, and therefore louder cryes, Why doe we dally here? Wake, and Arise. But let him cry on, she hath heard her last, Deafe to all sounds now, but the latest blast. And art thou dead, he cryes? what dead? with that You'd wonder which had beene alive, as flat He lay, and speechlesse, glad of the same death, But that thicke sighes betray that he had breath: Which onely serves his Anger: now he hyes Home to mount Ephraim, all his jelousies Are dead with her, and now he meanes to make Her common after death: each Tribe shall take A peice of her; O the obdurate mind That so could part, what God had so combin'd! I faint in the relating it, nor well What he durst act, dare undertake to tell.
Twelve made of one? O who would not be mad, To thinke upon that madnesse? if she had But such another griefe, with both opprest, My Muse would thē be dumbe, which now doth rest. Canto. II. The Argument. The twelve peices of his wife Cut out by the Levites knife, To the field to doe him right, Draw the angry Israelite. Abrahams Prayer, Heav'ns decree, Benjamins glad victory Twice repeated, doe prolong My story to a second song. SVch crimes amongst the Israelites? I feare Incredulous posterity will sweare Mine was the fault, and when they muse hereon They'l judge the Crime was in my Fiction, When Vice exceeds a Probability It gaines excuse, so that to sinne on high Is politicke offence, for he that shall Sinne so, is thought not to have sinn'd at all. 'Tis the corruption of the minds of men To judge the worst of actions, but 'tis when The fault is frequent, when the daily use Gives it at once, the guilt, and the excuse: But if a crime swell to the height of this, Murder, or Incest, or if any is Of fowler name; when man will man abuse, We doe absolve more gladly then accuse,
Can it be possibly presum'd that they To whom the God of Iacob shew'd the way, Both of their feet and manners, who had seene His frequent Miracles, nay who had beene Part of the wonder too, so to have fell As to commit a greater Miracle? Sodom in Iudah? now the Fable winnes Credit, and is out-acted by true sinnes: Report hath made Pymalion to have lov'd That which he made, who by his Art was mov'd To palpable Idolatry, yet so At least he lov'd a woman in the show: Hee's fixt on his faire Image, so that one Would wonder which had beene the truer stone. Yet 'twas a Woman Image, so that I Wonder at's lucke, more then his vanity, A Painted Woman will cause love: I'me mov'd More, how he did obtaine, then why he lov'd, These doe affect what to obtaine is worst, What in the very thinking is accurst: In other loves the wife may barren prove, In this the barrennesse is in the Love, In other faults there have excuses beene, This hath no other Motive then the Sinne. And can this sinne be theirs? Yes know it can, Man forsakes God, and then he doates on man. But who did tutor them to this offence? For, though we find it in each conscience That we are naturally vicious, That ther's no true good in the best of us, That we pursue our ill, as drawne by Fate, Yet 'tis example does specificate, That teacheth us This sinne: 'tis mine owne Vice, But that I am more lost in Avarice,
That I doe choose Adultery, or preferre The lustfull man before the Murtherer, I have from Praesident: and thus our ill Comes from the Patterne too, as from the Will. Egypt denyes to have an hand herein, (Egypt the house of bondage, not of sinne.) Their cruelty I heare, and which is odd, I reade that their chiefe sinne, is their chiefe god. They make their gardens heav'ns, and in each plant They find a Deity: If that any want Be in their fields, if thence they doe not gaine, It is their gods they want, and not their graine. Their superstition might issue hence, The Calfe, on which they plac'd their confidence, Which act this glory to them doth afford, They make themselves the beast which they ador'd Or did the Desart make them thus to stray, And cause them lose their Manners with the Way? Did those vast places, which wise Nature fram'd, Wherein wild man should by his feare be tam'd, His feare of wilder beasts, instruct these men, That there are beasts which are not in the Denne▪ And that when ever we neglect, or scanne The Lords commands, the Monster is the Man? No, these suspitions may suspected be, As farre from Truth, as they from Honesty: Egypt was free from this fault, and much lesse Can we impose it on the Wildernesse. They had no King: as well the fooles as wise Did all what did seeme right in their owne Eyes. And Sodomes crime seem'd right to some: to see When every man will his owne Monarch be, When all subjection is tane quite away, And the same man does governe and obey;
How there is no obedience, nor rule, How every man like to the Horse and Mule, Which want the understanding of their bit, And neither have their owne nor Riders wit, Make a swift pace to Ruine. Giue me then Leave to admire, and pitty those poore men, Who thinke that Man should his owne Ruler be, And exercise Home-principality: Who in one speedy minute strangely doe What Alexander but aspir'd unto, Conquer all Kingdomes, which they affirme to be, No better then a well-nam'd Tyranny. Let me inquire of these, if they have read Any such crimes where people had an head? Let me inquire of men, as yet not wild, Whether they thinke thēselves Lords of their child? Whether their servants Masters? whether they Suppose that God did not make some t'obey? In Innocence there was Dominion, And the first man was the first Lord: that one King of the Creatures, whom for this none blames, He prov'd his Soveraignty by their Names. That he was his wives Soveraigne, in the Fall He fell not from his Monarchy, when all His Righteousnesse was vanish't, that remain'd, And so a knowledge of this truth he gain'd, (A truth he could not know had he still stood) We can be longer Powerfull then Good. Nay let us looke on Hell, and we shall see That there's a Prince of that obscurity. It is a torment such as Hell hath none, To want that order in confusion: That is the best; we may conclude from hence, That is in Hell, and was in Innocence.
But I doe wonder at the fault so long That I deferre the punishment: my song Must to the Levite turne, or rather be No more a Song, but a sad Elegy. He having carv'd his Love, as you have heard, And done that act, which Hell and Furies fear'd; Sends a choice piece to every Tribe, to plead Their injuries, and tell why she is dead: Benjamin shall have one of them, lest he Might dare commit a crime, he durst not see, A severall messenger to each Tribe is sent: But he that unto Princely Iudah went, Carying the head of the dismembred coarse, With such a voice which sorrow had mad hoarse, (Least he should rave too highly) thus beginnes! Is there an Heav'n? and can there be such sinnes. Stands the Earth still? me thinkes I hardly stand, Feeling the Seas inconstancy on Land. After this Act, why flowes the water more? Why does't not staine, which alwaies clear'd before? It is not Ayre we draw now, 'tis a breath Sent to infect us from the Land of Death: The Fire, whose office 'tis to warme and shine, Growes blacke and downewards, as it did repine To see the fact, and sheds a kinde of teares, Quenching his heat, because he cannot theirs. Can you behold these eyes without a teare? Can you with patience longer thinke they were, And are not the worlds wonder? yet I erre, It is Revenge, and not a Teare fits her: Let women weepe for women, then you shall Shew you have sorrow'd heartily, if all Doe sorrow which have injur'd her, and be Examples, as of Crimes so Misery.
Gibeah 'twas (O 'twas not Gibeah) Credit me not, beleeve not what I say, I scarce dare trust my selfe, and yet agen, Gibeah 'twas that did this Fact: and then He tells them all, what I before have wept; Now Iudah stormes, and as a River kept From its owne course by Weares and Milles, if once It force a passage, hurryes or'e the stones, Sweepes all along with it, and so alone Without stormes makes an Inundation: Such was the peoples fury, they're so hot That they will punish what we credit not, And be as speedy as severe: but some Who loath'd the bloudy accents of the Drumme, Who thought no mischiefes of that foulnesse are, But that they gaine excuse, compar'd with warre, And warre with brethren; these, I say, of age The chiefe amongst them, doe oppose their rage, Exhort them to a temper: Stay, sayes one, And be advis'd before you be undone. Whence is this fury? why d'yee make such hast To doe that act which you'l repent as fast? Are any glad to fight? or can ought be Mother of warre, beside Necessity? Be not mistaken; brethren, take good heed, It is not Physicke frequently to bleed. He that for petty griefes incision makes Cannot be cur'd so often as he akes. Are then your sisters, daughters, wifes too chast? Or are you sorry that as yet no wast Deformes your richer grounds? or does it stirre An anger in you, that the souldier Mowes not your Fields? Poore men, do you lament That still you are as safe as innocent?
We yet have Cities proudly situate, We yet have people: be it not in fate That your esteeme of both should be so cheape To wish those carcasses and these an Heape. Me thinkes our Iordan hath an happier pace, And flowes with greater majesty and grace In his owne naturall wave, then if the sword Should higher colour to his streames afford; Should paint and so deforme it: to mine eye A River's better then a Prodigy. But I desire, deere Countrymen, to know, Whose is the blood that we must lavish so? Perhaps the Philistins ambition Would to our Shiloh bring their Ascalon, And these you would encounter: or it may be Egypt still envying that you are free Intends a second bondage: or perchance Your daily conquer'd Enemies advance Their often flying ensignes, those at hand Possessors and destroyers of the Land; Whom God reserving for our future Pride, Left to our eyes as thornes, prickes to our side. No none of these, but all your swords intend, I grieve to speak't, the ruine of a friend: And all the sonnes of Israel doe presse That Israel may have a sonne the lesse. Ioseph I've read suffer'd his brothers hate, (Ioseph of neere acquaintance unto fate. The mouth of Destiny,) they would kill him first But after sell him, to try which was worst: And yet no reason for this spleene appeares, But that his glory was beyond his years. To hate the yonger still is too much sinne, And after Ioseph to spoile Benjamin.
Hath twelve no mystery? doe ye ascribe Meerely to Chance, that there is no odd Tribe? Trust me my brethren, they doe injure God, Who say that he delights in what is odd: I thinke 'tis parity best pleaseth heav'n; And what is most just, loves what is most ev'n. Doe I excuse them then to please the time, And onely make an error of a Crime? Am I sinnes Advocate? farre be't from me To thinke so ill of Warre as Sodomy: For Sodomy I tearme it, Iustice calls That, fact; which never into action falls, If it hath past the license of the will: And their intent reacht to that height of ill; But whose intent? O pardon me, there be Benjamites spotlesse of that Infamy. Shall these be ioyn'd in punishment? a sinne You'd warre against, O doe not then beginne To act a greater, as if you would see Whether Injustice aequall'd Luxury? This madnesse was from Gibeah, 'tis true, Yet some doe more distast the crime, then you▪ Even in that City: heare then my advice, And God shall prosper what you enterprize. Exhort them to doe justice, if that then They still be partiall to these guilty men, Their guilt is greatest, let them perish all And equall their offences with their fall. Thicke acclamations breake off his discourse, Theyle heare no more because they like't: Remorse Ceizeth each conscience, they already hate The civill warre, which they so wisht of late. Embassadors by generall voice are sent: But Benjamin conceits that to repent
Were the worse sinne, and that who ere will doe A wicked act, he ought defend it too. But are not we true Benjamites in this, And aggravate what ere we doe amisse By a new act? as if the second deed Excus'd the former, if it did exceed. Did we not thus, an end were come to warre; Did we not thus, no more should private jarre Molest our peace; Kings might put up their swords, And every quarrell might conclude in words: One conference would root out all debate, And they might then most love, who now most hate, The most sworne foes: for shew me, where is he Would seeke Revenge without an injury? A wrong receiv'd, or thought one? then no need But to deny, or to excuse the deed, Why is Defence? O what doe they intend Who justifie those acts, which they should mend! O Pride! O folly! O extreme disease! O Fact, which he condemnes who practises! Who in his soule confesseth he offends, And yet doubles his guilt when he not ends. Great crimes find greater patrons: impudence Followes each fault, to make us thinke that sense Hath fled us with our Vertue, and that men By such an hardnesse were turn'd stones agen. So wifes of Entertainment (who doe know More then one Husband) in the publicke: shew As vertuous as the best whilst undescry'd, Whilst they have this good left, that they will hide And veile o're their offences: but if once Either their husbands just suspicions, Or their security betray their fact, No more doe blush to answere, then to act,
As if 'twere meritorious, and so, did Appeare no sinne no longer then 'twas hid. Why should the bad be bold? why should there be Audaciousnesse joyn'd to impiety? Whence is this daring? Sinne was child to Night, How dares he then approach and blast the light? How dares he stand th' examining, and try If men can find out his deformity? I have the reason, we are flatterers all, And to our selves the most; if any fall Into grosse errors, still he thinkes hee's free, And Pride supplies the place of honesty. He thinkes tis good to have a vertuous name, And cares not for the goodnesse, but the fame. Which makes the Benjamites reply: we admire (To say no more) at your so strange desire. And at the craft on't most, that you pretend Love and advice▪ when you subjection send: Are we so stupid, and so senslesse growne As to be thought not fit to rule our owne? Benjamin was the youngest we confesse Of Iacobs sonnes, and yet a sonne, no lesse Then Levi, or proud Iudah: he that gave Life to each Tribe, intended none a slave, Nor shall you make us. But youle say that you Out of a generall love to goodnesse sue For justice 'gainst her Enemies. Tis poore If what we would we cannot cover o're With specious pretences: tis an ill Physitians part so to betray his pill, That children may perceive its want of dresse, And chuse disease before seene bitternesse; But let me tell you, who so ere do's deale, In the affaires of a strange common-weale,
Is tyrannous or mad: he would be knowne Either anothers Lord, or's not his owne. Yet what is't your grave Masters doe advise Our sleepy Councell of? whose duller Eyes See onely open vices: we have heard The Levite and his Concubine, we feard You'd have us punish him: then you relate That comming unto Gibeah some thing late, And willing to depart the earlier thence, He found his Chast one dead: O dire offence. She had the punishment she deserv'd, and just It was, that who had liv'd should dye by Lust. And yet for feare Levits in time to come Might want such easie favourites, and some Would leaue their courteous trade, if there be found No cure, no remedy for such a wound: We are content to be severe: but then We doe expect, you name those guilty men. Our's the more hard and thanklesse taske I trow, For we will punish those whom you but show. These mockes doe whet the Isra'elites so farre, Nothing remaines now but a civill warre: When all the Tribes have unto Mispah ran, With such consent you'd thinke they were one man. If warre had ever reason, or if men Had ere authority to kill others, then Certainely these, in so divine a cause, Twas not the peoples quarrell, but the Lawes. Here no ambition, no untam'd desire Of Principality, of growing higher, Put on these Armes, nor was it fault enough That Benjamin was rich, to raise these rough Spirits of Mars, nor is't a true surmise That private wrongs did cause these Enemies:
These fight the battel of the Lord, herein Iustice on the one side fights, on th'other Sinne: So that in height of blood, heat of the warres, They rather Iudges are, then Souldiers. The Israelites if they now spare, are shent, The more they kill, the more they're innocent. Our Age makes us againe these actions see, An Age of warre, though not of victory. For 'tis not victory to winne the Field, Vnlesse we make our Enemies to yeeld More to our Iustice, then our Force, and so As well instruct as overcome our Foe Call you that Conquest, or a Theft of State, When in a Stranger region of late, The Eagle built his nest, having expell'd (Vpon a meere pretence that he rebell'd) The former Ayry, for no other cause, But that his bill was strong, and sharpe his clawes. To see the malice, and the power of hate, That made ev'n the Elector Reprobate. When Caesar did not sticke, nor blush to doe What they detested, who advis'd him too, When that all lawes their ancient force might loose, He made a Choyce of him that was to Choose. Now all occasions can perswade to fight, When Power is misinterpreted for Right. There is a Lust of killing men so great, Rivers of blood can scarce asswage the heat Our lives are cheaper then the lives of beasts, Then those whose very being is for feasts; Who have no use but for the throat: hard plight! Anger not kills them, but our appetite If we have eaten once, we spare: and then If we are full are kind: but to kill men
We have a lasting appetite, shedding blood, Our famine is increas'd ev'n by our food: Such Erisichthons are we; they that have Vnlimited desires, Death and the Grave But shadow this affection, and to it Compar'd, the Horse-leach wants an Appetite: It may be weighing mans high faculties (Which make him claime a kinred with the skies) Wee seeme to doubt of his mortality And onely strive to know if he can die. Nor doe we care on what pretence (lest ought Should make our crime the lesse) no reason's fought To mitigate our fault, and we are thus So farre from good, we scarce are cautelous. But 'tis a sore will fester, if you touch, Away my Muse, sometimes a truth's too much For Honour, or for safety: he alone Prospers who flatters. But if any one Shall aske a colour, a pretence for this How such a multitude, such a swarme is Assembled of the Israelites (for then There met at once foure hundred thousand men Against their brother Benjamin,) whilst yet They had not dispossest the Canaanite, (There was a mixture not a Conquest made) How durst they then so foolishly invade Their brethrens Countrey, when they left their owne Subject to imminent destruction? Or when was this invasion made? To me The Number hath a more Facility For credit, then the Time; doe we not finde, That Israel wanting Iudges was assignde To bondage, as to Anarchy? they groane Vnder a forraigne yoake, wanting their owne.
Carries it any likelyhood; or can It sincke into the fancy of a man, That when they were opprest, they should oppresse? As full of folly as of savagenesse: This were to perfect Eglons victory, And act what Iabin but desir'd should be. And yet it might be, Ioshua being dead, Then was the time, the people lack'd an head: Who taking no care for posterity, Twas the worst act of Ioshua to dye. Moses deputed him, and if that he Had left another Governor, it might be Our Levite had beene chast, and Benjamin Beene noted for his vertue; not his sinne. Then were those multitudes no miracle, And Canaan so oft beat by Israel, In likelihood would rest quiet, and expect If these would doe what they could not effect. Besides, their dwellings in the Valleys be So that their seat teaches humilitie: And then to climbe the mountaines was such paine As that the labour did exceed the gaine. And thus you see, that they may fight, but ere Their enemies Countries by them wasted were, They to the Oracle repaire, to know If victory shall grace them, or their Foe. Yet pardon me, I erre, they are so strong As that they would imagine it a wrong Done to their valor, if we should suppose, That they intreated conquest of their foes; No, being sure of victory, they aske Which of the Tribes shall undertake the taske Of the first on set, and the Tribes refus'd, Envy at Iudahs choyce, as if abus'd,
And injur'd they esteem'd themselves, that they Should lose the dangerous honour of the day. Such was their pride, such thoughts their Numbers bred; Numbers, whose feare might strike the Enemy, dead: Whose hands deserv'd a fiercer Enemy, And matter of an higher victory. With these they think, they might to Memphis passe, And make the Egyptians know, what bondage was. VVith these they thought with ease to force a VVay (Though nature did oppose) to India. And in a sawcy victory out-runne, The primitive uprising of the Sunne. How large are our desires? and yet how few Events are answerable? So the dew VVhich early on the top of mountaines stood (Meaning at least to imitate a flood) VVhen once the Sunne appeares, appeares no more, And leaves that parch'd, which was too moist before. That we are never wholy good! that still Mixt with our Vertue, is some spice of ill! The Israelites are Iust, but they are Proud, As if a lesser fault might be allowd For punishing the greater; yet I'de know VVhilst yet they might suffer an overthrow, VVhy they rejoyce as if th'ad wonne! or why They have a Pride ere they have Certainty? Their numbers are incredible, 'tis true, Yet multitudes have beene orecome by few: Their army is compleat, 'tis right, but then VVe know it is an army but of men. Of future carkasses, so quickly some They have no time to thinke of death to come: To whom no starre a certainty does give, That they at least to the next Field should live.
Foure hundred thousand carkasses; enough To give the beasts a surfet, and allow Fertility which Nature had deny'd Vnto those Lands: So that their height of pride, Of hope, of glory, and of all their toyle Is to inrich the Land which they would spoile. So thought the Benjamites, who though they saw That Pow'r too was against them with the Law, Yet resolutely they intend to die, And such despaire gives them the victory. They are not Cowards, yet, though they are bad, They slay more numbers then wee'l thinke they had. Whence comes this Courage to the Desperate? The bad me thinkes should be effeminate, And as the Bees (the subject or the King) Having abus'd it once, doe loose their sting: And to inforce a Stoick unto laughter, Being once too fierce, they are alwaies sluggish after Converted unto Droanes, so it seemes fit (And not so much heavens Iustice, as its wit) That who hath lost his Vertue once, should straight Lose courage too, opprest with his owne weight. The Israelites though amaz'd at this defeat, Yet gather head, and to their Campe retreate; There might you see Sorrow and Anger joyn'd, Nor doe they grieve so much as they repin'd. Here fathers weepe their onely sonnes, and there Brothers for as deare losses dropp a teare, Accompany'd with threatnings, they are mad Till they bestow the sorrow which they had. Once more to Shiloh they repaire, to heare If God at last will aide them, and for feare That it was pride did frustrate their first sute, They're now as humble, as then resolute:
In stead of fighting they now weepe a day, Sighes they doe thinke and teares can make a way Where swords are uselesse, they'l gaine victory No longer by their hand, but by their Eye, Great and just God, sayes one, we doe confesse That all this heavy anger is farre lesse Then our deservings: should'st thou fully weigh Our sinnes enormity, 'tis not a day Losse to the Foe, can expiate: did we feele What ere we saw in Agypt, did the steele Peirce deeper in our bowells, should the skes Shed those hot showers in which Gomorrah fryes, We could not taxe the Iustice of our King, But after all, owe still a suffering. Yet thou hast ancient mercies, we've beene told Of all thy courtesies, which were of old Shew'd to our Fathers; O vouchsafe them still, And make us heires of those: we have done ill, Prodigiously ill, there's no offence Which we are guiltlesse of, each conscience Accuseth, and amazeth us: yet now Our flinty hearts to a repentance bow: Yet now at last vouchsafe thy favour to us, And as thy rod hath scourg'd, let mercy wooe us; We dare not looke for victory: O no, Give us at leastwise a more vertuous Foe. Thy wrath is just, great God, and 'tis our sute Onely just men thy wrath may execute. We beg not for our lives, they are thy loane Which when thou wilt receive, yet as thine owne. Let not their swords bereave us of our breath, And we shall find a benefit in death. Yet what a glory can it be to thee That we are dead? and that the Heathen see
Thy anger on thy Children? that thy wrath In stead of being left, is told in Gath, And publisht in fierce Ascalon; spare us then If not for us, yet for thy selfe; and when Thou think'st of plaguing us, thy selfe exempt, Since that our Ruine will breed thy contempt: Let then thy mercy above justice shine; If we are bad, consider we are thine. Thus grumbled they a pray'r: and he that sees Councells unhatchd, and what he will, decrees, (Yet ever justly) does perceive that they VVhat ere they faine, doe murmur, and not pray. VVhich he decrees to punish: they would know VVhether that once more they shall fight or no? Once more he grants that they shall fight: and thus They're not so craving, as he Courteous. If they but aske him, he will not deny, Fight's their desire, and then his answere's, I. Had they but ask'd the victorie, as well, He would have heard his troubled Israel: He that deliver'd them from forraine armes, And taught their weake hands to repaire their harms VVith admirable victory, He I say VVould have bestow'd the honor of the day On them, had they desir'd it; they have knowne How he hath warr'd for thē from heaven, & showne Such miracles in their defence, they fright Those whom they save, as when the wondring night Thought herselfe banisht from the world (the Sunne Standing unmov'd, forgetting how to runne,) If they now lose the day, the fault is theirs, God does no mercy want, they want right prayers. But they suppose it too too fond to stand Begging of that which is in their owne hand.
This they conceive were to mocke God, to crave That to begiv'n which they already have, A pow'r to use their armes: No, if once more They may have field-roome, may but fight it o're, Though Heav'n doe not fight for them, they suppose They cannot lose, if Heav'n doe not oppose. They thinke no chance can possibly bestow The foile on them, the Lawrell on the foe. What though they lost the praise of the first day, And fought as though they came to runne-away: Twas not for want of courage sure, but either The foe had got advantage of the weather Or else the wind had rais'd the dust so high That they suppos'd fresh enemies to be nigh, And fear'd to be environ'd round: what ere Occasion'd their first overthrow, no feare, No chance, shall cause another; and the slaves That now triumph, shall find their trenches, graves. Is this their Crime alone, or doe not all Partake as of their fault, so of their fall? Israel is not onely mad, there be Some vices which we give posterity, And this is one of them: O how vaine is man! O how his Reason too is but a spanne, And not his stature or his Age! we have long Injur'd the beasts, and done them too much wrong, By calling them Irrationall; could they speake, Thus in rough language, they would fiercely breake Their mind unto us: O you onely wise To whom kind Nature hath imparted Eyes, Leaving all other blind; pardon if we Doe tell you where you have forgot to see, Where we are clearer sighted: can you show Where ever beasts did to that madnesse grow.
As to pronounce of that, which is to come, Of that which onely seemes in Chances doome? Yet thus you doe; and doing thus have showne; Reason's your title, our Possession. The Israelites had to their cost of late Found confidence to be unfortunate; (Their confidence in Numbers) and yet still (Though now contain'd in smaller roome) they will Forespeake their victory: why, because they see That they are many yet; poore vanity! When they were more, they were o'recome, yet dare Conceive a Conquest when they fewer are; Because still some are to be kill'd: as though Successe to Multitudes did homage owe, And multitudes impair'd: as if the way To winne another were to lose one day. But had we seene the City now! what joy Raign'd in those streets, sufficient to destroy Those whom it comforted (for pleasue too Can find a way to death, and strangely doe The worke of heavinesse and griefe) I say Had we but seene the glory of that day: The whooping, dancing, and the generall noyse To which the sea and thunder are but toyes; We should have thought it (so the sounds agree,) No noise of Triumph, but Captivity. At last they doe repose themselves, and one Of highest judgement and discretion, Instructs them thus: My dearest Countrymen, Who ere intends his private ends, does pen A speech unto the Eare, his study is Which words soūd wel, & which are thought amisse, He tryes all wayes, he layes all colours on To cheat the Iudgement, sooth the Passion,
So that he hopes at last that it must hit Either the subject, or the clothing it: But I whose end is Publike good, intend Nothing but that which caryes to that end: Pardon me then if I am harsh, and round, If that I am not Plausible, but sound. We wonne a victory last day, so great We hardly dare beleeve we were not beate: Our conquest easier was then our beleife; And with great reason too: for tell, what chiefe, What petty captaine is so vaine, so mad As to ascribe to his conduct the glad Event of last dayes hazard? to my sense The Conqueror was onely Providence, And we but instruments: then I'de advise That as you have beene happy, you'd be wise: That man does still in greatest glory stand, Whose braine is better thought of then his hand▪ And so I wish that yours should be: we know That what is gain'd by Fortune is lost so, She hath no constant Favorite; then now Whilst yet our victory does meanes allow To purchase peace at our owne rate, and thrive By Covenant more then Battle: let us drive All thought of warre farre from us, tis in vaine To get that hardly, which we may obtaine By easier meanes, and he does more then rave Who hazards that which he may certaine have. More was he speaking, when a thousand tongues Made his be silent, one would thinke their lunges To be unequall to that noyse, so fierce Their clamor is, such sounds the heavens doe peirce. So have I oft heard in our Theater (When that a daintier passage wan the Eare)
A thousand tongues, a thousand hands rebound, (As if the Plaudite were in the sound, And most noise were most pleasing:) they expresse Their liking so, as these their frowardnesse. Who rave from noise to action, one stoopes downe, To reach a stone, another fiercer clowne Shakes a steel'd Iavelin at him, all the hands, Against which Israel but weakely stands, Ayme now at one; who dreadlesse, unimpair'd In courage, neither wisht life, nor despair'd. At last a serious Counceller stood up; Much had he tasted of the liberall Cup, And thankefully exprest it in his face, To which a larger wound would be a grace By hiding his rich pimples: This brave man Raises himselfe, and with what speed he can Stutters thus to them; Cease my noble boyes, Quiet your threatnings now, and stint your noyse. Tis a just anger you have showne, but yet The time in which you shew it is unfit. Now should we dance, my bloods, now should we sing, And make the wondring firmament to ring With joyfull acclamations; now brave spirits To shew the most joy, is to shew most merits. Sadnesse is onely Capitall: in fine, Now should we shed no blood but of the vine. For you Sir whom we doubly guilty see, Of Treason first, and then Philosophy, If these doe please, thus we pronounce: to shew How little we doe feare you, or the Foe, Wee'l send you first unto their campe, and then Wee'l fetch you by our conquest home agen. This is a mercy if well understood, You shall injoy the fortune you thinke good.
Here his breath failes: when all the people cry He hath spoke nobly, none this day shall dye. And yet the Traitor shall not scape at last, Whose execution is deferr'd, not past. Twas neither peace, nor warre now, either side Having sufficiently their forces try'd, Take breath a while: O happy men, if still This mind continue in them! If they kill Their appetite of killing! if this rest Can at the last informe them what is best! To bury their slaine friends, both sides agree Vnto a two dayes truce: Stupiditie Not to be borne with! had they knowne the use At first of that which they now call a truce, This truce had beene unnecessary, then They might have spar'd, whilst now they bury men. And that they now may bury, they intreat Respite a while from warre: thus all their heate Is buried for the time: good heav'n to see Th' Omnipotency of Necessity, Whom all the nearest ties of Neighbourhood, Religion, Language, nay of the same Blood Could not containe from fight, but that they would (To see if it were theirs) shed their owne blood, These are intreated to a forme of peace, Their fury for a day or two can cease, Commanded by Necessity: they feare Lest th' Ayre by so much carcasse poysoned were: Lest to revenge the blood which they had shed, They now might feele the valour of the dead, Of strong corruptiō: these thoughts hold their mind These thoughts a while inforce them to be kind On both sides (for they doe not jarre in all) Nature prevailes not, but a Funerall,
Nor doth this long prevaile, for when they had Interr'd some carcasses, they yet are mad Till they have made some more, till they have done A second fault, as not content with one, They see their Error, and commit it, thus Who are not eminently vertuous, Are easily entrapp'd in vices snares, And want the poore excuse, that unawares They were ingag'd; we greedily runne on Offending with Deliberation. And can you call this but Infirmity? Nick-name a Vice? O call it Prodigy. Call it—O what? What name can well expresse The miracle of humane guiltinesse? Could he pretend an ignorance at least And be in Nature as in Fact a beast, He were not worse then they, then he might be Both from the Vse and fault of Reason free. But what new horror ceizeth me? what fire Raignes in my thoughts, & prompts me to rise higher▪ Hence you low soules, who groveling on the Earth Basely deject your selves below your birth, Sold to your senses: I intend to tell What none can know but in whose breasts doe dwell Coelestiall fires, and unto whom 'tis given To have a neerer intercourse with Heav'n. Yet pardon you pure soules, whom no one dares Eas'd of our flesh, to trouble with our cares: Pardon I once more aske, if my weake pen Fitting it selfe to ordinary men, Attaine not to your height (to us unknowne) And give you those words which you shame to owne. The Lawgiver, who saw as in a glasse All in the Word, what ever 'twas did passe
In these neer enmities, as farre as Man Perfectly happy knowes a griefe, began To feele Compassion: Have I then said he Deliver'd Israel for this misery? And did I free them from the Aegyptian Onely to find them graves in Canaan? I did foretell their Land shall overflow, But never thought to be expounded so; Never with bloud: I meant that they should have More blessings then the covetous can crave, The flowing Vdder, and the untir'd Bee, An happy Deluge of Fertility. O how would now proud Pharaoh rejoyce! How he would have a joy beyond a voyce, Beyond his tyranny, could he but know What Israel does indure without a Foe! Was it for this I did so oft repeat Wonders before him, wonders of so great Exuberance of powre, so highly done, That they contemne all admiration? How wert thou Nilus bloody'd into Red, Thy waters as unknowne as is thy Head? When all thy finny progeny did find That to destroy now, which did breed their kind, When by a nimble death they understand, The River as discourteous as the Land? Can I forget that when I did bestow A liberty as heretofore to flow Vnto thy now pale waters, there did passe An issue stranger then his Colour was From the too fertil river? Frogges are found With such a multitude to hide the ground That there's no grasse appeares, no corne is seene. The spring does blush because he lookes not greene.
Their numbers and their noise equally harsh Make Egypt not a Region but a Marsh. What a small portion of my acts where these? How scarcely to be counted passages In my large story? Dust is chang'd to Lice And now beginnes to creepe, which the most nice And curious eye before could never find To move at all, unlesse't were by the winde: Which could not scatter those thicke clouds of Flyes That would not let them, no, not see the skyes. When I but threaten, all the cattle dye, And Egypts Gods find a Mortality. But lest the men should thinke that they were free From the fault too, if the Calamity, I taught their bodies with blacke goare to runne, And imitate their soules corruption. What was a Face, is now a pimple growne, And in each part is plentifully sowne A store of blaines, so ugly, that to me It was a kind of Iudgement but to see. And if this were but little, was't not I That call'd those candy'd pellets from the sky, Which in a moment overwhelming all Did badly change their colour in their fall: And by the murthering every one they found Within their reach came red unto the ground? When to repaire the numbers they had slaine (Beasts of all sorts) the land is fill'd againe, But tis with Locusts, such a swarme they see Made for the shame of all their Husbandry, That they could wish, so they were rid of these, The former Murrein, ere this new increase. But who can tell the following Prodigy? Last day the Earth was hid, but now the sky
Chaos returnes, the Sunne hath lost his rayes And Nights obscurity is turn'd to Dayes. Who could a greater miracle afford? God made the Light, I Darknesse by a Word, Which had it lasted, had it ne'r beene spent, They would have call'd it a kind punishment, They had not seene then their first borne to dy, To challenge death by their Nativity: All this I did, but why? was it to see My people suffer fuller misery? To gaine the Country which they could not hold, From which their owne armes ignorantly bold Expell their owne selves: O let no man tell That Israel did banish Israel. My prayers forbid, nor let it ere be said That Moses was unkind since he was dead, That in the grave I left my goodnesse too; And could not pity when not feele a woe. Having said this, with all the speed he may He seekes out holy Abraham, who that day, By his deere Isaac seconded did sing The ancient mercies of their heavenly King. One tells how having now worne out a life, And so being fitter for his Grave then Wife, Nay then when she had liv'd unto those yeares, To be accounted with the Grandmothers, When Sara now was so unweildy growne, Her legges could scarcely beare her selfe alone, She beares another burthen, and does swell Not with a child, but with a Miracle. This said, he stops; and then againe goes on No more with story, but Devotion. O praise the Lord my soule, let me not find My body was more fruitfull then my mind.
O let that teeme with thankefulnes, and be Made sweetly pregnant by my memory. Father, sayes Isaac, I have often heard That we doe tell with Ioy what we have Feard, And what in suffering terrifies our sense, Does in relating please: what violence Of blisse possesseth me when I compare My dangers past with joyes that present are! Me thinkes I yet carry that fatall wood (A burden which I hardly understood Should carry me) me thinkes I still enquire Where is the sacrifice, and where the fire? How little did I thinke, or feare till then That God commanded sacrifice of men! How little could I guesse in any part That God in such sort did desire the Heart? Yet pardon Father, if you now must know, Your silence seem'd more cruell then your blow: Could I oppose my mind against your will, Or wish him spar'd, whom you decreed to kill? Wherefore was as all this circumstance? what need But first to tell, and then to act the deed? I never knew what disobedience meant. And your distrust was my worst punishment, I must confesse I was amaz'd, my blood Congeal'd within me, and my faint haires stood Yet not for feare of death (Death was my profit) But for the manner and the Author of it. Was this the heav'nly promise? and must I So strangely borne, somewhat more strangely die? What should I say now? or what should I doe? That frustrate by my death Gods promise too. Should I invoke Heav'ns ayde? alas, from thence Came the injunction for this violence:
Should I implore my fathers helpe? why, he Would sooner hearken unto heav'n then me. And so he did: for when the trembling sword As if he knew the temper of his Lord Theatned a death, most fortunately then He that did arme you did disarme agen; Shewing your will was all he did require, Commanding you to that you most desire, To be againe a Father: O the power And mercy of our God! who in an houre, Who in a minute, can make all things well, Can bring and then deliver out of Hell. These were their Accents, when that Moses sayes, It is an holy businesse to praise, To magnifie our Lord, so to goe on In the intent of our Creation. To this all times, all reasons doe obey, And we may praise as often as we pray. But now let's change these tones, let us be mute In all discourses now, but in a suite; Let us at once conjoyne our prayers, and see If our one God will hearken unto three. Your issue, and my charge, whom I have led Thorow those paths that never man did tread. (As if they fear'd a scarcity of foes) Doe their owne selves against themselves oppose, And their destruction (unlesse we repaire Sooner to ayde them) will prevent our pray'r. It was a place above the Ayre, the Sky, Whither Man cannot reach, not with his Eye, Nay if th'exactnesse of the height be sought, Whither Man cannot reach, not with his thought. Beyond the place where haile, and raine doe growe, Above the chill-white treasures of the snow;
To which compar'd the starry heav'n is fell Vnto a neerer neighbourhood with Hell. And when I shall of Gods abode intreat It does become his prospect, not his seat. To which compar'd, the Chrystall heav'n does meet With Earth, to be a stoole unto his feet, This was the Place (yet pardon 'twas not so, Places are things which onely bodies know, Our bounds of Ayre, from which the heav'ns are free As from Corruption and Mortality) But here it was His sacred throne did stand, Who with a word created Sea and Land: Who with a word was Maker of his Throne, Who till he made it never wanted one. Bring me the richest goldsmiths treasuries (Those baites that doe allure our hearts and eyes) The dusky Sapphire, the Pearle richly white, The sparkling Diamond, yellow Chrysolite, Or if there be a gemme Nature hath fram'd, Of so high price that Art hath never nam'd, Ransacke the Inga's tombes, where there doth lie With their corrupted dust their treasury: (Who to that pretty bounty doe attaine That they bestow their gold on earth againe.) Search me their graves, or if you fearfull be Of treasure guarded by Mortality, Rob all the mines fenc't with so many barres, (Where Nature in the Earth hath fancy'd starres, Whose luster lest our weaknesse cannot beare Her kinder wisedome made her store up there) Bring these unto the view, to an exact Figure, which Phidias durst call his act: Yet to this throne compar'd, it will appeare So farre from shining, it will scarce looke cleare.
Here does the Ancient of dayes disclose The glory of his Majesty to those To whom he daignes his presence, who enjoy At full, what would a weaker eye destroy: Whose blisse shall never have a period, Who therefore live because they see their God, How could I ever linger, ever dwell In this so blest Relation! O how well Should I esteeme my selfe entranc'd; if I By staying here should lose my History! Here thousand thousands wait upon his call Of humane servants, and Angelicall, And such a multitude invest his throne (Millions of Spirits waiting upon One,) That it may be we should not say amisse, Their Number stranger then their Nature is: Here sound the Hallelujahs, here the Quire Of Heav'n is high, and full as their desire: No voice is here untun'd, they doe not find A jarre, more in the sound, then in the mind. Their power of singing growes on with their song; And they can longer sing, because thus long; Thus here them selves they fully strengthned see, To a melodious eternitie. Here Abraham presents himselfe; and sayes O thou above the injury of Dayes; Who making Times art subject unto none, Who giv'st all knowledge, and art never knowne; Who in my dayes of flesh didst gladly lend An eare unto my suite, and wouldst not bend Thy plagues against thine enemies; untill I knew th' intent, and thou hadst askt my will, The will of me poore mortall, nay farre worse Of me a sinner then, the ancient curse
Stucke deeply in me, that I might have feard My faults, and not my pray'r should have been heard: Could I speake then, and am I silent now? Did Sodom move, and cannot Israel bow? O pardon me if I bewaile their state, If I their Father prove their Advocate, Didst not thou promise when I had giv'n ore All hope of Father, when I wisht no more Then a contented Grave, that then from me, Should come so numerous a progeny: That all the cleerer army of the sky And the thicke sands which still unnumbred lye Should come within account before my feed, Which not my Sara, but thy truth should breed▪ How oft I thought that promise did include Their lasting too as well as multitude; That their continuance should be as sure, As long as either sands or starres indure. If they have sinn'd, thou know'st they may repent And be the better by a punishment, Never by Ruine: O then use thy rod Thinke that they are thy People, thou their God, And if they are so, O then let not be Any more strife, but who shall most serve thee, If they are so, let Abraham once more Receive those children which thou gav'st before. Now they have left their heav'nly ecchoing, Now all the Quire does wonder and not sing, When from th'eternall Majesty are heard Speeches, which all but the dread Speaker fear'd. Am I as Man that I should change? or like The sonne of man to threaten and not strike? If I pronounce my wrath against a Land Shall that continue, and my word not stand?
If I doe whet a sword, shall it be blunt, And have no direr sharpnesse then t'was wont? Benjamins crime h'as such an horror in't, (Who have confirm'd their faces like a flint Against all dye of modesty) that till Their blood (which now their too hot veines doe fill) Flow in their fields, till that their numbers be Of as small note as is their Chastity, It shall not be remitted: yet to show That I can pay that which I doe not owe, A remnant shall escape: but for the rest, (Those other Tribes which boast they are the best.) And yet to verifie their goodnesse lesse; Speake, as if they were injur'd by successe, So making the fault mine: who therefore have Beene lib'rall benefactors to the grave By their thicke deaths: untill that I doe see A confirm'd truth of their humility, They shall not see a victory: Ile make Benjamin punish these, and after take Vengeance on the Revengers, till they see My mercy hath not spent mine Aequity. This I pronounce, this is my constant will. Now all the holy company doe fill The heav'ns with shouts of praise, and loudly cry All Honor, Glory, Power to the most High. But now the Israelites once more have brought, Their troopes into the field, once more have fought; And whether 'twas the fault of them that led, Or of the Soldier, once more they have fled: And now because their battle was not long I will not be more tedious in my Song.
Canto. III. The Argument. The Levites vision, Phineah's Prayer, The Israelites late caus'd despaire Now turn'd to courage, when by them A new invented stratagem Drawes the enemy from the walls, Untill within their net he falls, With the full righting of the wrong Does both conclude, and crowne my Song. WHen will Vice faile? whē shall we see th'event Of wicked acts as bad as the Intent? As yet the worst are prosperous, and worse, The good as yet have never miss'd their curse: Review the Levites wife, and you shall see When she had forfeited her honesty, Her father entertain'd her; but once more When she was come to what she left before, Her Lord and Vertue, when that all her strife Shall be to gaine the name of a good wife, Gibeah will not harbour her; O poore! Gibeah were guiltlesse had it done no more: But Gibeah will murder her; review The Campe awhile, and that'th campe is true Which was in her; Twice had that army try'd The valour of their enemies, and twice dy'd The fields with their best blood, so hardly crost That they have fought no oftner then th' have lost:
And yet their cause was best: neither were they The onely people which have lost the day, Which they deserv'd to winne: search the records Of every Age, and every Age affords Examples of like strangenesse: who can tell What the Assyrian did to Israel? How in despite of all their lofty towers, (Which hop'd a standing to the last of hours) He made one houre their last: unlucky howre, Where vice shew'd what't could do when it had power▪ The sword did sport with lifes, nor were they such Whose losse or preservation did not much Pertaine unto the State: but the Kings sonnes In the same time, the same Pavilions, By the same tyrant are inforc'd to die, And which exceeds all, in their father eye. Poore Zedekiahs kingdomes first is gone And then his heyre's, O harsh inversion▪ If he had lost them first, it might be thought His kingdomes losse would not have mov'd him ought He would have made the best of th'other crosse Esteeming it an easing, not a losse. As he might now to be depriv'd of sight When he should covet the kind screene of Night, Betweene his woes and him: if in his mind He saw, it was a blessing to be blind: That then he should be forc't to see no more When he could not see what he saw before, This Israel suffer'd, and this Ashur did, And yet I dare affirme it was not hid No not from Ashur ev'n in his owne doome That they were better who were overcome. Or if the goodnesse to his side he drawes, Tis that his sword was better, not his cause
I could goe on in presidents as true, Actions betweene the Heathen and the Iew, Betweene the Turke and Christian: but what need To shew there is no birth without a seed? No speech without a tongue? or if there be More truths of such knowne perspicuity. How doe they doate then, who would tye the Lord To be so ayding to his childrens sword, As that he ne're should use his owne, nor doe Any one act, but what they wish him too? Are they so good? or is his love so fond As of a courtesie to make a bond? Shall they indent with him? and say thus farre Thou maist correct, but if thy judgements are Of longer date, they are unjust? for shame (All ye that glory in a purer Name,) Hence those blasphemous thoughts, far hence remove, Lest they deserve the plagues they would reprove. Is it injustice to suppresse our pride, To bring unto our eyes what we would hide, Ev'n from our selves, our close deformities? Or, may not God, to shew how he does prize His servants labours, make them thus appeare, As does the Sunne after a cloud, more cleare? His judgement certainly wee'l say's too quicke, Who'l prove one bad because he sees him sicke; These judgements are diseases, and bestowd At pleasure, and not where they most are owd: Yet due they are where ever they are found, Since there are none so Catholikely sound, But in a word, but in a thought have strayd, Perhaps in those Afflictions, when th'ave wayd Their deeds and suffrings, which they thinke to be Of farre more rigor then Aequality.
Then courage noble Countrymen, nor feare, Though you should want successe a while, to reare Your names up to your ancestors, (who did Those acts which now were better to be hid: Lest that they should upbraid us) doe not feare That Spaine is neerer the Almighties Eare Then our devotions: he that could bestow A victory after a second blow Vpon the doubting Israelites, can still Create our better hopes ev'n out of ill Or if he doe not, if he have decreed That our just plague shall be their unjust deed: That Israel shall be once more overcome, And David flie away from Absalom: Yet let this glad us in our chiefest woe, Man may be good and yet unhappy too. Now are they truly humbled, now although No curious eye could guesse their overthrow When he had seene their numbers, yet at length They will rely upon another strength, Or if to numbers they will trust agen, 'Tis to Gods numerous mercies, not their men. He can deliver (they have seene) by few, And they doe thinke it possible and true That he can help by many too, they find Without him all their actions full of wind, Of emptinesse, and with him they not doubt To be as well victorious as devout, Now Pride hath left them, now they goodnesse yeeld▪ Now have they lost their vices with the field. Such holy lessons doe misfortunes teach, Which make our once bad thoughts bravely to rea▪ At Heav'n and glory: if you marke it well Whilst yet it was a populous Israel
It was a proud one too, but when that now God lookes upon them with an angry brow, When all their troopes halfe weary and halfe sicke, Are growne to easier Arithmeticke, Th'are truly penitent; hence we may see The pow'r, the good pow'r of Adversitie, W'are bad if we are happy, if it please Heav'n to indow us with a little ease, If riches doe increase, untill our store Meet our desires, till we can wish no more, If that our garners swell (untill they feare Ruine from that with which they furnisht were) We but abuse these benefits: our Peace Brings forth but factions, if that strangers cease To give us the affront; our selves will be Both the defendant, and the Enemy. Our riches are our snares, which being giv'n, To man, to make a purchase of the heav'n, We buy our ruine with them, the abuse Is double, in the getting, and the use, So that our summes unto such heaps are growne When Avarice succeeds Oppression. In briefe, our garners so well stuff'd, so eramm'd, Detaine our Corne, as if that it were damn'd, To everlasting prison, none appeares, And thus we give dearth to the fruitfull yeares: Being to such a proud rebellion growne, Famine is not heav'ns judgement but our owne. So wretched are we, so we skilfull grow In crimes, the which the heathen doe not know. We wrong God for his blessings, as if thus We then were thankfull, if injurious. Why should not mercy winne us? why should we e worse by that, whence we should betterd be?
Blessings were ne're intended for our harme, Nor should the snake have stung, when he was warme Him that had warm'd him. O how base is man! How foolish Irreligion has wanne Vpon his reason too! Doe we not say That hee's a beast, whom onely stripes can sway. O what is man then! who ne're heares his Lord, Till that the famine call him, or the sword. Who (as he meant to tyre his patient God) Yeelds not unto his favours, but his rod. And can we yet intreat him to be kind, To alter his, when wee'l not change our mind? If we are heard, we will offend agen, And all our pray'r does but intreat a Sinne. Thus pray'd the Israelites, but if th'are heard If he that made them scorn'd, will make them feard: It is in chance, no, tis as sure as fate, Having forgot their misery of late They will rebell againe: like those good hearts Who though they know the paines, the many smarts Which fruitfulnesse is fruitfull with, still give Death to themselves, to make their issue live: And if they scape this death, they try againe, And boldly venture for a second paine, As if twere pleasure, or as if they meant Rather to dye, then to be continent. Thus have we seene a barren, sandy soyle (Made onely for the husbandmans sad toyle And not his profit) when the full heav'n powres His moisture downe, easing himselfe by showres, Drown'd with the drops, to make us understand A figure of the Sea upon the Land; When once those drops are spent, when that the sky Smiles with his new restor'd serenitie,
Swifter then thought, before that we can say This was the place; the water's gone away, Theres a low Ebbe, againe we see the Land Changing its moisture for its ancient sand. Yet he that knowes this their infirmity, At last will pitty it, and from on high, (When now their thoughts of war they will adjourne When there's no talke now, but of their returne) Hee'l hinder it by victory: with that (About the time that pitchy night had gat The conquest of the day, of which being proud He wrapt himselfe within his thickest cloud, Thinking perhaps his conquest to be voyd, If any saw the triumphs he injoyd) Vnto our Levite he a vision sends Clad in her dearest shape, in whom he ends All thoughts of Fancy: Whom when he had seene (And quickly he had spy'd her) Fairest Queene Of heav'n, he sayes, what is there here on earth That could perswade thee to a second birth, Thus to appeare agen? needs must thou know (For ignorance belongs to us below Excluded out of heav'n) that our sad state Is for its goodnes prov'd unfortunate; That Benjamin is conqueror, and that we Could not revenge, but onely follow thee▪ Nor was't one losse, one petty overthrow Hath daunted us, but (as if fate would shew All her choyce malice on us) we have try'd How many wayes 'twas possible t'ave dy'd. Beleeve it, heavenly one, no cowardise (Which heretofore being base; is now tearmd wise) Lost us the day, no providence; no zeale Nor that (which can the maymes of actions heale)
Councell, and grave advice was wanting to us: Only the heav'ns, which we had thought would wooe us To prosecute thy vengeance, and from whence We look'd for daies, like a good conscience Shining and cleare, with cruelty unheard Give vs an overthrow for a reward; That we can onely (such our wretched fate) Deplore the losse, which we should vindicate. Is this your Iustice heav'ns? nay I would know If it at least be wisedome, thus to show Your wrath upon you followers? if there be Such a desire in you to make us see What powre you have, wherefore d'ye not use That powre on those, who impiously abuse Vs and your selves? O there are heathen still, People that neither feare, nor know your will, If you will ruine these, or any wise But lessen, y'ave the fewer Enemies: On these be powerfull; but if you doubt Whether such nations may be singled out, That sinne hath fled the world, then here begin, For all the Heathen are in Benjamin. Are we the onely faulty? or am I Pickt out for eminent Iniquity? All lights on me, twas I that rays'd these warres, Twas I that this thicke people like to starres, Have lessend into Number; I alone Merit both peoples curses joynd in one, Benjamin does detest me, and I guesse Israels hatred is more close, not lesse. What shall I doe, what course is to be tryde When safe I cannot goe, nor safe abide? No more sayes she, nor foolishly conclude To give complaints in stead of gratitude
Wee' are heard my deare, and he at whose command The earth will learne to move, the heav'n to stand Fast as the Center, who brings downe to hell, And out of deeper mercies (which to tell Would pose thē that they blesse) brings backe againe▪ Making the pleasure greater by the paine,) Hath crown'd our wishes; O joyfully good! Not to be had on earth, nor understood: Heav'ns high superlative, for unto me Revenge is better then Aeternity. Revenge upon Gods enemies: know my deare (And know that thou must doe what thou shalt heare) It is the will of heav'n, when once the skye Is proud of the next mornings livery, All Israel should meet, where what shall fall Iust with our wishes, or exceed them all, I must not now discover, yet thus much I dare deliver (my affection's such) A truth, that is confest as soone as heard, That he who knew to plague, knowes to reward. Our Levite wakes, but stretching out an arme He feels no body, no, nor no place warme To prove she had beene there, he thinkes 'tmay be No vision, but a birth of Phantasie: An issue of a troubled braine that fram'd Formes to it selfe which Nature hath not nam'd: Have I not slaine enough he sayes, but still Is it my office and my curse to kill? Twas but a dreame injoyn'd me to be bad, A dreame, a vapour, and am I so mad For nothing to be monstrous, and commit A crime, that men shall feare to dreame of it! But can I disobey what it hath pleas'd Heav'n to command me? O how I am ceaz'd
With strange extremes! nor readily can tell Whether this Revelation should dwell Clos'd in my brest; or whether I goe on As counting it a Revelation: There may be guilty silence, if we feare In the affaire of heaven to wound an eare With threatning Rhetoricke; this will not be Excus'd by a pretence of modesty: Rather twill prove the judgement of just heav'n, We shall receive the doome we should have giv'n, Now all the people know what he hath heard, Now they have all their forwardnesse declar'd In sacrifice, when Phineas appeares, One that had lived unto so many years; He knew not how to count them, and that knew The Desert wonders, and could prove them true By his owne sight, that could the more ingage Men to beleeve, not by his tongue, but age. Nay I have heard some having duely waigh'd How long in that high office he had stayd, Conceive they may affirme without a checke, Him of the order of Melchisedec; And prove (as onely judgeing what they see) Their Priesthoods, by their Priests eternity. Who having enter'd, all the people bow'd: (For 'twas not yet as perfect zeale allow'd To be irreverent to their Priest, that name Which now is prov'd a title but of shame, Then was the badge of glory) he indeares Himselfe, more by his office, then his yeares, To those, who thinke these two can ne'r agree, To scorne the Priest, and serve the Deitie. Before the Altar his weake knees he bends, Which age before, but now devotion sends
Vnto the ground, where with a voice so low, That he could onely heare it, who could know What it would have before it spake, he thus Whisper'd a prayer; King of Heaven, of Earth, of Seas, And of men exceeding these: Thou that when thy people ranne From the proud Aegyptian, Leadst them through aliquid path Safe, and scarce wet, when thy wrath Wonderfully made them know, Twas a Sea unto the foe. Thou that when the heat, the sand Of a barren thirsty land, Made our tongues be so confin'd To our roofes, they scarce repin'd, But in secret, so that we Onely fear'd a blasphemy. Thou then by a powerfull knocke Mad'st a Sea within a Rocke, And gav'st Israel to know For them drought should overflow: Thou art still the same, and we Stand in the same need of thee, Pardon then if we presume To an hope, and so assume Courage to us, when we joyne Our wants to that power of thine. Yes our wants, for we can find None of merit, w'ave declin'd Ev'ry good way, and have still Beene ambitious of ill, So that when we are exact, And have all our good deeds rackt
To the highest rate, ther's none Dares appeare before thy throne: Onely this desert we see, Continuance of adversity. Nay such monsters have we bin, Such proficients in each sinne, That we durst not looke on heav'n, Nor intreat to bee forgiv'n. Hadst not thou vouchsaf'd to doe What our wishes reacht not to: Hadst not thou vouchsaf'd to be Tutor to our Infancy: And bestow'd when we were mute Both our prayer and our sute. O the Courteous Respect heav'ns beares us! Scarcely had he done, Scarce finisht his impos'd devotion, When on the sudden, ere you could have said The Priest had sacrific'd, or he had pray'd, Through all the Campe a light was spread, to this Compar'd, the Sunn but a darke body is: And in respect of so divine a light Our day is honor'd, if he be tearmd night, Nor this alone, but that they there might see And feare their God in his full Majesty, Such voyces and such thunders fright the Ayre, That they suppose they want another prayer To be assur'd from them; so they declar'd They were afraid to heare, that they were heard▪ Downe on the pavement every knee is fixt, Some groveling on their faces, when betwixt Astonishment and hope, whilst yet they doubt What all this preface meanes, and whilst the rout
Fear'd judgements which they merited, they heare A voice for which they wish a larger eare, It was so sweetly mercifull: Once more Goe up (it sayes) and though that heretofore Y'ave had the worst: yet thus my sentence stands Ile now deliver them into your hands. Have you beheld how some condemn'd to dy, When they were fitted for Aeternity, When life they did despise, and all below, Receiv'd a pardon, when they fear'd the blow That should unman them, have you seene them then Almost forgetting that they were but men; How to expresse their mind they want a word, Ioy having done the office of the sword, And made them speechlesse? then you may in part Conceive the wonder of their joy; which Art Confesseth it exceeds her power to show At full, which onely they that have can know. Thus brave Corvinus, then whom fame nere knew Any that to an higher vertue grew, When once it pleas'd Fortune to leave her frowne, Made an exchange of Fetters for a Crowne, Thus, not to seeke a forreigne president, Our Henry, whom the Heav'ns courteously sent To set a period to our Civill broyles, To joyne both Roses: after many foyles, Receiv'd and conquer'd, after he had seene Himselfe an Exile, who a Prince had beene, When banishment was envy'd him, when nought Would please his Enemy, unlesse he bought His death of him that harbour'd him; ev'n then, To foole the projects of the cunning'st men, This wither'd root begins afresh to spring, And from a banisht coarse revives a King.
Thus (not to seeke out a stale president, Mentioning mercies after they are spent, And lost in story) Englands present Ioy (Whom Fate can onely threaten, not annoy,) How hath he try'd variety of griefe! How beene in dangers, as in Rule our Chiefe; That when there is a speech of suffering, He is no lesse our Patterne, then our King, The Seas spoke loud, yet if we rightly poyse, There was more danger, where there was lesse noyse: Yet was he freed from both, when in mans eye, Successe had seem'd to smile on Trechery. These are your wonders, Heav'n, and not so much Favours, (although the Favour too be such, That it does pose our gratitude, and so Onely proclaimes that we are made to owe Our proverty of merit) to be short, Th'are not so much your Favours, as your Sport. You in an instant rayse, whom we would sweare, Nayl'd to the Earth, him that had left to feare More then he suffer'd, that had beene so long Acquainted with ill lucke, with such a throng Of misadventures, that he does not know VVhat it is to be free from them, and so This courteous intermission he expounds Rather a Change then Cure of his neer wounds: You in an unthought Minute can depresse, VVhom we beleeve in league with Happinesse. And as upon the Stage we oft have seene, Him act a Beggar, who a King hath beene: For no default, but that the Poets art Thought at that time he best would fit that part: So in our serious Theaters, when you please Kings are as varying persons as are these▪
Onely in this their disadvantage lyes; That they may fall, but cannot hope to rise. They, whom the bands that make a kingdome strong; Succession to the Crowne both right and long From worthy Ancestors, obedience At home, and lastly sure intelligence Abroad hath fortifyed, those that suppos'd True joy to be wholly in them inclos'd: If you but please to frowne, in one short day (When they not thinke their Enemies on their way) Are conquer'd by them, and at last retaine This comfort onely to allay their paine That their misfortune (if the heavens decree) May be the portion of their Enemy. Why then doe trifling miseries so grate Our minds, and make us more unfortunate Then heav'n intended? if out of a summe Of mony (not so rich as troublesome By the large roome, it occupies,) some one Willing to teach us moderation, Nibble a little, how we fret! we rave! How for our treasure we distraction have! As if we did beleeve (to say no more) Heav'n had the onely powre to make us poore. Israel thought not thus, but does prepare All things that for the action needfull are: He thinkes now double diligence is due, That he may be victorious, and God true. On the Eastside of Gibeah there stood An overgrowne and unfrequented wood, The trees so thickly plac'd, that you would guesse, (Had you beheld that horrid wildernesse: How darkenesse all the Mastery had wonne,) Twas made for the discredit of the Sunne;
Never did any raye pierce through those leaves, And if at any time it light receives Tis onely when the heavens doe misse their stroke, And passing wicked men, murder an Oke. So that the brightnesse that adornes the same Serves not so much to'inlighten, as inflame. Here never did the nimble Fairy tread, Nor ever any of the Wood-nymphes bred Within this grove, but it was singled out For Pluto's regiment, for that bad rout Of Hell-borne furies, there you might have seene Alecto stretch'd at her full length betweene Two fatall Yughs, where while her rest she takes, She gives an intermission to her Snakes, Who in a thousand curles there hissing lye, And she sleepes sweeter by their harmony. Here had the Canaanite in former times (Whilest that Religion did consist in crimes) Offer'd his sonnes in sacrifice, as though He meant to pay backe heav'n all he did owe Or did conceive, (that which he should despaire) To be without sinne, when without an heire. This horrid place till now had emptie stood, But now the Israelites conclude it good To plant an ambush there: for thus they plot That when the skirmish shall be growing hot, They will draw backe, to make the Benjamite Conceive that stratagem to be a flight, And leave the towne for the pursuit; when straight Vpon a signe giv'n, they that lie in waite Shall ceize upon the City, and so force Their Enemy to such a desp'rate course, That being pursu'd by those he put to flight, He shall not know, whether to flie or fight,
Hearken ye silly ones that doe suppose You ought not to beare Armes against your foes: VVho having cast off ordinary sense, Affirme that they doe warre with Providence, VVho providently warre, that they distrust The powre, or care of heav'n, who will be just To their owne cause, which you will noyse to be A spice of wiser Infidelity. To these I need no other answer find: Shall we be foolish because heav'n is kind? And when your industry might doe as well, VVill ye inforce God to a Miracle? It is a truth I grant, which you pretend That God hath destin'd all things to their end, Which stands immoveable: nor is't in Fate To alter what he will praeordinate: Yet never any did so farre proceed In folly, to affirme that he decreed Onely the end, that was in Gods intents, Whilest we did sleepe, to blesse us with events We dreame not of: Such fondnes cannot find Any excuse (unlesse they were design'd Inevitably to't:) for I would know (If they suppose it possible to shew Their mind in these affaires, or if they be Not hindred from an answer by Decree) Why they doe eate; and why they doe not hence Conclude rebellion against Providence; Why they doe cloath themselves; and why desire When cold oppresseth them to choose a fire; Have you forgot that for his holy ones, God can at ease produce e'ne out of stones As solid sustenance? or is it lost In your fraile memory, that when Israel crost
The Desert out of Aegypt, forty yeares Nor Taylors they imploy'd, nor Shoomakers? Trust me if you your selves thinke your selves true, Your care does vilify Gods care of you; And every dish that to your board is brought Vpbraides him to his face, as if you sought To mend his purpose; and by this odd feat, You doe blaspheme as often as you eate. The Israelites are wiser farre, although They have that unknowne happinesse, to know Their victory aforehand, though they heare This truth from him, from whom they cannot feare Any deceit, (whose powerfull word alone Makes that a truth which he resolves upon,) Although they will allow his Act for chiefe, Yet they will doe their part too: to be briefe, Every soldier to himselfe sayes thus; God will bestow the victory, but by us. The night they spend in prayer, but whē the morne Had dimm'd the pride of Cynthia's cleerest horne By higher luster, being call'd away Nor by the Cocke, the Trumpetter of Day; But by an earlier trumpet, then you might By her unwilling, and yet hasting light, Discerne, and seeing, almost rightly poyse Whether were more, their number, or their noyse, And unto which more feare was to be giv'n. Who fill the Earth with Numbers, with noyse Heav'n. Benjamin takes th'alarme, and having chose One in whose faithfulnesse they might repose A wary confidence; they quit the wall And to the wider field issue out all.
Lest if they stay'd within, and did oppose Rampiers and ditches onely to their foes, They might have bragg'd, (as if that they had won) Making a prison of their garrison. Now both the Hoasts themselves so neere do find, That it would aske more labour t' have declin'd The field, then to have wonne it, yet they stay Hoping that innocence is in delay, If they are slowly guilty: now speares flye Shiver'd in thousand fitters to the skye; And whether it revenge or fortune were, Every peece becomes a Murtherer, And from their bodies frees a many soule, Doing that broken, which they could not whole. Could Xerxes here have sate upon an hill, To see these warriors, he would not still Fondly lament, nor lavish out a teare Because they could not live an hundred yeare, But melt into just passion away Because they could not live out all that day. Now might you have beheld the fiery horse Proud of his owne, and of his Masters force. Robb'd of his Master, whom you now might see Running, as if twere after Liberty, Or you'd conceive, had you but seene the race That 'twas no more a battle, but a chase. No stroke falls idle, nay they are so neere; They need not strike at all: death is caus'd here By their bad neighbourhood, the whole and sound You might have seene here dead without a wound. To save the guilt and labour of the sword, Bodies to bodies their owne ends afford. Now nothing but the dust is to be seene Which like so many Emblems flyes betweene
They mingled armies, which in silence sayes, They are no better then the motes they raise, Thē those poore Atomes: but they think to shrowde Their acts from sight of heav'n under that cloud, And therefore doe their utmost: yet as though Those hands were sluggish, or this fury slow, The trumpets chid them to a lustier guilt, And the loud drums proclaim'd, you have not spilt Blood enough yet: O what were they that found Out first the use and malice of that sound? Which makes us kill with greedinesse, and when Tis the Corrupted Nature of most men Hardly to yeeld unto the destitute, These will not suffer us to heare their suite. This drowns the groanes: but now both armies reele, Now this gives backe some ground, now that doth feele That it is prest too hardly. Thus the seas When over it the angry winds doe please To exercise their fury, doe not know What course to take, nor whither they should flow: This wave breakes that, and then another blast Makes that the conqueror, which was conquerd last. At length the Israelites give backe indeed, And though in order, yet with such a speed, Benjamin calls it Flight, all's ours they cry, If we can runne we have the victory: With that, what ever men the towne affords, Skilfull to use their fingers or their swords, For spoyle or for pursuite, issue out thence With such a noyse, they give intelligence That they have left it emptie: O the vaine Attempts of foolish man! O deserv'd paine! Th'are made the spoile, that they intend to make, So wisely can just heav'ns their vengeance take
On bad attempts, so all our heate asswage, And make our Ruine greater then our Rage. It never entred into their proud thought, They should receive the damage which they sought To give unto their brethren: who having left Their woody covert, and the friendly cleft, Which entertain'd them, by a quicke surprize, Take the unguarded towne: O who can prize Those losses to the full? or who rehearse Those misadventures in an equall verse? They spare no age, but (cruell) take away From the old men, the solitary day They could expect to live: now Infants dye, Ev'n those, who yet within their mothers lye, Finding a Night before they see the Morne, Being buri'd thus, before that they were borne, For whom their murtherers no crime could choose, But that they were▪ and had a life to loose, Nor does the weaker sex escape the rage Of these intruders, and as every Age, So every Person suffers, onely here May be the difference, (if that any were) Either they're killd out-right, or which is worse, They thinke their life to be the greater curse. Here mothers see their daughters whom they bred As Votaries unto their Maiden head, Vn-virgin'd in their sight, where having lost That peerelesse jewell, which they valewd most, They doe receive to vindicate their name A death from them, from whom they had their shame. Avarice followes Lust, now they have leisure To ransacke all those Mineralls of treasure Long peace and thrift had hoarded up, at last As children when their Appetite is past
Spoyle what they cannot eate, and badly kind Pamper their dogs with that they leave behind: So these, as surfeiting with such a store, (Which made them lose all feare of being poore) What is not ready spoyle, give to the fire, Whose conqu'ring flames unto the heav'ns aspire, As boasting of their service: through the towne, Swifter then any thing that has renowne For speedinesse, they runne, one houre does spoile (Vnlucky houre) what was an Ages toyle, Now cracke the houses, now the Temples fry, Now the poore Citizens resolv'd to dye, Doubt of what death: and know not which to try, The fire, the downefalls, or the Enemy, Had this misfortune hapned in the Night (Though Nature had oppos'd) such a full light Had made a day, and so againe had wonne A Conquest of the towne, and of the Sunne. Never did Sailor with such joy behold Castor and Pollux when his ship was roll'd Vpon the angry Ocean, (whose proud waves Made the most haughty mindes freeze into slaves With a base feare,) as Israel does view Those flames, which he does feare not to be true They are so great, and yet he hopes to see These flames to light him to a victory. Now all the face of things is chang'd a new, Now those which earst seem'd vanquish'd, do pursue: The Israelites confirming by their Fight, That they could cause as well as act a Flight. Benjamin growes amaz'd, and does not know What he should doe, nor on what grounds to goe, Which probably seeme safe: if he should flye He runnes away unto the Enemy:
And shall he fight? alas! but he will find It is impossible to fight behind, Where he shall be assay'ld: yet he shifts ground, And figures out his battle in a round. And since he hath no hope to scape away, Hee'l nobly sell, not give away the day. They never fought till now, all the whole day Before, was onely somewhat fiercer Play, Murder in jest, but now they are so fierce As if they would inforce their swords to pierce Beyond the body; this a while, at length Despaire does yeeld the victory to strength; And Fortune (that the world henceforth might find That they had injur'd her who call'd her blind) Crownes the best side, and providently tryes At once to prove their Conquest, and her Eyes. The Parallell is easie; was't not thus, When Heav'n was pleas'd to be as kind to us? We felt the prickles first, but then our Nose Suckt in the sweeter vertue of the Rose. We had successe, as it were chose, and pickt, And, what we feard to suffer, did inflict. When Brett and Burrowes (that I speake their due) Reviv'd to France, Talbot and Montague. (O too like Montague, that lost thy breath, By the same fatall Engine of quicke death.) When the choyce valour of each rancke, and fyle Made up a double Sea within the Isle Of blood and teares, O give us thankes, kind heav'n, And adde a vertue to our Fortune giv'n. But soft, I heare the wise man say, Commend No man, nor action till you see the end. Our night is not yet past, or if it be Tis but the dawning, not the day we see,
And but a misty dawning, we must know That yet we have not payd God what we owe And that would worse then any Madnesse be To have a joy ere a security, Vnder the rodd to laugh: yet we conclude Patience does please no lesse then gratitude; And he that can orecome a losse, nor be Too much cast downe for want of victory, Is in some part victorious, and can say Tis blest to be a conquerour any way. That we may all acknowledg his desert, Who nobly gain'd a conquest of the heart Of them, whose bodies he had conquer'd first, To whom he then discover'd, what he durst, And after what his Nature was, when he In the sad field had spent his Cruelty, For when they offer'd to redeeme their dead, Summes which another would have vanquished, He freely yeelds unto the sutors breath, And gives the Grave, as easily as the Death, Whilst they doe give— O how I blush to tell, A poisond knife, a poison that will dwell And eate into their fame till earth be gone, Till poyson have no more to worke upon. Teach us our right to him, but then to you What shall we give? and yet what not leave due? Then, O kind Heav'n, for this let me be pleader, May we still sing your praise, who led our Leader, And now I hast unto my songs conclusion; Israels conquest, Benjamins confusion: Of all that valiant number which but now Made treble numbers to their valor bow: Onely sixe hundred scape away, so few, They were scarceable to commit anew
The Crime for which they suffer'd; had not Night Became their Vmpire and forbad the Fight, Those few had perisht too; then at the last Let future Ages learne of Ages past How vice rewards her servants! Let them be Afraid at leastwise of the misery, Who slight the sinne: why should a beauteous face Make my soule foule? and an externall grace Bereave me of my inward? O despaire! Shall I be bad, because another's faire? Hence that poore folly, rather let us winne A conquest by the losse of Benjamin. To know that those bely'd, and stolne delights Are not of so long lasting as the Nights, In which we did injoy them, how the Day Takes both their darknesse, and our sweets away: To understand that tardy heav'n is just, That Ruine is the consequent of Lust. And now O Father, once more I repaire To thy great presence, O thou onely Faire, (Who dwelling in the light that none comes neere, Canst not be seene of us, because too cleere; To whom created beauties if compar'd, Ev'n such as have the wisest eyes ensnar'd, Are nothing but Deformity at best, Durt somewhat better colourd then the rest) Instruct my youth, O teach that I may know, What mischiefes lurke under a seemely show; What a sweet danger woman is: O thou To whom the knees that doe not love, doe bow, Whom all obey, ev'n such as have no sense, Who doe not know their owne obedience; Whom all obey, ev'n such as doe goe on In a perpetuall Rebellion,
The Spirits accurst: Grant me, that chastly wise I enter into Covenant with mine eyes, Never to looke on Woman, not to see What would perswade my soule to forsake thee, To make a God of flesh: But if that I Forc'd by Temptation, or Necessity, Must see my Ruine, yet thus much, O thou Whō my soule loves, & would more, knew she how, (For his deare sake and worth, in whom was found Onely a place, no reason for a wound) If I must have the sight, yet I require I may at leastwise not have the desire, If I must see, let it be to despise So shall my heart be chast, if not mine eyes. FINIS.
A Thanksgiving for a recovery from a burning Feaver. I Burne againe, methinkes an holy fire Kindles my dull devotion, and farre higher Raiseth my spirit, then my hot disease Inflam'd my blood: how with a sacred ease Feele I these flames through my glad soule to rush! Like those, which made a Chappell of the bush Whence God did tutor Moses; would 'twere found That this place too were such an holy ground: Then should I boldly vent my Gratitude, And being Godly, not be counted Rude, The Night approacht, when by my paines I might Suspect it would have beene my lasting Night: I had a griefe beyond a Cowards feares, And such a griefe, it robb'd me of my teares. I was all Fire, the greedy Element Left no one part unsing'd, as if it meant To crosse the vulgar notions of our birth, And prove that man was not compos'd of Earth; That he was made of Flames, that past all doubt To dye was nothing, but to be put out. And yet the truth of this, this truth denyes, Man is not made of that by which he dyes. And had I dy'd thus, they had beene unjust Who had pronounc'd, we give dust unto dust. Ashes they well might tearme me, and so turne My Christian buriall to a Pagan urne. Without a tedious pilgrimage to Rome, (If that the torment make the Martyrdome) I might be Canoniz'd, and sooner farre Then some whose names in the gulld Calender Burne in red letters, of whom none can tell Whether they onely felt a Fire in Hell.
O heat! O drought! O am I quencht as yet, Or is not this Remembrance a new fit! Yet in my fiercest fit how oft I thought (Whilst yet there was some moisture left, which fought With my hot Enemy) how durst liberall men Give us a freedome of our wills, that when Ever we list we may be good, and so Owe to our selves as well the Cure as Blow? Who gave us this strange power, can any tell, Not to be Bad, and yet not to be Well? Can we command our sinnes so easily, And faint at a poore Feaver? tell me why You will consent to dye? and wherefore still You plead not then a liberty of will? My God cry'd I, though I must needs confesse Vnto my shame, that all my paines are lesse Then my demerits, yet I grant as free That they exceed all possibility Of mine owne cure, and yet I sooner can (Spite of disease) turne my Physitian Then my Redeemer, thou alone canst doe A powerfull cure on soule and body too. With that I felt recovery: my flame Was kindly lessen'd to a lower name, To moderate heat: Sleepe did my senses charme, And I that burnt before, was now but warme, Health and Devotion ceize on me, my fire Had left my bones to live in my Desire, And I was sicke of thankfulnesse: then now Teach me O Lord not why to praise, but how: Bow my stiffe knees, that they may beg a pow'r▪ Of full thanksgiving to my Saviour. Some praise for lesse: I've read of Ionah's arke (Which was of surer cariage then his Barke)
Th'inhabitable Fish, and yet we see That he gives thankes for his Delivery From his Preserver, and shall retchlesse I Deliver'd from a neerer death, now dye In the Remembrance? first, O Lord returne My tutor-torment, let me againe burne. And now great God, I doe intreat and change My praise into a pray'r, (for tis not strange That benefits should make a suppliant, Since courtesies cause pray'r as well as want) Twas thy great mercy made my body whole, O let me find that mercy to my soule, Then shall I boldly hasten to the grave, And wanting Life, not want what I would have. In illos qui Crastinum faeliciorem putant, Hendecasyllabon. HEu quam tempora ludimus diferti, Heu quam quaerimus improbi dierum Successus, quibus invenire tandèm Possimus miseri repente mortem. Injustus tamen imputare Fato (Fato quod melius meretur, aut nil) Audet quisque suam subinde mortem. Aude quisque suum vel inde crimen. Optamus celerem Leves ruinam, Et stultè cupimus quod execrandum est, Sic ut pectore pullulent in uno (Heu sors prodigiosa!) Mens et Hostis. Quis primas adeò probavit horas, Ut semper cupiat manere primas Ut non turbine raptus impotenti Laudaret magis ipse quae sequantur:
Acsi tempora sera quae sequuntur Non morti mágis obviam propinquent, Acsi tempora sera quae sequuntur Non sint tempora sera sed beata. Hoc ex vbere profluit parentis, Infanti tenero, nec invenire Quenquamtam puerum, rudemve possis, Quisi forte minus queat loquendo, Non mutire tamen velhiscere ausit (Quamvis hoc violare, non precari Divos, auribus esset eruditis) Annos ut videat, homo{que} crescat. Et jam Numina prorsus annuêre, Et jambarba virum satis probavit, Num constant ibi vota, num morantur? Num non alter adhûc rogatur annus? Hic tandem rogo vota nūm fatiscunt? Rotatus citius jacebit aer, Et rivus sciet inquies quietem, Luctus, quem fero; sit, sit et voluptas (Expertis onus est quin et voluptas) Quicquid sit Modo, Crastinum petemus Quin curas fugat ille pertinaces Quin et spem quo{que} longiusfugatam (Si mens certius autumet) reducit Sic mens stultior autumat: quin illa Quae non novimus anne sint futura Laudamus nimium, parum{que} certi, Incertissima perperam probamus, Cum praesentia tedio futura, et Sint desiderio nimis futura, Advenit modo Crastinus petitus, Advenit quo{que} Crastinus secundus, Tot demum, quibus impar omnis esset
Annorum fuga, computus dierum. Quid tandem inveniunt? quid, oro, tandem Non abunde leves, ut ante, quaerunt? Et quaerunt modo, denuoque quaerunt, Donec jam leve sit velinvenire. Us{que} ad tempora verticis soluti Rasi tempore, num severa frontem Non tantum ceperat ruga, sed omnem Obnubit faciem, at{que} luscus intus Abdit sese oculus, ut inde possit Visu cernere clariore mentem, Cum nasi stupeas videns acumen, Donec longa dies rogare fecit, An hic quem videas homo vocetur. Cum sulcis lacerata tota frons sit, Donec tempora jam irruant suprema Expectatio tunc suprema fati, Et voti male compotes perimus. Upon our vaine flattery of our selves that the succeed∣ing times will be better then the former. HOw we dally out our dayes! How we seeke a thousand wayes To find Death▪ the which if none We sought out, would shew us one. Why then doe we injure Fate, When we will impute the date And expiring of our time, To be hers, which is our Crime? Wish we not our End? and worse, Mak't a Pray'r which is a Curse? Does there not in each breast lye Both our soule and Enemy?
Never was there Morning yet (Sweet as is the Violet) Which mans folly did not soone Wish to be expir'd in Noone; As though such an hast did tend To our blisse, and not our End; Nay the yong ones in the nest Sucke this folly from the breast, And no stamm'ring ape but can Spoyle a prayer to be a Man. But suppose that he is heard, By the sprouting of his beard, And he hath what he doth seek The soft cloathing of the Checke: Would he yet stay here? or be Fixt in this Maturity? Sooner shall the wandring starre Learne what rest and quiet are: Sooner shall the slippery Rill Leave his motion and stand still. Be it joy, or be it Sorrow, We referre all to the Morrow, That we thinke will ease our paine, That we doe suppose againe Will increase our Ioy, and so Events, the which we cannot know We magnifie, and are (in summe) Enamor'd of the time to come. Well, the next day comes, and then, Another next, and so to ten, To twenty we arrive, and find No more before us then behind Of solid joy, and yet hast on To our Consummation:
Till the baldnesse of the crowne, Till that all the face doe frowne, Till the Forehead often have The remembrance of a Grave; Till the eyes looke in, to find If that they can see the mind. Till the sharpnesse of the Nose, Till that we have liv'd, to pose Sharper eyes, who cannot know Whether we are men or noe▪ Till the tallow of the Cheeke, Till we know not what we seeke; And at last of life bereav'd, Dye unhappy, and deceiv'd. FINIS.
TO the READER. REader, my Profession is not versifying, but this is part of the King of Swedens power, that he can transforme a Divine into a Poet, and indeed he that cannot make a verse upon this Argument, is an Argument for verses to be made upon. But thou shalt have nothing of a Poem here besides the Ryme, it being this Kings singularity, that he who writeth his History, shall be thought to write a Poem, and he that would write a Poem of him, cannot but write an History. It is impossible, that invention should exceed his actions, or that a Penne should dare more then Sweden. So that now an excuse is needlesse, a Divine may write an History. And why not such a Poem? I am sure a Prince in Israel is fallen, and therefore it can be no shame for David himselfe to follow the Beer. Which I trust thou dost in a true sorrow for him, and an harty prayer to the Almigh∣ty that he would raise up another to perfect, who thus farre hath advanc't this royall instument in his cause. Thus thou art advised by R. GOMERSALL.
AN ELEGY VPON the untimely, yet Heroicall death of Gustavus Adophus the Victorious King of Sweden, &c. ARe all our hopes but this? did we expect that thou our falling Fortunes shoulst erect, And must thou fall thy selfe? a little dust Remaine of him, who, we did surely trust, Should into dust have brought Romes prouder walls, And hastned the great whores just Funeralls? Is this the noble Conquerour? this he, Who was the Favourite of victory? Who, whatsoever he attempted, wrought, Event still gladly lackying his wise thought, Who wrought no other thing, then what he should, His power being still confin'd to what was good: How could he choose then but be happyest, Who had his will, who will'd that which was best? Alas how pale he lookes! sure tis not He, This is the count'nance of the Enemy, When Sweden prest him, thus did Tilly looke, When in the field of Leipsich, that sad booke, He read his following miseries, which did reach, As farre as Elve is distant from the Leach; Where he receiv'd his Death at his proud knee, Because before he would not bow to thee, This was Bavaria's colour when he saw His Arts could not diswade, nor forces draw Thee from thy high designes, this was his hew, When after all his projects, he not drew
A sword in his defence, and threw away His lands without the hazard of a day, As if hee'd see, how nobly thou wouldst use them, Or he had had his countryes, but to lose them. Or thus look'd Fridland, when he saw the field Strew'd with his slaughter'd souldiers who doe yeeld Riches o those grounds, whēce they took the spoile; And their dead bodies doe manure the soile, Which, living, they had wasted, in that howre, When Sweden foyld the Emperours Emperour. If these looke pale 'tis fit, a pretty art, That their owne cheekes, should represent the heart Of their dead forces, should want blood as well, And by their Faces, shew us how They fell. Let's looke againe: Alas! tis He, tis He, This was Gustavus, was? ô misery, Was it, and ist not? ô that face! those eyes! Where Spaine and Austria read their destinies Are they the dainties for the worme? that hand, Lift up to Prayer alway, or Command Must that lye still for Ever? must it bee, So still, as it would make the nemy? Was it for this thou leftst thy native soile, Thy Queene, thine Heire, was it for this? to toile For others benefit, and after, have For all thy travells but a German grave? Could not thy Sweden bury thee? nor give Rest to thy bones, which whilst that thou didst live Bestow'd a Crowne upon thy head? was't more To give a Grave, then a whole Realme before? Yet this is thy reward, that thou doest lye, In the, by thee twice reskew'd Saxony: Yet what reward is this for thee? they have From thee their Right, frō them thou but thy Grave.
Farre be all blessing from that man, who first Found out that Fatall instrument, who durst Thunder on Earth, and teach mankind a way How they might send mankind unto their clay, Not knowing who 'twas sent them, by whose skill The Coward is instructed how to kill, And the brave man must at a distance dye By him, whom neerer, his owne livelyer eye Would look to Death: how could he have the braine, To teach the world, by what a world is slaine, Or since he knew the mischiefe of his Art, If he could have the Braine, yet how the Heart? Is this the Cloysterd study? cannot they Deny the world; unlesse the world they slay? Is this (I'de know) their owne selfes to deny, To cause, besides themselves all else should dye? Are they coop'd up for this? but I admire In vaine, how from the Devill, and the Frier Commeth ought, that is not, Hellish, how those two Should thinke, what 'twas not a lowd crime to doe? Wert not for them 'twould be no wondred thing To see at once one Aged, and a King, Since we doe learne in Sage experience Schoole Crownes would be sacred wert not for the Cowle. Nor are we longer ign'rant now, who gave Birth to our sorrow, to our joy a grave, What ever mist to blind our eyes they spread, The Hand we doe not know, we doe the Head, Which that we may curse home, to pay his due, Let us their triumph and our losse review. Many have beene victorious, ev'ry Age Hath once produc'd some Worthies on the Stage, Sacred to glory: Rome doth Caesar praise, Carthage her Hannibal to Heav'n doth raise
Thy Bruce ô Scotland is farre fam'd by thee, Their Henry, France doth boast, our Edward we. All these were Conqu'rours, but upon what right May we inquire, did some of them first fight? Some were but Royall robbers, and the best Made man so cheape for their owne Interest, Revenge, or Profit drove them unto Fame, And thus they injur'd, whilst they gain'd their name: Whilst all Thy power is spent in doing good, And thou gain'st nothing but the losse of blood, Whilst all thy power is spent the wrong'd to right, And thus thy acts are Iudgement, and not Fight, Thus whilst their actions in this currant ran To make th' Oppressour greater the Man, Had there beene none opprest, thou hadst lien still That thou might Save, thou wert inforc't to Kill: Whilst all thy power is spent in Gods owne Cause, To plant, or to establish his pure Lawes To make Professours fearelesse, that it might No longer be a crime to be i'th' Right, Nor a sufficient cause to make one Dye That he would seeke a true Aeternity. These are thy Acts— to make the Enemy yeeld, By force to make him quit the blood-died field; To take in townes with as much ease, as though Their walls were like to those of Iericho, Would fall to give thee entrance; to or'e come Whole countryes with more speedinesse then some Could view them, all these are thy acts tis knowne, But these, with others, thine; those, thine alone. I challenge thee proud Greece and prouder Rome, From their first birth unto their latest tombe, Peruse your Heroes, read their actions or'e Make what was somewhat, by your Fabling, more,
Add lye and all to boot, then if you dare Bring them: if with Gustavus you compare, They shall as much that competition shunne, As a weake Taper yeelds to the bright Sunne, Which of them ever fought for others gaines, That theirs might be the Profit his the Paines? I could be infinite thee to commend, But thou thy selfe doest not despise an end I therefore hasten: having done thus much Thou now wouldst see whether another such Would after thy departure rise, or why May I not say, that thou wouldst therefore dye That man should grudge no longer at his Death Nor strive to keep whē heav'n would take his breath? Must we all Dye? proud death then doe thy worst, What ere thou canst, Sweden hath sufferd first And he being dead who now would live? mine eres Begin to flow a fresh, new fountaines rise, Which threaten inundations, but I stay, When I consider, thou hast found one way, Not to doe all for others: Princely shade! This is thy Art of warre at length t' invade Heav'n for Thy selfe, there all the gaines are Thine, Thou wert not Kill'd for the Prince Palatine: When I thinke this then doe I spare mine eye: For others thou dost Fight, for thy selfe Dye. The Epitaph in Latin. SVecia me genuit, Borealis gloria plagae, Lipsia bis palmam dat mihi, fata semel. Erexi oppressos, incurvavique prementes, Sceptra alijs, mortem comparo at ipse mihi.
Nescio quae balista meum jaculata Sepulchrum est. Sic cecidi, incerto vulnere fixus humo: Occubui, per quem non certó novimus, Author Non licuit cuiquam dicere caedis Ego. Lachrymulam funde unam lector, funde vel unam Qui vivus plures fundere te vetui. In English thus. ME Sweden bred, there I receiv'd my breath, Leipsich twice gave me honour, once my Death, I free'd th' opprest, brought down th' oppressors pride, Won crowns, that other men might weare thē, dy'ed. A bullet, out of what piece none can tell, Brought me that dismall message, thus I fell, Death at adventure my last blood hath spill'd, No man must boast that he hath Sweden kill'd. Reader shed one teare for my death, but one, Whose life took order, that thou shouldst shed none. FINIS.
