12476 S103536 99839288 3694
¶ THE STAFFE of Christian Faith, profi∣table to all Christians, for to arme them∣selues agaynst the enimies of the Gospell: and also for to knowe the anti∣quitie of our holy fayth, and of the true Church. Gathered out of the vvorks of the ancient Doctors of the Church, and of the Councels, and many o∣ther Doctors, vvhose names you shall see here follovving. Translated out of Frenche into English, by Iohn Brooke of Ashe next Sand∣vviche. With a Table to finde out all that which is contayned in the booke. EPHES. 6. Put on the vvhole armour of God, that ye maye stande stedfast agaynst the craftie assaultes of the Deuill. Jmprinted at London by Iohn Daye, dwelling ouer Aldersgate. ANNO. 1577. Cum Priuilegio.
Sr. Richard Newdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709 blazon or coat of arms
To the Right honourable and his singular good Lorde and maister, Edwarde de Vere, Lorde d'Escales, and Ba∣dlesmere, Vicount Bulbecke, Earle of Oxenforde, and Lorde great Chamberlayne of Englande, Iohn Brooke vvisheth long lyfe, vvith the increase of honor. &c. ALTHOVGH VER∣tue the roote of well doing (Right honorable Lorde) hath of it selfe, sufficient force to withstande, repell, and ouerthrowe, both the open malice, and secrete slaunders of euill tongues, yet notwithstanding considering howe daungerous, yea howe vnpossible a thing it is to escape that poysoned sting of Zoilus, and also that nothing hath euer ben so well done, but that this Scorpion hath eyther openly or priuily stong, I nede not to doubt, nay I may be right sure, that these my labors shal come into the hands of some, more curious than wyse, more ready to nippe and tante (yea euen withoute fault) then frendly to admonishe or amende. By occasi∣on
whereof (right honorable and my singu∣lar good Lorde) I haue not only thought it expedient for hope of your honours fauou∣rable patronage, towardes these also my la∣boures bestowed in translation: But also for respect of my particular duetie towardes your honor, to offer and dedicate the same likewyse to your fauorable allowance and well liking. For if in the opinion of all men, there can be found no one more fitte, for pa∣tronage and defence of learning, then the skilfull: for that he is both wyse and able to iudge and discerne truly thereof. I vnder∣standing righte well that your honor hathe continually, euen from your tender yeares, bestowed your time and trauayle towardes the attayning of the same, as also the vni∣uersitie of Cambridge hath acknowledged in graunting and giuing vnto you such com∣mendation and prayse thereof, as verily by righte was due vnto your excellent vertue and rare learning. Wherin verily Cambridge the mother of learning, and learned men, hath openly confessed: and in this hir con∣fessing made knowen vnto al men, that your honor being learned and able to iudge as a
safe harbor and defence of learning, and therefore one most fitte to whose honorable patronage I might safely commit this my poore and simple labours. Likewyse remem∣bring howe much and many wayes I am by dutye bounde vnto your honor, as also howe vnable I am to discharge the same: I haue thought it in respecte also of my behalfe and duty, most meete to offer and exhibite, such trauelles as my abilitie and skill can reache vnto, to your Lordship as pledge and token of my dutifull and vnfained good wil: To the ende that such profyt as by this my trauels may growe to my countrey and com∣mon wealthes, may be receiued vnder your Lordshyppes approbation and defence: that all men which doe reape benefyte thereby, should owe thankes vnto you in whose duety and good will I am. Wherefore hartely re∣quiring and humbly beseeching your Lorde∣shippe to take on you the patronage and de∣fence of these my labors by translation that by your approbation and well liking, others may also the rather like thereof. Crauing pardon for this my symple boldnesse or ra∣ther bolde symplicitie hoping also of the
continuance of your honors accustomed goodnesse towardes mee, and instantlye praying to God for your prosperous e∣state, I cease further at this time to sollicite you. Your honors obedient ser∣uant, Iohn Brooke.
Ʋnto the Church and con∣gregation of God which is in L. Guido desi∣reth grace and peace, and the mercie of God, through Iesus Christ our Lorde: And perpe∣tually to perseuere in the knovvledge of the holy Gospell of the sonne of God. Amen. KNOVVING AND CON∣sidering the vvarre and combat that yee daylye suffer to mayntaine and keepe the true and pure Christian do∣ctrine of the ancient and true Church of God, agaynst a sort and heape of glorious decei∣uers, vvhich hyde and boast themselues vvith false ensignes, of the name and title of the auncient Church, and of the auncient Doctors: I haue de∣dicated vnto you (my vvelbeloued frendes) this present booke, entituled: The Staffe of the Faith, gathered out of the vvorkes of the auncient doctors of the churche, and of the counselles, and out of many authors: to the ende that thereby you may learne vvholy, to fight against your ennemies, vvith the same staffe vvith vvhich they doe fight agaynst you, that is to say, the auncientes. I doe not tell you hovv this staffe, shall keepe you from the danger of your ennemies only, I vvill content my selfe in speaking but one vvorde, touching the same, (that is to say) that you shall not only obtayne and get victory of your ennemies, but also send them avvay vvith their mouthes stopped. Therefore I desire you in Gods name, that ye be not slothfull nor negligent, to study therein often, and to haue those
sentences therein alledged readily at yovr fingers endes, that thereby the kingdome of Iesus Christe be auaunced, and the dominion of the deuilles and infidels destroyed and abolished. I doe knovve very vvell that manye people haue accustomed to saye, vvhen it is spoken vnto them of the auncients, speaking vvithout eyther iudge∣ment, or reason, in saying that as touching the Auncientes, they haue nothing to doe vvith them, for they vvvere men as they: but that they con∣tent themselues only vvith the vvorde of God. I vvoulde not altogither denie or gainesaye them in that, if they vvould not reiect thereby God and his giftes, by thinking to reiect men and their doctrine. Therefore vve ought to take good heede vnto men vvhen they speake of themselues, and also vvhen God speaketh by them. The same vve may knovve, vvhen their doctrine is confirmable and agreeing to the rule of all right, vvhich is the vvord of God the doctrine of the prophets & Apostles. Furthermore, vve vvould not haue you ignorant, that the aun∣cient fathers haue ordayned and established a great many of ceremonies, and thinges in the churche respecting the time and personnes, and the in∣firmitie of those that dayly come vnto the knovv∣ledge of the Gospell, asvvell of Ievves as of panims and Idolaters: But they haue done that onely but for a certaine time, to the ende they might dravve to the Gospell all nations, and let and stoppe the vvay of the Heritickes and ennemies of the catho∣lyke faithe, from gayning and vvinning the vveake in faithe. For vve ought not to maruayle, if the aun∣cient fathers haue done many thinges in that time,
vvhich novv can not serue, nor profite vs any thing at all, inasmuch as they haue serued but onely for their time. For the Apostles haue ordayned some thinges vvhich novve ought not to be follovved nor kept. As vve doe reade in the actes of the Apo∣stles, that the counsell that vvas celebrated by the Apostles in Ierusalem,Act. 15. decreed that vve should ab∣staine from bloude, and from the fleshe of beastes that vvere strangled: VVe knovve vvell inough that this ordinance novv hath no more place, and is not in force among the christians,Titus. 1. 1. Tim. 1. Rom. 14. nor ought to haue, bicause that all thinges are cleane and purifi∣ed through the vvorde and prayer. Then vvee see that that decree, vvhich hath bene decreed by the holy spirite & by the Apostles, to haue bene made, bicause of the personnes, and to serue onely but for that time. Iudge novve, if an ordinance made by the Apo∣stles to support the infirmitie of men, hath bene set foorth, and aftervvardes abolished: vvhat oughte vve to iudge of those vvhich are of lesse importance vvhich haue bene ordayned by men, a great deale inferior and of lesse estimation then the Apostles? There is no doubt, that forasmuch as they haue bene ordayned to serue onely for that time, that novve vve may let them alone and forsake them, bicause that there is neyther Ievves nor Turkes a∣mong vs, but christians, at the least as they saye. Also vve ought not vpon this to holde our peace or hide the vnshamelesse malice of many, vvho (ne∣uerthelesse calling themselues christians) vnder co∣lour of antiquitie, and of the auncient doctors, doe forge and inuent of their ovvne vvicked and fil∣thye
brayne, naughty and most detestable errors: and aftervvard say that the auncient fathers haue vvritten so, and preached so: and by that meanes make the poore vvorld being seduced to beleeue it. And yet the malice is so great in them, that all they that vvill not receiue and allovve, that vvhich their brayne hath inuented vnder the name of holy men, they crye after them vvith open mouth, to the fire, to the fire vvith the Heritickes. They reiecte the doctrine of the fathers. Alas O my God and Lord thou knovvest our hearts: and the heartes of these lyers, that vve doe not desire but that in all and through all, be it through life or death, that thy son Iesus Christ, and his doctrine, may be onely recei∣ued, loued and vvorshipped: And for this are vve apoynted as sheepe to be slayne: vve are nought set by, mocked, beaten, banished, chased from tovvne to tovvne: To be short vve are esteemed and counted as the most vile & stinking filthynesse of all the vvorld, troden dovvne vnderneth the feete of the vvorldlinges: But for all that vve possesse our soules in patience, looking for the righteous Iudge vvhich vvill iudge all the vvorld, not accor∣ding to the doctrine of men, but according to hys holy vvorde, for vvhich vve are had novve in suche abhomination to the vvorlde. Furthermore they vvhich dayly accuse vs vvith so greate rage and furye, against the auncient doctrine of the Apostles and Doctors, shall at the last ac∣knovvledge their malice and liuing, that they haue declared in their bookes, corrupting and marring the bookes of the auncient fathers of the churche: If I durst, I vvould gladly name one vvho in that
occupation or science hath serued out his prenty∣shyppe, for that cause is called our maister, in his booke that he hath intituled. The bouckler of the faithe: vvherein he declareth the subtiltie of his in∣tent and craft, alledging the auncient Doctors in Latine, after translating them into Frenche, and at euery place where he found Sacrificium, or the like manner of speaking, in steade to put in sacri∣fice, or holy mysterie, he hath translated them al∣vvayes the holy mysterie of the Masse, and so by that meanes they finde that vvorde Masse in the bookes of those good fathers, vvhich they neuer thought nor did. I beleeue he thought that his booke should not come but only in the handes of yong children, or else he thought that he had to doe but vvith beastes like vnto himselfe. There is no man though he haue but small iudgement and vnderstanding, vvhich reading that booke, but that he may see at the first dashe hovv he lyeth, and vn∣sayeth and reuoketh it agayne, and neuerthelesse he is heard and accounted as halfe a God: not on∣ly of the poorest sort, but of the greatest in the vvorlde. In the meane time vve ought not to mar∣uayle at this, that such gallants haue bene so hardy and ouerbolde, forasmuch as they vvere supported and maintayned of Kings, Emperors, Princes, and Magistrates, and that they vvere the best vvelcome to their Court. I remember that I haue reade in the Ecclesiasti∣call histories, that in the time of the auncient Do∣ctors,Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 22. there vvere abusers and seducers of the peo∣ple, that sovved their pestilent venim amongst the doctrine of the auncients: Of that Denise bishop
of Corinth complayned very much, saying, that many haue sovvn in his Epistles much vvicked doc∣trine. Therefore thinke, that if they haue bene so hardy and bolde that they durst corrupt the vvry∣tinges of the auncientes, yea vvhilest they vvere yet aliue. VVhat vvill they doe novve? at the least they vvill doe asmuch, as their auncient fathers, that is to saye those Apostates ennemies of the fathers. Novv notvvithstanding their shamelesse malyce they rebuke and checke vs vvith a vvhores face, that vve are ennemies of the fathers, despisers and contemners of their doctrine, and disturbers of the vvorld. I vvould to God that they vvould permitte and suffer vs to compare our doctrine openly, and before all the vvorld vvith theirs, to the end that all men might knovve vvho be the contemners and ennemies of the fathers: somuch it vvantith that vve should be found condemners and ennemies of those good fathers, that altogither it vvoulde be seene that the same doctrine that vve hold & keepe at this day, is the very same for vvhiche manye of those good fathers haue shead their bloud: and vvould shead it, if they vvere novve aliue. It seemeth that the same is not true that I haue spoken, that if the fathers vvere yet aliue, that men vvould put them cruelly to death, as most vvicked Heritickes. Yea they vvhich at this daye doe boste and brag them selues to be their obedient children, and make bucklers of their bookes. Vnderstand and hold fast in minde (dearely belo∣ued) behold this present booke may serue vs for a certayne argument, of that vvhich is composed and faithfully gathered togither, out of the very bookes
of the auncient Doctors: That if I vvould present this present booke (vvherein there is nothing in it of mine, but altogither of the auncientes) for con∣fession of my faith to those enemies of the fathers, I doubt not but presently I should be as a moste vvicked Heretick, condemned to be burned quicke into ashes. Novve see (dearely beloued) and iudge iustly before God according to your ovvn consci∣ence, vvhether vve be the ennmies of the fathers or they. The auncient fathers haue sayde that the breade of the supper abideth alvvayes breade, not being transubstantiated or chaunged: I doe demaund of you in good faith, vvherefore or vvhat is the cause that they shead dayly so abundantly the bloude of the poore children of God? Is it not vpon this on∣ly poynte, or for this cause, that the fathers haue beleeued and mayntayned vvith a common con∣sent, as you shall see in that booke vpon the arty∣cle of the Lordes supper? I leaue it to your ovvne iudgement. Furthermore vve doe reade that the an∣cient fathers, of vvhom these here doe aduance, and bost them selues to keepe and mayntayne their doctrine, haue broken in peeces the images of Iesus Christe, and of the Saintes, that haue bene set vp in the temple of the christians, saying that it is against the Christian doctrine to haue Images in the Church. VVhat is he that doubteth, that if the good fa∣thers vvere yet liuing, and that they shoulde so breake the Images as they did in that time, but that they shoulde be out of hande, or vvith all speede condemned as heretickes to be burned, yea if they
escaped so. For vve do see many dayly vvhich doe not escape so good cheape, but they haue done vn∣to them all the torments and paynes that these vvorshippers of the fathers can inuent or imagin. Then vvhen you shall reade the doctrine of the fathers contayned in this present booke, iudge vvhether it may be confessed and maintayned o∣penly before these vvorshippers of the fathers vvithout daunger of lyfe. In the meane time, I de∣sire you (my deare brethren) that ye feare not to a∣bandon your bodie and lyfe, for a doctrine so iust, holy, and good: and let vs reioyce in this, that vve holde the true auncient doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles and Doctors of the Church. And as touching you, O ye Princes, Iudges, and Magistrates, betvveene vvhose handes this present booke shall happen to fall: I desire and re∣quire you, in the name of the liuing God, and of his sonne Iesus Christ our Lorde vvhich hath shed out all his bloud vpon the crosse for the loue of vs, that you doe giue right iudgement vpon the poore faithfull people, of vvhome your prisons are at this time full, through the furor and madnesse of those vvorshippers of the fathers, and bee no more the hangmen of that vvicked Vermine: for it is not counted a thing honest nor meete among men, that the Kings, Emperours, Princes, and Magi∣strates shoulde bee made the hangmen of beg∣gers. 1. Pet. 2. Rom. 13. Sapi. 6.Be ye then more ashamed than euer you vvere, bicause that you beare the name of God, and the povver to gouerne the people is giuen you from God, not for to abuse it in punishing the good, and
defending the vvicked, but to maintayne and ayde the good, and to punish the vvicked (as the Apo∣stles haue taught vs.) But alas my God, into vvhat blindenesse is the vvorlde fallen into, to esteeme and thinke that they vvhich holde and keepe the true auncient doctrine are heretikes. O you Iudges and Magistrates, doe you not see dayly in your prisons, the poore children of God, to eate and drinke very scarsly bread and vvater, and to be cast most vilely and filthily into a lovve dunge on vvith the venimous beastes, lying as the poore beastes vpon a little stravve hauing their ar∣mes and legges broken vvith the racke? Doe you not see (I say) on the other side those goodly masters vvhich beare such great zeale to the auncient fathers, to haue their bellye altogither stuffed vvith vvine and delicate fare, coming forth from their bankets and feastes vvith a face as red as fire, or like to a Butchers boule, comming forth to passe avvaye the time, for to examine the poore faythfull people, vvhich are not sought for at the table vvhere good cheare is, but in a most filthie and darke dungeon: they are poore children of God tyed and bounde vvith chaynes, vvith a pale face and thinne cheekes, brought before those fat bellies and firie faces through their ouermuche drinking and quaffing of vvine, and the first vvords they speake is, come hither thou vvicked here∣tick, avvay thou dāned seducer of the people, thou hast the deuil vvithin thee. And assone as the pore children of God did thinke to haue spoken for their defence, the fatte bellies quicklye put their hands to their Bible, but it is another Bible than the olde
olde or nevve testament: For they can do nothing but prouide faggots, and crie to the fire, to the fire vvith those vvicked heretickes, I knovve not vvhere they haue learned to doe so. Haue they lear∣ned that of the Prophetes and Apostles? It appea∣reth no. Neyther haue they learned it of the aunci∣ent fathers. For they shall finde vvithin this present booke, that they haue spoken and done altogither othervvise: therefore they declare that it is a rage and a madnesse that they haue conceyued against the truth for to extinguishe and abolishe it vtterly, and all those that maintaine it: For libertie to speake is taken from vs. Those that vvould speake, their tongues are cut out of their heades? and af∣tervvardes are burned. In the meane time O ye Iudges and Magistrates, vvhich haue the publicke charge, haue regard from henceforth vvhat you doe in condemning them to death. You cannot condemne them to death ex∣cept ye condemne all the good and auncient fa∣thers to death vvith them. VVhat order doe you call this to condemne to death as Heretickes the Saintes and their doctrine, vnto vvhom they crye and dayly pray vnto in their Letanie, saying, O Sancte Augustine, O Sancte Cypriane, O Sancte Hieronime. &c. Ora pro nobis, that is to say, O Saint Augustine, O Saint Cyprian, O Saint Ie∣rome, and so consequently of the other, pray for vs. And in the meane time they condemne them, and their vvritinges, and all those that follovve theyr doctrine to be burned, as the experience dothe dayly teach vs. Therefore ye that Iudge the people haue a good
respect vnto that that you haue to doe: for it is not onely vnto vs that you doe adresse your selues, but also to the sonne of God, vvhich hath sayd vn∣to vs, he that toucheth you, toucheth the apple or sight of mine eye. The same hath bene vvell shevv∣ed to Paule, VVhen he persecuted the poore fayth∣full, crying from heauen after him,Act. 9. Saule Saule vvhy persecutest thou me? he did not persecute him in his ovvne person, but he persecuted him in his members, vvhich are all the faithfull that beleue in him. Euen so (my deare brethren) vve shall rest in pa∣tience, and shall not be ashamed to be condemned vvith all those good and auncient fathers of the church, and not onely vvith them, but also vvith all the Prophets and Apostles. Then vvhen you see your selues bound and brought before the Iudges, to receiue sentence of death and condemnation a∣gainst you, behold vvith you the Prophets, Apo∣stles and the auncient doctors bound vvith you to be condemned in the same torment. Be ye ioyfull and reioyce to be enrovvled in their bande, for to beare vvith them, the yoke of Iesus Christ? perse∣uere valiantly in the doctrine that you haue already receiued, for no man can hurt you. Ought vve not greatly to reioyce of this, that the persecuting ty∣rantes can doe our bodyes no more hurt, then a vvolfe or theefe of the vvoods, vvhich can but murther or kill vs. Let vs reioyce, for our names are vvritten in heauen. VVe haue yet this good turne (thankes be vnto our good God therefore) that the persecutors can do vnto vs no vvorse then to to put and place vs vvith our good God in the
company of Angelles and all the blessed soules in heauen. VVhat is he that vvould not desire to goe playe vvith so happy a company eternally and vvithout ende?1. Cor. 2. Yea to be in glory vvhich the eye hath not seene, and eare hath not heard, neyther hath entred into mans minde, the thinges vvhich God hath prepared to such as loue him. Againe, forasmuch as they esteeme and court vs so vvicked and abhominable, and crye so spitefully after vs, as after the vvickedest people of all the vvorld, to make vs and our doctrine odious vnto the people: They commaund them not to heare or harken vnto vs, they make the simple people be∣leeue, vvhen they haue them vnder confession, that if they doe not accuse vs, they shall be damned. Their craft, subtiltye and enuye agaynste the truth is to be maruayled at. In the meane time I vvould vvillingly that they vvould accord and a∣gree vvith vs to conferre their doctrine vvith ours, their crosse and persecution vvith ours, their lyfe vvith ours, theyr church vvith ours: By that means vve should plainly see vvhether they be the childrē of God or vve. First of all haue not vve the baptis∣me purely administred, as vve doe reade that the Apostles haue administred it vvithout any inuen∣tions of men, but onely according to the vvord of God? Let one reade the Scriptures, and he shall see vvho it is that hath added to the Sacramentes, eyther vve or they. Furthermore let men behold the persecutions that they suffer for their doctrine, the number is soone counted, for there is not one vvhich hath
suffred death for their doctrine: neuerthelesse Ie∣sus Christ hath promised that his church shal haue persecution in the vvorld, saying, ye shall be hated of all men for my name.Mat. 10. Hovv can they be hated of all men sith that they be in all places the best vvelcome? Hovv commeth it that one shoulde thinke to doe sacrifice vnto God in putting them to death? I did neuer knovve any. I doe accord and agree in this, that they are of∣ten times taken prisoners, but it is in the good feastes and bankettes, and in the best seates of the table: and vvhereas the children of God are bur∣ned vvith fire, they here are burned throughe the heate of VVine. Their innocent fleshe is hevven and cut in peeces, but it is at the table vpon their treachers. They are rotten and consumed vvith the Goute of Naples, insomuch that they fall in peces. They are melted and melted againe many times in a yeere. Besides all the dangers they put them selues into both day and night to runne after other mens vvyues, in great danger of their life. And yet some vvill say that they are not persecuted: It ap∣peareth that they be, for one shall see a great many more among them to dye Martyrs, of the paines that vve did speake of euen novv, then of their na∣turall diseases or sicknesses. They are then Mar∣tyres, no man can denie, yea, but it is of the diuell: and vvhat is he that doubteth of it? And as concerning their life it is knovven vvell inough and manyfested vnto all men: Their good vvorkes and godly fruites vvhat it bringeth in all places, destroying and corrupting all the vvorlde, asvvell spiritually as corporally. This I am sure of,
that forasmuch as I haue touched and medled but vvith the doore of their kitchin, they vvill say I am a vvicked Hereticke: But vvhat then? Shoulde I hold my peace for their menaces and iniuries? No, no, God forbid, but rather I vvill crye vvith open mouth after them, bicause they haue so corrupted and destroyed the Lordes Vineyard. Alas, alas, my God vvhat is he that ought not but to lament and vveepe vvith bloudy teares, see∣ing all the vvorld to be so led into the bottome of hell, so many poore soules led to perdition. O Lord regard thy poore people, haue some pitie and com∣passion on them, for vvhom thy sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ hath offred to thee his body and bloud in a sacrifice: and suffer not that thy poore sheepe be so put as a pray for to be deuoured of al beastes. For vve are dayly assaulted vvith so many enne∣myes, that sathan riseth agaynst vs, for to make vs forsake and abandon our Lord Iesus Christ, and to renounce his Gospell: One day vve haue vvarre agaynst the Heretickes Anabaptistes, an other day agaynst Libertines, Epicures, Arians, Dauidistes, and agaynst dissemblers, and consequently, against the vvorshippers of the fathers, through vvhose zeale the children of God are put to death. Haue not vve then great neede of vveapons? It appea∣reth yea, if vve vvould not be taken in their snares, as many at this day are, through the iust iudgement of God. Therefore if there be any time to pray, or to vvatch, it is novve: Let vs then vvatch and praye, to the end vve may auoyde all those dangers, and perseuer and continevve to the ende.
You haue bene the first of your citie (dearely be∣loued) I also doe hope in the Lord you shall not be the last: But as you haue bene vntill novv the example and myrror of the poore ignorant people, to dravve them to the true light of the spirite, I doe hope through the grace of God, that nothing shall hinder you to continevve vnto the end on so holy a vvorke. For the poore ignorant people seeing the peace and vnitie, and the promptnesse and good courage that is in you to receiue the holy doctrine, are con∣strayned through your holy life and conuersation to come vnto the knovvledge of Iesus Christ, and consequently to saluation. Forasmuch then as the Lord doth vnto you dayly so much good, or shevv∣eth vnto you so much of his grace, shevving vnto you from day to day his maruaylous vvorkes, set to so your handes in the vvorke of the Lord, so long as he giueth you time and life, that you doe not leaue for your children that shall come after you, an euill example of life: but instruct them in that holy doctrine that you haue receiued, to the ende they may knovve after your death, that they had fathers and mothers that feared God, and vvell in∣structed in his vvord, and that they haue not recey∣ued the gospell in their mouthe onely, but also in their handes. And that they vvere not dissemblers, but true confessors of the name of God. Dispose and bestovve then vvhilest you haue time so vvell your affayres, and businesse according to the meanes as God hath giuen you, that youre successors may haue none occasion to complayne, that you haue left them an euill example: That
they say not after that you are dead, vve haue had parents & ancesters, vvhich haue had great knovv∣ledge of God, but they feared more to lose the a∣mytie and freendship of the vvorlde then of God. O hovv much ought you to feare the same, for it vvill turne to your great confusion. Remember also that vvhich the Apostle spea∣keth,1. Tim. 5. saying, if there be any that prouideth not for his ovvne, and namely for them of his housholde, the same denieth the faithe, and is vvorse then an infidel. Therefore all faithfull people ought to take god heede and marke vvell those vvordes, for it is a great euill to denye the fayth. Take good heede you be not an offence to any man, I doe meane in doing euil, be gentle curteous & mercifull the one to the other, not rendring euill for euill,1. Thes. 5. but render good for the euill. Liue so holy that if men vvold punish & persecute you, that they doe not punish any thing in you but righteousnes, and good life. And in that doing you shall declare your selues to be the children of God. VVatch al∣vvayes, praying that you be made vvorthy, to a∣uoyd al things that are to cōe, & that you may stād before the son of God, after the end of your dayes. I beseeche our good God and father, which ac∣cording to his great goodnesse & mercy hath done so much good for vs, to adopt vs for his children to the eternall inheritance of heauen, that it woulde please him through his goodnes to ioyne and knit you in such sort togither (my dearly beloued bre∣thren and sisters) through the bonde of his holy spirite, which by the same will gouerne and leade you to eternall life. Amen.
To the Reader. HOVV EASIE A THING it is (gentle reader) rashly to discō∣mend, eche one is vnto himselfe a witnesse: but how hard a thing right∣ly to commend, few, yet the wyser, can testifie. Therefore to make any great or tedi∣ous relation of that, which of it selfe is worthy, I thinke a thing vayne and superstuous: or to com∣mend that which in the very shew is commenda∣ble, should be to bereeue thee of thy iudgement. Notwithstanding, least I should be accused and condemned of negligence, which I haue sought to shunne and auoyde, I determined priuatly, to set thy sight openly, that this booke hath bene out of the Doctors and Counselles collected carefully, composed by the authour pithilye, and by the same alledged fitly and aptlye: and not onely out of the Doctors, but out of the Popes owne Ca∣nons culled gratiously, whereby he hath not brought a Doctor agaynst a Pope, but a Pope with a Pope conferred learnedlye. This being rightly wayed and considered. I thinke there is no∣thing left for the more enuious (being the moti∣on godly, the matter their owne, the order fitte and conuenient) as an obiect to worke on theyr insatiable minde, and desire of reprehension, ex∣cept they wyll seeke and runne to the manners of the author (common practises now a dayes) to search and prye ouer curiouslye, something to a∣nimaduert and oppugne, and sore agreeued that he hath beaten them with their owne rodde, say with
Zeuxis contending with Parrhasius, when he had seene all, now vncouer thy sheete Parrhasius, that we may see thy worke. Yet least there shoulde growe in their mindes some vndeserued suspition, being the authour vnknowen, I will endeauour not onely to remoue, but to roote it cleane out of their entendement: and playnely affirme that which is credibly and sincerely referred to me, that he was of manners modest, of life laborious, of countenance sober, and of witte quicke, and willing to profite euery one to his power and abi∣litie. Therefore as I iudge and esteeme, there is no cause for any one, nor yet for the aduersaryes to bee greeued, seeing to the one it redoundeth to his vtilitie, and the other may not complayne, that in disclosing the veritie, he paynted foorthe that which he hath worthelye deserued. Next to this is the cause of the translatour, whome thou shalte thanke, that for thy further benifite, he hath with good zeale learned the authour to talke in an o∣ther tongue, and shewing that which before was well spoken to a fewe, to be better spoken to a great many, rendered it, copied out of the French, into thy Englishe, vulgare and natiue speache. Lastly I admonishe the to view and reade diligent∣ly the cataloge of the doctors and counselles, al∣ledged by the authour, which I haue layde downe, to the ende thou mightest see for thy emolument what euery one hath bene, and what he hath suffred and written, and the time he florished, wishing thee to ponder the same, and loke if they haue thought any otherwyse, then truth, or fallen into any in∣extricable error, not redily to condemne them,
as the enuious doe: but to ascribe it to mans fra∣gilitie, as christians ought: and to marke and im∣print the same in thy minde, not to fall into the like, nor to stay on mans sayinges, seeing as it is vsually sayde: nihil omni parte beaum. Nothing (meaning mortall thinges) is blessed or happy on euery side but to boulster and trust who∣ly to Gods mercyes, who is onely the truthe, and the phisition for euery sore. Thus much I thought good to aduertise thee (gentle re-der) of this pre∣sent booke, being, as it may be sayde, in sight fayre, in matter good, in effect fructuous and godly, wish∣ing and willing thee to accepte gratefullye that which for thy pleasure hath bene penned paynefully. Farewell. Concussus, surgo. C. A.
The Catalogue of the Do∣ctors, and Councels, out of the which we haue gathered togither this present booke, for the approbation of the Articles of our Faith, and to shewe in what time they flourished and were celebrated. DIonysius Areopagita, a Grecian borne, and iudge in the causes of weight at Athens: was con∣uerted by S. Paule, when he dis∣puted with the Stoikes and Epicures in the same Citie: and constituted byshop there of the faythfull: Afterwarde he went into Fraunce, and was made byshop of Paris, where he was also beheaded by the go∣uernour Fesceninus, in the yeare of our Lorde, as Trithemius reporteth, 96. and Paulus Eberus, Pag. 327. being the ix. daye of October vnder the Emperor Do∣mitian in the seconde persecution. He flou∣rished chiefly vnder the two Vespasians fa∣ther and the sonne. Hee was called the French mens Apostle, and lieth buried in a place in Fraunce, called after his name S. Denis, a little distant from Paris, verye
famous throughe the sepulchres of the Kings of that Countrie, reade Act. 17. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 4. and lib. 4. cap. 22. Mar∣tinus Polonus in the life of Domitian. Onu∣phrius Panuinus in his Chronologie, Pag. 14. Gregorius Turonicus, pag. 23. Roffin. pag. 365. Pantaleon. pag. 4. Of his iudge∣ment of the Eclipse of the sunne in the passion of our Lorde, reade the annales of Glycas, pag. 306. and in his owne Epistle to Polycarpus the martyr. Clemens, a Grecian, flourished vnder the two Vespasians, Domitian, and Nerua. He was the Disciple of Paule, called his fel∣low labourer, as he himselfe witnesseth: and as Dorotheus sayth, one of the 70. dis∣ciples. He first preached the Gospell at Metz in Frāce. Pantaleon, pag. 7. Maior, Munster. Afterwards was made Bishop of Sardis now called Triaditza. Dorotheus in the lyues of the 70. Disciples. Lastlye bishop of Rome the 3. in succession, and was martyred vnder Traian, anno. 103. in the thirde persecution, by tying an an∣ker about his necke, and throwne into the sea. He obtayned the dignitie of the seate 9. yeares, 2. monethes, 10. dayes. Marti∣nus
Polonus in his lyfe. Gregorius Turo∣nicus, pag. 21. Platyna in his lyfe. Ignatius, a Grecian, byshop of Antioch the yeare of our Lorde .99. seconde in suc∣cession after Peter the disciple of S. Iohn the Euangelist and Apostle: flourished chieflye vnder Nerua, and Traian, was martyred, as he testifieth of himselfe at Rome in the thirde persecution: the histo∣rie saith, that as Traian returned from the victorie of his enimies, the yere 109. and threatened death to the Christians, Igna∣tius came towardes him, and confessed himselfe a Christian, wherefore he was straight apprehended and bounde with fetters, and caried to Rome, and deuou∣red with wild beasts. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 33. shewing his owne Epistle, howe he was bounde and fettered and garded with a great troupe of souldiers, and inclosed with ten Leopardes. Gregorie of Tours, pag. 21. Martin the Polonian in the lyfe of Traian. Pantaleon, pag. 9. Onuphrius Pan∣uinus, pag. 16. Irenaeus a Latine Doctor, the seconde bishop of Lyons in Fraunce, and successour of Pothynus the disciple of Polycarpus the
martyr bishop of Smyrna. Florished vnder Commodus the yeare .175. Pantaleon, pag. 13. He was sent into France, by the sayde Polycarpus, and was commended by the martyrs there vnto Elutherius the 13. by∣shop of Rome, and confuted there certaine heretikes. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 4. cap. 18. He reprehended sharplye Victor successor of Elutherius in the sea of Rome, bicause he had excommunicated the Christians of Asia and Greece. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. Hee was martyred at Lyons vnder Seuerus in the v. persecution, or according to Sulpiti∣us Seuerus, the sixt in the yeare. 184. Gre∣gorie of Tours, pag. 22. Martin the Polo∣nian, in the life of Seuerus. He was present in the Councel of Palaestine with Polycar∣pus, Theophilus, Narcissus, and Bacchylus the noble and learned Byshoppes of Asia. Platyna in the lyfe of Victor the first. Tertullian Priest, a Latine Doctor, by∣shop of Carthage in Aphrica, flourished in the yeare 202. vnder Seuerus and Antoni∣nus. He wrate many learned workes, but at length by reason of a schisme risen of e∣mulation betweene him and the Romane Clergie, he fell from the truth into the
Montane heresie. Hieronymus in cataloge. Nicephorus lib. 4. cap. 34. He wrote an A∣pologie for the Christians alledged by Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 2. Origen Priest, a Grecian Doctor, flou∣rished in the yeare of our Lorde 235. the Disciple of Clement of Alexandria, whom also he succeeded in the schoole, and in∣structed many in the fayth, which after∣warde became martyrs. In his youth his father was martyred vnder Seuerus, who being in prison, he often visited, and ther∣fore was in great daunger of his person, and woulde haue suffred martyrdome if his mother had not hindered him: being growen in age, he gelded himselfe, to the intent he might the freelyer be at his stu∣die. He wrate many things, of which there are not all extant. Hieronymus in Catalogo. He liued till the time of Gallus and Volusi∣anus Emperors, and died in the 69. yeare of his age, and lyeth buried at Tyrus. Suydas. Euseb. in the whole 6. booke. Cyprianus, a Grecian, Bishop of Car∣thage, flourished in the yeare of our Lord 355. vnder the reigne of Decius. Pantaleon pag. 21. Hee was a great enimie of the
Arians, and other heretikes. His opinion that he helde of rebaptizing the heretikes, was the occasion of falling at square with Stephan the first bishop of Rome. He was present at the first Councell of Carthage. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 3. Pantaleon, pag. 22. Eusebius, a Grecian, Bishop of Caesa∣rea in Palaestine, flourished in the yeare of our Lorde 325. vnder the raigne of Con∣stantine the great. Pantaleon, pag. 25. By his familiaritie with Pamphilus the mar∣tyr, he was surnamed Pamphilus. Hee wrate manye workes, of which certayne are extant. Hieronymus in Catalogo. Hee was highly esteemed of the great Constan∣tine, as appeareth by the Epistles which the Emperour wrate vnto him. Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 6. Lactantius Firmianus, a Latine Rheto∣rician, flourished in the yeare of our Lord 340. vnder the reygne of Constantine the great. He wrate against the Gentiles, and confuted their errors. Hieronym. Pantale∣on, pag. 27. Athanasius the great, a Grecian, By∣shop of Alexandria, successor of Alexan∣der, flourished in the yeare of our Lorde
340. vnder Constantine the great. He had much adoe with the Arians, and was tho∣row them twyce expelled his Bishoprick: once by Constantine. Socrates lib. 2. cap. 13. Another time by Iulianus. Theodoret, lib. 4. cap. 9. At length he died vnder the reign of Valens Emperour of the East. Hilarius a Latine, Bishop of Poictiers in Fraunce, flourished in the yeare of our Lorde 345. vnder the reigne of the sonnes of Constantine the great. He was driuen in exyle by the Gouernour. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 8. He wrate many goodly workes, of the which many are extant. He liued vntill the time of Augustine. Hieronym. Augu∣stin. Epistol. 89.64. Basile, a Grecian, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, very familiar with Gregory Nazianzene, flourished in the yere of our Lord 370. vnder the reign of Valentinian and Valens. He was a great enimie of the heretikes, and confuted them in manye workes. Valens after he banished all the true Christians of the East, for his re∣noume spared him, yet he went of his own accorde into exile. Camerar. in Catalogo. Pantaleon, pag. 26.
Gregorie, a Grecian, Bishop of Nazan∣zum, called the diuine, flourished in the yeare 371. vnder Valentinian and Valens, although he was elder thā Basil. Camerar. in catalogo. He wrate many goodly works and was a great Oratour. He liued 90. yeares, a long and quiet lyfe. More of his vertues looke in the aforenamed author. Epiphanius, a Grecian, Byshop of Cy∣prus, flourished in the yeare 375. vnder the reygne of Valens. He wrate eyght bookes against the heresies, in the Greke tongue. He was great enimie of Origen and Chry∣sostome. He excited the people of Constan∣tinople agaynst the sayde Chrysostome. More, looke Socrates lib. 6. cap. 11. Sozo∣men. lib. 7. cap. 26. Ambrose, a Latine, Bishop of Millaine, flourished in the yeare 376. vnder the reygnes of Valens in the East, and Grati∣an and Valentinian sonnes of Valentinian in the West. Pantaleon, pag. 31. He was a noble man, and gouernour of the whole prouince of Millaine, and made Bishop after the death of Auxentius. After exiled by Iustina mother of Valentinian, infected with the heresie of Arius. He sustayned
great troubles, and wrate many learned workes for the defence of religion. Socra∣tes lib. 4. cap. 25. lib. 5. cap. 11. Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 13. Gregorie, a Grecian, Bishop of Nyssa, brother of Basile before named, flourished in the yeare of our Lorde. 381. vnder the reygne of Gratianus in the West. Hee wrate certayne works, and especially one very learned, De anima, agaynst the Phi∣losophers of the Gentiles. Of Basile his Epistle to him, De differentia essentiae & substantiae, reade the Tripartite in the ende of Theodoret. Ierome Priest, a Latine, borne at Stri∣donium in Dalmatia, flourished the yeare 390. vnder the reygne of Valentinian the yonger. He liued in Bethlehem in Syria, and was verye famous for his workes. Pantaleon, pag. 31. He dyed the yere 422. the 30. of Septēber. Paulus Eberus. pag. 317. Reade his owne workes. Augustine, a Latine, disciple of Ierome Bishop of Hippo, now called Bona, within the realme of Tunes in Aphrick, flourished in the yeare 395. vnder Theodosius the el∣der. He is so famous by his workes, that
the reader may plainely see him in them. He died the yeare 433. in the 40. yeare of his Bishops sea, the 28. of August. Chrysostome, a Grecian, called Iohn of Antioch, but so surnamed of his eloquent speach (that is to say, golden mouth) Bi∣shop of Constantinople, flourished in the yeare 405. vnder the reygne of Arcadius & Honorius. He was the scholer of Libanius the Sophister, afterwardes left him, and was christened by Meletius. Lastly made Bishop of Constantinople, whence he was twyce banished by Eudoxia the Em∣presse, wyfe of Arcadius, by the meanes of Epiphanius. In ye last time of his exile, being at Cucussa in Armenia, he sickened, and was caried to Potij, and there dyed the yere 410. the 14. of September. His workes are extant, being large and lear∣ned. Tripartit. pag. 422. Glycas. 359. Ebe∣rus, pag. 301. Cyrillus, a Grecian, Bishop of Alexan∣dria, flourished the yere 432. vnder Theo∣dosius the seconde. Theodorit. lib. 5. pag. 35. Socrates lib. 7. cap. 7. He was a great eni∣mie of the Iewes, and threw them out at Alexandria. Socrates. lib. 7. cap. 13. Reade
of him the whole Tripartite. Primasius, a Latin, a bishop of Aphrick, and disciple of S. Augustine, flourished the yeare 435. Pantaleon, pag. 35. Reade more of him in Gesner. Fulgentius. a Latine, Bishop of Ruspa in Aphricke, florished the yeare 456. vnder the reygne of Martian. He wrate certaine workes now extant. But of his actes read his lyfe prefixed to his works. Read Gesn. Prosper, a Frenchman, flourished in the yeare 456. vnder the reigne of Martia∣nus, read Gennadius in catalogo. He wrate certayne sentences, and a Chronography, read Gesner. Simlerus in catalogo scriptor. Gelasius, a Latine, borne in Aphricke, first of that name bishop of Rome, flouri∣shed in the time of Zeno and Anastasius Emperors of the East. He wrate manye learned bookes. Read Platyna in his life. Iustinian the 57. Emperor of Constan∣tinople, sonne of the sister of Iustinus the Emperor, flourished the yeare 527. Hee collected the Codices of the lawe into a short volume for the beginners, and called them his Institutions. He reygned 38. yeares. Reade Iornandes, Pomponius,
Laetus, Ignatius, Constantinus Manasses, pag. 83. Annales Glycae, pag. 371. Cassiodorus, a senatour of Constantinople. afterwardes made a Monke, flourished the yeare 575. vnder Iustinianus the Em∣peror. But as Pantaleon accounteth 497, before the reygne of Iustinian vnder Ana∣stasius. He wrate being as yet extant, an Historie, and abridged the Tripartite, Reade Diaconus, lib. 1. cap. 11. Gregorie the first Bishop of Rome, called Gregorie the great, flourished in the yere 605. But according to Pantaleon, 586. vn∣der Mauritius the Emperour. He wrate diuerse things, but especiallye his Mo∣ralles are most excellent. Reade Bedae hi∣stor. Anglosaxon. Platyna in his lyfe. Theophylactus, a Grecian, constituted Bishop of Antioch, by Marua, chiefe of the Saracenes, flourished the yeare 608. But according to Pantaleon, 761. vnder Constantine. 6. He wrate certayne workes being extant in the Greeke tongue. Gesn. Simlerus. Pantaleon, pag. 61. Beda, a Latine, borne in Englande, and as it seemeth, about Cambridge. For he calleth himselfe Beda Giruinus, which Gir∣ni
or Giruij were Cambridge shyre men, as appeareth by the towne of Cambridge, called of olde Granta Giruiorum. Leland in Cyenaea cantione. Flourished in the yere 732. But as ye truer with Pantaleon, 704. vnder Leo the 2. and Iustinian Emperors. His workes extant testifie what the man hath bene. He wrate an historie of the Saxones. Platyna in the lyfe of Iohn the sixt. Druthmarus, a Latine, Monke of the order of Saint Bennet, flourished the yere 800. vnder Irene the Empresse. He wrate certayne Commentaries vpon the Euan∣gelistes. The Abbot of Augspurg in Germanie, a Latine, called Saint Vlrike, or Vlda∣rike, flourished the yeare 860. vnder the reygne of Michael the 3. of the East, and Lotharius the first in the West. Barnard, a Latin, borne in Burgoigne, & the first Abbot of Clarenaux in France, flourished in the yeare 1111. vnder Henrie the Emperour of the West, and Alexius the first Emperour of the East. He wrate moste flourishingly and learnedly. His works are extant in one volume. Irenicus,
lib. 30. cap. 106. Volater. Gulielmus Abbas in his lyfe. Abbot of Vrsperg in Germanie, a Latin, by name vnknowne, flourished the yeare of our Lorde 1200. vnder Alexius the first Emperour of the East, and Philip Em∣perour of the West. He wrate an historie which is extant, of the Emperors, and o∣ther things most notable, from the begin∣ning of the world to his time, to the which there are added Paraleipomena (or Chro∣nicles not touched) vnto our time. Panta∣leon, pag. 95. Gesner. Pantaleon in his Poso∣pograpie, lib. 2. Thomas Aquinas, a Latine, borne in I∣talie, Frier of the order of Preachers, and descended of a noble house, of the Lordes of Aquino. He flourished the yere 1271. vnder Michael Palaeologus the 7. Emperour of the East, and Rodolphus the first Earle of Augspurge of the West. He made Commentaries vpon all Aristotle, and likewise in Diuinitie. His works are extant in 14. volumes in Fol. newly im∣printed at Rome. Reade his owne life set forth in a priuate booke. Xystus the 4. Bishop of Rome, borne at
Cellae in the territorie of Genoa in Italie. named Frier Francis de Rouere, of the or∣der of Minores. He was created Pope the yeare 1414. He lyued vnder Sigismond the Emperor. Onuphrius Panuinus in hys lyfe. Bishop of Panormus in Sicilie, a great Lawyer, called commonly of his Bishop∣ricke, Panormitan. Flourished the yeare 1415. vnder Sigismunde the Emperor of the West. He wrate very large volumes of the lawe. Iohn Gerson, a Diuine of France, one of ye Chancellors of the Vniuersitie of Paris, flourished in the same time with the for∣mer Byshop, and stoutlye resisted the de∣crees of the Counsell of Constance. Peucer. in synodo Constantiensi. Platyna, an Italian, Secretarie of the sea of Rome, flourished the yeare 1470. vnder Fredericke the first, Emperour. He wrate of the liues of the Popes from Li∣nus vnto Xystus the 4. Sabell. Gesner. Simler. Sanazarius, an Italian Poet, flourished in the time of Maximilian the first, and A∣lexander the .6. Pope.
Marcus Antonius Coccius Sabellicus, borne in the dominion of Venice, a bishop, flourished the yere 1501. vnder Maximi∣lian Emperour, and Pius the 3. Pope. He wrate a large historie from the creation of the worlde to the yeare 1504. whiche is augmented by Gaspar Hedio. Gesner. Simler. The order of the Councelles according to Pantaleon. AT Carthage, once very famous, now ruinous and cleane destroyed, a Ci∣tie in the kingdome of Tunes, vnder the Turkes dominion, were celebrated sixe Councelles. The first, in the yeare, 360. Galienus being Emperor, 32. in successi∣on, and Stephen the first, Pope. The se∣conde, the yere 413. Honorius being Em∣peror. The thirde, in the yeare 429. vn∣der Theodosius the 2. The fourth, fifth, in the yeare 437. vnder the same Emperor. The sixt, by 217. Byshops in the yeare 459. vnder Martianus. At Anticyra in Galatia, was celebrated a Councell by Vitalis Bishop of Antioche
the yeare 295. Diocletian being Empe∣rour. At Nice a Citie in Bithynia nowe called Nichea in Asia the lesse, vnder the Turke, were celebrated two Councels. The first against the Arians, the yeare 326. vnder Constantine the great, where was esta∣blished the Nicene Creede. The seconde, the yeare 781. vnder Constantine the sixt. The Councell of Gangra, nowe called Cangri in Asia the lesse, was celebrated the yeare 333. vnder Constantine the great. At Elyberis, or Illyberis, nowe called Granado in Spayne, was celebrated a Coū∣sell in the yere 337. vnder Constantine the great, by xix. Bishops. At Ariminum now called Rimino in the territorie of Flaminia nowe Romandiola in Italie, was celebrated a Councell the yere 362. vnder Iulian the Apostata. The Councell of Laodicea in Syria, was celebrated the yeare 368. vnder Iulian the Apostata. At Constantinople in Thrace, sometime called Byzantium, builded by Constantine the great, nowe the chiefe seate of the
Turke, and called in his language Stam∣bola, were celebrated eyght Councelles. The first, the yeare 383. by 180. Bishops vnder Gratian the Emperour. The se∣conde, the yeare 448. vnder Theodosius the seconde. The thirde, in the yere 546. vnder Iustinian the first. The fourth, the yeare 576. vnder Iustine the seconde. The fift, the yeare 681. by 289. Bishops vnder Constantine the v. The sixt, the yeare 695. vnder Iustinian the seconde. The seuenth, the yeare 726. by 330. Byshoppes, vnder Leo the thirde, Emperor. The eyght, the yeare 870. vnder Basilius Macedo Em∣peror of the East, and Lewes the seconde, of the West. At Toledo in Spayne, were celebrated 13. Councelles. The first, the yeare 393. vnder Arcadius and Honorius, by 18. By∣shops. The seconde, the yeare 470. vnder Leo the first. The thirde, the yeare 615. vnder Heraclius, by 62. Byshoppes. The fourth, the yeare 632. vnder Heraclius. The fifth and sixt, the yeare 639. vnder Constantine the thirde. The seauenth, the yere 680. But according to Phrygio, 640. by 30. Bishoppes vnder Constantine the
fourth. The eyght, the yeare 666. by 59. Bishoppes vnder Constantine the fourth. The ninth and tenth, the yeare 675. by 16. Bishoppes vnder Constantine the fourth. The xi. xii. xiii. the yeare 692. vnder Con∣stantine the fourth. The Councell Mileuitan, was celebra∣ted at Mileuita in Aphrica against the Pe∣lagians, the yeare 418. vnder Honorius. The Councell of Ephesus, nowe called Epheso in Ionia in Asia the lesse, was cele∣brated, the yeare 430. by 200. Bishops, agaynst the Pelagians and Nestorians vn∣der Theodosius the 2. At Orenge in France, but excepted from the dominion of the Frenche Kings, ha∣uing a seuerall Prince, were helde two Councelles. The first, the yeare 451. vnder Theodosius the seconde, and Va∣lentinian. The seconde, the same yere, vn∣der the sayde Emperors. The Councell of Chalcedon in Bythinia, nowe called by the Turkes Scutari, situa∣ted right ouer against Constantinople, was helde, the yeare 453. agaynst the Eutychi∣ans, Manichees, and Dioscorus, by 600. Byshops, vnder the reygne of Theodosius
the 2. and Valentinian the 3. At Orleans in Fraunce were helde fiue Councelles. The first, the yeare 518. vn∣der Iustinus the first, by 33. Bishops. The seconde, the yeare 550. vnder Iustinian the great. The thirde, the same yeare vn∣der the same Emperor. The fourth, the yeare 567. vnder Iustinus the second. The 5. the yeare 572. vnder the sayde Empe∣rour. At Bracara, now called Braga in Spain, were helde three Councelles. The first, the yeare 555. vnder Iustinian the great. The seconde and thirde, the yeare 583. Martianus being Emperor. The Laterane Councelles were seauen. The first, by Stephan the 3. the yere 767. vnder Leo. The seconde, by Nicolaus the seconde, the yeare 1058. vnder Constantine the 12. of the East, and Henrie the 4. of the West. The thirde, by Innocentius the 2. the yeare 1138. vnder Caloioannes of the East, and Lotharius the 2. of the West, Emperors. The fourth, the yeare 1167. by Alexander the 3. vnder Emanuel of the East, and Frederike of the West. The fift, the yeare 1205. by Innocentius the thirde,
in the presence of 7. Archbishoppes, 412. Bishops. 1300. Prelates, vnder Henrie the 6. of the West, and Balduine the first, of the East. The sixt, the yeare, 1446. by Eugenius the 4. vnder Frederike the 3. The seauenth, the yeare 1510. by Iulius the 3. vnder Maximilian the first. At Chalons in Fraunce, were helde two Councelles. The first, the yeare 670. vn∣der Constantine the 4. The seconde, the yeare 805. vnder Charles the first, Em∣perour of the West, and Nicephorus of the East. At Wormes in Germany, were 5. Coun∣celles. The first, the yeare 868. vnder Lewes the seconde of the West, and Basi∣lius of the East, Emperours. The second, the yere 1067. vnder Romanus the second, of the East, and Henrie the fourth, of the West. The thirde, the yeare 1494. vnder Maximilian the first. The fourth, the yere 1520. vnder the sayde Emperour. The fift, the yeare 1536. vnder Charles the fifte. FINIS.
The summe of the common places contayned in this Booke. OF the Supper of our Lorde Iesus Christ. Pag. 1. Of confession to God, and of auricular confession. Pag. 40. Of the power to binde and lose. Pag. 46. Of free will. Pag. 51. Of merites, and of good workes, Pag. 70. and iustification by fayth. Pag. 107. Of the Lawe. Pag. 133. Of Purgatorie. Pag. 147. Of the honouring of Saintes. Pag. 174. Of one onely Mediator. Pag. 191. Of Images, whether they be lawfull in Chur∣ches of Christians or no. Pag. 201. Of fasting and meate. Pag. 228. Of Mariage. Pag. 243. Of Vowes. Pag. 254. Of the Church, and howe it may be knowen, and the authoritie thereof. Pag. 258. Of holy Scripture, and that it is lawfull for all men to reade it. Pag. 293. Of the assemblies and congregations of the faythfull. Pag. 340. Of constraining no person to beleeue. Pag. 347. Of persecuting Magistrates, which vnder sha∣dowe of religion, doe persecute the fayth∣full, and their torments of eternall paynes. Pag. 368. Finis.
The Staffe of the Chri∣stian Faith. Of the holy Supper of our Lorde Iesus Christ. I Am that liuing breade,Iohn. 6. which came downe from heauen: If any man eate of this breade, hee shall liue for euer: & the breade that I will giue, is my fleshe, which I will giue for the life of the worlde, &c. That which I deliuered vnto you,1. Cor. 11. I receyued of the Lorde, to wit: That the Lorde Iesus the same night in whiche he was betrayed, tooke breade, and when he had giuen thankes, he brake it, and sayd: Take ye, eate ye,Math. 26 Marc. 14. Luke. 22. this is my bodie which is broken for you: this doe ye in remem∣brance of me. After the same maner also he tooke the Cup when he had supped, say∣ing:Or the nevv alliance. This Cup is the newe testament in my bloude: this doe as ofte as ye drinke it, in remembrance of me. For as often as
ye shall eate this breade, and drinke this Cuppe, yee shewe the Lordes death till he come. Wherefore, whosoeuer shall eate this breade, and drinke this Cuppe of the Lorde vnworthily, shall be guiltie of the bodie and bloude of the Lorde. Let a man therefore examine himselfe: and so let him eate of this breade, and drinke of this Cup. Is not the Cup of blessing whiche we blesse,1. Cor. 10. the Communion of the bloude of Christe? Is not the Breade which wee breake, the Communion of the bodie of Christ? Bicause that we whiche are ma∣nye, are one breade and one bodie, in as muche as wee are all partakers of one breade. Our fathers haue all eaten the same spi∣rituall meate,1. Cor. 10. Exod. 17. Num. 20. and did all drinke the same spirituall drinke: for they dranke of the spirituall rocke that followed them: and that rocke was Christ. Iohn. 6.I am the breade of life, he that com∣meth to me, shall not hunger, and he that beleeueth on me shal neuer thurst. &c. This is that breade which commeth downe from heauen, that he whiche eateth of it,
shoulde not die. Augustine in his 2. Quinqua. vpon the 96. Psalme. When the Lorde commaunded this,Iohn. 6. he spake of his fleshe, and sayde: He that ea∣teth not my fleshe, shall not haue eternall lyfe. And sayd: The words that I speake vnto you, are spirite and life.VVe eate not Christes bodie car∣nally. Vnderstand spiritually that which I haue sayde vnto you: you shall not eate that bodie whiche you do see, & you shall not drinke the bloud which shall be shedde by them which will crucifie me. Augustine vpon Saint Iohn, in the 27. treatise vpon the 6 Chapter. If ye shoulde see the sonne of man as∣cend vp where he was before.Iohn. 6. What is this? By that he resolueth those whom he hath knowen: of that he manyfested the thing whereby they haue ben offended.Christ not eaten by morsels. For they did thinke that he would giue vnto them his body: but hee sayth, that hee will ascend vp into heauen all whole, saying: when yee shall see the sonne of man ascend vp where he was be∣fore: at the least you shall see then that he doth not giue his bodie in the same ma∣ner
as ye thinke and iudge: at the least you shal then vnderstand that his grace is not consumed by morsels. &c. Augustine in his Sermon of the Sacra∣mentes of the faithfull, in the 2. ferie of Easter. And for this cause (as also the men of God haue vnderstoode it before vs) our Lorde Iesus Christ hath recommended his body and his blood to the thinges, which of many are reduced and brought into one thing. For also, the one of many Graynes is confecte and made into one, and the other of many Grapes is reduced into one: he that eateth my flesh and drin∣keth my blood, dwelleth in me and I in him. Then to eate this meate, and to drink this drinke, is to dwell in Christ, and to haue our dwelling in him.The sinner eateth no∣thing in the supper but the oute∣vvard signe. And so hee that dwelleth not in Christ, and in whome Christ doth not dwell: without doubt hee eateth not the flesh, and drinketh not the bloud: although that he eate and drinke the Sacrament of so great a thing, to his iudgement.
Augustine in his .3. booke of the christian doctrine. If you eate not (sayth he) the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drinke not his blood you shall haue no life in you. It seemeth that he doth commaund an vnlawful thing, or a fault. That is then a fygure: commaun∣ding that it must be communicated to the passion of our Lorde, and gentlye and profitablye to put in memorye that his fleshe hath bene wounded and crucified for vs. Augustine of the words of the Apo∣stle in his .2. sermon Saith: If ye eate not my flesh,Iohn. 6. and drinke not my blood, ye shall haue no life in you. &c. The disciples were offended, not all truly, but many of them saying within themselues: This is an harde saying, who can abide ye hearing of it? What doth this signifie? Doth this offende you? Did you thinke, that of this bodie here whiche you doe see, I ought to make peeces:Christ ma∣keth not peeces of his bodie. and that I shoulde deuyde in peeces my mem∣bers for to giue them vnto you? What and if you shoulde see the sonne of man as∣cende
vp where he was before? Truly he which is ascended vp all whole, cannot be consumed, &c. What is it to drinke this thing, but to liue? Eate the lyfe, drinke the lyfe: thou shalte haue lyfe, and thou shalt be the whole lyfe. And then this shall be (that is to saye) that the bodie and bloude of Christ shall be the lyfe of euerye one: if that which they do take visibly in ye sacrament, be in dede spiritually eaten and drunke. For we haue hearde the Lorde himselfe saying: It is the spirite that quickeneth, the fleshe profiteth nothing. The wordes that I speake vnto you,Iohn. 6. are spirite and life. Augustine in his Decrees of penance, in the 2. distinction. Chapiter of Charitie. To eate the breade, and drinke the wyne, that is to beleeue in Christ, and in louing him, to giue our selues vnto him. Bede in his Collection: These are also the wordes of Saint Augustine in his sermon made to the chil∣dren at the aultar of the Sacrament. The Cuppe of blessing. &c. That which
ye see in the Aulter,That vvhich vvee see in the supper, is breade. ye haue also seene it the night past. But you haue not yet vn∣derstoode what it doth signifie, and howe it conteyneth a Sacrament of a greate thing. That then whiche ye haue seene, is bread, and wine, the which your eyes doo demonstrate vnto you. But that which your faith desireth to be instructed in: the bread is the body of Christ: and the wine the blood. And that truly is brefly sayde, in asmuch peraduenture that it suf∣fiseth the fayth: but the fayth desireth to be instructed: for the Prophet sayth:Esay. 7. If ye beleeue not, you shall not vnderstand. Yee may then say vnto me: thou hast com∣manded that we should beleeue: expound it, to the ende that we may vnderstand it. For such cogitacion and thought may en∣ter into the mindes and vnderstanding of euery one,Luc. 1. Math. 2. we doo know very well from whence our Lord Iesus Christ hath taken his flesh: that is to say of the Virgin Ma∣ry, he was nourished vp in his infancie, he was brought vp, he became great, and came to the age of a young man. He suffe∣red persecution by the Iewes. He hath ben hanged on the tree, and dyed on the
tree,Luk, 24. Act. 1. and was buryed, and rose againe the third day, and ascended into heauen the day it pleased him. There he eleuated his body, and from thence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead, there he sit∣teth now at the right hand of the father. How then is the bread his body? And the cuppe or that which the cuppe conteineth, how is that his blood? My bretheren, therefore are these thinges here called Sacramentes: because that in them, one thing is seene, and an other thing is vn∣derstoode. That which we see in a cor∣porall likenesse: but that which we vnder∣stand, to a spirituall fruite. He that recea∣ueth the mistery of vnity, and keepeth not the bond of neace, he receiueth not by him the mistery, but receaueth a witnesse a∣gaynst him selfe. And no man ought in a∣ny thing to doubt, but that then euery faithfull man is partaker of the body and of the blood of the Lorde: As to baptisme he is made a member of Christ: and is not depryued from the company of that bread and of that cuppe, also when hee which is constituted in the vnitie of the body of Christ, shall depart out of this
world, before he doo eate that bread, and drinke the cuppe: for also he is not depry∣ued from the participation and from the benefite of that Sacrament, whiche hath found that which the Sacrament dooth signifie. Prosper in his booke of sen∣tences. He that abydeth in Christ, and in whom Christ dwelleth, hath taken the meate of lyfe, and hath drunke the drinke of the e∣ternitie. For he whiche discordeth from Christ, doth not eate the fleshe of Christ, nor drinketh his bloud: Although that he doe take euery daye indifferently the Sa∣crament of so great a thing, according to his iudgement. Innocent in his thirde booke of the holy Aultar. 4. 13. 14. Chapter. Iudas (sayth he) hath eaten the Lordes breade, but he hath not eaten the breade, which was the Lorde. Saint Hilarie in his 8. booke of the Trinitie. The breade which descended from hea∣uen, is not receiued, but of him which hath the Lorde, and which is the true member
of him. Augustine in his 49. treatise vpon Saint Iohn the 11. Chapter. If fayth be in vs, Christ is in vs. For what other thing, sayeth the Apostle, Christ dwelleth in your heartes through fayth, but that through the fayth whiche thou hast of Christ, Christ is in thy heart. Augustine vpon Saint Iohn in his 25. treatise and 6 Chapter. This is then to eate the meate, not that which perisheth, but which abideth vnto eternall lyfe Wherefore make ready thou the teeth, and the belly, beleeue, and thou hast eaten. &c. Saint Cyprian in his Sermon of the vnction of Christ. Our Lorde Iesus Christ hath giuen in the table in the whiche he hath made his last banket with his Apostles, the breade and the wyne with his owne hands, but he hath giuen his bodye for to be wounded on the Crosse by the handes of the soul∣diers. &c. Augustine vpon Saint Iohn in the 26. Homely. Sayth: All we haue very well this daye
receyued the visible meate, but it is ano∣ther thing of the Sacrament, and of the vertue of the same. From whence com∣meth it that many doe come vnto the aul∣tar, and take to their condemnation that which they receyue? For the morsell of breade which our Lord gaue vnto Iudas, was poyson vnto him, not for that it was euill, but bicause the man which tooke it, was euill, he tooke it euill. &c. A little af∣ter he sayth: the Sacrament of this (that is to saye) the spirituall vnitie whiche we haue with Christ, is presented vnto vs at the Lordes table, to the one to lyfe, to the others to death.Iohn. 6. A little before hee hath sayde: He which shall eate, shall not die: but I doe vnderstande it of him whiche shall haue the veritie of the Sa∣crament, and not the visible Sacra∣ment: whiche shall eate him inwardlye, and not outwardly: whiche shall eate him in the heart, and not crashe him with the teeth. In what sense the auncient Doctors of the Church, haue vnderstoode this place: Hoc est corpus meum: This is my bo∣dye.
S. Augustine wryting against Adaman∣tius the disciple of Manichaeus in the, 12. Epistle. Saith after this manner: I maye in∣terpret,The breade is the signe of the bodie of Christ. that this commandement cōsisteth in a signe: for the Lord hath made it no doubt to say: This is my body, when hee gaue the signe of his body. In the same place he sayth these three thinges: The blood is water: Behold my body: And the rocke was Christ. He teacheth these thinges to be sayde, as though he spake by figure in signe and by signification. Tertullian in his .4. booke against Marcion, Hoe est cor pus meum, hovve to be vnderstode.Sayth after this sort: Iesus Christ after he toke the bread, and distributed it to his disciples, made it his body, in say∣ing: this is my body. That is to say (saith he) the signe of my body. Chrisostome vpon S. Mathewe in the .83. homily the .26. chapter, called the sym∣bole of the supper and signe of the body of Christ. Augustine in his first quinquagesima, in his prologue of the 3. psalm, Saith: Christ receiued Iudas vnto his
supper, in the which he recommended and gaue the figure of his body, and of his blood to his disciples. Chrisostome vpon S. Mathew in the .83. homelye, Saith: When the Heritickes say, how shall it appeare that Christ hath ben offe∣red? We wyll stoppe their mouthes thus, if Iesus Christ be not dead, to what ende shall that sacrifice be a signe. Saint Ierome vpon the 26. Chapter of S. Mathewe. After that he acomplished the mysticall Passeouer, or Easter: & had eaten the flesh of the Lambe with his Apostles: He toke the breade which comforteth the heart of man, and passed further to come vnto the Sacrament of the true Easter: That e∣uen as Melchisedech the highe Priest of the souereygne God hath done,Iesus Christ representeth his body by the breade. in the fi∣gure of this, in offering of breade and wyne: Euen so he representeth the veritie of his bodie, and of his bloude. Saint Ambrose vpon the first Epistle to the Corinthians the 11. Chap. Forasmuch as we are deliuered by the death of the Lorde, hauing recordation
thereof, in eating and drinking, wee doe signifie the fleshe and the bloude, the which haue bene offered for vs. &c. Chrysostome vpon the 22. psalme. Christ hath ordeyned the table of his ho∣lye Supper, to the ende, that in that sa∣crament, he doe shewe vnto vs daylye, the breade and the wine, for the similitude of his bodie and of his bloude. Saint Ambrose in his 6. booke of the Sa∣cramentes, the first Chapter. The Priest sayth: Make this oblation to bee acceptable vnto vs: the whiche is the figure of the bodie and bloude of oure Lorde. &c. Chrysostome in the 83. Homelie vpon Saint Mathewe, If thou haddest bene withoute a bo∣die, hee woulde haue giuen thee all his signes naked and bare: but bicause that thy soule is ioyned to a body, he hath gi∣uen thee in the sensible thinges, the things which are comprysed by the spirite. S. Ambrose in his booke of the Sa∣craments, the 1. Chapter. Note.Thou doest receiue the Sacrament,
for the similitude of the flesh and of the bloud of Christ: but thou obteynest the grace of his true nature. And in receiuing the bread, in that meate, thou art partaker of his deuine substaunce. &c. And he sayth afterward: Euen as thou hast receiued at baptisme the similitude of death: so like∣wyse thou hast drunke in that Sacrament the similitude of the precious bloud of Christe. &c. Bede vpon the .22. chapter of S. Luke. After he had ended the solemnitie of the ancient Passeouer: the which he made in remembraunce of the auncient deliuer∣aunce out of Egypt: he passed foorth to the newe solemnitye the which the church desireth to celebrate, in remembraunce of her redemption: to the ende that putting the Sacrament of his flesh & of his bloud, vnder the likenesse of bread and wine, in steede of the flesh and of the bloud of the Lambe:Note. he sheweth himself to be him vn∣to whome the Lord hath sworne and wyll not repent, thou art a priest for euer. &c. It followeth after, bicause that the breade doth fortefie the flesh, and that the wine
causeth the bloud in the flesh, the bread is referred mistically to the body of Christ, and the wine to his bloud. &c. Druthmarus Monke of S. Benet, in his commentary vppon Saint Mathew. The wine refresheth and augmenteth the bloud, for that cause the bloud of Christ is not vnproperly figured by the same: in asmuch as all that commeth vnto vs from him, doth make vs glad with a true ioye, and increaseth all our goodnesse. &c. A lit∣tle before he sayth. The Lord gaue vnto his disciples the Sacrament of his body, in remission of theyr sinnes, and for to keepe loue and charitie, to the end that ha∣uing remembraunce of that deede, he would doo alwayes in a figure, that which he ought to doo for them: and shoulde not forget that charytie. This is my body, that is to say, in Sacrament. &c. Origen vpon Leuiticus in the .7. homely. We must vnderstande many things in the scrip∣tures spiri∣tually.Knowe that these are figures which are wrytten in the holy bookes: and there∣fore they ought to be examined as spiritu∣ally and not as carnall: and to vnderstand
the thinges which are sayd. For if you doo receiue those thinges here as carnall,2. Cor. 3. they doo hurt you and not nourish you: for the letter which killeth is not only found in the old testament: but also in the Gospell, in the new testament. The letter killeth him which considereth not spiritually the thinges which are spoken. For if thou fol∣low according to the letter that whiche is sayd, except that you doo not eate my flesh and drinke my bloud, that letter killeth. Wylt thou that I doo aledge vnto thee an other letter of the Gospell which killeth. He which hath not a sword saith he, let him sell his coate and buy one. Doest thou see, that letter is of the Gospell, but it killeth truely, if thou receiue it spiritually, it kyl∣leth not: but in the same is the quickening spirite, and therefore receiue spiritually the thinges which are spoken, be it in the Lawe, or in the Gospell.1. Cor. 2. For the spirituall man iudgeth all thinges, but he him selfe is iudged of no man. &c. Denys in the ecclesiasticall Hierarchia. Saith: The Byshoppe after that hee shall haue ended by preaching the heauen∣ly giftes, he consecrateth, and blesseth the
holy misteryes, and that which he before hath preached, he setteth before euery one couert and hidde by venerable signes and tokens. And after that he hath shewed his heauenly gyftes in all reuerence, he tur∣neth him selfe to the holy communion of them, admonishing all other to communy∣cate: and after that the holy communion is receyued of euery one, rendring thanks vnto God, he maketh an end of ye mistery. Obiec.Mat. 26. Hoc est corpus meū, this is my body. Aunswere. When God gaue the circum∣cision to Abraham, he made his couenant before the circumcision, and yet he called the circumcision his couenant, or alliance, saying,Genes. 17. Hoc est pactum meum. This is my couenant. S. Paule expoundeth the same saying:Rom. 4. Abraham hath receyued the signe of circumcision, as a seale of the righteous∣nesse of fayth. God sayd to the Prophet Ezechiel:Ezech. 4. &. 5. thou sonne of man, take a tyle stone, and laye it before thee, and des∣cribe vpon it the citie of Ierusalem: after he saith, this same is Ierusalem. Hoc est corpus meum. Augustine vpon Leuiticus 9. & .7.57. also he wryteth agaynst Adamant.
The thing whiche signifieth, hath of custome bene called of the name of the thing which is signified. As it is wrytten, the seuen eares, are seuen yeeres:Genes. 41. The Scripture sayth not that they signifie se∣uen yeeres. And the seuen kyne are seuen yeeres, and many such thinges. In lyke manner sayth S. Paule, that the Rocke was christ, and not that it signified Christ,1. Cor. 10. but as if it had ben him in very deede: the which notwithstanding was not Christ by substance, but by figuration. &c. Augustine wryting to Boniface. Epistle. 23. If the Sacraments haue no certayne similitude, or agreeing with the things of which they are sacramentes,The sacra∣ments take oftentimes the name of the things that they represent. they shall be in no maner of wyse Sacramentes. For they take oftentimes the names of the things themselues by reason of that simi∣litude. As the Sacrament of the bodie of Christe is after one fashion or maner, the bodie of Christ, and the sacrament of the bloude of Christ, the bloude of Christ. Al∣so the Sacramente of Fayth, is the fayth.
Irenaeus agaynst the heretike Valens in his 4. booke, & 34. Chapter. The breade with the which wee render thanks vnto God, although that it be of the earth, yet neuerthelesse when the name of God is inuocated and called vpon, it is not the common breade, but of giuing of thankes, hauing two things in it, the one earthly, and the other heauenly. &c. Gelasius writing against Eutyches and Nestorius, and also to the Counsell of Rome, in the Chapter Compe∣rimus de consecrat. Distin. 2. The sub∣stance of breade and vvine is not chaunged in the supper.The Sacramentes of the bodie and of the bloude of the Lorde Iesus Christe, which we take, they are heauenly things, whereby we are made partakers by them of the diuine nature. And yet neuerthelesse the substance of the breade and of the wine remayne there still, and trulye the image and the similitude of the bodie and of the bloude of Christ, are celebrated in the do∣ing of the mysteries. Then that is eui∣dently shewed vnto vs which we must fele in Iesus Christ our Lorde: yea, the same
which we protest, celebrate, and are in his image, to the ende that euen as the na∣tures are conuerted and chaunged into the diuine substance, by the meanes of the ho∣lye spirite, and yet neuerthelesse they a∣byde in their natures. Also the same prin∣cipall ministerie (whose efficacie and ver∣tue is trulye represented vnto vs by the things whereof it consisteth, whiche abide properly in their being) doe demonstrate vnto vs, that onely Christ abydeth altogi∣ther wholy and in his veritie. The Councell of Nice. Let vs not staye here belowe on the breade and wyne, whiche are sette on the Lordes table:Col. 3. but let vs lift vppe our spi∣rites on high through fayth. Let vs consi∣der that the lambe of God whiche taketh away the sinnes of the world, is in that ho∣ly table,1. Cor. 6. the whiche is not offered in sacri∣fice by the Priestes, after the manner of beastes. And in taking his precious bodie and his bloude, let vs beleeue that they are the signes and tokens of our resurrection. And for the same cause we eate not much, but a little, to the ende we may know that the same is not ordeyned for to fill our bel∣lye
withall, but for to serue to sanctitie and holynesse. &c. Saint Ambrose in his booke of those which are dedicated to the mysteries. Consecrati∣on is to de∣dicate a cō∣mon thing to a holy vseBefore the consecration one kinde, or likenesse is named, but after the consecra∣tion the body of Christ is signified. Christe sayth that his bloud before the consecrati∣on is called an other thing: but after the consecration is signified the bloud of Christe. &c. S. Ciprian in his sermon of penitent sinners. Note that he sayth not the bloude, but the drinke sanc∣tified.Speaking of the mayd which did vomit out the Sacrament: The drinke sanctified in the bloud of the Lord, issued out of the polluted entrailes. Chrisostome wryting to Cae∣sar the Monke. Before the consecration of the breade, we doo call it bread: but when the grace of God hath sanctified it by the priest, it is deliuered from the name of bread, and is exalted to the name of the body of the Lorde: although that the nature of the bread abydeth alwayes: and is not called
two bodyes: but one body of the sonne of GOD. Augustine vppon S. Iohn in his 80. homelye. Iesus Christ sayth not that you are cleane bicause of the baptisme,The vvater of baptisme doth not purge sinnes by ye which you haue ben washed: but he sayth it by∣cause of the word which I haue sayd vnto you. That is for none other cause, but that the word doth wash and clense you in the water. If one doo take away the word, what shall the water be but water? Which if the word be ioyned to the ele∣ment, it shall be made a Sacrament: and the word it selfe is made as visible: from whence commeth so great vertue to the water, that in touching the body it wa∣sheth the hart, but by meanes of the word? Not alwayes, bicause that the word is pronounced, but bicause that one belee∣ueth. For in the worde it selfe, truly there is a difference betwene the sound passing, and the vertue abyding. The Rubrycke wrytten in redde letters, whiche is called cautela Missae. If the body of the Lord be found with∣in the armorye or pyxe, to be rotten or
mustye, through to great moystnesse of the armorye, or through to great negligence in not changing it. If none can be founde which wyll receiue it, that the sayd body of the Lorde be burned, and the asshes put in a certayne halowed place. Item if the sayd body of the Lorde be found within the sayd armorye to be eaten parte of it with Myce, or Spiders, if none can bee found which wyll receiue it, that it be bur∣ned, and the asshes put in a halowed place. Item if any that is sicke,Note vvell and vnder∣stande. who hauing re∣ceiued the sayd body of the Lord, and through the infirmitie of his stomacke is constrayned to vomite it vp agayne,The bodie of the Lorde cannot stink nor be bur∣ned, nor vo∣mited. if none can be found which wyll take that refection: that the sayd body of ye Lorde be burned, and the asshes put into an ha∣lowed place. S. Peter aunswereth to the same in his sermon. Thou shalt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption.Psal. 15. Act. 2. Ast. 13. S. Paule sayth asmuche, in his sermon that he made to the people of Antioche, saying: He whome God ray∣sed agayne, sawe no corruption, also God hath raysed him from death for to returne
no more to corruption. How our Lord Iesus Christ according to his Humanite, cannot be but in one place. S. Ambrose wryting vpon S. Luke in his 10. booke. We ought not to seeke thee vpon earth, nor in the earth, nor according to the flesh,Christ vpon the earth, nor in the corruptible elements is not to be sought. Act. 7. Iohn. 2. if we wyll finde thee. For we may not knowe now Iesus Christ after the fleshe. S. Stephen did not seeke him vpon earth, who did see him at the right hand of God. But Mary which sought him in the earth, had not the power to touche him. Stephen hath touched him, for he sought him in heauen. Augustine in his 2. Quinquagesima, psalme. 54. Vntill such time as the heauen shal end,The bodie of Christ but in one place. the Lord shall be alwayes on high: but the truth of the Lord is here with vs. For it must nedes be yt the body with which he rose agayne, be in one certayne place: but his truth is spread abroad euery where.
Augustine wryting to Dardanus in the 67. Epistle. Doubt not that Iesus Christ as tou∣ching his manhod, is not there, where we doe looke for him. And doe remember that which we confesse in our crede: That he rose agayne,Christ shall come as he ascended, that is, in the same forme. and ascended into heauen, and that he shall come from thence, and not from any other place, to iudge ye quick and the dead. And he shall come according to the witnesse of the Angell, as they haue seene him ascend in that same visible form, and in the same substance to the which he hath giuen immortalitie. But he hath not taken frō him his nature: according to the forme and substance of his body, we must not think that he is dispersed euery where: for we must take heede so to affirme his deytie, that we destroy not his humayne nature. Therefore it followeth not that all which is in God, is God. Augustine vpon S. Iohn in his 30. treatyse. The body of Christ is raysed vp from death, and it must needes be that it is in one place. 2. Colos. 3.If ye then be rysen agayne with Christ,
seeke those thinges which are aboue, where Christ sitteth at the righ hand of God. Thinke on the thinges which are a∣boue, but not on those which are on earth. Iesus Christ sayth:Iohn. 7. I am yet a little while with you, and then goe I vnto him that sent me. Also the poore ye haue alwayes with you, but me ye shall not haue alwayes.Iohn. 12. My little children,Iohn. 13. yet a little whyle am I with you, ye shall seeke me, and (as I sayd vnto the Iewes) wheither I goe, thither can ye not come. Again, I go to prepare a place for you:Iohn. 14. I wyll returne agayne, and receiue you, euen vnto my selfe: that you may be there, where I am also. I tell you the truth,Iohn. 16. it is expedient for you that I goe away. For yf I goe not away, that comforter wyll not come vnto you: But if I depart I wyll send him vn∣to you. I came out from my father,Iohn. 16. and came into the world: Againe, I leaue the world, and goe to my father. Also the Angell sayde vnto the wo∣men,Mat. 28. I knowe that ye seeke Iesus whiche
was crucified: he is not here, for he is ry∣sen, as he sayd: come and see the place where the Lord was layde. Behold my handes and my feete: for it is euen I my selfe:Luk. 24. handle me and see: for a spirite hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me haue. And when he had thus spo∣ken, he shewed them his hands & his fete. Act. 1.And while they looked stedfastly vp to heauen, as he went, behold two men stode before them in white apparell, which also sayd, ye men of Galyle, why stand ye gasing into heauen: This same Iesus which is taken vp from you into heauen, shall so come, euen as ye haue seene him goe into heauen. Act. 3.Also whom the heauen must contayne vntill the time that all thinges be restored. That we ought not to take from the lay people the wyne of the supper. Gelasius Pope of Rome of consecration in the seconde distinction, chapter Comperimus. &c. We haue vnderstoode that some men re∣ceyuing
only the bodye of the Lorde,The supper to be recey∣ued in tvvo kindes, or else not. doe abstayne themselues from the Cup, who forasmuch as they sinne by superstition, ought to be constrayned and compelled to receyue the Sacrament wholy: or else to reiect it altogither. For the diuision of this mysterie cannot be without great sa∣criledge. Iesus Christ commaunded in his supper, and sayde: Drinke ye all of this:Mat. 26. For this is my bloude of the newe testa∣ment. The Counsaile of Basile hath ordeined that the laye people shoulde communicate the supper in two kindes.The Coun∣sell of Basill. Saint Cyprian in his Sermon of penitent sin∣ners. Howe shall we exhort the people to shed their bloude for the confession of Christ, if we doe denie vnto them the bloude of him when they ought to fight? Or howe can we make our selues capable to drinke the cuppe of Martyrdome, except yt we suffer our selues firste to drinke of the cuppe of the Lorde.
That we ought not to keepe the breade of the supper, nor to carie it here and there. Saint Clement in his 2. Epistle to Iames. And of the consecration in the 3. Distinction. Chapter tribus. &c. The vse in the primi∣tiue Church of the sup∣per.So many hostes ought to be offred at the Aulter, as shall be sufficient for the people. And if any remaine, we ought not to keepe it vntill the next day: but through the diligence of the clarkes, with feare and trembling ought to be receiued, and eaten. Origen vpon the 7. chapter of Leuiticus. The breade not caried in processi∣ons.The Lorde hath not ordayned or com∣maunded, that the bread should be kept, vntill the morrowe, the which he gaue vn∣to his disciples: but sayd vnto them, take ye and eate. &c. And in this he commaun∣ded not to carry the bread by the wayes, it may be, that by the same is conteyned a mysterye, that is to say, that alwayes
thou oughtest to bring forth the newe breade of the worde of God, whiche thou bearest within thee. Iesus Christ sayth: Take and eate.Mat. 26. In which sense we ought to vnderstand the auncient Doctors: when they haue sayde, we offer, we sacrifice, in calling the supper a sacrifice. S. Augustine writing against Faustus, the 8. Chapter. The Hebrues sacrificing the brute bea∣stes, did exercise themselues in the pro∣phecie of the sacrifice which Iesus Christ hath offered: And nowe the Christians in the oblation and communion of the bodie of Iesus Christ, doe celebrate the memo∣rie of the sacrifice already ended. Chrysostome in his first tome vpon the 8. Chapter of Saint Mathew, in the 16. homily. For this cause these reuerende and salu∣tarie mysteries, which we celebrate in all the congregation of the Church, are called Eucharistiae,VVherefore the sacra∣ment of the supper is called Eu∣charistia. that is to saye: a giuing of thankes: for they are the remembrance of many benefites, and doe shewe the verye heade of the heauenly loue towardes vs,
and doe make vs alwayes render thankes vnto God. Psal. 50.The Prophet Dauid in the 50. Psalm: Offer vnto God thanks giuing. &c. Irenaeus in his 4, booke against the here∣sies. Chap. 32. 33, & 34. He hath willed that we shoulde offer of∣ten the gift at the aultar, and without in∣termission. The aultar then is in heauen, for thither our prayers and oblations are addressed, and directed to the temple (as S. Iohn saith in his Apocalips:) And the temple of God was open,Apoc. 11. and the taber∣nacle: For beholde (sayth he) the taber∣nacle of God, in the whiche I doe dwell with men. S. Cyprian in his 2. boke of Epistles, the 3. Epistle vnto Cecill. We must not, welbeloued brother, that any man thinke,VVe ought not to fol∣lovve cu∣stome but Christe, vvhich is the veritie. that one ought to followe the custome of some men, whiche haue thought or iudged that we must offer the water only in the Lordes cuppe, we must aske of those, whō they haue for example. For if in the sacrifice which is Christ, we must followe none but Christ: truly then we must heare and doe that which Christ
hath done, and commaunded to be done:Iohn. 15. Inasmuch as he sayth in his Gospell, if you doe whatsoeuer I commaunde you, I will call you no more seruauntes, but my frendes. And that Iesus Christ ought to be onely hearde, the father himselfe doth witnesse it from heauen, saying: This is my welbeloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare him. Wherefore if Christe ought to be only hearde, we ought not to regarde that, whiche another before vs shall thinke good to be done: But that he who is before all (that is to saye) Christ, hath done first. For we must not followe the custome of man, but the veritie of god: forasmuche as he sayeth by his Prophete Esay: They worshippe me in vayne,Esay. 29. tea∣ching doctrines whiche are but mens pre∣ceptes. And the Lorde himselfe repeateth the same in the Gospell, saying:Math. 15. ye doe re∣iect the commaundement of God, for to establishe your owne tradition. But yet he hath sayde in another place: Whosoe∣uer shall break one of these least comman∣dements, & teacheth men so to doe,Math. 5. he shall be called the least in the kingdome of hea∣uen. Then if it be not lawfull to breake
the least of all the commaundementes of God: howe much lesse shall it be lawfull, to breake these so greate, so excellent, and so properly appertayning to the Sacra∣ment of the passion of the Lorde, and of our redemption: Or to chaunge it thorow the ordinance, and tradition of men, to an other thing than to that to ye which it hath ben godly instituted? For if Iesus Christ be the very souereygne Priest of God the father: and if he hath bene the first offered sacrifice to God his father: and hath com∣maunded to doe this in remembraunce of him, he shall doe truly the office of Christ, which shall followe that which Christ hath done. And if he doe begyn to offer in the Church to God the father, according as he shall see that Christ him selfe hath offe∣red: then he shal offer vnto God a full and whole sacrifice. Furthermore, if one kepe not that faithfullye, which is spirituallye commanded, the discipline of all religion and truth is ouerthrowne. S. Augustine in his booke of fayth vn∣to Peter. Chap. 16. In that sacrifice which we doe vse, there is giuing of thankes, and remembrance
of the fleshe of Christ which he offered for vs, and of his bloude which he hath shed. Augustine in his 10. booke of the Citie of God. Chap. 5. The visible sacrament is the testament: that is to saye, the holy signe of the inuisi∣ble sacrifice. Chrysostome in the 7. homilye vpon the Epistle to the Hebrues. We doe offer in deede,The supper is but a re∣membrance of the sa∣crifice. but that which we doe offer, we doe it in remembraunce of his death: for that which we doe, is done in remembraunce of that which hath bene done: For he sayth, doe this in remem∣braunce of me: we doe not make it any o∣ther sacrifice, as the priest doth: But wee doe alwayes the very same: and for to tell you better, we doe the remembraunce of the sacrifice which hath ben done. The Apostle vnto the Hebrues,Heb. 13. we doe by him offer, the sacrifice of laude alwayes vnto God: that is to say, the fruite of those lippes which confesse his name. I beseche you therefore bretheren,Rom. 12. by the mercifulnesse of God, that yee make your bodies a quick sacryfice, holy and ac∣ceptable vnto God: which is your resona∣ble
seruing of God. Oseas. 14.The prophet Oseas, O forgiue vs all our sinnes, receiue vs graciouslye, and then wyll we offer thee bullockes of our lippes vnto thee. Philip. 4.S. Paule sayth, I was filled after that I had receiued of Epaphroditus, the which came from you, an odour that smel∣leth sweete, a sacrifice acceptable and plea∣sant to God. Lactantius Firmianus in his 6. booke the .24. & .25. chapters. Iesus Christ sayt: I haue pleasure in mercy and not in offring. Math. 9. Mat. 12. Oseas .6. and the 1. of Samuel. 15. Pope Gregory in his .16. decretall the .7. question. Pope Gregory in his decretals, adiud∣geth him culpable of Idolatry, which shall heare the masse of a priest, that is a whore monger, or which shall communicate at his Sacramentes and Sacrafices. Francis Maro, in his suffrages for the deade. He which causeth a masse to be sayde by an vnchast, or whore maister priest, or which is in deadly sinne, it profiteth no∣thing,
neyther to the liuing, nor to the deade. The Apostle to the Hebrues,Heb. 10. the lawe which hath but the shadowe of good things to come,If then the sacrifices commanded of God haue no povver to take a∣vvay sinnes, hovv shall those doe vvhich God hath neuer commanded Heb. 10. and not things in their owne fa∣shion, can neuer with the sacrifices which they offer yearely, make the commers therevnto perfect. Agayne, it is impossible that the bloud of Oxen and of Goates should take away sinnes. Also, Lo I come to do thy will, O God, &c. By the which will, we are sanctified through the offering of the bodie of Iesus Christ once for all. Moreouer:Heb. 10. This man after he had of∣fred one sacrifice for sinnes, sat him downe for euer on the right hand of God. Likewyse, with one offring hath hee perfected for euer those that are sanctified. Agayne,Heb. 10. theyr sinnes and iniquities wyll I remember no more. And where re∣mission of these thinges is,Hebr. 9. Iesus Christ is no more offred in sa∣crifice but once for all. there is no more offring for sinnes. Also he sayth not that Iesus Christ doth offer him selfe often, as the hie priest en∣tred into the holy place euery yeere, with
strange bloud, for then must he haue often suffred sence the world began. &c. That there is but two Sa∣cramentes in the church of Iesus Christe. Augustine in his .3. booke of the chri∣stian doctrine the .9. chapter. 1. Pet. 1. Galat. 3.But in this time hereafter that the ma∣nyfest iudgement of our liberty is reuea∣led, by the resurrection of the Lorde: wee are not ouermuch charged through heauy operacions,The sacra∣ments are tvvo, Bap∣tisme, and the Lordes supper. and workinges of signes, which we already doe vnderstand: But the same Lord hath giuen by the doctrine of the Apostles, a certayne little number in steede of many, which are easye to doe, and good to vnderstand, and most chast to keepe: As is the Sacrament of baptisme: and the celebration of the body and bloud of the Lord. And when euery one doth vse them, being instructed to what ende they serue, he shall acknowledge them, not with a carnall seruitude and bondage, but to honor them in the liberty of the spirite.
And as it is a seruyle infirmytie to follow the letter, and to take the signes for the thinges, which are signified by them: so is it an euill error, to interprete vnprofitably the signes. &c. Augustine wryting to Ianuarius in the 118. Epistle. I would that thou shouldest knowe, that our Lorde Iesus (as he him selfe saith in the Gospell) hath submitted vs to an easie yoke, and light burthen.Saint Augu∣stine nameth but tvvoo sacraments. And there∣fore he hath ordayned in the christian church, a fewe Sacramentes in number, easie to be kept, excellent in significacion: as the Baptisme, consecrated in the name of the Trinitie: and the communication of the body and bloud of the Lord. And if there be any other thing commaunded in the Scripture. &c. Augustine vpon S. Iohn in the .80. homelye. The word being adioyned to the Cle∣ment, it shalbe made a Sacrament. How we ought to vnderstand this word Sacrament. Sacrament, Mystery, Secrete, is all one, and is vnderstoode for an hidde and
vnknowen thing, the which notwithstan∣ding is reuealed at a certayne time, when it pleaseth the goodnesse of God. Reede Tob. 12. Daniell. 2. Sapien. 2. 1. Cor. 4. Ephe. 5. Ephes. 1. Ephes. 3. Collos. 1.1. Timoth. 3. Apocal. 7. Of confession to God, and of auricular confession. Psal. 32. 1. Par. 16. 2. Par. 20Dauid sayth in the .32. psalm: I haue acknowledged my sinne vnto thee: and mine vnrighteousnesse haue I not hydde. I sayd I wyll confesse my sinnes vnto the Lord, and so thou forgauest the wicked∣nesse of my sinne. Psal. 51.Againe, I acknowledge my faultes: and my sinne is euer before me. Agaynst thee only haue I sinned, and done this euill in thy sight. 1. Iohn. 1.If we acknowledge our sinnes, he is faythfull and iuste to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to clense vs from all vnrighteousnesse. Iames. 5.Acknowledge your faults one to an o∣ther, and pray one for an other. Eccles. 28. Ephe. 4. Collos. 3.
If thy brother trespasse against thee. &c.Mat. 18. Reade Luke. 17. Deut. 17. 1. Cor. 5.2. Cor. 13. Augustine in his 10. booke of confessi∣ons, the 2. chapter. What haue I to doe then with men, that they should heare my confessions? As though they should heale my griefes. That is a curyous kinde of people, to know another mans life, and slowe to cor∣rect and amend their owne, wherefore doe they demaund of me to heare what I am, where they wyll not heare of thee what they are? And how doe they know when they doe heare me, wheather I doe speake true, when in deede no man knoweth that which is done in the man but the spirit of the man which is in him. &c. Chrysostome in the 12. chapter to the Hebrewes 3. homily, and in the 4. tome 41. homily. I doe not say vnto thee that thou ac∣cuse thy selfe openly, nor before others: But I would that thou shouldest obay the Prophet which saith,Psal. 32. Confesion to God on∣lye. reuele vnto ye Lorde thy way: acknowledg then thy sinnes be∣fore God, pronounce thy vnrighteousnesse
with prayer to the true Iudge, not with the tongue, but by the memory of thy con∣science: and then finally haue hope to haue mercie. And vpon the .51. psalm, in the .2. Tome. Confesse thy sinnes,Psal. 50. Mar. 2. to the end thou doe put them away: If thou art ashamed to tell vnto an other that thou hast sinned tell it alwayes vnto thy soule. I doe not saye that thou shouldest confesse thy selfe vnto one, like vnto thy selfe, for to rebuke and checke thee of them: tell them to God, which wyll heale them.Confession to the Priest reiected by Chrisostom. But when thou wilt not tell them, is God ignorant when thou doest them? He is there present when thou committest them, he knoweth them very well: wyll not he that thou shouldest acknowledg them? Thou wast not asha∣med to sinne, and art thou ashamed to con∣fesse them? Confesse them in this worlde, that you may haue rest in the other. Chrysostome in his sermon of penance and confession, the .6. Tome. It is not necessary to confesse it before witnesses: only make the acknowledging in thine heart, this examynation doth not require witnesses, it suffiseth that God on∣ly
doe see and heare thee. Chrysostome in the 5. homilie of the in∣comprehensible nature of God, a∣gaynst the Anomians. I doe not call thee before men, for to discouer thy sinnes, vnfolde thine owne conscience before God, shewe thy wounds and strypes vnto the Lorde who is the Phisition, and pray him to remedie it: he it is which doth not checke, and whiche gently healeth the poore sicke persons. In the historie tripartite in the 9. booke and 35. Chapter. It is sayde that auricular confession was vsed at Constantinople,Auricular confession abolished in Constan∣tinople. vntill suche time that a woman making as though she woulde be confessed, was founde that she tooke that cloke, for to lye with one of the Deacons of the same Church. Bicause of which euill fact, Nectarius bishop of the sayd place, a man renoumed in holynesse, and of great learning, abolished that ob∣seruance of confession. The hystories doe declare,Ponti. 183 that there was no lawe or constitution before the time of Innocent the thirde, touching au∣ricular confession.
Chrysostome in his 4. Tome, of Lazarus. I would not that thou shouldest confesse thy selfe vnto a man, who afterward may rebuke or checke thee, or defame thee in telling thy faultes: but shewe thy griefe vnto God, who is the good phisition. Af∣terwarde he bringeth in God speaking in this maner: I do not compell thee to come in the open assembly, confesse to me one∣lye thy sinnes, that I maye make thee whole. The Church of Rome doth commaunde to confesse all our sinnes, not ex∣ceptnig any. Psal. 19.Answere. Dauid sayth: Who can tell howe oft he offendeth: O clense thou me from my secret faultes. Saint Ambrose of the repentance of S. Peter, in his .46. sermon. Mat. 26.Peter poured forth teares, not praying in voyce: I doe finde that he did weepe & lament, but I doe not find what he hath sayde: I doe reade of his teares, but I reade not of satisfaction.
Chrysostome in the 12. homilie of the Cananite. Iesus Christ did heale him that had the Leprosie, and sayde vnto him:Luk. 17. Go shewe thy selfe vnto the Priest, and offer that which Moyses commaunded in the lawe,Leuit. 14. for thy healing. O thing neuer hearde?Hovve vve ought to vnderstand: go & shevve thy selfe to the Priest. the Lorde healed the disease, yet neuerthelesse he did sende them to the lawe of Moyses. Wherefore did he so? For none other cause but that the Iewes might not reproue him as a transgressor of the lawe. S. Ambrose in his 3. sermon vpon the 119. Psalme. Go and shewe thy selfe vnto the Priest:Mar. 2. who is the true Priest, but he which is the euerlasting Priest? S. Cyprian in his 5. sermon of penitent sinners. The seruant cannot pardon that whiche is committed agaynst the Lorde.Man cannot pardon sins. Ambrose in his booke of Cain and Abel. The sinnes are pardoned by the worde of God, of the which the Leuice is the ex∣positor, and as an executor.
Chrysostome in his 7. Tome in the ho∣milie of repentance. This is the place of healing, not of iud∣gement: Tell vnto God onely thy sinne, who will giue no punishment, but the re∣mission of sinnes. Of the power to bynde and vnbynde, or loose. Augustine in the 50. homilie vpon S. Iohn. The keyes giuen to the Church, and not to the person of Peter.If the figure of the Church had not bene in Saint Peter, the Lorde woulde not haue sayde vnto him, I will giue vnto thee the keyes. For if the same be spoken to Peter only, the Church hath not the keys: if the Church hath them, it was figured in the person of S. Peter. Augustine in the 11. homilie, and in the 124. homilie. Mat. 16.Although it be that all were asked, Pe∣ter alone aunswered: thou art Christ,S. Peter re∣ceyued the keyes vvith all the Apo∣stles. and it is sayde vnto him, I will giue vnto thee the keyes, as though the power to
bynde and loose, had bene giuen vnto him onely. But as he answered for all, so he re∣ceyued the keyes with all, as bearing the person of vnitie. He is then named alone for all, forasmuche as there is betweene them vnitie. Augustine vpon S. Iohn in the 124. treatise. Chapter. 21. The rocke is not sayd of that name Pe∣ter,The rocke giueth name to Peter, & not Peter to the rocke. but that name Peter is named of the rocke. So Christ is not called Christ of a christian, but the christian is called chri∣stian of Christe. And therefore also the Lorde sayde:Mat. 16. vpon this rocke I will build my Church, bicause that Peter had sayd, thou arte Christ the sonne of the liuing God: vppon this rocke then (which thou hast confessed) I will builde my churche, and the rocke was Christ, vpon the which foundation also, Peter himselfe hath bene builded.1. Cor. 3. For other foundation can no man laye, than that which is layde, whiche is Iesus Christ. The church then whiche is builded vpon Christ, hath taken the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, of Christ in Peter, (that is to say) the power to bynde and loose.
Theophilact vpon Saint Iohn, the 8. Chapter. It belongeth to God onely to pardon sinnes:Iohn. 8. therefore, sayeth he, whosoeuer committeth sinne, is the seruant of sinne, you are then seruāts, for you be all sinners. Saint Hilarie in his 6. booke of the Trinitie. The father hath reuealed vnto Peter, who sayth, thou art the sonne of GOD: wherefore the building of the congregati∣on is vpon that rocke of confession:Mat. 16. that faith is the foundation of the church: that fayth hath the keyes of the kingdome of heauen.Collo. 2. 1. Iohn. 5. Philip. 1. 2. Pet. 1. All that whiche this fayth shall bynde and loose in earth, is also bounde and loosed in heauen. This fayth is the gift of the fatherly reuelation. Augustine in his first booke of retracta∣tion, the 22. Chapter. S. Augustine recanteth.In the booke where I haue before time affirmed in a certayne place of S. Peter the Apostle, that in him, as in the rocke, the church is builded: The which sense al∣so is song of many in the verses of Saint Ambrose, there where he speaketh of the cocke. But I doe knowe very well, that
oftentimes afterwarde I haue thus ex∣pounded it: Thou art Peter, and vpon that rocke (that is to say) the rocke, affir∣ming thou art Christ the sonne of the li∣uing God: Origen vpon Saint Mathew, the 2. homilie. Doest thou thinke that the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, are onely giuen vn∣to Peter, and that none other of the bles∣sed shall receyue them? Augustine vpon the wordes of the Lord in S. Mathew, in his 13. sermon. Thou art then Peter, and vppon this rocke which thou hast confessed, vpon this rocke whiche thou hast knowne, saying: thou art Christe the sonne of the liuing God, I will builde my church: Vpon me I will buylde thee, and not me vpon thee. For those men which woulde be buylded vpon men, doe saye, I holde of Paule, and I holde of Apollos, and I holde of Ce∣phas, that is to saye, rocke: and the other which will not be builded vpon Peter,Iesus Christ hath builded his Church vpon him selfe, and not vpon Saint Peter. 1. Cor. 1. but vppon the rocke doe saye: I holde of Christ. &c. Iesus Christ is the heade of the church,
reade Ephes. 4. Colos. 1.2. Reg. 22. Augustine in his 3. booke of Baptisme, the 3. Chap. And they are the wordes of S. Cyprian in the counsell of Carthage. None of vs truly is establyshed By∣shoppe of Byshoppes, or none shall com∣pell his companions by cruell tyranny through necessitie to come thereunto. Gregory wryting to Eulogius Byshoppe of Alexandria in the 7. booke, .3. Epistle. Behold how you haue wrytten to me: you haue put this worde of pryde in cal∣ling me vniuersall Pope:Gregorie vvoulde not be called v∣niuersall Pope. but I pray your holinesse to call me no more so here∣after. For all that which is giuen vnto an other aboue reason, is taken from you: Concerning my selfe I doe not repute that for honor, wherein I doe see the honor of my bretheren weakened. For my honor is that the estate of the vniuersall Church, and of my bretheren, be mainteyned in theyr strength: If your holynesse doe call me vniuersall Pope, you confesse that you are not in part of that, which you attribute and giue vnto me for the whole.
Of free wyll of the merites of workes, and of iustifica∣tion by faith. Iesus Christ sayth,Iohn. 8. whosoeuer com∣mitteth sinne is the seruant of sinne. Rom. 6. 2. Peter. 2. All haue sinned and haue neede of Gods mercie.Rom. 3. Also Iesus Christ sayth,Iohn. 15. without mee ye can doe nothing. We are not apt to thinke any thing,2. Cor. 3. as it were of our selues: but our abilitie commeth of God. The flesh ryseth agaynst the spirit,Galat. 5. and the spirite agaynst the flesh: and these thinges are contrary one to an other, so that ye cannot doe the same thinges that ye woulde. Also he which beganne a good worke in you,Philip. 1. shall goe foorth with it vntill the day of Iesus Christ. Agayne,Philip. 2. it is God which worketh in you both the will and also the deede, accor∣ding to his pleasure.
Rom. 7.Likewyse I doe not that good thing, which I would, but that euill doe I, which I would not. Augustine in his Enchiridion to Laurence: Chapter .29. This part of mankinde vnto whome God hath promised deliueraunce, and the euerlasting kingdome can it be made bet∣ter by his workes?Man cannot be made better by the merit of his vvorkes. No, no, for what good can he doe which is lost, but asmuch as he shall be deliuered from his perdition? Can he doe by his free wyll the same? the same also he cannot doe. For man ill vsing his free wyll,Free vvill lost. did lose him selfe, and his free wyll: and as he which killeth him selfe, whiles he is liuing, killeth him selfe: but in putting him selfe to death, he liueth no more, and cannot rayse him selfe vp a∣gayne when he is dead: so when he hath sinned by his free wyll, bicause that sinne hath bene victoryous, hath free wyll ben loste.2. Pet. 2. Iohn. 8. For of whome soeuer a man is ouercom, vnto the same he is in bondage. This is truly the sentence of S. Peter: And bicause that it is true, I praye you what may be the liberty of a seruant that is in bondage, but when he doth take plea∣sure
to sinne? For he serueth freely which doth willingly the wyll of the Lorde: and therefore he is free to sinne which is the seruant of sinne: and no man shall be free to doe iustly, if first being deliuered from sinne he doe not begin to be the seruant of righteousnesse. This is the true liberty for the bond of the worke that is wel done, and also it is the faithfull bondage, bicause of the obeying of the commaundement.Man is solde vnder sinne. But from whence shall this libertie to doe well come vnto the man which is brought vnder and solde, but by him who hath re∣deemed him: of whom it is sayd,Iohn. 8. if the son make you free, then are ye free in deede. Augustine vnto Paulinus in the .106. Epistle. Let no man stumble agaynst the stum∣ling stone,R. 9. as in defending subtelly free wyll and nature:VVe ought not to defēd free vvill or nature, as the vvise men of this vvorlde doe. euen as the Philoso∣phers of this world haue done with great force, for to be esteemed, or for to thinke to great the blessed life, by vertue of theyr owne proper wyll: Let such people then take heede to make through wysedome of wordes, the crosse of Christe vayne: and that the same be not vnto them to
stumble against the stumbling stone. For when humayne nature abydeth in that in∣tegryte in the which it hath bene made, yet it cannot in any wise keepe it, if his creator doe not ayde him. Forasmuch then as it cannot keepe the health and saluati∣on that it hath receiued, without the grace of God. How can it receiue that which it hath lost? S. Augustine in the 107. Epistle vnto Vitalis. If we will in deede defend free wyll, let vs not fight against that whereof it is free: for he which gaynsayeth the grace, by the which our wyll is made free, for to decline from euill, and for to doe good: he would that his free will, be yet bond and captyue. When man was in honor, he did not vnderstand it:Psal. 49. he was compared vnto the beastes, and was made like vnto them. Augustine in his booke of corrections & grace, the 12. Chapter. Libertie lost thorovv sin.Now then forasmuch as that greate liberty is lost, through the demeryte of sinne, euen so doth remayne and abyde the infirmytie for to be ayded and holpen
with greater giftes in truth. It hath plea∣sed God so, to the ende cheifely to quenche the pryde of mans presumption: that all flesh (that is to say euery man) should not glorie in himselfe before him. &c.Psal. 148. The Counsell Mileuitan in two Canons. Free will weakened to the first man, can  not be repayred and amended, but thorow the grace of baptisme, the which after that it is lost, cannot be restored agayne, but by him whiche hath power to giue it: Wherefore the truth sayth, if the sonne make you free, then are you free in dede. The seconde Canon sayeth: God doth  worke so in the heartes of men, and to free will,No good cogitation can procede from vs but by the ver∣tue of God in vs. that if there be any godly cogi∣tation, any deliberation tending to the ho∣nor of God, and any motion of good will, all the same proceedeth from God. For by him we may doe some good thing, and without him we can doe nothing. Augustine writing to Valentine of grace and free will. Chap. 18. To the end it should not seeme that men should doe any thing by free wyll:Psal. 95. It is sayd in the .95. psalme: harden not your
hartes:Ezec. 18. And in Ezechiel: cast away from you all your vngodlynesse, that yee haue done: make you newe hartes and a newe spirite, and obey to all my commaunde∣mentes: wherefore wyll ye dye, O ye house of Israel, sayth the Lorde? Seing I haue no pleasure in the death of him that dyeth, sayth the Lorde God. Turne you then, and ye shall liue. Let vs remember what God sayth: turne you and you shall lyue: vnto whome notwithstanding we do say: O God turne vs. Let vs remember that God sayth: Caste from you all your vn∣godlynesse, and yet it is he that iustifieth the wicked. Lette vs remember that hee sayth: Make you newe heartes and a new spirite: and yet notwithstanding he him∣selfe sayth, I will giue vnto you a newe heart and a newe spirite. Howe then, that he which sayth,God com∣maundeth that vvhich man cānot, and giueth that vvhich hee com∣maundeth. make you, sayth agayne, I will giue vnto you? wherefore doth he commaunde it, if he himselfe doe giue it? wherefore doth he giue it, if man ought to doe it? Except he giue that whiche hee commaundeth, and aydeth, to the ende that he to whom he doth commaund it, do it. For the will is alwayes free in vs, but
it is not alwayes good: for eyther it is free from righteousnesse, when it serueth to sinne, and then it is euill: or it is free from sinne, when it serueth to righteous∣nesse, and then it is good. But the grace of God is alwayes good, and by the same it commeth to passe, that man is of a good will, who before was of an euill and wic∣ked will: by the same also it is brought to passe, that the same good will which hath already begun to be in vs, doth increase, and is made so great, that it can accom∣plishe and fulfill the commaundements of God, which it will, and when it wil, great∣ly and perfectly. For to the same serueth that which is written: If thou wilt, thou shalt keepe the commaundements, in such sort, that the man which woulde, and can not yet knowe that he hath a full desire, and shall pray that so great a will be giuen vnto him, then that sufficeth for to accom∣plishe the commaundements: for he is in this maner ayded, to doe that whiche is commaunded him. For the will is then profitable when we can: for what profi∣teth it to will which we cannot: or not to will, that which we can?
Saint Augustine in his booke of the newe canticles. Chap. 8. It is well declared what free will can doe which is not aided: it is sufficient of it selfe to doe euill, but not to doe good, if it be not ayded of God. For the first man receyued free will rightly: he did set be∣fore him (as sayth the Scripture) fire and water, vnto which thou wilt (sayth he) put forth thine hande. He chose the fire, and left the water: beholde ye righteous iudge: that which man hath chosen, being at his libertie, the same hath he receyued: he de∣sired the euill, and the euill followed him: beholde agayne that righteous Iudge which is mercifull: For when he saw that man thorowe his yll vsing of free will, had damned all his posteritie in himselfeAdam hath damned all his posteritie in himselfe. as in the roote, before that anye man did in∣treate him, came downe from heauen, and hath healed mankinde in destroying the proude through his humilitie. He hath led those yt wandred out of their way, into the right way, and hath led the straungers into their countrie. Let not mans nature then glorie in it selfe: but glorie it selfe in him which hath made it.
Augustine in his booke of correcti∣on and grace. Chapter 11. Without the grace of God Adam could not be good, yea though he had free wyll: wherefore God would not leaue him with∣out his grace, although he left him in his free wyll, bicause that free wil is sufficient to doe euill:Free vvill to doe euil, but not to doe good. But to good it is but of small valewe, if it be not ayded with the good∣nesse of the Almightie: which ayde if man had not forsaken through his free wyll, he had bene alwayes good: But he did for∣sake it, wherefore he was also forsaken. Augustine of the wordes of the Apo∣stle in the 13. sermon. All those which are leade by the spirite of God, are the children of God: where∣fore then wylt thou eleuate thy selfe,Rom. 8. when thou hast heard: If you mortify the deedes of the body by the spirite, you shall liue. For thou wast ready to say, my wyll can doe this, my free wyll can doe that: what can will doe? What can free wyll doe? If the holy spirite doe not gouern thee, thou shalt fall, if he doe not gouern thee, thou shalt abide & continew ouerthrowen. How then shall he doe the same? By his
holy spirite, when thou hast heard the Apo∣stle, saying: all those which are conducted with the spirite of God, which if it be ab∣sent, thou canst by no manner of meanes doe any good:Augustine sayde that man hath freevvill, but he doth vn∣derstande it, to doe euill. Thou maist doe some thing by thy free will, although he doth not ayde thee, but that is euill: Vnto the same thy will is apte, which is called free, and in doing euill, is made a damnable seruant. When I doe say vnto thee, that thou doest nothing without the ayde of God, I speak nothing of goodnesse: for without the ayd of God, thou hast free wyll to doe euill: although that it be not properly free. Augustine against the two Epistles of the Pelagians vnto Boniface, 2. booke. Chapter. 8. But to the ende that the Lord shoulde aunswere vnto the Pelagians in time to come, he hath not sayde, without me you can hardly doe any thing: But he hath sayd, without me can ye doe nothing. It appertayneth vnto man to purpose a thing in his harte,Iohn. 15. Pro. 16. but the aunswere of the tongue commeth of the Lorde: they are deceiued through euill vnderstanding, and so much as they doe thinke the preparation of the
harte to appertayne vnto man (that is to say) to begin good without the ayde of the grace of God: God forbyd that the sons of the promesse should vnderstand it so. As where they haue heard the Lord say∣ing, without me ye can doe nothing, they doe com as though they would vanquysh, saying, beholde we can without thee, pre∣pare the harte: when they haue heard the Apostle S. Paule, who sayth,2. Cor. 3. not that we are apte of our selues, to thinke any thing, as it were of our selues: but our a∣bilitie commeth of God, as also in ouer∣comming, vanquishing, and saying: Be∣holde we are apt of our selues to prepare our harte, and thereby to thinke any good thing: And who is he that can prepare the harte to goodnesse for a good thought?Catholike fayth de∣stroyed by free vvill. God forbyd that they should vnderstande it so: except it be those which defend their proude free will in destroying the catho∣like fayth: therefore it is truly wrytten, it appertayneth to man to prepare his heart, but the answere of the tongue com∣meth of the Lorde, for bicause that man doth prepare himselfe, not alwayes with∣out the ayde of God. In lyke maner it is
sayde:Psal. 81. Open thy mouth wyde, and I shal fill it. And although yt we cannot open the mouth, except it be through the ayde of him, without whome we can doe nothing: Neuerthelesse, wee doe open it through his ayde, and through our worke: but the Lorde doth fill it without our worke. By and by after he sayeth, God doth many good things in man, which man doth not: But man doth none, which God doth not, to the ende that man doth them. Augustine vpon Saint Iohn in the 49. treatise. Chap. 9. Let no man then flatter himselfe: for of himselfe he is a deuill:Man naught of himselfe. but of God he is blessed. And what is that to be of himself, but of sinne? Cast awaye the sinne which is of thee: thy righteousnesse, sayth he, is of me.1. Cor. 4. For what hast thou, that thou hast not receyued? Augustine in his contemplations of the soule with God. Chap. 18. O Lorde, I doe confesse, as thou hast taught me, that I am no other thing, but altogither vanitie, and a shadow of death, and but a darke earth, vayne and voyde, the which without thy blessing, doth not
encrease and bring forth anye fruite, but confusion, sinne, and death. If I haue had any good thing, I had it of thee. All that which I haue receyued is from thee, or I had it of thee. If I doe any thing that is right, that is through thee.Genes. 1. Iames. 1. But when I am fallen, I am fallen through my selfe, and had alwayes remayned in the myre, if thou hadst not lifted me vp. I had bene alwayes blinde, if thou hadst not illumi∣nated mee. When I did fall downe, I shoulde neuer haue bene raysed vp againe, if thou hadst not giuen me thy hande: And afterwarde also when thou hadst raysed me vp, I shoulde haue fallen agayne, if thou hadst not sustayned mee. I had bene oftentimes lost, if thou hadst not gouerned me. Euen so, O Lorde, euen so thy mer∣cie hath alwayes gone before me, in deli∣uering me from all euill, keeping me from those that be past, and in keeping me from those that be present, and in defending and preseruing me from those whiche are to come, breaking also in peeces before mee the snares of sinners, in taking awaye the occasions and the causes: for if thou hadst not done vnto me those things, I had done
all the sinnes of the worlde. For O Lord, I doe knowe verye well, that there is no sinne that euer man hath done, but that an other man dothe the same, if the creator of whome man is made, be absent. But thou hast done it so, to the ende that I doe not that which thou hast forbidden, and hast shed out in me thy grace, to the ende that I may beleeue in thee. &c. Augustine in his .2. boke of the remissi∣on of sinnes. Chapter. 18. Men doe take payne to finde in our wyll some goodnesse, which is ours, and not of God: but I doe not knowe howe they can finde it. Saint Barnarde in the first homily of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary. As touching good workes, it is moste certayne that no man hath them of him selfe:Good vvor∣kes procede not of man. for if the humaine nature could not continue in his state, when it was whole and perfect, how much lesse can it rayse it selfe nowe in that it is marred and corrup∣ted? It is most certayne that all thinges drawe to their beginning, asmuch as is possible for them.
Augustine vnto Vitalis in the 107. Epistle. Aunswere I pray thee: how saith the Apostle in giuing thankes to God the fa∣ther, which hath made vs fitte to be of the company of Saintes in light,Free vvill deliuereth not. if it be not he which doth deliuer our free will, but that the free will doth deliuer it selfe? We doe render then faulsly thankes vnto the father, as if he did that which he doth not: and he hath erred whiche hath sayde that he doth make vs fitte. Aunswere how we haue our free will, for to deliuer vs from euill, and for to doe good, and when free wyll was vnder the power of darke∣nesse? From which darkenesse if God hath deliuered vs (as saith the Apostle) truely he hath made the wyll free: where∣fore it followeth that euen as men are not faythfull but by free wyll: Neuerthelesse they are made faithfull through ye grace of God, which hath deliuered free will from the power of darkenesse: And so the grace of God is not denyed, but is decla∣red to be verytable and true, although no merytes of men preceede it. And free will is so defended, that it is affirmed by hu∣mylitie,
and not ouerthrowen by pryde. Then the grace of God is not geauen in the nature of free will, nor in the lawe, nor in doctryne,No grace of God by free vvill, nor by the lavve. as the wicked and peruerse Pelagian hath set foorth. But is geiuen to all the workes through the will of him of whome it is wrytten. O Lord God thou doest seperate from thy wyll the soule that is wylfull: for we haue lost free wyll, for to loue God through the greatnesse of the first sinne. &c. Afterwardes he sayth in that we doe beleeue in God, or in that we doe liue faithfully, it lyeth not then in mans will or running,Rom. 9. but in the mercy of God: nor that we ought to wyll nor runne but bicause that he doth in vs both the wyl and the running: Let vs not say then that the grace is the loue: but let vs acknowe∣ledge the grace which doth cause the doc∣trine and learning to profit, for where that grace is absent: we doe see that the same doth hinder and let the learning. Augustine in his fyrst booke against Pelagius and Celestine. Whosoeuer hath heard and learned of the father commeth vnto me. The wyll of mā is so ayded, not only in this that it doth
knowe what it must doe, but hauing know∣en what it doth: And therefore when the Lorde doth teach through the grace of his spirite, he doth teach in such sorte, that not only euery one doth see that which he hath learned in the knowledge thereof, but of will he doth desire it, and of worke fulfill it. Augustine in the .3. booke vpon the wordes of the Apostle .3. sermō. And in his booke of the spirite and the let∣ter. Chapter. 3. How are these wicked men proude of free wyll, before they are free, or of their strength if they are already free, they doe not consider, that in this word of free wyll is signified a libertie? For where the spi∣rite of the Lorde is, there is libertie. If then they be the seruantes of sinne,Throughe sinne the free vvill is lost. how doe they bragge and bost to haue free wyll? For of whome soeuer a man is ouercome, vnto the same is he in bondage: If they are already deliuered how doe they boste them selues,2. Pet. 2. as it were of their proper workes? Are they so free, that they would not be the seruantes of him which sayth, without me ye can doe nothing?Iohn. 15.
Iohn. 6.Iesus sayth: No man can come vnto me, except the father which hath sent me, drawe him. Iam. 1.Saint Iames: Euery good gift, and euery perfect gift, is from aboue, and cō∣meth downe from the father of lights. 2. Cor. 3.Saint Paule also: We are not able of oure selues to thinke anye thing that is good, as it were of our selues: but our a∣bilitie commeth of God. Rom. 7. Galat. 5.Agayne vnto the Romaynes: I knowe that in me (that is to saye) in my fleshe, dwelleth no good thing. For to will, is present with me: but I finde no meane to performe that which is good: for I doe not that good thing which I woulde, but that euill doe I which I would not. 1. Cor. 2.Also the naturall man is not able to perceyue the thinges of the spirite of God, for they are but folishnes vnto him, neyther can he knowe them, bicause they are spiritually discerned. And 1. Cor. 12.1. Cor. 12. Esay. 26. God worketh all things in euery man. 1. Cor. 12.Agayne: No man can say, that Iesus is the Lorde but by the holy ghost. Psal. 39.Also Dauid: Euery man liuing is al∣togither
vanitie. And in the 8. Chapter of Genesis:Genes. 8. The heart of man is enclined to euill euen from his youth. To the Ephesians:Ephes. 2. We were naturally the children of wrath, euen as well as o∣ther. Gregorie vpon the 7. psalme, vpon the versicle, Anima mea. &c. Forasmuch as freewill is corrupted in our first father, we haue not the power to will well, if we bee not ayded with the grace of God. Saint Hierome in his commentarie vpon Ieremie. Chapter. 23. Forasmuch as the heretikes haue accu∣stomed to promise felicitie, and to open to sinners the kingdome of heauen, say∣ing: thou mayest imitate the maiestie of God, so that thou be withoute sinne, bi∣cause thou hast receyued the power of free will, and the intelligence and vnderstan∣ding of the lawe, by the which thou mayst obtayne that which thou wouldest: Euen so the sayde heretikes doe abuse the poore simple people through fayre wordes: and chieflye the yong women charged wyth
sinnes, who are caryed here and there with euery kynde of doctrine, deceyuing thorowe flatterie all those which heare them. Augustine in the 30. booke of his homilies. Homilie. 41. VVe ought not to ac∣corde vvith them vvhich do establish free vvill.Let vs not consent vnto those which tho∣rowe great pride, go about to eleuate and extoll free will: the whiche so doing, doe bring more euill than good, and seeke no∣thing but to ruinate and destroy man: but let vs consider meekely that which the A∣postle speaketh: It is God that worketh in vs,Phil. 2. both the will and also the dede, euen of his free beneuolence. Let vs giue than∣kes vnto the Lorde our redeemer, which without any merite preceding, hath hea∣led vs of our wounds & sores, and hath re∣conciled vs vnto God, and redeemed vs from captiuitie, and reduced and brought vs from darkenesse into light: and called vs from death to lyfe. &c. Of merite, and of good workes. 2. Ephe. 2.By grace are yee made safe throughe faith, and not of your selues: it is the gift
of God, not of workes, least anye manne shoulde boast himselfe. For we are his workemanship, created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, which God ordeyned, that we shoulde walke in them. S. Ambrose in the first booke of Cain and Abel. Chap. 7. It is the deede of a dull and slowe heart,Nothing done by our vertue. to attribute to his proper vertues, that which is good, or that whiche he doth ob∣tayne of God, and not to the author of grace: but to esteeme himselfe to bee the author of his goodnesse. There is another kinde of sinne, yea lesse, but of equall ar∣rogancie and pryde (that is to say) of those which doe not denie God to be the distri∣buter of goodnesse: but doe thinke the goodnesse which commeth vnto them, is bicause of their prudence and wisedome, and that the merites of all other vertues are giuen vnto them of right. And for that cause it is sayde agaynst those which haue receyued the heauenly grace, that they doe not esteeme themselues in no wise to bee vnworthy to haue suche goodnesse of God: When the Lorde thy God shall begyn to consume his people here in thy presence,Deut. 9.
saye not in thine heart, the Lorde hath brought me in to possesse this lande for my righteousnesse. &c. S. Barnard in the fyrst sermon of the An∣nunciation of the Virgin Mary. Beleeue not that thou canst throughe any workes merite eternall life, except it be giuen thee freely.VVee can through no vvorkes me∣rite eternall lyfe. Iob. 14. For who is that which can make him cleane being concei∣ued of filthy seede: but only he which is altogeather cleane? And so that which is done, cannot be vndon: But bicause that God doth not impute it, it shall be as though it had neuer bene done. Whiche the Prophet considering speaketh in this sort, blessed is the man, vnto whome the Lord imputeth no sinne.Psal. 32. But as concer∣ning good workes it is most certaine that none hath them of him selfe: for if the hu∣mayne nature being yet entire and whole, coulde not holde it selfe in his estate: how much lesse can it rayse it selfe, when it is already corrupted? But we doe knowe very well concerning this eternall life,Rom. 8. that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be shewed vnto vs: Yea when man shall suffer them
all togeather. For mans merites, are not suche, as by them eternall life shoulde of right be due vnto them, or that God doth iniury and wrong vnto some men, if he doe not giue it: For although I should not say that all merites are the giftes of God, in somuch as man is more bound vnto God for those merytes, then God is vnto man: yet what are all the merites, in re∣spect of so greate glory? S. Barnarde of free will. What hast thou that thou hast not re∣ceyued? art thou created? art thou healed? art thou saued?VVe recey∣ued al things of God. whiche of them hast thou of thy selfe? whiche of them is not im∣possible for free will? thou couldest not create thy selfe when thou wast not made: nor iustifie thy selfe, when thou waste a sinner. &c. Agayne in the same booke: But if that will vpon which all merites doe depende, was not in Saint Paule, by what meanes did he presume, that ye crowne shoulde bee kept for him, which he calleth the crowne of righteousnesse? But it is, bicause that whiche is promised thankfully, is of right demaunded as a thing due. Finallye he
sayth:2. Tim. 1. I knowe him in whome I haue be∣leeued, and am persuaded that he is able to keepe that which I haue committed to his keeping. He doth call the promise of God the thing kept: and therefore he hath beleued him which hath promised it: con∣fidently he doth aske agayne the promise, the promise (I say) done through mercye, but the which ought nowe to bee restored through righteousnesse. The crowne then whiche Saint Paule hath striued for, is the crowne of righteousnesse: but it is of Gods righteousnesse, and not of his. This is trulye a iust thing, that he doth restore that whiche he hath sayde: but he oweth that whiche he hath promised, and that is the righteousnesse of the whiche the A∣postle did presume, euen the promise of God. S. Barnarde vpon the Canticles, sermon. 47. Wherefore is that? That is to the ende it doe trye and proue it selfe more strong, to be full of grace, when it dooth attrybute all to the grace, that is the be∣ginning and the ende: otherwyse howe shall it be full of grace, if it had any thing
which was not of the grace?Grace can∣not bee vvhere me∣rite hath ta∣ken place. There is no place where grace shall enter, where meryte already hath taken place. Nowe then the full confession of grace, dooth sig∣nifie the fulnesse of the same grace in the soule of the confessor: For if there be any thing of itselfe, forasmuch as it is there, it is necessary that grace doth giue place vnto it: All that which thou imputest vn∣to meryte, is taken away from grace: I wyll none of the merite which putteth out grace,Grace doth iustifie vs freely. I am afrayd of all that which is of my selfe, which doth make me to be to my selfe, if it be not that peraduēture rather it should be I which causeth me to be to my selfe. Grace doth make me iustified freely,Iohn. 15. & so doth deliuer me from the seruitude & bondage of sinne. Ye haue not chosen mee, but I haue chosen you, and I haue not founde thy merytes for to chose thee: but I haue preuented thee: euen so then I haue espoused and marryed thee in fayth,Oseas. 2. and not by the workes of the lawe. I haue ioyned thee in righteousnesse, but in the righteousnesse wich is through fayth, and not of the lawe: It resteth that you iudge right iudgement, betwene thee and mee,
that is to say, the iudgement in the which I haue fianced thee, where it is manife∣sted that thy merite hath not bene the meane, but only my pleasure. For beholde the iudgement, that thou doe not exalt thy merit, that thou do not preferre the works of the lawe: that thou doe not preferre the charge of the heate of the daye: But that thou doe knowe rather to haue all thy hope and trust in fayth, in mercye, and kynde∣nesse. Augustine of the predestination of Saintes. Mans merites shall keepe silence here, which were lost in Adam, and the grace of God shall reygne as it reygned by Ie∣sus Christ. Saint Augustine vpon the 139. Psalme. The Saintes doe attribute nothing to their merites, but all to the mercie of God. Augustine in the 2. Quinquagesima. Psal. 88. When man doth see and perceyue that all yt goodnes that he hath he hath it not of himselfe, but of his God: he doth see yt all
that which is praysed in him, is not of his merites, but of the mercy of God. Chrysostome vpon Genesis. Homilie. 33. All our workes whiche doe followe the thankefull calling of God,VVe are in∣debted vnto God vvith all oure vvorkes. are as debtes which we doe render vnto him: but his be∣nefites are of grace, beneuolence, and pure liberalitie. S. Hilarie vpon S. Mathew, in the 20. Canon, vpon this place, called the labourers. Truly no hyre is not of gift, for it is due for the worke. But God hath giuen vnto all men grace freelye, in iustification of fayth. Augustine in his Quinquagesima psalm. 137. I doe not say vnto the Lorde that he shoulde dpise the worke of my handes:VVe ought not to e∣steme our vvorkes. It is very true, that I doe seeke the Lord with my handes, and am not deceyued: but I doe not esteeme the workes of my handes, for I doe feare that if God behold them, that he should finde more sinne then meryte. This onely doe I say, pray, and desire that he doe not despise the worke of
his handes. O Lorde then see and beholde thy worke in me, and not mine: for if thou doest see mine, thou wylt condemne it, if thou seest thine thou wylt rewarde and crowne it, and in deede all the good works which I haue, are come from thee. S. Barnard vpon the canticles sermon. 61. Safetie in the vvounds of our Lord.Where shall those that are weake find true rest and saftye but in the woundes of our sauiour? I doe dwell there so much the more safely, for that he is puyssant to saue. The worlde is nigh vnto me, to trouble me, my body doth molest and griue me, the deuill also lyeth in wayght to catche me: I wyll not fall bicause that I am stayed vpon a sure rocke. If I haue gre∣uously sinned, my conscience is troubled, but it shall not be confounded, when I shal remember the woundes of the Lorde. &c. Afterwarde he concludeth, saying, my meryte is the mercye of the Lorde, I am not poore of merytes, whilest that the Lorde is ritch in mercye.Our merite is of the mercie of the Lorde. So muche the more as the mercyes of ye Lord are great: so much the more do I abound in merits. Shall I sing my righteousnesse O Lord?
I wyll remember thine only righteous∣nesse, for the same is myne, forasmuche as thou hast bene made for me the righteous∣nesse of God thy father.1. Cor. 1. S. Barnarde vpon the psalme: Who so dwelleth. &c. sermon. 15. psalm. 91. Behold all the merytes of man, is to put all his hope and trust in him whiche doth saue man wholy. Augustine vpon the .88. psalm, in his fyrste treatise. I might despayre bicause of my great sinne,The sonne of God hath taken oure proper flesh, vvherby vve haue firme assurance. and through my infinite negligen∣ces, if the sonne of God had not taken our fleshe. Afterwarde he sayth: all my hope, all the assurance of my confidence, is put in his precious bloud, the which hath bene shedde for vs, and for our saluation. In him my poore hart doth take breath. And tru∣sting altogither in him, I desire to come vnto thee O father, hauing not my righte∣ousnesse, but that of thy sonne Iesus Christe. Augustine writing vnto Boniface the .3. booke. Chapter. 5. All the faithfull people which doe sigh and grone vnder the burthen of their cor∣ruptible
fleshe,Iesus Christ hath satis∣fied for our sinnes. and inclosed with this pre∣sent life, haue this only hope, that we haue a mediator (to say Iesus Christe) whiche hath satisfied for our sinnes. Augustine vpon the .32. psalm. and the .109. psalm. The Lorde is faithfull who made him selfe debter vnto vs, not in taking any thing of vs, but in promising vs all thinges freely. Augustine in the first Quinqua∣gesima. psalm. 31. The proude reioyce in their ovvne strength.O what are you which secretely doe take pleasure or delight in your owne ver∣tue? O proude infidells which doe reioyce your selues in your strengthes? If you doe beleeue hereafter in him which doth iusti∣fie the wicked, your fayth shall be compted for righteousnesse: Reioyce you righte∣ous in God, and be mery: and wherefore? Bicause you are righteous: and whereof are ye righteous? The same is not through your merytes, but through the grace of God: whereof are you righteous? But for bicause he hath iustified you by fayth, and knowledge, the which without your merytes, he hath giuen vnto you?
Also in the same booke. Vnto him sayth the Apostle, whiche doth the workes, the higher is not impu∣ted according to grace,To boast vpon merits is to be se∣perate from grace. but according to the debt: If thou wilt seperate thy selfe from grace, boste thy selfe of thy merytes: Truly God doth knowe very well what thou art, and what thing he ought to giue vnto euery one. And he whiche dooth not good workes, and which after many euills that he hath done beleeueth in God, who iustifieth the sinner, whiche beleeueth in him his fayth will iustifie him: Euen as Dauid sayth:Psal. 32. Blessed is the man whome the Lorde accepteth, and iustifieth without workes: and how is he iustified? But for∣asmuch as he receiueth of God righteous∣nesse: and what righteousnesse? the righteous∣nesse of fayth the which God giueth without any good workes preceeding, but not without good workes following after: for righteousnesse of fayth profiteth not,Iames. 2. if after the fayth receiued man doth not ex∣ercise him selfe in all good workes. In the same. I doe not account thy workes good,Good vvor∣kes are the fruite of fayth. what soeuer they be, if they doe not pro∣ceede
from the good roote of fayth. In the same. God doth not giue vnto thee the payne and punishment whiche thou hast well de∣serued: but he doth giue vnto thee the grace not deserued nor due. He oweth vnto thee punishment, and he giueth vnto thee mer∣cie, and doth pardon thee. Begin then to be in fayth through the forgiuenesse of thy sinnes. Gregorie vpon Ezechiel, the first boke, homilie. 7. Rom. 8.Then our iust aduocate doth defende vs for iust at the iudgement, bicause that we shoulde acknowledge our selues, and ac∣cuse our selues as vniust: Let vs not then trust in our weepings, nor in our works, but in the allegation of our aduocate. Augustine in his booke of medita∣tions. Chap. 14. Iohn. 17.This is lyfe eternall, that they knowe thee to be the only very God, and whome thou hast sent, Iesus Christ, through a right fayth, and through workes worthy of fayth. For thy inestimable loue excee∣deth all knowledge, the which thou hast shewed vnto vs throughe thy pietie and
goodnesse, vnto vs whiche are vnworthy. For thy sonne our God in no sort toke the Angels:Heb. 2. but he tooke the seede of Abra∣ham, being made like in all things vnto vs, without sinne. This is verily all my hope, and all my trust: for the porcion of euery one of vs is to ye same Iesus Christ our Lorde, that is to saye,Our proper flesh and our proper blud is in Iesus Christ, and there vvhere hee doth reygne, vve doe reygne vvith him. the fleshe and the bloude, and so where my porcion doth reygne, there I doe beleeue that I shall reygne: there where my flesh is glorified, there I doe know my selfe to be glorified: there where my bloude doth beare rule, there I doe knowe that I shall rule. Al∣though I be a sinner, yet I doe not distrust of the communication of this grace: and if my sinnes do hinder or let it, my substance doth require and aske it. And if my offen∣ces doe shut me out, the communion of the nature doth not dryue me backe: but our Lord God is meeke and lowly,Math. 11. and loueth his fleshe and his members, and his bow∣els in himselfe, which is God, and in Ie∣sus Christ our Lorde, most meeke and lo∣uing and gentle, in whome we are raysed vp, and are already ascended into heauen, and already sitting in the celestiall place.
Our fleshe doth loue vs, and we haue in him the prerogatiue of our bloude:Ephes. 5. for we are his members and his fleshe, and final∣ly he is our heade, of whome all the bodie doth depende (as it is written) bone of my bones,Genes. 2. and fleshe of my flesh, and they shall be two in one fleshe: this mysterie here is great, I saye in Christ and in the congregation, sayth the Apostle. Augustine in his manuel. Chap. 22. The death of Iesus Christ is our merite.All my trust and hope is in the death of my Lorde: his death is my merite, my re∣fuge, my helth, my life, & my resurrection: my merite is the mercy of God. I am not poore of merite, so long as the Lorde of mercie shall be in being: & if the mercies of the Lorde are great, I am great in me∣rites: the more puissant he is for to saue, so much the more am I assured. Augustine in his manuel. Chap. 23. I haue committed a great sinne, and do feele my selfe culpable of a great many of sinnes, and yet I will not despayre. For where sinnes haue abounded, grace hath more abounded. He which hopeth not to haue pardon of his sinnes, he denyeth that God is mercifull: he doth great iniurie
vnto God, which distrusteth of his mercy, as much as he can, he denyeth that God hath loue, truth, and strength, in whiche things consisteth all my hope, that is, in the loue that he hath towards me, to make me his adoptiue sonne, in the veritie of his promise, and in the puissaunce of his re∣demption. Let my foolishe thought nowe thinke, and murmure as long as it will, saying: but what art thou? and what is this glorie? and by what merites thinkest thou to haue it? Then I doe aunswere: in good fayth I doe knowe verye well vnto whom I submit my selfe, and that through great loue he hath made me his adoptiue sonne, and is true in his promises, and of power to fulfill them, and it is lawfull for him to doe all that pleaseth him. I cannot then bee afrayde of the multitude of my sinnes, if I doe remember the Lordes death. S. Ambrose in the booke of Iacob. and of blessed life. Euen as Iacob hauing not of his meate the eldershippe,Genes. 27. hid him selfe vnder the ha∣bite of his brother, and apparayled him selfe with his coate, the which did giue a
most sweete sauour: and in this manner presented him selfe vnto his father, to re∣ceiue to his profite the blessing vnder the person of another: so it is necessary that we doe cloth our selues, and put on the righ∣teousnesse of Iesus Christ through fayth, and that we doe hide our selues vnder the deuine purite of our eldest brother, if wee will be accepted and taken for righteous before God: And truly the same is the true verytie: for yf we doe appeare before God, not clothed with the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, without doubte we shall be iudged worthy of eternall damnation. S. Ambrose vpon the .4. chapter of the Epistle to the Romaines. Psal. 32. Rom. 4.They are manifestly blessed, vnto whom without laboure, or without any workes iniquities and wickednesse are pardoned and the sinnes couered, not requiring of them any works of penance, but that they doe beleeue onely. Ambrose vpon the 3. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romaines. Rom. 3.They are iustified freelye throughe his grace, bicause that not doing anye
thing, and not rendring the lyke, by onely fayth, they are iustified through the gift of God. Augustine in his boke of 50. homi∣lies. Homilie. 14. The Lord will giue vnto me the crown as a iust and righteous iudge.2. Tim. 4. For hee which beholdeth, after that he hath beheld the worke, cannot deny the reward. I haue fought a good fight, that is a worke: I haue fulfilled my course, that is a worke: I haue kept the fayth, that is a worke: There remayneth for mee the crowne of righteousnesse, that is the rewarde. But thou doest nothing to the rewarde, and in the worke thou hast not wrought alone: thou hast the crowne of him, but the work is of thee: and yet it is not but throughe the ayde of him. I haue fought, I haue en∣ded and fulfilled my course, I haue kepte the fayth. He doth rewarde the goodnesse, but what goodnesse? Such as he hath gi∣uen. Hath not he giuen vnto thee to fight a good fight? If he hath not giuen it, what is that that thou sayest in another place:1. Cor. 15. 2. Tim. 2. I haue laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of
God which is in me? In that then that he hath ayded thee, and that he hath giuen vnto thee, thou hast fought a good fight, and hast fulfilled thy course, and hast kept the fayth. Pardon mee (Apostle) I doe knowe nothing of thine owne, but the e∣uils. Pardon me (Apostle) we doe speake it bicause yt thou hast taught it: I do heare him which confesseth himselfe, and I doe not finde that he is vnthankfull. Truly in all that thou art instructed of thy selfe, we can knowe nothing but euill. Then when God doth crowne thy merites, he crow∣neth nothing but his giftes, to the ende, that none be waxen proude of such fayth, or of such puritie in good workes through his free will. Augustine vpon the wordes of the Apostle sermon .15. Thou shalt doe the worke of God, not only bicause thou art a man, but also bi∣cause thou art iust and righteous: for it is better to be righteous then to be a man: if God hath made thee a man, and that thou makest thy selfe righteous,He vvhich maketh him selfe righte∣ous, doth more than if he made himselfe a man. thou doest a better thing then God hath done: But God hath made thee without thy selfe, for
thou hast giuen no consent vnto God for to make thee: how shouldest thou consent, which wast not then borne? He then which hath made thee without thy selfe, doth he not iustifie thee without thy selfe? He hath then made him which giueth not his consent: but he iustifieth him whiche giueth thereunto his wyll and consent, yet he doth iustifie thee, to the ende it shoulde not be thine owne righteousnesse, and that thou shouldest not turne thy selfe to hurt, detryment, and vnto filthynesse: And shouldest be found in him,Phil. 3. not hauing thy owne righteousnesse, which is by the law: but that which is of God, through the fayth of Iesus Christ, (that is to say) the righteousnesse of fayth, for to knowe it, and also to knowe the vertue of his resurrecti∣on, and the fellowshippe of his afflictions, and that same vertue, shall be the fellow∣shippe of the afflictions of Christe that shall be thy vertue. Augustine in the first Quinquagesima: in the Prologue of the .31. psalm. Who be those that are blessed? Are not those they in whome God did finde no sinne? No, for he did finde it in all men,Psal. 32.
for all haue sinned and are destitute of the glory of God.Rom. 3. If then sinne be found in all, it followeth that none are founde blessed,Rom. 4. but those whose sinnes are pardoned: Therefore hath he euen so praysed the same. Abraham beleeued God and it was rekened vnto him for righteousnesse: but vnto him which doth the worke, that is to say which doth presume of workes, and which by the meryte of the same saith, that the grace of faith is giuen vnto him: The rewarde is not imputed according to the grace, but according to the debt. What is this but that our rewarde is called grace? if that be grace,If GOD should re∣vvarde our vvorkes, he should finde them alto∣gither vvic∣ked, & vvold condemne vs. it is giuen freely? What is this that is giuen freely? It is that thou hast done no good thing, and yet the forgiuenesse of thy sinnes, is giuen vnto thee, if thy workes be considered, they shal be founde all wicked and euill: if God should render that which is due to such workes, truely he shoulde condemne them: God doth not render vnto thee the punish∣ment due, but he doth giue thee grace, which is not due vnto thee.
Augustine in the fyrst Quinquagesi∣ma, vpon the .31. psalme: verse: Lorde I haue hoped in thee. O Lorde deliuer me, and redeeme me through thy righteousnesse. For if thou doe consider my righteousnesse, thou con∣demnest me, deliuer me through thy righ∣teousnesse: for the righteousnesse of God is ours, when it is giuen vs:Gods righ∣teousnesse giuen vs is ours. but it is cal∣led the righteousnesse of God, to the ende that man doe not esteeme or thinke to haue righteousnesse of him selfe. For as the A∣postle saith, vnto him which beleeueth in him, which iustifieth the infidell or vnbe∣leeuing man: What is he that iustifieth the infidell? He which maketh the infidell righteous. What is he that is not saued freely? Is it he vnto whome the sauiour doth finde nothing for to crowne him, but for to condemne him. He doth not finde the merytes of goodnesse, but he findeth the merites of euill: if he doe as moste truly it is purposed and set foorth by the rule of the lawe,Mā hath no righteous∣nesse. the sinner ought to be damned: if he doe after that rule, whome shall he deliuer? For he hath found them
all sinners: he is come alone without sinne, who hath foūd vs sinners. The same the Apostle speaketh, saying: all men haue sinned and are destitute of the glorie of God,Rom. 3. he doth deliuer thee and not thou thy selfe, bicause thou canst not deliuer thy selfe: whereof dost thou vaunte and boste thy selfe? Wherefore dost thou pre∣sume of the lawe, and of righteousnesse? Dost thou not see that which shall heale thee inwardly,Rom. 7. is against thee? Dost thou not heare the rebell and the confesser, and him which desireth ayde and helpe in the battayle, saying: O wreatched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from this bo∣dy of death, the grace of God through our Lorde Iesus Christe: wherefore ye grace bicause that it is giuen freely without merytes preceeding, but the benefites of God haue preuented it. S. Ambrose vpon the Epistle vnto the Romains chapter. 34. Bicause that without the workes of the lawe, faith is reputed for righteous∣nesse, vnto him which beleeueth, that is to say vnto the gentill which beleeueth in Christ, as it was reputed vnto Abraham:
how then doe the Iewes thinke to be iu∣stified by the workes of the lawe, of the iu∣stification of Abraham:Abraham iustified tho∣rovv fayth only before the lavve. seeing Abraham to be iustified, not through the workes of the lawe, but only through faith? The lawe then taketh no place, when the infi∣dell is iustified only through faith, before God: according to the purpose of the grace of God.Onely faith doth saue vs. Euen so ought it to be or∣dayned, to the ende that the lawe doe cease and that we demaund only faith, of the grace of God for our health and saluation. As also Dauid saith, confirming the same, by the example of the Prophet:Psal. 32. The bles∣sednesse of man, is in him, vnto whome God, imputeth righteousnesse without workes. He calleth those blessed, vnto whome God hath confirmed the same, yt without labour and without any obserua∣tions, through faith only they are iustified with God: he declareth then the blessed∣nesse of the time, in whiche Christe was borne: as also the Lord did, saying:Mat. 13. That many Prophetes and iust men haue desi¦red to see those thinges which ye see, and haue not seene them: and to heare those things which ye heare, and haue not heard
them. Augustine vpon the words of the Lord in the mountayne. Sermon. 7. O thou Christian take heede, take heede (I say) of pride: for although that thou be a follower of the Saintes, yet repute al∣wayes euery thing to the grace of God: for the grace of God hath done it in thee, and not thy merite which hath had anye abyding in thee. &c. Augustine vpon the Apostles words. Ser. 15. Ephe. 2.By grace are yee made safe throughe fayth, and not of your selues: but it is the gyft of God, not of workes, least perad∣uenture thou doe say: I haue deserued it, and therefore I haue receyued it: doe not thinke that thou hast receyued it in de∣seruing it, thou which shouldst not deserue it, if thou didst not receyue it. Grace hath gone before thy merite, grace commeth not of merite, but merite commeth of grace:God giueth his grace freely, bi∣cause he can finde no∣thing for to saue. for if thou hast bought grace tho∣rowe thy merite, then thou hast not recei∣ued it freely? thou wilt saue thē (sayth he) freely, thou doest find nothing in thē, for to saue thē, and yet neuerthelesse thou doest saue them. Thou giuest freely, thou sauest
frelye, thou precedest all merites, to the ende that merites doe followe thy giftes: thou giuest altogither freely, for thou fin∣dest nothing for to saue, but many things to condemne. Augustine vpon the wordes of the Lorde in the mountaine. Sermon. 7. In this time the remnant haue bene sa∣ued through the election of grace. But if it be through grace (sayth he) then it is not through workes: that is to saye, doe not nowe eleuate nor exalt thy selfe vpon thy merite, otherwise grace shall be no more grace. For if thou presumest vppon thy workes, then the rewarde is giuen thee, and grace is not giuen thee: but if it be grace, it is then giuen freely:2. Cor. 11. I doe now demaunde of thee thou sinner, doest thou beleeue in Christ? I doe beleeue. And what doest thou beleeue? that thy sinnes generally maye be pardoned through him freely. Thou hast that that thou hast be∣leeued. O grace thankfullye giuen:The righte∣ous cannot abyde in righteousnes if he be not holpen. Thou righteous person what doest thou beleeue? That thou canst not keepe without God his righteousnesse. Then impute vnto fayth all that of which thou art righteous,
and in yt thou art a sinner, impute it to thy infidelitie. Be thou thine own accuser, and he shall be thy forgiuer. But euery crime, all euill, and all sinne commeth of oure negligence, and all vertue and holynesse is of the indulgence of God. Augustine vpon the 43. psalme, vpon the verse, And redeme vs for thy names sake. That is to saye freely, bicause of thy name, not for my merite, forasmuche as thou hast vouchsafed to doe it, bicause that it pleased thee to doe it, not that I am worthye that thou doe it. For in as muche as we haue not forgotten thee, & that our hart is not retired and plucked back from thee. And that we haue not stretched out our hands vnto another God: howe haue we power to doe the same? but through thy ayde, but through thy worde, spea∣king inwardlye and exhorting vs: and thereby also thou doest not leaue of, or cease to helpe and ayde vs: of whome wee haue the power. Then be it that wee are pacient in tribulation, or be it that we be ioyfull in prosperitie, redeme vs not tho∣rowe our merite, but bicause of thy holye
name. S. Hilarie vpon S. Mathew, in the 9. Canon. The same moued the Scribes that sinne shoulde be pardoned by a man,Math. 9. for they regarded and behelde nothing in Ie∣sus Christ but manhode, and that the law could not release that which was pardo∣ned of him, for only faith iustifieth:Rom. 3. and af∣terwardes the Lorde behelde inwardly their murmuring and sayd that it was ea∣sye for the sonne of man to pardon sinnes in earth:He vvhich doth pardon sinnes is god but neuerthelesse none can par∣don sinnes but God only: wherefore hee which doth pardon them is God, for none doth pardon but God. Augustine vpon the wordes of the Apostle. Sermon. 2. By grace are wee made safe through faith and not of our selues,Ephe. 2. but it is the gifte of God. Truly there are men that are vnthankefull to grace, which doe attry∣bute much to the poore and wounded na∣ture: It is true that when man was made that he receyued great force of free will,Free vvill lost by sin. but he lost it in committing sinne, he fayn∣ted in death, and was made feeble. &c.
Againe in the same Sermon. We are very much constrayned to complayne of our bretheren which gain∣say and speake against the grace of God, not against the secrete, but against the cleare and manyfest grace, he is to pardon the Iewes: but what shall be done to the christians? Wherfore are they enimies of yt grace of Christ? Wherfore do they pre∣sume of them selues? Wherefore are they vnthankefull? For wherefore is Christe come? Was not nature here? Was not nature shee which hath deceyued you in praysing?Gala. 2. was not shee the lawe? But the Apostle sayth if righteousnesse came by the lawe,If the strēgth of our na∣ture coulde iustifie vs, then Christ dyed in vain. Rom. 10. it followeth then that Christ dyed in vayne: That whiche the Apostle sayde of the law vnto the Iewes, the same say we of nature vnto those here. Then if righteousnesse is by nature, Christ died in vayne. The same then which was sayde to the Iewes, we see in those here. They haue a feruent mynde to Godwarde, but not according to knowledge. For they, be∣ing ignorant of the righteousnes of God, and going about to establishe their owne righteousnesse, haue not bene obedient to
the righteousnesse of God. My brethren beare with me, where you shall finde such, doe not conceale nor hyde them. Let not peruerse and wicked mercie be in you, where you shall finde such, in no case hide them: rebuke those that speake agaynst it, and those that do resist the same, bring them vnto vs. Augustine vpon the Apostles words. Ser. 11. He hath made vs,Psal. 100. and not wee our sel∣ues. The holy spirite hath foreseene that some shall saye, that God hath made them men. But that they shoulde make them∣selues righteous, he hath foreseene them, he hath admonished and warned them, and hath called them backe agayne from that pryde, saying: That it is he that hath made vs, and not we our selues. For to what purpose hath he added, and not we our selues, in asmuch as it sufficeth to say, that it is he that hath made vs. What is the same? But that hee woulde admo∣nishe vs of that doing, of which men saye, that we are made of our selues (that is to say) that we haue bene righteous, we are made righteous of our free will: when we were created, we receyued free will: then
where we are righteous, we doe the same of our free wil. Wherfore do we yet inuo∣cate and call vpon God, yt he doe make vs righteous, in asmuch as we haue ye power of our selues to make our selues righte∣ous?Gene. 2. Beholde, beholde him that hath made vs both righteous and vnrighteous, and not we our selues.If we haue povver to iustifie our selues, vve neede not pray vnto God to iu∣stifie and make vs cleane. The first man was created of nature without faulte, without vices, he was created right. But that which he did, is most euident, that in fal∣ling from the hande of the potter, he was broken. Afterwards he sayth: Then God did shew vnto mā how much worth fre wil maye be without God, we haue proued howe auayleable it is without God: ther∣fore haue we bene made miserable, bicause that we haue proued what power we haue without God. Beholde man was made good, and through free will he was made euill. Then when shall the wicked man be a good man, in forsaking God through free will. He being good, coulde not kepe himselfe good. Nowe he being euill, can he make himselfe good? When hee was good, he coulde not keepe himselfe good. And when he is euill, he sayth, I do make
my selfe good. What doest thou being e∣uill, when thou art lost being good, except that he which continueth alwayes good, doe not repayre and amende thee? Augustine writing vnto Paulinus. 106. Epistle. What is he which shal seperate vs from that masse or burthen of perdition, and from that fight, but only he which is come to saue that whiche was lost?Mat. 18. Luk. 19. Of whome also the Apostle being asked, say: who is he that doth iudge or discerne thee? where if man say, it is my fayth, it is my will, it is my good worke: It may be an∣swered him agayne:1. Cor. 4. and what hast thou that thou hast not receyued? If thou hast receyued it, why reioycest thou as though thou hadst not receiued it? And yet neuer∣thelesse all this is sayde, not that man shoulde reioyce: but hee that reioyceth,1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 10. Ierem. 9. shoulde reioyce in the Lorde, and not of workes, to the ende that none doe exalte himselfe: not that good workes are fru∣strate thorowe that faythfull cogitation. Howe is it that God will rewarde euery man according to his deedes?Rom. 2. Psal. 62. Mat. 16. And yt vnto euery man which doth good, shall be ren∣dred
prayse,Apoca. 22. Galat. 5. Rom. 5. honor and peace: but bicause that workes are of grace and not grace of workes: for faith which worketh by loue is nothing worth, if the loue of God bee not spreade abroade in our heartes by the holy Ghoste,Rom. 12. Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 12. which is giuen vnto vs: yea we haue not that faith, if God doe not deale to euery man the measure of faith. &c. Augustine writing to Valentin 46. Epistle. Iam. 1.Euery good gift and euery perfecte is from aboue, and commeth downe from the father of lightes: and let no man say that the grace of God is giuen vnto him eyther by the merites of workes, or by the merite of his prayer, or by the merites of his faith: And that he doe not esteeme that to be true,The grace of God not giuen vnto vs by our vvorkes. which the Heritickes say, that the grace of God is giuen vnto vs according to our merites, the which is al∣togither false: But the grace and mer∣cie of God doth conuerte man, of whom the Psalmist sayeth.Psal. 59. The mercie of my God shall goe before me, to the ende that he that is an infidell be iustified, that is to say, that of an infidell he be made a righ∣teous man: and that he doe begin to haue
good merites, the which God shal crowne when the world shall be iudged. Augustine in his booke of the true definition of faith. There is neyther Saint nor righte∣ous man which is without sinne,There is no Saint vvhich is vvithout sinne. and yet neuerthelesse he leaueth not of nor cea∣seth therefore to be holy and iuste, inas∣muche as through affection hee holdeth sanctification:Psal. 143. Iob. 9. for we are not holy through the force and strength of mans nature: but we doe obtayne sanctification through the grace of God, whiche dooth ayde and helpe our purpose. And therefore all the Saintes truely doe declare them selues to be sinners, for truely they haue inough for to lament and bewayle. And although that their consciences doe not rebuk them, yet they haue to lament, bicause of the no∣bilitie and vnconstancie of nature subiecte to preuarication. S. Ierome against the Pelagians. A certayne man of our writers hath very well affirmed, the Philosophers to be the Patriarkes of Heriticks, & to haue defiled the puritie of the Church through peruerse doctrine, insomuch as that they
doe not knowe that, which they speake of mans fragilitie or weakenesse. Whereof should earth and ashes bost them selues? In asmuch cheifely as of them the Apo∣stle speaketh,Rom. 7. saying: I see another law in my members. &c. And againe, I doe not that good thing, which I would, but that euill doe I, which I would not. If he doe not that which he woulde, how can that be true, whiche is sayde, that man may bee without sinne if he will? By what reason may he be that which he will,The ende of vertue is but a beginning. when the Apostle affirmeth that he cannot accom∣plishe and fulfill that which he desireth? When I shall thinke my selfe to be come to the ende of vertues, then shall I but be∣ginne: the onely perfection of men is to acknowledge them selues imperfect. Chrysostome in his imperfect worke. Chapter. 6. If euery one doe consider the motions, or mouinges of his flesh, he shall be founde to do no goodnesse: for all goodnesse is accomplished of vs, in gainesaying and speaking against our selues, bicause that the nature of the fleshe is contrary to good∣nesse.Galat. 5.
S. Ierome against the Pelagians firste booke. Then are we righteous when we doe confesse our selues to be sinners,Our righte∣ousnesse is only of the mercye of God. and our righteousnesse is not of our owne proper mertie, but consisteth in the mercy of God: for the Scripture saith, the righteous man is an accuser of him selfe, in the be∣ginning of the worde. S. Barnard in his .5. Sermon of dedication Who shall be saued?Luk. 18. Say the Apo∣stles to the Sauiour? And he saide vnto them, things which are vnpossible with men, are possible with God. This is all our trust, this is all our consolation, this is all the reason of our hope: but we whiche are already certayne and sure of the possi∣bilitie, what doe we determine of the wil? Who knoweth whither he be worthy of loue or hatred?Rom. 11. Esay. 40. 1. Cor. 2. Sap. 9. It behoueth that faith do ayde oure debilitie. Who hath knowen the minde of the Lorde? Or who was his counseller? Now it is here necessary for vs that fayth doe helpe vs: It behoueth here that the truth doe ayde vs, insomuche as that which is hid from vs in the heart of the father, be reueled vnto vs by his ho∣ly
spirite: and that his spirite in giuing witnesse, doth perswade our spirites and mindes that we are the children of God, that he doth perswade vs in calling, in iu∣stifying vs freely through faith. &c. Gregory in his morales .22. booke. 6. Chapter. There are also some men, who in do∣ing any good thing, doe forget inconti∣nently their sinnes, and doe fasten the eye of the hart in the consideration of the good works that they doe, & therby doe esteme & thinke themselues already holy: where∣fore among ye goodnesse that they do, they take away ye remembrance of their faults:VVee are debters to God. in the which peraduenture they are yet stil wrapped: who if they did consider dili∣gentlye the rigours of the Iudge, they woulde more feare their euils, then they woulde reioyce of their imperfect good∣nesse: They ought to regarde rather that they are debters of thinges yt they ought to doe, that they haue not payed by their good workes the parte already due. And so after the manner of the trauayler, we ought by no manner of meanes to regarde or marke what way we haue walked in,
but what way we haue yet to walke in: we ought then rather to behold the good∣nesse which we haue not yet done, then those of which we doe reioyce our selues to haue already done: and the elect are often times tempted with such vices, and oftentimes it is rysen in their heartes to bring them in remembraunce of all the goodnesse that they haue done, and to re∣ioyce themselues of the band of assurance. But if they be truly elected, they will turn awaye their eyes from thinking of the same, wherein they doe please themselues, and keepe backe in them all the ioy of the goodnesse which is alreadye done, and be sorie for those which they knowe to be by no maner of meanes done. They doe e∣steeme themselues vnworthye, and they onely do not see their goodnesse which are of all men seene by good example. &c. Of iustification of Fayth. Augustine in the first Quinquagesima, in the prologue of the 31. psal. TRuly the Apostle Saint Iames inLam. 2. his Epistles hath praised the works
of Abraham, agaynst those which woulde not do any good, and which presume them selues of fayth: of which Abraham, Saint Paule hath praysed his fayth, and yet the Apostles are not contrarie the one to the other:S. Paule and S. Iames are not contra∣rie the one to the other. but he speaketh of the work which is knowne to all men (that is to saye) that Abraham did offer his sonne vnto God, for to doe sacrifice. That is a great worke, but that is of fayth. I doe prayse the buylding of the worke made vpon the foundation, but I doe beholde the foundation of faith. I doe prayse the fruite of the good and iust worke, but I acknowledge the roote in fayth. For if Abraham did those things without right fayth, nothing woulde haue profited him, whatsoeuer worke it hadde bene. Furthermore, if Abraham did keepe so the fayth, that when God commaunded him to offer his sonne for sacrifice, hee thought in himselfe, I will not doe it, and yet neuerthelesse I doe beleeue that God will deliuer me, although that I doe con∣temne and despise his commaundements. Fayth without workes shoulde be deade, and shoulde abyde as a drie roote, barren, and without fruite. What then? we ought
not to preferre workes before fayth: that is to say, nothing is sayde to be well done before fayth: although that they are estee∣med of men prayse worthye, yet notwith∣standing they are vayne. And me thinketh that they are like vnto great strengths, and vnto the easie course out of the waye. Let none then esteeme his workes. &c. After∣wardes he sayth: Let vs not then obiect the Apostle Saint Iames to Paule, but the same Paule to himselfe, and let vs say vnto him by this worde: thou doest suffer vs somwhat to sinne without punishment, when thou sayest: wee doe esteeme man to bee iustified thorowe fayth withoute workes: but thou wilt saye to the same,Rom. 4. Galat. 5. faith worketh by loue. How am I so much assured by the same, if I doe nothing? yea, I shall not bee counted by the same to haue trust in the good fayth, if I doe not worke by loue. O Apostle I doe heare thee, wilt thou here prayse vnto me fayth without workes? But loue is the worke of fayth, which loue cannot be ydle, that it doe forsake all euill, and doe all the goodLoue can∣not be ydle, for it forsa∣keth euil, and doth good. that it can. And what maketh loue? De∣clyne from euill and doe good. Praysest
thou then fayth without works?1. Cor. 13. And thou sayest in another place: If I had all fayth, so that I coulde moue mountaynes out of their places, and yet had not loue, I were nothing: then if fayth doe not profite any without loue, and that there where loue shall be, it behoueth that it work (for faith worketh by loue) howe then is man iusti∣fied without workes? The Apostle aun∣swereth: O thou man, therefore haue I sayde this thing vnto thee, that thou doe not presume of thy workes, and that thou doe not thinke to haue receyued the grace of fayth thorowe the merite of thy works: Presume not then of workes before fayth, acknowledge that fayth hath founde thee a sinner, and if the fayth which hath founde thee a sinner, hath made thee righteous, then it doth finde him an infidell whiche it hath made righteous.Rom. 4. The fayth (sayth he) is counted for righteousnesse vnto him, which beleeueth on him that iustifieth the vngodly. Augustine in his booke of the 83. questions. 76. Chapter. If any man doe departe out of this life immediatly after yt he hath beleued the iu∣stification
of faith abideth with him: and commeth not to him by any workes pre∣cedent, or going before (for it is not giuen through merite but through grace nor through workes following, bicause that he is not permitted to be in this life:) and therefore the two sentences of the two A∣postles, Paule and Iames,Rom. 4. Iame. 2. The mea∣ning of S. Paule, and of S. Iames, and hovve vvee ought to vnderstād them. are not con∣trary the one to the other: For the one saith that man is iustified through faith without workes: And the other saith that faith is dead without workes: for Paule speaketh of workes whiche goe before faith, and Iames speaketh of works which doe followe faith. Origene vpon the Epistle to the Ro∣mans. 3. booke. 3. Chapter. The onely iustification of God, suffi∣ceth so, that he which beleeueth onely is iustified, when in deede no workes shall be done by him. For the thefe was iustified through faith without the workes of the lawe: and vpon that faith the Lorde did not demaunde what that is that he had done before, and did not tarry after that he had beleeued what worke he shoulde doe, but receiued him as iustified throughe
the onely faith for to enter with him into paradise. Also that woman which is recei∣ted by the Euangelist the which did heare at Iesus feete, thy sins are forgiuen thee: And again,Luc. 7. thy faith hath saued thee, go in peace: But also in many places of the gos∣pell,The vvorkes of the lavve serue no∣thing for iustification. Iesus Christ hath vsed such wordes, where he sayth, that the cause of saluation is the faith of him which beleeueth. Man then is iustified through faith, vnto whome the workes of faith serue nothing at all for iustification. But where faith is not, which iustifieth the beleeuing man, when any one shall haue the workes of the law, neuerthelesse bicause they are not buyl∣ded vpon the foundation of faith, although that in appearance they are good, yet they cannot iustifie the worke, if it be without faith: the which is the marke and token of those which are iustified of God. And what shall he be which wyll boste him selfe of his righteousnesse, when he heareth God and the Prophet saying: all our righte∣ousnesse are as a menstruous cloth,Esay. 64. where∣fore the only right glorye is in the fayth of Christ.
Augustine in his .50. homilies. homily. 17. Peace be vnto the bretheren, and loue with the faith of God our Father, and of our Lorde Iesus Christ. What hast thou,1. Cor. 4. that thou hast not receiued? If thou hast receiued it, why reioysest thou, as though thou haddest not receiued it? Did Abra∣ham so reioyce? He reioysed of faith, what is the full and perfect faith? The same which beleeueth that all our goodnesse are of God, yea faith it selfe.1. Tim. 1. Againe the Apo∣stle saith, I haue obtayned mercie. O true confession? He doth not say I haue ob∣tayned mercy bicause that I was faithful: but to the ende that I should be faithfull, I haue obtayned mercie.Gala. 1. Act. 9. Let vs come vn∣to the first works of Paule: Let vs behold Saule which did wax madde, let vs behold him in his crueltie: let vs behold him brea∣thing out his threatnings, and thirstie af∣ter bloude. This was the way of Paule, Christ was not yet his way: what had he in his heart? What had he but euill? Giue me his merites? Whiche if we doe searche his merites, they shall bee me∣rites of damnation and not of deliuerance.
Augustine vpon the wordes of the Lorde. Sermon. 40. The medecine of the soule, is the only propitiation for the sinnes of all, that is to beleeue in Christ. &c. Afterwarde he saith: wherefore doe the children of God whiche beleeue in him liue: for they are borne of God, by the adoption of grace, whiche is through the faith of our Lorde Iesus Christ. And therefore, welbeloued, it is not without cause that our Lord and Sauiour saith,Iohn. 6. Mat. 9. Mat. 5. that same to be the only sinne of which the holy Ghost rebuketh the world, to wete because they haue not beleeued in him.All sinnes pardoned by fayth. He would then that the world should be reproued only of that sinne, that they doe not beleeue only in him, to wete be∣cause that in beleeuing in him all sinnes are pardoned: he woulde that to be impu∣ted, by which all the other are assembled. And therefore in beleeuing they are borne of God, and are made the children of God, for he hath giuen vnto them the power (saith he) to be the sonnes of God,Iohn. 1. euen to them that beleeue in his name. &c.
Chrysostome vpon the .25. chapter of Saint Mathewe, 2. Tome .2. homilye. Come ye blessed of my father inherite ye the kingdome prepared for you from before the beginning of the worlde:Mat. 25. bi∣cause that you haue giuen that which you cannot haue: receiue that which you shall possesse eternally:Mat. 19. for one graine that you haue sowen vpon earth, you shall haue an hundreth folde asmuch in heauen.The king∣dom of hea∣uen not crea¦ted as man coulde me∣rite, but as God might prepare it. For the kingdome of heauen hath not bene crea∣ted suche as the righteousnesse of man could merite it, but such as the power of God might prepare it: for if he woulde haue created the kingdome of heauen ac∣cording to the merites of mans righte∣ousnesse: Truely he would haue created it after mans workes: but bicause that nowe he hath not ordayned the reward of Saintes according to the reward of men, but according to his greatnesse: therefore hath he prepared the kingdome of heauen in heauen, before that he created the saints in heauen.
S. Barnarde vpon the first sermon of the Annunciation of the virgin Marie. 2. Cor. 1. Luk. 18.The testimonie of our conscience is our reioycing, sayth the Apostle: not such te∣stimonie as the proud Pharisey had in his wicked thought, and seducing his master which bare witnesse of him selfe, whiche witnesse is true, which the spirite doth witnesse vnto our spirite. For I doe be∣leeue that this witnesse consisteth in three things. First, and aboue all things, it is necessarie to beleeue that thou canst not haue remission and forgiuenesse of thy sinnes,No remissi∣on of sinnes, but of God. but throughe the indulgencie of God. Secondly, thou canst not haue any good workes, except he himselfe doe giue them vnto thee. Finallye, that thou canst not merite eternall life for any workes, and it must be giuen thee freely. &c. After∣wardes he sayth:Rom. 8. For we doe well know, that as for eternall life, the afflictions of this lyfe are not worthie of the glorie which shall be shewed vpon vs, although that one only man doth abide and suffer al. For mans merites are not suche, that for them eternall life shoulde be due of right,
or that we shoulde saye that God doth vs wrong, if he doe not giue them vs by rea∣son of them. For though I shoulde holde my peace, that all merites are the gifts of God, insomuch that for them man is more indebted to God, than God is to man. What is that that all the merites doe in respect of so great glorie; To conclude what is he that is more excellent than the Prophete, vnto whome the Lorde doth giue so excellent a witnesse, saying:1. Reg. 16. I haue founde a man according to mine owne heart. And yet he had neede to saye vnto God:Psal. 143. Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant. &c. Let no man then de∣ceyue himselfe, for if he will thinke well, he shall finde without all doubt that he can not with ten thousande men go to meete him whiche commeth agaynst him wyth xx. thousande. But these things which we haue now spoken of, are not yet altogither sufficient, but wee must the rather holde them for a beginning and foundation of fayth. Therefore if thou beleeue that thy sinnes cannot be put or blotted out but by him agaynst whome onely thou hast sin∣ned, thou doest well. But adde yet one
thing more, to wete, that thou beleeue al∣so that thy sinnes by him are pardoned: Beholde the testimonies and witnesses which the holy ghost doth giue into our heartes, saying: thy sinnes are pardoned thee. For euen so doth the Apostle think, that man is iustified freely through fayth. In lyke maner as touching merites,Luc. 7. Rom. 3. if thou beleeue that one cannot haue them but by him, it sufficeth not vntill such time as the spirite of fayth doth witnesse that thou hast them through him:Let vs assure our selues to come to hea¦uen through the gift of God. Euen so it is necessarie that thou haue also witnesse, to wete, that thou doest come therevnto tho∣rowe Gods liberalitie. For it is he which pardoneth sinnes, which giueth merites: and yet neuerthelesse doth giue agayne the rewarde. For all his testimonies are most assured. For as to the remission of sinnes, I doe hold the passion of our Lord for a most strong argument. For the crye of his bloude hath had greater force than the bloude of Abel:Heb. 12. in as much as he doth crie in the heartes of the electe, re∣mission of all sinnes. For he was deliue∣red to death for our sinnes. And there is Rom. 4.no doubt but that his death is more puis∣sant
and of greater force to doe good,Remission of sinnes is through the bloude of Christ. than our sinnes are to doe euill. As touching good workes, his resurrection is an ar∣gument for me which hath no lesse vertue. For asmuch as he is rysen againe for our iustification: as touching the hope of re∣ward, his ascention serueth for a witnesse, for he is ascended for our gloryfication.Ephe. 4. Thou hast these three things in the psalm saying:Psal. 32. Blessed is the man vnto whome the Lorde imputeth no sinne. And in an∣other place,Psal. 84. blessed are the men whose strength is in thee: Also in an other place?Psal. 65. Blessed is the man whom thou hast cho∣sen and receiuest vnto thee, that he maye dwell in thy courte: such is the true glory (I say) which is within, for that dooth de∣parte from him whiche dwelleth in our heartes through faith. But the sonnes of Adam seeking the glorye which commeth from man, will not haue that whiche com∣meth from one only God: and therfore in seeking it outwardly, they haue no glory in them selues, but rather in an other. Sixtus Pope of Rome, in his Epistle to the first tome of the Councels. He that is doubtfull in the faith,Iames. 1. is an
infidell: wherefore let vs esteeme and iudge those which doe commaund vs to doubt of the fauour of God towardes vs, not only to contende and striue againste the sentence of the true Catholicke church, but also to giue euill counsell to the health and saluation of the church. S Barnard in his .5. Sermon in Quadragesima. The trusting to vvorkes, auaileth no∣thing to seke eternall life.It may be that some doe not seeke, through humilitie euerlasting life, but as in the trust and confidence of their workes and merits, & I do not say this, that grace receiued doth not giue boldnesse to praye, but it must not be therefore that in the same they haue their hope and trust to ob∣tayne it: for that only doth giue the giftes promised, to the ende that of the mercy of God which giueth those thinges, we may hope yet for greater thinges. Let then those thinges which doe belong to our on∣ly necessities be restrayned, the prayer which is made for the temporall thinges, and that which is made for the vertues of the soule, sequestred from all impurite and vncleanenesse, be only attentife towardes the good will of God. And that whiche is
made bicause of eternall life, let it be made or done in all humilitie, presuming (as he must) of the only deuine mercie. Grace be with you and peace,Rom. 1. 1. Cor. 1. Colos. 1. from God our father, and from the Lord Iesus Christe. O wretched man that I am,Rom. 7. who shall deliuer me from this body of death? The grace of God through Iesus Christe our Lorde. Euen so at this time,Rom. 11. Rom. 9. the remnante is left through the election of grace: if it bee of grace, then it is not of workes: or els were grace no more grace. But if it be of workes, then is it no more grace: or els were workes no longer workes. By grace are ye made safe throughe fayth: and that not of your selues:Ephes. 2. it is the gift of God, not of workes, least any man shoulde boast of himselfe. Also:Titus. 3. That we being iustified by his grace, shoulde be made heyres according to the hope of eternall lyfe. Saint Peter sayth: why tempt ye God,Act. 15. 2. Par. 10. to laye a yoke on the Disciples neckes, which neyther our fathers, nor we, were able to beare? but we beleue that through
the grace of the Lorde Iesus Christ wee shall be saued, euen as they doe. Titus. 3.God doth not saue vs of the deedes of righteousnesse which we wrought, but of his mercie. Philip. 1.He which began a good worke in you, shall go forth with it vntill the day of Ie∣sus Christ. Philip. 1.Vnto you it is giuen for Christe, that not onely ye shoulde beleeue on him, but also suffer for his sake. Philip. 3.He sayth agayne: And as touching the righteousnesse whiche is in the lawe, I was without reproche. But the thinges which were vauntage to me, I counted losse for Christes sake: yea doubtlesse I thinke all things but losse for that excel∣lent knowledge sake of Christ Iesus my Lorde: for whome I haue counted all things losse, and do iudge them but dung, that I might winne Christ, and might be founde in him, that is, not hauing mine owne righteousnesse, which is of the law, but that whiche is throughe the fayth of Christ, I meane the righteousnesse which commeth of God through fayth. &c. Rom. 8.I am nowe ready to be offred, and the
tyme of my departing is at hande:Esay. 50. Psalm. 3. Psal. 73.44.102. I haue fought a good fight, and haue fulfilled my course, and haue kept the fayth. From henceforth is layde vp for me a crowne of righteousnesse which the Lorde that is a righteous iudge shall giue me at that day: not to me only, but vnto all them also that loue his comming. But nowe in Christe Iesus ye whiche once were farre of,Ephe. 2. 1. Pet. 2. are made nye by the bloude I say of Christ. It is God which worketh in vs bothe the will, and also the dede,Philip. 1. euen of his free beneuolence. To as many as receyued him,Iohn. 1. to them he gaue power to bee the sonnes of God, euen to them which beleeue in his name, which are borne not of bloude, nor of the lustes of the fleshe, nor of the lust of man, but of God. In thy light shall we see light.Psal. 36. Deut. 29. Your eyes haue seene great miracles and wonders: and yet the Lorde hath not giuen you an heart to perceyue, nor eyes to see, nor eares to heare. O Lorde giue me vnderstanding,Psal. 119. open myne eyes for to beholde the wonderous
things of thy lawe. Ezech. 36Gzechiel speaking in the person of God, sayth: A newe heart will I giue you, and a newe spirite will I put into you: as for that stonie heart I will take it out of your bodie, and giue you a fleshie heart. I will giue my spirite among you, and cause you to walke in my commaundements, to kepe my lawes, and to fulfill them. Psal. 62.As for men, they are but vayne: if they be put in the ballaunce, they are lighter than vanitie it selfe. Ierem. 31.Conuert thou me, and I shall be conuer∣ted, for thou art my Lorde God: yea, as soone as thou turnest me, I shall reforme my selfe. Rom. 3.Therefore we gather that a man is iustified by faith, without the deedes of the lawe. Rom. 4. Genes. 15. Galat. 3. Iam. 2.Againe, Abraham beleeued God, and it was counted to him for righteousnesse. To him that worketh, the rewarde is not reckened of fauour but of duety. But to him that worketh not, but beleeueth on him that iustifieth the vngodly, his faith is counted for righteousnesse. Also. for if they whiche are of the lawe,Rom. 4. bee heires, then
is faith but vaine, and the promise of none effect. &c. Therefore by faith is the inheri∣tance giuen, that it might come of fauour, and the promesse might be sure to all the seede (that is) not to them only which are of the lawe: but also to them which are of the faith of Abraham.Rom. 5. Then being iustifi∣ed by faith, we haue peace with God through our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom also we haue accesse through faith, vnto this grace, wherein we stand, and reioyce in hope of the glorye of God. Bicause of vnbeleefe they are broken of and thou standest stedfast by faith.Rom. 11. Whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne.Rom. 14. We know that a man is not iustified by the deedes of the lawe,Galat. 2. but by the faith of Iesus Christ: euen we I say haue be∣leeued in Iesus Christ, that we might be iustified by the faith of Iesus Christ, and not by the deedes of the lawe: bicause that by the deedes of the lawe, no flesh shal be iustified. I doe not abrogate the grace of God,Galat. 2. for if righteousnesse commeth of the lawe, then Christ dyed without a cause. So ye knowe,Galat. 3. that they which are of
faith, are the children of Abraham: for the Scripture sawe afore hand,Genes. 15. that God would iustifie the Gentils through fayth: and therefore preached before hande the Gospell vnto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed: so then they which be of fayth, are blessed with faythfull Abraham. For as many as are vnder the deedes of the law, are vnder the curse.Deut. 27. For it is written: Cursed is euerye man that continueth not in all things that are written in the booke of the lawe, to fulfill them. And that no man is iustified by the lawe in the sight of God, it is eui∣dent:Abac. 2. Rom. 1. Heb. 10. Leuit. 18. For the iust shall lyue by fayth: and the lawe is not of fayth: but the man that shall fulfill those things, shall liue in them. Nowe Christ hath redeemed vs from the curse of the lawe, when he was made ac∣cursed for vs.Deut. 21. For it is written: Cursed is euery one that hangeth on a tree. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Iesus Christ, and that we might receyue the promise of the spirite through fayth. Galat. 3.But the Scripture hath concluded all things vnder sinne, that the promise by
the fayth of Iesus Christ shoulde be giuen to them that beleeue. &c. For ye are all the sonnes of God by fayth in Christ Iesus. Galat. 3. De poenitentia, Distinction. 3. chap. which beginneth, Totam. &c. And we are iustified freely by his grace,Rom. 3. through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus, whome God hath set forth to be a pacification through fayth in his bloude, to declare his righteousnesse, in that hee forgiueth the sinnes that are passed. Without fayth it is impossible to please God.Heb. 11. In whome euen nowe,1. Pet. 1. though yee see him not, yet doe ye beleeue, and reioyce with ioye vnspeakable and glorious, recei∣uing the end of your faith, the saluation of your soules. &c.Act. 15. And God which knoweth the heartes, bare them witnesse, in gi∣uing vnto them the holy Ghost, euen as he did vnto vs: and he put no difference be∣twene them and vs, seing that with faith he purified their heartes. S. Ierome vpon Sophon. Chapter. 3. They doe seeke the righteousnesse, the which is not but Christ alone. Iesus Christ sayeth:Math. 9. Daughter bee of
good comfort, thy fayth hath made thee whole. Math. 9.Agayne: Beleeue ye that I am able to doe this? And they sayde vnto him, yea Lorde. Then touched he their eyes, say∣ing: according to your fayth bee it vnto you. Luk. 8.Also: Daughter, be of good comforte, thy fayth hath made thee whole, goe in peace. Iohn. 6.Also: What shall we doe, that wee might worke the workes of God? Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto them. This is the worke of God, that ye beleeue on him, whom he hath sent. Mar. 9.Likewise: all things are possible to him that beleeueth. Rom. 6.The wages of sinne is death, but the gyft of God, is eternal life through Iesus Christ our Lorde. Rom. 10.If thou shalt confesse with thy mouthe the Lorde Iesus, and shalt beleeue in thine heart, that God raysed him vp from death thou shalt be saued. For the beleefe of the heart iustifieth, and to confesse with the mouth, saueth a man. Rom. 10.Who soeuer beleeueth on him, shal not
be ashamed.Esay. 28. But ye are of him in Iesus Christ, who of God is made vnto vs wisedome,1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 10. Ierem. 9. and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and re∣demption: that according as it is written: He that reioyceth, shoulde reioyce in the Lorde. This is the name that they shal call him,Iere. 23. and 33. euen the Lorde our righteous maker. To him giue all the Prophets witnesse,Act. 10. Ierem. 31. Mich. 7. that through his name all that beleeue in him, shall receyue remission of sinnes. For among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen,Act. 4. whereby wee must be saued. Ye are gone quite from Christ as many as are iustified by the lawe,Galat. 5. and are fallen from grace. Let no man esteeme of himselfe,Rom. 12. more then it becommeth him to esteeme: but that he discretely iudge of himselfe, accor∣ding as God hath dealt to euery man the measure of fayth. How shoulde I then aunswere him:Iob. 9. or what wordes shoulde I finde out agaynst him? yea, though I be righteous, yet will I not giue him one worde agayne, but
meekely submit my selfe to my Iudge. If I will iustifie my selfe, myne owne mouth shall condemne me. If I will put forth my selfe for a perfect man, he shall proue mee a wicked doer: for that I shoulde be an innocent, my conscience knoweth it not: yea, I my selfe am weary of my life. Iob. 10.Thou hast graunted me lyfe, and done me good: and the diligent heede that thou tookest vpon me, hath preserued my spi∣rite. &c. If I doe wickedly, wo is me ther∣fore. If I be righteous, yet dare I not lift vp my heade: so full am I of confusion, and see mine owne miserie. Iob. 15.What is man that he shoulde be cleane? what hath he (which is born of a woman) whereby he might be knowen to be righ∣teous? Beholde there is no trust in hys Saintes: yea, the very heauens are not cleare in his sight. Howe much more then an abhominable and vile man, which drin∣keth wickednesse like water? Iob. 25.But how may a man compared vnto God be iustified? Or how can he be clean that is borne of a woman? Esay. 64.We are all as an vncleane thing, and all our righteousnesse are as the clothes
stayned or a menstruous cloth. There is not one iust vpon earth that doth good, and sinneth not.Eccle. 7.3. Reg. 8. 2. Cor. 6. 1. Iohn. 1. Esay. 45. Verely in the Lord is my righteous∣nesse and strength. To him shal men come: but all they that thinke scorne of him, shal be confounded. And the whole seede of Is∣raell shall be iustified, and praysed in the Lorde. The Lorde helpeth me,Esay. 50. therefore shall I not be confounded. I haue hardened my face like a flint stone, for I am sure that I shall not come to confusion. Mine aduo∣cate speaketh for me, who will then goe with me to lawe? My righteous seruant shall with his wisedome iustifie and deliuer the multi∣tude,Esay. 53. for he shall beare away their sins. &c. We being iustified by his grace should be amde heires according to the hope of eternall life.Titus. 3. Yet darest thou say, I am giltlesse:Ierem. 2. Tushe, his wrath cannot come vpon me: behold I wyll reason with thee bicause thou darest say: I haue not offended. O howe euill will it be for thee, to abyde it: when it shall be knowen, how oft thou hast
gone backwarde? Ierem. 14.Doubtlesse our owne wickednesse re∣warde vs, but Lorde doe thou according to thy name, thoughe our transgressions and sinnes be many, and haue sinned a∣gainst thee. Esay. 57.They that put their trust in me, shall inherite the land, and haue my holy hill in possession. Act. 13.Be it knowen nto you therefore men and brethren, that through this man is preached vnto you the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and that from all sinnes, from which you could not be iustified by the lawe of Moyses: by him euery one that beleeueth is iustified. Iohn. 1.And of his fulnesse haue all we recey∣ued, euen grace for grace. Rom. 8.Which he predestinated before, them also he called, and whō he called, them al∣so he iustified, and whome he iustified, them he also gloryfied. What shall wee then say to these thinges, if God be on our side, who can be against vs? Rom. 8.Who shall laye any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifieth. Who then shall condemne? It is Christe
which is dead, yea rather which is rysen againe: which is also at the right hand of God, and maketh intercession for vs. O Lorde enter not into iudgemente with thy seruaunte,Psal. 143. for in thy sight shall no man liuing be iustified. A iuste man falleth seuen times,Prou. 24. and ryseth vp againe. If thou O Lorde wilt be extreme to marke what is done amisse,Psal. 130. oh Lord who may abyde it. But there is mercye with thee, that thou mayest be feared. Of the lawe. The lawe is not giuen vnto a righte∣ous man,1. Tim. 1. but vnto the lawelesse and diso∣bedient. Augustine of free will and grace. Chapter. 6. The Pelagians doe thinke them selues to knowe great thinges, when they say,VVhat vvee ought to demaunde. the Lorde will not commaund that, which he knoweth man cannot doe: who is hee which knoweth not that thing? But therefore he commaundeth some thinges
which we cannot doe, to the ende that wee may knowe that which we ought to de∣maund of him: and that is faith, which in praying obtayneth that the lawe comman∣deth. Finally he which hath sayde, if thou wilt thou shalt kepe the commandements. Set a watch O lord before my mouth.Psal. 141. &c. This is a most sure and certaine thing that if we will we may kepe the comman∣dements: But bicause the Lorde prepa∣reth and maketh the will ready, we muste demaund the will which suffiseth to doe it willingly: it is certaine that we wil when we haue the will: but it is he that causeth that we desire and will the good, of whom it is sayde:Psal. 37. The Lorde ordereth a good mans goinges, and hath pleasure in his way: and it is God which worketh in vs, both the will,Philip. 2. and also the deede, yea, euen of his free beneuolence. It is certaine that we doe it,God giueth vvill, that vve may doe that vvhich hee com∣maundeth. when we doe giue the vertue of most greatest efficacie and strength to the will, the which sayth: I will cause you to walke in my iustifications, and that you shall keepe my iudgementes, and doe them.
Augustine vpon the 31. psalme. Without the grace of God, without the loue of eternitie, the lawe and the com∣maundements of God are a great and im∣portable charge. Augustine vpon the wordes of the Apo∣stle. Sermon. 6. O death where is thy sting?1. Cor. 15. Graue where is thy victorie? The sting of death is sinne: and the strength of sinne is the lawe. For by forbidding, sinne is aug∣mented, and not put out, the lawe hath gi∣uen power to sinne, in commaunding only by the letter, and not in helping by the spirite. For the lawe commaundeth, and doth not accomplishe it,The lavve vveakened thorovv the fleshe. Rom. 7. bicause yt the flesh doth resist it inuincibly where there is no grace. And the lawe was weakened tho∣rowe the fleshe, bicause that the lawe is spirituall, but I am carnall. Howe then shall the lawe ayde and helpe me, in com∣maunding by the letter, the which giueth nothing by the spirite? It was made weake through the fleshe. What is that that God hath done, considering that it was a thing vnpossible to the lawe, and that it was weakened through the fleshe?
God sent his sonne, wherefore was the lawe weakened, and wherefore was that impossible to the lawe? It was weakened through the flesh. What is that then that God hath done, he hath sent the fleshe a∣gainst the flesh: for he hath killed the sinne of the fleshe, and hath deliuered the sub∣stance of the fleshe. God hath sent his son in the similitude and likenesse of the fleshe of sinne: yea verilye in fleshe, but not in fleshe of sinne. That then which was im∣possible to the lawe, which caused preua∣rication, bicause the thought being van∣quished, hath not yet foūd out the sauiour, wherein it was weakened throughe the fleshe. God hath sent his sonne in the like∣nesse of the fleshe of sinne, and hath con∣demned the sinne in the fleshe. Howe then had he no sinne, if sinne hath condemned sinne?. 5.  Christ  hou  and  vve  to vstnde  ne. The sacrifice for sinne was in the lawe called sinne, the lawe doth remember that thing, not once or twyce, but verye oftentimes. The sacrifices for sinnes were called sinnes, such sinne was Christ, for what shall we say, had he anye sinne? no, no he had no sinne, but he was the sinne, he was (I say) the sinne, according to the
intelligence and vnderstanding, bicause that he was the sacrifice for sinnes. For what the lawe could not doe,Rom. 8. in asmuche as it was weake, bicause of the fleshe: God sending his owne sonne in the similitude of sinful fleshe, and that for sinne, condemned sinne in the fleshe: That the righteousnesse of the lawe, might be fulfil∣led in vs, which walke not after the fleshe, but after the spirite. Iesus Christ is come to redeme them which were vnder the law,Galat. 4. that we might receiue the adoption that belongeth vnto the naturall sonnes. Iesus Christ is the ende of the law,Rom. 10. to iustifie all that beleeue. They being ignorant of the righteous∣nesse of God,Rom. 10. and going about to establish their owne righteousnesse, haue not bene obedient vnto the righteousnesse of God. Is the lawe then against the promise of God? God forbide:Galat. 3. For if there had bene a law giuen which could haue giuen life, then no doubte righteousnesse shoulde haue come by the lawe. The lawe was our schole maister to bring vs to Christ,Galat. 3. that we might be made
righteous by faith. But after that faith is come, now are we no longer vnder a schole maister. Galat. 5.Ye are gone quite from Christ as ma∣ny as are iustified by the lawe, and are fal∣len from grace. Galat. 3.And this I say: That the law whiche began afterward, foure hundred and thir∣tye yeeres, cannot disanull the couenant, that was confirmed afore of God in respect of Christ, to make the promise of none ef∣fect: for if the inheritance come of the lawe, it commeth not then of promise, but God gaue it vnto Abraham by promise. Galat. 3. Abac. 2. Rom. 1.No man is iustified by the lawe in the sight of God, it is euident: For the iuste shall liue by fayth. And the lawe is not of fayth: But the man that shall fulfill those things,Galat. 3. shall liue in them. Galat. 3. Deut. 27.For as many as are vnder the deedes of the lawe, are vnder the curse. For it is written: Cursed is euery man that conti∣nueth not in all things, whiche are writ∣ten in the booke of the lawe to fulfill them. Iames. 2.Whosoeuer shall keepe the whole lawe, and yet fayleth in one poynt, he is gyltie
in all. The iust man falleth seauen times in a daye.Pro. 24. S. Paule propounding the similitude of the infant that is an heire,Gala. 4. and the alle∣gorie of the children of Sara and Agar, declareth that the lawe hath ceased. The fulfilling of the lawe,Rom. 13. Mat. 22. Galat. 5. Ephe. 2. is loue to∣wardes our neighbour. In abrogating through his flesh the ha∣tred (that is to saye) the lawe of the com∣maundements which standeth in ceremo∣nies, for to make of twayne, one new man in himselfe, so making peace. Christ hath put out the hande wryting of ceremonies that was agaynst vs,Col. 2. which I say, was contrarie vnto vs: he tooke it out of the way, and hath fastened it on his crosse. For by the lawe commeth the know∣ledge of sinne.Rom. 3. Lawe entred in, that offence shoulde in∣crease.Rom. 5. I had not knowen what lust had ment,Rom. 7. except the lawe had sayde: Thou shalte not lust. We knowe that the lawe is spirituall,Rom. 7.
but I am carnall, solde vnder sinne. Augustine in his. 9. booke of confessi∣ons. Chapter. 13. Woe be vnto mans life, although it be praysed neuer somuch, if the mercy of God drawen from it, thou wilt examine or dis∣cusse it. Augustine in his first booke of Retractions. Chapter. 19. All the commaundementes of God are reputed to be done, when that whiche is not done is pardoned. Augustine in his booke of the spirit and of the letter. Chap. 36. To loue god vvith all our heart, and our neigh∣bour as our selfe, cannot be accom∣plished in this life.This first commaundement of righte∣ousnesse, by the which it is commaunded vs to loue God with all our heart, with all our soule, and with all our thought, the which is following the other, which is to loue our neighboure in this life, then wee shal fulfil them when we shall see thee face to face. But therefore it is commanded vs in this world, that we may be admonished and warned of that which we ought to aske through faith: afterwardes and by that same as farre as I can perceiue, hee profiteth much in this life in righteous∣nesse
which ought to be ended, who in pro∣fiting knoweth how much he is farre from the perfection of righteousnesse. Ambrose vpon the .3. Chapter of the Romaynes. He that beleeueth in Christ, keepeth the lawe. The similitude of the creditor:Mat. 18. It is asked a∣gaine of him vvhich hath not vvhere∣vvith to pay, as also God demaundeth that vvhich vve cannot doe. Rom. 8. Rom. 8. the good∣man of the house willing to take account of his seruants, one was brought vnto him which ought him ten thousande talentes, and had not wherewith to paye, and yet notwithstanding woulde be payde. &c. We are debters, not to the fleshe, to liue after the fleshe, but to the spirite. Ye haue not receyued the spirite of bon∣dage to feare anye more: but ye haue re∣ceyued the spirite of adoption, whereby we crye Abba, that is to say, father. There is no feare in loue,1. Iohn. 4. but perfecte loue casteth out feare, for feare hath pain∣fulnesse: and hee that feareth is not per∣fect in loue. We loue him, bicause he lo∣ued vs first. Augustine of free will and grace. Chapter. 19. Iohn sayth: God is loue. And the Pe∣lagians
also doe saye,The Pelagi∣ans say that they haue loue of them selues. that they haue God, not of God, but of themselues. And where they confesse that the lawe is giuen vs of God, they will haue the loue of themsel∣ues, and do giue no eare vnto the Apostle, which sayth:1. Cor. 8. Knowledge maketh a man swell, but loue edifieth. Also the Scrip∣ture sayth, that true fayth and holy doc∣trine are both of God. For it is written: From his face proceedeth wisedome and vnderstanding. And it is written: Loue commeth of God.1. Iohn. 4. Augustine vpon the exposition to the Galat. 3. Chap. Galat. 3. Leuit. 18. Rom. 10. Ezec. 20.The lawe is not of fayth: but the man that shall fulfill those things, shall liue in them. He doth not say: he which shall doe the lawe, shall liue in it: insomuche that thou doe vnderstande, that the lawe in that place is put for the workes themselues. But those who doe liue in their workes, doe feare, that if they had not done them, they had bene stoned, or crucified, or suf∣fred some other kinde of payne. Where∣fore he sayeth: he whiche shall doe those things, shall liue in them, that is to saye, he shall haue the rewarde, to the ende not
to be punished with such death. Saint Barnarde vpon the Canticles. Sermon. 50. He which hath commanded, the com∣maundementes was not ignorant that the burthen of the commandement exceedeth the strength of men:God kno∣vveth verye vvell that vve cannot do that that he com∣mandeth, but to keepe vs in humi∣litie. but by that meanes hath iudged that it is profitable to admo∣nishe them that they are not able, and that they may plainely know to what ende of righteousnesse they must endeuor them selues with all their vertues: then in com∣manding impossible thinges, God hath not made men transgressors of the lawe: but hath made them humble, that euerye mouthe might be stopped, and that all the world be made subiect to God. For no flesh shall be iustified before him through the workes of the lawe: Euen so when wee haue receiued the commandement, and that we doe feele our default, we crye vnto heauen, and God hath mercye on vs: and knowe in that time, that he hath saued vs,Titus. 3. 2. Tim. 1. not of the deedes of righteousnesse whiche we wrought: but of his mercy.
Augustine against the aduersary of the lawe and of the Prophetes 2. booke. 7. Chapter. It was very needefull, that the lawe in the old Testament should be set forth vnto the proud, and vnto those which did truste in the vertue of their owne will: the which lawe doth not giue iustice, but it doth com∣mand it:The lavve doth not giue righte∣ousnesse. and euen as those being wrap∣ped in, through the death of preuarication, or transgressiō, ought to haue their refuge to grace, the which only doth not com∣mande, but also helpeth. The blasphemers, of the heauenly wordes, doe thinke that the lawe whiche was giuen by Moyses was euill, bicause that it was called the administration of death, figured in letters of stone, not re∣garding that it is sayde, for those whiche doe thinke that the lawe was sufficient for their free will. &c. Iohn. 1.The lawe was giuen by Moyses, but grace and truth came by Iesus Christ. Iohn. 7.Did not Moyses giue you a lawe, and yet none of you keepeth the lawe?
Augustine vpon Saint Iohn. 3. Trea∣tise. 1. Chapter. The lawe was giuen by Moyses,The lavve giuen to the ende that sin abounde. which helde them guiltie. For what sayeth the Apostle? The lawe entred in, that offence shoulde encrease. This is heauye vnto the proude, that is, that he sayth,Rom. 5. to the ende that sinne may encrease. For they doe at∣tribute muche to themselues, and doe as∣signe much to their strengths. And can∣not accomplish righteousnesse, if he which hath commaunded it, helpe them not. God willing to tame their pride, gaue the law. As if he had sayde: beholde, accomplishe it, to the end that you doe not thinke your selues to be without him which comman∣deth: you are not without a commaunder, but there is no fulfiller. Augustine of the spirite and the letter.2. Cor. 3. The lavv by the vvhich vve cannot be iustified, is the lavv of the tvvo ta∣bles, and not the ceremo∣niall lavve. Deut. 5. Chapter. 14. Doth not S. Paule call that lawe writ∣ten in his two tables, killing letters? When he sayth: the letter killeth: spea∣keth he only of the lawe of Circumcision, and of other olde Sacramentes alreadye abolished? Howe shall we esteeme it so, in as much as it is put in this lawe, thou
shalt not couet? By the which commaun∣dement (although that it be holy, iuste and good) he saith that sinne hath deceiued it, and thereby killed: And what is that the letter killeth and the spirite quickeneth, but that the law cannot iustifie. &c. Imme∣diatly afterwarde he saith, these my com∣maundementes if they are well kept as they are written, we must thinke that it appertaineth not to the lawe of workes, by the whiche none is iustified: but to the lawe of faith, by which the righteous man liueth. Who shall be of so wicked opini∣on to thinke that the administration of death figured in the tables of stone, is not saide of all the tenne commaundementes, but only of one, which appertayneth to the saboth? Where shall we put then this place,Rom. 4. the lawe ingendreth wrath? For where no lawe is, there is no transgressi∣on, and sinne hath bene in the worlde euen vntill the lawe, and sinne was not impu∣ted when there was no lawe. &c. Read the chapter all at length. Reade also the same booke the .31. chapter.
Of purgatory. It is written in the Hebrewes the first chapter:Heb. 1. which sonne being the brightnes of the glorye, and the ingraued forme of his person, bearing vp all thinges with the worde of his power, hath by him selfe purged our sinnes, and sitteth at the right hand of that most highe maiestie. Through Iesus Christ we haue re∣demption through his bloud,Ephe. 1. euen the for∣giuenesse of sinnes, of his ritch grace. In whom we haue redemption through his bloud, that is to saye,Col. 1. the forgiuenesse of sinnes, to reconcile all thinges vnto him selfe, and to set at peace through the bloud of his crosse, both thinges in earth and thinges in heauen. For asmuch as ye knowe how that ye were not redemed with corruptible things as siluer and golde,1. Pet. 1. from your vaine con∣uersation, which ye receyued by the tradi∣tions of the fathers: but with the precious bloud of Christ, as of a lambe vndefiled, and without spot.
1. Iohn. 1.And the bloud of Iesus Christ his son clenseth vs from all sinne. Apoc. 1.Vnto him that loued vs and washed vs from our sinnes in his bloud. Heb. 9.If the bloud of bulles, and of goates and the ashes of an heyfar sprinkled, sanc∣tifieth them that are vncleane, as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the bloud of Christ which through the eternall spirite offered him selfe with∣out spot to God, purge your conscience from dead workes, for to serue the liuing God? EsayEsay. 43. speaking in the person of God saith, it is I, it is I only that for mine owne selfe sake doe away thine offences and forget thy sinnes. Rom. 8.For I confirme, that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be shewed vnto vs. Titus. 3. VVe are sa∣ued by gods mercie, and not by the fire of pur∣gatorie. Esay. 1.After that the kindnesse and loue of our sauiour God to manward appeared, not of the deedes of righteousnesse whiche we wrought: but of his mercy he saued vs, by the fountayne of the newe byrth, and with the renuing of the holy Ghost. Nowe goe to (saith the Lorde) we wil
talke togither. Is it not so? Though your sinnes be as redde as scarlet, shall they not be whyter then snowe? And thoughe they were like purple shall they not by like white wooll? And hee put no difference betweene them and vs,Act. 15. seeing that with faith he pu∣rified their heartes. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus.Rom. 8. VVe cannot go into pur∣gatorie vn∣condemned. Iohn. 5. Iesus Christ saith, verely verely I say vnto you, he that heareth my wordes, and beleeueth on him that sent me hath euer∣lasting life, and shall not come into dam∣nation, but is escaped from death vnto life. Againe,Mar. 16. he that shall beleeue and bee baptised shall be saued. Also enter in at the straite gate,Mat. 7. There is but tvvo vvayes. for wyde is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction: and many there be which goe in there at. Obiection. Agree with thine aduersarie quicklye,Math. 5. Luc. 12. whiles thou art in the way with him, least thine aduersarie deliuer thee to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer thee to the sergeant, and then thou be cast into prison. Verily
I saye vnto thee, thou shalt not come out thence, till thou hast payde the vtmost farthing. Aunswere. Saint Ambrose sayth vpon these words of Saint Mathewe: When thou shalt go vnto the magistrate. &c. Chrysostome vp∣pon S. Mathewe. 5. Homelie. 10. Doth expounde it of the reconciliation. And Theophilact vpon the same place, sayth as much. Likewise S. Hilarie vnderstan∣deth it so in his Canons. Obiection. Verily I saye vnto thee, thou shalt not come out thence, till thou hast payde the vtmost farthing. Answere. Mat. 1.In the first of S. Mathewe it is sayde, that Ioseph knewe not his wife, till shee had brought forth hir first borne sonne. S. Augustine expoundeth that place by the Rauen that Noe did sende forth: and sayth that the Rauen did neuer returne a∣gayne: euen so Ioseph neuer knewe the virgin Marie,Psal. 110. Act. 2. Heb. 1. for she is a virgin. Also: Sit thou on my right hande vn∣till I make thine enimies thy footestoole.
Obiection. Whosoeuer shall speake agaynst the sonne of man, it shall be forgiuen him:Mat. 12. Mar. 3. but whosoeuer shall speake agaynst the holye ghost, it shall not be forgiuen him, ney∣ther in this worlde, neyther in the worlde to come. Aunswere. Chrysostome in the 12. of S. Mathewe, Homely 24. expoundeth it thus: Foras∣muche as this sinne is not veniall, you shall be grieuously punished, both in this lyfe, and in the life to come. Saint Augustine vpon Genesis. 10. booke. It is better to doubt of secrete things,Secret thin∣ges not to be reuealed. than to pleade of incertayne things. I doe not doubt but that we must vnderstande that the riche man was in most cruell tor∣ments, and that poore Lazarus in ioy. &c.Luc. 16. Sapien. 4. Thoughe the righteous bee ouertaken with death, yet shall he be in rest. The soules of the righteous are in the hande of God,Sapien. 3. Deut. 33. and the payne of death shall not touch them. In the sight of the vnwise they appeare to die, and their ende is ta∣ken for very destruction. The waye of the
righteous is iudged to be vtter destruc¦tion, but they are in rest. Luc. 8.Oure Lorde sayde vnto the woman: Daughter be of good comforte, thy fayth hath made thee whole, go in peace. Luc. 23.Agayne vnto the theefe: Verily I saye vnto thee, to day shalt thou be with me in paradyse. Eccles. 12.Man after his death, goeth to his long home. Also the bodie shall returne agayne vnto the earth from whence it came, and the spirite shall returne vnto God whiche gaue it. Psal. 146.Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any childe of man, for there is no helpe in them. For when the breath of man goeth forth, he shall turne agayne to his earth, and so all his thoughts perishe. 1. Thes. 4. S. Paul spea∣king of the dead, ma∣keth no men¦tion of pur∣gatorie.I woulde not brethren haue you igno∣rant concerning them which are fallen a sleepe, that ye sorrowe not as other doe which haue no hope. For if we beleue that Iesus died, and rose agayne: euen so they also which sleepe in Iesus, God will bring with him.
Augustine of the Citie of God .13. boke. 9. Chapter. The soules of ye good men being sepera∣ted from the bodie are at rest, and we must nothing at all doubt of it. But those of the wicked are punished vntil that the bodie of those shall ryse againe to eternall lyfe, and of those here to eternal death, which is cal∣led the seconde death. Irenaeus sayth as much, writing against the hereticke Valentine. Augustine agaynst the Pelagians. 5. booke. There is but two wayes, that is, one to damnation, and one to saluation. Augustine in his Enchiridion. 108. Chapter. The time then which is betwene ye death of man, and the latter resurrection,The gloser Gratian vp∣pon those vvords, saith as much. the soules are receyued into secrete recepta∣cles, euen as euery one is worthy, eyther of rest, or of miserie, according to that that he hath deserued when it liued in the flesh. Augustine of the Citie of God .10. boke. 24. Chapter. Speaking vnto Porphyrius a Plato∣nist:Iesus Christ is our pur∣gatorie. He hath not known Iesus Christ to
be the beginning, throughe whose incar∣nation we are purged. In the same booke. Chapter. 22. We haue then victorie in his name, who hath taken mans fleshe, and hath liued without sinne, to the ende that he being the Priest and the sacrifice, was made the forgiuenesse of sinnes, that is to saye: by the mediator of God and men,1. Tim. 2. the man Iesus Christ, through whom the purgati∣on of our sinnes is made & we are restored agayne with God. For men are not sepe∣rated from God but through sinne:Men are not seperated from God but through sinne. of which the purgation is not done in our life through our vertue, but through Gods diuine mercie, through his clemencie, not through our power, for the same vertue which is called ours, whatsoeuer it be, is graunted vnto vs through his goodnesse. Reade Lactantius Firmianus 6. booke 3. Chapter of the institutions agaynst the Gentiles and Idolaters: There is but two wayes, the one of vertue, the other of sinne, which leadeth vnto hell. Augustine of the Trinitie .4. booke. 13. Chapter. By his death, that is to saye, throughe
one onely and moste true sacrifice whiche hath bene offered for vs, he hath purged, and hath abolished and put out all the faultes, for the whiche the principalities and powers doe detayne vs, for to bee pu∣nished: and hath called vs through his re∣surrection vnto a newe lyfe,Rom. 8. we which are predestinated: he hath iustified those whom he called, and hath glorified them whome he iustified. Augustine in his Enchiridion vnto Lau∣rence. Chapter. 66. Some men beleeue, that those also whiche haue not abandoned the name of Christ,Sinnes not purged in the fire of purgatorie. and whiche haue bene baptised in his Churche, and haue not bene cut of from the same through any schisme or he∣resies, that in whatsoeuer sinnes they haue liued, the which they haue not defaced and blotted out through penaunce, nor redee∣med through almes, but shall perseuer and continue in them continually vntil the last day of this life, shall be saued through the fire. Although that according to the greatnesse of their sinnes and misdeedes, that fire shall be diuturnall, not eternall. But me thinketh that those which beleeue
that, and notwithstanding are catholikes, are deceyued through mans beneuolence. For the holy Scripture, if one doe loke in it, answereth an other thing. S. Ierome vpon the Prophet Esay. 65. Chapter. He which shall not obtayne pardon of his sinnes whilst that he liueth in this bo∣dy, and shall so depart out of this life, hee perisheth to God, and leaueth to bee, al∣though yt he ryse vnto himselfe in paines. Augustine writing vnto Mace∣donius. 54. Epistle. There is no other place for to correcte the manners then in this life, for after this life euery one shall haue that he hath here gotten. Againe, in this world the mercye of God helpeth those which doe repent, but in the world to come repentance profiteth not, but we must render and giue account of our workes. Repentance hath no place but in this life.Libertie of repentance is only giuen vnto vs in this life: after the death there is no licence of correction, nowe is the time of mercye, afterward shall be the time of iudgement.
Augustine vpon S. Iohn. 12. treatise. Expounding the wordes of Christ, hee which beleeueth not is already iudged: Al∣so the iudgement is not yet appeared,2. Tim. 2. but the iudgement is already done. And the Lorde knoweth those which are his: and knoweth those which shall abyde, looking for the crowne of glorye, and those whiche abyde looking for the fire. S. Chrysostome in the .2. sermon of Lazarus. Make readye the woorkes for the ende, and prepare thy selfe to the waye: And if thou hast taken by violence a∣nye thing from anye man restore it and make restitution, and saye with Zachaeus,Luk. 19. if I haue taken any thing from any man by forged cauillation, I restore it him foure double:VVhile vve be here in this life, vve haue good hope, but af∣ter there is no place for to vvash & purge sinnes And if thou art angry with any man, reconcile thy selfe before that thou cummest to iudgemente: paye here all thinges, to the ende that without trouble or molestation thou mayest see that iudge∣ment: All the while that we be here in this life, we haue a most faire and shining hope: but when we shall be departed and deade,
we shall no more repent, nor doe penance, nor washe and clense the sinnes that wee haue committed. Afterwardes he saith, truly he which shall not in this lyfe washe and clense his sinnes, in the other lyfe he shall finde no consolation. Saint Cyprian agaynst Demetrian. 1. Treatise. Beleeue, and ye shall liue, and ye which doe persecute vs for a certayne time, bee ioyfull with vs for euer. When one shall depart from hence, he shall haue no more place of repentaunce, nor no more ef∣fect of satisftion: Here is the lyfe lost or wonne. Here is conquered the eternall health, through the veneration of God, and through the fruite of faith: and so long as one shall abyde in this lyfe, no repen∣tance is to late. &c. S. Ierome in his .7. Tome vpon Ecclesi∣astes. 9. Chapter. Eccle. 9.Bicause that before he hath sayde, that the heartes of men are full of wickednesse and shame, and after that all these things doe ende when they doe die: nowe he ma∣keth an ende of the same, and repeateth,
that as long as men doe liue,As long man liu he may pro∣fite, but not after he is deade. they may be made righteous, but no occasion of good workes is giuen after death. For the sin∣ner that is alyue, maye be better than the righteous whiche is deade. If he will passe into the vertues of him: or verily he maye be better than he which reioyceth in his wickednesse, and in his strength and shame, the which is deade: and maye be better than he, howe poore or base soeuer he be. Wherefore? Bicause that those that be liuing, for feare of death, may doe good workes. But the deade can nothing adde to that that they haue once caried a∣way with them from this life. &c. Chrysostome vnto the people homily .69. and .70. and vpon S. Iohn. 11. Chap. and vpon the He∣brues. 2. chapter. 4. Homelye. Let vs not bewayle without reason those that are deade, but let vs bewayle those which are dead in sinne. Those are worthy of sorowe and of teares. For what hope hath he to be gone with his sinnes, where it is not giuen him to put of the sinnes?There is no hope to bee gone from this life, vvhere it is not giuen to put of sinnes
Ambrose in the first Tome of the good∣nesse of the dead. chap. 2. The holy man Dauid, hasted him selfe to goe out of the place of his pilgrimage, saying I am a stranger and a pilgrimme with thee,Psal. 39. Philip. 1. as all my forefathers were: and therefore as a pilgrimme he hasteth him to goe to that countrey common to all the Saintes, in asking (bicause of the filthy∣nesse of that tarying) that his sinns should be pardoned him before that he did depart from this life: for he that shall not receiue here forgiuenesse of his sinnes: he shal not haue it in the other life. And he shall not haue it, for he cannot come to eternall life, bicause that eternal life is the forgiuenesse of sinnes:Iob. 10. and therefore he saith, pardon me that I may be comforted before that I goe, and that I be no more: wherefore then doe we desire so greatly this life? In the which the longer that any one shall be in it, so much the more is he charged with the more sinnes. &c. S. Ierome in the Epistle of the Gala∣tians. 6. Chapter. This little sentence doth declare vnto vs (although that it be somewhat obscure)
a newe doctrine and hidde, that is when we be in this world we may helpe our selues togither, aswell through prayers as through counsell, when notwithstanding when we shall come before the consistorye and iudgement of God, neyther Daniell, no nor yet Iob, can praye for any one, for euery one shall beare his burthen. The Canon of the .3. councell of Tole∣do. Chapter. 22. and .23.2. chap. which beginneth, Qui diu. We doe commaund that those whiche depart out of this life,The counsel of Toledo doth forbid prayer for the deade. through Gods cal∣ling, should be carryed to the earth with psalmes only, and not the song of those which doe sing: for we doe forbyd alto∣gither that prayer of the funeralles which they haue accustomed to sing commonly for the dead. That it suffiseth that they doe giue vnto the bodyes of the christians the seruice of the heauenly songes, in hope of the resurrection. Epiphanius in his .2. booke Tome .1. Heresy .59. Vpon that place of the songes.Canti. 2. O my Doue come out of the caues of the rockes,
which toucheth the wall, out of the holes of the rocke, in the loue of Christ, and in the mercy of the Lord: These are yt caues of the rockes of faith, of hope and veritie, touching the wall. That is to say before that the gate be shut, before that the King being within the wall receiueth no person vnto him, after the departing from hence and death, when the gates are no more, touching the wall, but are shut, and it is no more lawfull to correct. And afterward he saith, there is neither fasting nor almes nor penance nor righteousnesse neyther good nor euill,Nothing can profite after death. which doth profite or hurte after that one is dead. For Lazarus did not come vnto the ritch man, nor the riche man vnto Lazarus: And the rich did not receiue that that he demaunded,Luke. 16. although that he demaunded it through great pray∣er of the mercifull Abraham: for the gar∣ners and cellers are shut vp, and the time is accomplished, and the combat ended, and those whiche haue fought, doe rest themselues. &c. S. Cyprian in his sermon of mortalitie. We must not thinke that the deathe of the wicked is of such forme and condition
as is of the good men. The good men are called to rest and solace, the wicked and vniust to paynes and torments: safegarde and defence is sodainlye giuen vnto the faythfull, and tormentes vnto the vnfayth∣full. We are verye much vnthankfull for the heauenly benefites, not acknowled∣ging that which is giuen vnto vs. &c. Af∣terward he sayth: we ought not to mourne for our brethren deliuered frō this world, through Gods vocation: Forasmuche as I doe knowe very well that they are not vtterly lost, but are onely sent before, pre∣ceding those which depart, and that wee ought to desire their companie,Black vvedes not to bee vvorne in funerals. and not to bewayle them, euen as those do which go by lande or by sea, and that we must not here take blacke robes, in asmuch as they haue already taken vpon them whyte ve∣stures. &c. Augustine of the Citie of God .1. booke, 12. & 13. Chapters, and in the 4. of his sen∣tences, 45. Distinction. It is also written in the Decretals, and also by the Maister of the sentences. The diligence and labor that some take about funerals, the ornament and decking of bu∣rials,
the pompe of obsequies and burials, are more for to comforte the liuing, than for to ayde the deade. If the costly burying doth profite any thing vnto the wicked, the vyle and contemptible sepulture shall hurt the good, or if they remayne vnbu∣ried. &c. Gregorie Neocaesarian vpon Eccles. Chapter. 9. Nothing common vvith the deade.Those whiche are departed out of this worlde, haue no more any thing common with our affayres. And it was so that the begger dyed, and was caryed by the angels into Abra∣hams bosome.Luc. 16. The riche man also dyed, and was buried. &c. Chrysostome vpon the Epistle vnto the Hebrues. Chap. 13. No place for buriall ought to be sought.In what place soeuer we be buried, the earth is the Lordes, and all that therein is, that which a man ought to doe, let him doe it. But to bewayle, weepe, and lament for those whiche depart oute of this lyfe, commeth of weakenesse, and for lacke of courage, and we cannot vnderstand it, but that it cometh of none other thing, but of a despayre of the resurrection to come.1. Thes. 4. &c.
Dauid prayed for his chylde that was sicke, he fasted lying vpon the grounde:2. Sam. 12. But when they tolde him that he was deade, he rose vp and ceased. Nowe the chylde dyed without Circumcision, the which Circumcision was vnto them,1. Cor. 7. as Baptisme is vnto vs, yet Dauid did not despaire of the saluation of the chylde. Obiection. The Priestes say that we must offer for the deade. S. Cyprian in the .4. booke of Epistles. 5. Epistle. Writing of Celerin which hath had al∣most all his houshoulde martyred and put to death for ye name of Iesus Christ, sayth thus: It is alreadye a long time sithence that Celerin his grandmother hath bene crowned for a martyr, his vncle by the fa∣ther, and Laurence his vncle by the mo∣ther, & Ignatius which once haue fought, and haue bene men of armes in worldlye affayres: but being true and tryed men of armes to fight in Gods quarrel, hauing vanquished the diuell through the confessi∣on of Christ,The diuell is ouercome through the confession of Christ. haue obteyned of the Lorde rewards and crownes through a glorious
suffering:To offer is here taken for giuing of thankes. We doe offer alwayes (as you doe remember well inough) sacrifice for them, as often as we doe celebrate the pas∣sions of the martyrs: and that we do make commemorations of their dayes yearely. See diligently the commemoration that the priestes doe make for the dead, which is the .10. part of the Canon. Memento etiam domine, famulorum, fa∣mularumque tuarum, N. qui nos praecesserūt cum signo fidei, & dormiunt in somno pa∣cis: ✚ ipsis domine, & omnibus in Christo quiescentibus, locum refrigerij, lucis & pa∣cis, vt indulgeas deprecamur per eundem do∣minum nostrum.The Priests doe here a∣gaynst their doctrine, in praying for the virgin Marie, and for all the Apostles & Martyrs vvhich are departed vvith the signe of fayth. Amen. That is to say, remember O Lorde thy menseruauntes and maydseruauntes N. which haue gone before vs with the signe of faith, and do sleepe in peace: ✚ vnto them O Lorde, and vnto all those whiche doe reste in Christe, we desire thee that thou wylt giue them place of comforte, through the same Christe our Lord amen. Aunswere. In the 4. of the sentences, Distinction 45. and the 13. glose. Iniuriam facit martyri, qui or at pro martyre
That is to say, he which prayeth for a Martyr doth iniury and wrong vnto the Martyr. S. Cyprian in his .4. booke of baptisme. and the maister of the sentences 4. distinct .4. Chapter. If all the deaths and all the tormentes, that all men the Patryarckes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and confessors haue e∣uer suffered should be put togither: they shall not be sufficient to put out the leaste sinne of the world. Knowe ye not that the vnrighteous shal not inherite the kingdome of God:1. Cor. 6. Bee not deceiued: neyther fornicators, neyther idolaters, neyther aduouterers, neyther wantons, neyther abusers of them selues with the mankinde, neyther theeues, ney∣ther couetous, neyther dronkardes, ney∣ther euill speakers, neyther extorcioners shall inherite the kingdome of God. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are iustified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirite of our God. Christe loued the church,Ephe. 5. and gaue him selfe for it, to sanctifie it, and clensed it in
the washing of water through the worde. To make it vnto him selfe a glorious church, without spot or wrincle, or anye such thing: but that it should be holy and without blame. Iohn. 3. Marke vvell he sayth not of fire.Iesus Christ sayth, verely verely I doe saye vnto you, except that a man be begot∣ten of water and of the spirite, he cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen. Math. 3. Iesus Christ purgeth his, and not the fire.Saint Iohn Baptist sayde of Iesus Christe, he shall baptise you with the holy Ghoste and with fire, which hath his fanne in his hand, and will make cleane his floure, and gather the wheate into his gar∣ner, but will burne the chaffe with vn∣quencheable fire. Iohn. 15.Iesus Christ saith, nowe are ye cleane through the wordes which I haue spoken vnto you. Iohn. 13.Also Peter saide vnto Iesus: thou shalt neuer washe my feete. Iesus sayde vnto him, if I doe not washe thee, thou shalt not haue parte with me: Peter saide vnto him Lord not my feete only, but also my hands and my head. Iesus sayd vnto him, he that is washed, needeth not saue to washe his feete but is cleane euery whit.
He shall put downe our wickednesse,Mich. 7. and caste all our sinnes into the bottome of the sea. Raymonde sayth: Gratia magna dei veniamnon dimidiabit, Aut nihil aut totum propitiando dabit. That is to say, God doth not pardon the moytie or halfe: but his great mercye pardoneth all or nothing. Moyses and Saint Paule doe say,Heb. 12. Deut. 4. our God is a consuming fire. The Pope in his Canons in the Glose of Baptisme and of his effect. Chap. which beginneth, maiores Causas. Larga dei pietas veniam non dimidiabit. Nam nihil aut totū te lachrymante dabit. That is to say: the great goodnesse of God wyll not giue pardon for the moyte:The Pope sayth that God doth not giue pardon to the moytie, and so there is no purga∣torie. for when thou commest vnto him with teares and weepings, he will giue thee all or nothing. Moyses saith,Deut. 32. The workes of God are perfect. O Lorde thou forgiuest all our sinnes.Oseas. 14.
Chrysostome in the .2. homily vpon the 50. psalme. When one demandeth mercy, that is that he might not be examined of his sinne, to the end he should not be handled accor∣ding to the rigour of righteousnesse, and to the ende that all punishment may cease: for where there is mercie, there is no more hell fire, neyther rigour nor paine.VVhere ther is mercie, there is no more hell fire, rigour, nor payne. Chrysostome in his sermon of penance and confession. The Lord doth punish vs for our sinnes, not for to take anye recompence of oure sinnes, but for to aduise vs of things to come. S. Ambrose vpon S. Luke, of repentance, first distinction, Chapter which beginneth Petrus. Peter was sorowfull and did lament, for he hath transgressed as man. I doe not finde what he sayde, I doe knowe verye well that he hath wept, I doe reade of his teares, and not of his satisfaction. The Priestes doe sing in the beginning, or prose of those that be deade, such wordes. Rex tremendae maiestatis, qui saluandos
saluas gratis, salua me fons pietatis.The Priests vvoulde be saued tho∣rovve grace according to their song. Apoc. 14. That is to saye: O redoubtable king in maiestie, whiche doest saue freely those which ought to be saued, saue me O foun∣tayne of goodnesse. Blessed are the deade, which hereafter die in the Lorde, euen so sayth the spirite. For bicause they rest from their labours, and their works followe them. Of a truth he onely taketh away our in∣firmitie, and beareth our payne:Esay. 53. yet wee shall iudge him as though he were plaged and cast downe of God,Iesus Christ taketh avvay our infirmi∣ties, he par∣doneth then the fault & the payne. where as he (not∣withstanding) shall be wondred at for our offences, and smitten for our wickednesse. For the payne of our punishment shall be layde vpon him, and with his wounds shal we be healed. As concerning the place of S. Paule, 1. Cor. 3.1. Cor. 3. That euery one shall be saued, as it were by the fire,Hovve saint Augustine expoundeth this place, the 1. of the Cor. 3. S. Augustine (in his boke of the Citie of God, the 21. booke, Chapter .26. And in his treatise of fayth and of workes, Chapter .16. And in his Enchiridion, Chapter 28.) expoundeth it of the fire of tribulation, and of the crosse, and persecutions of this worlde, by the
which the Lorde examineth those that be his. Gregory vpon Iob the .29. Chapter. And in his morals the .28. booke the .17. chap. And in the .16. distinct. Chap. whith beginneth Canones glossae atque. As touching the bookes of the Macha∣bees the church doth not hold them for canonicall,Gregorie sayth that the bookes of the Ma∣chabees are not cano∣nicall. saying: we doe nothing vnor∣derly if we bring in the examples of the bookes, which although that they be not canonicall yet neuerthelesse doe serue for the edification of the churche. S. Augustine of the citie of God. .18. booke. 36. Chapter. And of christian doc∣trine .2. booke .8. chapter. Speaking of the number of the times which haue bene sithence the returne from Babilon, vntill the comming of Iesus Christe: the count and computation of them are not found in the holy Scripturs, which are called canonical but in the other among whom are the bookes of the Ma∣chabees.
S. Ierome in the Epistle written vnto Chro∣matius and Heliodorus bishops. And al∣so in the Byble before the booke of the Prouerbes. The Churche doth reade the bookes of the Machabees: but it doth not receiue them as canonicall. Also, although that the Church doth reade the bookes of Iu∣dith, Tobie, and of the Machabees: yet neuerthelesse the Church doth not receyue them as Canonicall scripture. And so the Church may read these two bokes for the edification of the people, but not for to confirme ecclesiasticall doctrine. Ierome in his Prologue Galeatus which is set before the booke of the Kings. Sayth, that he hath neuer founde the se∣conde booke of the Machabees in the He∣bue tongue, but he hath founde it in the Greeke tongue. And writing against the Pelagians. The seconde booke of the Machabees is written by Iosephus the Historiogra∣pher.
Ierome vnto Chromatius in the 5. Distinct. Chapter which beginneth, Sancta. The Covnsell of Laodicea, the 59. chap. doth not name them in the roll of the cano∣nicall Scriptures, and reciteth that which is of other canonicall bookes amongst his other Decretals. The author of the boke of ye Machabees in the ende of the sayde booke, doth praye that if he haue sayde any thing whiche is not good, to pardon him: Let vs then wil∣lingly pardon his faultes. Of honoring and wor∣shipping of Saintes. S. Augustine of true religion. The last Chapter. Let vs not loue the outwarde and visi∣ble spectacles, for feare that in erring and straying from the truth, and in louing the shadowes, wee bee cast into darkenesse. That our religion be not after our fanta∣sies.That our religion be not after our fantasie. For whatsoeuer truth it be, it is bet∣ter than all that our will can feyne and in∣uent. That our religion be not the wor∣shipping
of deade men.Our religi∣on is not the venera∣tion of dead men. For if they haue liued faythfully, they are not suche to de∣maunde and aske suche honor, but they woulde that wee shoulde honor him, by whom they being illuminated, are gladde that we shall be seruaunts with them, of their holy lyfe. We ought then to honour them bicause of their imitation, and not to adore and worshippe them bicause of their religion. For the same was done through temporall dispensation for our helth, that the vertue of God, and the immutable wysedome of God which is of one sub∣stance, which is coeternall to the father, toke on him mans nature, by the which he would teach vs that man ought to honor the thing which ought to be honored of all creatures,The Aun∣gelles, the Saints vvold not that vve should ho∣nour them, but God. hauing vnderstanding and rea∣son. And let vs also beleeue that the varye Angells them selues the most good and excellent administrators of God, woulde it so, to wete that we should honor one onely God with them, through whose contem∣plation they are blessed. For we are not blessed in seeing and beholding the An∣gells, but in beholding the verytie, by the which we doe loue the Angells, and doe reioyce of them: wherefore we doe honor them through loue and charytie and not through seruice. &c. And let vs not buylde any temples for them, for they woulde not be so honoured of vs: for that they doe knowe when wee bee good, wee are the temples of the soueraigne God: And so it is rightly written, that it was forbyd∣den to men by the Angels,Apoc. 19. that they should not worshippe them, but one only God, vnder whome they all were togither ser∣uauntes. Esther. 13I doe greatly feare least that I shoulde set the honor of a man in the steede of the glory of God, and that I woulde worship none but only thee my God. Act. 10.Cornelius fell downe at Peters feete, and worshipped him: But Peter tooke him vp saying, stand vp, for euen I my selfe am a man. Act. 14. VVe ought not to doe sacrifice vn∣to the saints, nor to offer vnto them, for they are but men.Barnabas and Paule sayde vnto the people whiche would haue done sacrifice vnto them. O men, why doe ye these thinges: we are mortall men like vnto you, and preache vnto you, that ye shoulde turne from these vayne Idoles vnto the li∣uing God, which made heauen and earth
and the sea, and all thinges that are in them. Chrysostome vpon S. Mathewe .45. ho∣milye .23. Chapter. Howe shoulde ye escape the damnation of hell? shal that be in buylding the sepul∣chres of Saintes? or rather in making cleane your heartes from malyce? dooth God iudge as man doth? man iudgeth man in works, but God iudgeth the heart. But what is that righteousnesse to honor the Saintes, and to contemne their holy∣nesse? The first degree of fidelitie is to loue sanctite, afterwardes the Saintes, for the Saintes haue not bene before holy∣nesse, but holynesse hath bene before the Saintes. He then without cause doth ho∣nor the righteous, which despiseth righte∣ousnesse. Shall the Saintes whose sepul∣cres ye decke and beutifie deliuer you?The Saints giue no ayde vvhere God hateth. The Saintes cannot be the freendes of those to whome God is an enemye? Can the houshold be in peace and quietnesse, when the Lord is an aduersarye? Howe can ye doe it? will the bare name deliuer you? for asmuch as possible ye thinke, that ye are the people of God? What profiteth
it the harlot if shee haue the name of a chast woman? Euen so doth it not profite the sinner, to be called the seruant of God. In the same towardes the ende he sayth howe can ye escape the damnation of hell? In buylding of churches,The iudge∣ment of god cannot be auoyded in building of Churches. and not holding the ende of the ecclesiasticall veritie? In reading the Scriptures, and not beleuing them? In naming the Prophets Apostls and Martyrs and not following the works of the Martyrs nor their confession. &c. Augustine vpon Saint Iohn .23. Treatise .5. Chapter. This is the Christian religion, that one God onely be adored and worshipped, and not many Gods. For nothing maketh the soule blessed, but one onely God. It is made blessed through the participation of God, and the soule being feeble, is not made blessed through the participation of an holy soule, and also the holy soule is not made blessed through the participation of an angel: but if the weake and feble soule requireth to be made blessed,VVe cannot bee made blessed by Saints nor by Angels. it must de∣maunde that whereof the holye soule is made blessed. For thou shalt not be made blessed by an angel, but thou shalt be made
blessed by him of whome also the angell is made blessed. Augustine of the Citie of God. 10. booke. They which are constituted immortall and blessed in the heauenly places, who togither doe reioyce themselues of the participation of their creator, the which are made strong through his eternitie, by good reason woulde not that wee shoulde make any sacrifice vnto them, but onely vnto him of whom they doe acknowledge themselues with vs to bee the sacrifice. For with them we are togither the Citie of God, of the whiche it is sayde in the Psalme:Psal. 87. Very excellent things are spo∣ken of thee, O thou Citie of God. &c. Augustine in his 10. booke of the Citie of God. 16. Chapter. Then if there be any angels which de∣sire that any shoulde offer vnto them sa∣crifice,Reade Lac∣tantius Fir∣mianus of his heauenly institutions. 2. booke, 7. chapter. truly we ought to preferre those which doe not desire that one shoulde sa∣crifice vnto them, but vnto God the crea∣tor of all, vnto whom they serue. For ther∣by they shewe how entire the loue is that they doe beare vnto vs: for they pretende
not to make vs subiecte vnto them tho∣rowe sacrifice, but vnto him, throughe whose contemplation they are also blessed, and they do go about to leade vs vnto him from whom they themselues are not turned. Augustine of the Citie of God .8. booke. Chapter .27. We doe not ordayne for the Martyrs, temples, neyther sacrifices of diuine ser∣uice: for they are not our God, but their God is ours. Truly we will honor their memorials, as of the holye men of God which haue fought for the truth, euen vn∣to death, that true religion might bee knowne, and that false religions might be vanquished. Epiphanius agaynst the Colliri∣dians. VVe ought not to vvor∣ship the vir∣gin Marie.The bodie of the virgin Marie was in dede holy, neuerthelesse she was not God. Of truth the virgin was a virgin, and ho∣noured, neuerthelesse she was not put forth to be worshipped, but she hirselfe worship∣ped him, who according to the fleshe pro∣ceeded and was borne of hir.
Augustine in his booke of the care and sorowfulnesse that men ought to haue for the deade. Chap. 13. If the soules of the deade were present with those of the liuing,The saints vvhich are in heauen, haue no knovv∣ledge of our affaires. when we doe see them in dreames, they woulde speake vn∣to vs. And without speaking of others, my holy mother, who hath followed me by sea and by lande for to liue with me, woulde not forsake me one night. God forbydde that through the most blessed life in which she is, it shoulde chaunce that she woulde not comfort hir sorrowfull sonne (when I haue any anguishe in mine heart) whome she loued dearely, whome she would neuer see sorrowfull. But truly that which holye Dauid sayth, is true:Psal. 27. My father and mo∣ther haue forsaken me, but the Lorde hath taken me vp. If then our fathers haue for∣saken vs, howe are they present at our af∣fayres or doings? And if our parents are not present, who are they among the dead which doe knowe what we doe or suffer? The Prophet EsayEsay. 63. sayth: Thou art our father, for Abraham knew not vs, neyther is Israell acquainted with vs. If the wor∣thie
Patriarkes were ignorant, or knewe not the things whiche the people of the worlde did which were engendred and be∣gotten of them, vnto whome that people were promised, that he wold come of their lyne and stocke, bicause they haue beleeued in God, and was promised that the people themselues shoulde come of their roote or stocke. Howe is it possible that the deade shoulde knowe and helpe the affayres of the liuing?It is not possible that the dead can in any thing helpe the liuing. Howe doe we saye that it hap∣pened well vnto them which are depar∣ted, to die before that the euilles shoulde come which are come after their decease, if it be so that after their death they per∣ceyue all things which shall happen in the calamitie of mans lyfe? Shall it be possi∣ble that wee can erre in saying and thin∣king those to be in rest, which are tormen∣ted with the lyfe of the liuing, whiche is full of ingratitude? What is that then that God promised vnto the most holyest king Iosias for a great benefite? That is, that he shoulde die before the euils whiche shoulde happen vnto that place, and vnto that people should come, and that to ye end he shoulde not see them. The words of the
Lorde are these:2. Reg. 22 Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel, as touching the wordes which thou heardest: bicause thine heart did melt, and thou didst humble thy selfe before the Lorde, when thou heardest what I spake agaynst this place, and the inha∣biters of the same, howe it shoulde be de∣stroyed and made accursed, and tarest thy clothes and didst weepe before me: of that also I haue hearde, sayth the Lorde. And therefore see I will receyue thee vnto thy fathers, and will fet thee vnto thy graue in peace, thyne eyes shall see none of the euill which I will bring vpon this place. Iosias being afraid of Gods threatnings, did weepe, and rent his clothes, and belee∣ued all the euilles to come, by the death which shoulde come, bicause that by that meanes he shoulde rest in peace: in suche sort that he shall not see all those things. Then the soules of the deade are in one place, where they see not the thinges which are done or chaunced in the lyfe of men.The soules departed, see not the things vvhi∣che are done in this life. S. Ierome in his commentary vpon Ezechiel .16. Chapter. The righteousnesse of the righteous,
shall be vpon him, and the wickednesse of the wicked shall dwell vpon him: euerye one shall die in his owne sinne, and shal be saued through his righteousnesse. And the Iewes doe saye in vayne, Abraham is our father, forasmuch as they haue not the workes of Abraham:VVe ought to put our trust in no Saints, but in God only Ierem. 17. and if there bee any thing whereon we must put our trust, let vs haue our hope and trust in the Lorde onely: for the man is cursed whiche put∣teth his trust in man, yea though he be ho∣ly yea and also a Prophet. We doe reade in the Scripture:Psal. 146. put not your truste in Princes nor in the sonnes of men. And a∣gaine: It is good to truste in the Lorde rather then in Princes, not only in the Princes of the worlde, but also in the Pre∣lates of the churche, who if they be righ∣teous, will saue only their soules. Genes. 22.God sayde vnto Abraham, in thy seede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. S. Paule saith that the seede is Christ.Galat. 3. Act. 4.Among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen whereby we must bee saued, but by the name of Christ, Esay. 55.Seke the Lord, while he may be found, and call vpon him while he is nie.
The time shall come:Ioel. 2. Rom. 10. that whosoeuer that calleth on the name of the Lorde shall be saued. He is ritche vnto all that call on him.Rom. 10. Augustine in his manuell .22. chapter. And of the wordes of the Lord 40. Sermon. All my hope is in the death of my Lord, his death is my meryte, my refuge my health, my life and my resurrection. Epiphanius in his .3. booke the 2. commentarye. Speaking of the Christians whiche committed Idolatrye with the dead bo∣dyes sayth,In the olde time there vvere chri∣stians vvhich committed idolatrie to the deade bodies, as also novve in our time. many thinges and the like vn∣to this haue bene done in the world for the seduction of the deceiued, not that the Saintes are a cause of offence to any man. But bicause that the thoughtes of men cannot be kept quiet, but are peruer∣ted and turned into euil. For although that the Virgin Marye be dead and buryed: her sleepe is in honor, and the death in cha∣stitie, and the crowne in Virginitie: or be it that shee hath bene killed (as it is writ∣ten the sword shall pearce throughe thy soule) among the Martyrs, that is hir
glory and the holy body of her,Luc. 2. by whome the light is come into the world in pray∣ses: or be it that shee doe continewe. For it is not impossible to God to doe all that he wyll: for the ende of her is not knowen of any man, we must not honor the Saints besides the deutye, but we must honor the Lorde of them. Then let that error of the seduced cease: for Marye is not God, and hath nother body from heauen, but of con∣ception of man and of woman, disposed neuerthelesse according to the promise, as the body of Isaac. Chrysostome of the seuen Machabees 2. homilye. Speaking of the seuen Machabees. Staye not vpon the ashes of the bodyes of Saintes, and of the relikes of their fleshe, and to all the bones which are consumed by the time. But open the eyes of faythe, and beholde the hidden thinges of the hea∣uenly vertue and of the grace of the holye spirite, and shining of the clerenesse of the heauenly light. Iude. 1.Yet Michael the Archangell when he stroue against the deuill, and disputed a∣bout the body of Moyses, durst not blame
him with cursed speaking, but sayth the Lorde rebuke thee. Moyses the seruant of the Lorde dyed there in the land of Moab at the comman∣dement of the Lorde.Deut. 34. The sepul∣chre of Mo∣ses is vn∣knovvne. And was buryed in a valley in the land of Moab besides Beth Pheor: but no man wist of his sepulcher vnto this daye. Iohn was beheaded of Herode,Mat. 14. Iohn vvas not put in a reliqurie, bvt in a se∣pulchre. Act. 8. Genes. 3. and af∣ter his disciples came, and tooke vp his body, and buryed it. And certayne men fearing God, carryed Stephen among them, to be buryed and made great lamen∣tation ouer him. God saide vnto Adam, earth thou art, and vnto earth shalt thou returne. Eusebius in the ecclesiasticall history 4. booke .15. Chapter. The diuell inuyted Niceta the father of Herodes and brother of Alces, to ob∣tayne of the iudge that he would not suffer the body of Saint Policarpe to be bury∣ed, fearing (saith he) least the Christians should leaue and forsake him whiche hath bene crucified, and would beginne to wor∣shippe him here. &c. The faithfull wil aun∣swere: The miserable men doe not knowe
that we can neuer forsake Iesus Christe,The faithful cannot for∣sake Iesus Christ and adore saints. who hath suffered death and passion for vs, and that we cannot adore or worshipe any other then he whom we doe knowe to be the true God. And afterwardes they gathered the bones of the Martyr, which were burned, and haue put them in a se∣pulchre. &c. Chrysostome in his vnperfect worke vpon Saint Mathewe. 23. Chapter. Mat. 23.They make their Phylactaries broade. &c. O ignorante priestes (saith he) is not the Gospell reade euery day in the church,The Gospel profiteth no thing to be hanged a∣boute our necke, nor vvritten in a booke, but in the heart. that is to say in the congregation, and heard of all? And if the Gospell put into the eares of many doe not profit them any thing at all to saluation, doest thou thinke that it will profite them any thing to hang it about their neckes? Further∣more I doe aske thee, wherein consisteth the truthe of the Gospell, in the figures of the letters, or in the vnderstanding of the same? If the vertue of the Gospell dooth consiste in the figures of letters written, thou doest well to carry them hanging a∣bout thy necke: But if the vertue of the
Gospel consisteth in the true sense and true vnderstanding (as thou must beleue) thou shalt then doe better to beare and carye them in thy heart than about thy necke. But other which would shewe themselues to be more holye, adde with the letters of the Gospell, one part of the hemme or of the heares, to wete, of Iesus Christ, and doe hang them about their necke. O wic∣kednesse, they woulde shewe that there is greater holynesse in the robes than in the proper bodie of Iesus Christ. And seeing that they are not healed in receyuing the bodie of Iesus Christ, they thinke to bee through the holynesse of the hemmes: they despayre of the mercie of God, and put their trust onely in the robe of man. And thou wilt say vnto me:Act. 19. Did not S. Paule giue his partlets and napkins for to heale those that were diseased?Hovve vve must vnder∣stande that Paule gaue his partlets for to heale the diseased. I doe confesse the same, but that was before that men had knowledge of the true God, whom he declared and shewed forth. And it was good reason, and to the same had Saint Paule respect, to the end that through the holynesse of the men whiche doe declare the true God, they shoulde acknowledge
his vertue and power: but nowe it is fo∣lie. For sithence that wee haue the power of God, what doth it profite to knowe the puissance and strength of men. Act. 3.Ye men of Israel, why maruayle ye at this? or why looke ye so stedfastly on vs, as though we by our owne power or god∣lynesse had made this man go? The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob, the God of our fathers hath glorified his son Iesus. &c. Esay. 42.I my selfe, whose name is the Lorde, which giue my power to none other, ney∣ther myne honor to the Gods. Epiphanius in the 2. Tome. 3. booke, Heresie. 79. God which is the worde, hath taken fleshe of the virgin, neuerthelesse, not to the ende that the virgin shoulde bee wor∣shipped,God hath taken fleshe of the holye virgin, not to the ende that the vir∣gin shoulde be vvor∣shipped. or that we should make hir God, or to that ende that wee shoulde offer in hir name. And agayne he sayth: that the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost should be worshipped, that none doe worshippe Marie, nor anye woman, nor anye man. That mysterie is due vnto God. The an∣gels themselues are not capable of suche
glorie. Anon after he sayeth: Let not the women saye, we will honour the Queene of heauen. &c. Of one onely mediator. S. Augustine vpon the first Epistle of S. Iohn, the first treatise. THis manne here hath not sayde,1. Iohn. 2. yee haue an aduocate with the father: but if any man haue sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the father. He hath not sayde, ye haue: nor hath sayde, ye haue me. And also he hath not sayde, ye haue also very Christ:S. Iohn did put himselfe in the num∣ber of sin∣ners, that he maye haue Christ for an aduocate. but he hath put Christ, and not himself: and hath sayde, we haue, and not ye haue. He had rather to put himself in the number of sin∣ners, for to haue Christ for an aduocate, than to put himself an aduocate for Christ, & to be found amongst the proude damned creatures. My brethren we haue an aduo∣cate with the father, Iesus Christ the righ∣teous, & he it is yt obtayneth grace for our sinnes. He yt holdeth this doctrine, holdeth no heresie, nor doth any schisme. For from
whence come the schismes or diuisions, but when men saye,Prou. 17. Iam. 4. wee bee righteous? when men saye we doe sanctifie those that be defiled, we doe iustifie the infidels, we aske and obtayne it. But what is that that Iohn sayth? If any man sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the father, to wete, Ie∣sus Christ the righteous. But some will say, doe not the Sayntes then aske for vs? doe not the Bishoppes then praye for the people? vnderstande the Scriptures, and marke that also the Prelates doe com∣mend themselues vnto the people, in pray∣ing also togither for vs. Collo. 4. 2. Thes. 3.The Apostle prayeth for the people, and the people doe praye for the Apostle. My brethren, we doe pray for you, but pray ye also for vs. Let all the members pray one for another, and the heade shall be the me∣diator for all. Therefore it is no maruayle that he sayde that which followeth:Some men vvold shevv Iesus Christ by sight, those doe deuide the Church. where he stoppeth the mouth of those which de∣uyde the Church of God. For he sayeth: we haue Iesus Christ the righteous for an aduocate: he it is that obtayneth grace for our sinne, for those which ought to talk and saye:Mat. 24. Lo, here is Christ, or there is
Christe, and for those which will shewe in parte him which hath redeemed all, and possesseth all thinges. Augustine against Parmenian in his 2. and .6. booke .8. Chapter. The Christians doe commend them selues the one to the other in their praiers,Iesus Chist is the true and onely mediator. but he which prayeth for all, for whom no man can praye, is the true and onely me∣diator. Although that Saint Paule were one of the chefest members, neuerthelesse in asmuch as he was a member (know∣ing that the Lorde Iesus the true hie priest for all the church and congregation was entred into the sanctuary of God, not by figure or image, but in truth) he com∣mendeth him self to ye prayers of the faith∣full: and maketh not him selfe a mediator betwene God and man, but requireth that all the members of the body doe praye al∣so for him, as he also prayeth for other, ac∣cording as all men ought to haue mutu∣all care and compassion. In this manner the mutuall prayers of all the members which doe trauaile yet vpon the earthe, ought to mount and ascend vnto the heade which is gone before to heauen, in whome
we haue remission and forgiuenesse of our sinnes: for if Saint Paule were a media∣tor, the other Apostles should be also, and so there woulde be manye mediators,If Paule vvere a me∣diator, the other Apo∣stles shoulde be also, and so there vvere many mediators. 1. Tim. 2. the which will not agree with that which is sayde in an other place, that there is one God, and one mediator betweene God and man. &c. Ambrose in his boke of Isaac, and of blessed lyfe. Iesus Christ is our mouth by whome we doe speake vnto the father, or eye by whome we doe see the father, or right hand, by whom we do offer vnto the father, with out which mediator there is no nerenesse toward God, neyther to vs, nor to all the Saintes. Augustine in his Quinquagesima vpon the .94. psalme. If thou doe seeke thy mediator for to bring thee vnto God, he is in heauen, and prayeth there for thee, as he dyed for thee in earth. It is most true that we doe not imagine that he kneeling vpon his knees maketh humble supplication: But we doe vnderstand it with the Apostle, that he ap∣peareth so before the face of God, that the
vertue of his death is auaylable to perpe∣tuall intercession.Rom. 8. And he being entred into the sanctuary of heauen, representeth only the prayers of the people, who haue not neare accesse vnto God. Augustine vpon the Epistle of S. Iohn .2. Treatise. But in whose name be our sinnes par∣doned? Is it by the name of Augustine? Then it is not also through the name of Donatus.Our sinnes are not par∣doned vs in the name of S. Paule, nor of S. Peter. Doest thou see that it is of Au∣gustine, or of Donatus? neyther is it by the name of Paull nor of Peter. In loue the mother bringing forth the little chil∣dren, openeth hir bowells in the Apostle, vnto those which deuyded the church, and which desired to make many partes of the vnity. And by words doth somwhat breake his wordes, and bewayleth those whom he seeth to de carryed out, and calleth againe vnto one name, those which woulde make them many names, and repealeth them backe from his loue, that Christ be onelye loued: and saith,1. Cor. 1. was Paule crucified for you? eyther were ye baptised in the name of Paule? what saith he? I wyll not that ye be to me, but with me, be with me, wee
are all to him which is deade for vs, who is crucified for vs. Augustine in his Quinquagesima, vpon the 108. Psalme. The prayer which is not made through Iesus Christ, not onely doth not put a∣way sinnes, but it is sinne it selfe. Chrysostome in the .16. homilie, of the profite of the Gospell. Mat. 15. The Cana∣nite prayed not the A∣postles, but only Christ Iesus.Speaking of the woman that was a Cananite. But tell me O thou woman, howe hast thou bene so bolde to come vnto him, in as muche as thou art a poore sin∣ner? I know very well, sayde she, what I doe. Beholde the wisedome of the woman, she neyther prayed to Iames nor Iohn, she did not go vnto Peter, and regarded not all the assembly of the Apostles, shee sought not a mediator, but in steade of all those, she tooke repentaunce for hir com∣panion, who holdeth the place of an ad∣uocate. &c. In the same. Wilt thou knowe that when we do pray for our selues, we doe more towards God, than when other doe praye for vs? This woman did crie out,Mat. 15. and the disciples ap∣proched
vnto him, and sayde:God vvill giue vnto vs rather or so∣ner that vvhich vve desire, vvhen vve pray, thā vvhen other praye for vs. sende hir a∣waye, for she cryeth after vs. And he sayd vnto them: I am not sent, but vnto the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. Then shee came and worshipped him, saying: Lorde helpe me. But he answered and sayde: It is not good to take the childrens breade, and to cast it to whelpes. And she sayde: truth Lorde, for in deede the whelpes eate of the crummes which fall from their mai∣sters table. Then Iesus answered and said vnto hir: O woman great is thy fayth, be it vnto thee, euen as thou desirest. Doest thou see howe he refused, when the other desired him? But when she hirself cried in praying for the gift, he accorded vnto hir. For he sayde vnto them (when they in∣treated him) I am not sent but to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. But he sayde vnto that woman: great is thy fayth, be it vnto thee euen as thou desirest. In the same. It is not needefull to haue patrons with God,It is not nedefull to haue patrōs vvith God. nor to runne much here and there for to entreate others, but althoughe that thou art alone, and that thou art without a patron, and that by thy selfe thou doest
pray vnto God, thou shalt haue altogither that thou desirest. For God will not so ea∣sily giue it when other men doe praye for vs, as when wee doe praye our selues: yea although that we are full of many e∣uils. Chrysostome vpon Genesis. 43. Chapter. We are constrayned to set forth all this hystorie, to the ende to learne, that we doe not so muche by others as by our selues. So that we doe approche or come with a pure and vigilant thought. Also the same woman hauing the disciples praying for hir, profited nothing at all, vntill suche time as she presented hir selfe, for to draw vnto hir the mercie of the Lorde. Chrysostome in the first Tome. 5. homi∣lie of the first chapter of S. Mathewe. We may a great deale sooner bee assu∣red by our prayer and supplication, than by the prayer of another. For God will will not giue so soone our health vnto o∣thers which doe praye for vs, as vnto our selues, to the ende that by the same that we desire, his ire and wrath maye be ap∣peased
in vs: We may come to do better, and that wee maye gather the trust of a good conscience. Euen so truely had he pitie of that Ca∣nanite.Mat. 15. Luc. 7. Luc. 23. And in like manner he did giue sal∣uation vnto the harlote. Euen so did hee transporte and carye the theefe that did hang vpon the crosse into Paradise, not entreated of any patrons, neyther through the puritie of any. There is one God and one mediator be∣tweene God and man,1. Tim. 2. which is the man Christe Iesus. Iesus Christ is rysen againe:Rom. 8. who is also at the right hand of God, and maketh intercession for vs. He is able also perfectly to saue them that come vnto God by him,Heb. 7▪ seeing hee e∣uer liueth to make intercession for them. Iesus Christe saith. I am the waye,Iohn. 14. and the truth and the life, no man commethe vnto the father but by me. I am the dore,Iohn. 10. he that entereth not in by the dore into the sheepefolde, but clymeth vp some other way, the same is a theefe and a robber. Thou O Lorde onely doest knowe the3. Reg. 8.
heartes of all men. Psal. 44.God knoweth the very secretes of the hearte. Luk. 16.Iesus Christe saith. God knoweth your heartes. Mat. 11.Also: Come vnto me al ye that are wea∣rye and laden, and I will ease you. Galat. 6. While we haue time let vs doe good vnto all men. S. Ambrose vpon the fyrst Epistle to the Romans fyrst Chapter. Men haue of custome vsed a miserable excuse, saying, that by them men may goe vnto God, euen as men come vnto kinges by the earles and lordes. Is there anye man so mad, and so obliuyous of his safety which doth attrybute and giue the honor of a king vnto an earle or lorde, for if any such be found which dare saye the same, they are worthely condemned as culpable of his maiestie. And yet those doe not hold those men gyltye or culpable which doe attrybute the honor of the name of God vnto the creatures. And in forsaking the Lord,Men forsake God, and do vvorship the seruants. And in forsaking the Lord, they doe worship those whiche are seruantes with them. As though the seruing of God were worldly gaines. For
the same cause men doe finde to haue ac∣cesse and comming vnto the king by the meanes of the earles and lordes: bicause that the king is a man, and doth not well knowe whom he ought to truste of his common wealth. But for to winne and ob∣tayne the fauor of God, vnto whome no∣thing is hydde (for he knoweth the hearts of all men) we haue no neede that any doe entreat for to present our supplication, but with an humble and lowlye heart. Of images. Whether it be lawefull to haue them in the temples of the christians. MOyses saide:Deut. 4. Take heede vn∣to your selues therefore, that ye forget not the appoyntment of the Lord your God, whiche hee made with you: and that ye make you no grauen image,We ought to make no Images. of what soe∣uer it be that the Lorde thy God hath for∣bidden thee. For the Lorde thy God is a consuming fire, and a ielous God. If after
thou haste gotten children and childrens children, and hast dwelt long in the land, ye shall marrye your selues and make gra∣uen images after the likenesse of what so∣euer it be, and shall worke wickednesse in the sight of the Lord thy God to prouoke him. I call heauen and earth to record vn∣to you this daye, that ye shall shortlye pe∣rishe from the lande. &c. Deut. 4.Againe: The Lord spake vnto you out of the fire, and ye heard the voyce of the wordes, but sawe no image, but hearde a voyce onely.Those are greatly de∣ceyued vvho vvoulde fi∣gure God being inui∣sible by vi∣sible things. And he declared vnto you his couenante, which he commaunded you to doe, euen tenne verses and wrote them in two tables of stone. And the Lorde com∣maunded me the same season, to teach you ordinances and lawes, for to doe them in the lande whyther ye goe to possesse it. Take heede vnto your selues, diligentlye as pertayning vnto your soules, for yee sawe no manner of image the daye when the Lorde spake vnto you in Horeb out of the fire: least ye marre your selues, and make you grauen images, after whatsoe∣uer likenesse it be: whither after the like∣nesse of man or woman.
I my selfe whose name is the Lorde,Esay. 42. which giue my power to none other, ney∣ther mine honor to the Gods. Thou shalt worshippe no strange God,Exod. 34. for the Lorde is called ielous, bicause he is a ielous God: &c. Thou shalt make thee no Gods of mettall. To whom then will ye liken God?Esay. 40. Vnto vvhō shall vve li∣ken God, he is a spirite incompre∣hensible. or what similytude will ye set vp vnto him? shal the caruer make him a carued image? and shall the goldsmith couer him with golde? or cast him into a forme of siluer plates. &c. Knowe ye not this? hearde ye neuer of it? hath it not bene preached vn∣to you sence the beginning. &c. To whom nowe will ye liken me, and to whom shall I be like saith the holy one? lift vp your eyes on hie, and consider, who hath made those thinges. Whome will ye make me like in fashi∣on or image, that I may be like him?Esay. 46. ye will take out siluer and golde out of your purses, and waye it, and hyre a goldsmith to make a God of it, that men may kneele downe and worshippe it: yet must hee bee taken on mens shoulders and borne, and set in his place, that he many stand and not
moue. Alas that men should crye vnto him which giueth no aunswere: and deliue∣reth not the man that calleth vpon him, from his trouble. Consider this well, and be ashamed. Goe into your owne selues (O ye runnagates) Remember the things which are paste, sence the beginning of the worlde, that I am God, and that there is els no God, yea and that there is nothing like vnto me. Sapien. 15.No man can make a God like vnto him: for seeing he is but mortall him selfe, it is but mortall that he maketh with vnrigh∣teous handes. He him selfe is better then they whom he worshippeth, for he liued though he was mortall, but so did neuer they. Leuit. 26.The Lord hath saide, ye shall make you no Idolles nor grauen image, neyther reare you vp any pillers, neyther ye shall set vp any images of stone in your lande to bowe your selues thereto, for I am the Lorde your God. Deut. 11.Beware that your heartes deceiue you not, that ye turne aside, and serue strange Gods, and worshippe them. Deut. 27.Cursed be the man that maketh any
carued image,The caruers of Images are accursed. or image of mettall (an ab∣homination vnto the Lorde the worke of the handes of the craftesman) and putteth it in a secret place: and all the people shal aunswere and say Amen. The Images of the people are but sil∣uer and golde,Psal. 115. Psal. 135. euen the worke of mens handes. The Lorde God sayde:Deut. 7. Exod. 34. ye shall ouer∣throwe their aultars, breake downe their pyllers, cut downe their groues, and burn their grauen images with fire. For thou art an holye Nation vnto the Lorde thy God. They hewe downe a tree in the woode,Iere. 10. with the handes of the workeman, and fa∣shion it with the axe: they couer it ouer with golde or siluer, they fasten it with nayles and hammers that it moue not. &c. All these things are the works of ye craftie workeman. But the Lorde is a true God, a liuing God, and an euerlasting king. Ieroboam sayde: Beholde your Gods,3. Reg. 12 O Israel, which brought you out of the lande of Egypt. And he put the one in Be∣thel, and the other in Dan. And that doing was a cause of sinne.
Iosua. 24.Nowe then feare the Lorde, and serue him in purenesse and truth: and put away the Gods which your fathers serued on the other side of the floude, and in Egypt, and serue the Lorde. But if it seeme euill vnto you to serue the Lorde, then choose you this daye whome you will serue. &c. And the people aunswered and sayd: God forbyd that we shoulde forsake the Lorde, and serue straunge Gods. Sapien. 14The honoring of abhominable Images is the cause, the beginning and ende of all euill. Act. 17.We ought not to thinke that the God∣heade is lyke vnto golde, siluer, or stone, grauen by craft and imagination of man. Rom. 1. The foolish men vvould resemble God to a man.When they counted themselues wyse, they became fooles: for they turned the glorie of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of mortall man, and of birdes, and of foure footed beastes, and of creeping beastes: wherefore God gaue them euen vp vnto their heartes lust, vnto vncleannesse, to defile their owne bodies betweene themselues, which turned the truth of God vnto a lie, and worship∣ped and serued the creatures, neglecting
the Creator, whiche is blessed for euer. A∣men. For this cause also God gaue them vp vnto shamefull lustes. &c. Be yee no worshippers of Images as were some of them,1. Cor. 10. according as it is written: the people sat downe to eate and drinke, and rose vp agayne to playe. Flie from idolatrie.1. Cor. 10. 1. Iohn. 5. 1. Cor. 8. Babes keepe your selues from Idols. We knowe that an Idoll is nothing in the worlde, and that there is none other God but one. And thoughe there be that are called Gods, whether in heauen or in earth (as there be many Gods and manye Lordes) yet vnto vs there is but one God, which is ye father, of whom are all things, and wee in him: and one Lorde Iesus Christ, by whome are all things, and wee by him. Athanasius agaynst the Gentiles. The Gentiles and Paynims saye vnto me: how is God knowne by the Images, is it by the thing or cause whiche is out∣wardly, or by the forme and figure which is grauen and put within the thing? If it be through the thing it selfe, what nede is there to make the forme or figure? For as
much then, as before that suche portray∣tures were made, God was manifested and shewed forth, by the meanes of all things: Inasmuch also as all things doe giue witnesse of the glorie of God. If the pourtracture be the cause of the heauenlye knowledge, what needeth it painting or any other matter or thing? And wherfore doe not men come vnto the knowledge of God by the true creatures rather then by figures and remembrances?Those vvhich doe graue Ima∣ges for to represent God, doe vvicked things. for truly the glorye of God should be more clearly kno∣wen if it were manifested by the resonable and vnreasonable creatures then by those which are without soules and immouable. Then when you doe engraue and make the images and pourtractures for to make vs to knowe God, truely you doe a wicked thing. Lactantius Firmianus of his godly institu∣tions, against the Gentils and ido∣laters. 2. booke. God is aboue man, and is not set here by lowe, but we must seeke him in the hie region, and therefore it is most certayne yt religion is not in the places where there are images. For if religion cōsisteth in di∣uine
thinges,Religion is not vvhere there are Images. and that it is so that there is nothing diuine but in heauenly and celesti∣all thinges, we must then conclude that there is no religion in images. He saith further in his second booke and second chapter.Reade the 3.4. and 5. Chapters. That God whose spirite and puissance is spreade abroade euerye where, cannot be absent. The image then is alwayes superfluous. Lactantius Firmianus in the .2 booke and .4. Chapter. Seneca did deryde and mocke the folly of the auncientes, saying: Wee are not twyse children (as the prouerbe is) ther is notwithstanding great difference by the same that we being old, and of age to iudge and discerne the good, shoulde occu∣pye our minde to such follyes, that to these great puppets, beutified and decked vp, men should offer oyntmentes, incens, and good smells, to those that haue mouthes without teeth. Clement in his .5. booke vnto Iames the brother of the Lorde.Men doe a∣dore images in the honor of God, vvhich is a∣gainst God We doe adore and worshippe the visible images in the honor of the inuisible God, the which truely is false. For if ye wyll
truely worship the image of God in do∣ing good vnto man, you shall worship the true image of God in him. For the image of God is in all men, and the similitude is not in all. But only there where the soule is gentle, and the thought pure. If thē you will truly honor the Image of God, wee shall declare vnto you that which is veri∣table and true,The honor of the image of God. Mat. 25. that you doe good vnto man which is made after the Image of God, that you doe honour and reuerence him, that you administer meate vnto him which is an hungred, and drinke vnto him that is a thirst, clothing vnto him whiche is naked, visite those that bee sicke, and lodge and harbour the stranger, and helpe the necessities of him that is put in prison. The same is the thing which shall be re∣puted truly to bee done vnto God. And therefore those things doe come vnto the honor of the Image of God, insomuche that he which hath not done them, shall be esteemed to haue done iniurie vnto the I∣mage of God. What is that then to honor God, to runne here and there after Ima∣ges of stone and woode? and to honor the vayne figures & without soules, as diuine
things, and to despyse man, in whom tru∣ly is the Image of God? And which is more, be ye certayne that he which doth commit homicide or adultrie, and all that which is payne or iniurie to men, the Image of God is violated and defiled in all such things. For it is great infidelitie agaynst God, to hurt man. Then when thou doest vnto another, that whiche thou wouldest not suffer, thou doest defile and marre the Image of God most wickedly. Vnderstande then that such subiection is of the serpent which is hydde within you, the which doth make you beleeue that you may be faythfull when you doe honor the insensible things, and that you are not vn∣faythfull, when ye hurt those that be sensi∣ble, and haue reason. In the same booke. Who is so wicked, or so vnthankfull,It is great infidelitie to receyue the goodnesse of God, and to render thāks vnto the I¦mages of vvood or stone. which to obtayne and receyue the benefite of God, doth render thankes vnto woode or stones. Therefore awake ye, and gyue good eare vnto your health. Trulye God hath no neede of any man, and requireth nothing, and is nothing at all hurt. But it is onely we whiche are ayded or hurt, in
that that wee are eyther thankefull or vn∣thankefull. Agayne in the same booke. They are esteemed verilye to be righte∣ous and iust, whiche haue in veneration, not the things which are done for the ad∣ministration of the worlde, but the creator of them and of the worlde: also those thin∣ges doe reioyce themselues when he is ho∣noured and worshipped: and cannot abide to see that the honor of the creator shoulde be giuen to the creature.Adoration apertaineth only vnto the true God. For adoration is a thing belonging vnto God alone, who onely was not created: And all things are his workes. As then it is the propertie of him whiche onely was not created to bee God: in lyke maner, all that which hath bene made, is not truly God. We ought then before all things to vnderstande the deception of the olde serpent, and his cau∣telous suggestions, who as through wise∣dome hath deceiued you: As by a certaine reason doth creepe into your senses. And begynning at the head, doth slyde vnto the interior partes, esteeming your deception to be great gayne.
Lactantius Firmianus. 6. booke. 2. Chapter. Woulde not a man iudge him to be out of his wit, which doth offer candles of wax for an oblation and gift vnto God, whiche is the author and giuer of light? S. Ambrose in his .4. Tome vpon the 118. Psalme. 10. Sermon. The Gentyles doe adore and worshippe the woode, bicause they thinke that the same was the image of God: but ye image of the inuisible God is not in that whiche is seene, but is altogither in that which is not seene. Thou doest then see that we doe walke among manye of the images of Christ. Let vs take heede that wee be not found to take the crowne from the image, which crowne Christ hath put vpon euery one. Let vs take heede to take nothing from them, vnto whome we ought to adde and giue. &c. Ambrose of the death of Theodo∣sius. Tome. 3. Helena then did finde the title, she wor∣shipped the king, and not the wood: For the same is the error of the Gentils, and the vanitie of the infidels: But shee wor∣shipped
him which did hang on the wood, written in the tytle. &c. Lucyan Byshoppe of Antioche confes∣sed his fayth before the Iudges, as recy∣teth Eusebius in his ecclesiasticall history the. 9. booke and .3. chapter. Saying thus among other thinges. The omnipotente God who was not made by our handes, but by whom we are created and compo∣sed hauing pitie of our error, hath sent his wysedome in this world, taking vpon him our fleshe, for to shewe and teach vs, that we ought to seke the same GodVVe ought not to seeke God by the Images. (who hath made heauen and earth) not in images made with mans handes, but in eternall thinges. The counsell of Illyberis or Granado, the .36. decretall. It hath benne concluded yt there shoulde be no painting in the temples: to the ende that the same which ought to be worship∣ped and serued be not painted on the wals. Augustine of the citie of God. 4. booke. 9. and .31. Chapters. Those which haue put forth first of all the images, haue taken from the world the feare of God: And haue augmented error.
Augustine vpon the .113. psalme. No man can pray or worshippe, behol∣ding and looking so towards the images, but that he is touched as if he were heard from thence, or els he looketh and hopeth to haue that he doth demaunde. Furthermore he saith,Images doe dravve the senses of the vveake vnto vayn things. men cannot place and set the images in hie and honorable places, for to be looked on of those that praye and worshippe, but that they doe drawe the senses of the weake, as if they had senses and soules. S. Augustine in his Cataloge of heresyes. There was a woman named Marcelin, one of the secte of the Carpocratines, which did worshippe the image of Iesus Christe, and of Saint Paule, of Homer and of Pythagoras: prostrating hirselfe before them, and offering vnto them in∣cence. Shee is put in the rolle of the heresyes by Saint Augustine. The counsel of Constantinople celebra∣ted by Constantine the fift,Eutropius of the dedes of the Ro∣manes. and by .38. Bi∣shoppes of Asya and of Grece (people ex∣cellently lerned, amonge whome the chee∣feste
were the Byshoppe of Ephesus, the Byshoppe of Perga, and the Byshoppe of Constantinople, and was begonne the .15. day of Februarye, continuing vntill the 15. day of August, decreed that it was not lawfull for those that beleeue in God through Iesus Christe,Images for∣bidden in Temples. to haue any ima∣ges of the creator nor of creatures in the temples for to worshippe them: But that all such thinges ought to be taken awaye out of the temples, according to Gods lawe and for to auoyde offence. Asmuch hath the second counsell of To∣ledo decreed condemning images. The counsell of Illyberis or Granado, in the .48. Canon. Those are reiected frō the Church, vvhich vvill not abstaine frō Images.We haue often times admonished the faithfull, that they doe let and hinder as∣much as they can that there be no images in their houses, which if they feare the force and strength of their seruants, yet at the leaste they them selues auoyde from them: And if they doe it not, that they bee reputed as strangers from the Churche. Origen against Celsus. 8. booke. Celsus sayth: That we doe auoyde the
Temples, Aultars, and Images, to the end that they be not builded nor edified by vs, forasmuch as hee esteemeth that the fayth of this our inuincible communion & charitie, and the which cannot be expressed that it is a faction or sect. In the meane season notwithstanding hee doth not see, that there is in vs a spirite of righteous∣nesse, in stead of the Aultar and of the tem∣ple, out of whom without doube doe goe most sweete sauors and encense, tht is to saye prayers and requestes proceeding from a pure conscience. And to that effecte Saint Iohn saith thus in his Apocalips,Apoc. 8. that the incense and odours are the pray∣ers of the Saintes.Psal. 141. And Dauid prayed saying: Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense Lorde. Furthermore these are images and oblations agreable vnto God, which are not made by vnclene workes, but formed and fashioned in vs by the worde of God: Euen so then all men haue such images in them, I doe meane those which haue acquired and got∣ten by heauenly doctrine, continency, righ∣teousnesse, strength wisedome, and a true feare of God: And the buyldinges of all
other vertues, the which I doe beleeue to be reasonable to beare honor vnto that which is the true patron of all images,A recital for to make suche I∣mages vvhi∣che are plea¦sing vnto God. Rom. 6. to wete the image of the inuisible God, which is the only God, or rather those which doe kill the olde man with his workes, putting on the newe man, the which is renued in the knowledge of God, after the image of him which hath created him. And then they shall make such images, as that great and soueraigne workeman desireth. And incontinently afterwardes he saith, to the ende that I may speake in fewe wordes, all christians doe endeuer them selues greatly to buyld such Aulters as we haue spoken of, and such images as we haue de∣clared, not of thinges insensible and with∣out life,The diuels dvvell in the temples of Idolaters. neyther of Gods and Idolles of wicked spirites, neyther of dwellinges where the diuells doe make their abiding: But of places capable of the spirit of God which dwelleth where vertue is: and also of that great God which hath created vs to his owne image, and which doth ap∣proche nigh vnto vs, as comming to his domesticall and familiar freendes: And in such sorte that the spirite of Christ be resi∣dent
in vs, which are so figured and fashio∣ned. And the heauenly worde willing to set the same foorth, hath described God making promise to the righteous, and speaking vnto them after this manner:Leuit. 26. 2. Cor. 6. I will walke among you, and will be youre God, and ye shall be my people. And the heauenly word hath also described the sa∣uiour saying thus:Iohn. 14. He that hath my com∣mandementes and keepeth them, the same is he that loueth me, and he that loueth me shall be loued of my father, and I wil loue him, and will shewe mine owne selfe vn∣to him manifestlye. Whosoeuer then woulde haue suche aultars, as I haue lately declared, that he doe seeke diligent∣lye, and if he thinke it good, that he doe conferre with such aultars. Immediatlye afterwardes he sayth, speaking of Ima∣ges: Truly one ought to knowe that they are insensible, and without mouing: and in processe of time they will become rot∣ten and corrupt: and that ours shall dwell and abyde in the immortall soule, as long as it shall haue any reasonable soule dwel∣ling in it.
S. Cyprian wryting agaynst Demetrius, first Treatise. What beastlynesse of mynde is it, or ra∣ther what blynde foolishe rage of madde men is it, not to go from darkenesse, for to come vnto the light. And when those which are tyed and bounde with the bonds of eternall death, will not receiue ye hope of immortalitie, and not to feare God, threatening and saying that hee that doth sacrifice vnto anye Gods, saue vnto the Lorde onely, let him die without redemp∣tion.Exo. 22. Esay. 2. Also: They haue worshipped those which their hands haue made and fashio∣ned, and man did prostrate and humble himselfe before it, and I will not pardon them. Wherefore doest thou humble and bowe thy selfe before the false Goddes? Wherefore doste thou bowe thy wretched body before Images that are filthye, and that haue no vnderstanding, and before the workes of the earth? God hath made thee right and straight, in comparison of other crooked creatures, making them to looke downe on the earth. Thou hast a hie looke, and a face to beholde thy God: beholde him, fixe thine eyes on him, seeke God on
hie, that thou mayst be exempted from the lowe hell: lyft vp thine heart vnto celesti∣all and heauenly things.Those vvhi∣che doe ho∣nor images, doe honor the deuill. Wherefore doste thou cast thy selfe agayne to the grounde, in the fall of death with the serpent whom thou honourest? why doste thou fall head∣long in the ruine of the diuell throughe him? Keepe the highnesse in the whiche thou art borne, perseuere and continue to be such a one as thou wast made of God: lyft vp thy hearte with the stature of thy bodye, and the shape of thy visage, that thou mayest knowe God, knowe thy selfe first: leaue and forsake Idols which mans error hath founde out. Turne vnto God, who will assist and helpe thee after when thou shalt call vpon him. Beleeue in Iesus Christ whome the father hath sent for to quicken and amende vs. &c. Confounded be all they that worship I∣mages, and delite in their Idols.Psal. 97. Those are cursed that vvorship Images. 2. Cor. 6. Exod. 20. Deut. 5. Psal. 81. Howe agreeth the temple of God with Images. God did expressely forbid in the old lawe Images, saying thus: Thou shalt haue none other Gods in my sight. Thou shalt make thee no grauen Image, neyther any
similitude that is in heauen aboue, eyther in the earth beneath, or in the waters that are beneath the earth. See that thou ney∣ther bowe thy selfe vnto them, neyther serue them: for I the Lorde thy God, am a iealous God. 4. Reg. 18. Ezechias did burne the Image of Iesus Christ, bicause it vvas abused.Ezechias king of Iuda, ordeyned that the Image of Christ shoulde bee burned (that is to saye, the brasen Serpent that God commaunded to be made in the wil∣dernesse) bicause that when it was borne about by the people, they did burne sacri∣fice vnto it, and honoured it, yet the sayde Serpent was the image of Christ, prefi∣guring him as he himselfe hath said in the Gospell. Notwithstanding Ezechias brake it in peeces, bicause that they abused it: And he was greatly praysed for it of the Lorde. Obiection. The Canon lawe in the Chapter which beginneth Praelatum of consecra∣tion, distinct. 3. The Ca∣non lavve permitteth those vvhich can reade, to haue the scriptures.That which the Scripture doth vnto the readers, the very same doth the payn∣tor vnto the gasing fooles or Idiotes. For in the same the ignorant people doe see
that which they ought to followe, in the same those doe reade which doe not know any letters. Aunswere. The Prophet Abacuc in his .2. chap. aunswereth to the same Canon. What helpeth then the grauen images for the workeman hath left it,Abac. 2. it is molted and an image & a thing shewing dreames and lyes. Gregory writing vnto the Byshoppe Marsill, in his .4. Epistle. We had praysed thy doing, if thou had∣dest forbidden to worship images: which haue bene set in the Temple not for to worship, but onely for to instruct the spi∣rites of the ignorant. &c. The Prophet Ieremye in his .10. Chap. aunswereth vnto Gregory. In that onely poynt they are altogither brutish and doe folishly,Iere. 10. for the wood is an instruction of vanitie. Iesus Christe saith:Marc. 7. In vaine they wor∣ship me, teaching for doctrines the com∣maundementes of men. For ye laye the commaundement of God aparte, and ob∣serue
the tradition of men. S. Ierome vpon the Prophet Esay. 57. Chapter. There was not a place that was left vn∣defiled with the filthinesse of Idolatrye, in such sort that behind the doores and postes of their houses they haue set vp images,Esa. 57. whom they doe call their priuye and fami∣liar Gods. And by and by after he saithe: The Cities of many countreys and pro∣uinces are in that error, and doe keepe that wicked custome of the elders. Yea and Rome the mistres of the worlde, doth the like honouring the image of Ceres, as their sauegarde, through out euery house, with torches and candels, to the ende that they haue memorialls, which should ad∣monish them of their inuented error, aswel in the comming in as at the going out of the house. &c. Gala. 3. VVe haue a true Image of the cruci∣fixe in the Gospell.O foolish Galatians, who hath bewit∣ched you that ye should not obey the truth? to whom Iesus Christ before was descry∣bed in your sight, and among you cru∣cified.
Epiphanius the good Doctor in the Epistle written vnto Iohn Byshoppe of Ierusalem, and afterwarde translated by S. Ierome out of Greeke into Latine. Beside that that I haue heard (saith he) that some did murmure against me, for as∣muche as when we did goe vnto a holye place which is called Bethel, to the ende that I might make there with thee some prayer, according to the ecclesiastical cus∣tome: and after that we were arryued to the village, which is called Anablatha, I sawe in passing by a Lampe burning, and after I demaunding what place that was, one aunswered to me, it was a Temple. And when I was entred in for to praye, I found therein a vayle hanging at the gate painted, hauing the image of Iesus Christ or of some kind of Saint:Epiphanine entring into a temple of the christi∣ans, founde there the I∣mage of Ie∣sus Christ, the vvhich he did teare in peeces. For I doe not well remember whose image that was: Then as I sawe in the churche of Iesus Christe an image of a man hanging, a∣gainst the authorytie of the holy Scrip∣tures, I did teare and rent it in peeces, and gaue counsell vnto the keepers of the sayd place, rather to wrappe some poore deade body in it, and to carry it awaye. They did
murmure against me saying: if he woulde haue cut it of, were it not reasonable that he should giue an other vayle in change? I hearing the same promised to giue one, and to send it incontinent. But there was a little time betweene them, whilest that I searched for a certayne vayle of price for to sende in steade of the other. For I dyd thinke that I must sende one of Cypres, but nowe I haue sent one such as I could finde, and I desire thee that thou doeste commaund the priestes of the saide place to receiue this vayle of this bringer which is sent from vs. And to commaunde from∣henceforth in the Churche of Christe that they doe hang no more any such vayles, which are against our religion: For it be∣commeth thy honestye and it is also reaso∣nable that rather thou haue a care to take from the Church of Iesus Christ all scru∣pulous thinges, which are not meete for the people giuen thee in charge. S. Ierome doth giue witnesse of Epiphani∣us writing to Pammachius against the errors of Iohn Byshoppe of Ierusalem. Thou hast Epiphanius the Byshoppe,
who by the letters that he hath sent vnto thee, hath called thee openly Heriticke: Truely thou art no greater then he, ney∣ther of age nor of knowledge, neyther in holynesse of life, neyther according to the testimonye of all the worlde,The here∣tikes had thought that it had turned to their disho∣nestie, if they had persecu∣ted Epipha∣nius for his holy life. during the time that the heresye of the Aryans and Eunomians did raigne in all the Easte countreys, except Pope Athanasius and Paulin: when thou wouldest not commu∣nicate, or haue felowship with those of the West partes, neyther with those that did confesse the name of God in exile. Eyther he was not heard of Euticius during the time that he was but priest of the Mona∣stery, nor after that he was Byshop of Cy∣pres, he was not touched of Valens, for he was alwayes so honored and esteemed that the Heritickes them selues being in their kingdome, would haue thought that the same should haue turned to their igno∣mynie and sclander if they should haue-persecuted so excellent a man. Also the history Tripartite. 9. booke. Chapter. 48. affirmeth. That he did many myracles. The saide Epiphanius hath written a
booke called the booke of heresyes, out of which Saint Augustine allegeth witnes∣ses. He liued in the time of Theodosius a∣bout the yeere of our Lorde, 390. Of fastings and of meates. 1. Tim. 4. Those vvho doe forbid mariage, and to eate of certayne meates, doe teache the doctrine of diuels.THe spirit speaketh euidently that in the latter times some shal depart frō ye faith, and shal giue hede vnto spirites of error and doctrines of diuelles, which speake false lyes through hipocry∣sie, & haue their consciences burned with an hotte yron, forbidding to marrye, and commaunding to abstayne from meates, which God hath created to be receiued with giuing thanks of them which beleeue and knowe the truth. For all creatures of God are good, and nothing ought to be re∣fused, if it be receiued with thanks giuing. For it is sanctyfied by the worde of God, and prayer. S. Athanasius in his expositions vpon the Epistle to the Hebreus 13. Chapter. These are truly strange doctrines. And
he rebuked those which had brought in the Iewishe abstinences and obseruations of meates. For (he sayth) you ought to be fortified with grace, that is to saye, with fayth, and ye ought to be moste sure, that nothing is defiled, and that all thinges are pure and cleane vnto him that beleeueth, and so that faith is necessary:Faith is ne∣cessarie, and not the ob∣seruation of meates. and not the obseruation of meates. For those whiche doe abstayne from meates, that is to saye, those which haue their affection alwayes to obserue in such manner meates, it is most manifest, that such haue nothing pro∣fited, no more then those which doe sepe∣rate them selues from the bonds and ly∣mytes of the true faith, and serue wholy a lawe altogither vnprofitable. What soeuer is solde in the fleshe mar∣ket,1. Cor. 10. that eate ye, and aske no question for conscience sake. S. Ierome vpon the first Chapter, of Malachye. Turne neyther to the right hand neyther to the left: to decline and turne to the right hand is to abstaine from meates whiche God hathe created to bee vsed. Also to condemne and forbyd marriage, is to fall
into that whiche is written in another place? be not righteous in thy selfe be∣yonde measure. Iesus Christ sayth: that whiche goeth into the mouth defileth not a man:Mat. 15. but that which commeth out of the mouth defileth the man. The Councell of Bracara or Braga. 2. 30. distinct. Chapter which begin∣neth, Si quis. Helde in the yeare. 619. Hath excommunicated those which did abstayne themselues from eating of fleshe through superstition. Eusebius in the ecclesiasticall historie, the .5. booke. Chapter. 3. Rehearseth, that among those whiche were prisoners for the fayth at Lyons, there was one named Alcibiades, who led a very strayte life: for he woulde eate no∣thing but breade, and drinke water wyth salt, the which lyfe he was willing to con∣tinue being in prison. He was notified vn∣to Attalus (the true martyr of Iesus Christ) after his first confession that hee made in the theater) that the same Alcibi∣ades did euill, in not eating those crea∣tures
which God hath made, and that the same was an offence vnto others? the which thing being come to the knowledge of Alcibiades, he did eate (by the admoni∣shing of Attalus) all things as others did, rendring thankes vnto God, for that the holy ghost reuealed vnto the same At∣talus that which he did teach. S. Augustine of ecclesiasticall maners, 33. vpon the letter K. Speaking of the Monkes of Millaine,Behold the order of the Monkes in times past. whose straytnesse he sawe: None is con∣streyned to beare a heauyer burthen than he can, else let him refuse to beare it, and he which is weaker than the other, is not therefore condemned of them. They all do knowe howe greatlye loue and charitie is commended. They doe knowe very well that all meates are cleane to those that are cleane: therefore all their industrie is not to reiect any meates as vncleane, but only to tame their concupiscence and lust, and to holde and keepe themselues in brother∣ly loue. They do remember this sentence,1. Cor. 6. Meates are ordeyned for the belly, and the bellye for meates: neuerthelesse, manye which are strong shall abstayne bicause of
the weake. Many haue another reason, to wete, bicause that they had rather to bee fedde with grosse meates, and not with sumptuous and delicate, therefore those which in health doe abstayne from one kynde of meate, make no doubt being sick to eate of it. Many doe not drinke wyne, yet neuerthelesse they doe not thinke to be defiled therewith: for they themselues doe ordeyne, that one shoulde giue vnto those that are of a weake complexion, and can none otherwise keepe their health: if there be any that refuseth to drinke, they admo∣nishe them brotherly, not to make them∣selues through vayne superstitions more weake than holye. Euen so they doe dili∣gently exercise themselues in the feare of God. And as touching the exercise of the bodye,VVe ought to giue mea∣tes accor∣ding to cha∣ritie. they doe knowe verye well, that it profiteth onely for a little time. Loue is chieflye kept, and therevnto is applyed meates, words, apparayle, and the coun∣tenances: euery one doth consent vnto a mutuall loue and charitie, and doe abhorre to violate it, as much as God doth, if any one do resist the same, he is cast out: & if a∣ny one doe disagree from the same, they
will not suffer him one day.Titus. 1. Rebuke them sharply, that they maye be sounde in fayth, and not taking heede to Iewishe fables, and commaundements of men, that turne from the truth. Vnto the pure al things are pure: but vnto them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing, is no∣thing pure: but euen the very mindes and consciences of them are defiled. The Councell of Toledo. 13. hath excō∣municated those whiche forbydde to eate fleshe. The Councell of Pope Martin hath or∣dayned as much. Pope Elutherius hath ordayned, that none sholde keepe himfelfe through super∣stition from eating of any meates, whiche are agreable to mans nature. Let no man therefore condemne you a∣bout meate and drinke,Collos. 2. or for a peece of an holy day, or of the newe Moone, or of the Saboth dayes, which are nothing but sha∣dowes of things to come, but the bodie is in Christ. Let no man wilfully beare rule ouer you by humblenesse, and worship∣ping of Aungels, aduauncing himselfe in those things which he neuer sawe, rashlye
puft vp with his fleshly minde. &c. Where∣fore if ye be dead with Christ, and are free from the ordinances of the worlde. Why, as though ye yet liued in the worlde, are ye yet burdened with traditions of them that say: touch not, taste not, handle not, which all peryshe with the vsing of them, and are after the commaundementes and doctrines of men? Which things haue in deede a shewe of wisedome, in voluntarie worshipping and humblenesse, and in not sparing the bodie, yet are of no value, but appertayne to those thinges wherewith the flesh is crammed. 1. Tim. 4.The bodily exercise profiteth little: but godlynesse is profitable vnto all things. In the first booke of the historie tripartite. Chap. 10. Spiridion durst eate fleshe in Lent.The holy Bishop of Cypres, Spiridi∣on sayth, that freely he dare eate fleshe in Lent, when others doe abstayne from it, bicause he was a Christian (sayth he.) Rom. 14.Let vs not therefore iudge one another any more: but vse your iudgement rather in this, that no man put a stumbling blocke, or an occasion to fall, in his bro∣thers waye. I knowe and am fully certi∣fied
through the Lorde Iesus, that there is nothing vncleane of it selfe: but vnto him that iudgeth it to be vncleane, to him it is vnclean. But if thy brother be grieued with thy meate,1. Cor. 8. nowe walkest thou not charytably. Destroy not him with thy meate, for whom Christ dyed. Cause not your commoditie to be euill spoken of. For the kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, but righteousnesse, peace, and ioye in the holy ghoste. &c.Rom. 14. But why doest thou iudge thy brother? or why doest thou de∣spise thy brother? for we shalbe all brought before the iudgement seate of Christ. He that eateth, eateth to the Lorde:Rom. 14. for he giueth God thankes: And he that ea∣teth not, eateth not to the Lorde, and gi∣ueth God thankes. Meate maketh vs not acceptable to God for neyther if we eate, are we the richer:1. Cor. 8. neyther if we eate not, are we the poorer. But take heede least by any meanes this liberty of yours be an occasion of falling to them that are weake. &c. Wherefore if meate offend my brother, I will eate no fleshe while the world standeth,1. Cor. 8. bicause I will not offend my brother.
Esa. 58.The Lord sayd vnto the Prophet Esay, crye nowe as loude as thou canst. Leaue not of, lift vp thy voyce like a Trompet, and shewe my people their offences, and the house of Iacob their sinnes. For they seeke me dayly and wil knowe my wayes, euen as it were a people that did right, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God. They argue with me concerning right iudgemente, and will pleade at the lawe with their God. Wherefore faste we (saye they) and thou seest it not? We put our liues to straitnesse, and thou regardest it not? Beholde when ye fast, your luste remayneth stil: for ye doe no lesse violence to your detters: Loe, ye faste to strife and debate, and to smyte him with your fyste that speaketh vnto you. Ye faste not (as sometime) that your voyce might be heard aboue. Thinke ye this faste pleaseth me, that a man shoulde chasten himselfe for a daye, and to writhe his heade about like a hoke in an heary clothe,The true fast vvhich pleaseth god is to abstayn from all e∣uils. and to lye vpon the earthe? Should that be called fasting, or a daye that pleaseth the Lorde? But this fasting pleaseth not me, tyll the time be, thou loose him out of bondage, that is
in thy danger: that thou breake the othe of the wicked bargaynes, that thou let the oppressed goe free, and take from them all manner of burthens. It pleaseth not me, till thou deale thy breade to the hungrye, and bring the poore fatherlesse home into thy house, when thou seest the naked that thou couer him, and hyde not thy face from thine owne fleshe. Origen vpon Leuiticus. 10. homely 16. Chapter. If thou wilt faste as Christ commaun∣deth thee, and humble thy soule, it is con∣uenient that thou doe it all the time of the yeere, yea, doe the same all the dayes of thy life for to humble thy soule, neuerthe∣lesse if thou haste learned of the Lorde our Sauiour, that he is gentle and lowly of hearte, then if thou wilt faste, after the com∣maundementes of the Gospell: and keepe in thy fastinges the euangelicall lawes, the which the Sauiour hath commaunded to faste in such manner. But if thou do fast,Math. 6. annoynt thine head, and wash thy face. &c. Wilt thou that I doe shewe vnto thee what fasting thou must faste? fast from all thy sinnes, take no meate of malyce, take
no meate of pleasure, be not to hotte with the wine of luxurye, fast from doing euill, abstaine from euill wordes, keepe thy selfe from euill thoughtes, touch not the breade of thefte,Col. 2. of wicked doctrines, couete not the meates of false Philosophy, which doe seduce thee from the truth. Such fasting pleaseth God,1. Tim 4. but to abstaine from meates which God hath created for the faithfull to take with giuing of thankes, and to doe the same with them which haue crucified Iesus Christ, it cannot please God. The Pharyses were offended with Christe bi∣cause that his disciples did not faste, vnto whom he aunswered,Math. 9. Mar. 2. Luc. 5. that the wedding children cānot mourne as long as ye bride∣grome is with them. Those then doe faste which haue lost the brydegrome, we which haue with vs the bridegrome cannot faste, but therefore we saye not this, that we woulde let slacke the brydle of christian abstynence. This is verily the ChristianChristian libertie is to fast al∣vvayes, and not by ob∣seruing of dayes. libertye to faste alwayes, not through su∣persticion of obseruance: but by vertue of continencye. For howe can they keepe them selues chaste and not defiled and marred, if they bee not holpen and su∣stayned
through the ayde of continencye? Howe shall they vnderstand the Scrip∣tures? Howe shall they studye in know∣ledge and wisedome? Shall not that bee through the continencie of the bellye, and of the mouth? howe shall euery one make himselfe chaste for the kingdome of hea∣uen, if he doe not cut awaye the affluence of these meates? The Christians then haue that reason to fast. Augustine in the .86. Epistle written to Lasulanus. In the diuine and Apostolicall scrip∣tures, and also throughout the newe testa∣ment, in feruentnesse of courage beholding it, I doe see fasting to bee commaunded,VVe finde not in the Scripture in vvhat time vvee must fast. but I do not finde it to be defined by Gods commaundement, or of the Apostles, in what time or day we must fast or not fast: wherefore by this I doe vnderstande that the commaundement to fast, is not for to obtaine righteousnesse, the which inward∣ly is the beautie of the kings daughter. Chrysostome in the 4. tome, of fasting in Lent. Homilie. 73. If we doe dayly here agree, and that we doe fast all the Lent, and doe not amende
our lyues, greater occasion of damnation shall be done vnto vs. Gregorie the 7. hath commaunded to fast the Lent, vpon payne of deadly sinne. Reade Platyna, Pag. 171. in his life. Apollonius the martyr of Iesus Christ in the ecclesiasticall hystorie. 5. booke. Chapt. 11. Rebuked the heretike Montanus, bi∣cause he was the first which made the law of fastings. Saint Ierome to Nepotian, first tome. Laye vpon thee such maner of fasting, as thou canst beare. That thou haue pure, chaste, simple, and moderate fastings, not supersticious. What profiteth it, not to eate of the oyle, and to seeke certayne dainties, and difficult kyndes of meates, as figges,Superstiti∣ous fastings. peares, nuttes, fruites of pal∣mes, or dates, the flower of wheate, of ho∣nie, and such maner of meates? There is no kynde of garden fruite wherewith we do not torment our selues, to the ende we eate not of breade, and whylest we doe fo∣lowe our pleasures, we are drawen from the kingdome of heauen. Further∣more,
I haue hearde of some, who against the rule of the nature of men drinke not water, and eate no breade, but doe eate of delicate suppings, and of punned Leekes, and drinke not the pottage in a cuppe, but in a dishe. What shame is this, howe are we not ashamed of such maner of follies? how are we not weried with such supersti∣tions? Furthermore also, we seeke in de∣licates the renowne of abstinence.The most strong fa∣sting. The strongest fasting is breade and wa∣ter, but bicause that there is no glorie therein, and bicause all liue of breade and water, as of a common thing, we doe not esteeme it to be fasting. In the olde time they fasted vntill night.Iudg. 20. Zacha. 7. The fasting without workes of mer∣cie displeaseth God. Cassiodorus reciteth in the 9. boke of his historie, That the Romaynes had but three wee∣kes for the Lent, fasting euery day except the Sundaye and Saterdaye: The Ille∣rickes and the Grecians had sixe, and the other seauen: but they fasted by space be∣tweene. Reade of fasting, Actes. 13. 1. Cor. 16.
Math. 4. Luc. 2. Tobi. 2. 1. Reg. 6. 2. Cro 20. 1. Esdras. 8. Ioel. 2. Ionas. 3. Hester. 4. and .14. Psalme. 35. and .69. and .109. Deut. 9. 3. Reg. 19. 2. Reg. 1.Dauid and his people fasted vntill eue∣ning, hearing that Saule and Ionathas were dead. 2. Reg. 12Dauid fasted and prayed for the people which were stroken of God. 3. Reg. 21.Achab fasted and slept hauing on sacke∣cloth, walking comfortlesse, and the Lord had compassion and pitie on him. IudithIudith. 8. fasted all the dayes of hir life. HesterHest. 4. purposing to enter vnto the king for to speake vnto him, fasted three dayes and three nightes. Iosias declareth the fasting to all the people, and caused the wordes of the booke of IeremyeIere. 36. to be reade openly. Math. 4.Iesus Christ humbled his soule with fasting psalm. 35. and .69. and .109. Esay. 58.Vnto whome is he like that fasteth, and neuerthelesse ceaseth not to sinne? Ierem. 14.Fasting profiteth nothing at all to the wicked and obstinate people. Luc. 21. Rom. 13.Iesus Christ saith: Take heede to your selues, least at any time your heartes bee
ouercome with surfeting and drunkennesse and cares of this worlde. Ye haue bene called vnto liberty,Gal. 5. onely let not your libertye be an occasion vnto the fleshe, but in loue serue one an other. Of maryage and of vowes. THe spirite speaketh euidently,1. Tim. 4. that in the latter time some shal depart from the faith, and shal giue heede vnto spirites of error, and doctrins of deuills, which speake false lies through hipocrysie, and haue their consciences marked with an hotte iron: forbidding to mary. Iesus Christe saithe, haue ye not reade,Mat. 19. Genes. 1. Genes. 2. Ephes. 5. 1. Cor. 6. howe that he whiche made man at the be∣ginning, made them man and woman, and sayde, for this cause, shall a man leaue fa∣ther and mother, and cleaue vnto his wyfe, and they twayne shall be made one fleshe, wherfore they are no more twayne, but one fleshe. Let not man therefore put asun∣der that which God hath coupled togither.
Origene vpon Saint Mathew. 23. Homilye. The Scribes and Pharyses are set in Moyses chayre. &c. He doth rebuke then such manner of preachers, who doe not on∣ly that they saye, but also doe cruelly and without mercy,No con∣straint from mariage. great thinges, whiche one cannot doe, not esteeming, or iudgeing what is the vertue of euery one of the hea∣rers, as those which forbid to mary: And doe constraine the people to a moste vyle vyllanye, for that they doe forbydde that which is expedient. Those also which doe teach to abstayne from meates, and other such manner of thinges, to the which the faithfull ought in no wyse to be constray∣ned. They do laye great burthens through the worde of their expositions, against the will of Christ saying, my yoke is easie, and my burthen is light: And often times we doe see that those that doe teache suche thinges, doe liue altogither contrarye to their sayings, doing all thinges for the re∣garde of men, and for vaine glorye, as the word following doth shewe it, saying. All their workes they doe for to be seene of men.Mat. 23.
Salomon in the .18.Pro. 18. Chapter of the pro∣uerbes doth describe the blessing of mary∣age. The Prophet Dauid in the .128 psalmePsal. 128. dothe describe the blessing of God vppon those that are maryed. The angell Raphael did teache TobieTob. 6. howe hee ought to marie as God com∣maundeth. The confirmation of mariage is in the 9. Chapter of Genesis vnder the letter A.Genes. 9. Eusebius in the Ecclesiasticall hystorie, 3. booke .27. Chap. Saint Clement, as Eusebius of Ce∣saria doth recite, hath written agaynst those who doe despyse mariage. Among other things that he hath written, sayth as followeth: Will they also reproue the Apostles? Saint Peter and Saint Phi∣lip had wyues, and maried their daugh∣ters,The Apo∣stles vvere maried. and Saint Paule in one of his Epi∣stles, was not ashamed to make recom∣mendations and salutations vnto his wife,Clement sayth that Saint Paule vvas maried. whom he sayth he woulde not leade with him about the countrie, to the ende he might be the more free to preache the gos∣pell. And by and by after hee sayth, that
Clement in his 7. booke of his work, sayth as followeth: It is sayde that S. Peter when he did see his wyfe to be martyred, reioyced, seeing that by that meanes shee was of the number of the elect, and that she returned vnto hir owne house of Pa∣radise, and that he cryed after hir when they brought hir to hir death, calling hir by hir name, saying vnto hir: O deare wyfe remember God. Such were the ma∣riages of the Saintes, and their affecti∣ons perfect. In the 4. of the sentences, distinction .17. Chapter .4. and in the 27. decret. question. 2. Chapter which beginneth, Cum so∣cietas. &c. The Pope in his Decretals calleth ma∣riage, vncleannesse, pollution, and car∣nall filthynesse. Heb. 13.Saint Paule answereth the Pope, say∣ing: Wedlocke is to be had in honor a∣mong all men, and the bed vndefiled, for whore keepers and adulterers God wyll iudge. Iohn. 2.Iesus Christ allowed mariage, for hee and his mother were at the mariage in
Cana of Galile. Augustine in his treatise of the good∣nesse of mariage .21. chap. I dare not preferre the virginitie of Saint Iohn, before the mariage of A∣braham. The historie tripartite, 2. booke, Chapt. 14. rehearseth or doth make declaration of the Councell of Nice, how it hath decreed that Priests ought not to marry. But the holy man of God named Pah∣nutius bishop of Egipt, who had his right eye pluckt out, and the right leg cut of in the hamme, and condemned by the Em∣perour Maximine to be boyled in molten leade. All these great euils did he suffer for the Gospell of Iesus Christ. The same holy man, seeing that the Councell had or∣dayned that decree, resisted it boldly, say∣ing that mariage is honourable,Note vvhat chastitie is. and that the companie of his owne wyfe was cha∣stitie, persuading the Councell neuer to establishe such a lawe, saying: that if they doe make such a lawe, it will be vnto them a great occasion of fornication. Then the Synode praysed the sentence and aduice
of that holye man,The Coun∣cell of Nice vvould not make a lavve that the Priestes shoulde not marie. and woulde constitute nothing touching that matter, but left it to vse at euery mans libertie, not making lawe or necessitie, yet notwithstanding the sayde Pahnutius was not maryed. This Councell was celebrated in the yeare of our Lorde .328. Platyna in the lyfe of Siluester the first. The Councell of Gangres in Galatia celebrated in the yeare of our Lorde 333. hath permitted mariage vnto Priests, and hath excommunicated those whiche shall forsake their father and mother and wyfe, vnder coulor of religion. Distinction .31. Chapter. which begin∣neth, Quoniam. The counsell of Constantinople the sixt, hath in like manner ordayned not to make any vowes not to mary, & that the priestes which doe seperate them selues from their wyues, bicause of their holy orders, should be excluded from the communion. Distinction .27. Chapter, Quidam, and in the Canon of the Apostles. Chapter .6. The counsell of Anticyra whiche was celebrated the yeere of our Lord .304. like
wyse did permit the Deacons to be mary∣ed, after that they haue taken their orders. Iohn le Maire of the differences of schis∣mes and of the counsells of the Church. I founde in the library of the Abbey of Desnay at Lyons in an olde booke:Priestes ma∣ried in France. that in Fraunce in the time of Pope Formo∣sus, and King Lewes the second of that name, who was surnamyd the stammerer or stutter, the priestes were maryed. The Canon of the Apostles saith, if there be any which saith or teacheth vnder the title and cloke of religion, that priestes ought to forsake their wyues, let them bee cursed. Long time after the counsell of Nice,S. Hilarie bishop of Poictiers vvas maried. in the church of the Latines, many By∣shoppes were maryed: among other S. Hilary Byshoppe of Poictiers, as wee may see by his Epistle which he wrote be∣ing in exile vnto his daughter being a vir∣gin, in which Epistle he made also menti∣on of his wyfe the mother of hir.1. Tim. 3. S. Paule tea∣cheth that the byshops may be ma∣ried. A Byshoppe therefore must be fautlesse the husband of one wyfe, watching, sober, modest, herberous, apt to teach not giuen
to wine, no fighter, not giuen to filthy lucre but gentill, abhorring fighting, abhorring couetousnesse, one that can rule his owne house honestly, hauing children vnder obe∣dience with all honesty. For if a man can∣not rule his owne house, how shall he care for the church of God. &c. Likewyse muste Deacons be honest, not double tōgued, not giuen vnto much wyne, neyther to filthie lucre: but hauing the mysterie of the faith in pure conscience: and let them first bee proued, & then let them minister if they be founde faultlesse. Euen so must their wy∣ues be honest, not euill speakers, but so∣ber, and faythfull in all things. Let the DeaconsThe Dea∣cons vvere maried in the prima∣tiue church. bee the husbande of one wyfe, and such as can rule their children well, and their owne housholdes. After these wordes in the beginning of the fourth chapter,1. Tim. 4. he sayth: the spirite speaketh e∣uidently, that in the latter times some shal depart from the fayth, and shall giue hede vnto spirites of error, and doctrines of deuils, which speake false lyes through hypocrisie, and haue their consciences marked with an hote yron: Forbidding to marie.
Agayne:Titus. 1. For this cause haue I left thee in Creta, that thou shouldest continue to redresse that which resteth, and shouldest ordayne Elders in euerye citie, as I ap∣poynted thee. If any be faultlesse, the hus∣bande of one wyfe, hauing faythfull chil∣dren, which are not slaundered of ryote, neyther that are disobedient, that hee bee chosen. Obiection. Pope Gregorie the 7.Naucler. Albertus. Crantzius. Lambert. Hirsued. Monke of Cluny otherwise called Hildebrande, who was Pope in the time of the Emperor Henrie the 4. hath commaunded by letters, vnto Otto bishop of Constance, that he should forbyd in his Dioces, the Priestes to ma∣rie, and that he doe vnlose or make fru∣strate the mariages of those which were already maried. Aunswere. The Lorde aunswered vnto the same,Genes. 2. saying: It is not good that man should be alone. Extra de Cle. cons. lib. 6. Cap. 1. Pope Boniface the 8. hath permitted all libertie vnto ye religious people, although they were maried.
Saint Ambrose in his first booke of Virgins. 1. Cor. 7.As concerning Virgins, I haue no commaundement of the Lorde: but I giue vnto you myne aduice. If the Doctor of the Gentiles had no commaundement, what is he that can haue it? And in very deede he had no commaundement, but he hath had an example.Virginitie not com∣manded, but desired. For virginite cannot be commaunded, but be desired. For the things whiche are not in our power, are more to be desired, than to bee commaun∣ded. &c. After that Paule hath counsayled that it were good, if we coulde liue vnmaried, bicause that we are more free to thinke on God,1. Cor. 7. he sayth: And this I speake to de∣clare what is profitable for you, not to tan∣gle you in a snare: but that ye followe that which is honest and comely, and that yee maye quietly cleaue vnto the Lorde with∣out separation. 1. Cor. 7.To auoyde fornication, let euerye man haue his wife, and let euery woman haue hir owne husbande. I woulde wish that all men were as I am: but euerye man hath his proper gyft of God, one after this ma∣ner,
another after that▪ &c. If they cannot abstayne, let them marie: for it is better to marie, than to burne. &c. S. Vldaric bishop of Augspurge, in the E∣pistle that he sent to Nicholas the first, concerning the forbidding of ma∣riage vnto Priestes. The forbidding of mariage was altogi∣ther contrarie both to the worde of God, the decrees of the Councell of Nice, and to the auncient Church. After he declareth vnto him the great euilles and daungers which therein were.Note the fruite vvhich came of the forbidding of mariage vnto Priests. And among other things he declared that which chaunced in the time of Gregorie the first, through the occasion of such forbidding, whiche con∣strayned him to chaunge his mynde in that case. At a certayne day the said Gre∣gorie sent to his fishe ponde or stewe, for to drawe fishe, and there were brought vn∣to him more than sixe thousande heades of little children, whiche had bene cast in there, for to couer and hide the whoredome of the Priestes and other Ecclesiasticall persons. Wherefore Gregorie seeing the same, was constrayned to saye, condem∣ning the decree that he had made against
the maryage of the ecclesiasticall persons. The Apostle saithe, it is better to marye then to burne: And I say also for my part, that it is better to mary, then to giue occa∣sion of death. This Epistle was founde in a library of the towne of Hollande, called Aldwater. Of vowes. S. Ambrose vpon the fyrst to the Corinthians. 7. Chap. NO man ought to be constray∣ned, least hauing forbid things that are lawfull he doe fall into thinges vnlawfull. VVe maye breake the vovves made agaynst the fayth.The counsell of Toledo .8. did permitte to breake the vowes and othes made a∣gainst the faith. Dauid sinned in swearing that he would put to death Nabal and all his men,1. Sam. 25 The vovve of Dauid. hee did very well to breake that vowe, whiche was against God: And therefore he pray∣sed greatly God for that he letted him to shead bloud, by Abigail. Mat. 14.Herode made a vowe to giue vnto the
daughter of HerodiasThe vovve of Herode. that daunced before him, whatsoeuer shee would aske. And she being before instructed of hir mother, said, giue me here Iohn Baptist his heade in a platter. And ye king sorowed: neuerthelesse for his othes sake, & for their sakes which sat also at the table, he commaunded it to be giuen hir. He did euill in fulfilling that vowe against God. Saule did euill to vowe1. Sam. 14 The vovve of Saule. to put to deathe his sonne Ionathas, who was hindred to accomplishe his vowe by the people. God hath sayde and commaunded,Exod. 20. thou shalt not kill. Iephtha vowed a vowe vnto the Lorde and sayde,Iudg. 11. The vovve of Iephtha. if thou shalt deliuer the children of Ammon into my handes, then that thing that commeth out of the dores of my house against me, when I com home in peace, from the children of Ammon, shall be the Lordes, and I will offer it vp a burnt offring. After the wars were ended he came home, and see his daughter came out against him with Timbreles and daun∣ces. And when he sawe hir, he rente his clothes, and sayde: Alas my daughter, thou hast made me stoupe and art one of
them that trouble me. For I haue opened my mouth vnto the Lorde, and cannot goe backe. &c. And he killed his daughter a∣gainst the commandement of God, which forbyddeth to kill. Saint Cyprian the Martyr of Iesus Christ. 11. Epistle fyrst booke. If the virgins haue giuen them selues with a good wil vnto Christ, let them per∣seuere in chastitie not dissembling,If the vir∣gins vvil not or cannot perseuere in their virgi∣nitie, let them marie. being so strong and constant that they attend the rewarde of their virginnitie: if they will not or cannot perseuere, it is better for them to mary, then to be throwne hedlong into the fire through their pleasures. The counsel of Arausique or Orenge the 11. chapter hath decreed, that we can vowe nothing rightly vnto God, but that which we haue receiued at his hand: In asmuch as all thinges which we can offer vnto him, are gyftes proceeding from him. The counsell of Gangres in Galatia, in a Canon and rule saith, if any of those which keepe virginitie for the loue of Ie∣sus Christe, doe eleuate them selues a∣gainst those that are maryed, let them bee
excommunicated,If the Mon∣es do think themselues more holy than the maried folk, they ought to be excom¦municated, or giuen vn∣to the deuill. or giuen to the diuell. In an other Canon it is saide, when a man bicause of dissembling countenance, vseth strange apparell, beleeuing that thereby he hath righteousnesse in him selfe, and de∣spiseth others, which with honesty and re∣uerence doe weare caps and other come∣ly apparell, that he be excommunicated. Iohn le Maire of the difference of schismes and of the counsels of the Churche. Pope Gregory the seuenth, was the first which made a lawe that priestes shoulde not mary. Platyna in the life of Pope Pius .2. or Aeneas Syluius. The Pope Pius borne at Senee, afore¦named Aeneas Syluius, among other prouerbes,The pro∣uerbe of the Pope. which he was wont to speake, was accustomed also to saye, by good right and by good cause, they haue taken awaye maryage from priestes, but for better cause they ought to restore it vnto them a∣gaine. Iesus Christ sayth in vayne they wor∣shippe me, teaching for doctrines,Mat. 15. whiche are but mens preceptes.
Math. 15.All plantes whiche my heauenly father hath not planted, shall be plucked vp by the rootes. 1. Cor. 7.It is better to mary then to burne. Of the church, and howe it may be knowen and of hir authorytie. Chrysostome vpon S. Mathewe .48. homily .24. Chapter. The vvic∣ked haue Churches, Preachers, Orders, and Clarkes.THere be some who doe greatly seduce, althoughe that it be through liyng, yet neuerthelesse they doe preache Christe, they de∣clare the faith: For they also haue orders, and priestes aswell as the faithfull. They doe also reade the holy Scriptures. Also they doe thinke that they do giue the same Baptisme, and the same Sacramentes of the body and of the bloud of Christe: like∣wyse they doe honor the Apostles, & Mar∣tyrs, and thereby doe cause the thoughtes of men greatly to erre, not onely of the meane and simple people, but also of the
prudent and wyse. Who shall he be whom Antechrist will not moue? partly doing the workes of Christe, and fulfilling al the offyces of the Christans, before the Chri∣stians: excepte it bee paraduenture hee which considereth that which the Apostle hath sayde:2. Cor. 11. Forasmuch then as Sathan himselfe is changed into the fashion of an angell of light. Therefore it is no great matter, though his ministers fashion them selues as though they were the ministers of righteousnesse, whose ende shall be ac∣cording to their deedes, and not after the fayning and forme of their christianitie. Chrysostome vpon S. Mathew, 9. Ho∣milie. Chapt. 24. All the Christians in this present time, ought to conferre themselues in the holye Scriptures.The true Church knovvne by the holye Scriptures. For sithence the time that heresie hath obtayned and gotten hir chur∣ches, men can haue no certayne proofe or triall of true christianitie: And there can be no other refuge for the Christians, who are willing to know the truth of the faith, but the holy Scriptures. Afterwardes he sayth: Whosoeuer then will knowe what the true church of Iesus Christ is, howe
shall he knowe it but onely by the Scrip∣tures? Saint Augustine, 2. Tome, 166. Epistle. In the holy Scriptures we haue lear∣ned Iesus Christ: and in the Church we haue commonly those holye Scriptures. Wherefore then is it, that in them we kepe and holde not altogither, in common both Iesus Christ and his Church? S. Augustine .7. Tome, in the Epistle against Petilian a Donatist. Chapter. 2. 3. 4. Amongst vs and the Donatistes is a question where the Church is. What is it then that we shall doe? Ought we to seke it in our wordes,The Church is in the vvordes of Iesus Christ. or in those of our heade Iesus Christ? Truly we ought to seeke it in the wordes of him whiche is the truth, and which also knoweth his bodie. Chrysostome vpon Saint Mathewe, 49. Homilie. Chap. 24. Heresie the troupe of the souldiers of Anti∣christ.Heresies are the bandes and troupe of the souldiers of Antichrist, chiefly those whiche haue obtayned the place of the church. And it is holden in the holy place, insomuche that it seemeth that they are
there holden, as the worde of truth: but it is the abhomination of desolation, that is to saye, of the hoste and bande of Anti∣christ, the which hath made the soules of many men desolate, forsaken, and desti∣tute of God.2. Thess. 2 And peraduenture that is that which the Apostle speaketh of, which is an aduersarie, and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he shall sit as God in the temple of God, and beare in hande that he is God. And so all his euils of diuerse heresies, the which were before but only hearde of, are afterwarde holden in the holye place, in ouerthrowing the Churche of Iesus Christ. &c. Chrysostome vpon Saint Mathewe, Chapt. 24. Homilie .49. He then which woulde knowe what is the true Church of Iesus Christ, howe shall he knowe it in so great confusion of such likelyhoode, but by the scriptures?For to haue the surenesse of the true fayth, vvee must haue regard vnto the holy Scripture. In the same. The Lorde then knowing so great con∣fusion to be come in the latter dayes, ther∣fore willed that the Christians which are in Christianitie, which will take the sure∣nesse
of the true fayth, should haue refuge vnto nothing but vnto the Scriptures: Otherwyse if they regarded other things, they shall be euill spoken of, and shall pe∣rishe, not vnderstanding what the true Church is, and thereby shall fall headlong into the Abhomination of Desolation which standeth in the holye place of the Church.Mat. 24. &c. In the same. Mat. 24.If any mā shal say vnto you, behold here is Christ in the houses, beleeue it not. For nowe you doe iniurie and wrong to the Godheade, if you seeke it in houses, that which filleth both heauen and earth: or if ye think that he which is come for to resist the proude, and for to exalt the humble and meeke, is hydde there: shewing by suche things, howe of his true Churche often∣times doe ryse vp seducers. Therefore we must in no wyse beleeue them,VVe must beleeue no men if they do not teach the scrip∣tures. if they saye not or doe not that whiche is agreeable to the Scriptures, beleeue them not: for as the smoke goeth before ye fire, and the bat∣taile before the victorie: euen so the temp∣tation of Antichrist, preceedeth and goeth before the glorie of Christ. &c.
Saint Barnard vpon the Canticles 33. Sermon. From whom shall the church hide hir∣selfe? all are freendes, and all are enemies:Iudges of the Church in our time. all are kinsefolkes, and al are aduersaries: all are houshold seruantes, and there is none at peace: all are neighbours, and all seeke but their owne profite: They are the ministers of Christ, and serue Antechrist:The Priestes are apparal∣led pom∣pously like harlots, and those that play in co∣medies or tragedies vvhen they doe their di∣uine office. they do walke in the honor of the gooneds of the Lorde, vnto whom they doe no ho∣nor: thereby commeth that beauty of the harlotte, whiche thou seest dayly in their apparell, as the players of Comedyes, as in the apparell of a King: thereby thou seest the golde in the brydels, saddels and spurres: Thereby are the tables beauti∣fied with meates and vessells. Thereby commeth drunkennesse, and gloutonye, thereby proceedeth the harpe and the viol, thereby are the priestes ouerrunning, and the garners full, aunswering the one the o∣ther: Thereby are the boxes full of oynt∣mentes and sweete sauor, thereby are the purses filled, therefore would they be, and are the princes of the Churches, the Pro∣uostes, Deanes, Archedeacons, Bishops,
Archebyshoppes, and such thinges come not lawfully, but bicause they doe walke in the businesse of darkenesse. By that before it hath bene forespoken, and nowe is come the time of the fulfilling of the same,Esay. 38. Be∣hold nowe in peace my bitternesse is most bitter, it hath bene before bitter, in the death of Martyrs, afterwardes more bit∣ter in the controuersye of Heretickes, now it is most bitter in the manners of those of our owne house: we can neyther chase them nor driue them away, they are so mighty and multiplyed without number. The fores and plagues of the Church are entred into the inwarde partes, and are in∣curable, and therefore is hir bitternesse most bitter. &c. S. Hilary writing against Auxentius. VVe ought to take hede of Anti∣christ, for if vvee doe marke vvell the scrip∣tures, vve shall finde him in the Church.I doe admonishe you to take heede of Antechriste, ye staye your selues to muche on the walles, seeking the church of God, in the fairenesse of buyldings, thinking that the vnitie of the faithfull is there con∣tayned: doe wee doubte that Antechriste ought there to haue his seate? The moun∣taines and the woodes, lakes, prisons, and desertes are more sure vnto me and of bet∣ter
truste, for the Prophets being therein hid haue prophecied. Saint Barnard vpon the .90. psalm, Qui habitabit. verse .6. O Lorde Iesus thou hast multiplied the people,Esa. 9. Mat. 20. Philip. 2. and thou hast not increased theyr ioye: for many be called, but fewe bee cho∣sen: Al the Christians, almost al doe seeke their owne profite, & not of Iesus Christe. And haue remoued the offyces from the ecclesiastical dignitie into shameful gaine, and into workes of darkenesse, and the health of soules is not searched for in suche thinges: but the pleasure of riches. Therefore are they shoren, therefore doe they frequent the Churches,The Priests are shoren and shauen, and doe all their cere∣monies for couetousnes and doe cele∣brate masses, and sing psalmes. They stryue and contende most impudently day∣ly by proces for Byshoppryks, Archeby∣shoppryks, in somuch that the reuenewes of the Churches are bestowed and wasted in superfluyties, and to vayne vses. There remayneth nothing but that the man of sinne be reueled, the sonne of perdition. &c. S. Barnard in his Sermon of the con∣uersion of S. Paule. Alas O Lord God,Esay. 1. for these are the first
which doe persecute thee,The heades of the Church doe persecute the Church. whome we doe see to loue the hyest places in thy Church, and to holde the principalitie. They haue taken the Arches from Sion, they haue occupied the Castle, and afterwards haue freely & by power and strength, set all the citie on fire: their cōuersation is miserable, the subuertion of thy people is pitifull. S. Ierome vpon the .9. Chapter of the Prophete Oseas. I doe not finde in the olde hystories any other to haue seperated and diuided the Churche, and seduced the people from the house of God, than the Priests and Pre∣lates which are placed of God, for to bee the spyes and watchmen for the Christian people, agaynst the enimies of the church. S. Barnarde in his first booke, De consi∣dera. to Eugenius. Speaking vnto Pope Eugenius: what are those thy flatterers whiche saye vnto thee: nowe vp boldly: thou doste by them of the spoyle of the Churches? The lyfe of the poore is sowen in the places of the riche. Siluer shyneth in the myre, they runne thither out of all partes, the poorest sort doe not carie it awaye, but the most
strong, or hee that runneth swyftest: this custome, or rather this mortall corrupti∣on, hath not begon in thy time, but I be∣seeche God that it may ende in thine. In the meane time thou art apparayled and decked vp very gorgeously and sumptu∣ously. If I durst speake it, thy seate is ra∣ther a Parke of diuels, than of sheepe? Did S. Peter so? Did S. Paule mocke after that sort? Thy Court ought rather of custome to receyue the good, than to make them such. For the wicked do pro∣fite nothing, but the good doe very muche empayre. Afterwardes hee concludeth: Beholde the murmuring and common complaynt of all Churches, they doe crie out that they are cut in peeces and dis∣membred. There are very fewe, or almost none, whiche doe not feare the stroke or wounde: Doest thou demaunde what? The Abbots are drawen away from their Bishops, the Bishops from their Archbi∣shops. It is great maruayle if one can ex∣cuse the same. In doing so, you doe shewe very wel, that you haue fulnesse of power, but not of Iustice. You doe the same, bi∣cause that you can doe it: but the question
is, whether you ought to doe it. You are there constituted and placed for to keepe and preserue vnto euery one his honour, and his degree, and not for to beare him enuie and malice. In the 34. distinction, Chapter, Lector. Glose and distinct. 82. Chap. Presbyter, & Glose. And in the Canon of the Apostles .17. quest. 4. Chapt. And distinct. 40. Chapt. Si Papa. And distinction .96. Chapt. Satis. And Chapter, Simplici. And Incipitis. The Pope sayth that he hath povver to make lavves a∣gainst na∣ture, and a∣gaynst the Gospell.It is written in those Canons, that the Popes haue such power and authoritie, that they may dispence agaynst the Apo∣stolicall doctrine, and agaynst the right of nature, and consequently agaynst the Go∣spell and the worde of God. For the Pope hath all the rightes as well diuine as hu∣mane, in the inwarde partes of his brest, wherefore he ought to iudge euerye man, and ought to be iudged of none: Insomuch that though he should lead a great number of people into hell, yet no mortall man ought to presume to rebuke his faultes: For he is God which cannot be iudged of men.
Saint Paule aunswereth vnto the same saying.2. Thes. 2. Iudge yee novve vvho is Antichrist according to the Ca∣non, and ac∣cording to the vvord of God. Let no man deceiue you by anye meanes, for the Lorde commeth not, ex∣cept there come a departing first, and that that sinnefull man be opened, the sonne of perdition which is an aduersary, & is exal∣ted aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he shall sitte as God in the Temple of God, and shewe himselfe as God. Saint Hilary in his booke against Auxentius. Whosoeuer denieth Christe to be suche as he hath bene preached by the Apostles, he is Antechrist. The property of the name of Antechriste, is to bee contrary vnto Christe. The Priestes doe saye that the Pope cannot erre, neyther the counsels. Iesus Christ hath sayde vnto S. Peter,Luc. 22. I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not. Vnto the same their owne Canons doe aun∣swere in the .40. distinction Chap. which beginneth, Si Papa. If the Pope doe fall into an error in the
in the faith, and that he be an Hereticke one may very well rebuke and checke him in his faultes. Alexander .6 Pope .227. in the yeare of our Lorde 1492. Reade Guliel. Bud.Pope Alexander the .6. speaking once vnto an Embassador of ye king of Fraunce, vnto whome he had these wordes, this fa∣ble of Iesus Christe hath gotten vnto vs great riches. Sanazarius an Italian Poet in his Epi∣grammes in the .2. booke. Beholde the enormitie of the Popes, and their life more than diabolicall.Speaking of that Pope Alexander, no∣ting the inceste of him, with his owne daughter Lucrecia, and asking hir, Lu∣crecia wil Alexander desire thee alwayes? afterwardes aunswered, O wicked case: it is thy father. Behold the witnesse whiche the writers of his time haue, declared of that head of the churche. Abbas Vrspurgensis reciteth of Gregory the .7. otherwise called Hildebrand. That the common wealth of Rome, and all the Churche hath bene vnder him in great danger,The Popes may verye vvell erre. through the error of newe schismes, and not heard of, and that he hath vsurped the Papall seate through tyran∣nye, and not by lawfull election.
The counsell holden at Wormes in the yeere .1080. Affirmed of Gregory the seuenth,Gregorie .7. vvas not chosen of God. that it is most true that he was not chosen of god, but that hee exalted him selfe, without all shame through disceit, and money, and that he hath turned vpside downe the ecclesia∣sticall order, and that he hath troubled the kingdome of the Christian Empyre: and that he hath attempted the deathe both of the bodye and soule of that Catholicke and quiet king, and that he hath defended and holden vp the wicked and periured king, and that he hath sowen discorde, among those that agreed togither, and strifes a∣mongest the peace makers, and offences amongest brethren, and diuorcement be∣tweene maryed folke, and that he hath re∣moued and troubled all that was at reste, quiet and in peace betweene the good ly∣uers.Gregorie hath put in question the catholike fayth, and hath bene a coniurer & necroman∣cer. We being assembled togither of God agaynst the sayde Hyldebrand, prea∣ching sacriledges, and fires, mayntayning periured persons and homycides or men slears, putting in question or doubt the ca∣tholicke and Apostolicke faith of the body and bloud of the Lorde, being an obseruer
and keeper of diuinacion and coniuring, and of dreames, and a most manifest Ne∣cromancyer, hauing familiar spirites, and for that cause swaruing from the true faith, we doe iudge that he ought to be canoni∣cally deposed driuen away, banished, and condemned perpetually, if he doe not leaue of his seate, after that he hath heard these thinges. Benno Cardinall in the life of the sayde Gregorye. Amongest many wickednesses that he alledged of him, sayde, that he alwayes v∣sed to beare about with him a booke of Necromancye,Note the lyfe of Gre∣gorie. the which was vnto him very familiar, and that he did cast through his enchauntments, the consecrated hoste into a fire, that by that meanes he might faine to haue had a heauenly reuelation, a∣gainst the Emperor Henry: Benno alled∣geth for witnesse, Iohn Byshop of Porta, Secretary of the said Hildebrand. Platyna in the lyfe of Iohn the 8. And Sabellicus, lib. 1. of the 9. Ennead. The Papesse Iohn. 8. Pope. 107. Yeare. 855.The woman called Iohn the eyght, was borne in Englande, and hir parents were
of Mentz. She followed in hir yong age, a yong scholler in the studies of learning, and profited so well at studie, that she was esteemed at Rome amongst the wysest: for which cause she was chosen to be Pope, thinking that shee had bene a man, and was chosen with as great consent as euer was Pope, following still the studie that she had learned with hir studie felow.Apoc. 17. At the time that she was chosen Pope, she was founde with childe with one of hir owne seruants, who perceiuing hirself big,Esay. 3. knewe so well to prouide for hir great bel∣lye, that none coulde perceiue it,Beholde the goodly stuffe that hath bene holden by the popes vntill such time as she trauayled of childe in the open streete, and in the open procession, vppon the shoulders of those that did beare hir, & dyed in the same trauayle, the second yere after hir Papacie. One maye nowe well see whether the Pope cannot erre. Platyna in the life of Syluester. And Sa∣bellicus. Lib. 2. of the 9. Ennead.Syluester. 2. Pope. 147. Yeare. 999. Syluester the 2. was a Monke in his youth, afterwards did giue himselfe vnto the diuell, as a right sorcerer,The Pope giueth him∣selfe to the deuill. vpon condi∣cion that his bodie and soule, should be his
after his death. Prouided that the diuell doe helpe to obtayne that that he desireth, by which meanes he came afterwardes to be Pope. Platyna in the life of Bennet. 8. And Sabellicus lib. 2. of the 9. Ennead. Benet. 8. Pope. 152. Yeare. 1012. The Pope did shevve himselfe a diuell being aliue, and the diuell appeared Pope after his death.Bennet the .8. appeared damned after his death in a monstruous and horrible likenesse hauing an heade and tayle like vnto an Asse, and the residewe of the body like vnto a Beare, saying that he did shew himselfe after such sorte, bicause that being Pope he hath liued beastly. The yeere. 457. The counsell of Car∣thage was holden in which S. Augustine ruled. In the same a lawe was made, vpon the appellations in Ecclesiasticall iudge∣ment.The Pope vvas founde in a lie, and proued a lier The Pope required that it might be lawfull to euery one that woulde, to ap∣peale vnto his seate. And to ye end that he might obtayne that which he demaunded, did committe falshode, in alledging a de∣cree of his owne inuenting, the which sayd that it was made in the counsell of Nice: After that the lye of the Pope was kno∣wen, through the doublenesse of the Coun∣celles,
brought from Constantinople, the request of the Pope was refused & denied. The counsell of Ariminum or Rimino,The Coun∣cell of Ari∣minū hath erred, neuer∣thelesse it vvas general which was holden by .60. Byshops was generall, condemned the counsell of Nice. And did erre with Arius, who was before condemned, by the word of God in the said counsell. In like manner the .2. counsell of Ephesus hath erred, with Eutyches, and Dioscorus. The counsell of Carthage in which that holy man Cyprian was present, with .86.The Coun∣cell of Car∣thage in vvhich Saint Cyprian vvas present hath erred. Byshoppes, that is to saye almost all the Byshoppes of Africa, Numidia, and of Mauritania, decreed that Baptisme mini∣stred by the Heritickes, ought not to take place, but that those which haue bene bap∣tised by them should be baptised agayne: The whiche sentence was afterwardes condemned, as it appeareth in the .5. di∣stinction, chapter, Quare. S. Augustine writing against Maximi∣an bishop of the Arians. Lib. 3. Chapter. 14. I ought not to preferre the Councell of Nice, nor of Ariminum, as though I shoulde preferre them before the Scrip∣tures.VVe are not holden by the authori∣tie of Coū∣cels, but by holy scrip∣ture.
For by the authoritie of the same, I am not bounde, neyther thou likewise by the other: But by the authorities of the holy Scriptures, and not of men what soeuer they be. But witnesse vnto both a lyke, as the thing with the thing, the cause with the cause, reason with reason. &c. We ought also to obserue the decrees of Pope Alexander the 3. of Gelasius, of Nicholas the 2. of the Councell of Illybe∣ris, of Toledo, of Carthage, of Chalons, of Calcedonia, & the Lateran, the which haue forbidden to take money and gyftes for the satisfaction of sinnes, for baptisme, for the temples, for the sacramentes and giftes of God. And haue ordayned that none shoulde be promoted and ordained in the Church by money and rewardes, and that he shoulde be holden for an Apostate, and not for an Apostolike, which shall ob∣tayne the seate of Rome, eyther with mo∣ney or fauour. The Councell of Orleans hath deter∣mined, that the poore, the sicke, and the weake, shoulde bee nourished and clothed by the Bishoppes, and that the Monkes shoulde possesse nothing of their owne.
Iohn Gerson in his first part of the exa∣mination of doctrines. The first veritie shoulde be so sure,A lay man vvell instru∣cted in the Scriptures, may be ob∣iected a∣gainst the Councell, or the Pope, if they erre. that euery simple man not authorised, might be so well instructed in the holy Scriptures, that one ought rather to beleeue his asser∣tion in the cause of teaching, than the doc∣trine of the Pope. For it appeareth that rather we should beleeue the Gospell than the Pope. If then such a man doe teache any veritie which is contayned in the Go∣spell, there where the Pope cannot great∣ly erre, it is manifest of whether one ought to preferre the iudgement. By and by af∣terwardes he sayth: If it shoulde happen that there shoulde be a generall Counsell assembled, in which such a man were pre∣sent which is well instructed, in case the greatest part should declyne through ma∣lice or ignorance, to the opposition of the Gospell, such a lay man may be obiected agaynst the sayde generall Counsell. Panormitan in his Chapter, Significasti, extra de electionibus, who was pre∣sent at the Counsell of Ba∣sill, and of Constance. In matters which concerne the fayth,
the saying of a lay man ought to be prefer∣red before that of the Pope, if his saying be more probable, by better authoritie ey∣ther of the olde or newe Testament, than that of the Pope. Thomas of Aquino in the somme, 3. parte. 46. addition 6. article. Bicause that the church is buylded vpon faith and the Sacramentes,Articles of the faith not to be altred. it appertay∣neth not vnto the ministers of the church to make new articles of the faith, or to make newe Sacramentes, or to chaunge or take awaye those that are made: for that is the excellency and puissance which appertay∣neth onely vnto Iesus Christe, which is the foundation of the churche. The counsell of Gangres in Galatia, doth curse those which abide not in the faith of the Lorde, and which doe make e∣uery day newe constitutions. The Canons and Decretals of the Popes in the .9. distinction chapter Noli, and chap. Ego, and chap. Negare, and .24. Q. 1. chapter. Non afferamus. We must holde our selues vnto the holy
Scripture, and not vnto the sayinges of men how holy soeuer they be. Origene vpon the Prophet Ieremy, in the first homilye. It is necessary for vs to call to witnesse the holy Scriptures: for vnto our senses and allegations, without those, one ought not to beleeue. S. Ierome vpon S. Mathewe. That which is spoken without authory∣tie of the Scriptures through the like fa∣cilitie may be despised as it is saide. Saint Augustine vpon S. Iohn. 46. treatise. Chap. 10. Verily in sitting vpon Moyses seate,VVhat it is to sit vpon Moyses seat. if they doe teache the lawe of God, it follo∣weth that God teacheth by them: but if they will teach that which is theirs, heare them not, neyther do them. For truly such people do seeke the things which are their owne, and not of Iesus Christ. S. Cyprian vnto Cecill, 2. booke of his Epistles. 3. Epistle. If you doe whatsoeuer I commaunde you, I will not call you seruauntes,Iohn. 15. but frendes: and also that Christ ought to be onely hearde, the father hath witnessed it
from heauen,Mat. 17. saying: this is my deare sonne, in whome I delite, heare him. Wherefore if it bee so that Christ alone ought to be hearde,Christ alone ought to be hearde. we ought not to haue regarde what that is that others before vs haue thought good to be done: but that which Christ which is before all hath don. For we must not followe the custome of men, but the veritie of God, forasmuch as the Lorde speaketh by Esaye the Pro∣phet, saying:Esay. 29. They doe prayse me highly with their lippes, teaching the commaun∣dements and doctrine of men. And againe in the Gospell,Mat. 15. ye haue made that the com∣maundement of God is without effecte, through your tradition. And therfore, dere brethren, if any of our predecessors either through ignorance, or through simplenesse, hath not obserued and kept that which the Lorde hath taught vs to doe by his exam∣ple, or doctrine,Those vvhi∣che doe re∣iecte the vvorde of God, haue none excuse the same maye be left of through the simplicitie therof, and it may be pardoned him, through the mercie of the Lorde. But it cannot be pardoned vs which are now admonished and instructed of the Lorde. And also we must wryte let∣ters vnto our companions that the lawe of
the Gospell and the doctrine of the Lorde be kept of euery one, and that wee doe not goe backe from that ye Christ hath taught and done. &c. Afterwardes he saithe: If wee bee the priestes of God and of Christe, I doe not finde that we ought to followe any other than God and Christ. Forasmuch as espe∣cially he saith in the Gospell:Iohn. 8. I am the light of the worlde, he that followeth mee shal not walke in darkenesse, but shal haue the light of life. Lactantius Firmianus in the .6. booke of his godly institutions 8. Chapter. We ought not to follow men but God. S. Augustine writing vnto Fortuna∣tus. 198. Epistle. We ought not to holde or esteeme all the disputations of men as canonicall scritures,The vvri∣tings of holy men are not to be prefer∣red before the canoni∣call scrip∣tures. although they haue bene made by learned men, insomuch that it is lawe∣full for vs (sauing the honor of men which is due vnto them) to gainesay or reproue some thinges in their writinges, if perad∣uenture we doe finde that they sauor other∣wyse then the veritie conteyneth, vnder∣stoode
by others, or of vs through the help of God. I am such a one in other mens writings, as I woulde that they shoulde be which doe vnderstand mine. S. Augustine in his Prologue of the .3. booke of the trinitie. Augustine vvoulde not that vvee should obey his vvritings as canonicalObey not my writinges as if they were the canonicall Scriptures, but all that which thou shalt finde in them, beleeue the same without doubting: But giue no farther credit vnto myne than they do accorde and agree with them. In the same booke. I cannot denie, but aswell in my greate workes as in my small workes there are many thinges, which iustly and without a∣ny temeritie might be blamed. S. Augustine in his Epistle vnto S. Ierome .19. Epistle .3. Tome. folio .161. I doe confesse thorowe thy loue, tt I haue learned to beare that honor and reue∣rence only vnto the bookes of the holy Scriptures which are called canonicall.There is no fault in the canonicall scriptures. And I doe beleeue most surely that no Authors of them, writing them haue er∣red: but if any thinges are found in them
the which do seeme to be repugnant to the truth: I doe esteeme it none otherwyse, but that eyther the booke is euill written,Augustines opinion. or that the interpreter hath euil vnderstode that which is saide therein, or els that I doe vnderstande it nothing at all. And as for others, I doe reade them in such sort, that with whatsoeuer holinesse or doctrine they be set and paynted forth, yet I do not thinke that to be true which they saye, bi∣cause that they haue such an opinion, but so farre as they coulde persuade me, eyther by those canonical authors, or by probable reasons which are not disagreing from the truth. And as for thee, my brother, I doe thinke that thou thinkest none otherwise. Yea, I doe esteeme truly that thou woul∣dest not that we shoulde reade thy bookes, as the bookes of the Prophetes and Apo∣stles, which haue written so certainly, that it shoulde be a wicked thing to thinke that they haue erred or fayled in their wry∣ting. S. Augustine in the .112. Epistle writ∣ten vnto Paulinus. I woulde not that thou shouldest follow mine authoritie, thereby to thinke that it
is necessary for thee to beleue it, bicause I haue spoken it: but to the ende that thou beleeue the canonicall scriptures. &c. Saint Ierome vpon the Epistle vnto Titus .1. Chapter. Without authoritie of the Scriptures, babling and scoffing ought not to be be∣leeued. Tertullian in his prescriptions agaynst the heretikes. It is not in our desire or free will, law∣fully to bring in, to chose, or to alledge for witnesse, that that another shall bring in or alledge, for his will and pleasure. For we haue the Apostles of the Lord for authors, who haue brought in nothing for their pleasure, neyther no newe thing, but they haue faythfully taught vnto the people, the discipline & knowledge which they haue receyued of God. S. Augustine of one onely Baptisme in the Epistle vnto Vincent. What is hee that knoweth not the holy scriptures? &c. My brother meddle not a∣gainst so great & heauenly things. For the places are knowen by the Canon lawe of the Bishops.
Saint Augustine writing vnto Vincent, in the .48. Epistle. Gather not togither false accusations a∣gaynst the brethren,VVe ought not to bring the faults of the auncient doctors a∣gainste so great num∣ber of vvit∣nesses of the holy scrip∣tures. of the writings of the Bishops, or of ours: as of Hilarie, or of that vnitie (before that the part of Dena∣tus be deuided or seperated) as of Cypri∣an, or Agrippin, agaynst the heauenlye witnesses, which are in so great number, so cleare, and not to be doubted. First of al, bicause that such kynde of letters ought to be discerned from the authoritie of the ca∣nonicall Scriptures. For we do not read them after that sort, as for to take witnes, to whiche it is by no meanes lawfull to speake agaynst, except peraduenture they haue perceyued any thing otherwyse than the truth requireth. Immediatlye after∣warde he sayeth: But neuerthelesse let vs walke in that in which we are come vnto, (that is to saye) in that waye whiche is Christ. For the integritie and the know∣ledge of letters, of any Bishop (howe no∣ble and vertuous so euer he be) cannot bee kept as the canonicall Scripture is kept, through or by so many letters, orders, and tongues, and through the susception of
the ecclesiasticall celebration. Against the which, there are some notwithstanding, who vnder the name of the Apostles, haue inuented and imagined many things: ne∣uerthelesse, it hath bene in vayne, bicause that it is to well proued, celebrated, and knowen. &c. S. Augustine in his .2. booke of Baptis∣me against the Donatistes 3. Chapter. You haue accustomed to put before vs the letters of Cyprian, the sentence of Cy∣prian, wherefore doe you take the authori∣tie of Cyprian, for your schisme, and do re∣peale and keepe backe his example for to trouble the churche? And what is he but that he knoweth that the holy canonicall scripture, aswel of the olde testament as of the newe, is kept within his limits which are certaine, and that the same is to bee preferred before all the writinges of the Byshoppes that are past, insomuch that we must nothing doubt thereof neyther di∣spute, to wete, whither that all that which is written in the same be true. But it is lawefull to rebuke the writinges of the by∣shops which haue bene written or whiche
they haue written sithence the confirmati∣on of the canonicall scriptures, or by word, peraduenture more full of wisedome of e∣uery one better instructed in such things, or by greater authoritie of other byshops: or through the wisedome of the wyse, or by the counsels, if peraduenture they haue swarued in any thinge from the truth, and also the counsels which are done, through out euery region or prouince, without all doubtes ought to giue place vnto the au∣thoritye of the first counselles whiche are made through out all Christendome, and the first & generall determinations, ought often times to be amended by those that follow after, when through any experience of thinges that which was secrete is de∣clared, and that which is hid is made kno∣wen, without any kinde of pryde, which is no sacriledge, not hauing a necke puffed vp with pride, without any contention or enuye, with holynesse, humilitie, with the catholicke peace, with christian charitie. Irenaeus in his .3. booke .4. chap. What would it be if there were any di∣sputation or debate moued, of anye lighte question, must wee not haue our recourse
vnto the moste auncient churches, whiche were in the time of the Apostles, and to take of them that which is cleare and cer∣tayne, for to resolue the debate or question put foorth? S. Augustine of baptisme against the Donatistes .3. booke .9. Chapter. Honoratus Attuca hath saide, forasmuch as Christe is the truth, we ought rather to followe the truth, then custome. The Byshop Castus in the 5. Chapter. Custome ought not to be follo∣vved.He that presumeth to follow custome, in condemning the truth, eyther he is enuy∣ous or wicked towardes the brethren, vn∣to whom the truth is reueled, or he is in∣gratefull towardes God, through whose inspiration the church is instructed. Iere. 7.Trust not in false lying wordes, saying: here is the Temple of the Lorde, here is the Temple of the Lorde, here is the tem∣ple of the Lorde. &c But take heede howe ye doe trust in coūsels that beguile you and doe you no good. Mat. 17. 2. Pet. 1.God hath witnessed of his sonne saying: This is my deare sonne, in whome I de∣light
here him. The Lorde hath saide:Deut. 18. Deut. 17. But the prophet which shall presume to speake ought in my name, whiche I commaunded not to speake, and he that speaketh in the name of strange Gods, the same prophet shall dye. Moyses saide,Deut. 12. ye shall doe after nothing that we doe here this daye, euery man what seemeth him good in his owne eyes. Moyses saide, ye shall doe afer nothing that we doe here this daye,Deut. 12. euery man what seemeth him good in his owne eyes. Ye shall put nothing vnto ye word which I commaunde you,Deut. 4. Apoc. 22. neyther doe oughte there from, that ye may keepe the com∣maundementes of the Lorde your God which I commaunde you. Beholde I haue taught you ordinances and lawes such as the Lorde my God commaunded me. S. Augustine writing vnto Orosus against the Priscillanistes and Origini∣stes .11. Chapter. The doctrine of man seemeth to haue reason so long as it is not compared vnto the heauenly knowledge:Mans doc∣trine hath great appa∣rance in it selfe, but compared to the truth, is confoun∣ded. but when the lye approcheth to the truth, it is by and by deuoured and destroyed, as a sparke of fire, and all the teachinges of faulshod and ly∣inges the whiche nowe are called Idolles.
Forasmuch as they are made, they shal be altogither broken. Iohn. 3.He that commeth from an hie, is aboue all: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earthe: he that commeth from heauen is aboue all. And what hee hath seene and heard, that he testifieth: but no man receiueth his testimony, how∣beit he that hath receiued his testimonye, hath sealed that God is true. For he whom God hath sent, speaketh ye words of God. Iohn. 5.Iesus Christ saith. And his wordes haue ye not abiding in you: for whom hee hath sent, him ye beleeue not. Search the scrip∣tures, for in them ye thinke ye haue eter∣nall life: and they are they which testifie of me. Iohn. 7.My doctrine is not mine but his that sent me. If anye man will doe his will, hee shall knowe of the doctrine, whither it be of God, or whither I speake of my selfe. He that speaketh of him selfe seeketh his owne prayse: but he that speaketh his prayse that sent him, the same is true, and no vnrighteousnesse is in him. Iohn. 8.He that sent me is true: and I speake in the world, those thinges which I haue
hearde of him. If ye continue in my wordes,Iohn. 8. then are ye my disciples, and shall know the truth, & the truth shall restore you to libertie. &c. I speake that I haue seene with my fa∣ther: and ye doe that which ye haue seene with your father. Verily, verily, I saye vnto you, if a man keepe my saying, hee shall neuer see death. My sheepe heare my voyce,Iohn. 10. and I know them, and they followe me. I haue not spoken of my selfe:Iohn. 12. but the father which sent me, gaue me a comman∣dement what I shoulde saye, and what I shoulde speake. And I knowe that this commaundemente is lyfe euerlasting. Whatsoeuer I speake therefore, euen as the father bade me, so I speake. The wordes that I speake vnto you,Iohn. 14. I speake not of my selfe. If ye loue me, kepe my commaundements. He that hath my commaundements and keepeth them, the same is he that loueth me. He that loueth me not, keepeth not my sayings, and the wordes which ye heare, are not mine, but the father which sent me. Many other signes also did Iesus in ye pre∣senceIohn. 20.
of his disciples, which are not writ∣ten in this booke. These are written that ye might beleeue that Iesus is Christ the sonne of God, and that in beleeuing yee might haue lyfe through his name. Galat. 1.Though that wee, or an aungell from heauen, preach vnto you other wayes than that whiche we haue preached vnto you, holde him as accursed. As we sayd before, so say I nowe agayne, if any man preache vnto you other wayes than that yee haue receyued, holde him accursed. Iohn. 4.The woman that was a Samaritane, sayde vnto Iesus, I wote well Messias shall come, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell vs all things. Act. 20.I haue kept nothing backe, but haue shewed you all the counsell of God. Chrysostome in the first homilie vpon the Epistle vnto Titus. The Gospell doth contayne all things, the things present, and things to come, honor, pietie, and fayth. &c. Saint Hilarie vpon Saint Mathew, 14. Canon. Mat. 15.Euery plant which my heauenly father hath not planted, shall be plucked vp by
the rootes, that is to say:All mans traditions ought to be plucked vp by the rotes. all mans tradi∣tions ought to be plucked vp, by the fauor of the whiche they haue transgressed the commaundement of the lawe. And there∣fore he called them the blinde leaders, pro∣mising the waye of euerlasting lyfe, the which they see not themselues: and sayth that the falling hedlong of those blind lea∣ders and their conductors, is common. S, Augustine vpon S. Iohn .49. trea∣tise .9. Chapter. Although that the Lorde Iesus Christe hath done many things which haue not bene written, as also his owne Euange∣listes doe witnesse it, that the Lord Iesus Christ hath sayde and done many things whiche are not written, neuerthelesse, the things haue bene chosen to be written, whiche were thought sufficient for the saluation of the beleeuers. Of the holy scripture, and howe it is lawfull for all men to reade it. HAppie is he that readeth,Apoca. 1. and happie are they that heare the wordes of this
Prophecie, and keepe those things which are written therein: for the tyme is at hande. Luk. 11.Iesus Christ sayeth: Happie are they that heare the worde of God, and kepe it. Psal. 119.Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my feete, and a light vnto my pathes. Eccle. 1.Gods worde in the heygth is the well of wisedome, and the euerlasting commaun∣dements are the entrance of hir. Iere. 15.When I had founde thy wordes, I did eate them vp greedilye: they haue made my heart ioyfull and glad. Ephes. 6.Take the helmet of saluation, and the sworde of the spirite, which is the worde of God. S. Augustine of the Citie of God .19. booke .19. Chapter. VVe ought not to for∣bid any man to knovve the truth.It is forbidden no man to knowe the truth, that which he ought to doe through honest repast and recreation: howe much time doe men and women lose daylye, in going and comming, playing and scof∣fing, in detracting and beholding playes and follies.
Chrysostome vpon S. Iohn in the end of the .16. homilye. I praye you marke well one thing which is true, is it not a thing full of absurdite that a surgian, a shoomaker, a weauer and generally all men of occupation, euery one of them doe striue for the profession of their arte and science, and that a christian kno∣weth not howe to make an account or a reason of his religion? It is very true that when the occupation is not knowen it is but a losse of mony, but the despising of christian religion bringeth with it the losse of the soule, and yet neuerthelesse we doe trauayle through so greate misery and through so great madnesse, that we doe put therein all our heart and cogitation: but the thinges which are necessary for vs, and which are as most strong holdes of our saluation, we esteeme them nothing at all.The igno∣rance of the Christians is the cause that the infi∣dels doe not acknovvlege their error. That same is that which letteth the Gentils to knowe their error. Forasmuch then as they doe ground them selues vpon lyinges, for to doe all that, that they doe, and for to defend the ignominye and sclan∣der of their teachinges, we which doe o∣bey and serue the truth, dare not open the
mouth for to defend that which is oures. What letteth them that they cannot con∣demne our great imbecillitie and weake∣nesse, and that they should not suspect vs of some disceyt and follye? That they doe not speake euill of Christe, as of a lyar, whiche by his fraude and disceyt hath a∣bused a great multitude? we are the cause of that blasphemy: This is commaunded vs of Saint Peter.1. Pet. 3. VVe ought to be readie to giue a reason of our fayth vnto those that aske vs. Colos. 3. For he saith, let vs be ready alwayes to giue an answere to eue∣ry man that asketh vs a reason of the hope that is in vs. Let the word of Christ dwel in you plen∣teously. But what do they which are more fooles then madde answere vnto the same, blessed be euery simple soule, and he that walketh surely. But this is the cause of all euilles,Prou. 10. Common vvordes to be simple. that many knowe not to bring wit∣nesses of the Scriptures in due time: for we must not vnderstand in this place here the simple for the foole, and for him that dothe vnderstande nothing, but for him which is not crafty and malitious. For if we should vnderstand it so, it should be su∣perfluous to say,Mat. 10. be wyse as serpents and innocent as doues.
S. Ierom in his Prologue vpon the Prophet Sophony. If they had knowen that Huldah did prophecie when men held their peace,4. Reg. 22 Iudges. 4. and that Debora did iudge and prophecy, who ouercame the enemies of Israell when Barack was a frayde, and that Iudith and Hester (in figure of the church) killed the aduersaryes and deliuered Israell whiche were like to perishe,Iudith. 13 Hester. 7. they would neuer haue played the noddyes behinde my back (that is to saye) they would not mocke me behind my backe. And a little after he saith, it suffiseth me to saye in the ende of the prologue that our Lorde Iesus Christ appeared first vnto the women, and they were Apostles of the Apostles, to that end that the men should be ashamed that they haue not sought that, which that same brit∣tle or frayle kinde hath already founde. Chrysostome vpon S. Iohn .3. homi∣lie .4. Chapter. Let vs then bee ashamed,The sloth∣fulnesse of Christians in not rea∣ding dili∣gentlye the vvorde of God. that the wyfe that had fiue husbandes, and a Samari∣tane, was so diligent to learne, who ney∣ther for the time of the day, nor for any o∣ther businesse coulde not be drawne from
the doctrine of Christ. But as for vs, we are not only far of frō enquiring any thing of that which appertayneth vnto the erudi∣tion of heauēly things, but also we are, as it were assured in all things, & we do care no more of the one, than of the other, and therefore wee are ignorant of all things. What is he among vs, I pray you, who being come into his house, doth go about to doe anye worke appertayning vnto a Christian?A great number of those vvhich doe cal them¦selues chri∣stians, haue oftener the tables and dyce in their hands, than holy bokes. What is he that will declare the sense and meaning of the scriptures? Trulye none. Wee doe finde oftentimes Dyce and Cardes, but verye seldome ty∣mes bookes: and if any haue them, they doe keepe them sure in their chambers, as though they had none. Or else all their de∣lyte and studie is to haue fayre and plea∣sāt couerings, & painted or goodly figures of letters, not for to read them, nor vse thē, but for to shewe forth their riches and am∣bition, and studie none other thing. Vaine glorie is so great, as I doe not heare any ambitious persons to vnderstād any boke, but onely to esteme letters of golde. What gayne commeth thereof I pray you? The Scriptures are not giuen vnto vs, for to
haue them only in bookes,Prou. 7. but to that ende we shoulde print and engraue them in our heartes.Scriptures to be grauen in our harts, and the bo∣kes diligent∣ly read ouer. Iere. 31. Wherefore such hauing and kee∣ping of bookes, is of the ambition of the Iewes, vnto whom the commandements were giuen in letters. But vnto vs it is not so, vnto whome they are giuen in the tables of the heart of charitie. I doe not forbyd to haue bokes, but I doe admo∣nishe them, and instantly pray them, that we may so haue them, that neuerthelesse, as wee maye rehearse often times in oure myndes, both the letters and the sense, in such sort that thereby we may be cleane. For if the diuell dare not enter into an house where the Gospell is, muche lesse shall he touch his soule, which by continu∣all reading hath that doctrine familiar and common. Sanctifie then the soule and the bodye,Psal. 1. and that shall come if thou haue alwayes the Gospell in thy heart, and in thy tong. S, Ierome in his Proheme vpon the first booke of his Exposition vnto the Ephesians .9. Tome. All words and all reasons are conteined in the holy bookes, by the which also wee
knowe God, and forgette not the cause, wherefore wee are created. I doe muche maruayle, that some haue bene giuen so muche vnto foolishnesse, and to slothful∣nesse, not willing to learne the most excel∣lent things, yea, they haue esteemed and doe esteeme worthie of rebuke and blame all those whiche haue such a studie: vnto whome although I coulde aunswere more straitly and briefely, leauing them eyther angrie or appeased. I doe say that it is a great deale better to reade the scriptures, than to giue themselues after riches, for to gather and heape them vp.1. Tim. 6. Chrysostome vpon Genesis .6. Tome. 5. Homilie .1. Chapter. Neighbours ought to take holye scripture in their handes to sprinkle their soules.I desire you that wee bee not negligent vnto our owne saluation, yea rather that our worde be of spirituall things, and let vs take in our handes Gods bookes, and calling togither our neyghbors, sprinkle with heauenlye wordes oure owne sel∣ues, and of the assistentes, that thereby we may chase and driue away the treasons and assaultes of the diuell.
S. Ierome in his first Tome vnto Mar∣cellus, perswading him to goe to Bethleem. In the towne where Iesus was borne, there are none but rusticall people, where ye shal here nothing but singing of psalms in euery place: the ploughman holding the plough by the tayle singeth Alleluya: The mower to passe away the time sin∣geth psalmes, the Vine dresser with his hooke cutting the vine, singeth some thing of Dauid, these are the songes of this pro∣uince, these are (as we say commonly) the songes of loue. Athanasius vpon the Epistle vnto the Ephesians. .6. Chapter. Ye fathers moue not your children to wrathe. &c.Ephes. 6. he addeth the cause of the obey∣ing of the fathers commaundement, and sheweth vnto the parents how they should make their children obedient and ready to doe that that they are bydde. If thou wylt (saith he) that thy children doe obey thee, accustome them vnto heauenly wordes, and saye not that it belongeth vnto the Monkes to vnderstand holy letters: For truely it is the office rather of euery chri∣stian,
and chefelye of him which medleth and hath to doe with the affayres and bu∣sinesse of this worlde. And the more that he hath neede of the greater healpes, the greater neede hath he to vnderstand it: for he is more prouoked with the assaults of this world. This then is greatly for thy profite,Reading of the scrip∣tures ma∣keth chil∣dren obe∣dient. that thy children may heare & read holy Scriptures, for thereby they shall learne to honor father and mother: But thou doest the contrary, thou bringest vp thy children in the doctrine of panims and gentiles, of whiche they shall learne moste wicked thinges, the which shall not be so when they are instructed in the heauenlye Scriptures. Primasius (Byshop of Vtica in Africa, disciple of S. Augustine) vpon the Epistle to the Collos. 3. chapter. Collos. 3. The lay peo¦ple ought to haue the ho∣ly scriptures.Let the worde of Christ dwell in you plenteously. &c. Here is most amply decla∣red, that the laye people ought also to haue the word of God, not only simply, but also aboundantly and plenteously, and they ought also to admonishe and teach the one the other.
Athanasius vpon the .3. Chapter of the Collossians. Let the worde of Christe dwell in you plenteously in all wisedome:Collos. 3. He declareth the way by the which we may giue thanks in all things. For if the worde of God (sayth he) dwell in you, that is to say, the doctrine or heauenly commaundementes and admonitions,The holy scriptures cause vs to beare all tri∣bulations paciently. by the which he instruc∣teth vs to despyse this lyfe, we cannot greatly esteeme earthly riches. Truly we shoulde not fall or bee ouercome with to grieuous things, but to beare all things stoutly and manfully rendring thankes vnto God, although there happen aduersi∣ties. For he hath not sayde, let the word of God be in you simply, but let it dwell in you plenteously. For if we doe abound in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, we shall easly beare trybulations, paines and calamities, and all other manner of euill. Theophilacte vpon the .6. chap. to the Ephesians. If thou wylt (saith he) that thy children should obey thee, instruct them in the word of our Lorde, and saye not that it dooth be∣long
onely vnto the Monkes to reade the Scriptures. For it belongeth aswell vnto euery christian, and cheefely vnto all those which haue to doe in this worlde. S. Ierome vpon the .6. chap. vnto the Ephesians. Little chil∣dren ought to be taught the holye scriptures.If he doe commaund the Ephesians be∣ing laye men, and vnto many that are oc∣cupyed in the businesse and affaires of this life (as we see among the people) to teach their children in all discipline, and admo∣nition of the Lorde: what oughte wee to thinke or iudge of the priestes? of whose order he hath written vnto his disciple Ti∣mothe saying, hauing children subiect in all reuerence. &c. S. Ambrose vpon the .2. Epistle vnto Timothe. 3. chapter. 2. Tim. 3.All scripture giuen by inspiration of God. &c. It is manifeste that all scripture of which God is said to be the author, to be profitable: For it is giuen to that ende that it may profite the ignorant and amend the disformed creatures, drawing the wic∣ked into all good workes: For in profit∣ting a little and little to the newe man, it will make him the man of God.
Chrysostome vpon the .2. Epistle vnto Timothe .3. chapter. Thou hast (saith he) through me the Scriptures, if thou doest desire to learne any thing, of them thou mayest learne it: If he did write those thinges vnto Timo∣the who was full of the holy ghoste, howe much more ought we to thinke that it is spoken vnto vs. Lactantius Firmianus in the Proeme of his heauenly institutions. We which haue receiued the Sacra∣ment of true religion, for asmuch as the truthe is reueled vnto vs, and that we may followe God the doctor of sapyence and wysedome, let vs call vnto that heauenlye banket all men vniuersally without anye difference eyther of kinde or age: for there is no meate sweeter and more delectable vnto the soule, then the knowledge of the truthe.Euery one may dravve out of the holy scrip∣tures that vvhich is needefull for his soules health. S. Augustine in the .6. chapter of the vtilitie and profyte of beleeuing. All that which is in the Scriptures is high and heauenly, all is truth and moste fitte and holsome doctrine (beleeue me) for
to fill and satisfie the spirites, in such sorte that euery one may drawe out that which is sufficient for him, so that he drawe it deuoutly and holily, according as true re∣ligion requireth. Augustine of true religion .51. chapt. about the letter E. In forsaking (sayeth he) the open and Poeticall trifles and foolishnesse, let vs feede and comfort our spirite, in treating and considering of holy scriptures. The which spirite being wearye and to muche ouercome with the heate, hunger, and thirst of vayne curiositie, and things to no purpose, desireth to bee refreshed and comforted with vain fantasies, as of good∣ly and daintie meates. Chrysostome vpon S. Iohn 5. Tome .10. Homilie, first Chapter. VVe ought to teach one another in Gods vvord.Before I doe come to intreate of the wordes of the Gospell, I would request of you one thing, which I woulde not haue you to despyse. For I doe not demaunde of you heauie things, nor such as are hard to be done, neyther that which is onely profitable to me, but a great deale more to you. What is then the request that I de∣maunde?
That one day in the weeke, or at the least vpon the Sundayes and Festi∣uall dayes ye be diligent to haue in youre handes before the preaching the Gospell, which we doe reade vnto you, and to re∣peate them often in your houses, searching diligently the vnderstanding thereof, and noting that which is easie or obscure and harde in them, and that which seemeth to haue contrarietie, yet notwithstanding hath not: and after that ye haue through∣ly examined it, bee very attentiue to those Sermons, by whiche meane shall come great profite both to you and to me. For I shall haue no great labor to declare vnto you the vertue and efficacie of the gospell, so that the sentence before be made easy by you in your house. And you shal be a great deale more wyse, not onely to heare and vnderstande, but to teach others. For there are a great manye that heare,VVhat is the cause that manye doe profite so little in the scrip∣tures. and take great payne to keepe all the wordes of the Gospell, and all that wee doe interprete vpon them, yet neuerthelesse they profite not very much, although wee shoulde re∣mayne there with them a yeare. Where∣fore? Bicause they giue not themselues
vnto our sermons but a small time, & that onely in the Churche. And if anye excuse themselues by reason of their businesse, and occupations of publike and particular things: First of all, they erre very much, chiefly in that they vnderstande so manye things, and are so much giuen vnto tem∣porall affayres and businesse, as they doe nothing at all studie on the things whiche are moste necessarie,No excuse from rea∣ding of scripture. and doe alledge a vayne excuse, and of no force. For one may rather accuse in this matter, the long conuersation of frendes, the long sitting in the theaters and gasing places, the long time that men spende in beholding the running of horses, in which vayne things they consume and spende manye times a whole daye, and the which neuerthelesse, they excuse not themselues by reason of their occupations. Furthermore, ye are to diligent in things that are vyle, and no∣thing worth. But when ye muste vnder∣stande heauenly things, ye esteeme them vnprofitable, and of no price: insomuch as yee make none account to bestowe on them anye little care and diligence. And howe are they worthie of victuals, and to
see the sunne, which make so small account of it. The negligent people haue yet ano∣ther excuse, but very euill, yt is to say, that they haue no bokes. That should be a ridi∣culous thing to answere here for the rich, but bicause I doe thinke that many poore men doe vse manye times that excuse,An admo∣nition vnto the poore people to haue the ho∣ly bookes. I will a little speake vnto them, and aske them whether they haue not all the instru∣ments and tooles that belong to their arts and sciences. Although that pouertie let∣teth or hindreth them greatlye to buye them: It is then a foolishe thing to excuse themselues through pouertie, and to be diligent in lacking nothing necessarie for their occupations and sciences, yet to ex∣cuse themselues vppon their occupations and pouertie, in things whereof commeth vnto them so great vtilitie and profite. Augustine in the .56. Sermon vnto the brethren being in sorrowe and care.He ought to feare vvhich vvill not reade the Scriptures, to be tor∣mēted vvith eternall paynes. He which maketh none account to reade the holy Scriptures, sent from paradise, ought to feare, yt he do not only peraduen∣ture receiue eternall retributions and re∣wardes, but also that he escape not eternall
paines. For it is so dangerous not to reade the heauenly precepts, that the Prophet with great mourning doth crye,Esay. 5. therefore commeth my folke into captiuitie bicause they haue no vnderstanding: for he that is ignorant shall be ignorante still.1. Cor. 14. Without doubt he whiche maketh none accounte in this world to seeke God by heauenly rea∣ding, God will scorne to knowe him in the eternall and euerlasting blessednesse: We ought greatly to feare with the fiue foolish virgines (who came after the gates were shutte) when Christe saide vnto them,Math. 25. I knowe you not, depart from me ye wor∣kers of iniquitie. What is that to saye, I knowe you not, I knowe you not? Howe doth he not knowe those whom he sendeth to the fire? not without cause both of them. For as he saide not long sithence, those whiche will not vnderstande in reading in this worlde, God will not knowe them in the daye of iudgement. We ought also to heare not negligently, but diligently, and with great feare that which is written in the prouerbes of Salomon,Pro. 28. hee that tur∣neth (saith he) awaye his eare from hea∣ring the lawe, his prayer shal be abhorred.
He that woulde be hearde of God, oughte first to heare God:Hee that vvoulde be hearde of God, ought first to heare God. for howe would he that God should heare him, considering that he dispiseth so much as he maketh none ac∣count to reade his holy commaundements And that, what is it my brethren? Some christians yea and which is worse some of the clergye, when they would bring them into the right waye doe ordaine that bread wine and oyle and other necessarye things of coste be prepared for them. And foras∣muche as euery one prepareth so manye thinges for his terrestriall iorney, for to nurrishe his fleshe, wherefore hath he no care or desyre to reade so excellent a booke of whiche his soule shoulde be refreshed here eternally. What soeuer thinges are written afore time are written for our learning,Rom. 15. that we through pacience, and comfort of the scrip∣tures, might haue hope. To all you that be at Rome:Rom. 1. he hath written vnto all, that that he did write. These thinges were written to put vs in remembrance,1. Cor. 10. whom the endes of ye world are come vpon.
Saint Ierome writing vnto Caelantia a gentlewoman of Rome. You demaund and redemand very care∣fully and earnestly, that I should describe for you a certayne rule of the holy Scrip∣tures, to whiche you shoulde addresse and leade the course of your life, to the end that knowing the will of the Lorde, among the honors of this worlde,The maried vvife ought to be an ex∣ample to all those of hir house, in holynesse of life and con∣uersation. and the pleasure of riches, you should rather haue a heape and great store of good manners. And to that end that you being maryed may please not onely your husbande, but also him whiche hath permitted maryage. And againe, first of all that the authority of the husband be kept, and that all his family doe learne of you, how greatly they ought to honor him, the Lorde declareth through seruice and great obedience by humilitie, for the more you honor him, the more you shalt be honored: for the Apostle saith: The husband is the wiues heade.Ephe. 5. 1. Cor. 11. For the bodie hath more ornaments vpon the head, than all the residue of the whole parts. Againe S. Ierome writing vnto the sayde Caelantia. Let all excuse of error cease, the filthie
the filthie and dishonest reioycing in sinne,The vvicked lyfe of ano∣ther to co∣uer ours, ought not to be alled∣ged. let them be put awaye: for if we will ex∣cuse and defende our selues by the exam∣ple of the multitude, reciting many times the vices of others for our consolation and comfort, & saying that we haue none whō we may followe, we doe nothing. We are sent to the example of him, who, we doe all confesse, ought to be followed. And there∣fore the chiefest care is to knowe the hea∣uenly lawe, by the which thou mayest see the examples of the saints, as if they were present: Learne by the counsell of the same what we ought to do, & what to auoid. For he helpeth greatly to iustice (that is to say increaseth vertues) that filleth his spirite and mynde with heauenly wordes, and whiche hath alwayes in his heart that which he desireth to fulfill by works. &c. Immediatly after he sayth: Let the ho∣lye Scriptures bee then alwayes in thy handes, and continually in thy thought, and thinke it not sufficient for thee to re∣member, or to haue in mynde the com∣maundementes of God, and not fulfilling them by workes. But knowe them, to the ende you may learne that which ought to
be done. For before God they are not righteous which heare the lawe:Rom. 2. but the doers of the lawe shall be iustified. Truly the fielde of the heauenly lawe is muche, and without measure enlarged, the which doth shyne with many witnesses of truth, and as with a certayne heauenlye flower feedeth and nourisheth the spirite of him that readeth it, with a marueylous delite: All which things you shall knowe to be ve∣ry good to keepe iustice. S. Ierome writing vnto the Ladie Gau∣dentia, of the bringing vp of hir daughter Pacantull. Hovve vve ought to bring vp the yong daugh¦ters in rea∣ding.When the little & yong damsel shal come vnto seauen yeares of age, and that she be∣ginneth to be shamefast, to knowe when she woulde keepe silence, and to doubt of that that she ought to speake. Let hir then learne by heart the Psalmes, and vnto twelue yeares, that shee doe make a trea∣sure in hir hart of the bokes of Salomon, of the Gospels, of the Apostles and Pro∣phetes. Agayne, writing vnto another good Ladie called Leta, exhorting hir to in∣struct hir daughter from the cradle in the
holy scriptures, he willeth hir to loue the godly bookes, in steade of precious stones and silke, in which bookes, let not the co∣uers being embrodered with diuers co∣lours please hir, but the erudition distinct and corrected according to fayth: Let hir learne first the Psalter, and through such songs, that shee doe withdrawe hir selfe from the worlde: Let hir be taught to liue vertuously in the Prouerbes of Salomon. And that shee doe accustome hirselfe to de∣spyse and contemne worldlye things in Ecclesiasticus.The cano∣nicall bokes. That she doe followe the example of vertue and pacience in Iob. That she doe learne the Gospell, not let∣ting it go out of hir handes. That she wil∣linglye learne the Actes and Epistles of the Apostles. And when she hath enriched hir heart with suche riches, to learne by heart the Prophetes, and the bookes of Moyses, the bookes of the Kings, Para∣lipomenon, Esdras, also Hester, and last of all the Canticles of Salomon, called Cantica canticorum. For if she should read them at the beginning, it might hurt hir, vnderstanding not the holye songs of the spirituall mariages, vnder carnall words.
That she doe auoide all bookes that are apocrypha or hidden. That shee haue al∣wayes in hir handes the workes of Cy∣prian, Athanasius, and Hilary. S. Ierome in his Proeme of his commen∣taries vpon Esay vnto Eustachius. I giue vnto thee that which I doe owe thee, obeying the commaundementes of Christe,Iohn. 5. whiche saithe, seeke diligently the Scriptures, seeke and you shall finde, that it be not sayde vnto me as it was said vnto the Iewes,Christ is the vertue of God. you doe erre knowing not the Scriptures and the vertue of God and the wysedome of God, and hee that knoweth not the Scriptures, knoweth not the vertue of God, nor his wisedome. Igno∣rance of the Scriptures, is ignorance of God. Chrysostome in his .3. Sermon of Lazarus. I haue tolde you many times, before nowe whereof we ought to speake, to the ende that in the meane season you maye take the booke, and consider it diligent∣ly, and after that you haue vnderstoode that whiche shall be saide, and that whiche shall remayne to be declared, you shall
make your spirites more instructed & redy to heare the thing spoken of. I doe exhort you and wil not cease to exhort you alwais to be attentife, not only to that which shall be spoken here: but also when you shall be in your houses, alwayes giue good eare to the holy Scriptures, which I haue not ceased to pricke forwarde cheefely those which haue bene with me, and that none say vnto me his wordes are colde,The excuses that the temporall people doe make, to a∣uoyde from reading the holy scrip∣tures. there are many things smally to be esteemed: I am an aduocate: I am let with pub∣licke affaires: I haue an occupation: I haue a wyfe: I doe bring vp my children: I haue charge of my familie: I am a temporall man, it belongeth not to me to reade the Scriptures, but for those that haue forsaken the worlde, whiche dwell a∣boue the mountaynes, which chastly leade a solitary life. What saiest thou O thou man? doth it not belong vnto thee to reade the Scriptures, bicause thou art let and hindred with businesse and innumerable cares? Therefore the more thou haddeste neede to reade them then they. For those haue not so much neede of the ayde and helpe of the Scriptures as thou
which art tossed through the middes of the waues of businesse troubles, and cares: for truely the MonkesMonkes vvere solita∣rie people, vvho not∣vvithstan∣ding did lead a com∣mon life, not as the Monkes at this day. and those that dwell in solitary places which liue without sute of lawe and other businesse, and which dwell in the desertes, haue none acquaintance with any man, but studye philosophy in moste peaceable tranquillitie with safetie, and haue the fruition of most safe thinges. On the contrary we (as in the middest of the sea) tossed with innumerable sinnes, haue alwayes neede of the perpetuall and continuall solace and comfort of the scrip∣tures. They are very farre of from the combat, and therefore they doe not receiue many strokes and woundes, but thou bi∣cause thou art still in the battayle, and that thou doest receiue many woundes, thou hast the greater neede of remedy. For thy wyfe doth prouoke thee, and thy sonne doth make thee sad, and doth styrre thee vp to anger, and thy enemy goeth a∣boute to circumuent and deceiue thee, and thy freende doth beare thee enuye and ha∣tred, & thy neighbour doth persecute thee, and thy companion doth deceiue thee, and many times the Iudge doth threaten thee,
and pouertie doth molest and greeue thee, the losse of the thinges in thy house dooth make thee sorowfull, and prosperitie ma∣keth thee proude, and aduersitie draweth thee awaye: to conclude diuers occasions and necessitie of cares, troubles, sorrowe, boasting, pride, doe compasse and inui∣rone thee on euery side, and rounde about innumerable dartes doe flye, for whiche thinges it is necessary to take incessantly the weapons and armor of the Scripture. Acknowledge thē that thou walke through the pinnacles (that is to say the most high places) of the citie. For the concupiscences of the fleshe doe eleuate themselues more sharply against those which liue amongest the multitude of men, whom the beauty of the face and the comlynesse of the bodye conceiued through looking on and disho∣nest wordes which entre in at the eares, doe trouble muche. And the harmonious and pleasant songes doe weaken often times the constancy of the spirite. But to what ende doe I recyte this? The sauor of the sweete smelles (which seemeth to be a thing more vile then all that) comming from those women whiche dwell at the
stewes for gayne in playing the whores, doth leade vs captife and ouercommeth vs by only meeting them: so many things there be which doe assayle our soule: And therefore we haue neede of heauenly reme∣dyes, not aswell to heale the hurtes wee receiued, as for to keepe vs from them, that they doe not assault and afflict vs a∣gaine, but to auoyde and giue the repoulse through the continual reading of the scrip∣tures, to the darts of the diuell comming a farre. For if we be alwayes hurt & take no remedy, what hope of health shall we haue: Doest thou not see the workers of mettal, goldsmythes, coyners, and all those which doe exercise any occupacion, to haue all the instrumentes of their occupacion readye and to lacke none? Although that honger constrayneth them, and pouertie doth af∣flict them, they had rather to suffer all thinges then to sel any instrument of their occupacion for to nurrish them, yea many had rather to borrowe mony vpon vsurye, then to lay to gage any little instrument of their science or occupacion, and for a good cause, for they doe knowe that after that they haue solde it, the occupacion
shoulde be vnprofitable, and all the foun∣dation of their gayne taken away: but in hauing them, it may be that in time they will paye that they haue borowed of ano∣ther, in vsing alwayes their occupation: But if they doe sell them to other before they haue payde that they doe owe, they haue not whereby to excogitate or inuent any thing to helpe their hunger and po∣uertie. Truly it behoueth vs to be of such courage: for euen as to them the Ham∣mers, Anuiles, and Tongs, are instru∣ments of their Artes,Euen as the instruments of arte for to gayne the lyfe, euen so are the boo∣kes of the Apostles for the lyfe of our soules. euen so the bookes of the Apostles and Prophets, are instru∣ments of the Arte and waye of saluation, and all Scripture being heauenly inspi∣red, is profitable. And euen as they finishe all that they doe take in hande to doe by those instruments, euen so truly by those bookes, we frame our soule, and amende and correct it when it is wicked, and re∣nue it when it is waxen olde. For those can but onely by their Arte giue formes and fashions to things, for they cannot chaunge nor alter the substaunce of the mettall, neyther make golde of siluer, but onely giue them their figures to be like.
But it is not so with thee, but thou mayst doe more, for thou mayest sometime of a vessell of wood make a vessell of golde: of which thing S. Paule is witnesse,2. Tim. 2. spea∣king after this maner: In a great house are not onely vessels of gold, and of siluer, but also of woode, and of earth, some for honour, and some for dishonour. But if a man purge himselfe from such fellowes, he shall be a vessell sanctified vnto honor, meete for the Lord, and prepared vnto all good works. Wherfore let vs not be neg∣ligent to buye vs bookes, that we receyue not woundes in our heartes, and let vs not lay vp our gold in the earth, but let vs furnishe our selues with a treasure of spi∣rituall bookes. Truly when that golde a∣boundeth greatly, then it deceyueth great∣ly those which possesse it: but great store of bookes gotten togither, doe bring great vtilitie vnto those that haue them, euen as weapons in the roial assemblies: although that none doe vse them, yet neuerthelesse they giue great assurance vnto them which dwell in the house where they are, when neyther theeues, nor breakers of wals, nor anye wicked persons, dare not assayle the
house. Euen so in any house where these spirituall bokes shall be,The profite that com∣meth vnto vs of the ho∣ly bookes. from them all the force of the deuill is driuen awaye, and great consolation and comfort commeth vnto those that dwell there: for the onely beholding of bookes maketh vs the slower to sinne. And although that we haue done some things that are prohibited, and haue defiled our selues: the conscience doth con∣demne vs more sharplye, when wee are come vnto the house, and haue behelde the bookes, and are made slower to committe at another time such things agayne. If we doe persist in holynesse, wee are made surer and stronger by the bookes. For as soone as any hath touched the Gospell, he hath by and by withdrawne his spirite from worldly things, by the beholding of them: and if he reade diligently,Although that manye doe not vn∣derstand all the scrip∣ture, they must not therefore leaue of to profit in it. the soule is by such meanes purged & made better, no otherwise thā being in ye holy secrets, it imploieth it selfe to holy things, God spea∣king vnto it by such scriptures. What thē (say they) if we vnderstand not yt which is contayned in ye bokes: truly although thou vnderstād not yt which is hid, yet neuerthe∣lesse, great holines cōmeth of such reding:
For it cannot be that thou be ignoraunt of it altogither. For trulye the grace of the holy spirite hath so dispenced and modera∣ted it, to the ende that the Publicanes and sinners, makers of Tabernacles, Pastors, and Apostles, Idiotes, and the vnlearned shoulde be saued by those bookes. And to the ende that none of those Idiotes might excuse themselues, alledging the difficul∣tye thereof, he woulde that those things whiche are spoken, shoulde be easie at the first sight, and that the labourers, seruants, women, wydowes, and the most ignorante of all men should receiue some gaine and profite of the reading that they did heare. For those whom God hath reputed from the beginning worthy of the grace of the holy spirite, haue not done all these things through vayne glorie as gentilles, but to the saluacion and healthe of the hearers. Truely the Philosophers being ignorant of Christe,The Philo∣sophers haue not searched that vvhich profiteth, but to make themselues esteemed. good orators, and composers of bookes, not seeking that which profiteth all men, but tending to make them selues esteemed, although they haue saide some thing that is profitable, yet not withstan∣ding obscuritie hath kept it hid, as in a cer∣tayne
kinde of foolish wysedome: but the Apostles and the Prophets, haue done al∣togither therwyse,The Apo∣stles and Prophetes haue vvrit∣ten clearely and plainly. expounding vnto all men the bookes clearly and manyfestlye that they haue written, as publicke doc∣tors of the worlde, in such sort that euerye one may learne the thinges which are spo∣ken by the onely reading: That whiche the Prophet did pronounce,Iere. 31. Heb. 8. saying al shall be taught of God: and from thence foorth shall no man teache his neighbour or his brother, and say: know the Lorde: But they shall all knowe me, from the loweste vnto the hyest. I brethren when I came vnto you,1. Cor. 2. came not in gloriousnesse of wordes or of wyse∣dome, shewing vnto you the testimonye of God: And agayne, my wordes and my preachinges was not with entising words of mans wysedome: but in shewing of the spirite and of power. And againe: That which we spake is not the wisedome of this worlde, neyther of the rulers of this worlde whiche goe to noughte. For vnto whome are not all the thinges that are in the gospell manyfest? who would haue a maister for to learne, hearing any of these
wordes?Math. 5. Blessed are the meeke, blessed are the mercifull, blessed are the pure in heart and such other thinges: The signes, mi∣racles and historyes are not they knowen and manyfest vnto euery one? That is a colour and a cloked excuse of their sloth∣fulnesse, to saye thou vnderstandest not the thinges which are there, how canst thou a-thing at all vnderstand when thou wilt not but with great paine lightly see it? Take the bookes in thy handes, reade all the hy∣story, and keeping in memory the thinges that are playne and knowen, let passe the harde and obscure thinges. And if thou canst not with continuall reading find out that whiche is there spoken, goe vnto one that is wyser then thy selfe, or vnto a doc∣tor, declare vnto him the thinges that are written, declare vnto him thy feruent de∣sire: And if God would giue vnto thee so great promptitude of corage, he will not dispise thy diligence and carefulnesse. But yet although that no man will teache thee that whiche thou desirest to knowe, yet without doubt he will declare it vnto thee. Remember the Eunuch of the Queene of the Ethiopians,Act. 8. who although he were a
barbarous and rude man,The dili∣gence of the Eunuch rea∣ding the scriptures, not vnder∣standing them. letted and hin∣dred with innumerable cares, and on euery side enuironed with worldly affaires and troubles, and that he did not vnderstande that which he reade, neuerthelesse he did reade it sitting in his charret. If all the time as he went in the way, he ceased not to reade, much lesse when he was at rest in his house: if he did reade vnderstanding not that which he reade, and hath not cea∣sed to reade: muche lesse after that he hath learned: Now to the ende that thou know that he did not vnderstande that which he did reade, heare what Philip sayde vnto him.Act. 8. Doest thou vnderstande (sayth he) that which thou readest? And he hearing his wordes, was not ashamed, but confes∣sed his ignorance, and sayde: Howe can I vnderstande except I had a guyde. When there was none that coulde shewe him the way, neuerthelesse he did reade, and therefore he had immediatly a guyde. God knowing his prompt and ready cou∣rage, and louing his diligence, inconti∣nently did sende him a doctor: but we haue not Philip ready. Let vs not despyse my brethren and frendes, our health and sal∣uation,
all thinges are written for the loue of vs, for our correction vnto whome the endes of the ages are come vpon.1. Cor. 10. The rea∣ding of the Scriptures is a great muni∣tion against sinne, the ignorance of the Scriptures is a greate perill of falling headlong into hell: to know nothing of the heauenly lawes is a great perdition of saluation. This thing hath engendred heresyes, this hath made vs lead a naugh∣ty life, and hath mingled all thinges bothe high and lowe. Truely it can not be that he shoulde be sent awaye without fruite which taketh pleasure in continuall and attentiue reading of the Scriptures. S. Ierome in his .6. Tome vpon Iere∣mie. Chapter .9. The error of our forefathersVVe ought not to fol∣lovve the er∣ror of oure forefathers. ought not to be followed, but the authoritie of the Scriptures, and the commaundement of God which he teacheth vs. And agayne, truly through the ignoraunce of the lawe, they receyue Antichrist for Christ. Chrysostome in the 29. homilie vpon Genesis. There is neither the passion of the body nor of the soule in mans nature, but that
it maye take medicine of the holy Scrip∣ture. Afterwarde he sayth: Therefore I pray you come often hither, and marke di∣ligently the reading of the holy scripture, not onely when you doe come hither, but also in your houses, take in your handes the holy Byble, and receyue with greate diligence and care the vtilitie that lyeth therein hid, for thereby you shall get great profite: First trulye that by the reading your tongue bee reformed: afterwarde your soule taketh wings, and eleuateth hir selfe, and is illuminated through the splen∣dor and brightnesse of the sunne of righte∣ousnesse. And in the meane time it is deli∣uered from the inticementes and allure∣ments of filthie and vncleane thoughtes, reioicing with great rest and tranquillitie. And furthermore, that whiche the corpo∣rall meate doth vnto the body, for to aug∣ment & increase strength, ye same doth the reading of the holy scriptures vnto ye soule. The Canon lawe in the Chapter, Prae∣latum, de consecratione .3. Distinction. That whiche the Scripture doth vnto the readers, the same doth the Paynter
vnto the Idiotes and ignoraunt in behol∣ding it: for in the same the ignorant peo∣ple doe see that whiche they ought to fol∣lowe:This consti∣tution in the bodie of the lavve is imprin∣ted at Paris at the signe of the gol∣den sunne. in the same they doe reade whiche knowe not the letters. The Emperor Iu∣stinian in his newe Constitutions auten∣tike, in the 146. Constitution of the He∣brues, sayth thus: It was expedient that the Hebrues shoulde take great pleasure, not of the hystorie onely, when they gyue eare vnto the holy bookes, but that they shoulde marke and beholde the sense hidde in them, by the whiche they shewe forth the great God, Iesus Christ, sauiour of mankinde. But although that by the in∣terpretation among them dreamed, they doe debate and reason it among them sel∣ues vnto this day: neuerthelesse they haue erred from the right sentence. And bicause we haue knowen that they haue amongst themselues debates, we woulde not leaue them in such dissentions. For wee haue known by the interpellation and reports, whiche haue bene tolde vs, that some of them would not receiue but the Hebrewe tongue onely, and would that we shoulde vse them in the reading of holy bookes, o∣ther
doe holde an opinion that wee muste haue the Greeke tongue, and there hathe bene for this thing of long time sedition among them.The holye ordinaunce that Iustini∣an made tou¦ching the holy bokes, to haue thē in al tōgues, to the ende they should be reade of all men. We then hauing vnderstode this debate, haue iudged those better whiche desire to haue the Greeke tongue in the reading of holy bookes, and for to be short, such a tongue as the place requi∣reth moste fitte and meetest for the hea∣rers, we then doe ordayne that in what so∣euer place the Hebrewes are, it shall be lawefull for them in their assemblies to reade the holy Scriptures in the Greeke tongue, and in the Italian tongue, or translated and changed into any other tongue, as the place shall require, to the ende that all the continuation and order of that whiche is sayde, be manifested vnto those which shal vnderstand the holy boks, by the reading of them. And according to these thinges, they doe direct their lyfe and study, and their interpretors (whiche doe vse only the Hebrewe tongue) may not after their owne fancie maliciously en∣treate and expounde them, hiding and clo∣king their wickednesse by the ignorance of the people.
And a little after he saith, let vs altogi∣ther forbyd that, which they doe call Deu∣teros, as the second tradition, not contay∣ned in the holy bookes, not giuen from a∣boue by the Prophets, but conteyning a certayne extracte of men, whiche speake not but of earthly and terrestriall things, not hauing in it any thinge of the heauen∣ly spirite. But truly we desire that they reade the holy sayinges, when they declare the holy books, not hiding the things that are therein contayned, and not heape togi∣ther vaine wordes that are not written, but excogitated and inuented by them, to the destruction of the simple people, which licence by vs giuen shall not turne to any mans hurt or dammage, of those that re∣ceiue the Greeke tongue & other tongues: and that shall not be prohibited nor forbid∣den them by no man what soeuer he bee: And ouer and besides those which are cal-Archpharasies or Auncients, or maisters shall not haue licence to prohibite through their cautelous inuentions, or anathema∣tisations, if they will not be chastised nor corrected with corporall punishment, and after confiscation of their goodes, malgre
their heades to consent vnto vs, who doe will and commaunde thinges better agre∣able vnto God.VVe ought to take hede of the ma∣lice of the interpre∣ters. And againe a little after he saith: For our will is that by this and o∣ther tongues, those which giue good eare vnto the holy bookes, ought to be ware of the malice of the interpretors, and that they doe not onely vnderstand the letters, but also taste well the thinges therein con∣tayned, and receiue it throughly, and vn∣derstande the moste holy sentences, to the ende they may learne better that which is best, and be no more deceiued, erring and fayling in the ende. For there is nothing so excellent as for to haue affiance & truste in God: Therefore we haue opened vnto them all tongues, for the reading the holy bookes: to that ende that if all by order, do embrace the science and knowledge of them, they may be the more diligent to learne that which is the best:The Empe∣rour Iustini∣an giueth li∣bertie vnto all men to read the ho∣ly scriptures, and the rea∣son vvher∣fore. Forasmuche as it is most euident that he whiche hathe ben and is nourished and instructed in the reading of holy bookes, is more prompte and ready to discerne and receiue that which is the best, to receiue correction and to be conducted and leade into goodnesse,
then he that vnderstandeth none of all this, depending of the only name of religion: and staying him selfe as to the anker of re∣specte and soueraigne refuge, thinking that the scyence and true knowledge of God, is in the only calling of the secte. This then whiche hath pleased vs, and which is declared by this holy lawe, shall keepe aswell thy glorye as those whiche are vnder thy obedience: And also shall keepe and obserue them which shall suc∣ceede in the honor of thy magistrate and ruler.Those vvhi∣che vvoulde not suffer the scripture in all lan∣guages and tōgues, vver punished through the confiscation of their goodes. And shall not suffer that the Iewes doe contrary or against those thinges: but shall vtterly put to exile and banish al those that shall resiste, or attempt to let this or∣dinance, punishing them first by corporall punishment, afterward confiscating theyr goodes, to the ende they may not eleuate them selues against God and the imperial maiestie, more insolently through a foo∣lishe and rashe boldnesse, and vse their E∣dictes towardes the presidentes of the prouinces, considering our law, to that end that knowing those thinges, they may set them foorth in euery towne and village, and that they may knowe that they ought
necessarily to obserue these thinges, by them whiche doe feare our indignation and displeasure. S. Ierome in his Proeme of the Pro∣phete Ieremie. What other lyfe can there be without the knowledge of the Scriptures, by the which Christ also is knowen, who is also the lyfe of the beleeuers. Saint Ambrose in his .35. Sermon. The Lorde doth witnesse that the rea∣ding of the Scriptures is lyfe,Iohn. 6. saying: The wordes that I speake vnto you, are spirite and lyfe. Moyses sayde:Num. 11. Moyses en∣uyed not those vvhich had the gift of God. Amos. 7. What is he that causeth that all the Lordes people doe prophecie, and that the Lorde doth giue them his ho∣ly spirite. &c. As for me, I am no Prophete, nor Pro∣phetes sonne, but a keeper of cattell. &c. Eusebius bishop of Caesaria in his Eccle∣siasticall historie. lib. 6. Chapter .11. Alledging the Epistle of Alexander bi∣shop of Ierusalem agaynst Demetrius, and rebuking him thus, sayeth: That which thou hast added in thy letters, thou
sayest,The Priestes doe say that it appertay∣neth not vn∣to the laye people to dispute in the Church: behold dili∣gently the contrarie. that it was neuer seene that the lay and secular people shoulde dispute of the fayth in the presence of the Bishoppes. I maruayle what moued thee to affirme a lye so euident. In asmuch that as often as there is founde any man that is sufficient and apt for to giue good counsayle, and to instruct the people, the Byshops haue ac∣customed to desire him to doe it, as oure brother the Byshop Neon did vnto Euel∣pius in the Citie of Laranda, and the Bi∣shop Celsus vnto Paulinus in the Citie of Iconium, and the Byshop Atticus vn∣to Theodosius in the Citie of Sinnas. And there is no doubt but that the other Byshops may doe the lyke in their dioces∣ses, when they finde any one whiche is a man for to profite the people. Chrysostome vpon the first Chapter of Genesis. 8. homilie. Chrysostom vvould that all vvere do∣ctors.I desire most earnestlye, and doe praye that ye may be all in the order of doctors, and not only to be hearers of our wordes, but also that ye woulde report and declare vnto others our doctrine, and that ye wold correct those that doe erre and go astraye, to the ende they may returne into the way
of truth, as S. Paule sayeth:1. Thes. 5. Exhort one another, and edifie one another. &c. And a little after he sayth: God would not that the Christian shoulde bee onely content with himselfe, but that he do also edifie others, and not only with doctrine, but also with good lyfe & conuersation. &c. Chrysostome vpon the .2. Chapter of Genesis .10. Homilie. He which hath the care to teach and in∣struct his neyghbour, doth not so muche good vnto his neighbor, as he getteth gret gayne vnto him selfe, when hee shall re∣ceyue double rewarde, and obtayneth of God great retribution. &c. In the same place he sayeth moreouer: If we do vnderstand rightly those things, we may being at home in our houses, and taking the holy Scriptures after we haue well dyned or supped, to take the profite and giue spirituall meate vnto the soule. For as the bodie hath to doe with sensible meates, in lyke maner also hath the soule neede to refreshe it selfe dayly with spiri∣tuall meates, to the ende that the same be corroborated and made strong agaynst the assaultes of the flesh, and agaynst the con∣tinuall
battayle, by the which we are con∣strayned, that it may resist it. And it is to be feared least the soule should be brought into seruitude and bondage, if we will be slothfull any thing at all. Chrysostome vpon the first Chapter of Saint Mathew. 1. Tome, 2. Homilie. You that are here present, aunswere me I pray you, what is he among you, who if one demaunde of him a Psalme, can say it without booke, or any other parcell of the holye Scripture? There is not one, and yet this euill is not only here, but for bicause you are slothfull and negligent in spirituall things,Many doe learne soo∣ner foolish and baudie songs than spirituall. so much do you surmoūt through feruentnesse the fire vnto diuelish things. For if any man will demaunde or aske you foolishe, or (as men call them) merye songs, or songs of bawdrie, they shall finde many which moste diligentlye haue learned them, which they will sing very willingly. But yet they would defend such crimes, saying:The excuse of many. I am not a Monke, I am maried, and haue care of children & of my house keeping. Truely it cometh thereby, that
you doe corrupt and marre all thinges to∣gither, as a plague, bicause that you doe thinke the reading of holy Scriptures to belong only vnto the Monkes, where it is a great deale more necessary and neede∣full for you then for them: For those whiche are in the middest of the battayle, and which doe receiue continually wounds vpon woundes, suche people haue more neede of Gods medicine or helpe. &c. Chrysostome vpon the .21. Chapter of S. Mathewe. 39 homily. And when he was come into the temple,Math. 21 the cheefe priestes and the elders of the people came vnto him as he was teaching, and sayde: By what authoritie doest thou these thinges? and who gaue thee this power? They declared that there was some which did giue power vnto men, be it corporall or spirituall: As if they had said thus, thou art not engendred of the sacer∣dotall family, the Senat hath not permit∣ted thee to doe this, Ceasar hath not giuen it thee, but if they had beleeued that all power is from God, they woulde neuer haue asked, who hath giuen thee this pow∣er,Rom. 13. knowing that euery good gift and eue∣ry
perfect gifte is from aboue,Iam. 1. and com∣meth downe from the father of lightes, and that a man can receiue nothing at all,Iohn. 3. except it be giuen him from heauen. Of the assemblies and con∣gregations of the faithfull. Saint Hilary against Auxentius. I Praye you O ye Byshoppes, whiche doe thinke your selues to be so, what suffrages haue the Apostles vsed for to preach the gospell? with what power were they ayded for to preache Christ,Act. 5. Act. 16. and as it were to change all Gentils from images to God? haue they taken any dignitie of the palace, in singing of Himnes & Psalmes vnto God in prison, being in yrons and chaynes? and afterwarde to be whipped and scourged? Did Paule assemble the Churche of Christ by the Kings Edicte, when he was as a spectacle in the theater? He did defende himselfe (as I beleeue) by Nero, or Vespasian, or Decius, through whose hatred and malice the confession of
the heauenly preaching hath flourished: they nourishing and keeping themselues with their owne handie labour, in assem∣bling themselues togither within cham∣bers and secret places, and by the stretes, and villages, did enuiron and compasse a∣bout almost all people, by lande and by water, against the decrees and ordinaun∣ces of the Senators, and Edictes of the Kings. Tertullian in his Apologie against the Gentiles .29. Chapter. This assemblie of the Christians should be very vnlawfull, if it were like or equall vnto the vnlawfull things,The Chri∣stians neuer assembled themselues to the hurt of any man. it shoulde bee worthilye condemned, if it were complay∣ned of as of a faction or sect. But whome haue we endammaged or hurt by our as∣sembling and meeting togither, wee are the very same as when we were all disper∣sed asunder, euerye one by himselfe, not hurting any man. When wyse men, and good and faythfull people doe assemble themselues togither, we must not call that a faction or sect, but rather a court. And on the contrary, we must applye the name of faction, vnto those which hate good mē,
that crie agaynste the bloude of the in∣nocents,If rhere happeneth any euill vn∣to the vvorlde, the vvorldlings doe say that it is bicause of the faith∣full. vnder colour of their vnitie, and for defence of their hatred, forasmuche as they doe esteme and iudge that the Chri∣stians are the causes of all losses and com∣mon mishaps. If the riuer Tyber moun∣teth or swelleth aboue the walles: If the riuer Nylus doe not descende vppon the fieldes: If the heauen doe stande still: If the earth tremble: If there be famine or pestilence: by and by they crie after the Christians, for to cast them into the lyons denne. Saint Luke declareth in the Actes, the order of the primitiue Church, that the faythfull assembled themselues oftentimes in the fieldes,Act. 16. saying thus: On the Sa∣both day we went out of the citie, besides a ryuer where they were wont to praye: and wee sate downe and spake vnto the women which resorted thither. &c. They assembled themselues togither in the night, within chambers, for to preach the word, & celebrate the Lords supper, as it appeareth by that which is written: And the first day after the Saboth,Act. 20. ye disciples being come togither fo to breake breade,
Paule preached vnto them,Act. 2. Act. 1. redy to depart on the morowe, and continued the prea∣ching vnto midnight. And there were ma∣ny lightes in an vpper chamber where we were gathered togither. &c. And when the dayes were ended,Act. 21. we de∣parted, and went our wayes, and they all brought vs on our way, with their wyues and children, till we were come our of the citie, and we kneeling downe on the shore, prayed. &c. Tertullian in his Apologie. 39 Chapter. We coming and assembling our selues togither, doe pray for the Emperors,In the aun∣cient assem∣blies they prayed for the Empe∣rors and magistrates. for their seruants, and for the magistrates, for the estate of the worlde, for peace. &c. We are assembled to make commemora∣tion of the diuine scriptures, we doe feede and nourishe the fayth with voyce and ho∣lye wordes, we hope well, we plant and graffe most stronglye our fayth, and doe trauayle much to imprint in the hearts the discipline of the commaundements. &c. Tertullian in his Apologie 30. Chap. We christians haue our eyes eleuated
vnto heauen, and our handes streched out, bicause they are innocente, and the heade bare and vncouered bicause we are not a∣shamed, and we doe it without bydding. For we doe pray with the hearte, we pray alwayes, for all the Emperors, that God would giue them long life, and assured em∣pyre and a trusty and sure house, mightye in battayle, a faithfull counsell, good peo∣ple, a quiet worlde, and all that man and the Emperour can desire. I may not de∣maunde and aske these thinges but of him of whom I doe know I shal obtaine them: for it is he onely that will giue it, and I am he that ought to require it, that is to say his seruant, which doe honor him, and which haue in reuerence him only: which am killed for his doctrine and discipline and whiche doe offer the best and greatest sacrifice that he hath commaunded,Praier is the best sacrifice that one can offer vnto God. that is to saye the prayer that proceedeth from a chast body and from the innocent soule and from the holy ghoste. Not with little graines of incence of small valew, nor also with the teares of the tree of Arabie, nor those two drops of wine, neither the bloud of a wicked man that desireth his owne
deathe. &c. Plinie in the .10. booke of his Epistles 317. Epistle. The Emperor Traianus did sende him a commaundement,Plinie vvri∣teth vnto the Emperor of the lyfe and maner of the faith∣full in their assemblies. commaunding him to make enquirye of the faithfull, and of their manner of liuing: and afterward to perse∣cute them. Plinie did write againe vnto the Emperor, that after he had through∣ly enquired, yea with most cruelty and tor∣mentes, vntill suche time as he deliuered them into the handes of the hangmen to see them executed, he neuer did finde anye other thing, but that the faithfull haue ac∣customed to assemble them selues togither at certayne times in the morning, before daye, and when they were come togither, they did sing prayses and psalmes vnto Christe as vnto God. &c. If any wyll see more amplye these thinges,Eusebius Caesariensis in the eccle∣siasticall hi∣storie, lib. 11. Chap. 4. let him reade the ecclesiasticall history and there he shall finde howe the faithfull did assemble them selues in the mountaines, in caues and dennes for feare of persecutions. As it is declared in the hi∣storye of Theodorite,Theodorite lib. 4. cha. 24. after this manner. When that the faithfull were driuen a∣waye
(by Valentius) they assembled them selues togither at the foote of the moun∣taine,Historie tri∣partite, lib. 10. chap. 20. and there gaue prayses and thankes vnto God, reioysing of the heauenly scrip∣tures, suffring there the impetuositie and violence of the cōtrarietie of the ayre, some time raines, snowes and coldes, and other times moste extreame heates. Valentius not suffering them to vse this most labo∣rious and paynfull commoditie: sent men of war who draue away and scattred that assemblye euery where. Ievves bur∣ned in a caue.The Iewes being in captiuitie were not suffered to liue after the lawes of God. They went and assembled them selues to∣gither in the next caues, for to celebrate secretly the saboth: But being accused vn∣to Philippe the gouernor,2. Mac. 5. he caused them all to be burned Psal. 133.Behold, how good and ioyfull a thing it is brethren to dwell togither in vnitie. &c. Math. 18.Iesus Christ saith in the Gospel, where two or three be gathered togither in my name, there am I in the middest of them.
That no man oughte to bee compelled to beleeue by force. Lactantius Firmianus in his diuine institutions. Li. 5. chap. 20. THose whiche kyll theyr owne soules and the souls of others, let them learne and know that they haue committed a faulte that will not be forgiuen. &c. O meruaylous and blinde foolishnesse, they thinke that those who endeuor them selues to keepe the faithe haue wicked thoughtes, and that the tyrants and hang men haue good. Haue those wicked thoughtes, who against the right of huma∣nitie, and agaynst all heauenly or godly right, are torne and pulled in peeces: It should be rather those that doe such things vnto the bodyes of the innocentes: The which the most cruell theeues, nor the cru∣ellest ennemyes, nor barbarous people neuer did? Doe not they deceiue them selues in turning and chaunging the name
of euil into good,In this latter time the vvicked are called good, & the good vvicked. and good into euil? wher∣fore then doe they not call the daye, night, and the night daye, the sunne darkenesse: otherwyse it is the like impudency to giue the name of euill vnto good, and of fooles vnto wyse men, and of the wicked vnto the iuste and righteous. If they haue anye beleefe or trust in Philosophy, or in elo∣quence, let them arme them selues with their disputacions, let them ouercome or vanquishe vs if they can with the wordes that wee speake: let them approche for to fight togither, and to examine particulerly euery poynt: let them defend their gods, to the end they be not forsaken with theyr temples, tromperies, and disceytes wor∣thy to be mocked. Nowe bicause they can doe nothing by force and violenee (foras∣much as Gods religion the more it is op∣pressed the more it augmēteth and encrea∣seth) let them proceede rather by prayer, and exhortations. Let the Byshoppes and Priestes of their religion call vs vnto their Sermons and disputations: let them ex∣hort vs to receiue the adorations of their gods: let them tell vs that there are a greate many whiche take a greate care to
gouerne, and to mayntaine all thinges by their puissances and powers: Let them declare vnto vs the originall and begin∣ning of their ceremonies, of their sacrifi∣ces, and of their goddes, and howe they were giuen vnto men: let them declare the beginning of them, and the cause wher∣fore. Let them declare vnto vs and tell vs what reward those shall haue which shall adore and worship them, and what payne they shall haue that shall dispise them. &c. Let them proue and confirme all these thinges, not with their owne opinions, (for the opynion of mortall men is nothing worth or auaylable)Mortal man is vvoorth nothing. but that it be by some witnesses of holy Scriptures, as we doe. It is no neede to vse any force, nor iniu∣ries, forasmuche as religion cannot bee compelled, they ought rather to proceede by faire wordes, then by stripes, for to cause vs to be willing. Let them disploye all the puissance and subtiltie of their spi∣rites: And if their reason be good, let it be brought forth, and we are ready to heare it. But if they doe hold their peace and be dumme, we will not beleeue them, nor any more we wil giue them the victory, through
their crueltye. Let them followe vs, or els tell vs the reason of all the doinges: For wee drawe none vnto vs throughe fayre wordes (as they say) but we doe teache, proue and declare: And so we compell none by force, for he is vnprofitable vnto God which hath neyther fayth nor deuoti∣on, and yet neuerthelesse none departeth from vs, bicause the truth holdeth them. If they haue any confidence or truste of the truthe, let them speake and open their mouth, and let them dispute with vs, vpon any matter. Trulye their error and their foolishnesse is nowe mocked at of the olde men whom they despised & set nought by, and by our children, wherefore then are they so incen∣sed and mad that where they would dimi∣nishe their follye and foolishnesse they aug∣mente it?Truth and force inse∣perable, and righteousnes and crueltie. There is greate difference be∣tweene crueltye and pitie, and truthe can not be ioyned with force, or righteousnesse with cruelty, but it is not without cause that they dare not teache any thing of hea∣uenly thinges, for they feare to be mocked at of our people, and forsaken of their peo∣ple. &c. Religion ought to be defended, not
in putting to death,To kill and exercise cru∣eltie belon∣geth not vn¦to the good, but to the euill. but in suffering hir selfe to be killed: not through cruelty, but by patience, not through wickednesse, but through faith: For to kill and exercise cruelty, is wickednesse, and belongeth vn∣to the wicked: And to suffer death and to haue patience and faith, belongeth vnto the good. There is no question but the good is in religion, and not the euill, foras∣muche as if thou wilt defende religion, throughe sheading of bloude, throughe tor∣ments & cruelty, it shall not be then defen∣ded, but polluted and defiled: For there is nothing more franke and free then reli∣gion. The reason is then good and righte, if thou defendest religion throughe pati∣ence, and by suffring death, in the whiche the faithe kepte and preserued, is agreea∣ble vnto God. Saint Ierome saithe: He followeth Christe, which is persecuted, he followeth Antechrist which persecuteth. Rubert or Robert writing vpon the .13. Chap. of the Apocalyps. Beholde the signe and token whereby you shall knowe those that are of God,The signe of the good and the euill. from the euill and wicked: Those are the
wicked, which doe kill and leade into cap∣tiuitie, the which thing all those that are of God, haue not done nor doe. Lactantius Firmianus in his diuine In∣stitutions. Lib. 5. Chap. 21. I woulde demaunde this question, vnto whome do they thinke chiefly to doe plea∣sure in compelling men, agaynst their will to doe sacrifice: Is it vnto them whome they compel? But that which is in charge vnto him that refuseth, that is no benefite vnto him. But we must also giue counsell vnto him that refuseth when they knowe not that which is good:Compulsion auayleth not Wherefore then doe they torment and vexe them so cruelly, if they desire to haue them saued? Or frō whence commeth the pietie so vnfaythful∣ly, and most miserablye to destroy, lame, and make impotent them vnto whom they shoulde prouide and giue remedie? Is it vnto the Gods they doe suche pleasure? No, for that whiche a man doth by com∣pulsion is not a sacrifice, forasmuch as if it be not done voluntarlye and with the heart, it is most execrable and accursed. Forasmuch as there are but they whiche are constrayned and compelled throughe
banishments, iniuries, imprisonmentes, and tormentes which doe it: If they bee Gods which are so honored, truly for that only cause they ought not to be honored, in as much as they woulde be so adored and worshipped: they are worthye to be dete∣sted of men, vnto whome sacrifice is made with teares and sighings, and with bloud running downe all their bodie. But we to the contrarie, require not that any will he, nill he, shoulde adore and worship our God, which is the Creator of all things: nor we are not angry if they doe not wor∣ship him. For we doe trust in his maiestie,God vvill auenge the griefes of his seruants. that he hath also great power to auenge as well those that doe contemne and despyse him, as the iniuries and troubles of hys seruants: and therefore when we suffer such things so wicked and execrable, wee doe not therefore repugne agaynst the worde, but we referre the vengeance vnto God. The Prophete Esay sayeth:Esay. 59. Truth is fallen downe in the streete, and the thing that is playne and open may not be shew∣ed, yea, the truth is layde in prison, and he that refrayneth himselfe from euil, must
be spoyled. When the Lorde sawe this, it displeased him sore. &c. Ezec. 34.The Lorde sayde by the Prophet Eze∣chel: I will deliuer my sheepe from their mouth, so that they shall no more be spoy∣led. &c. Lactantius Firmianus in his diuine In∣stitutions. Lib. 5. Chap. 22. They are not then madde or angry with vs,Veritas odi∣um parit. bicause we adore not or worship their Gods. For there are many people that do not worship thē, but it is bicause the truth is with vs, the which, as the Prouerbe is, getteth hatred. &c. Lactantius Firmianus. Lib. 5. Chapter .23. VVhat pa∣tience is.Pacience is a principall vertue, the which is by the common voyce of the peo∣ple, and of the Philosophers and Ora∣tors exalted with great prayse. If no man wil denie but that pacience is a soueraine vertue: It is necessary that the righteous & wise man be in the power of the vnrigh∣teous mā, for to haue that pacience: for pa∣cience is a volūtary suffring of euils which are done vnto any man, or which doe hap∣pen vnto him, whereby the righteous and
the wyse man, hath in himselfe pacience,It is neces∣sary that the righteous man be af∣flicted of the vvicked, to the ende he haue paci∣ence. bicause that he receyueth the vertue of the which he shall be altogither depriued, if he suffer nothing to the contrarie: Although that he do no iniurie vnto anye man, nor that he coueteth his neyghbors goodes, and though he defende not his own goods if they be taken from him by force and vi∣olence, forasmuche as he can quietlye y∣nough suffer the iniurie that is done vnto him, bicause that he is garnished with ver∣tue. It is necessarye that the righteous man be subiect vnto the vnrighteous mā. And the wyse be despised of the foole, to the ende that the one doe sinne, bicause he is vnrighteous, and that the other be in seruitude and bondage, bicause he is righ∣teous. For howe can a Captaine prooue and trie his souldiers, if he haue no eni∣mie? And yet neuerthelesse the aduersarie eleuateth and exalteth himselfe maugre him, bicause that he is mortall and maye be vanquished and ouercome: but bicause we cannot repugne and striue agaynste God, he himselfe moueth and stirreth vp the aduersaries agaynst his name, not for to striue and fight against him, but a∣gainst
his souldiars,The cause vvhy aduer∣saries are stirred vp. to that ende he maye proue and trye the faithe and deuotion of his: vntill suche time as he doth correcte and amend in pressing and beating the di∣scypline whiche was become colde. There is also an other cause wherefore hee dooth permitte and suffer that we should be per∣secuted that is to the ende that the people of God shoulde bee augmented. Some de∣sire to know what that goodnesse is which is defended euen vnto death, which is pre∣ferred aboue all the pleasant thinges and best loued and set by in this world: of which goodnesse, nothing can drawe them from it, neyther the losse of their goodes, nor the losse of their sight,Through persecutions a great nū∣ber is ioined to the gos∣pell. dolor of body, nor a∣nye other tormentes whatsoeuer they be: all thinges are much worth, but the grea∣test causes which followed, haue alwayes augmented our number. The people being rounde about the good christians, hearde them saye in their tormentes, that they should not do sacrifice nor offer vnto stons made and hewen with mans handes, but vnto the liuing God which is in heauen: many doe heare that the same is good and true, they receiue it in their minds and vn∣derstandinges.
Afterwarde (as men haue accustomed or vsed to doe in vncertayne thinges) when they demaund and enquire within them selues, what may be the cause of that perseuerance and constancie, many things belonging vnto religion are spread abroade and knowen, and declared from the one to the other, by the report that they make: And by yt meanes they are taught, who for asmuche as they are good, it is necessary that they please. Furthermore, the vengeance that followeth (as it happe∣neth often) hath a greate vehemence to make them beleeue: All these causes put togither, haue gotten and drawen vnto God, a maruelous great company of peo∣ple. S. Hilary in his booke against Auxentius. Ambition doth ayde it selfe by the name of Christe: The Churche doth feare and compell the people through banishements and imprisonmentes to beleeue hir, the which they haue beleeued through banish∣mentes and prisons: Shee dependeth vp∣on those that doe disdayne to communi∣cate with hir: She which is consecrated
and made holy by the terror of the perse∣cutors, driueth awaye the prestes. Shee which hath bene engendred by the running away of priestes, doth glory and extoll hir selfe to be beloued of the worlde, Shee whiche coulde not be beloued of Christe, if the worlde had not hated hir: Experience cryeth in all mens mouthes and declareth and sheweth the comparison of the church, the which of late hath bene giuen vnto vs, and neuer shall be destroyed. Rom. 14.All that which is not of faith is sinne. Chrysostome in his first Tome vpon S. Mathewe .47. homily Chapter .13. Math. 13Let them both growe togither till har∣uest come, the Lorde did forbid them least while they wente aboute to weede out the tares they should plucke vp the wheate al∣so:Iesus Christ doth not re∣quire shed∣ding of blud whiche thing he spake to forbidde the sheading of bloude. For if the Heritickes were put to deathe without alliance of peace, warre shoulde bee without truce. Wherefore he doth forbyd it for two cau∣ses, the one bicause they shoulde hurte and hinder a little the corne. The other is that if they doe not heale them selues, they shal
neuer escape the eternall and euerlasting punishmentes and tormentes: wherefore if thou wouldest amend and in no wyse hurte the corne, you must attend and tarry the time conuenient and that is meete for the same. But he doth not forbyd to deuide breake vp and put asunder the consistories of the Heritickes, with their counsels, and to stoppe their mouthes and to restrayne them of their libertie to speake, but he for∣byddeth to kill them, and to put them to deathe. S. Augustine in the .58. Epistle of the catholike clarkes of the citie of Hi∣pona, vnto Ianuarius, and Donatus. This is then our desire, whiche wee doe alledge by these letters vnto your reue∣rence, and also by the brethren whome we haue sente. Firste if it may bee, that you would conferre with our Byshoppes pea∣ceably and quietly, to the ende that the er∣ror be taken away from those in whom it shall be founde, and not that the men be ta∣ken awaye, nor punished but gently cor∣rected.
In the history tripartite. Lib. 6. Chap. 22. Athanasius in the satisfaction of his fle∣ing saith. Behold the presumption of the infidelles, which doe such thinges, and are without shame, of whiche, firste they haue imagined euilles and disceyt against vs. And vnto this present time they accuse vs that we flee from them, being ready to kill vs. But whiche is more they doe sighe and mourne most bitterly, bicause they cannot altogither destroy vs. And doe rebuke vs bicause that we feare: And when they murmure of the thing, the more doe they cause the euil to returne vpon them selues. For if it be euill done to flee, to persecute is a great deale worse. For the one hideth himselfe, to the ende he turne not & change his opinion, & the other persecuteth for to kill. But it is commaunded to flie, and he that demaundeth to kill transgresseth the lawe, and giueth vnto vs greater occasion to flie. Then if the persecutors doe rebuke vs bicause that we doe flee, let them rather be ashamed in them selues, and let them cease and leaue of to lye in wayte, and in∣continently those whiche did flie will flie no more: but they will not cease from their
malice, but haste themselues as much as in them lyeth to take them, knowing that the fleeing of those which suffer persecuti∣on, is a great signe of those which perse∣cute them. For none did euer flee from the meeke and gentle, but rather from the cruell and deceytfull: euerye man that sighed and which was vexed of Saule, went for re∣fuge vnto Dauid, and fled from Saule: But therefore these here desire to put to death those that are hidde, fearing that their malice shoulde not be by them stop∣ped. Who are not blinded in that matter.The persecu¦tors do seke to put to death, for feare that their malice shoulde bee vncouered and knovvn. Forasmuch as the more the fleeing is ma∣nifested and knowne, the more are they knowne by their slaughters, murders, and banishments: For although they kill, their death crieth dayly against them: Againe, although they threaten to banishe, it is knowne all about, that they establish a me∣morial or remembrance of euil against thē. If they were wyse and had any vnder∣standing in them, they shoulde see themsel∣ues stopped and let in such things, & they themselues fayle in their counsayles: but bicause they haue no vnderstanding, ther∣fore
are they deceyued through their per∣secutions, and in seeking to kill, they con∣sider not their infidelitie: for if they rebuke those which flie, when they seeke to kill them:Genes. 27. What will they say that Iacob did flee from Esau his brother,Exod. 2. and that Moy∣ses went downe to Madian for feare of Pharao?The holye men haue fled from the handes of the per∣secutors. 1. Reg. 21. What will they say of Dauid which fled from Saul, who sent into his house to kill him, when he hid himselfe in the caue, and that he chaunged his face vntill he was come to Abimelech? By which meanes he escaped the watchings and vayne deceytes of his enimies. What will those here say, which rashly vtter and speake all things, seing the worthie man Helias which throughe his prayer had raysed vp one that was deade, and yet ne∣uerthelesse hid himself for feare of Achab, and fled for feare of the snares of Iezabel?3. Reg. 19. yea, then the children of the Prophetes which were sought for to be put to death,3. Reg. 18 were hid in ditches and holes by Abdias: but if they haue not reade those auncient histories, at the least let them remember the Gospels. For the Disciples for feare of the Iewes,Iohn. 20. did withdrawe and hid them¦selues.
And when Paule was sought for by the Prince of the countrie at Damas∣cus,Act. 9. the Disciples put him out of the wall, and let him downe in a basket, and so hee escaped their handes that sought for him. Wherefore in as much as the scripture telleth such things of holy men, what excuse doest thou think that they can find to excuse their madnesse? If then they rebuke their feare, they speake as men madde and incensed agaynst themselues, and if they say that it is done agaynst the will of God, they shewe themselues alto∣gither ignorant of the holy scriptures:Num. 35. Iosua. 20. for in the lawe it was commaunded, that aun∣cient cities were deputed and appoynted for refuge, to the ende that they whome men did seeke for to put to death, myght there saue themselues. And in the latter time of the worlde, when the worde of the father (which was spoken vnto Moyses) is come, he hath giuen agayne a com∣maundement, saying: When they perse∣cute you in one citie, flie into another.Mat. 10. And a little after he sayth: When ye ther∣fore shall see the abhomination of desola∣tion spoken of by Daniel the Prophete,
standing in the holye place: let him that readeth it, take hede. Then let them which be in Iurie, flie into the mountaynes, and let him which is on the house top, not come downe to fet any thing out of his house: neyther let him which is in the fielde re∣turne backe to fetch his clothes. Where∣fore in knowing these things they are so gouerned: For that which the Lord hath commaunded, the very same hath he spo∣ken by his saintes, before he tooke on him our fleshe. And this is the ende that lea∣deth to perfection, that we doe that which the Lorde hath commaunded. Therefore also the very same worde being made man for vs,Iohn. 8. Iohn. 12. did hyde himselfe when they did seeke for him (as also wee doe.) And a∣gayne, when he suffred persecution, he did flie and hyde himselfe from the treasons, for it was couenable & nedefull for him to suffer such things, as hunger & thirst, and after such sort to shew himselfe to be man. Yea also at the beginning when he was made man, being yet but a little childe, it was commaunded by the angell vnto Io∣seph saying,Math. 2. arise and take the childe and his mother, and flye into Egypte, and bee
there tyll I bring thee worde. For it wyll come to passe, that Herode will seeke the babe to destroy him. Also when Herode was dead and that he had hearde that Ar∣chelaus raigned in his fathers steade, hee fledde into Nazareth. Also when Iesus shewed him selfe as God,Mat. 12. and had healed the hande that was dryed, and that the Phariseys went out, and consulted against him, how they might destroy him, Iesus knowing the same de∣parted from thence. Also when Iesus raysed Lazarus from death,Iohn. 11. from that day foorth (sayth he) they consulted togither to put him to death. Ie∣sus therefore walked no more openlye a∣mong the Iewes: but went thence into a country nye to the wildernesse. In like manner when Iesus sayde,Iohn. 8. yer Abraham was I am. Then tooke the Iewes vp stones to cast at him, but Iesus hidde him selfe, and went out of the tem∣ple,Luc. 4. Men ought not to burn them that speake other vvise than the truth allovveth. and passed euen through the middest of them, and wente his way. Thou doest nowe knowe how that they which see these thinges, or which doe heare them (for they see them not) as it is written, ought not to
burne those which speake & thinke things contrary vnto suche as the Lorde hathe made and taught.Mat. 14. For when Iohn suffred martyrdome, and that his disciples bury∣ed his body, Iesus hearing thereof depar∣ted thence by shippe into a desert place, and euen so the Lorde doth his thinges, and also teach them: But would to God they were so ashamed that they would not declare their furor, but vnto men, and that more and more throughe their madnesse, men should not see them rebuke and check the sauiour,The perse∣cutors them selues are ignorant of the gospell. blaspheming agaynst him: But the same the Idiotes and fooles could not suffer, althoughe they are rebuked of them selues, not to knowe onely the gos∣pell: for this is the occasion of our depar∣ting and fleeing, of which the euangelistes doth make mention, and of which our sa∣uiour hathe vsed, and we must also thinke suche thinges to haue bene in holy men: For that which is nowe written of the sa∣uiour after the fashion and manner of men, the same is commonly deputed vnto mankinde. He hath taken those thinges that are ours, and hath shewed and decla∣red the passions of our infirmitie, ye which
Saint Iohn wryteth thus:Iohn. 7. They soughte to take him, but no man layde handes on him bicause his houre was not yet come. For before that the same was come hee sayde vnto his mother,Iohn. 2. woman what haue I to doe with thee myne houre is not yet come.Iohn. 7. And he sayd vnto those which were called his brethren, my time is not yet come.Math. 26 And agayne at the time of his passi∣on he sayde, sleepe hencefoorth and take your reste, for behold the houre is at hande and the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of sinners. But he did not suffer him selfe to be taken before the time was come, also he did not hide him selfe, but gaue him selfe vnto his aduersaryes, and enemyes: In like maner the blessed Mar∣tyrs, did keepe them selues from tempo∣rall persecutions, and when they were sought for they fledde into secrete places. But when they were found out, they gaue them selues to martyrdome: beholde the wordes of Athanasius a Martyre of Iesus Christe.
That the magistrates that persecute the faithful, vnder coulour of religion, shall be tormented with eternall paines. Sapien. 6. Rom. 10.HEare therefore (O ye kings) and vnderstande ye therefore ye Iudges of the endes of the earth:An admo∣nition vnto Kings, Prin∣ces, and Iud∣ges. Learne and giue eare ye that rule the people, glorifie your selues in the multitude of nations. For the pow∣er is giuen you of the Lord, & the strength from the hiest: whiche shall trye your works and search out your imaginations: howe that yee being officers of his king∣dome haue not executed true iudgemente, haue not kept the lawe of righteousnesse, nor walked after his will. &c. Miche. 3.Heare, O ye heades of the house of Ia∣cob, and ye leaders of the house of Israell: Should ye not knowe what were lawefull and right? But ye hate the good and doe that is euill, ye plucke of mens skinnes, and the fleshe from the bones: ye eate the fleshe of my people, and flaye of their skin:
ye breake their bones, ye choppe them in peeces as it were into a cauldron, and as fleshe into a pot. &c. And a little after hee saith, O heare this ye rulers of the house of Iacob, and ye Iudges of the house of Israell: ye that abhorre the thing that is lawefull, and wrest aside the thing that is straighte: yee that buylde vp Sion with bloud, and Ierusalem with doing wrong. O ye Iudges, ye giue sentence for giftes: O ye priestes yee teache for lucre: O yee Prophetes, ye prophecye for mony. &c. Lactantius Firmianus in his diuine institu∣tions, Lib. 5. Chap. 24. writing vnto the Emperour Constantine. All that whiche the wicked Princes doe against vs, God doth permit and suffer it to be done. And yet neuerthelesse the most wicked persecuters, in whom the name of God hath bene had in derision and moc∣kery, ought not to thinke therefore to scape vnpunished, for they haue bene as mini∣sters of his wrathe agaynst vs:Persecuters cruelly tor∣mented. Truelye they shall be punished by the iudgemente of God, bicause that after receiuing pow∣er they haue abused it aboue all measure, and by that meanes are waxen & growen
into greate pryde agaynst God, and haue vnfaithfully troden vnder their feete his eternall name. Therefore he promiseth that he will with all speede be auenged of them, and roote out of the earth all wicked beastes: But although that he hath accu∣stomed to aduenge the vexations, and tor∣mentes done vnto his people, and espe∣cially in this worlde, neuerthelesse he doth commaund vs to attend and tarye pati∣ently in this worlde vntill the celestiall iudgement, at which day he will rewarde or punishe euery one according to theyr workes.Luk. 18. Wherefore the wicked people and cōmitters of sacriledge, ought not to hope that those whom they haue so hand∣led shall be despised & vnreuenged. The re∣ward shal come vnto the rauening wolues, who haue tormented the simple and righ∣teous soules that neuer offended. But as for vs, let vs onely trauayle that nothing be punished in vs by men, but onely righ∣teousnesse, let vs endeuor our selues with all our strength to serue God, and to be a∣uenged of that whiche we suffer, and to receiue our rewarde.
Saint Barnard in his sermon of the con∣uersion of Saint Paule. Oh Lorde God, these are the chiefeste and first that persecuted thee, whom men see to loue the hiest seates and romes in thy church, and whiche bare the greateste rule: They haue taken the arke of Sion, they haue occupied and vsed the castle, and afterwards haue frankly and by pow∣er set al the citie on fire,The despi∣sing of the poore peo∣ple of God is pitifull. their conuersation is miserable, the subuersion of thy people is pitifull, and woulde to God that they should not hurt but in that onely part, per∣aduenture there wilbe some who wilbe aduertised and admonished with the exhor∣tation of the Lorde, who will beware of following their example, and who wyll keepe the commaundements according to that which is sayde,Mat. 23. whatsoeuer they byd you obserue, that obserue and doe, but af∣ter their workes doe not: But nowe holy orders are giuen for an occasion of moste filthy gayne, and doe esteeme and thinke gayne to be pietie and godlynesse. The Prophet Esay sayth, O Lord our God,Esay. 26. though such Lords haue domination vpō vs as knowe not thee, yet grant, that wee
may hope onely in thee, and keepe thy name in remembrance. Eze. 22.Thy rulers in thee are like rauishing wolues, to shead bloude, and to destroy soules for their owne couetous lucre. Miche. 7.There is not a godly man vpon earth, there is not one righteous among men, they labour all to shead bloud, and euery man hunteth his brother to death. Iohn. 16.Iesus Christ saith: The time shal come, that whosoeuer killeth you, will thinke that he doth God seruice. Mat. .12.If ye wist what this meaneth, I require mercy and not sacrifice: ye would not haue condemned innocentes. Psal. 116.Right deare in the sight of the Lorde, is the death of his saintes. Esa. 26.The earth shall discouer the bloud that shee hath deuoured, shee shall neuer hyde them, that shee hath murthered. Zacha. .2.The Lord sayd vnto the faithfull, who so toucheth you, shall touch the aple of his owne eye. Mat. .23.Iesus Christ sayd vnto those that perse∣cuted the faithfull. Fulfill ye likewyse the measure of your fathers, ye Serpentes, ye generation of vipers, how should ye es∣cape
the damnation of hell? wherefore,Persecution is propheci∣ed to happen vnto the children of God. beholde I sende vnto you prophetes and wyse men, and Scrybes, and of them ye shall kill and crucifie: and of them shall ye scourge in your sinagoges and persecute from citie to citie: That vpon you may come all the righteous bloud that was shead vpon the earth, from the bloud of righteous Abel, vnto the bloud of Zacha∣rias the sonne of Barachias, whome yee slewe betweene the Temple and the Aul∣ter. Verily I saie vnto you al these things shall light vpon this generation. Ierusa∣lem, Ierusalem which killest the prophets and stonest them which are sent vnto thee. The Iudges and gouernors willing to please and fulfil the wicked desire of Ieza∣bel,3. Reg 21. condemned the innocent Naboth to be put to death. Augustine vnto Boniface. 182. Epistle. To doe well, and not to let and forbyd the things which are vnlawfull, is a verye consenting vnto error. Origen in the 3. Homilie vpon Leuiticus. Let vs take heede that we doe not con∣sent
vnto other mens sinnes, I saye con∣sent, not only in doing the lyke things, but also in holding our peace, or winking at things that are euill done. Prou. 17. Esay. 5.The Lorde hateth as well him that iu∣stifieth the vngodly, as him that condem∣neth the innocent. Prou. 29.The righteous considereth the cause of the poore, but the vngodlye regardeth no vnderstanding. Prou. 29.The seate of the king that faythfullye iudgeth the poore, shall continue sure for euermore. Prou. 31.With thy mouth defende the thing that is lawfull and right, and the cause of the poore and helpelesse. Prou. 29.Many there be that seeke the Princes fauor, but euerye mans iudgement com∣meth from the Lorde. Moyses hath written what the Magi∣strates ought to be. They must be (sayth he) vertuous men, fearing God, men of truth, hating auarice and couetousnesse. &c. Chrysostome in his imperfect worke. Chapter .23. vpon that text, And say: if we had bene in our fathers dayes, we woulde not haue bene their cō∣panions,
to shead the bloud of the Pro∣phets. When thou shalt heare any man saye, that the doctors of the olde time be blessed, proue and trye, what good will or zeale he hath towardes those doctors, for if he doe honor and reuerence those with whom he liueth, without doubt he would also haue honored the other if he had liued with them. In the same place he sayth moreouer: the Iewes haue alwayes bene worship∣pers of the Saintes that be past and dead, and condemners of those that be present and a liue. S. Ierome in his .4. Tome in the rule of Monkes. It is very true, that ye truth can be kept in and bound, but it cannot be vanquished, whiche is content with hir little number, and is not a frayde of the great number of hir enemies. Saint Ierome vpon Ieremie .5. Tome. Chapter .26. When the congregation of the people were assembled togither,Ierem. 26. Ieremy vvas accused by the priests. the Priestes and false Prophetes accused Ieremie, and the Priestes and false Prophetes would haue
destroyed and killed the Prophete, if the Iudges had had the power of iudgement: By that we doe vnderstande that they which seeme to be altogither ordayned for religion, being moued with enuie, with the holynesse of the Prophet, were more cru∣ell than they that had the charge of pub∣like necessities. In the same Chapter he saith moreouer: If at anye time for the commaundement of God, and for the veritie of the fayth, the Priestes, or false Prophetes, or the foolish people, are angry with vs, let vs not esteeme nor make any account of it: but let vs execute the sentence of God, not thinking on the euilles that are pre∣sente, but beholding the goodnesse to come. Esa. 10.Wo be vnto you that make vnrighteous lawes, and deuise things which be to hard to keepe: thorow which the poore be op∣pressed on euery side, and the Innocentes of my people are therewith robbed of iud∣gement: the wydowes may be your pray, and that ye may rob the fatherlesse. What will ye doe in time of the visitation and de∣struction that shall come from farre? To
whom will ye run for helpe?The tor∣ments of the vvicked princes. or to whom will ye giue your honour, that yee maye keepe it: that ye come not among the pri∣soners, or lye among the deade: After all this shall not the wrath of the Lord cease, but yet shall his hande bee stretched oute styll. It is verily a righteous thing with God,2. Thess. 1 to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you whiche are troubled, rest with vs when the Lord Ie∣sus shall shewe himselfe from heauen, with his mighty Angelles, in flaming fire, ren∣dring vengeance vnto them that doe not knowe God, neyther obey vnto the Gos∣pell of our Lorde Iesus Christe. Whiche shall be punished with euerlasting damna∣tion, from the presence of the Lorde, and from the glorye of his power. At the daye of iudgement (saythe the booke of wisedome) the righteousnesse shall stand in great stedfastnesse agaynst such as haue dealt extreamely with them,Sap. 5. and taken away their labours: when they see it, they shal be vexed with horible feare, and shall wonder at the hastinesse of the sodayne health: Groning for very di∣stresse
of minde,The com∣plaint of the persecutors at the day of iudgement. and shall say within them selues, hauing inward sorowe and mour∣ning for very anguish of minde. These are they whom we sometime had in derision, and iested vpon. We fooles thought their life very madnesse, and their ende to be without honor. But loe, howe they are counted among the children of God, and their porcion is among the saintes. Ther∣fore we haue erred from the way of truth, the light of righteousnesse hath not shined vnto vs, and the sonne of vnderstanding rose not vp vpon vs. We haue weried our selues in the way of wickednesse and de∣struction. Tedious wayes haue we gone: But as for the way of the Lord we haue not knowen it. What good hath our pride done vnto vs? or what profite hath the pompe of riches brought vs? all those thinges are passed away like a shadowe. And towardes the ende of the Chapter he sayth:Sapi. 5. his cruell wrath shall hee sharpen for a speare, and the whole compasse of the worlde shall fight with him against the vnwyse. Then shall the thunder boltes go out of the lightnings, and come out of the rayne bowe of the cloudes to the place ap∣pointed:
out of the harde stonie indigna∣tion there shall fall thicke hayles, and the water of the sea shall bee wroth agaynst them, and the flouds shall runne roughlye togither, yea, a mihgtie wynde shal stand vp agaynst them, and a storme shall scat∣ter them abroade. &c. Beholde howe the true christian doctrine is at this day called a new pestilentious doctrine by the worldlinges. Euen as in the old time it was called, and in the Apostles time. Men haue called before time (as they doe at this day) the doctrine of the Apo∣stles newe doctrine,The doctrin of the Apo∣stles nevve doctrine. as it appeareth in the actes of the Apostles where it is sayde: And they tooke Paule,Act. 17. and sayde vnto him, maye we not knowe what this newe doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? for thou bringest straunge tydings in oure eares. Some called him a babler, and a ti∣dings bringer of newe Gods. All men did speake agaynst the Aposto∣licall doctrine,Act. 28. as it appeareth by that which the Iewes sayde vnto Saint Paul when he was come to Rome, saying vnto him: we will heare of thee what thou thin∣kest:
for as concerning this sect, we know that euery where it is spoken against. Saint Paule being accused and brought before the great gouernor, they accused him after this sort: We haue founde this fellowe,Act. 24. a pestilent fellowe, and a mouer of debate vnto all the Iewes throughout the worlde, and a chiefe mayntayner of the sect of the Nazarites. Act. 24.Saint Paule answereth vnto the same: This I confesse vnto thee, that after that way (which they call heresye) so worship I the God of my fathers, beleeuing all thinges which are written in the lawe and the Prophets.The resur∣rection of the righte∣ous and vn∣righteous shall come. And haue hope towardes God, that the same resurrection of the deade which they them selues looke for al∣so, shall be both of the iust and vniust: some sayde that the Apostles with their doc∣trine, did nothing but moue the people to sedition, as it appeareth by the actes of the Apostles:Act. 17. saying, certayne vagabonds which were wicked fellowes did make as∣sault against the house of Iason, and drewe him with certayne brethren vnto ye heades of the citie, crying, these are they whiche haue subuerted the state of the world, and
here they are, which Iason hath receiued: and these all doe contrary to the decrees of Ceasar, affirming that there is another king one Iesus. Therefore we labour and suffer rebuke,1. Tim. 4. bicause we haue sure hope in the liuing God, which is the sauiour of all men, but specially of those that beleeue. The Tyrantes shall not escape vnpuni∣shed, but often times they them selues that did put to death the children of God, by the handes of the hangmen, haue not that good to be killed of the hangmen, but they them selues are the hangmen or murde∣rers of their owne bodyes.1. Sam. 31 Note the vengeance of God a∣gaynst the vvicked persecutors. As it appea∣reth by Saule which persecuted Dauid. It was not needefull that Dauid shoulde haue pursued him, for he was auenged more then he desired. It was not needefull to hang vp Achitophel: nor the Apostles to pursue Iudas that betrayed his mai∣ster,Act. 1. for he him selfe was his owne hang∣man, hanging himselfe by the necke, brast a sunder in the middes, and all his bow∣elles gusshed out.Esay. 37. 2. Mac. 8. And Senacherib had for his hangmen his owne sonnes: and it did cost Ezechias nothing for to auenge him
selfe of the tyrannie agaynst him. Act. 12.Were Antiochus and Herode left vn∣punished for theyr tyrannie vpon the chil∣dren of God?Euseb. li. 1 cap. 9. li. 2 cap. 10. It appeareth no. For they were consumed and eaten with lyce and vermine. God will not leaue the wic∣ked vnpunished as it appeareth of Achab,3. Reg. 22 4 Reg. 15.21.24.25 Manasses, Se∣dechias and many Em∣peroures of Rome. 1. Timo. 6. Regi autem seculorum immortali, inuisibili, soli sapienti deo, honor & gloria in secula seculorum. Amen. FINIS.
A Table to finde oute the principall things contayned in this pre∣sent booke, and first of the Letter A. ABstinence. Pag. 229. Adam condemneth his posteri∣tie. Pag. 50. Adam not good of himselfe. Pag. 59. Adam his free vvill. Pag. 59. Aduocate for vs, Iesus Christ. Pag. 192. Aduocate any other is error. Pag. 191. Aduocate for S. Iohn, onely Christ. Pag. 191. Aduocates none vvith God, as Earles, and Lordes vvith Kings. Pag. 200 Angels not to be honoured. Pag. 175 Angels vvould vve should honour God. Pag. 175. Apostles maryed. Pag. 245. Apostles teach the commaundements of God. Pag. 284 Apostles vvrite clearely. Pag. 325. Apostles praying for the Cananite. Pag. 197. Apostles assembled secretly. Pag. 340. Assemblies certified by Plinie. Pag. 345. Assemblies of the Christians by night. Pag. 342. Assemblies their deedes. Pag. 343. Assemblies harmelesse. Pag. 241. Assembled, their prayers. Pag. 343. Assemblie of Ievves burned. Pag. 346. Ashes of Saints. Pag. 186. Augustine counteth but tvvo Sacraments. Pag. 38. Augustine his recantation. Pag. 48. Augustine of free vvill. Pag. 60.
Augustine his exposition. Pag. 171. Augustine his opinion. Pag. 283. B. Baptisme purgeth not sinnes. Pag. 23. Bishop of Bishops none. Pag. 50. Bloude of Oxen. Pag. 37. Bodie of Christ not carnally eaten. Pag. 3. Bodie of Christ not diuided. Pag. 3. Bodie of Christ vvhole in heauen. Pag. 3. Bodie of Christ in likenesse of breade. Pag. 4. Bodie of Christ called breade. Pag. 22. Bodie of Christ not consumed. Pag. 24. Bodie of Christ but in one place. Pag. 25. Bodie of Christ offred once for all. Pag. 37. Bookes of the Machabees. Pag. 173. Bookes of the Apostles. Pag. 321. Bookes holy to be had. Pag. 309. Bookes spirituall. Pag. 222. Bookes their profite. Pag. 223. Burners of Christes bodie. Pag. 24. C. Canons. Pag. 24. 28. 30. 36. 161. 169. 172. 214. 216. 222. 230. 246. 248. 251. 268. 269. 271. 278. Chayre of Moyses. Pag. 279. Chastitie. Pag. 247. Children obedient. Pag. 301. 303. Children vvell instructed. Pag. 302. Christ the vertue of God. Pag. 316. Christ the only heade. Pag. 280. Christians giuen to dyce. Pag. 298.
Christians theyr idlenesse. Pag. 297. Christians small account of faith. Pag. 295. Christians not content. Pag. 337. Christians theyr ignorance. Pag. 295. Church the true. Pag. 263. 261. Church of the wicked. Pag. 258. Church where. Pag. 260. Church of our time. Pag. 263. Church of the wicked mightie. Pag. 263. Church rent by priestes. Pag. 266. Chrysostome his opinion. Pag. 316. Clement. Pag. 245. Commaundements of God what. Pag. 56. 134. Commaundements how perfected. Pag. 140. Commandements bring humilitie. Pag. 144. Commaundements greate. Pag. 143. Compulsion of no effect. Pag. 352. Compulsion no pleasure. Pag. 353. Confession auricular abolished. Pag. 43. Confession not before men. Pag. 43. Confession to God onely. Pag. 40. Counsell of Basill. Pag. 29. Counsell of Toledo. Pag. 161. 216. 233. 276. Counsell of Constantinople. Pag. 215. 248, Counsell of Gangres. Pag. 248. 256. 278. Counsell of Nice. Pag. 249. 247. 21. Counsell of Anticyra. Pag. 248. Counsell of Ariminum. Pag. 275. Counsel of Oreng. Pag. 256. Counsell of Illyberis. Pag. 276. 214. 216. Counsell of Carthage. Pag. 274. 275. 276. Counsell of Orleans. Pag. 276. Counsell of Chalons. Pag. 276.
Counsell of Chalcedon. Pag. 276. Counsell Lateran. Pag. 276. Counsell Mileuitan. Pag. 55. Counsell of Laodicea. Pag. 174. Counsell of Ephesus. Pag. 275. Counsell of VVormes. Pag. 271. Counsell of Braga. Pag. 230. Counsell the authoritie. Pag. 275. Custome not followed Pag. 288. Custome follower. Pag. 288. Cuppe ministred to the laye. Pag. 29. D. Daughters their education. Pag. 314. Daughter to eschew the world. Pag. 315. Deacons maryed. Pag. 250. Deade haue nothing common. Pag. 164. Dead nothing profiteth. Pag. 162. Death of Christ. Pag. 84. Doctrine of men. Pag. 281. Doubt. Pag. 283. Doubt of secrets. Pag. 151. Drinke sanctified. Pag. 22. Deuill ouerthrowen. Pag. 165. Deuill his dwelling. Pag. 218. F. Fast without workes. Pag. 241. Fast of the Grecians. Pag. 241. Faith onely saueth. Pag. 93. Faith the helpe. Pag. 105. Faith without lawe. Pag. 112. Faith the suretie. Pag. 261. Faith the thinges concerning. Pag. 277.
Faith newe. Pag. 78. Faith rendred. Pag. 296. Faith the excellencie. Pag. 333. Faithfull not compelled. Pag. 244. Figure none of God. Pag. 202. Flesh of Christ. Pag. 214. Flesh. and bloud of man Pag. 8 Flesh agaynst fleshe. Pag. Flesh of Christ without sinne. Pag. 17. Flye from the meeke none. Pag. 361. Flye the wicked. Pag. 362. Flight commaunded. Pag. 360. Flight reproched. Pag. 360. Flight of the Saints. Pag. 362. Foole fashioneth God. Pag. 206. Forgiuenesse of God. Pag. 116. Forgiuenesse in the bloud of Christ. Pag. 118. Forgiuenesse in this world. Pag. 156. Freewill condemneth. Pag. 52. Freewill to doe ill. Pag. 59. Freewill destroyeth faith. Pag. 61. Freewill not to be defended. Pag. 53. Freewill deliuereth not. Pag. 65. Freewill lost. Pag. 67. Freewill established. Pag. 69. Freewill naught. Pag. 70. G. Gift of God. Pag. 118. God descended from heauen. Pag. 58. God giueth the demaund. Pag. 344. Good thought. Pag. 55. Good workes. Pag. 72. 117.
Good workes not of our vertue. Pag. 71. Gospell in the heart. Pag. 188. Gospell dispensed. Pag. 268. Gospell the suretie. Pag. 292. Gospell contayneth all. Pag. 292. Gounes for the deade. Pag. 163. Grace seperated from merite. Pag. 75. Grace iustifieth. Pag. 75. Grace hindered. Pag. 81. Grace free. Pag. 94. Grace worketh goodnesse. Pag. 94. Grace of the Heretickes. Pag. 102. Grace easeth. Pag. 135. Gregorye his doubt. Pag. 271. H. Heretickes spared Epiphanius Pag. 227. Hereticks their bookes. Pag. 286. Hilarye. Pag. 249. Hoc. Pag. 11. I. Idolaters Christians. Pag. 185. Iesus Christ seene with the eye. Pag. 192. Iesus Christ where. Pag. 25. Iesus builder of the Church. Pag. 49. Iesus our purgatory. Pag. 152. Images not lawfull. Pag. 201. 215. Image caruers. Pag. 208. Images doe not shew God. Pag. 207. Image of God the honor. Pag. 210. Image the pilgrimage. Pag. 210. Images of Christ. Pag. 213. Images not to seeke God. Pag. 215.
Images pleasing God. Pag. 218. Image honorers. Pag. 216. 221. Images burnt. Pag. 222. Image rent. Pag. 225. Images hurtfull. Pag. 215. 223. Iudgement giuen. Pag. 157. Iudgement not auoyded. Pag. 178. Iust. Pag. 95. Iustification not by nature. Pag. 100. Iustified freely. Pag. 86. Iustification. Pag. 88. Iustification by faith. Pag. 93. K. Keyes of the Church. Pag. 46. Keyes of Peter. Pag. 47. Kyll. Pag. 351. 360. L. Law of the two tables. Pag. 145. Law for the proude. Pag. 145. 144. Lent. Pag. 234. Life. Pag. 156. Life lasting profiteth, Pag. 158. Loue of God. Pag. 140. Loue, not idle. Pag. 109. M. Man naught. Pag. 62. Man vnder sinne. Pag. 53. Man separated from God. Pag. 154. Man wise despised. Pag. 355. Man profiteth not by force. Pag. 252. Mariage forbidden. Pag. 244. 253. Mediatour Iesus. Pag. 192.
Mediatour not man. Pag. 194. Merite of men. Pag. 75. Monkes their life. Pag. 231. N. New alliance. Pag. 1. O. Offering of candelles. Pag. 213. P. Pelagians. Pag. 141. Popes. Pag. 270. 271. 272. Prayer. Pag. 196. Prestes. Pag. 45. 166. 249. 265. 335. R. Religion. Pag. 208. Righteousnesse. Pag. 103. 144. 86. Righteousnesse of God ours. Pag. 79. S. Sacraments. Pag. 19. 39. Sacrifice. Pag. 36. Saint hath sinne. Pag. 103. In Saints no hope. Pag. 184. 181. Scripture hath no fault. Pag. 282. 279. 285. Scripture in the heart. Pag. 299. 313. Scriptures forbidden. Pag. 300. 301. 302. 334. 222. Scriptures the profite. Pag. 303. 304. 305. Scriptures no excuse. Pag. 308. 309. 310. 317. Scriptures the necessitie. Pag. 318. 323. Scripture spirituall. Pag. 16. Scripture life. Pag. 335. Signes for the signified. Pag. 39. Soules of the good. 151. 153. of the wicked. Pag. 153 163. Soules of the dead. Pag. 181
Supper. Pag. 3. 4. Supper of the sicke. Pag. 7. 8. Supper the signification. Pag. 20. Supper in two kindes. Pag. 27. Supper of bread not kept in the pix. Pag. 29. Supper called Eucharistia. Pag. 31. called a Sacrafice. 35. not changed Pag. 20. Songes filthy. Pag. 338. T. Torments of the wicked Princes. Pag. 377. Truth not vanquished. Pag. 338. V. Vengeance of Christ. Pag. 377. 381. Village of Christ. Pag. 301. Virginitie. Pag. 252. W. VVill of good thinges. Pag. 69. VVoman of Canaan. Pag. 196. VVoman maryed. Pag. 312. VVoman honour of the husband. Pag. 312. VVord reiected. Pag. 280. VVorkes condemne vs. Pag. 77. VVorkes not esteemed. Pag. 77. VVorkes of ours haue no life. Pag. 72. VVorshyppe of Saintes. Pag. 180. 188. 190. 200. 209. VVorshipp onelye the true God. Pag. 212. VVorshippe of Helena. Pag. 213. VVorshippers of images Heretickes. Pag. 215. VVorshippe of infidels Pag. 220. VVoundes of Christe. Pag. 78. FINIS.
