14110 99854466 19889
An ente of Welth, and Helth, very my and  Pastyme, newly  Imprinted. ¶The Names of the players. Welth. Helth, Lybertie. Ilwyll. Shrowdwyt. Hance. Remedy Foure may easely play this Playe.
¶Here entreth Welth, and Helth synging together a balet of two partes, and after speaketh Welth. WHy is there no curtesy now I am come I towe that all the people be dme Or els so god helpe me and halyd They were almost a sleepe. No wordes I harde, no yet no lking No instrument went nor ballattes synging What ayles you all thus  syt dreaming Of whom take ye care? Of my coming ye may be ld Therefore I pray you For all your desyre shall be had I can amende your chee By God I thinke ye haue forgotten me. I am welth of this realme looke vpon me For I am to euery man louing and frendly For welth hath no pere. Helth. Brother welth haue ye not yet doone? ye prayse your selfe aboue the moone Euery man may perceyue therby soone That you lacke discresyo Weth. Wherfore, by god I cannot say to much I am so welthy of substaunce and rych In all the worlde where is one such As I am of comparison. Helth. Welth is good I cannot deny Yet prayse your selfe so muche ye may For welth oftentimes doth decay And welth is nothing sre.
Welth. Welth hath ben euer in thi countrey And here I prpose styll for to be For this is the lande most mete for me And here I wyll endure. Health Therin ye speakfull louingle For in this realme welth should be yeth no displeasure I pray you hartely But in the way of communicacion. And for pastyme I would peake some wayes Of no comparison, nor to you no dyspyre, I doo not intende that maner alwayes, But for a recreation, wealth Brother wht soeuer ye say to me. I wyll heare yo pcitly I am content and I  you hartely Begyn and say your pleasur Health I thanke you hly th wyll I Some what vnto my purpose apply Though welth be praised marululy yet to myne vnderstauding. Welth is mutable, and tht in shame And welth is hauty and proude of name Welth t cruell, and in great blame For welth is er wauerynge. walth. To whom haue I doone any harme can ye say, ye stander me noe, yet I trust I may Aunswere for my selte in euery maner way ye wyl not deny that? Health God forbyd but ye should d so And ye may doo it wheher I wyl or no Inlykewise, I must answer you als When ye say not true.
Though I be but to you a poore man yet helth I height, the same I am That is desyred vniuersally than Some calles me as good as you Welth. As I, mary ther in deede ye do compare. Such wordes myght brynge you soone in care Lewde parson, thou art not ware Of what substaunce I am Health. Yes I can tell what you are, be not dyspleased welth is of great substaunce, that cannot be denyed yet shew your comodities, and ye shalbe answered I promyse you wellh is fugitiue. wealth What sayst thou`am I a tagetyue I was neuer so taken vp in my lyfe Nor called vnsure, well I wyll make no stryfe yet where as thou dost lay, Thai I should shew my commodityes alwayes The best for my selfe wherof I aske prayse yf I shoulde staud her all my lyfe dayes yet I coulde not say. Nor halfe the benefites that commeth of me yt cannot be tolde nor resyted shortly Welth is the  of althing earthly That you cannot denye. Ferste god saue, our soueraine Ladye the Queene With all the counsel and all that wish them bne Am not I welth with them euer at eue Who should be there but I? Men of the lawe, and ioly rych marchauntes There be welthy both of goodes and lands, Without comparyson is in their handes I walth hatg all freasure.
Health. O good syr, of whom commeth all this Of god only, to yo no thanke I wys And yet mans welth tands not all in ryches I dare saye that boldly, Wan a man hath a cempetent liuing with the grace of god that passeth all thyng Loue of his neyghbour, aud good reporting Then is he welthy, Welth of goodes is but a fame Ye is welhy that hath a good name Euery wyse man wyll coueyte the same For other welth I not reche yf a man haue neuer so much good name Euery wise man wyll coueye the same if his disposicions be nought aud wood Then he is but a wretch, Welth. Nay thou art a wretch, and a foole vuwyse welth of ryches thus to despyse Doest thou not se all the worlde aryse By goodes and substaunce He that hath plenty of syluer and golde May haue all thyng whatsoeuer he woulde whan can welth lacke, seing all thing is solde Ad welth is of assuraunce. Health I deuye that, your saying is nought Grace heauen, nor cunning, cannot be bought wihout great paine, ād good dedes wrought Els man cannot them haue. wealth Stop thereat, and hold thy peace May not men by heaen with richesse As to bylde churches and make bye wayes Such deedes mans soule doth sans
Health Yea, ut yet ye ust marke one synge yf these goodes came with wroge doyng Shall ye haue heauen for so spendynge Or yet ay mede. Nay nay except that ma himselfe doo meeke And make resystace the ryght hoour to seeke Els all such good dedes is not woth a leeke welth hereof take heede. wealth. Why thinkest thou that all men which hth welth Getteth theyr goodes with brybry and sealeth Thy repore is nought therfore Helthe I counsell thee to ay the best. Health So I wyll, but yet I must say true And ow a lyttle more I wyll say to you Much sorowe and care wlth doth rewe He i seldome in rest. when a man is a lyttle hit and welthy Ad hath in his hese treasures plentye Then wyl he wrangle, and do shreudly By his power and might. With his neighoures he wyll go to lawe And a wreke his malyce for valew of strawe welth is fykle and out f awe wylfull in wronge or ryght Welth. Thou speakest with a slaunderous tong All of euyll wyll, and yet it is wroe welth in this realme hath bin louge Of me commeth great honour. Because that I welth ath great port All the worlde, hyher doth resorte Therfore I wlh, am this realmes comfort, And here I wyll indure.
Helth. So I wold ye shou, and I shall do the same Helth I am called, and that is my name If I would not abyde heare I were to blame For here I am well cherihed Yet say your selfe, nhw indifferenly And if euery man doo not loue me Helth as well as welth, yes verely Therof I dare be reported Weth. Why should they loue thee that wolde I knowe As wel as me, I pray you showe I am the superiour of hi and lowe No man may compare with me. Helth. To shew why I wyll not be afraied For I can bide by that I aue sayde Yf welthy men be very well apayd Or muche they set you by. But of welth, if they haue neuer so much Goodes, tryasure and golde, and be called rych Yet yf they lacke helth, there payne is suche That they were better dye. A man to were golde, and be in paye What ioy hath he? none, but would be fayne To giue all his treasure for helth playne Or els he were very mad: For if a man be neuer so poure Yet if he haue helth, that is a treasure, Then for his liuing, he may laboure And in his harte be glad, Welth. I neuer marked thus muche, nor vnderstood That Helth was such a treasure, and to man so good Wherfore I am sory, ad I wil chaunge my moode Now I pray you forgiue me.
Healh I will forgiue or els I were to blame And I pray you to forgiue me the same I loue you hartly, and wyll prayse your name yf it please you to keepe my company. ¶Here entreth lyberty with a sog & after speaketh libert Why tary syrs whether are ye going I see well ye looked not for my commig Loe, out of syght out of remembryg Absece is cause of straugnes, What looke ye on werwhy are ye so straunge From your fellow liberty, doth your minds chaūge I your company I was wont to range What nedes all this busines, wealth By liberty now I doo not set Seyng that helth and I am met As feloweh together no man shall let Me for to loue hym best. liberty. Let me heare what ye do say Then ye are about to cast me away How happes this? mary then I may Goe pyke strawes and take me rest. I pray you tell me whom I haue ofended yf I haue made a faute it shalde amended with so shorte warning let me not be voyded I crow yet ye do but iest. Heth Why do ye make this cauelacion we entende to make no alteracyon welth and I haue had communication He is my freende of olde. liberty What was the matter, I pray you tell Me thinkes I ought to be of counsel Or els I promyse you ye doo not well
With you I should beholde. Welth. The matter is doone we are agreed To reason it more it shall not neede O brother helth, thou art in deede More preciouser then golde. liberty. Gods bodi how commeth this gere to pas I am cast out at the cartes arse The worlde is nothing as it was For I am here refused Health Why be you angry that we doo agree Then are ye not wye, for if ye loue me I will loue hym agayne, so it should be Or els I were mysaduised libert Then of my loue ye set no store My company I see well ye looked notfore Farewell I wyll get me out of the doore yet I am your betters and so am I called. wealth Such presumptuouse wordes wyll haue a fall your comparyson is but feble and small What can ye do nothyng at all As you haue reputed. liberti. What were ye both two, were not I. Wretches and caytyfes, looke not so hye Thinke no scorne hardly For I may be your peare yf welth haue neuer so much substaunce Lacking Libertye and wer in duraunce Within a whyte, I am in assurance ye woulde pray me come nere. Yf Helth be neuer so lust and stronge yet if Lyberty were kept from him longe Then sorow and care wolde be his songe.
yt would abate your cheare. Fye of welth which lacketh ybertye Fye of Helth and be in captiuitie Fye of riches and lack good company Lyberty hath no pere, . Wyll ye heare how he doth clatter? What neede ye to rehearse all this matter. ye know that we twayne afore any other. Lyberty must nedes haue styll. Lybertie o vs is glade to wayte ye stade to farre i your owne conceyte I wys lybertye ye ran make no bayte To catche vs at your will. liberty Now there ye lye, I can suffer no loger Welth for Libertye doth lobore euer Aud helth for Libertye is a great store Therfore set me not so lyght wealth Libertye I pray the reasou no more ye are welcome to vs as ye were before In dede of liberty it is great suter Therfore welcome by this lyght liberty Now I thanke you both full kindly your strange wordes a lytle did grene me And now at your cōmaūdement I am redy Aud at your owne wyll. ¶Here entreth with some iest yll wyll Wyll. Mary I am come at the first call Wyll, your owne man haue me who shall For I am will seruaunt to you al Ye shall not neede to sende for me. Welth. Who is acquanted with this man
He is very homely aud lytle good he can To come in here so boldly, then Due him away quickly, Wll. Why, I cam not tyll C was called your owne wyll opeuly ye named Then I came a pace lest I should be blamed Therore I pray you let me hyde styll, Whose wyll, or what wyll, doth he meane Thou art not my wyl, I forsake thee cleane My wyl and their wylles is often sene Our wylles can none yll Wyll. Alas good masters I can none yll yet by my trouth I am your euyll wyll your wil, & your will, & yonr will, therfore keepe m I loue ye by goddes mother, liberty. This is a straunge saying vnto me My wyl, your wyll, and his wyll, this cannot be For in our wyles is great diuersitie For one is not lyke another, yll. Yet by Christ your owne wyl I am The maddest wyl, and the meriest, than For goddes sake now, let me be your man Tyl ye haue better acquaintaunce. wealth I perceyue this felow is kynde And oweth to vs good wyl and mynde Some kindes agayne then let hym finde Let him haue some furderauuce Wyll. By god ir and I durst be so bolde Aquaintance of this man clayme I would and kyted to, yf the trouth were tolde we be of one consangnynitie Halth How so? let me here that I pray thee hartly
Wyll. Wyl and lybertyis, of auncierie olde with ont lyberye, wil dare not beolde And where wyl lacketh, lybertye is full colde Thyrfore wyl and lybertye must nedes be of kyn. liberti. In dede as he saythe it may well be For wyl euer longeth vnto lybrtye Therfore good freende welcome to me I praye you al be good to him And goeth out Welth. For your sake he is welcome to b all Let him come to our place an than he shall Haue succoure of vs and helpe withal & now we wil epart. And welth & helth goth out. Wyll. Wyl ye go hence. I thanke ye masters with al my hert I wyl ske you out I warrat you feare not Now they be gone I am glad by saint mary A lyttel while heare I purpose to tary How to deceyue welth, helth, and libertie Now must I deuyse. For I am a chylde that is pas grace I wyll I am called that in euery place Doth much michiefe this is a playne case Uertue I doo vtterly dispise, But if they wyst what I were Then of my purpose I should be neuer y• ere I wyl kepe my onge lee that I r. My whole intent and wyll. But now I meruayle by this day Where shrewd wit is gone a stray Some crafty touche is in his way I here him, peace, stand styll ¶Entreth shrewd wyt with a songe. ¶Dien vous garde playsaunce
On seuen or no chaunce, what youkers dare auaunte To playe a grote or twaine. Loe heare I haue in store Two or three grotes and no more I take great thought therfore For to kepe it, it is much payne I come uow out of a place where is a company of small grace Theues and hores that spendes a pace They were dronken all the sorte. One of their purces I did a spy Out of his sleue where it dyd lye And one wynked on me with his eye But ther began the sporte Their false falsehode, and I crafty wyt got the purse loe, heare I haue it I ran my way and let hym syt Smoke and shitten arse together. And yf that I had yll wyll here with this money we wolde make good chere Gentle brother wyll, I pray the apeare For thou art in some corner. Wytte I woulde come in but I am a fearde Least that I be taken by the bearde Wyth some catchepol, I haue heard How thou haste stollen a purse wytte Thou horsou art thou mad, cum in I say This is not the fyrste hazard that I haue scaped yf I make au hand to decke my felfe gay what am I the worse. wyll From thy company I cannot abyde I must edes holde vpon hy syde
ywyll and shrewd wit who ca hyde For they will be together. wytte. Now welcome wyll and what cha: By god I thought for thee a thosand yere Pace for gods body who cummeth there Hauce bere pot Ascon router. ¶Entreth Hance with a dutche songe. Gut nyuen sone rutters by the moder got It eist ōwne shon, for saue ye nee De quseker mau iche bie do do Uan the groate bnmbarde well ic wee Dartyck dowsant van enhebit mete Ic best de mauikin van de keining danglier De grot keyser kind ic bene his usketr Wyll. Her ye not donkē hance how he be gius to prae The ma low perte slemige is a litle to cheke mate wytte Let the knaue aloue, for his name is war. Such dronken slminiuges your company wilmar Hance. Ic bes nen emond, ic best in soche ye secte nete vell ic forsaue ye in doche Wyll. Cpt hore leyf with yor gound stand nere yt beummes you better to handle a potte of beare Hance Dat maght ic vell dan, ic can skynke frlyck Tab bers frw, ic briges brore, begots nemerick wytte. The horse ka by he ese is dronke A winking for dep his eyen be cleane lonck Hauce Ic ore ye vell ye seg dac ic ope Ne nike, u nike, ic compta hoe for an aud or cope. Wyll. Wel coppin I pray the hartly tell vs trew Wherfore comest thou hether for any thig to sew Hanc ye icke fgr en būbardere vā de koynig wei it be Heb twe skelling de dagh ic cn scote de culueryn
wytte. Nay ye shall walke a fleming knaue, wyl ye not see We haue English gnners ynow, there is no rome empty Hance Ic best en omerde moye to m spreken what segye ye bones, it sal ye yode stan Wyll. We speake not to thee thou art a sone man But goe thy way they be not here that promot y• cā Hance Cant ye me a de house dragen van degrot here. wytte. Hauce ye must go to y• court & for welth inquire Hance What segre ye welth nenyke he is net hore welth best in saunders, it my self brought him dore Wyll. Be shrew your horson seminges hert therfore. in dede as he saith, by war in laūders theris welth store Hance Segt ye dat brower, by the moder got dan Gut naught it mot waft, to sent cafrin to mi laninā & goeth out wyll. Is he gone, farewel hanykin howse I pray god giue him a hounded drouse For I trow a knaue brought hym to house But now brother wyt. We must deuoe how that we may Be in seruice with welth alwaye Let me here what thou canst do or say To helpe for to contryue it. wytte. For thy pleasure that I shall This wyll I doo first of all Flatter and lye, and euermore call Them my good maysters styll. Then with swering, lying and powlinge Brybry theft, and preuy pyking Thus I shred wet, wyll euer be doinge I warrant ther yll wyll. Wyll. I un thee thanke, this is well deuysed And I yll wil, wolde haue euery man dispised
B now another thing must be conriued O els al wilbe nought There is one they call good remedy I this realme, he hath geet actory He is a nole m and much worthy Mny thiuges he hach wrought He is called lst, discreete and indifference Willing to fulfil his soueries commaundement H is not fraide to do right punishment Terfore of him I am afrayde wytte. So an I to this maketh me very sadde Yet oftentymes I he bene harde bestadde Nw yt I m aned of him I am vry glad caft wle for him hle hae Wyll. Pce no mo wordes but M think I eare mast welth ca Kle doe  deuout orison Tt they may heare vs pry Nw  Welth, Heh, aud Lbertie. Liberty and helth retureth back with welth Wealth Srs you shll haue bo ods blessing Sce e worth for our praying ye are wel disposed and of good liuing I wll loue you the erteral way Wyll. Sir this do we vse euer day Fr wth helth and liberty  ray This sa is m brother, He is an hard honest man. wytte. Foroth mater I am his rother To be  sera, was my cūing hether A loge as we two be to gether ye shall not peyhe than
Health To haue you both  seruyce I am content How say you libertie wil you therto consen Wyll and wit, god hath vs lent We may be glade of them liberti. Yf we sholde refuse wyl and wyt we were to blame or they be fyt Therfore by my wel they shal not lye They be welcome to me, Wyll. God thanke you maisers all three ye shal finde vs pore but  we cannot be My tonge stomles, I cry you mercy We wyll be true I should ay, wealth Syrs go your way home vnto one place And w wyl hye vs after pace And when we come we shall set you in case To hau a lyuing lway. Health Thn loke ye do both truely and iust For we must put you in great All our houhoulde guide y must Bhaue you selfe well. wytte Maisters feare not for I he wit iough To beguyle my selfe, and  beguyle you I haue begyled many one I may say to you I pray you kepe that in councelll liberty. Beware of that, what doth he say? Beguyle vs all, yet I charge ye ay Ye shall not beguile vs yf I may I wyl beware betyme. Wyll. Syr be not angry I you praye he foole woteth not he doth say He meneth hat he wil be profitable alway And saue you many thinges.
Health What he meaneth I canot te But his saying is not well Depart hence syrs by my councell And tary vs at our lodging. wye. ¶Now and it please ye, wyll ye ere any synging Therein I tell you I am swhat onyng ye shall heare and ye list. libry Syr I pray you sing and ye ran wll. Now wil I begin like a lusty bloud thā. thei sing & go out Sirs now go your way of you I am glad As of any serauntes that euer I had For these can do doth good o bad We must needes haue such men What were we yf we lacked wyll: And without yt we oulde lyue yll Therfore wyll and wit I wyll epe styll. I promise you I loue them ¶Here commeth remedy in and to him saith Welth. Syr your maystership is ately welcome Tke your place here aboue as it is reason. Health I pray you ardon vs, we know not what ye be ye seme a man of honour, and of great anctority liberty Sr to know wherfore ye come we are desyrons Remdi I am be that ought for to be well knowen Of you thre specially, and of duetie Great payne and busines as for mine owne For you I haue taken because I loe you hartely To mitaine you is all my deyre and faculty yet hard it is to doo, the people be so variable And many be so wilfull, they will not be reformable. wealth Syr I pray you pardon vs of our ignoraunce now I se well ye know vs better tha we do yo
Remdi I pardon you, for I doo know you wl both welh, and lh, is your Th which nglad to forbee were very lot For by welth and helth commeth re al saes Many other enes or our gret welth ames Ta they ae not preume, nor thy dare no e bold Health To strye againe Enlad or ay right with holde. remedi Sir ye be welcom, I deeh you show s your name liberti. Good remedy forsouth I  the sme yf I  o bolde I wolde pray you harely To shwe vs apart of you great acoritie, md My actoritie is geuen to e most speciall To maintaine you three, in this realme to be What mine intent is. I wyl tel, u not all For that were to longe to rehere of a surety And I desyre you all or to be louing o me For your owne ease, come wlth and profyt Wealth Good remedy, then we anst desre yor aydyng For by good remedy cometh all ou preferrig. Remdi All that I doo intende, if ye wil therto agre And to be reformable for your owne case It is not the thynge that lieth only in me But my good wyl, therfore I wyl not cease To haue your loue ad fauour, and thereby to please Al the worlde ouer, and to promote his realme That you thre may prosper, ye perceue what I mene The chiefe parte of all welth lyeth in great estates Theyr substance and landes. is right commendable Prelates of the churche is welthy of ryches Merchaūtes hath marchaūdise & goods iucōperable Mē of aw & franklins is welthy which i laudable
Ths welth of riches is deuided diuerse wayes Ad to these ma charges, come now a dayes Health My hert reoseh to er your good reporting are we bound to god, which prouideth althing Remdi Forsoth here is  half that I cou reerse The benefits of god that e sheweth to you welth Cosider Englysh men, how vaiant they be & fere O al nacious one such, when they haue their elth No land can do vs arme, b wyth falled or elth rmēbre what nōbre of m or aerie good ordnāe Specially ye grace of god, which is our  forderāce If there be any that wyll grudge, surm or o Againe welth, helth & libertie, then st I for ye e Shw ine auctoritie and power, for o remedy it o That noe of you shall diminishe nor amiss be ane I good remedy therfore may & will speak won blāe For the comen welth, & helth both of the soule & bdy y• is mi office & power, & therfore I haue my actoritie wealth Our lorde coninue ye, & we thanke you harly Both for your good istruction, and for your kindnes That you intnd so wel for vs good remedy when we haue nede we will desyre your goodnes Health When we be infect in the soule or body Then will I seke good remedy for succor As yet I thanke god I haue no nede greatly yf I haue then wyll I seke to haue your fauour liberty Syr now we wyl departe hence with yor licence Remdi For other diuers busines that we mus haue tohether Sirs I am coutent, now when ye wyll depart To god I commyt yo I wyll not make you tary But yet I pray with all my minde and heart Take hede in any wise exchewe yl & shrewd compani
y a mā be neuer soo ood & vs  be utrist̄ He shalle e his name, & to some vice they wil him tēp herfore bewar of such people, & eom thē be exemp Health yes yes I warrant you of sc I wyll beware. Farewel good remedy & wel to fare. & goth out Remdi I pray god be our spede & preserue you frō paine it is mi mind ye shold prosper I wold haue it so ain. Wll. Here is none of our acquaiutaūce wil reoureth we haue made to louge taraunce that wyll y say percunce Aud they begone home come away apar Wytte. Nay by god not so astie A lytle whyle we wyll larye Good euen sr to you mary Dwell ye in this place? Remdi Nay good fellowe I dwel not eare Wherefore doest thou hat inqui: Woldest thou ought with any eare Speake e not afryde Wyll. By God I would I had yor gowne Aud were a myle without the towne Theron A woulde borowe a crowne It is I that so sayde Wytte. Hew lookest thou one him halfe a scorne I pomise you he is a scant gentylman bore What sūyst thou in his face Remdi For somwhat in his face I loke Iu dede his mastership standes a crook For false shrewes both of you I tooke And chyldren that be past grace. Wyll. I wyll swere for hym, as or this yeares twenty that he hath ben euer as true as I
yet sometyme he will steale and make a He is of my alyaunce. Remdi In good fayth the same thinke I That ye be both lyke, full vnthrifty Syrs how do ye lyue, shew me quickly Or I shall put you in duraunce wytte. How liue we? mary our meate Cummest thou hether for to threte: So lordly syr wittam doth speake From whne doth he come can ye shewe Wyll. What dost thou ayle canst thou tell? Hast thou any thing with vs to mell? By the masse thy handes doth tykell Thou shalt beare me a blowe. remedi you false theues I know ye well I shall let your purpose uy deale yll wyll, and shrewd wit, the deuyll of hell Take ye both for me. wytte. Mary thou lyest, our names be not so Call vs but wit, and wyll, adde no more thereto, yf thou doest thou were as good no We shall handle you shrewdly Remdi Syrs farewell here I wil no longer abide For you both shortly I wyll prouide Tha all your ale craft shalbe out tryed And our subtillitie knowen and goeth out. wytte. To go so soone the horson was wyse therfore some now I must deuise that each man may welth, helth and liberti despise Or els he wyll marre all our mateer. Brother wat, let me alone When they come you shal see me a none
Cmplayne of him vnto them econe And put him out of fauour Wytte Peace no mo words, for they come yonder wealth Syrs I am glade that you h heare How doth all our houshold with them what chere Is euery thig in order there Air our intente? wyll. ye syr they be all mery and glad With reuell and out somtime they be mad Pipe whore bot heef, euery knaue and drabe Is at our commaundemet. Helth urneth hym. What do ye say, then e are to blame Ad we put you in trust for the same To kepe such rule, it is a shame It is not for our honour wye. By the masse he horson doth lye There is no such rule by gods body A man may breke his eck as lyghtly As his fast in your kechin, or seller truly. Liberty turneth him With that nother I am o cotet I wolde there should be liberaitie compeēt Ad with honesti it is conenient That our neihbour fare the better Wyll. you be agy with all that we haue done Cum away brother let vs go eus soone I know a nw mister wher we shalbe welcum God be with ou gentyl maister Welth. Why wil ye begone or a worde Praduenture we did but boorde Me thinke ye should your mayster foorde
For to speake my minde. wytte Nay ay, I can tel what was the matter Remedy was here, and he dyd latter ye trust he more than vs and better But marke the ende, what ye shal find Halth With good remedy we spake iu dede To low his counsel we had neede He warned vs that we should take hede Of excesse and prodigalitie. Wytte I meruayle ye speake so of good remedy It is I that can do more than be Wyt can make shyft at necessit When Remedi cannot be hearde I know some that hath this thousand yere Sought god remedy and yet neuer the nere wit can put remedy by, yea this is cleare For wit is a crafty lad. Wyll. And wyl is an vngracious stay Wyl hath doone many thinges me say And yf ye let wit and wil goe his way ye wil repent it soone. liberty Why what cause haue you to go your way ye shall abyde wich vs though you say nay I wyl folow wyl, and wit alway And so I haue euer done wytte. yf I wilt al my masters wolde so do Then from your seruyce I wolde ot goo Speake ow wheher ye wyl or no And let vs know your minde Health Syrs ye be welcome to me playne And for your company I am full fayne I had leuer suffer great payne Then to leue my wit aud wyl,
Wyll. Then let vs go hence, with kidnes my herye do kyll Health I pray you let vs go, wherfore do we byde styll. and goeth out Remdi As touching my first purpose hither I am com again I trow ye kow me, good remedy is my name That euery day doth take great abor or payne To amende all faultes, I am chosen to the same yf any mas conscience here doth grudge or shame Hauing in him self remorse, & mendes in tyme & space I am good remedy, and god is ful of mercy and grace Therfore I wyl stand asyde, & a lyttel whyle remaine Of welth, Helth and Lybertye, for to inquire How they be ordred, and yf any man complayne I wil be glad to shew me remedy, my think I se one a¦peare. Hance Begots drowse it my selfe bin cūpt heye scō lansiu Remdi Ic mot in ander land loen, al is quade dan Hance Thou fleming frō whēce comest y• & what dost yu here Remdi Ic my self cumt frō sent Katryns dore mot ic skyn de cā beer Hanc Get y• thether againe, & tary here no lōger Remdi Syr ic mot mid ye spreken ic my self be en scomaker Hance What and thou be therwith I haue nothin a doo. Remdi Ic dest al forlore, copin is dod, ic maght aot do thero Hance I pray thee go hence, for thou dost trouble me yll. Remdi Nen ic seker, ic wyl not gon, ic wold fain liue hore stil There is to mainy allaunts in this reale, but now I good remedy haue so prouided that English men shall lyue the better dayly. Hance What segt ye by got drowse, dai is de quade man Be de moro goi, ic my selfe loue descone Englishmau. Remdi Fie on ye flatterig knane, fie ou you aliaūts al I ay ye can wt craft & subtel iget englshmēs welth away Hance O skon mester, ic heb hore bin, this datten yeore ic nskote de coluein & ic can be or beare droer
trust see so proide that welth fromyn haue I shall Hance Ic seg to you dat welth is lopen in an ader conty wat he beg dar brough, fortan ye net, segt me Rem Ic vnderstand the wel, yet thou liest lyke a knaue welth is here ī Englād, & welth stil i trust we shal haue Hance Ic ment no quad ic loue de english man  min ere Cūp vp sent Katrin and ic shal ye geuē two lope bere, Remdi Get ye hence drōkē leming yu shalt tary no leger here Hance Mor it net mare here bin, woder sal ic gewest kiskin Ic wil to de Kaizer gan, dar sall ic wal skinkin & goth out Remdi Is he gon I pray god the deuyll go with him wher is welth, helth & iberty. I wold see thē come i Health Helth commeth in with a kercher on his head. ¶O good lorde helpe me, by yonr licence my souerain I am homely to com her in your presēce thus diseased Nede constraineth me, for remedy I wold haue faine I am īfect both body & soul, I prai you be not displesed Remdi Why what aile you shew me, yet you I do not know Glad I am to remedy auy man, that is affirmity I perceiue by your phisnamy, yt ye ar veri weke feble & low yet show me your giefe, & I wil help you gladl. Health Gracio{us} remedi I thak you, yet I am half ashamed to shew you mi maladi & mi name, I was caled helth Therfore I am wel worthi to be punished & blamed Because I haue not folowed your coūsel, but al thing may be suffered saue welth. Remdy Are you helth, this maketh me very peie and sad yet be of good chere, & show how you were infect To remedy you ad succour you I wold be very glad For god wyl puish the people when they be deelt Health Syr I thanke god therof for wel worthy I am My consciene doth iudge, some trouble haue I must A medes I wyl make to god and if I can
Wil ād wit hath deceiued me in them I put my trust. Remdi yf thou haue oone amisse, and be sory therfore Then helfe amedes is made, for that is contrission Let that passe, now wil I axe you one thyng more Wher be welth ād Libertie, be they of good disposiciō Health As for welth is fallen iu decay, and necesitie By wast & war, thorow yll wyll, and hrewd wit And lybertie is kept in duraunce and captiuite God helpe vs all, and sende vs good remedy for it Remdi For to heare this tale it maketh my hart heauie yet be of good cōfort, god is ful of grace, & I am good Health ¶Sir, thē I besech you help vs in the way of charity Remdi I would fayne but I cannot tel which way to begin Except I might catch wil & wi, then I trow I could Tye thē shorter, for they destroy welth, helth & liberty bi sin yf I had ye theues, punih thē extremly I wole. Health You may soone catch them, if ye wil stande a syde From this place they two, wyl uotonge abide. Remdi Me thinkeh I here them com, helpe to holde thē fast will turneth . Cum in wit for here is no body We may ve bolde and talke largely Our hartes to ease and shew plainly What we haue doone. wytte I must nedes laugh I cannot forbeare To remember ware that knaue wil ye heare The horson fleming was be itten for feare Because he should boyde so soone. Herke now do I meruayle by this bread Wll. For I we surely hat hlth be dead I saw saw him go with a kercher on his head As he should go to hangyng. ytte Harke in thine Eare, yf te horson hap To complayne to him that weres the red cap
I feare theu shortly he wyl vs cla By the heles from out liuing Wyll. Nay nay, there is no doubt By hym I haue reported all about Tha he doth not wel, his good name to put out ylwyl cannot say wel, remedi. Frende therin thou art the more to blam Cosauder me wrogfully, and vudesrued But or thou drpart thou shalt answere for the same. wher is Welth & liberty, how hast thou thē ordred? Wyll. Qury cicis quest is vn malt ombre Me is vn spy & nardo compoco palauere. Health Thou folse thefe is thine English tonge gone as mischeuo{us} il wil & shrewd wit, ye haue destroyd ma¦ni on Wytte. Sir hurt not me, & I wil tel you trouth anone This same i as false a knaue as euer cam wtin saint Iohēs wyll. Per amorde my as pi ca vn poco Eo queris and a pour lagn creae so Remdy I can not tel what thou dost mae blabbler: But yu shalt speake English & confesse an other mater, Health Syr I besech your lordship, in the way of charity Let not these thefes escape your hands they haue de∣stroyed vs vterly. wytte: Syr, beleue hym not he speakes but of malice onely we be true men, therof we shall fetch good witnes An honest man that shalbe bound for him and me The law sayth plaine, nulla fides conestes that is trouth, but who wilbe witnes or boūd for the Remd There is three amonge you in this howse Wyll. I Iyfo to fetch them quickly Wytte. They wil come vnsēd for I warant you if they wyll Remd what be theyr names, tel me what they be, Wyll. That on is Iohn Irische and Iohn soler
But ful these be honest men all thr Health Trust not their wordes they wyll dessemble styll They are so false and cray, all heyr intent is yll. Wyll. ye lye falsely, I peake but right ad reason And by the law of armes ye must neds be ane you ae called good remedy which a al feason Sholde leaue to mans lyfe, and mataine the same we be hee oth your prisoners wrongfully accused bi deame Kepe ou of vs fast let him lye for all That other sor frendes and wytnes goo shall. wyte, Syr let hym not goo ad lee me behynde He wyl euer e a false knaue, for I kow his mynde Wyll. Holde thy tonge folis kaue I do not meane so Remd I here now ye canot agre, which of you should go Wyll. No by gods body there shall none go but I Wytte. Tho playest the knaue it must nedes be I Health Kepe them safe I pray you for yf they scap againe Many me shal repent it, it shale to our paye Remdi They be here yet, to kepe them fast is myne inteut, Haue them away both to prison in continent. wyll. Lo false knaue this is for thy crafty wi. Now fast by the heeles we are lake to syt. Wytte. I am coent so that I may haue compny yf I shold be hanged, I wold be hāged honest & goth out Remd Go bence with them & bring welth & liberty. helth, Com away ye thenes, now I shall kepe you srely, & goth out Wyll. Lock vs vp & kepe vs as fast as ye can yet yll wyl and rewd wit shalbe with many a man. Remdi I am halfe ashamed, that long i hath ben sayd That noble men by such wretches hath ben deceied they did reioyce and iest, and were very well apaide Trusting to cape cleae, and tyl for to haue rained But now they shall not so, let them be wel assured
That ylwyl and shrew de wyt shal haue but yl rest For wheresoeuer they be I wyll break theyr nest wealth In the honour of god we aske you forgeuees al the we ought to be ashamed o looke you in the face By our foly & negligence, we haue done so vnwisely we were towle deceyued, we pt vs to your grace Thys shalbe a good warding for vs alonge space whan man is wel punished then he wyl beware wo that knoweth what nede is, wel after drede are Remd I may not blame you gretly for by mine owne reasō I know ylwyl and shrewd wit deceiueth great & smal yf ye can remābre thys and beware a other season This is a good example and lernig to you all Now serue god and loue him, & for grace euer call And ylwyl and shrewde wyt, from yo I shall abtaine ye haue vsd them to longe to your domage and pain. health. Forsoth syr ye sai trouth, they did vs great dispesur Full hard it is to banquishe the vngrcious ylwyl He is so croked, by slattery, dissulaion & such other Mannes mynd i so varable, & glad to report yl I feare many one yet wolde haue him raine styll For some vnto their owne wyl hath so much affection yet the devyl an yl wyl is both of oe complexion liberty yll wyll is nought, but worse is shrewd wyt For he contryueth al subtil ymanginacien yt were vnpossyble for a man els to doo it shrewd wyt breweth myscef & false conspyracion He hath put me lyberty in prison, ād great at tribulacion if it had not bene for your good remedi & fortheraūce I  other yt hath libertie, shold haue bē in duraunce. Remdi Be al of good chere, and haue no mistrust The ede of yl wyl and shrewd wyt is but shame Though they reygue a while, wrongfully and vniu
yet truth wyll appeare and their misdedes blame Then wroge  suued, and good remedy ta Though alsehodeloke, and hide his matters all Craft wl out and discete wyll haue a fall Whereas ye are now, in distresse all three Neare were ye brought in case lyke o marre Now haue ye no dout, yf ye wyll e ruled after m I shal restore ye agayne as well as euer ye were Welth kepe styll this realme, looke ye stray not fa And Helth be of good chere, yor disease I ca soone mēde Liberty now ye e released do no more offnd, wealth Now let vs al thāke god ye good remedy hath sude Trust to hym only for his grace and goodnes we are forgiuenes o our trespa I trust we wil amēd And cleane forake syn, foly, and vnthriftines we wil here cōclude, soueraine of your graciousnes we besech you to emyt our negligence, & misbehauor There we haue sayd amīs, we cōmit also your fauor Health And for your preseruacion hartely we wyl pray your realme to increase, wth oy ad tranquility That welth, helth & liberty, may cotinne here alway By the ouersight and aide of him that is good remdy which willingly doth his deu, vnder your actoritye As parte here apereth your prpose to maitaine God continue his goodes, that longe he may riagne Remdi Iesu preserne quene Elizabeth ye noble prīcis worthy Iesu continue her helth long for to endure Ies indue her w vertue grace & honour Iesu maintaine the lords of ye coūsel to execte good remedi euer Iesu spede and helpe al them gods honour to further Iesu increase the comunaltie to prosper and doo wel. FINIS.
