17622 99849628 14787
CHRISTS VICTORIE OVER SATHANS TYRANNIE. WHERIN JS CONTAINED A CATALOGVE OF ALL CHRISTS FAITH∣FVLL SOVLDIERS THAT THE DIVELL either by his grand Captaines the EMPE∣ROVRS, or by his most deerly beloued sonnes and heyres the POPES, haue most cruel∣ly Martyred for the TRVTH. WITH ALL THE POYSONED DOCTRINS WHEREWITH THAT GREAT REDDE DRAGON hath made drunken the Kings and In∣habitants of the Earth; with the confuta∣tions of them TOGETHER WITH ALL HIS TRAYTEROVS PRACTI∣SES AND DESIGNES, AGAINST ALL CHRISTIAN Princes to this day, especially against our late Queen ELIZABETH of famous memorie, and our most religious Soueraigne Lord King IAMES. Faithfully abstracted out of the Book of Martyrs, and diuers other Books. By Thomas Mason Preacher of Gods Word. LONDON, Printed by George Eld and Ralph Blower. 1615.
To the most Reuerend Father in GOD, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his GRACE, PRIMATE and ME∣TROPOLITAN of all England, and one of his MAIESTIES most Honourable Priuie Councell. And to the Right Honourable SIR EDVVARD COKE, Lord Cheefe Iustice of England, and one of his Maiesties most Ho∣norable Priuie Councell: THOMAS MASON wisheth all Happinesse in this Life, and eternall Felicitie in the world to come. MOST Reuerend and Right Honorable zealous Lords, your daily and faithfull Orator, being a professed Soldi∣our vnder Christs Banner, in the behalfe of his spouse a∣gainst Antichrist: I could busie my selfe in no office so pro∣fitable for the Church, and hurtfull vnto Antichrist, as to gather together the bullets which haue been shot at him by Christs Souldi∣ours in times past, that now his children may shoote them at him againe, with great facilitie. And whereas venerable Mr Fox, of worthy memory, hath gathered into one Booke the Acts and Monuments of the Church vn∣to his time; one of the most profitablest Bookes that is for Gods Children, except the Bible; a Club able to beate downe the Popish Tower of Babell: Yet what with the labour of reading so large a volume, together with the deareness of the price thereof, few that haue the Booke reade it ouer, and the most part of men are not able to buy it, whereby very little profit ariseth thereof vnto the Church. I haue, according to my po∣wer, pared off the barke of this Club, and made it tractable for all sorts of people; they may buy it with little charge, and peruse it with small paines; and I dare promise them that they shall reape as much profit by reading this abridgement, as by reading of the Booke at large. I haue willingly omitted no matter of substance: Here the Reader may see the cruelty of the Emperors vnto the Primitiue Church, and whom they put
to death, and the manner of their deathes during the first ten Persecutions; and how, and when Christianitie began in this Realme: And what successe it hath had at all times; and when, by what occasion, and by whom most of the Monasteries, and Cathedrall Churches of this Realme were builded, and how, when, and by whom, all points of Popery came into the Church; and how the Pope hath exalted himself against Emperors & Kings; what iniu∣ries he hath done to them: With the Treasons, & Conspiracies that Papists haue practised, against those that the Lord hath annointed, vnto this day: The Reader may also heere see the innumerable multitude of the Saints of God, that the Papists haue from time to time murdered in all Countries▪ for the testimonie of the Truth: With all the points of Religion that the Mar∣tyrs did defend vnto death; and all the reasons that the Papists vsed a∣gainst their Arguments, and how cruelly they handled them; with many o∣ther most profitable things. After I had done this Booke, I was discoura∣ged from putting of it to Print, by reason I found another had abridged the Booke of Martyrs before me; but when I perceiued it was done but super∣ficially, for all the points of Religion that the Martyrs defended, or Papists obiected were omitted; (which disputations I chiefly labour to set forth) therevpon I was resolued to goe forward. When I had begun to quote all the Authors, from whence Mr Fox had his proofes for them that the Empe∣rors put to death, the Quotations were almost as large as the Story, and made it very vnpleasant: wherefore in most places, for breuitie, I haue o∣mitted them, leauing them that would see the proofes to the Book at large. I haue herein abridged many bookes, but especially the Booke of Martyrs; as the Papists cannot abide the booke of Martyrs of all bookes: so much more will they hate my booke, which hath so truely and briefely discouered all their shame, not onely out of that booke, but out of diuers other bookes. Wherefore most Reuerend, and Right Honorable Lords, your manifest dislike that you beare against the wickednes and falshood of Antichrist; hath imboldned me to be an humble sutor vnto your Lordships, to bee the Patrons of this my Booke, and that you would vouchsafe to defend and further it, by your Spirituall and Temporall Powers, to the honour of Christ, the great dishonour of Antichrist, and the vnspeakeable benefit of Gods Children. So with my hartie prayers, I commit both your Honors, your soules, bodies, and all that you haue, vnto the safe preseruation of Christ Iesus and his holy Angels. Your Lordships daily Oratour, THOMAS MASON, Preacher of Gods word in Odiham, in the County of Southampton: whose Father was Heire vnto Sr IOHN MASON, sometime a Priuy Councelor vnto Queene ELIZABETH.
THE EPISTLE VNTO THE RBADER. EVen as the Reuelation and other places of Scriptures (good Reader) do foretell Anti∣christ to come, so this Historie declareth the fulfilling of those prophecies in all points: all the Martyrs died in this faith, that the Pope is Antichrist. I could bethink my selfe of no instruction so profitable for the rea∣ding of this Booke, as to giue thee a few rules to manifest vnto thee that the Popedome is that Antichrist; which I will endeuor to declare vnto thee by these rules following: first, by his out∣ward place of abode; secondly, by his inward and spirituall throne; thirdly, by his doctrine; fourthly, by his conditions; fiftly, by the height, breadth, length and ruine of his Kingdome. I will but open the way vnto thee, this Booke shall proue by ex∣perience my sayings to be true. Touching his outward seate, Reuel. 17. 18. it is the Citie that then did raigne ouer the Kings of the earth, which was Rome: the place is also described in the ninth verse, to be compassed a∣bout with seuen mountaines. This Booke shall proue that Rome hath seuen mountaines about it. In the same verse, this Citie hath had fiue kings that were then falne, another King did raign, which was the Emperour, when the Reuelation was made, and another was to come afterward. This book shall teach thee, that the seuen Kings signifie seuen maner of Gouernments in Rome, of which fiue was falne, the Emperour then raigned, and after the Pope should raigne there: so the Holy Ghost hath pointed out Rome, as plainly as can be, the place of Antichrists King∣dome.
Touching his inward or spirituall seat, S. Paule 2. Thess. 2. 24. saith, He sitteth as God in the Temple of God: Antichrist signifieth an aduersary of Christ; and if it had bin meant of the Turke, or any other aduersary that did not professe Christianitie, he might easily be seene without so many reuelations: but hee is, accor∣ding to the description of a false Prophet, Mat. 7. 15. a most grie∣uous Wolfe to Christs Lambs, and yet so couered with a sheeps skin, that it is impossible to know him without the spirit of God. Outwardly he seemeth to be a good tree, but his fruit is nothing but thornes and thistles to destroy Gods children. Matth. 24. 24. Christ calleth them false Christs and false Prophets, prophecy∣ing, that they shall do such wonders, that if it were possible they should deceiue the elect; so thou seest the Antichrist which is prophecied of must be a professor of Christ, as the Pope is, which calleth himselfe the Catholique Church, but he is the onely ad∣uersary thereof, as this book will teach thee by experience. Touching the third point, to know him by his doctrines, 1. Tim. 4. 1: They shall depart from the faith, and follow doctrines of di∣uels, and speake lies through hypocrisie: they shall haue their consciences seared with an hote iron forbidding to marrie and commaunding to ab∣stain from meats: and they teach the same superstitious doctrins that S. Paule warneth vs from Coloss. 2. 16. Let no man condemne you in meat and drinke, or in respect of an holy-day, or a new Moone, nor Sabboths, nor make you forsake Christ the head in worshipping Angels, neither let them burden you with traditions, as touch not, tast not, handle not, which things haue a shew of wisedome, in that the profes∣sors be voluntary religious, and humble their mindes, and spare not their bodies, nor haue their bodies in any estimation, but all is nothing but to fulfill a fleshly religion: and Iude in his twelfth verse compareth them to clouds which in a drieth seem to bring raine but doe not: for, though they make great promises of fee∣ding of soules, yet there is no true hope of remission of sins, nor assurance of eternall happinesse in their doctrines. And in 2. Pet. 2. 17. he calleth them Wells, not with a little water, but quite without water: for although by name they professe the Trinity, yet their doctrins of euery person of the Trinitie, and of al other points of religion, are contrary to wholsome doctrine, they maintaine their doctrines, though falsely, vnder the names of
the Scriptures, the Catholique Church, and the auncient fathers▪ this is the golden cup that the Church of Antichrist holdeth in her hand, Reuel. 17. 4. but it is full of abominations and filthines of her fornications: so if thou marke this booke, it is easie to know Anti∣christ by the falsenesse and wickednesse of all his doctrines, yet co∣loured ouer with glorious shewes of truth and wholsomnesse, yea, although thou haddest no other meanes to discerne him by. Touching the fourth point of the conditions of Antichrist, Iude in the eleuenth verse, saith, They follow the way of Caine: all the persecutions of Gods children before times were but types and pro∣phecies of the Papists in killing their brethren, as Caine did, because they please God better then they. The abominable desolations of Nabuchadnezzar, and of Titus and Vespasian of the materiall Tem∣ples were but prophecies of the Papists abominable desolations of Gods Saints. For this cause Antichrist is called in the Reuelation a great redde Dragon, a Serpent, and a cruell Beast. S. Iohn Reuel. 17. 6. foresaw the Church of Antichrist, drunken with the bloud of the Saints and Martyrs of Iesus Christ. And although he had seen all the persecutions that were before or in his time, yet he wondred at the bloud that he foresaw that the Papists should shed with a great maruaile. Iude in his 12. verse saith, They are cast away in the deceit of Baa∣lams wages: for as Baalam, though he knew the Israelites to bee the blessed of God, yet he would haue cursed them for lucre sake if God would haue suffered him, so the Papists maintaine doctrines which they know to be false, and commit all their murders of Gods chil∣dren, only to maintaine their Kitchin pleasures, honour, glorie, ri∣ches, and other worldly respects, as it shall plainly appear vnto thee in this Booke. In 2. Pet. 2. 14. Their eyes are full of adultery, and they cannot cease to sinne, beguiling vnstable soules. This Booke will shew thee how in∣speakeably wicked they are, according to this prophecie: they are spiritually called Sodom, because in that case they exceede in wic∣kednesse the Sodomites. These and many other wicked conditions of theirs, are plentifully prophecied of in the Scriptures; and thou shalt see the true performances of the prophecies in this book, wch wicked conditions shall plainly shew the Pope to be Antichrist. Touching the height of Antichrists Kingdome, Reuel. 17. 3. the Church of Antichrist is said to sit vpon a skarlet coloured beast, ful
of names of blasphemy, which is the Pope, who is a bloudy beast to Gods children, & takes all Gods names blasphemously to himself: and vers. 4. he & his Church are arrayed with purple & skarlet, and deckt with gold, precious stones & pearls; and how gloriously the Pope and his Church hath bin set forth, & how rich they haue bin, according to this prophecy, this book wil shew thee. In 2. Thess. 2. 14 He sitteth as God in the Temple of God, and exalteth himself aboue all that is called God. C. Caesar Caligula the Emperor, which vsed to sit in the Temples of the Idols, to be honored as God, & caused his picture to be set vp to be worshipt in all Temples, and in the Temple of Ieru∣salem, yet was he not such an abominable Idol as the Pope maketh himselfe to be: he is the Gaoler of Purgatory, and thither comes (as he saith) all the soules of Christians, except som few, to whom for building some religious houses, and for being otherwise a speciall maintainer of his kingdome: hee giueth a speciall prerogatiue, im∣mediatly to go to heauen: these soules his prisoners hee punisheth how, and as long as he list, and at his pleasure he throweth any of them into hell, or sendeth any of them into heauen. Of the reue∣nues of this Gaole hath all the Popes riches, honour, & superioritie aboue Emperors, and Kings proceeded: he hath taken from Christ the honor of pardoning sins to himselfe: God made man of clay, but the Pope and all his shauelings can daily make God of a piece of bread. In these, and many other respects (as this booke will teach thee) doth the Pope exalt himself as God, according to this prophe∣cie; and he exalts himselfe aboue all kings, which are called Gods, and at his pleasure with excommunications can cast them out of heauen and out of their kingdoms, as himselfe saith: he hath trode vpon Emperours, & made them kisse his feet, hold his stirrups, and leade his horse. He made the Emperor Hen. 4. his wife and his child to wait three daies and three nights bare-foot in winter at his gates, to sue to him for his fauor, and gaue away his Empire in the meane time. This prophecie of Antichrists exaltation aboue Princes, is verified in none but the Pope. Touching the breadth of his kingdom, it is not said he shall ex∣alt himselfe aboue one or two, but aboue all that are called God, wch are all Christian rulers, spiritual & temporal, to whom God vouch∣safeth this name, because hee ruleth and instructeth by them, and dwelleth in them, if they be good: this declareth the large limits of his kingdome. And as he is said heere to exalt himselfe aboue all
Kings, so Reu. 17. 3. he is said to haue ten horns; and in ver. 12. they are interpreted to be ten Kings, which shal giue their power and au∣thority vnto the beast, that is to say, the beastly Pope, and fight with the Lambe, that is, they shal be the Popes Butchers to destroy Gods children; and as the prophecies foretell such an Antichrist as shall raigne ouer all Christian Princes, so this storie shall shew thee the true fulfilling of this prophesie in the Pope. Touching the length of his Kingdome, it is prophecied Anti∣christ shall raigne three yeares and a halfe; and in Reuel. 12. three times and a halfe: these times and these yeares are all one; so is the fortie two moneths, Reuel. 13. 5. for there be so many moneths in three years and a halfe: the same likewise is the 1260. dayes in Re∣uel. 12. 6. for there be iust so many daies in three yeares & a halfe, at 360. daies to the yeare, which was the number of the dayes of the Iewes yeare. And it is common with the prophets to set downe a day for a year; so by these prophecies Antichrist must raign 1260. yeares, which is iust so many yeares as Christ preached daies: and Gregory the first sheweth that Antichrist began when one Bishop exalted himselfe aboue all others. And though there were manie Popes before him which did exalt themselues aboue all other Bi∣shops, yet he would not but haue himself called, Seruus seruorū Dei. Wherefore Sabinianus which succeeded him in the popedom, was a malitious detractor of his works, as thou maist see in this book. Antichrist was not at his height vntill Hildebrand had gotten aboue the Emperor, for then he was aboue all that was called God; yet Antichrist began when the Bishop of Rome, being the least of all the foure Patriarchs, exalted himselfe aboue all other Bishops, which was about the yeare of Christ 400. for then began pride and superstition to creep into the Church, and Anno 666. according to the number of the name of the beast in Reu. 13. 18. Latin seruice was set vp in England and all other places, and masss, ceremonies, le∣tanies, and other Romish ware, which was long before Hildebrands time. And if we account the aforesaid 1260. yeares of Antichrists raigne from thence, there remaineth but about 46. yeares to come, vntil God shal call together the kings of the earth to destroy Rome. Touching the fall of his kingdom, Mat. 24. 22. If God should not shorten his kingdom, none of Gods children could be saued from his cruelty: but for the elects sake, Reu. 11. 13. God first destroyed the tenth part of his Kingdom: thou mayest note in this book when this prophe∣cie
was fulfilled; and Reu. 8. at the blowing of the foure first Trum∣pets, the third part of all his kingdom is destroyed: which prophe∣cie we see fulfilled at this day, for the third part of his kingdom are wholly become Protestants, yet Reuel. 11. 22. the Church of Anti∣christ is not heerewith moued to repent of her murders, sorceries, fornications, and thefts, but Reu. 18. 7. glorieth her selfe that she is a Queene, and shall be no widdow, that is, shee shall neuer lose her Spouse the Pope, therfore shall her plagues come at one day, death, sorrow, and famine, and shee shall be burned with fire, for strong is the Lord God which will condemne her. The meanes of her de∣struction is set forth, Reu. 17. 16▪ the ten kingdomes that first tooke her part against Gods children shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eate her flesh and burne her with fire, for God doth put into their hearts to fulfill his will. The manner of the destruction of Rome and the Popedome, is declared Reu. 19. 17. as fowles gather together to a dead carkasse, so God shall gather all Nations together to warre against Rome, and shall take her and the Pope, the false Prophet that worketh miracles, wherby he deceiued all that receiued his marke, and worshipped his Image: and they shall not only be destroyed in this world, but they shall bee cast a∣liue into a lake burning with fire and brimstone, to wit, into eternall damnation: and Reu. 18. 20. the Angells and all Gods children are exhorted to reioyce at her destruction, and vers. 21. Rome shall be destroyed with such violence as a Mill-stone falleth into the Sea, and there shall neuer any more Mill grinde any light corne, or a∣nie be married in Rome, but it shall euer after be a desolate wilder∣nesse, as Babylon was. They that cannot behold Antichrist in this Glasse, 2. Cor. 4. 3. it is a signe the Diuell, the God of this world, hath blinded their eyes: but as Salomon when hee dedicated the Temple, prayed God to heare euery one that prayed therein, so I beseech God with his holy spirit to illuminate all that shall reade this book, that they may plainly see the pope to be Antichrist, and to flie from him lest they be partakers of his pu∣nishment in this world, and in the world to come.
AN ABSTRACT OF ALL THE HISTORIES OF THE CHVRCH from CHRIST to this day. 1614. THE FIRST BOOKE. IN describing the whole State of the Primtiue, and latter times of the Church: First shall be declared the suffering time of the Church▪ 300. yeares after Christ: secondly, the flourishing time of the Church, 300. yeares more: then the declining of true Religion, 300. yeares more: sourthly, of the raigne of Anti∣christ since Sathan was loosed. Lastly, of the refor∣ming of the Church in this last thrée hundred yeares. In the tractation of all which things, the Christian Reader may by experience obserue two special points: First, the Nature of the World: Secondly, the con∣dition of the Kingdome of Christ: By the World is meant, all that by ignorance know not Christ, and that will not beléeue him, or that persecute him. The Kingdome of Christ, are the beléeuers in Christ, and take his part against the World; and though they be much fewer then the other, and alwaies lightly hatd and molested of the world, yet they are they whom the Lord doth blesse, and euer will: and Christs Subiects which we call the Uibe Church, thee are of two sorts; first, of such as onely outwardly professe Christ; secondly, of such as by eection inwardly are ioyned to Christ: the first, honour Christ onely in their lippes, and partake the outward Sacrament, but not the inward blessing: the second, in word and heart truely serue Christ, and partake with the outward Sacrament the Grace of Christ. And as betwéen the World & Christs Kingdome▪ there is a continuall resistance, so betwéene these two parts of the Uisible Church oft groweth mortall persecution, so that the true Church hath no greater enemies then her owne Professors, which hap∣pened in the time of Christ, and other times, but especially in the persecution of An∣tichrist. Who should rather haue receiued Christ then the Scribes and Pharises, and who persecuted and reiected him more? they refused Christ to be their King, and chose Cae∣sar, who after destroyed them, whereby we may learue the daungr of refusing the Gospell. The like example is to be noted in the Romains, for when Pontius Pilate had cer∣ified Tyberius CaesarTyberius Caesar. of the doings of Christ▪ of his Myracles, Resurrection, and
Ascention, and how he was receiued of many as God, he did beléeue, and willed the Senate that Christ might bee adored as God, but they refused, because he was conse∣crated before the Senate of Roe had so decréed and approoued him, so obeying the Law of Man more then of God: they refused him, and contented themselues with the Emperour, and as they preferred the Emperour and reiected Christ, God iustly stirred their Emperours against them, that the Senators were almost all deuoured by them, and the Citty it selfe horribly afflicted thrée hundred yeares, for at last the same Tyberius was a sharpe Tyrant to them, who spared not his owne Mother and Nephewes, and of his Princes and Councellors, he left but two or thrée aliue: Many were condemned with their Wiues and Children, Maides also first defloured, then put to death. Pilate,Pontius Pi∣late. vnder when Christ was crucifed, was depriued by him, and ba∣nished to Lyons,Anno 34. and there slew himselfe, and AgrippaAgrippa. by him was cast into Prison. In the seuentéenth of his raigne Christ suffered. After whose death this Tyberius Nero liued sixe yeares, during which time no per∣secution was in Rome against the Christians through the commaundement of the Emperour. fter him succéeded C. Caesar Caligula,Ca Caesar Caligula. Claudius Nero, and Domitius Nero, which thrée were likewise scourges to the Senate and people of Rome. The first tooke other mens wiues from them, and defloured thrée of his owne Sisters, and banished them, he commaunded himselfe to be worshipped as a God, and Temples to bee erected in his name, vsing to fit in the Temples amongst the Gods, and made his Image to be set vp in all Temples, and in the Temple of Ierusalem: he wished all the people of Rome had but one necke, that at his pleasure he might destroy them. By him Herod, that killed Iohn Baptist, and condemned Christ, was banished, where he died misera∣bly. Caiphas, which sat vpon Christ, was at the the same time remoued from the high Priests roome. The Tribunes slew this Caligula in the fourth yeare of his raigne, there was found in his Closset two Libels;43. one called the Sword, the other the Dag∣gar, in which were contained the Names of the Senators and Nobles of Rome which he had purposed to put to death, and there was found in a Coffer diuers inds of poi∣sons for the purpose to destroy a number of people, and being throwne into the Sea, they destroyed a great number of Fishes. Claudius Nero,Claudius Nero. which succéeded Caligula, raigned thirtéene yeares, with no little cruelty, but Domitius Nero,Domitius Nero. which succéeded Claudius raigned fouretéene yeares, with such cruelty, that he slew the most part of the Senators, and all the Order of Knight∣hood: He abstained not from his owne Mother, his Sister, or any degrée of his Kindred in monstrous vncleannesse and Incest, and cased them, with his Brother, his owne Wife great with childe, and his Maister Seneca to be put to death, together with Lu∣can, and diuers of his Kindred. He made Rome to bee set on fire in twelue places, which continued sixe daies and seauen nights, to sée the example how Troy burned, and the while sang verses of Homer. He laid the sauit vpon the Christians, and cau∣sed them to be persecuted, at last the Senate proclaimed him a publike Enemy, and condemned him to be whipped through the Cittie to death, and for feare he fled, and slew himselfe, complaining he had neither friend nor enem would doe it for him. In the latter end of his raigne Anno 69.69. Peter and PaulePeter and Paul. were put to death for the faith of Christ. Thus you sée the iust iudgement of God from time to time, on those that con∣temne Christ and will not receiue him, by this destruction of the Romaines, by their Emperors, and by their ciuill warres, and 5000. Romains slaine at one time by the fall of a Theater. But most especiall by the destruction of the Iewes, which in the yeare 73.73 and thrée yeares after the suffering of Peter and Paul,The destru∣ction of Ie∣rusalem. was destroyed by Tytus and Vespasian to the number of eleauen hundred thousands, besides them that were slaine in Galily, and 17000. were sold for slaues, and 2000. were brought with Tytus in triumph, and part deuoured with wilde beasts, and the rest most cruelly slaine. Whereby all Na∣tions may take example to reiect the verity, and much more to persecute them which be sent of God for their saluation, likewise the Emperors themselues for persecuting Christ in his members, escaped not without their iust reward, as in this Story hath and hereafter will appeare.
Steuen was the first Martir; the same day that hee suffered, Nicanor one of the Deacons with two thousand suffred for the faith, after Herod slue Iames the brother of Iohn, whose accuser repented and confessed himselfe to bee a Christian also, and was beheaded with him. Simon one of the Deacons was after Bishop of Bosrum in Arabia, where hee was burned, and Parmenas another of the Deacons suffred for the faith. Thomas preached to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Germaines, Hereaco∣nies, Bactries, and Magies, and was slayne with a Darte in Calamia a City of Iudea. Simon Zelotes preached in Mauritania, Aphricke and Brittayne, who was Crucified. Iudas Thaddeus, brother of Iames, preached in Mesopotamia and in Edisseus, and the King there slew him in Berito a Citty thereof. Simon the brother of Iude and Iames the younger, the sonne of Mary Cleopha and Alpheus, as Dorotheus writeth, was after Iames Bishop of Ierusalem, and crucified in Egipt, Trayanus beeing Emperour, but Abdias writte hee was slaine with his brother Iude by the people of Suauir in Persidis. Marke was Bishop of Alexandria, hee preached in Egypt, and there was drawne with ropes to the fire and burned in the raigne of Trayanus. Bartholomeus preached long time to the Indians, and translated St Matthewes Gospell into their languadge, did many Miracles there, and after many persecutions in Albania of Armenia, hee was beaten downe with staues, crucified, excoriated and beheaded- Andrew, Peters brother, was crucified at Patris in Achaya (by Egeas) embracinge the crosse and reioycing therein. Matthew conuerted Ethiopia and Egypt, Hercan the King sent one to run him through with a speare. Matthias preached to the Iewes, and they stoned and beheaded him. Phillip preached to the barbarous Nations who crucified and stoned him at Hira∣polis of Phrygia, where hee and his Daughters with him were burned. The Iewes required IamesIames. to stand vppon the Battlement of the Temple and disswade the people from Christ, but hee preached him there and was throwne downe headlong and stoned, where hee was buried, at which time the Iewes put many other to death for the testimony of Christ. The first Persecution by Nero Domitius NEro Domitius caused the first persecution, hee regarded neither sect, condition of life, or age, the streets were spread with dead bodies of Christians, hee indeuored vtterly to abolish the name of Christians: in this persecution, Peter was crucified, who required his head to be hanged downward as vnworthy to dye like Christ, the cause was thought to bee because Symon Magus,Symon Ma∣gus. pretending to flye from the Mount Capitolinus to Heauen, by Peters prayers was brought downe head∣long, and his ioynts beeing broken hee dyed, at that time Peters wife suffred, and the same day twelue-month Paule suffred. The Second Persecution by Domitian. THe Church had some rest vnder Vespatian, but Domitian mooued the second persecution, he killed all the Nephewes of Iuda called the Lords brothers, and slew all hee could find of the stocke of Dauid as Vespatian did before him, least any of that stocke should inioy the kingdome: in his time Symon Bishop of Ieru∣salem, after other torments, was crucified, and Iustus succéeded in his Bishop∣ricke. Hee banished IohnIohn. to Pathmos, and vnder Pertinax hee was released and came to Ephesus and continued there vnto the time of Trayanus:Eusebius 99 Gouerned the Church
of Asia, and wrote his gospell there: Flauia, Daughter to Flauius Clemens a Con∣sull of Rome, suffred for Christs name, and with many other was banished out of Rome to Pontia. Some of the stocke of Dauid were brought to Domitian to bee slaine, who séeing they were poore, and vnderstanding by them, that Christs Kingdome should bee heauenly and not worldly, he let them go and stayed persecutions, they after gouer∣ned Churches and liued in peace vnto the time of Traianus, in the time of which persecution no kind of torment was omitted that might empaire the credit of the Christians, they would not suffer their bodies to bee buried and yet the Church dayly increased. Euaristas, Bishop of Rome, next to Clement, succéeded in the third yéere of Tra∣ianus, and suffred nine yéeres after. Alexander succéeded him, and conuerted many of the Senators of Rome to the faith; he raysed the son of Hermes from death to life, and made his mayd, being blind, to sée, which Adrianus the Emperour hearing of him sent word to the Gouernor of Rome to apprehend him and his two Deacons, Euentus ad Theodorus, and the said Hermes, and Quirinus▪ a Tribune, whose daughter Albina hee cured, which Cure, moued him to bee baptized, and suffer for the faith of Christ, and Aurelianus tooke Alexander with Hermes, his wife, Children, and whole houshold, 1250. put them in prison, and burned them all in a furnace, and martired the said Theodorus for rebuking him thereof, and Quirinus had his tongue cut out, then his hands and eete cut off, after was beheaded, and east to the Dogges. The third Persecution. THere was but one yeare betweene the second and the third persecution by the Emperour Traianus, which was so grieuous that Plinius Secundus, an Infidell, wrote to the Emperour, that so many thousands were put to death with∣out cause, sauing that they gathered themselues together before day to sing Hymmes to a God which they called Christ, he reasoned why that sin should be pu∣nished more then all other sins, and that he had put two Christian maides vpon the racke to proue if they could haue extorted confession of further crime, but could not; wherevpon the persecutions were greatly alayed, Symeon, sonne of Cleophas, Bishop of Ierusalem, was accused by the Iewes to be a Christian, and of the stocke of Dauid, wherefore Attalus commanded him to be scourged many dayes together beeing an hundred and twenty yeares old, his con∣stancy was greatly admired; he was crucified. Because Phocas, Bishop of Pontus, refused to sacrifice to Neptune, Traianus cast him into a hote furnace, and after into a scalding ath. Sulpitius and Seruilia, with there wiues, whom Salma conuerted to the faith, were also then martired: Salma was beheaded and Lepidus, in the Mount Auentine, with whom suffred Seraphia, a Uirgen of Antioch, in this time Nereus and Achilleus suffred at Rome and one Sagaris, who was martired in Asia. In this time Ignatius suffred, hee was sent from Siria to Rome; comming to Asia hee confirmed the Churches, and comming to Smirna, where Policarpus was, he wrote diuers Epistles to Ephesus, to Magnesia, and to Trall; hee was a∣iudged to be deuoured of Beasts, and hearing the Lions roare, I am the wheate of Christ (said he) and shall be ground with the teeth of wild beasts that I may be pure bread: at this time many thousands died for the faith, amongst them one Pub∣lius Bishop of Athens. Hadrian the Emperour, succéeded Traianus, who slew Zenon a Noble man of Rome, and 10023 for Christ. Borgomensis Lib▪ 8. makes mention of ten thousand in Hadrians dayes to bee crucified in Mount Ararat, crowned with thornes, their sides pearced with Darts, after the example of the Lords passion. Eustachius, a Captaine, who was sent against the Barbarians, and subdued them, Hadrian met him honourably, and doing sacrifice to Apollo for the victory, willed Eustachius to doe so also, which hee refusing, hee was brought to Rome, and with
his wife and children suffred marterdome. Faustin us and Iobita, Cittizens of Brixia, suffred marterdome with grieuous torments, Caelocerius, seeing their great paience cryed out, vere magnus deus Chri∣stianorum, wherevpon he was apprehended, and suffred with them. Anthia, a godly woman committed Eleutherius her sonne vnto Anicetus Bishop of Rome, who after was Bishop of Apulia, she with her sonn was beheaded, and Iustus and Pastor, two brethren, suffred vnder Adrian at Complutum in Spaine. About the same time, Simpronissa, the wife of Gerulus, the Marter, suffred, with her seauen children, beeing first, often scourged, then hanged by the haire of the head, then a stone fastned about her necke, she was cast into the Riuer, after her children were martired wth diuers punishments, they were tied to seauen staes & so racked with a pully thrusting thorough one in the necke, another in the brest▪ another in the heart, another about the nauell, another cut in euery ioynt, another runne thorough with a speare, the last cut a sunder in the middle, then were they cast into a déepe pit, which the Idolatrous Priests intituled, Ad septem Biathana∣tos▪ Getulius, also a preacher at Tiber with Cerdelis, Amantius and Prinitiuus▪ were condemned to the fire at Hadrians commandment: Sophia with her two children, Serapia and Salma, were likewise martired.Anno. 130. Hadriana at Eleusina in Athens sa∣crifising to the gentiles Gods, gaue all men liberty to kill the Christians, where∣vpon Quadracus Bishop of Athens and Astydes  Philosopher, & Serenus Granus, a great Noble man, wote Apologies for the Christians, so larnedly laing out their innocency, that the Emperour wrot to the Proconsull of Asia, henceforth to exercise no more cruelty vpon the Christians; thus for a time they had some quiet. Antonius Pius succeeded Hadrian, the rage of the Heathen ceased not to perse∣cute the Chrstians, but the Emperours affection toward them appeared by an Edict of his to the Commons of Asia, to ay the rage against the Christians, ex∣et they offended the laow of the Empire, willing them to consider their patience in torments, and bouldnesse in Earthquakes and Tempests, when others quaked: This Edict was proclamed at Ephesus in the publicke assembly of all Asia, which applased the tempest of perecution in his dayes. The fourth Persecution. AFter him succéeded M: Antonius Verus, many Christians in his time suffred diuers torments▪ at Smirna some were whipped that their eines appeared, and their bowels were seene, and after they were set vpon sharpe shelles taken out of the Sea, and nayles and thornes set for them to goe vppon, and then throwne to beass to be deuoured, amongst whom Germanicus suffred so constantly that they admird him. Policarpus, a Disciple to the Apostles 86. yeares, a preacher 70. yeares placed by St. Iohn in Smirna, these persecutions beeing begunne, hee hid himselfe, with a few of his company, and continued night and day in supplication for the peace of the congregation .3. dayes before his apprehension, he dreamed his bed was sud∣denly consumed with fire vnder him, which hee interpreted that hee should suffer martirdome by fire, and beeing found by the pursuers, hee intertained them cheer∣fully, made them die, and desired an houres respit to pray, which he did in such sort, that they which heard him were astonied, then they brought him to the Citty vppon an Asse, where Irenarcus, Herodes, and his father Nicetes met him, caused him to come into their Chariot and perswaded him to doe sacrifice, but when hee would not, they gaue him rough words, and thrust him downe the Chariot, that he might breake hi legs, but he went merrily to the place appoynted, where there came a voyce from Heauen to comfort him: the Proconsull disswaded him from the faith, and willed him to say with them, destroy these naughty men, who with con∣stant countenance beheld the whole multitude, & looking vp to heauen said thou, th it is, that will destroy these wicked men, then the Proconsul was arne with him▪ and said, take thine Oth, and defie Christ, & I will discharge thee, who answered,
these foure score and sixe yeares I haue béene his seruant and hee hath not hurt me, how then may I speake euill of my Lord and King which hath thus preserued me, and when they could not preuaile by perswasions nor threatnings he was comman∣ded to be cast to the Lion, but because the Lion had his prey already, the people with one voyce required that he might be burned, and when they would haue nayled him to the stake with iron hoopes, he said, hee that hath giuen me strength to abde the fire, shall also giue me power that I shall not stirre in this fire, which when they onely bound him, hee praysed God and testified his faith: the fire seemed to the beholders to compasse the body like a vayle, which seemed like gold and siluer, and yéelded a plesant smell; the fire not consuming his body one thrust him in with a sword, whereby so much blood issued out of his body that it quenched the fire, after the body was taken and burned, At that time suffred twelue that came from Philadelphia with diuers other, as Metrodorus a Minister and Pionius a worthy man, who after grieuous torments were burned, and Carpus, Papylus, and Agothonica a woman were put to death at Pergamopolis in Asia: Felicitas with her seauen Children suffred at Roome, the first was whipped and prest to death, the second and third had their braines broken out, the fourth was cast downe head-longe and had his necke broken, the other thré were beheaded and left the mother slaine with the sword. At this time Iustinus the learned Piilosopher suffred, who wrote appolo∣gies to the Senate of Rome, the Emperour, and Liefetenant of the Citty for the Christians,174 hee preuayled so much with Antonius Pius that he stay∣ed the persecution in Asia, he vanquished Crescens a Philosopher, in reueng whereof hee procured his death. Under this Tyrant also suffered Ptolomeus and Lucius for confessing Christ in Alexandriain Egypt a vicious infidell, whose wife was vicious, but conuerted by Ptolameus, and departed from her vicious husband, wherefore in re∣uenge hee suborned a Centurion to accuse him, who beeing brought before Vrbanus hee condemned him to death, and Lucius a Christian blaming the Iudge therefore, was with him also martired, also Concordus, a Minister of Spoletum, because hee would not sacrifice to Iupiter, but spate in his face, after sundry torments hee was beheaded: Diuers other martires suffred vn∣der this tyrant, as Symetricus, Florellus, Pontianus, Alexander, Caius Epipodus, Victor, Corona, Marcellus, and Valerian, who were killed because they would not sacrifice to Idols: Under this Tyrant suffred diuers Martirs at Uienna and Lions in France, amongst whom Vetius, Zacharias, Sanctus, Maturus, Attallus, Blandina, Alexander and Alcibiades are chiefly renowned. Vetius Epagathus for reprouing the cruell sentence of the Iudge against the Chri∣stians, and making an apology for them was martired, hee was called the aduocate of the Christians. At that time Photinus, Deacon to the Bishop of Lyons, about 90. yeares old, was first beaten, then cast into prison where hee dyed within two dayes. Blandina, was fastened to a stake, and cast to beasts to bée deuoured, but none would touch her, so they put her in Prison vntill another time. Attalus was brought forth, with one Alexander a Phrigian Phisition, who be∣cause hee encouraged the Christians before the Iudge, died most patiently broyled in an iron chaire. After Blandina, and one Ponticus, but fifteene yeares ould, was brought forth, the child dyed with extremity of torments: Blandina after whipping gridirons, and beasts, was cast into a nette and throwne vnto a wild Bull, and so gored to death; they would not suffer the dead bodies to bee buried; the causes why these Persecutions were so sharpe, was, because the Eth∣nicks, being seruants to the Christians, by threatning, for feare, said the Christi∣ans kept the feast of Thiestes, and incest of OEdipus, with other haiuous crimes.
Meleto Bishop of Sardis, and Claudius Apolinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis exhibited Apologies vnto these Emperours for the Christians, so did Athenagoras a Philoso∣pher and Legate of the Christians, whereby the persecution for the same time was stayed, others thinke that if was by a miracle in the Emperours Campe, for when the soldiers wanted water fiue dayes and were like to perish, a Legion of the Christian Soldiers withdrew themselues and prayed, whereby they obtained raine for them, selues, lightenings and hale to discomfort and put to flight their enemies, wherevp∣pon the Emperour wrote to the Gouernours to giue thankes to the Christians, and giue them peace of whom came the victory. Anthonius Comodus sonne to Verus succeeded and raigned 13. yeares, some thinke the persecution slaked in his time,175. by the fauour of Martia the Emperors Concubine who fauored the Christians, by reason whereof many Nobles in Rome receiued the Gospell: amongst whem one Apollonius, being accused by Seuerus his seruant, but this accuser was sound false and therefore had his legges broken, yet hee was driuen to confesse his faith, and for the same beheaded by an ancient law, that no Christian should be released without recantation. The Emperour and the cittizens of Rome on his birth day assembled to offer sa∣crifices to Hercules and Iupiter, proclaiming that Hercules was Patron o the Citty; but Vincentius, Eusebius, Perigrinus, Potentianus, instructers of the people hearing thereof preached against the same, and conuerted Iulius a Senator, with others to the faith, whereof the Emperor hearing, caused them to be tormented, and then prest to death, sauing that Iulius was beaten to death with Cudgels at the commandement of Vitellus maister of the soldiers. Perigrinus was sent of Xistus Bishop of Rome to teach in France where the per∣secution had made wast,18. who established the Churches and returned to Rome & was Martired: this Xistus was the 6. Bishop of Rome, after Peter, and gouerned the mi∣nistry there 10. yeares Telesphorus succeeded him, and was Bishop 11. yeares, and was martired: after him succeeded Hyginus and died a martyr: after him succeeded Pius, after them Anicetus, Soter, Elutherius about the yeare 180.180. In the time of Comodus, amongst others, were martired, Serapion Bishop of An∣tioch, Egesippus a writer of Ecclesiasticall histories from Christ to his time, also Mil∣tiades who wrote his Apology for Christian Religion. About this time wrote Hiraclitus, who first writ Anotations vppon the new Testa∣ment; also Theophilus Bishop of Cesaria, Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, a famous lear∣ned man, who wrote diuers Epistles to diuers Churches, and exhorteth Penitus a Bishop that he would lay no yoke of chastity, vpon any necessity, vpon his Brethren, also Clemens Alexandrinus, a famous learned man, liued in that time, and Gautenus, who was the first that read in open schoole in Alexandria, of whom is thought first to rise the order of Uniuersities in Christendome; he was sent to preach to the Indians by Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria. In this tranquility of the Church grew contention for Easter day, which had beene stirred before of Policarpus and Anicetus, forthey of the west Church, pretending the tradition of Paul and Peter, but indeed it was of Hermes and Pius, kept Easter the 14. day of the first month, the Church of Asia followed the example of Iohn the Apo∣stle, and obserued another day. The fifth Persecution. AFter Comodus raigned Pertinax, after whom succeeded Seuerus, vnder whom was raised the fift Persecution, hee raigned 18. yeares: in the first ten hee was very fauorable, after (through false accusations) hee proclaimed, that no Christian should be suffered, wherevppon an infinite number were slaine in the yeare 205.205. The crimes obiected was rebellion to the Emperour, Sacriledge and murdering of In∣fants, incestuous pollutions, eating raw flesh, libidinous commixture, worshipping the head of an asse which wa raised by the Iewes, also for worshipping of the Sunne in rising, because they vsed daily to sing vnto the Lord, or because they vsed to pray to∣wards
the East, but the speciall matter was because they would not worship Idols: these Persecutions raged in Affrica, Alexandria, Cappadocia, and Carthage: the number that were slaine was infinite. The first that suffered was Leonides, father of Origen, who but 17. yeares old desired to haue suffred with his father, but that his mother in the night stole away his garments, and his shirt, yet he wrote to his father: take heed you alter not your purpose for our sakes, hee was so toward in knowledge of Scripture and vertue, that his father would often in his sleepe kisse his breast, than∣king God that he had made him so happy a father of so happy a sonne: his father being dead, and his goods confiscate to the Emperour, hee sustained himselfe, his mother and sixe brethren by keeping schoole, at length hee applied himselfe wholly to Scrip∣ture, and profited in the Hebrew and Greeke tongues, which hee conferred with o∣ther translations, as that of the 70. and found out other translations of Aquila, of Sy∣machus and Theodocian, with which he also ioyned 4. others: he wrote 7000. Bookes. the Copies whereof hee vsed to sell for three-pence a peece to sustaine his liuing: hee had diuers Schollers, as Plutarchus Serenus, his brother who was burned, and Hera∣clitus and Heron, which were beheaded, another Serenus which was beheaded, and Rahis and Potamiena, shee was tormented with pitch poured on her, and martired with her mother Marcella, she was executed by one Basilides, who shewed her some kindnes in repressing the rage of the multitude; shee thanked him and promised to pray for him, hee being required after to giue an oth, touching the Idols and Empe∣rour, (as the manner was) refused it, confessing himselfe to be a Christian and there∣fore was beheaded. There was one Alexander, who after great torments, escaped and was Bishop of Ierusalem, Narcissus who was 61. yeares old, he was vnwildy to gouerne alone: he was 40. yeares Bishop of Ierusalem, vntill the Persecution of Decius, he erected a fa∣mous Library, where Eusebius had his cheefe helpe in directing his Ecclesiasticall History; hee wrote many Epistles, he licensed Origen to teach openly in his Church: after vnder Decius in Cesaria for his constant confession dyed in prison. Policarpus sent Andoclus into France, Seuerus apprehending him, and first being beaten with bats he was after beheaded: in that time Asclepiades suffred much for his confession, and was made Bishop of Antioch, and continued there seauen yeares. About this time Ireneus, with a great multitude beside were martired, hee was Scholler to Policarpus, and Bishop of Lyons 23. yeares; in his time the question of keeping Easter was renewed betwixt Victor Bishop of Rome, and the Churches of Asia, and when Victor would haue excommunicated them, Ireneus, with others, wrote to him to stay his purpose, and not to excommunicate them for such a matter. Not long after followed Tertullian who writ learned Apologies for the Christians, and confuted all that the slanderours obiected, hee wrote many bookes, whereof part yet remaine. Victor Bishop of Rome died a Martyr, after he had sitten there 10. or 12. yeares; he was earnest in the matter of Easter, and would haue excommunicated them that were contrary, but for Ireneus and others who agreed to haue Easter vppon the Sun∣day, because they would differ from the , and because Christ rose on that day. On the other side were diuers Bishops of Asia, as Policrates Bishop of Ephesus, (al∣leadging the example of Philip the Apostle) with his three daughters, of Iohn the E∣uangelist at Ephesus, Policarpus at Smirna, Thraseas at Eumenia Bishop and Mar∣tyr, and of Sagaris of Laodicea, Bishop and Martyr, and Iapirius and Melito at Sar∣dis with diuers other more. This sheweth that varience of Ceremonies, was no strange thing in Gods Church. After Victor succéeded Zepherinus; he sate 17. yeares. Under Seuerus also suffered Perpetua, Felicitas, and Rouocatus her brother, and Saturnius and Satyrus brethren, and Secumdulus, who dyed in prison, the rest were throwne to wild beasts. Seuerus hauing raigned 18. yeares was slaine at Yorke, by Northerne men and Scots, (leauing two Sonnes Bassianus and Geta, Bassianus hauing slaine his brother
in Brittaine, gouerned the Empire 6. yeares, he was slaine by his , with his sonn Pyadumenus raigned one yeare and were people, then Varius Heliogab: raigned two yeares, very and was slaine by his Souiers drawne through the . Aurelius Alxander Suerus raigned 13. years, well commended fauoured the Christians. Mammea the Emperours mother, commanded of erome for she sent to nioch for Origen, who stayed a while with the and returned to Alexandria, the Emperour and his mother were Commotion in Germany▪ Though there was no open persecution in his Iudges martyred many, because there was no  to the contrary: as Calixus of Rome, who was tied to a great stone, and throwne out of a He succeeded Zpherinus, and Vibanus succeeded him, who died a many , amongst whom was yburtius and Valerianus, of Rome, and remained constant to Martyrdome. Agapitus but 15. yeares old, suffered in his time, who was because he would not doe Sacifice, after other torments, the torments were executing, the udge fall suddenly from his his Bewels burned within him▪ and dyed vnder whom also of Rome, was drawne through the Citie and cast into ber. In his time also Pamachus a Senator of Rome, with his wife other men and women, and Sin pliciu a Noble Senator▪ all these had their heads smitten off and their hands hanged vp on diuerse Under him also suffered Quiritius, a Nole man of Rome, with his many more; also Tberius and Valerianus,  of Rome and with , and afterwords beheaded; also Martina a Uirgin. ¶The sixt Persecution. MAximinus succéeded Alexander, and for the hatered he bare him, he 27. Perscution, against the Teachers of the Church in his  Origen writ his Booke De Martyrio; in is time Rome who uccded Vbanus, with Phillip his Priest, was banished there died. In these times notable men were raised vp to the Church, as Philetus Bishop of An∣tioch, and Zebenus Bihop of the same, Ammonius Schoolemaster of Origen, Africanus Origens Scholler, and Natalius who had suffered for the  ∣clepiodotus and Theodtus Arrians promise to be the Bishop of their Sect, whereunto he yeelded, but the Lord and regarding it not, he was  with Angels, and hee and what had happened vnto him, so Zephirinus Bishop, with the him againe. After Pontianus Bishop of Rome, Antonius succéeded, and after him  Hi∣politus Bishop of a head citie in Arabia, hee was a Martyre, he was a great . Prudentius maketh mention of great heapes of Martres burned by 60. saith, that Hipolitus was drawne with  horses through fields, Goianus succded; Maximinus and Phillip succeeded him, and two Emperours were Christned with their Families and conuerted by Fabianus Bi∣shop of Rome and Origen. Phillip▪ with his Sonne▪ was Captaines, because the Emperours had commited th treasures vnto bianus. ¶The seauenth Persecution. DEcius hauing slaine the former Emperours, inuaded the Crown, in the yeare250 50. who  a terrible Persecution against the Christians. Fabianus was made Bishop of Rome, by lighting of a Doue vpon him in the Con∣gregation,
which was minded to elect some Noble and was put to death by Decius, who proclamed the  of Christians, Origen wrote of the rightuous of his Faith Origen taught and and sustained  persecutions. Under Decius be with bats of , and death and part of Scripture,  of the 46. Psalme; Why dost thou preach my Iustification, and why dost thou take my Testament in thy mouth? . In his time Alexanderines Bishop of ▪ where he had  40. yeares, and was brought from thence of Casaria, and died therein prison. Mzananes succeeded him the 36. Bishop after Iames. Babilas Bishop of noch resisted an Emperour, who against his promise had a Kings sonne  suffer him to  to the Temple of the Christians was  by him his body was  into the Subbs of the Christians, as stte as his body taken out of the Tempe, with fire. In Decius his  40. Uirgine suffered in Antioch, one Peter one Andrew, one Paulon, one Nichomachus an Dionisia a virgin were and  Chrstians were led from Cappadocta, Germanus, Theophilus, Cesarius, and Vitalis suffered Martyrdome, and Policronios Bishop of Bathlon, and Nesto Bishop of  O∣limpiades and Maximus; in  Anatolia a virgin, and Audx the Faith. In his time diuerse suffered in Alexandria before the sayer  vp the people▪ first, they  a Priest, beat him with him in the face and eyes with , and them stoned him. tooke Quinta a faithful  through the  vpon the hard stones, dashed  against then they spoyled all the Christians,  the citie, and tooke the They tooke Apollima an ancient Uirgin rashed out all her teeth, made a fire she would deny Chrst; but she  suddenly into the and was burned. They tooke one Serapion, and broke almost all the and cast him from an vpper oft, so he dyed, shortly after came the against the Christians, wherevpon the Persecution grew more . Cromon and Iulianus were laid vpon Camels, and whipped, then cast into thy for the testimony of Iesus; a Soldier tooke part with them going to Mart, and was beheader; also  was burned, and Epimacus and Alexander, hauing suffred bands and torments with  scourges, were burned with 4. women, Ammonarion a holy virgin, Marcuria an aged Maton, and Dionisia mother of many faire children, after many torments, were slaine by the word. Horon and odorus E∣gyptian, were grieuously tormented and then burned; there was one Dioscorus of their company but 5. yeares old, whe the Iudge  for his  age, being at his . Nmesian an Egyptan was accused of theft and purgd, and then was  of
Christianitie and was more grieuously scourged then the théeues, and then was burned. Amnon Zenon, Ptolomeus, Ingenius Souldiers, and an old man Theophilus, they séeing a Christian fearing to confesse his Faith, incouraged him by signes and being no∣ted and ready to be taken; they pressed to the Tribunall Seate, and confessed themselues to be Christians; whereat the Iudges and their Assistants were greatly amased, and the Christians imboldened, and they departed glad for the testimony they had giuen. Ischrion often moued of his Master to doe Sacrifice, and refusing, he runne him through with a speare. In this time many wandred in wildernesse, suffered hunger, colde, danger of wilde beasts. Clerimon Bishop of Nilus, an olde man, with his wife, flying to the mountaine of Arabia, could neuer be found againe. Dionisius Alexandrinus suffered much aflction, and had strange deliuerances. First, the messenger was struckn blinde & could not finde his house, after which three daies, God had him flye; after, comming to Ierusalem, he was taken, the Keeper was from home when he was brought to Prison, and the Keeper returning home and finding di∣uerse runne away, he ranne away himselfe, and tolde the matter to one he met going to a Mariage, who tolde it to them at the wedding, who in the night rushed towards the prioners with great shouting, they that kept the prisoners were afraid and left them, then the company willed them to depart, and they tke Dionisius, set him vpon an Asse, and conueyed him away. In this time suffered one Christopherus a Cananite, 12. cubits high; also Menea∣tes a Florentine, and Agatha a holy virgine in Sicily, who suffered imprisonment, was beten, racked, famished, rayled on, tormented with sharpe shels and  coes, and her breasts were cut from her body. Amongst others also suffered 40. virgines by diuerse knds of deathes; Triphon a very holy and constant man of Nice, after much torments, suffered death by the sword. Decius erected a Temple at Ephesus, and compelled all the citie to dee Sacrifice; 7. of his Souldiers refused, and they hi themselues in Mount Celius in caues; the Em∣perour caused them to be rammed vp with stones, and so they wre Martired. Hieronimus writeth of a godly Souldier, which could not be brought from his Faith, was brought into a pleasant Garden, laid vpon a soft bed, and an Harlot sent to allure him, she offering to kisse him▪ he bit off her tongue and pit it in her face. Theodora a virgine, was commanded to the Stewes, a young man, a Christian, cau∣sed her to change garments with him, and conuey herselfe away, and offering himselfe to their violence, being found a man, he confessed himselfe a Christian, and was condem∣ned to suffer, Theodora offered herselfe to the Iudge, and desired that the other might be discharged, he commanded them both to be beheaded, and cast into the fire. Agathon was condemned to lose his head for rebuking them that derived the dead bo∣dies of Christians. One Paulus, and one Andreas, were scourged, drawne through the citie, and aftrer troden to death vnder the féete of people; also Iustinus a Priest of Rome, and Nicostra∣tus a Deacon, and Portius a Priest of Rome, which is reported to haue conuerted the Emperour Phillip, were all Martyred. Secundarius, as he was led to the Iaile, Verianus & Marcellinus asked whether they led the innocent, whereupon they were taken▪ and after torments and beatings with waisters, were hanged, with fire put to their sides; but the Tormentors some fell so∣dainly dead, others were possessed with euill Spirits. Beza registers these to suffer in this Tyrants time, Hipolitus, Concordia, Hiereni∣us, Abundus, Victoria a virgin being Nobles or Antioch: Belias Bishop of Apollinia; Leacus, Tyrsus, and Galmetus, Nazazo, Triphon, Phillas, Bishop of Philocomus; Philocronius Bishop of Babilon, Thesiphon Bishop of Pamphilia, Nestor Bishop of Corduba, Parmeuius Priest, Circensis, Marianus, and Iacobus, Nemesianus, Felix, Ro∣gatianus Priest Felicissimus, Iouinius, Basilius, Ruffina and Secunda virgins, Tertul∣lianus Valerianus, Nemesius, Sempronianus, Olimpiadus, Teragone, Zeno Bishop of Cesaria, Marinus, Archinius, Priuatus Bishop, Theodorus Bishop of Pontus, Pergen∣tius and Laurencius children, suffered Persecution in Tuscia.
Many reuolted, as Serapion▪ Nichomachus in the middest of his torments, Euari∣stus Bishop of Africa, Nicoftratus a Deacon, diuerse of them were punished by Gods hand, some with euill spirits, some with strange diseases. At this time rose the heresie of Nouatus, he disturbed Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, and Cornelius Bishop of Rome, he was assisted with Maximus, Vrbanus, Sidonius, and Celerius, but they forsooke him: after he allured three simple Bishops in taly to lay their hands on him to make him Bishop of Rome, with Coruelius, whom by all meanes he sought to defeate, and made the people that came to receiue the Eucharist▪ sweae they would stand with him. Two young men, Aurelius, which was twise tormented, and Mapalicus in the mid∣dest of his torments, told the Proconsull, to morrow you shall see the running for a wa∣ger, meaning his Matyrdome. Decius the Emperour raigned but two yeares, and with his sonne, was slaine of the Barbarians; presently God sent a pleue 10 yeares together, which made diuerse paces desolate, especially where the Persecution most raigned the Christians comforted and ministred vnto their sicke brethren, the Infidels forsooke their neighbours and friends, and left them destitute of succour, vpon this Plague Ciprian wrote his Booke, De mortalitate. Vibias Gallus▪ and Volusian his sonne, by treason, succeeded Decius. Gallus at the first was quiet, anone after published Edicts against Christians; Cy∣prian Bishop of Carthage was banished, others were condemned to the Mines, as Ne∣misianus, Fex, Lucius, with their Bishops, Priests and Deacons▪ to whom, and to Se∣agrius and Rogatianus Cyprian wrote consolatory Epistles: Lucius Bishop of Rome was banished, whom Cornelius succeeded, but a while after hee returned againe to his Church, and Stephanus succéeded him, and sate 7. yeares, 5. monethe, and died a Martyre, betwixt him end Cyprian fell a contention about rebaptizing of Hereticks. Emilianus slew the former Emperours, and succéeded himselfe, after 3. moneths he was slaine, and Valerius and Galienus his sonne succeeded him. Valerius 3. or 4. yeares was so cuteous to Christians, as no Emperour before him, that his Court was full of Christians, but he was seduced by an Egyptian Magitian, finding himselfe hindred by them, from the practising of his charmes, hée brought the Emperour to Idols, he Sacrificed Infants, and reised the eight Persecution. ¶The eight Persecution. CIprian was an African borne in Carthage, an Idolater, and giuen to Magicke, he was conuerted to the Faith, by Cecia Priest, by hearing the Prophet Ionas, as sOOne as he was conuerted, he gaue his goods to the poore: not long after he was Priest, he was bishop of Carthage, he had the gouernment of the whole East Church▪ and Church of Spaine, he was called the Bishop of Christian men: he loued to read Tertullian, and called him his Master. In the time of Decius and Gallus he was banished, in the time of Valerianus he returned againe: but after, he was found in a Carden, and his head stricken off. At this time Zistus Bishop of Rome, with sixe of his Deacons, more be∣headed: one Laurence a Deacon, seeing the bishop goe to execution, cryed to him, Deare Father, whether goest thou without thy deare sonne? He answered, within three daies thou shalt suffer in more painefull manner then I, which fell out accordingly: for Laurence hauing distributed the goods of the poore, by the charge of the bishop, the Emperour hearing thereof, commaunded him to render the Treasure to him▪ but after thrée daies respite, in sleede thereof, hee presented vnto him a sort of poore Christians, as the Treasure of the Church; whereupon hee commaunded Laurence to bee broyled on a gridyron, where after hee had suffered a great space, hee said this side is rosted enough, turne vp Tyrant, try whether rosted or raw be bettermeate. A Souldier of Rome was conuerted to the Faith by the constant proion of this Lau∣rence, and desired to be baptized of him, but the Iudge called him, and scourged, and be headed him.
At this time suffered Dionisius Bishop of Alexandria, he was banished and scourged, then remoued to a more strait place; one Gaius, one Petrus, and one Paulus were afflic∣ted with him notwithstanding; Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, and Lucius, visited the brethren, also Eusebius suffered affliction for the truth, who after was Bishop of a∣odicia: Faustus long after being an oldman, was beheaded▪ but Dionisius suruiued all these troubles and in great age departed in peace, after he had gouerned the Church of Alexandria 17. yeares, and taught Schoole there 16. yeares, and Maximus succee∣ded him. In the same time Priscus, Marcus, and Alexander, who stepyed to the Iudge, and declared themselues Christians, with a woman, were giuen to wilde beasts. In Carthage were 300. martyred in a Lime kill for refusing, because they would not Sacrifice to lupiter. Maxima, Donatilla, and Secunda, three Uirgins, after cruell torments, were giuen to beasts, which refused to touch them, then they were beheaded; also one Pontius af∣ter diuerse torments, was giuen to beasts, who refusing to touch him▪ he was burned at which time Claudius his Iudge with Anabius his assistant, were taken with wicked Spirits, and bit off their owne tongues, and died. The same time Zeno Bishop of Uerona was Martyred; one Phillippus President of Alexandria came downe with his Wife, two Sons, and his Daughter Eugenia she with two Enuches, Prothus and Hiacintus, were conuerted to Christianitie; she put on the apparell of a man to aide trouble, and to heare Helenus Bishop, and named herselfe Eugenius. Malena a Marton of Alexandria fell in lou with her, end séeing that by no meanes she could obtaine her sute, she made an outcry, saying that Euge∣nius went about to delowre her, and accused her to Phillippus, so shee was forced to manifest her selfe to her Father; after, she wonne him and other of her kindred, to the Faith, her Father was after Martyred: after, shee returned to Rome with her Eu∣nuches, and conuerted Basilla, who was beheaded after sundry torments. In the sixt yeare of Valerianus, Victor and Victorinus, with Claudianus and Bossa his wife, after thrée yeares imprisonment, and diuerse torments, were put to death. Fructuosus Bishop of Tarraconia, with his two Deacons Augurius and Eulogius, at their execution, their hands bound behinde them vnloosed, and the fire flewe from them▪ vntill they had prayed▪ at which time a certaine Souldier did sée the Heauens open, and the Martyres entred in; which sight he shewed to the Daughter of Emilia∣nus the President. This Emperour Valerianus, after he had raigned, with his Sonne, about sixe yeares, and afflicted the Christians two yeares, was taken of Sapres King of the Persians, who made him alwaies his footstoole to get vppon his horse till hee dyed. At the same time, amongst the Romaines, there happenned 30. Earthquakes to∣gether, whereupon the Persecution was moderated: yet some uffered, as Marinus, a Noble-man, he was accused to be a Christian of him that should succeede him; the Iudge gaue him three dayes to aduise himselfe, but being incouraged by Theoditus Bishop of Cesaria, hee presented himselfe to the Iudge, by whose Sentence he was beheaded. Galienus succeeded Valerianus, and Claudius succeeded him. Vincentius maketh mention of 262. Martyres that suffered vnder him: Quintilianus succeeded him after Aurelianus, vnder whom was moued the ninth Persecution. ¶The ninth Persecution. AS Aurelianus was subscribing the Edict against Christians,278. he was terrified with ghtning▪ and about the 6. yeare of his raigne was slaine, yet Vincentius and O∣rosius reckon vp a great number of Martyres which suffered vnder him in Fraunce and Italy. Publius Annins Tacitus succeeded Aurelianus, and raigned 6. moneths; his brother
Florianus succéeded him 60. daies. Marcus Aurelius succéeded him, surnamed Probus; he moued no Persecution: after he had raigned 6 yeares, 4. Moneths, because, by rea∣son of Peace, he had no worke for his Souldiers, therefore he was slaine. Carus with his two Sonnes, Carinus and Numerianus succéeded him 3. yeares Numerianus kil Cerillus, for not suffering him to enter into the congregation of the Christians, he being their Bishop; he was slaine of his Father. Dioclesian succeeded; vntill the 19. yeare of his raigne the Church was quiet, which quietsse had indured 44. yeares; the Church grew mightily, and the chiefe of them in fauour with the Emperour, were Derotheus and Gorgotheus, and diuerse moe. The Church began to were wanton with Peace, and to build large Churches, but their desolutenes broght on them the tenth persecution. ¶The tenth Persecution. VVHilst Dioclesian abstained from Persecuting, he obtained diuerse victories, and being proud thereof, he would be worshipped as a God, calling himselfe brother of the Sunne and Moone, inioyned the people to kisse his feete, and in the 19. yeare of his raigne he moued Persecution, he commaunded the Churches of Christians to be destroyed, and the Scriptures to be burned; put Christians from Magistracie, and constrained them with torments to offer to Idols. After the Proclamation of the Edict, a Noble-man, a Christian openly rent it in pieces, for which act he was put to most bitter death. Dioclesian began with his Campe, willed the Christians to lay away their wea∣pons, and giue ouer their charges, which they did willingly. At Tyre there were Chri∣stians giuen to cruell beasts: preserued miraculusly, though they were kept hungry of purpose; they raged against those that brought the Christians, and deuoured them they could catch, therefore they were beheaded, and cast into the Sea. At that time was Martyred the Bishop of Sidon, but Siluanus Bishop of Gazens, with 39. others, were slaine in the Mettie-mines; thon Pamphilius an Elder, and the glory of the Church of Cesaria, whom Eusebius writeth of, was Martyred. All the Bi∣shops and Teachers in Syria were imprisoned; Tyrannion throwne to fishes, Arnobi∣us a Physition, slaine with brickbats, some drowned themselues rather then they would worship Idols, Siluanus Bishop of Emissa, with others were throwne to wilde beasts. In Mesopotamia the Christians were hanged by the feete, and choked with smoke: in Cappadocia their legs were broken, in Cilicia Taragus, Probus, and Andronious Martyred: the Persecution was so outragious, that they refrained not from the slaugh∣ter of the Emperours children, & the chiefest Princes of his Court, amongst whom was one Peter of the Houshold whom the King did loue as his owne childe, after cruell tor∣ments, he was whipped to the bones, powdered with salt and vineger, and ofled with a fire. Dorotheus and Gorgonius séeing it, reproued the Emperour, and confessed they were Christians; wherefore, though they were in great authoritie, they were almost tormented as he, and strangled. Anthonius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Lucianus, and a great company of artyrs were beheaded. Dioclesian beheaded his owne wife Serena. Elampia, Agapen, Irenea, Cronia, and Anastachia were burned, 2000. Christians were burned in one Temple: In Arabia many Martyres were slaine with xes: I Phrigia, a whole Citie of Christians compassed, set on fire, and burned: In Melitina, the Bishop and Elders were cast into prison. A Sheriffe in doing execution vpon the Christians was conuerted, and confessed him∣selfe a Christian, and after diuerse strange torments, was burned. Eugenius, Auxen∣tius, Marderius, were Martyred: In Egypt, Pelus and Nilus Bishops, were Marty∣red, the rage was great in Alexandria the Bishop thereof and Elders, Faustus, Didius, Ammonius, Phildas, Hefichius, and Theodorus, with many other were Martyred. (6660. Souldiers, being Christians, vnder the Christian Captaine Mauritius, lying at in Egypt, refusing to worship Images, died altogether constant in the Faith. Ascla, Phremon & Apolinius with diuerse Christians, were martyred at Anteno, in Sci∣lia were 79. put to death▪ in Calcedon Euphenea was martired, in Rome, Iohn & Crispus
Priests, at Babem Agricola and Vitalis, at Aquilia the Emperour commaunded man to kil the Christians, where Felices and Fortunatus was killed, Victor suffered at  Beluans Lucian suffered. In Spaine was great persecution as at Emerita, Eulalia, Adula, Vincensia, Sabina, and Christiana suffered; Leucadia virgin, Augusta, and 18. besides were martyred. Where was such Persecution at rers by the riuer Mosella, that he blood of Christi∣ans like a little Brooke, and coloured by Riuer; Horsmen  to kill the Christians: Agripina and Augusta were . In  all the Christians were destroyed, no tongue  the deathe and that this Tyrant vsed, hanging them by one hand,  them▪ and but not to death: but euery day. Eusebius saith, he saw the the  of the pe∣secutors blunt with often slaughter, themselues for wearinesse sit downe and ; but the Martyres nothing  were patient for Chrsts sake. Miletus Bishop of  gaue backe, wherefore Peter Bishop of so did Marcellus Bishop of Rome, whrefore he was and was Martyard. In 30. dayes were  17000 Martyres, besides many that There were Mariyd at Alexandria. 300. 120. more Martyres. This Persecution endured vntill about the 7. yeare of Constantius; at length, be∣ing out of hope to exinguish them, the slaughter ceased▪ yet they  many, and put 360. Regmus  the eyes of  and condemned many to the . After Dioclesian and Maximianus had raigned about . yeares thy vp the Empier, and the Empire remained with Constantius, and Galius Maxeminus. Max∣eminus presecuted the Persecution about 7. yeares, vnt the years 318. but Constantius ather auoured the Christians and to try  Couriers he eigned in Sacrifice to , and commaunced his Houshold so to de, and finding a number that constantly re∣fused e cherished them and  them to great places, and refused the backders. Maximinus vsed great cruceltie in the East Churches  God stayed his rage by sending him  a bothe as pufied his trals, from whence came inumerable mul∣titudes whereupon he published Edicts of Peace to the Christians and desired them to pray for him, but 6. monethes after he set out conrary of  and  them to be  so Persecution rose againe as great as before. Siluanus, Lucianus, Petrus Bishop, Querinus Bishop, Marcellus, Tmothe, Victo∣rianus, Symphocrianus, Castorius, Castus, Cesarius, Meous, Nobilis Dorotheus, Gorgamus, Petus vnto inumerable Martyris; Iuliana, Cosmus Damanus Basileus, with eauen others, Dorathca, Theophilus. Theodosia Vita is, Agricola, cha, Phile∣mon, Hireneus, Januarius, Festus, Diiderius, Grigorius, Spolitanus, Agaps, Cro∣ia, Hirenea. heodora, with 270. others. Florianus▪ Prinius, Felicia, Vitus, Mo∣destus, Crescentia, Abinus, Rogatianus, Donatianus,  Catharina, Marga∣reta. Lucia  Atheus the King with 3700. Simplicius Fausts, Beatrix, Pan∣thaleon, Grigorns, Iustus, Leocandia, Anthonia, with infir. Felix Victor, with his parents, Lucia widdowe, Germinianus, with 79. others; Anastacia, Cogonus, Felix, Audactus, Adrianus Nathalia, Agnes of 13. yeares olde, these many other were then Martyred. The Emperour in his Edict declared what plently they enioyed when they adored their . As  as that Persecution began, there was a miserable Fmine ad Pesti∣lence, wherein the Christians (to their power) reued the Gentiles, whereby grewe some yeare. a Christian woman, whose husband they had killed to satisfie the filthy desire of the Emperour, shee killed her selfe rather then she would so doe. He banished a Noble woman of Rome, because she gaue her goods to the Church. The people of Rome, wearied with the vilany of Maxentius, quired ayd Con∣stantine, he gathered an Armie in Fraunce and Britane, and being in , looking vp to Heauen about the going downe of the Sunne, he sawe a brightnesse like acrosse, with
Starres of equall bignesse, with this inscription, In hoc vince. Eusebius Pamphilus re∣porteth he heard Constatine often affirme it; In the , Christ appeared vnto him with the signe of the same Crosse, bding im make the figure thereof and carry it before him in his warres, and he should hau vctory; whereupon he towards Maxntius, who not being able to sustaine Constantines orce, and o the Ctie, was ouerthrowne of his horse in the floud, and owned, and so ended th last Persecution, he gaue liertie, by Proclmation, to Christians o prolesse their Re∣ligion: Diclesian heaing herof, dyed for sorrw some say he poysoned . Licinius first oyned with Constanne, and onqured Maximinus a great in the West, who killed his Charmrs that  him o warre, and with a disease, he glorified the God of the Christians, and made a Lawe for their . Licinius called Learning▪ the poyson of the common wealth, and said it was a for a Prince to be learned; he said, the Christians prayed for Constant  and not for him, therefore he persecuted them, first in his owne Court, them in the  he rased many Churches to the ground, he hanged Theodorus on a Crosse, thrst nayles into his ame pits then strucke off his head, He put to death Basilius Bishop, Niclo∣laus Bishop Grigrus of Armenia the great Paul of  whose ands were off ith a earing Iron, in Sebasta he drowned 40. Souldiers in a horse Pond, the wiues of these 40. with Ammones a Deacon, after inumerable torments were slae with th sword. Diuerse btels were sought betwéene Licinius and Constantine first in Hungary, where he was our throwne, in Macedonia, where he fled and epyred his Arm, and being vanquished by Sea and Land, he yeelded to Costantine, and was commd liue a priuate life but he was killed by the Souldiers in the yeare 324.324. Constantius he father of Constantine dyed in the yeare 310▪ and wee buried at Yorke. Abon, the fist that sured Martyrdome in England, he was conuerd by A phi∣bolus, a persecuted Clarke which he loged; the Prince hearting thereof, sent out for him, Albon came to the Souldiers who brought him to the Iudge, and would not sacrifice to Diuels, after he was grieuosly scourged he was beheaded, the Clarke fled into Wales, where he was set and made to runne about a Stake, his blly being opened, whilst  owels were drawne out, hee was stabbed with wag∣gers, and after stoned, this was Anno 301. It is to be noted that England was no touched with any of the nine Persecutions, but onely with the tenth, in which almost all Christiantie was in the  exin∣guished. Galerius threatning the Christians in Antioch, Romanus a Noble man encouraged them he was strangely tormented, he requred the Tyrant that a childe should be pre∣sented vnto him, he asked the childe whether it was ore reasonble to serue one God rathr thn umerable; the Childe answered the Tyrant, that one God was to be worshipped; the Tyrant scourged the Childe, and pulled off the skinne of his head, the mother being by, exhorted the Childe to patience, the Childe was beheaded, and Ro∣manus cast in the fire, which when it would not burne him, hee was angled in prison. Gordius a Centurion liued in the Desert a long time, but at a eest of Mars he got vpon the highest pace of the Theaor, and vtered himselfe to all the people to bee a Christian; after many torments, he was urned. Menas likewise▪ a Souldier, cones∣sed himselfe a Christin in Colis, and afer diuerse torments, wa beheaded. Basilius writeth of 40. Martyres, young Gentlemen, professing themselues Chri∣stians, they were caused to stand in winter in a Pond all night, and in the morning bnrne. Nicephorus reporteth of 40. Martyres drowned in a Ponde at Sebestia. Cirus a Poysition, with one Ioannes, led a solitary life in Arabia in Persecuion, they hearing of the imprisonment of Athanasia with her three daughters, Theoste, Theodota, and Eudoxa, they came to confime them, and being accused, and would not doe Sacrfice, they were put to death. Sebastian, Lieutenant or Diaclesian, was accused to the Emperour for encouraging
diuers Martyres: he was brought into the Fielde, and of his owne Souldiers shot through with innumerable Darts, after threw his body into a Iakes. Nicostratus, with Zoe his Wife: Tranquillinus, with Martia his Wife; Traglianus, Claudius, Ca∣stor, Tiburtus, Castullus, Marcus, and Marcellus, with others moe suffered with him. Barla, a Nobleman, whom Basilius mentions in a Sermon, after many torments he was sacrificed on an Altar of their Idols, they put Fire and Incense into his hand, thinking he would scatter it vpon the Altar, and so haue sacrificed, but the fire burning about his hand, it endured as if it had béene couered about with Embers, he saying the Psalme, Blessed is my God which teacheth in hands to fight. Vincentius was so racked, that all the ioynts of his body cracked, then there was many wounds made in his body, then his flesh was combed with Iron Combes, sharply filed, then they scourged him, then they laid his body vpon an Iron Grate, and opened it with Hooks, then they seared it with diuers plates, sprinkling the same with hot Salt, then they drew him into a Dungeon sprinkled with sharpe shels, and locked his féete in the stockes. Philoronimus forsooke great possessions for Christ, and was beheaded, and neither Friends, Wife, or Children could moue him: also, Procopius being conuerted, brake his Siluer Images, and gaue them to the poore, after gréeuous torments, his hands and féet being cut off he was beheaded: so was Grigotius a young man vsed. Panthion, Theodorus, and Gerion, with 318. were martyred, Hermogines, Eugra∣phus, Samonas, Gurias, Abilus, Hieron, Indes, Dominas, with two thousand were mar∣tired. Enclasius and Maximinius, whom Fausta the Uirgin conuerted in her torments: also, Thusus, Lucius, Callinicus, Apollonius, Philemon, Asilas, Leonides, Arianus, Cy∣prian Byshop of Antioch, before his conuersion being a Magitian, suffered with Iu∣stina a Uirgine. Glicerius, Felix, Fortunatus, Achileus, Arthemius, Ciriacus, Anthoni∣us, Marcellinus, Cucusatus, Barcimonia, Felix Byshop, Audactus, Ianuarius, Fortuna∣tus, Septimus, these suffered vnder Dioclesian. Cassianus was stabbed of his Schol∣lers with Iron Pen wherewith they vsed to write. Eulalia was shut vp of her Pa∣rents, least she should be cause of her death, shee brake out in the night, came to the Iudge, confessed her selfe a Christian, and reprooued the cruelty of the Iudge, and their vanity in worshipping Images, she threw downe the Idols, and scattered the Incense when she was brought to worship them; she had one ioynt pulled from ano∣ther, her flesh was scraped off with clawes of beasts to the bones, she reioysing and praising God, they seared her breasts with torches: when they had caught her haire, which hanged downe to her féet and couered her shame, shee opened her mouth ouer the flame and died. Agnes, a Romaine virgine, not marriageable, for her constancy in Christ was con∣demned to be committed to the common Stewes, and Younkers appointed to assayle her, whom when she refused, she was tied to a corner of a stréet naked: one beholding the Uirgine with vnchast eyes, was striken with lightning, his eies dashed out of his head, whom Agnes prayed for and restored: after he was beheaded, she preferred the sight of her Executioners more, then of her louers. There are many myracles repor∣ted of her. Katherine openly resisted the Emperor Maxentius to his face, and rebuked him of his cruelty, after she had felt the racke, and the fouresharp cutting wheeles, she was beheaded. Iulitta sued to the Emperor for goods wrongfully detained from her, her aduersary accused her of Christianity, being commanded to doe sacrifice with Incense, shee re∣fused it, and encouraged others, and was burned. Barbara, a Noble woman suffering cruell torments, as cords, and burning of her sides, was lastly beheaded for her Faith. Fausta, Iuliana, Anisia, Iustina, Lucia, Agatha, and Tecla, with all holy Uirgines, suffered in the tenth Persecution. aius succéeded Xistus B. of Rome: Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius were Byshops afterward, and then Miltiades, which was the last Bishop of Rome that was martyred: These all were Martyrs. Sapores King of Persia put to death, Acyndiuus, Pegasius, Anempodistus, Epidephorus, Simeon
Arch-byshop of Seleuia, Cesiphon B. in Persia, with other religious men. 128. Symon, chéefe Bishop of Persia, was accused by the Magitians, as he was lea∣ding to Prison: Vhazares, who was the Kings Schoole-maister, and had fallen from Christianity, who sitting at the Kings Gate, rose vp and reuerenced him, but Simi∣on rebuked him with sharpe words, which made him put on mourning wéeds, sit wée∣ping at the gate; saying, what hope haue I of God when my familiar friend Simion disdaineth me, which being knowne to the King, and he confessing himselfe a Christi∣an, the King commaunded he should be beheaded: He desired of the King to certifie that he died for nothing but Christianity, which he obtained; Simion being in prison, and hearing of it, reioyced, and the next day suffered with an 100. more. Pusices, séeing an old Father shrinke in the sight of the Martyr, said; shut thine eies, be strong, and shortly thou shalt sée God, wherefore the King caused an hole to be made in his necke, and thereout pulled his tongue, and so he was put to death, and his Daughter, a Uirgine, died with him in Christs cause, the number of them that were martyred in Persia, was 15000. This comming to Constantines eares, mooued him, he graunted Sapores his Ambassadors all they requested, thinking thereby to mooue him to fauour the Christians, and wrote to them to take compassion on the Innocents, and shewed how the hand of God had béene against Tyrants of the Church. Beniamin, for preaching Christ, was thrust vnder the nailes with twenty sharpe prickes, when hee laughed at it, a sharpe Réede was thrust into his yard, and a long thorny stalke vp into his body vntill hee died. Under Iulianus Apostata, Emilianus was burned, Domitius was slaine in his Caue: Theodorus singing a Psalme, was tormented from morning to night, hardly escaped with life, and being asked how hee could abide the torments, said, at first I felt some paine, but after there stood a young man by me, who so refreshed me, that it greeued me more when I was let down from the Ingine then before. The Arethusians of Syria, tooke a company of Uirgines, Christians, whom first they set sorth naked to bee scorned of the multitude, then shaued them, then couered them with draffe, and caused them to bee deuoured of Swine, their cruelty was the greater, because Constantine restrained them, from defiling Uirgines, and destroyed the Temple of Venus. Marcus Arethusius, because, at the commaundement of Constantine, he pulled down a Temple of Idols, and builded a Church for Christians in the place, they stripped him naked, and beat him gréeuously, then put him in a filthy sincke, then they caused Boyes to thrust him in with sharpe stickes, then they annointed him with Hony and Broath, and hung him in the Sunne as meat for Waspes and Flyes, then they re∣quired somewhat towards the building of the Temple againe: he answered, it were as great impiety to conferre one halfe-peny to a matter of impiety, as a great summe. Constantine raigned about thirty yeares: he was borne in Brittaine, his Mothers name was Helena, Daughter of King Coilus; hee trauailed greatly for the peace of Christians, he set peace amongst the Byshops at dissention; hee made prouision for Preachers, and caused all to bee restored vnto the Christians that was taken from them by Persecutors. He wrote to his chéefe Captaine, that Ministers should be fréed from all publique duties and burthens: He wrote to Eusebius for the edifying of new Churches, and after he had gathered the Nicene Councel, for the vnity of the Church, he writeth to Alexander and Arius for the same intent. He inioyned a Prayer to his Souldiers in stead of Catechisme. We knowledge thee onely to be our GOD, we confesse thee onely to bee our King, we call vpon thée our onely helper, by thée we obtaine our victories, by thee we vanquish our ene∣mies, to thee be attributed whatsoeuer commodities we presently enioy: by thee we hope for good thinges to come, vnto thee we direct all our sutes and petitions, most humbly befeeching thee to keepe Constantinus our Emperour, and his Noble Children to continue in long lie, and to giue them victory ouer their enemies, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
He graunted great immunities vnto the Ministers that they might appeale from the ciuill Iudge to their Byshop, whose sentence was of as great value as if the Em∣peror had pronounced it. He prouided maintenance for liberall Sciences and Arts, for the Prosessors, there Wiues and Children, and gaue them great immunities. He wrote to Eusebius By∣shop of Nicomedia, to procure fifty Uolumes of Parchment well bound, and cause to bee written out of the Scripture therein in a leageable hand, such things as were profitable for the instruction of the Church, allowed him two Ministers for the busi∣nesse: he was a Father to the Church, and inforced himselfe euery way to set forth the Gospell, and to suppresse the contrary. The end of the tenth Persecution. THE SECOND BOOKE Containing the next 300. yeares. BY these Persecutions hitherto, we may vnderstand that what the fury of Sathan and rage of men could deuise to do by death or torments, all was to the vtmost attempted to extinguish the Name and Religion of Christ, yet notwithstanding the wisedome of the world and the strength of men, Christ hath the vpper hand as thou seest. Now because the tying vp of Sathan giueth the Church rest▪ we will leaue the af∣faires of the Uniuersall Church, and prosecute the Histories of our Country of Eng∣land and Scotland, beginning with King Lucius, with whom the Faith began first in this Realme. The Papists doe earnestly contend, that the Faith of Christ was first brought and receiued into England from Rome, both in the time of Eleutherius their Byshop, in the yeare 180. and also in the time of Augustine, whom Gregory sent hither in the yeare 600. but it is proued otherwise by these seauen Arguments. 1 Gildas affirmeth,Lib. de victo∣ria. that Brittain receiued the Gospel in the time of Tyberius the Emperor, vnder whom Christ suffered, & saith farther, that Ioseph of Arimathia, was sent of Philip the Apostle from France to Brittaine, in the yeare 63. and remained héere all his time, and founded the Faith amongst the Brittaines. 2 Tertullian,Ex Trtul. cōtra Iudeos liuing about the time of Elutherius, testifieth how the Gospell was dispersed by the Apostles, reckoneth Brittany amongst the Countries conuerted by them. 3 Origen,Ex Origen hom. 4. in Ezech. before the daies of Elutherius, said the Brittaines consented to Chri∣stianity. 4 Bede affirmeth, that 1000. yeares after Christ, Easter was kept in Brittaine after the manner of the East Church, on the fouretéenth day after the full Moone, what day soeuer it was, and not on sunday as we doe, whereby is gathered, the first Preacher came from the East, rather then from Rome. 5 Nicephorus Lib. 2. Cap. 4. saith, Simon Zelotes spread the Gospell in Brit∣tany. 6 Petrus Cluniensis saith, that the Scots in his time celebrated Easter after the
manner of the Gréekes and as the Brittaines, were not vnder the Romain order, nor vnder their Legate in the time of Gregory, nor would admit any primasie of the By∣shop of Rome aboue them. 7 By the Epistle of Elutherius to Lucius, it appeareth that Lucius had receiued the Faith before he wrote to Elutherius, for the Romaine Lawes. Elutherius might help some-thing to conuert the King, and to increase the Faith, but was not the first that planted it, but if it were so, it maketh nothing for them, for he challenged no such Supremacy as they doe, and was farre from their errours and superstitions. The Chroniles write, that about the yeare 180.180 King Lucius, Sonne of Coylus, which builded Colchester, hearing of the myracles of Christians in his time, writ to Elutherius Bishop of Rome to receiue the Faith; the good Bishop sent him certaine Preachers, which conuerted the King of the Brittaines, and baptized them, there were the twenty eight Priests called Flamines, which they turned to twentie eight Bishoppes, and thrée Arch-Flamins, to thrée Arch-bishops, to wit; London, Yorke, and Glamargan by Wales. Thus all the Realme setled in good order, Lucius sent againe to Elutherius for the Romaine Lawes, thereby likewise to gouerne the Realme. Unto whom Elutherius wrote againe: we may reprooue the Law of the Romaines, but the Law of GOD wee cannot reprooue: you haue with you both partes of the Scriptures, out of them, by Gods grace, with the councell of your Realme, take yea Law and rule your kingdome of Brittaine, for you are Gods Uicar in your king∣dome. The Faith thus receiued of the Brittaines, continued and flourished 216 yeares, vntill the comming of the Saxons, who then were Pagans: whilst Brittaine had thus receiued the Faith, the Emperors of Rome were Infidels, wherefore much trouble wos sought against them, as it was against all parts of Christendome. Lucius, after he had raigned about 77. yeares, died without issue: whereupon fol∣lowed great misery and ruine to the Realme, for sometime the idolatrous Romaines, and sometimes the Brittaines raigned, as violence and victory would serue; one King murdering another, vntill at length the Saxons depriued them both. Some write▪ but falsely, that King Lucius, after he was baptized, forsooke his king∣ly Honor and the Land, and became a Preacher in France and Germany, and other places, and was made Doctor and Rector of the Church of Cureac, where hee was martyred, but this fansie is contrary to all our English Stories, which doe agrée that he hauing founded many Churches, and giuen great liberalities to the same, deceased in great tranquility in his owne Land, and was buried at Glocester. Betwéene the time of King Lucius, and the entring of the Saxons, there raigned after Lucius Seuerus a Romaine: after him Bassianus, a Romaine; after him Cerausi∣us, a Brittaine; after him Alectus, a Romaine; after him Asclepiodotus, a Brittaine; after him Coilus, a Brittaine; after him Constantius, a Romain; after him Constan∣tinus, a Brittain, by Helena his Mother, the Daughter of King Coilus, and Wife of Constantius. Constantine first made the wals of London and Colchester: when the Romaines ruled it, it was ruled by Infidels, and when the Brittains ruled, by Chri∣stians; yet no persecution was raised in it, vntill the tenth persecution, which was so cruell, that all our English Chronicles report, that all Christianity almost in the whole land was destroyed, Churches subuerted, and the Scriptures burned, as be∣fore is shewed. It is worthy to be noted, that Constantine, that worthy Emperor, was not onely a Brittaine borne, but his Mother Helena, Daughter of King Coilus a Brittaine, but also by the helpe of the Brittaines Army, which Constantine tooke with him, with great victories he obtained the peace of the Uniuersall Church, hauing thrée legions with him out of this Realme, of chosen Souldiers. After, Maximinian tooke all the power that was left of fighting Men, to subdue France, and after sent for 100000. Souldiours more at once, at which time Cona∣nus his Partner sent for 11000. Uirgines out of Brittaine, which were drowned
and spoyled by the way by Infidels, because they would not pollute themselues with them. Thus Brittaine being destitute of strength, had béene oppressed by Guanus and Melga, had not Guethlus Arch-bishop of London, and Constantinus, Brother to Al∣dranus, defended the Realme and State of Religion. Then came Vortigerne, who murdred Constance his Prince, and inuaed the Crowne, and fearing Constance his two brothers, he sent for ayde of the Saxons, and married with the Daughter of Hengist, but not long after he was dispossessed of his kingdome by the said Hengist, and the Saxons beeing all Infidels, and the Brit∣taines were driuen out of the Country. Two hundred seuenty one of their Nobles at one méeting at Almesbury, being subtilly slain by the Saxons, or at a place cald Stone∣henge, by the Monument of which Stones, there hanging, it séemeth the Noble Brittaines were there buried. I passe ouer the fabulous Story of the Welchmen, of bringing these Stones from Ireland by Merlin. Some Stories record, they were slaine, being bid to a banket: Thus came the Angles and Saxons fist into this Realme, being yet Infidels, about the yeare 469. they were diuers times driuen out by Aurelius Ambrosius, and his Brother Vter, but they returned againe, and at length possessed all, and droue the Brittains into Wales. Hengistus raigned 43. years and dyed in Kent, Galfridus saith he was taken in the warre of Aurelius Ambrosius, and beheaded in the 39. yeare of his raigne. His Sonne Offa succeeded him twenty foure yeares, Octa and Imericus his sons succéeded him, 53. yeares, and were slaine by Vter Pendragon. The Saxons deuided the Realme into sauen Kingdomes: to the first Kent; to the second Sussex and Surrey; the third West-sex, the fourth Eastsex; the fifth Cambridgeshire, Norffolke, and Suffolke: the sixt, the Countries of Lincolne, Lei∣cester, Huntingdon, Northampton, Oxford, Darby, Warwicke: the seauenth was King of Northumberland: they continued so a while with great Warres amongst themselues, at length all came to the possession of the West-Saxons. This ingdome began in the yeare 522. and continued vntill about the comming of William the Con∣queror, which was 554. yeares. Saint Paules Church in London was builded by Ethelbert, King of Kent, and Sigebert King of Essex, when Ethelbert turned vnto the Faith. Malmsburie wri∣teth, that Mauricius the Kinges Chancellour, then Byshoppe of London, did first begin this famous building of Paules, and after Richard his Successour, bestowed all the rents of his Byshoppricke vpon the same, and it may be the first Church was ouerthrowne by the Danes, and re-edified by these Byshops. These Kings of the Brittaines raigned in Wales and Cornewall, Vortiger, Vor∣timer, Vortiger againe, Aurelius Ambrosius, Vter Pendragon, Arthur, Constantius 3. Aurelius Conanus, Vortiperius, Malgo, Carecius. The sinnes of the Brittaines was the cause of the iust iudgement of God against them, as out of an old Authour, and partly out of Gildas doth appeare: These bee the words of the Authour: There following Constantinus, and others a∣boue named, out of the Realme all the Nobility, when the rascall sort had got∣ten their places, and through aboundance of riches were surprised with pride, they fell into so great Fornication as neuer was heard of, and vnto all manner of wic∣kednesse, that mans Nature is inclined vnto; hating the truth, louing lyes, regar∣ding euill in stead of goodnesse, receiuing the Deuill in stead of an Angell of light, choose such for their Kings as were most cruell, and if any seemed to bee humble and fauour the truth, they hated and backbited him as a destroyer of Brittaine, and not onely the seculer men did thus, but also the Byshoppes and Teachers, there∣fore it was no maruell that such a people should loose their Country which they had so defiled. As there were many wicked Kinges among the Saxons, so there were some very good, but none almost frō the first to the last, which was not either slain in war or mur∣dred in peace, or constrained to make himselfe a Monk, whether it were the iust iudg∣ment of God, because they had violently dispossessed the Brittains, they were not only
vexed of the Danes, conquered of the Normans, but more cruelly deuoured them∣selues. Ethelbert King of Cambridgeshire, Norffolke, and Suffolke, came peaceably to King Offa, for dispousage of Athilrid his Daughter, and by the Councel of King Offa, his Wife was secretly beheaded. Wherevpon Offa, through repentance, made the first peter-pence to be giuen to S. Peters Church at Rome. One Lothbrooke a Dane of the Kings blood,The first comming of the Danes. being a hauking by the Sea-side in a little Boat, was cast by weather vpon the Coast of Norffolke, and being brought to King Edmund, he retained him in great fauour, at length he was priuily murdered by one Bericke, which being knowne, Bericke was sent away in Lothbrookes Boate without tackling, and was driuen into Denmarke, and being séene in Lothbrookes Boate, and examined of Lothbrooke, he falsely said the King had killed him. Where∣vpon Iugner and Hubba, Lothbrookes Sonnes, gathering an Army of Danes inua∣uaded first Northumberland, then Norffolke, and sent to King Edmund to deuide his Treasures to him, and be subiect to him, else he would dispossesse him of his ing∣dome, he answered he would not be subiect to a Pagan Duke, vnlesse before hee be∣come a Christian, then the Danes besiedged his house, but he fled and pitched a fielde with them, but the Danes preuailing, he fled to the Castle of Halesdon, where they tooke him and bound him to a stake, and shot him to death. Seauen or eight Kings are highly commended in the Histories for leauing there Kingdomes, and becomming Moonkes, but they are more to be discommended for lea∣uing their calling, wherein they might so much benefite the Church. There were foure Persecutions in England, before Austen came into England: the first vnder Dioclesian; the second, by the inuading of Gnarius and Melga, one cap∣taine of the Hunnes, the other of the Picts, after they had slaughtered 11000. Uir∣gines, as before made a rode into Brittaine, hearing it wanted strength, and mur∣dered Christians and spoiled Churches without mercy: the third by the Saxons, who destroyed Christs Saints and the Churches, vntill Aurelius Ambrosius restored again the Churches: the fourth, Gurmundus King of the Affricans ioyned with the Sax∣ons, and wrought much grieuance to the Christians of the Land, which persecution remained to the time of Ethelbert the fift King of Kent. In the tme of Ethelbert, the faith was receiued of the Saxons; by this meanes Gregory Bishop of Rome, seeing Brittaine Children to be sould in Rome, very beau∣tifull, vnderstanding what Country they were of, pittied that the Country which was so beautifull, and angellicall, so to be subiect to the prince of darkenes: Where∣fore he sent thither Austen with about forty Preachers with him, and when they were apaled and would haue turned backe again▪ Gregory emboldned and comforted them with his Letter, so they came to the Ile of henet in Kent, Ethelbert as before was King of Kent, he had married one Berda, a French Woman, vpon condition shee should vse the Christian Religion with one Lebardus her Byshop, Austen sent to the King, signifying hee was come from Rome, bringing with him glad tydings to him and all his people of life and saluation, if he would so willingly hearken vnto it, as he was gladly come to preach it vnto him. The King hauing heard of this Religion by his Wife, came to the place where Austen was, Austen against his comming erec∣ted a Banner of the Crucifire (such then was the grosenesse of the time) and prea∣ched to him the word of God, the King promised they should haue all things necessary, and none should molest them▪ and gaue them frée leaue to preach to his subiects, and conuert whom they might to the Faith. When they had this comfort of the King, they went with procession to Canterbu∣ry, singing Alleluia, with the Letany that was vsed at Rome in the great plague, We beséech thée O Lord in all thy mercies, that thy fury and anger may cease from this Citty, and from thy holy house, for we haue sinned, Alleluia, they continued in the same Citty preaching and baptizing, in the old Church of S. Martine, where the Quéene was wont to resort, vntill the King was conuerted, at length the King séeing their myracles, and their godly conuersation, he heard them gladly, and was conuer∣ted in the thirty sixe yeare of his raigne, Anno 586. After him innumerable daily
were adioyned vnto the Church, whom the King did specially imbrase, but compelled none, then the King gaue Austen a place for his Byshops Sea, at Christs Church in Canterbury, and builded the Abbey there, where after Austen and all the Kings of Kent were buried, which now is called S. Austine. Then Austen by the commandement of Gregory, went into France to the Bishop of Arelatensis, to be consecrated Arch-byshop, and so was then Austen sent to Grego∣ry, so declare how they had sped, and to be resolued of diuers questions, how Bishops should behaue themselues towards their Clarke, of offerings and Ceremonies, and what punishment for stealing Church goods, and such like, to no great purpose; there∣fore if thou béest disposed to sée them, I referre thee to the Booke at large. Gregory, after he had sent resolutions to these questions, sendeth moreouer more Coadiutors, as Melitus, Iustus, Paulinus, and Ruffianus, with Books and implements necessary for the English Church, and in reward of Austines paines, he sent him a Pal onely to be vsed at the solemnity of the Masse, and granteth two Metropolitane Seas, London and Yorke, but granted to Austen during his life, to be cheefe Arch-bishop of all the Land, and that they should not destroy the idolatrous Temples, but conuert them to Christian vses, and that Austine should not be proud of the myracles that God wrought by him, & that he should remember they were not done for him, but for their conuersion, whose saluation God sought thereby. Then he wrote to King Ethelbert▪ first hee praysed GOD, then the King, by whom it pleased God to worke such goodnesse of the people, then exhorted him to perseuer in his profession, and to be zealous therein, to conuert the multitude, and destroy Idolatry, and to gouerne them in holinesse of conuersation, according to the Emperor Constantinus the Great, comforting him with the promises of life, and re∣ward to come. Austine receiuing his Pall, as aboue said, and of a Monke being made an Arch-Byshop, hee made two Metropolitanes, as Gregorie commaunded; then Austine assembled the Byshops and Doctors of Brittaine, in this assembly, hee charged the Byshoppes that they should preach the Word of GOD with him: also, that they should reforme certaine rites and vsages in the Church, especially for keeping of Easter, and baptizing after the manner of Rome, the Scots and Brittaines would not agree thereto, refusing to leaue the custome which they so long time had conti∣nued. Beda, Fabianus, & others, write of a myracle wrought vpon a Blinde English∣man, when the Brittaines could not helpe him. Austine kneeling downe and praying, restored him to sight before them all, for a confirmation (as these Au∣thours say) of keeping of Easter, I leaue the credite of the myracle to the Authors of whom I had it. Austine gathered another Sinode, to the which seauen Byshoppes, and the wi∣sest Men of the famous Cittie of Bangor came, they tooke councell of a holy man whether they should be obedient to Austine, he had them agree to him if hee bee the Seruant of GOD, and you shall know it by his humblenesse and meeke∣nesse, you are the greater number, if he at your comming into the Sinode arise vp and courteously receiue you, perceiue him to be an humble and meeke man: but if he shall contemne and despise you, despise you him againe; thus the Brittaine By∣shoppes entring into the Councell, Austine after the Romish manner keeping his Chaire, would not remooue, wherefore they being very much offended there∣at, after some heate of words, departed in great displeasure, to whom Austine said: If they would not receiue peace with their Brethren, they should receiue war with their Enemies. There was in Bangor in Wales an exceeding great Monastery, wherein was two thousand and one hundred Monkes, the Monkes came out of this Monasterie to Chester, to pray for Brocmayle, fighting for them against the Saxons, Ethelbert King of Northumberland seeing them intentie to their prayers, and perceiuing it was to pray for their Consull; he said, although they beare no Weapon, yet with their praiers and preaching they persecute vs, he commaunded his men to kill them,
who killed, or rather martyred 1100. of them. The Authors that wrote this, say that the forespeaking of Austine was verified on them, but Galfridus Monumetensis, saith, that Ethelbert the King of Kent being conuerted by Austine to Christs Faith, seeing the Brittaines deny their subiection to Austine, therefore stirred vp the said Ethelfrid to warre against the Brittaines. After Austine had baptized 10000. in a Riuer called Swale by Yorke, on a Christ∣mas day, perceiuing his end to draw neere, ordained Laurencius his Successor: by his Baptizing in Riuers it followeth there was then no vse of Fonts, and the Rites of baptizing in Rome was not then so ceremoniall, nor had so many trinkets as it hath since: and not long after Austine died,604 after he had sitten Arch-bishop 15. or 16. yeares. About this time also Gregory died, who was called the basest of all the By∣shops before him, and the best of all that came after him. Ranulphus Cestrensis writeth,Poli: li. 5. ca. 10. that Iohn the Patriarch of Alexandria, as he was at prayer, there appeared vnto him a comely Uirgine▪ hauing on her head a Gar∣land of Oliue Leaues, which named her selfe Mercy, promising him if he would take her to Wife, hee should prosper well: After that day this Patriarch was so mer∣cifull to the poore, that he counted them his Maisters, and himselfe as Steward vn∣to them. Gregory withstood the pride of Iohn, Patriarke of Constantinople, which would be the Uniuersall and Cheefe Bishop of all others, calling him the fore-runner of An∣tichrist, he brought in the Title of the Pope, Seruus seruorum Dei. Sabinianus succeeded him two yeares, a malicious Detractor of his workes, after him succeeded Bonifacius the third, one yeare. After Phocas had murdered his owne Maister Mauricius the Emperor and his Children, thinking to establish the Empire to himselfe by friendship of his people, and especially with the Pope, he granted Boniface all his Petitions, and to bee Uni∣uersall head Byshop ouer all Churches. Hiraclius the Emperour that succeeded Phocas, cut of his hands and feete, and threw him into the Sea, but Rome would not so soone loose the supremacy once giuen, as the giuer lost his life: for euer since they haue maintained the same with all force and pollicy, by the word of Grego∣rie. Boniface may well be called the fore-runner of Antichrist, as Gregory brought in the Stile of Seruus seruorum Dei; so he brought in Volumus & mandamus, Statuimus & praecipimus. Besides the building of Pauls, as aforesaid, by Ethelbert King of Kent, and Sige∣bert King of Essex: Ethelbert also founded the Church of S. Andrew in Rochester. Moreouer, he caused a Cittizen to make Westminster Abbey, which was inlarged and new builded by Edward the Confessor, and new re-edified by Henry the third, and when he had raigned 56. yeares he died, Anno 616.616. The foresaid Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, after the cruell murder of the Monkes at Bangor, was not long after slaine in the Fielde of Edwine, who succee∣ded him in his Kingdome. First this Ethelfride enuying this Edwine, persecuted him, who hauing fled from him, as he sat in his Study a Stranger appeared vnto him and said; I know thy thought and heauinesse, what wouldst thou giue him that should deliuer thee out of this feare, and make thee a mightier King then any of thy Predecessors, and shew thee a better way of life then euer was shwed to any of thy Ancestors? wilt thou obey him and doe after his councell? yea, said Edwine, promi∣sing with all his heart so to do, and the stranger laying his hand on his head, he said; when this is come to passe remember thy tribulation, and the promise which thou hast made, and with that hee vanished away. Presently a Friend of his came to him, and said, the heart of King Redwaldus is with thee. This Redwaldus sud∣dainely assembled an Hoast, wherewith he suddainely gaue Ethelfride battell, and slew him, whereby Edwine was quietly King of Northumberland. He marryed the Daughter of Ethelbert King of Kent, Edwine yet remained a Pagan, albeit his Queene a Christian, and Paulinus the Byshoppe ceased not to perswade him to the Christian Faith. When Paulinus saw the King so hard to bee conuerted,
he prayed to God for his conuersion, who reuealer vnto him the Uision before mentio∣ned; whereupon Paulinus comming to the King, he laie his hand on the Kings head, and aked if he knew that token; the King bering the Uision, and remembring the to∣ken, would haue falen at his fete, but suffeed him not, saying; O King, you haue vaquished your enemies and obtained your Kingdom, now receiue the Faith of Christ, as you promised, whereupon the King was baptized of Paulinus at Yorke▪ with many of his seruants, and his Idolatrous Priests, which by their old Law mustride but vpon Mars, gae vpon Horses, and rode and destroyed all the Altars of their Idols, and their Idols Temple. After this conuersion, was so great peace in the Kingdome o Ed∣win, that a woman, laden with gold, might goe safe from the one side of the Sea vnto the other, and by all his high waies he chained a Bowle of brasse at euery Fountaine, for passengers to refresh themselues with, and no man tooke them away during his life. King Oswald, a Christian, by prayer vnto God, with a little company ouercme Cadwallo, and Penda the Britain King, which with a mightie Host came against him. There is much commendation in writing of this Oswalds zeale in religion, and piety towards the poore; he sent into Scotland for a Bishop called Aydanus, a famous Preacher, as he preached to the Saxons in the Scottish tongue, the King vnderstand∣ing the Scotish tongue, he disdained not to preach and expound the same to his Nobles in the English tongue. King Oswald being at Dinner on Easterday, one brought him word there was a great company of pre people in the streets which asked almes of him, be commaunded the meate prepared for his owne Table to be caried vnto them, and brake a sier Plat∣ter in pieces and sen it amongst them: by his meanes Kinigillus King of the West Saxons was conuerted to Christs Faith, and after he had raigned 9. yeares, he was slaine by the said Penda, who was after slaine by Osway brother to Oswald, and succee∣ded him in his Kingdome,643. together with his Cosin Oswine. This Oswine gaue Aydanus, the Scotish Bishop aforesaid, a principall Horse, with the trappers and appurtenances, and as he ws riding vpon this kingly horse, a poore man craued his charity, who hauing nothing else to giue him, gaue him his hore gar∣nished as he was; wherefore, as he came to Dinner, he King chie him, he answere; O King, set you more prise by a horse, then by Chrst? Then the King prayed him to forgiue him, and he would not hencefoorth finde fault with him for giuing away any of his Treasure: then Aydanus wept, and being asked wherefore he wept, he answered, for that this King cannot liue long, this people is nto worthy to be uled by such a Prince, which shortly came to passe, for Osway caused him traterously to be slaine. One Benedict, a great man with Osway, that brought vp Bede from his youth▪ or∣sooke Oswayes house,65. and all his kindred, to serue Christ; he was the first that brought vp the Arte of glazing in windowes. About this time there was a Counsell bolden at Stene-halt, for the right obseruing of Easterday.664. King Osway began with an Oration, that it was necessary or such as serued one God, to liue in an vniforme order, and such as looked for one kingdom in Hea∣uen, should not differ in celebration of heauenly Sacraments: then, by his commande∣ment, Colman Bishop, said he receiued the order of keeping Easter the 14. day of the first Moneth, from his Auncesters, Forefathers, and from Iohn Euangelist: to which▪ at the Kings commandement, Wilfride answered, Easter is kept alwaies on the Sun∣day, as we keepe it in Rome, where Peter and Paul taught, in Italy, France. Affrick, Egypt, Greece▪ and in all the world. I will not reproue Saint Iohn which kept the rights of Moses Law according to the letter, the Church being yet Iewish in many points, they could not reiect Images inuented of the Diuell, which all beleeuers ought of necessitie to detest, least they should offend the Iewes; therefore Saint Paul circum∣cized Tymothy, therefore he shaued his head, and Sacrificed in the Temple: all this was done onely to eschew the offence of the Iewes. Therefore ames said to Paul; Thou éest brother how many thousand Iewes doe beleeue yet all are zealous of the old Law; yet, since the Gospell was preached, it is not lawfull for the faithfull to be circumcized, nor to offer Sacrifices of carnal things to God: but Peter remembring that the Lord did rise from death the first day after the Sabbath, instituted Easter on that day, and not
according to the Law, and though your forefathers were holy men, what is their few∣nesse, being but a corner of an Iland, to be preferred before the vniuersall Church of Christ? Then said the King; Did the Lord giue the kingdome of Heauen vnto Pe∣ter? And they both answerd, yea; then the King concluded: being Saint Peter is the Doore-keeper of Heauen, I will obey his Orders in euery point, least when I come to the gates of Heauen hee shut them against mee, and with this simple reason they consented. Ethelwood preached vnto the people in Southsax, and conuerted them to Christ in the time of whose baptizing, the raine, which before they lacked three yeares, was giuen them plenteously, whereby there great famine slacked. About this time, the detestable sect of Mahomet began to take place, which well a∣grées with the number of that beast signified in the Reuelation 666.666. Of Mahomet came the Kingdome of the Haarines, now called Saracens, to whom he gaue many Lawes: they must pray Southward, Friday is their Sunday, called the day of Ve∣nus, he permitted them to haue as many Wiues as they were able to maintaine, and as many Concubines as they list: they must abstaine from wine, excep on solemne daies: hey were to worship one onely God Omnipotent. Moses and the Prophets were great▪ but Christ was greatest, being borne without mans seede, and taken vp in∣to the Heauen, with many such Lawes; at length the Sarasins were wholly conquered by the Turkes. Theodorus was sent into England by Vitellianus Pope, and diuerse other Monks with him, to set vp Latine Seruice in England and Mases, Cerimonies, Letanies, and other Romish ware, he was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and began to play the Rex in placing and displacing Bishops at his pleasure. He held a Prouinciall Counsell at Therford, the contents thereof were the vniformitie of keeping Easter, that no Bishop should intermeddle in anothers Dicesse, that Monasteries should be free from Iurisdic∣tion o Bishops, that Monks should keepe the obedience they first promised, and not goe from one Monastery vnto another without leaue of the Abbot, that none of the Clergy should be receiued in another Diocesse without Letters Commendatory of his Bi∣shop, that foraine Bishops and Clergy men should be content with the hospitality of∣fered them, and not meddle in any Bishops Iurisdiction without his permission, that once a yeare a Prouinciall Sinod should be kept, that no Bishop should preferre him∣selfe before another, but according to his time of consecration, that as the people in∣creased, so the number of Bishops should be augmented. The next yeare was the sixt generall Counsell of Constance,705. where this Theodore was present, vnder Pope Agatho; Mariage there was permitted to the Greeke Priests, and forbidden to the Latine: in this Counsell the Latine Masse was first openly said by Iohn Portuensis the Popes Legate. Colfride, Abbot of Shirwin in Northumberland, writ to Naitonus King of Picts, that shauen Crownes was necessarie for all Priests, and Monks, for restraint of their lusts; and that Peter was shauen, in remembrance of the Passion of Christ, so we must weare the signe of his Passion on the toppe of our head, as euery Church beareth the holy Crosse in the front thereof, that by the defence of that banner it be kept from euill Spirits; and exhorted him to imitate the Apostolike Churches, and, when he died, the Prince of the Apostles would open Heauen gate to him; whereat the King reioyced, and knéeling downe, thanked God that hee was worthy to receiue such a present from England, and made Proclamation for the performance. When Iue, King of the West Saxons, had ruled them 37. yeares, he was perswa∣ded by his wife Etheburge,724. to goe to Rome to be made a Munke, when the king an she had rested in a faire Palace, richly adorned, she commanded all the roomes in the Palace to be strewed with Dung of vile beasts, and hogs and beasts to be laid therein▪ and a Sowe and pigs in her chamber, then she brought the King to visit the Palace, and said, My Lord, where are now the rich▪ clothes of gold and siluer▪ that we let héere? where are the pleasant Seruitors, delicacies, and costly dishes that we lately were serued with? We shall vanish away as sodainly as these worldly things be passed, our bodies that are now delicatly kept, shall turne vnto the filth of the earth: therfore busie you to purchase
the Palace that euer shall indure, by meanes of these, and other words, the King resigned his Kingdome vnto Etheraldus his Nephew, and for the loue of Christ, in the habit of a poore man, accompanied with poore men▪ went to Rome; and his wife went into the Nunnery of Barkin, seauen miles from London, where, after she had beene Abbesse a certaine time, she died. This ue was the first King of the Saxons, that made Lawes for his Country. In this time was Beda, a man of worthy memory, he was a Priest of the Monastery of Peter and Paul, at Wire; at 7. yeares old, he was committed to the education of Be∣nedict▪ as before; at 19. yeares old e was made Deacon, and at 30, Priest. He wrote 37. Uolumes; in his Treatise vpon Samuel, he said; If my exposition bring no vtilitie to the readers,735. yet it conduceth not a little to my selfe, that whilst my cogitation was v∣pon them, I had little minde of the slippery intisements of the world: hee continued in diligent study, vntill the age of 62. yeares, and in his latter end, whilst he was sicke sea∣uen weekes, he translated the Gospell of Saint Iohn into English. Celulphus, king of Northumberland, when hee had raigned 8. yeares was made a Mke in the Abey of Farne▪ where, by his meanes, Licence was giuen to the Monks of that house to drinke wine, or Ale, which before, by the institution of the aforesaid Ay∣danus, drunke nothing but milke and water. Cutbert,747. Archbishop of Canterbury, collected a great Sinod, where these decrées were enacted, that Bishops should be more diligent in seeing to their Office, then in admonish∣ing the people, and liue in peace one with another, and once a yeare goe about all the Pa∣rishes of their Diocesse. That they should admonish Abbots, and Monks, to liue Regu∣lrly, and Prelats not to oppresse their infertours, but loue them▪ that none should be ad∣mitted to Orders, before his life was examined: that the reading of holy Scripures shoud be more frequented in Monasteries: that Priests should not dispose seculer busi∣nesses: that they should take no money for baptizing: that they should teach the Lords prayer and Créed in the English tongue: that they should ioyne in their Ministery after one vniforme manner: that they should sing in the Church with a modest voice: that the Saboth be reuerently obserued: that the 7. Canonicall Powers be obserued euery day: that the Rogation daies should not be omitted: that a Festiual day for all Saints should be celebrated, and a Feast of S. Gregory an S. Austin, our Patron, should be obserued▪ that the fasts of the 4. times should be kept: that Churchmen should not giue themselues to drunkennesse: that the Communion should not be neglected of the Clergy, nor : that Laymen should be examined, and well tried, before they become Monkes: that Monkes should not liue amongst Lay-men: that publike prayer should bee made for Kings, and Princes. Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz, a Martyre, an English man, wrot a Letter to King Ethelbert, and rebuked him for abstaining from Mariage, that he might liue in luxuri∣ousnesse with Nunnes, and that, he heard the chiefe of hi Kingdom, by his example, for∣sooke their wiues, and liued in adultery with Nunnes; whereby appeareth the great dis∣order of life that alwaies hath beene in these Religious houses of Nunnes, whose vowe of coacted chastitie hath neuer beene good to Church or Common-wealth; and this Bo∣niface, and others were most to blame, for that they gu occasion thereof, by maintai∣ning such superstitious orders of lasciuious Nunnes, and other religious, restraining them from lawfull Mariage. For we finde of him in Stories, that, he being the Popes Legate, builded Monasteries, Canonized Saints▪ commanded Reliques to be worship∣ped, permitted religious Fathers to carry about Nunnes with them a preaching; and he founded the great Monastery of Floa in Germany▪ of English Monkes, in which, no woman might enter, but only Leba and Seca two English Nuns, and by him Chil∣dericus, king of France was deposed, and Pipinus▪ the betrayer of his master, made king. From this Boniface proceeded that detestable doctrine; that in case the Pope liued most filthily, and neglected himselfe, and all Christianitie, and led inumerable Soules with him to Hell▪ yet ought no man to rebuke him, because he hath power to iudge all men, and ought to be iudged of no man. Pope Gregory the 2. Pope Gregory the 3. Pope Zachary, and Pope Constantine the 1. wrought great masteries against the Gréeke Emperours, Philipicus and Leo, and
others, for the maintaining of Images in Churches, of whom Philipicus lost both his Empire, and his eyes: and Leo was excommunicated for the same cause. This Grego∣ry then brought into the Masse Canon, the clause for Reliques, and the Sacrifice for the dead. And Zachary brought in the Prieste Uesture, and Ornaments; and Constanti∣nus was the first that gaue his feet to be kissed of the Emperours. The aforesaid Pipinus, which was the betrayer of his said master Childericus king of France, and by the Pope made king in his steed, to gratifie the Sea of Rome for this benefit to him, gaue vnto the said sea, the Princedome of Rauenna, and the Kingdome of Lombards, and many other great possessions of Italy, with all the cities thereunto adioyning vnto the borders of Uenice; and this no doubt, is the same which falsly hath beene thought to hae beene the Donation of Constantine. To this Pipinus was sent first into France the inuention of the Orgaines out of Grecia, by Constantinus Emperour of Constantinople, in the yeare 757.757. Pope Stephanus succeeded pope Constaninus, and Paul the 1. succeeded him; hee thundred great Excommunications against Constantinus Emperour of Constantinople, for plucking downe Images, set vp in the Temples, notwithstanding he neglecting his cures, destroyed Idolatry to the end of his life. Then Constantinus the 2. came to be Pope, a Layman, & brother to Desideius, king of Lumbardy, but he was shortly deposed, thrust into a Monastery, & his eyes put out. Stephanus the 3. succéeded Paul, he cōdemned the seauenth Councel of Constantinople for Hereticall, because the worshipping of Images was condemned there: he aduanced the veneration of Images, commanding them, most Ethnically, to be incenced. In this time Charles the great raigned▪ by whom the Pope caused Dsiderius, the Lumbard, King to be deposed. Pope Adrianus the 1. succéeded him, he added more then all the other to the venerati∣on of Images, writing a Booke for the adoration and vtilitie of them▪ commanding them to be taken for Lay-mens Calenders. As Pope Paul before him, made much of Petro∣nel, Peters daughter, so this Adrian clothed the body of Peter all in siluer, and couered the Altar of S. Paul, with a pall of golde. He confirmed, by reuelation, the Order of S. Gre∣gories Masse, before the order of S. Ambrose his Masse: in this manner, both the Masse bookes were said vpon the Altar of S. Peter, and the Church doore shut and sealed by ma∣ny Bishops, who continued in praiers all night, that the Lord would shew by some eui∣dent signe which of these Seruices he would haue vsed; and in the morning they found Gregories Masse booke plucked in pieces, and scattered about the Church, and Ambrose his booke lay open in the same place where it was layde; Pop Adrian expounded it, that as the leaues of Gregories booke were sattered all ouer the Church, so should Gregories booke be vsed throughout the world, and that Ambrose his Seruice should onely be vsed in his owne Church, where he was Bishop, so Gregories Masse had onely the place, and hath to this day. Charles, the sonne of the aforesaid Pipinus, confirmed the gift of his Father vnto the Pope, and added thereunto the citie and Dominion of Uenice, Histria, the Dukedomes of Foroinliense, Spoletanum, Beeentanum, and other more possessions to the patri∣mony of Peter, making him the Prince of Rome and Italy, wherefore the Pope intitu∣led him, most Christian King, and ordained him onely to be taken for Emperour, and made him Patricium Romanum; and Caroloman, Carolus his eldest brother, being ead, Bertha his wife, with her two children, came to Pope Adrian, to haue them confirmed in∣to his fathers Kingdome: the Pope, to shew a pleasure to Carolus, would not agrée, but gaue her, and her two children, and Desiderius the Lumbard king, with his whole King∣dome, wife and Children, into the hands of Carolus, who led them into France, and kept them in seruitude during their liues. By this Adrian, and Pope Leo his successor, was Carolus Magnus proclamed Em∣perour, and the Empire translated from the Grecians to the Frenchmen, in the year 801.801. where it continued about 102. yeares, vntil the comming of Conradus and his Nephew Otho, which were Germaines, and so hath continued amongst the Almains vntill this time. This Charles builded as many Monasteries, as there be letters in the A. B. C. he was beneficiall to the poore, but cheefly to Churchmen; he held a Councell at Frankford,
where was cōdemned the Councel of Nicee Irene, for setting vp & worshiping Images. Egbert succeeded Ceolulphus, and when he had raigned 20. years in Northumberland, was likewise shorne Monk, about the time of the death of Ceolulphus, in his monastery. In the year 754. the cities of Weire, London, York, Doncaster, with others▪ were burnt. In the yeare 780. it rained blood it the citie of Yorke, it fell from the top of S. Peters Church, the Element being cléere▪ out of the North part of the Temple, & some expounded it to be a token of the comming of the Danes, which entred thi land about 7. years after. In the yeare 784. Irene Empresse of the Greekes, by the meanes of Pope Adrian, tooke vp the body of Constantinus Emperour of Constantinople, her husbands father, and burned it, and caused the ashes to be cast into the sea, because he disanulled Images, as afore is said; afterwards raigning with her son Constantine the sixt being at disscen∣ion with him▪ she caused him to be cast into prison, and his eyes to be put out, so cruelly, that within short time he dyed: after, she held a Councell at Nice, where it was decréed that Images should againe be restored to the Church, which Councell also was repealed by another Councell holden at Frankeford, by Charles the great▪ wherin he did great∣ly lament, that no so few as 300. Bishops of the East did decree that Images should be worshipped, which the Church of God hath alwaies abhorred; at length she was de∣posed by Nicephorus, who raigned after her, and after, according to the iust Iudgement of God, ended her life in much penury and misery. The first Crosse and Altar that was set vp in this Realme, was in Heuenfield in the North, vpon the occasion of Oswald king of Northumberland, fighting against Cadwal∣la, where he in the same place set vp the signe of the Erosse, kneeling, and praying there for victory. The Church of Winchester was founded by Kingilsus, king of the Mercians, and fi∣nished by his sonne. Anno 636. The Church of Lincolne founded by Paulinus Bishop 629. The Abbey of Westminster begun by a citizen of London, by the instigation of E∣thelbert King of ent. 614. The Schooles of Cambridge erected by Sigebert king of East Angles, 636. The Monastery of Malmesbury, by Meldulphus a Scot, 640. after inlarged by A∣gilbet Bishop of Winchester. The Monastery of Gloster, builded by Opricus king of Mercia, 679. The Monastery of Maybrose by Aydanus the Scottish Bishop. The Nunnery of Herenton, by Hey, which was the first Nun in Northumberland. The Monastery of Hetesey, by Osway king of Northumberland, who with his Daughter Elfred, gaue possessions for twelue Monasteries, 657. The Monastery of S. Martine in Douer, builded by Whitred king of Kent. The Abbey of Lestingie, by Cedda, whom we call Saint Ced, 651. The Monastery of Whithy, by Hilda, daughter to the Nephew of king Edwine▪ 657. she builded also another Monastery, called Hacanus, not farre hence. The Abbey of Abbington, builded by Sissa, king of Southsaxons, 666. Saint Botulph builded an Abbey on the East side of Lincolne, called Ioann, 654. The monastery in Ely, foūded by Etheldred, daughter of Anna K. of east Angles, 674. The Monastery of Chertsey in Southery, founded by Erkinwald, Bishoy of London 674. he founded also the Nunnery of Barkin. The Abbey of Peterborough founded by King Ethelwald, 675. Bardnere Abbey, by King Etheldredus, 700. Glastenbury, by Iue King of West Saxons, 701. Ramsey, by one Aylewinus a Nobleman, 973. King Edgar builded, in his time, forty Monasteries, he raigned, Anno 678. The Monastery of Wincombe, builded by king Kenulphus, 737. Saint Albons, builded by Offa, king of Mercians, 755. The Abbey of Eusham by Egwinus Bishop, 691. The Abbey of Ripon in the North, by Wilfridus Bishop, 709. The Abby of Echlingheie by king Aluredus 891. The Nunnery of Shaftsbury, by the said Aluredus, the same yeare; so you see that
Monasteries began to be founded by the Saxon kings, within 200. yeares after they were conuerted; these had a zeale, but they lacked the true Doctrine of Christ, especial∣ly that Article of free Iustification by Faith▪ of Iesus Christ: for lacke whereof▪ as well the builders, as they that were possessed in the same, haue both runne the wrong way, and béene deceiued: for so much as they did these things seeking thereby merits with God, remedy for heir soules, and remission of sinnes, as doth appeare, testified in their owne Records, besides the 7. or 8. Kings that forsooke their Kingdomes to be Monkes; there were many Quéenes and Kings daughters entred into Nunneries at that time, as thou maist sée them in the booke at large, named. THE THIRD BOOKE Containing the next 300. yeares, from the raigne of King EGBERTVS, vnto WILLIAM the Conquerour. EGbertus, King of the West Saxons, hauing put downe all the other Kings he gouerned oly. King Brithricus doubting Egbert, because he was of the kings bloude, was chased out of the land into France; where, hea∣ring of the death of Brithricus, hée came home, and btained the Crowne. King Bernulphus, and other kings, had him in derion, and made diuerse scorning Rimes of him; after he assembled his Knights, and fought with Bernulphus, in a place called Elme∣den, and there was ods, six or eight against one; yet Egbert, through the helpe of God, gat the victorie,826. at length he subdued all the Kings, and ioyned their Dominions to his, Kingdome: he wnne also the towne of Chester from the Brittaines, or Welchmen, which they possessed vntill this time: then he called a Counsell at▪ Winchester, where he was Crowned King ouer this land, and where before it was called Brittaine, he sent into all costs, and charged them straitly that henceforth the Saxons should be called An∣gles, and the land Anglia. About the third yeare of his raigne,833. the Danes which a little before had made horrible destruction in Northumberland, as before, entred the second time, with a great Host, and spoyled the Isle of Shp in Kent; Egbert met with them at Carrum, but he was com∣pelled to forsake the Field: but in the next Battell, with a small company, he ouerthrw a great multitude o them. The next yeare they turned againe into the Land West∣ward and ioyning with the Britaines, did much harme in many places of Egberts Do∣minions; after that, they aaded in the Land, so that many of them were maried to English women, and many, that now be English men, descended of them. Ethelwolfus the sonne of Egbert succéeded him in his raigne; he was Bishop of Win∣chester, and by the dispensation of the Pope, was made King: he being nuzled therein, was alwaies deuout to holy Church,837. he gaue thm the Tythes of all his goods and Lands, and fréedome from all serage and ciuill charges. Hee made his Donation to God, the Uirgin Mary, and all the Saints, for remission of our Soules, and sins, and in that we haue, in some part, eased the seruitud of the Church, they may the more diligent∣ly powre forth their praiers without easing, to God for vs. It is no swall derogation to the merits of Christ thus to set remission of their sins, and remedie of their Soules, in this Donation, and such like déeds. The King Ethelwolfe went to Rome with his yongest Sonne Alfred, and commit∣ted
him to the bringing vp of Pope Leo the 4. and re-edified the English Schoole in Rome, which was founded by King Offa, or king Iue, which in Egberts time was con∣sumed with fire; and, as king Iue had done in his dominions, he gaue a penny yearely to be paid for euery fire-house throughout the Realme, to the Pope. Also he granted 300. Markes yearely to Rome, to maintaine lights in Saint Perters Church 100 Markes, and to maintaine lights in Saint Pauls Church 100. Markes, and to the Pope one o∣ther 100 Markes: this done, he maried Iudith, the daughter of Carolus Caluus, the French King, whom he made Queene, contrary to the Lawes of the West Saxons, that no Kings wife should haue the name, or place of a Queene, because Ethelburge poi∣soned king Brithericus, her husband. The king was most ruled by the Counsell of two Bishops, one of them was Swithi∣nus Bishop of Winchester, who had béene Scoole-master to the king, the king shewed his kinde Nature, in that he not oy followed the aduertisments of his old Schoole-ma∣ster but in that he ceased not vntill he had made him Bishop of Winchester; but as con∣cerning the Miracles which are read in the Church of Winchester, of this Swithinus, them I leaue to be read together with the Iliads of Homer, or tales of Robin Hood. Pope Leo the 3 succéeded Adrian, Stephen the 4. succéeded him, and Gregory the 4. succéeded him, in whose time, by the commandement of Lodouicus the Emperour, a ge∣nerall Synode was commanded at Aquisgrane, where it was decreed that euery Church should haue sufficient of his owne Reuenewes to maintaine the Priests thereof, and that none of the Clergie should weare any Uestures of any precious or scarlet colour, nor Kings on their fingers, except at Masse time, or in giuing Consecraions, and that they should not kéepe great ports or Families, or vse great Horses, or vse Dice, or Harlots, or vse any gold or siluer in their shooes slippers, or girdles; by this it may bee coniectured what pompe or pride in these daies was crept into the Clergie. After him succeeded Pope Sergius the 2. he first brought vp the altering of Popes names, because his name was Os Porci, that is, Swines snoute: he ordained the Ag∣nus twise to be sung in the Masse, and the Host to be diuided into thrée parts. Pope Leo the 4. succéeded him, it was enacted in a Counsell of his, that no Bishoppe should be condemned vnder 72. witnesses, as you sée in the witnesses of Stephen Gardi∣ner, orderly practized; he ordained the Crosse, all set with precious stones, and gold, to be caried before him like a Pope. Next to him succéeded the Whore of Babilon, who appeared vnto the world, not only after the spirituall sence, but after the very letter and right forme of a whore indeed. In stead of a man Pope, they chose a Whore, called by name Ione the 8 her proper name was Giberta, a Dutch woman of Magunce, who went with an English Monke out of the Abbey of Fula, in mans apparell, vnto Athens, after through her dexteritie of wit and learning, she was promoted vnto the Popedome▪ where she sate two yeares and sixe Moneths; after, in open Procession, fell in trauell of childe, and so died. Pope Benedictus the 3. succeeded her in the whorish sea, he ordained the Dirge to be said for the dead, yet before him▪ Gregorius the 3. had done his part therein. Ater him succeeded Pope Nicholas the 1. who inlarged the Popes Decrees with many constitutions▪ equalling the authoritie of them with the writings of the Apostles. He ordained that no seculer Prince▪ nor the Emperour should be present at their Coun∣sels, to the end they might murder such as they Iudged to be Hereticks, and that no Lay man shold Iudge Clergy men▪ or reason vpon the Popes power. That no Magistrate should haue power ouer a Prelat, alledging that a Prelat is called God. That all Church seruice should be in Latine, except with the Sclauonians, and Polonians. Sequences in Masse were by him first allowed, by him Priests began to be strained from Mariage; wherof Hulderick Bishop of Ausrough sent a Letter to the Pope, that his Decrees, con∣cerning single life of the Clergie, were farre discrepant from al discretion, I feare how the Members of the Body wil do, when the Head is so greatly out of frame. Is not this a vi∣olence & tyranny, when a man is compelled by your Decrees, to doe that which is against the Institution of the Gospell, and the old Law, as appeareth by many examples; there be many vnder a false pretence of Continencie, going about to please men more then God, some lye with their fathers wiues, some are Sodomits, and play the beasts with
brute beasts; wherefore, as Saint Paul saith; Because of Fornication let euery one haue his owne wife. When the Counsell of Nice went about to establish this Decrée, one Paphnutius withstood them, confessing Mariage to be honorable, and called the bed of Matrimonie, Chastitie, and perswaded the Counsell from making that Law: some take Saint Gregory for their defence in this matter, being ignorantly deceiued how dangerous this Decree was, and how Saint Gregory after reked the same, with conigne fruit of repentance: for as he sent to his Fish pond to haue Fish, hée sée more then 6000. Infants heads, which were taken out of the same Mote, then he confessed his Decrée to be the cause of that so lamentable a murder, so he altered his Decrée, com∣mending the counsell of the Apostle, which saith; It is better to marry then to burne, What can be more foolish, then when any Bishop, or Archdeacon runne themselues headlong into all lust and Adultery, and Incest, and Soomitrie, yet shame not to say, that chaste Mariage of Priests stinkes: and they adde this filthy and foolish suggestion, that it is more honest priuily to haue to doe with many women, then openly to be bound to one wife. After this Nicholas succéeded Pope Adrianus the 2. Ioannes the 9. Martinus the 20 Adrian the 3. and Stephen the 1. By this Adrian it was decreed, that no Emperour, af∣ter that time, should haue any thing o doe in the election of the Pope, and thus began the Emperours first decay, and the Ppacie to swell▪ and rise alot. About the latter end of the raigne of Ethelwolfe, the Danes with 33. ships, arriued about Hampshire, through whose barbarous tyranny much blut shed and murder hap∣ne heere amongst English men. They first ouercame Ethelwolfe; and after, he and his Sonne Ethelbaldus, warring against them in Souher, at Okley, raue them to the Sea; where they houering a space, burst in againe with horrible crueltie. Besids the iust Iudgement of God for their manifold sinnes, which at this time most plentifully abounded, there was two outward causes of the Danes comming into Eng∣land; the first was, the death of Lothbroke▪ which was falsly imputed to King Edmond▪ as is ore recited. The other was giuen by the meanes of Osbright, raigning vnder the King of West Saxons in the North parts, who rauished the wife of Bruer one of his Nobles; wherefore the said Bruer tooke shipping, and sayled into Denmark, where hee was brought vp, and had great friends; and making his mone to Codrinus the King, who being glad of some iust quarrell, leuied a great Army, and sent them with ugnar and Hbba, his chiefe Captaines, into England, who first arriued at Holdernesse, and bur∣ned vp the Contry, and killed, without mercie, men, women and children: and en∣tring towards Yorke, entred battell with Osbright, where he, with the most part of his Army, was slaine, so they tooke possession of Yorke. Ethelbald,857. eldest sonne of Ethelwolfe succeeded his Father in Westsex, and Ethel∣bright is second sonne, in Knt; they raigned both together 5. yeares. Ethelbald ma∣ried Iudith his Stepmother, his Fathers wife. After these two, succeeded Ethelred, his third sonne, he was so incumbred with the Danes, that he and his brother Alured, fought nine battels with them in one yeare, and they spoyled and burned the citie of Yorke. The Northumberlands likewise rebelled, thinking to recouer their Kingdome againe, whereby the strength of England was weakened, and the Danes the more pre∣uailed, after he had raigned 5. yeares in much trouble, he died. Alured,872. otherwise called Alfride, his brother succeeded him; in the second Mont that he was made King, he gaue the Danes a battell besides Wilton, but he was put to the worst; yet the Danes did agree with him to depart out of Westsax, and re∣ned from Reding to London, and abode there all that winter: the number of the Danes were so increased, as it is written of thm, that in one day 3000. of them were slaine, shoty after they increased double as many. The Danes hauing the Rule of the North part of England from the Thames▪ wih Mrcian London, and Essex,879. they disdaed that Alfride should beare any rule on the o∣ther side of the Thames; whereupon three Kings of the Danes▪ with all their strength, made warre with him, that King Alfride being ouerset with his eemis, and forsaken of his people, he withdrew himselfe into a wood Country in Summersetshire, called
Etheling, standing in a Marsh, that there is no comming to it without boe, where he had nothing to liue by, but what he got by hunting, and fishing; there was a Cottage of a poore Swineheard, called Dunwolfus, by whom the King was cheered with such poore fare as he and his wife could make him, for which, the king after set the Swine∣heard to learning, and made him Bishop of Winchester. Notwithstanding, the king, in time, was comforted by the prouidence of God: First, 1300. Danes were slaine, as they landed, by an ambushment of King Alfrids men, who lay in Garison for their owne safetie, then the King shewed himselfe more at large, and men out of Wiltshire, Somersetshire, and Hampshire came to him, vntill hee had a strong company Then the king apparelled himselfe in the habit of a Minstrell, as he was very skilfull in Musicke, and entred into the Tents of the Danes, lying at Eddingdon, and there es∣pied their Idlenesse, and heard much of their Counsell, and sodainly, in the nigh, he fell vpon the Danes, and slew a great multitude of them; his Subiects bearing of his man∣ly Uictories, drew to him daily, so he wonne Winchester from the Danes, and diuers o∣ther townes, and forced them to sêeke peace, the which was concluded, vpon condition that Gutrum their King should be Christned, and that such as would not be Christned should depart the Country. King Alfride, was king Gutrums Godfather at his Baptisme, and named him Athel∣stan, then he gaue Norfolke▪ Suffolke▪ and part of Cambridgeshire, and Northumber∣land to them that were Christned, those that would not be Christned, though they de∣parted the Realme, they did diuerse times returne againe, and did much spoile in many parts of the Realme, but King Alfride ouercame them euer. During the whole time of the Danes, the Land was plagued with warres, pestilence, and murren of beasts: the King alwaies thanked God, what troubles soeuer hapned vnto him, and after hee had raigned 29. yeares and sixe moneths, he died, and is buried at Winchester. He euer be∣stowed eight houres in the day in studie,899. there was none in England more quicke in vnderstanding, nor more elegant in interpreting then he was. He sent for many lear∣ned men out of other Countries, to instruct his people. He was the first that ordained certaine Schooles of diuerse Arts, at Oxford, and Franchised them with great Liberties: he translated many bookes into the Saxon tongue; all that he could, by faire meanes and threats, he endeuoured to stirre vp his subiects to learning: he preferred none to any great place, except he were learned; since his time, learning was neuer extinguished in this Realme, Edward his sonne succeeded him in his kingdoms. After Stephen the fist was nine Popes of Rome in nine yeare. Formosus being Bi∣shop of Portiax, had offended Pope one the 8. which was a woman, as before, and being afraid, fled; and because he would not returne, he was excommunicated, and af∣ter disgraded, and made to sweare he would neuer claime his Bishopricke againe, but remaine a seculer man: but Pope Martine released him of his Oath, and restored him to his Bishopricke, and shortly after he obtained the Papci; whereupon was a great controuersie: some held, because of his degradation and Oath, he could not be Pope; o∣thers held the contrary, because he was absolued by Pope Martin from that his periury and Degradation. He sent to Arnulphus for ayde, who marching to Rome, they would not suffer him to enter; and a Hare comming néere the Citie, the Host of Arnulphus fol∣lowed after with such a maine cry, that the valiant Romaines, for very feare cast them∣selues downe from the wals; so that Arnulphus, with a little labour, scaled the wals, and gate the Citie: thus he obtained the citie of Rome, and rescued the Pope, and be∣headed his aduersaries, whom the Pope to gratifie, blessed him, and crowned him for Emperour. After Formosus succéeded Bonifacius the sixt, after him Stephen the sixt, which so enuied Formosus that he abrogated all his Decrées, and tooke vp his body, and cut off two fingers from his right hand, and threwe them into Tyber, and buried the body in a Laymans Sepulcre. Romanus succéeded him, and repealed the Acts of Stephen, a∣gainst Formosus. Theodorus the second succéeded him; Iohn the tenth succéeded him, who repugned the Romaines, and held a Sinode at Rauenna of 74. Bishops: the French King Eudo, with his Archbishops, being present, where he ratified all the De∣crées
of Formosus, and the contrary Acts of Stephen the sixt were burned. After him Benedictus the 4. after him Leo the 5. who was with strong hand taken and cast into prison, by one Christopher, his owne Houshold Chaplin, which Christopher being Pope 7. moneths, was likewise hoysted from his Papall throne by one Sergius, he thrust him into a Monastery, and shore him a Munke; thus in nine yeares were nine Popes. This Sergius was rude, vnlearned, proud, and cruell; he before was put backe from the Popedome by Formosus, wherefore he caused the body of Formosus to be taken vp againe, disgraded him, beheaded him, and cut off the other thrée fingers which were left, and threw his bodie into Iyber; and deposed all such as by Formosus had beene con∣secrated. By this Pope Sergius came vp the vse to beare about Candles on Candlemasse day, for the purifying of the blessed Uirgin, as though the sacred conception of the Son of God were vnpure, and to be purified by Candlelight. Pope Anastatius succeeded him, after him Pope Laudo succéeded, which was father of Pope Iohn the 11. Pope Iohn is said to be the Paramour of Theodora, a famous Harlot of Rome, by whom he had a daughter called Marozia, and the aforesaid Pop Sergius had a sonne by her, which after was Pope Iohn the 12. After, she maried Guido Marquis of Tuscia, by the meanes of whom, and his friends at Rome, she caused Iohn the 11. to be smothered with a pillow, and Iohn the 12. her sonne to be made Pope; but the Clergy and people did not agrée to his election, therefor Pope Leo the 6. was set vp in his place: after him Pope Stephen succéeded, who being poysoned, the said Iohn the 12. was set vp againe in the Papacie, where he raigned about 5. years. This strum∣pet Marozia, maried two brothers one after another, she gouerned all Rome, and the Church at that time. After him succeeded Stephen the 7. After him Leo the 7. After him Stephen the 8. After him, Pope Martine the 3. After him, Pope Agapetus the 2. about whose time began first the Order of Monks called Ordo Cluniensis. After king Alfride, as before, his sonne Edward succéeded, surnamed, the Elder; there were thrée Edwards before the Conquest: the first Edward, the Elder; the second Ed∣ward the Martyre; the third, Edward the Confessor. This Edward began his raigne in the yeare 901.901. The Princedome of Wales, and the Kingdome of Scotland, with Constantine king thereof, wre subdued vnto him, also he recouered Northfolke, Suf∣folke, Essex, and Northumberland from the Danes. In all hi warres he had the vic∣torie, his men were so inured with continuall practises of Feates of Warre, that when they heard of any enemies comming, they would neuer tarry for the King, or any of his Dukes, but incountred with them, the assaults of enemies were to the Souldiers but a trifle, and vnto the King a ridicle. Then the King builded Chester, twise as big as it was, and builded a Castle at Her∣ford in the edge of Wales, and another Castle at the mouth of the water of Auon, and another Castle at Buckingham; and another vpon the riuer of Ouse. He re-edified the townes of Tocester, and Wigmore, vpon the riuer of Trent. He builded a newe towne ouer against Nottingham, and made a Bridge ouer the Riuer betwixt the two townes, By the Riuer of Merce he builded a new Citie called Thilwall, and repaired the City of Manchester, and diuerse others. His Daughter Edgitha was aried vn∣to Otho,25. the first Emperour of the Almaines, when hée had raigned 24. yeares hee dyed. Adelstan his Sonne raigned after him, and was Crowned at Kingstone; hée was nothing inferiour to his Father in renowne of Ciuile Gouernment, and in prospe∣rous successe in reducing this Realme into subiection of a Monarchie. He expelled the Danes, subdued the Scots, and quieted the Welchmen. One Elfredus, with seditious persons, conspired against the said King at Win∣chester, presently after the death of his Father, went about to put his eyes; but, by the helpe of God, he escaped. Elfred, being accused thereof, fled to Rome to purge himselfe by his Oath, before the Pope, and swearing, or rather forswearing himselfe in Saint Peters Church, suddenly, vpon his Oath, fell downe, and within thrée dayes died. The Pope sent to the King to know whether he would haue him buried in Chri∣stian buriall; at length, by perswasion of his kinred, he was buried in Christian buriall.
Ater the death of Sythericus King of Northumberland, King Adelstone seazed that Prouince into his hands, and put out his sonne Alanus, who fled into Scotland, ma∣ried the daughter of Constantine King of Scots, by whose stirring, gathered a com∣pany of Danes, Scots, and others, and entred the North of Humber with a strong Nauie of 615. shippes. King Adelstone and his people ioyned in fight with them at a place called Binford; where fighting with them from morning till night, after a ter∣rible slaughter on both sides, the like hath not béene seene in England, King Adel∣stone had the victorie; fiue vnder kings were slaine in that battell, with Constan∣tine King of Scots, and twelue Dukes, with the most part of the strangers that were there. Then King Adelstone subdued the Brittaines, and forced them to grant to him yearely tribute 20. lib. of gold, 300 lib. of iluer, 2500. heads of neate, with a certaine number of hawkes and dogs. King Adelstone caused his guiltlesse brother Edwine, through sinister suggestion of his Cup-bearer, to be set in an old rotten bote in the broad sea, onely with one Es∣quire with him, without any tackling; where the tender Prince dismaie with the age o Windes and Flouds, weary of his life, cast himselfe into the Sea; the Es∣quire shifed for himselfe, and recouered the body of his maister, and brought it to Sandich, were it was buried. The reason the King the more doubled of his brother, was because he was by his mother of a base bloud, and begotten before wedlocke: for King Edward, his Father, comming into his Nurses house, was rauished with the beautie of one Edwina a beautifull maide, begat that night of her King Adelstone, and afterward married her: after the King was stricken with great repentance for the death of his brother, by the space of seauen yeares, at length the Cup-bearer, his accuser, bea∣ring the Cuppe vnto the King, stumbled with one foote, and recouering himselfe with the other, saying; Thus one brother helpeth another. These words so moued the king, that forthwith he commaunded the false accuser of his brother to bee had out to execu∣tion; and he builded two Monasteries of Middleton and Michlenes, for his brothers Soule. Whereby it appeareth what was the speciall cause of building of Monasteries, to wit, for releasing of sinnes for them departed, and them aliue, which is contrarie to the grace and veritie of Christs Gospell. He deuised diuers good and wholsome lawes, as well of the state Ecclesiasticall as Seculer, which thou maist see in the booke at large, whereby it is to bee vnderstoode that the vsurped power of the Bishop of Rome did not then extend or derogate from the authoritie of Christian Princes, but that euery one in is owne Dominion had the do∣ing of all causes▪ whether they were spirituall or temporall, he raigned 16. yeares, and because he had no Issue, his brother Edmond succéeded him. This Edmond expelled the Danes,940. Scots, Normanes, and all forraine enemies out of the Land, and recouered such Cities as were in their hands from them; then the King set his minde to building of Monasteries, and furnishing of Churches with pos∣sessions: in his time Monks were dispersed out of the Monastery of Esham, and Ca∣nons substituted in their place. At the first, Religious houses were replenished with Priests and Canons, which were Clergie men; after, Monkes succéeded, they profes∣sed Chastitie, that is, to  vnmaried, for so they defined Chastitie in those blinde daies: the Priests and Canons liued more frée from Monkish rules and obseruations, were commony marie, and in their life came néerer to seculer Christians, so there was great enmitie betweene them, one uer sought to expell the other. Thus Monkes first beganne, about the time of this King Edmond, when straitnes of life, with superstition, was had in veneration; which men, either to haue publike fame with men, or merit of God, gaue themselues to leade a strict life. There was a Monastery in Fraunce called Floriake, of the rule of Benedict, from whence came our English Monkes, for after they were professed there, returning into England, they daily congregated men to their profession, and for their outward holinesse and straite life wee in great admiration, not onely with the rude sort, but with Kings and Princes, who founded them Houses, maintained their rules, and inlarged them with possessions.
After King Edmund had raigned 6.946 yeares and a halfe, he was slaine, and buried at Glastenbury, leauing bebing him two children, Edwine, and Edgar, but because they were vnder age, Edred, brother to King Edmund, gouerned, as Protector, nine yeares with great moderation and fidelity to the young children. Edwine,955. eldest sonne of King Edmond was crowned at Kingstone; the day of his Coronation he forsooke his Nobles, and went into a Chamber to a woman whom he inordinately had retained. Dunstone, Abot of Gastenbury, followed the King into the Chamber, and brought him out by the hand, and accused him to Odo Archbishop, causing him to be separated from her company: for which act Odo suspended the king out of the Church. The king being displeased, banished Dunstone, who went into Flanders, where hée was in the Monastery of Aandus: about that time the order of Benedict Monkes, or blacke Monkes, beganne to multiply in England, so that Priests and Canons were put out in many places and Monkes put in their , but King Edwine, for the displeasure he bare to Dunstone, so vexed all the Order of the said Monkes, that in Malmesbury, Glastenbury, and other places, he thrust out the Monks and set seculer Priests in their steed. Edwine being hated of his Subiects for his misdemeaners was remoued from his kingly honour, and his brother Edgar receiued in his stéede: yet one raigned ouer all on the one side of the Thmes, and the other on the other side of the Thames: but Ed∣wine after hee had raigned 4. yeares dyed, leauing no Heire, wherefore all fell to Edgar. Edgar at the age of 16▪ yeares began to raigne,959. but was not crowned vntill 14. yeares after. He sent for Dunstone home againe, whom Edwin had exiled, he was made Bishop of Woster, and after of London; and not long after of Canterbury. By his intretie to the King, Oswoldus was made Bishop of Woster; and by his meanes also Ethelwaldus, Abbot of Abendon, was made Bishoppe of Winchester. By the meanes of these thrée Bishoppes the multitnde of Monkes began first to swarme in this Realme of England. By the meanes of them King Edgar, builded 40. Monasteries, and by the instigation of them King Edgar, in diuerse great houses, and Cathedrall Churches, where Prebends and Priests were before, displaced them, and set in Monkes, and many seculer Priests, being put to their choyce whether they would change their habit or leaue their roomes, departed out of their houses. After, Os∣waldus was made Archbishop of Yorke, and then they had their minde; and when he by no perswasion could make the Priests and Canons of the Cathedrall Church of Yorke become Monkes, within the Churchyard he erected another Church of our La∣dy, replenishing it with Monkes, and there he kept his seat, and was euer conuersant, whereby the other Church was desolate, and all the people gathered where the Bishop was, so they were faine, for shame and contempt, either to relinquish the house, or be∣come Monkes: so did Ethelwolfe driue out the Canons and Priests, out of the Mo∣nasterie of Hide in Winchester, and placed his Monkes so in Oxford and Mildune, and diuerse places more seculer Priests and their wiues were expelled o giue place to Monkes. The Monkes of the primitiue time did differ from the Monkes of the middle time, and from our Monkes of the latter age. The name and order of Monkes began 300. yeares after Christ; Basilius Magnus was one of the first institutors and commen∣ders of that Superstition. Cassianus maketh mention of a certaine Monastery in The∣baid▪ wherein were 5000. Monkes, vnder the gouernment of one Abbot; and héere also in England, mention is made before of Bangor, wherein were 2200. Monkes, vnder one mans ruling, in the yeare 596. but these were such as either by tyranny of persecuti∣on were driuen into desart places, or else, of their owne detion, ioyned with Su∣perstition, for the loue they had to Spirituall contemplation, and hatred of the wic∣ked world withdrew themselues from all company, hauing all things common; these were Lay-men leading a stricter kinde of life then others, as Saint Augustine, Le∣rome, and others testifie, one thing pertaineth to the Monkes, and another thing to the Clergie; the Clergie fed the flocke, and the monkes are fed. It appeareth also by the forth Canon of the Councell of Calcedon, that Monkes should not meddle with
matters of the Church. And Leo in his 62. Epistle, doth forbid Monkes and lay∣men to bée admitted to preach. They differed from the Monkes of the middle age in thrée points; First, they were bound to no strict apparell, or dyet, or any thing else. Secondly, they were but Lay-men, onely being of a stricter life then the rest, and had nothing to doe in Ecclesiasticall matters, vntill Pope Boniface the 4. gaue them au∣thoritie. Thirdly, though many of the Monkes of the first age liued single from wiues, yet some of them were maried, and none of them were forbidden from mariage. A∣thanasius in his Epistle ad Pracontium, saith, hee knew Monkes and Bishops maried men▪ and fathers of children. Yet though the former Monkes were better then the latter, yet amongst them superstition beganne to créepe into the Church, by the subtiltie of Satan, and all for the ignorance of frée iustification by Faith in Christ, as for example; One Abbot Moses testifieth of himselfe, that hee so afflicted himselfe with fasting, and watching, that hee felt no appetite to meate, and could not sleepe, that hee prayed to God to giue him a little sléepe some péece of the night. This Cassianus doth testifie, Cap. 7. Cola. . Hée saith also of an olde Hermite that made a vowe hée would neuer eate without some guest, sometimes fasted thrée or foure dayes for lacke of guestes. One Mucius, to declare his obedience to the Abbot, did not sticke at the com∣maundement of the Abbot, to cast his sonne into the water, not knowing whether∣any were there to saue him from drowning, preferring the Abbots commaunde∣ment before the commaundement of God. And Basilius Magnus, and Nazean∣zenus, with immoderate austeritie, did so plucke downe themselues, that when they were called to bee Bishoppes, they were not able to sustaine the laboure thereof. After these Monks, followed Monkes of the middle Age, who increased both in number and Superstition, from their dennes in Wildernesses, the approched to great townes, where they had solemn Monasteries, founded by Kings, Queenes, Kings Daughters, and rich Consuls, for the remedie of their Soules remission, and the redemption of their sinnes, the good of their Fathers poserities, of their Coun∣try, and the Honour of our Lady, and lightly it was for some murder, or great sinne. In which monasteries they abounded in wealth and riches, and did swime in Superstition and Pharisaicall hypocrisie, being yoaked, in all their doings, to certaine obseruations, in watching, in sleeping, in rising, in praying, in walking, in talking, in looking, in tasting, in touching, in gestures, and in their Uestures; and the number of their Sects were diuerse: some, after Basilius rule, went in wite some, after Be∣nicts rule, went in blacke: some, after Hieromes rule, their white cloth girt with leather girdles: some Gregorians, copper coloured: some Gray monkes; some ware a coate of male vpon their hare bodies, with a blacke cloke thereupon: some had white ro∣chets vpon a blacke cote: some cloke, coule, and cap, all blewe: some Charter monkes, wearing heire-cloth next their body: some Flagillants, went in long linnen shirts with an open place in the backe, where they beate themselues with scourges on the bare shinne euery day, before the people, till the bloud ranne downe, saying, it was reuea∣led by an Angell, that in scourging themselues so, within thirtie daies and twelue houres they should be made so pure from sinne as they were when they first receiued bapisme: some Iesuits, with a white girdle, and a russet coule, with enumerable more Orders; they were so subiect to seruile rules, that no part of Christian libertie remained amongst them, and so drowned in Superstition, that they lost Christs religion, and the sence of mn. King Edgar reduced England into a full and perfect Monarchie, hee would suffer no man, of what degree soeuer he were, to daly out his lawes without punishment▪ in all his time there was neither priuie picker, nor open theefe, for if any were a heefe, he was sure to leese his life. He coused Ludwallus, Prince of Wales, to pay him yearely for tribute 300. wolues, whereby within foure yeares, a wolfe could scarce be found in England and Wales.
He had in readinesse 3600. ships of warre, and in the Sommer 1200. kept the East Seas, so many the West Seas, and so many the South Seas, in the winter he Progresse ouer the Land, to sée how his Lawes were kept, that the poore should not be opprest by the mightie. In the 13. yeare of his raigne eight Kings that were vnder him, of which the King of Scots was one, came to him to Chester, and did him Homage, next day in a royaltie he caused the eight kings, euery one rowing with an Oare, to cary him in a boe vp and downe the riuer to the Church of Saint Iohn and vnto his Palace againe, in token that he was Lord of so many Prouinces. He sent one Ethelwold, an Earle of his priuie Counsell, to sée Elfrida, daughter of the Duke of Somerset, whose beautie was commended vnto him, who tolde the King all things contrary, and after maried her; the King came to see her, her husband had prayed her to put on her worst apparell, and disgrace her selfe as much as shee could, but she set her selfe forth as gloriously as she could: when the King see her, hee was not so much inflamed with loue of her as with hatred to her husband, and sen∣ding for him to hunt with him, runne him through with his sword, and killed him: Wherefore Elfrida builded a Monastery of Nunnes in remission of her sinnes. Hee was incontinent, and lasciuious in deflowring Maids, hee deflowred Wilfrida, a Dukes Daughter being a Nunne, and had a daughter named Editha by her; and he comming to Andiuer, thinking to haue his pleasure of a Dukes Daughter, the mother grieuing to haue her daughter a Concubine, coneyed another beautifull maid into his bed in stead of her Daughter, which the King perceiuing, made the Maid Mistresse of both her Master and Mistresse. He had another Concubine Edelfeda, daughter to Duke Ordmere a professed Nunne, of whom hee begat Edward. But his greatest of∣fence was in that he was the first, and chiefest cause of this Monkery: for lying with this Ethelfleda, Dunstone held him from Coronation seauen yeares, and had seauen eres penance inioyned him. After he had raingned 16. yeares he dyed, and was bu∣ried at Glastenbury. His penance was, to weare no Crowne seauen yeares, to fast twise a wéeke, to giue his treasure to the poore, and to build a Monastery of Nunnes at Shaftsbury, as he had robbed God of one Uirgine, so he should restore many; and that he should expell Priests and Canons, and place Monkes in their place. As for the lying Miracles, that all were healed of any disease that prayed at the Tombe of this Ethelfleda, and how Saint Dunstone hunted the Deuill away with dogs, and caught him by the nose with a hote paire of tongues, and many other my∣racles of this Dunstone, with many other lying myracles before; in this Treatise I haue omitted, thinking them not worthy to be abridged, referring thée therein to the Booke at large. Edward succéeded Edgar, being his bastard sonne by Ethelfleda the Nunne,975. by the meanes of Dunstone and the other Bishoppes, onely to maintaine their Monkery, and Egeled the lawfull sonne of Edgar was put backe: then they supposed they had esta∣blished the Kingdome of Monkery for euer. Yet Alferus, Duke of Mercia, folowing the Quéenes minde, with other great men, drou the Monkes out of the Cathedrall and o∣ther Churches, and set in the Priests with their wiues againe: there were great conten∣tions about the matter, and two Councels. In the first Councell, they being almost all against Dunstone, he turned them by making a Crucifixe speake on his side, which most likely was the voice of some Monke through a Cane. And in the second Councell, the roofe of a Chamber brake▪ where they were all assembled, and all fell downe sauing Dunstone, which stood vpon a beame, which did not fall: this was likely done to by po∣licie vpon this the matter ceased, and Dunston had all his will. King Edward after hee had raigned almost 4. yeares,979. was murdered, and Egelred his brother succeeded him: the Queene being consenting to his murder, in repentance of her fact, builded two Nunneries, one at Amesbury, the other at Weewell, this was Edward the Martyr. After Pope Agapetus the 2. succeeded Pope Iohn the 13. he is noted to bee an Adulterer, Incestuous, and Tyrannous: of some of his Cardinals he put their eyes out, of some he cut out their tongues, of some their fingers, of some their noses.
In a generall Councell before Otho the first Emperour of the Germaines, it was Articled against him, that he neuer said Seruice, that in saying Masse, hee did not Communicate: that he committed Incest with two of his Sisters: that at Dice, he cal∣led for the Diuell to helpe him: wherefore he was deposed, and Pope Leo substitute in his place: but after the Emperour was gone, by the Whoores of Rome, and their great promises, he was restored againe, and Leo deposed. In the tenth yeare of his Pope∣dome he was snd with a mans wife, and so wounded by her husband, that in eight dayes he dyed. After him, the Romaines elected Benedictus the first, without the Emperour. Because they had put downe Leo and chosen another without his consent, the Em∣perour came with his Army, and set vp Pope Leo the eight againe; wherefore Leo Crowned Otho for Emperour, and intituled him Augustus, and what Carolus mag∣nus had giuen to the Sea, and people of Rome, he by a Synodall Decre▪ granted to the Emperour and his successors. The Emperour againe restored to the Sea of Rome, all such donations and possessions as Constantine, as they falsly pretend, or which Carolus Magnus tooke from the Lumbards, and gaue to them. After him succéeded Iohn the 14. against whom, for holding with the Emperour, Petrus, the chiefe Captaine of the Citie, with two Consuls, and twelue Aldermen, and other Nobles, laide hands vpon the Pope, and imprisoned him eleuen mo∣nethes: the Emperour came to Rome with his Armie, executed the chiefe doers of the fact. But he committed Petrus to the Popes arbitrement, he caused him to bee stripped naked, his beard to bee shauen, and to be hanged by the heire of the head a whole day, then to be set vpon an Asse, his face turned backeward, his hands bound vn∣der the Asses tayle, and so to be ledde through the Citie, then to bee scourged with rods, and banished the Citie; from this Pope procéeded first the Christning of Bels. Benedictus the 6. succéeded him, who was imprisoned by Cinthius a Captaine of Rome, and there slaine. Then came Pope Donus the 2. after whom, Bonifacius the 7. was Pope; he  the citizens of Rome to conspire against him, tooke the treasure of Saint Peters Church, and stle to Constantinople. The Romaines set vp Iohn the 15. Pope; Boniface, by his treasure, procured a Garison to take his part, and retur∣ned to Rome, he tooke Pope Iohn, put out his eyes, threw him in prison, and famished him, but he, not long after, sodainly died. The Romaines drew his carkeasse about the streets by the feete after his death, in despitefull manner, the people exclaiming a∣gainst him. Pope Benedictus the 7. succeeded him by consent of the Emperour Otho, the se∣cond, and raigned 19. yeares. After him succeeded Iohn the 16. after him, Iohn the 17. after him, Gregory the 1. Crescentius, with the people of Rome, and the Clergy, con∣uenting against him, set vp Pope Iohn the 18. Wherefore the Emperour Otho the 3. sent an Armie into Italy, got the citie, and tooke Crescentius the Consull, and Pope Iohn, he put out the eyes of Pope Iohn, and then killed him: he set Crescentius vpon a vile Horse, his nose and eares cut off, his face turned to the horse taile, and after his mem∣bers were nt off, and he hanged vpon a gibbit. Hee assembled a Councell at Rome, where he established the Empire in his owne Contry, and by the consent of Otho, or∣dained seauen to be Electors; three Bishops, three Princes, to wit, Prince Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquesse of Brandenburge, to whom was added the King of Boheme to giue the odde voyce, if the eauen voyces could not agree: this Constituti∣on being begun, Anno 997. was after established in Germany by Otho, 1002. which or∣der remaineth to this day. After the death of King Edward, Egelred his younger brother, raigned in his steade; vpon his Coronation a cloud was scene through the Land, one halfe like bloud, the other halfe like fire; shortly after, the third yeare of his raigne, the Danes ariued in sundry places of this Land, and did much spoyle, and retyred to their ships againe, and about the same time a great part of London was con∣sumed with fire. The King besieged the Bishoppe of Rochester; Dunstone
required the King, for Saint Andrewes sake, to giue ouer the siege, yet he would not de∣part vntill the king had of him 100. lib. of gold. The Danes, séeing the hatred of the Subiects against the King, rose againe, and great harme in many places in England,990 that the King granted them great summes of money for peace, and a sore sicknesse of the bloudy Flix, and hot Feuours fell amongst the people, of which many dyed; and a like murren amongst the beasts, and for lacke of Iustice, many théeues and bribers were in the Lan. Not long after, the Danes inuaded the land againe in such sort that the King was so séeke in which Coste he should first withstand them, and was compelled to appease them with great summes of money; and for lacke of a good Goernour, many things perishe in the Land: for the King gaue himselfe to Lechery, and polluting his Subiects, disin∣heritig them, and causing them with great summes to redae the same againe. payed the Danes tribute yearely, which was called Dane-gilt; which tribute increase▪ from 10000. lib. yearely, and in fiue or sixe yeares, it came to 40000. lib. yearely. ∣dricke Duke of Mercia, and Alfrike Admirall of the Ships, warned the Danes whatsoeuer the King deuised against them, wherefore the king put out the eyes of th Admirals sonne, and of the two sonnes of Duke Edricke. The Danes thus preuailing, were so proud, they forced the Husbandmen to plo, and sows their lands, and the whilst would sit at home with their wiues and daughters▪ and fared of the best, when the Husbandmen fared but scantly of their owne; they were glad to please them, and call them Lord Danes▪ which after was turned to a name of proby, when they rebuked another, they called him Lurdaine. The king in the 21. yeare of his raigne,1000. maried Emma, the Daughter of Richard Duke of Normandy, which Mariage inhauned the Kings minde, that hee sent secret, and strait Commissions to the Rulers of euery towne in England, that vpon Brices day, at an houre appointed, the Danes should be suddenly slaine, and so it wa performed. Then Swanus king of Denmarke, hearing of this slaughter of the Danes, with a great Hoste and Nauie, came into England, and did much spoyle, but at length he was met with of Duke Vskatell, and beaten, and many of the Danes slaine, wherefore they returned to Denmarke. The next yeare Swanus entred into the Land againe,1004. and spoyled the Contry, and e∣uer when as he heard of the Kings Hoste comming, he tooke ship againe, and went to a other part of the Contry, and when the King would méete him by Sea, he would fly, or else bribe the Admirall, so they brought the Englishmen into vnspeakeable misery, that the king was faine to giue them 30000. lib. for peace. But after Swanus broke cou∣nant, and landed in Northumberland with a great Hoste, proclaiming himselfe King, caused the Earle with the Rulers of the contry, to sweare him fealty: so he Conquered through the Contry▪ and tooke pledges of them. He tooke Winchester, and Oxford, and came to London, hearing the King was there; he went into Kent, and conquered Can∣terbury, where he fired the citie, and slew 900. Monke of the Abbey of Saint Augu∣stines, and 8000. of the men and women of the Citie, and they stoned Elphegus ∣shoppe of Canterbury to death at Grinewich because hee would not giue them 3000. lib. The King, for feare, sent his wife Emma and his two sonnes, Alfred and Edward, the Duke of Normandy; after, the King fled to the Isle of Wight, and went thence to Normandy to his wife. Swanus teared exceeding impositions vpon the people, and required a great summe of money of Saint Edmunds lands, which being dnyed him▪ because the Land was frée, he spoyled the Contry, despising the Martyre, and menaing the place of his Sepulchre: wherefore the people fell to prayer, and fasting, so that short∣ly after, Swanus suddenly crying and yelling amongst his Knights, dyed: wherfore Ca∣nutus his sonne ruling as King after his father, builded the Abbey of S. Edmundsbury our Saint Edmonds Sepulchre, and ditched their Land with a great ditch; ordained a House of Monks there, and gue them their autient freedomes. After that, it was vs that the Kings of England when they were crowned, offered their Crownes to Saint Edmonds shrine▪ and bought them againe.
King Eldred hearing the death of Swanus, returned into England. Canutus fled to Sandwich, and cutting off the noses and hands of the pledges, which his Father left him, sayled into Denmarke. The next yeare Canutus returned againe with a great Host, and forced the people to be sworne vnto him, and giue him pledges. In this season King Eldred died at London, after he had raigned 38. yeares, and was buried in Paules. After whose death the most part chose Canutus, the King of the Danes, King; ge∣nerally all the Clergie men choose him, but the Citizens of London, and certaine Nobles choose Edmund, the eldest sonne of Egelred King; who for his hardinesse to indure la∣bour was surnamed Ironside. Betwixt these two martiall Princes many great bat∣tels were sought, with no great difference of victory; at length, by rensent, they two onely tryed the quarell in the fight of both Hosts, and when they had assayed each o∣ther with sharpe words and strokes, they both agréed, and kissed each other, and diui∣ded the Land betweene them, and during their liues loued as brethren. Shortly after, one of the sonnes of Duke Edricus aforesaid killed King Edmund, after hée had raigned two yeares. Hee left two sonnes behinde him, Edmund and Edward, whom the wicked Duke tooke from their mother, shee not knowing of her husbands death, and presented them to Canutus, saying; Aue Rex solus. Canutus sent them to his brother Swanus, King of Sweueland, to be laine; but hée sent them to Solamon King of Hungary, where Edmund maried the Kings Daughter, and dyed: and Edward was maried to Agatha the daughter to the Emperour Henry the fourth. Then Canutus held a Parliament, established the Crowne to himselfe, hee disdained euer after those whom he found false to their natiue King, some of them he exiled, some he beheaded, and some died suddenly by the punishment of God; and wicked Duke E∣drike was beheaded, an his head set vpon London bridge. In the meane time Swaynus▪ his brother, King of Denmarke, dyed, and the Land fell to Canutus, hee  toither, and tooke possession thereof, and returned, and maried Emmalate wife of Egelred by whom he had a sonne called Hardyknight. He held a Parliament at Oxford, where it was agreed that Englishmen and Danes should hold the Lawes made by King Edgar. Then the Danes begun to be Christians, and Canutus went to Rome, and returned. He gouerned the Lnd 20. yeares, and left two sonnes, Harold and Hardeknight, which was made King of Denmarke in his Fathers time. Harold, called Harefore for his swiftnesse, succéeded him, hee banished his Step∣mother Emma,1039. and tooke away her goods and Iewels. Hardeknight King of Dem∣marke succéeded him, and when he had raigned two yeares, being merry at Lambeth, he was suddenly strucke dumb and died, being the last king of the Danes that raigned in England. In the time of these Danish Kings, there was one Godwine, an Earle in Eng∣land, when the aforesaid two snnes of King Egelred, Alfred and Edward, came from Normandy to England to visit their mother Emma, and brought with them a great company of Normaines, this Godwine, hauing a Daughter named Godith, whom he thought to haue maried to Edward, and made him king. Hee perswaded the king Hardeknight that the Normaines should be slaine, and gat authoritie to order the matter himselfe. Wherefore hée met them at Guildowne, with a com∣pany of English Souldiers, slewe almost all the Normaines, winding their gots out of their bellyes, and put out the eyes of Alfred the eldest brother, and sent him to the Abby of Elie, where hée fed him with bread and water, vntill shorty after hée dyed. Edward escaped to his mother, who fearing Godwine, sent him againe into Normandy. This cruell fact to the Normaines, séemeth to bée the cause why the Iust Iudgement of God, shortly after, Conquered the English Nation by the Normaines. After the death of king Hardeknight,1043. last king of the Danes, the Lords sent into Nor∣mandy for the aforesaid Edward, yonger sonne of Quéen Emma, to take possession of the Realme, who came with a few Normaines, and was crowned at Winchester. He maried
Godith, Daughter of Earle Godwine, hee ruled with much wisdome and 24. yeares. In his time his mother Emma was accused to be too familier with Alwine Bishop Winchester, by the councell of Godwine, they were committed to prison; many of Bishops laboured for them to the King, but Robert Archbishop of Canterbury stopp their sue, saying; How dare you defend her, shée hath defmed her sonne the and taken her lererous Lemman the Bishop: she is accused to bee consenting to he death of her sonne Alfred, and procured poyson for her sonne Edward; it she will bare footed for her selfe foure steps, and for the Bishop fiue, vpon nine , if she escape harmelesse, they shall be afoyled: she agreed theris: then the ing and many Nobles being present, she was led blindfold to the place, where Irons lay burning hote, and passed the nine shares vnhurt, when they opened her eyes, and she se her selfe past the paine, she kneeled downe and gaue thankes to God, then the King asked her forgiuenesse but the Archbishop fed into Normandy. The said cruell  Godwine tooke bread and eate it, in witnesse that he was not guilty of the death of Alfred the Kings brother, but as soone as hee had receied the bread he was choked at the table, before the king at Winsor, and he was conueyed to Winchester and buried. Harold the second sonne of Godwine succeeded Edward,1066. who was the last King of the Sxns. Then the Kings sone of Denmarke came into England with 300. ships, who entred the North, and claymed the Land; the Lords of the country rose a∣gainst them, but the Danes had the victory, then Hrold gaue them a great battell, and got the victory, and slew the King of Denmarkes sonne. After this victory Ha∣rold waxed proud and couetous, and would not diuide the pry to his Knights, but kept it to himselfe. Whereas Harold had sworne to William Duke of Normandy▪ after the death of King Edward, to take possession of the Kingdome of England to his vse, according to the will of King Edward, that the Duke of Normandy should succéede him. The Duke sent to him, admonishing him of the Couenants that were agréed vpon betwixt them▪ Harald answered thus, That such a nice foolish promise ought not to be holden, concer∣ning the Land of another, without the consent of the Lords of the same, especially be∣cause neede and dread compelled him thereto. Whereupon Duke William prepaired his Armie, and sent to Pope Alexander con∣cerning his Title, and oiage, the Pope confirmed him in the same, and sent him a Ban∣ner. And they tooke shipping with a great company, and landed at Hastings in Sussex, the Normans and Harald ioyned battell in the place where after was builded the Ab∣by of Battell in Sussex, where the Normaines obtained the victory through the Iust Prouidence of God, where Harold was wounded in the left eye with an arrowe, and incontinently dyed, when hee had raigned nine yeares, and was buryed at Walome. This Duke William and King Edward were by the Fathers side, Cosen Ger∣maynes. After this Gregory the first, succeeded Siluester the second; he sate 4. yeares, moneth and 8. dayes Pope. By the testimony of Stella, Benno, and Platina, and many others, he was a Sorceer, and was exaled to the Papacy by the Deuill, vpon this condition, that after his death, he should giue himselfe to the Deuill. He demaunded of the Deuill how long he should nioy his Popedome. Hee answered, Untill thou say Masse in Ierusalem thou shalt liue. At length the Pope▪ in Lent, saying Masse in the Temple of the Holy Crosse, which Church (vnknowne to him) was called Ierusalem▪ then hee knewe hee should dye; then repenting, hee confessed his fault before all the people. fer him succeeded Iohn the 19. which brought in the Feast of All-Soules to bee celebrated next after All-Saints day, by the meanes of Odilo, Abbot of Clnake. This Abbot, thinking that Purgatory should bee in Mount Ena, dreamed vppon a time that he, by his Mases, had dliuered diuerse Soues from thence; saying, that hee heard the voyces and lamentatious of Duils,
crying out, for that the Soules were taken from them by Masses, and Dirges funrall, Pope Iohn the 20. succeeded him, and after him Sergius the 4 after him Bene∣dictus the 8. then Iohn the 12. who was prmoted by Arte Magicke of diuerse Sorcerers. He brought in the fast of Saint Iohn Baptist eauen, and of Saint Laurence. After him followed Pope Benedictus the 9. aspiring to his Papacie by Magicke, prac∣tising Inchatments and Conrations in words: he resisted the Emperour Henricus the third, sonne of Conradus, and placed in his roome Peus King of Hungary. After for feare of Henricus, he was faine to sell his Sea so Gratianus, called Gregorie the sixt, for 1500. lib. at which time there was three Popes in Rome together raigning, one against another, Benedictus the 9. Siluester the 3. Gregorius the 6. for which cause, Henricus, surnamed Niger, the Emperour, displaced these three monsters, placing for them Clement the second; and Encted that no Pope shoud be chosen without the consent of the Emperour: and the Romanes made an Oth to the Emperour to that ef∣fect. But the Emperur being gone, they forgot their Oath, and poysoned the Pope; which  some impute to Damasus the 2. his successor, and some to Erazutus, which poysoned six Pps. Damasus within 23. daies after he was Pope, was poysoned. hen the Romaines, and Cardinals, sent to the Emperour for a Pope, who gue them Leo the 9. He kept two Councels, one at Uercellis, where the Doctrine of Berigarius against the Real presence was condemned: the other was kpt at Moguntia, where, amongst many de∣crees, Prists were vtterly excluded from mariage, and that no ay man ight giue enice, Bishopricke, and Spirituall promoion, Leo being at Wormes with the Em∣perour on Christmas day, hee excommunicaed the Subeacon, for not reading the E∣piste in Latine▪ the Archbishop being at Masse, staid and would go no further, vnlesse his Subdeacon were restred: whereupon the Pope released him. Leo was poysoned by Brazutus, the first yeare of his Popedome. Victor the . succeeded him, hee kept a Councell at Florence, hee deposed diuerse Bishops and Priests for Simony, and Forni∣cation: of Simony, because they were tooke their liing of Secular mn for money for for∣nication, because they were maried. In his econd yeare he was poysoned also▪ by the said Brazutus, by the procurement of Hildebrand his master. Stephanus the 9. succéeded him, hee was chosen without the Emperour, hee accused the Emperour of Heresie, for deminishing the authoritie of the Romaine Sea. Hée likewise called it Symony for secular men to present to a Spirituall Liuing. He sent Cardinall Hildebrand with Commission to reforme the matter: in the meane time he, tasting Brazutus cup, dyed. After him the Romaines set vp Benedictus the tenth Pope: but Hildebrand per∣swaded the Clergie to choose Nicolaus the second, who by force caused the other Pope to vnpope himselfe. Nicolas called the Councell of Lateran, in which hée vnderminded the Emperours urisdiction, and gaue the full authoritie or choosing the Pope vnto a fewe Cardi∣nals, and certaine Catholike persons, and against such as be Popes without the full consent of the Cardinals, he thundreth terrible blasts of excommunication, accursing them and their children with denils; giuing power to Cardinals, with the Clergie and , to depose such person, and call a generall Councell, where they will, against them. In this Councell Beringarius was forced to recant his Doctrine against the Re∣all presence in the Sacrament, and the terme of transubstantiation was there first de∣uised. Hée displaced the right Heire of the Dukedome of Aplia, and placed Ro∣bertus Quistardus to bée Duke, and generall Captain of Saint Peters land: but it standeth not with the Gospell, a Bishop with outward armes to conquer christian men and countries. After hee had raigned three yeares and a halfe, he met with Bra∣zutus cup, and turned vp his héeles. Then the Emperour set vp Coralus Pope, but Hildebrand set vp Alexander the second, who ouercame Coralus. Then there was a Councell kept at Mntus, where Alexander was declared Pope, and it was conclu∣ded that Priests should haue no wiues, and those that had wiues should say no Masse: no Benefices to bee bought for money, Alleuia to bee suspended in Lent, that no pirituall man should enter into any Church by a Secular man, that the
Pope should be elected onely by the Cardinals, this Alexander being at Masse, as hee was preaching vnto the people, told them he would not sit in the place, except he had the licence of the Empeour, which strucke Heldebrand into such a furis, that as soone as Masse was done, he forced him into a Chamber, and beat him with his , rating him that he would séeke fauour of the Emperour; and kept him in Custodie, allwing him but twenty pence a day: and Heldebrand incroched all the reuenewes of the Church vnto himselfe. At lst Alexander, vnder this miserable indurance, died, hauing béene Pope 11. yeares and a halfe. THE FOVRTH BOOKE Containing other 300. yeares, from WILLIAM the Conquerour, to the time of IOHN WICKLIFFE. WILLIAM the Conquerour was the base  of Robert Duke of Normandy, Nephew to Kig Edward after the said Uictory against Harald, he was receiuer King ouer Eng∣land, and was Crowned vpon Christmas day. The yeare before his comming was a great blasing Starre the space of seauen daies,1067. he made the Englishmen pay for euery twentie Acres of land 6. . yearely wherefore many rebelled, but he con∣quered them: many of his Lords departed into Scotland, wherefore hee kept them that aried the straiter. Hee gaue the Nomaines the chiefest possessions of the Land, hee changed all the temporall Lawes of the Realme, and set straite Lawes vpon the Spiritualtie. Hee builded foure strong Castles, two at Yorke, one at Nottingham, and another at Lincolne. In the 3. yeare of his raigne, Harald and Canutus, sonnes of Swanus King of Den∣marke, came into the North Contry, but, after much spoyle, King William chased them to their Ships, and he was so displeased with the Inhabitants for fauouring them, that he destroyed the Land from Yorke to Duham, so that nine yeares after the Prouince lay waste and vnmanred. In the 4. yeare of his raigne Malcoline King of the Scots, entred into Northumber∣land and destroyed the Contry, and slew men, women, and children; but within two yeares King William made such warre with the Scots, that hee forced Malcome, their King to doe him Homage. In the same 4. yeare of this King,1070. there was holden a Councell of the Clergie at Winchester, at which was present two Cardinals from the Pope, and the King was there present: diuerse Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, by the meanes of the King, were depriued, without any euident cause, that the Normaines might bee proferred vnto the rule of the Church, as his Knights were to the rule of the Temporalty. O Thomas, a Normaine, was preferred vnto the Archbishoprick, of Yorke, and one Lanfranckus an Italian, was made Archbishop of Canterbury, betwixt them grew a contention, about giuing and taking the Othe of obedience; but the King appeased it, and the Bishop of Yorke, builded the Minster of Yorke, and gaue possessions thereto. But when these two Archbishops came to Rome for their Pale, the contreuersie renewed betwixt them for the Primacie, the Pope not disposed to decide the matter, sent them
home to haue their matter determined; so the mater came before the King and Clergie at Windsor, the Archbishop of Canterbury said; Since the time that Austin conuerted this Land to Christianitie, and was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, by Pop Gregory, the Primacie hath succéeded there euer since, and being Yorke tooks the Christian Faith from thence, it was reason it should bee subiect thereto. The Bishop of Yorke answered, that the Britaines, the fist possessors of this King∣dome, which indured from Brutus to Cadwalader, 2076. years, vnder an hundred and two Kings, and they receiued the Christian Faith in the yeare of Christ 162. In the time of Lucius their King, Elutherius being Pope, who sent thither Fagamus and Da∣mianus Preachers, who ordained in the realme 28. Bishops with two Archbishopes, Theonus Archbishop of London, and Theodosius Archbishop of Yorke, so it continued 300. yeares▪ vntill the Saxons (being Infidels) subdued the Realme, and diuided it in∣to seauen Kingdome, and so it continued vntill Gregory sent hither. Austin to conuert the Realme, who was after made Archbishop of Canterbury; and it was Gregories purpose to reduce the new Church of the Saxons to the order that was in the old time amongst the Britaines, vnder the two Metropolitaines of London and Yorke: yet hée gaue Austen this prerogatiue during his life time, to haue the Iurisdiction aboue all the Bishops and Priests in England; but after his decase London and Yorke to ouersée the charge, and he willed no distinction of Honour to be betwixt London and Yorke, but that he that had béene longest Bishop of the place should be preferred. Upon this it was decréed that Yorke should be subiect to Canterbury, and that wheresoeuer Canterbury would hold a Councell, Yorke, with his Bishops, should come thither, and be obedient to his Decrées; and when Canterbury should decease, Yorke should come to Duer to consecrate the new Archbishop: but if Yorke decease, his successor should resort to Can∣terbury, and where the Bishop of Canterbury should appoint, to receiue his consecration, swearing obedience. In the 9 yeare of King Williams reigne, another Counsell was holden at London, were was decreed that the Bishop of Yorke should sit on the right hand of Canterbury, and London on the left and in his absence Winchester; and that Bishops should trans∣late the Seas from vlages to cities; that Monks should haue nothing propper, and if any so had, he dying vnconfssed, should not be buried in the Churchyard; that no Clarke or Monke should be retained in another Dicesse without Letters testimoniall; that none should speake in the Councell without leaue, but Bishops and Abbots; that none should buy or sell any ffice in the Church; that neither Bishop, Abbot, nor any of the Clergie should be at the Iudgement of any mans death or dismembring. At this time diuerse good Bishops displaced Monkes, and restored maried Priests againe, the Bishop of Winchester placed aboue 40. Canons in stead of Monkes for his part, but this godly enterprise was stopped by Lanfranke the Archbishop of Canter∣bury; he plucked downe the old Church of Canterbury and builded vp the new. After the death of the Pope Hildebrand succéeded, who was surnamed Gregory the 7. he was a Sorcerer, and the principal cause of all the perurbation that hath beene since in the Church, for before he wrought his feats, setting vp and displacing what Bishops he listed, setting them against Emperours, and destroying Matrimony vnder colour of chastiie; the Chuch was in some order, and Popes quietly ruled vnder Christian Em∣perours, and were defended by them. He first, contemning the authoritie of the Emperor, thrust in himselfe to be Pope, vanting himselfe to haue both the Ecclesiasticall, and the Temporall sword, committed to him of Christ, and full power to binde and loose what he lifted, he challenged all the Dominion both of the East and West Church; he set at light Kings and Emperours, who raigned but at his godamercie; Bishops and Prelates as his vnderlings he kept in awe, suspending, cursing, and chopping off their heads. He irred vp warres, releasing Othes, Fidelitie, and due allegiance of Subiects to their Princes. To this scope tended chiefly all his practises, to abolish the mariage of Priests, and to translate the authoritie Emperiall vnto the Clergy, as appeared before in the Councell of Latern; for though he was not then Pope in name, yet was he Pope indéed, and ruled the Pope as he li∣sted. In a Councell which he held at Rome, he enacted that no Priest hereafter should
mary, that those that were maried should be Diuorced, and that none hereafter should be admitted Priest, but should sweare perpetuall Chastitie. The Clergie of France resisted this Decree, and said it was repugnant to the word of God, that the Pope should take from Priests that which God and Nature had giuen them; and against the Doctrine of Saint Paul; I haue no commaundement of God touching Virginitie, and he that cannot liue continent, let him mary. And that it was against the Canons of the Apostles, and the Nicen Councell: and that thereby would be opened a pernicious window to vncleanesse, and fornication, and concludd, they had rather giue vp their benefices then forsake their lawful wiues against the word of Christ. Likewise, the Priests of Germany were as stout against the Pope: but at last, this gréedinesse of Liuings, in weake Priests, made them to yéeld vp their godly libertie to wicked tyranny. He preached, in a great assembly, that the Emperour should die before Saint Peters day next, and should be so deiected, that he should not be able to gather together aboue sixe knights, and that if this prophesie were not fulfilled, they should plucke him from the Altar, and he would be no more Pope. And when he had gone about diuerse waies to murder the Emperour, and yet God preserued him beyond the appointed time, them subtily he turned his tale, and said, he ment of the soule of the King. About the time Hildebrand was made Pope, there was great warres betwixt O∣tho Duke of Saxony and the Emperour, which was a fit occasion for the Pope to worke his seats. First, he excommunicated all that receiued Spirituall liuings of Lay∣men, and all the giuers thereof, which he called symony, whereupon he sent Legats to the emperour, to appeare before him at the Councell of Lateran. The Emperour appea∣red not: whereupon hee threatned him excommunication, and to depriue him of his Crowne, If he would not renounce the heresie of Symony, which was, giuing of Spi∣tuall Liuings. Wherefore Centius, a Romaine Captaine, caught the Pope, and shut him vp into a Tower; the next day the citizens plucked downe the Tower, and deliue∣red the Pope, and cut off the noses of the men of Centius, but he escaped to the Empe∣rour. The emperour, being moued with this arrogancie, called a Councell at Wormes, where all the Bishops of Germany deposed Hildebrand. The Pope, in his Councell of Lateran, excommunicated and depriued as many as tooke the Emperours part, and excommunicated the emperour, depriued him of his empire, and all his subiects of their Oath of alleagiance. As soone as he rose out of his papal seat, to excommunicate the Em∣perour, the seat being but new, and of strong tymber, suddenly shiuered and rent vs pieces. The princes of Almany all concluded to forsake Henry, and choose another em∣perour, except he would submit himselfe, and obtaine the Popes pardon. The Emperour, with his wife and young sonne, all hauing forsaken him, laying apart his regall orna∣ments, in sharpe winter, came bare food to the gate of Canossus, where fasting from morning to night, humbly he desired to be absolued, and to come in and speake with the Pope, Thus he continued and could not be let in, in thrée daies: the fourth day, being brought to the Pope, he surrendred his Crowne and princely ornaments vnto him, desi∣ring he might be forgiuen, and he would neuer doe against him againe. He told him, he would not absolue him, but vpon condition he should doe such penance as hee should en∣ioyne him, and appeare at the Councell when he should send for him, and answere there all obiections laid against him▪ and stand to his pleasure whether hee should haue his Kingdome restored, or loose it; and should doe nothing as a King, vntill the cause were tryed: and, vpon his Oath, for performance hereof, he was absolued. For all this the Pope sent to France, for their consents, that Rodulphus should be Emperor. Then there was sent to Rodulphus bing Duke or Swia a crowne from the pope, with this verie, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho. Then he gaue in commaundement to the Archbishop of Ments, and of Cullen, to elect Rodulphus emperour, and annoint him King, and defend him with all their strength. Whilst this conspiracie was in hand, the Emperour was absent, and the Popes Ambassadors with him, and, vnknowne to him, Rodulphus was elected Emperour: the Bishop of Stasbrough  Henry the emperour thereof, who seeing the Saxons so bent against him, marched forward with his Souldiers to defend his right, but first sent to Rome, requiring the Pope to excom∣municate
Rodulphus. But he minding nothing lesse, sent word that he would not con∣demne any person without hearing the cause: so, vnder colour of Lawe, disappinted Henry; who being forsaken on euery side, with his men attempted battell with Ro∣dulphus: there was great slaughter on both sides, but no victory, so yet both chalnged the Empire. Then they both sent to Rome for the Popes determination, to whether of them the Empire appertained: the Pope willed them to breake vp their Amies, pro∣mising shortly to call a Councell, where this matter should be disputed; but before the messengers returned, they had another conflict, but no victory So both being wearied in warre, (the Romish beast being the cause therof) and the Pope perceiuing these warres would be to the great calamitie, not onely of Germany, but to other Nations, deuised another way to helpe Rodulphus; sent a Commission to the Archbishop of Treuers, and others, giuing them in charge to call a Councell to sit at Almany to determine he right, promising what they determined, he by the auhoritie of God omnipotent, and of Saint Peter and of Sant Paul would ratifie the same: but Henry the Emperour would not permit a Councell to be had in Germany, except they would first depriue Rodulphus. The Legat perceiuing that was against the Popes drift returned. The Pope hearing his purpose disappointed; drue another excommunication against Henry the Emperour, hereauing him of his Kingdome, sending them through all places, thinking thereby to further Rodulphus part, biginning his excommunication with these words Blessed Saint Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and thou Paul also, teacher of the Gentiles, giue eare vnto me a little, I beseech you, and gently heare me &c. I take this matter in hand that my brethren (whose saluation I seeke) may the more obey me, and knowe that I trust vpon your defence (next to Christ and his mother) and thereby resist the wicked, and am ready to helpe the faithfull. I entred this Seat against my will with teares, thinking my selfe vnworthy to occupy so high a Throne, I chose not you, but you chose me, and ayd this great burden vpon Our shoulders. Then reciting the whole matter of the Story before, concludeth therefore;  trusting in the Iudgement and mercie of God, and in the supportation of the blessed Uirgin, and bold vpon your authoritie (meaning S. Peter & S. Paul) do lay the sentence of Curse vpon Henry & his adherents. And againe. I take his regall Gouernment from him▪ discharging all Christian men of their Oathes to him, and forbidding them hereafter to obey him in any thing, but to take Rodulphus for their King, &c. Therefore▪ O blessed Princes of the Apostles, confirme this your au∣thoritie that all may know as you haue power to binde and loose in Heauen, you haue also power on earth, to giue and take away Empires, Kingdomes Principaities, and whatsoeuer belongeth to mortall men on earth. For if you haue power to Iudg of mat∣ters of God, how much more of prophane things; and if you can Iudge the Angels which rule proud Princes, how much more the princes. Let all Kings and princes, by this example, know your power, that they may feare to contemne the commaundement of the holy Church. Exercis quickly this Iudgement vpon Henry, that all may see him fall from his Kingdom, not by chance, but by your onely worke: notwithstanding, this I would craue of you, that he being brought to repentance, through your intercession, yet in the day of Iudgement may finde grace with the Lord. Pope Hildebrand further deposed the Archbishop of Rauenna for taking his part. commaunding all priests not to obey him, and sent another with full authoritie thither. Upon this Henry and Rodulphus tryed the matter with sword, with much bloud: whereas Henry, with Gods fauour against the Iudgement of Hildebrand, had the victory, Rodulphus greatly wounded, was carried to Herbipolis, where he comman∣ding the Bishops▪ and doers of this conspiracie to be brought to him, and lifting vp his right hand, which was deadly wounded said; This hand gaue the Oath to Henry my prince, and hath so often fought against him by your inigation but in vaine▪ goe and performe you Oath and alegiance to him your King, for I must go to my Fathers, and so dyed. Henry, after his enemy subdued, and warres ceased in Germany, remembring the iniuries of Hildebrand, by whom he was twise excommunicated, expulsed from his King∣dome, and making sute thrée daies in sharpe winter, and could finde no fauour, and by him his enemy was incited and ayded against him, assembled a Councell of 1083. Bi∣shops
at Brixienc, where hee purged himselfe, and accused Hildebrand of diuerse cimes: to be an vsurper, periured, a Nigromacer, a Sorcerer, a sower of discord; and that his Father had set in diuerse Popes in Rome by his assignement, without other e∣lection, and now this Bishop, contrary to his Oath, thrust in himselfe, without the will and knowledge of him, being their King and Magistrate. For in the time of Henry the third, his Father, this Hildebrand and others, had tooke a corporall Oath, that du∣ring the life of him, and this Henry his sonne, now king, they should no presume them∣selues norsuffer any other to aspire to the Papall Seat, without the approbation of the said Emperours. Wherefore, the aforesaid Councell, with one agréement, condemned this Gregory that he should be deposed. ¶The Sentence of the Councell of Brixia against Hildebrand. BEcause it in knowne this Bishop, not elected of God, but intruded himselfe by faud and money, subueted Ecclesiasticall order, disturbed the gouernment of the Em∣pire, nacing death of bodie and soule vnto our peaceable king, set vp a perured king, making discors amongst friends and brethren, Diuorcements amongst the ma∣ried: (for he tooke away the marriage of Priests, as Henricus Mutius witnesseth) ther∣fore we heere in the name of God congregated, doe procéede in Canonicall Iudgement against Hildebrand, a man most wicked, preaching Sacriledge and burning, maintai∣ning periurie, and murders, calling in question the Catholike Faith of the body and blod of Christ, following of Diuinations and dreames, a manifest Nigromancer, a Sorcerer, infected with a Pithnical spirit. We adiudge him to be deposed, and expelled, and vnlesse he depart vpon the hearing hereof, to be pepstually condemd. This being sent to Rome, they elected Guibertus Archbishop of Rauenna, which was deposed by Hilde∣brand as aforesaid, in his place, and named him Clement the 3. And because Hilde∣brand would not giue ouer his hold, the Emperour with an Army came to Rome to de∣pose him: and Hildebrand sending to the Countesse Mathilda, before mentioned, requi∣red her, in remission of all her sinnes, to withstand the Emperour, and so she did; but the Emperour besieged the Citie all the Lent, and after Easter got it, and comming into the Temple of Saint Peter, placed Clement in his Papacie Hildebrand ed into Adans Tower, where being besieged, he sent for Robert Guischardus a Normaine, who with his Army, when the Emperour was gone, burst in at one of the gates of the Cy, spoyled it, and deliuered Hildebrand, and caried him to Campania, where not long after he dyed in exile. In the meane time, whilst the Emperour was at Rome, the Abbot of Cluniake, and the people of Rome, exhorted Hildebrand to Crowne Henry Emperour at Lateran, and they would ause the Emprour to depart with his Arm to whom he answered, he would, so the Emperour would submit himselfe, aske pardon, amend, and promise obedience. The Emperour not agréeing to the conditions, departed, and tooke the new Pope with him. The Emperour was wont to pray in the Temple of Saint Mary, Hildebrand knowing by spies the place where he was wont to pray hi∣red one to cary vp stones to the roofe of the Church, to let them fall vpon his head when he was at prayers; the hireling, aying his stones in order, fell downe and was slaine. The Romaines vnderstanding the truth, drew him thrée dayes, by the legs, through the streets for example; but the Emperour, of his méekenesse commaunded him to b bu∣ried. Hildebrand, being a dying, bewailed his faults, and sent a Cardinall to the Em∣perour to desire him forgiuenesse, and to pardon the Emperour and all his parakers, quicke and dead, of the danger of excommunication. From this Pope sprang all mis∣chéefe, pride, pompe, and tyranny, which since raigned in his successors; hence was the subiection of Temporall Regiment to the Spirituall, and the suppression of Priests mariages: héere came in the authoritie of both Swords to the Spiritualty, so that the Magistrates could doe nothing in giuing of Bishoprickes, benefices; in calling of Coun∣ceis, in correcting the excesses of the Clergie, but the Pope must doe all. Nor no Bi∣shop, nor Passor, in his owne Parish, could excommunicate, or vse any  dis∣cipline, against his flocke, but it was onely the Popes Prerogatiue. In him was the first example of persecuting Empeours and kings with rebellion and excommunication;
then Victor the third was made Pope, who likewise shewed himselfe staut against the Emperours;1087. but God gaue the shrewde cowe short hornes: some say hee was poysoned in his Chalice, and raigned but one yeare and a halfe. Notwithstan∣ding the Popes followed still the steps of Hildebrand, as the Kings of Israell Ieroboam: in the time of this Victor began the Order of Monkes of the Char∣terhouse. Next him Vbanus the 2. was Pope, which confirmed the Acts of Hildebrand, and gaue new Decrees against Henry the Emperour, and against Clement the Pope, hee held two Councels, one at Plactia, the other called Synodus Claromontana, wherein he caused all Christian Princes o warre against the Sacens,1094. for recoue∣ring Ierusalem: whereupon 30000. were appointed for the same businesse, by the said Vrbanus. The King of Galacia, with the whole Dices of Saint Iames, was excommunicated for the prisoning of a certaine Bishop. About this time the King of England fauoured not much the Sea of Rome, for their pride and exactions, and would not suffer his subiects to giue to Rome, saying; The followed not Petrs steps that hnted for rewards,1908. nor had Peters power, which had not his holinesse. The order of Cisterins was first estblished in Burgundia, by the same Vrbanus the seauen Canonical houres were first instituted in the Church▪ By him, the order of the Cartusan Mnkes was confirmed. Hee Decreed no Bishop to be made, but vnder the name of some place, he Decreed that Maens and houres of the ay should euery day be said, and that the Masse of our Lady should bee said euery Saturday, and the Cler∣gy that had wiues, should be depriued of their Order, and that it was lawfull for sub∣iects to breake the Oath of Alegiance with such Princes as were excommunicated, and that it was not lawfull for a man and his wife, both together▪ to Christen a childe, with many moe matters. After him followed Pascalis the 2.1100. he putting on a purple Uesture and a tyre on his head, was brought vpon a white Palfrey, into Lateran, where a Scepter was giuen him, and a girdle about him, which hauing seauen Keyes, with seauen Seales, to to∣ken the seauen powers by the seauen graces of the holy Ghost of binding, loosing, shut∣ting openning, sealing, resigning and Iudging, which the Emperour Henry the 4. hearing of, thought to come to Italy to salute the new Pope, but vnderstanding the Popes minde against him, changed his purpose. This Pascalis dposed all such Abbos, and Bishops, as the Emperour had set vp; and banished many that stri∣ued, at that time, for the Papacie, and made an Armie against Clement, whom the Emperour made Pope, as aforesaid, and being put to flight, not long after dd. A∣bout the same time, the Bishop of Fluence began to teach and Preach of Antichrist then to bée borne, as Sabelius . Pascalis put to silence the said Bishoppe, and condemned his Bokes, by a Councell, which hée assembled at Treas. Ma∣ried Priests, in this Councell, were condemned for Nicholaitans. All Lay-men, that gaue Spirituall Dignities, were condemned of Symony. The Statue of Priests Tythes was renewed, counting the selling thereof sinne against the holy Ghost. Hée renewed the excommunication of Hildebrand against Henry the Empe∣rour, caused ceraine Bishoppes to depriue him of his Crowne, and to place his sonn Henry the 5. in his Fathers roome; these Bishops required of the Emperour his Di∣ademe▪ Pple, ing, and other ornaments of his Crowne: when the Emperour would know the reason, they aleadged, the Popes pleasure, and for selling Spirituall Liuings: but these Bishops being demaunded of him, could not deny but hee tooke no∣thing of them, they being preferred by him: well, said hée, you requie mée well, and admonishing them of their Oath and alegiance, as hee sate in his Throne, they plcke away all his Cuperiall Ornaments. The good Emperour, being destitute, said, Videat Deus & Iudicat. Thus leauing him, they confirmed the Kingdome to his Sonne, and caused him to driue his Father out, who with nine persons, did y to the Dukedome of Liburg, the Duke bearing of it, made after him, the Emperour ha∣uing before put him from his Kingdome, being afraid of death, craed pardon of him,
and not reuengement, the Duke pittying his estate, remitted his displeasure, and receiued him to his Castle, and collecting men of Warre, brought him to Colin. His Sonne hearing thereof, besieged the City, but hee escaped by night to Leo∣dium, thither all they that had compassion and consiant hearts resorted to him, so hee was able to pitch a Field against his enemies, and so did, hee desired his friendes, if they that had the victory, they would spare his sonne, in that sight the Fa∣ther had the victory, and the Sonne was chased, but in another battell the Sonne had the victory, and the Father was taken, who being vtterly dispossessed, was faine to craue of the Bishop of Spire, whom he had done much for, to haue a Prbendry in the Church,1103. to serue in our Ladies quire, who swore by our Lady hee should haue none. Thus hee came to Leodium, and there, for sorro  dyed, after he had raigned 50. eares. Pope Pascalis caused his body to be taken our of the graue, and to remaine at Spites fiue yeares without buriall. About this time Anselmus Bishop of Canterbury, which brought in the Concep∣tion of our ady to bee halwed; accused King Henry the first of England, to Pas∣cals for making certaine Bishops by his owne election; the Kings Proctor, in his behalfe, signifd to the people, that the King, for the value of his Kingdome, would not forgoe his right, in setting in Bishop▪ and Prlates. The Pope answe∣red. Before od, I for the price of my head, will not permit it vnto him. The Arch∣bishop returning home, being the Popes Legate, was turned out of his Bishopricke, and goods. Henry the 5. Emperour, after his fathers death, raigned twentie yeares, being at Rome,1107. could not be crowned, except he would relinquish his clayme of making Popes, or any other Bishops: there was such a stirre made by the Pope, that if the Emperour had not defended himselfe with his owne handes, hée had béene slaine. But the Emperour hauing the victory, tooke Pope Pascalis, led him out of the city, made him agree to crwne him, and to allow him his prerogatiue of election of Popes, and other Bishops; and being crowned, returned with the Pope to Rome. But as soone as the Emperour returned to Germany, the Pope called a Synoe, euoking his agrée∣ment, and excmmunicated the Emperour, as he had done his Father. The Empe∣rour a it, marched to Rome, and put the Pope to flight, and placed another in his . The Germaine Bishops, with all they might, stirred the Saxons against ther Caesar, it grwe at length to a pitched Field. The Emperour, seeing no end of his conflicts,1115. was faine to forgoe his priuledge of the Popes election, and other things be∣longing to the Church, and Churchmen. In the time of Pascalis, lied Barnardus, of whom sprung the Barnardine Monkes. The Emperour had no issue, his wife was Mathildas, daughter of King Henry the fist of England, which was Gods iust Iudgement for deposing his Father. Pas∣calis being dead, Pope Gelasius was chosen by the Cardinals, without the Empe∣rour; and the Emperour made another Pope,1118. Gregorius the 8. which made Pope Ge∣lasius into France, and there dyed. The Cardinales choose Calixus the 2. Pope, without the Emperour; who before hee came to his Seat in Rme, sent his Legate to excommunicate the Emperour, and droue Gregorius, the Emperours Pope, out of Rome. The Emperour fearing the vaine thunderbolts of the Popes curse, perswadd by his Princes and fiends, resigned his yle, pertaining to the of the Pope, and the inuestiture of Bishops. This being set vy in writing, in the Church of Lateran, in tryumph of the Emperour thus subued. Then the Pope made out, and tooke his fellow Pope Gregorius, set him on a Camell, his face back∣ward, holding the tayle for a bridle, brought him throgh the streetes of Rome, and sho him, and thrust him into a Monastery. ée established the Decrée of the Pa∣pall Sea against the Emperour, and brought in the foure Ember-fasts, called em∣ber aies. He ordained the order of Monkes, called Praemonstratenses. It was by him to be iudged adultery for any person to put away his Liuing or Bisho∣prick uring his life, according to Saint Paul; The wife is bound vnto the husband as long as he liueth.
By a generall Councell at Rhemes, he decréed, all Clergy men should put away their wiues,1119. or be depriued of their Liuings, wherupon an English writer made these verse: O bone Calixte, nunc omnis clerus odit te. Quondam presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti, Hoc destruisti, post quam tu Papa fuisti. Pope Honorius the . succeeded him, he sent one Iohn Cremensis Cardinall, Legat into England,12. and Scotland, in colour of redresse, but to fsill his purse, as all other did after him in those dayes; afte he had well refreshed himselfe in Bishops and Abbots houses, he assembled the whole Clergy, inquired of Priests wiues, and made a Statute they should haue no women in their houses, vnlesse ih kindred as were not to be us∣pcted, and the offendr of this Act, to forfaite all his Spirituall promotion, and that no kindred should mary vntill the seauenth generation; and rfling within houres at night, was taken in the same vice he was so strict against, to no little shame of the Clergie. At this time the Emperour Henry the 5. dyed without issue,1127. the Emperiall crowne came to Lotharius Duke of Saxon. Not long after deceased Henry the first, King of England. In this Honorius his time, came a Priest to Rome, called Arnulphus, who preached vehemently against the pride, auarice, and incontinencie of the Clergie, and exhorted them to follow Christ. He was well respected of the Citizens, but the Cardinals and Clergy hated him, and made him away in the night by drowing him. Sabelicus and Platina say, they hanged him. His Martyrdom (he said) was reuealed to him by an Angel in the Desert, and said vnto them. I know you will kill me priuily, and no maruell; for if Saint Peter were héere, and rebuked your vices that exceed, you would serue him so, and said with a loud voice; I am not afraid to suffer for the truth, but God will be reuenged, you play the blinde guides, and leade the people to Hell. In the second Booke of Councels, printed at Colen, either this Arnulphus or about his time, one complaineth of the number of Holly daies, and the increase of vice thereby▪ whoores, say they, vantage more in one Holy day, then in fiftie other dayes: and of the curious singing in Cathedrall Churches, wherein much time is spent that might better be betowed in other Sciences, and learning. And of the multitude of begging Fryers, and other professed men and women, the cause of Idlenesse, and vncomely life; of promotion of euill Prelates, and their negligence in reprouing vice. Of the wantonnesse of their seruants, and their excesse in apparell: Of the excessiue gaines of the prelates and their officers for their Seales: giuing them, they care not for what, so they get money. That Prelates bée too slacke in looking to non residents. Of gi∣uing benifices, not for godlinesse and learning, but for fauour, friendship, or hope of gaine, of which commeth the great ignorance in the Church. How Prelates wast the Church goods in superfluitie on kinsfolkes, or worse wayes, and not on the poore. How, by negligence, the Bookes of the olde Concels, and o the new, are not to be found, which should be kept in all Cathedral Churches. The negligence of Pre∣ates, and their voluptuousnesse, by example of Storks, whose nature is, if one leau his mate, and ioyne with another, all the rest fly on him, and plucke his feathers off: so, and much more, should prelates de to their fellowes, that defile so many▪ and stinke in the whole Church. And as Edras, in purging Israel from strange women, began with the priests, so now the purgation ought to begin with them, as it is written in Ezechill: Begin with my Sarctuary. &c. Againe, if the whole Realme of France was interdicted, because Phillip the King, had but one Concubine, which was not his lawfull wife. And the King of Portugall, sequestred from his Dominion, and thought by the Clergie insufficient to rule. What shall be said to prelates which abuse mens Wiues, Uirgings, Nunnes, and are insufficient to take charge of Soules. About this tie the Order of the Knights of the Rhodes, called Iohannits, and the Order of the Telers rose vp. After Honorius succéeded Pope Innocentius the 2. At euery mutation of new Popes,1130, came new troubles, sometime two Popes, sometimes thrée together. The Romaines e∣lected another Pope, called Anacletus, betwixt whom was great conflicts. The Duke of
Sicile taking with Anacletus, vntill Lotharius the Emperour droue Anacletus of Italy. This Pope decréed that whose strucke a shauen Priest, should be excommunicated, and not absolued but onely by the Pope. Steuen king of England,1133. reserued to himselfe the authoritie of bestowing Spirituall liuings, and of inuesting Prelates. At which time Lodouicus the Emperoue would haue done the like, had not Bernar∣dus giue in him contrary councell. At this time came in the manner of cursing with Booke,1144. Bell, and Candle, in a Coun∣cell of London, holden by William Bishop of Winchester, vnder Pope Celestinus, suc∣cessor of Innocentius. After Lotharius succeeded in the Emperiall Crowne, Conradus Nephew of Henry the fift, he raigned 15. yeares. There was diuerse Popes in his dayes, as Celestinus the 2. Lucius the 2. Egenius the 3. at which times the Romaines endeauored to recouer the old manner of chusing Conuls, and Senators; but the Popes, being in their ruffe, would not abide it▪ which caused much ciuill warre; insomuch that Pope Lucius sent the Emperour for ayde, who thought to haue destoyed them in the Senate: but they were ware o it, and were all in aray, the Pope being in the fight was well pelted with stones and blowes, that he liued not long after. Eugenius cursed the Romaines for that matter with excommunication,1145. which when he saw would not serue, came vpon them with his Host, and compelled them to abo∣lish their Consuls▪ and to take such presidents as the Pope should assigne. Then followed Anastatius the 4. after him Adrianus the 4. an English man,1154. called Breakespeare, belonging once to Saint Albons, he likewise kept great slure with the Citizens of Rome, to abolish Consuls, with cursing and warres vntill he had brought them vnder. In the meane time Fredericus, called Barbarossa, succeeded Conradus in the Empire, marched to Italy to subdue rebels; the Pope and his Clergie met him to haue ayde a∣gainst their enemies, the Emperour lighted to receiue him, and held his left stirrop where he should the right, the Pope displeased, he smiling, excused himselfe as not vsed to hold stirrops, and that it was not of duetie: the next day the emperour sent for him, receiued him, and held his right stirrop, and all was well. When they came in the Pope told the Emperour that his predecessors left some token of beneuolence for crow∣ning of them; as Carolus Magnus subdued the Lumbards, Otho the Bexingarians, Lotharius the Normans; therefore required him to restore the Country of Aplia to the Church of Rome. He and his Princes seeing he could not otherwaies e crowned, promised to doe it, and the next day was crowned. Whilst the Emperour was proui∣ding for Apulia, the Pope excommunicated William Duke thereof, and sent Ema∣nuell Emperour of Constantinople, incensing him to warre against the said Duke. Th Duke hearing it, sent vnto the Pope for peace, promising to restore what hee would, which the Pope, by the Councell of the Cardinals, would not grant. The Duke put Emanuell the Emperour to flight, and besieged the Ctie Beneentum, where the Pope and Cardinals were looking for victory, that they were glad to intreat for the peace they refused, the Duke onely granted not to inuade the possessions of Rome, and the Ppe made him King of both Sicils. The Pope was so troubled with the Senators and Consuls of Rome, that when his curses would not auaile, he was faine to remoue from Rome to Ariminium. The Emperour, considering the wrongs the Pope had done to his predecessors re∣quired of the Bishops of Germany Homage and Oath of alegiance, commaunding if the Popes Legats came thither without sending for, they should not be receiued, char∣ging his subiects not to appeale to Rome, and prefixed his name in his Letters before the Popes name. Whereupon the Pope wrote to him, that God promiseth long life to thm that ho∣noured their Parents, and death to them that cursed them: and the word of truth saith▪ He that exaleth himselfe shall be brought lowe. He maruelled not a little that he shew∣ed not the reuerence he ought to blessed Saint Peter▪ and the holy Church of Rome
preferre your name before Ours, wherein your incurre the note of insolencie, or rather arrogancie. How kéepe you the Oath of fidelitie to Saint Peter and vs, séeing you re∣quire Homage and Alegiance of them that be Gods, and all the sonnes of the high God, and presume to ioyne their holy hands with yours; and exclude from your Churches and Cities our Cardinals, Legates from our side; amend, amend: hile you go a∣bout to obtaine the things you haue not, I feare mée, your Honour will loose the things which you haue. The Emperour wrote againe, that Iustice giueth to euery one his, Wée derogate not from our parents, as We haue receiued our Emperiall Crowne of them, we render their due and ue Honour to them againe: and forasmuch as duety of all sorts of men is to be sought out, did not Constantine restore Peace to the Church, and of his liberall be∣nigity, & other Princes, gaue whatsoeuer Regality or Patrimony the Sea of your Pa∣pacie hath, as is to be found in the Chronicles? Of them that be Gods by adoption, and hold Lordships, why may not wée require Homage and sworne Alegiance, when he that is you master and ours paid oule and tribute for himselfe and Saint Peter to Caesar, giuing you example to doe the like, and therefore saith, Learne of mee, for I am humble and meeke. herefore▪ either render our Lordships, or if they b too sweete to you, giue God his due, and Caesa his due. We shut out the Cardinals because we see them no preachers but prowlers, not repayrers of peace, bat rakers for money; not Pillars, bt pollers of Church.. When we see them such as the Church requireth them to be, then they shall find vs ready to receiue them with stipends and all necessaries. By your inferring such questions, not conducing to Religion▪ you incurre no little blemish of your humility, which is keeper of all vertues; let your Fatherhood beware, least in mouing such questions, as seeme vnseemly for you to doe, you giue on offence to such as pend on your word, and giue eare to your mouth as an euening shoure. We cannot  fell you of that we heare, seeing now the detestable beast of pride doth crepe into th Seat of Peter, prouiding alwaies as much as we may for the peace of the Church. Upon this, the Pope sent a Bull against the Empour, excommunicating him conspi∣red with the Duke of Apulia, and sought all waies to ifest him, and set all men against him, especially the Clergie. The Pope wrote to the Bishops of Germany, that the Empire of Rome was trans∣lated from the Greekes to the Almaines, so that the King of Almaine could not be cal∣led Emperour▪ before he were crowned by the Pope. Before his consecration he was a King, after an Emperour: he hath the name of King by the Princes election, the name of Emperour, Augustus, and Caesar, by our consecration, ergo, by vs he raigneth Em∣perour. Pope Zacharias promoted Carolus to the name of Emperour, after that▪ all the Kings of Almaine were called Emperours,. and Aduocates to the Sea Apostolike. So that Apuia, conquered by him, was subiect to the Pope; which Apuli, with the citi of Rom, is ours, and not the Emperours. Our seat is at Rome, the Emperours at Aquis n Ardenna, which is a wood in France. Whatsoeuer the Emperour hath, he hath of vs: wee may translate it to the Grees againe, as Zacharias did to the Almaines, it lyeth in our power to giue it whom we will being set vp of God aboue gentiles and Naions, to destroy, plucke vp, build and plant. When this Emperour Predericus came first to Rome, the Pope shewed him a picture of Lotharius the second Emperour, with verses, shewing how he first sware to the citie, after was made the Popes man, and so receiued the Crowne of him. Fredericus dired that the picture might be abolishd, least hereafter it cause discention. The Pope seeing the emperour loth to be subiect to his Sea, deuised all craftie waies to bring him vnder. First, taking occasion by the imprisonment of the Bishop of Laodi∣cia, sent vnto him diuerse sharpe Letters, and not so sharpe as prou and disdainefull, wherein the salutation was, Salutat vos beatissimus pater noster Papa, & vniuersitas Cardinalium, ille vt pater, hii vt fratres, meaning he should vnderstand himselfe to be subiect to the Pope, no lesse then the Cardinals; where reciting, what many and great benefits, and fulnesse of Honour, he had receiued of him. The emperor with his princes, perceiuing whereat the Pope, by his Legats, shot, could not ree such a proud Message, so that much contention fell betwixt the Legat and princes, of whom then, said the
Legats doth Caesar receiue his Empery, if not of the Pope? With which woords the princes were so offended, that they would haue ved violence, if the Emperour had not stayed them, and commaunded the Legats away straight, charging them not to turne by the way to any person, but straight to depart home. And to certifie the whole Empire of the matter, he directed Letters to this effect. First, he greatly sorroweth that the roote and foundation of dissentions, and euill, should rise from the holy Church, imprinted with the Seale of loue and peare of Christ, where with wee feare (except God preuent it) the whole body of the Church will be polluted, and the vnitie broken betweene the Spiritu∣all and Temporall Regiment. Then he sheweth them the manner of the proud Legacie as aforesaid, and touching his straight sending them home, without tarying, or going out of the way, was, because there was Letters found about them to the Churches of Germany, to spoyle the Altars of our Churches, to cary away the Iewels thereof, to fley the lymes and plats of the golded crosses thereof, &c. This Letters of Caesar fretted the Pope, who wrote againe to the Bishops of Germa∣ny, accusing the Emperour, willing them to worke against him what they could. They answered him againe with all obedience, yet excusing the Emperour, and blaming him rather, exhoring him hencefoorth to temper his Letter and Legacies with more mo∣destie, which councell he followed, seeing he could preuaile no other way. In his time liued Gracianus, compiler of the Popes decrées. Petrus Lumbardus, Petus Comester, Auicenna, Abbas Ioachimus,1159. and the order of Hermits rose by William Duke of Aquitania, and afterward a Fryer. This Hadrianus walking with his Cardinals to a place called Auignon, was choked with a Fly▪ getting into his thrat, when he had raigned 4. yeares and odde monethes, He would say in his latter time, there is no more miserable life then to be a Pope, and come to it by bloud, which is not to succéed Peter, but Romulus, who to raigne alone, slewe his brother. Though he was bad, his successor was worse, Pope Alexander the 3. The Emperour, with nine Cardinals, set vp another Pope, Victor the 4. betwixt whom there was great and long discord. The Emperour being required therefo, sent for them both to heare their cause, and Iudge the matter. Victor came, but Alexander isdainfully refused to appeare. Where∣upon the Emperour, with full consent of his Bishops and Clergíe about him, ratified the  lection of Victor, and so brought him into the Citie to be receiued and placed. Alex∣ander flying into france, accursed them bath, as maan to be cast out of all Christian sending Letters there of into all Christiandome; and with money and flattery, not the greatest part of the Citie to sauour him, and to set vy such Consuls for his purpose: returned from France to Rome, and was receiued with much sauour, through the helpe of Phillip the french king. The Emperour hearing thereof, came with great power to Italy, where he destroyed great cities, and came to Rome, required the Citi∣zens that the cause betwixt the  Popes might be decided, and hee that had the best∣right▪ to be taken for Pope, and then he would restore to them that which he had taken. Alexander, doubting his part, and the wils of the Citizens, hauing ships prepared, fet∣hed a course about to Uenis. The Emperour required the Uenetians to send him, but they would not: wherefore Fredericus sent thither his Sonn Otho, with men and ships well appointed, charging him to attempt nothing before his comming: notwith∣standing he ioyned with the Uenetians in battell, and was ouercome, taken, and brought into the Citie. The farther to redeeme his Sonne, was compelled to submit himselfe to the hope and intreat peace. To the Emperour comming to Uenis at S. Markes Church, where the Pope was, there to take his absolution, was hid to knéels downe at the popes féete, the proud Pope set his foote vpon the Emperours neck, and said. Super aspidem & basilicum ambulabis, & concultabis leonem et Draconem. e ani∣red; Non tibi, sed Petro. The Pope againe. Et mihi, & Petro. The Emperour fearing more quarreling, held his peace, and peace was made betwixt them. First, that hée should receiue Alexander for true Pope; then, that he should restore to the Church of Rome all that he tooke from it, thus he obtained his sonne. Alexander was Pope 1. yeares, he kept sondry Councels at urd and Latran,
whre he confirmed the proceedings of Hildebrand, and other his predecessors. In this time spung vp the Doctrine of the Waldenses,Waldenses. which was of one Waldus a chiefe Senator of Lion in France. The aforesaid Gratianus,1140. master of Decrees, and Petrus Lumbardus, at this time did much maintaine proud Prelacie; after whom followed two, as euill or worse▪ Fran∣ciscus and Dominicus, maintaining as much blinde hypocrisie. I pleased God to raise vp the Waldenses against their Doctrine of Pride and hypocrisie. Thus we neuer see a∣ny great corrupin in the Churc, but sme sparke of the true ligh of the Gospell by Gods prouidence, doth remaine, howsoeuer their aduersari  them, yet by the Iudiciall aying their Articles, thou shalt finde that they maintained nothing else, but the same doctrine whh we now defend; yet I suppose the Papist did gather thm, and wrest them otherwie then they were ment, as they did them of Wiclife and Hs. It chanced that certaine of the chiefe of the citie of Lions went a walking, with the aforesaid Waldus, of whome came the Waldenses was one, one of them fll downe sud∣dainly dead, the sight whereof smoe this Waldus with a eepe and inward repentance, with a carefull study to reforme his life. First▪ he began to giue large almes to the nee∣dy. Secondly, to instruct his family and himselfe, with the knowledge of Gods word. Thirdly, to exhort all that resorted to him to repntance and vruous life, by his almes, and diligent teaching, more resorted to him dayly, to whom he gaue certaine rudiments of the Scripture. The Bishops and Prelates seeing him so meddle with Scripture, and to haue such a resort about him, though it were but in his owne house, moued with great malice against him, threatned to excommunicate him, if he did not leaue so to doe. He neglec∣ting the threatnings of the wicked, said; God must be obeyed more then man, and was the more diligent to set forth the Doctrine of Christ against the errours of Antichrist. When they saw their excommunication dispised, they ceased not with prison, with sword, and banishment to prosecute, till they had driuen the said Waldus and all his fauourers out of the city. Here followeth their Articles they held. 1 That the holy Scripture is to be beleeued, in matters pertaining to saluation, and no man besides. 2 All things, contained in holy Scripture, necessary to saluation, and nothing to bee admitted in Religion, but what onely is commaunded in the word of God. 3 To be but one onely Mediator, other saints to be made in no wise Mediators, to be inuocated. 4 That there is no Purgatory, but all men either by Christ are Iustified, or without Christ, condemned; besides these two neither thre nor foure places. 5 That all Masses, sunge for the deads, are wicked and to be abrogated. 6 All mens traditions to be reiected, at least, not to be reputed necessary to salua∣tion: therefore singing, and superflueus chaunting in the Chaunell to be left▪ constrai∣ied and prefixed aste bound to dayes and times, differences of meats, varieties of egres and orders of Priests, Fryers, Monkes, Nunnes, superluous holy dayes so many bene dictions, and hallowing of creatures, vowes, Pilgrimages, with all the rable∣ment of Ceremonies brought in by men to be abolished. 7 The supremacie of the Pope, vsurping aboue all Churches, and especially a∣boue all pollitiue Realmes and Gouernments: or for him to occupie and vsurpe the Iurisdiction of both swords to be denyed, neither that any other degree is to be receiued in the Church, but only Priests▪ Deacons, and Bishops. 8 The Communion of both kinds to be necessary to all people, according to the in∣stitution of Christ. 9 I m the Church of Rome to be the very Babilon spoken of in the Reuelation, and the Pope to be the fountaine of all error, and the very Antichrist. 10 They reiect the Popes pardons and indulgences. 11 The mariage of Prists and ecclesiasticall persons to be Godly and necessary in the Church. 12 Such as heare the word of God, and haue a good Faith, to bee he right
Church of Christ, and to this Church the Keys of the Church to be giuen, to driue a∣way wolues, and to institute true Pastors to preach the word, and institute the Sacra∣ments, these were their principall Articles. Being exiled, they dispersed in diuerse places of whom many remained long after in Bohemia. Eeas Syluius in the Bohemian Histories, writeth that these Articles they held. The Bishop of Rome to be equall with other Bishops, no difference of degrées a∣mongst Priests, no Priest to bee reputed for the dignitie of his Order, but for the worthynesse of his life. No Purgatory, as before, in vaine to pray for the dead, a thing onely ound out for the luee of Priests. The Image of God (as of the Trinitie) and of Saints to be abo∣lished. The hallowing of ater, and palmes, a ridice. The religious of begging Friers to be found out by the Diuell, That Priests shol not incroh riches, but bee content with their Tythes, and mens deuotions. The preaching of the Word to be frée to all men, called thereunto. No deadly sinne to be tollerated, for what respect soeuer of greater commodity to en∣sue thereby. Confirmation of Bishops, with oyle, and extreame vtion, none o the Sacraments. Auriculr confession, but a toy. Baptisme to bee ministred onely with pure water, without mixture of holy oyle. The Maiestie of God not to bee restrained more within Temples, Monastries or Chappels, then any where els. Priests apparell, ornaments of Altars, Uestments, Corporaces Chalices, patenes, and other Church-plate, to serue in no steed. It maketh no matter in what place the Priest consecrateth the Sacrament, and that it is sufficient to vse only the Sacramental words, without other superstitious ceremonies. Prayers to Saints vaine, they not able to helpe. In saying, and singing the houres and Mattens of the day, the time lost. A man ought to cease from his labour, no day but Sunday. The Feasts of Saints to be reiected▪ coacted feasts haue no merite. The truth o these Articles be the lesse to be doubted, being set out by a Popes pen. They being accused slaunderously by one Doctor Augustine, vnto the Bohemian King, gaue vp their confession, with an Apology of their Faith. They held Thomas Aquinas author of Purgatory. Concerning the Supper of the Lord, their Faith was, it was to be eaten, and not to be shewed, and worshipped. That it was for a memorial and not for a Sacrifice, to serue for the present, not to be reserued; to be receiued at the table, not to be caried out of doores, according to the vse of the primi∣tiue Church, when they vsed to communicate sitting: this they proued by Cronicles, and by Origen vpon the third of Moses. Doctor Austin asked them, whether it were not the same Christ in the Sacrament which is in heauen, else how can it be said, there is but one Faith, and one Christ; then, why he should not bee worshipped in the Sacra∣ment as well as in Heauen. They answered to this effect; that the same Christ that is in Heauen is in the Sacrament, but after diuerse manners, in Heauen he is corporally, locally, with the full proportion and quantitie of the same body wherewith hee ascended, and to be séene in the Sacrament, he is but sacramentally to be remembred, not to bee séene; our bodies receiue the signe, our spirit the thing signified. They asked him againe, whether Christ was not aswell in them that receiue the Sacrament, as in the Sacrament before it was receiued, and why it should not be wor∣shipped as well in the brest of the receiuer, as before it is receiued, seeing e is in a more perfect manner in an then in the Sacrament, in it he is but for a time, not for the sa∣crament ske, but fr mans sake. In man he is for his owne sake, not for a time but for euer, as it is written, Qu manducat hunc panem, viuat in aeternum. Then they asked whether he was there wholly God and man, which if hee grant it, it is contrary to Nature and Faith, that any creature should be changed into the Cre∣ator. If he say, it is changed into his body and soule, and not into the Godhead, then he separates the natures of Christ, if hee say into the body alone, and not the soule, then hée separateth the Natures of the true manhoode, and so cannot be the same Christ that was betrayed for vs, so to what part soeuer he should answere he could not defend transubstantiation without great inconuenice of all sides.
It appeareth in a certaine Libell of Inquisition that vpon their knes with great reuerence they vsed to pray, euery morning, and euery euening, and that they vsed to say grace before meate and after: and after meate to edifie one another with some instruction. They were so diligent and painefull in teaching that Reynerius an old Inquisitor against them writeth, that one of them to bring another vnto the faith, in the night, and in winter swamme ouer the Riuer Ibis to come to him, to teach him, and they were so perfect in the Scripture, that he heard an vnlettered man that could say the booke of Iob word by word without booke, with others which had the New Te∣stament perfectly by hart. Hee writeth moreouer, that none durst stop them for the number of their fauou∣rers: saying, I haue often béen at their examination, and there were numbred forty Churches of their opinions, in smuch that in one parish of Cammah were ten o∣pen schooles of them, and when he had spoken what he could against them, he is dri∣uen to confesse that they both liue iustly before men, and beléeue all things wel of God, and hold all the Articles contained in the Creede; onely they blaspheme the Church of Rome and hate it. Touching ther persecution, which commonly followeth true preaching, they being scattered from Lions, that the sound of their doctrine might gee abroad n the world; some went as it is said into Bohemia, many into other prouinces of France; some into Lombardy and other places, but these could not be suffered to liue at rest, as may appeare by the consultations made by the Lawyers & Bishops of France against them, writ aboue three hundred yeares agone, remaining yet in writing▪ whereby it appeareth there were a great many in France. Besides there was a Counsell kept in Tolse about 355. yeares agone▪ and all against these Waldenses, they also were condemned in another Counsell at Rome before that. What persecutions they had in France by three Archbishops, appeareth by their writings: who is such a stranger, that knoweth not the condemnation of the Wal∣denses, done so many yeeres agone, so famous, so publique, followed vpon with so great labour, expences and trauell; and sealed with so many of their deaths; so solemnely being condemned, and openly punished, wher by we may know persecu∣tion to be no new thing in the church of Christ, when Antichrist three hundred yéeres agone did rage against the Waldenses. But there was neuer more trouble then was against them of late, in the yeare 545. in France by the French King, which followeth in this booke, when we come to the yeare wherein it was done, where it shall be set forth more at large. In which persecution is declared, that in one towne Cabria by Miuerias were slayne eight hundred persons at once, not respecting women, children, nor any age: and forty wo∣men, most of them great with child, were thrust into a Barne, the windowes kept with pikes were fired and consumed: besides in a Caue not farre from Mussin, were fiue and twenty persons fired and destroyed the same time; the same tyrant at Me∣rindolum, seeing all the rest were fled away, finding one yong man, caused him to be tyed to an Oliue tree, and destroyed with torments most cruel: the foresaid Rey∣nerius speaketh of a Glouer, one of them in the towne of Cheron, that in his time was brought to execution. There is an old Monument of processes, wherein appeareth 443. brought to exa∣mination in Pomarina, Marchia, and places there abut, in the yeere 1391. thus much of the original doctrine, and lamentable persecutions of the Waldenses, who as it is said began about the time of Pope Alexander. Now for as much as Thomas BecketThomas Becket. happened in this Popes time, let vs somewhat story of him.
THE HISTORY OF THOMAS BECKET Arch-bishop of Canterbury. KIng Henry the second K. of England conuenting his Nobles & Clarks required to haue punishment of certain misorders of the clergy, but the Archbishop Tho∣mas Becket would not agrée therevnto: the King came to this point to know whe∣ther he & the rest of the Clergy would consent to the customes set forth in Henry the fift his time, he with the rest of the Bishops, vpon consultation held, they would con∣sent with this exception, Saluo ordine suo, so all other Bishops being particularly de∣manded, except Christopher, who séeing the King angry, said, for Saluo ordine suo, he would bona fide, the King told them hee was not well content with that exception which was captious and deceitfull, hauing some venome lurking vnder, therefore required an absolute grant: they answered, they would not binde themselues in no other manner, at which the King and all the Nobilitie were not a little mooued: the King, when he could get no other answer, departed with gret anger, not saluting the Bishops: Chester was greatly rebuked of his fellowes for changing the exception; the next day the King took from the Archbishop all such Mannors and Honors as he had giuen him before being Lord Chancellor; not long after vnknowne to the Bi∣shops he sayled into Normandie; not long after the Bishop of London followed af∣ter him to craue his fauour, and gaue him counsell to ioyne some of the Bishops with him, least if all were against him, hee might the sooner be ouerthrowne: thus by his meanes the greatest number of the Bishops were reconciled vnto the King, onely the Archbishop with a few other remained in their stoutnes: when the King saw no feare or threats could turne him, he assaid him with gentlenesse but it would not serue, though many Nobles laboured to exhort him to relent vnto the King: Likewise the Arch-bishop of Yorke, with diuers other Clergie men, Bishoppes and Abbots, especially Chester did the same: besides his owne house dayly called vpon him, no man could perswade him; at length vnderstanding what danger might happen by the Kings displeasure, not onely to himselfe but to all the Clergy, and considering the old kindnesse and loue of the King towards him in times past, was content to giue ouer vnto the Kings request, came to the King at Oxford, and reconciled himselfe: wherevpon the King receiued him with a more cherefull countenance, saying, hee would haue his Ordinances confirmed in o∣pen sight of his Bishops, and all his Nobles; after this the King beeing at Cla∣rem Doune, called all his Peeres and Prelates before him, requiring to haue that performed which hee had promised in consenting to the obseruing his Grandfa∣thers ordinances and proceedings; the Archbishop drew back, and would not that hee would before, yet with great teares, intreaties, and perswasions of Bishops and of two Templers, that desired him on their knees, with teares, and with threatenings of Imprisonment, and other dangers hee did agree onely, with a clause of exception, bona fide, and he and all the Bishops set too their hands and seales. Alanus recordeth that the Archbishop in his voyage to Winchester greatly repen∣ted that he had done, so that he kept himself from al company, lamenting with teares and fasting, and afflicting himselfe, did suspend himselfe from all diuine seruice, and would not be comforted before he had sent to the Pope, and were assoiled of him, the Pope in his Letters not only assoiled him from his trespas, but with words of great consolation, incouraged him to be stout in the quarrell he tooke in hand. Upon this, Becket took no small heart & consolation: The King hearing of him, & how he denied to set his seal to those sanctions, which he condiscended too before, took no little disple∣sure against him, threatned him of banishment & death, called him to reckoning, and burdned him with paiments: the Archb▪ thought to make an escape out of y• realme, attempting to take the Sea, with two or thrée priuily. Amongst other the kings ordi∣nances.
This was one, that none of the Prelasie or Nobility without the Kings li∣cense, or his Iustices, should depart the Realme. So Becket twice attempted the sea to fly to Rome, but the weather serued not, which being known and noysed abroad, the Kings Officers came to seaze vpon his goods to the Kings behalfe, but finding Becket at home and returned, they did not procéede on their purpose, Becket séeing this, went to the Court, the King taunted him gestingly, as though one realm could not hold them both, but shewed him no great fauour. The Arch-bishop of York did labour to renew peace and loue betwixt the King and him, but the King would not be reconciled, except the other would subscribe vnto his lawes, which Becket would not graunt to, but by vertue of his Apostolike authority, gaue censure vpon these Lawes of the King, condemning some, and approuing some as catholike. The Pope sent the Arch-bishop of Rotomage to the King, to mae peace betwixt the King and Canterbury: the King was content, so the Pope would ratifie his Ordinances, which could not be obtained at the Popes hands. The King sent to the Pope to ob∣taine of him, that the same authority of the Apostolike Legacie might be conferred vnto another after his appointment, which was the Arch-bishop of Yorke, but the Pope denied; but he was content, so the King would be Legate himselfe, at which the King was angry, and sent to the Pope againe, according to the old practice of popish Prelacy to play on both sides: priuily he conspireth with one, and openly dis∣sembleth with the other, He granteth the Legate should be remoued, and the Arch∣bishop of York placed in the office, and writ to Becket that he should take no harm thereby, for the Kings Ambassadors had promised him, and did offer to sweare vnto him, that the Letters which they obtained, should not be deliuered vnto the Arch∣bishop of Yorke, without the Popes consent therein: assure your selfe it is not, nor neuer shall be our will nor purpose to subdue you or your Church vnto any, saue on∣ly the Bishop of Rome; therefore if you sée the King will deliuer the said Letters, giue vs knowledg, & we will cléerely exempt by our authority Apostolical, both your person, your Church, and your Citty committed vnto you from all iurisdiction of any legacy. Upon these letters and such other, Becket took all his stoutnesse against the King. The King after he had receiued his letters from the Pope, was more strong in his purposed procéedings against the Archbishop, and procéeded to punish the offences of Cleargy men, and there was aboue 100. found that had committed homicide and murder, beside other offenders: he adiudged them first to be depriued, and then committed to the seculer power. This séemed to Becket to derogate from liberty of holy Church, that seculer power should giue iudgement vpon the crimes of Ecclesiasticall persons, they picke this law out of Anacletus and Euaristus, who de∣duce this constitution from the Apostles, that all Ecclesiasticall persons, shall bee frée from seculer iurisdiction. The King daily incensed more & more against Becket, cited him to appeare at a certaine day and place, where at the time all the Péeres, Nobles, with the Clergy were assembled by the Kings proclamation, where great fault was found with Becket because he did not appear but by Deputy. Whervpon by the publike sentence both of the Nobles and Bishops, all his moueables were ad∣iudged to be confiscate to the King: the stuborne Archbishop answered, he was pri∣mate & spirituall Father, not onely of all other in the Realme, but of the King him∣selfe, and that it was not conuenient the Children should iudge the Father, and the the flock the Pastor: but especially complaineth of his fellow Bishops which should haue tooke their Metropolitans part; the next day the King laide an action against him for the iniury done to his Marshall, and required the Archbishop to repay him 500. markes which he lent him when he was Chancellor: he answered it was giuen him, but could bring no probation therof: whervpon the King required him to put in an assurance for the paiment: wherevpon 5. persons of their own accord stpped in and were bound for it, else the Archbishop had béen in a great strait: the third day he was charged with other monies due vnto the King, by reason of many Bishopricks, & Abbaricks which he had kept long vacant in his hands, & he & al the Bishops being shut into a roome together by the Kings appointment, they did all take counsell what was best for the Archb. to doe in this case, they all aduised him to yeeld to the
Kings Lawes, or else he would be in danger and the rest of the Clergy, or else to re∣signe his Arch-byshoppricke, and then no doubt the King would haue compassion on him, if not, they saw no other way but he would loose his life, and then what good would his Byshoppricke doe him: to this effect was their consultation. Becket checked them with rebukefull words, you goe about to cherish your owne cowardli∣nesse with a shaddow of sufferance, and with dissembling softnesse to choke the li∣berty of the Church: who hath thus bewitched you O vnsatiable Bishops! is not God able to help the state of the Church without the sinfull dissimulation of the tea∣chers thereof? when should the Gouernors thereof put themselues in danger for the Church, but in the distresse thereof, I thinke it no greater merit for the ancient Byshops to found the Church with their blood, then for vs to effude our blood for the liberties of the same, and I thinke it not safe for you to swarue from the example which you haue receiued from your holy Elders. Then the Arch-bishop sent for two Earles, to whom the Archbishop said: touching the matters betwixt the King & vs, we haue conferred, we would craue respite vntill the morrow, then we will be rea∣dy to giue our answere vnto the King: two Bishops were sent to the King with this message, which the King granted, the conuocation beeing dissolued, the most part of the Bishops separated themselues from the Arch-bishop▪ for feare of the Kings displeasure: he being thus forsaken, sent for the poore, lame, and halt, to furnish his house, saying by them he might sooner obtaine his victory, then by them which had slipt from him; the said day appointed was Sunday, therefore nothing done, the next day he was sicke of the Gout, he could not come, it was thought hee fained, the Earle of Deuon: and the Earle of Leicester were sent to him, to try the truth of the matter, and to cite him to appeare at the Court, the Bishops came to perswade him to submission to the will of the King, of all his goods and Arch-bi∣shoppricke, if peraduenture his indignation might swage by that meanes▪ else per∣iury would be laid to his charge for breaking his oath made to obserue the Kings Ordinance, he answered it was dolorous that the world was against him, yet it gréeueth me most, that Sons of mine owne Mother be pricks and thornes against me, but I charge you bee not present personally in iudgement against me, and that you shall not so doe I appeale to the Church of Rome, the refuge of all such as bée oppressed, and if any seculer men lay hand on me, as it is rumord they will, I strait∣ly charge you, that you exercise your Ecclesiasticall censure vpon them, as it becom∣meth for your Father and Arch-bishop, & whatsoeuer happen, I will neuer coward∣ly shrinke, nor vily forsake my flocke: then he addressed himselfe to his Masse of S. Steuen with all solemnity, with his Metropolitan pall, which was not vsed but vp∣on holydaies: the Masse beginning with Sederunt principes, & aduersum me loque∣bantur. The Bishop of London accused him that it was done by art Magick, and in contempt of the king, then the Archbishop went to the Court, and to make him more sure, he priuily taketh the Sacrament within: as hee was entring into the doore of the Kings Chamber, he taketh the Crosse with the Crosse-staffe from the Crosse-bearer, and carried it himselfe: one of the other Bishoppes would haue borne the Crosse, saying it was not comly for him, the Bishop of London told him, if the king met him so, he would draw his sword at him; he answered, the Kings sword strikes carnally, but mine spiritually striketh himselfe downe to hell. The King complained to the Nobles and Bishops, that he shewed himselfe as a traytor, all gaue witnesse thereto, affirming him alwaies, to be a vain and proud man, so altogether with one cry, called him Traytor, and being he had receiued such great benefits, preferments and honours of the King, and thus requite it, was well worthy to be handled as a periured Traytor: The Bishop of Excester desired him to haue compassion of him∣selfe, and of them, else they were all like to perish, for there commeth a precept from the King for your apprehending and suffering as an open Rebell, and whosoeuer shall take your part, and the Bishoppes of Salisbury and Norwich are to bee had to the place of execution, for their resisting, and making intercession for you. Hee answered, Auoyd hence from mee, for thou sauorest not the thinges of GOD. Upon great consultation, the Bishoppes agreed, that they
would appeale the Arch-bishop to the Sea of Rome vpon periury, and that they would oblige themselues to the King, with a sure promise to doe their dilgence in deposing of him, so the King would promise their safety; it being so finished, two Bi∣shops were sent to him in stead of them all, which said, once you were our Archbi∣shop, and we bound to your obedience; but now, being you once sware fidelitie to the King, and doe resist him, neglecting his Lawes, appertaining to his terrne ho∣nour: Wherefore we héere pronounce you periured, neither be we bound to giue o∣bedience to you, but putting our selues and all ours in the Popes protection, doe appeale you vp to his presence, and assignd him his time to appeare: the Archbishop answered he heard him well enough, and sendeth to Rome in all hast, signifying to the Pope the whole matter, to whom the Pope writeth againe: wee are not a little disquieted in our spirits for your sake being our most déere Brother, remember that the Apostles departed away reioycing from the face of the Councell, receiue conso∣lation that w may reioice with you in the Lord, who hath preserued you in this di∣stresse to the corroboration of the Catholick verity, and God through his punish∣ment of afflicions hath wiped away the blot of your offences, that they might not be called to account in the day of Iudgement: bee not greeued that you are appealed to the Apostolike Sea, which to vs is gratefull and accepted, draw not you backe spare not to follow the appeale, for the authoritie of the Church of Rome tendreth your constancie, our diligence shall bee to preserue the right and preheminence of your Church to you, as one working for the Church, a constant and valiant Cham∣pion, I thought good especially to premonish you, neither for aduersitie nor what∣soeuer happens renounce not the right and dignitie of your Church. The Archbishop sitting with his Crosse in his hand as before was not abashed at al that was: the King sent for him presently to render account for thirty thousand markes, and fruits and reuenewes of the Realme in the time when he was Chan∣cellor; he answered, the King knew how often hee had made reckonings of those things, and that Henry his Sonne and heyre, with all the Barrons, and the Lord chiefe Iustice of England told him was frée and quit to god and holy Church from all receipts, computations on the Kings behalfe, and so taking his discharge en∣tred into his office, for other accounts he would make none: when his answere was brought to the King, he required the Barons to doe their office, who adiudged him to be apprehended and laid in prison: the King sent the Earl of Cornwall and De∣uonshire, and the Earle of Leicester to shew him his Iudgement; to whom he said, heare my Sonne and good Earle, how much the soule is more precious then the bo∣dy, so much ought you to obey me rather then your terrene King, no Law doth per∣mit the child to condemne their Father: wherefore to auoide all your iudgements before you all I appeale to the Sea Apostolicke, and as for you my fellow Bishops, which rather obey man then God, you also I call and claime to the Iudgement of the Pope, and I doe depart from you as from the enemies of the Catholick Church, and of the authoritie of the Apostolicke Sea: whilst they returned this answere to the King, the Archbishop passed through the throng and tooke horse, holding the bri∣dle in one hand, and his Crosse in the other; the Courtiers followed, saying, tarrie Traytor and héere thy Iudgement; the vtmost gate being locked, one of his ser∣uants found a bunch of Keyes & trying them found the right and opened the gate, he went to the house of the Cannons where hee did lie▪ and calling to him the poore where they could be found, after supper he caused a bed to be made him betwixt two Altars; but whilst the King was at supper, he changed his garments, and named himselfe Derman, and made an escape to the Sea, and taking ship sayled into Flan∣ders, and thence iournied vnto France; the King sent the Bishop of London, and the Earle of Arundell vnto the King of France, to require him not to receiue the Archbishop, nor retaine him in his Dominion, and that he would be a meanes to the Pope not to shew any familiaritie vnto him, but the French King, contrarie to the Kings Letters and request, not only harboured and cherished him, but writ to the Pope, intreating him vpon all loues, as euer he would haue his fauour to tender the cause of the Archbishop Becket. The King sent another ambassage to Pope Alex∣ander,
by the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Chichester, Exeter, with other Doctors and Clarkes: with the Earle of Arundel, with certaine moe Lords and Barrons, they were friendly accepted at the Popes Court, the next day following the Pope sitting in the Consistorie with his Cardinals, when the Ambassadours were called for the hearing of Beckets matter, and the Bishops euery one in order had made his Oration, the Pope did not accept some of their spéeches, and disdained some: wherefore the Earle of Arundell disdained in this manner, spake: Though I am vnlettered, and cannot vnderstand what these Bishops haue said, neither can vtter my minde in that tongue which they haue done, yet I must de∣clare the cause of my sending as well as I may, which was not to contend with or iniury any man, especially in presence of such a one at whose beck all the world doth stoope, but our Legacie is to present, in the presence of the whole Church of Rome, the deuotion and loue of our King, which hee euer had and still hath to∣wards you, and that it might the better appeare to your excellencie, hee hath ap∣pointed for the furniture of this Legacy his greatest and cheefest subiects of such worthines and parentage, that if hee could haue found greater in his Realme hee would haue sent them, for the reuerence of your person and holy Church of Rome: I might adde more, which your Sainctitude hath already proued, the harty fidelity of our King towards you, who at the entrance to his Kingdome, submitted him∣selfe, and all his, wholly to your will and pleasure, and wee beleeue there is none more faithfull in Christ then he, nor more deuout to God, nor more moderate in kéeping the vnity of peace: neither doe I deny touching the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, a man not vnfurnished with gifts in his calling, being both sage and discréete, sauing that hee seemeth to some more quick and sharpe then needeth, if this blot had not beene, the King and he had not discented: then both the temporaltie and spiritualty might haue flourished one with the other in much peace, vnder so worthy a Prince, and so vertuous a pastor, therefore our message and supplicati∣on to your vigilant prudence, is that through your fauour and wisedome the neck of this discention may be broken, and reformation of vnitie and loue by some good meanes may be sought. But the Pope would not condiscend to their sute, which was to haue two Le∣gates sent from his popish side into England, to examine and take vp the contro∣uersie betweene the King, and the Archbishop, but because Becket was absent hee willed them to tarry his comming vp: for hee being absent hee would in no case procéede against him, but they alledged there time appointed to be ended, and hauing other lets they could not waite for the comming of Becket, and so returned back, there cause frustrated, without the Popes blessing to the King. Within foure dayes after, Becket commeth to the Popes Court, offered the pope a scroule of the custome and ordinances of the King: the Pope condemned and cur∣sed the most part of them, and blamed Becket for so much yeelding to them at the beginning: yet because he was repentant, hee was content to assoile him for the same, and the rather because he had suffered so great troubles for the liberties of the Church: The next day, the Pope and his Cardinals beeing assembled in his secret chamber, Becket made an Oration to them to this effect: he confessed with griefe the cause of these perturbations was because hee entred into the sould of Christ, not by the doore of Christ, because the King made him Bishop, not the Pope, and if I had resigned it to the King againe at his commandement, I had left a dange∣gerous example vnto the Catholique Church: therfore now recognising my ingresse not to be Canonicall, and my abilitie not sufficient for such a charge: therfore I ren∣der into your fatherly hands the Archbishoprick heere of Canturbury, and put∣ting his Ring from his finger offered it to the Pope, and desired a Bishop to be pro∣uided for the Church of Canturbury, and so with teares ended. This done hee was bid stand a part, after consultation they concluded, being he had ventred his goods, dignity, and authoritie, and his life, for the liberties of the Church, if he should now be depriued at the Kings pleasure it would be an exampl
to others hereafter none to resist his Prince in like case, and so weaken the Catho∣lick Church, and derogate the Popes authoritie, and his cause being maintained it would bee a president to others to doe the like, so hee receiued his Pastoral Of∣fice at the Popes hand againe with commendation and much fauour, and he Pope sent him vnto the Abbey of Pontiuiacke in France, with a Monkes habit, where he was two yeares; thence he remoued to Senon, where he was fiue yeares; so he was in exile seuen yeares. The King beeing certified by his Ambassadors that the Pope inclined more to Becket, then vnto him, was wrathfull, and sayling into Normandie sent ouer certaine iniunctions against the Pope and the Arch-bishop to this effect. 1 Whosoeuer brought any interdict or curse from the Pope or Becket, so bee apprehended and executed as a Traytor. 2 That no Clarke, Monke, or conuert of any other countrey, without the Iu∣stice and Kings Letters, to passe ouer or returne into the Realme, otherwise to be imprisoned. 3 None to appeale to the Arch-bishop or bring any transcript from them. 4 No Decrée from them to stand in force or be receiued in England vpon paine of imprisonment. 5 If any person shall keep the sentence of their interdict, they shall bee exiled with all their kindred, and take none of their goods with them, and be bound without speciall licence not to resort where the Arch-bishop was. 6 All the possessions and goods of such as fauoured the Pope or Arch bishop to be confiscate for the King. 7 All such of the Clergy as were out of the Realme to bee warned in euery Sheere within three monethes to repayre home, or else their rents and goods to e∣turne to the King. 8 That the Peter pence shall be no more paid vnto the Apostolick Sea, but to be reserued vnto the Kings Coffers. The Arch-bishop writ to a friend of his to write to him with speed what was done touching the Kings Decrees, heere set out, which are these: that all Hauens be diligently kept, that no interdict or curse be brought in, if the bringer bee a reli∣gious man, his feet to be cut off; if a Priest to loose his pruy members; if a lay∣man to bee hanged; if a Leper to be burned; if a Bishop will depart for feare of the Popes Interdict, let him haue nothing with him but his Staffe, and that al Schollers and Students beyond the Seas shal repaire home or loose their Benefi∣ces, and if they remaine still to loose the libertie of all returning: if any Priest for the Popes interdict wil refuse to sing, to loose his priuy members: In summe al such Priests as shew themselues Rebels to the King, to bee depriued of their Bene∣fices. Further it was proclaimed that all of the kindred of Thomas Becket should bee exiled with their goods with them,1166. and sent to him, which was no little vexati∣on to him to behold. Moreouer, the King writ to the Abbot of Pontiuiack, where he lay, not to retaine him in his house, or else he would driue out of his Realme all the Monkes of his Order: wherevpon hee remoued, by the French Kings appointment, to Se∣non as aforesaid, and found of him fiue yeares. In the meane time messengers went daily from the King to the Pope, and from the Pope to the King; and betwixt the Archbishop and others, where I finde onely rehearsals of matters, which are declared sufficiently in the History, whereof if the Reader be desirous to see, let him resort to the booke at large. After these Letters sent too and fro in the 15. yéere of Henry the second,1169 the King misdoubting that the Archbishop would procéed in excommunication against his own person, made his appeale to the presence of the Pope, requiring to haue cer∣taine Legates sent from Rome from the Popes side, to take vp the matter betwixt the Archbishop and him; requiring also that they might be absolued, that were in∣terdicted: wherevpon two Cardinals sent from the Pope, with Letters from the
Pope came into Normandie, where they appointed the Bishop to meete before the King, but the Arch-bishop delayed his comming, vntill eight daies after, nei∣ther would come any further then Grisorsium, where the two Cardinals, and the Archbishop with other Bishops conuenting together, had a treatie of reconciliation, which came to no conclusion. The two Cardinals writ to the Pope to this effect: comming to England we found the controuersie more vehement then we would, for the King and the greater part about him said the Arch-bishop stirred vp the French King against him▪ and made the Earle of Flanders his open aduersarie: and after the King had receiued your Letters, and brought forth other Letters, diuers and altering from them re∣ceiued of vs, be was moued with no little indignation; saying, that since wee came from you, the Archbishop receiued of you other cotrarie Letters, wherby he was exempted from our Iudgement: Moreouer, the King and the Bishops there did affirme, that the complaint that was made vnto you of the ancient customes of his progenitors, for the most pat was false; affirming farther to vs, that if there were any customes and lawes in his time that seemed priudiciall to the Statutes of the Church, he would willingly reuoke and disanull the same: therefore we & other Bi∣shops and Abbots of the land, hearing the King so reasonable, laboured by al meanes that the King should not breake from vs, but incline to vs, and to haue the matter brought before vs, betwixt him and the Archbishop. Wherevpon we sent our owne Chaplains with Letters to him, appointing him the time and place, where safely hee might meete with vs, yet he made his dilatories till eight dayes after, which tirred the Kings heart more then is to be thought: thus when hee refused to meete vs in the borders of the King, though we offered him safe comming: we to satisfie his minde condescended to meete him at a place which hee appointed within the Land of the French King, we exhorted him humbly to submit himselfe vnto his so∣ueraigne and King, who had heaped him with such benefits and dignities: after aduise with his Counsll, hee said he would submit himselfe to the King sauing the honour of God, the libertie of the Church, the honestie of my person, the possessions of Churches, and the Iustice of him and all his in all things: wee asked him whe∣ther h would submit himselfe to vs, as the King and the Bishops were content to doe: he said he had a commandement from you not to answere before he and all his were restored to all their possessions, then he would proceed in the matter as hee should receiue commandement from the Sea Apostolick, whereof wee made rela∣tion to the King, yet keeping back a great part, which we had heard and séene: which when the King and Nobles vnderstood, the King said he was so much the more cleere, for that the Archbishop would not stand to Iudgement: af∣ter much heauinesse and lamentation of the King, Bishops, and Abbots, they required of vs whether wee had any power to proceed against him, and percei∣uing wee had none, least the Archbishop should worke any disquietnes to any of the Noble personages of the Realme agreed together with one assent to make their appellation to your audience, prefixing accordingly the terme of their ap∣peale. The Archbishop saying, he stood onely for the peace of the Church, one of the Car∣dinals offered him, if he would relinquish his Bishoppricke, the King should relin∣quish his Customes. He answered, He could not renounce his Church, sauing the honour of the Church and his person, but it standeth vpon the soules health, and ho∣nor of the King to renounce his customes. After the Cardinals were gone, the French King séeing the King of England disquieted, and sicitous of peace, pretending to set agréement betwixt them, the King and the Arch-bishop, both were content to stand to his arbiterment. The Archbishop prostrating himselfe at the féete of the King of England, said he would commit the whole matter to his owne arbiterment, Saluo honore Dei, the King was highly there-with displeased, rebuking him of pride and stubbornenesse, and charged him with sundry and great benefits bestowed on him, and hee a person vn∣kind and forgetfull.
And speaking to the French King there present said, whatsoeuer displeaseth this man hee saith it is contrary to the honour of God, and by this meanes will vindi∣cate to himselfe that which is his owne and mine too, there haue bin Kings of Eng∣land of greater and lesse puissance then I am, & there haue haue béen Archb. of Can∣terbury both great & holy men, what the best of them haue done to my predecessors before me, let him doe the same to me and I am content: the standers by with one voice cried, the king hath debased himselfe enough to the Bishop, the French King said what my Lord will you be better then those holy men, will you be greater then Peter, you haue peace and quietnes put in your hands if you will take it: he answe∣red, my predecessors euery one in his time did pluck vp, and correct something in his time, though not all things, for then there would bee no cause of this fire of tempta∣tion to try vs: though some haue béen slack, we are not to follow their examples, we rebuke Peter for denying Christ, but we commend him for resisting Nero, hee could not in his conscience consent vnto him; he did not dissemble, wherby he lost his life: by such oppressions the Church hath alwaies growne, our forefathers suffered, be∣cause they would not dissemble the honour of Christ, shall I▪ to haue the fauour of one man, suffer the honour of Christ to be supprest: the Noble men standing by, no∣ted him of arrogancy, and wilfulnes: and one openly protested, that séeing he refu∣sed the request of both kingdomes, hee was worthy of the help of neither: as Eng∣land had reiected him, so France should not entertaine him. One of the Archbishops Chapleins writeth that the French king prostrated him∣selfe at the féet of the Archb. repented he had giuen him such councell in a case pertai∣ning to the honour of God, & desired to be assoiled, and that Henry sent to the king to desire him not to support his enemy within his Realme: the French King vtterly denied the Kings request, and tooke part rather with the Archbishop. The King of England returned from Normandy into England & in the 16.1170 yéere of his reigne kept his Court of Parliament at Westminster, & by assent both of the Clergy & Temporalty, caused his sonne Henry to be crowned King: the Coronati∣on was done by the Archbishop of Yorke, other Bishops assisting Becket: not beeing called tooke no little displeasure; and so did the French King, hearing that Mar∣garet his Daughter was not like wise crowned with her husband: wherevpon hee came with a great armie to Normandie, but the King sent his sonne to him which intreated peace, promising that his sonne should be crowned againe, and his daugh∣ter crowned with him. Becket sent to the Pope, complaining of foure Bishops, especially the Archbishop of York, who durst be so bold in his absence, without his licence to crowne the king, being a matter peculiar to his Iurisdiction, at whose instance the Pope excommu∣nicated the Bishop of London: the other thrée with the Archbishop hee suspended: they resorted to the King, declaring how miserable there case stood, for fulfilling his commandement, the King was highly moued. The King of France with his Clergy and Courtiers slacked no occasion to in∣cite the Pope to excommunicate the King of England, also thinking to haue some aduantage against the Realme, neither was the King ignorant of this, which made him the readier to agree. The pope sent two Legats with full commission, either to driue the K. to be recon∣ciled, or to be excommunicated: the King seeing himselfe in great straites, which he could not auoid, and by the mediation of the king of France, and other great pre∣lates and Princes of the king, was content to be reconciled with the Archb. whom he receiued into his Realme, and granted him free returne to his Church. But he would not grant him his lands vntill he came into England, and did see how he would agrée with his subiects, he was ioifully receiued of his church, albeit he was not very welcome vnto the yong king: so that comming to London to the king, he was returned back to Canterbury and bid to keepe his house, hee excom∣municated one Robert de Brocke on Christmas day, for cutting off the taile of one of his Horses the day before, hee would not absolue the foresaid foure Bi∣shops without cauels and exceptions, who went to Normandie to the king,
and complained of the miserable state & vncourteous handling, which made him con∣ceiue such displeasure towards Becket, that hee lamented oft to them about him, that none would reuenge him of his enemy: vpon occasion of which words, 4. ad∣dressed thēselues in great heat of hast, within 4. daies after, the said Christmas day they came to Canterbury, they pressed at length into the palace, where the Arch-b. was sitting with his company about him: they said they brought him a commande∣ment from the king, bad him chuse whether he would receiue it openly, or secretly, the company being commanded away, and he alone, they told him the King com∣manded him to repaire to the King his sonne to doe his duety, and sweare fidelitie for your Baronage, and to amend those things you haue committed against him, in denying to be sworne to him: he perceiued their intent, and called for his company, and they commanded him in the Kings name that he should absolue the 4. Bishops: he answered, he did not excommunicate them, but the Pope, if that were their griefe they should resort to him; séeing you thus stand against the Coronation of our new King, it séemeth you aspire to take his Crowne from him, and to bee King your selfe: he said nay, if he had thrée crownes he would set them all vpon him, except his father there is none whose honour I now tender and loue, and touching the seque∣string of the Bishops, there was nothing done without the assent of the King, for I complaine to him what iniury my Church had by their crowning the ing, hee gaue me leaue to seeke my remedy at the Popes hand, they said what doest thou mae the King a Traytor and bewrayer of his own sonne, when he commanded them to crwne him, and then gaue thee leaue to suspend them for so doing; and they said, thinkest thou we the kings subiects wil suffer this, thou hast spoken enough against thine own head: the Achbishop said, since my comming ouer, e hath suffered ma∣ny iniuries and rebukes concrning my selfe my men, cattell, wines, and other goods: yet the King writ to his sonne I should liue in safety and peace, and now you come hether to threaten me; they answered, if you haue any niury, the law is open, and e said he sought for remedy at the Kings hands as long as hee could be suffered to speake with him, but now I am stopped and can find no redresse, nor can haue the benefit of law or reason, such law as an Arch-bishop may haue I will Realme: then they denounced he had spoken words to the ieopardie of his head, so they depart, charging the Monkes in the Kings name to keep him forthcomming: the Arch-bishop would not fly for the king nor any man: the names of the foure Souldiers were, first, Renold Berison: Secondly, Hugh Morteuill: Thirdly, William Thracy: Fourthly, Richard Britto: who going to harnesse themselues, re∣turned the same day, but the Hall doore being shut, they went to a back doore, and broke vp a window: the Monkes had gotten the Arch-bishop into the Church, and caused his crosse to be borne before him, and procéeded into the Quiere, the Haruest men following came to the Church doore, the Monkes would haue shut the doore, but as the Story saith the Bishop would not suffer them: so they came into the church, and the Bishop méeting them on the stayres was slaine, euery man striking him with his swrd in the head, who fied into the north, and at length were pardoned of the Pope by the Kings meanes, and went to Ierusalem. Newbergensis an ancient Chronographer condemneth the doings of Becket. Cesarius a Monke in his eighth booke of Dialogues 48. yeares after the death of Becket, writeth that it was a question amongst the Masters of Paris, whether Thomas Becket were saued, or damned. But it is certaine this antheme collected and primered in his praise is blas∣phemous. Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christe scandere quo Thomas asendit. Wherein is a double lye, first that hee dyed for Christ; secondly, that his bond should purchase heauen, which none of the Apostles durst challenge, for then Christ died in vaine. After his death the king fearing the popes curse, which the French king helped for∣wards
what he could, the King sent his excuse vnto the pope which he would not heare. And after second messengers which some of the Cardinals receiued, shewing them that the pope vsed to curse & assoile on good-Friday, which was néer at hand, and it was noised that the King, Bishops & realme, should be interdicted: and here∣vpon the kings messengers were put into prison, some of the Cardinals shewed the pope that the Kings messengers had power to sweare that the King should obey his penance which was taken both for the King & the Archb. of Yorke, so that in the said day, the pope only cursed the déed, doers, consenters, ayders & harbourers of them: the deed-doer had in penance to goe in linnen clothes barefoote, in fasting & prayer, to Ierusalem, who by this hard penance are said to die in few yéeres after. Two Cardinals were sent to inquire who were consenters to his death, the king, being not certaine wherefore their comming was, with a great power entred into Ireland, giuing charge that no bringer of any briefe should come into the realme, or passe out without speciall license, and an assurance to bring nothing preiudiciall to the Realme: the King in short time subdued the whole land of Ireland, which was gouerned by fiue Kings, of whom foure submitted themselues; only the fift, the king Tonacta, denied to be subdued, kéeping himselfe in woods and Marshes. In this time the two Cardinals were come to Normandy:1172 the next yéere in Octo∣ber, the king went to them, & made his purgation touching the death of Becke, ta∣king his othe he was neuer aiding nor consenting, but onely spake rigorous words against him; wherefore for penance hee was sworne to send so much money to the holy land, & should find two hundred Knights for the defence thereof, and should set forth by Christmas following his own person to fight for thrée yéeres, excpt the pope should dispence with him: and that if he went into Spaine, & fought with the Sarracns, as long as he was there he might prolong his iourney to Ierusalem. Itē, that he should not hinder or cause to be hindred any appellatios made to Rme. Item, That he nor his Sonne should dissent from Pope Alexander, nor his Ca∣tholick successors. Item, That the goods and possessions taken from the Church of Canterbury should be restored. Item, that the foresaid decrées established against the church should be extinct, and repealed, besides other secret fastings and almes inioyned him. All these conditions the King and his Son agreed vnto, debasing himselfe with humilitie and submission before them whereof the Cardinals tooke no little glory, v∣sing this vers of the Psalme: Qui respicit terram, & facit eam tremere: qui tangit montes & fumigant. The returning from Normandie, by reason the Scots had made a road into England, by the way, as soon as he came to the fight of Beckets Church he lighted & went barefoote to his toombe, whose steps were found bloudy by the roughnsse of the stones, and receiued a whip, with a rod, of euery Monke of the Cloister, where∣by thou maist see the lamentable superstition and ignorance of those dayes, and the slauery that Kings and Princes were brought too vnder the Popes Clergy,1174 the same yeere almost the whole Citie of Canturbury was consumed with fire, and the said Minster church cleane burnt. The next yeare in a conuocation of Bishops,1175 Abbots, and other of the Clergie at Westminster, there was great discention betwixt the two Arch-bishops, whether Yorke must beare his Crosse in the Dioces of Canterbury, and whether the Bi∣shopricks of Lincoln, Chichester, Worcester, and Hereford, were of the sea of York. Wherefore the one appealed the other vnto the presence of the Pope. How much better had it beene if the Supremacie had remained in the King, whereby much trauell, and great wastfull expences had bin saued, and there cause mor indifferently, and more spéedily decided. Diuers of Glocester in the Dioces of York were excommunicated by the Archb. of Canterbury, because being summoned they refused to appeare: a Cardinall by the Kings procurement was sent from Rome to make peace: by the meanes of the King it was agreed that Canterbury should release his claime to Glocester, and ab∣solue
the Clarks thereof, & the bearing the crosse and other matters was referred to the other Bishops, and a league of truce for fiue yeares betwixt them. The next yeare Henry the second denided the Realme into six parts,1176. & ordained thrée Iustices of assise on euery part: to the first Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge shire, Huntingdon-shire, Buckingham-shire, Essex, Hereford-shire: to the second Lin∣coln-shire, Nottingham-shire, Derby-shire, Stamford-shire, Warwick-shire, Nor∣thampton-shire, Leicester-shire: Thirdly, Kent, Surry, South-hampton-shire, Sussex, Berk-shire, Oxford-shire: Fourthly, Heriford-shire, Glocester-shire, Wor∣cester-shire, Salop-shire: Fiftly, Wilt-shire, Dorcester-shire, Sommerset-shire, Den-shire, Cornwall: Euerwick-shire, Richmond-shire, Lancaster, Copland, Westmr-land, Northumberland, Cumberland. In this yéere the Archbishop of Canterbury made thrée Arch-deacons, where there was but one, and the K. granted the pope, that no Clarke should be called before a temporall Iudge, except for his of∣fence in the Forrest or his lay-fée that he holdeth, and that no Bishopricke or Abbey should remaine but one yeere in the Kings hands without great cause, This yeare there was great controuersie betwixt the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, and the Abbot of S. Austen, he being Elect, whether the Bishop should come to his house to consecrate him, or he to come to the Metropolitan church of Canterbury to be consecrated: The bbot appealed to the audience of the Pope, and went thi∣ther with a fat purse, procured letters to the Bishop of Worcester to command the Arch-bishop to consecrat him in his Monastery, because it did properly belong to the Iurisdiction of Rome, & should do so likewise to his successors without exception of obedience, & if the rchb. refuse to doe it, then he should doe it: the Archb. vnderstan∣ding it, & loth to yéeld, vsed policy, he watched a time when the Abbot was frō home, came to the Monastery, with all things appointed for the busines, called for the Ab∣bat to be consecrated: the Abbot not being at home, he fained himself not a little grée∣ed: wherevpon the Abbot was disappointed, faine to fill his purse a new, & make a new course to Rome to the Pope of whom he receiued his consecration. This yéere a Cardinal was sent into England,1177 (as few yéeres there was not one sent to get mny, he was to make peace betwixt the Archbishops of York & Canter∣bury, who kept a Councel at Westminster, to which all the chiefe of the Clergy re∣sorted with great confluence; Yorke thinking to preuent Canterbury, came first and placed himselfe on the right hand of the Cardinall: Canterbury seeing the first place taken, refused to take the second: Yorke alledged the old Decree of Gregory by whom this order was taken betwixt these two Metropolitans, that he that should be first in election, should haue the preheminence in dignity, and goe before the o∣ther. From words they went to blowes, Canterbury hauing more seruants was to strong for Yorke, plucked him from the right hand of the Cardinall, treading on him with their feet that it was well hee escaped aliue: his Robes were all rent from his back, this Noble Romane Cardinall which should haue ended the strife committed himselfe to flight: the next day Yorke shewed his Rochet to the Cardi∣nall to testifie his wrong, and appealed, and cited the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certaine of his men to the Pope. The kingdome of England in the Henry this second his time, extended so farre as hath not béen seene: The King of Scots, with all the Lords spirituall and temporal, did him homage for them and their successors: Ireland, England, Normandie, A∣quitane, Gaunt &c. Unto the mountaine of Pireni, in the vtmost parts of the O∣cean in the Brittish sea: protector of France, and offered to bée King of Ierusalem, by the Patriarke and Master of the Hospitall there, which he refused, alledging his great charge at home, and it might be his sonnes would rebell in his absence. The fame of his wisedome, manhood, riches, was so renowned through all quar∣ters that messengers came from the Emperor of Rome, and from the Emperour of Constantinople, and from many great Kings, Dukes, and other great men to de∣termine questions of strife, and aske councell of him: he raigned thirty fiue yéeres, and hauing great warres, yet neuer set tribute or taxe vpon his subiects, nor first fruits, nor appropriations of benefits vpon the Clergy; yet his treasure beeing
weighed by King Richard his Sonne after his death, weighed 900000. pounds, be∣sides Iewels and Houshold-stuffe, of which 11000. pounds came by the death of Robert Arch-bishop of Yorke, for hee had procured a Bull of the Pope, that if any Priest dyed without Testament, he should haue all his goods. His Sonne Henry,1181. whom he ioyned with him in his Kingdome, and at his Co∣ronation serued him as a Steward, and set the first dish at the Table, renouncing the name of King, the Archbishop of Yorke sitting at the right hand of the young King, he told him, he might greatly reioyce, being no King had such an Officer as he had, the young King disdaining his words, said; My Father is not dishonored, for I am a King and a Quéenes Sonne, and so is not he. He tooke Armes with the French King against his Father, and persecuted him, but after hee had raigned a few yeares, died in his youth by the iust iudgement of God. After his death, his Sonne Richard, called Cor-de-Lyon, rebelled against his Father, and Iohn his youngest Sonne did not degenerate from his Brothers steps, the said Richard brought his Father to such distresse of body and minde, that for thought he fell into an Ague, and within foue daies dyed, Richard méeting his Corps, beginning to wéepe, the bloud burst out of the Kings nose at the comming of his Sonne, giuing a monstration that he was Author of his death. His Children, after his death, worthily rewarded for their vnnaturalnesse, lost all they had beyond the Sea which their Father had gotten. Alexander Pope decréed, that no Arch-bishop should receiue the Pall, vnless hée first sware obedience to the Pope. These be the words in Englsh of the giuing of the Pall. To the honour of Almighty God, and of blessed Mary the Uirgin, and of blessed S. Peter, and S. Paul, and of our Lord Pope, and of the holy Church of Rome, and of the Church committed to your charge: we giue you the Pall taken from the body of Saint Peter, as a fulnesse of the Pontificall Office, which you may weare within your own Church, vpon certain daies expressed in the priuiledge of the said Church, granted by the Sea Apostolike. This Pall ought to bee asked with great instance, and within thrée moneths, without which Pall he is not Arch-bishop, but may be deposed. The same Pall must be burned with him when hee dyeth, and when it is giuen, some priuiledge must be giuen with it, or the old renewed, the Arch bishops pay swéetly for it. Euery Bishop must sweare to be obedient to Saint Peter, the Apostolike Church of Rome, and to the Pope, to doe nothing whereby either of them, or any member of them may be impaired, nor helpe, counsell, or consent vnto any so doing, not to vtter their councell any way sent to them, to any body to their hurt, to retane and maintaine the Papacy and the Regalities of S. Peter against all men, honorably to intreat the Popes Legats going and comming, and helpe them in all necessities, to be ready to come to a Sinod being called, without any lawfull let, to visite the Pal∣lace of the Apostles euery third yeare, by himselfe, or a Messenger, except other∣wise licensed by the Pope, not to sell, giue, or lease out any the possessions of his Church without the Popes license, So God helpe him and the Holy Ghost. By this Oath, the Byshop could do nothing but what the Pope would in generall councels, which was the corruption of them. Besides this, it was decreed in the said councell of Rome, by 310. Byshops, by Pope Alexander, that none should haue spirituall promotion, except he were of full age and borne in wedlocke: that no Parish-Church should be voyd aboue sixe mo∣neths; that none within orders should meddle with temporal businesses; that priests shall haue but one Benefice; that Bishops be charged to find the Priest a liuing vn∣till he be promoted. That open Usurers shall not communicate at Easter, nor be buried within the Church yard. That nothing shall be taken for ministring Sacraments, or burying. Item, that euery Cathedrall Church should haue a Maister to teach Children fréely, without taking any thing for the same.
In this Councell the vow of Chastity was laid vpon Priests, Thomas Becket and Bernard were canonized for Saints. In this yeare Richard,1179. the eldest Sonne of Henry the second, succeeded his Fa∣ther, at which time Clement sat Pope, succéeding Gregory, who died a little before for sorrow, for losse of the Holy Crosse by the Popes meanes. He and Frede∣ricke the Emperor, and Phillip the French King, went with their Armies to Pale∣stina, atchieuing the recouery of the Holy Land. Richard in this iourney gat Cy∣prus, Acon, Ptolemayda, Surrah. For preparation for this iourney hee sold Lordships, Castles, Offices, Liberties, Priuiledges, Byshopprickes, &c. He said he would sell London, if he could finde one able to buy it: Many Bishops purcha∣sed to their Bishopprickes diuers Lordships. The Bishop of Winchster purcha∣sed Werregraue, & Meues. The Bishop of Duresme, Hadberge, with all their ap∣purtenances for 500. markes, and purchased the whole Prouince of the King for his owne, and himselfe to be made Earle of the same. In this Kings daies there fell a great dissention in the Church of Yorke, betwixt the Arch-bishop of Yorke, and the Deane, because euening Song was begunne before the Arch-bishoppe came, his Grace comming into the Quire, was angry, because they tarryed not for him, and commaunded the Quire to stay: the Dean and Treasurer willed them to fing on, the Quire left and recanted, and begun a∣gaine. The Treasurer not to take the foyle, caused the lights to be put out, so the euening Song ceased, for the Popish euening Song is blind, without light, though the Sunne shine neuer so bright: His Grace suspended the whole Church from Di∣uine seruice vntill the parties had made him amends. The next day being Ascenti∣on day, the Deane and Treasurer would make no sarsfaction, the people would haue fallen vpon them if his Grace had not let them. The Deane was faine to flye to his House, and the Treasurour to Saint Williams Tombe for succour: The Byshop excommunicated them, and the Church was suspended from Ser∣uice that day. Thus much of the Heroicall cmbat betwixt these Ecclesiasticall persons. King Richard, in his iourney aforesaid, talked with Abbot Ioachim of his Uisions and Prophesies, especially of Antichrist: hee expounded vnto him the place in the Reulation. There be seuen Kings, fiue are fallen, one is now, another not yet com, He said they were seuen Persecutors of the Church: Herod, Nero, Domitianus, Max∣entius, Mahomet, Turka, the last, which is not yet come, was Antichrist, which is already borne at Rome, and should bee there exalted into the Apostolike Sea, as the Apostle faith; He is an Aduersary, and exhalteth himselfe aboue all that is cal∣led GOD, then the wicked man shall bee reuealed, and the Lord shall consume him with the breath of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightnesse of his com∣ming: Why said the King, I thought Antichrist should haue béene borne in Anti∣ch, or Babylon, and of the Tribe of Dan, and ruled in Ierusalem thrée yeares and a halfe, and disputed against Enoch and Elias, and put them to death, and then died himselfe, and that sixty daies of repentance should be giuen to them that were sedu∣ced by his preaching. When King Richard went his iourney, he committed the Custody of his Realme principally to the Byshop of Duresme, and the Bishop of Ely, and to two Lay men: The two Byshops fell at variance for superiority, at length this order was taken by the King, that Duresme should haue vder his custody from Humber is the Scottish Seas. Ely was ordained Chancellor, hauing vnder his gouernment from the said stood of Humber, all the South parts besides: but Ely beeing more ambitious, so practised with the King and his Ambassadors, sending his Letters to the Pope, obtained the authority Legatiue vpon the whole Realm of England, and became so ambitious and proud, that all the Realme cryed out of him, he beeing intollerable vnto the Cleargy and Layty. He assembled a generall Councell at Lon∣don, in colour for Religion, but it was for his owne pompe and oppression of the Clergy and Layty, wonderfully oppressing the Commons. Hee vsed o ride with & thousand Horses: Noble-mens Sonnes were glad to be his Slaues. He married
his Cosens Neeces and kinswomen (I will not say his Daughters) vnto the best Barons and Earles, yet his Grand-father was a poore plowman, and his Father a Cow-heard; and hauing thus tyrannously abused his office, fearing examinati∣on, fled with a few of his trusty seruants to Douer Castle, to haue stolne beyond Sea: and comming in a womans apparell with a pece of cloth vnder his arme, and a mete rod in his hand, being taken vpon susption, his Kercheefe plucked off, his Balaams marke or shauen Crowne appeared: the people wondred, raied and spit on him, and drew him, some by the armes, some by the legges ouer the Sea sands, vntill they brought him to a darke Seller with shame enough to be kept, till the Councell ent for him to the Tower of London, where he was xamined, depri∣ued, and banished the Realme: after restored by King Richard, and sent to Rome, but died by the way. As King Richard returned from the Holy Land, driuen by diresse of weather about the parts of Austria,1192 he was taken in Synaca by Hubald, Duke of the same countrey, and sold to the Emperour for 60000. marke: the Emperour writ of the matter to the King of France, that hee might reioyce with : at lenth King Richard was ransomed for 140000. Crownes, and as he was comming into England, besieging a Castle in Pictauia, tooke his deadly wound, and being sick, amongst others, Fulco Archbishop of Roane came to him, who said to the King:1199 O mighty King thou hast thrée Daughters very vicious, prouide good Husbands for them, least thou incurre great damage, and th vtter ruine: the King called him lying, and mocking hypocrite; saying all the world knoweth I haue no daughters; he answerd yes if it pease your Grace, I meane greedy couetousnsse, mischieuous pride, filthy uxury: againe I say, O King, beware of them and get them marriages: Wherevpon the King calling his Lords and Barrons, laring the matter to them, and said; wherefore heere before you all, I giue my Daugh∣ter swelling pride vnto the proud Templers to Wife; and my Daughter grée∣die Auaric vnto the couetous and Cistertian Monkes; and last of all ty filthy Daughter Luxury, to the ryotous Prelates of the Church, whom I thinke vry meete for them. The King not long after departed without issue, and Iohn his Brother raigned after him: the Arch-bishop putting his crowne vpon his head, swearing him to deend the Church and his good lawes and destroy the euill, and except he thought in his minde to doe this, he charged him not to presume to take vpon him this dig∣nitie: On Iohn Baptist day next after, he went to Normandy, where he was royaly receiued, and a truce made betwixt him and the French King: and the Earle of Flanders, and all the Lords of France that were in league with King Richard, cam to him, and were sworne vnto him. Not long after the French King made Arthur Knight, and tooke homage of him for Normandy, Brittaine, and all his possessions beyond the Sea, and promised him help against King Iohn: after the French King, and King Iohn with their Nobles spake together an houre: the French King asked him much land for himselfe, and King Arthur, whch he would not gant, but departed in wath. The same yeere a Legate came into France, and commanded the King vp∣on paine of interdiction to deliuer one Peter out of prison, which was elected to a Bishoprick, who was deliuered, the same Legate came into England, and commanded King Iohn vpon paine of interdiction to deliuer the Arch-bishop whom hee had kept in prison two yeares, which the King denied vntill he had payed him six thousand markes, because hee had tooke him in harnesse in a field against him, and he swore him hee should neuer beare harnesse against a Christi∣an man. This time King Iohn & his wife were diuorced,1200. because they were in the third de∣grée of kindred, and after by the Councell of the French King, was married vnto the Daughter of the Earle of Anguilla, and then Arthur of Brittan did homage for Brittaine, and other his possessions to King Iohn. This time was strife betwixt the King and the Archbishop of Yorke, because he
would not suffer the Sheriffe to do such affaires as he had to dee in his Dioces for the King, and excommunicated the Sheriffe, and would not go with the King into Normandy, to make the marriage betwixt the French Kinges Sonne and his Néece. The King of France required King Iohn to depart with all his Landes in Nor∣mandy and Pictauia,1202. &c. vnto Arthur his Nephew, else hee would warre against him, which he denying, the next day the French King, with Arthur, set vpon cer∣taine of his Towns and Castles in Normandy, but he was so repulsed of the Eng∣lish, who followed so néere, and so inforced vpon them, that they took Arthur and ma∣ny other Prisoners, and left none to beare tydings home. This Arthur was the Sonne of Geffery, the elder Brother of King Iohn: Geffery was the third Son of Henry the second, and Iohn was his fift Son. Arthur being taken, was brought to the King home, he exhorted him with many gentle words, to leaue th King of France and incline to his Uncl, hee stoutly required the kingdome of England, with all things thereunto belonging, to bee restored to him as lawfull heire of the Crowne: Whereupon he was committed to the Tower of Roane, wher he fini∣shed his life. No Story agréeth certainly how, whether by leaping into the Ditch or no. The next yeare King Iohn lost all his possessions in Normandy,1203 by the force of the French King. This yeare grew great dissention about chusing the Archbishop of Canterbury,1205 the younger sort of the Monkes there, at midnight, and before the old Arch-bishop was buried, and without the Kings assent, elected one Renald, sending hm to the Pope, charging him vpon his oath to be secret, but he reuealed the matter, where∣by the rest of the Monkes sent priuily to Rome, and sent to the King for hs assnt to chuse an Archbishop: the King granted their petition, desiring them to shew a∣uour to Iohn Gray, Bishop of Norwich, which they did, and elected him, and the King sent to Rome at his owne charge, to haue this election ratified: he Suffra∣gans of Canterbury sent likewise to Rome, to haue both those elections frustrated, because their assents were not to them. The next yeare the Pope dcided the matter betwit the Monkes and Suffri∣gans,1206 pronouncing with the Monks, charging the Suffragans and Bishop to med∣dle no more with that election. The next yeare the Pope decided the controuersie betwixt the younger Monkes and the elder Monkes,1207 and condemned both their elections, commanding them to chuse Steuen Langton, Cardinall of Saint Chrisogone for their Arch-bishop; they said they durst not for feare of the King, and that it was preiudiciall to their liber∣ties. He in a fury said, We will you to know, that we haue full power ouer the Church of Canterbury, and are not wont to tarry the consent of Princes; there∣fore Wee command you, vnder pane of the great curse, that you cuse him. Whereupon they all assented, sauing he whom the King had sent for the Arch bi∣shop of Norwich. Upon this the King conceiued great displeasure against the Monkes of Canter∣bury, wherefore he banished 64. of them out of the Land. The King sent Letters to the Pope, sharply expostulating with him, for reu∣ing the Bishop of Norwich, and setting vp one Stephen Langton (vnknowne to him, and brought vp in the kingdome of France amongst his enemies) Archbishop of Canterbury: and that the Monkes without his consent, presumed to promote him, and meruailed that the Pope did not reuolue with himselfe, how necessary his fauour had euer béene to them. What great reuenues had procéeded hence, thether, the like whereof hath not béene receiued out of any Country on this side the Alpes, and that he would stand for his liberties vnto death, nor would not bee so shaken from the election of the Bishop of Norwich, which he séeth so commodious to him, and that if his request were not heard, he would prouide by Seas that there should be no more such gdding to Rome, to export the riches of his Land thither, where∣by he is lesse abled against his Enemies, and that he had sufficient Prelats of his
owne, and hath no néede of any from abroad. Pope Innocentius writ to him againe. Whereas wée haue written gently to you, concrning the matter of Canterbury, you haue written to vs after a threatning sort; and where wée, aboue our duetie, haue giuen to you, you have not giuen to vs ou due∣tie, which you are bound to doe, and though your sauour (as you say) be necessary for vs, yet consider, ours is not a little oporune vnto you; and whereas wee haue not shew∣d the like honour to any Prince, as to you, you haue so much derogated to our Honour, as no Prince besides hath presumed to doe. Where you say, the Archbishop is vn∣knowne to you, and brought vp amongst year enemies. Then be sheweth how learned e was, how he was Prebend at Paris, and of an host stocke, borne an Englishman, and knowne to the King being he wrote to him thrée times before; and saith, that at the Monkes request he sent his Letters once or twise to the King for his assent, al∣though was not the manner of the Sea Apostolike, who hath the fulnesse of the power of the Church of Canterbury, to waite for princes consents in such elections: therefore, according to the Canons of the Fathers, w did proide that the said Church should be no longer  of her Pastor: therefore, being this election hath so orderly procee∣ded vpon a person so meete for the same, we will not for any mans pleasure, nor may without danger of ame and conscience deferre the consummation thereof. And my sonne, seeing we hae respected your Honour more then our duetie is, study to Honour vs so much as utie requireth, that you may deserue fauour at Gods hands and Ours, and least doing contrary, you bring you selfe into such a peke of toubles, that you can∣not ri your selfe againe, for it will fall out, he will haue the better to whom euery knée doth bowe, whose turne I serue in the earth: therefore obey not them that desire vn∣quietnesse, that they might fsh the better in a troubled water. It will not be for your saftie and glory to resist God and the Church, in whose quarrell the blessed and glorious Martyre, Bishop Thomas hath lately shed his bloud; especially seeing your Father, and brother being Kings of England, did giue ouer those thrée wicked Customes into the hands of the Sea Apostoke: but if you will yéeld your selfe humbly into our hands, we will looke that you and yours shall be sufficiently prouided for. Thus haue you the glo∣rious Letter of the proud Pope, I beséech you marke it well. Not long after proceeded a commaundement to certaine Bishops, requiring them by the authoritie Apostolicall, that if the King would not receiue the Prior of Canterbury, and his Monkes, then they should interdict him through his Realme. Whereupon the foure Bishops, of London. El, Winchester, and Herford, shewed the King thereof, but the King refused the same, and would not grant their request, wherupon they pronoun∣ced the said Inerdiction throughout England and Wales, and the Church doores were shut vp, with keyes, and other fastnings. Then the King tooke all the possessions of the foure Bishops into his hands, and apoin∣ted certaine to keepe the Liuings of the Clergie throughout the Realme. The Bishops cursed all that kept, or medled with Church-goods, against the wils of the owners. Then they went to the Bishop of Canterbury, and shewed him all the matter, he promised, he would shortly come to Canterbury himselfe, or send some which should doe as much as himselfe.  came to the King, that the Bishops had beene beyond-Sea, with the Archbishop and were returned. He sent to them Bishops, Earles, and Abbots, to shew that the King would receiue the Archbishop Steuen, and the Prior, and all the Monkes of Canterbury, promising on his behalfe, that he should neuer take any thing of the Church-goods, but would make amends for them taken, and the Church should haue all her Franchices, as amply as in King Edwards time the Confessor. This agreement was concluded, and ingrossed in a payre of Indentures, the saide foure Bishops set their hands to one part, the other part was caried to the King, which he liked well, but he would not make restitution of the Church-goods. The foure Bi∣shops would not agree to put out that Article, then the King sent for the Archbishop to come to him and speake with him at Canterbury, and for his safe conduct to come and goe at his will, sent thrée Iustices to be pledges for him: whereupon the Archbishoppe came to Canterbury, and the King came to Chham, and sent his Treasurer to him to put out the clause of restitution, which he denyed to doe, or any word of the same.
Then the king caused to be proclimed throughout the Realme, that thse that had any Church-liuings, and went beyond-sea, should returne at a certaine day, or loose the Liuings for euer. And that all Sheriffes should inquire if any Church-man, from that day forward, receiued any commaundement from the Pope, to apprehend him and bring him before him: and that they should take into their hands, vnto his vse all the Church Lands, that were giuen by the Archbishop Steuen, or the Priors of Canterbury, from the time of the election of the said Archbishop, and that all the woods of the Archbishop, should be cut downe▪ and solde. Thou the Pope sent ouer two Legats, which resorted to the King at Northampton, where he held his Parliament, and saluted him, they said, they came from the Pope, to reforme the peace of holy Church, and we admonish you, in the Popes behalfe, that you make full restitution of the goods that you haue rauished of holy Church, and of the land, and that you receiue Stephen Archbishop, into his dignity, and the Prior of Canterbury, and his Monkes, and yeeld againe to the Archbishop, all his Lands and rents; and Sir, yet moreouer, that you shall make such restitution to them, as the Church shall thinke good. The King answered, he would gladly grant their request touching the Prior and Monkes of Canterbury, but touching the Archbishop, let him giue vp the Archbisho∣pricke, and I will giue him some other Bishopricke; vpon this condition I will admit him, otherwise not. Then one of them said, holy Church was neuer wont to disgrade Archbishop, with∣out reasonable cause, but to correct Princes, that were disobedient to her. What now, (quoth the King) threaten you me? They said, You haue told vs what is in your heart, now we will tell you what is in the Popes will. He hath wholly interdicted and accur∣sed you, for your wrongs to holy Church, and the Clergy, and we doe accurse all those that shall common with you hereafter, and we assoyle all Earles, Barons, Knights, and others from their homage, fealty, and seruice they should doe to you; and to confirme this, we giue power to the Bishops of Winchester and Norwich; and the same power ouer Scotland, we giue vnto the Bishops of Rochester and Salisbury; and in Wales, wee giue the same power to the Bishops of Saint Dauid, Landaffe, and Saint Assaph. And we send throughout all Christendome, to all Bishops, to accurse all that helpe and com∣fort you in any néede. And we aoyle all your aduersaries, and command them to warr with you, and with all that are enemies to the Church: Then the king answered; What may you doe more? They said, we say to you in verbo Dei, that no heire of yours, af∣ter this day, may be crowned. Then the King sware, if hee had knowne their newes, hee would haue kept them out this tweluemonth. Upon this occasion Pope Inocent commanded ageine, in paine of his great curse, that none should obey King Iohn, nor kéepe company with him, to eate, drinke, common, or Councell with him, or his seruants to doe him any seruice, at bed, boord, hall, or stable. But, the greater part that sled from him by this meanes, of diuerse and sundry diseases, that yeare, died. Betwixt England and France, that yeare, fell great amitie, but false, to the bitter betraying of England. Further, the Pope with his Cardinals, gaue sentence definitiue, that King Iohn should be deposed from his Regal Seat, and promised Phillip the French King full remission of all his , and cleare possession of the Realme of England, vnto him and his heirs, if he did either kill him, or expel him. Moreouer, he wrote vnto other Nations, that they should take vpon them the badge of the Crosse, and reuenge him of the manifold iniuries done to the vniuersall Church, by the cursed Tuke, and Pagan, King Iohn. The next yeare, the French King, manned with the Bishops, Monkes, Prelates, and Priests, and their seruants, began his attmpt, in hope of the Crowne of England, but the English Nauie tooke 300. of the French Kings ships, loaden with wheat, wine, meate, flesh. Armour, and other necessaties for warre, and burnt 100. within the Ha∣uen, and tooke the spoyle of them. The Priests of England prouided them a false prophet, one Peter Wakeield, they noysed daily amonst the Commons, that Christ had twise appeared to him, in shape of a
childe betwixt the Priests hands, once at Yorke, and againe at Pomfret, and breathed, saying: Peace, peace, peace, and that he was rapt in spirit, and hee saw the oyes of Heauen and sorrowes of Hell. He prophecied of King Iohn, that he should raigne no longer then scention day, within the yeare of our Lord 1213. Being asked the que∣stion, he could not tell whether he should be slaine, expelled, or of himselfe giue ouer the Crowne: but he was sure, he nor none of his stocke should raigne, that day once fi∣shed. The King laughed thereat, when he sawe himselfe out of dange. He prated thereof at large so, that they which lned the King, apprehended him, and put him in prison, the King not knowing therof: the fame hereof went through the whole Realme, and the more, becaue he was imprisoned. When the prophesied Ascention day was came, King Iohn commauned his Regal Tent to be spred abroad in the open field▪ and passed the day with his Noble Councel, and men of Honour, in the greatest solemnity that euer hee did before. When that day was passed withall, his enemies turned it to an algoricall vnderstanding, and said, He is no King, for the Pope raigneth, and not he▪ yet raigned he stil, and his sonne after him, to proue the prophet alyer. And because this false prophet had troubled the Realme, peruerted the people, raised the Commons against the King, and was caried ouer the Sea by the Prelates, and gaue incourage∣ment to the French King to inuade the Land, the King commaunded the false prophet should be hanged, and his sonne, least any more should rise of his race. At length, the King seeing himselfe so compassed with enemies, and treasons, and great danger that was like to follow, especially fearing the French King▪ was inforced to submit himselfe to that execrable monster, and Antichrist of Rome, conuerting his Land into the patri∣mony of Saint Peter, as many other had done before him: for hee was sure, though not without shame, being vnder his protection, no forraine Potentate was able to sub∣due him. King Iohn made a Letter obligatory to the Pope, in this manner; Whereas wee haue grieuously offended God, and our mother Church of Rome, and our body and Realme is not a sufficient satisfaction to him that humbled himselfe on the Crosie for vs, through Councell of the noble Earles and Barons, we freely grant vnto God and the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and to our mother Church of Rome, and to our holy Father Pope Inocent the third, and all the Popes that come after him, all the Realme, and patronage of the Churches of England and Ireland, with all the ap∣purtenances, for the remission of our sinnes, and the helpe of our kinsfolkes soules, and of all Christian Soules; so that henceforth we will hold as Farmer to her Mother Church, doing fealtie to the Pope, and his successors. Wee will doe homage to the Popes Legate▪ as it were in the Popes presence; paying or all manner of Custome which we shold doe for the said Realmes yearely 1000. markes of siluer, sauing to vs and our heires, our Iustices and our Franchises, and other realties that appertaine to our Crowne. And for the assurance hereof, we binde our successors and heires, that if any of our heires shall goe against these things, and being warned, will not an end, he shall then loose the foresaid Realmes for euermore. But before the releament of the Interdiction, the king was compelled to giue ouer his Crowne and Scepter to the Antichrist of Rome for fiue dayes, and to receiue it at another Cardinals hands. Then all that had their hearts wounded for obeying their liege King, came and were absolued of their owne Bishops, but the Spirituall men were compelled to séeke their absolution of the Pope. Some of the Clergie were not pleased that the King should be absolued, vntill the King had payed all which any of the Clergie should demaund, and complained of the Popes Legate, that he was too partiall for the King, in the mat∣ter of restitution, and because he went, with the Kings Officers, to the Cathedrall Churches, Abbyes, Priories, and other Churches vacant, and appointed two Iucum∣bants, to euery place, one for the King, and the other for the parties, and commonly compelled the election to passe vpon him whom the king nominated. The Archbishop called a Councell at Oxford, some would not tary, séeing the confysion thereof, others reuiled the king most spiefully, behinde his backe, saying; he ought to bée taken for no Gouernour of theirs, that it grew to a grieuous tu∣mult,
and most grieuous commotion. In this years Pope Inocent held the Councell at Rome, called Lateran; it was pre∣tended to be for the rformation of the Church Uniuersall, and to haue the holy Land recouered from the Turtes: but it was because the Doctrine of the Truth, which they call Here, begin to  very high, by reason whereof the Emprour Otho, and many other Priestes and their Countries were excommunicated. In this Councell he established by publique Deerce, that the Pope should haue the correction of all Christian Princes, and that no Emperour should bee admitted, except he were sorne to him, and Crowned of him. Item, that whosoever spake euil of the Pope, should be punished in Hell, with eter∣nall damnation. Item, Transubstantiation was first inuented, brought in, and a Pix ordined to co∣uer the bread, and bell to be rung bfore it, when it went abroad; and the Masse to bée made equall with Christs Gospell. Item, the Act was established and ratified, of compelling Priests to abiure lawfull miage. Marke how the Priests and their adherents were plagued for handling king Iohn so, Stephen Lancton, Archbishop of Canterbury, in this Councell was excommunicated of Pope Inocent, with all thse Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Barons, and Commons, which had béene of Councell with him in the former Rebellion; and when the Archbi∣shop had  instant sute to be absolued, the Pope answered; I sweare by Saint Peter, thou shal not so soone obtaine thy absolution: for thou hast hurt the king of England, and iniured uch the Church of Rome. He was also suspended from Church, saying Masse, or exercising other Ecclesiasticall Office, because he would not execute the Popes curse vpon the said Rebellious Barons, and cursed all the other rebels with bll, book, and candle, and they appealed to the generall Councell. In the same yeare, many were summoned to Rome, because they would not consent to the Kings deposing, and submitting to the Pope. Thus the whole Realme was mi∣serably deuided into two factious, some Lords, and Gentlemen, a great number followed the King, and loued his doings. Others fled to the French King, desiring of him his eldest sonne Lodowicke, and they would elect him their King, and that he would send with him a mightie Armie, to subdue the King: but as certaine Lords and Barons were chusing Lodowicke for their king, the Pope sent a Cardinall to stop their rash and cruell attempts, charging the French king, vpon his alegiance, with all possible power, to auour, and deend King Iohn of England, his Feoday, or Tenant. Tho French king answered. The Realme of England was neuer yet part of Peters patrimony, neither now is, nor euer should be. No Prince may pledge, or giue away his Kingdome, without the lawfull consent of his Barons: If the Pope shall se vp such a president, he shall, at his pleasure, bring all Christian Princes, and their Kingdomes to naught, Though he be my aduersary, I much lament that he th brought the noble ground, and Quéene of Prouinces, vnder miserable . The chiefe of his Lords standing by, cryed by the bloud of God, in whome we hope to be saued, we will sticke in this Article to the loosing of our heads, that no King may put his and vnder tribute, and make his Nobilitie captiue seruants. Lodowicke  that his purposed iourney might not vs let, for the Barons haue elected mee, and I will not loose my right, but fight for it to death, and I haue frindes there: to which the King answered not, belike doubting somewhat, because he saw all of the Priests, that they might liue licentiously in wealth, frée from the Kings yoake. The same time a such treasons and conspiracies were wrought by Clergie men, that the King knew not where to finde trustie friends. At length he went to Douer, looking for ayde from other quarters, to whom resorted a wonderful number of men from Flan∣ders, , Holland, and many other parts. It was reported the Pope writ to them to ade him. First, bcause he submitted his kingdome to his protection, and he had ta∣ken vpon him the  of the white Crosse, to winne againe Ierusalem. Thirdly be∣cause he had gotten by him, England, and Ireland, and was like to loose both.
Upon the Anciation day of our Lady, hee ooke vpon him his voyag again he Turkes, to recouer Ierusalem. He told his seruants  did prospe with him since he submitted himselfs and his kingdomes to the Church of Rome. In this yeere, one Simon Langton was chosen  of Yorke, but he was de∣posed by the Pope, because he was brothe to Stephen rchbishop of , wm the Pope hated, hauing brought him vp of naught, and ound him so , and he places the Bishop of  in his oome. The  night the Pope renewed his curse vpon the king of France his , for vsurping vpon king Iohn, and against the said Simon Langton, and Geruas Hobruge, for prouoking him to the same, with wonerfull , cousing, the els to ring, cales to be ghted, and doores opened, the  to be red, com∣mitting them wholy to the Deul, and communded the ishops and  to poblish it through the whole Realme, to the errour of all subiects. The  Simon, and Ger∣uais derd him and appealed vnto the  all Councell, for Lodowicke and them∣selues. The Magestrates, and citizens of London did likewise  at the Popes commandements, and kept company with the excommunicated, at able and Church, in contempt of the Pope, and . Lodowicke, at  taking him∣selfe, king, made Simon Langton hig Chancellour, and Geruais Hobruge, his chiefe Preache: vy whose daily Preaching, the Bar, and Citizens bring excommunicated, caused all the Church doores to be opened, and  sung, and Lodowicke was sit for them in all paints. About this time Cardinall Pandulphus was made Bishop of Norwich, for gathering Peter , an old illage of the Pope, & other great labours one by him for the Pope. About this time one Uicont of Meinn, a  man, which came ouer with Lodo∣wicke, felll cke, and called to him certaine English Baron, and said; I pittie the de∣struction that is comming towards you and your Realm. Prince Lodowicke hath sworne a great oath, and sixtéene of his Earles and Nobes are of  with him, that if he obtaine the Crowne of England, he will anish and depriue of their Lands and goods, all that h now findeth to goe against their leach King, and are Traytors to him; vpon my Faith, nw lying at Gods mercie, I was one that was  to the same: and with teares, he said, take héede in time, your King for a  hath kept you vnder, but if Lodowicke preuaile, he will put you from all, hee had them kéepe his councel, and so he dyed. This trobled the Barons, and seeing withall  Prince Lo∣dowicke obtained by warres, he gaue to French men in spite of them, saying they were but Traytors. They at length concluded to submit themselues,
neuer drunke before: I trust this Wassell shall make all England glad, and dranke a great draught thereof, the king pledged him: the Munke went away, and  bust out, and hee dyed, and had euer after thrée Monkes to sing continually Masse for his Soule, confirmed by their generall Chapter. I would you would see how religiously they bestow: heir confessions, absolutions, and Masses. King Iohn feeling himselfe not well, asked for Symon the Monke, they answered▪ he was dead; then the tooke his Chariot, and departed, and dyed within three dayes. He admonished that his Sonne Henry would learne by his example, to be genle and le∣uing to his natiue people. He being imbalmed, his bowels were bured in Crompton Abbey, his Soldiers olded his Corps triumphantly in Armour, and honourably buried him in the Cathedrall Church or Worcester, hauing raigned 17. yeares, 6. moneth, and odde daies. After whose death the Princes, Lords, Barons, and strangers, that were on the kings part, with the Councell of the Legate Gualdo, proclaimed Henry his sonne king, and at Gloster, with the Earle there, they annointed and Crowned him King, b the Legate Gualdo, assisted with the Bishops of Winchester, and Bath, and called him Henry the third. The Pope sent with all spéede, that they should mightily stand ith the young king, being but ten yeares old, and defend England with Armur, and his thundring curses against Lodowicke. Hée confirmed his Legat Gualdo, and committed to his discretion all that appertained to his Office, none to appeale from him. Hee compelled the Pre∣lates to bée sworne to the young King, and punished them which refused, Th Bishop of Winchester laid a heauie talke vpon his beneficed men, to helpe the king in his warres. Gualdo left not one beneficed man vnpunished, that had taken part with the French King. In this yeare,1219. Gualdo was sent for home to Rome▪ for by this time he had welfao∣redly vnladen the purses of the Clergie men, and returned with all his bags well stuf∣fed, leauing Cardinall Pandulfe behind him, to supply his Baliwicke The Bishop of Lincolne, not long before, paid 1000. markes for recouery of his Office, and an hun∣dred markes to the Legate, for his goodwill; so were other holy Prelates and Priests taught by his example. Inocentius Pope, condemned Almerius, a worthy Bishop, for an hereticke, for tea∣ching, and holding against Images: also he condemned the Doctrine of Ioachim Abbas, as before, for heresie. He brought in first the paying of priuie tyhes, and the receiuing once at Easter, and the reseruation of the Sacrament, and the going before it with a bell and a light. He stirred vp Otho against Phillip the Emperour, because he was elected without his will, whereupon followed much slaughter in Germany; and against Otho, which he had made Emperour, he set vp Fredericke king of Cile, and caused the Archbishop of Mayence to excommunicate him▪ and depose him of his Empire: for which cause, the Princes of Germany did inuade his Bishopricke, and burned his possession: all was because Otho held certaine Cities, Townes, and Cstles, which the Pope said be∣longed to him. In his time came the order of Blacke Friers, called the Preaching Fryers; it began of one Dominicke a Spaniard, who after he had Preached ten yeares against the Al∣bigenses, and others that held against the Pope, comming to Lateran, desired to haue his Order of Preaching Fryers confirmed, which the Pope refused, vntill hee dreamt that the Church of Lateran was readie to fall, vntill Dominicke came and propped it vp with his sholders, and so preserued it. The Pope waking, called Dominicke to him, and grn∣ted his request. Dominicks mother being great with child, dreame she had a wolfe in her wombe, which had a burning torch in his mouth, the which dreame, the Preachers of that order aduance to their glory. In his time came vp the order of the Minorits, of one Frances an Italian, hee left off shooes, had but one cote of vile cloth, and an hempen cord about his middle, and so apparelled his Disciples, teaching them to fulfill the perfection of the Gospell,
walke in pouertie, and holy simplicitie; this rule was confirmed by Pope Innocent. Many Nobles, and others, in Rome, builded manflons for him and his disciples, he was like∣wise strt to his flesh, leauing clothes▪ in winter, he  himselfe in Ice and snow, he called pouerty his Lady, he kept nothing ouer night, he was so desirous of Martyrdome, that he went to Siria to the Solda, who receiued him honourably: it is written that Christ and his Saints marked him with fiue wounds. These Franciscans, or begging Fers, though they haue but one Rule, they haue many Orders, there by 101. seueral sorts of Friers and Nunnes, which the reader, if he be disposed, may see in the booke at lrge, with their names, Fol 70. Hildegardis a Nunne a Prophetesse, liued in the yeare 1170. She reprehendeth grieuously the abhominations of the lues of the Spiritual Papists, the contempt of their Office, and destruction of Gods children with these words; Now is the Law neglected amongst the Spirituall, which neglct to Preach, and to doe good things. The masters and Prelates, sleepe and neglct Iustice. The Church appeared to her in the shape of a , her face  with dirt, and her  rent, complaining that the Priests did not shine ouer the people neither in Doctrine, not example; but contrary, did driue the in∣nocent lambe from them, that Ecclesasticall order grew worse and worse, and Priests destroyed the law of God, and did not teach it; and propheth to them Gods heauie wrath and punishments. She prophesieth likewise of the reformation of Religion, and saith, it shall be most godly, saying; Then shall the Crowne of the Apostolicall honour bee deuided, be∣cause there shall be found no religion amongst them, and the name of that dignity shall bée despised, and they shall st ouer them other men, and other Archbishops, and the Apostolicall order shall haue scarce Rome, and a ew other Countries thereabout, vn∣der his Crown; and this shall be done partly be wares, and partly by a common con∣sent of Spirituall and Seculer persons, then Iustice shall florish, and men shall ho∣nestly apply themselues to the auncient Custoes and disciplines of the ancient. She propheseth likewise of Fryers; There shall rise a sencelesse, proud, greedy people, without Faith, and subtile, which shall eate the snes of the people, preten∣ding in Order of certaine deuout persons, vnder the dissimuled cloake of beggers, prferring themselues before others in fayned deuotion, in puffed vp knowledge, and pretened holinesse, walking without , and the eae of God, finding out ma∣ny new mischiefes, strong and sturdy. Of wise men, and Christes faithfull that Or∣der shall bee accursed; they shall cease from labour, and studie for quietnesse, rather ta∣king on them the Order of flatterers then beggers, they shall study altogether how to resist the Preachers of the trueth, and kill them with the mightie. The Deuill shall roote foure vices in them, Flattery, Enui, Hypocrisie, and Backbiting: that by flattery, they may hae boutifull gifts; that by Hypocricie they may please men, and by Backiting, dispraise others, and extoll themselues, for the praise of men, and sducing of the simple. And in example of Martyres, hauing no deuotion, shall preach instantly. They shall speake euill of Princes, and withdraw the Sacraments from Pastors, rereuing the almes of the poore, weake, and néedy; and conueying themselues into a multitude of people, being familier with women, teaching them how to deceiue their husbands, and friends, and conuey away their goods by stealth, and giue it them, and say that they wuld pray for them; so that they couer other mns faults curiously, and forgt their owne vtterly. They shall take away things frm Pirates, théeues, Church-pillers, from Usurers, Hereticks, and Apostates, Adulterers, lecherous wo∣men, bud, from the mightie, priured Marchants, false Iudges, Soldiers, Tyrants, Princee liuing against the Law; and they shall follow the Deuill, and swéetnesse of sinne, deicatenesse of life and  to their eternall damnation, all men shall sée this, yet shall they daily become more indurate and wicked. But when their iniquities, and seducings shall bee tryed, men shall cease to giue them, then shall they go about hungry, and looking downe to the earth like madde dogges, and shrinking in their neckes, like Turtles, that they may bée filled with bread, then shall the people say, Wo vnto you wretches, children of sorrow, the world seduced you, the Deuill snared your moths, your flesh slippery your heart without taste, your minds wandring,
your eyes delighted in vanitie, and madnesse, your pnches desire sweete dishes, your feete swift to mischiefe; consider how you were accounted  and zealous, poore rich men, and simple stout men; but you were deuout slatterers, false betrayers, peruerse backe iers, holy hypocrites, peruertrs of the truth, too much strickt and precise, proud, shamelesse, and vnstable Doctors, delicate Maryres, professors for lucre sake, meeke slanderers, religious couetous, lowly proud, godly hard men, pleasnt lyers, peaceable persecuors, oppressors of the simple, inuenters of euill Sects, vnmercifull lo∣uers of the world, sellers of pardons, spoylers of benefices, vnprofitable makers of prayers, seditious conspirers, dronken whisperers, desirous of honour, curious in mens faults, the extortioners of the world, vnsatiable preachers, pleasers of men, seducers of women, so wes of discord. Moses well prophesied of them in his Canticle; A people without Councell and Wisdome, would God they were wise and vnderstood, and foresaw the latter ends to come, you builded aloft, and when you could build no higher you fell downe. Like Simon Magus whom the Lord repressed, and strooke with a mightie plagne, so you likewise haue fallen through your deceiueable wickednesse, lies, , the people shall say to them, away teachers of peruersitie, subuerters of verity, brethren of the Shunamite, father of Hereticall praie, false apostles, you séeme to follow the life of the Apostles, but follow not their steps one ot, you children of iniquitie, we will none of your trades and waies, for presumptuous pride hath de∣ceiued you, and insatiable concupiscence subuerted your erronious heart, and when you coueted to climbe vp higher and higher, then, by the iust Iudgement of God, you haue fallen downe to euerlasting shame. About the same time that the Franciscans, and Dominicke Fryers began, sprang vp the Crobearers, or Crouche Fryers, by Pope Innocent the 3. who raised an Army, signed with the Crosse on their brest, to  against the Albenses, whom the Pope and his sect account Hereticks. About the parts of Tholous, I finde in some records, that the opinion of them was sound enough, professing against the wanton wealth, pride▪ and tyranny of the Prelates, denying the Popes authoritie to haue ground in Scriptures, neither could they away with the ceremonies or traditions, as Images, Pardons, Purgatory, calling them blasphemous occupyings; many of them were slaine at times, and burned by the Pope, and Symon Ecclesiasticus, with o∣ther moe. After King Iohn, as aforesaid, had submitted himselfe, and his whole Realme vn∣der tribute to the Pope it is incredible how the insatiable aarice of the Romaines did oppresse the Commons, and all estates of the Realme, especially the Churchmen, who, what for the Pope, for the Legats, for the Holy Land, and other subtill deuises to get away their money, were brought to such slauery and penury, that whereas the King durst not, or could not remedy their exclamations, they were almost driuen by fore to remedy their owne wrongs, that they writ to the Bishops, and other Ecle∣sasticall Gouernours, that they had rather die then be thus confounded of the Ro∣mans, that it was not vnknowne to them, how they had deposed men, and giuen away the Bnefices after their owne lust, and how they haue thundred excommuni∣cations against you, if you place any, in any Spirituall Liuing, in any of your Di∣oces within the Realme, vntill fue Romaines in euery Dioces, and in euery Ca∣thedrall, such as the Pope shall name, be prouided for, to the valew of 100. lib. yearely; and what other grieuances they doe inflict to the Layty, and Nobles. Wherefore, w considering the rigorous austeritie of the omanists, which take vpon them to Iudg and condemne vs, and lay on vs intollrable burdens: therefore vpon a full aduise had a∣monst vs, we haue though good rather to resist then to bee subict to their intollerable oppresions, and greater slaury to be looked for hereafter. Therefore we straitly com∣mand you, as your friends, that you doe not intermeddle, or take part with them, leting you vnderstand for trueth, that in case you shall bee found culpable herein, not onely your oods and possessions shall bee in danger of burning, but ao your bodies, shall incurre the same perill as shall the said Romish opprssors. In the raigne of Henry the third, who succeeded King Iohn, and raigned 57. yeares, Cardinall Otho was sent to the King with Letters to him and other
places for exactions of Money: the Letters were to require for the Pope two Prebends in euery Cathedrall Church, a portion of euery Abbot, and of euery Couent, as much as belonged to one Monke: their good being equally deuided, because the Church of Rome of greatly slandered, that none could proceede there in any cause without great guifts and expences, whereof the pouertie of the Church is the cause; therefore it is sit, that you as naturall Children should helpe and succour your Mother, for if wee should not receiue of you and other good men, we should lacke, which were a great dishonour to our dignity. The King answered, Hee could doe nothing, because it concerned the Commons, and he assmbled a Councell, hee was answered, they could conclude nothing, because the Arch-Byshoppe, the King, and other whom it concered were not there. The next yeare the same Cardinall came againe into England, and summo∣ned all the Clargy to another Councell, to be held in the Cathedrall Church of S. Paule in London, for redressing of diuers and sundry matters concerning Benifi∣ces Religion, and other abuses of the Church: putting them in feare and hope, some to lose, and some to obtaine spirituall promotions at his handes. Diuers preious rewards were offered him, in Palries, in rich Plate, and Iewels, in costly and sumptuous Garments richly furred, in Coyne and Uictuall, &c. The Bi∣shop of Winchester sent him fifty fat Oxen, and hundred coome of pure Wheat, eight tun of chosen Wne, likewise other Bishops offered to the Cardinals Boxe after their ability. The Cardinall commaunded, at the West end of Saint Paules Church, a high solemne Throne of great State to bee prepared, rising vp with a glorious Scaf∣fold: before the Cardinall begunne his Sermon, there happened a great discord betwixt the Arch-byshops of Canterbury and Yorke, about sitting on the right hand of the glorious Cardinall: the Cardinall shewed them a Bull of the Pope, in the middest of which was pictured the Crosse, and Paule pictured on the right side of the Crosse, and Peter on the left: saying, yet there is no con∣tention betwixt these two, yet Saint Peter for the Prerogatiue of his Keyes, and for the Preheminence of his Apostle-ship, and Cathedrall Dignitie, sée∣meth most worthy to be placed on the right side, and from that time foorth, the Arch-Byshop of Canterbury hath enioyed the Dignity and Prheminence of the ight hand. The Cardinall, sitting like a God in the middest betwixt them, made his Ser∣mon vpon these words; In the middest of the Seate, and round about, were foure Beasts, full of eyes behind and before. He compared them about him to the foure Beasts, declaring how they ought to haue eyes before and behind; that is, they must be carefull and prouident, as well in disposing secular thinges, as wise and circumspect in spirituall matters, contriuing, and ioyning wiselie thinges past with thinges to come. And this was the greatest effect of his Clearkely Sermon. Then he gaue forth sundry Constitutions and Statutes, for ordering of Chur∣ches, dedicating Temples, for seauen Sacraments, for giuing Orders, farming Benefices, Collations, and resignations, Priests apparell, and single life, for ea∣ting of flesh in religious Houses, for Arch-deacons, Byshops, Proctors, &c. The King dreading the Commons, willed him to repaire home to Rome, but he could not so be rid of him, but hee renued his commission, and still applyed himselfe to his Haruest, gleaning and raking what hee could, writing his Letters to euery Byshop or Arch-Deacon, for procurations to beare his charges, and withall, to be spéedily collected and sent to him. Prouided, that the summe collected, should not excéede aboue foure Markes of a Liuing, and where small Liuings were two Liuings to ioyne, and if any contradicted or gaine-sayed him, to excommuni∣cate them. And they sent forth Preachers and Fryers in all places, to perswade men to fight
against the common enemy the Turke, whom when they haue bound with a vow, and signed with the crosse, then they send their Bulles to release them for money, and the Bishops and Arch-deacons to proclaime it. The Pope was not ashamed to require the fift part of euery Ecclesiasticall liuing, and further, hee promised and gaue to the Romanes, for helping him in warrs against Fredericke the Emperour, which had married King Iohns daugh∣ter: the gift of all the spirituall liuings in England, belonging to the religious houses, and therevpon sent expresse Commandement to the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, and other foure▪ Bishops ioined with him that they should prouide spiri∣tuall liuings, for three hundred Romanes, in the best Benefites in England, at the next voidance, so that the said Bishoppes should bee suspended in the meane time from all collation of Benefice: the Arch-bishop séeing their vnreasonable oppres∣sions being not able to endure it, went into France. And further one Petrus Rubeus, was sent from the Pope, to goe from Bi∣shop, to Bishop, Abbot and Abbot, telling them such a Bishop, such an Abbot hath giuen thus much vnto the Popes Holines, trusting you also will not be behinde, in a matter that so much concernes the good of the Church, by which cunning sub∣tiltie he gathered together into the treasurie of the Church such a Masse of money as is almost incredible to beleeue. At length the Bishoppes, Abbots, and Arch-deacons came to the King, whose Father they had so obstinately resisted and repugned; lamentably com∣plaining of their extreame miseries, of the vnmeasurable exactions of the Pope, so all the Prelates were called together, and vppon talking together made many exceptions aganst the same: the Legate and his followe hearing these allegations, seeing their owne vtter confuson, were the lesse impor∣tunate. Not long after this followed a generall Councell at Lyons, in the Kingdom of France, called by Pope Innocentius: in the which Councell the English Na∣tion did exhibite sundry Articles of all their greeuances, and that the Italians did succeed one another in the benefices, whose language they could not vnderstand, and that there was no preaching in their Churches, nor no almes giuen to the poore, and that there came fresh Letters from the Pope, commanding the Prelates to finde at their proper costs and charge for a whole yeare, some ten armed souldiers, some more, some lesse, to be ready at the Popes commandement, when, or where be should appoint. After these terrible greeuances and enormities, the States of England consulting together, directed their Letters to the Pope for Reformation: First the Abbots and Priors, then the Bishoppes and Suffragans, after the Nobles and Barons, and last of all the King, but all was neuer the better. Not long after the Pope sent for new tallage and exactions, which when it came to the Kings eare hee vehemently disturbed writ seuerally to euery Bishop, in manner following. THat whereas wee haue heeretofore written to you, once, twice, thrice, both by our Priuy Seale, and our Letters Patents, that you should leuy for the pope no exactions, either vpon the Clergy, or Laitie, yet you vilepending our comman∣dement, and contrarie to our prouision made in our last Councell at London, haue proceeded in collecting the said your taxes and tallages wherevpon wee greatly maruell and are mooued: Wherefore we straitly will and command you, that you doe so no more, as you will enioy our auour and your possessions; and if you haue made any such collection or gathering, that you suffer it not to be transported out of the Realme, but kéepe it vntill the returne of the Ambassa∣dours,
and that you make this our inhibition common to your Arch-Deacons and Officials. At length the Ambassadors came home, bringing word that the Pope was great∣ly displeased with the Realme, saying; Rex Anglorum qui iam recalcitrat & frede∣riscat suum habet consilium, ego vero & meum habeo, quod & sequar, &c. And that they were halfe counted Schismatickes, for speaking in the Kinges behalfe, and could no more be heard, the King being insenfed heere-with, sent out Proclamati∣ons through all the Realme, that none should consent to any taxe of Money for the Pope: he hearing of it, in cruell rage sent to the Prelats, vppon paine of inter∣diction to prouide the saide summes of Money by the Feast of Assumption, the King for feare of the Pope, durst not stand to the liberties of the Church. Moreouer, the gulfe of the Romish Auarice waxt so immeasurable, that he sha∣med not, vpon his curse, to aske the third part of Church goods, and the yearely fruit of all vacant Benefices. Otho comming to Oxford, lying in the house of Osney, was receiued with great honour, the Schollers presenting him honourable Dishes and rewards Dinner being done, they came to welcome him; comming to the Gate, the Porter an Ita∣lian asked what they would haue, and holding the doore halfe open, with contume∣lious tearmes, thrust them out, they with force thrust open the gate, and came in, the Romaines within fell to alarum by the eares together, some of the Schollers going or Weapons, the Maister Cooke cast scalding liquor, wherein meat was sod∣den, in the face of a poore Scholler, an Irish-man, which waighted for Almes: ano∣ther Scholler a Welsh-man séeing it, shot the Cooke thorough with an Arrow, and killed him: Whereupon was a great clamour, the Cardinall hearing the tumult, like a valiant Romaine, ranne vp into the stéeple, and locked himselfe vntill mid∣night. The Schollers sought all corners for the Legate, crying out; Where is that Usurer, that Symniacks, that Proylar and Extortioner of our Liuings and Monies? Who peruerteth the King, and subuerteth the Kingdome, enriching him∣selfe with our spoyles: The Cardinall heard all this and held his peace, and conuay∣ed himselfe by night vnto the King, and the King sent to Oxford a garison of armed men to deliuer the Romaines which were hid, for feare of the Schollers. One Odo a Lawyer, and thirty of the Schollers were apprehended and carried to Walling∣ford Castle, and thence in Charts to London, and by much intreaty of the Bishops, were brought bare-footed to the Legats doore, where they pardoned, and the Uniuersity released of interdiction. The State of Germany, and of the Emperour Friderick the second, was then as much or more pittifull then that of England, who were so persecuted by Pope In∣nocentius, Honorius, Gregorius, Celestinus, Innocentius the fourth, infamed with excommunications, and did commonly warre against them in open fielde, and all with English mens Money: first they made him Emperour against Otho, whom they depriued, then for clayming his right in Apulia and Sicilia they accursed him, when they had warred against him, they sent him to fight against the Turkes, who recouered Ierusalem, Nazareth, and Ioppe, from the Souldane. Whilst hee was occupied in these Warres, these vnholy Fathers inuaded his Lands and possessi∣ons at home, subduing Apulia vnder his owne possession, and inhibiting his Soul∣diours to goe ouer to him, and when the Emperour sent to the Pope and other Christian Princes his Letters gratulatory, declaring what God wrought by him against the Turkes, the Pope stayd the Messengers, kept the Letters close, and caused it to be noysed abroad that the Emperour was dead, and the said Pope Gregorie the ninth wrote to the Souldane, that he should not render the holy Land into the Emperours handes. The Emperour hearing this stirre of the Pope, tooke truce with the Souldane for tenne yeares, and repayreth home, and driueth the Popes Army out of Apulia, and recouered all the Pope had gotten from him before: The Pope laid his cursse vpon the Emperour, for making truce with the Souldane, and conspired with the Tuscanes and Lombards against him: the Em∣peror,
at the instigations of the Princes, glad to compose with the Tyrant▪ was faine to ransome the absolution of the Pope for ten hundred thousand ounces of gold, and yet hee sent to the Princes of Germany, charging them to admit none of the Emperors stocke to be King of the Romaines, and stirred vp the Citties of Italy against him. The Emperor vnderstanding his politick and subtile traynes, marched into Italy, where he put downe the Rebels, and recouered againe the Citties be∣longing to the Empire. Wherefore a new excommunication was laid vpon him, and all his Subiects released of obedience and loyalty, and much indulgences and eternall life promised to them that would fight against him. After Gregorie, suc∣céeded Celestinus the fourth, who raigned not long. After him, succéeded Innocenti∣us the fourth, who following the steps of his predecessors, called a generall Councell at Lyons, as is before mentioned, where standing vp, he cited the Emperour: his Legate required lawfull time for him to come, which hee would not graunt, but in his fury denounced him accursed, and depriued him of his Imperiall Dig∣nity, charging him with periury and sacriledge, writing Libels of defamation to all Kings. The Emperour made purgation of these landers, charging the Pope, not with fained, but true and most hainous crimes, of slander, falshood, perdition, periury, rebellion, hypocrisie, and prooueth him by his Letters, to be very Antichrist. Hee wrote to the French King, that hee much marueiled that the prudence and wise∣dome of the French-men, did not more quicke then others sée the Popes subtilty and couetousnesse,1250. purposing to subdue all Realmes as he hath done England, and doth presumptuously achieue to subdue the Maiesty of the Imperiall Crowne. This Emperor departed to Apulia, and there dyed, being poysoned, as some thinke, by meanes of the Pope. In the time of this Innocent, dyed one Robert Grosted, Byshop of Lincolne, a famous learned man, as that time serued, whose Sermons to this day are extant, in the Quéenes Library at Westminster. There is one speciall Sermon written to Innocent. Cestrensis writeth, that he was greeued for the exactions of the Pope in England, and would not admit of the Popes Nephew to be Canon of his Church. Writing to the Pope, that hee could not admit such into his Church, which did neither know themselues, nor their charges: hee was therefore called to Rome and excommunicated, who appealing from the Pope to Iesus Christ, short∣ly after departed. Two yeares after the said Pope being asleepe, one apparelled Bishoplike, appeared vnto him, and striking him with his Staffe, saide; Surge miser & veni in iudicium, the next day after, the Popes Bed was found bloody, and he dead. After Henry the third,1307. succeeded his Sonne Edward the first, who raigned thirty fiue yeares, Edward the second his Sonne succeeded him, who raigned twentie yeares, he was deposed, and being in prison, was striken in with a hot Spit. Af∣ter whom, succeeded Edward the third, in whose raigne Calis was first wonne, and after the French King taken Prisoner,1347. and brought into England, and ranso∣med for 3000000. Florens. At which time happened the great conflict be∣twixt the Townes-men of Oxford and the Uniuersitie, whereof a remembrance remaineth to this day. In whose raigne two Friers Minorites were burned in Auignion,1374. and in his raigne was Maister Iohn Wiclife Reader of Diuinity in Ox∣ford.
THE FIFT PART OF THE ECCLESIASTICALL History containing the Actes of Martyrs. ALthough the Holy Ghost raised vp many before Wickliffe, to van∣quish the great errors which daily did preuaile in the world, as Berengarius, Bruno of Aniow▪ Oklens the second, Valden: Marsili∣us, of Pado: Iohn of Gandauo: Okchammus, with diuers o∣thers of that schoole, yet because they were not very famous nor notable, we will begin at Wickliffe, at whose time the furious fire of persecution seemed to take his originall.1371 In those great and troubelous times, and horrible darknes of ignorance, what time there séemed in a manner to bee no one so little sparke of pure doctrine remai∣ning, this foresaid Wickliffe, by Gods prouidence, sprang vp, throgh whom the Lord would first waken, and raise vp againe the world, which was ouermuch drowned, in the déepe streames of humane traditions, when hee had long time professed Diuini∣tie in Oxford, and perceiuing the true doctrine of Christs Gospel to bee adulterate with so many filthy inuentions of Bishops, sects of Monkes, and dark errors: first, he began to touch the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, in which he tooke much paines, protesting in open schoole that it was his purpose to call back the Church from her Idolatry in this point, but this sore could not bee touched, without the great griefe of the whole world: first the whole glut of Mnkes and Fryers were mad with him, fighting for their altars, panches and bellies: after them the Priests; after them the Bishops took the matter in hand; at last when there power seemed not sufficient to withstand the truth, which then was breaking out, they ran wholl to the thunder-bolts of the Bishop of Rome, against them all: this valiant Wickliffe happely maintained the cause of the Sacrament, prouing it by Scriptures, and the ancient Doetors: hee refused the Doctors since the thousand yeares after Christ, saying, that after these yeares Satan was loosed, and the life of man hath been most subiect to errors, and that the simple and plaine truth doth appeare and consist in the Scriptures, when all humane traditions must be referred: he proued most stoutly, in the Sacrament, the substance with bread, the accident not to be pre∣sent. As long as King Edward the third liued, he was well enough defended by him against all there woluish cruelty, yet in the last yeare of his raigne, hee was taken by the Bishop of Canterbury, at the instigation of the Pope, and put to silence in presence of the Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord Henry Piercy, yet after by the fa∣uour of certaine Noble-men he kept not long silence, but King Edward being dead, Pope Gregory neuer ceased to moue King Richards minde, by his Letters, Bishops and Bulles, to persecute Wickliffe, and his adherents: by this meanes the examina∣tion of Wickliffe being at hand before the Bishops of Canterbury and London, a
certaine Noble man called Lewis Clifford, comming in amongst the Bishops, com¦manded them that they should not proceede, with any defintiue sentence against Wickliffe, wherewith they were so amazed, and their combes so cut, that they had not a word in their mouthes to answere: and when the Bishops and Wickliffe were come together in the Archbishops Chappell at Lambeth, the Citizens and common people of London by force brake in vpon them, and disturbing the Session, were not afraid to intreat in the cause of Wickliffe, by which meanes he escaped, after hee had made a short protestation, to be a true Christian, and to professe and defend the law of Christ as long as hee breathed, and if hee should erre hee would aske God forgiuenes, and submit himselfe to the correction of our holy Mother the Church, and that hee woud set forth in writing, the Articles hee was now accused for, the which to death hee would defend, which all Christians, especially the Pope and all Priests ught to defend: for vnderstand the conclusions after the sence of the Scrip∣tures, and holy Doctors, and I am ready to expound them if they seeme contrarie to the faith. The first conclusion of IOHN WICKLIFFE, exhibited in the Conuocation of certaine Bi∣shops at Lambeth. 1 THat none but Christ was ordained, and not Peter and all his off-spring poli∣tiquely to rule ouer the world for euer; for in the 1 Cor. 15. Then shall the end come when he shall deliuer vp his kingdome to God his Father, when hee shall haue made voide all princely dominion: it seemeth probable that they defraud her of her reward, and vniustly defer to take vengeance vpon the body of the diuell which he hath deserued. 2 The substance of the second was that by no power any writing was to be ca∣nonized, contemning the Scripture, this was spoke to one that commended mans writing, and contemned the Scripture. 3 That euery man in grace iustifying, hath not onely right to all things, but aboue all the good things of God, as appeareth by the 24. of Mathew, verily hee shall make him ruler ouer all his goods: and in the eight to the Romans, God spa∣red not his Sonne, but gaue him for vs, how then did hee not giue vs all things with him: this allureth vs to loue God, that hath chosen vs to so many great and true riches. 4 None can giue any temporall Dominion or gift, but as the Minister of God; the Apostle saith Iesus Christ was a Minister, let not his Uicar then which should be a seruant of seruants be ashamed to vse the ministerie of the Church, for his pride of seculer Dominion, with his worldly stile, seemeth blasphemie, and the aduance∣ment of Antichrist: especially, where they repute the Scriptures as cockle, and the determination of all controuersies of Scripture in themselues. 5 As sure as God is: the Temporall Lords may lawfully and meritoriously take away the riches from the Church, when they doe offend: yet I say, that it is not lawfull to doe it by the authoritie of the Church, and for lacke of some spirituall gouernour, and in case when the Ecclesiasticall Minister, being strayed from the Ca∣tholique faith, is to be corected and punished. 6 The Uicar of Christ is not able by his Buls, of himselfe, not by the consent of his colledge, to make a man the more able, or disable a man, that ought to procéed of God, but he onely in the Name of God, to notifie to the Church whom God hath enabled, else he is as presumptuous as Lucifer, for in the 1. Cor. 3. All our sufficiency commeth of God. 7 A man cannot he excommunicated to his hurt, except hee be first excommuni∣cated
of himselfe, as Chrysostome saith, None can be hurt except sinne hurt him▪ which takes away Gods helpe and ayde, as in Esay 59. Your sinnes haue seperated betwixt God and you. 8 That none ought to be exommunicated but in Gods cause, and wee ought to forgiue all priuate iniuries: Math. 18. If thy brother offend thee, forgiue him, euen to 70. times 7. times. 9 An Excommunication doth not binde, except pronounced against the aduer∣sarie of Gods Law: For if God iustifie, who can condemne? 10 There is no power giuen by the example of Christ, or his Apostles, to ex∣communicate any for denying of Temporalties: in the ninth of Luke, Christ rebu∣keth his Disciples, when they would haue fire come downe from Heauen to ex∣communicate them that would not entertaine them; You know not (said he) what Spirit you are of. 11 The Disciples of Christ haue no power to exact, by any Ciuill authoritie, Temporalties by censures, vntil Churches were indued with possessions: Christs Disciples, what need souer they had, they did onely exhort men to willing almes. 12 It is not possible, by the absolute power of God, that the Pope, or any Chri∣stian, can binde or loose at their pleasure, by what meanes souer, yet may they ex∣act temporall things by Ecclesiasticall Censures incidentally, if case be that it ap∣pertaine to the reuengement of their God. He that doth pretend to haue such Po∣wer, is the man spoken of in the 2. Thess. 2. that sitteth in the Temple of God, and sheweth himselfe as though he were God. 13 All the power that Christs Uicar hath, is then only lawfull in effect, so long as it is ruled by the good will of Christ, the Head of the Church. 14 That euery Priest, duely ordered by the Law of Grace, hath power to Mi∣nister the Sacraments, and to absolue any man, confessing his fault, and being pe∣nitent for the same: whereby it appeareth, that the power is alie to all Christian Priests: as Hugo in his 2. Booke of Sacraments declareth. 15 That the K. ma take away the Temporalties of the Clergie, abusing the same habitually, in cases by Law limited, according to the 2. Thess. 3. We declared vnto you, that they that would not worke, should not eate. 16 The ndowment of Churches are giuen conditionally, that God should be honoured thereby, and the Church edified; with condicion, if it be left vndoe in any point, the title of the gift is lost: the Lord▪ which gaue the gift, ought to correct and amend the fault, and not to b stopped from the execution of Iustice or any excom∣munication. And yet God forbid, that by these words occasion should be giuen to the Lords Temporall to take away the goods of Fortune from the Church. 17 An Ecclesiasticall Minister, & also the Pope, may be rebuked of his subiects, either of the Clergie or Laitie: Gal. 2. Peter was rebuked by Paul: for the Church is aboue the Bishop; and to say, he ought not o be rebuked, but only of God, what offence soeuer he commit, he should be aboue the Church, the Spouse of Christ. These be the effect of the conclusions of Wickliffe at that time, which either be∣ing not read, or vnderstood, they granted him free libertie to depart. Soone afer died Pope Gregorie; which was happe to Wickliffe: for presently after fell a great dis∣sention betwixt the Romish and French Pope; which continued 30. yeares, with great orrow & destruction of men on both parts: and about 3. yeares after there fell a great dissention in England betwixt the Commns & Nobilitie; in which trouble, Sudburie, Archbishop of Canterburie, was taken by the rude people & beheaded: to whom William Coutnay succéeded; who was no lesse diligent to root out hereticks then his predecessor. Notwithstanding, Wickliffes sect daily encreased, and grw to greater strength, vntill one William Barton, Uicechancelor of Oxford, calling toge∣ther 8. Monasticall Doctors, and 4. other▪ with the rest of his affinitie, putting the common seale of the Uniuersitie vnto certaine writings, set forth an Edict, threat∣ning euerie man, vnder rieuous penaltie, not to assemble themselues with any of Wickliffes fauorers, and threatned to Wickliffe greater excommunication, & impri∣sonment,
and all his fauorers, vnlesse after three daies canonicall admonition, they doe repent and amend: Wickliffe appealed to the King; but the Duke of Lancaster forbad him to begin such matters, but rather submit himselfe to the censure of his Ordinarie: whereby Wickliffe being in the midst of the waues, was inforced again to make confession of his Doctrine; wherein he answered, with intricate words, and a gentler kind of phrase, whereby he either persuaded or deluded his enemies. William Archbishop of Canterbury held a Conuocation at London;1382. where Wick∣liffe was commanded to be: when as they were gathered together at the Gray-fri∣ers in London, to consult about Wickliffes Bookes, & the whole Sect, a wonderfull Earthquake fell: diuers doubting, thought good to leaue off their purpose; but the Archbishop interpreting the chance to another meaning, strengthned their hearts to proceed: who discoursing Wickliffes Articles, not according to the Scriptures, but to their priuate affections, they condemned some Articles of Heresie, and others of Error. These of Heresie. 1 The substance of Bread and Wine remaineth in the Sacrament after con∣secration. 2 The accidents remaine not without the subiect after consecration. 3 Christ is not truely and really, in his proper corporall Person, in the Sa∣crament. 4 That a Bishop or Priest, in deadly sinne, doth not Order, Consecrate, or Baptize. 5 That outward Confession is needlsse, if one be inwardly truely penitent. 6 That it is not found in the Gospell, that Christ ordained Masse. 7 If the Pope be a Reprobate and a member of the Diuell, he hath no power giuen him ouer the faithfull, except by the Emperour. 8 That none is to be receiued for Pope since Vrban the sixt, but to liue as the Greekes, euery man vnder his owne Law. These as erroneous. 1 That no Prelate ought to excommunicate any, except he knew him first to be excommunicated of God. 2 He that doth so excommunicate, is an Hereticke, and excommunicated. 3 He that excommunicateth any of the Clergie which appealed to the Coun∣cell, is a Traytor to the King and Realme. 4 All that leaue off preaching or hearing the Word for feare of Excommuni∣cation, are excommunicated, and at the day of Iudgement shall be counted as Traytors to God. 5 That it is lawfull for any man, Deacon, or Priest, to preach without licence of the Pope, or any his Catholikes: that one is no Prelate, so long as he is in deadly sinne. 6 Temporall Lords may take away goods from Church-men, if they offend. 7 The Tenths are pure Almes, the Parishioner, for the offence of the Cu∣rate, may bestow them vpon others. 8 That Spirituall Prayers applyed particularly to any, profit them no more then Generall Prayers profit others in the same case. 9 That one is more vnapt and vnable to kéepe the Commandements of God, by entring into any priuate Religion. 10 That those that haue instituted priuate Religions, or haue indwed them with possessions, or the begging Fryers, that haue no possessions, haue grieuously offended. 11 That those of Priuate Religions are not of the Christian Religion. 12 That Fryers are bound to get their liuings by labour, and not by begging. 13 That he is accursed that giueth Almes to begging Fryers. When these Articles were condemned, it was commanded, that the condemna∣tion
should bee published through the whole vniuersitie, the Chancellor hindred as much as hee could, and when there must needs be Sermons made he commit∣ted the preaching to the fauourers of Wickliffe, of which Repington was one: who said in his Sermon, hee that commends the Pope or Bishops aboue Temporall Lords, doe against the Scripture, and that Maister Wickliffe was a true Catho∣lick Doctor: that hee taught no otherwise of the Sacrament of the Altar then accor∣ding to the intent of the Uniuersall Church, & his opinion therof most true; and con∣cluded he would kéep silence touching the Sacrament, vntill God had better n∣lightned the Clergy. The Archbishop hearing hereof sent for the Commissary, and the Proctors of the Uniuersitie, and one Maister Brightwell, and accused them as fauourers of Wickliffe, and forced them to confesse his Articles hereticall and erroneous: the Commissarie fell on his knees and desired pardon, which was granted vpon condi∣tion he should make inquirie, and put to silence all that he found fauouring Wickliffe, Harford, Repington, Ashton, and Bedman: and that hee should publish in the head Church of the Uniuersitie the condemnation of Wickliffes conclusons: and that hee should put all his adherents he found to purgation, or cause them to abiure: he answe∣red he durst not doe it for death: what said the Bishop, is Oxford a nestler of heresies that the Catholick truth cannot be published? Oxford was the first Uniuersitie that maintained the truth that is now spread farr and néere: the next day the Bishop shewed the matter to the Kings Councell, who sent commandement with all dili∣gence, to execute the Arch-bishops iniunction. One Henry Crompe a Cistertian Monke, which after was accused of Here∣sie, now was suspended by the said Commissarie, for calling the Heretickes Lo∣lards: he complained to the Archbishop, who sent for the Commissarie and Proc∣tors in the Kings and Councels name, where he receiued a new commandement to punish the Wickliffes: then Philip Repington, and Nickolas Harford, beeing priuily warned by the Uice-chancellor: they fled to the Duke of Lancaster, but they were apprehended and sent by him to the Archbishop: Wickliffe was exiled, and after returned againe to his parish of Lutterworth where he died: the prouidence of God is to be noted in this man and many other whom the Lord prserued in such rages of1387. enemies from all their hands vntilll his old age, whom the Lord will keepe nothing can hurt. All his bookes were condemned and forbidden to be read by the Councell of Con∣stance, and by the Dcrée thereof forty yéeres after his death, by the commandement of the Bishop, his bones were digged vp and burned, & the ashes powred into the Ri∣uer: he had written diuers works, which in the yéere 1410. were burned at Oxford: the Abbot of Shrewsbury being Commissary, & sent to ouersée the matter, his bookes were likewise burned in Boheme by the Archb▪ of Prage, he burned 200. of his books, richly adorned with bosses of Gold, and rich couerings. In the yeare 1384. he wrot an Epistle to Pope Vrban the sixt, that the Gospell of Christ was the whole body of the Law, and that Christ was very God, and very man: and that the Pope Christs Uicar was bound most of all other vnto the Gospel, for the greatnes of Christs Disciples consisteth not in worldly honour, but in néere ollowing the life and manners of Christ▪ Christ was a most poore man, casting off all worldly rule and honour, therefore none ought to follow the Pope, nor other holy man, but as they follow Christ: for Peter and the sonnes of Zebedy in desiring worldly honours offended, and therein they are not to be followed, therefore the pope ought to leaue his temporall dominion to the seculer power, and therevnto exhort his whole Clergy. There was none so great enemies to him as the Clergy, yet he had many good frends both of the meaner sort & the Nobility: amongst whom these men are numbred: Iohn Clenton, Lewis Clifford, Richard Sturius, Thomas Latimer, William Neuil, Iohn Moun∣tegew, who plucked downe all the Images in his Church: the Earle of Salesbury when hee died refused the Sacrament of the Altar, and confession: and one Iohn of Northampton Mayor of London, who vsed such seuere punishment against the
fornicators and adulterers that they were ashamed of their offences, & others afeard to offend: the Lord Cobham, who confessed he neuer hated sinne with his heart, be∣fore he was instructed by Wickliffe: all these were Noble men, and there was no want of the meaner sort of such as did with all their diligence defend his Doctrine, especially Oxford men, who were most shamefully forced to recantation, and most cruelly iudged to the fire. One Iohn Ashton Maister of Arte, beeing examined, confessed that the bread by the sacramentall words was the very same body of Christ in number, which was borne of the Urgin Mary: yet because hee did not answere simply, according to the tradition of Rome, as touching the subiect and accident of transmuting the sub∣stance of the bread, he was committed to the secular powers, and cast into prison where he died: many other notable Clarkes, some were burned, some died in pri∣son, but all were afflicted: as William Swinderby, Iohn Puruey, Henry Crompe, Ri∣chard White, William Thorpe, Raynold Peacock, Bishop of Saint Asaph, and after of Chichester, Lawrence Redman, Dauid Sawtry, Iohn Ashwarbie Uicar of S. Ma∣ries in Oxford, William Iames, Thomas Brightwell, VVilliam Hawlam, Raffe Gre∣hurst, Iohn Scut, Philip Noris, which being excommunicated by the Pope, appealed to a generall councell. Peter Paine, who flying from Oxford into Bohemia, stoutly contended against the Sophisters about both indes of the Sacrament, and was one of the fourteene that was sent to the Councell of Basil, and disputed three daies touching the Ciuill Dominion of the Clergy: Also the Lord Cobham: thus much touching the adhe∣rents of Wickliffe. The Uice-chancellor of Oxford, with the whole congregation of the Maisters, made a publike testimonie of the learning and good life of Iohn Wickliffe, that his conditions throughout his whole life were sincere and commendable, whose honest manners and conditions, profoundnes of learning, and most redolnt renowne and fame, we desire the more earnestly to be notified to all the faithfull, for that wee vnderstand his maturitie and ripenes of conuersation, his diligent labours to tend to the praise of God, the help and safegard of others, and the profit of the Church, there was neuer note or spot of suspition raised of him, in answering, reading, preaching, and determining: he behaued himselfe laudably, and as a stout and valiant Champion of the Faith, vanquishing by the force of Scripture, all such who by wilful beggery blasphemed Christs Religion, neither was he conict of heresie or burned by our prelates after his buriall: God forbid our Prelates should con∣demne a man of such honesty, for an heretick, who amongst all the rest of our Uni∣uersitie had written in Logick, Philosophy, Diuinity, Morality, and the Speculatiue arte without pare: In witnes whereof we seale this testimonial with our common Seale 5. October 1406. Iohn Hus hauing read ouer Wickliffes Bookes, concludeth by many infallible presumptions and reasons that hee was no Heretick, but in the number of the sa∣ued, and that it was a foolish consequent, because the number of Prelates and Clergy in England, France, and Boheme doe count him for an Heretick, that there∣fore he is one: like is the reason for burning of his bookes, for in the first Chapter of the Booke of Machabees, they burned the Bookes of the Lord, and tore them, and whosoeuer was found to haue or vse them was put to death by the Kings comman∣dement: if this argued the wickednes of the bookes, then the Law of God was wic∣ked: so likewise of the burning of S. Gregories bookes and of diuers other good men, it followeth not because the Scribes and Pharisies condemned Christ as an Here∣tick, that therefore he was one, so Iohn Chrysostome was twice condemned an Here∣ticke by the Bishops and Clergy. Besides the Articles afore, there were other Articles gathered out of his Bookes, which his malicious aduersaries peruersly collecting, and maliciously expounding, did exhibit to the Councell of Constance. They sinne in Simony that be hired by temporal liuings to pray for others. The prayer of the Reprobate preuaileth for no man.
Hallowing of Churches, confirmation of children, the Sacrament of orders bee reserued to the Pope, and Bishops onely for temporall lucre. Graduation and Doctor-ships in Uniuersities and Colledges as they bee vsed conduce nothing to the Church. The excommunication of the Pope and his Prelates is not to be feared, because it is the censure of Antichrist. Such as founded Monasteries offend, and all such as enter into them be mem∣bers of the Diuell. A Deacon or Priest may teach Gods word without the authority of the aposto∣like Sea. They that enter into Monasticall Order or Religion, are vnable to keep Gods commandements, or to come to heauen except they returne. The Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Satan, neither is the Pope the imme∣diate vicar of Christ, nor of the Apostles. The decretals of the popes be Apocripha, and seduce from the faith of Christ, and the Clergy that study them be fooles. It is not necessarie to saluation to beleeue the Church of Rome to be supreme ead ouer all Churches. It is but folly to beleeue the Popes pardons. All othes made for any contract or ciuill bargaine betwixt man and man bée vn∣lawfull. Benedick, Francis, Dominick, Bernard, and al other that haue béen patrons of priuat religions, except they haue repented, with such as entred into the same, be in damna∣ble state, and from the pope vnto the lowest nouis they are all hereticks. Thus you haue the whole summe of Wickliffes Articles, albeit not as hee vttered them, but as his froward aduersaries collected them out of his writings, if some of them séeme hard or strange, thinke it rather to be imputed to their euill will, then to his good meaning, as it might appeare if his bookes had now been extant: but this is certaine howsoeuer his Articles were taken of the euill disposed, with all good men he was highly fauoured and had in such estimation for his profound knowledge, and great learning, that all forren Nations were moued with his authoritie; espe∣cially the Bohemians had him insuch reuerence, that Iohn Hus, the greatest doer in the Uniuersitie of Prage, tooke profit of his Doctrine, and openly defended his Articles. Wickliffes Doctrine came into Bohemia, by reason of a Student of Bohemia that was at Oxford being of Noble stock: who returning to Prage, carried certaine bookes of Wickliffes with him, De realibus vniuersalibus, De ciuili iure, et Diui∣no, De Ecclesia, De questionibus vars contra clerum &c. a Noble man of Prage builded a Church called Bethelem, giuing lands to it, and finding two prea∣chers euery day to preach to the people, of the which Iohn Hus was one, hee beeing familiar with the yong man, reading and perusing these bookes, tooke such pleasure and fruit thereby, that he defended and commended them in schooles and sermons, commending him for a good man, wishing when he died to be there placed where his soule was. We think it worth labour to shew certaine prophesies, whereby so many perscu∣tions were figured: and first the aforesaid Abbot Ioachim, told King Richard, as hée went to Ierusalem, that the last of the seuen Kings spoken of in the Reuelati∣on was Antichrist, and that at that present hee should be bred at Rome, and be exal∣ted into the apostolick Sea, according to the Apostle, hee is exalted aboue all that is called God: hee was in the yeare 1290. And in the Prophesie of Hildegardis, afore mentioned, she saith in the yeare 1200. the Doctrine of the Apostles, and Iustice which God appointed to spirituall Chri∣stians, beganne to war flack, and doubtfull, but this womanly time shall not so long continue as it hath done. Bishop Fluensius, doubted not openly to preach, that Antichrist was borne in his daies.
Bih. Gerardus, in the yeare of our Lord 1239. in his Book of the preseruation of Gods seruants, doth coniecture Antichrist to be at hand, by the rarity of prophesie, and the gift of curing. Hierome Sauanorol 69. yeares before prophesied, that Italy shall be plagued by the scourge of God for the manifold sinnes thereof, amongst the Princes as well Ecclesiasticall as secular, and when the Cities of Rome and Florence are ouer∣throwne, then shall the Church bee renewed, which shall happen very shortly, and the Turkes, and the Mauritanians shall bee conuerted vnto the knowledge of Christ, and that one should passe the Alpes like vnto Cyrus, and hee shall subuert all Italy. I thinke it lacketh not his prophesie, which happened in the yeare of our Lord 1501. that throughout all Germany there was scene vpon mens garments, Crosses, crownes of thornes, similitude of Nailes, and drops of bloud fll from heauen, and oftentimes they fell within the houses, insomuch that many women wore the same long time vpon their railes. One Iohn a Franciscane Fryer, in the yeare of our Lord 1346. fore-shewed that the Ecclesiasticall order, should suffer much through the Ambitious aua∣rice, and pride of the Pope: wherevpon Pope Clement the sixt, cast him in the prison. One Manfredus a Dominick Frier, fore-shewed that Antichrist should rise vp in his time, after the yeare of our Lord 1300. and should fully rage ouer the godly, and that there should be persecution in the Church, and hee said that the Cloyster Monkes did falsifie the Doctrine of Christ, that the sacrifice of the Altar was not profitable to the quick nor dead, and that there was no knowledge i the consolations of the Pope, but onely of mens workes: at last Frederick King of Cicill sent him to the Pope, where he died vpon the Sea by the way. Peter, Iohn Aquine a Franciscane Frier, prophecied that in the later daies the law of Liberty should appeare: Pope Clement 4. pronounced him an hereticke after his death, and caused his bones to be digged vp and burned. There was so many Christian Martyrs, in all parts of the world, whereof a great number were cmpassed in with craft and deceit: some were poisoned, others tor∣mented with torments, many oppressed with priuate and vnknowne deaths, others dyed in prison, some by famine, some by other meanes were openly and priuately de∣stroyed, that it is scarsely possible to attaine to the knowledge of a small number of them: or if I happen to attaine to the knowledge of the names of them, yet I can not finde out the manner of the execution of them, and their causes, no one man is able to doe it, but by the example of some of them, you may asily Iudge what hath happe∣ned to all: for the cruelty of Bishops haue been alike against them, and the forme of their Iudgements all one: the reason of their condemnation agreeing, and the order and kinde of their death. It was fiue hundred yeeres since Satan was set at libertie: this Story were won∣derfully to be enlarged, if all that were put to death by the Primates of the Church should be recited: for in Narbone 140. chose rather to suffer the fire, then giue any credit to decretals: and in the yeare 1210. at Paris were foure and twenty put to death, and in the yeare after, foure hundred burned, and fourescore beheaded: the Prince Armericus hanged, and the Lady of Castele stoned to death. At Erphurd Begardus was burned, 1218. and a Deacon burned at Oxford 1222 ad in the County of Cambray, diuers more were burned by the Dominicans. The Pope commendeth a King in Boetius, that for one that the Pope had slaine, he had slaine foure hundred, cutting away the genitals: there were many burned in France 1392. not long before Wickliffe, Eckhardus a Dominick Fryer, was condem∣ned at Hedelberge: I passe ouer the Aluenses, that were burned in K. Iohns time, and I passe ouer the Hermite that disputed in Paules Church, that the Sacrament then vsed was not ordained by Christ: of this number were two Gray-Friers that were burned at London.1395. Certaine Conclusions were put vp vnto the Parliament house: first, when the
Church of England began first to dote in temporalties, according to her Mother in law the Church of Rome, and Churches were appropriated, Faith, Hope and Cha∣ritie began to vanish away, because pride with her Genealogy of mortall and dead∣ly sinne, did challenge the title of truth. 2 Our priesthood that tooke originall from Rome, is not that which Christ ordai∣ned to his Disciples, because it is done by signes and pontificiall ceremonies, and benedictions of no effect, hauing no ground in Scripture, neither see wee the Holy Ghost giuen by any such ceremonies, it is a dolorous mockery, to sée Bishops play with the Holy Ghost, by giuing of crownes when they giue orders, in steed of white hearts, the marke of Antechrist, brought in to cloe their idlenes. 3 The law of Chastitie, inioined vnto Priests, which was to the preiudice of wo∣men, induceth Sodomy into the Church, by reason the delicate fare of the Clergy will haue a naturall purgation or worse, and the secret proofe of them is they doe de∣light in women, the primate religions must be disanulled, the originall of that sinne. 4 The fained mracles of the Sacrament of bread, induceth almost all to Ido∣latry, because they thinke the body, which is neuer out of heauen, is included in the little bread which they shew the people: the Feast of Corpus Christi and the seruice thereof, inuented by Thomas Aquinas, fained and full of false myracles, for hee would haue made a myracle of an Hens Egge: these lies openly preached, turne to the approbry of him that is alwaies true. The Orcismes or blessings ouer the Wine, Bread, Water, Oyle, Salt, Incence, the Altar Stone about the Church walles, ouer the Uestment, Chalice, Myter, Crosse, and Pilgrim-staues, are the practices of Negromancers, for by it the Crea∣tures are honored to be of more vertue then by nature they are, and we sée no change in any creature exercised, except it be by false faith, which is the principall point of diuellish Art: if the coniuring of Holy Water were true, it would bee an excellent Medicine for all kinde of sicknesses and sores, the contrarie whereof dayly experi∣ence teacheth. 6 One man to be a King and a Priest, a Prelate and a Temporall Iudge ma∣keth the Kingdome out of order: the Temporaltie and Spiritualtie are two parts of the Church, to be called Amphradite, or Ambidextri are good names for such men of double States: we shew this to the Parliament, that it bee enacted, that the Clergy should onely occupy themselues with their owne charge, and not meddle with others charge. 7 Prayers made for the soules of the dead, is a false foundation of Almes, wher∣in all the almes houses in England are falsely founded, meritorious prayers ought to proceed of Charitie, but the gift is the cause of their prayers which is Simo∣ny: againe, a prayer made for one in hell is vnpleasant to God, and it is most like the Founders of such Almes houses, for their wicked indowings are most of them passed the broad way: euery prayer of effect proceedeth of Charitie, and compre∣hendeth generally all such as God would haue saued, these strong Priests are able to labour and serue the Realme: let them not be retained in idlenes, for it hath been proued in a Booke to the King, that a hundred almes-houses are sufficient for the whole Realme. 8 Pilgrimages, prayers, and offerings to blind Crosses or Roods, and deae I∣mages are Idoatry and farre from almes: though these be forbidden, yet they are thought Bookes of error to the common people: and the common Image of the Tri∣nitie is especially abhominable: but God commands almes to be giuen to the poore, and not to Idols: the seruice of the Crosse celebrated twice euery yeare, is full of ido∣latry: for if the nailes and the speare ought so profoundly to be honored, then were Iudas his lips a maruellous good relike, if one could get them. Thou Pilgrime when thou offerest vnto the bones of Saints, whether doest thou relieue their soules be∣ing in ioy. 9 Auricular Confession, and the fained power of Absolution, setteth vp the Priest of Priests, and giueth them opportunitie of other secret talkes, Lords and Ladies
doe witnes that for feare of their Confessors, they dare not speake the truth, and in time of confession is opportunity ministred to play the Bawdes, and make other se∣cret conuentions to deadly sinne: they say they are Commissaries from God, to Iudge and discerne all sinnes, to pardon what they please, that they haue the kyes of hell and heauen, that they can excommunicate, blesse and curse, binde and lose at their pleasure: for twelue pence they will sell the Kingdome of heauen, by writing and clause of warrants, sealed with the common Seale, the Pope hath fained that he is the Treasurer of the whole Church, hauing the treasure of the passion of Christ in his kéeping, with the merits of all Saints in heauen, whereby hee giueth fained pardons a poena et culpa, and whereby he can deliuer all captiues being in purgatory at his pleasure, and make them not to come there. 10 The vow of Chastitie made by women, imperfect by nature, bringeth in hor∣rible vices, the murdering of Children borne before their time, and before they are Christned, the destruction of their natures by medicines, accompanying amongst themselues, and with beasts, and any creature without life, commeth to such vnséem∣linesse, that they are punished with hell torments, wee would that Widdowes and Maides which take the mantle and ring were married. John Bale, a man indued with great knowledge and vnderstanding was condem∣ned to death by Robert Triuillian chiefe Iustice, 1382. albeit he was chiefe Iustice he suffered the like punishment, and was hanged at Tyburne, being iustly requited for the bloud which he had shed. One Iohn Puruay was accused of heresie at Oxford: Walden writeth hee was the Library of Lollards, and glosr vpon Wickliffe; hee with Harford, a Doctor of Diuinitie were greuously tormented in the prison of Saltwood, and made to recant at Paules Crosse, by Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and one and twenty yéers after, taken and imprisoned againe by Chichely, Archbishop of Canterbury: these be his Articles he recanted. 1 There can be no accident without the subiect in the Sacrament after conse∣cration; but there remaineth the same substance visible bread, and the same wine as before the consecration; as when a Pagan is baptized, spiritually hee is a member of Christ: yet he hath his nature and substance as before. 2 Auricular Confession, is a whispering, destroying the liberty of the Gospel newly deuised by the Pope and Clergy, to intangle the conscience in sinne, and the soule in hell. 3 He that is holy and predestinated to eternall life, though he be a Lay man, is a Priest before God. 4 Wicked Prelates haue neither the keyes of hell nor heauen, though the pope interdict the Realme, he could not hurt but profit vs, for thereby wee should be dis∣missed the seruice of his Church, and his Lawes. 5 If any make a vow to keep perpetuall chastitie, or any other thing that God hath appointed him too, no Prelate can compell him to keep it. 6 Hee that hath taken the office of Priesthood, though hee haue no charge of soules committed to him, they may and ought to preach the Gospel freely, else he is a théefe, excommunicated of God, and the holy Church. 7 That Pope Innocent the fourth and six hundred Bishops, and a thousand Pre∣lates and the rest, that ordained Transubstantiatin, auricular confession, and o∣ther such lawes were fooles, heretickes, blasphemers, and seducers of the people: and we ought not to beleeue them nor their successors, nor obey their lawes, except they be grounded on the Scripture, or some reason that cannot be impugned. About the same time Richard Wiche hauing preached the Gospel, the Bishop of Durham made him recant these Articles. 1 Images are not to be worshipped. 2 God of his ordinarie power cannot make an Image bleed. 3 That we should not confesse to a wicked Priest. 4 Euery Lay-man is bound to know the Gospel, and to preach it priuately or o∣penly if he hau habilitie.
5 A Lay-man ought to pray in his own tongue which he vnderstands, such pray∣er is most accepted. 6 Euery priest according to his capacity is bound to know the whole Scripture, and by his office to preach it. 7 Pilgrimages to Ierusalem or Rome are vaine, what you may haue there, you may haue at home, and Baptisme may as well bee had heee as in other places. 8 Men or women in iourneying ought to haue their communication vpon the Scripture. 9 No Priest ought to beg any thing: almes is to be giuen to the lame, feeble, and sicke▪ or they that haue been spoiled. 10 The Cross is not to be worshipped. 11 Euery place is as fit for prayer as another. 12 hey doe against the Law that burne men. In the same yéere one William Santrey, who, nflamed with true Religion, required in the Parliament that he might be heard, for the commoditie of the whole realme: but the matter being before smelt of the Bishoppes, they obtained that the matter should be put to their hearings and Iudgements, by whom hee was at last atta∣ched of heresie, condemned for seuen Articles, disgraded and burned by the comman∣dement of the King. Thirteene yeares after the death of Wickliffe, Henry the fourth then raigning: King Richard was deposed and put into the Tower, and there died: A Parliament was holden, in which it was decreed that the fauourers of Wickliffe should be appre∣hended▪ who then were called Lollards: and if they did perseuere to bee deliuered to the Bishop of the Diocesse, and from him committed to the correction of the secu∣lar Magistrate: this brought a certaine Priest vnto punishment that yeare, who was burned in Smithfield in presence of a great number: I take it was Swinderby, who as aforesaid was forced to recant by the Bishop of Lincolne. Héere followeth the examination of Maister William Thorpe, written with his owne hand; hee sheweth first the reasons why he wrot it: First at the earnest re∣quest of diuers friends, and that hee had a desire of himselfe so to doe, that profit might come thereby, for the truth hath this condition, where euer it is impugned it hath a swéet sauour, and the more enemies addresse themselues to oppresse it, the sweeter smell commeth thereof, and will not passe away like smoke, but rest in some cleane soule that thirsteth thereafter: thirdly, that the good by shewing it one to an other, may strengthen one another, and shewing it to some enemy of the truth, hee may be astonied and conuerted. His examination before ARVNDEL, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor, in his Closet, with but three with him. Bishop. WIlliam this twenty yeeres and more, thou hast trauelled  about the North, and other Countreyes to poison all the Land with hy vntrue preaching, but by Gods help thou art in my ward, and I will let thee to inue∣nome the shéepe of my prouince: but as Saint Paul saith, as much as in vs is wee will haue peace with all men, if thou wilt faithfully sware to submit thy selfe to my correction and ordinance, I will be gracious vnto thée. Thorp. After he had made a confession of his Faith in the Trinitie, and in the Sonne of God, reciting the whole substance of the Gospel, from the Conception of Christ vntill the holy Ghost was sent, he beléeued the Catholike Church was all that euer were, are, or shal be, that endeuour to know & kéep Gods commandements,
fearing to offend him, and louing to please him, hoping stedfastly in his mercy, conti∣nuing in Charity, gladly suffering persecutions by the example of Christ and his A∣postles: all these haue their names written in the Booke of life. The gathering to∣gether of these that be aliue, is the Church fighting against the find, the prosperity of the World and the fleshly luss: and I wil submit my selfe only to the rule and go∣uernance of them, whom after my knowledge I may perceiue, by the hauing and v∣sing of the foresaid vertues, to be members of the holy Church. These Articles and all other that I ought to beléeue by the word of God, I verily beléeue in my Soule, and I beleeue that the word of God is sufficient to saluation: if I haue erred that I submit my selfe to be econciled, and I beleeue the authorities of Saints and Doc∣tors as farre as they may be approued by the word of God, and no further, for any earthly power or dignity. Sir, I pray shall I lay my hand on the Booke to sweare by it; yea, said he, where∣fore else? Sir, I say a Booke is a thing coupled together of diuers Creatures, and Gods and Mans Law is against swearing by any Creature, but I will sweare vnto you as I ought by Gods Law, but for Charity, tell me wherein I shall submit my selfe, and wherein you will correct m? Bishop▪ I will that you swear to forsake all the opinions of the Sect of Lollards, which I shall rehearse after you haue sworne, and that you will neither priuily nor openly teach none of them, nor fauour none of that opinion, but withstand them, and them that will not yéeld, make knowne to the Byshop of the Diocesse, and that thou preach no more vntill I do know that thy hart and mouth accord. Thorp. If I consent vnto you, heren I should be euery Bishops spy, Sommoner of al England; yea, I should deceiue many persons, and be y• cause of their death bodily and ghostly, for many of them that stand now in the truth, and are in the way of sal∣uation, would rather chuse to forsake the way of truth, then to be scorned, slandered, and punished, as Byshops and their Ministers now vse to dee: and I finde not in the Scripture that this office you would now enfeoff me with, accordeth to any Priest or Christian; therefore to do thus, were to me a full noyous band, for many trust so mickle in me, that I would not doe it to saue my life, and they might well account me a Traytor to God and man, and that I had fasly and cowardly forsaken the truth, and slandered shamefully the Word of GOD, If I doe thus for feare of bond∣cheefe and mischeefe in this life, I deeme in my conscience, I were worthy to bee cursed of GOD and all his Saints, from which keepe me and all Christians Al∣mighty God. Bishop. Thy heart is full hard indurate, as the hart of Pharaoh, the Diuell hath blinded thy wits, that thou hast no grace to know the truth, nor the measure of mer∣cy that I haue proered thee: but I say to thee lewd Lossell, eyther quickly consent to me, or by Saint Thomas▪ thou shalt be disgraded, and follow thy fellow o Smith∣field. Thorp. I thought with my selfe God did me great grace, if of his mercy he would bring me to such an end, and my heart was not afraid of his menasing, but I conside∣red in him, that he was not sorrowfull that he had burned William Santry wrongful∣ly, and that he thisteth to shed more innocent blood, and I was fast mooued to hold him to be no Priest of God, and mine inward Man was departed from him to haue no feare of him, and I was right heauy that there was no audience of seculer men by: and I prayed the Lord to comfort me against them, that were against the soth∣fastnesse, and I purposed to speake no more then my neede behooued. All the while I prayed God for his grace, to speake with a méeke and easie Spirit, and that I might haue authorities of Scriptures, or open reason for my words, and his Clearks said, Why muse you, do as my Lord commands you. Byshop. Hast thou not yet bethought thee, whether thou wilt doe as I haue said? Thorp. My Parents spent mickle Mony about my learning to make me a Priest, but I had no will to be a Priest, wherefore they were right heauy to mee, that I thought to leaue thē; at length I desired that I might go to such as were named wise,
and of vertuous conuersaion, to haue the Councell, so I communed with such, till I perceiued their honest and charitable workes, to passe their fame; wherefore , by the example of the Doctrine of them, after my cunning and power, I haue exercised me to know perfectly Gods Law, hauing a desire to liue thereafter, and that others exerci∣sed themselues faithfully there abouts. Then he sheweth the reasons aforesaid, and what would follow, if he should forsake, so suddenly, the learning that he had exercised this 30. winters, according to the example of some, whose name I wil now recite, and according to the present doing of Phillip Rampington, now Bishop of Lincolne, by Gods grace, I will learne by them to fly such slander as thy haue defiled themselues with, and as much as is in them, they haue enuenomed all the Church of God, by their flaunderous reuoking at Paules Crosse, and how now Phillip Rampington pursueth Christs people, which will not be vnpunished of God. Bishop. These were fooles, and heretickes, when they were counted wise of thée, and sch loses, but now they are wise, though ye deeme them vnwise. Thorpe. I thinke they are wise concerning this world, I did thinke by their former doings, that they had earnest of the wisdome of God, and deserued ckie grace of him, to haue saued themselues and many others, if they had continued faithfull, and in their bue fitfull sowing of Gods word: but woe worth false couetousnesse, euill councell, and tranny, by which they, and many be led blindly to an euill end. Bishop. Which are those holy and wise men, of whom thou hast taken thine in∣formation? Thorpe. Sir, master Iohn Wicliffe, holden of ull many the greatest Clarke then liuing using rul an innocent in his liuing great men communed oft with him▪ they so loued his learning, that they wrote it, and bsly inforced themselues to ollow it; and his learning is yet holden most agréeable to the learning of Christ and his Apostles, and master Iohn Ayston taught and wrote accordingly, and vsed himselfe right perfectly to his liues end. And sometimes Phillip Rampington▪ Nichols Herford, Dauid Gotray of Paking, and Iohn Puruay, and many other, which were holden right wise and pro∣dent, taught and writ busily his foresaid learning: with al these men I was right home∣ly, and communed with them, but of all other, I hose to ollow Wicliffe himselfe, as the most wise and godly man that I heard of, or know. Some of these I heart them whilst they sate in Christs chaire, but after the workes they now doe, I will not doe, by Gods elpe, for they faine would hide and contrary the trueth, which before they taught plain∣ly and truely, and some of them haue confessed they doe it because they are constrained by paine, to leaue the truth; so they blaspheame God rather then suffer a little, though Christ shed his heart bloud for vs. Bishop. That which thou callest truth, is slander to holy Church, and though Wicliffe were a great Clerke, and a perfect liuer yet holy Church hath damned many of his Doc∣trines, and well worthy; but Phillip Rampington Bishop of Lincolne, wil not hold the learning that he taught, nor no Bishop pursueth more sharpely them that hold thy way then he doth. Thorpe. Many wonder at him▪ and speake him mickle shame, and hold him a cursed enemie of the trueth. Bishop. Then the Bishop read a Certificate that the bailiffes of Shrewesbury sent to him vnder their Seale the third Sunday after Easer, 1407. William Thorpe preaching in Saint Chaddes Church, in his Sermon, said, that the Sacrament, after conecration, was materiall bread, and that Images should not be worshipped, and that men should not goe on Pilgrimages, that Priests haue no title to Tythes, and that it is not lawfull to sweare. Then he said, is this wholsome learning to be amongst the people? Thorpe. I am sory, and ashamed of them, I neuer taught such Doctrine. Bishop. I will beléeue those worshipfull men before thée, thou hast troubled them, and they pray mee, that if thou suffer for thy heresies, that thou most be executed there, that such other oels, for feare, may be reconciled, and they that stand in Faith of holy Church more stablished, by my thirft, this feruent requst shall b thought on. Thorpe. I thanke God, for all this, I was not afraid, but my heart reioyced, and still doth; for I then thought, and yet thinke, that grace shall come to all the Church of God
herethorow, and I said, I doubt not but I can proue that they which are fained to bee out of holy Church at Shrewsbury, and other places, are in true Faith of holy Church, for they dread to offend God, and loue to please him, i true and faithfull keeping his commaundements; and they that are said to be in faith of holy Church there, and in o∣ther places, are proud, eious, coetous, lecheros, and foule in words and deeds, and know not, nor will know the right Faith of holy Church, their customable swearing, and shamefull workes witnesse it. And sir, where you say, I haue troubled the Com∣munaltie with Preaching, it is not to be wondred at of wise men, seeing all the Com∣munaltie of Ierusalem was troubled at Christ, & all the Synagogue of Nazaret moued against him, that they led him to a mountaine, and would haue cast him downe headlong. Bishop. Thou, and such lsls▪ presume to Preach without licence of any Bishop. Thorpe. It is euery Priests duetie to Preach busily, freely, and truely the word of God, and they should take the Order of Priesthood chiefly to make Gods word knwne to the people, and approuing the truth of the word by his vertuous workes and for this purpose chiefly Bishops and Prelates should take their Prelacie, and for this cause Bi∣shops should giue their Orders, and should accept none to be Priest▪ except he were well disposed, and well learned to Preach. Wherefore, by the example and Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and Prophets, wée are bound vnder full great paine so to doe. Bishop. Lede losell, why makest thou mée such vaine reasons, asketh not Saint Paul, How should Priests Preach, except they be sent? And I sent thée not to Preach. And saith not Sait Paul, Subiects ought to obey their Soueraignes, and not only the good and vertuous, but tyrants and vicious. Thorpe. None of you will grant vs any such licence, but we must oblige vs to you by vnlawfull Othes, not to passe the bonds you will limmit vs, and we dar not so oblige our selues. Wherefore, though we haue no such licenses, we dare not leaue the ffice of Preaching, for so muh as we haue taken vpon vs the Office of Priesthood, trusting God will bo our sufficient letters and witnesse, if we occupie vs faithfully to de our Of∣fice iustly; yea, the hearers shall be our Letters, for the truth, where it is swne, cannot be vnwitnessed, as Saint Paul saith; Wee neede no Letters of commendations, a some doe, which Preach for couetousnesse, and mens praisings. Touching obedience to superiours, good superiours with sound Doctrine and holy couersation, to them wée must willingly and gladly obey, consenting to their charitable biddings, and working af∣ter their fruitfull workes, of these Saint Paul speaketh; Bee mindfull of your Soue∣raignes, that speake to you in the word of God, and follow the faith of them, whose conuersation you know to be vertuous. These Soueraignes make feruent prayers, that they, and their Subiects may liue in the feare and loue of God, and liue so vertuous∣ly, that they that will liue well may take example by them: but Subiects ought not to obey Tyrants, whose biddings and workes are vicious, that they ought to be hated and left. But if they menace oppressions and punishings, Saint Peter biddeth the seruants of such Tyrants, to, Obey meekely, suffering patiently their malicious cruelty: but hée councelleth not any seruant or subiect, to obey any Lord, Prince, or Soueraigne in any thing not pleasing to God. Bishop. If a Soueraigne bid a Subiect doe the thing that is vicious, the Soueraigne is to blame, but the Subiect deserueth méede of God, for obedience pleaseth God more then Sacrifice. Thorpe. Samuel told Saul that God was more pleased with the obedience of his com∣mandement then with Sacrifices, but Dauid, S. Paul, and S. Gregory accordeth therto, that they that doe euil are not only worthy condemnation, but they that consent thereto. Bishop. All these aagings are nothing else bu proud presumptions, for hereby yo inforce you are iust, and ought not to bey the Prelates, and of your owne authoriti you will Preach and doe what you list. Thorpe. Presenteth not euery Priest the Office of the Apostles, and Disciples Christ▪ He said yea, the tenth of Mathew, and the last of Mathew witnesseth, Christ sent his Apostles to Preach. And in the tenth of Luke, He sent his 72. Disciples to Preach in euery place that Christ was come to. And Saint Gregory saith, He that taketh vp∣pon him the Office of Priesthoode, taketh on him the Office of Preaching, and
that the Priest stirreth God to great wrath, whose mouth is not heard to Preach, and Ezekiel saith; The Priest that preacheth not busily to the people, shall bee parta∣ker of their damnation, that perish by their default. And though the people bee saued by other means, yet if the Priest Preach not, he is a manper, bcause they hold from the people the word of God, the life of their soules. Saint Isidore saith; Priests shall be damned for the wickednesse of the people, if they teach not the ignorant, and blame not the sinners. Christ saith; He came into the world to beare witnesse of the trueth. Lincolne saith; That Priest that Preacheth not the word of God, though he haue no other default, hee is Antichrist, and Satan, a night theefe, and a day theefe, a slayer of Soules, and an Angell of light turned into darkenesse. Therefore, I count my in damnable ase, if I, for feare, neglect Preaching; and so I doe them that willingly neglect Preaching, and so I doe them that haue purpose or will to let any Priest of this businesse. Bishop. Lo sirs, this is the businesse of this losell, and such other, to pike sharpe Sentences out of the Scripture, and Doctors, to maintaine their . Thou desirest the Psalter I tooke from thée, but thou shalt neer hae it, nor none other booke, vntill I know thy heart and tongue acord to be gouerned by holy Church. Thorpe. My will is, and euer shall be, to be gouerned by holy Church. And hée as∣ked me what holy Church was; Christ and his Saints are holy Church, though euery one in charitie be the Church, yet it hath two parts, the first part hath ouercome wretch∣ednesse, and raigneth in ioy with Christ, the other is in earth fighting day and night a∣gainst the temptations of the Feind, forsaking the glory of the world, and the usts of the flesh, and which onely are the pilgrimes of Christ, wandring towards Heauen by stedfast faith, grounded hope, and perfect charitie; these will not be let from their purpose by any Doctors discording from the Scripture, nor by the flouds of tribulations, nor the winde of prie, or menasing of any creature: for they are fast grounded vppon the stone Christ, hearing his word, louing and practising it with all their wits. Bishop. you not how he is indurate, and trauelled with the Deuill, occupying himselfe busily to aledge Sentences to maintaine his Heresie? Thus he would doe all ay, if wee would suffer him. One of his Clerks id the Bishop appose him vpon the the points of the Certificate from Shrewsbury. And he said; Was it true that is cer∣tified thou diddest Preach touching the Sacrament. Thorpe. As I stoode in the pulpit Preaching, there toled a Sacring bell, and much people went from me, and I said; Good men, you were better stand still, and heare Gods word, for the vertue of the Sacrament stondeth much morein the beliefe thereof, that ye ought to haue in the soule, then in the outward sight thereof. Bishop. Resteth there in the host materiall bread after consecration? Thorpe. Saint Paul was a great Doctor, and he called it bread that he brake, and in the Canon of the Masse, after consecration, it is called holy bread, and euery Priest af∣ter he hath receiued the Sacrament, saith▪ that thing that wee haue taken with our thea, we pray God we may take with a pure minde. And Saint Augustine saith. That which is seene is bread, but that mens Faith asketh to bee informed of, is very Christs body. Fulgentius saith, It is an error to say Christ is very man, and not God, and that hee is very God, and not man; so is it to say the Sacrament is but a substance. Bishop. I command thée answere me shortly. Thorpe. I vnderstand it all one, to grant that there dwelleth substance of bread, and that Christs body is accident without subiect; your asking passeth my vnderstading, I dare not deny it, nor grant it, I commit this terme accidens cum subiecto, to those Clerkes which delight in subtile Sophistry, they determine often so difficult matters, and wnder so in them, from argument to argument, with pro & contra, vntill they vnderstand not themselues, but the shame that proud Sophisters haue to yeelde to , before men maketh them oft fooles, and to bée shamefully concluded be∣fore God. Bishop. I will not oblige thee to the arguments of Clerkes, since thou art vn∣able thereto, but I purpose to haue thee obey the determination of holy Church.
Thorpe. By open euidence, and plaine witnesse, 1000. yeares after Christ, this determination which I rehearse was accepted of holy Church, as sufficient to sal∣uation, but that which was brought in since the Deuill was loosed by Thomas A∣quinas, calling the Sacrament an accident without subiect, I vtterly deny to make this Fryers sentence, or any such my beliefe, dee with mee God what hee will. Bishop. Well, well, thou shalt say otherwise before I leaue thee. Thou Preachest that Images ought not to be worshipped. Thorpe. Not so, for all ceatures are the Images of Gods glory, and a man is made after Gods Image, and they are worshipfull in their nde; but the  or pain∣ting of Images, though it be in high dignitie with man, and for a Calender to lewde men, that nether will nor can be learned to know God in his word, nor by his creatures, nor wonderfull workes; yet this Imaginarie ought not to be worshipped. Bishop. But a Crucifixe ought to be worshipped, for the Passion of Christ is pain∣ted therein, and brought to our remembrance thereby, so of the Image of the Trinitie, and of the Uirgine Mary, and of the Saints: as when men receiue the Kings, or their Lords Seale, wheein is their Pictures or Armes, in worshippe of them they put off their cappes to these Letters, and since in Images we may know many things of God and his Saints, shall we not worship their Images? Thorpe. These worldly vsages of Temporall Lords may be done, but this is no similitude to worshippe Images, since Moses, Salomon, Bauch, and others in the Bible forbid plainly the worshipping of such Images. Bishop. Lewde osell, there was no likenesse of the Trinitie in the Old Law, but since Christ became man, it is lawfull to haue Images to shew his manhood, though great Clarkes hold it an error to paint the Trinitie, I say it is well done, for it mo∣eth deuotion, so doe other Images of Saints. Beyond Sea are the best Painters, and this is their manner, before they make an Image, they shréeue themselues to a Priest as if they should de, and take penance, and make a vowe of fasting, prayer, or pilgri∣mage, praying the Priest to pray for them, that they may haue grace to make a fayr and deuout Image. Thorpe. I doubt not if the Painters truely vnderstood the Sciptures they would repent themselues of their sinfull and vaine Arte of Painting Idols, and the Priests that  them penance, and prayed for them, sinned more then the Painters, for they comfort them in that which they are vnder paine of the great curs of God they ought to forbid, for , if the word of God were truely Preached, and ministers li∣ued thereafter▪ there would be no neede of these Images▪ Bishop. I hold thee a viies and cursed Priest, for thou, and such others goe about to destroy all Priests and Images of holy Church. Lozell, were it a faire thing to come into a Church, and see neuer an Image. Thorpe. They that come to Church to pray, their inward wits may be the more fer∣uent in that their outward wits bee closed from outward seeing. Christ blessd them that sawe him not and beleeued, it sufficeth to know God in his word without Images. Bishop. Is it not a stirring thing to behold an Image? Thorpe. Being euery person of the Trinitie is eternall, and you say it was not lawful to picture it before Christ, and in that there were many Prophets. Mar∣res, and professors before Christ, why was it not then as lawfull to make Images, to moue men to deuotion as now it is? Bishop. The Synagogue of the Iewes had not authoritie to approue things, as the Church now hath. Thorpe. Saint Gregory was of great dignitie, as the Cannon Lawe witnesseth▪ hee greatly commended a Bishoppe for forbidding Images to bee worshipped. Bishop. Ungratios losell, thou sauorest truth no more then a houn, since at the Roode at the North dore at London, and at our Lady at Walsingham, and many other places in England, are many great and praisable miracles one. Thorpe. I am certaine there is no such miracle done of God▪ that any Image should
be worshipped, therefore I say as I haue often Preached; None should tust there were any vertue in them, nor vowe to them, nor seeke to them, nor , bowe, pray, oer, kisse, or incense them. The Brasen Serpent was  by Gods biddig, et the good King Ezekiah, because it was incensed so, worthy destroyed it, and it is to bee dread, that for the vnfaithfulnesse of en, the Fd  power to  the miracles that now are done in such places: wherefore seing the God of  is the most vnknowne and wonderfull Spirit, what Image may he be painted ? Bishop. As holy Church suffereth Images to ee painted, and shewed, it suffiseth to thm that are members of holy Church, but thou art  member cut off from holy Church, thou fauourest not the ordinances thereof. Thou speakest against Pilgrimage, and that pilgrimages to Canterbury, e∣uerley, Carlington, Walsingham, are accursed, and flish spending their goods in wast. Thorpe. There bée true trauellers, trauell all their life, with all their endeauour to please God, that they may attaine to the heauenly Kingdome: but I say now as I said at Shrewsbury, I haue Preached often in other places, and will doe as long as I liue God willing; They that trauell their bodies, and spend their money to seke, or visite the bones of Images of this Saint, or that, such pilgrimage is nei∣ther, praiseable, or thankefull to God, nor to any Saint of God; since such pilgri∣mages, almost all▪ despise God, and his commaundements, and vppon Saints they waste blamefully Gods goods, in such vaine Pilgrimages, sometimes vpon vitious Hostices, which they should doe workes of mercie withall vpon the poore and néedie, they offer their gods to rich Priests, which haue more then they nede, many of them borrow other mens goods, and neuer pay them, and sometimes they steale them. And they haue with them Singers, that can sing wanton Songs, and some will haue Bag-pipes, so that euery Towne where they come, with their noyse of singing, piping, angling of Canterbury Bels, and the barking of dogs, they make more noyse then if the king came thither, with all his Clarions and Minstrels, and if they bee a moneth in pilgrimage, they will bee halfe a yeare after, wranglers, tale-bearers, and lyers. Bishop. Lewde losell, thou seest not farre enough into this matter, it is fit they haue such musicke with them, that when one goeth barefoote, burteth his foote a∣gainst a stone, and maketh it bleede, it is well done that his fellow sing a song, or play on a bagge pipe, to driue away with mirth the hurt of his fellowe, and with such solace their trauell and wearinsse, is lightly, and merrily brought forth, Dauids last Psalme teacheth mee to haue diuerse nstruments of musicke. Thorpe. By the sentence of iuerse Doctors, that musicke that Dauid, and other Saints of the Old Lawe spake of, ought not to be interpreted literally, but gostly, for Saint Paul saith, all such thing befell to them in figure, therefore I vn∣derstand that the letter of this Psalme, and other Psalmes and Sentences doth slay them that take them now literally. This sence I vnderstand Christ approueth, puting out the minstrels, ere he would quicken the Damzell. Bishop. Lewd losell, is it not lawfull so haue Organes in the Church, to worship God withall? Thorpe. Yea, by mans ordinance, but a good Sermon to the peoples vnderstanding, were much more pleasant to God. Bishoppe. Organs, and delectable Songs, quicken mens wits more then a Sermon. Thorpe. Worldly men delight in sencible solace▪ but the faithfull louers of Christ delight to heare Gods word, and vnderstand it truly, and Saint Ierome saith; No bo∣dy may ioy with this world, and raigne with Christ. Bishop. What thinke you this  will speake, whereas hee hath no dreade, be∣ing bee speaketh thus in my presence? well▪ well, by God, you shall bee ordai∣ned for. Thou saidest Priests had no tittle to Tythes. Thorpe. One would know of me whether Priests, by the word of God, may curse
one for not paying of Tythes, Christ and his Apostles tooke no Tythes, nor commanded none so to doe. Saint Paul saith, The Lord hath ordained, that they that Preach the Gospell, should liue of the Gospell. And if Priests were now in measurable number, and liued vertuously, add tagh busily and truely Gods word, without Tythes, , and other duies, the people would giue them sufficint liuings. One of his Clarkes said, How can that be, sluc by the Law, Priests can scarcely constraine the people to giue them their Liuing? Bishop. Thou sayest it is not lawfull in any case. Thorpe. I neuer taught in that wise, I haue Preached in many places, that it is not lawfull to sweare by any creature, and that none ought to swrare in any case, if with∣out an oath he may excuse himselfe to them that haue authoritie so take an oath, but as he cannot otherwise excue himselfe, he ought onely to sweare by God, taking him only that is true to witnesse truth. And there were many other arguments▪ wherein was no great mater worth a∣bridging, if the reader be disposed, hee may see the booke at large. After hee had de∣nied to sweare obedience vnto the Bishop, except in those things that were accor∣ding to the word of God, the Archbishoppe bade the Constable haue him away in hae. Bishop. I was led foorth, and brought to a oule and vnhonest prison, where I was neuer before; when they were gone, and had shut the doore, I busied my selfe to thin on God, and thanke him of his goodnesse, and I was greatly comforted, that I was deliuered for a time, from the sight, hearing and presence, and scorning▪ and mena∣sing of mine enemies, but much more I reioyced in the Lord, that of his grace he kept , that without heauinesse, and anguish of conscience, I passed away from them. Now O God, to the praising of th blessed name, make vs one together by authority of thy word to be knit and made one in truth, faith, and stedfast hope in perfect charitie Amen. ¶Another Treatise of the said WILLIAM THORPE. CHrist, in Saint Matthew, likeneth them that heare his word, and kéepe it, to a wise man that buildeth his house vppon a stone, this house is mans Soule, in which Christ desireth to dwll, if it bee stablished in Christes liuing and teaching, adorned with his faire Uertues, and chiefly Charitie, without edling of any rrour, vppon none other ground; none may make any building, or house, but vpon the teaching and liuing of Christ, as Saint Paule teacheth to the Corinthians, and to comfort these, Saint Paul writeth to the people of Ephesus. Now ye are not strangers, guests, nor comelings, but Citizens, and of the houshold of God, builded vpon the foun∣dation of the Apostles and Prophets; in which foundation, euery building that is buil∣ded, it increasth to a holy Temple. This is the stable Stone Christ, fast holding together two wals, for through him, he Father is pitious, and mercifully ioyned, and made one together to mankinde, and through dread so offend God, and feruent loue to please him, men bee inseparably made one to God, nd ended surely vnder his protection. This stone Christ was figu∣red by the square Stones of the Temple: for wheresoeuer a square stone is laid, it a∣bideth stedfst▪ so Christ, and euery faithfull member of his Church, by example of him, abideth ably in true Faith, and in all heauenly vertues, in all aduersities, that they suffer in this valley of eares. When these quared stones were laid in the wals and Pillars of Gods Temple, no noyse or stroke of the workemen was heard, this lence signifieth Christ, and his faithfull members, which haue béene, are, and euer shall bee meeke and patient in euery aduerstie, and no sound of grudgig perceiued in them. This Stone, and ground of all vertues, proud beggers reproued, Christ suffered it
most méekely in his owne person▪ to giue example of méekenesse to his faithfull fol∣lowers. This world is now so full of proud beggers, called Priests, but are farre from such as Christ approueth Priests. For from the highest to the lowest, they doe all to please the World and the Flesh, since I had discretion, all the Popes, Cardinals, Bishoppes, and all the contagious flocke of the Priest-hoode haue increased damnably,  sinne to sinne, oud Hereticks, couetous Symoners, desouled Adulterers, abusing the Sacramntes, especially the Sacrament of the Altar, the highest Priests oc∣cupie vnlawfully Temporall Lordships, for fauour and gaine they sell Bene∣fices to vnworthy and vnable persons. Their Somnrs sell sinne, suffering men and women so lye in diuerse vices. The Priestes sell the Sacramentes full deare to the people, and thus the Priest-hoode is blowne vp into pride, and vaine-glory of their dignitie, that they disdaine to follow Christ in meeke∣nesse, holinesse, and busie Preaching of his worde, and to take their liuing at the peoples hands, as pure almes, and if they Preach not, to labour for their li∣uing. And they inforce, that all holy Scripture should bee expounded according to their manners. Therefore all Kings and Rulers, that knowe the trueth of this Testimony of Priesthoode, and will not inforce themselues to withstand these enemies, and Trai∣tors of Christ and his Church, all these striue with Antichrist against Iesus, and they shall beare the indignation of God Almightie, without end, if in conuenient time they amend them not and repent, doing due mourning and sorrow. For through the presumptuousnesse and negligence of the Prelates, wicked men are wrongfully named Hermits, and haue leaue to defraude the poore, and liue by their false winnings, and begging, in sloth, and other vices, and the copper nosed Prelates, are suffered to liue in pride and hypocrisie, and to defile themselues bo∣dily and Ghostly. Also by the sufferance of these Prelates, there bee vaine bro∣therhoodes and Priesthoodes, full of pride, they are cause of much dissention, and exercise themselues in eating, and drinking vnmeasurably, and out of time, and they are of one cloathing, and holde together, and in all vnlawfull doings they are Partners, medlers, and Councellers. Also, Prelates admit Pardoners, and strange beggers, with flatterings to be∣guile the people, against true beliefe, and to increase diuerse vices in them: and thus the viciousnesse of Prelates haue beene, are, and shall bée cause of Warres within this Realme and without, and cause of Pestilence of men, and murren of beastes, and barrennesse of earth, and all other mischiefes, vntill the Lords and Commons able them with grace, accordring to Gods will, to redresse this foresaid Priesthood, vnto the innocent eaching, and liuing of Christ and his Apostles. Therefore, all that know the viciousnesse that now raigneth cursedly in these Priestes, and in their learning, let them pray for the health of his Church, and abstaine from these indurate enemies of Christ and his people, and from all their Sa∣craments, which are fleshly and false. Saint Ciprian, and other great Doctors wit∣nesse, That not onely vitious Priests, but they which fauour and consent to them shall perish with them, as they perished that consented to Dathan and Abiram, for no∣thing were more confusion to them, then refusing their Sacraments, which are most vnlawfull, and none needs to eace to dye without taking any Sacra∣ment of these, Christs enemies, since Christ himselfe will not faile to minister all healthfull Sacramentes, to all them that are in true Faith, Hope, and Charitie. But some madde fooles, to eschewe slaunders, will bee shrieued once a years of their propper Priest, though they knowe him defouled with slaunderous vi∣ces, no doubt, these are culpable of great sinne, since Saint Paule witnesseth, that, Not onely they that doe euill are worthy of damnation, but they that consent to euill doers. And the vicious Priestes despise and cast from
them heauenly wisdome that is giuen of the Holy Ghost. Therefore the Lord throweth such dispisers from him, so that they doe no Priesthoode vnto im. There∣fore they that tooke, or consent that any other should take any Sacrament of any sch Priest sinneth against the Trinitie, and are vnable to any Sacrament of health. And that this Sentence is rue, and in the hope of the remission of all my sins, trusting stedfastly in the mercie of God. I off to him my Soule, and to proue that this is true, I suffer méekely, and gladly, my wrtched body to be tormented, to his praise, and the edification of the Church. And I, wretched caie, shall now, through the spirituall grace of God, make him a pleasant Sacrifice, with my most sinfull body, I beseech all that reade, or heare this my Testament, that they ideauour by all meanes, to vnderstand truely, and kéepe faithfully the commaundements of God▪ and to pray deuout∣ly to he blessed Trinitie, that I may haue grce and wisdome from aboue, to ende my life for his cause, in a true and liuly faith, stedfast hope, and perfect charitie. A Handicrafts man dyed constantly in the opinion1410. that it was not the body of Christ really which was Sacramentally ved in the Church. Hee was cayed to the place of execution, and included in  Pipe, or Tunne. The Prince, the eldest Sonne of King Henry was present, hee endeauoured to saue him, pr∣swading him from his opinions, adding often threatnings, which might haue daunted any mans stomacke; but this valliant Champion of Christ, neglcting the Princes faire words, ather determined to suffer any torments▪ then so great Idolatry. Beeing inclosed in the Pipe, hee was tormentd by the raging of the fre, and miserably roaring in the middest thereof, the Prince, beeing mo∣ued, came to him againe, commaunded the fre to bee taken away, comforted him, and promised him life, and a yearely stypnd during his life, if ee would consent to his Councell. But beeing more inflamed with the Spirit of God, thn with any earthly desire, hee continued vnmoueably in his former minde. The Prince commaunded him to bee put in againe, and that after, hee should looke for no grace. So this Lay-man persuered inuincible vnto the end, not with∣out a great and cruell battell, but with so much the more tryumph and victorie. As soone as King Henry the fift was Crowned, at the same time the Lord Cobham was cast into the Towre, the Bishoppes and Prelates came to the King, complaining that they, and the whole Clergie were despised, and their cen∣surs and Sacraments not regarded, and all iending to vtter ruine and decay, and all by suffering of Heretickes, which holde assemblyes in secret places, ad cor∣ners; which if it were any longer suffered, would ouerthrowe the Common∣wealth. Whereupon the King held a Parliament at Lecester, and made an act, that they that held Wicliffes opinion, were Heretickes, and Traytors, and to bee hanged and bur∣ned. The Bishops, beeing armed herewith, exercised wonderfull crueltie against many guiltlesse men, amongst which (besides the Lord Cobham, whose Story is de∣ferred) was Sir Roger Acton Knight, Iohn Browne Gentleman, and Iohn Be∣uerley a Preacher, who were condemned by the Lawe aforesaid, and crow∣ned with the double Martyrdome of hanging and burning,1413. at Saint Gyles i the Field. At that time there was 36. together, all of Noble, and gentle blods, condemmed by the Bishops for Heretickes, whom this cruell Lawe draue vnto the . Also one Iohn Claydon a Currier, and Richard Turmine a Baker, were burned in Smithfield. I passe ouer such, whom Iohn Mayor in his sixth Booke reporteth to be condemned for Heretickes, in the yeare 1447. amost which, such as were found most constant were burned.
About the same time a Fryer Minor, an English-man, being Ambassador of Pope Benedict 13. vnto Scotland, if he had not escaped by flight had beene burned, for cer∣taine herisies that were laid against him. About this time was a Sermon written, whether by Wickliffe or Thorpe, or any other, it is vncertaine, it is mentioned to be in the yeare 1388. Christ likeneth the Kingdome of Heauen to a Housholder, that went in the mor∣ning to hyre Worke-men into his Uineyard; so did he about the third houre, the sixt houre, and the ninth, and the eluenth, and as he found men standing idle, Hee said to them; Why stand you beere vn-occupyed, goe into my Vineyard, and that which is duty I shall giue you, and when the day was ended, he called his Steward, and bad him giue euery man a penny. This Housholder is Christ, head of the Church on Earth, which calleth in diuers ages; as in the time of Nature he called by inspiration Abell, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and diuers others. In the time of the olde Law, Moses, Dauid, Esau, Ieremy, with the Prophets: In the time of Grace, the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Uirgines, some in youth, some in middle age, some in the latter dayes: it is to labour in his Uineyard, which is his Church, as there be diuers Officers in trimming of the maternall Uine, no lesse néedfull in the Church be these thrée Officers, Priest-hood, Knight-hood, and Labo∣rers. The Priests must cut away the branches of sinne with the Sword of Gods Word: the Knights must maintaine Gods Word: the Teachers thereof, and the Land from wrongs and Enemies: the Labourers must by their sore sweat, get su∣stenance for themselues and others, if Priests want, the people for want of Gods Word all will grow wilde in vices, and dye ghostly, and were not men to rule peo∣ple, Théeues and Enemies would so increase, that none could liue in peace, and were it not for Labourers, Priests and Knights must be Artificers, Plough-men, and Heard-men, or else die for want of sustenance: as the great Clarke Auicenna saith, euery vnreasonable Beast, if he haue that which belongs to Nature, can liue of himselfe alone. But if there were but one man in the World, if he had all the goods in the World, yet for default he would dye, or his life worse then if he were not, because that which is prepared for mans sustenance must be altered, or else it accordeth not with him; therefore he saith, it is very needfull to haue men of diuers trades and callings. This should be a great cause that euery calling should loue, and not hate one another, and this I dare say, that they which doe not diligently la∣bour in some one necessary calling or other, when the day of reckoning shall come, which is the end of this life, as he liued without trauell, so shall hee want the reward of the Penny, the endlesse ioyes of Heauen, and be cast into Hell. Where∣fore, if thou be a labouring man, doe it truelie; if thou be a Seruant, be subiect, & feare to displease thy Maister for Christs sake; if thou be a Marchant, deceiue not thy Brother in chaffering; if a King, defend the poore and needy; if a Iudge, goe not to the right hand for fauour, nor to the left for hate. If thou be a Priest, instruct the ignorant, praise the obedient, and reprooue the disobedient to God, for in the end of the world you shall euery one haue a reward, a good or a bad, then Christ wil say to euery of these three States, Come giue a reckoning of thy Bayliwicke: First, Priests that haue cure of Soules shall bee called, and they shall answer for themselues and others: The second is, Temporall Lords shall answere for them∣selues and others: The third Baily shall account but for himselfe, or at least, haue lesse charge then the other, and euery one shall answere three questions: How en∣trest thou? How rulest thou? How liuest thou? To the Priest, how entrest thou? by Truth or Symony, God or the Deuill, for that thou wouldst labour in thy cal∣ling, or for that thou wouldst bee richly arrayed? Answere in thy conscience to thine offence now, or thou shalt ere it be long answere to GOD? and I aske the question, why men set their Children to schoole, whether for their worldly ad∣uancement, or to make them the better to know GOD and serue him? They set them to the Law, not to be Ministers of Iustice, to defend the poore, but because it is a meanes to make them great men; therefore there bee so fw to learne the word of GOD to be Preachers, because there is no gaines therein. Chrysostome
saith, Parents care for the bodies of their Children, but not for their soules; they desire their welfare in this world, but they passe not what they shall suffer in ano∣ther; they will sore bewaile the hurt of their bodies, but they reckon not much of the health of their soules, they are moued for their pouerty, but not for their sin: here∣by they shew, that they begot the bodies, but not their soules. To returne to Priests, there is now great abhominations in the Church; Priests come into Christs fold, not at his calling, but to make themselues rich, which is cause of many errors. In the Booke of mourning the Prophet saith, The enemy hath put his hand to all things he would, for he hath seene a lawlesse people in the Sanctuary, of which thou saidst they should not enter, The enemy is Sathan, for in what plenty is pride, enuy, wrath, and couetousnesse; and wherefore, but because such are entred into the Temple, which cannot kéepe the Law of God themselues, nor teach others: And OseaOse. 4. saith to them, Because thou hast put away the knowledge of Gods will, I haue put thee away from vsing Priest-hood to me. The second question, how hast thou ruled Gods flock committed to thy cure, for the good of the sheep, or for hire, as a father, or a wolfe; whom hast thou turned from their cursed liuing by thy preaching and good example? whom hast thou taught the law of God? he that is ignorant, the fatherlesse, Children and thy flocke shall greeuously ac∣cuse thee, that thou hast liued by their labour, and done nothing therefore, but let them go astray. S. Barnard saith, Priests be in place of Saints, and they doe wickedly, not being content with necessary wages, but ouer-plus: that the needy should liue by, they wast in houses of pride and lechery; beware, thou shalt giue an account to the last far∣thing, thinkest thou that thou shalt not be disalowed for nourishing young men, idly taught, as in a schoole to blaspheme God in all euill liuing: for féeding of fat palfries, of hounds, and of haukes, and of lecherous women. Heare what is said of such, they lead their daies in vanity and wealth, and in a moment go downe to hell. The third question, what light hast thou shewed, and what myrror hast thou béen vnto the people in thy liuing? It is wonder to sée how the life of Priests is changed, they be cloathed like Lords, they speake as dishonestly as any Ribold or Harlet: No Marchant more couetous for gaine, they ride like Princes, and all is of poore mens goods, they be blinded with to much shining of riches, they make houses as bigge as Churches, superfluously abounding with all things, they paint their Chambers with pictures, and cloath their Images with Silkes of diuers colours, but the poore for want of cloathing, and with an empty womb, cryeth at their doores; and oftentimes the poore be robbed to cloath stockes and siones: thou occupiest the place of Peter and the Apostles, no otherwise then Iudas and Simon Magus, as a candle newly quenched that stinketh ouer the house, in stead of light, and as smoake that blinds ones eyes in stead of fire; they shall haue an hard iudgement, because they haue misentred, and harder, because they haue misruled, and the hardest, because they haue cursedlie liued. The second that shall make account for himselfe and others, is Kings, and other temporall rulers; Hast thou entred thine office to profit the people, to destroy sinne, and further the truth, or for worship and riches? Some desire such estate to be rich, ad to oppresse such as they hate, and to take bribes, for sparing to punish sinne, and make themselues partners of other sinnes, and for bribes worke all things. Many in high office, thinke they are of higher kind of nature then others, not knowing they are poore mens brethren, and seruants for the good of the Common-wealth, and that their glory is vanity. Of whom the Prophet Osea saith, They haue raigned, but not by me; so was Roboam when he answered the people, My little finger is bigger then my Fathers Rib-bone, my Father greeued you somewhat, but I will adde more, which made the people rebell, and the kingdome neuer came wholy together again; where∣fore it is good for Rulers to take sober councell, to eschew eare-rounders, and to haue an eye of loue vnto the Commons, for be they neuer so high, they shall come before an higher Iudge to giue a reckoning. The second question, how hast thou ruled? Hast thou not beene the harder to the poore for his pouerty, nor fauored the rich for his riches? what abuse is now amongst
Officers, if a rich man plead with a poore, euery Officer is ready to further the rich man, and the poore man shall haue so many delaies, that though his right be neuer so good, for default of spending, hee shall be constrained to let his cause fall. And I haue heard say of them that haue proued both Courts, that the Court that is called most Spirituall, is most cursed; therefore it is truly said, a guift out of the bosome subuerts right Iudgement, but the words of Christ be to be feared, As you iudge you shall be iudged. The third question, how hast thou liued? Thou that punishest other for sinne, must not sinne thy selfe, else thou condemnest thy selfe in doing the thing thou dam∣nest in others, and when any standeth before him in Iudgement, hee must take héede before what Iudge hee must stand himselfe: but it is to be feared, that it fa∣reth with some, as with the two false Priests that would haue put Susanna to death, because she would not consent to their Lechery, and of the most worthy to bee hanged, damne the lesse worthy. Socrates being demaunded why hee laughed, saide, Because I sée great Théeues lead a little Theese to hanging: who is the grea∣ter Theefe, he that taketh House and Land from one, and his Heires, or he that stea∣leth a Sheepe. The third Bayly, is euery Christian that shall reckon to God for the goods he hath had of him; First, how haue you entred heere to your goods, if by extortion, stealth, vsury, or deceit; woe shall it be to you at this dreadfull day, as S. Augustine saith, if hee shall be in hell that hath not giuen of his goods well gotten, what shall become of him that stealeth others goods: desire of honour, and feare of pouerty be the causes that mae men liue by the rape of other mens goods; the vengeance of this couetous∣nes is discribed by the pot in the sixt of Zachary, wherein sat a woman named Im∣piety, into which the Angell threw a waight of Lead: and two women like Spirits with winges, carryed it betwixt Heauen and Earth, vnto the Land of Sinear; as a pot with a wide mouth, so Couetousnesse gapeth for riches and honour, and as li∣quor in a pot profiteth not the pot, but them that draw it out, so worldly goods profit not the Getters, but others that comes after, as Owles see better by night then by day, so the couetous are blinde in heauenly matters, and quicke-eyed in earthly matters. The Lead is obstinacy, the Woman is called Impietie, because Piety is lost by Auarice: the Pot is couered with Lead, which stoppeth in Impie∣ty, to shew that Couetousnesse hardeneth the heart, that Impiety cannot goe out by repentance, the two Woemen that bare the Pot, are Pride and Lust of the Flesh: which in Scripture are called the two Daughters of the Water, each crying, bring, bring. The first Winge is Pride of Spirituall guifts: The se∣cond Wing Pride of Temporall guifts: The Winges of the second Woman, be Gluttony and Sloth. Doctor Gregorie speaking of Gluttony, when the bel∣ly is filled, the prickes of Lecherie are stirred. And of Sloath Doctor Augustine saith, Lot was a good man whilst he was in businesse in Sodome, when hee was idle in drunkennesse he lay with his Daughters. Saint Augustine saith, rauening Fishes when they are full be satisfied, but onely couetous men cannot bee satisfied, he is not affraid of GOD, nor ashamed of Men, he spareth not Father nor Mo∣ther, Brother or Friend, oppresseth the Widdow and motherlesse Children, hee maketh frée men bond, hee bringeth forth false Witnesse, and occupyeth dead mens goods. What madnesse is this, to looselife and grace, to win damnation, and to loose Heauen to win God: And Innocentius saith, how many hath Couetousnesse deceiued for Balacks rewards. Balaam would haue cursed Gods people, notwith∣standing his Asse reproued him, Couetousnes made Achan steale the accursed things to the destruction of him and his house: Gehesie was stricken with Leprosie for sel∣ling a mans health that came by the grace of God: Iudas for couetousnes sold Christ, and after hanged himselfe; Couetousne was the cause of the lying and sudden death of Ananias and Saphira. If a rich man haue a whole streete, or a great field, and a poore man haue an Acre of Land, or but one House neere, eyther by intreaty, or pursuing, hee neuer cea∣sth vntill he hath gotten the poore mans House and Land, as Achab and Iezabell
sw Naball for his Uineyard. Saint Ambrose saith to the rich, how long will you scratch out your couetousnes, will you dwell alone, and haue no poore dwell with you: why put you out your kinde, and challenge the earth which Nature hath made common to poore and rich: Nature bringeth forth all men poore, naked, and needy of meate and drinke, without riches or gay clothes, and the earth taketh vs naked againe, and closeth none of our riches: he that maketh difference betwixt poore and rich, when they haue lien a little in the graue, looke vpon them who was poore, and who was rich, and thou shalt se no difference in their bones, except there be more clothes rotten with the rich then the poore, which is a hurt to the liuing, and no good to the dead: of such extortioners it is written, they reape other mens fields▪ and they pluck away the Grapes of the vine of the oppressed, they pluck away their clothes and leaue them naked: and in that the aforesaid pot was lift vp betwixt hea∣uen and earth, sheweth that couetousnesse hath no Charitie to God, or Man, and they carry the pot to the Land of Synear, that is, the land of stench or Hell. Héere wee should aske how thou hast gouerned thy Wife, thy Children and seruants, whether thou hast brought them vp in Gods Lawes, and continued them ther∣in according to thy power, otherwise thou shalt giue an account, and to a∣uoide these hard accounts, I councell euery one to trust in the mercy of God, through Christs demerites with a liuely Faith, and repenting heart of thine iniquities, and Amend, else who shall graunt thee pardon and release of thy ac∣counts. Now we will consider, who shall call vs to this reckoning, before whom, and what punishment to the wicked, and what reward to the faithfull: there bee two Iudgements, one at separation of body and soule, which is the particular doome: and the second at the generall resurrection that is vniuersall; to the first we shall be called one after another, to the second we shal come altogether in the twinckling of an eye: we are called to the first by thrée summons; sicknes, age, death: the first war∣neth, the second threatneth, the third taketh; some are slayne without sicknes or age, and the most part without age, and there is a sicknes that makes the body fe∣ble, and a sicknes of the soule which is generall to all men, and the continuance ther∣of is cause of corruption: if a man cast all worldly things out of his minde, yet can he scantly thinke onely of God a Pater-noster while: O God, what a sicknes is this to the sonnes of Adam, of this sicknes spake S. Paul, I see another Law of my members, rebelling against the Law of my Spirit; as a man looking on the Sunne cannot long indure, yet the fault is not in the Sunne for it is most cleere, but in the féeblenes of mans eyes: so since Adam was put out of Paradice, all his off-spring haue been thus sick: the second sicknes is of the body, as hunger thirst, cold, heat, sorrow, wearinesse, and many others: as Iob saith. A man borne of a woman is full of many miseries, and is but for a little time: there be other sicknesses that happen to some as Feuers, Dropsie, Blindnes, and such like, as it is said of the Israelites, if thou keep not the comman dements of God I shall increase the sorrows and sicknesses of thy seed, but God sendeth such sicknesses sometimes to good men, and tribulati∣ons for two causes: First to know that it is of God, and to increase in méekenes: of this saith Saint Paul,Rom. 12. least my great reuelations should extoll me in pride, to mee is giuen the pricke of the flesh: I three times prayed God it should goe from me, he an∣swered, my grace is sufficient; for my power is manifested in weaknes; the Diuell asking Iob to be tempted, was heard, and not the Apostle asking his temptation to be remooued▪ he heard the damned, and heard not him that should bee saued: also God sendeth sometime his Saints to giue vs sinners example of patience, being we haue deserued much more: as Toby came from the Charitable worke of burying the dead Swallowes were suffered to dung in his eyes being asleepe, and make him blind it is written, that it was for an example of patience to them that should come after, and though he euer feared God he was not agreeued with God, but feared him still, and thanked him alwaies, and the sicknesses of wicked men be for two cau∣ses: first that they should leaue their sinnes and loue God; we see often men in sick∣nesses know God, that neuer would turne to him whilst they were whole: Also
God sendeth sicknes and troubles often to the wicked, to make others afraid to folow their sinnes, as Antiochus wormes crauled out of his body whilst he was aliue, and his friends were weary of his stinke, yea he might not abide his owne stinke: then he said it is rightfull to be subiect to the Lord, & for mortall man not to hold himselfe equall with God: the Story saith, hee asked mercy of God, and could none haue, and vowed to doe more good to the Temple and Iewes then he had done harme, and to become a Iew an goe ouer all the land preaching Gods Law; yet because it cam not out of true repentance springing of Faith, but of his odious paine, hee obtained not fauour: by this men should see what it is to be disobedient to God: also sicknes sheweth that the patient is mortall, and that hee must die though hee may now scape. The second Somner is age, hee will not leaue thee vntill hee haue brought thee to death: yet many, though they see all their members decayed with age, take no heed; but if he see a little mirth forgetteth the Somner hath him by the sleeue, and what a reckoning he must make, which if he answere not well, he forfeiteth bo∣dy and soule to damnation: a Doctor saith, this is the greatest abuse of the world; the reason is because these three, idle youth, vnhonest speech, and wicked déed, which if they grow with a man from his childhood to his old age, they make a three-fold cord to binde the old man in custome of sinne: wherefore Esay saith, breake the cordes of sinne. The third Somner is death, his condition is come, hee, first or last spa∣reth neither poore nor rich: Saint Augustine saith, wee ought feare death, for in what estate it findeth one, it bringeth him to Iudgement: therefore the Wise man saith to his Sonne, thinke on the last day, and thou shalt neuer sinne. We shall likewise be called with three messengers vnto the last Iudgement: the first the sicknes of the world, the second his age and feeblenes, the third his end: as decay of Naturall heate, and increase of vnnaturall heate, is the sicknes of the body: so decay of the loue of God, and our neighbour, and increase of vnnaturall lusts is the sicknes of the world, Christ saith this is a signe of the end of the world that wic∣kednes shall wax plenteous, and charitie wax cold: know well saith Saint Paul, in the last daies shall be perilous times,Mat. 21. 2 Tim. 3. men louers of themselues, couetous, proud, vn∣obedient to parents, without affection, &c. when thou seest suchmen, know the first Somner warneth the world that the day of reckoning draweth neere. The second Somner the age of the world, the day of the end of the world was hid from the Apostles, and from Christs manhood as to shew it vs: yet by authori∣ties of Scriptures we may show that that day of wrath draweth neere, least any say as that foule belly seruer,Luke 12. 1 Cor. 10. I will say to my soule, eate, drinke and be merry, thou hast much goods laid vp for many yeares. If Paul said 1300. yeares past, we be those to whom the ends of the world is come, much more we may say the same, and Chri∣sostome saith, when thou seest the Sunne so low that the vallies be darke, thou kno∣west night is néere: much more when it is so low that the hils be darke, so if thou seest darknes of sinne haue mastery of seculer men, it is a token the end of the world is nigh: but when thou seest the darknes of sinne hath gotten the vpper hand of Priests, that should be as hilles amongst the communaltie in perfect liuing, who doubteth but that the world is at an end: and Abbas Ioakim saith from the yeare 1200. all times be to be suspected: and Ildiger in her prophesies saith, as the seuenth day the world was full made, and God rested from his worke: so in seuen thousand yeares the number of them that shall be saued shall be fulfilled, and then shall the Saints wholly rest in body and soule: and now it is from the Creation six thousand and six hundred yeares. The Disciples asked Christ three questions; the first of the destruction of Ieru∣salem, the second of his comming to Iudgement,Mat. 24. the third of the end of the world: To the first he said, when the Romans besiege the Citie, soone after it shall bee de∣stroyed, to the second and the third he gaue many tokens, as that there should bee warres, pestilence, and earthquakes: lastly, when wee shall see the abomination of holinesse standing in the sanctuarie, then who so readeth let him vnderstand: this
abomination as Doctors say shall bee in the great Antichrists dayes 1240. dayes: and a Doctor saith that a day must be taken for a yeere by authoritie of Scriptures, and by reason: and it is thought to this Clarke, that Antichrist shall more appeare, in the yeare of Christ 1400. then any time before, and there lacketh but twelue yéeres of the fulfilling thereof.Reuel. 7. In the opening of the seuen seales is declared the state of the Church, from Christ to the end of the world: the foure first seales from Christ to An∣tichrist; the first Seale the state of the Church in Christs and his Apostles time: the voice of the Lyon is Christs voice, the white horse his Disciples, the whitenesse sheweth their righteousnes, by their bow their true preaching, pricking repentance into mens hearts, they went to Iewry ouercomming them to leaue the trust they had in the old Law, and to trust onely in Christ: they went out winning the Paye∣nims from Idolatry to Christ: The Calfe in the second Seale which is a Beast, was vsed to be sacrificed, betokeneth the state of the Church in the time of Martyrs, and that is tokened by the Red Horse: this began at cursed Nero, and indured vnto Con∣stantine the great that indowed the Church: in this time many shed their blod for the testimonie of Gods word, and of two and twenty Bishops, vntill Siluester the first, I read but of foure but they were Martyrs: and in the time of Dioclesian the Emperour, the persecution was so great, that in thirty daies were slaine 22000. in diuers countreys for the Gospell. The opening of the third Seale, telleth the state of the Church in the time of Heretickes, by the Black-horse is figured false vn∣derstanding of the Scripture: then cried the third Beast which is a man, for it was needfull to preach Christs Incarnation and Passion against Heretickes, that tooke those points amisse: The fourth Seale tlleth the state of the Church in the time of hypocrites, that by outward signes of repentance onely blind the people: the pale co∣lour of the Horse signifieth their hypocrisie, the rider was death, to signifie they slay ghostly, that teach any other way but Christ, and Hell followeth them▪ for Hell re∣ceiueth those that deceiue men: in that time it was needfull that the fourth beast the Eagle which flyeth highest of all Birds, to make his cry, to raise vp the Gospel, least mens traditions ouergrow it, by the information of these hypocrites: The fift Seale sheweth the state of them that shall follow, and the desire the followers of Gods law shall haue to bee deliuered from this woe. The sixt Seale tellth the state of the Church in Antichrists limmes; the Angels that stood in the foure corners of the earth, to hold the foure windes from blowing are the Diuels Ministers: the foure windes are the foure Gospels, they shall let the preaching thereof, and the breath of the Holy Ghost to fall vpon men: after this commeth the mysterie of the seuen Seales, that Antichrist is come in his owne person, whom Iesus shall slay with the breath of his mouth, hee and his seruants shall show their vttermost persecution a∣gainst Christ and his subiects. I said in my second principle, that it was to be knowne before what Iudge wee must reckon: the Iudge is God himselfe that seeth all our deeds and thoughts, and euery mans deeds, and the secrets of their hearts shall be opened to all the world: as Saint Iohn saith, the dead men, great and small, stood about the Throne, and bookes were opened, and the Booke of Life was opened, and the dead were iudged accor∣ding to their deed written in that Booke: this Booke is mens consciences, that now are closed, but then shall be open to all men: the Booke of Life is Christs Gos∣pel, which is now hid from the damned, through their owne malice: in the first book is written all that is done, in the second all that should be done: therefore look in the Booke of the Conscience whilest thou art heere, if thou findest any thing contrarie to Christs example and Doctrine, scrape it out with the knife of repentance, and write it better. I said it were good to know what reward the good shall haue, and what reward the wicked shall haue: it is written, Christ shall come with the same body that was crucified, all that shall be saued shall cleaue to him, and be rauished, meeting him in the ayre, they that shall be damned lying vpon the earth. Then Christ shall aske ac∣count of deeds of mercy, reproouing false Christians for leauing them vndone, re∣hearsing the paines that his true seruants haue suffered: then the wicked with the
Diuell shall goe into euerlasting fire, and the righteous into uerlasting life: then that which is written shall be fulfilled. Woe wo, to them that dwel on the earth; wo to the Paynim that worshipped Idols, and other creatures; woe to the Iew that trusted too much in the Old Law, and despised Christ; woe to the false Christian that knew the will of God, and did it not, and hath not contemplated his mercies and waies, and been thankefull for his bene∣fits, and hast made thy hart a house of swine, & a den of theeues, by vncleane thoughts and delights: thou hast shut God out of thy heart, and hee shall shut thée out of hea∣uen, thou hast harboured the fiend, and thou shalt euer dwell with him in hell, thou shouldest haue sung holy, holy, holy Lord: but thou shalt cry woe, woe, woe to mee: but they that bee saued shall ioy in God, Ioy all amongst themselues, and one of an others saluation: how happie bee they that their trauels bee fi∣nished, and brought to so gracious an end: especially, that they haue escapt the paines: O how happie are they for the endlesse blisse which they haue in the sight of God. In this yeare began the Councell of Constance,1414. called by Sigismond the Empe∣rour, and Pope Iohn the 23. for pacifying a Schisme betwixt three Popes, all stri∣uing for the Pope-dome, which continued nine and thirty yeares: the Italians set vp this Iohn, the Frenchmen set vp Gregory, the Spaniard set vp Benedict, and e∣uery Nation defended his Pope, to the great disturbance of Christian Nations: this Councell indured foure yéeres, wherein all matters were decided most by foure Na∣tions: the English, Germans, French, and Italians, out of euery Nation was a president: there names were, Iohn the Patriarch of Antioch for France, Anthony Archbishop of Rigen for Italy, Nicholas Archbishop of Genesensis for Germanie, and Richard Bishop of Bathe for England: the aforesaid Pope Iohn, resigned his Pope-dome, for which the Emperour thanked him, and kissed his féete: but after he repented himselfe,  being disguised fled, but was taken by the Emperour and put in prison: this Pope was deposed, by the Decree of the Councell; more then for∣tie most hainous crimes prooued against him; as for hiring a Physition to poison A∣lexander his predecessor, and that he was an Heretick, a Symoniack, a Lier, an Hy∣pocrite, a Murderer, an Inchanter, a Dice-player, an Adulterer, a Sodomite, and many others: he held a Councell at Rome about foure yeares before, and euer when they assembled there was a huge Owle in the place, or somewhat else in the shape of an Owle, which did alwaies looke so earnestly vpon the Pope, which made him still breake vp the Sessions, and at length to dissolue the Councell: some said it was the Spirit of God in the shape of an Owle, indeed there Spirit is better figured in the shape of an Owle then of a Doue. The Councell said the way to reforme the Church was to begin a minoritis: the Emperour said, non a minoritis, sed a maioritis, there was fiue and forty Sessions in this Councell: there was three seuerall Popes deposed in this Councell. In the eighth Session was the condemnation of Iohn Wickliffe, and his fiue and fortie Articles, & of his memory and bones to be burned, as it is before recited: and in the thirtéenth Session was decréed that no Priest vnder paine of excommunication shall communicate vnto the people vnder both kindes of Bread and Wine: In the fifteenth Sessions silence was commanded vnder paine of the great curse, and that none should make any noise of hand, foote, or voice: and then the condemnation of Iohn Hus was read. In the seuenteenth Session, the Emperour tooke vpon him a iourney to the King of Arragon, to intreat with Pope Benedictus about the resig∣nation of the papacy, and an excommunication was denounced against al that should goe about to hinder the Emperours iourney, and that the Councell should euery Sunday make prayers and processions for him, and an hundred daies of pardon gi∣uen to them that would be present at the said prayers and processions, and that all Prelates should then weare their Pontificalibus: granting besides to euery Priest that said one Masse for the same an hundred daies pardon, and to all other that once a day should say one Pater-noster, and one Aue-Mary for the safety of the Emperour forty dayes pardon.
In the nineteenth Session, Ierome of Prage was accused of Heresie, cast into prison, and forced to abiure. In the two and twentieth Session, Letters were made and set vpon all Church doores, admonishing Duke Frederick, to restore George Bishop of Austridge such Lands, Kents and Reuenues as hee detayned, vnder paine of interdiction, suspen∣tion, and excommunication. In the one and twentith Session, the Bishop of Londy made a Sermon, which being ended, Ierome of Prage, which had abiured, stood vpon a Bench; replying against his Sermon, preaching sundry things: wherevpon the said Ie∣rome was condemned and deliuered to the seculer power to be burned. In the seuentéenth and eighteenth Sessions, there was great proces giuen out a∣gainst Duke Frederick, accusing him for sacriledge, and excommunicating him: for not obaying the admonition of the Councell, concerning the vsurpation of the posses∣sions of the Bishop of Austridge as aforesaid. In the one and thirtieth Session, Letters were directed to a certaine Earle in Italy, for laying violent hands vpon the Bishop of Asce, and imprisoning him, commanding him to set him at liberty, vnder paine of interdiction and excommuni∣cation: and an other Decree was set forth for the restoring of the Liberties of the Church of Baron. In the nine and thirtith Session, it was ordered that euery Pope should sweare to beleeue and hold the Catholick Faith, after the traditions of the Apo∣stles, generall Councels, and holy Fathers, namely of the eight generall Counsels, Ephisme, Calcedone, two of Nice, and foure of Constantinople: also the Coun∣cels of Lateran, Lyons, and Uinna; to obserue, preach and defend him to death: and by all meanes to prosecute the right of the Sacraments, canonically deliuered to the Catholick Church, and writing his Oath, he should offer it before witnesses vp∣on some Altar. On Saint Martins Euen a new Pope was chosen, therefore they called him Martin, and hee was brought to the Emperour and Councell, into the Church of Constance, and there authorized for Pope: and was brought thence most honora∣bly with sumptuous procession, vnto the Monasterie of Saint Augustine, to bee crowned: The Emperour on foote leading his horse on the right hand, and the Marquesse of Brandenburge, Prince Elector, leading his Horse on the left hand. When this Councell should be ended, the Pope sent a Cardinall with procla∣mation to dismisse the Councell, and to giue euery man leaue to depart, and to shew the Popes indulgence, which he had granted to all and euery person present, at: that Councell that they should haue full absolution during his life, so that hee procured his absolution in writing within two monethes: also an other iudul∣gence was granted of plenarie remission of sinnes at the houre of death, and was not onely for their Maisters, but for their houshould: vpon condition that from notification thereof, they should fast euery Friday one whole yeare, for the absolution of their life time: and for their absolution at the houre of death, to fast the same Friday one other yeere, if they had no lawfull impediment, and after the se∣cond yeere they should fast to their liues end euery Friday, or else doe some other good worke. There were at this Councell three hundred forty and six Arch-bishops and Bi∣shops: fiue hundred threescore and foure Abbots and Doctors; sixteene thousand seculer Princes, Dukes, Earles, Knights, Esquires: foure hundred and fifty com∣mon women: six hundred Barbers: three hundred and twenty Minstrels, Cookes, and Iesters: there was 60500. forrenners at that Councell from Easter to Whit∣sontide; the chiefe thing to be noted in this Councell was, that the Popes authority is vnder the Councell.
The History of IOHN HVS. IOhn Hus being a preacher at Prage, in the temple of Bethelem, those rather to teach the Gospell of Christ, then the humane traditions of Bishops; their sprung vp certaine which accused him as an heretick to the Bishop of Rome: the Pope committed the matter to the Cardinall of Columna, who appointed a day hee should appeare at Rome: The King and Nobilitie of Boheme, sent to the Pope to acquit him from his appearance, and if they suspected the Kingdome to be infected with any heresie, they should send an Ambassadour to correct the heresie, and the King would beare the charge, and likewise assist the Le∣gate with all his authoritie, to punish such as shall bee sound with erronoous Doctrine: and Iohn Hus sent his meete procurators vnto the Court of Rome, and with firme and strong reasons did prooue his Innocencie, but when the Cardinall would admit no defence, his procurators appealed to the Pope; not∣withstanding the Cardinall excommunicated him as an obstinate heretick, because he came not at his day, and the matter was referred to two other Cardinals, who after they had delayed the matter a yeere and a halfe, confirmed the Iudgement of the first Cardinall, and some of his procurators were committed, and grecuously pu∣nished for being so earnest for him. But the generall Councell being assembled as aforesaid: The Emperour sent certaine of his Gentlemen to bring Iohn Hus Bacheler of Diuinitie vnto the Coun∣cell, to purge himselfe of the blame which was laid against him, and granted him a safe conduct, that hee might come freely to Constance, and returne home without fraud or interruption: he seeing so many faire promises, and his safe conduct, sent vnto the Emperour that he would come vnto the Councell: but before he went hee caused certaine writings to bee set vpon the gates of the Cathedrall Churches, Parish Churches, Cloister and Abbies, signifying hee would go to the Councell, and that if any that haue suspition of his Doctrine, that hee should declare it be∣fore the Lord Conrade, or the Bishop of Prage: or if hee had rather at the gene∣rall Councell, for there he would render an account of his Faith before them all: the Bishop of Nazareth, the inquisitor for heresie, made his certificate vnder his hand and Seale, with a testimoniall vnto Maister Iohn Hus, that hee had of∣tentimes beene before him, and had conferred with him, and yet could neuer finde any heresie in him: and so did the Bishop of Prage, set vp Letters in euery Ci∣tie as he passed to Constance, that hee was going to the Councell to descud his fath, and if any could lay any thing to him as touching his Faith let him come thither: ma∣ny resorted vnto him all the way as hee went, and hee was gently reate, e∣specially of the Citizans, and Burgesses, and sometimes of the Curates: and if there were noise of his comming, the streets were euer full to see him: In Norren∣berge many Curats came to him, desiring talk with him secretly, hee said he had ra∣ther shew his opinion openly before all men: so after dinner vntill night he spake be∣fore the Priests and Senators, and Citizens, that all had him in great reuerence, saue one Doctor which was a Charter-house Monke, who impraued all that h had said: then after he was come to Constance, Master Clum, and M. Latzembodge, which came with him went to the Pope, and certified him Iohn Hus was come to Constance, & that he had the Emperors safe conduct, desiring him to grant him libertie likewise to remaine there without trouble, which the Pope promised hee would: in the meane time Maister Pallets, Iohn Hus his great Aduersarie was come to Constance, but his Companion Zuoyma, Husses other Aduersarie died of an impostume by the way: then this Pallets associated himselfe with one Causis a Bohmian, which afore-time had vndertooke to finde a Mine of gold for the King: and hauing receiued much money of the King towards the bu∣sinesse, seeing his hope of making Gold to faile, runne away to Rome with the
Kings money: these two drew certaine Articles out of the writings of Hus, against him, and tooke great paines to shew these Articles to the Cardinals, Bishops and Monkes: and shewing that hee had done many other things against the holy con∣stitutions of the Pope and Church: whereby they made Iohn Hus to bee appre∣hended the six and twentith day he came to Constance: and the Cardinals sent the Bishops of Augusta, and Trent with the Burgesse of Constance, and a Knight to Iohn Hus his lodging, to report they were sent by the Pope and the Cardinals, to certifie him hee should render some knowledge of his Doctrine before them, as hee had often desired, and they were ready to heare him: hee answered, hee desired o∣penly to defend his Doctrine, but not priuately: notwithstanding, I will goe to them, and if they handle mee cruelly, I trust in the Lord Iesus that he will comfort mee, that I shall desire rather to die for his glory, the deny his verity, which I haue learned in his holy Scriptures: and Iohn Hus tooke his horse and went to the Popes Court, when he had saluted the Cardinals, they said to him, wee haue heard many reports of you, which if they be true are not to bee suffered, that you haue faught many errors, contrarie to the Doctrine of the true Church, and that you haue sowed your errors through all Bohemia by a long time: to whom hee an∣swered, I rather those to die then to bee found culpable of one errour: therefore I came to the Councell to receiue correction, if any can prooue any errours in me: The Cardinals said they were pleased with his answere, and departed, lea∣uing Iohn Hus, with Maister Clum, vnder the guard of armed men, and they suborned a Franciscane Frier, a subtill malicious hypocrite, to question with him: Who said Reuerend Master, I a simple rude Idyot am come to you to learne, for I haue heard that you haue taught many things contrarie to the Catholicke Faith: I desire you for the loue that you haue to the truth and to all good men, that you would teach mee some certainty: First it is said you maintaine that there remaineth but naturall bread in the Sacrament after consecration, which hee denied: Then the Frier asked him what manner of vnion is betwixt the man-hood and God-hood of Christ: Then Hus said, you say you are simple, but you are double and crafty, in that you haue propounded so difficult a Question: yet I will shew you my minde, which when he had done, the Frier thanked him, and departed: after the Popes Garison told him that this Frier was counted the subtillest Diuine in Lombardy: then Pallets and Causis his Aduersaries made earnest meanes to the Cardinals that hee should not bee set at liberty: and hauing fauour of the Iudges, mocked the said Hus; saying, now wee will hold you well-enough, you shall not depart vntill you haue paid the vttermost far∣thing: At night the Prouost of the Romane Court told Maister Clum he might depart, but they had otherwise prouided for Maister Hus: Maister Clum went to the Pope, declaring all that was done, beseeching him to remember the pro∣mise which hee had made: the Pope answered, it was done without his con∣sent, and told Maister Clum apart, why doe you impute this to mee; you know that I my selfe am in the hands of these Cardinals and Bishops, so hee retur∣ned very pensiue, and complained openly and priuately of the Popes wrong, but it profited not. Then Hus was led to prison and kept there eight daies, from thence he was carried to an other prison belonging to the Abbey, where by rea∣son of the stie of the place hee fell sicke, and was so weake that they despai∣red of his life. In the middest of his sicknes they put vp these Articles to Pope Iohn, the 23. and to the principals of the Councell, desiring that Iohn Hus might bee con∣demned. 1 That hee taught that the Sacrament ought to bee ministred in both kindes, and so his Disciples did now vse it, and that materiall bread remaineth in the Sa∣crament after consecration. 2 A Minister in mortall sinne cannot minister the Sacrament, and that other men besides Priests may minister the Sacraments. 3 Hee both not admit that the Church signifieth the Pope, Cardinals, Arch∣bishops,
and the Clergy vnderneath them: but saith this signification was tooke from the Schoolemen; and that the Church ought to haue no temporall possessions: and that the temporall Lords may take them away without any offence: and saith also that Constantine, and other seculer Princes haue erred by endowing Churches and Monasteries. 4 That all Priests are of like power, and that the reseruations of the Popes casualties: the ordering of Bishops, and consecrating of Priestes, were inuented onely for couetousnes. 5 When the Pope, Cardinals, and rest of the Priests are in sinne, as is possible enough, then the Church being in sinne hath no power of the Keyes: 6 Hee beeing excommunicated contemneth it, and saith Masse notwith∣standing. 7 Hee maketh Ministers himselfe, and putteth them into Churches without the ordinarie of the Dioces, or other Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, and teacheth it to be lawfully done. 8 That one being ordained a Priest or Deacon, cannot be kept back from the of∣fice or preaching: therefore he would neuer be let from preaching by the Apostolick Sea, nor the Arch-bishop. Moreouer, when there was Questions moued in the Uniuersitie of Prage, vpon the 45. Articles of Iohn Wickliffe, and the Diuines of Boheme concluded euery one of them Articles, either to be hereticall, seditious, and erroneous: he held that none of them were hereticall, seditious, or erroneous, as after hee did dispute & teach in the common schooles of Prage: notwithstanding they were condemned in Eng∣land, and by the whole Church. Because I finde these Articles and many others answered by Iohn Hus in wri∣ting, which hereafter followe, and which were read in the Councell, I omit his answeres in the Councell, because what with the outragiousnes of the Councell a∣gainst him, so many interrupting him at euery word, and some mocking, and ma∣king mouthes at him, that it was impossible for him to make a perfect answere to a∣ny thing: I likewise omit for breuitie, the many supplications that the Nobles of Boheme made for his Baile and libertie, and what surety they offered: if thou bee disposed to see these circumstances, and with what great labour they obtained that he should answere openly, and how cruelly he was vsed in prison; I referre thee to the Booke at large. The Answeres of IOHN HVS, written with his own hand. I Iohn Hus, vnworthy Minister of Iesus Christ, Master of Art, and Bacheler of Di∣uinitie, doe confesse I writ a Booke intituled, of the Church: in reproofe whereof there are diuers Articles drawne out of the said Treatise, deliuered vnto me. 1 The first Article: there is but one holy vniuersall Church, which is the vniuer∣sall company of all the predestinate. Answere. I confesse this proposition is mine, and confirmed by the saying of Saint Augustine, vpon S. Iohn. 2 Saint Paul was neuer a member of the Diuell, though he did many things like the malignant Church: nor Saint Peter, though he horribly sinned in periury, and denying his Master. Answere. It was by Gods permission, that they might more stedfastly rise againe and be confirmed: I answere according to S. Augustine, that it is expedient that the Elect should offend: there be two separations from the Church; the Elect are diuided from the Church, but not to perdition: the second is to perdition, by the which certaine Heretieks are through there deadly sinne diui∣ded from the Church.
3 No member of the Church doth at any time fall away from the body, because the Charitie of Predestination, which is the bond of the same, doth neuer fall: An∣swere this is proued by 1. Cor. 13. Rom. 8. All things turne to good to them that loue God: Also I am certaine that neither death nor life can seperate vs from the loue of God, &c. 4 The Prdestinate although he be not in the state of Grace, according to present Iustice: yet he is alwaies a member of the Church. Answere. I declared in my booke that there be diuers manners of being in the Church: there be some in the Church ac∣cording to a mishapen Faith, and some according to Predestination, which are now in sinne, but shall returne to grace. 5 No degree of dignitie, nor election of man, nor any sensible signe can make a man a member of the Church. Answere. I say Predestination maketh vs members of the Church, and prepareth for vs grace heere, and glory in the world to come; and not degree of dignitie, nor the election of a man, nor sensible signe: for Iudas, though Christ elected him an Apostle, and gaue him Temporall Graces, and that he was so reputed of men, yet was he a Woolfe in a sheeps-skin, as Saint Augustine saith. 6 A Reprobate man is neuer no member of the Church. Answere. It is in my Booke with sufficient long probation of the Psalme 26. and the 5. Ephes. and by Saint Bernards saying; the Church of Christ is more plainely his body, then the bo∣dy that was crucified: the Church is the flower of the Lord in which is corne and chaffe: the Elect and Reprobate. 7 Iudas was no true Disciple of Christ: Answere. This I confesse, S. Augu∣stine in his Booke of penance where he expounds 1. Iohn 2. They came out from vs, but were not of vs: Christ knew from the beginning who should beleeue, and him that should betray him: and said, none commeth to mee except it be giuen him of my Father, from that time many departed from him, though they were called by the Gospell, they were no true Disciples, because they did not continue in the word of Christ, as it is said, if you remaine in my word you bee my Disciples: it is eui∣dent, that Iudas could not be the Disciple of Christ, by meanes of his couetousnes: For Christ saith, except a man forsake that hee hath, he cannot be my Disciple: there∣fore because Iudas was a Theefe Iohn 12. and a Diuell, Iohn 6. It is euident that Iudas was no true but a fained Disciple. Saint Augustine vpon Saint Iohn, that Christs sheepe heare his voice, saith, what manner of hearers were his sheepe; Iu∣das heard him but was a Woolfe, yet he followed the shepheard, but being clothed in a sheep-skin he laid waite for the shepheard. 8 The predestinate whether they bee in the state of grace, or no, according to there present Iustice, is the same Church which hath neither wrinkle nor spot, but is holy and vndefiled, which Christ calleth his owne. Answer. In the fift to the E∣phesians, Christ so loued his Church that he offered himselfe for it. I pray you then, is there any faithfull man that doubteth that the Church doth not signifie all the E∣lect: the glorious spouse of Christ, holy and without spot: This is an Article of faith which we ought firmely to beleeue. 9 Peter neuer was, nor is the vniuersall head of the Church. Answere. All men agree, that Peter receiued of Christ, which is the Rock of the Church, humility, sted∣fastnesse, and blessednes: When Christ said vpon this Rock I will build my church, he did not meane that he would build euery Militant Church vpon Peter, but vpon Christ which is the Rock: from whom Peter receiued his Faith, for he is the head and foundation of euery Church, and not Peter. 10 If he that is called the Uicar of Christ, follow Christ in his life, then he is his true Uicar; otherwise he is the messenger of Antichrist, the enemy of Peter and Christ, and the Uicar of Iudas: Answere. For this cause Saint Bernard in his fourth Booke did write vnto Pope Egenius, thou delightest to walke in great pride, be∣ing gorgeously arrayed, what fruit doth the flooke receiue by thee▪ If I durst say it these be rather the pastures of the Diuels then of sheepe: Saint Peter, and Saint Paul did not so, thou séemest to succéede Constantine, and not Peter. It followeth in
my Booke, if thy life be contrary to Peters, or giuen to auarice, then he is the Uicar of Iudas, which loued the reward of iniquity, and sold the Lord: As soone as they reade the same, the Rulers of the Councell looked one vpon another, and making mockes and moes, nodded their heads at him. 11 Priests that vse Symony, and liue desolutely, haue an vntrue opinion of seuen Sacraments, as Bastards and not Children, not knowing the Oice of the Keyes of Censures, neither of the rights of Cerimonies and seruice of the Church, nor of worship of Relikes, nor of Orders of the Church, nor of indulgences and pardons. Answere. It is in this manner in my Booke, the authoritie is abused by such as sell Orders, and get riches by Symony, making markets of holy Sacraments, liuing voluptuously, desolutely, a filthy villanous kind of life. They pollute the Ecclesi∣asticall estate, and though they professe they know God, they deny him indéede, and beléeue not in him, but as vnbeléeuing Bastards hold a contrary opinion, as a∣foresaid, to whom Malachy in his first Chapter saith, Vnto you Priests be it spoken, which despise my name. 12 The papall dignity hath his originall from the Emperors of Rome. Answer. This is proued by the 96. distinction, for Constantine granted this priuiledge to the Byshop of Rome, and others after confirmed the same; that as Augustus is counted the most high King aboue all others, so the Bishop of Rome shall be called the princi∣pall Father aboue other Bishops: then a Cardinall said in Constantines time, there was a generall councell at Nice, in which the highest place in the Church was giuen to the Byshop of Rome, why did you not then say it tooke his dignity rather from the Councell? 13 No Man with reason, without reuelation can affirme, that hee or any o∣ther is head of any particular Church. Answere. I confesse it, but it followeth, that he ought to hope through his good liuing, that he is a member of the Spouse of Christ. 14 No man ought to beleeue that the Pope is head of any Church. Answere▪ confesse it, for the Church was deceiued by Agnes, a Woman Pope, as it appa∣reth by Saint Augustine, and it so being deceiued, Christian Faith should bee de∣praued. 15 The Popes power, as Uicar, is nothing worth, if he liue not according to Christ, and follow the manners of Peter. Iohn Hus confessed this, and said before the Councell, I vnderstand, the power of such a Pope as doth not represent the manners of Christ, is void. 16 The Pope is most holy, not because he supplieth the place of Peter, but because he hath great reuenues, my words be mutilated. Thus it is written, he is not holie because he is Uicar of Peter, nor for his great possessions, but if he follow Christ in humilit, patience, labour, and perfect loue. 17 The Cardinals are not the true Successors of the Apostles, if they liue not after the fashion of the Apostles, keeping the ordinances of Christ. Answere. I confesse it, for if they enter not in at the doore which is Christ, they be Theeues and Robbers. 18 An Hereticke ought not to be committed to the secular power to be put to death, it is sufficient that he suffer the Ecclesiasticall censure. Answer. These are my words, that they might be ashamed of their false iudgement, for Christ would not condemne such to bodily death: The first point appeareth in the 12. of Luke: The second, by the Woman taken in Adultery, and in the 18. Chapter of Mathew, If thy Brother haue offended thee, &c. therefore an Hereticke ought first to be in∣structed with Christian loue, by reasons drawne out of holy Scriptures, as Saint Augustine and others haue done, disputing against Heretickes; but if for all this they will not leaue their errors, they ought to suffer corporall punishments. The Iudges had read in Iohn Husses Booke, where hee greeuously inueyed against them which deliuered an Heretike vnto the Secular power, not being conuicted of Heresie, and compared them vnto the High-Priests, Scribes, and Pharises, which told Pilate it was not lawfull for them to put any man to death, and deliuered Christ vnto him,
but Christ told Pilate they were greater murderers then he which deliuered him vn∣to him, then the Cardinals and Bishops made a great noyse, saying; Who are they that thou dost asimule vnto the Pharisies? And he said, All that deliuer any that is in∣nocent vnto the ciuill sword. 19 The Nobles of the World ought to compell the Ministers of the Church to kéepe the Commaundements of Christ. Answere. These be my words, the Militant Church consisteth of these parts; Ministers of the Church, which should kéepe purely the Ordinances of Christ; and the Nobles of the World, which should com∣pell them to keepe his Commaundements, and of the common people seruing to both parties. 20 The Ecclesiasticall obedience, as the Priests and Monkes haue deuised, it hath no authority in the Scripture. Answer. I confesse it, there be three obediences, the Spirituall, Secular, and Ecclesiasticall: the Spirituall, which is onely according to the ordinances of God▪ in which Christ and his Apostles liued, and all Christians ought to liue in: the Secular obedience, is due according to ciuill ordinance: the Ec∣clesiasticall obedience is such as the Priests haue inuented, without any expresse au∣thority of Scripture. 21 He that is excommunicate of the Pope, and apealeth vnto Christ, the curses of the Pope cannot annoy him. Answere. I acknowledge not this, but I did make complaint in my Booke, that they had done mee, and such as fauoured mee, great wrong, and they would not heare me in the Popes Court: and after the death of one Pope, I apealed to his successors, and it profited not, and to apeals to the Councell, it were to long; therfore at la I apealed to the head of the Church Christ Iesus. Then said a Cardinall, wilt thou presume aboue Saint Paul, who apealed to the Emperor, and not to Iesus, and they mocked him: the tenor of his apeale, was nothing but an earnest Prayer to Christ, to be his refuge and helpe when all keles fayled, and that he did appeale before God, for his greefe, from the wicked sentence and excom∣munication determined by the Byops, Scribes, and Pharisies, as Iohn Chryso∣stome did twice from the Councel of the Bishops; And Andrew Bishop of Prage, and Robert Bishop of Lincolne, apealed vnto Christ, who is not defiled with cruelty, nor corrupted with gifts, nor deceiued by false witnesses. 22 A vitious man liueth naughtily, and a vertuous man liueth godly. Answere. My words are these: All humane workes are deuided into two parts, they be either vertuous or vitaus; therefore if a man bee vertuous, that he doth, he doth vertu∣ously, and if a man be naught, that which he doth is naught: for as vice infecteth all the deeds of the Subiect, so vertue quickens all the doings of the vertuous, whih is proued by many places in the Scriptures. 23 The Minister of Christ liuing according to his Lawes and hauing knowledge of the Scriptures, and an earnest desire to edifie the people, ought to preach, notwith∣standing the excommunication of the Pope: and such a Minister ought not to obay any forbidding of him to preach. I Answer. We ought rather to obay God thn man, for a Minister to preach, and a rich man to giue Almes, are duties commaunded of God: and if the Pope or any other commaund a Minister not to preach, and a rich man not to giue Almes, they ought not to obay him. I cal that an vniust excommu∣nication, which is giuen contrary to Gods law, for such a one a Preacher ought not to leaue preaching, nor feare damnation: then they obicted that he had said that such excommunications were blessings: euen so say I now againe as the Prophet saith, They shall curse, but thou O Lord shalt blesse. 24 Euery man admitted to the Ministry, hath thereby authority to preach, and ought so to do, notwithstanding the excommunication or forbidding of the Pope, or any other. Answere. I doe confesse this, and that no Christian ought to doubt, but he that is sufficientlie instructed in learning, to instruct the ignorant, and to tell the vnruly of their sinnes, then for to do any other worke of mercy. 25 Ecclesiastical Censures, are Antichristian, such as the Cleargy hath inuented for their owne preferment, to defend their malice, and multiply their couetousnesse: It is not thus in my Booke, but I confesse it in substance.
26 There ought to be no interdictment vnto the people. Answer. For Christ the High Bishop, neither for the iniury done vnto Iohn Baptist, nor for any other iniurie did make any interdictment. I complained that for one mans fault, a whole Land shall be interdicted, and all the good cease to praise God, but Christ notwithstanding, Iohn Baptist was imprisoned, then whom there was no greater amongst the Chil∣dren of men, did not giue any curse, no not when Herod beheaded him, neither when himselfe was spoyled, beaten, and blasphemed; he did not curse, but praied for them, and taught his Disciples to do the same: and Peter exhorteth to follow Christ. Who when he was cursed, cursed not againe. And S. Paul saith in the 12. to the Romanes, Blesse them that persecute you. These are the Articles which are alleadged out of his Booke of the Church. Seauen Articles gathered out of his Booke against Stephen Pallets. 1 THE first Article, If the Pope, Bishop, or Prelate, be in deadly sinne, he is then no Pope, Bishop, or Prelate. Answere. I grant thereunto, and I send you to Saint Augustine, Ierome, Chrysostome, Gregory, Cyprian, and Barnard, who say moreouer, that he that is in deadly sinne, is no Christian; how much lesse, Pope, Bishop, or Prelate, of whom it is said in the eight of Amos, They haue ruled but not through me; they became Princes, and I knew them not: but I graunt, a wicked Pope, Bishop, or Priest, is an vnworthy Minister of the Sacrament, by whom God doth baptise, consecrate, or otherwise worke, to the profit of his Church. God saith by Samuell to Saul, because thou hast cast off my word, I haue cast thee off from being a King, much more a Pope sinning. 2 The Grace of Predestination, is the bond whereby the body of the Church and euery member thereof are firmely knit vnto the Head. Answere. This Article is mine, and it is proued out of the eight to the Romanes, Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ: And the tenth of Iohn, My Sheepe heare my voyce, I know them, and giue them eternall life, they shall not perish, nor any shall take them out of my hands. This is the knot of the body of the Church, and the spirituall head, vnderstand∣ding the Church of the predestinated. 3 If the Pope be a Reprobate, then as Iudas, he is a Deuill, a Théefe, and the Son of perdition, and not the head of the Militant Church, nor member thereof. I answer, If he were a member of the Church, then should he be a member of Christ, and then he should cleaue vnto Christ by grace of Predestination and present Iustice, and should be one spirit with God, as in the 1. Cor. 6. Know you not that our bodies are the members of Christ. 4 That an euill Pope or Prelate is no Pastor. Answer. The Text of my Booke, is, if he be euill, he is a hireling: of whom Christ saith, He is no Shepheard, nor the sheepe his, he seeth a Wolfe and forsaketh his sheepe, so doth euery Reprobate, there∣fore no true Pastor. 5 The Pope is not, nor ought not by his Office, to be called most holy. I An∣swere, When as the King, according to S. Augustines mind, representeth the Deity of Christ, and the Priest representeth only his humanity; therefore the King of Ro∣maines by reason of his Office, ought rather to be called most holy. These thinges are more at large discided in my Booke (saith Iohn Hus) but I can finde no foundati∣on, whereby I should call the Pope most holy, when it is only spoken of Christ. 6 If the Pope liue contrary to Christ, though he be lawfully chosen according to humane election, yet he commeth in another way then by Christ. Answere. The text is thus, if the Pope liue contrary to Christ, in Pride and Auarice, doth he not then come in another way, then by the lowly and méeke doore of Christ. Iudas was law∣fully chosen by Christ, yet bee came in another way: and as Christ saith in the sixt
of Iohn, Was a Theese, a Deuill, and the Sonne of perdition, and whosoeuer doth enter into a Bishopprick or any other place, not with intent to labour in the Church, but to liue voluptuously and richly, and to aduance himselfe with all kind of pride, he com∣meth in another way, and not by Christ, and is a Théefe. 7 The condemnation of the forty fiue Articles of Wickliffe, made by the Doc∣tors, as wicked and vnreasonable, and the cause by them alleadged is fained and vn∣true. Answere. So it is, to say that euery one of them is hereticall, erronious, and offensiue: then he said to Cardinall Cambray? O Maister Doctor where is your proofe! Then the Cardinall said: Iohn Hus, thou diddest say thou wouldst defend none of Iohn Wickliffes errors? I will not if they be errors, but in my conscience, I could not consent to the condemnation, being I saw no Scripture against them. There remaineth sixe Articles of the thirty nine, out of a Booke wrote against STANISLAVS de Zuoyma. 1 THe first Article: A Minister is not the Successour of Christ by his humane ele∣ction, be it neuer so rightly done, but in that he doth more aboundantly worke to the profit of the Church, hee hath thereby more aboundant power giuen him of God. Answere. It standeth in the hands of wicked Electors to chuse a Woman into Ecclesiasticall office, as it appeareth by the election of Agnes, which was called Iohn, who occupied the Popes place and dignity two yeares and more, and they may chuse a théefe, a murderer, a deuill, and an Antichrist, or such a one as God alloweth not of: so whatsoeuer the election is, we ought to giue credit to the works of him that is chosen; therefore Christ saith in the tenth of Iohn, Giue credite vnto workes. 2 The Pope being a Reprobate, is not head of the Church. Answere. I would know of the Doctor how this is contrary to Faith? Did not Christ dispute against the Faith, when he demanded of the Scribes and Pharisies. Math. 12. You off-spring of Vipers, how can you speak good things when your selues are wicked. I demand of the Scribes, if the Pope be a Reprobate, and the stock of Uipers, how is he head of the holy Church? for it is more possible that a Reprobate may speake good things, be∣ing he may be in the state of grace according to present Iustice, then to e the head of the holy Church: In the fift of Iohn Christ saith, How can you beleeue which seeke glory amongst your selues, and seeketh not the glory that commeth of God: And I demand how the Pope can be head of the Church which is a Reprobate, and receiueth the glory of the world, and séeketh not for the glory that commeth of God, for it is more possible he should beléeue so doing, then be head of the Church. 3 There is no apparance that there ought to be one head in the spiritualty to rule the Church. Answere. I grant it, Christ sitteth at the right hand of God, doth necessarily rule the Militant Church as head, and there is no sparke of apparance, that there should be one head in the spiritualty▪ ruling the Church that should alwaies be conuersant with it, except some Infidell would heretically affirme, that the Mili∣tant Church should haue here a permanent and continuall Citty, and not to seek after that which is to come: And it is euident in my booke, how vnconsequent a similitude it is for a Reprobate Pope to be head of the Militant Church, and a Reprobate King to be hed of a Kingdome. 4 Christ would better rule his Church by his true Apostles, dispierced through∣out the world, without such a monstrous head. I answere, Albeit that Doctor doth say, that the body of the Church is often without a head; yet we verily beleeue that Christ is the head of euery Church, ruling it without lacke or default, powring on it motion and sence, euen vnto the latter day: then they said, behold now hee prophesi∣eth? but Iohn Hus said, the Church in the time of the Apostles, was fa better gouer∣ned then now it is.
5 Peter was no vniuersall Shepheard of the shéep of Christ, much lesse is the Bi∣shop of Rome. Answer. It appeareth by the words of Christ, that he did not limit vnto Peter for his iurisdiction the whole world, no not one only Pronince, nor to any other of the Apostles: some walked through many regions, some fewer; as Paule trauailed more then all the rest, and did couert more to the Faith of Christ. Wherefore, it is lawfull for any Apostle or Uicar to conuert and confirme as much people, and as many Prouinces as they are able. 6 The Apostles and faithfull Priests of the Lord, haue stoutly ruled the Church in all thinges necessary to saluation, before the office of the Pope was brought into the Church, and would doe so to the end of the world. Then they cryed out againe, Behold the Prophet. Certaine other Articles which were brought vnto IOHN HVS in Prison. 1 THE first Article, Paul, according to present Iustice, was a Blasphemer, and none of the Church, and withall in Grace, according to Predestination of e∣ternall life. Answer. This proposition is not in the Booke, but thus: as Paul was both a blasphemer according to present Iustice, and also a faithfull child of our holy Mo∣ther the Church according to Predestination; So Iscariot was both in Grace accor∣ding to present Iustice, and withall, was neuer of our holy Mother the Church, be∣cause he lacked Predestination of life euerlasting. 2 Christ doth more loue a predestinate Ban being sinfull, then any Reprobate, in what grace soeuer he be. Answere. The reason is, because the predestinate shall haue perpetuall blessednesse, and the Reprobate eternall fire; therefore GOD infinitely loueth them both as his Creatures, and much more because he giueth them greater graces, to wit; euerlasting life, which is far more excellent then onely grace, according to present Iustice; and the predestinated cannot fall from Grace, for they haue a certaine redicall grace rooted in them, although they be depriued of the aboun∣dance of grace for the time. 3 All the sinfull according to present Iustice are vnfaithfull, swaruing from the true Catholike faith, for none can commit deadly sinne, but in the point he swarueth from the faith. Answer. I acknowledge it to be my sentence: for if they did beléeue the punishment that shall be laid vpon sinners, and had faith of the diuine vnderstanding, &c. then they would not so offend. This is verified by the Prophet Esay, Thy fellows are misbeleeuers, and fellowes of theeues, they loue bribes, and are followers of re∣wards, so he calleth them Infidels for their offences: also in the first of Titus, They confesse they know God, but in workes they deny him. 4 Iohn 22. Math. 16. and the 18. Receiue the holy Ghost, whatsoeuer you shall binde in earth, shall be bound in heauen, &c. Many for lack of vnderstanding, shal be terrified by the Priests and be deceiued, presuming vpon their power and authority. Answer. I allow this sentence, it is not possible for a Priest to binde and lose, except that binding and losing be in heauen: but many are made afraid, thinking whether they be iust or vniust, the Priests may at their pleasures bind them, and the ignorant Priests presume to haue such power, saying; they haue such power to absolue euery man confessing himselfe, of what sinne soeuer it be, though many sins are forbidden thē. And an Hypocrite may confesse himselfe, that is not contrite for his sin, whereof proofe is often found, & is euident, because the Letter killeth, but the spirit quickneth. 5 The binding and losing of God is plainely the cheefe and principall. Answere. This is verie euident, for it were a blasphemous presumption, that a man may for∣giue an offence to GOD, hee not allowing the same: for it is necessarie, that GOD doe first forgiue, before his Uicar can doe the same▪ and no Article of our Faith ought to be more common and knowne to vs then this, and whosoeuer
granteth this authority to the Pope, graunteth he is without sin, and that he is God, the fact of the Pope proueth this same: for alwaies in his Absolutions, h presuppo∣seth contrition and confession, but vnto true Absolution there is required; first, con∣trition; secondly, the purpose to sin no more; thirdly, true confession; fourthly, sted∣fast hope of forgiuenes: the first appeareth by Ezechiel, If the wicked repent: the se∣cond in the 5. and 8. of Iohn, Sinne no more: the third by Luke, shew your selues to the Priests: the fourth, Christ saith, My Son beleeue, and thy sins shall be forgiuen. 6 The Priests heap vp out of the Scriptures, such things as serue the belly, but such as pertaine to the imitation of Christ, they reiect as impertinent to saluation. Answere. This Saint Augustine prooueth in his seuenteenth Homily, The Har∣uest is great, but there are few Haruest-folke; and speaking that, which I cannot without gréefe, though there be many that would heare good things, there lacks such as should declare the same vnto them. The world is full of Priests, yet there are few Worke-men in the Haruest of the Lord: we would be willingly Priests, but we do not the office of Priest-hood; we are fallen into outward affaires, and take vp∣on vs an office for honor, and hire another to ease our labour; we leaue preaching, we are called Bishops to our paine; we retaine the name of honour, but not the vertue; we daily call for our stipend, but care not for our flocke; wee gape after earthly things and glory, and leaue the cause of God vndone; we take vpon vs the place of holinesse, and are wholy wrapped in cares and troubles. And S. Barnard saith in his 33. Sermon vpon the Canonicals, all are friends, and all enemies, all kinsfolkes, and all aduersaries, all of an houshold, and no peace-makers, they are the Ministers of Christ, and serue Antichrist; they goe honorably, honoured with the goods of the Church, and yet they do no honor. 7 The power of the Pope, which doth not follow Christ, is not to be feared. An∣swere. Subiects are bound willingly to obay their good Rulers, and those which are wicked: yet if the Pope do abuse his power, it is not to be feared as by bondage: so his Cardinals as I suppose, did not feare Gregory the 12. before he was deposed, when as they resisted him; saying, He did abuse his power. 8 A wicked Pope is not the Successor of Peter, but of Iudas. Answere. If the Pope be humble, neglecting the honors and luker of the world: if he be a Shepheard, taking his name of féeding his shéepe, if as Christ commandeth, he feed the shéep with the word and good example, then is he the Uicar of Christ, but if he walke contrary, because there is no society betwixt Christ and Beliall: and Christ saith, He that is not with me, is against me. How is he the Uicar of Christ, and not rather the Uicar of Antichrist? Christ called Peter, Sathanas, when he contraried him but in one word, why should not any other then being more contrary to Christ, be called Sathanas, and Antichrist. 9 The Pope is the same beast, of whom it is spoken in the Reuelation, Power is giuen him to make warre vpon the Saints. 10 It is lawfull to preach notwithstanding the Popes inhibition. Answere. The Article is euident, because the Apostles did preach contrary to the commaundement of the Bishop. And S. Hialry did the like, contrary to a Pope that was an Arian: and Cardinals, contrary to the commaundement of Pope Gregory the 12. sent through∣out all Realmes such as should preach against him. 11 If the Popes commaundement be not agréeable to the word of God, it is not to be obayed. Answer. S. Isidore saith, He that ruleth and commaunds any thing contrary, or besides the word of God, he is honored as a false witnes, and a Church-Robber; therefore we are bound to obay no Prelate, but in case he commaunds the commaundements of Christ. And Saint Augustine speaking of the Chaire of Mo∣ses, saith; They teach in the Chaire of Moses the Law of God, therefore God teach∣eth by them: but if they will teach you any of their owne inuentions, heare them not, neyther doe as they commaund you; let therefore my Aduersaries and Slanderers learne, that there be not onely twelue Councels in the Gospell, but as many Councels as there be Commaundements of God binding vs thereunto, vnder the paine of deadly sinne.
12 It is lawfull for the Cleargy and Layty, to iudge by their iurisdiction of all thinges pertaining to saluation, and of the workes of Prelates. Answere. Subiects ought first to examine themselues. 1. Cor. 11. Secondly, to examine all thinges which appertaine to their saluation: for a spirituall man iudgeth all thinges; therefore I say a Lay man ought to iudge and examine the workes of his Prelate, and to bewar of false Prophets, and they ought to examine their workes, that if they be good, they may reioyce in GOD, and if they be euill, be sory for them, but not to do the like, least they be damned with them, accor∣ding to the saying: If the Blind lead the Blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. 13 God doth suspend euery wicked Prelate from his Ministry whilst hee is in actuall sinne, because then he sinneth in whatsoeuer he doth. Answere. 1. Cor 11. Paul suspendeth all such as are in any greeuous crime, from the eating of the odie of the Lord, and the drinking of his blood; and so consequently suspenth all sinfull Prelats from the ministration of the Sacrament: and God doth suspend the wicked from the declaration of his righteousnesse. Psal. 49. To suspend, is to prohi∣bite the ministry of any other good thing for the offence sake: or as the new law terms it, to interdict or forbid. 14 The Cleargy, for their owne preferment and exhaltation, doth vndermine the Lay people, and multiply their owne couetousnesse, cloaketh their malice▪ and prepareth a way for Antichrist. The answere which is made to the 25. Article in prion, sufficeth for this: the first part he proueth by the example of Peter de Luna, which named himselfe Benedict, and of Angelus Coriarius, who named himselfe Gregory the twelth: & of Iohn the 23. and by the 13. and 14. of Ezechiell, and out of Gregory, who saith, What shall become of the flocke when the Shepheards are become wolues? The second part is proued by Ierome & Gregory 17. Homily, and by Barnard vpon the Canonicals: the third is proued by experience, for who defendeth the wickednes of any scisme, but only the Cleargy, alledging Scriptures, & bringing reasons therefore. They excuse symony, couetousnes in heaping together many be∣nifices, luxuriousnes and fornication, how many now say it is no deadly sin, allead∣ging the saying of Genesis, Increase and multiply: heereby also the fourth part is veri∣fied, for Barnard vpon the Canonicals, saith, wicked Priests prepare the way for Anti∣christ. 15 Iohn Hus openly teacheth, that these Articles are true. Answer. Some of these I did publish, and some mine enemies fained; now adding, then diminishing; now falsly imputing the whole proposition vnto me, which the Commissaries did confesse before me, whom I desired that they might be punished for the false faining of those Articles. 16 All the foresaid conclusions be false, erronious, and seditious, and weaken the power of the Church, inuented contrary to the scriptures and the Church. Answer. If there be any such, I am ready most humbly to reuoke and recant the same. 17 They obiected against him to change the Treatise that hee wrote against Pallets, and Stanislaus de Zuoyma. Answer. I desired for Gods sake, that it might be openly read in the audience of the Councell, and that I would submit my selfe to th iudgement of the whole Councell. 18 Iohn Hus preached he should go to Constance, & if he should be forced to recant that which he had taught, he neuer purposed to do it with his mind, because what he had taught was pure doctrine of Christ. Answer. This Article is full of lies, God saith to the inuenter thereof, All the day long thou hast imagined wickednes, and with thy tongue as with a sharp razor thou hast wrought deceit: thou hast delighted to talke of wickednes rather then of Iustice. I wrote an Epistle, & left it to be read vnto the peo∣ple, that they should pray for me, & perseuer stedfastly in the doctrine of Christ, know∣ing certainly that I neuer taught any such errors as mine enemies ascribe vnto me, and if I should be ouercome with false wilnesses, they should not be troubled, but con∣tinue stedfastly in the truth. First the councell condemned all his bookes to be burned, and condemned al his Articles to be hereticall and himselfe to be an heretick, & when the sentence was ended, knéeling down on his knées he said, Lord Iesu Christ forgiue
mine enemies, by whom thou knowest I am falsly accused, and that they haue vsed false witnesse and slanders against me, forgiue them for thy great mercy sake: and the chiefe of the Priests derided his prayer. Seauen Bishops which were appointed to disgrade him, commanded him to put on his priestly garments, when he put on his white vesture hee remembred the Albe that Herod put on Christ to mocke him withall, and in all other thinges comforted hee himselfe by the example of Christ: when hee had put on his vestures, the Bi∣shops exhorted him to change his mind, and prouide for his honor and safegard, and according to the manner of the Ceremony, going to the top of the scaffold, hee spake to the people in this sort. These Lords and Bishops exhort me, that I should confesse before you all that I haue erred, if it were a thing that might be done without the slander of any Man, they might easilie peraduenture perswade me, but I am in the sight of my Lord my GOD, without whose great ignominy, and the grudging of mine owne conscience, I cannot doe that which they require. I neuer taught the thing that they haue falfely alleadged against me; with what countenance should I behold the Heauens? With what face should I looke vpon them whom I haue taught, Whereof there is a great number: if those things which they haue hitherto knowne most certaine, should now be made vncertaine by mee, should I by this example astonish so many consciences, indued with so certaine knowledge of the Gospell of Christ armed against all assaults of the Deuill, I will neuer commit such offence, more to esteeme this vile carkase appointed to death, then their health and saluation. And being commaunded to come downe, one of the Bishoppes tooke away the Chalice from him, saying; O cursed Iudas! why hast thou forsaken the way of peace, and councelled with the Iewes? we take from thée this Chalice of saluation? He answered, I trust in my Lord Iesus, for whose sake I suffer these things, that he will not take away his Chalice of Redmption, but haue a stedfast hope this day I shall drinke thereof in his Kingdome: then each of the Byshoppes tooke a∣way a vestiment, and gaue him a curse; He answered, he willingly imbrased their curses for the Name of Christ. When they should raze off his shauing, they could not agree with what Instrument they should doe it, then hee turning to the Emperour, said; I maruaile being they are of like cruelty, they agree not in their kinde of crueltie: At length they agreed, to cut off the skinne of the crowne of his head with a paire of Sheares: Then they saide; Now hath the Church taken away all her Ornaments, then they made a Crowne of Paper, a cubit deepe, in which were painted three vgly Deuils, and this Tytle set ouer, Heresiarcha; Hee said, Christ for my sake ware a Crowne of Thornes, why should not  weare this light Crowne for his sake, be it neuer so ignominious? I will doe it willinglie, the Byshoppes when they had put it on, said: Now wee commit you to the Deuill; but hee said, Lord Iesus, into thy hands I commit my Spirit which thou hast redeemed: then they deliuered him to the Emperour, who caused one to receiue him, and deliuer him to be burned. When he saw his Bookes burned before his face, he smiled, he exhorted all that were by, that he di∣ed not for Heresie, but for the hatred of his Aduersaries: almost all the Cittie followed him in Armour. In his Prayers he often repeated; into thy hands I com∣mit my Spirit, the standers by said, what this man hath done we know not, but hée prayeth very deuoutly and godly. A Priest sitting on horsebacke in a greene gowne, draw no about with red Silke, said he ought not to be heard, because he is an Heretick: as he prayed his crown fell off, one of the Souldiours said, let vs put it on againe, that it may be burned with his Maisters. When he rose from prayers, he said, Lord Iesus assist me, that with a constant mind I may beare this cruelty, and ignominious death whereunto I am condemned for preaching thy most holy Gospell: when he was fastned to the stake, being turned to the East, certaine cryed, he ought not to looke towards the East, because he is an Hereticke, so hee was turned to the West, then the Emperours
master of his horses, exhorted him to repent of his errors, and be mindfull of his safe∣gard; he answered he preached no errors: the principall end of my Doctrine was to teach all men repentance, and remission of sinnes, according to Christs Gospell and Exposition of holy Doctors, therefore with a cheerefull courage I am ready to suf∣fer death: when the fire was kindled he began to sing with a loud voice, Iesu Christ the Sonne of the euerliuing God haue mercy on me, and when hee had said it thrice, the fire smothered him, they made a new fire and burned the part of his body, they cut the head into small gobbits that it might the sooner be consumed: his heart being found amongst his bowels, when they had well beaten it with staues, they pricked it vpon a sharpe prick, and rosted it in another fire till it was consumed: they tooke the ashes and cast into the Riuer Rheyne that there might bee no dust of that man left vpon earth: but they could neuer abolish his memory out of the hearts of the godly. Maister Ierome of Prage greeuously lamenting the false reproh of the glorious Kingdome of Boheme,1415. and the manifold iniuries of Iohn Hus, of his owne accord came to Constance: and seeing Iohn Hus was denyed to be heard, and that hee him∣selfe was laide waite for, he departed a mile off that night, and writ vnto the King of Hungary and the Councell earnestly, for safe conduct to come and goe, and hee would answere before the Councell to euery one that could lay any thing against him: The said King denied him safe conduct: the Lords of Boheme moued the de∣puties of the foure Nations of the Councell therein, who answered, they would giue him a safe conduct to come, but not to depart: hee hearing hereof writ certaine inti∣mations, and caused them to be set vpon the gates of the Citie, and of the Churches and Monastries, and of the houses of the Cardinals, and other Nobles & Prelates to this effect: To the most Noble Prince Sygismond, by Gods grace King of Ro∣manes, and Hungary alwaies Augustus &c. Ierome of Prage, Master of Art of the Uniuersities of Paris, Collein, Heidelberg, and Prage, doe notifie to all men I am ready to come to Constance, openly to declare to the whole Councell, the purity of my true Faith: wherefore if there be any slanderers, which will obiect any error or heresie, let them come openly before me in the presence of the Councell, and I will be ready to answere for mine owne innocencie, and declare the sinceritie of my true faith▪ and if I shall be found culpable to suffer such punishment as shall be méet: wherefore I desire a safe conduct, that all the world may know, that if I haue any violence or imprisonment offered me, this generall Councell doth not proceeds ac∣cording to equitie: or if they put me back from this profound Iustice, beeing com hither freely of mine owne accord; the which thing I suppose to be far banished from so sacred a Councell of wise men, when yet he could not obtaine a safe conduct, the Nobles and Knights, specially of Boheme, gaue him their Letters, Patents vnder their Seales, witnessing the premisses: with the which Letters, the said Maister Ierome returning to Bohem, but by the conspiracie of his enemies, he was taken in the Dukedome of Horrissaw, and sent again by the Duke to the Councell: the chéefe Priests, Scribes and Pharisies, vnderstanding thereof assembled and sent for him, and they led him in chaines, making a great noise, one going a great way before, lea∣ding him by the same chaine, with which chaine they kept him bound in the Cloister: when he was before them, the whole rabble rising vp alledged sundry accusations & testimonies against him, with a great noise and tumult: when they held their peace the Chancellor of Paris said; Ierome when thou wast at Paris tho thoughtest thy selfe an Angell by thine owne eloquence, alledging in the Schooles many errone∣ous conclusions, and consequences: Answere. I put them philosophically, teach mee that any of them be erroneous and I will amend them. Then said the Maister of the Uniuersitie of Colleyn: when thou wast at Col∣leyn thou didst propound many erroneous matters: then he said, shew mee one er∣rour: he said I remember them not now, but they shall bee obiected against thee: Then said the Maister of the Uniuersitie of Heidelberge, when thou wast with vs, thou didst propound many erroneous matters, and compared the Trinity to Water, Snow, and Ice; That which I taught there, I will teach heere, and
teach me that they be erroneous and I will recant: then certaine cried out let him be burned: he answered, if my death doe delight you let it be so: the Archbishop of Rygen sent some of his seruants which led away Maister Ierome, béing fast bound in chaines both by the hands and neck, and when it was night they carried him into a ower of the Citie, tying him to a great block, his féet in the stocks, his hands be∣ing made fast vpon them: the block was so high he could not sit thereon, but his head must hang downward: thus he lay two daies & two nights reléeued only with bread and water, & one M. Peter hearing thereof, got leaue to giue him meat: hanging thus by the héels 11. daies he fell sore sick euen to death, he lay in that prison a yéere lacking but seuen daies: after they had put Iohn Hus to death, they threatned him with death, and what with feare of death, and hope of deliuery, they made him recant, yet they sent him to prison againe, but not so straitly chained as before: but when his Aduer∣saries plainly perceiued that he did not recant of pure mind, but to the intent to scape there hands: and also certaine Friers of Prage put vp new accusations against him, & certain Cardinals, being appointed to heare his answer, he refused to answere in prison, desiring open audience: they thinking hee would renew his recantations granted him open audience: at which time hee answered all their arguments pro∣foundly▪ & subtilly disputing of many matters, at last he much praised the blessednes of Iohn Hus: affirming that he knew him from his youth vpward, & that he was nei∣ther Fornicator, drunkard, or any vicious person, but a chast & sober man, and a iust true preacher of the Gospel, and whatsoeuer thing Maister Iohn Hus had holden or written against the enormities, pomp, and disorder of the Prelates, he would defend vnto the death: and added that all his sinnes did not so much gnaw and trouble his Conscience, as that sinne which hee committed in that pestiferous seat which in his recantation he had spoken against that man, and his Doctrine: concluding that he vtterly reuoked and denied that wicked recantation, and that he did it throgh weaknes of heart, and feare of death: when hee had spoken these and many other things touching the praise of Iohn Wickliffe, and Iohn Hus, then was he caried again vnto prison, and greeuously fettered by the hands, armes, and feete, with great chaines and fetters of Iron: and when he was brought againe to his Iudgement, they exhorted him againe to recant: he answered, I take God to my witnes I hold all the Articles of the Catholick Faith, but I shall be condemned, because I will not consent vnto the condemnation of those most holy & blessed men aforesaid, whom you haue most wickedly condemned, for certaine Articles abhorring your abomina∣ble life: then hee confessed his beliefe, and vttered many things profoundly, and eloquently, that all that were present could not sufficiently commend his great e∣loquence, and profound learning, and by no meanes could they perswade him to re∣cant: he said further you will condemne mee vniustly and wickedly: but I after my death will leaue a remorce in your consciences, and a naile in your hearts, and I cite you all to answere mee bfore the most high and iust Iudge within a hundred yeeres: when sentence was giuen they brought vnto him a great long miter of paper, painted about with red Diuels: then hee throwing away his hood, he put the Miter on his head; saying, Christ when he suffered death for mee wore a crowne of Thornes, and I for his sake will willingly weare this Miter: when he was led to execution with a loud voice he sung, Credo in vnum Deum: after he sung other Canticles of the Church: hee was tyed to a stake like the picture of Iohn Hus: whilst hée was praying the tormenters tooke him vp, and lifted him vp from the ground, stript him naked, and girded him about the lomes with a linnen cloth: and so bound him to the Image: when they beganne to lay the wood to him hee sung, Salue festa dies, then they cast his Garments on the Woode, and set them on fire, and when hee was fired hee sung, In manus tuas domine commendo Spiritum meum, when hee vehemently burnd hee said, Lord haue mercie vppon mee, for thou knowest how sin∣cerely I haue loued thy truth: after hee was dead they burned his bedding, Bootes, Hood, and all things he had in prison, after they gathered his ashes, and cast them into the Riuer.
Thus endeth the tragicall Historie of Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage faithfully collected by a Bohemian, being a present beholder of the same: Iohn Hus beeing a Minister at Bethelem, had a vision by night, that he had pictured in his Church of Bethelem, pictures of Christ and his Apostles: and the Pope and his Cardinals came and defaced them, and that a while after other Painters renued the said pic∣tures, much more fairer then before: and that there was so many Painters that they gloried against the Pope and his Cardinals, bidding them put them out if they could, which with all their power they were not able to doe: this vision he thus ex∣poundeth, applying the pictures to the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, which though the Pope and Cardinals should extinguish in him, yet the time would come that Doctrine should be renued by other preachers, so plentiously that the Pope with all his power should not be able to preuaile against it: wherevnto the prophe∣sie of the said Hus, a little before his death, and printed in the Bohemian come cal∣led Moneta Husa, hauing this superscription, Centum reuolutis annis Deo respon∣debitis & mihi, this was Anno 1415. if wee count from this yeare vnto the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and sixtéene: in which yéere Martine Luther first began to write against the Pope, wee shall finde the number of an hundred yéeres fully complete. When as the Newes of the barbarous cruelty exercised against Iohn Hus, and Ie∣rome of Prage, was reported in Boheme: their Disciples assembled, and celebrated a memoriall of their deaths, decréeing it to be holden yéerely, and after they obtai∣ned certaine Churches of the King to preach and minister the Sacraments in: then they suppressed diuers Monasteries, and Pharasaicall and Idolatrous Temples, driuing the vicious Priests and Monkes out of them, or compelling them to a better order, whereby their number augmented vnder the conduct of one Nicholas a Noble man, and comming againe to the King for more Churches, the King told Nicholas thou hast begun a Web to put me out of my Kingdome, and I will make a rope of it wherewith I will hang thée: Wherevpon Nicholas departed, and the king went to a new Castle which he had builded, and sent Ambassadours vnto the Emperour his brother for ayde. The Protestants being assembled at Prage, the King sent his Chamberlain with thrée hundred horsemen to run vpon them, but he was faine to fly for fears of his life: at this newes the King and all about him were amazed; but his Cup-bearer said, I knew these things would thus come to passe, the King in a rage caught him & threw him downe, and would haue slaine him with his Dagger: but béeing let with much ade he pardoned him, immediately the King fell sick of a Palsie, and within eigh∣téene daies died: when he had marked the names of them which hée would haue put to death, & before the Princes which he had sent to for ayde were come, when he had raigned 55. yeares, and was 57. yéere old. Immediatly after whose death, a Noble man named Zischa, minding to re∣uenge the iniuries of Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage, gathered a number of men of Warre, and subuerted the Monasteries and Idolatrous Temples, breaking in péeces the Images, driuing away the Priests and Monkes, which hée said were kept vp in their Cloisters like Swine in their fat sties a fatting: his army increased to fortie thousand men: hée went to Pelzina where hee knew hée had many friends of his faction, and tooke the Towne and fortified it strongly, and some of his company tooke the Castle of Uissegard: then the Quéene sent Letters to the Em∣perour Sygismond, and other Nobles, requiring ayde: in the meane time the Quéene raised an armie with the treasure of the King which could not preuaile a∣gainst them. Then the Protestants sent Letters throughout the whole Realme, that they should not let the Emperour enter, who was an enemy to Boheme, had bound the ancient Citie of the Prutenians vnto order by pledges, put the Marques of Brandenburge from the Bohemian Crowne, and not onely suffred but procu∣red Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage to be burned, and with all his endeuour doth impugne the Doctrine which they taught: Zisca was twise assaulted of his ene∣mies,
but was alway victor: after he went to Ausca, a towne, out of which the Papists had cast many Protestants, he tooke the towne and set it on fire: the chéefe Papists fled to the Castle Lytius, but he took the Castle, and put them all to sword saue one: then he chose a place by a riuer which was fenced by nature, this place he compassed in with walles, and commanded euery man to build them houses, and named it Thaber, and his companions Thabarites, as if they had seene the transfiguration of Christ in the mount: the way to it by land was scarse thirty foot broad, for it is almost an Iland, they had no horsemen vntill the Emperour sent Ni∣cholas, Maister of the Mintes, with a thousand horsemen, to withstand the Tha∣borites, vpon whome Zisca came in the night, and tooke away all his horses and armour. In this time one Picardus comming out of the Low Countries into Boheme, by inchantments got credit with the people, and allured a number of men and wo∣men vnto him, whom hee commanded to goe naked, calling them Adamits, and pos∣sessing a certaine Iland, he called himselfe the Sonne of God: they had no respect of marriage, yet it was against the Law for any man to know a woman without the leaue of Adam: but when any desired a woman, hee must leade her in his hand to him, and say, I am inflamed to this woman, and he answereth goe and multiply and replenish the earth, he affirmed that they and their posteritie were free and all other bondmen: on a time forty of this sect came out of the Iland an slew two thousand husbandmen, whom they called the children of the diuell: Zis∣ca hearing hereof and detesting their abominable doings let his army against them, and subdued the Iland, and slew them all sauing two, of whom hee might vnder∣stand the superstition of the people. In the meane time the Emperour with a great armie entered Boheme, and got Cencho, with large gifts and promises, to render vp vnto him the Castle of Prage, and there placed himselfe to anoy the towne: the Cittizens of Prage sent for Zisca, who speeded thether with his Thaborites, and receiued the Citie vn∣der his gouernance, the Castle was so strong it could not be conquered, but by famine, therefore they stopped all the passages, that no victuals should bee car∣ried in: but the Emperour opened the passages by force, and gaue them in the Ca∣stle all things necessarie, and besieged the Citie, and was crowned in the Metro∣politane house in the Castle. Zisca planted a strong Garrison vpon a high hill, neere the Towne of Prage, with whom the Emperours host skermishing, hauing gotten the top of the hill, were driuen back into a corner: Some were slaine, and some falling headlong from the hill were destroyed: wherevpon the Emperour raised his siege, and Zisca and his company returned to Taber: they of Prage strongly besieged the Castle, then they were compelled to eate horse-flesh, and except the Em∣perour did ayde them by such a day they promised to yeeld it vp: the Empe∣rour was present before the day: but entering into a strait vnder the Castle, was sodenly set vpon by the Souldiers of Prage, had a great ouerthrow, and so leauing his purpose vndone returned back againe, and the Castle was deliue∣red vnto them. Zisca subuerted and burned fiue Monasteries in Pelna, and pitched him∣selfe at the Monastery of Saint Clare: thither came the Emperour with his army: but when Zisca brought his armie against him, hee fled; and shortly after left Boheme: Then Zisca wonne Commitauia a famous Citie, and burnt all the Priests therein: and hauing but one eye in the siege of Raby hee lost that eye and was blind, yet still he tooke the charge of his army. After the Garisons of Prage went to Uarona, where was a great gari∣son of the Emperours, and tooke it by force, and tooke many other townes and holds. After the Emperour and the Princes electors appointed a day when they and their armie should inuade the West part of Boheme: and the Emperour with an other Host would enter the East part, and many Princes and Bishops came to
his ayde: when the Emperour was entred Boheme, Zisca although he was blind set vpon him, and he being afraid and many of his Nobles slaine fed: Zisca pursuing the Emperour a dayes iourney, got great riches and spoile: The Emperour pas∣sing by a Bridge ouer a Riuer, one Piso which had brought fiftéene thousand horse∣men out of Hungary to these warres passing ouer the Ice, which brake and deuo∣red a great number: Zisca hauing obtained this victory would not suffer any Idol to be in the Churches, nor Priests to Minister in Copes and vestures: the Consuls of Prage being agreeued at this, called Iohn Premonstrensis, & nine others, which were principals of this faction into the Councell house, as though they would confer, and slew them, but the blood of them seemed to be washed through the sinkes and Chan∣nels: wherefore the Councell house was ouerthrowne, and eleuen of the principall authors thereof slaine, and diuers houses spoiled. About the same time the Castle Purgell, wherein the Emperour had a garison, whether many Papists with their wiues and children were fled, was through negligence burned. When the Emperour perceiued that all things came to passe according to Zis∣ca his minde, and that the state of Boheme depended on him, he sought meanes to gt Zisca into his fauour, promising him the gouernment of the whole King∣dome, and great yearely reuenues, if he would proclaime him King, and cause the Citties to be sworne vnto him: wherevpon Zisca going to the Emperour died by the way. The Epitaph of IOHN ZISCA. IOhn Zisca not inferiour to any Emperour or Captaine in warlike policy, a se∣uere punisher of the pride & auarice of the Clergy, and a defender of my country lie heere: That with Appius Claudius in Councell, and Marcus Furius Camillus by valiantnes did for the Romans, I being blind haue done for the Bohemians: Eleuen times in ioined Battell I went victor out of the field: I worthily defended the cause of the miserable against the delicate, fat, and gluttonous Priests, and for that cause receiued help of God: notwithstanding my bones lye heere in this hol∣lowed place in despite of the Pope. Pope Martin perceiuing the Gospell to increase more and more, sent a Cardi∣nall into Germany to moue them to warre against the Bohemians: wherevnto the Emperor assisted: there were three armies: in the first were the Dukes of Saxony, the second was vnder the conduct of the Marques of Brandenburge, the third was led by the Archbishop of Treuers. They entred Boheme, and set vpon a Towne which the Protestants the night before had woon from the Papists: The protestans hearing thereof gathered an army and came towards them: they fled leauing behinde them their warlike En∣gies, with a great prey: they followed them, and destroyed many Citties, and re∣turning back againe, they had great summes of money sent them that they should not destroy the Countries of Bamberge, and Norenberge, whereby the host of the Bohemians was greatly enriched. After this Newes the Emperour gathered a new ayde, and Pope Martin sent an other Cardinall to Germany to stirre them to make warre against the Bohe∣mians: so there was a new expedition decreed. Many Bishops allowing a great ayd thereto: the number of the horsemn was forty thousand, but the footmen were not full so many. A Cardinall entred into Boheme with this huge army, destroying many of the protestant townes, killing Men, Women and Children, sparing none: the Protestants hearing thereof gathered their host, besieged a Towne and woon it: so that there fell such a suddaine feare amongst the Papistes throughout the whole Campe, that they ran away: the Cardinall marueiling thereat, went
to the Captaines, exhorting them to order the battals, and couragiously to abide their enemies, saying; they fought for the religion of Christ, and saluation of soules, notwithstanding, they did all fly, and the Cardinall with them; the Protestants couragiously pursued them, and had a great prey and spoyle of them. The Emperour going to Rome to bee rowned Emperour, wrote Letters to the Nobles of Boheme, how he was borne a Bohemian, & that he was not more affec∣ted vnto any Nation then his owne, and that he went to Rome for no other cause but to be crowned: the which honour should be also to the Bohemians, whose renowne hath béene alwaies his care, and that through his indeuour the Councell of Basill is begunne, exhorting all such as were destrous to be heard touching Religion, that they should come thither, and that they should not maintaine any quarrell against the holy Mother the Church, and that the Councell would louingly and gently heare their reasons, and that they should indeuour themselues to agrée with the Synode touching Religion, and to reserue a peaceable kingdome for him against his returne, neither should the Bohemians thinke to refuse his Empire, whose Brother, Father, and Unckle had raigned ouer them. The Councell of Basill also wrote their Letters to the Bohemians, to send their Ambassadours to shew a reason of their Faith, promising safe conduct to goe and come, and free liberty to speaks what they would. Whereupon an Ambassage of thrée hundred Horses was sent to Basill: the chéefe were William Cosca a valiant Knight, and Procopius, sir-named Magnus, for his manifold victories, Iohn Roche∣zana, Preacher of Prage, Nicholas Galicus, Preacher of the Thaborits, and one Peter, an English-man, of an excellent prompt wit: all the stréets were full as they came to see them, and maruelling at their strange kind of apparrell, stout couragi∣ous countenances, saying; it was not vntrue that was reported of them. These Ambassadours were gently receiued: the next day Cardinall Iulianus sent for them to the Councell-house, and made a gentle, long, and eloquent Oration vnto them, exhorting them to vnity and peace, saying, the Church was the spouse of Christ, the Mother of the faithfull, and hath the Keyes of binding and losng, and is white and faire without spot or wrinckle, and cannot erre in necessary points of saluation: and that he which contemneth her, is prophane, an Ethicke, and Publican, and that the Church cannot bee better represented then by the Councell, and that they should giue no lesse credit to the Councell, then to the Gospell, by whose authority the Scriptures themselues are receiued and allowed, and that the Bohemians, which call themselues the Children of the Church, ought to heare their Mother, which is neuer vnmindfull of her Children; and how that of late they haue liued a∣part from their Mother, but that was no new or strange thing: for there haue beene many in times past haue forsaken their Mother, and yet seeking saluation haue re∣turned againe. All without the Arke in Noahs floud perished, the Lords Passeouer is to be eaten in one House, there is no saluation out of the Church; she is the Gar∣den and famous Fountaine of Water, whereof whosoeuer shall drinke, shall not thirst euerlastingly. That the Bohemians haue done as they ought, in that they haue sought the Fountaines of this water at the Councell, and now at length giuen eare to their Mother: now ought hatred to cease, Armor be laid aside, and warre re∣iected; the Fathers would louingly heare them in their owne cause, requiring them that they would willingly receiue the Councels of the sacred Synod, whereunto all faithfull Christians ought to consent and agree, if they will be partakers of eternall life. This Oration was commended of the Fathers. The Bohemians answered: they had neither contemned the Church nor Councels, and that they are come to manifest their innocency before the whole Church, and re∣quired open audience, where the Laity may bee present, their request was graunted them: and being demanded in what points they did differ from the Church of Rome, they propounded foure Articles. 1 First, all such as would be saued, ought of necessity to receiue Communion vnder both kinds of Bread and Wine. 2 All ciuill rule and dominion to be forbidden to the Cleargy by the Law of God.
3 That the preaching of the Word of God is free for all men and in all places. 4 Open crimes are in no wise to bee suffered for the auoiding of greater euill. One affirmed hee heard sundry things of the Bohemians offensiue to Chr∣stian eares: one of them was, that they should preach that the inuention of beg∣ging Friers was diabolicall. Then Procopius said, it is not vntrue: for if nei∣ther Moses, nor the Partriarcks before him, nor after him the Prophets, nor in the new Lawe Christ nor his Apostles, did institute the orders of begging Friers, who doubteth but the Diuels inuented them, and that they are the worke of dark∣nesse, all the Councell derided him, and Cardinall Iulianus laboured to prooue that not onely the Decrees of the Patriarcks, Prophets, Christ and his Apostles: but also the Decrees which the Church should ordaine to be the workes of God; yet the order of begging Fryers may seeme to be taken out of some part of the Gos∣pell: the Bohemians chose foure Ministers to dispute for them, and the Councell chose foure, the disputation continued fifty daies, many things were alledged on both parts, which we will discourse more at large when we come to the Councell of Basill. The History of the most valiant and worthy Martyr of Christ, Sr Iohn Old-Castle, Knight, Lord Cobham. AFter the true seruant of Christ Iohn Wickliffe six and twenty yeares most valiantly had battelled with the great Antichrist of Europe, and his disgui∣sed hosts of annointed hypocrites, to restore the Church againe to the puritie of the Gospell, and was departed hence in Christ Anno 1387. he left a number of god∣ly Disciples, against whom Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury was as fierce as euer Pharaoh, Antiochus, Herod, and Cayphas, and hauing called a Councell about the matter, they concluded it was not possible for them to make whole Christs coate, without seame (meaning thereby their patched Popish Synagoue) vnlesse cer∣taine great men were wrought out of the way which were chiefe maintainers of the Disciples of Wickliffe: amongst whom the Lord Cobham was complained of for a mighty maintainer of suspected preachers in London, Rochester, Hereford, that he not onely sent them thither, but maintained them with force and armes, and that hee beleeued otherwise of the Sacrament of the Altar, of penance, of pilgrimages, of Image worshipping, and of Ecclesiasticall power then the Church of Rome taught, and it was concluded that proces should goe against him, but first they would know the Kings minde: wherevpon the Archbishop with his Bishops, and a great part of the Clergy went to the King, and gréeuously complained against the Lord Cobham: the king desired them, in respect of his Noble stock, they should fauorably deale with him, and that if it were possible they should reduce him to the vnity of the Church without rigour, and promised he would seriously common the matter with him. Anon the King sent for the Lord Cobham, and secretly admonished him to sub∣mit himselfe to his mother the holy Church: he answered, I am ready to obey to you most worthy Prince, for I know you an appointed minister of God, but touching the Pope and spiritualtie, I owe them neither sute nor seruice, for I knowe by the Scripture he is great Antichrist, the sonne of perdition, the aduersary of God, the abhomination standing in the Holy Place: when the King heard this he would talk no more with him, and when the Archbishop resorted to him againe, he gau him full authoritie to cite him, examine him and punish him: then the Arch-bishop sent his chiefe somner to his house with citation, when he came thither he durst not enter
his gates without licence, but returned without doing his message: then the Arch∣bishop got one Iohn Butler, doore keper of the Kings Priuy Chamber, to go with his Somner, who went to the Lord Cobham, shewing him it was the Kings pleasure that he should obey the said citation: he answered, that in no case he would consent to those most diuelish practises of the Priests: after hee sent another citation to bee hanged vpon the Cathedrall Church doore of Rochester, and because hee appeared not, excommunicated him: and when he heard that he derided his proceedings, hee threatned the seculer power with curses and interdictions if they did not assist him, against that seditious Apostata, Scismatick, and Heretick, troubler of a publike peace, enemy of the Realme, and aduersarie of holy Church: then he writ a Chri∣stian profession of his Faith, and signed & sealed it: wherin he answered foure of the chiefest article that the Archbishop laid against him: then he took a copy thereof and went to the King, it agréed in all points with the Apostles Créede: and moreouer that Christ is the onely head of the Church, and that all that haue béen, or shall be sa∣ued, are members of his holy Church, & that it is seuered into thrée estates: Priest∣hood, Knight-hood, and Commons: and that it is Gods will that one should ayde and not destroy the other: the priests, secluded from all worldlinesse, should con∣forme their liues vnto the example of Christ and his Apostles, euermore occupied in teaching and preaching the Scriptures purely; in giuing wholesome Councell of good liuing vnto the other two degrees of men, more modest also, more louing and lowly in spirit should they be then any other sort of people: in Knight-hood are all they that beare sword by Law of office: these should defend Gods lawes, so that the Gospel were purely taught, reforming their liues according to the same, and se∣cluding all false preachers, they ought rather to hazard their liues then suffer wicked decrees to blemish the word of God, and let the frée passage thereof, whereof here∣sies and scismes sprung: for they spring of nothing else, as I suppose: which Con∣stitutions craftily creepe in by hypocriticall lies for aduantage: they ought also to preserue Gods people from oppressors, tyrants & théeues: and to sée the Clergy sup∣ported so long as they teach purely, and pray rightly, and minister the Sacraments fréely: and if they doe otherwise they are bound by the law of God to compell them to change their doing, & to sée all things performed according to Gods ordinances. The last is the common people, whose dueties is to beare a good mind and true o∣bedience to their Kings ciuil Gouernors and Priests, their office is iustly occupied in their calling; whether it be marchandise, handicraft, or husbandry. And I beleeue that the Sacraments of the Church are necessary to all beléeuers: so that they bee truely ministred according to Christs institution: I beleeue in the Sacrament of the altar to be containd Christs body vnder the formes of bread & wine: and I beléeue the law of God to be most true & perfect, and that they that follow it not in faith and works, one time or other, cannot be saued: whereas he that séeketh it in Faith, learneth it and delighteth in it, and performeth it in loue, shall tast felicitie euerlasting. Finally, that God wil aske no other obedience then to his law, and if any Prelate require more, or any other kinde of obedience; hee contemneth Christ; exalteth him∣selfe aboue God, and becommeth an open Antichrist, all these premisses I beléeue particularly: and generally all that God hath left in holy Scripture, desiring my most worthy King, that this my confession may be examined by the most godly and learned of the Realme, and if it be found agréeing to the verity, then let it be allowed and I holden for a true Christian: and if it be proued otherwise, let it bee condemned; prouided that I be taught a better beliefe by the word of God, and I shall most reue∣rently obey therevnto. This being offered to the King, he would not receiue it, but commanded it to bee deliuered vnto them that should be his Iudges, then hee desired that 100. Knights & Esquires might be suffred to come vpon his purgation, which he knew would cleere him of al heresies. Moreouer, he offred himself, according to the law of armes, to fight with an mā liuing in the quarrel of his faith, the K. & Councel excepted, or y• he wold suffer any maner of correction that should after the law of God be ministred to him: notwithstanding, the king suffred him to be summoned in his priuy Chamber, then
hee said hee had appealed to the Pope, and shewed his appeale ready written: the King said he should not pursue his appeale, but tarrie in hold vntill the Pope allow∣ed his apeale, and then whether he would or no the Archbishop should be his Iudge. And because he would not be sworn to submit himselfe to the Church, and take what penance that the Archbishop would enioyne him, he was arrested at the Kings com∣mandement and led to the Tower: then he caused the foresaid confession to be writ∣ten in manner of an Indenture, that at his answere hee might giue one copie to the Archbishop, and keepe the other himselfe; which he did doe when hee was shortly af∣ter called before the Archbishop. The Bishops of Winchester and London said more∣ouer touching the Sacrament of Penance, We must forsake our sinnes and doe pe∣nance with true contrition to God, and confesse them to Christ, and haue satisfacti∣on in him, else can wee haue no saluation. Images pertaine nothing to Christian be∣léefe, but were permitted to be Kalenders to Lay-men, to bring to minde the passion of Christ, and martyrdome and good liuing of Saints. He that worshippeth them, hopth in helpe of them, or preferreth one aboue another, committeth Idolatrie: and I beleeue that euery man liuing is a Pilgrime, either towards blisse or paine; and he that will not kéepe the commandement of God, though he goe to all quarters of the world in pilgrimage, he shall be damned, and the faithfull shall bee saued in Christ though they neuer goe in pilgrimage, as men vse now-a-dayes to Canterburie, Wal∣singham, Compostell and Rome, or any other place. Then the Archbishop said, We denie not but that there are many good and Catholike things herein, but you are ap∣pointed this day to answer other matters. Whether doe you beleeue that there is materiall bread in the Sacrament after consecration, and whether a Christian be necessarily bound to confesse his sinnes to a Priest? The Lord Cobham said, he would answer no otherwise then he had in his Writing. He said, take héed; for if you will not answer directly by our law▪ we may openly proclaime you an hereticke: notwithstanding, what question any of the Bi∣shops asked him, he would make no other answer, but bade them resort to his Bill, he would stand to it vnto death. The Archbishop sayd, the holy Church of Rome followed the sayings of Saint Au∣gustine, Hierome, Ambrose, and of other holy Doctors that haue determined in these matters, which all christian men ought to beleeue and follow. Then he said, I will beléeue all that the Church, which Christ instituted, decréed, or what God hath willed vs to beléeue or do: but that the Pope and his Clergie haue power to determine such matters as stand not with Gods word, I will not affirme. Then the Archbishop said hee would send him Articles, and bade him aduise himselfe to answere them by Monday. The latter examination of the Lord COBHAM. Archb. YOu are excommunicated: the last time you were before me I gently pro∣fered to haue assoyled you if you would haue asked it, and yet I doe the same if you will humbly desire it, in manner as holy Church hath ordained. Cobh. I will not, for I neuer trespassed against you: and God saith in the second of Malachy, Maledicam benidictionibus vestris: and knéeling down, he said, I sriue my selfe before you all: In my youth I offended thée, my Lord, in pride, wrath glut∣tonie couetousnesse and lecherie: I haue hurt many in mine anger, and done many horrible sinnes: good Lord, I aske thee mercie; and therewith weepingly stood vp, and said aloude. Lo good people; for breaking Gods lawes they neuer cursed me, but for their owne lawes they most cruelly handle me and others. Archb. Then he examined him of his Christian beleefe.
Cobham. I beléeue all the Lawes of God, and all is true that is contained in the holy Scriptures: finally, I beleeue all that God would I should beleeue. Archb. He asked an answere of the Bill he had sent him, especially how hee belee∣ued touching the Sacrament of the Altar. Cobham. With the Bill I haue nothing to doe: but this is my beleefe touching the Sacrament, That Christ sitting at his last supper with his Disciples, the night before his death, he tooke Bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gaue it to his Disciples, and said, Take and eate it, this is my bodie that shall bee betrayed for you; doe this in remembrance of me, &c. Archb. Then he asked if it were bread after the consecration. Cobh. I beleeue it is Christs very bodie in the forme of bread. Then said a Doc∣tor, If the sacramentall words be vttered, there remaineth no bread, but it is the onely bodie of Christ. Then he said to one Master Whithead; you said once to me that the sacred Host was not Chrsts bodie. I proued there was his bodie, though Seculars and Friers could not therein agree, but held one against another in that opinion. Then said many together with great noise, We say all it is Gods bodie. nd diuers with great anger asked him if it were bread after the consecration. Then he looking earnestly vpon the Archbishop, he said: Sir, I beleeue surely that it is Christs bodie in forme of bread. Do not you do so? Archb. Yes marrie doe I. And the Doctors asked him if it were only Christs bodie after consecration, and no bread. Cob. It is both Christs bodie and bread, as Christ on earth was both God and man, and the inuisible Godhead was hidden in the manhood, as one of your owne Doctors Eutiches saith. As the selfe same Sacraments doe passe by the operation of the holy Ghost into a diuine nature, and notwithstanding keepe the propertie still of their former nature: so that principall mysterie declareth to remaine one true and perfit Christ. Then they smiled one vpon another, that the people might iudge him taken in an heresie: and diuers said with a great bragge, it is a foule heresie. Archb. What bread is it? And the Doctors inquired of him whether it were ma∣teriall, or not. Cob. The Scripture maketh no mention of materiall bread, therefore my faith hath nothing to doe therewith: but I say and beleeue, that it is Christs bodie and bread. Christ saith in the sixt of Iohn, I am the liuing bread, and not the dead bread. Then all with one voyce said, it is an heresie. And one of the Bishops said, it is an error manifest to say it is bread after the Sacramentall wordes once spoken, but Christs bodie onely. He said I am sure S. Paul was as wise and more learned then you be and in 1. Cor. 10. calleth it bread and not Christs bodie, but a meanes whereby we receiue Christs bodie. They said; Paul must bee otherwise expounded: for it is an heresie to say it is bread after the consecration. Hee asked how they could make that good? They answered, it is against the determination of holy Church. Archb. Wee sent you a writing concerning the faith of this blessed Sacra∣ment, cleerely determined by the Church of Rome our mother, and by the holy Doctors. Cobh. I know none holier then Christ and his Apostles, and that determination is none of theirs: for it standeth not with the Scriptures but is cleane contrary. It hath beene the Churches but since shee receiued the great poyson of worldly posses∣sions, and not before. Then they asked him if hee beleeued not the determination of the Church. Hee answered no: for it is no God. In is but thrice mentoned in the Creed, in God the Father, and in God the Sonne, and in God the holy Ghost: the birth, death, buriall, resurrection and ascension hath none In for beleefe, but in him. Neither hath the Church the Sacraments, the forgiuenesse of sinnes, or resurrection, or eternall life any other In then in the holy Ghost. Then one of the Lawyers said, But what is your beleefe concerning holy Church? I beleeue the Scriptures bee true, all that is grounded vpon them I beleeue, and I know it is Gods pleasure I
should so doe: but your Lordly lawes and idle determinations I doe not beleeue; for you are none of Christs Church, as your déeds shew, but very Antichrists, obsti∣nately set against his law and will: your lawes are nothing for Christs glorie, but for your owne vaine-glorie and abhominable couetousnesse. They said in great ume this was an exceeding herese not to beleeue the determination of holy Church. Archb. Then he asked him what he thought holy Church. Cobh. Holy Church is the number of them which shall be saued, of whom Christ is head. Archb. Can you tell who is of this Church? Cobh. Yea truely can I. Then a Prior said, it is doubt to you who is thereof: for Christ said noli iudicare; if you must not iudge your neighbors, much lesse your superiors. He answered, Christ saith in the same Chapter, As the ill tree is knowne by his ill fruits, so a false Prophet by his workes. And he saith in Iohn, Beleeue the out∣ward doings. And againe in Iohn, Iustum Iudicium iudicate: When wee know the thing is true we may iudge. And Dauid saith, Recte iudicate filii hominum. As for your superioritie; were you of Christ you would be meeke Ministers, and not proud superiours. Then Doctor Walden said, You make no differences of iudgements: so swift Iudges alwaies are the learned Schollars of Wickliffe. He answered, your iudge∣ments are preposterous, as the Prophet Esay saith, yee iudge ill good, and good ill: therefore your wayes are not Gods wayes, nor Gods wayes your wayes. Afore that vertuous man Wickliffe, whom you disdaine, I will say before God and man; before I knew the despised doctrine of his, I neuer abstained fom sinne, but since I trust I haue done otherwise: so much grace could I neuer finde in all your glorious instructions. Doctor Walden answered, It were not well with mee if so many lear∣ned and vertuous men, teaching the Scriptures, and the examples of the Fathers so plenteous, if I had no grace to amend vntill I heard the Diuell preach. Hierome, saith, hee which séeketh such suspected masters, shall not finde the mid-day, but the mid-day Diuell. He answered, the Pharises your fathers ascribed Christs miracles to Belzebub, and his doctrine to the Diuell; and you, their naturall children, haue still the same iudgement of his faithfull followers: they that reproue your vicious liuing must needs be hereticks, and when you cannot proue it by Scriptures, then your Doctors must proue it. Then said he to them all, to iudge you we néede goe no further then your acts: Where finde you in Gods law that you should thus sit in iudgement, and sentence euery man to death as you doe here daily? You haue no ground in Scripture but in Annas and Cayphas, which sat thus vpon Christ, and vp∣pon his Apostles after his ascention: you learned it not of Peter and Iohn. A Lawy∣er said, yes sir, Christ iudged Iudas. Hee answered, no; Christ iudged him not, hee iudged himselfe: Christ said indéed vnto him, woe vnto him for that couetous act of his, as he doth yet still to many of you; for since the venom was shed in the Church, you neuer followed Christ, neither were perfit in his law. Archb. What meane you by that venom? Cobh. Your possessions and Lordships: for there cried an Angell in the ayre, as your owne Chronicles mention, Wo, wo, wo, this day is venome shed into the Church. Before that time almost all the Bishops were Martyrs, and few since; but since that time one hath put down another, one hath poysoned another, one hath cur∣sed another, and one hath slaine another, and done much more mischiefes, as all the Chronicles elleth: and if all men consider this well, Christ was meeke and merci∣full, the Pope is proude and a tyrant; Christ was poore and forgaue, the Pope rich and a malitious man-slayer; Rome is the neast of Antichrist, and out of that neast proceedeth all the disciples, of whom Prelats, Priests, and Monks are the bodie, and these pill Friers are the taile which couereth his most filthie part. Then a Prior sayed, alackr, that is vncharitably spoken. He answered, it is not only my saying, but the Propet Esayes; Hee that preacheth lies is the tayle. As your Friers and
Monks be like Pharises, deuided in outward apparell and visages: so yee make deuision amongst the people. Thus you, with such others, are the naturall mem∣bers of Antichrist. Then hee said vnto them all; Woe vnto you Scribes and Pha∣rises hypocrits, you shut the Kingdome of heauen from others, and enter not your selues, nor suffer any other to enter: you stoppe vp the wayes with your traditi∣ons, therefore are you the houshold of Antichrist. You will not let Gods veritie to haue passage, fearing to haue your wickednesse reproued by such vaine flatterers as vphold your mischiefes: you suffer the common people most miserably to bee seduced. Archb. By our Lady sir, there shall none such preach in my Diocesse as make di∣uision amongst the poore Commons. Cobh. Both Christ and his Apostles were accused of sedition making, yet were they most peaceable men. Both Daniel and Christ prophesie that such a trou∣blous time shall come as hath not beene been before: this is partly fulfilled in your dayes and doings; for many haue you slaine, and more will you slay if God fulfill not his promise: if hee shorten not your dayes scarcely should any flesh bee saued. Moreouer, though Priests and Deacons, for peaching Gods word, and ministring the Sacraments, with prouision for the poore, bee grounded in Gods law, yet your other Sects haue no ground thereof. Then a Doctor of the law plucked out of his bosome a Writing, wherein was foure Articles, and examined him heron: the first was touching the Sacrament of the Altar, which he answered as before: the second, whether a man is bound to conesse himselfe to a Priest; hee answered, a diseased or wounded man had neede haue a true and wise Chirurgion, knowing the ground and danger of the same: therefore it is most necessarie to be first shréeuen to God, which only knoweth our diseases, and can helpe vs. The lawes of God are to be required of a Priest which is godly learned: but if he be an idiot or vicious, that is my Curate, I ought rather to flie from him then seeke him, for I might sooner get ill then good of him. The third was touching the authoritie of the Pope: hee answered, he that most followed Peter is next him in succession; but your Lordly order esteemeth little the lowly be∣hauiour of Peter, nor the humble manners of them that succeeded him vntill Silue∣ster, which for the most part were Martyrs: you let their good conditions goe, and hurt not your selfe therewith. ll knowe it, and yet you boast of Peter. Then said one of the Doctors, then what say you of the Pope? Hee answered, he and you to∣gether make an Antichrist: he is the great head, you Bishops, Priests, Prelats, and Monks are the bodie, and the begging Friers the tayle, for they couer the filthinesse of you both with their subtile sophistrie. Neuer will I obey vntill I se you with Peter follow Christ in conuersation. The fourth was touching Pilgrimage to Images: hee answered, I owe them no seruice by the commaundement of GOD, therefore I will not seeke them for your couetousnesse. You were best sweepe them faire from Cobwebs and Dust, or lay them vp safe for catching hurt, or burie them in the ground, as you doe other aged people which are GODS Images. It is a wonder that Saints beeing dead should bee so couetous, néedie, and beggers, which in their life time hated couetous∣nesse and begging. I would all the world knew it, With your shroeues and Idols, your fained Absolutions and Pardons, you draw vnto you the wealth and chiefe pleasures of all Christian Realmes. Then a Frier said, Will you not worshippe the Crosse, as Saint Paule saith. God forbid I should reioyce in anie thing but in the Crosse of Christ. Then did hee spread his aes abroad, and said, This is a very Crosse, and much better then your wodden Crosse▪ beeing it was created of GOD himselfe, yet will not I seeke to haue it wor∣shipped. Then said the Bishoppe of London, yet wot you not how hee died vpon a materiall Crosse? Hee answered yea; and I wot also that our saluation came not vnto vs by the materiall Crosse, but alone and onely by him
which dyed thereupon, and well wote I that Saint Paul reioyced in none other crosse, but in Christs passion and death onely, and in his owne suffering like persecution with him for his veritie. Then another said, Will you then doe no honour vnto the holy Crosse? Yes, it he were mine I would lay him by, least he tooke harme, and were rob∣bed of his goods, as he is now adayes. Bishop. Sir Iohn, you haue spoken many wonderfull words, to th slaunderous re∣buke of the whole Spiritualty, giuing a great ill example to the common sort heere, to haue vs in the more disdaine, and  spent mu time in vaine, as farre as I can sée: well, wée must be now at this short point with you, you must either submit your selfe to the ordinance of holy Church, or else throw your selfe into most déepe daunger, sée to it in time, aone lse it will be too late. Cobham. I know not to what purpose I shall submit my selfe▪ much more haue you offended me, then I euer offended you, in thus troubling mee before this compa∣ny. And because hee would not submit himselfe the Archbishop read he definitiue sentence. Cobh. Though you Iudge my body, which is but a wretched thing, yet, I am sure, you can doe n harme to my Soule, no more than Sathan could doe to the Soule of Iob. And touching my articles before rehearse, I wil stand to them vnto death. Then e tur∣ himselfe vnto the people, casting his hands abroad, saying with a lowde voice; Good people, beware of these men, else they wil beguile you, and lead you headlong to hel with themselues. Then he fell on his kées before them all and prayed for his enemies, ho∣ding vp his hands, saying; Lord, for thy mercie sake forgiue my pursuers, if it bee thy blessed will. Th he was lead againe vnto the Tower. After, the Lord Cobham escaped out of the Tower by night, and ed to Wales, where he continued more than foure yeares after. In this yeare,1416. Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury died, who had béene a heauie troubler of Christs Saints in his time, he was so stricken in his tongue, that nei∣ther he could swallow, nor speake, for a certaine space before his death; this was thought of many, to happen vnto him, for that he so bound the word of God, that it should not he preached in his dayes, such was the death of Steuen Gardner. These may be terrible spectacles for such as occupie their tongue and braines to stop the course of Gods word: but his tyranny dyed not with him, but succeeded with his Office, in Henry Chichley, and in more of the spitefull Spiritualty. They confederated with the Lord Powis, a great gouernour in Wales, féeding him with large gifts, and promises, an being with Iudas, vnder pretence of amitie▪ tooke the Lord Cobham, and sent him to London, where he was imprisoned in the Tower againe, and after, they condemned him againe of Heresie and Treason, according to the aforesaid Act of Parliament. Hee rendred thankes to God that he had appointed him to suffer for his name. At his execution, hé was laide vpon an Hurdle, as a Traytor, and drawne into Saint Giles Field, wheres they had set vp a new paire of Gallowes. When he was taken from the Hurdle, he fell deuoutly vpon his knees, desiring God to forgiue his enemies, then stood vp, and exhor∣ted the multitude in most godly manner, to follow the Lawes of God, written in the Scripture, and to bware of such Preachers that are contrary to Christ in their conuer∣sations, with many other speciall Councels; then was he hanged by the middle in chaines, and so consumed aliue in the fire, praising the name of God so long as his life lasted, and o commended his Soule to God,1418. and departed mst Christianlike in the sixt yeare of the raigne of Henry the fifth. The people shewed great dolour, but the Priest blasphe∣med and accursed him, requiring the people not to pray for him but to iudge him dam∣ned in Hell, because he departed not in the obedience of the Pope. ¶The Councell of Basell. THE Councell of Basell began,1431. which was most troublesome, and endured longer then any other Councell, almost 17. yeares, wherein was concluded, as in the Councell of Constance, that the generall Councell was aboue the Pope. Unto this Councell came the Emperour Sygismund. Pope Martin dyed after he had summoned
This Councell, and Eugenius the 4. succéeded Pope, who would haue drawne the Councell vnto Bonony from Basell, pretending the Gréekes would come to the Coun∣cell, and be vnited to the west Church, and that they would not passe the Alps. And he cited the Fathers of the Councell vnto Bonony, and they cited him againe to bee at the Councell, or his Embssadours: Whereupon sprung a doubtfull question amongst the Deuines some held the Pope an Hereticke, because hee had contemned the commaun∣dement of the Church; others▪ that hee was an Heretcke and relaps, and vpon long arguments, contentions, and fallings out, and when by no meanes e would allow the Councell of Basell, hee was dpriued by the Councell, and Amedeus Duke of Sa∣uy chosen Pope. ¶The rest of the Story of the Bohemians. THe Story of the Bohemians, being in this Treatise before set forth, vntill it was agreed that the Bohemians chose foure Ministers to dispute vpon the foure Ar∣ticles, and the Councell chose foure to dispute against them, at the day appointed, Ro∣chezantus, one of the foure Ministers chosen by the Bohemians, propounded the first Article, touching the Communion to be ministred in both kindes, and desputed thereof three dayes in the forenoones. Then Venceslaus disputed vpon the second Article tou∣ching the punishment of sinne, two dayes; after whom Vldaicus propounded and dis∣puted vpon the third Article two dayes, touching the free preaching of the word of God Last of all, Peter Paine an Englishman, disputed three daies vpon the fourth Article, touching ciuill Dominion of the Clergie, and after, gaue Copies of their diputations vnto the Councell, with heartie thankes that they were eard. The three last some∣what inueyed against the Councell, commending Iohn Hus, and Iohn Wickliffe, for their Doctrine. One Ragusio answered the first point, and  puted eight dayes thereon. Egidius Carlerius answered the second point, by the space of foure dayes. One Henricus answe∣red the third Article three daies. One Iohn Pollomarius answered the fourth Articles, three daies▪ the Bohemians stil stood to their Articles. At length the Councel and the Bohemians were agreed, and receiuing the Commu∣nion in both kinds was permitted vnto the Bohemians, and Articles drawne vnder the hands and Seales of the Councel of one part, and the Bohemians on the other, concer∣ning the other Articles. After all this,1428. the Bohemians put vp these petitions following vnto the Councell. First, for the extirpation of diuerse discentions, which will follow, amongst our people, vpon the  of the Communion, that you would grant an vniforme or∣der of Communion vnto all men vnder both kinds vnto our Bishops, hauing charge of Soules, and to their Uicars, and flocks: for this done by your benefite, the whole Kingdome shall bee comforted without measure, and established in brotherly loue, whereby an vniforme obedience shall bee perpetually attributed to holy Church. 2 That to auoid the doubtfulnesse of many, which suppose that the Councell doth suffer the said Communion vnder both kinds vnto vs, but for a time, as neither profi∣table nor wholsome, we desire that you would confirme and continue it by th buls of your Letters. 3 Wee beseech you for the finall defence, and obseuation of all things compoun∣ded, and for the good order in the Spiritualties, you would prouide for vs a good and lawfull Pastor▪ which shall seeme to vs most meete for our Kingdome. 4 Wee desire you, for the worthy  of our Realme, that you will direct Letters of the sacred Councell, declaring to all Princes Seculer and Spirituall, Cities and Communalties▪ according to the compositions. 5 Wee desire you▪ that in the discussing of the matter of the Communion vnder both kinds, that you will proceede no otherwise then according to the Lawe of God, the Order of Christ and his Apostles, the generall Councell and minds of holy Doctors,
truely grounded vpon the Lawe of God. 6 We dsire, that for the great affection of our people, you will giue vs the li∣bertie to communicate to oung children the Sacramet of the Supper; for if thi vse of Communicating be taken away, which our Kingdome, being godly mooued by the wrtings of most great and holy Doctors, and brought in by examples, hath receiued as Catholicke, and exercised now a long time, it would rise vp to an intollerable offence amongst the people, and their mindes would bée grieuously vxed and troubled. 7 Wee require you, that you would permit, at least, the Gospels, Epistles, and Crede, to bee read in the Church, in our vulger tongue, to moue the people to deuotion, for it hath beene so vsed of olde time in the Church, and in our . 8 Wee desire, that Prebends, and collacions of certaine benefices o Cathedral Churches, may bee annexed and incorporated vnto the Uniuersitie of Prage, that it may be increased and preerred. 9 Wee rquire▪ that with allare and studie, you will watch and séeke for that long desired, and most necessarie reformation of the Church, and Christian Religion, and effectually labour fr the rooting out of all publike eils, as well in the head as in the members, as you haue often promised, in our Kingdome in the Compositios, and as our fourth Article, touching the auoiding all publicke euils, doth exact and require. In this Councell was ordained the feast of the Concetion of our Lady, and the feast of the Uisitation of our Lady. In this Councell there was diligent cae about reformation of the Church, that through euery Church apt and méete Ministers might bee appinted, which may shine in vertue and knowledge, to the glory of Christ, and the healthfull edifying of the Christian people, whereunto the multitude of expectatiue gifts haue béene a great im∣pediment; hereby often times, vnméete Ministers are appointed for the Churches, and they giue occasion to desire anothers death, and many contentions are moed a∣ongst the seruants of God, and the ambition and gréedie desire of pluralities main∣tained, and the substance of Kingdomes consumed, poore men suffer vexations, by running to Rome▪ they are often by the way robbed, murdered, afflicted with diuerse plagues, and hauing spent their parimony, left them by their parents, are constrained o liue in extreame pouertie. Many craue benefices which haue no iust title, and get the same, and such as haue most craft and subtiltie to deceiue, and greatest substa to contend in the Lawe, doo great wrongs: the Eccleasticall order is confounded, whiles euery mans Iudgement is not preserued; and the Pope, by chalenging and ta∣king vpon him too much, the Office of Superiours is drowned from more waightie and fruitfull matters, and intends not to the guiding and correction of the inferiours, as publicke vtilitie requireth, all which things bring a great confusion vnto the Clergie, to the great preiudice of Gods true worship, and the publike saluation.
THE SIXT SECTION OF this Ecclesiasticall Historie. THIS Storie following, and that before confuteth the vaine opinion of some, that this Religion now vsed, hath risen but twentie or thirtie yeares since, and manifesteth that it hath béene spred in England this 220. yeares, and often sparkled before that time, although it flamed not so as it hath done within this 100. yeares and more, wo although they were not so strongly armed in their cause, as of late yeares, yet were they warriours in Christs Church, and although they gaue back for tyranny, yet Iudge the best, and referre the cause to God, who euealeth all things according to his determinate will and time, there hath bin no realme more fertile for Marters then England. Oxford was as a continuall sprng of Christian knowledge whence, as out of the Troiane horse, hath come so many inuincible witesses of the truth, amongst whom William Taylor, Master of , hath not deserued the least praise, being a fauorer of Wickliffe▪ who because he had written cerain things against the inuocation of saints, and many other matters, after he had recanted nine articles, returned vnto th right way, and with a maruellous constancie,  but in Smithfield the 7 of March. Iohn Florence,1422. a Turner of Shelton, in the Dicesse of Norwich, was attached be∣cause he held and taught that the Pope and Cardinals haue no power to consttute Lawes, that nor day is to be kept holiday, but Sunday. That there ought to be no fast, but of the Quauor temporum. That Images are not to be worshipped▪ not lights to be set before them. Not  goe on Pilgrimage, nor offe for the dead, or with women that are purified. That Curates should not claime Tithes by any exaction, and that they should be diuided amongst the poore. That such as sweare by their life, or power, except they repent, shall be damd. He was brought before the Chauncellour, and forced to abiure, and was sworne not to hold or teach any thing contrary to the determination of the Church of Rome, nor to helpe or ayde any that should so doe. He was inioyned for penan thr Sundies Solemne Procession in the Cathedral Church of Nor∣wich, to be whipped before all the people, and three other Sundaies about his Parish Church of Shelton, bare fted, & bare necked, his bodie being couered with a canus shirt, and canus briches, carying in his hand a Taper of a pound waight, & so was dismissed. Richard Belward of Erisam, in the Diocesse of Norwich, was accused for holding, and teaching, that Ecclesiasticall Ministre and Ordinaries, haue no power to excom∣municate; and though the Bishop excommunicate any, God doth absole them. And that he held the opinion of Sir Iohn Oldcastle. And that such as goe on Pilgrimage, of∣fering to Images, are excommunicated, because they ought to giue to the poore which are aliue, and not to the dead. And that the Curates sell God on Easter day, when they receiue Offerings, before they minister the Sacraments. And that hee councelled ∣uerse women that they should not offer for the dead, nor with women that were puri▪ and for that he called his neighbours fooles for not learning his sect, and that they of sect were able to confute all others, and that we ought not to pray vnto the Saints heauen, but onely to God, and that he kéept schooles of Lolardie in Dichingham, that a Parchment maker bringeth him bookes from London, containing  Doctrine. The Bishop of Norwich siting in Iudgement vpon him, he denied his articles, and was purged by  of his neighbours, swearing that he would not teach or defend any thin contrary to the Church of Rome, and the aforesaid parchment-maker was likewise accu∣sed vpon the aforesaid Artices who dnyed them, and was likewise purged by his neigh∣burs, and sword in like manner. Also sir Hugh Pie Chaplen of Ldney was likewie accused before the said Bishop of Norwich, for holding that the people ought not to goe
on pilgrimage, and that people ought not to giue almes to Images, but to the poore That the Image of the Crosse, & other Images are not to be worshiped, and that he had cast the Crosse of Brome hold into the fire to be burnt, which he tooke from one of Ludney, which he denied, & purged himselfe by three Laymen, and three Priests & was sworne, as before. In this yeare, Henry the fift sent a most cruell Commission vnto Iohn Exeter,1428. and Iacolet Germaine, kéeper of the Castle of Colchester, for the apprehending of sir William White Priest, and Thomas Chaplin of Setling in Northfolke; and William Northam∣ton Priest, and all other suspected of Lolardy, and to commit them to prison, by vertue of which Commiion, sixe persons were attached in Bugay of Norwich, whose names were so defaced through antiquitie, that there remained but three names in the worne booke to be red, to wit, Iohn Teaderton in Kent, Bartholomew Monke of Ensham in Norfolke, Corneleader▪ a maie man; these three were in the custodie of the Duke of Norfolke, in the Castle of Fremingham. We finde also in the Diocesse of Norfolke, and Suffolke, specially in the townes of Bechels, Ersham, and Ludney within the space of three or foure yeares, 120. men and women, which sustained great vexation for the profession of Christs Faith, whose names are recited in the booke at large; the Articles that were generally obiected against them, were; That auriculer confession is not to bee made vnto a Priest, but vnto God, because no Priest hath no power to absolue a sinner. That no Priest can make the body of Christ in the Sacrament, and that material bread remaineth after consecation. That euery true Christian man is a Priest to God. That none is bound, vnder paine of damnation, to Lent, or other dayes prohibited. That the Pope is Antichrist, and his Prelates Antichrists disciples; and that the Pope hath no power to binde and lose on earth; and that it is lawfull to doe any worke, except sinne, vpon the holy daies. That Priests may haue wiues lawfully. That the Communica∣tions of the Prelates are not to be regarded. That it is not lawfull to sweare in priuate causes. That men ought no goe on Pilgrimage, nor giue honour vnto Images of the Crosse, of our Lady, or other Saints. That holy water hath no more vertue then other water. That the death of Thomas Becket was neither holy nor meritorious. That re∣lickes, as dead mens bones, ought not to be worshipped, or digged out of graues, or set vp in Shrines▪ That prayers made in all places are acceptable to God. That men ought not to pray to any Saints, but onely to God. That bels, and ringing in the Church were ordained to fill the Priests purses. That it is no sinne to withstand the Ecclesia∣sticall precepts. That the Catholicke Church is only the Congregation of the elect; they did so agree in vniforme faith, that whatsoeuer one did hold, all did maintaine. William White, being a follower of Iohn Wickliffe, yet laboured continually, vnto the glory of his spoute Christ, by reading, writing, and preaching. The principall points of his Doctrine were these which he was forced to recant at Canterbury. That men should seeke for forgiuenesse of sins only at Gods hands, that the wicked liuing of the Pope, and his holinesse, is nothing else but a diuelish estate, and heauie yoke of Antichrist: therfore an enemy to Christs truth, that men ought not to worship Images or other Idolatrous paintings, nor the holy men which are deade. That the Romish Church is the figtree that Christ cursed, because it brought forth no fruit of the true belief. That such as weare Coules, or are annointed, and shorne, are the Lance-knights, and sol∣diers of Lucifer, and that all of them, because their lamps are not burning, shal be shut out when the Lord Christ shall come: after his said recantation he was much more stronger in Christ, and confessed his errour and offence, and busying himselfe in preaching and con∣uerting the people to the doctrine of Christ in Norfolke, he was apprehended by vertue of the Kings letters aforesaid, and brought before the Bishop of Norwich, by whom hee was contemned of 30. Articles and burned the said yeare in Norwich, who was of so de∣uout and holy life that all the people had him in great reuerence. One Margery wright confessed, if any Saints were to be prayd vnto, she would rather pray vnto him then any other, when he was come to the stake, thinking to open his mouth to exhort the people, one of the Bishops seruants strooke him in the mouth. Thus he receiued the Crowne of Marterdome, to the grife of all good men in Norfolke; his wife following his steps, by er teaching, confirmed many in the trueth. Wherefore shee suffered much trouble and punishment that yeare. By the saide Bishoppe the same yeare
also was burned father Abraham of olchester, and Iohn Waddon Priest, for the like Article. Amongst them that were arrested, and caused to abiure; in this yeare▪ as aforesaid▪ was Thomas Pie, and Iohn Mendham of Aldborough, who being conuicted vpon di∣uerse Articles before mentioned, were ioyned penance sixe whippings about the Church of Alborrough, before a solemne Procession, sixe seuerall Sundaies; and three whippings three seueral Market daies about the Market Place of  heads, necks, legs, and feete bare▪ their bodies onely couered with their  and breeches, ei∣ther of them carying a taper in his hand, of a pound waigh, which tpe, the last Sun∣day after the Penance , they should deuoutly offe vnto the high Altar of the Church of Alborrough, at the time of the ffetory of the high Masse; and that going a∣bout the Market plce aforesaid, they shal make foure stays▪ euery one to receiue deuout∣ly thrée whips, and if they would not obey this monition, they were to be cited to appeare before the Bishop, to shew cause why they should not bee excommunicated, and to re∣ceiue such punishment as Iustice shall prouide in that behalfe, this was their of penance, howbeit some were often more cruelly handled, and after banished out of the Dioces: and others were more straly vsed by lng imprisonment, whereof we will briefly rehearse one or two for example. Iohn Beuerley, alias Batile, a labourer, hauing lye long in Irons, and hauing no∣thing proued against him, the Commissary made him sweare, that euery yeare after he would confesse is slune, once a yeare vnto his Curate, and receiue the Sacrament at Easter, and for his penance, the Friday, and Saturday next following, hee should fast brad and water, and vpon the Saturday be whipped from the Bishops Palace Norwich, about all the streets, and the Market place, hauing in his hand a waxe candle of two pence, to offer to the Image of the Trinitie, after he had done his penance; and because he had eaten flesh on Easter day and was not shriuen in Lent, nor receiued on Easter day, the Iudge inioyned him he should fast Tuesday. Wednesday, and Friday, in Whitsun weeke, hauing but one meale a day of Fish and other white meates, and depart out of the Dioces, and neuer come there againe. Iohn Skilley of Flixton Miller, was forced to abiure, for holding the Articles aforesaid, and for receiuing certaine godly men into his house, had a most sharpe penance▪ seauen yeares imprisonment in the Monastery of Langly. and to fast with bread & water, euery Friday, and to appeare euery Wednesday in the beginning of Lent, and euery Munday, and Thursday for two yeares after the seauen yeares, before the Bishop, his successor, and Commissary in the Cathedrall Church of Norwich, together with other penitntiaries, to doe open penance for his offence, diuerse others the same yeare were forced to abiurati∣on and penance. In this next yeare,1429. in the same Register, were sixteene, or seauenteene, that were examined, and did penance likewise, amongst whom was Iohn Baker, otherwise called Vsher Tunstall, who for hauing a booke with the Pater noster, Aue, and Creede in En∣glish, and for other Articles of Fasting, Confession, and inuocation, was constrained to abiure, and doe such penance as others did before him. Another was Margerie Bakster, wife of Willam Backster, against whom, one Ioane Cliffe and was compelled by the Bishop to depose. First, that she bad her take héede of swearing, else a Bee would sting her tongue, and venime her soule: and that she rebuked her for saying Pater nosters to the Cruciixe, and Aue Maries to our Lady; saying, you will doe ill in , or praying to such Images, and that God will giue no more re∣ward for such prayers, then a endle, put vnder the foote, will giue light in the night, saying, that lewde wrights of stockes hewe such Crosses and Images, and lewde Painters gleere them with coloures, and opened her armes, and tolde her, this is the true Crosse of Christ: And that she said, if euery Sacrament were God and the very bodie of Christ, then 1000. Priests and more, doe euery day make a 1000. such Gods, and eate them, and voide them out of their hinder parts, filthily stinking vn∣der euery hedge, where you may finde many such Gods. It shall neuer be my God, it was falsly and deceitfully ordained by the Priests, to induce simple people to Idolatry. for it is onely materiall bread. And that Thomas of Canterbury, whom the people cal
Saint Thomas, was a false Traytor, and damned in Hell. And that the Pope, Car∣dinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and especially the Bishop of Norwich, and others that support Heresies, and Idolatries, shall shortly haue the same, or worse mischiefe so fall vpon them, then that cursed man Thomas of Canterbury had, for they cursedly deciae the people with false mmmetries, to extort money to maintaine their pride, riot, and idlenesse, and haue slaine the true Preachers or Go Lawe. And that she said, that none was bound to fast in Lent, or other daies appointed. and that it was lawfull to eate flesh, and other meates vpon the said dayes that Pope Sluester made the Lent. And that William White was a good man, and falsly condemned, and at his execu∣tion, when he would haue exhorted the people, a Deuill, one of Bishop Caiphas his ser∣uants, stroce him on the lips, that he could not declare the will of God. And that shee taught her not to goe to Pilgrimage, to the Lady of Walsingham, or any other Saint or place. And that she desired this deponent, and her maid, to come in the night to her chamber, to heare her husband reade the Lawe of Christ vnto them. And that she saide, that the people did worship Deuils which fell from Heauen with Lucifer, and entred into the Image which stand in the Churches, so that the people which worship Images ommit Idolatry. And that holy bread and water are but trifles. And they are excom∣municated that first ordained bels, And that the Saturday after Aswednesday, shee had a pot séething ouer the fire, with a piece of Baken and Otmeale seething in it. Others also were sworne, which confirmed the former depositions, but wee finds no mention in Regester what became of her. Diuerse good men, this yeare were accused by the deposition of one William Wright, their names appeare in the booke at large. And the said William Wright deposed that it is read in the Prophecies amongst the Lollards, that their sect shall bee, in manner, de∣stroyed, yet at the length it shall preuaile, and haue the victory against all her enemies. Iohn Burrell, seruant to Thomas Moone of Ludney,1430. in the Dioces of Norwich, was apprehended, and it was obiected against him, besides the Articles before mentio∣ned, that hee held that the Catholicke Church, is the Seules of euery good Christian. That Lent, and other Fasting-dayes, were ordained of the Priests, and not of God: and that men may eate flesh, or fish indifferently vpon those dayes: That Pilgrimage ought not to be made, but to the poore. That it is not lawfull to sweare, but in cse of of life and death. That Masses, and prayers for the Soules of the dead are vaine, and that the deade are either in Heauen, or Hell, for there is no Purgtory, but this world. He was forced to  and suffer like punishment as before. Thomas Moone of Ludey was apprehended, and the Articles aforesaid laid against him, especially that he had receiued, comforted, and supported diuerse, vpon which hee being conct, was forced to abiure, and receiue like penance. Robert Grigges, of Mar∣tham was brought before the Bishop for the Articles aforesaid, especialy for affirming that the Sacrament of confirmation by the Bishop did auaile nothing to saluation, that it was no sinne to withstand the ordinances of the Church of Rome, that holy bread and water were but trifles, and that they were the worse for the conurations and characters made ouer them, he was forced to abiure and suffer penance as aforesaid. Iohn Finch of Colchester, was taken in Ipswich, and brought before the Bi∣shop, and being conuicted of the aforesaid Articles, was inioyned penance three whip∣pings three seuerall Sundaies in solemne Procession about the Cathedrall Church of Norwich, and thrée whippings about the Market place, thrée principall market daies; his head, necke, and eete bare, his bodie couered onely with a short shirt, with a taper of waxe of a pound waight in his hands, which the next Sunday after his penance, he should offer vnto the Triuitie, and euery Ashwednesday, and Munday, and Thurs∣day three yeare after, hée should appeare before the Ordinary, in the Cathedral Church, to doe open penance amongst other penitontiares. About the same time, shortly after the Coronation of King Henry the sixt, one Ri∣chard Houeden a wool winder, and Citizen of London, was crowned with Martyr∣dome, whenby no perswasions he could be drawne from the opinions of Wickliffe, as Fabian writeth, he burned hard by the Tower of London.
Nicholas, Canon of Eye, was brought before the Bishop of Norwich,1431. and many wit∣nesses being sworne against him, they appointed one to speake for them all. First, that on Easter day, all the Parish going of Procession, he went the contrary way, deciding them, and méeting them. Hée confessed it, and hougt he did well therein. And that he should say; If the Sacrament of the Alter be very God, and very man, then God may be put in a small roome, as when it is in the Prists mouth. And why may not wee as well vpon Fdaies and other prohibited dayes, as the Priests eate the flesh and bloud of our Lord euery day. To which he answered, hee thought hee had spoken well therein. Item, that on Corpus Christi day, at the eleuation of high Masse, when all kneeled downe, and held vp their hands, and did reuerence to the Sacrament, he went behind a piller, turned his face from the Altar, and mocked them. He affirmed, he thought he did well in so doing. Item, when his mothr would lift vp his right hand to crosse himselfe from the and assaults of the Deuill, hee mocked her. This, hee thought, it was well done. Item vpon All-ballend day, at the eleuation of the Masse, when many lighted torches, them vp to the Altar, and knéeled downe there, in honour of the Sacrament, hee standing behinde the Priest with a fozeh, turned his backe to the Priest, and would no euerence. He said, he did well therein. Item, that he said, he doubted whether in the Sacrament of the Altar were the very body of Christ or no. This Article he confessed to be true. Item, that he beleeued that a man ought not to confesse his sinnes to a Priest. This Article he also confessed. After, he was conuicted, and enioyned for penance three whip∣pings about the Cloyster of the Cathedrall Church of Norwich, before a solemne Pro∣cession, barefooted and bare headed, as the aforesaid ponitentiaries, and to be kept in pri∣son vntill the Bishop came into the Dioces, least he should enuenoms the flocke. Thus you haue the troubles, which in the aforesaid foure yeares, hapned in Norfolke and Suf∣folke, hauing shewed certaine notable examples, sufficient to declare the rest, for their opinions, neither their penance did differ, otherwise then by these examples may bee seene. Thomas Bagley Priest, Uicar of Malden, being a valiant Disciple, and adherent of Wickliffe, was condemned by the Bishops of Heresie, at London, about the middest of Lent, and was disgeaded, and burned in Smithfeld. The same years was Paul Craws a Bohemian, taken at Saint Andrewes, by the Bishop, and deliuered to the Seculer power, to be burned, for holding contrary opinions touching the Sacrament of the Altar, the worshipping of Saints, auriculer confession, with other of Wickliffes opinions. Thomas Rhedon a Frenchman,1436. a Carmelits Frier, which take their name of Mount Carmelus, came with the Uenitian Embassadors into Italy, trusting that hee should finde there some, by whose good life hee might bée edified, but the successe of the matter did frustrate his hope, for hee found nothing but hypocritie, and golde and siluer in stead of heauenly gifts; pompe and pride raigned in place of godlinesse, in stéed of learning and studie, flohulnesse and superstition, and for Apostlolike simplicity tyranny and hautinesse; they did so passe all measure and patiencs, that hee could by no meanes refraine his tongue, in so great corruption of the Church, and by continual prea∣ching, got great enuie and hatred. The Rulers began to consult together, by what meanes they might circumuent this mans life, for it is a continuall custome amongst the Prelates, that if any man displease them, and speake any thing which is hurtfull so their lucre, by and by they frame Articles of some heresie against him, ouerwhelme him with suspition, seeke to intangle him with questions, and so condemne him, and destroy him. This is their godlnesse and peaceable order: they gathered these Articles against him. That the Church lacketh reformation: That it shall be punished, and reformed: That , Iewes, Turkes, and Moores shall be conuerted vnto Christ in the lat∣ter daies: And that abhominations are vsed at Rome: That the vniust excommunica∣tion of the Pope is not to be feared, and those which doe not obserue the same, doe not
sinne: Eugenius was Pope, then this good man Thomas Rheden was taken and brought before him, and from thence to prison, and after sundry greeuous torments was brought before the Iudges, and was condemned to be burned foure yeares af∣ter he came to Rome. In this yeare the maruellous inuention of Printing was first found out, by one Iohn Guttenbergh in Strawsborrow, and afterwards by him made perfect in Ments, our dayes declare how profitable this hath beene vnto all the world: if wee consider that thereby ignorance is vtterly banished, the truth declared, and the Pope and Antichrist vtterly subuerted, which could neuer haue been, if this most worthy Science had not been found out, for before Bookes were so scarce, and at such excesse price, that few could thereby attaine to knowledge: heere∣in the prophesie of the Sybils is fulfilled, that Flaxe and Lime should ouerthrow Antichrist. Reynold Peacock,1457 Bishop of Chichester, was for his godlinesse and professi∣on of the Gospell afflicted and tormented, and made to recant, and after put to death in prison: he was brought before Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth, in which Conuocation the Duke of Buckingham was present: whereas besides many other Articles, the presence of bread in the Sacrament was laid vnto Pecock; insomuch that the Sacrament, the knot of amitie, ordained by Christ, to the great comfort of the Church, through the enuy of Sathan, it turned into a matter of most greeuous discord, that no matter hath continued so many yeares more pernitious to mans saluation: Hee declared many things worthy of a good Diuine: they la∣boured for their dignitie and gaine, and so much the more earnestly, because they had gotten an Aduersarie, whose authoritie the higher it was in the Church, i would bring the greater ruine of their tyranny and estimation among the people. First, the matter was attempted by priuate Coloquies; after by a terrible Iudge∣ment, threatning present death, with threatning exhortations, mingled with flattering promises, granting him further time to consult, that the delay of death might make his life the sweeter: They gaue him hope of his life and Dignitie if hee would recant, till at length his minde began to quaile: by and by a recanta∣tion was made by the Bishoppes, the effect whereof followeth. Which when he declared vnto the people, hee did so pronounce that hee was carried againe to pri∣son, from whence hee could not bee deliuered but by death: The Arti∣cles that were mentioned in the Recantation to bee recanted were, that first it is not necessarie to beleeue that CHRIST after his death des∣cended into Hell, that it is not necessarie to Saluation to beleeue in the Ca∣tholicke Church, nor to beleeue the Communion of Saints, neither the body materiall in the Sacrament: and that the vniuersall Church may ere in mat∣ters pertaining vnto Faith; and that it is not necessarie to saluation to beleeue the generall Councell. Wee shewed before in the latter end of the Councell of Basil, how Eugenius was deposed, and Foelix Duke of Sauoy elected Pope. Wherevpon arose great discords. Eugenius sent his Orators into Germany, to perswade them to in∣fringe the Councell of Basil, and the Dolphin of France, set on by the said Eu∣genius, led an armie of fiue and twenty thousand men into Alsatia, and laide siege vnto Basil to disturbe the Councell, hauing there a great conflict with the Germaines with great slaughter, whereby the Councell could not bee kept any longer in Germany, but in France through the pragmaticall sanction of the French King After Eugenius brought to passe by the Emperour, and his Orators of which Aeneas Siluius was one, that they were content to giue ouer the Councell of Basil. Frederick of Austridge not beeing yet Empe∣rour, but labouring for the Empire, brought to passe that Foelix, which was chosen Pope in the Councell of Basil, was content to resigne his papacie vn∣to Nicholas the eight, successor to Eugenius, of the which Nicholas, the said Frederick was confirmed Emperour at Rome, and there crowned in the yeere one thousand foure hundred fifty and one.
This Pope, to gather great summes of Mony, appointed a Iubile in the yeare of our Lord 1450. there resorted great number of people to Rome, more then at any time before were seene there. At which time, as there were a great sort of people going to Mount Uaticane, to behold the Image of our Sauiour, which they had there to shew to Pilgrims, a Mule of the Cardinals of Saint Marke com∣ming that way, the people for multitude being not able to voyde the way, one or two falling vpon the Mule, there was such a throng, that two hundred men and thrée horses were strangled vpon the bridge, and many fell ouer into the water and were drowued: wherefore the Pope caused the small houses to bee plucked downe, to make the Bridge broader. In the yeare 1453. Constantinople was taken by the Turkes. In the yeare one thousand foure hundred fifty fiue, when the death of Pope Ni∣cholas was published, the Germaines bewayling their miserable estate, perswaded the Emperour that he should be no longer vnder the Popes obedience, except they first obtained certaine thinges touching the Charter of Apeales, shewing that they were in worse case then eyther the French-men or Italians, and as it were their Seruants, and especially of the Italians: that they alone had not the vse of their Lawes, and that the French Nation had not made their sute in vaine vnto their King, against the exactions of the Popes, by whom they were defended, which also prouided decrées for the liberty of his people: The Empe∣rour promised, hee would prouide for them, no lesse then the King of Fraunce had done for the French-men. But Aeneas Siluius brake off the matter, saying; Though there bee variance amongst Princes in waighty matters, yet peace may be made againe: but betweene the Prince and the Common people, there is al∣waies mortall hatred, and because he should be Successour vnto the Pope; hee concluded, he thought it better to accord to the Pope, then to follow their de∣sires, whose minds are led with couetousnesse, rather then by reason: and the Emperour chose him Ambassadour to Pope Calixtus, to sweare vnto him in his Name, and to promise the absolute obedience of all Germany. Thus twice Fridericke of Austrich contemned and derided the Germaines, frustrating them of their natiue ordinances, and brought them into subiection vnder the Pope, which was the cause that seauen yeares before his death, he caused his Sonne Maximillian to bee crowned King of the Romaines, least after his death the Empire should be transported vnto another Familie, as it afterwards came to passe. Whereupon Germany being in this miserable pouerty, and greeuous subiection of the Popes tyranny and polling, with teares and sighes lamenting their estate, continued so almost vnto Luthers time, as those Histories hereafter doe testifie. The Ambassadour of the Arch-bishop of Maydenburge, Henry Token, writeth, that in the Councell of Basill, the Arch-bishop of Lyons did declare, that in Pope Martines time, there came out of Fraunce to the Court of Rome, nine millions of Gold, which was gathered by the Byshops and Prelats, besides the poore Clergy, which daily without number runne vnto the Court of Rome, carrying with them all their whole substance. The Arch-byshoppe of Turonne said, also at Basill, that three Millions of Gold in his time came to Rome in foureteene yeares of the Prelates, besides the poore Cleargy, which daily runne to that Court. Let the man which fea∣reth God, iudge what a deuouring Gulfe this is, a million containeth ten hundred thousand. Sir Roger Ounley followed the Lord Cobham, and Sir Roger Acton being a Knight of like Nobility and Order, and pertaker of the like cause: a man endewed with like valiantnesse and godlinesse, whom we reade in certaine Annals to be han∣ged for the truth, 1441. Although there haue beene many Women which haue followed their spouse Christ by torments, banishment, and death; yet the first that commeth to our handes, is Elinor Cobham, a Woman, nothing degenerating from her stocke,
kindred and name, albeit wee can finde no other thing of her but for suspition of heresie, that is to say, for the loue and desire of the truth, she was by the papists banished into the Ie of Man, whom a fewe yeares after there followed a woman, who for her constancy and vertue was greatly to be praised, being mother of the La∣dy Yong,1490. she perseuered vnto the fire with a stout and manly courage, for the profes∣sion of the Gospel, and was burned. Hieronimus Sauonarola, being singularly well learned, and a Monke in Italy preached sore against the euill life of the spiritualtie, especially of his owne order, saying they were the springs of all mischiefes, and by the help of certaine learned men, began to seeke reformation in his owne order. The Pope fearing him, being in great reputation amongst all men, least hee should diminish his authoritie, hee ordained his Uicar to reforme this matter. But the said Hierome withstood him alwaies: wherefore hee was accursed, yet he left not off preaching, but threatned Italy, with the indignation of GOD, and prophesied that the Land should bee ouerthrowne, for the pride and wicked∣nesse of the people, and for the vntruth and hypocrisie of the Clergy, which came to passe when King Charles came to Rome, and besieged Pope Alexander that hee was forced to make composition with him. Because the said Hierome would not leaue preaching, hee was commanded to appeare before the Pope to giue account of his new learning, but hee went not. Then was hee againe forbidden to preach, and his learning condemned as false and seditions, whereby he left off preaching: But when the people ore hungred for Gods Word, and were instant vpon him that hee would preach againe,1496 hee beganne againe to preach in Florence; many exhorted him to the contrarie, but he regarded it not but went forward freely. When the Pope and his Shauellings heard thereof they were greatly inflamed against him, and cursed him as an obstinate heretick: yet hee pro∣ceeded in teaching the people, saying men ought not to regard such curses which is against the true doctrine and the common Prophets; for by preaching wée should be learned and amended, Christs Kingdome inlarged and the Kingdome of the Diuell ouerthrowne. He desired to teach no other thing then the pure word of God,1498. often protesting, that all men should certifie him if they heard him teach any thing contrary therunto: for in his conscience he knew nothing which he had taught but the pure word of God. What his doctrine was, may easily be iudged by his books he wrote. After that he was taken, with two Friers with him which fauou∣red his learning, named Dominick and Siluester, and carried to prison, where he wrote a godly meditation vpon the most comfortable one and fiftieth Psalme; wherein hée excellently described the strife betwixt the flesh and spirit. The Popes Legats came to Florence, and called forth these thrée good men, threatning them maruellously, but they continued still constant. Then they gathered Articles against them, whereup∣pon they were condemned, and were first hanged vp openly in the market-place, af∣ter burned to ashes, and the ashes cast into the riuer of Are. This man foreshewed of the destruction of Florence,1499. Rome, and the reuenues of the Church, and that the Turks and Moores in the latter day should be conuerted to Christ, and that one like vnto Cyrus should passe the Alpes into Italy, and vtter∣ly destroy it. Philip Norice an Irishman, professor at Oxford, though he was not burned, yet he was long time troubled with the religious rout. Thomas Norice for the profession of the Gospell was by the Bishop condemned and burned in Norwich.1507. Elizabeth Sampson was conuented in the Consistorie of London for saying our Lady of Wildesdon was a burnt arst else and stock;1508. and if she could helpe men and women which goe to her on pilgrimage, she would not haue suffered her tayle to be burnt: and why would she or the Lady Crome that puppet, be worshipped? It were better to giue almes to the poore then to goe on pilgrimage, and that she called the Image of S. Sauiour, Sin Sauiour with Kite lips, and that she said she could make
as good bread as that which the Priest occupied, and that it was not the body of Christ, for that Christ could not be both in heauen and earth at one time: wherefore she was compelled to abiure. One Thomas, a Priest of Norwich, was burned in the village of Eckels. When he was in prison,1510 by perswasions, he was led away from his former opinions, wher∣fore for pennance he went to be burned vpon sharp hurdles made of Thornes. Ioane Baker of S. Margets in new Fish-stréete in London,1511 for saying to the Pa∣rish Priest of Bow, that the Crucifixe was not to be worshipped, and that she was sorry she had gone so many times on pilgrimage to S. Sauiour and others, being they were but Mammots and false Gods, and that she could heare a better Sermon at home then at Pauls Crosse; and that she said, the Lady Yong died a Martire, and that Sampsons Wife was punished for saying the truth, and that the Pope hath no power to forgiue sinnes, she was constrained to abiure. One Thomas Bingy, an old reuerend man, was burned at Norwich, because hee had not receiued the Sacrament in 14. yeares, and abhorred the Popish kind of ad∣ministration thereof. One Pope,1512. a Weauer in Eye, an old man, about the quarrell of the Sacrament, was martired. About the same time, one Peake was burned at Ipswich, because he gaue one of the Sacrament Cakes vnto a Dog, the Dog was burned in the fire with him, wher∣at he laughed, saying; they did the Dog great wrong, because he was not abiured: for it was the manner, that those which they called Heretickes, might bee saued if they would recant. Complaints of the Germaines to Maximillian the Emperour, against the Popes op∣pression. FIrst, the Popes think themselues not bound to obserue the Buls and priuiledges granted by their Predecessors, but will dispence with, and rebuke the same at the instance of euery vile person. That the election of Prelats is oft put backe, and the election of Presidentship of mony-places obtained with great cost: as the church of Spire and Hasels, whose Bull for the election of their President, is made fru∣strate in the life of him that granted it. That the greatest Ecclesiasticall Dignities, are reserued for Cardinals and No∣taries. That expectatiue Aduousons are graunted without number, so that much Mo∣ney is laid out for such Aduousons, and in going to Law for them: whereupon is this prouerbe; He that will haue an Aduouson at Rome, must haue 100. or 200. péeces of Gold for the obtaining thereof, that he need no to prosecute Law. That yearely Reuenues are exacted without mercy, for new Offices and new Seruants: That the rule of Churches, are giuen at Rome to them that are more fit to féeds Mules: That new indulgences are graunted with reuocation of the old, to scrape Mony together. That tenths are exacted, by pretence of making warre against the Turke and no expedition followeth thereon; and that the causes which might bee determined in Germany, are carried vnto the Court of Rome. That it is intollerable to the Germaines to pay so great Amats for the confir∣mation of the Byshops and Arch-bishops, where the Arch-bishop of Ments was wont to pay but 10000. Florens for his confirmation, It was after augmented to 20000. Florens, then to 25000. Florens, and at last to 27000. Florens: And in one Popes time, this was seauen times paid out of the Arch-bishopprick of Ments,
that the Arch-bishop hath beene faine to borrow it of Marchants, and to pay them againe, forced to exact a Subsidy vpon his poore Husbandmen, so that our people are brought to extreame pouerty, and mooued to rebellion to seeke their libertie, greeuously murmuring against the Cleargy. Iames, Arch-byshop of Ments said at his death, he was sorry for nothing, as for that his poore Subiects should after his death be forced againe to pay a greeuous exaction for the Pall: therefore let the Pope, as a godly Father, deale more fauourably with his Children the Ger∣maines, least men follow the example of the Bohemians, and swarue from him, especially let him be more fauorable vnto the Bishops, that die so soone one after an∣other: whereof there be fiftie Bishoppricks, besides many Abbots in Germany that are confirmed at Rome, otherwise Germany will want treasure and Munition of warre against their enemies, and to preserue peace, and minister Iustice to euerie man, and banish away murderers and theeues, and repaire Churches and Mona∣steries and Hospitals, and other necessaries. There were besides these 100.1522 grieuances, complained vpon to the Popes Le∣gats, in the raign of the Emperor Charles the fift, out of which we haue but touched certaine which we thought to be most effectuall. First, that many things are commaunded and forbidden by mens Constitutions, contrary to the commandement of God, as innumerable lets of Matrimony, and the vse of meats forbidden, which are created for mans vse, & are indifferently to be re∣ceiued with thanks-giuing: by which Constitutions, men are brought into bondage, vntill by Money they obtaine dispensations, so that Money maketh that lawfull to the rich, which is prohibited to the poore, by which snares of mens Lawes, great summes of Money are gathered out of Germany, and it bréeds priuate offences of the poore, when they see themselues intangled in these snares, onely because they haue not the thornes of the Gospell, for so Christ often calleth riches. That those that haue receiued Ecclesiasticall orders, being free from the punish∣ment of Secular Magistrates, doe presume in sinning, and are maintained therein by the principall estates of the Cleargy. They attempt the chastity of Matrons and Uirgins, and by gifts and flattering, they bring to passe, and by their secret confes∣sions, that many, which otherwise would liue honest, haue beene ouercome and mo∣ued to sinne: and often they keepe wiues from their husbands, and daughters from their Fathers, threatning them with fire and sword that require them. They of∣fend liuewise daily, in robbery, murders, accusing of Innocents, burning, rapine, theft and counterfeiting Coyne; besides many other mischiefes, and the Bishops cannot openly punish them, except hee disgrade them; and they are bound by their Charters, that they dare not punnish them; therefore necessity and Iustice doth re∣quire, that the said priuiledges of the Cleargy should bee abrogated, and that they should haue the same iudgement as the Layty for such offences. That Christians are excommunicated for vaine and prophane causes, for desire of filthy luker, whereby the weake in faith are burdened, and brought to dispaire, where a man ought to be excommunicated only for heresie. That there are so many holydaies, that Husbandmen haue scarce time to gather the fruits of the earth, which were brought forth with so great trauell: and vpon these holidaies innumerable offences are committed. If any fight or shed blood in any hollowed place, it is interdicted, and cannot haue any more seruice done in it, vntill all the Cittizens, with great pompe and ex∣pences, haue caused it to be now consecrated, which charge redound vpon the Laity, and none but the Suffragans can baptize Bels, who do affirme, that Bels so bap∣tized, will driue away euill Spirits and Tmpests. Whereupon many Godfathers are appointed: and such as bee rich, at the baptising, hold the Bell-rope, the Suffragan speaking for them, and they all answere, and name the Bell, it hauing a new Garment vpon it: then they goe to sumptuous banquets, to which the Gos∣sips are bidden, the Suffragan and his Chaplaines are sumptuously fed, and yet he must haue a reward, that in small Uillages 100. Florens are often spent about such Christenings.
The Officialls of the Arch-bishops for the most part are vnlearned men and of e∣uill conditions, taking thought for nothing but money, where they ought to correct the offences of the Laity, they burthen them with most grieuous offences, and spoyle and robbe them of their goods. When causes belonging to the temporall Court are handled in the Spirituall Court, the Eclesiastiall Iudges will by no meanes be intreated to remit them to their ordinary Iurisdiction, but if the Temporall Court hod any Pley which be∣longeth to the Spirituall Court, the Iudge shall be excommunicated, they say they may take prophane matters into their hands if the ciuill Magistrate bee negli∣gent in executing iustice, but contrariwise they will not suffer that the like order shall be kept with them by the ciuill Magistrate if they be negligent, and for their vnsatiable desire of money, they suffer and mainetaine vsury, and they take yearely pensions to suffer the Cleargy vnlawfully to dwell with their Concubines and beget children by them, this none can deny except hee will make himselfe as blinde as a mole, and if a man and his wife bee long one from another by rea∣son of warre or otherwise, the Officialls for money will suffer them to com∣mit adultery, calling it sufferace; not without great offence and contempt of matrimony. The Cannons Cathedrall and other Colleagiall Churches, which haue power to chuse their Superiour and Bishop they will choose none except he sweare and bee bound by déed insealed, that in no matter neuer so greiuous he shall be against them, and not to punish any of them if he do offend. The Bishops and Officials in some places doe not only suffer Priests to haue Concubines, so they pay for them, but compell chast Priests (which liue without Concubines) to pay tribute for Concubines, affirming the Bishop to be worthy of such money, whereby it is lawfull for them either to kéepe Concubines or no. These and many other Articles were offered vp to the Emperour, in the next assembly of the Princes and States at Wormes, the Archbishops and other States of the Clergy, but hitherto they haue not begunne to amend any thing. After Nicholas the fift succéeded Pope Calixtus the third, hee ordayned at noone and euening the bell to tole the Aues to helpe the souldiers that fought against the Turkes, and for that purpose ordayned the Feast of the transfiguration of Christ, solemnizing it with like pardons and indulgences as Corpus Christi day, and contrary to the Councels of Constance and Basell, hee decreed none should appeale from the Pope to the Councell, and he Canonized for Saints S. Edmond of Canterbury, with diuers others: after him succeeded Pius secundus, which was AEneas Siluius whch wrote the two bookes aforesaid of the Councell of Basill, at that time he was a man of indifferent iudgment, from which beeing Pope hee swarned, seeking by all meanes to abollish the bookes which before he had writ∣ten. The Prouerbs of this Pius. THe diuine nature of God may rather be comprehended by faith then by dispu∣tation. Christian faith is to bée considered not by what reason it is prooued but from whom it procéedeth. A couetous man cannot be satisfied with mony, nor a learned man with knowledge. Learning ought to be to a poore man as siluer, to noble-men as gold. and to Prin∣ces in steed of precious stones. An artificiall Oration moueth fooles but not wise men. Sutors in the Law be as birds, the Court is the bayt, the Iudges the nets, and the Lawyers the fowlers. Men are to be giuen to dignities, and not dignities to men.
The office of a Bishop is heauy, but it is blessed to him that doth well beare it. A Bishop without learning may be likened to an Asse. An euill Phisition, destroyeth bodies, but an vnlearned Priest destroyeth soules. Marriage was taken from Priests not without great reason, but with much greater reason, it ought to be restored againe. He dissolued certaine Nunnes of the orders of Saint Bridget, and Saint Clare, bidding them depart out that they should burne no more, nor couer a harlot vnder the vesture of Religion. The Epistle of Hulderick is abridged in this Booke before: therefore omit∣ted now. After this Pius secundus, succeeded Pope Paulus secundus, who was wholly set vpon his belly and ambition, voide of all learning, and a hater of all learned men: because his Daughter was reproched, for that shee was gotten in fornication Hes went about to reforme the Lawe of the single life of Priests, had not death preuen∣ted him. After him succeeded Sixtus the fourth, which builded in Rome Stewes of both kindes, and thereby got great Reuenues and Rents vnto the Church of Rome: He reduced the yeare of Iubile from fifty, to fiue and twenty yeares: hee institu∣ted the Feasts of the Conception, and of the presentation of Mary, and of Anna her Mother and of Ioseph; he canonized Bonauenture, and Saint Francis for Saints; he brought in Beades and made our Ladies Psalter, through Alanus and his Order: He made two and thirty Cardinals in his time. Petrus Ruerius was the first, who in two yeares spent in luxurious ryot 200000. Floreines, and was left six thousand in debt: This Pope licenced the whole Fami∣ly of the Cardinals to play the Sodmites the three hot monethes; Iune, Iuly, and August. After him succéeded Innocentius the eight, as rude & vnlearned as his predecessor: at Polus he caused eight men, and six women, with the Lord of the place, to be con∣demned for Hereticks, because they said since Peter none was true Uicar of Christ, but they onely which followed the pouerty of Christ. Hee condemned of heresie George the King of Boheme, and depriued him, made his whole stocke to be reiected, and gaue his Kingdome to Mathias King of Panonia. Pope Alexander the sixt succéeded him: Hee receiued two thousand Florens for poisoning Gemen the Turkes brother at Rome. Hee sent for help of the Turkes against the French King: He was vngratefull to the Cardinals that chose him: He commanded Marcinellus one of them to haue his hands and tongue cut off, for speaking against his vices. After sitting with his Cardinals, and the rich Se∣ators of Rome at dinner; his man vnawares bringing a wrong Bottle vnto him he with his Cardinals about him were poisoned: In his time the Angel which stood on the top of the Popes Church was beaten down with thunder; which thing see∣med to declare the ruine of the Pope-dome. Pius the third succéeded Pope: after him Iulius the second, passing all other in ini∣quitie, as he was going to warre, he cast the keyes of S. Peter into the riuer Tybris, saying, being the keyes of Peter would not serue him to his purpose, he would take himselfe to the sword of Paul. By this Iulius, partly with warre, partly with cursings, in seuen yeares 200000. Christians were destroyed: he got many Citties out of Princes hands by bloudshed: when he was made Pope, he tooke an oath to haue a Councel within two yeares; but breaking his Oath, he was occupied in warres: whervpon nine of his Cardinals de∣parted from him, and appointed a Councell at Psa, they alledged the cause, for that the Pope was forsworne, and that they had diuers other crimes to accuse him of, purposing to remooue him from his seate, which hee had obtained through bribes and ambition. Iulius commanded vnder great paine that none obeyed them; the next yéere he called a Councell. The French King seeing the Pope take part with the Uenetians against him,
called a Councell at Thurin, in which Councell they agréed, that the Pope ought not to war against any Prince without cause: and that it was lawfull for the King to defend himselfe against him, and that vniust excommunications were not to bée feared. After the King sent to the Pope the decrées of the Councell, who accursed the French King, with all his Kingdome: and the next yeare after this warlike Pope dyed. The lamentable handling of RICHARD HVN, who was priuily murdered in Lolards Tower in London. HVN had a Child died in his house,1515 the Curate claiming the bearing-shéet for a Mortuar, Hun answered; The Infant had no property therein, whereupon he was cited to the Spirituall Court; he sued the Curate in a Premunire, and then the Priests of mallice accused him of heresie, and brought him to Lolards Tower, where he was found dead, hanging by the necke in a girdle of silke. The Bishop of London called Richard Fitziames and Doctor Horsey, his Chancelor said e hanged himselfe; and the Temporalty said he was murdered: The Coronor summoned a Iury, and viewed the body, and many times they were with the Kings Councell, and heard their opinions, but in the mean season the Bishop burnt the dead carkase in Smithfield, to the abhomination of the people: but after the matter had beee heard by the Kings Iudges, and after by the Kings Councell, the King being pre∣sent; at las Doctor Horsey the Chancelor, and one Charles the Bel-ringer of Pauls, an Ioseph the Bishops Somner, were indicted of murder, and the said Charles be∣ing in the Tower of London, of his owne frée will said; that Maister Chancelor deuised and wrote with his own hand all the heresies that were laid to Huns charge, and that when Richard Hunne was slaine, Iohn Bell-ringer bare vp a Waxe Can∣dle, and I went next to him and Maister Chancelor came vp last, and Hunne was lying in his bed: and Maister Chancelor said, Lay hands on the Theefe, and so all we murdered him, and I put the girdle about his necke, and Iohn Bell-ringer and I did heaue him vp, and maister Chancelor pulled the girdle ouer the staple, and so Hun was hanged. The said Charles, told Iulian Little his maid, he killed him by putting a Wyer vp into his nose. Before that time the Chanceller commaunded to be put vpon Huns necke a great coller of Iron, with a great Chaine, which is to heauy for any man or beast to weare, and long to endure. And before Huns death, the Chanceller came into the Lolards Tower, and kneeled downe before Hunne, holding vp his hands and asked him for∣giuenesse▪ of all he had done and must doe to him. And on the Sonday before the night in which he was destroyed, he caused the Penitentiary of Paules to go to Hun and say a Gospell, and make for him Holy Water, and Holy bread, and giue him, which was done. The Bishop did all he could by word or writing to the King and Cardinals, and the Councell▪ to smother the matter, affirming that he hanged himselfe, and that the Iury was forsworne, and that the said Charles spoke that which he had done as be∣fore, by reason of durance of imprisonment: and that if the King and Councel should fauour this matter, he should not be able to goe abroad for Heretickes; and by the meanes of him, and the spiritualty, and money, the Chancelor caused the Kinges Atturney to confesse on his arraignement, him not to be guilty: so he escaped to Ex∣cester, and for shame neuer durst after come to London.
The Historie of Doctor VVESALIANVS. THis Wesalia was complained vpon to Piorherus Archbishop of Mentz, by the Thomists, which is an Order holding of Thomas de Aquino. The Bishop made him answer, he should giue vp all his workes and writings which he had made and preached. This being done, they deuided them amongst themselues, that euery man might finde out what errours and heresies they could. His Articles and opinions were these: That all men be saued fréely and through méere grace by faith in Christ Iesus: frée-will to be nothing; only that we should beléeue the word of God, and not the glosse of any man or fathers: that the word of God is to be expounded by the collati∣on of one place with another: that Prelats haue no authoritie to make lawes or ex∣pound the Scriptures, by any peculiar right more then another: that mens traditi∣ons, as Fastings, Feasts, long prayers, Pilgrimations, and such like are to be reiec∣ted. Extream vnction and confirmation to be reproued, confession and satisfaction to be reprehended: the primacy of the Pope he also affirmed to be nothing. Upon which Articles this Wesalia by a generall assembly was condemned, and his books to be burned. He bring required of the Councell, what he thought of the Uicar of Christ in earth? He said he beléeued that Christ left no such Uicar in earth: for ascen∣ding into heauen hee said, Behold I am with you &c. By which wordes hee decla∣red that he would substitute vnder him no Uicar in earth: for a Uicar signi∣fieth one who in the absence of the principall hath to doe the workes of the principall. And being asked his opinion of Indulgences and Pardons: he said he beleeued that the treasure-boxe of the merits of Saints could not be distributed of the Pope to others, because their treasure is not left here on earth: for it is written in the Re∣uelation, Their works follow them; and that their merits could not be applied to o∣ther men, for the satisfaction of their paine due to them: and he called Indulgences and Pardons pias fraudes fidelium. And being asked the question, he said, He thought that hallowing of Altars, Cha∣lics, Uestments, War Candles, Palmes, Hearbes, Holy water, and other diuine things, made them haue no spirituall power in them to driue away any Diuells, and that holy water had no more efficacie then other water, concerning remission of veni∣niall sinnes and driuing away Diuels, and other effects which the Schoole Doctors attribute vnto it. After these Articles were condemned by the Inquisitor and his assistants, hee said, As you doe with me, if Christ himselfe were here he might be condemned as an hereticke: but within thrée or foure dayes, with much perswasions, he was content to condiscend vnto them, and submit himselfe to their holy mother Church. Doctor VESELVS. THis Veselus and the foresaid Vesalianus were great friends: and when Vesalianus was condemned, this Veselus thought that the Inquisitor would al∣so examine him. He was so worthy a man, that the people called him Luxmundi. He reprehended the Papists doctrines of the diuision of Repentance, and Purga∣torie, and workes of Supererogation, and Pardons, and Indulgences, and dispu∣ted against them at Rome and at Paris; so that many of the Popes Court per∣swaded by him, began to speake more freely and more boldly against these matters
then himselfe did: hee disallowed the abuses of the Masses, prayers for the dead, and the Supremacie of the Pope, and that no such supreme head ouer all o∣thers ought to bee in the world: and that the Pope hath no authoritie to com∣mand, but so farre as truth goeth with him, and that hee ought not to preuaile by commanding, but by teaching that the Pope and the Prelates proceeding a∣gainst Christes Doctrine, are plaine Antichristes. Hee said those Priestes that had vowed not to marrie, and were not able to bee chaste might breake there vow. Hee said that their forefathers before Albert and Thomas did resist the Popes indulgences, and called them Idolatry, fraude and errour: in his Booke de subditis & superioribus; he disputeth against the Pope, and his Prelates: affir∣ming, except their Faith be sound, they are not to bee obayed, and that the Pope may erre, and men ought to resist him therein, that superfluous riches in the Cler∣gy doe not profit but hurt. That the Pope doth wickedly distribute the rents of the Church, and the Church itselfe to vnworthy Ministers by Symony for hir own profit: whereby it appea∣reth hee careth not for GOD nor the Church: That the precepts of the Pope and Prlates binde no farther then the precepts of physitions, that is so farre as they bee holsome, and stand with the truth of the word; that the Pope can command no∣thing vnder paine of deadly sinne, but what God commandeth: The Kingdome of heauen, is rather shut then opened by the Popes keyes, as the Pharisies did: that the hearers ought to discerne and Iudge the Doctrine of the Prelates, and not to re∣ceiue all things they say without due examination. Hee prophesied to Iohn Ostendorpius, well my Childe thou shalt liue to that day, that the Doctrine of these new and contentious Diuines of THOMAS and BONAVENTVRE, with other of that sort, shall bee vtterly reiected from true Christian Diuines: And hee often disputed of the righ∣teousnesse of faith, and why Saint Paul did so often inculcate that men be iustified by faith and not by workes, that all men were deceiued who attributed to Traditions any opinion of GODS worship, or that they could not in any wise be violated or broken. MARTIN LVTHER. THus proceeding in our Storie (by the ayde of Christ) we approach vnto the time of Martin Luther; at what time it pleased God by his great mercie to re∣forme the desolate ruines of religion by the industrie of this Luther, sent & set vp by the mightie spirit of Christ, to abolish the abuses and pride of Antichrist, which so long had abused the simple flocke of Christ. Many prophesies went before of this time, as of the aforesaid prophesie of Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage, that a hundred yeares come and gone they should giue ac∣count to God and him. This prophesie was in the yeare one thousand foure hundred and fifteene; so to this time one thousand fiue hundred and sixteene was iust an hun∣dred yeares. Philip Melancton maketh mention of a Monke about fiftis years before this time, named Iohn Hilton, in Thuring, who was cast into prison for speaking against cer∣taine abuses of the place and order where he liued: and being weake and feeble, hee desired the Warden of the Couent to respect his wofull case; he rebuked him for that which he had spoken: he said he had spoken nothing preiudiciall to their Monke∣rie or religion, but there shall come one in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and sixteene, which shall vtterly subuert all Monkerie, and they should neuer be able to resist him. The Angell falling from the high pinicle of the Popes Church into the Riuer Ty∣bris in the yeare 1500. might well portend the ruine of the Pope.
And the strange sight in Germany as before in the yeare 1501. of the crosses seene vpon mens garments, and figures of cownes of Thornes, and of Nailes, and of drops of bloud fell from heauen, that many daies after the women carried them vp∣on their garments, might declare the like. Likewise the other Dreame of Iohn Husse as before: how that some abolished the Images of Christ in his Church of Bethelem: but next day new Pain∣ters painted the same, and more Images of Christ, and fairer, and the Pain∣ters with the multitude of the people said, now let the Bishoppes and Priests put out these Images if they can, whereby much people reioiced, and I arising vp felt my selfe to laugh: he interpreted the painting of Christs picture, his prea∣ching of Christ which should be destroyed, and the other Painters new Preachers, whose Doctrines the Bishops and Priests should not bee able to resist. By these and such like prophesies it was euident, that the time of resto∣ring the Church was not farre, as also the hearts of the people, which at that time were inflamed so with hatred against the pompe and pride of Rome, and there contempt and derision beganne to arise on euery side, for there de∣estable doings were not so secret, but they were seene and abhorred. Where∣vpon grew many prouerbes of derision: as, what is this to see the world round about, for that these shauelling priests none may rout. It is a saying in Italy, as soone as a Priest receiueth rsure the Diuell en∣tereth into him. It is a saying in Germany, the neerer Rome the further from God: and that all euill beginneth in Nomine Domine, alluding vnto the Popes Bulles: and when Bulles come from Rome binde well pour purses. He that goeth once to Rome séeth a wicked man: hee that goeth twice knoweth him, he that goeth thrice bringeth him home with him. The Court of Rome neuer regardeth the sheepe without the wooll. Once were wooden Chalices, and golden Priests: now we haue golden Chali∣ces and wooden priests. Once Christians had blind Churches, & light hearts: now they haue light Chur∣ches, and blind hearts. Many are worshipped for Saints in heauen, whose soules bee burning in Hell. It was a saying in France foure hundred yeres before this time, that Satan was let loose at Rome to destroy the whole Church. Thomas Becke writ to the Cardinals, that it was a common Prouerb, that there is no right in Rome. By these and such like innumerable Sayings it doth appeare what Iudge∣ments the people had in those dayes of the Romish Clergy, which was of GOD as a secret prophesie, that Religion should bee restored shortly, as it came to passe in this yeare one thousand fiue hundred and sixteene: in which yeare Doctor MARTINE LVTHER first beganne to write: before whom Pi∣cus Mirandola, and Laurentius Valla, and last of all Erasmus Roterodamus had somewhat broken the way before, and had shaken the Monkes houses, but LV∣THER gaue the stroke, and plucked downe the foundation, all by opening one veine long hid before, wherein lyeth the touchstone of all truth and Doctrine: as the onely origine of our saluation, which is our free Iustification by our Faith on∣ly in Christ: the laborious trauels and constant preachings of this worthy man: because they are at large in the History of Iohn Sleydan, I neede not to stand thereon. Luther was borne in Isleben in Saxony, hee was a Student in the Uniuer∣sitie of Magdburge and Erford: where Veselus was an old man, as before is mentioned: of whom it seemeth to bee that Luther speaketh of an Old Man there, of whom hee learned many things touching Faith, and hee thus ex∣pressed vnto him the Article of remission of sinnes: wee may now generally be∣leeue onely, that sinnes are, and haue been remitted to some, as the Diuels beléeue
they were remitted to Peter, or Dauid, but that Gods expresse commandement is, that euery man should beléeue particularly his sinnes are forgiuen: and this is con∣firmed by Saint Bernard, in his Sermon vpon the annunciation, adde that thou be∣léeuest thy sinnes are forgiuen thée; this is the Testimonie that the Holy Ghost giueth thee in thy heart: and this is that the Apostle saith, a man is free∣ly iustified by Faith: by whose words Luther said hee was strengthned, and at last by prayer and reading he perceiued that Doctrine more euidently. After hee began to expound the Epistle to the Romanes and the Psalmes, so Diuinely that hee seemed to all the faithfull and learned a shining light, which beganne to cleere after the long cloudy sky; hee shewed the difference be∣twixt the Lawe and the Gospell: Hee confounded the errour that then raigned in the Schooles and Sermons, teaching that men merite remission of sinnes by their proper workes, and were iust before GOD by outward Discipline, as th Pharisies taught. But Luther expressely shewed that sinnes are freely re∣mitted for the loue of the Sonne of GOD, and that wee ought faithfully to em∣brace this bountifull gift: His life was likewise correspondent to his profession, whereby it appeared his words were not lip-labour, but proceeded from the heart, whereby many notable personages consented with him in his opinions: at this time Luther altered nothing in the ceremonies, but taught this onely doctrine as the principall of all others; to wit, the Doctrine of Repentance, of remission of sinnes, of Faith of true comfort in time of aduersitie, euery man receiued good taste of this sweet Doctrine. A Dominick Frier named Tecell, caused the Popes indulgences to be car∣ried and sold about the Coontre. Luther beeing moued with the blasphemous Sermons of this shamelesse Frier, set vp certaine positins against Indulgences openly vpon the Temples: This Frier hoping to obtaine the Popes blessing, as∣sembled certaine Monkes, and sophisticall Diuines, and commaunded them to write something against Luther, and in his Sermons, he taught that Luther was an heretick, and worthy to bee burned, and he burned Luthers positions, and the Sermon he writ against indulgences: This forced Luther to intreat more amply of things and to maintaine the truth. Frederick Duke of Saxony, in the presence of the Emperor, besought Erasmus, his opinion, if Luther had erred, he answered his opinions were good, but he desired he would moderate his stile. Now Luther, the plainer to expresse the doctrine of repentance, of remission of sinnes, of Faith and of Indulgences, Hee added also these matters; the diffe∣rence of Diuine and humane Lawes; the Doctrine of the vse of the Lords Sup∣per, of Baptisme and vowes; touching the Question of the Popes power, Ec∣kius was the Author thereof, to the intent to inflame the wrath of the Pope and Princes against Luther. Upon this the Supper of the Lord was published to be vsed in both kindes: pri∣uate Masse was omitted, and the Monasteries abandoned, but this alteration was by Carolastadius in the absence of Luther. He held in contempt the seditious Doctors of that time, as Monetarius and the A∣nabaptists, but especially the hored Bishops of Rome, who arrogantly affirmed that Saint Peter had not onely the charge to teach the Gospell, but to gouerne com∣mon-weales. In the yeare of our Lord one thousand fiue hundred and one and twenty,1521 Lu∣ther entred into Wormes being sent for by the Emperour Charles the fift King of Spaine, and Arch-Duke of Austrich, who in the first yeare of his Empire made an assembly of Princes in his regall Citie. And whereas Luther had published three yéeres before, certaine new propositions to be disputed on at Wittenberge, against the tyrannie of the Pope, which were torne in péeces and burned by the Papistes. Wherevpon, they began to tend to vprore, and yet Luther maintained openly his cause against the Clergy: Wherevpon by the solicitation of the Romaine Legates, LVTHER was sent for by the Herauld of Armes, with Letters of safe conduct by the Emperour and Princes: wherevpon hee came as before
and was visited of many Earles, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Priests and the Comminaltie, who frequented his lodging vntill night. He came contrarie to the expectation of many, and of his aduersaries; for they thought he would not come, because his bookes a few dayes before were condemned by publique proclamations, and many perswaded him not to submit himselfe to any danger: who answerd, since I am sent for, I am resolued to enter into Worms, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, though I knew there were so many Diuels to resist me, as there be tiles to couer the houses in Wormes. The fourth or fift day after he came to Wormes, he was enioyned at foure of the clock in the afternoone, to appeare before the Emperor, Dukes, and other estates of the Empire, to vnderstand the cause he was sent for. And standing before them, he was commanded silence vntill he was interrogated. Then was asked him, whether those books were his which were written in his name, a great company of them ly∣ing before them? and if they were thine, whether thou wilt recant, and reuoke them, and all that is contained in them, or rather meanest to stand to that which is written in them? Then Luthers Aduocate desired that the titles of the books might be read, which was done. Luther answered, Hée could not but acknowledge those bookes to be his, and that he would neuer recant any clause thereof: and for the iustifying of them he desired some time to consider, because there be questions of faith, and the saluation of the soule, wherein it were dangerous, and a rash thing to pronounce any thing without good aduisement. After they had consulted, the Officiall said, Though thou doest not deserue to haue opportunity giuen thée to determine, yet the Emperour of his méere clemencie gan∣teth thée one day: to morrow at this time thou shalt render before him; conditional∣ly, thou do not exhibit thine opinion in writing, but pronounce the same with liue∣ly voyce. At which time, when he was appointed to answer, he answered to this effect; All my books are not of one sort: there be some in which I haue so simplie and Euange∣lically intreated of the religion of faith and honest conuersation, that my very ene∣mies are compelled to confesse they be profitable, and worthy to be read of all Chri∣stians; and the Popes Bull iudgeth certaine of my books inculpable: if I should reuoke these, I should condemne that truth which friends and foes confesse. There is another sort of my books, which containe inuectiues against the Pope and doctrine of the Papists, as against those which haue corrupted all Christendom bodily and spiritually, with their pestiferous doctrine, and pernicious examples: for I cannot dissemble this, when the vniuersall experience and common complaint of all beare witnesse, that the consciences of all faithfull men haue béen most miserably in∣trapped, vexed, and most cruelly tormented by the Popes lawes, and doctrine of men: and further, their substance deuoured, specially in this famous Countrey of Germanie. If then I should reuoke these, I can doe none other but augment force to their ty∣rannie, and not only open windowes but wide gates to such an infernall impietie, the which will extend more wide and with more libertie then yet she durst, and by the testimonie of this my retractation, their insolent and malitious Kingdome shall be made most licentious, and lesse subiect to punishment, If I Luther should do this by the authoritie of your most excellent maiestie. The third sort of my books I haue written against priuat persons, such as with tooth and nayle labor to protect the Romish tyrannie, and deface true religion, which I haue taught and professed; I confesse, against these I haue been more violent then my profession required: if I should recant these, it would come to passe that tyranny and impietie shall raigne, spported by my meanes. Neuerthelesse, as Christ when he was examined of his doctrine before Annas, and hauing receiued a buffet of the Minister, said, If I haue spoken ill, beare witnesse of the euill. If Christ, which was assured he could not erre, refused not to haue testi∣mony giuen against his doctrine, how much more I that cannot but erre, ought ear∣nestly
to intreat, if any will beare witnesse against my doctrine: and if any can by Scripture conuince me of error, I will reuoke any manner of error, and be the first that shall consume my books with fire. I conceiue no greater delectation in any thing then when I behold dissentions stirred vp for the word of God; for such is the course of the Gospell, as Christ saith, I came not to send peace vpon the earth but a sword: I came to set a man at variance against his father. And we must thinke our god is terrible in his Councels against his aduersaries, lest the condemning of the word of God turne to a huge Sea of euils, lest the Em∣pire of this yong and bounteous Prince Charles bee lamentably and miserably be∣gun. I could amplifie this with authorities of Scripture, and Pharo, the King of Ba∣bylon, and the Kings of Israell, who then most obscured the bright Sunne of their glorie, and procured their owne ruine, when they attempted to pacifie their Realmes in this manner. Then the Emperours Ambassador checked Luther, saying, he had not answered to any purpose, and that he ought not to call in question things long time agoe defi∣ned by generall Councels: therefore they required whether he would reuoke or no. Then he answered, If I be not conuicted by testimonies of Scriptures and probable reasons (for I beléeue not the Pope nor his generall Councels) I will not nor may not reuoke any thing: for it is vngodly to doe against my conscience. Then the Embassador replied; if all such as impugne that which was decréed by the Church and Councels may once get this aduantage, to be conuinced by the Scriptures, we shall haue nothing established in Christndom. Luther answered, the Councells oft gainsaid themselues, and that he was able to proue that Councels haue erred: and night approaching, the Lords arose; and af∣ter Luther had taken his leaue of the Emperor, diuers Spaniards scorned and scof∣fed at him, hollowing and whopping after him a long time. After, there were bills set vp against Luther, and others with him: but this was subtilly done of his enemies, as it was thought, that there might be occasion offered to infringe the safe conduct giuen him, the which the Romane Embassador with all diligence indeuoured to bring to passe. When he was sent for to the Archbishop of Triers, they protested vnto him they sent not for him for disputation, but beningly and brotherly to exhort him: and they said, though the Councels had erred, yet their authoritie was not thereby abased, nei∣ther was it lawfull for euery man to impugne their opinions, and that Decrées, Traditions of men, and Ceremonies were established to represse vices according to the qualities of times, and that the Church could not be destitute of them. the trée is knowne by his fruits. These lawes haue much profited. And they alleadged that Luthers books would breed great tumult and incredible troubles, and that he abused the common sort, with his booke of Christian liberty, in∣couraging them to shake off their yoake, and to confirme in them a disobedience, and that now the world was at another stay then when the beleeuers were all of one minde. And albeit he had written many good things, and doubtlesse with a good spirit, yet now the Diuell hath attempted by wily meanes that all his works for euermore should be condemned: and by these last workes, it is easie to know the tree by the fruit, not by the blossomes, often repeating in his Oration that this admonition was giuen of singular good will and great clemncie: in the shutting vp of his Oration he added menasings, that if he would abide in his purposed intent, the Emperour would exterminate him his Empire. Luther answered to this effect, That the Councell of Constance had erred in con∣demning this Article of Iohn Hus, That the Church of Christ is the communion of the predestinat, and that we ought rather to obey God then man. There is an offence of faith, and an offence of charitie: the slander of charity consi∣steth in manners and life, the offence of faith and doctrine consisteth in the word of God; and they commit this offence which make not Christ the corner stone. And if Christs sheepe were fed with the pure pasture of the Gospell, and the faith of Christ
sincerely preached, and if there were good Eclesiasticall Magistrates who duely exe∣cuted their office, wee should not néede to charge the Church with mens tra∣ditions. And that hee knew and taught, that wee ought to obay the higher powers, how perursly soeuer they liued, so that they inforce vs not to deny the word of God. Then they admonished him to submit himselfe to the Emperour and the Em∣pires Iudgment, hee answered hee was well content, so that this were done with authority of the word of God, and that he would not giue place except they taught sound Doctrine by the word of God, and that St. Augustine writeth, hee had lear∣ned to giue honor onely to the Canonicall bookes of the Scripture, and touching other Doctors, though they excell in holinsse, and learning hee would not credit them vnlesse they pronouced truth, and St. Paule saith, proue all things, follow that which is good, and againe, if an Angell teach otherwise let him bee accursed, finally, hee meekely besought them not to vrge his conscience, captiued in the bands of the word of God, to deny that excellent word. After the Arch-bishop sent for Luther to his Chamber, and tould him for the most part that at all times holy Scriptures haue ingendred errors, and went about to ouerthrow this proposition that the Catholike Church is the communion of Saints, presuming of cockle to make wheate, and of bodily excrements to compact mem∣bers; Martin Luther and one Ierome Schuffe his companion reproued their follies. Hee was oftentimes assayled to reforme the censure of his bookes vnto the Em∣perour and Empire, or to the Generall Councell, which he was content to doe, so they would iudge them according to the word of God, otherwise not, aleaging the words of the Prophet, trust you not in Princes, nor in the children of men wherein is no health, also, cursed be hee that trusteth in men: and when newes came hee should returne home, hee sayd, euen as it hath pleased God so it is come to passe, the name of the Lord be blessed, and sayd, hee thanked the Emperour and Princes that they had giuen him gracious audience and graunted him safe conduct to come and re∣turne, and said hee desired in his heart they were reformed according to the sacred word of God, and sayd, hee was content to suffer any thing in himselfe for the Em∣perour, but only the word of God he would constantly confesse vnto the latter end: About a yeare after this, Luther dyed, when hee had liued almost thrée score and thrée yeares, and had béene Doctor thrée and thirty yeares, hee sayd at his death, O hea∣uenly, eternall and mercifull Father, thou hast manifested in mee thy deare Sonne Christ, I haue taught and knowne him. I loue him as my life, health, and redempti∣on, whom the wicked persecuted, maligned, and iniured, drawe my soule to thée, and sad thrise, I commend my spirit into thy hands, thou hast redéemed me, God so loued the world, that hee gaue his onely Sonne that all that beleeue in him should haue eternall life, and so he dyed, whose death was much lamented: In the yeare 1516. the aforesaid French King receaued from Pope Leo a Iubi∣le, and pardons to be sould, and so in England vnder the pretence of warre against the Turke, they perswaded the people, that whosoeuer would giue tenne shillings should deliuer his soule from the paine of Purgatory, but if it lacked any thing of tenne shillings it would profit them nothing: at that time Martin Luther was in Germany, who vehemently inueyed against these indulgences, aganst whom Iohn Eckius put forth himselfe, they disputed before the people, at last eyther of their ar∣guments were sent to Paris to bee iudged by the Sorbonists, the iudgment was long protracted: In the meane time Pope Leo condemned Luther for Heresie and excommunicated him, he appealed to the next Councell. Pope Leo commanded Luthers bookes to bee burned openly, Luther also burned the Popes decrees and Decretalls in the Uniuersity of Wittenberge. In the yeere 1517. the Pope hauing creaed one and thirty Cardinalls, thunder, and lightening so strake the Church where the Cardinalls were created that it stroke the little child Iesus out of the lappe of his mother, and the keyes out of St. Peters hands, being Images in the Church of Rome. In the yeare 1519. newes was brought to Pope Leo at supper, that the French∣men
were driuen out of Italy, hee reioycing said God hath giuen me thrée things, I returned from banishment with glory to Florence, I haue deserued to bee called Apostolike, and thereby I haue driuen the Frenchmen out of Italy, as soone as he had spoken hee was stricken with a suddaine feuer and dyed shortly after. What Godly man hath there euer beene for this fiue hundred yeares, either ver∣tuously disposed or excellently learned, which hath not disproued the misordered and corrupt examples of the Sea and Bishop of Rome from time to time vntill the comming of Luther, yet none euer could preuaile before the comming of this man, the cause to bee supposed is this, other men spake but against the pompe, pride, whoredome, and auarice of the Pope, Luther went further with him, charged him with his Doctrine, not picking at the rine, but plucking vp the roote, charging him with plaine Heresie, as resisting against the blood of Christ, for whereas the Gospell leadeth vs to bee iustified onely by the worthinesse of Christ and his bloud, the Pope teacheth vs to séeke our saluation by mans merits, and deseruings by workes, whereupon rose all the Religious sects, some professing one thing, some an∣other, euery man seeking his owne righteousnes▪ but Luther opened the eyes of many which before were drowned in darkenesse, to behold that glorious benefit, of the great liberty & frée iustification set vp in Christ Iesus, but the more glorious this benefit appeared to the world, the greater persecution followed the same, and where the Elect tooke most comfort of saluation, the aduersaries tooke most vexation, ac∣cording as Christ sayd, I came not to send peace but a sword, therefore so great per∣secutions in all the world followed after Luther, but in no place more then in Eng∣land as shall be declared. In the yeare 1517. one Cardinall Campeius was sent as Ambassador into Eng∣land, to gather money for warre against the Turke, the Cardinall of Yorke caused him to send to Rome that hee might be ioyned in Legacie with him, and sent him red cloth for his seruants, that he might come moe gloriously; at euery towne hee was receiued with procession, accompanied with Lords and Gentlemen: at Black heath the Duke of Northfolke, with a number of Prelates, Knights, and Gentlemen met him richly appareled, and in the way hee was brought into a Tent of cloth of gould, where b put on his Cardinalls Robes and tooke his Mule towards London, this Cardinall had eyght Mules laden, the Cardinall of Yorke, thinking them not sufficient for his State, sent him twelue mules more wt empty Coffers couered with red, the next day these twelue Mules were led through the Citty as though they had beene laden with treasure and other necessaries, to the great admiration of all men, but passing through Cheapeside, the people pressing to behold them, one of the Mules broke his coller and ranne vppon the other Mules, and they running together, ouer∣threw diuers of their burthens, and so there shewed the Cardinalls treasure, with great laughter and scorne o many, and the boyes and girles gathered vp peeces of meate and bread and rosted egges, horse showes and old store of such baggage, crying out, behold here is my Lord Cardinalls treasure, and the Mulers greatly ashamed, gathered vp their treasure as well as they could and went forward, then hee was brought to the Cardinall of Yorke, and then to the King, this Cardinall of Yorke, at all times at dinner and supper was serued with his Seruitoures kneeling, and many Noble men of England wayted vppon him, such was his monstrous pride. Such as were forced to abiure in King, Henry the eyght his raigne, after the first begining of Luther, because there is a great many, and nothing but their bare name ricited, I referre thee to the booke at large. IHon Coines alias Laueland was detected for contemning the Sacrament of the Altar, and because he receaued not at Easter, who after died at St. Martins. Robert Ward Shoomaker of St. Brids Parish in Fleetstreet detected by thrée wittnesses for holding opinions against the Sacrament of the Altar died in the Counter of redstreet.
Mathew Ward, Marchant-venturer, committed to the Counter in Breadstreet, for that he being Priest, was married, and kept company with his wife, and because he was a Sacramentary, and despised auriculer confession, and priuate Masses, and defended the Communion to bee ministred to the Lay people in both kinds, and maintaining that Priests ought to haue wiues. Herman Peterson, and Iames Gossen, Taylers, Duch-men, were committed to the Counter in Breadstréete, because the said Iames was not confessed in Lent, nor receiued at Easter, which he said came by the counsell of the said Herman, which councelled him rather to giue thrée or foure pence to the poore then to be shrieuen. Thomas Lancaster, imprisoned in the Counter in the Poultry, for bringing in pro∣hibited bookes. Iohn Wilcocke, a Scottish Frier, committed to the Fléete, for preaching against Confession and Holy-water, against praying to Saints, and against Purgatory; that Priests might haue wiues, and that the people ought not to pray for soules de∣parted. Also, Iohn Goodale was prisoner there. Nicholas South, committed to Newgate, for not being shrieuen in Lent, nor re∣ceiued at Easter. There was apprehended for heresie in Couentry, Robert Hatchets, Shomaker, one Wrigsham,1519 a Glouer; one Lansdll, a Hosier, with thrée others: and one Mistris Smith, a Widdow, because they taught their children and families the Lords praier, the Beleefe, and the ten Commandements in English; they were imprisoned, some in places vnder-ground, some in Chambers, and other places: after they were sent to Blackstocke Abbey, where they were imprisoned whilst they were there; their Children were sent for before one Stafford, Warden of the Gray-Fryers in Couen∣try, who examined them of their beleefe, and what errors their Fathers had taught them, charging them vpon paine of death, which their Fathers should suffer, that they no waies meddle with the Pater-noster, Creede, and ten Commandements in English, which is heresie. After their Fathers were brought againe to Couentry, where foure yeares before they had borne Faggots in the Church and Market. The Bishops and Doctors, they and the said Gentlewoman before them, who told them they should weare Faggts portraied in their cloaths, to signifie they were hereticks. Robert Hatchets answered, we desire no more but the Lords prayer, ten Comman∣dements, and Creed, in English, which I am sure euery Christian ought to haue. Wherupon they were iudged all to be burned, except the Gentlewoman, who was pardoned: and because it was euening, and her sight dim, the Somner offered to go home with her; as he led her, he heard somewhat rattle in her sleene, and taking it from her, and looking vpon it, he found it was the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and ten Commaundements in English; so he brought her backe againe to the Bishop, where she was presently condemned, and burned with the sixe before. There was another in Couentry, called Robert Silkes, which escaped from taking, and two yeares after was taken in Kent, and sent to Couentry and burned. Then the Sheriffes went to their houses, and tooke all their goods and Chattels to their owne vse, leauing their wiues and children nothing to liue by. Henry Voz and Iohn Escy, two yong Austen Fryers,1522 were disgraded, because they would not deny the doctrin of the Gospel, called Lutheranisme, & they thanked God for deliuering them from that abhominable priesthood, and making them Priests of his holy order, and that he had receiued them as a sacrifice of a sweet odor. The grea∣test error they were accused of, was, that men ought only to trust in God, because mē are Lyers. They went ioyfully to the place of execution, protesting they died for the glory of God, and the Gospell, beleeuing in the Sonne of God, saying; This is the day we long desired, being in their shirts, they ioyfully imbrased the stake, praysing God, singing Psalmes, and making testimony of their Faith. A Doctor seeing their iolity, bid them take heed so foolishly to glorifie themselues: they answered, God for∣bid we should glory in any thing but the Crosse of Christ: Another councelled them to haue God before their eies; they answered, We trust we carry him truly in our hearts. When the fire was kindled at their feete, one of them said; me thinkes you
strew Roses at my feete▪ Henry being demaunded whether Luther had seducd him? Yea said he, as Christ seduced his Apostles. He said also, that it was contrary to Gods Law, that the Cleargy should be exempt from the iurisdiction of the Christian Magistrate, and that Byshops haue no power but only to preach the word of God. They were burned at Bruxels, after their death their Monastery was dissolued at Antwerp. Their President was called Iacobus Lutherianus, he was forced to recant, but his mind renewed by the holy Ghost, and he fled to Luther. A Scholler borne at Abbevile, in King Lewis his Pallace, tooke away the Host from the Priest at Masse and brake it in peeces, and trode it vnder his feete. He was burned in the Swine-market, the peeces of the Host and the pauement where∣on it was trodden, were gathred and laid vp amongst the Treasures of the Pal∣lace. After Adrianus the sixt, who succeeded Iulius, came Pope Clement 7. whose life is in one verse described; Bellorum hic fomes, cunctorum lerna malorum,1523 he was poiso∣ned with diuers of his Cardinals & familiars with the smoak of torches. In his time wroe Nicholas Michiauellus, who proueth; that through y• ambition of Popes procée∣deth almost all euils & wars amongst Christian men, and that before the yeare 500. in all politick affaires, the Bishop of Rome euer obayed the Emperors and Kings, & that the Cardinals, in the first beginning of them, were nothing but Popish Priests: but after they inuaded the Temporall and Spirituall Iurisdiction, vsurping aboue Kings and Emperors. By thrée manner of waies the Romain Bishops did créep vp, by excommunications, by indulgences, and force of Armes. In this yeare the Turk wrote to the maister of the Rhodes, to deliuer vp the Isle as followeth. Solimanus Tsaccus, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, most mighty Emperor of Constantinople and Trapezuntis, &c. Unto the Reuerend Father Philip Vilerius Liladamus, great Maister of the Rhodes, to his Knights and the Communalty there: The pitty of my afflicted people, and your extreame iniuries, moue me. I command your speedy surrender of your Ile of Rhodes, you may obtaine Our Grace to de∣part with your riches: or if you will remaine in our Dominion, your liberty shall not be diminished, either in Religion, or paying of tribute: if you be wise, preferre peace before cruell war: if you be ouercome, looke for extreame cruelty, from which neither your force, forraigne ayde, nor your wals shall defend you. I sweare, by God, the Maker of Heauen and Garth, by the foure Histoographers of the Euangelicall Histories, by the 8000. Prophets that came from Heauen, and by our mighty God Mahomet, aboue all others to be worshipped, and the Spirits of my Father and Grand-Father, and by this my Sacred, Royall, and Imperiall Head, from our Palace at Constantinople. The very same yeare the Island of Rhodes was lost, and yéeled to the Turke, to the great hindrance of all Christendome. Henry Sudphen,1524 was desired of the Cittizens of Breame, to come thither to preach: when they had heard him, they hyred him to bee their Preacher: when the religious rout vnderstood thereof, they desired of the Senate that such an Here∣tike might be banished the Towne, which preached against the Catholike Church. The Senate sent for the head men of the Parish, and shewed them the complaint of the religious men. They answered; They knew no other but that hee was a learned honest Preacher: yet if they can proue that he taught any thing contrary to the Word of God, they will be ready with them to persecute him, otherwise wee will not suffer him of malice to be driuen away. The Senate certified the religios of this answer, then they certified the Byshop thereof, who sent two of his Councel to Breame for the Preacher: they receiued this answere of the Senators; That being he was hyred of the Church-wardens, and was not conuicted of Heresie, they could not obtaine of the Cittizens that he should be carried away. Wherefore they desired the Byshop, that he would send his learned men to dispute with him, and if he were conuinced he should be punished, else he should not depart. After when newes came that he preached more and more haynous mater against the religious. Then they admonished the Cittizens of Brame, into what ieoperdy their Com∣mon-wealth
might fall by their Preachers preaching, contrary to the decrées of the Pope and Emperour. Further, they said, the Preacher was the Prisoner of the Lady Margaret, and got Letters of her to require her Prisoner, but all would not serue. Then the Byshop decreed a prouinciall councell to be holden at Bream, which was accustomed to be at Bucksted, whereunto this Henry was called, but the Cittizens detained him at home: Then Henry gathered a summe of his Doc∣trine into a few Articles, and sent it with his Letters vnto the Archbishop, offe∣ring if he were conuicted of any error by the Word of God, he would bee readi to recant. But shortly after the religious set vpon the Church-porch the Bull of Pope Leo the tenth, and the Decrée of the Emperour, made at Wormes, not∣withstanding, he procéeded daily in preaching the Gospell. The Papists sent their Chaplaines to euery Sermon, to trap him in his wordes, whereby many of them were conuerted, and the greater part of those that were sent, did openly wit∣nesse his doctrine was Gods truth, against which no man could contend, and such as in all their liues they had not heard, and that they must beléeue the same, if they would be saued. At last this Henry was sent for by Letters, by the parishoners of Mldrophe, to preach the Gospell to them, and deliuer them out of the bodage of Antichrist, and because he had preached two yeare at Breame, and that there were men sufficiently instructed in the Gospell to build further: and that the Papists there, were for the most part vanquished, and that their folly was knowne euen to women and children, and that Diedmar liued without a Pastor in the midst of Wolues, he could not with a safe conscience deny their requests. When he came thither he was ioyfully reciued of the Parish-priest, and others: The Papists hearing hereof, before he had preached, stormed and fumed, especiallie the Prior of the Black Monastery, who went to the Officiall, to take councell what was to be done, least they lose their Kingdome, they tooke councell to withstand the beginning, that he might not haue leaue to preach, least their crafts and wickednes∣ses being laid open, it were folly after to resist, remembring what happened at Breame. The next day early in the morning, the Prior, with the Chancelor, went to the forty eight Presidents, being vnlearned men, and perswaded them what a seditious Fellow was come from Breame▪ and there-withall, if they would put him to death, what fauour they should haue of the Byshop of Breame, whereupon they decréed he should be put to death. Further, they had Letters from the forty eight Presidents vnto the Parish-priest, commaunding him vnder great paine, that he should send away the said Henry without preaching. The Priest maruelled at their meddling in such matters, being it belonged not to them, but the Parish-Priest onely to receiue and put out a Preacher: and shewing this to Henry, hee said he was sure hee must dye for the Gospell, and it was as neare to Heauen to dye there, as in another place: and being he was sent for, and was sure it would be gratefull to the people, he resolued to preach: and after the Sermon, the whole Congregation be wayled, called together the Priors, deliuered them the Letter from the Presidents, and that they should be fined a thousand Gildrons, if they suffered him to preach. They were moued, because it was against the custome of their Country as aforesaid: yet they concluded to keepe Henry for their Preacher, and defend him. In the after noone hee preached againe, the next day the Cittizens sent Ambassadours to the Presidents, offering to answer all causes for their Prea∣cher, and they declared what godly Sermons he had preached, and the Parish-Priest wrote to excuse himselfe, that Henry neuer intended sedition, but to preach the Word truly, and offered himselfe ready to answere for the saide Hen∣ry whensoeuer he should be called: most earnestli desiring not to credit the Monkes, which being blinde with hatred and Auarice, would suppresse the truth. After he Preached three forenoones and afternoones, and taught cleere∣lie Iustification to bee onely by Faith in Christ, and not by workes, they all reioy∣ced, and desired God that he would send such a Preacher to continue amongst them.
Finally, this Prior and others determined to take this Henry by night, and burn him before the people should know it. All the Presidents and others that were in this conspiracy, assembled in the Pa∣rish of the new Church, in the Councelors house. They assembled aboue 500. men of the Country, the husband-men would haue gone backe againe when they knw the matter, but the Presidents compelled them to stay, and to incourage them gaue them thrée barrels of Hamborow beare: at midnight they came in armour, the Monkes prepared them torches, they burst into the Parish Priests house, they tooke away all things, they fell vpon the Parish Priest, crying, kill the théefe; they pulled him by the haire of the head out into the dirt; then they runne vpon Henry, drew him naked out of his bed, bound his hands hard behind him, and drew him to and fro so vnmer∣cifully, that a cruell Persecutor of the word cryed, let him alone. When they had led him almost all night barefooted vpon the Ice, he desired a horse, because e was wea∣ry, and his féete sore cut, they laughed and mocked, saying; must we hire an Horse for an Hereticke. When they brought him to the fire to be burned, a woman offered her selfe to suf∣fer 1000. stripes, and to giue them much money, so they would kéepe him in prison vntill he might plead his matter before the whole Conuocation of the Country: then they were more mad, threw downe the woman, trod her vnder féet, and beat Henry vnmercifully; one strucke him behind the head with a Dagger, another struck him with a Mace, othersome thrust him in the backe and raines, as often as he began to to speake: The Chancelor cryed, go to boldly, good Fellowes, truly God is presnt with vs. A Franciscan Fryer came to confesse him, to whom Henry said; What iniury did I euer do you Brother? The Fryer said; neuer none, then hee saide, What should I confesse vnto you, that you can forgiue me? when the fire still was kindled, it would not burne, yet they satisfied their minds on him, striking and pric∣king him with all kind of weapons: then they gat a lather and bound him to it, and cast him into the fire. When hee beganne to pray, and repeate his Creede, one strucke him with his Fist, saying; Thou shalt first be burned, after prate while thou wilt: another trode on his breast, and bound his neck so hard to the Ladder, that the blood gushed out of his mouth, and the Ladder being propped vp with a Holbert, and slipping aside, the Holbert runne through him: then one strucke him with a Mace on the breast vntill he was dead, then they consumed the body in the fire. Maister Iohn Castellane,1525 Doctor of Diuinity, hauing truly preached the Word of God at Metz in Loraine, and many other Townes, and returning from thnce, was taken Prisoner by the Cardinall of Loraines men: Whereupon they of Metz tooke certaine of the Cardinals Subiects Prisoners, at length, by meanes from the Pope and otherwise, they were discharged, but Iohn Castellane was kept still Prisoner, and most cruelly handled, but hee perseuered very constant in the saide Doctrine: so they proceeded to the disgrading and condmning of him. Euery ignorant man may see the horrible blindnesse of these vnshamefull beasts, by their horible blasphemies and brutish subtilty, which they vse in their Processe against the Children of God: the preamble whereof followeth in effect. For as much as thou art accused before the Inquisitor, for maintaining false and erronious Doctrine, and of thine owne good will hast confessed it: remem∣bring also, the lamentale admonions and charitable exhortations which wee made vnto thee in the Towne of Metz, which you, like the Serpent Aspis haue re∣fused to heare, and considering thy answeres to our Intergatories, in the which by diabolicall Art thou hast hid and kept backe the truth, and followed the ex∣ample of Caine, in denying to confsse thy mischeeuous offence, and considering the great number of witnesses and worthy men that deposed against thee, before the Reuerend man, Doctor Sauin, Inquisitor, and hauing communicated our pur∣pose vnto diuers most excellent Maisters and Doctors, which haue subscribed there∣vnto. Whereby it appeareth, y• thou Iohn Castellane hast oftentimes in diuers places
openly taught many erroneous propositions full of the heresies of Luther, against the Catholike Faith, the verity of the Gospell, and the holy Apostolike seate, & so ac∣cursedly looked back and turned thy face, that thou art found to be a lyer before Al∣mighty God: therefore according to the common Law, such as through the sharpe darts of their venemous tongue doe peruert the Scriptures, and goe about with all their power to peruert and corrupt the soules of the faithfull, should bee corrected with most cruell vengeance, to feare others to attempt the like, and that all may re∣ioice in Christian concord, all take example of goodnes: therefore hauing God onely before our eyes, and surely considering what measure wee doe mete vnto others, God will measure the like to vs againe: wee therefore pronounce sentence defini∣tiue, and Iudge thée excommunicate with the great excommunication, and to be cul∣pable of treason against the diuine Maiestie, and a mortall enemy of the Catholicke Church, and verity of the Gospell, and to be a manifest Heretick and follower of the execrable cruelty of Martin Luther, a stirrer vp of old heresies all alrea∣dy condemned, and so they disgraded him, and deliuered him to the seculer Iudge. This done, the Bishop, after a certaine manner, intreated the seculer Iudge for him for the loue of GOD, and the contemplation of the gifts of pietie and mer∣cie, for the respect of our prayers, that you will not doe any thing that shall be hurt∣full vnto this miserable man, or tending to his death, or maiming of his body: then the seculer Iudge condemned him to be burned quick, which he suffered most constantly, that not onely many ignorant people were thereby drawne to the knowledge of the verity, but a number, which had some taste thereof, were greatly confirmed. Iohn Oecolampadius reporteth,1525 how a Prince murdered a good Pastor for preaching of the Gospell, pretending hee was in a commotion: hee sent a cuell Gentleman with a number of men to hang this Priest: they came to the Priestes house and saluted him: The Priest made them a great banquet, and bad them eate and drinke chéerefully: After dinner the Gentleman told his followers they must hang the Priest: They said, God forbid we should doe such a crime to hang one that hath intreated vs so gently, his good chéere not yet disgested in vs: The Priest desi∣red them rather to carry him to prison to there Prince, and propounded vnto him the gentlenes that he had alwaies vsed to the Gentlemen of the Countrey in spending his goods to entertaine them, and aduertised him of the eternall toments which would follow an euill conscience, protesting he had faithfully taught the Gos∣pell, and the cause hee had the ill will of some, was for sharpely and openly re∣prouing the horrible vices of the Gentlemen: The Gentleman told him he should gaine nothing by preaching in such sort, for the Prince had commaunded him to hang him, whose fauour hee would not loose, to saue his life, so they put him to death. Oecolampadius reporteth of another godly Priest that when he came to the true vnderstanding of the Gospell: O God, said he, who would haue thought it that so many learned and holy men, haue wandred out of the right way, and haue so long time béen wrapped in errors, or that the holy Scriptures had been defiled with such horrible abuses, for hee neuer vnderstood before that the Gospell was the vertty of God, because it containeth much matter touching the crosse, persecution, & ignomy: after this good Pastor began to preach the Gospell there, but many which repined, that the Gospell should be freely preached, caused him in the night to be taken by cer∣taine souldiours, which bound him hand & foot, and set him vpon a horse, and led him vp & down by a great rope before his wife and children, & were not moued with their grieuous sighes and teares: after they had kept him long in prison, & that he had in∣dured most terrible torments, as well by his priuy members, as other parts, they iudged him to deth, hauing no other cause against him, but that he had maried a wife: when the Fryers troubled him about Confession, he said he had already confessed his sins vnto the Lord Iesus, nothing doubting but that hee had receiued absolution of his sins; and I said he shall this day be an acceptable sacrifice vnto my Sauior Iesus
Christ: for I haue done nothing for which I am condemned displeasing to God, which giueth me a a quiet conscience, and let them which thirst after blud, consi∣der that they offend him, who truely iudgeth the harts of men, who saith vengeance is mine and I will punish: I desire to die, I doe not much shorten my time, for I am so leane that my skin is scarce able to couer my bones, and I reioice in nothing but the Crosse of Christ Iesus. Some could not abide these exhortations, and made signes to the hangman to cast him into the Riuer: after he was cast downe the Riuer was red, which was a token that innocent bloud was shed: they that were present were greatly amazed therat, and returned home pensiue. An other History by Oecolampadius: an honest man, when hee had wrongfully suffered most intollerable torments, for being in a commotion, and was condemned. A Frier being brought vnto him, when he was taken out of the dungeon, and see the Frier, Hée cryed with a loude voice; O miserable wretch that I am: now am I betrayed my last houre is at hand: The dreame which I dreamed this night will come to passe. The Frier plucking out a woodden crosse, said poore man confesse thy sinnes in mine eare, and after thou hast receiued absolution at mine hands, doubt not but this day thou shalt goo strate to the Kingdome of Heauen: Who answered, thou wicked Frier get thée away from me, for I haue long bewailed my sinnes before the face of Christ, who hath forgiuen me, I haue no need of thy abso∣lution, which thou thy selfe doest not vnderstand. Thou shouldest long since haue amended thy wicked and hpocriticall life: I know what thou art, thou playest the Ape with mee, thou hast a subtle heart which hath deceiued much people: if thou hast any comfort out of the Gospell let mee haue it: if not, get thée away with thy portas: whereat the Frier was confused: The hangman wiser then the Frier, bid him reade him something of the Passion: whereat he would take great plea∣sure. The foolish Frier had no other consolation but to hold the Crucifix of wood, before him, saying bhold thy Sauiour which died for thée; Looke on him and thou shalt bee comforted. Hee answered, get thee from mee thou naughty person, this is not my Sauiour; my Sauiour dwelleth in Heauen, in whom I trust that he will not deliuer my soule to eternall death: The Frier crossed himselfe and departed. The Bishop of Constance caused Iohn Howghly a priest to bee burned at Mers∣purge,1526 for that he would not allow the Popes Doctrine in all points. Iohn Frederick, heyre to the Prince, and Elector of Saxony, was contracted by writings to the Lady Katherine, the Emperours Sister: But when Reli∣gion was altered in Saxony, they swarued from their Couenants, and the Emperor Ambassador said, there was no promise to be kept with hereticks. In this yeare, beeing the seuentéenth yeere of King Henry the eight his raigne, there was great commotion in Suffolke, and Norfolke, by reason the Cardinall had sent commission in the Kings Name that euery man should pay the sixt part of his goods: but it was appeased by the Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke, and the pai∣ment released by the King. This yeare the Cardinall tooke vpon him as the Kings chiefe Councellor: Hee reformed the house and made new Officers in the house of the Duke of Richmond. Also hee established a Councell, and established another hushold for the Lady Mary, then being Princes of the Realme. Hee made the King beléeue hee need take no paines: insomuch that the charge of all things was committed vnto him: he gaue the King the Lease of the Mannor of Hampton Court: and the King licenced him to lye in his Mannor of Richmond, which K. Henry 7. loued so well, whereat some grudged, saying, sée a Butchers Dogge lye in the Mannor of Richmond: His pride was so high he regarded no man, and was hated of all men. Hee came to Paules the eleuenth of Ianuary, a number of Bishops, Abbots, and Doctors attended him: there hee sate in his Cloth of Estate of rich Cloth of Gold, and Frier Barnes for heresie, and two Marchants for eating flesh on Fri∣day, bare Faggots before him.
And this day the Bishop of Rochester preached in the reproofe of Martine Lu∣ther, and in the honour of the Pope and his Cardinals, insomuch that hee forgot the Gospell he preached vpon: his Sermon was much commended of the Cardi∣nals and Bishops. This yeare the New Testament was first translated into English, and brought into this Realme, by William Tindall. This yéere the good Lodouicus King of Hungary, pursued by the Turk, was faine to take the Marsh, where with his horse falling into a Bogge was swallowed vp and rowned, his body afterwards found, was royally buried in Uienna. George Carpenter of Emering was burned in Monuchen of Bauaria,1527 for main∣taining of these foure Articles. First, that he did not beleeue that Priests could for∣giue sinnes; neither that a man could call God out of heauen, neither that God was in the bread that the Priests hang vpon the Altar: Fourthly, that the element of water in Baptisme, doth not giue grace: Then one asked him whether he feared not his Iudgement, neither loued his Wife and Children, and if he would recant he should returne to them, and be pardoned. Wherevnto hee answered, my wife and Children are so dearely beloued vnto mee, that they cannot be bought from mee for all the Duke of Bauaria his riches: But for the loue of my Lord God, I will willingly forsake them: as hee was going to execution, one bid him beleeue the Sa∣crament of the Altar, and not to beleeue it to be onely a signe. Hee answered, hee beleeued the Sacrament to bee a signe of the body of Christ offered for vs: Then he said why doest thou so little esteeme Baptisme, beeing Christ was baptized: Hee answered not the baptisme of Christ, but his suffering, was our Saluation: Him this day will I confesse before the world: Hee is my Sauiour in him I will beléeue: Then one bid him put his trust in God, and say if I erre, truely I re∣pent: To whom hée answered, God suffreth me not to erre: Then one bid him not to hazard the matter, but to choose some Christian brother not to confesse thy self vn∣to, but take Councell off: He said it would be too long: Then one said, Our Father: He answered, truely thou art our Father, and no other, this day I trust to be with thée. The other said, Hallowed be thy Name: He answered, my God how little is thy Name Hallowed in this world: Then he said, thy Kingdome come: He said let thy kingdome come this day vnto me, that I may come to the Kingdome: the other said: Thy will be done in earth as in heauen: He said for this cause, O Father I am now héere that thy will may be finished, and not mine: Then the other said, Giue vs this day our dayly bread: He said th' onely liuing bread Iesus Christ shall be my food: The other said, And forgiue vs our trespasses as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs: He answered, with a willing minde doe I forgiue all men, friends & aduersaries: The other said, Leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill: He answered O my Lord without doubt then shalt thou deliuer me, for I haue laid my hope onley on thee. Then one said doest thou think it necessary after death to pray for thée or say Masse for thée: He said so long as the soule is in my body pray for me that God would giue me grace & patience, with all humility to suffer death with a true faith: but when my soule is from my body I haue no néed of your prayers: He was desired of certaine to shew some signe of beliefe when he was in the fire: Hee answered, so long as I can speake, I will call vpon Iesus; I haue neuer séene the like constancie of a man, his countenance neuer changed colour: he went chéerefully to the fire and said this day will I confesse my God before the whole world: when he was in the fire, he stil ryed Iesus, Iesus; and so ioyfully yéelded vp his spirit. Leonard Keyser of Bauaria was burned for the Gospel, h being a Student Wittenberge; was sent for by his Brothren, if euer hee would sée his father he should come with spéed: and as he was comming, by the commandement of the Bishop of Passaw, he was taken by his Mother and Brethren: His Articles were first that faith iustifieth: secondly, that works are the fruits of faith: Thirdly, that the Masse is no Sacrifice or Oblation: That Confession, Satisfaction, the vow of Chastitie, Purgatory, difference of dayes: for affirming onely two sacrifices,
and inuocation of Saints: Hee maintained three kindes of Confssion; the first of Faith, which is alwaies necessary: the second of Charitie, which serueth when any one doth offend his neighbour, hee ought to reconcile himselfe againe. Mat. 18. The third is to aske Councell of the ancient Ministers of the Church: sentence beeing gi∣uen against him, he was disgraded, he was rounded and shauen, & clothed in a short gowne, a round Cap set vpon his head all cut and iagged, and so deliuered to the seculer power; As hee was led to burning, hee said, O Lord Iesu remaine with me, sustaine and help me, and giue me force and power: In the fire he cryed O Lord Iesu, I am thine, haue mercy vpon me and saue mee; this was the blessed end of that good man. In this yéere the Senate & people of Berne, which are most of power amongst the Switzers, assigned a Disputation within the Citie, and called vnto the same the Bishops of Constans, Basil▪ Sedne, and Lozanna, warning them to come themselues, and bring their Diuines, or else lose their possessions: they appointed that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament should onely bee of autho∣ritie, granting safe conduct to all that would come thether, that there should bee no chiding, that euery one should speak his minde freely, and in such sort that it might be written, and whatsoeuer should be there agreed vpon, should be ratified, and ob∣serued throughout all their Dominions; there were ten Articles to be disputed vpon as followeth. 1 The true Church wherof Christ is head, proceedeth of Gods Word, perseue∣reth in the same, and heareth no other man voice. 2 The same Church maketh Lawes without Gods word, therefore we are not bound to mens traditions, but in as much as they be consonant to Gods word▪ 3 That Christ only hath made satisfaction for the whole world, to say there is ∣ny other way to saluation, or meanes to put away sinnes, is to deny Christ. 4 That it cannot be proued by Scriptures that the body and bloud of Christ is really and corporally receiued in the Sacrament. 5 The Masse, wherein Christ is presented & offred vnto his Father for the quick and the dead, is against the scriptures, & a contmely to the sacrifice of Christ. 6 That onely Christ is to be called vpon as Mediator to God for vs. 7 That in the Scriptures there is no place after life wherein soules should b purged: wherefore prayers, ceremonies, yearely Dyrges and obits, which are besto∣wed vpon the dead; also lampes, tapers, and such other things profit nothing. 8 That no Images should be set vp to bee worshipped p the Scriptures, and therefore they are to be taken downe in Churches. 9 That Matrimony is prohibitd to no kind of men by the worde: but euery whoremonger is by the word sequestred from the Communion of the Church. 10 That single life vnchast & filthy is most vnséemely for priesthood. The Bishops would not come but sent their Diuines: then the disputation was begun by Swinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Blaurer, and diuers others de∣fended the Conclusions. Amongst others, Conrado Treger an Austine Fryer of great fame impugned them: who at last when hee sought for help besides the Scriptures the Masters of the Disputations would not suffer him so to doe: Wherefore hee departed out of the place, the disputations ended, the foresaid con∣clusions were approued, by the common consent of the most part, and were ratified & obserued in Bere, and proclaimed by the Magistrate in sundry places thereabouts: and Masses, Altars, and Images abolished in all places, and immediately after was the like reformation at Constance, and after at Geneua. Pope Clem: 7. in this yéere conspired with the Uenetians, & raised a great army, and proclaimed war against the Emperor about the possession of Italy: the Empror sent his army to Millaine, & tooke the City & Castle; marching towards Rome, took it & spoiled it, & besieged Pope Clement, with his Cardinals in mount Adrian, and took the pope, who could not be ransomed vnder 40000. Floreines: This Pope bare great hatred against the Family of the Columni, because it was imperiall, and threatned the Cardinall thereof to take away his Cardinals hat, who answered,
if he so did, he would put on a helmet to ouerthrow the Popes triple Crowne. Our Cardinall of England hearing of the captiuitie of his father the Pope, stirred vp the King all he might fight with the Emperour, and defend the Faith, and he should receiue a great reward of God. The King answered he was sorie for it: but where you would haue me defend the Faith; I assure you this warre is not for th Faith, but for temporall possessions: I and my people can by no meanes rescue him; but if any treasure may helpe him, take that which seemeth to you conuenient. Then the Cardinall made out of the Kings treasure twelue score thousand pounds, which he carried ouer the Sea with him: then the Cardinall sent his commission to all Bishops, commanding fastings and solemne processions to be had, wherein they did sing the Letany after this sort: Sancta Maria ora pro Clemente Papa: Sancte Pe∣tre, ora pro Clemente Papa &c. The Cardinall passing the Seas, went out of Callice with the Bishop of London, the Lord Sandes the Kings Chamberlaine, the Earle of Derby, Sir Henry Gilford, Sir Thomas Moore, with many other Knights and Esquires, to the number of one thousand and two hundred horses, hauing in his carriage foure score Wagons, and threescore Mules and Sumpter Horses: he bestowed great summes of money in hy∣ring Souldiers, and furnishing out the French Kings armie, and appointed certain English Captains, in the K. of Englands name to go against the Emperor to rescue the Pope: hee caused Clarentius king at Armes, to ioyne with the French Herald, openly to defie the Emperor; wherupon ensued great troubles in England, Spain, the low Countries of Flanders, Brabant, and Zeland: all which his priuie policies and treasons, were shortly after known to the King. In this yeare a Iew in Constantinople was baptized and became Christian,1528. which thing vehemently exasperated the Turks against him: and fearing it should be some detriment to their Mahumeticall law, they sought to kill him, which they did, and cast his dead carkasse into the stréets, commanding that none should burie it. Wherin the glorie of Christ appeared: for the dead corps lying there nine daies, was as fresh coloured, without corruption or smell, as if it had bin aliue; whereat the Turks being astonished, took it vp and buried it. The Cardinall hauing defied the Emperour, as before, and made him displeased with the King of England, he further whispered in the Kings eare, that the Empe∣rour had euill intreated and imprisoned the Kings Embassadours in Spaine: by which meanes the Emperours Embassadour in England was imprisoned, and his goods seised, vntill Letters came to the contrarie, and then he was set at li∣bertie. When the Embassadour complained vnto the Cardinall, hee layed all the fault vpon Clarentius, and that Clarentius had defied the Emperour without the Kings knowledge, by the request of the Herald of France, and that at his returne he should lose his head at Callice. Clarentius hearing hereof, came priuily into England, and was brought vnto the King before the Cardinall knew it, to whom he shewed the Cardinalls commission, and their gentle intreatie. When the King heard hereof, and had mused a while, he said, O Lord Iesus, hee that I trusted most told me all these things contrary: well Clarentius, I will be no more so light of credence. And from thence the King neuer put any more trust in the Cardinall. Some write that the Cardinall did beare the Emperour such malice, because when the Pope was imprisoned, as before, the Cardinall wrote vnto the Empe∣rour to make him Pope; and he sent him an answere that pleased him not: where∣upon he writ menacing Letters vnto him, that if he would not make him Pope, hee would make such a rufling betwixt Christian, Princes as was not this hundred yéers before, to make the Emperour repent, yea, though it cost the whole Realme of England: the Emperour returned him answere, bidding him looke well vnto it, lest through his doings it should cost him the Realme of England in∣deede. Thus King Henry came to the Title of Defender of the Faith. When Luther
had vtterd the abomination of the Pope and his Clergie, and diuers books were com into England. Our Cardinall to find a remedie for it, sent to Rome for this title of Defender of the Faith. After, the Uicar of Croydon preached, that the K. would not lose it for all London and twenty miles about it. When this glorious title was come from Rom, the Cardinall brought it to the King at Gréenwich: and although the King had read it, yet in the morning were all the Lords and Gentlemen sent for that could be, to come and receiue it with honor. In the morning the Cardinall went tho∣rough the backside to the Frier obseruants, and som went round about, and met him from Rome: part met him halfe way, and some at Court gate; and the King met him in the Hall, and brought him into a great chamber, where was a seat prepared on high for the King and Cardinall. Whilst the Bull was read with all pompe, wise men laughed: then the King went into his Chappll to heare masse, the Cardinall being inuested to sing masse: the Earle of Essex brought the bason of water, the Duke of Suffolke gaue the asasy, the Duke of Northfolk held the Towell, and so he prceeded to Masse. When Masse was done, the Bull was againe published, the Trumpets blew, the Shawmes and Sackbuts played in honor of the Kings new stile; and in the midst of dinner the Heralds proclaymed his new stile: this was en∣ded with great solemnity. Not vnlike to this was the receiuing of the Cardinals hat, when one had brought it to him to Westminster vnder his cloak: he clothed the messenger in rich aray, and sent him back to Douer, appointed the Bishop of Canterbury to méet him, besides an other company of Lords and Gentlemen: when it came to Wstminster, it was set vpon a cubbord with Tapers about it: the greatest Duke in the land must curtsi thereto, and to him empty seat. And thus much touching Cardinall Wolsey. He founded a certaine new Colledge in Oxford; for furniture whereof he gathe∣red together all the best learned hee could heare of; amongst whom were Clerke, Tindall, Frith, and Tauerner, who after were found to be hereticks (as they call them) and were cast into a prison of the Colledge where salt fish lay, through the stinke whereof they being infected, the said Clerke, being singular in learning, died. One Simon Grineus hearing a Sermon of Faber Bishop of Uienna,1529. after the Ser∣mon he followed Faber, and declared vnto him that of good zeale he had somewhat to say to him, and said, he was very sorie that a man of such learning should confirme such nelious errours, which might be refuted by manifest Scripture. Poly∣carpus vsed to stop his eares when he heard any monstus errours, how then do you think he would haue heard you reason what the Mouse did eate when she gnaweth the consecrated Host? who would not bewayle the blindnesse and ignorance of the Church? Then Faber asked his name: he tolde him his name was Grineus; and he fained he was sent for by the King, and had no leisure now to reason vpon this mat∣ter, and shewed that he was desirous of his acquaintance, and intreated him, both for his owne matter and the Common-welth, he would come the next day vnto him. He willingly promised him. When he was returned to supper, a stranger, an old man of great grauitie told him, the Sergeants would by and by come vnto the lodging, sent by he King, to carrie Grineus to prison, whom Faber had accused vnto the King, exhorting Grineus straight way to depart the Town without delay, and so departed. Thn we tooke Grineus and carried him vnto the Riuer Rhyne, and conueyed him ouer in a Boat, and returned. In the meane time the Sergeants were at the lodg∣ing, wherefore we iudged that this cruell purpos was frustrate by Gods prouision; therefoe let vs giue thanks to God, which giueth his Angels to be our kéepers, and with quiet minds fulfill the office of our vocation. Ptrus Flistedius, and Adolphus Clarbachus, singular Diuines, for differing from the Papists touching the supper of the Lord, with diuers other of the Popes tradi∣tions and ceremonies, by the Archbishop and Senate were burned in Cullen: this was by reason som diuines had preached that the punishment & death of such as these were, would pacifie the wrath of God, which at this time plagued Germany; for the sweating sicknes did then mortally rage and raigne throughout all Germany. In this yeare Solymanus the Turkish Emperour passed through Hungarie, with
an Armie of fourtéene thousand fighting men, and came into Austrich, where he exer∣cised extreame crueltie; some he bereft of sight, some he rent and mangled in pieces, cutting off their noses, eares, handes, armes and priuie members, deflouring Uir∣gins, cutting off womens paps, openings their wombes with childe and burning the yong babes: then he besieged Uienna, and assayed to vndermine it, and the wals be∣ing ourthrowne, he assaulted it desperatly; and seeing the Souldiers within desend the breach valiantly a month, he brake vp the siege, and returned with great dishonor. The Emperour came to Strawsborough,1530. and commanded the Protestants to be present at Masse which they refused to do: and he called the Prince Elector of Sax∣ony to beare the Sword before him at the Masse; and the Diuines resolued, because he was sent for, to beare the Sword and not to heare Masse: therefore hee might there present himselfe. There was an Assembly holden, and diuers Decrées made against the Protestants; and Faber and Eckius forged confutations against them, with diuers other troubles. At this time the new Testament was newly translated, and imprinted by Willi∣am Tindall; wherewith the Bishoppe of London was grieued, and deuised how he might destroy it. The Bishop being at Antwarp, and desirous to bring this pur∣pose to passe, communed how he would buy the New Testaments. One Packing∣ton, which was a fauourer of Tindall, but made the Bishop otherwise beleeue, said, My Lord, I can doe more in this matter then most Merchants: for I know them that haue bought them of Tindall, and for money I will assure you to haue euery booke of them that is printed and vnsolde. Hee ade him get them, and hee would pay for them: for he intended to burne euery booke of them at Paules Crosse. Hee hereupon declared the matter to William Tindall: so the Bishop had all the bookes. After this Tindall corrected the same againe, and had them the second time newly reprinted; so they came abundantly into England. The Bishop sent for Packing∣ton to know the reason thereof: he said he bought all that were there, and these were new printed. One George Constantine was apprehended by Sir Thomas Moore L. Chancelor of England for heresie. My Lord asked him who it was that maintained Tindall Ioy, and a great many more of you? I know they cannot liue without helpe; and thou being one haddest thy part thereof: I pray tell me who helpeth them thus▪ My Lord, quoth Constantine, I will tell you truly: It is the Bishop of London; for he hash be∣stowed amongst vs a great deale of money vpon New Testaments to burne them, which hath bin, and yet is, our only succour. By my troth, quoth Moore, I think the same: I told the Bishop so much before. The Townes of Zurick and Berne being at contention with the Townes of the Cantons, stopped all the Straits that there could no victuals passe vnto them; wherefore they prouided a power to come against them of Berne and Zurick, and fought a great conflict with them: in which fight Swinglius, being Minister of Zu∣rick, was slain, and after his dead corps taken by his enemies and burned: when his body was burned to ashes, his heart was found in the midst of the fire whole, which could not be without the great miracle of God. The like happened after to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. In this yeare the King held a Parliament at Westminster: diuers Articles were put vp against the Clergie touching their excesses and extortions, and there was pro∣uided for pluralties and non-residents, and for buying and selling of pardons. This so displeased the Clergie, that they called the commons hereticks and schismaticks: and the Lords put a book of articles against the Cardinall, that he procured the Le∣gat without the Kings consent, whereby he took away the right of all Bishops, that in all writings to Rome and other Princes he wrote Ego & Rex meus, that he stande∣red the Church of England to be brought into a reprobate sense, sending to Rome to be Legat, to reforme the Church, and carried the great Seale with him to Flanders, and that without the kings consent he sent commission to conclude a league betwéen the King and the Duke of Florence, and that hauing the French pocks, he presumed to come and to breathe on the King, and that hee had caused the Cardinalls Hat to
be put on the Kings coyne, that he had sent innumerable substance to Rome to ob∣taine his Dignities, to the great impouerishment of the Realme, with many other things. The princely possessions and great pride of the Clergie in those dayes, did not only farre excéede the measure of subiects, but surmounted the estates of Kings and Princes. In Henry the fourth his dayes the Temporalties in the possessions of the Cler∣gie of England amounted to three hundred twentie two thousand marks by the yeare. And it appeareth by a Libell giuen to Henry the eight, compiled by one Ma∣ster Fish, that the Cleargie had gotten into their hands more then the third part of the lande of the Realme, and the goodliest Lordships, Mannors and Territories are theirs, besides the tenth part of corne and all things else, and seruants wages: and they looke so narrowly to their tythes, that they will haue the tenth egge, or else the good wife getteth no rights at Easter, and shall be taken as an herticke; beside what they get by their foure offering dayes, prouing of wills, priuie tythes, offerings to pilgrimages, and at their first Masses; euery one that is buried must pay somewhat for Masses and Dirges to be sung for them, else they will accuse their frinds and exe∣cutors for hereticks. What money get they for mortuaries, by hearing confessions? and yet will keepe no Councell; by hallowing of Churches. Altars, Superaltars, Chappels and Bels, by cursing men and absoluing them againe for money. What a multitude of money gather the Pardoners in a yeare, by cyting men to the Court and releasing them for money, and what abundance the begging Friers get yearly. There be two and fifty thousand parish Churches in England, and euery house in the Realme payeth a pennie a quarter to euery of the fiue srts of begging Friers, which is twenty pence yearely for euery house in England. And the number of the Clergie, reckoned with men, women, and children of the Laieie, are but one of foure hundred; and their substance draweth nigh to the halfe of the whole substance of the Realme; and they doe nothing therewith but exempt themselues from the obedience of your grace, and translate all power to themselues, and that your subiects may re∣bell against yon, and be vnder them, as they did vnto your noble predecessor King Iohn: they then interdicted the Realme; wherefore your Realme hath stood tribu∣tarie, not to any temporall Prince, but to a cruell diuellish bloud-sucker, drunken in the bloud of the Saints and Martyrs euer since: and what doe they more? nothing but apply themselues to haue to doe with euery mans wife, daughter, or mayde: that Cuckoldrie and baudry should raigne amongst your subiects, that no man should know his child: and that their bastards should inherite euery mans possessions, they haue made an hundred thousand idle whoores in your Realme, which would haue gotten their liuing honestly, had not their superfluous riches inticed them to vn∣cleanenesse and idlenesse: they catch the pcks, or be burnt, or the leprosie, and beare it vnto another; yea some one of them shall boast amongst his fellowes that he hath had to do with an hundred women. When they haue intised mens wiues vnto them, they spend away their husbands goods, and make the women runne away from their husbands; and runne away themselues with the wife and goods, bringing man and wife, and children to idlenesse, theft, and beggerie. Who is able to number the broad bottomlesse Ocean full of euils, that this sinfull generation may lawfully and vnpu∣nished, bring vpon vs? Who is shee that will worke for three pence a day, when she may haue at least twentie pence a day to fleepe an houre with a Frier, Monke, or Priest? and who will labour for foure pence a day, that may haue at least twelue pence a day to be bawde to one of these? What a sort are there that marrie Priests Lemans but to cloake the Priests incontinencie, and that they may liue of Priests for their labour? and who is he, though he be grieued neuer so sore for the death of his Ancestor, rauishment of his wife or his daughter, robberie, trespasse, maime, debt or any other offence, dare lay it to their charge by any way of action? if he do, then by and by he is accused of heresie, and except he beare a faggot they will excommunicate him, and then all his Actions be dashed. Notwithstanding, the statute to Mortmayne, they doe daily get into their hands
more lands: the Kingdome of the bloud-suckers is like to preuaile aboue your King∣dome; for to them is giuen daily out of you Kingdome, and that which is once giuen them, neuer commeth from them againe. What Kingdome can indure, that uer giueth and receiueth nothing again? All their colour for their gathering these things into their hands, is, that they pray for vs, to deliuer our soules out of Purgatorie: without whose prayers, and especially the Popes pardon, we could neuer be deliue∣red thence: but the truth is, there is no Purgatorie, but it is a thing inuented by the couetousnesse of the spiritualtie. And if there were a Purgatorie, if the Pope can deliuer them there with money, he can deliuer them without; and if hee can deliuer one, he can deliuer all, and so destroy Purgatorie, and then is he a cruell tyrant, with∣out all charitie, if he keepe them in prison and paine vntill men will giue him mo∣ney. They will not let the New Testament goe abroad in the mother tongue, lest their cloaked hypocrisie, and that their cruelty, vncleanenesse, and vnmercifulnesse be seeue, and that they seeke not Christs honour but their own, that remission of sins are not giuen for the Popes pardon, but for Christ by true faith in him. And except your Maiestie suffer their hypocrisie to be disclosed, the people will think you take a∣way their liberty from them, to buy their soules out of Purgatorie by giuing to the spiritualtie, as their predecessors haue done: therefore let their hypocrisie be vttered, and that shall be more speedfull in this matter, then all the lawes that possibly can be made. The Author of this Booke was fled to Tindall, where he wrote this Booke for feare of the Cardinall: when the King had read this, he caused his Wife to send for him home, he was brought to the King, and after he had communed with him, and was afraid to goe home, the King deliuered him his Signet for a Token, to delier to the Cardinall, that he should not trouble him. The Cardinall answe∣red; Though this discharged him, yet he had no discharge for his Wife, and sent for her, and had troubled her, if herDaughter had not béene sicke of the plague, of which sicknesse, the said Fish within halfe a yeare after dyed, and she marryed one Baynham, which after was martyred, as followeth in this Story. To preuent the spreading abroad of this Libell, there was a prohibition sent out y the Bishop of London, for calling in this the New Testament, and diuers other Books tran∣slated into English: the names whereof, because they are many, I omit, and leaue you to the booke at large. King Henry, about the twentith yeare of his raigne, made an Oration vnto his Commons, that though it had pleased God to send him a faire Daughter of a Noble woman, and of him begotten to our great comfort and ioy: yet it hath beene told vs by diuers great Clarks, that neither she is Our lawfull Daughter, nor her Mo∣ther Our lawfull wife, but that we liue together abhominably in open adultery: and when our Ambassadors were last in Fraunce, motion was made that the Duke of Orleans should marry our said Daughter: One of the chiefe Councellors said, it were well done to know whether she be his lawfull Daughter or no; because hee begat her on his brothers Wife, which is directly against Gods Law: Thinke you my Lords, that these words touch not my body and soule, and that it doth not daily and hourely trouble my Conscience: I doubt not but euery one of you would seek remedy when the perill of your soule, and losse of your inheritance is laid vnto you. For this cause I haue asked Councell of the greatest Clarkes in Christedome: and for this cause I haue sent for this Legate, as a man indifferent to know the truth, and settle my conscience; and if the Queene be adiudged by the Lawe to bee my lawfull Wife, it would be the most acceptable thing in my life, both to cleere my conscience and for the good qualities which I know to bee in her, besides her Noble parentage, as almost this twenty yéeres I haue tried, so that if I went to ma∣ry againe, & the mariage lawfull, I would choose her before all women, & if the marri∣age proue vnlawfull, I shall sorrow the departing from so good a Lady, and louing a companion▪ but much more lament that I haue so long liued in Adultery, and haue no true heyre of my body to inherit this Realme: Therefore I require you to make our minde knowne to our Subiects that they may pray for vs.
The Quéene hearing thereof, answered, it was a great maruell that they would make question of this now, after they had béene married twenty yeares, and no question in the meane time, and that all the learned at the time of the marriage did conclude it was lawfull, and that both their fathers, being so wise did not foresee it, if there had béene any such doubt, and the King my father sent to Rome, and with great costs obtained a dispensation, that I beeing one brothers wife procarally knowne, might without scruple of conscience marry with the other brother lawfully, which licence vnder lead I haue yet to shewe, but I may thanke you my Lord Car∣dinall onely for this trouble, this is of malice, because I haue wonred at your high pride, and abhorred your voluptuous liuing, and little regarded your tranny, and for the malice you beare to my Nephew the Emperour because he would not make you Pope by force: and the Quéene appealed to the Pope. The King to try out the matter sent first to the Pope, then to most part of al Uniuersties, first the Pope sent his two Legats, Wolsey and Campeius to hear and decide the Case, they cited the King and Quéene personally to appeare, or else by Proctors; at the day, the Legats with their crosses, axes and pillers were set, the King was ready to heare the determination, requiring to haue an end, notwithstan∣ding from month to month, they detracted the matter vntill August, the King not taking it well to bee so vsed, sent the Dukes of Northfolke and Suffolke vnto the Legats, requiring them to hasten an end and to deferre no longer, it is the manner of Rome, about the beginning of August, during the Dogge dayes, to haue a solemne vacation, in which neither Schooles bee vsed, nor any Terme kept. Cardinall Campeius pretending the order of Rome, whereof he was a member, answered, hee neither could nor would goe against the ordinance thereof, and be∣fore October he would procéed no further in the cause: te Dukes séeing their pre∣tended excuses, and that by no wayes they would be intreated, burst out in open defiance, the Duke of Suffolke clapping his hands on the table, sware by the Masse▪ there neuer came Legate or Cardinall from Rome to doe good in England, so in an∣ger they departed from the Cardinall: the King for quietnesse was content to tarry vntill October, but before October came, Campeius was called home by letters frm the Pope, so the matter was left vndiscussed, the King seeing himselfe thus deluded, sent againe to Pope Clement, desiring to hue an answere of the cause, the Pop would take a pause, and after send him word. Twelue Uniuersities agreed in one consent, that the mariage was vnlawfull, and repugnant to the word of God, and that no man is able to dispence with it, but nothing was heard of from Rome, wherefore the King assembling his Parliament sent the Lord Chancellour with twelue of the vpper house, to notie the determi∣nations of the Colleages as afore said, vnto the lower house: And the same year the King sent out a Proclamation for the abollishing of the Pope and establishing of the Kings Supremacy, and hee brake off with the Cardinall and caused him to be attainted in Premuire, and to bee apprehended, and the Clergy maintaining th power Legatiue of the Cardinall, incurred the like premunire, wherefore the Spiri∣tuall Lords were called by processe into the Kings Bench to answere, but befor the day of appearence they submitted themselues to the King, offered him an hun∣dred thousand pounds to pardon them by Act of Parliament, and offered him the Title of Supreme head of the Church of England, which they would neuer confesse beore, whereby the Pope, by the proudence of God, lost his whole Iurisiction an Supremacy in England. Patricke Hamelton a Scottish man, hee was of the Kings bloud and family, beei of the most ancient and Noble stocke and name in Scotland, was of the Uniuersity of Marpurge in Germany, he openly procéeding so intreated and iudged of matters of the Church, with such praise as passed the expectation of his age, that he made the common people and learned to admire him: Francis Lambert in his Preface D∣icatory maketh mention of him, then he tooke a companion with him, and ret∣ned home to Scotland, he was not able to suffer the filthinesse and blindnesse of the Countrey, he was accused of Heresie, and after disputed constantty with the Car∣dinall
and his Band: he confessed Christ to be his onely Aduocate, excluding the merits of Saints, acknowledged frée ustification by the merits of Christ, and de∣nied Purgatory: At last he was condemned, and the same day after dinner burned: The King being but a Child by the Testimonie of his bloud, hee left the verity o of God, fixed in the hearts of many. William Tindal in his Apology against Moore maketh mention of Thomas Hitten, a preacher at Maidstone in Kent, whom the Bishops of Canterbury and Rochester kept long in prison, and tormented him with diuers torments, yet he continued con∣stant, and at the las they burned him at Maidestone, for the constant testimony o Iesus Christ, and of his frée grace and saluation. Thomas Biley of the Uniueritie of Cambridge, a man of excellent constancy. Cam∣bridge taking roote in him, after long barrennes did begin to flourish. He conuerted many of his fellowes to the Gospell: amongst whom was Thomas Arthur, and Mai∣ster Hugh Latimer, who was Crosse-kéeper of Cambridge, bringing it on procession daies: at last he forsooke the Uniuersitie, and went to diuers places preaching, asso∣ciated with Arthur: the authoritie of Cardinall Woolsey was then great, but his pride reater, which declared the vanity of his life, and of the liues of the Bishops and Clergy. Bilney with others, maruelling at the incredible insolency of the Cler∣gy, which they could no longer suffer, they began to preach against this dignity, and against the Pope. Then the Cardinall which did not greatly feare any power of Kings, but onelie feared the Gospell of Christ to be preached, least it should detect their Hypocrisie and deceits. Whereupon he caused the said Bilney and Arthur to bee cast into prison, then they were brought before the Cardinall and  number of Bishops into the Char∣ter-house of Westminster: then the Cardinall required of them, wherefore they had taught the people the opinions of Luther, which are condemned, and whether he had not once made an oath, not to preach or defend any of Luthers opinions, but to impugne the same. He said, He had made such an Oath, but not lawfullie: After hee was sworne to make true answere, and not to reueale his examina∣tions. 1 It was laid against him that he preached, though Preachers bee restrained now adaies: yet he had warranty by the Word of God, where he said; Goe ito all the world and preach the Gospell. By which authority, euery man that hath the gift may preach, and the Pope nor any other can make any law to the contrary, which he confessed. 2 That he said, when crosses were set vp against Walls in London, that men should not pisse there: When there were but few men did reuerence them, but when in euerie corner there was a Crosse, of necessitie men pissed vppon the Crosses: So that when there were but few Lawes in the Church, then men were afraid to offend them: after ward they made many lawes, whereof some are pecuniall, as they call them, and them they doe obserue; those that are not pecuni∣all they call palea, and regard them not. To this or the like effect, he confessed he spake. 3 If I should suffer persecution for the Gospell, yet there are seuen thousand more that would preach the Gospell as I doe now: therefore good people thinke not much if these tyrants put a man to death for preaching the Gospell. This Article he confessed. 5 That euery Christian man is a Priest so offer vp sacrifice of prayer: and if they murmured against Priesthood, they murmured against themselues: and that we should not pray to Saints nor worship Images. 6 That he should preach at Cambridge: that a Bachelor of Diuinity, or any other knowing the Gospell, should be let from preaching by no man: and if any Bishop did accurse them for so doing, their curses should returne to themselues. All these hee confessed. Master Luther did recant, and submit himselfe vnto the punishment and iudge∣ment of the Church: but these Interrogatories were ministred vnto Master Bilney;
Whether hee beléeued the assertions of Luther impugned by the Bishop of Ro∣chester were detestable: Whether generall Councells and Constitutions where or ought to be obserued of all men euen for conscience, whether the Popes Keyes were no profitable, or against Gods word, whether the Catholik Church may erre, or whether it may bee demonstrated or poynted out, or else whether it is a spirituall Church knowne to God, whether Images of Saints ought to bee worshipped of all true Christian, whether a man may beléeue that there is not yet any Iudgement giuen vppon the soues departed, whether a man may beléeue that our Lady remai∣ned not alwayes a Uirgine? whether Holy dayes and fasting dayes may without bee broken by any priuate man? whether we are bound to be obedient to Bi∣shoppes and Kings as vnto Parents? whether the Church doo godly, in praying to Saints? whether all true Christians bee Priests, and haue the Keyes of binding and loosing? whether faith may bee without workes and charity? whether it is more agreable vnto faith, that the people should pray in their owne tongue, or in a learned and vnknowne tongue? whether children should be taught the Lords prayer without the salutation of the Uirgine? whether beades be to be denied or no? whether Scrip∣tures ought to bee translated into English or no? whether Organs and all maner of songs ought to bee in the Churches? whether a Bishoppe haue any Temporall power? whether it bee a godly Constitution that no man should preach in an others Dioces without lycence of the Bishop? whether vowes of priuate men commeth of the spirit of God? whether we should pray for the dead, or that there is a Purgatory? whether Morall philosophy helpe the vnderstanding of the Scriptures? whether the Popes pardons are to be eiected? whether there may bee any Morall verues without the grac of Christ? whether Saluation and damnation come of necessity and nothing to bee in our owne wills? whether Images ought to be taken out of the Churches? whether preachers should exhort men to Pilgrimage or to the wor∣shipping of reliques? hee in a maner confesseth them all. Hee answereth that he did beléeue the assertions of Luther, and that men were not bound to beléeue Councells and Constitutions, and St. Augustine in his tim marnailed, that we could liue in safety amongst so many snares of Constitutions, when Adam and Eue could not obserue one. Fourthly he sayd that the Catholike Church cannot erre in fayth, for it is the whole Congregation of the Elect knowne onely to God, otherwise no man could be assured of his owne or anothers saluation, for it is written, no man knoweth whether e be worthy of hatred or loue▪ yet I may truely say of the generall Councell, congre∣gated by the holy Ghost: Behold here the Catholike Church, denominating the whole by the most worthy part: and hee affirmed by the Scriptures, that the faith∣full haue the Idgment of their soules as soone as they die, and are in Heauen, and that we are bound to obay Magistrates as Parents, and that the people should haue the Lords prayer and the Créed in their owne tongue, that their denotion might bee furthered by their vnderstanding of it, and might be more expert in their faith: I hau heard many say, they neuer heard any speake of their resurrection, and by the know∣ledge thereof became more ready to goodnes, and fearefull to doe euill, and he would wish that the Scripture were in our owne tonge, for St. Paule sath, hee would ra∣ther haue fiue words in a tongue that is knowne &c. that the Church may be edified, and Chisostome bad his hearers looke vpon bookes, that they may the better remem∣ber that which they had heard, and Bead translated the gospell of St. Iohn into Eng∣lish, and where it is obiected, it is daungerous for Herese, hee said good Pastors might easily helpe the matter by adding the interpretation of the hard places in the margent: touching pardons, he said it were better that they should bee restraind, then any longer to be vsed as they haue béene to the iniury of Christs passion. Further these things were deposed against him, that he should preach at Ipswich, Christ is our Meadiator betwixt vs and the Father, why then should wee séeke to any Saint for remedy, and to make petition to Saints is great iniury and blasphe∣mie to Christ: and that man is so imperfect of himselfe, that hee cannot merit by his owne deedes, that it was great iniury vnto our Sauiour Christ, to teach that to b
buried in Saint Francis Coull, should remit foure parts of penance: what is then left to Christ which taketh away the sinnes of the world: This I will iustifie to bee great blasphemie. And that it was great folly to go in pilgrimage, and that preachers in times past haue been Antichrists, and now it hath pleased God somewhat to shew their errors; and that the myracles done in Walsingham, Canterbury, and Ipswich were done by the Diuell by the sufferance of God, to blind the people: and that the pope hath not the Keyes that Peter had, except hee follow Peter in liuing, and that it was deposed against him, that hee was twice pulled out of the Pulpit by the Fry∣ers in the Dioces of Norwich: And that hee xhorted the people to put away their Gods of Siluer and Gold, and leaue offering vnto them, because it hath often béen knowne, that those things offered, haue after been giuen to Whoores of the Stewes: And that Iewes and Sarazens would haue becme Christians long agoe, had it not bin for the Idolatry of the Christians, in offering Candles, Wax and mo∣ny to stockes and stones. In a Dialogue betwixt him and Fryer Iohn Brusierd, hee proueth thrée points: Firs, that there is but one Mediator of God and Men, which is Christ: Then our Lady, S. Peter, and other Saints be no Mediators; and whatsoeuer wee aske the Father in Christs Name we shall haue, and God saith not in any other name: ther∣fore let vs aske in his name, least at the day of Iudgement it be said to vs, hetherto haue you asked nothing in my name. To which the Fryr answered: I would Maister Bilney that you would search the first Origen of the Rogation daies, which were ordained by Pope Gregory, with Fastings, Prayers, and holy Processions against the Pestilence, by the infetion of the ayre, in which time of Procession an Image like our Lady, Painted by S. Luke, went before them: About which Image Angels did sing Regina coeli letare: To the which the Pope ioined, Ora pro nobis Domine, &c. Therefore beeing the An∣gels did honour the Image of the Uirgine: And Pope Gregory with all the Cler∣gy did pray to her: It appeareth maniestly we ought to pray to Saints, that they may say like for vs, which the Disciples said in the Gospell, serue them, and send them away, because they cry after vs. Secondly, he proueth the Pope to be Antichrist, in that he exalteth himselfe aboue all that is called God. For the Pope imposeth but a small punishment vpon them that break any of the en Commandements; But he that shall violate the popes con∣stitutions, he is guilty of death. What is this but the Pope to sit and to raigne in the Temple of God, that is, mans conscience as God, and the popish miracles are not of God, but illusions of Satan; who as the Scriptres witnes, haue been loo∣sed this fiue hundred yeares; As it is written, that Satan should bee loosed after a thousand yeares; and they are illusions, because they make them put thir Faith in our Lady and othr Saints, and not in God alone. The third is, that no Saint, though his suffering were neuer so great, and his life most pure, deserued any thing for vs with God, as you may sée by the answer of the wise Uirgins, vnto the foolish Uirgins, when they craued oyle of them: No say they, least peraduenture we haue not sufficient for our selues and you, get you ra∣ther to them that sell, and buy, where be then the merits of Saints, whereby they may deserue for themselues and others. After he was brought againe before the Bishops at the Charter-house afore said; where he was admonished to abiure and recant: who answered, he would stand to his Conscience: but being many times sent for and perswaded, he did abiure: But God not willing to loose such a worthy instrument of his Church raised him againe after his fall, as hre followeth to be seene.
These Articles were obiected against GEFFREY LON, for which he was abiured. FIrst for hauing and dispersing abroad bookes of Luther, for affirming and belee∣uing that Faith onely iustifieth, and that men be not bond to obserue the con∣stitutions of the Church; That we should pray onely to God, not to Saints: That pilgrimages are not profitable to mans soule: That we should not offer nor set vp lights to Images: That no man is bound to keep the Fasts of the Church: That Popes pardons profit not a man: and Thomas Garnet Master of Art. Curat of all Hallowes in Hony Lane, for hauing and distributing Luthers Bookes, and them of that sect: For affirming Faith onely iustifieth: That Pardons profit neither the dead nor liuing: That the Constitutions of the Church binde vs not: for calling Bishops Pharisies: That fasting daies are not to bee obserued: That euery man that is able may preach the Word and no Law to the contrarie: for thes and such like he was abiured before Cutbert Bishop of London. But the aforesaid Bilney, notwithstanding his recantation: Hee abated not any part of his desire & study to preach, but was the more vehement against the Bishops corrupt life: but whilst he was occupied in that godly enterprise, to allure all men to saluation, Thomas Moore, and Richard Nickes, the blind Bishop of Norwich, who was as blind in body as Soule, they laid hands on him, and condemned him of heresie, and iudged him to the fire; because he had preached since his ab∣iuration, and because he taught Saints should not be worshipped, nor called vpon as Mediators. He would many times proue the paine of the fire by holding his finger neere the Candle: but the night before he suffered martyrdome hee held his finger so long that he burnt off the first ioynt. Hee was burned in Lollards yit in Norwich, with great ioy falling downe before the stake, and rising kist it, & bound himselfe with the Chaine, confessing his Faith, and animating the people to stand fast in the truth of Gods Word, and to suffer for it. Sir Thomas Moore beeing Chancellor of England; when those, should burne Bilney, required of him a Letter of his hand, whereby they might ee discharged after his death: He said goe too fellowes burne him first, then come to me after for a Bill of my hand. The Story of the valiant Martyr Maister BAYFIELD. THis Bayfield was a Monk of Bury, and for his Religion he was  in the pri∣son of his house, and whipped with a gagge in his mouth, and then ocked and continued in the same torments thrée quarters of a yeere; and then hee was com∣mitted to Doctor Barnes to go to Cambridge with him: when he had been thee a whole yeare, he tasted good learning so well that he neuer returned vnto his Abbey againe, but went to London to Maxwell and Stacy, & they kept him secret a while, and conuayed him beyond Sea. Doctor Barnes being in the Fléete for Gods Word; This Bayfield mightily prospered in the knowledge of God, and was veneficiall to Maister Tindall, and Frith, for he brought substance with him, and sould their works for them. And at last comming to London to M. Smithes house in cklers Bury, he was betrayed and dogged to his Book-inders house in Marke Lane, & there ta∣ken & carried vnto Lolards Tower, & from thence taken & carried to the Cole-house; because one Patmore Parson of Much-Haddam in Essex, then liuing in Lolards to∣wer, was confirmed in the Doctrine of Christ by him; there hee was tyed by the neck, middle and legges, standing vpight by the walles, diuers times manacled
to accuse others that had bought his Bookes, but he accused none, but stood in his Faith vnto the end: He was in the Consistory of Paules put to his tryall, whether he would abiure or no: he said he would dispute for his Faith, and so did to their great shame. Stokesley being their Iudge with others, hee was condemned for bringing ouer and selling hereticall Bookes, and because before time he was ac∣cused to the Bishop of London for affirming certaine Articles contrarie to the Church: and especially that all land should be giuen to God, and not to Saints or Creatures; and that euery Priest might preach the Word of God, by the au∣thoritie of the Gospell, and néed not to runne to the Pope or Cardinals for licence; and that hee abured, and hath since preached the like Doctrines: When they asked him what he had to say, why he should not haue his Iudgement; Hee said with a vehement spirit to the Bishop of London, your liuing of the spiritualty is so e∣uill, that you be hereticks, and you maintaine euill liuing, and let that true liuing may not be knowne: and that their liuing, neither their beleefe, is according to Christs Gospell: Then the Bishop read the sentence against him, and disgraded him▪ hee knéeling vpon the highest step of the Altar in Paules; He tooke the Crosie staffe, and smote him on the brest, that he threw him downe backwards and brake his head, and he sounded: and when he came to himselfe againe, he thanked God that he was deli∣uered from the malignant Church of Antichrist, and that he was come into the true Church, and that he trusted anon to bee in heauen with Iesus Christ, and the trium∣phant Church for euer: Then he was led againe to Newgate, & continued there in prayer an houre, and thence went to the fire ioifully, and was thrée quarters of an houre aliue in the fire, and when the left arm was burned, he rubbed it with his right hand, & it fell from his body, and he continued in prayer to the end without mouing. The History of Mr Iohn Tewxbury Cittizen and Lether-Dresser of London. IN all points of Religion, and the point of iustification, he disputed most openly in the Bishops Chappell, with such prompt and expert answers that Tunstall and all his learned men were ashamed: This disputation continued a senight, then he was sent to my L. Chancellor, Sir Thomas Moore to Chelsey, and there he lay in the por∣ters Lodge, hand, foote, and head in the stockes six daies. Then he was carried to Iesus Tree in the Garden, where he was whipped, and also twisted in his browes, with small ropes, that the bloud start out of his eyes, and yet would accuse no man. Then he was racked in the Tower, and there promised to retant at Paules Crosse. After he came to S. Austens with a new Testament in his hand, and stood vp be∣fore the people in a Pew, and declared openly with teares that he had denied God, and prayed the people to forgiue him, and to beware of his weaknesse not to doe as he had done: for if I should not turne againe to this truth, hauing the New Te∣stament in his hand, he said, this Booke Gods Word would damne mee body and soule, and he prayed euery body to doe as hee had done: for hee would not feele such a hell againe as he had done not for all the worlds good: and immediately hee was carried to the Bishop of London; and after he was burned in Smithfield, and died a glorious Martyr. In his Disputations, the Bishop proposed these Articles out of the Booke called the Booke of the wicked Mammon: and hee affirmed them. TEwxbery, A man should doe good works for the loue of God onely, and for no hope of reward higher or lower in heauen, for if he should it were presumption, & being asked whether faith only iustifieth: he said if he should desire heauen by works
hee were greatly to blame, for workes followe Faith, and Christ redéemed vs by his death: the diuell holdeth our hearts so hard that it is impossible for vs to consent to Gods Law: and that the Law of God suffereth no merits, nor any man to bee Iustified in the sight of God: and that the Law of God commandeth things impos∣sible; and as the good tree bringeth forth good fruit: so there is no Law to him that beleeueth and is iustified by faith, and all good workes must be done without respect of any profit thereby, for they deserue no reward of God, and that the Diuel is not east out by the merits of fasting and prayer. Item, We cannot loue God, except we sée first his loue and kindnes to vs: whilst we are vnder the Law, wee sée nothing but inne and damnation, and the wrath of God, and cannot but hate him as a tyrant, and flée from him as Cain, and that wée are damned by Nature as a Toade, and a Serpent are so by Nature. Item, Loue in Christ putteth no difference betwixt one man and another. Item, The sects of Saints Francis, Saint Dominick & others be damnable: Then the Bishop asked him whether he would renounce these heresies, and he prayed the Bishop to reforme himselfe: Then the Bishop gaue him respite, and when hee came before him againe. First, he affirmed that Christ & all his merits were his, and that he was knit to him so inseperably that he could not be damned, except Christ were damned. He that séeketh by his almes more then to be mercifull, and to succor his brother and neighbours need he is blind, and seeth not Christs bloud, so God is honoured on all sides in that we count him righteous in all his lawes, and to worship him otherwise is Idolatry: he concluded to them all, he found no fault throughout all the booke, but it is all good, and hath giuen him great light of conscience. The next Sessions he was intised to recant▪ but shortly after he was moued by the example of one that was burned in Smithfield, and after did constantly abide in the testimonie of the truth, and suffered in Smithfield. Lastly for these Articles he was condemned. 1 THat Faith onely iustifieth which lacketh not Charitie. 2 That Christ is a sufficient Mediator for vs, therefore no prayer to be made to Saints. 3 That Christ is our sufficient purgatory; and that there is no purgatory after this life. 4 That the soules of the faithfull departing this life rest with Christ. 5 That a Priest receiuing orders, receiueth more grace, if his Faith be increa∣sed, or else not. Lastly, hee beléeueth that the bloud and flesh of Christ is not in the Sacrament: wherevpon he was condemned and burnt as aforesaid. IOHN RANDALL. THis IOHN RANDALL was of Christs Colledge in Cambridge, and for the loue that he had to the Scriptures, and sincere Religion, hee was suspected and hated; the yong man being studious and about one & twenty yéeres old was long lac∣king of his companions, and through the stench of his corps, his study door being bro∣ken vp, he was found hanged with his owne girdle within the study, in such maner, that he had his face looking vpon the Bible, and his finger pointing to a place of Scripture: whereas predestination was intreated of, surely this matter lacked no singular policie, of some old naughty man, that it should seeme for feare of predsti∣nation, he was driuen to despaire, that it might keep their yong men from the study of the Scriptures as a thing most perilous.
In this yeare an old man in the County of Buckingham, for eating of Bacon in Lent,1531 was condemned to the fire and burned. EDWARD FRESE. EDward Frese, a Painter, was hired to paint certaine cloaths for the new Inne in Colchester, and in the vpper boarder of the cloaths, he wrote certaine sentences of the Scripture: then some of the Towne which had seene his worke, apprehended him, and brought him to London to the Bishop, where he was cruelly imprisoned, with others of Essex. One Iohnson and his wife, and one Willy, his wife, and his son, and one Father Bate of Rowshedge, & they were fed with fine Manchet, made of saw∣dust, or the most part therof: the said Frese being at the Bishops at Fullam, his wife being desirous to see him, came to the gate being big with Childe, the Porter kicked her on the belly, that on the same she died, and the childe died immediatly: after for writing against the wall, his hands were manacled, that the flesh of his armes were higher then the Irons: and they kept him thrée daies without meat, when he should come to his answer, he could say nothing, but looked on the people like a wilde man, and if they asked him any question, he could say nothing, but my Lord is a good man: an when they had spent his body and wits, they sent him to Bearsie-Abby, but hee would not tarry there, but he neuer came to his wits againe, vntill his death: And his brother Valentine Frese was burned for the testimony of Christ in Yorke. Also the wife of the aforesaid Father Bate, made a Supplication to the King, and deliuered it vnto him, who appointed her to go to one M. Seliard, of him she gat a let∣ter to the Bishop, she hoped some good should come to her Husband, but some of her friends would néeds sée the contents of her letter, which was to this effect: look what you can gather against Father Bate, send me word, that I may certifie the Kinges Maiesty: but shortly after he gat out of prison in a darke night, and was caught no more. In this yeare Fryer Roy was burned in Portugale, what his doctrine was, may easily be gathered by his testimony that he left here in England. The History of Maister IAMES BAYNHAM, a Lawyer. THis Maister Baynham was accused to Sir Thomas Moore, Chancelor, & arested with a Sergeant at Armes, and carried out of the middle Temple to his house at Chelsey, & when he saw he could not preuaile with him, he whipped him at a trée in his garden, then racked him at the tower before himselfe, vntill they had almost la∣med him, because he would not accuse Gentlemen of the Temple, nor tel where his bookes lay, and because his wife denied they were at his house, she was sent to the fléet, and his goods confiscate. When they had often vsed him vpon the tortures, then he sent him to the Bishop of London, who cast him into Lolards tower, vntill he had bin diuers times before him examined, and they were not able to resist him. He was both mighty in Scriptures and Arguments, that he was able to confound them with their owne Arguments: so he condemned him, and the Bishop sent one Doctor Sy∣mons to peruert him, and waite vpon him to the stake, & after much communication betweene the Doctor & him, he prayed the Sheriffes to deliuer him from Satan, for he was content to confirme his faith with his blood. At the stake he lay down flat and prayed, then rising vp, he imbraced the stake: then he said, Good people, I am come hither, accused and condemned for an hereticke: these be the Articles I dye for. I say it is lawfull for euery man or woman to haue Gods booke in their Mother tongue.
That the Pope is Antichrist, that he knoweth no other Keyes of heaun gate, but the preaching of the word, and that thee is no other purgatory, then the purgatory of Christs blood, and that the soules of the faithfull imediatly go to heauen, & rst with Christ for euermore. That Thomas Becket was no Saint, but a Traytor, and a shed∣der of innocent blood: thn one M. Pauey answered, Thou liest thou heretick, thou de∣niest the blessed Sacrament of the altar: He answered; I do not deny the Sacrament as it was instituted of Christ, and vsed of his Apostles, but I deny transubstantiation, and your Idolatry to the bread, and that Christ, God, and Man should dwell in a piece of bread; but that he is in heauen, sitting at the right hand of God: but it is an Idoll as you vse it in the abhominable Masse, making it a sacrifice propitiatory to the quicke and the dead, and robbing the Church of one kind: then Pauey bid, Burne him Here∣ticke: then he said, God forgiue thee, and shew thee more mercy then thou shewest me, and God forgiue Sir Thomas Moore: and prayed the people to pray for him, and so praying died. The next weeke after, M. Pauey went vp into a Galery, where he had a Roode be∣fore him and prayed, and bitterly wept, and his Maid finding him so doing, he ad her take a rusty sword and make it cleane, and not trouble him, and immediatly hee tyed vp a rope and hung himselfe. There was an Idoll named the Rood of Douer-Court,1532 many resortd vnto it, for it was blowne abroad, that the power of it was so great, that none could shut th Churchdoore where it stood, whereupon soure men came ten miles thither, and took the Idoll from the Shrie, and a quarter of a  from the place fired him, who bur∣ned so bright, that he lighted them homeward one mile. After, three of them were indicted of fellony, and hanged in Chaines; one at Douer Court, called Ncholas Msh, Robert King in Dedham, Robert Debnam, at Cottaway: which three per∣sons a their death, did more edifie the people in godly learning, then all the sermons preached there a long time before: the fourth escaped: the same yeare many Images were cast downe. The Martirdome of Iohn Frith. WHen Cardinall Wolsey prepared to build a Colledge in Oxford, which now is called Christs Church,1533 whence he was sent for to the King, being accused of certaine crimes: in the way by immoderate purgations he killed himselfe, and so left a most glorious péece of worke; part but begun, part halfe ended, and but a smal part fully finished. He appointed to that Colledge all such as were found to excell in any kind of learning: amongst whom this Iohn Frith was one, and William Tindall, and Tauernar of Bostone, and Iohn Clark, and many others. These were accused of heresie by the Cardinall, and imprioned in a déep Caue in te same Colledge, where they were all infected through the stinke of Fish: and Iohn Clarke, wih other good men, whose names are not knwne, died; but Frith escaped, and departed out of England for foure yeares, and returning home, Sir Thomas Moore promised great rewards to them that could take him, and laid all the hauens for him. At length he was taken at Reading for a Uacabound, and being put in the stockes, hee sent for the Schoolemaister, and began in the Lattine tongue to bewaile his captiuity, the Schoole-maister being ouercome with his eloquene, tooke pitty on him, and loue his excellent wit: then they fell to the Gréeke tongue, wherewith he so inflamed the loue of the Schoole-maister, that he went to the Magistrates and got him to be set at liberty without punishment: but after he was trayterously taken and sent to the Tower, where he had many conflicts with the Bishops, but especially in writing with Sir Thomas Moore, who wrote against certaine writings of Frithes, against the Sacrament of the Altar, which came to Sir Thomas Moores hands, and Frith hauing gotten a Coppy of it, wrote against it. Cranmer, Archbishop, in his Apology against the Bishop of Winchester, séemeth to haue collecte Friths reasons aboun∣dantly.
What Articles were obiected vnto him, appeareth by a breefe Commentary, written and sent to his friends out of prison, as followeth. First, the whole matter of the examination was two Articles, to wit; purgatory, and the substance of the Sacrament. Touching purgatory, they asked whether I beleeued that there was any place to purg the spots of the dead after this life: I denied there was any, because the nature of man consisteth but of two parts, the body and mind: one Christ purgeth in this world by laying afflictions vpon vs, and death the reward of sinne is laid vpon it, but our soules are purged with the word of God, which we drinke in through Faith, to the saluation both of body and soule: If you will shew a third part of man, I will grant you a third place, which you call Purgatory, otherwise I must deny vnto you the Bishops shop of Purgatory. Secondly, it was required of me, whether the very body of Christ were in the Sa∣crament of the Altar. I answered, it is both Christs body & ours, for as of many corns is made one loafe, so we being diuers, are but one body in Christ, therein it signifieth our body: so of the Wine that is made of many clusters, one liquor. But the same bread againe, in that that it is broken, signifieth the body of Christ, declaring his body to be broken and put to death for our redemption; and in that it is distributed the fruit of his Passion is signified: the communication whereof equal∣ly redounds to all Christians. And againe, when it is receiued to be eaten, it is the signification of the bodie of Christ, admonishing vs, that our inward man is refrshed by the merits of Christ, euen as the bread is receiued with our mouth, to the outward nourishment of the body. Then said they, dost thou beléeue the very body of Christ to be contained in th Sacrament really, without trope or figure? He answered; No surely, I doe not so thinke, and when by no meanes he could be perswaded to recant, hee was condem∣ned to be burned. When he was tyed to the stake in Smithfield, there it dot significantly appeare with what constancy he suffered: he willingly embraced the fagts & fire, the wind blowing away the fire to his fellow that was tyed at his back and brned with him, made his death the longer, but God gaue him such strength and patience, that as though he had felt no paine in that long torment: he séemed rather to reioyce for his fellow, then to be carefull for himselfe. The examination of ANDREVV HEVVET, that was burned with IOHN FRITH. HE was a Prentice in Watling-stréete, to a Taylor, when he was asked what he thought touching the Sacrament of the last Supper: he answered, euen as Iohn Frith doth: Then one of the Bishops said, Dost thou not beléeue that it is really the body of Christ, borne of the Uirgin Mary? He said, that I do not beléeue why said the Bishop; he said Christ commanded me not to giue rash credit to them which say, Behold here is Christ, and there is Christ, for many false Prophets shall rise vp, saith the Lord. Then Stokly, Bishop of London, said, Frith is condemned for an heretick, and except thou reuoke thine opinion, thou shalt be burned with him: he said, he was content. The Bishop vsed many perswasins to alure him to recant, but could not, wherefore he was burned with Frith as before. When they were at the stake, one Doctor Coke admonished all the people, that they should in no wise pray for them no more then they would for a Dog, whereat Frith smiling, desired the Lord to for∣giue him, and so departed. About this time High Latimer was inhiited by the Bishop of London to preach in his Dioces, and yet after he preached in the Precint of the Fryers Augustines of London. The Lady Anne of Bullen, although she was not yet married to King Henry, yet
she was in great fauour, and daily she inclined the Kings mind more & more against the Papists, so that the same yeare the King and certaine of his Lords came into the Parliament house, and he complained of the Cleargy, that they were but halfe his Subiects, yea and scarse our Subiects: for their oath to the Pope at their consecra∣tion, is cleane contrary to that which they make to vs: and he deliurd to the Par∣liament the coppies of both their oaths. These Oaths being thus receiued and pe∣ned to the people, were the occasion that the Pope lost al his iurisdiction in England shortly after. The matter falling out more and more against the Pope, Sir Thomas Moore, a great maintainer of the Pope, was driuen to resigne his Chancelorship, deliuer vp the great seale into the Kings hands. After whom, succéeded Sir Thomas Audley, kéeper of the great seale, a great fauorer of Christs Religion. Lady ANNE of Bullen. WIthin short time after, the King married the Lady Anne Bullen, Mother to Quéene Elizabeth, who was the secret ayder and comforter of al the Professors of the Gospell, and her almes shewed her life was accordingly, which was a hundred gownes wéekly, and other apparell yearely before she was married, both to men & women, she also gaue much priuate almes to the widdowes and poore hosholders continually, vntill she was apprehended. And she euer gaue thrée or foure pounds at a time to them, to buy them Kine, and sent her Sub-almner about to the Townes where she lay, that the Parisheners should make a bll of all the poore housholders in thir parish: and some parishes receiued 7. 8. or 10. pounds to buy Kine withall: Al∣so, she maintained many larned men in Cambridge, so did the Earle of Wiltshir her Father, and the Lord Roch her Brothr, and she brought them in fauour with ing Henry. She caried alwaies about her a little purse, out of which she was wont daily to scatter abroad some almes to the needy, thinking no day well spent wherein none had fared the better for her. She kept her Maids, and such as were about her, imployed in making shirts and smocks for the poore, but the Lady Dowager beeing deuorced, made the Pope to curse the King, and interdict the realme: In the meane time Queene Anne bein great with child, in the next yeare following was crowned with high solemnity at Westminster, and not long after brought to ed at Greene∣wich,1534 of the faire Lady, Elizabeth: The Lord Maior of London and his Brethren, with forty cheefe Cittizens, were commanded to be present, with all the Nobles and Gentlemen: The Kings Palace, and all the wals to the Fryers were hanged with Arras, d the Friers Church. The Font war of Siluer, and stood in the midst of the Church, thrée steps high, which was couered with fine linnen, and diuers Gen∣tlemen with aprones and towels about their necks, gaue attendance about it: Ouer the Font hung a faire Canopy of Crimson Sattin, fringed with Gold. The holy Maid of Kent. CErtaine Monkes put into the heads of many of the Kings Subiects, that they had Ruelation of God and his Saints, that he was highly displeased with king Henry, for the diuorcement of the Lady Katherine, and surmised that God had reuea∣led vnto a Nun, called Elizabeth Barton, whom they called the Holy Maid of Kent, that if the King did diuorce her, he should not be King of this Realme one month af∣ter, and not one day nor houre in Gods fauour. She would shew marueilous alte∣ration of her visage and body, as if she had béene wrapt in a trance, and inspired of God. She spoke against sinne, and reprooued the Gospell, which she called heresies, and spoke diuers things to the reproach of the King and Quéene, and to the establi∣shing of Idolatry, Pilgrimage, and derogation of Gods glory. The Archbishop▪ the Lord Cromwell, and Maister Hugh Latimer, with great labour found out her naugh∣tinesse, and condemned her and put her to death, with certaine of her councell.
VVILLIAM TRACY Esquire. A Little before this time William Tracy of Todington in Gloster-shire made his Will, that he would haue no funerall pomp at his burying, nor Masse; and said that he trusted in God only, and hoped by him to be saued, and not by any Saint. His Executor brought the Will to the Bishop of Canterbury that then was, to proue it; which he shewed to the Conuocation, and they iudged him to be taken vp and bur∣ned as an heretick, and sent a commisson to Doctor Parker Chancelor of Worcester, to execute their sentence, who accomplished the same. The King hearing thereof, sent for the Chancelor, who laid the fault on the Bishop; yet it cost him three hundred pount er he could haue a pardon. The storie of twenty foure burned at Paris. IN this year were diuers writings set vp in Paris, vpon the Porches and gates, against the Masse and other papisticall superstitions, whereupon many were ap∣prehended and cast into prison: but twenty foure were executed in seuerall places of the Citie of Paris. The bearer of the Popes curse and interdictment against King Henrie and the Realme,1535. durst not come into the Realme with it, but set it vp in Dunkerk in Flan∣ders: the king hearing thereof, took great displeasure against the said Princesse Do∣wager, and so stomacked the matter, that the next yeare he called a Parliament, and caused it to be prouided by sufficient Acts, that the Pope should be vtterly abolsht, and himselfe to be establisht supreme head of the Church: at which thing Sir Tho∣mas Moore & the Bishop of Rochester grudged, and would not consent vnto it, but o∣penly resisted the same; wherefore they were condemned of treason, and headed at Tower-hill. Likewise three Charter-Monks were hanged, drawne and quartred at Tyburne, for speaking trayterous words against the Kings Maiestie. This yere the King set forth a Proclamation for the abolishing of the vsurped po∣wer and iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, wherein is declared, that not onely the secular men granted him this iurisdiction, but all the spiritualty in the Conuocation house, vnder their seales; wherin also he signified, that he had addressed Letters vn∣the Bishops of the Diocesse, straitly commanding them that forthwith the sincere word of God should be preached euery Sonday and Holy-day vnto the people, and Our stile and iurisdiction of supreme head appertayning onely to our Crowne and Dignity royall to be publisht, and that the Popes vsurped name should be put out of all prayers, masses, or other books, except it be to his reproach. The life and storie of M. William Tindall. FIrst, he was Schoolemaster to one Master Welch, and for translating certain re∣ligious books into English, and for arguing with a certain Priest that often vsed to his Masters house, and confounding diuers points of their religion by the word of God, he was pursued & glad to go out of the Realme into Germany, and there trans∣lated the Bible into English, & compiled diuers other books, & snt them into Eng∣land; wherby the dore and light vnto the Scriptures was daily more and more ope∣ned, which before was many years closed in darknesse: from thence he went to At∣warp, and had his abiding there, and was lodged about a yeare in the house of one Thomas Poynets an English man, which kept a house of English Merchants: then came thither one Henry Philips, hauing a seruant waiting on him. M. Tindall became acquainted with him, and had great confidence in him, and had him often to dinner and supper with him, and got him a lodging in M. Poynets house.
At length Philips wnt to the high Court of Bruxelles to betray M. Tindall and pro∣cured to bring from thence with him the Procurator generall, with othr Officers, which was not done with small charges, from whom soeuer it came. After, Philips returning, would haue M. Tindall▪ to dine with him: then hee desired M. Tindall to lend him fortie shillings, which he did: he told Philips he could not die with him, for he was bid forth to dinner, and he should goe with him. And going forth to dnner, Philips hauing appointed the officers in the way, he gaue them a signe that this was he they should apprehend: then they took him and brought him to the Procurator generall▪ who sent him to the Casle of Filford, and the Procurator generall went to Poynets house, and sent away all that was there of M. Tindals. The said Poynets and certain Merchants went ouer into England, and got letters from the Concell for M. Tindals deliuery; vpon the deliuery wherof to the Councel of Bruxelles, M. Tindall should haue bin deliuered vnto him: which when Philips vn∣derstood, he accused Poynets o be an heretick, and a receiuer of such, & caused him to be apprehended & kept 13. or 14. wéeks in prison; but he escaped by night and got into England: but M. Tindall was condemned; and the same morning as he was had to the fire▪ he deliuered a letter to the chiefe Kéeper of the Castle, which the Kéeper him∣selfe brought to Poynets house, who compared him to be fellow to the Apostles being in prison, both for his conuersation and conuerting and preaching to the peole. M. Tindall hearing by certaine Merchants what wonderfull feats a Iugler did, he desired thm that he might be present also at supper to see him play his parts: accor∣dingly the supper was appointed, and the Merchants, with Tindall, were there pre∣sent. The Iugler being desired to vttr his cunning, shwed all that he could do, but all was in vaine: at last, with his labour, sweating and toyle, he saw nothing would go forward, he confessed there was some man present at supper which disurbed his doings. For his letters that he wrote, I refer thée to the book at large if thou dispose to sée them. The Lord Cromwell,1536 keeper of the Kings priuie Seale, Uicegerent of all the Kings iurisdiction ecclsiasticall, sent out certan iniuncions by the Kngs autho∣rit, for the preaching th word of God, for the btter publishing of the kings supre∣ma, against idols, &  on pilgrimage▪ & trusing in saints, and to abrogate di∣uers holy-daies▪ and for reformation to be had in diuers othr ecclesiastical matters. In the begig of this year the most noble and worthy Lady Queen Anne of Bul∣len,1537 28. He. 8 after she had liued Qne three ears, was cast into the Tower, together with her brother the Lord Rochford, and diuers others which shortly after were executed. The words of the Queene at the time of her death. Good Christian people, I ame come hither to die; I am iudged therto by the law, therefore I will not speake against it: I pray God preserue the King, for there was neuer a gentler Prince, and to me he was euer a good soueraigne: and I rquire e∣uery one to iudge the best of my cause; so  take my leaue of the world, and of you all, desiring you to pra or me. Then she kneeled down, and said, Into thy hands I com∣mend my soule, Iesus receiue my soule, diuers times, vntill her head was striken off. Fiue burned in Scotland. SEauen years after Patrick Hamelton aforesaid, there were fiue burned in Eden∣borough the chief Citie in Scotland; two were Dominican Friers, one Priest, one Cannon, and one Gentleman, adiudged by the Archbishop of S. Andrewes, Pe∣trus Chappeanus, and the Franciscan Friers, whose labour is neuer wanting in such matters. The murther of ROBERT PACKINGTON. HEe was a rich Mercer dwelling in Cheap side, and was one of the urgesses of the Parliament for the Citie of London, and had spoken against the couetous∣nesse
and cruelty of the Clergie; wherefore he was had in contempt with them, ther∣fore one Doctor Vincent Deane of Paules hired a stranger for sixtie crownes to kill him, which he did in this manner: this Packington vsed by foure of the clocke euery morning, to go to a Church neare Cheap-side; and in a mistie morning te hyred stranger shot him and killed him with a gunne as he crossed the street. This could not be knowne vntill the death of the Deane: then he repented the fact at his death, and confessed it to his ghostly father. In this yeare the Kings Maiestie by his Uicegerent the L. Cromwell sent out a∣gaine certaine Iniunctions vnto the Spiritualty,1538. for the reformation of religion, for the maintenance of reading the Bible in English, and for taking downe of Images, with such other like. The history of Iohn Lambert, alias Nicolson. BEing beyond Sea by reason of the persecution here, he returned, hoping the time had bin amended, by the means of Quéen Anne and Cromwell, and the abolishing of the Pope; he became a Schoolemaster: and being present at a Sermon preached by Doctor Taylor, one that was a Bishop in K. Edwards time, and died in the To∣wer in Queen Maries time, after the Sermon hee vttered diuers arguments to the Preachers, and desired to be resolued: Taylor alledged businesse, and desired him to write his minde, which he did. The first was vpon, The cup is the new Testament: and if these words doe not change neither the cup nor the wine into the new Testament, by like reason the words spoken of the bread, should not turn it corporally into the body of Christ. The second, it is not agreeable to a naturall body to be in wo or more places ot one time: therfore Christ hauing a naturall bodie, cannot be in heauen on the right hand of his father, and in the Sacrament. Thirdly, a naturall body cannot be without his forme and conditions, as he can∣not be without substance: i the Sacrament there is no forme and condition of the body of Christ, no, not any appearance of flesh, therefore there is no transubstantia∣ted body of his in the Sarament: and on the contrary, the forme and condition that you see in the Sacrament pertaineth to bread, which cannot be there without the sub∣iect, therefore of necessity we must confesse bread to be there. Taylor put vp the writing to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury; so hee was forced to defend his cause openly in the Court: the Archbishop had not yet sa∣nored the doctrine of the Sacrament, which he afterward was an earnest teacher of Lambert was faine to appeale from the Bishop to the King. Steuen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, as he was most cruell, so hee was most subtile, gaping to get occasion to hinder the Gospell. Hee priuily admonished the King, what great hatred he had gotten of al men for abolishing the Bishop of Romes authoritie, and for subuerting the Monasteries, and for the diorcement of Queene Katharine: and now the time serued, if he would take it, to remedie all these mat∣ters, and pacifie their minds that be offended; if on this man Lambert he would ma∣nifest how stutly he would resist hereticks, whereby he shall discharge himselfe of all suspicion of being a fauourer of new Sects; whereupon the King appointed a day for argument before him: when the time was come, the Bishop argued the fore∣said points against Lambert, which he answered most effectually; but the King and the Bishops would not suffer him to conclude his arguments. When the King min∣ded to breake vp his counterfeit disputation, he said to Lambert, What sayest thou now to the reasons and instructions of these learned men? Art thou satisfied? Wilt thou liue or die, thou hast yet free choyse? Lambert answered, I submit my selfe to the will of your Maiestie: the King said submit thy selfe to the handes of GOD, not to mine; then said Lambert, I commit my soule to the handes of GOD, but my body I submit to your clemencie. Then said the King, if
you commit your selfe to my clemencie you must die: for I will not be a patrn vn∣o hereticks. Then he bade Cromwell reade the sentence of condemnation against hm; which he did, though he was the chiefe friend of the Gospellers: this was by the poicie of Cranmer, that if Cromwell should haue refused to do it, he might incurre the like danger. And in the sentence was contained a decrée, that the same should be set vpon the Church porches, and be read foure times euery yeare in euery Church throughout the Realm, whereby the worshipping of the bread should be the more fix∣ed in the hearts of the people. The Answers of IOHN LAMBERT to diuers Articles administred to him. VVHere you aske me of frée-will,ree-will. whether a man haue frée-will that he may de∣serue ioy or paine: we deserue nothing by doing the commandements of God, as it appeareth by the Parable of the Master, which when his seruant is come from worke will make him waite on him vntill he hath eaten, and after giue him leaue to eate, and yet thanketh him not, because he hath done but his duetie: so should you say you are vnprofitable seruants when you haue done that which you were bound to doe; therefore when we haue done well, we should not magnifie our owne free-will, but his grace by which we did it. And though race be promised in many places to the kéepers of Gods precepts, yet such reward shall neur be attained of vs, but by the grace and benefit of him which worketh all things in all creatures. We should not doe works for loue of reward, nor for dread of paine, but because they doe please God: and if we only ayme at the contenting of his pleasure, reward vndoubtedly would insue good déeds, as heat inseparably followeth fire. Thus wee should serue God for loue, as children, and not for reward and dread as seruants. We haue no frée-will nor abilitie of our selues to doe the will of God, but as E∣say saith, We are subiect and thrald vnto sinne: and Paule saith, By the grace of God we are set at libertie. Touching eare coession; it was not ordained of God bt of man: in the booke called Historia tripatita, you shall find how it was first instituted, and after vndone againe, because of a huge vilanie committed by a Minister vpon a woman, through conession. And touching their power to forgiue sinnes; I say onely Christ looseth a sinner which is contrite, by his promise, and the Priest can but declare the promise: neither doth the declaring of the promise by the Priest benefit any one, vnesse he be loosed from his sinne, by credence in the promise ministred. And Chrysostome in his booke, in opere imperfecto, affirmeth that the keyes of heauen are the doctrine of the word of God. Ministers doe binde and loose after a sort, as Christ told Paule, Thou shalt open their eyes that they may be conuerted from darknes vnto light. Here Paule is said to open the eyes of mens hears, yet to speake properly, it is God that doth it: therefore Dauid prayeth▪ Reuela oculos meos: and it is said of Iohn Baptist, That he should turn the harts of the fathers vnto the children, and the vnbeleeuers vnto the wisdom of the wise, although to turne mens hearts only belongeth to God; but so we vse to speake Metonomi. Touching inioyning of penance; I know none that men need to admit, neither ought you to iniyne any, except casting away the old vice, and taking the new ver∣tue, which euery rue penitent intendeth, or ought to intend. Touching the question, whether grace be giuen only by the Sacraments; God sendeth his grace where it pleaseth him, either with them or without them, and when he pleaseth: and many lewd persons receiue the Sacraments that are destitute of grace, to their confusion; yet in due receit of the Sacraments God giueth grace. Where you aske,In opere imperf. whether all things necessary to saluation are in Scripture; S. Chrysostome saith he would haue a true preacher of Gods law not to swerue there∣from,
neither on the right hand nor the left: for hee that should thereunto adde or withdraw, should enterprise to be wiser then God. And Saint Cyprian in his Epistle ad Cicilium fratrem, teacheth how we ought to heare Christ only, not regarding traditions of men, like as he doth in diuers other places. And this agreeth well with Scripture, which is called the word of salua∣tion, the administration of righteousnesse, the word of truth, the rodde of direction, our spirituall food, the spirituall sword that we ought to fight withall against all temptations and assaults of our glostly enemies, the seed of God, the kingdome of heauen, the keyes of the same, the power of God, the light of the world, the law of God, his wisedome and Testament: euery one of which wordes will giue sufficient matter of argument, that following the same doctrine only shal haue sufficient safe∣conduct to come vnto the inheritance promised, though no other way or meas were annxed vnto the same. In the hundred and eightéene Psalme, Dauid saith, The word of God is true and his way verity; euery man is vanity and lying: and Christ saith, Euery one that heareth my words and doth them, is like one that buildeth his house vpon a sure foundation; and that there is none other foundation by S. Paule: and he would haue vs follow one doctrine of Christ to a vnitie of faith, that we may bee perfect men; not carried about with euery winde of doctrine, brought vp by the slights and wilines of men that tudie to deceiue vs. Touching the question, that there are many things to be beléeued vpon paine of sal∣uation, that are not in the Scripture: I say lawes ordained for the ciuill regiment of the body, and all other Lawes, so they be not hurtfull to Faith or Charitie, but help to the same, we ought to keep them not onely for feare of punishment, but for Conscience sake, although such ordinance be not expressely in the Scripture; but I say there is nothing that is not expressely in the Scriptures, that is to bee beleeued vpon necessitie of saluation. Touching your Question of purgatory, and whether soules departed be there in torment and purged: I say there is a purgatory in this world, which is the fire of tribulations, through which all Christians shall passe, as S. Paul saith: All that liue godly in Christ shall suffer persecution: In this purgatory I doe reckon my selfe now to stand, God send me well to perseuere vnto his honour. Other Purgatory doe I know none, neither can any be proued by any place of Scripture: And S. August: de ebrietate, saith, let no man deceiue himselfe; for there be two places, the third is not knowne: He that with Christ hath not deser∣ued to raigne, shall perish with the Diuell, and in his Booke de vanitate seculi, he saith, know you that when the soule is departed from the body, it is incontinent for the good deeds put into paradice, and else throwne headlong into the Dungeon of hell for the sinnes; and to this all Scripture agreeth. Touching your question, whether Martirs, Apostles, and Confessors departed, ought to be honored and prayed vnto. Saint Augustine in his Booke de vera religione, would haue that we should wor∣ship no men departed, be they neuer so good and holy, no nor yet an Angell, nor to honour them, but onely in imitating their good liuing as they followed God, not building Churches to them; no, the Angels would not haue vs builde Churches to them, but would with them we should honour the Maker of all things. They refuse all honour, sauing honor Charitatis, which loue wee should expresse, in helping the poore and helplesse: And the Scripture teacheth, that there is but one Mediator, and we are exhorted in all places of Scripture to call vpon God in néed, but in no place to call vpon any Saint. Touching your demaund, whether Oblations and Pilgrimages, may deuoutlie and meritoriously be done vnto the Sepulchers and Reliques of Saints. Moses when he died, would be buried where no man should know which was his graue: & it was, because the Iewes, which were prone to new fangled worshipping, should not fall into Idolatr, worshipping him as God, for the great and many mira∣cles that were wrought by him when he was aliue. It is no point of my beleefe, to thinke that Oblations & Pilgrimages at Saints graues and Reliques, are meritori∣ous
workes, neither is there any deuotion at all in doing of them. Touching fasting daies and time I say they are good for diuers respects, but it is no deadly sinne to breake them, for they are but the traditions of men. Touching your question whether Images ought not to be in the Churches for a remembrance of Christ, and his Saints. I know no Images made with hands that ought to be worshipped; For the Psalme saith, Confusion be vnto all such as worship carued Images and glory in pictures. And S. Augustine in his Book de vera religione, let vs not be bound to worship the workes of men, for the workemen are more excellent then the things that they make; whom notwithstanding we ought not to worship: and if Christs Doctrine were so opened, that people might vnderstand it, as Prelates chiefely ought to doe by tea∣ching, we should haue no need of Images, for nothing is so effectuall to excite the re∣membrance of Disciples, as the liuely voice of good teachers. Touching your demands, whether men forbidden to preach as suspected of Heresi ought to cease from preaching, Christ and his Apostles were coun∣ted heretickes, and the Apostles were forbidden oftentimes of the High Priest and others to preach any more, and were imprisoned and scourged for it, yet they would not leaue preaching, but told them to their faces they must obey God which bad them preach, rather then men which forbad them; yea, the Angel de∣liuering them out of prison, bad them go preach againe. This is for our instruction, doubt not, for such practice is shewed in all ages, so you may sée when men bée wrongfully infamed of heresie, and so prohibited by Bishops to preach the Word of God: they ought not to stop for any mans commandement. Touching your question of hauing the Bible in English, in England. In my opi∣nion, I say it was not well done to inhibit it: and worse, that the Bishops haue not sithence amended it if they could, that the people might haue it to vse vertuously. And I will adde one reason, the Scripture is the food and sustinance of mans soule, as it appeareth by many places of the Scripture, as other meate is the foode of the body: then if he be an vnkind Father that kéepeth away the bodily meate the space of a wéeke or a month from his Children, it should seeme that our Bishops be no gentle Pastors or Fathers, that kéep away the food of mens souls from them, both months, yeares, and ages, especially when others offer the same. Touching you question, whether faith onely iustifieth. I answer with S. Augu∣stine, Good works make not a man iustified, or right wise: but a man once iustified, doth good works. These Articles being directed to the Archbishop of Canterburie, which was not Cranmer but Doctor Warham: whereby it may be gathered, that this godly learned man was long before he disputed before the King, or was condemned to death: vpon the day that was appointed for him to suffer, this holy martyre of God was brought out of prison vnto the house of the Lord Cromwell, and carried into his inward cham∣ber, where it is reported Cromwell asked him forgiuenesse for what he had done. And being admonished of his houre of death, he was greatly comforted; and comming into the hall, he saluted the Gentlemen and sate down to breakfast, shewing no man∣ner of sadnes or feare; after breakfast he was carried to the place of execution, where he should offer himselfe a sacrifice of sweet sauour vnto the Lord, who is blessed in his Saints for euer and euer. Amen. The storie of one COLLINS. ONe Collins a Gentleman was burnt at London,1538. for that being besides his wits, by chance he came into a Church where a Priest was saying masse, and was come to the holding vp and shewing the Sacrament, Collins in like manner took vp a little Dogge, holding it ouer his head, shewing him vnto the people; wherefore hee was condemned and burned, and the Dogge with him.
LEYTON and PVTTEDVE. LEyton was a Monke of Aye in Suffolke, and was burned at Norwich, for speaking against a certaine Idoll, which they of Aye were wont to carry about in processions, and for affirming both kindes in the Sacrament: and Puttedue com∣ming into a Church merily taunted the Priest, that after he had drunke vp all the wine alone, he blessed the hungry people with the empty Chalice: wherefore hee was condemned and burned. Cowbridge. THis Cowbridge came of a good stocke, his auncestors euen from Wickliffes time hetherto, had been alwaies fauourers of the Gospell,1539 and addicted to the setting sorth thereof in English: Hee was borne in Colchester; his Father was head Bayly thereof; hee was burned at Oxenford, for affirming that euery poore Priest, being neuer so poore and needy, being of a good conersation, hath as great power and authoritie in the Church of God, and ministration of the Sacraments as the Pope or any other Bishops: they almoststerued him whilst hee was in prison in Bocardo: and a little before his examination they promised him meate, if at his execution he would say such things as they would minister vnto him, which he pro∣mised to do: whereupon he was well cherished, and recouered some part of his sense. When he was come to execution, contrary to their expectation, often times calling vpon the Name of the Lord Iesu, with great quietnesse and méeknesse he yéelded his spirit into the hans of the Lord. This yeare one Peter a Germaine, and another with him, constantly indured death by the fire at Colchester, for the Lords Supper. Fryer Forrest hanged for Papistry. HE was an obseruant Fryer, and had secretly in confessins declared to cer∣taine of the Kings Subiects in confessions: that the King was not supreame head of the Church, and being examined how he could say the King was not supreme head, being sworne to the contrary: he answered; he took his oath with his outward man, and his inward man neuer consented thereto: he was further accused of diuers damnable Articles & conuicted, after he was hanged in Smithfeld aliue in chaines, by the arme-holes and middle, and fire made vnder him, and so he was consumed to death. There was a scaffold prepared for the Priuy Cauncell and the Nobles to sit on, to graunt him pardon if he repented: there was also a Pulpit, where Mster Hugh Latimer Bishop of Worcester declared his errours, and conuted them by Scripture, with many exhortations to repent; but he would neither heare nor speak. A little before the execution, a great Image was brought out of Wales to the gallows, which was called Daruell Gatheren, whom the Welch-men much worshipped, and had a prophesie amongst them, That this Image should set a whole Forest on fire; which took effect: for he set this Forest on fire, & consumed him to nothing. When the Frier saw the fire comming vnto him, he took hold on the ladder, and would not let it goe, but died so vnpatiently as neuer did any that put his trust in God. Certaine Iniunctions giuen out in the thirtieth yeare of King HENRIES raigne. AGainst printing and bringing from beyond Sea any books,1539. and offering to sell them without acquainting the King, or some of his Councell first, vpon paine of forfeyting their goods and chattels, and their bodies to be imprisoned at the Kings pleasure. That there shall none argue about the Sacrament of the Altar, vpon paine of
death and loosing their goods, except it be the learned in Diuinity, in their schooles and appoyted places for such matters. And that holy bread, holy water, and procession, creeping to the Crosse, setting vp of lights before the Corpus Christi, bearing of candles on Candlemas day, Puri∣cation of women deliuered with childe, offring of Chrisomes, kéeping of the foure offering dayes, paying their Tithes, these to be obserued vntill the King doe abro∣gate any of them. Married Priests to be counted Laymen, and loose their Spirituall promotion. That all Cleargy men, should diligently in their cures, preach, and teach the peo∣ple the glory of God, and the truth of his word, declaring the difference betwixt the things that God commands, and the rightes and ceremonies then vsed, least the people thereby grow into further superstition. And that Thomas Becket was a trayor and not a saint, & his Images to be pluc∣ked downe in euery place, and his holy dayes not to bee kept, and that the Anthi∣phens, Collects and prayers to him be not read, but raced out of the bookes. Launcelot, Iohn a Painter, Gyles Germaine. Iohn Painter and Gyles Germaine were accused of Heresie, and whilst they were examination at London before the Bishoppe and other Iudges, by chance there came one of the Kings guarde one Launcelot, a tall man and of as goodly a mind, hee standing by, séemed by his gesture to fauour the cause and the poore men, whereup∣pon he was apprhended, examined, and condemned with them, and the next day at ue of the clocke in the morning was burned in St. Giles in the fields. Sir Iohn Bortrucke, a540. Scotish Knight, his confuta∣tion, of certaine Arcicles vpon which hee was condem∣ned by the Cardinall and most of the Nobles and chiefe of Scotland. FIrst touching the Popes Supremacy, these holy ones magnisse their Lord as common theues preerre their Captaines, calling them euery where most honest men, for it is euident that none in the whole world is giuen to more ryot, no séeketh more gréedily to all kind of delicates and wantonnesse, and aboundeth with al vices: as treason, murther, rapine, and all kind of such euills as He. And where they affirme him to bee Christ Uicar on earth, it shall appeare, that he cannot exercise more power then other Bishops: for whereas they say Peter had power ouer the Apostes, and consequently ouer the whole Church, the which pow∣er succéeds to the Bishop of Rome, but by the Scriptures wee may easily sée how they lie in the Councell: in the 15. of the Acts Peter heard them speake thei minds, receaued their Iudgment, and followed their decree, is this to haue powr ouer others, and in his first Epistle, writting to the Bishops and Pasors: he saith,  beséech the Bishops and Pastors which are amongst you, for so much as I my selfe  also a Bishop and witnesse of the afflitions of Christ & partaker of the glory which shall be reuealed, that they diligently feed the flocke committed vnto them: why then doe they challenge the authority of S. Peter which he neuer acknowledged in himselfe? I doubt not but it Peter were here he would rebuke their madnes, as Moses did Iosua which was so zealous towards him. And in the eight of the Acts he is commanded by his fellowes, To goe with Iohn to Samaria, he refused not so to doe: and being the Apostles send him, they declare that they doe not ount him as their superiour; and by his obedience he confesseth a fel∣lowship with them, but no Emperour ouer them. But the Epistle to the Galathians
putteth vs sufficiently out of all doubt, whereas S. Paul proueth himselfe to bee e∣quall with him, and how when Peter did not faithfully execute his office, hee was by him rebuked, and not obedient to his correction, all doth euidently proue, that there was equality betwixt Paul & Peter, and also that he had no mor power euer the residue of the Apostles then ouer him, the which Paul doth purposely intreat of, least any should prefer Peter or Iohn before him: wherefore I cannt acknowledge Peter head of the Apostles, nor the Pope ouer other Bishops, but I acknowledge Christ the onely head of the Church; And I say with S. Gregory, that whosoeuer calleth himselfe an vniuersall Bishop, he is the fore-rider of Antichrist. And where∣as they alledge the high priesthood of the old law, I say the right of that high priest∣hood is onely transported vnto Christ, for this Priest-hood doth not onely consist in learning but in the propitiation and mercy of God, which Christ hath fulfilled by his death, & in the intercession by the which he doth now intreat for vs vnto his father. Whereas they alledge out of the 16. Chapter of Mathew, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rock, &c. If they do thinke that this was particularly spoken vnto Peter, S. Cyprian and S. Augustine shall sufficiently answer them, that Christ did it not to preferre one man aboue the residue, but that he might set forth the vnity of the Church, hee saith: if this were spoken onely vnto Peter, the Church hath not the Keyes, and if the Church haue them, then Peter when he receiued the Keyes did figurate the whole Church. Touching their Arguments, that these words were spoken to none but Peter, this will easily be dissolued, if we know why Christ gaue this name Peter to him, whose name was Simon, hauing respect onely to the constant profession which hee made of Christ, as God changed the name of Abraham from Abram, which tooke the name of the multitude, which should come forth of his seede: so Peter took his name of the constant confession of Christ, which indeede is the true Rocks vpon which the Church is builded, and not Peter, no otherwise then Abraham was not the multitude himselfe, whereof he tooke his name: and the Church if it had béene builded vpon Peter, should haue béene builded but vpon a weake foundation, who was ouercome with the words of a litle wench, so constantly to deny Christ, so any man may vnderstand how these Romish builders doe wrest the scriptures to their pleasures. And when they alledge out of the 20. chapter of S. Iohn, feed my sheep, it is a childish Argument, for to feed shéep, is not to beare dominion ouer the whole Church: and Peter exhorts all Byshops, to feed their flocks; therefore there was no authority giuen vnto Peter more then to others, or that Peter did equally com∣municate the authority which he had receiued vnto others, and did not reserue it to himselfe, to be transported to the Bishops of Rome. 2 Touching pardons or indulgences: they say, that the merits of Chirst, and of the Saints, Apostles and Martyrs, which they impudently affirme to haue me∣rited more at Gods hands, then was néedfull for themselues, and there did so much superabound, that might redound vnto the helpe of others: and they affirme, that their blood was mixed with the blood of Christ, and the treasure of the Church was compounded of them both, for the remission of sinnes, and that the kéeping of this treasure is wholy committed to the Pope, and in his power consisteth the dispen∣sation thereof, and that he himselfe may bestow these treasures, and giue power to others so to do. Hereupon riseth the pleanary indulgences and pardons, granted by the Pope, for as many yeares as he will by Cardinals for 100. daies, they haue such power, and bishops but for forty daies, and no body but Satan taught this doctrin, who would vtterly extinguish the merits of Christ, which he knoweth to be the only remedy of saluation. Christ in the 17. of Luke saith; When you haue done all that you are cō∣manded, count your selues but improfitable seruants. And the 46. of Esay. All the me∣rits of mans righteousnesse is compared to menstruous cloth: by the Scripture the corruption of our nature is so manifest, that in our most perfect workes there lacketh not imperfection. The Parable of the ten Uirgines in the twentie fiue
of Mathew, putteth this out of all controuersie, where the wise virgins said, They had not sufficient oyle for themselues and others. This they ground vpon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Collossians, I fulfill the af∣flictions of Christ which were wanting in my flesh, for his body which is the church: But Paul referreth to those afflictions wherewith the members are and shall be af∣flicted, so long as they liue in this world, euen as Christ was afflicted: and wher∣as S. Iames addeth this word, for the Church: he doth not meane for the Redemp∣tion of it, but for the edifying of the same, as in the 2. to Timothy, he saith; He suf∣fereth for the elect sake, for by his constancy and stedfastnes in troubles, he sheweth he contemneth this life, in hope of a better life: whereby he doth confirme and esta∣blish the faith of the Church for great fruit, by the afflictions and martirdome of the faithfull, ariseth to the glory of God, in that they subscribe and beare witnesse vnto the truth by their blood, and being the Popes pardons are nothing else then such as he faineth, he is a manifest deceiuer, and a Simonist in selling such mar∣chandise as can in no place help. Touching the marriage of Priests, it is against the word of God, & against Iu∣stice to forbid Priests to marry in the 13. to the Hebrewes, The band of marriage is vndefiled and honorable amongst all men: And in the 1. Cor. 7. chap. For auoiding of whoredome, let euery men haue his owne wife: and in that they say, this is meant of others, and not of Ministers: That is disproued by the 1. Tim. 3. Chapt. Bishops and Deacons ought to be the husbands of one wife. And what can be more spoken against them herein, then in the fourth Chapter of the said Epistle; In the latter daies shall come deceiuers, and wicked spirits, which shall forbid to marry; they excuse themselues, that this was fulfilled in the hereticks cald Tatians, which did condemne matrimony, but we do onely forbid Church-men to marry, but this, notwithstanding this prophesie of the holy Ghost, redoundeth vpon them. They in∣terpret S. Pauls saying, that a Bishop shall haue but one Wife: That a Bishop ought not to bee chosen that hath married the second Wife; but this interpreta∣tion appeareth to be false: in that he presently declareth what manner of women Bishops wiues ought to be. S. Paul reckoneth matrimony amongst the principall vertues of a Priest, and these men call it in the Canons, the poluting of the flsh: God instituted matrimony, Christ sanctified it with his presence, and the turning water into wine, and would haue it the Image of his loue to the Church. They a∣leadge the Leuiticall Priests, which as often as they came to minister, were bound to be apart from their wiues, & being our sacraments be more excellent then theirs, and daily vsed, it would be very vncomely that they should be handled by married men. The Priests of the old Law were forbidden all outward vncleannesse of the flsh when they ministred, to signifie the holines of Christ whom they did prefigure, but our holines conssteth of the inward cleannesse of the spirit: and S. Paul is wit∣nesse, that the Apostles did both keep their wiues, & carry them about with them. 3 Touching that he should say that the Scottish nation and their Cleargy be al∣together blinded, no man will deny that people to be blind that neither heare Christ nor his Apostles, such is the people of Scotland, in that they cal the Pope supreme head of the Church, whith belongeth onely to Christ, and contrary to the word, they forbid Priests to marry in the tenth of Iohn, Christ is the doore, they affirme they must enter by the Uirgine Mary and S. Peter, Christ would haue vs worship him in Spirit and truth: The Scots build Temples and Chappels for Idols, in which they commit Fornication: In the tenth to the Hebrews, Christ, By one sacrifice, hath made those perfect for euer which are sanctified: And to this effect Christ said on the Crosse, It is finished, shewing that by his death all Sacrifices for sinne en∣ded; yet the Scottish Church-men daily offer Christ for sins, both of them aliue, and them that be dead: God commaundeth not to worship any Grauen Images, the Scots fall flat to them, and offer them: Incense. Paul teacheth, that Christ is our wisdome, righteousnes, satisfaction, and redemption: the Scots prefer the tradi∣tions of men before the law of God, they stablish righteousnes in their own works,
and Sanctification in holy water, and other outward things, and Redemption in péeces of Lead, which they buy of their great Antichrist. Touching the possessions temporall, and iurisdiction in temporalities, in the 18. Chapter of Numbers, God said to Aaron, Thou shalt haue no portion amongst thē, I am thy portion and heritage, thou and the Leuits shall haue all the tithes of Israell for their ministry; but what heritage is pruided for them I doe not say but they may possesse, but all temporall iurisdiction should be taken from them: when twice there rose a contention, which of Christs disciples should be greatest: he told them they should not haue dominion one ouer another, like the Kings of the Nations, & Christ in the 12. of Luke, answered him that desired him to deuide his Brothers inheritance vnto him, Who made me a Iudge. And in the 8. of Iohn, he refused to giue iudgement vpon the Adulteresse: whereby it appeareth, Christ reiected the office of a Iudge, as a thing not agréeable to his office. When Moses tooke vpon him the ciuill gouernment and the priest-hood, he was commaunded to resigne the Priest-hood to Aaron, for it was against nature one man should suffice both char∣ges, and as long as the face of the true Church did continue, no Priest did vsurpe the right of the sword. S. Ambrose saith, Emperors rather desired the Office of Priest-hood, then Priests any Empire, then sumptuous Palaces belonged to Em∣perors, and Churches to Priests. And S. Barnard saith, Peter could not giue that which he had not, but he gaue to his successors that which he had, carefulnesse ouer the Congregation, for this cause the kingdom of heauen is giuen vnto you, why do you inuade other mens bounds? They were ignorant of all iudgement that did fat with their possessions these belly-beasts, all they which do indow such filthy sinkes with their reuenues, they follow the steps of Iezabell, for what do they daily but bleat and bow before their Images, burning Incense, aud falling flat before the altars, as the Prophets of Baall did, and if Daniell and Elias were Hereticks, when they would destroy the Priests of Baall, so am I: We do but desire, that their riches wickedly bestowed vpon them, might be taken from them, but Elias was more rigorous, for he cast the Prophets of Baall into the brooke Kidron. The Pope cannot make lawes according to his owne mind and will, and say they are spirituall, and pertaine to the soule, and are necessary to eternall life: for the word of God giueth them no such authority, in the 23. of Iosua, Thou shalt not swarue from my law to the right hand, nor to the left: And in the 12. of Deutero∣nomy, Thou shalt neither adde to, nor take from my Commaundements: There∣fore in the second of Malachy; The Priest shall maintaine wisdome, and the law shal they require at his hands. And where he speaketh of hearing them, he putteth this condition, that they answere according to the Law of the Lord, then these are co∣uenant-breakers, that binde the consciences of men with new lawes: And in the 33. of Ezekiell, Thou shalt heare the word out of my mouth, and declare it vnto my people, So he could not speake any thing of himselfe, and God by Ieremie, calleth it Chaffe, whatsoeuer doth not procéede from himselfe: The Prophets speake nothing but the words of God, therefore they so often vsed these wordes; The word of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, the vision of the Lord, thus saith the Lord: The Apostles must not teach their owne deuises, but that which God commaunded them. Paul in the second to the Collosians, denieth he hath any domi∣nion ouer their Faith, though their Apostle. And in the nth to the Romains, Faith commeth by hearing the word of God, and not by hearing the dreames of the Pope: & Christ himselfe saith for our example, My doctrin is not mine, but his that sent me; to teach Ministers what to do: The power of the Church is not such, that it may teach new Doctrines, frame new Articles of Faith, and new lawes, but is subiect to the word of the Lord included in the same. They defended their Constitutions by these reasons, if it were lawfull to the Apostles to make a decree besides the commaundement of Christ, that the people should abstain frō things offered to Idols & blood, it is lawful for their successors as
oft as néede requireth to do the same: but the Apostles made no new decree, but to warne them how to rule themselues amongst their Brethren, least they should a∣buse their liberty to the offence of others: and contrary, Peter in the same councel pronounceth God to be tempted, if any yoake be laid vpon the necke of the Disci∣ples: and S. Iames saith, the Gentiles that are conuerted vnto God, are not to be troubled with externe decrées, and outward Elements. And by the 23. of Mathew, The Scribes and Pharises sit in Moses Chaire, what∣soeuer they command to obserue, keep; but do not after their doings. Christ taught his Disciples, that he saw nothing in the doing of the Scribes and Pharises to be followed, yet they should not refuse to do those things which they did teach by the word, but not what they taught of their owne head. Being accused for hauing the New Testament, and other Books of heresie, he called them blasphemers and Romish Swine, and their stomacks rankered, and tongues most venomous, which durst note the New Testament of heresie, as they were the greatest murderers that murdered Christ, so these men filled the measure of all other Heretickes and blasphemies: how shall these Serpents and scke of Uipers escape the iudgement of eternall fire. And being accused that he was so obstinate, that none of his friends could per∣swade him: he said he knew not why he should call them friends, which so great∣ly laboured to conuert him, nor will more estéeme of them then of the Madianits, which called the Children of Israell to do sacrifices to their Idols. Then they condemned him for an Hereticke, and his goods to be forfeited, and because they could not apprhend him, they made a picture of him and burned it, & cursed euery one that should shew any intertainment, fauour, or helpe towards him, and their goods likewise to be confiscated. The sixe Articles agreed vpon in the Parliament-house. 1 THe blessed Sacrament of the Altar,1540 by the efficacy of Christs words being spoken by the Priest, is present really vnder the forme of Bread and Wine, the naturall body and blood of Christ, conceiued of the Uirgine Mary, and that there remaineth no substance of bread and wine, but onely the substance of Christ, God, and Man. 2 Secondly, that the Communion in both kinds are not necessary, ad salutem vnto all persons: and it is to be beléeued, that in the flesh, vnder forme of Bread, is the very blood; and with the blood, vnder forme of wine, is the very flesh, aswell a∣part as both together. 3 That Priests after orders, may not marry by the Law of God. 4 That vowes of Chastity or widdowhood, by man or woman made to God, aduisedly ought to bee obserued by the Law of God, and that it exempteth them from other liberties of Christian people which without that they might enioy. 5 That it is méete that priuate masses be continued, as whereby good people ordering themselues accordingly, doe receiue both godly and goodly consolations and benefits, and it is agréeable to Gods Law. 6 That auriculer confession is necessary to be retained and vsed in the Church of God. Then they caused it to be enacted, that if any the Kings Subiects, after the 12. of Iuly next comming, by word, writing, or any otherwise, preach, argue, or hld any opinion against the reall presence as aforesaid, or against the Sacrament vn∣der one kind as aforesaid: they and their assistants to be condemned for hereticks, and to be burned without any abiuration, and Clergy of Sanctuary to be allowed them, and all their goods and lands forfeited vnto the King, as in case of high trea∣so: The like offence against any of the other Articles to be fellony.
The History of THOMAS CROMVVELL, Earle of Essex. THomas Cromwell became the most secret and deare Councelor vnto the King, after he was made Earle of Essex: He alone through the singular dextritie of his wit and Councell brought to passe that which no Prince or King throughout all Europe, dare or can bring to passe: For whereas Brittany was most supersti∣tious of all Nations: he brake off and repressed all the poliies and malice of the Frers, Mones and Religions, and subuerted there houses throughout all the Realme; and brought the Arch-bishops, and Bishops; yea Cranmer and the Bi∣shop of Winchester to an Order, though he were the Kings chiefe Councelor, pre∣uenting thir enterprises and complaints, specially in those things which tended to the decay of good men, which fauoured the Gospell, vnto whom Cromwell was euer a shield against the pestiferous enterprises of Winchester, betwéen whom there was continuall emulation both being great with the King; one much feared, th' other beloued; but Winchester séemed such a man to be borne onely for the destruction of the good, and Cromwell by thy Diuine prouidence appointed a help to preserue many, it were to tedious to declare how many good men through this mans help haue béen reléeued; whereof a great nmber beeing depriued of their patron by his fall perished, and many yet aliue which are witnes of these things: Iehu, the sharpe punisher of superstitious Idolatry was not much vnlike this man. For this purpose this man seemed to be raised vp of God, to subuert the dens of sloth and idlenes, where if they had remained, the Pope could not be excluded out of England; for there was an incredible number of Monasteris in England: There riches and possessions were so great, that they vpbraided euen vnto Kings and Noles beggery: and there houses were no lesse sumptuous, which for the most part were plucked down to the ground, and their reuenues and substance the King partly conuerted vnto his own Coffers, and partly distributed amongst his Nobilitie; but many reprhend the subuersion of these Abbies & say they might haue béen conuerted to other good vses which indéed would haue béen good and god∣ly, if in this Kingdome there should bee continually a succession of good Princes: but if it should happen to be a King of a contrarie Religion, it would haue been o∣therwise, as we may see by the example of Quéene Mary: If the Monasteries had been left standing vntill her superstitious daies, they should haue been restored a∣gaine, and filled with Monkes and Fryers. For if the goods and possessions of the religious, being in the hands of the Dukes and Nobility, could scarce withstand the Quéenes power, how should the meaner sort haue retained them. Wherefore no doubt Gods great prouidence did fresée these things in this man: Wherevpon as often as he sent any man to suppresse any Monastery, hee would charge them that they should subuert their houses from there foundation. When the Pope was abolishd out of England, and that there was diuers tu∣mults about Religion, and it séemed good to the King to appoint a Conuoation to which Cromwell came, and found all the Bishop attending his comming, and all did obeysance vnto him, as to their Uicar generall; and he saluted them euery one in their degrée, and sate downe in the highest place. Then Cromwell in the name of the King, spake words to this effect. The King thankes you o: your diligence, the cause why he hath willed you to assemble, is that you should estabsh certaine controuersies touching the state of Faith, and Christian Religion, which are now in controuersi, not onely in this Realme: but also amongst all other Nations of the world, for he willeth not that there should be any publike change in this Realme of Religion, except by the con∣sent of you and the whole Parliament, wherein you may easily perceiue his
profound wisedom & great leue towards you: Wherfore he desireth you in Christs name, that leauing blindnes, contentions▪ you would discusse those things amongst you which pertaine to religion; and the Church hauing onely respect vnto the Scriptures, neither will he any longer suffer the Scriptures to be wrested by any one of you; neither to be oppressed with the Popes Decrées, or authoritie of the Doctors or Councels; neither will he allow any Doctrine grounded onely vpon Antiquitie and Custome, hauing no other foundation in Scriptures, such as you call vnwritten verities, you owe this duety chiefely to Christ; and next of neces∣sitie vnto the Church, and yet you shall not be vnrewarded at the Kings hands if he perceíue you do your duty as you ought in establishing concord in the Church: The which to bring to passe the onely methode is to discusse all things according to the Canons of Gods word: wherevnto the Kings Maiestie doth exhort you, and hartily desire you: the Bishops gaue thankes vnto the King for his zeale vnto the Church, and his exhortation worthy so Christian a Prince. Then Bonner Bishop of London, the most earnest Champion for the Pope, defended the vnwritten verities, and maintained the seuen Sacraments of the Church, and others resisted him: Touching whose Arguments because there is no great matter in them, I refer thee to the Booke at large, where also thou maist sée the number of Idols in England, to which in great deuotion they vse to goe on pil∣grimage vnto. At length he was apprehended and committed to the Tower, and then hee was attainted by Parliament for heresie, for supporting Barnes and Clarke hereticks and many others; And by his authoritie and Letters rescued them, and deliue∣red them out of prison, and for evulgating a great number of Bookes, contai∣ning heresie: and caused Bookes to be translated into English, comprising mat∣ter against the Sacrament of the Altar, & for commending the Bookes after, and that he should speake words against the King, which they would neuer suffer him to answere vnto, which were not likely to be true, in that the King so shortly after his death, wished to haue his Cromwell aliue againe; by reason of which Act of Parliament, the Noble Lord Cromwell was oppressed with his enemies, and con∣demned in the Tower: He was beheaded vpon Tower Hill, where he patient∣ly suffered the stroke of the Axe by a Butcherly miser, which very vngodlily per∣formed the office. The History of Thomas Barnes, Thomas Garard, and William Hierome Diuines. WHen as Cromwell was dead, Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, being at liber∣ty to exercise his cruelty, it is to be wondred what troubles hee raised, and least he should loose his occupation by delayes: Hee first assaults Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerrard, and William Hierome, whom hee caused to be put to execution two daies after Cromwell; and first of Barnes Doctor of Diuinitie. There was sent downe a Sergeant at Armes to Cambridge, who arresd Doctor Barnes in the Conuocation house: and they determined to make priuy search for Luthers Bookes, and all the Germaines workes, but they that were suspected had word therof, and the Bookes were conuayed away before they came, and he was brought to Cardinall Wolsey in Westminster: At last he spake with the Cardinall in his Chaire of State, knéeling on his knees: Then said the Car∣dinall, What Maister Doctor▪ had you not scope sufficient in the Scriptures to teach the people: but my golden showes, my pollaxes, my pillars, my golden Cu∣shions, my crossee did so much offend you, that you made vs Ridiculum caput a∣mongst the people, we were iollily that day laughed to scorne: Uerily, it was a
Sermon more fitter to be preached on a Stage, then in a Pulpit: At last you said, I wore a paire of red Gloues, I should say bloudy Gloues, that I should not bee cold in the middest of my Ceremonies: Hee answered, hee spake nothing but the truth, according to the Scriptures, and the old Doctors: Then hee deliuered the Cardinall six shéetes of Paper to coroborate his saying: He receiuing them said, we perceiue you intend to stand to your Articles, and shew your learning: Yea said Barnes, by Gods Grace, and your Lordships fauour: He answered, such as you beare vs and the Catholick Church, little fauour: whether doe you thinke it more necessary that I should haue this royalty, because I represent the Kings person in all High Courts of this Realme to the terror of all rebellions, Treasons, & all the wicked members of this Common-wealth, or to be as simple as you would haue vs to sell these things, and giu them to the poore, which shortly would pisse it a∣gainst the walles, and pull his Maiestie from his dignitie: He answered, I think it necessarie to be sold and giuen to the poore, for it is not comely for your calling, and the King is not maintained by your pompe, and pollaxes, but by God, which saith per me Reges regnant: Then the Cardinall said to Doctor Gardiner, and Maister Fox, Loe Maister Doctors, heere is the learned and wise man that you told me of: Then they knéeled and desired his Grace to be good vnto them, for hee would be reformable: Then said he for your sakes, and the Uniuersitie, wee will be good vnto him: Maister Doctordost thou not know that I am legatus de latere, and that I am able to dispence with all matter in this Realme as much as the pope may: Hee answered, I know it: Then hee bad him be ruled by him and I will doe all things for thy honesty, and the honesty of the vniuersitie: hee thanked him, and said, he would stick to the Scriptures according to his little Talent: Then the Cardinall told him he should haue his learning tried, and haue the Law, and com∣manded him to the Tower: But Gardiner and Fox, became his sureties: After he was twice brought before the Bishops, and the Abbot of Westminster, in the Chapter-house at Westminster: Then he was put to haue the Councell of Gardi∣ner, and Fox, and they perswaded him rather to abiure the burne, & that he might doe more in time to come, and with other perswasions, mighty in the sight of rea∣son and foolish flesh: wherevpon he abiured, and bore a faggot: the Bishop of Rochester preaching at the abiuration of him and others, stood vp and declared vn∣to the people, how many daies of forgiuenes of sinnes they had for beeing at that Sermon; yet he continued halfe a yéere after in prison, and then he was committed to be frée prisoner in the Augustine Friers in London: when these Caterpillers and bloudy beasts had vndermined him, they complained on him again to my Lord Cardinall: Then he was deliuered to the Friers of Northampton to bee burned: Then Maister Horne heard that a writ should come shortly to burne him; then hée councelled him to faine himselfe desperate, and writ a Letter to the Cardinall, sig∣nifying that he would drowne himselfe, and to leaue his clothes there, and another Letter to the Mayor of the Towne to search for him in the water, because he had a Letter written in parchment, wrapt in wax about his neck, for the Cardinal which would teach all men to beware of him: vpon this they were seuen daies a search∣ing for him, but he went to London in a poore mans apparell, and thence to An∣werpe to Luther, and there answered all the Bishops of the Realme, and made a Booke called acta Romanorum pontificum, and another Booke with a supplicati∣on to King Henry: When it was told the Cardinall he was drowned he said, perit memoria eius cum sonitu, but this lighted vpon himselfe, for shortly after he poyso-himselfe. In the beginning of the Raigne of Quéene Anne, he and others came againe in∣to England, and continued a faithfull Preacher in the Citie of London, and in her Graces time well entertained and promoted; and after sent by King Henry the eight, Ambassador to the Duke of Cleaue, for the marriage of the Lady Anne of Cleaue, betwéene the King and her; and was well accepted vntill Gardiner came out of France: but then neither Religion nor the Queene prospered, nor Crom∣well,
nor the preachers: Then followed alteration in marriage vntill hee had grafted the marriage into another stocke, by the ccasion whereof hee began his bloudy worke. Soone after Doctor Barnes, and his Brethren, were carried to the King to Hampton Court to be examined: But the King seeking meanes of his safety, bad him goe home with Gardiner, and confer with him: they not agréeing▪ Gardiner sought opportunitie to dispatch Barnes, and the rest, as he had done by the Quene the Lady Anne of Cleue, and the Lord Cromwell: and he appointed them three to preach thrée Sermons at the Spittle, which were baites to minister iust occasion of their condemnations: A hen they were sent for to Hampton Court, and from thence carried vnto the Tower, and came not thence but to their deathes. Then the Protestants went beyond Sea, Priests were diuorced from there Wiues, certaine Bishops deposed, and other good men denied Christ, and bore Faggots: then they were put to dath without iudge∣ment; a Papist and a Protestant were laid vpon one hurdle and drawn to Smith∣field: This was Winchesters deuise to colour his tyrany: Then Barnes hid the Sheriffe beare him witnes he died Christianly, and Charitably, and prayed them all to pray for him, and if the dead may pray for the quick we will pray for you, so they forgaue their enemies, and kissed one another, and stood hand in hand at the stake vntill the re came, and so rested in Christ. The same day one Powell, Fetherstone, and Abel, were hanged, drawne, and quartered in the same place, for denying the Kings Supremacie, and maintaining the Kings marriage with the Lady Katherine Dowager: The reason was because as one halfe of the Councell being Papists called vpon Barnes, Garet, and Hie∣rome, to be executed: so the other part of the Councell called vpon these thrée Pa∣pists to be executed. In this yéers a Boy, one Richard Mekins, but fiftéene yeares old was burned in Smithfield, for speaking somewhat against the Sacrament of the Altar. In like manner Richard Spencer Priest, leauing his papistry, married a Wife, and got his liuing by day-labour; Hee was burnt in Salisbury, because hee was thought to hold opinion against the Sacrament, and one Andrew Hewet, was bur∣ned with him. About this time Cardinall Poole, Brother to the Lord Mountegew, was at∣tainted of high treason, and fled to Rome, where he was made Cardinall of Saint Mary Cosmoden, where he remained vntill Quéene Maries time. Stokely, Bishp of London, and Tunstone, Bishop of Duresme writ to him, to perswade him to a∣bandon the Supremacy of the Pope, and to conforme himselfe to the Religion of his King, which Letter thou maist reade in the Booke at large, which sufficiently proueth the Pope not to be supreme head of the Church, but because this Doctrine is as sufficiently proued in other places, I omit to abridge it. In this yeere the King by the aduice of his Councell, sent forth a Decree for the setting vp the Bible in the great volume in euery parish Church in England. This yeare Iohn Porter a Taylor,1542. a lusty yong man, was by Bonner Bishop of London cast into Newgate, for reading in the Bible in Paules Church, where he was miserably famished to death. About this time Iohn Longland, Bishop of Lincolne, burned two vpon one day: one Thomas Barnard, and the other Iames Morton, the one for teaching the Lords Prayer in Englsh, and the other for kéeping the Epistle of Saint Iames in English. In this yeare the Kings Maiestie vnderstanding that all Idolatry, and vain pilgrimages were not vtterly abolished within these Dominions: directed his Letters vnto the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the spéedy amendment of the same.
Anthony Pierson Priest, Robert Testwood singing man, Henrie Finmore Taylor, and Iohn Marbeck singing man, were burned at VVindsor.1543. THese Articles were obiected against Pierson, that he had said, Euen as Christ once hanged betweene two theeues, so when he is holden vp betwixt the Priests handes, he hangs betwixt two theeues, except the Priest sincerely preach Gods word. That he preached that Christ should not be eaten as he did hang vpon the Cross with his flesh torne, and the bloud running about their mouthes, but he was to be eaten this day, that we might also feed on him to morrow, and next day, and con∣tinually, and that he was of more power after his resurrection then he was before. That Christ sitting amongst his Disciples, commended the Scriptures vnto them when he said, This is that bread, this is that body of Christ; so when hee brake bread and bade them deuide it amongst them, and eate it, for it was his bo∣die, and likewise the cup, saying, This is my bloud; hee signified to vs that wee should receiue the Scriptures, and distribute them vnto the people. It was obiected against Finmore, that he had said that the Sacrament of the Al∣tar was but a similitude, and that if it were God he had eaten twenty Gods in his life. He condemned Testwood for iesting with the Priest when he lifted vp the host, saying, Ho, take héed that he fall not. That Marbeck with his owne hands had writ notes out of certaine Authors, which were repugnant to the masse and sacrament of the Altar: and that he said, The Masse was impure and defiled with much vngodlinesse, and it spoyleth God of his honour; and that the eleuation of the sacrament represents the Calues of Ieroboam, and is worse Idolatrie then those were, and that therein Christ was counted a mocking-stock. There was a fift man named Bennet, vnto whose charge it was laid that hée should say, the daily Masses vsed in the Church were superfluous, and that it were sufficient the seuenth day were kept holy. Bennet and Marbeck were pardoned by the King; the other thrée stoutly suffered martyrdom. We will passe ouer the Priest which was hanged in the Porters lodge of Gar∣dener Bishop of Winchester, and one Henrie his seruant burnt at Colchester, and one Kerby a Taylor, burnt at London, because we haue no certainty of the time. Doctor London Prebend of Windsor, and one William Simonds, which were the accusers of the foresaid fiue of Windsor: they went about to trouble foure Gentle∣men of the Kings priuie Chamber, that they forced thē to plead their cause in open Court: they declared to the King what danger they were in, wherupon they them∣selues were called in question; being conuicted of manifest periurie, they were ad∣iudged to weare papers, signifying their periuries, in the open market of Wind∣sor: then they were cast in prison at London, where the said Doctor London died. About this time was one Rogers, a Lay-man of Northfolk, burned by the Duke of Northfolke, for the true affirmation of the Sacrament: halfe a yeare after the Duke lost his eldest sonne, and himselfe was committed to prison, who then ac∣knowledging his errour, became more méeke to such kind of men. Iohn Athee was indicted for saying, He would not beleeue that which the knaue Priest made and Longs wife sold; meaning the Host. And when it was told him1544. God could make it flesh and bloud, he said, He might put into it a Chicks legge.
This yeare Iohn Heywood was attached for treason, for denying the Kings su∣premacy, but he recanted, and confessed to the people, that the Pope had no more authority then other Bishops, and that the King was supreame head by the Law of God. The destruction of Merindall and Cabriers. IN the yeare 1218. as is aforesaid, God raised vp one Waldo, a rich Merchant of Lyons in France, which hauing attained perfect knowledge by the word of God, discouered the naughtines of the Ecclesiastical Ministers, many ioyned themselues vnto them, which were called Waldenses, and being by persecution dispersed into diers Countries, there were two towns remaining of their Religion in France, to wit; Merindall and Gabriers. Certaine of the cheefe of Merindall, were commanded to appeare at the Parlia∣ment of Prouence, they would haue retained Aduocates to answere for them, who told them, it was not lawfull for them to giue councell to them, because they were but Lutherans, but one told them secretly; That they should not appeare before the said Court, except they were fully determined to be burned by a little fire made of Chaffe, without any further iudgement: for the Court had already determined the matter against them; whereupon, and because they had séene many good men serued so, hauing no other cause of condemnation, but that they were reported to be Lutherans, for these causes they did not appeare at the day appointed: where∣vpon, the Parliament gaue out an arrest, whereby not onely they of Merindal, that were appointed to appeare, were condemned to be burned, as attainted of heresie and high Treason, and their goods confiscate vnto the King, but also all the in∣habitants of Merindall, wherein was fourescore houses to be burned, men, women, and children, & the towne to be rased, and the trées cut vp 500. paces round about. A little after there was a great banquet at Ayx, at which was the president Cas∣sane, and many Counsellors and Nobles, and the Archbishop of Arles, and the Bishop of Ai, with their Ladies and Gentlewomen: One that was the Bishop of Aixis Concubine, said, My Lord president will you not execute the arrest that is giuen out against the Lutherans of Merindall? And she recited the manner of it, forgetting nothing the Lord Alenson said; Gentlewoman, you haue learned this of them that would haue it so, or else it was giuen out by a Parliament of wo∣men. Then the L. of Senas said it is true, & you do not well to call the parliament a Parliament of women, he answered, he did not beléeue it, for it is a thing that the & ueliest tyrants of the world, would iudge most inhumane & detestable, & many of Merindal which séem to me to be very honest men: thē the gentlwoman lifting vp her eyes with a great chafe, said, O that it pleased God that all Lutherans had hornes growing on their foreheads. Then said my Lord Bewieu, I would all Priests harlots chattered like Pies: she said, My L. you ought not to spak against our holy mother the Church; for there was neuer any dogge that bared against the crosse, but he waxed mad: the Bishop of Aix laughed and clapt her on the back, saying, By my holy orders my minion, you haue don me great pleasure, remember me the lesson she hath taught you. The Lord answered, I will not learn of her, nor of thée, neither honesty nor honour; for the most part of the Bishops and Priests are Adulterers, Deceiuers, Theeues, Seducers: I should not speake against the holy Church, but I speake against a flocke of Wolues, Dogges, and abominable Swine. Then said the Archbishop, My L. you must giue account of these words in time and place: he answered, I would it were now; for I wil be bound to proue more naughtines in Priests then I haue spoken. When Christ called the Priests deceiuing Hypocrits, blinde Seducers, and robbers, did he them any wrong? They answered no, for the most part of them were so. Then said my Lord Bewieu, Euen so is it with the Bishops and Priests; for they are such kinde of men and worse. Then he said, Aant thou Herodias, thou vnshamefac't and dishonest harlot,
is it thy part to speak in this cōpany? thou shouldst not desire the innocent bloud to be shed, then she sayd, if I were a man I would offer you combat, to proue that I desire not to shed innocent bloud, do you call the bloud of these wicked men of Me∣rendoll innocent bloud? I do desire and offer with my whoe power, that such as they should bee destroyed, from the greatest to the least: and to sée the beginning of this worke I haue not beene wanting to imploy all my credit and frien▪ and doe not spare neither body nor goods to make the vtter ruine and destruction of them, and to deface their memory from amongst men, I had rather méet ten diels then one Lutheran. After the Bishops and Clergy met againe to consult about the executing of the sayd Arest, and they had a banket at the Bishops house of Ruda: to this banket the ayrest and best Ladies of Ainion were inuited to solace these good Prelates: af∣ter they had dined, danced, and vsed their pastime, they walked vntill supper, and as they passed the stréets leading euery one a Gentlewoman vpon his arme, they saw a man that sould dishonest Images to stirre vp the people to whoredome and knauery, and all these pictures the Bishops bought, which were as many as a Mule could carry: a little further a Booke-binder had set out Bibles of lattin and french to sel, then the Bishops sayd, who hath made thée so hardy to set forth these Marchandise to sell? dost not thou know these Bookes are forbid? the Booke bin∣der answered, is not the holy Bible as good as these goodly pictures? the Bishop of Air sayd, I renownce my part of Paradice if he bee not a Lutheran, let him bee tryed what hee is: then the Book-binder was caried into prison, and a company of ruffins cryed, a Lutheran to the fire with him, and owne strucke him with his fist, another pulled him by the beard, so that hee was al imbrued with bloud, the mor∣row hee was brought before the Bishops, hee iustified the selling of the Bibles, and said; There was no Nation but had the Byble in their owne language; Will you forbid and hide that which Christ hath commaunded to bee published? Did not Christ giue power to his Apostles, to speake all manner of tongues to the end that his Gospell might be taught to euery Creature in euery language? And why doe you forbid this Booke, ad buy such prophane painting? What cruelty is this, to take the nourishment from poore soules, but you shall gie ac∣count heereof, which call sweete sower, and sower sweete: you bee rather the Priests of Bacchus and Venus, then Pastors of the Church: Then he was con∣demned to be burned the same day, and to haue two Bybles hang, one before, and another behind, to signifi the cause of his death. The Byshoppes twice raised an Army at their owne charges, to execute the aforesaid arrest, but their enterprises were let by one meanes or other: and the King hearing the confession of this Faith of Merindole, and finding that it did a∣gree in all points to the Word of God, gaue them their pardon: Some of the Byshoppes resort to them to get them to recant, but they prooued their Religi∣on so agreeable to the Word, that many Doctors were conuerted to their opi∣nions, and confessed they neuer learned so much in all their time, as by hearing them: Their Children were so well taught, and they questioned and answered one another so diuinely; that the Doctor confessed, they had not heard Ar∣guments, so well answered in the diuinity Schooles. Yet notwithstanding in this yeare, the twelfth of Aprill, Iohn Miners, Presi∣dent of the Councell of Aygues, called the Senate and read the Kings Letters▪ which the Cardinall had obtained for that purpose, and commaunded them to execute the sentence: Now euery where hee had mustred men for the English Warres, but he vsed them for this purpose, and tooke vp more Souldiours out of euery Towne, and they had ayde sent them out of the Popes Dominions. First they set vpon the Uillage about Merindoll, and destroyed and burned them, the Merindolins seeing their cruelty, left their houses and fled into the Woods, carrying their Children vpon their Shoulders and Armes: then it was showed vnto them, that Miners came with all his whole power to
destroy them: then the men went away and left the women and children, with som to looke to them, hoping they would shew mercie to them; whom when the soul∣diers found, they abstained from slaughter: but when they had spoyled them of their money and victuals, they lead them away. Their purpose was to handle them more shamefully, but that they were let with a Captaine of horse-men; so they left the women and droue away the booty: there were fiue hundred women. Miners burned Merindoll; and finding there but one yong man, he aused him to be tyed to a tree, and shot in with Dagges: then he went to Cabriers, and per∣swaded the townsmen to open the gates, promising they should haue no hurt; but when they were let in, they slew both man, woman, and childe. Miners shut fortie women into a arne of straw, set it on fire and kept them in till they were all bur∣ned. The number slaine within the towne and without, were eight hundred: the infants that escaped their furie were baptized againe of their enemies. Then they took the town of Costa and serued it so, and many maids and women being lead in∣to a Garden of the Castle they rauished them all: and when they had kept them a day and a night, they handled them so beastly, that the mayds and them with child died shortly after. In the meane time the Merindoles and diuers others that wan∣dred in the woods and mountains, were either sent to the Gallies or were slaine. Many also died for hunger: fiue and twenty hid themselues vnder a rocke, and they smothered and burned them; so that no kinde of cruelty was omitted: not∣withstanding diuers which had escaped came to Geneua and other places neere. The persecution in Callice, with the martyr∣dome of George Bucket, alias A∣dam Damlip. THis Adam Damlip had bin a great Papist, and Chaplaine to the Bishop of Rochester: he iournyed to Rome, thinking to haue found all godly and sincere religion, where he found, as he confessed, such blasphemy of God, contempt of Christs true religion, loosenesse of life, and abomination and filthinesse, that he ab∣horred to tarrie there any longer, although he was greatly requested by Cardinall Poole, to continue there to reade three Lectures euery weeke in his house, offering him great entertainment, which he refused; and returning home, the Cardinall gaue him a French crowne. And wayting at Callice for passage into England, William Steuens and Thomas Lancaster desired him to reade there two or three dayes, and got him license of the Lord Lisle the Kings Deputie of the towne, and the license of Iohn Butler the Commissary. When he had preached three or foure times he was wel liked, so that they hyred him to preach there; and twenty dayes or more, euery morning at seuen of the clocke, he preached learnedly and plainely the truth of the blessed Sacrament of Christs body and bloud, mightily inueighing against all Papistrie, but especially against transubstantiation & the propitiatorie sacrifice of the masse, declaring how popish himselfe was, and how by the detestable wickednesse that he did see vniuer∣sally in Rome, he was returned and become an enemie to all Papistre. He came at last to speake against the Pageant or picture set forth of the resurrection, in Saint Nicholas his Church, that it was meere Idolatrie and illusion of the French-men before Callice was English. Then there came a commission to the Lord Deputy, the Commissary, and o∣thers, to search whether there were three Hosts lying vpon a Marble stone be∣sprinkled with bloud, as was put in writing vnder a Bull and Pardon; and that
if they found it not so, that immediatly it should be pulled downe, and so it was; for they breaking vp a stone in the corner of the Tombe, in stead of three Hosts found souldred in the Crosse of Marble lying vnder the Sepulchre, three plaine Counters, which they had pointed like vnto Hosts: and aboue that was the tippe of a Sheeps tayle, which Damlip shewed to the people the next day, which was Sonday, out of the Pulpit. And after they were sent by the Lord Deputie to the King. Then the Prior of the white Friers, and one of the Lord Lisle his Chap∣lains, contradicted his Sermons, and caused him to be sent for to Cranmer and Steuen Gardiner, and others, before whome hee did so constantly defend the doctrine which he had taught, that Cranmer being yet but a Lutheran, maruelled excéedingly at it, and said, that the Scripture knew no such terme of transubstan∣tiation. Then the other Bishops threatned him, to whom he promised, the next day to deliuer them all in writing which he had formerly preached in Callice. In the meane time he had secret intimation giuen him by Cranmer, that if hee ap∣peared the next day, he should be sure to be committed: whereupon he sent them his Faith with the arguments thereupon in writing, and he went aside into the West countrey. Then the King was certified that there were many diuersities of opinions in Calice, tending to the danger thereof: Whereupon Doctor Champion and M. Garnet, who after was burned, were sent ouer to preach to them, where he prea∣ched the same true Doctrine which Adam Damlip had done. After them, one Wil∣liam Smith, Curate of our Ladies Parish in Callice, preaching earnestly inuay∣ing against Papistry and wilfull ignorance, exhorting them to imbrace the word, and not to contemne it, least Gods wrath fall vpon them, which followeth the con∣tempt of his holy word. At length the said Lord Lisle, which was Bastard to King Edward the fourth, which maintained Damlip as before, by the intising of his wicked wife, the Lady Honora, she being thereunto prouoked by Sir Thomas Palmer, and Iohn Rock∣wood▪ Esquire: these, with seauen others, wrote very haynous Letters vnto the King and Councell, against diuers of the Towne of Calice. Whereupon, diuers of them were often punished in Callice, and many of them sent for ouer into Eng∣land, and were orely imprisoned and punished, and had not escaped the fire, but by the Kings pardon. The aforesaid Adam Damlip taught Schoole about some two yeares in the West Country, after he was apprehended and brought vnto Stephen Gardiner, who committed him to the Marshalsie, where he continued two yeares: and for his honest behauiour hee was beloued of the whole house, and especially of the kée∣per, and he did much amongst the common sort of the prisoners in reprouing vice: Then being resolued rather to loose his life, then not to suffer his talent to be vsed to Gods glory by being detained in prison. Wherevpon he sent an Epistle to Gardiner: And then by the Bishops com∣mandement hee was had to Callice, where first hee layed vnto his charge here∣sie; but because all such offences before such a day were pardoned by an Act of Parliament: then for the receiuing of the aforesaid French Crowne of Cardinall Poole, as you heard before he was condemned of Treason in Callice, cruelly put to death, beeing hanged, drawne and quartered: At his death Sir Raph Ellerker Knight Marshall there would not suffer him to declare his Faith or cause he died for, but bad the executioner dispatch the Knaue: and said, he would not away be∣fore he saw the Traytors heart out: but shortly after in a skirmish with the French∣men at Bullen he was slaine, and his enemies cut off his members, and cut the heart out of his body and so left him a terrible example of the Iustice of God, vp∣on all bloudy persecutors. The said Lord Lisley with the others as before vniustly charging them of Cal∣lice with sedition and heresie, were all shortly after either greatly out of the Kings fauour, and committed vnto prison, or else by desperate deathes died. I
will recite but Rockwood the chiefe stirrer of the afflictions aforesaid, who at the last breath staring and raging cryed he was damned; and being bid to aske God mercie, he cried out, All too late, for I haue sought malitiously the deaths of a num∣ber of the Towne, which in my heart I thought to be honest men: which words he vsed when thirteene were carried in Irons into England; when one told him he neuer saw men of such honesty so sharply corrected, and taking it so ioyfully▪ Rock∣wood then leaping, scoffingly said, All too late: and the vnder Marshall suddenly fell downe in the Councell Chamber, and neuer spake. A labouring man hauing heard Damplip, said, Hee would neuer beleeue that Priests could make the Lords bodie at their pleasure: whereupon hee was con∣demned by one Haruy a Commissary, who said he was an heretick, and should die a vile death. The poore man answered, he was no heretick, but in the faith of Christ, and said, Whereas thou sayest I shall die a vile death, thou shalt die a viler death shortly; and so it came to passe: for within halfe a yeare the said Haruy was han∣ged, drawne, and quartred in Callice for treason. DODDE alias SCOT. HEe was taken in Callice, with certaine Germane bookes about him, and be∣ing examined thereupon, and standing constantly to the truth, hee was con∣demned and burned there. VVILLIAM BVTTON. HEe being a souldier of Callice, merrily asked a Papist, Whether one that were suddenly taken might not occupie one of the Popes pardons in stead of a broken paper: and another question, Whether the world might better want Dogs then Popish Priests, and answered it, that if there were no Dogs, we could make no more, but if there lacked ignorant Priests, we might soone make too many of them. There came a black Frier to Callice with the Popes pardons, who for 4. pence would deliuer a soule out of Purgatorie; this Button asked him, if the Pope could deliuer soules out of Purgatorie: the Frier said, there is no doubt of that: then he said, Why doth he not of charity deliuer all the sules thereout? for which caue he was accused vnto the Commissary, who chafing, called him heretick: then said Button, If the Pope can deliuer soules out of Purgatorie, and will not of chariti doe it, then would God the King would make me Pope, for surely I would deliuer all out without money. Whereupon the Commissary made him beare a Billet, and procured his wages, which was sixe pence a day, to be taken from him: then he went vnto the King, and declared the whole matter, who after gaue him eight pence a day. In Nouember,1545. after the King had subdued the Scots, and ioyning with the Emperour, had inuaded France, and had got the Towne of Bullen, he summoned a Parliament, in which was granted him, besides subsidies of money, all Colled∣ges, Chanteries, Free Chappels, Hospitals, Fraternities, Guilds and perpetui∣ties of stipendary Priests to be disposed at his will and pleasure. They being thus giuen to him by act of Parliament in December, the next Lent Doctor Crome preached in the Mercers Chappell: amongst other reasons to induce the people from the vaine reasons of Purgatorie, he said, It Trentalls and Masses could auaile the soules in Purgatorie, then did not the Parliament well in giuing away Monasteries, Colledges, and Chanteries, which serued principally
to that purpose: but if the Parliament did well, as no man could denie, then it is plaine that such Chanteries and priuate masses confer nothing to relieue them in Purgatorie. This Dilemma was insoluble, but at Easter next they brought him in question for it, and so handled him, that they made him to recant, or else they would haue dissolued him and his argument in the fire. ANNE ASKEW. AFter she had bin many times examined, and she had answered so wisely, that though she had affirmed the truth of the Sacrament, yet none could touch her for her arguments by the law. Then she wrote her minde of the Sacament, as followeth: I perceiu, deare friends in the Lord, that you are not yet perswaded of the truth in the Lords Supper, because Christ sayth, Take, eate, this is my bodie: but he giuing the bread as an outward signe to be receiued with the mouth, hee meant in perfect beléefe they should receiue his body which should die for the people; and to thinke his death the onely saluation of their soules. The read and Wine were left vs for a Sacramentall communion of the benefite of his death; and that we should be thankefull for the grace of redemption. And in the closing thereof he sayth, This doe in remembrance of me so often as you eate and drinke; or else we should haue béene forgetfull of that we ought to haue in daily remembrance, and also been vnthankefull: therefore we ought to pray to GOD for the true meaning of the Holy Ghost touching this communion; for the letter slayeth, and the spirit giueth life. In the sixth of Iohn all is applied vnto aith: and in 1. Cor. 4. The things which are seene are temporall, but the things which are not seene are e∣uerlasting: and in the third of the Hebrewes, Christ ruleth ouer his house, whose house we are, if we hold fast the confidence and reioycing of hope vnto the end: and the dead Temple is not his house, Wherefore to day if you will heare his voice, harden not your hearts. Her confession in Newgate. CHrist took the bread, saying to his Disciples, Take, eate, this is my body which shall be broken for you, meaning his body the bread, but a signe and Sacra∣ment: and so he said, He would break downe the Temple, and in three dayes build it vp againe, signifying his body by the Temple, although there be many that can∣not perceiue the true meaning thereof; for the vayle that Moses put euer his face before the children of Israell remayneth to this day: but when God shall take it a∣way, then shall these blinde men see. For it is plainly expressed in the Historie of Bell; O King, saith Daniell, be not deceiued, for God will be worshipped in nothing that is made with hands of men. O what stiffe-necked people are these, that will alwayes resist the Holy Ghost, as their fathers haue done. Truth is layde in pri∣son, Luk. 21. The law is turned to wormwood, Amos 6. and there can no right iudge∣ment goe forth, Esay 59. Her condemnation. THey said I was an heretick, and condemned by the law, if I would stand to my opinion; I said, touching my Faith I said and wrote to the Councell, I would not deny because I knew it true: then they would knowe whether I would denie the Sacrament of Christs bodie and bloud; I answered yea: for the same Sonne of GOD that was borne of the blessed Uirgin Mary, is now glorious in the heauens, and will come againe at the last day as he went vp: and
that which you call your God is a peece of bread, and for more proofe thereof, let it lie in a boxe but thrée monthes and it will be mouldy and turne to nothing that is good, therefore I am perswaded it is no God. Then they willed me to haue a Priest and then I smiled, then they asked mee if it were not good, I sayd I would confesse my faults vnto God, for I was sure hee would heare me with fauour, and so we were condemned by the quest. This was my beléefe which I wrote to the Councell, that the Sacramentall bread was left vs to bee receaued with thanksegiuing in the remembrance of his death, the onely remedy of our soles recouery, and thereby we also receaue the whole benefit of his passion, then they would needs know whether the bread in the boxe were God or no, I sayd God is a spirit and will bee worshipped in spirit and truth, then they sayd, will you plainely deny Christ to bee in the Sacrament? I answered I beléeue the eternall sonne of God, not to dwell there, in witnes where∣of I recited againe the history of Bell and the 7. and 17. of the Acts and the 24 of Mathew concluding I neither wish death nor feare it, God haue the praise thereof with thankes, then she wrte to the Lord Chancelour and the King but it pre∣uayled not. After she was sent from Newgate to the Tower, then Maister Rich and one of the Councell charged me vppon mine obedience, to shew vnto them if I knew any of my Sect, I answered I knew none, they asked me of my Lady Suffolke, my La∣dy Sussex, my Lady Hereford, my Lady Denny, and my Lady Fitzrallins. I sayd if I should pronounce any thing against them I am not able to proue it, they said the King was informed I could name if I would a great number of my sect, I sayd the King was as well deceaued in that behalfe as dissembled with in other mat∣ters. Then they commanded mee to shewe how I was maintayned in the Counter, and who willed me to stick to mine opinion, I sayd there was none did strengthen me therein, and I was maintayned in the Counter by the meanes of my Mayde, for she made mone vnto the Prentises, and they by her did send mee money, but who they were I know not. Then they sayd diuers Gentlewomen gaue me money, but I know not their names, then they said many Ladies sent me money, I answered, there was a man in a blew cote deliuered me ten shillings and said my Lady of Hereford sent it me, and another in a Uiolet cote gaue me eyght shillings, and sayd my Lady Denny sent it mee, but I am not sure who sent it me, then they said there were of the Councell which did maintaine mee, and I said no. Then they put mee vpon the Racke and kept me there a long time, because I would not confesse any Gentlewomen or Ladies on my opinion, and because I did not cry, my Lord Chancelor and Sir Iohn Baker tooke paines to racke me with their owne hands vntill I was nie dead. Then the Liefetennant caused mee to be loosed from the racke and incontinent∣ly I swounded, and they recouered me againe: after I sat two houres reasoning with my Lord Chancllor vppon the bare floure, where with flattering words hee perswaded me to leaue my opinions, but God gaue mee grace to perseuere and will doe I hope, then I was brought to bed with as painefull bones as euer paci∣ent Iob: then my Lord Chancellor sent me word if I would leaue mine opinions, I should lacke nothing, if I would not I should to Newgate and be burned: I sent him word againe I would die rather then breake my faith, She was borne of such a kindred, that she might haue liued in great prosperity, if she would rather haue followed the world then Christ: at the day of her executi∣on she was brought into Smithfield in a chaire, because she could not goe on her feete by meanes of her torments, she was tyed by the middle with a chaie that held vp her body, then Doctor Shaxton began his Sermon: Anne Askew hearing and answering againe vnto him, where hee sayd well, she confirmed the same, where hee iaid amisse, she said, hee speaketh without booke.
There was at the same time three burned with her: One Nicholas Belemy a Priest of Shropshire, Iohn Adams a Taylor, and Iohn Lacels, Gentleman of the Court and Kings houshold. Wrisley Lord Chancellor, the old Duke of Norfolke, the Earle of Bed∣ford, and the Lord Mayor: Wrisle sent Anne Askew the Kings Pardon, if shee would recant: she said the came not thither to deny her Lord, and master; Then were the Letters likewise offered vnto the others, who in like maner followed the constancie of the woman: Wherevpon the Mayor commanded the fire to bee put vnto them. Sir George Blage of the Priuy Chamber was imprisoned, condemned, and should haue been burned, but that the King pardoned him: For saying the Masse auailth neither quick nor the dead, being asked what then it was good for, he said belike to keep a horse from stumbling. The troubles of Katherine Parre, Henry the eight his last Wife, for the Gospel, by the meanes of Gardiner and others. A Yéere after the King came from Bullen, he was informed that the Quéens Katherine Parre, was much giuen to the reading and study of he Scrip∣tures; and that shee had retained diuers godly learned Preachers to instruct her therein, with whom shee vsed priuately to conferre, and in the after∣noones one of them made collation to her: her Ladies and Gentlewomen and others disposed to heare, in which Sermons they oftentimes touched the abu∣ses in the Church, and often shee would debate with the King touching Religi∣on, and perswade him as hee had to the glory of GOD, and his eternall fame bgunne a godly worke in banshing that monstrous Idoll of Rome, so hee would purge his Church from the dregges thereof, wherein was yet great superstition: And though the King in the later end grew oppnionate, and would not bee taught nor contended withall by Argument yet towards her he refrained his accustomed manner, for neuer handmaide sought more to please her Mistresse, then she to please his humour; and she was of such singular beau∣ty, fauur, and comely personage, wherein the King was greatly delighted: but Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, Wrisley Lord Chancelor, and others of the Kings Priuy Chamber, practised her death, that they might the better stop the passage of the Gospell: and hauing taken away the patronesse of the professors of the truth, they might inuade the remainder with fire and sword, but they dust not speake to the King touching her, because they saw the King loued her so well. At length the King was cke of a sore legge, which made him very fro∣ward, and the Queene being with him did not faile to vse all occasions to moo him zealusly to proceed in the reformation of the Church: The King shewed some tokens of mislike, and broke off the matter, and knit vp the Arguments with gentle words, and after plasant talke she tooke her leaue: The Bishop of Winchester beeing there; the King immediately vpon her departure vsed these words; It is a good hearing when women become such Clarks, and much to my comfort to come in mine old age to be taught by my Wife. Then the Bishop shewed a mislike that the Queene would so much forget her selfe to stand in Argument with his Maiestie, whose Iudgement and Di∣initie hee extolled to his face aboue Princes of that and other ages, and of
Doctors professed in Diuinitie, and that it wss vnseemely for any of his Sub∣iects to argue with him so malapertly, and that it was gréeuous to all his Coun∣celors and Seruants to heare the same: inferring how perilous it hath euer been for a Prince to suffer such insolent words of a Subiect, who as they are bold against their Soueraignes words, so they want not will but strength to o∣uerthwart them in deeds. Then the Religion by the Queene so stiffely maintained, did dissolue the po∣litick gouernment, and made the peoples opinions so odious, and perillous vnto the Princes estate, that they dae affme that the greatest Subiect in the Land, defendeth those arguments which they doe: yet he said he would not, neither durst without good warranty from his Maiestie, speake his knowledge in the Queenes cause, though many apparant reasons made for him: and such as his duety and zeale to his Maiesies preseruation would not licence him to conceale, though the vttering thereof through her, and her faction, might be his dstruction and theres which tendred his Maiesties safety, without his Maiestie would be his protector, which if hee would doe, hee with others of his faithfull Councelors, could disclose such Treasons, cloked with heresies, that his Ma∣iestie should casly perceiue, how perilous a matter it is to cherish a Serpent within his owne bosome, and he crept so farre into the King at that time, that he and his fellowes filled the Kings mistrustfull minde, with such feares, that the King gaue them warrant to consult together, about drawing of Articles against the Queene, wherein her life might be touched. Then they thought it best at first to begin with such Ladies as she most e∣steemed, and wer priuy to all her doing, as the Lady Harbert, after Coun∣tesse of Pembroke the Queenes Sister; and the Lady Iane, and the Lady Tir∣wit, all of her Priuy Chamber: and to accuse them vpon six Articles, and to search there Closets and Coffers, that they might finde somewhat to charge the Queene, and that being found, the Quene should bee taken and carried in a Barge by night to the Tower: of which aduice the King was made priuy by Gar∣diner, and the Lord Chancelor, to which they had the Kings consnt, and the time and place appointed. This purpose was so finely handled, that it grew within few daies of the time appointed, and the poore Quene suspected nothing, but after her accu∣stomed manner visited the King, still deale with him touching Religion as before: After the King brake the whole practise to one Doctor Wendy, one of his Physitions, telling him that hee would no longer bee troubled with such a Doctresse as shee was, but charged him vpon his life, not to vtter it to any. But it came to passe that the Bill of Articles drawne against the Queene, and subscribed with the Kings owne hand, falling from the bsome of one of the Councell was found of some godly person, and brought to the Queene; who see∣ing it, fell into a great agony and Melancholy. The King hearing what perill of life she was in, sent his Phisition vnto her; and the said Doctor Wendy perceiuing the matter by her words, brake with her touching the said Articles, deuised against her, and gaue her warning of that mischiefe which hanged ouer her head: beséeching her to be secret, and to con∣forme her selfe to the Kings minde, and no doubt she should finde him gracious: After the King came to her himselfe, vnto whom after she had vttered her griefe, how it was for feare his Maiestie had forsaken her, hee so refreshed her with com∣fortable words, that she began to recouer. Then shee commanded her Ladies to conuay away her Bookes which were against the Law, and then she went to the King: he courteously welcomed her, and entred into talke of Religion, séeming desirous to be resolued of the Queene of certaine doubts. The Queene perceiuing to what purpose this his talke tended, your Ma∣iestie
doth well know (quoth shee) and I am not ignorant of what great weak∣nesse by our first Creation is allotted to vs women, to bee subiect vnto man as our head: from which head all our direction must proceed, and as God made man after his own Image, that being indued with more speciall gifts of per∣fection, might bee stirred to meditate heauenly things, and obay his comman∣dements, so he made woman of man, of whom, and by whom, she is to bee com∣manded and gouerned, whose womanly weaknesse ought to bee tolerated and ayded, that by his wisedome such things as be lacking in her might be supplied: Therefore your Maiestie being so excellent in ornaments of wisedome, and I so much inferiour in all respects of Nature: Why doth your Maiestie in such defuse causes of Religion require my Iudgement, which when I haue vttered & said, what I can, yet I must and will referre my Iudgement in this and all causes to your Maiesties wisedome, as my onely Anker, supreme head, and the gouernor heere in earth next vnto God. Not so by Saint Mary said the King, you are become a Doctor late to in∣struct vs. Shee answered, your Maiestie hath much mistaken mee, who haue euer thought it preposterous for the woman to instruct her husband, but rather to learn of him; and where I haue beene bold to hold talke with your Maiestie, where∣in there hath seemed some difference in opinion, I haue not done it to main∣taine opinion, but to minister talke that your Maiestie might with lesse griefe passe the paine of your infirmitie, being attentiue to your talke, and that I might re∣ceiue some profit by your Maiesties learned Discourse: wherein I haue not mis∣sed any part of my desire, alwaies referring my selfe in such matters to your Ma∣iestie. hen said the King▪ tendeth your Argument to no worse end, then wee are now as perfect friends as euere we were, and he imbraced her, and kissed her; saying it did him more good to heare these words, then if he had heard newes of a hundred thousand pound fallen to him. On the day that was appointed for the aforesaid Tragedy: the King went into his Garden, whether the Queene being sent for came, onely the three La∣dies aboue named waiting on her; with whom the King was as pleasant as euer hee was in his life: In the middest of his mirth the houre appointed being come, the Lord Chancelor commeth into the Garden, with forty of the Kings guard at his heles, with purpose to take the Queene with the three Ladies to the the Tower, whom the King sternely beholding, called him to him, who on his knees whispered to the King: the King cal'd him knaue, arrant knaue, and beast∣ly foole, and commanded him to auant out of his presence; which words the Quéene heard, though they were low spoken: then he departed with his traine, the whole mould of his deuice broken. The Queene seeing the King so chaed, spoke for the Lord Chancellor: Ah poore soule quoth hee, thou little knowest how euill hee deserueth this grace at thy hands, he hath been towards thee sweet heart an arrant knaue, and so let him goe. If King Henry had liued, hee and the French King had been at this point, within halfe a yeere after to haue changed the Masse in both their Realmes into a Communion, as wee now vse it, and also vtterly to haue extirped the Popes vsurped power; out of both their Realmes: and they ment to exhort the Emperour to doe the like in Flanders, and his other countreyes, or else to breake off from him: and herein quoth the Archbishop Cranmer, the King willed mee to pen a forme thereof to be sent to the French King, but that it was letten by the death of King Henry. When the Bishops had brought ANNE ASKEVV and her fellow Mar∣tyrs to death, being now in their triumph, as the Pharisies were when they had killed Christ: they deuised how to euer read the truth for euer: where∣vpon
they made a strait Procamation authorised by the Kings  for a∣bolishing of the Scripture, and all other English Bookes which miht ge light to the setting forth of Gods Word, and the grace of the Gospell, which thou maist see in the Booke at large, which no doubt had done much hurt in the Church amongst the godly, in bringing them to danger, or keeping  in blindnes, had not the shortnes of the Kings daies stopped the malignant purpo∣ses of the Prlats, causing the King to leaue that to the people by his death, which by his life he would not grant, for within foure monethes after the procla∣mation,1547 he deceased the eight and thirty yeare of his raigne. The History touching the Persecutions in Scotland: Deane, Thomas Forret. THis Deane, Thomas Forret, preached euery Sunday in his parish vpon the Epistle and Gospell, which was nouely in Scotland to see any preach but the Black Frir, or the Gray. Wherefore the Friers enuied him, and accused him to the Bishop of Donkelden as an heretick, which shewed the mysteries of the Scripture vnto the vulgar people, to make the Clergy detestable: The Bi∣shop sending for him said: my Ioy, Deane Thomas, I leue you well,  am infor∣med you preach the Epistle and Gospel euery Sunday, and that you take not the Cow for mortuarie, nor the vpper Cloth for Crisome of your parishioners, which is very preiudiciall to the Church men: My ioy Deane Thomas, take your Cow and your vpper Cloth, and preach not euery Sunday, for in so doing, you will make the people thinke we should preach likewise: But when you finde a good E∣pistle or a good Gospell that setteth forth the lbertie of the Church, preach that and let the rest be. Thomas answered, my parishioners pay me my duetis willingly, and we agree well: and where your Lordship saith it is too much o preach euery Sonday, I thinke it too little: and also would wish that your Lordship would doe the like: nay, nay, we are not ordained to preach M. Forret: and where your Lordship spea∣keth of a good and an euill Epistle, I could neuer finde none but good. Then spake my Lord, I thanke God I neuer knew what the Old & New Te∣stament ment: (Wherevpon, grew a prouerb, you are like the Bishop of Dunkel∣den, that knw neither new nor old Law) therefore said the Bishop, I will know nothing but my portous, and my pontificall: if you forgoe not these fantasies you shall repent it. Thomas said, my cause is iust before God, and I passe not what fol∣loweth thereon. After he was summoned by the Cardinall of Saint Andrewes, and the said Bi∣shop of Dunkelden, and with him were summoned Frier Iohn Kellow, Frier Be∣uarage, Duncane Simson Priest: Robert Foster, a Gentleman, with thrée or foure other men of Striueling, who at thei day of apparance were condemned to death without any place of recantation, because they were chiefe hereticks, and teachers of heresies: and because many of them were at the marriage of the Priest of Twy∣body, and eate flesh in Lent at their Bridall, and they were all together burnd vpon the Castle Hill of Edenbrough, where they comforted one another meruei∣lously.
The Persecution of certaine in the towne of Perth. THere was an Act of Parliament in the gouernment of the Earle of Arrai, gi∣uing priuilege to reade the scriptures in their mother tongue, but secluding al conference thereof, wherby y• eyes of the elect of God, were opened to sée the truh, and abhorre Papisticall abhominations, at which time Fryer Spencer preached, that Prayers made to Saints were necessary, and without it no hope of saluation: Then Robert Lambe, a Burges of Perth, accused him opnl in the Church of er∣ronious Doctrine, and adiured him in Gods name to vtter the truth, whereupon trouble and tumul of people arose, so that the said Robert with great danger of his life escaped, euen the Women addressed themselues to great cruelty against him. Shortly after the Cardinall and the Earle of Argile sat about the matter, be∣fore these persons were brought; Robert Lambe, William Anderson, Iames Hun∣ter, Iames Rauelson, Iames Fouleson, and Hellen Sirke his Wife, and the next day were condemned to death by an Assize, for violating the foresaid Act of Parliment by conferring together of the Scripture, and for that the said Robert Lambe, Willi∣am Anderson, and Iames Raueleson, hanged the Image of Saint Francis in a cord, nayling Rammes hornes to his head, and a Cowes rump to his tale, and for ea∣ting a Goose of Alhollow Eue: and Iames Hunter for kéeping company with thm: Helen Sirke, for saying Mary merited not by workes to be the Mother of Christ, and to be preferred before other Women, but Gods free mercy xalted her to that estate: Iohn Raueleson for setting vp in his house a triple Crowne of Saint Peter, which the Cardinal tooke to be done in mockage of his Cardnals ha. At the place of execution Robert Lambe exhorted the people to feare God, and to leaue the leauen of Papisticall abhominations, and prophesied of the ruine of the Cardinall, which after came to passe: and comforting one another, that they should sup together in the Kingdome of heauen. The Woman desired to die with her Husband, but was not suffered, then she kissed him, saying; We haue liued to∣gether ioyfull daies, but this day is most ioyful, because we must haue ioy for euer. I will not bid you God night, for we shall all this night méete with ioy in heauen. The condemnation of GEORGE VVISHARD Gentleman, and his Articles before the Cardinall of Scotland, and others. 1 TOuching Preaching when he was forbidden, hee answered; I haue read in the Acts of the Apostles, that it is not lawfull to desist from prea∣ching the Gospell for menaces of men, therefore it is written, wee must rather obey God then men, and I beléeue that the Lord will turne your cursings of mee vnto blessings: and as in the second of Malachy; I will curse your blessings, & bless your cursings. 2 He affirmed the mouing of the body outward of the Priest at Masse, without the inward mouing of the heart, is but the playing of an ape, and not the seruing of God, who must be honored in spirit and verity. 3 That auriculer confession hath no promise of the Euangell, and therefore
it cannot be a Sacrament, but there are many testimonies of confession made to God. 4 As none will make marchandise with one of a strange Language, ex∣cept that he doe vnderstand the promise made by the Stranger: So I would that we vnderstood what wee promise in the Name of the Infant to GOD in Baptisme: then saide one Bleiter a Chaplaine; The hast the Deuill and Spirit of errour: then said a Child, the Deuill cannot speake such words as he doth. 5 The lawfull vse of the Sacraments is most acceptable vnto God, but the great abuse is very detestable vnto him: I once met with a Iew as I was sayling on the Sea, I inquired of him what was the cause of his pertinacy, that he did not beléeue the true Messias was come, being that he saw the prophesies of him fulfilled, and the Prophesies and the Scepter of Iuda was likewise ta∣kn away: He answered me; When the Messias commeth, he shall restore all things, and he shall not abrogate the Law giuen vnto our fore-fathers as yee doe: for we sée the poore almost ready to perish for hunger amongst you, and you pitty them not, and amongst vs Iewes, though we are poore, there are no beggars found. And it is forbidden by the Law, to faine an Image of any thing in Hea∣uen or Earth, but onely to honour God, but your Churches are full of Idols, and ye adore a péece of Bread baked vpon the ashes, and that it is your God, then the Bishops shooke their heads, and spitted on the earth. 6 He reproued coniurings and exorcismes of holy Water, and said that they were contrary to Gods word. 7 Saint Peter saith, God hath made vs Kings and Priests: and againe, hee hath made vs a kinglie Priest-hood; therefore I affirme, that any man cunning in the Word of GOD, and the Faith of Christ, he hath power from God, by the Word of God to binde and lose: and a man that is not conuersant in Gods Word, nor constant in Faith, what estate or order soeuer he be of, hath no po∣wer to binde or lose, being he wanteth the word of God, the instrument to binde and lose with. 8 Touching fréewill, he said; as many as firmely beléeue in Christ, haue li∣berty, as in the 8. of Iohn, If the Sonne make you free, then verily shall you be free, but as many as beleeue not in Christ, are bond seruants of sinne, he that sinneth is bond to sinne. 9 Touching praying to Saints, he said; it is certaine in Scripture, that we should worship and honour one God, but for honouring of Saints it is doubtfull, whether they heare our inuocation made to them; therefore I exhort all men, that they would leaue the vnsure way, and follow that way which our Maister Christ taught vs: He is our onely Mediator, and maketh intercession for vs; hee is the doore, he that entreth not in by this doore, but climbeth in another way, is a Theefe and a Murderer; he is the verity and life, he that goeth out of this way, is fallen into the mire. 10 Touching Purgatory, he neuer found any place of Scripture appliable ther∣to: then he said to Maister Iohn Lander his accuser, if you haue any testimony of Scripture, by which you can proue such a place, shew it before this Auditory: but he had not a word to say for himselfe. 11 Touching the Uowes of the religious, he said; some be gelded by nature, and some are gelded of men, and some are chast for the Kingdome of Christ: these are blessed, but as many as haue not the guift of chastity▪ neither haue ouer∣come the lusts of the Flesh for the Gospell, and yet vow chastity, you haue expe∣rience (though I hold my peace) to what inconuenience they haue vowed them∣selues, whereat they were angry, thinking better to haue ten Concubines then one Wife. 12 Touching generall Councels, hee said he would beléeue them no further
the they agréed with the word of God: then one Iohn Graysend bad Iohn Landers hast to reade the rest of the Articles, and not to arry for his answere, for wée may not abide them (quoth he) no more, then the Deuill may abide the signe of the Crosse. Then the Cardinall and Bishops pronounced their sentence▪ definitiue against him, and as he went to execution, two Fryers said to him; pray to our Lady, that she may be a mediatrix for you to her Sonne: to whom he said, Tempt me not my Brethren: when he came to the fire, he said thrice vpon his knées, O thou Father of heauen I commend my spirit into thy hands, O thou swéet Sauior of the world, haue mercy on me. Then he said, I beséech you Christian Brethren and Sisters be not offended in the word of God, for the torments you sée prepared for me, but loue the word, and suffer for it, it being your saluation and euerlasting comfort, and pray them that haue heard me, that they leaue not off the Word of GOD, which I taught them for no persecutions: for my Doctrine was no Wiues Fables, after the Constitutions of men. If I had taught mens Doctrine, I had gotten great thankes, but I suffer this for teaching the Gospell, and I doe it gladly: consider my visage, you shall not sée me change my colour for feare of this grim fire, and so I pray you for to do, if any persecution come vnto you for the words sake: some haue said of me, that I taught that the soule of man should sléepe vntill the day of Iudgemnt, but I know surely my Soule shall sup with my Sauiour Christ this night within this sixe houres. I beséech you exhort your Prelats to the learning of the Word of GOD, that they may bee ashamed to doe euill, and learne to doe good, and if they will not conuert from their wicked errors, the wrath of GOD shall hastily come vpon them: then the Hang-man asked him foregiuenesse, and he kissed him and said; My heart doe thine office, I forgiue thee, then he was han∣ged by the middle and neck, and burned: the people pitiously mourned for his great torments. Within two months after the martirdome of this blessed man, George Wise∣hard, Dauid Beaton, the blooddy Archbishop and Cardinall of Scotland, was by the iust iudgement of God laine by one Lech, and other Gentlemen, who sudden∣ly brake into his Castle vpon him, and murdred him in his bed, crying out, a∣lasse slay me not, I am a Priest: and so like a Butcher he liued and eyed, and he lay seauen months vnburied, and at last like a Carion was buried in a dung∣hill. ADAM WALLACE in Scotland. IN the yeare one thousand fiue hundred forty nine, Iohn Hamelton was made Archbishop of S. Andrews and Cardinall, not inferior to his Predecessor in cru∣elty: in the next yeare he condemned Adam Wallace, and one Feane, for these Ar∣ticles following. 1 That the Bread and Wine on the Altar, are not the body and blood of Iesus Christ after consecration. 2 That the Masse hath no ground in the word of God, and is very Idolatry and abhominable in the sight of God. 3 That the God which they worship, is but Bread sowen of Corne, grow∣ing out of the Earth, baked of mens hands, and nothing else: Then hee was asked whether he would recant; He said he had answered nothing but that which agréed with the Word of God, so GOD iudge him and his conscience, wherein hee would abide vnto death, and if you condeme mee for holding Gods Word, my innocent blood shall bee required at your handes, then they
gaue forth sentence against him: the night after he spent in singing and lauding God, hauing learned the Psalter of Dauid without booke, being besides the fire, he lifted by his eies thrée or foure times, and said to the people; Let it not offend you that I suffer death for the truth, for the Disciple is not aboue his Maister: then he said; They will not let me speake, so the ire was lighted, and he departed to God constantly. A schisme in Scotland for the Pater-noster. ONe Richard Marshall preached at S. Andrewes, that the Pater-noster should be said only to God, and not to Saints: the Fryers had great indignation, that their old Doctrine should be repugned, and stirred vp Toittis a Gray-Fryer to preach against it, who preached the Lords Prayer might be offered to Saints, bcause euery Petition therein appertained to them, as wee call an old man Fa∣ther, much more may we call Saints our Father, and because they are in Hea∣un, we may say our Father which art in Heauen, and because they are holie, we may make their Names holie, and say hallowed be thy Name; and because the Kingdome of Heauen is theirs by possession, wee may say to euery one of them thy Kingdome come; and because their will is Gods will, we may say, thy will be done to any of them: but he confessed, Saints had no power to giue vs our daily bread, but that they should pray to God to giue it vnto vs, and so he glosed the rest to the end: and he affirmed, that Pauls Napkin and Peters shaddow, did mi∣racle, and Eliseus Cloake deuided the Waters, attributing nothing to the power of God. Upon this there was a dangerous Schisme in Scotland; some affirming one thing, and some another: Whereupon rose this Prouerb; To whom say you your Pater-noster, and the people called the Fryer, Fryer Pater-noster, so that for very shame he left the Towne. At length there was a disputation about it at the Uniuersitie: The Popish Doctors affirmed, it should be said to GOD forma∣liter, and to Saints materialiter; others Vltime & non vltime, Others, that it should be said to GOD principaliter, and to Saints minus principaliter: Others, that it should bee said to God primarily, and to Saints secundarily; Others, to God it should be Capiendo strictè; and to God Capiendo largè: by which subtile Sophistry, the people were more doubtfull then before. The Doctors said, because Christ, who made the Pater-noster, neuer came into Brittane▪ and so vnderstood not the English tongue; therefore the Doctors con∣cluded it should be said in Latine. VVALTER MILL. AMongst the rest of the Martirs of Scotland the constancy of Walter Mill, is not to be passed in silence, out of whose Ashes sprang thousands of his opini∣on▪ who chose rather to dye, then to bee any longer ouer-trodden with the cru∣l, beastly, and ignorant Byshops, Abbots, Monkes, and Fryers: and scone af∣ter his Martyrdome, the Congregation began to debate true Religion against the Papists. He climbing vp into a Pulpet to be examined before the Bishops, they séeing him so weake, partly by age, and partly trauell, and euill intreatment, that hee could not climbe vp without helpe: they thought they should not haue heard him, but when he spake he made the Church sound with great stoutnesse, that the Christions reioyced, and the Aduersaries were ashamed: At first hee knéeling, praying long, and was commaunded to rise and answere his Articles, calling him Sir Walter Mill, He said, he ought to obay God more then Men, and where
you call me Sir Walter, call me Walter; for I haue bin ouer long one of the Popes Knights. Oliphant. What think you of Priests marriage? Mille. I hold it a blessed band: for Christ made it free to all men, but you ab∣horre it, and take other mens wiues and daughters: you vow chastitie and breake it. Paule hade rather marrie then burne: the which I haue done, for God neuer forbade marriage to any estate or degrée. Oliph. Thou sayest there is not seuen Sacraments. Mille. Giue me the Lords Supper and Baptisme, and take you the rest: and if there be seuen, why omit you one of them, to wit marriage, and giue your selues to whoredeme? Oliph. Thou art against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Mill. If a King bid many to a feast, and when they sit downe to eate, he turn his back to them and eate vp all himselfe, doth he not mock them? euen so do you mock the people, eating and drinking the Sacrament, and giuing them none: the Sacra∣ment of God is not to be taken carnally but spiritually, and stands in faith onely. Your masse is wrong, for Christ was once offered vpon the Crosse for mans tres∣passe, and will neuer be offered againe. Oliph. Thou deniest the office of a Bishop. Mill. I affirme, those which you call Bishops doe not the workes of Bishops, but liue after their sensuall pleasures, and take no care for the flocke, nor yet re∣gard the word of God, but desire to be honoured and called Lords. Oliph. Thou speakest against pilgrimages. Mill. I say it is not commaunded in Scripture, and that there is no greater whoredom in no places then at your pilgrimages, except in common Brothell-houses. Oliph. Thou preachest priuatly in houses, and openly in fields. Mill. Yea man, and in the Sea also, sayling in a ship. Oliph. If thou wilt not recant I will pronounce sentence. Mill. You shall know that I will not recant: for I am corne and not chaffe, I will not be blowne away with the winde, nor burst with the flaile, but I will a∣bide both. When sentence was pronounced, and he to be deliuered to the temporall Iudge, his constancie so moued the hearts of many, that the Prouost of the Towne Pa∣tricke Learmond, though he were Steward of the Bishops regalitie, refused to bee his temporall Iudge: and the Bishops Chamberlaine being therewith charged, would not take vpon him so vngodly an office: the Bishops seruants could get neuer a cord in the whole towne for money to tye him to the stake withall, nor a Tarre barrell to burne him when he came to the stake. He said to Oliphant, Put me vp with thy hands, and take part in putting me to death, for by Gods law I am forbidden to lay hands on my selfe. Then he put him vp with his hands; and he ascended gladly, saying, Introibo ad altare Dei, and desired he might speake to the people, which was denied him, they saying he had spoken too much already. Then some of the yong men committed the burners, and the Bishops their Ma∣sters to the Diuell, and bade him speake what he pleased. Then after he had prayed, standing vpon the coales, said, I die onely for the de∣fence of the faith of Christ, for the which the faithfull Martyrs haue offered them∣selues gladly before, being assured after the death of their bodies of eternall felici∣tie. And I praise God he hath called me of his mercie, amongst the rest of his ser∣uants, to seale vp his truth with my life; therefore as you will escape eternall death, be not seduced with the lies of Priests, Monks, Friers, and the rest of that Sect, but depend onely vpon the death of Iesus Christ and his mercie, that you may in the time to come be deliuered from condemnation. All the while the multi∣tude greatly mourned, perceiuing his mighty patience, constancie and boldnesse; whereby their hearts were so much enkindled and inflamed, that he was the last
Martyr that died in Scotland euer after for religion. After this by Gods iust iudgement, in the same place where Walter Mill was burned, the Images of the great Church of the Abbey, which passed in number and costlines, were burned in time of reformation. Heere followeth in the booke of Martyrs the names of diuers which were omit∣ted by him in King Henrie the eighth his time, and an instrument of the Popes definitiue sentence against Henrie the eighth for his diuorse with Katharine Do∣wager, and the instrument of the Bull of Pope Leo against Martin Luther, and his answer to it; in which for breuitie sake I leaue thee to the booke at large if thou be disposed to see them, and also the last Will and Testament of King Henry, and the manner of his death. A Storie of certain Friers in France in the Citie of Orleance in the yeare 1534. THe Mayors wife of the Citie prouided in her Will that she should be buried without any pompe or solemnitie: for the Bell did vse to warne euery one to pray for the dead corps; and when it is carried forth all or the most part of the begging Friers goe before it with Torches and Tapers, and the more pompe is vsed, the greater is the concourse of people; but this woman would none of this gears, the which buriall of hers, her husband performed according as she required in her Will. Then one Colman and Steuen Arras Doctors of Diuinitie: and the first a Coniurer, set a young man, which was a nouice, ouer the Uault of the Church, and when they came according to their vse to Mattins at mid-night, he made a wonderfull noyse and shrieking: then this Colman went to crossing and coniu∣ring, but the other aboue would not speake; and being charged to make a signe whether he were a dumbe spirit or no, hee ratled and made a great noyse againe. Then they tolde some of the chiefest of the Citie what a heauie chance had hap∣pened, and intreated them to come to their seruice at night. When they were there, and the seruice begunne, he aloft made a great noyse: being demaunded what he would, he made signes he could not speake: then he was commaunded to answere Intergatories by signes, and when any question was asked he strook vpon the Table so that he might be heard: then he was demaunded whether he was any that were buried there; then they reckoned vp diuers, and at last the Mayors wife: here he made a signe that he was the spirit of that woman; then he was asked whether he was damned for Couetousnesse, Pride, Lecherie, or not doing workes of Charitie, or else for Lutheranisme; then by striking twise or thrise vpon the Table gaue them to vnderstand that Luthers heresie was the cause of her damnation: and being asked whether the bodie buried in holy ground should be digged vp and carried hence, he made signes it should be so: then the Friers desired the Citizens to set their handes to a writing, testifying that which they had séene, but for feare of the Mayor, they refused to subscribe: then the Fri∣ers took the Pixe, with the Host, and the Lords body, and all the reliques of Saints, and carried them to another place, and there they said their masses: then the officiall came thither, and would faine haue seene the spirit coniured, and one should go into the vault and sée if any spirit appeared: but he could not get them to disturb the spirit any more.
Then the Mayor informed the King of the whole matter, and the King sent cer∣taine to know whether it were so, or no: then they put the ders thereof into seue∣rall Prisons, and examined them apart, and a great while they would confesse no∣thing: at length, the Iudges promising the nouice that he should haue no harme, nor come no more into the Fryers hands, he declared to them the whole matter in order: wherupon they were committed to Orleance to prison. And it was certainly reported, that the King would haue plucked down the House: but euen at the same time chanced a persecution against the Lutherans, and they feared the punishment of these men should haue bin a reproch vnto the Order, and a cause of much reioy∣cing to the Lutherans. These were Francisan Fryers. A Storie of certaine Monks of Sueuia. GVnrame, a noble Baron, in the yeare 1130. builded an Abbey in Sueuia, called Salmesuille, of Cistercian Monks. Amongst many Benefactors to the said House, the Earles of Montfort had bestowed vpon that Monasterie many new Li∣berties and Priuiledges, vpon condition, that they should receiue with frée hospita∣litie any stranger, Horse-man or Foot-man, for one night: but this hospitalitie did not long continue, through a subtile deuise of one of the Monks, who would coun∣terfeit the Diuell, ratling and raging in chaynes at the lodgings where the stran∣gers should lie: and so continued this a long space. At length, an Earle of the house of Montfort was lodged at the Monasterie: when the Earle was at his rest, in the night the Monke, after his wonted manner, began to play the Diuell, roring, thun∣dering, spitting of fire, and making a noyse: the Earle hearing thereof, tooke a good heart, and taking his sword, slew the Monk. And thus the Diuell of the Abbey was coniured, which stopped the guests from comming to the House. Who lift to see more and worse pranks of Friers and Monks, played in their Houses & Cloysters, let them resort to the Epistle of Erasmus, and he shall find ynough to infect the aire. IOHN BROVVNE, a blessed Martyr, burned at Ashford in the second yeare of Henrie the eighth, Anno 1511. THe said Iohn Browne passing to Graues-end in a Barge, a Priest began to swell and stomack that he should sit so neere him, at length said, Doest thou know who I am, thou fittest so neere me and vpon my clothes? No sir, said the o∣ther. I tell you, said he, I am a Priest. What sir, are you a Parson or Uicar, or some Ladies Chaplain? No, said he, I sing for a Soule. I pray you, said the other, where find you the Soule when you go to Masse? I cannot tel, said he. I pray where do you leaue it when you haue done Masse? I know not; said the Priest. How then, said the other, can you saue the Soule? I perceiue thou art an Heretick, said the Priest. Within three daies after, by vertue of a Warrant rom the Archbishop, with a Baylife and two of the Bishops men, they came suddenly into the house of the said Browne, as he was carrying a dish of meat to his guests (for his wife was that day Churched) they layd hands on him, and carried him to Canterburie, where they kept him fortie dayes: in which time he was so pitifully entreated by Warram the Archbishop, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester, that he was set bare-footed vpon hote burning coales, to make him denie his Faith; which he bare patiently, and continued in maintaining the Lords quarrell vnremoueable: then he was sent to Ashford, where he dwelt, the next day to be burned: where he was set in the Stocks all night; his wife sate all the while by him, to whom he declared the whole Tra∣gedie
of his handling: how they burned his et to the bones, that he could not set them to the ground, to make him denie his Lord here: which if I should haue done, he would denie me hereafter; therefore good wife, continue as thou hast be∣gun, and bring vp thy children in the feare of God: where the next day he was bur∣ned. This Iohn Browne bare a Faggot seuen yeares before this, whose sonn, na∣med Richard Browne▪ for the like cause of Religion, was imprisoned at Canter∣burie in the later time of Queene Marie, and should haue beene burned, with two more: but the next day after Queene Marie died, and they escaped by the Procla∣mation of Queen Elizabeth. THE NINTH BOOKE, CON∣tayning the Acts and things done in the Raigne of King EDVVARD the sixt. AFter the death of Henrie the eight, succeeded King Edward the sixt, his sonne, being of the age of nine yeares. Touching his commen∣dations, I leaue you to the Booke at large: who, because he was so young and tender, was committed to sixtéene Gouernours, amongst whome, especially the Lord Edward Semer, Duke of Somerset, his vncle, was assigned as Protector of him and the Commonwealth: a man of noble vertues, especially for his fauour to Gods ; throgh the industrie of whom, that monstrous Hydra with sixe heads, the  Articles, which deuoured so many, were abolished; whereby the proceedings of Gardner began to decay: who stor∣ming thereat, wrote to the Lord Protector in the cause thereof. He restored the Scriptures to the Mother tongue, and extinguished Masses, and by little and little greater things followed in the reformation of Churches: such as fled for the danger of the Truth, were againe receiued to their Countrey, the most part of Bishops were changed, dumbe Prlates were compelled to giue place to such as would Preach, and learned men were sent for out of other Countries, as Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, & Paulus Phagius, the first of whom taught at Oxford, and the other two at Cambridge, with great commendations. Bonner, Bishop of London, was committed to the Marshalsie, and for his con∣tempt and misdemeanor deposed: Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, with Tunstall Bishop of Durham, were cast into the Tower for their disobedience. In this time of King Edward, vnder this noble Protecto, this one commenda∣tion is proper vnto them, that amongst all the Popish ort; of whom, some priuily stle out of the Realme, manie were craftie dissemblers, some open aduersaries yet there was not one that lost his life during the whole time of the Raigne of this King, for any matter of Religion, Papist or Protestant, except lone of Kentan English woman, and one George a Dutchman, who died for certaine Articles not necessarie to be rehearsed. THOMAS DOBBE. THis man, in the beginning of King Edwards Raigne, comming from S. Iohns Colledge in Cambridge to London, as he passed through Paules Church, there
was a Priest at Masse at the South side of the Church: being at the eleuation, this yong man, repleate with godly zeale, pittying the ignorance and Idolatry of the people, in honouring that which the Priest lifted vp, he exhorted the people not to honour that visible bread as God, which was neither God nor ordained of God to be honoured;1543. wherefore he was apprehended by the Mayor, and accused to the Bi∣shop of Canterburie, and was committed to the Counter in Bread-stréete, where shortly falling sicke, he died; whose pardon was obtained of the Lord Protector, if he had liued. IOHN HVNNE. IN the first yeare of the Kings raige one Master Lewnax of Wresell and his wife, sent this Iohn Hunne their seruant, vnto the Bishop of Canterbury for de∣nying the flesh and bloud of Christ to be really in the Sacrament of the Altar, and saying he would neuer vaile his Hatte to it if he should be burned for it: and that if he should heare masse he should be damned. But because I finde nothing done therein, I leaue it. When this godly yong Prince was peaceably established in his Kingdome, and had a godly, wise, and zealous Councell about him, especially the Duke of Som∣merset, he earnestly desired the aduancement of the true honour of God, and plan∣ting of sincere Religion, and the sppressing of all Idolatry, Superstition, and hypocrisie throughout his Dominions: Following the good example of the good King Iosias, and being he found most of his Lawes repugnant to his zealous enter∣prise: He by the aduice of his wise and Honorable Councell, of his own regall au∣thoritie, did prosecute his godly purpose, vntill by consent of the whole estate of Parliament he might establish, a more free and vniforme order, and those cer∣taine wie, learned, and discreet personages for Commissioners, generally to visit all the Bishopricks of this Realme, to vnderstand and redresse the abuses of the same: and diuided them into seuerall companies, and assigned them seuerall Dio∣cesses to be visited, appointing to euery company, one or two godly Preachers which should preach to the people at euery Sessions, the true Doctrine of the Gos∣pell of Christ, and exhort them to all loue and obedience of the same: and earnest∣ly dehort them from their old superstition, and wonted Idolatry: and that they might the more orderly be directed in this their Commission, there were deliuered vnto them certaine iniunctions, and Ecclestasticall orders drawne out by the Kings learned Councell, the which they should both inquire of, and also com∣mand in his Maiesties behalfe, to be thenceforth obserued of euery person to whom they did seuerally appertaine within their seuerall circuits: the which Iniunctions if thou beest disposed for to reade, I leaue thee for breuitie to the Booke at large. Now during the time the Commissioners were in their circuits,1544. about diligent execution of their godly and zealous orders of the King and Councell, deiring a further reformation, as well in Ecclesiasticall as in Ciuill gouernment, appoin∣ted a Parliament to be summoned on the fourth of Nouember, in the first yeare of his raigne, which continued vntill the twenty foure day of December then next following. Whereby he caused to be enacted, that all Acts of Parliaments and Statutes, touching, mencining, or any wise concerning Religion, or opinions, to wit; the Statute of the first yeare of Richard the second, and the statute made in the se∣cond yeare of the raign of Henry the fift, and the statute mad in the fiftéenth yeare of the raigne of Henry the eight, concerning the punishments and reformation of Hereticks and Lolards: and the sixe Articles made in the thirty one yeare of Hen∣ry the eight, and the statute made in the thirty thrée year of Henry the eight, against
the bookes of the old and new Testament in English, and the printing and vtte∣ring of English or bookes writings, and preaching the Scriptures, an another Statute in the 35. yeare of Henry the eyght touching the qualification of the Sta∣tte of sixe Articles, and al and euery other Act or Acts of Parliament concerning Doctrine or matters of Religion, should from thenceforth bee repealed and of none effect, by occasion whereof all his godly subiects abiding within the Realme had free libery to professe the gospell, and those beyond Sea wer not onely licensed to retrne home but incouraged bouldly and faithfully to trauell in their calling, so that God was much glorified and the people edified. And in this Parliament it was enacted, that the Sacrament should be ministred in both kinde, and letters missiue were sent frm the Councell to the Bishops of the Realme, concerning the communion to bee ministred in both kinds, and from Bishop to Bishop, as thou maist sée in the booke at large. Another Parliament was assembled in the second yeare of his Raigne, beginning vppon the foorth day of Nouember 1548. continuing vntill the 14. day of March, wherein a booke in English intituled the Booke of Common prayer and administration of the Sacraments and other Rightes and Ceremonies of the Church, after the vse of the Church of England, was concluded vppon by the Clergy, which his highnesse receauing with great comfort, did exhibi it vnto the Lords and Commons of the Parliament, who for the honour of God and great quietnesse which by the grace of God should ensue vppon that one vniforme right and order in such Common prayer, rites and externe Ceremonies to bee vsed throughout England, Wales, Calice and the Marches of the same, authorise the sayd Booke by Act of Parliament, and set great penalty vpon them that wold bee disobeient thereto, as is to be seene in the booke at large. Aso the mariage of Priests was authorized by the sayd Parliament by these procéedings, and the Iniunctions, which thou maiest see in the book at large: thou maiest well perceaue the great zeale of the King and the Lord Protector, in refor∣mation of tue Religion, and also the lingring slacknesse on the other side of others, especially of the Bishops and old Popish Curats, by whose cloked contempt and wilfull winking, the Booke of Common prayers was long after the publishing thereof very irreuerently vsed throughout many places of this Realme, which when the King by diuers complaintes vnderstood, hee wrote spéedily to all the Bi∣shope of the Realme for the spéedy redresse thereof: and because Bonner was one of the backwardest, hee was peremtorly admonished vnder paine of depriuation to preach the next Sunday three weekes after the date there of at Paules Crosse, none but such Doctrine as was appoynted him in the said Iniuntion, and should preach the same Doctrines euery quarter of a yeare yearely, f sicknesse or some reasona∣ble cause did not let. Secondly, you your selfe in person, shall from henceforth celebrate the Commu∣nion at the high Altar in Paules euery such dayes as your Predecessors were wont to sing Masse. The Popish Priests grudging and mourning to see their old Popsh Church of Rome to decay, ceased not by all subtile and sinister meanes; first vnder Gods name and the Kings, and vnder colour of religion, to perswade the people to rebel∣lion. This first burst out in Cornwell and Deuonshire, of whom the chiefe Gentle∣men Captaines were Humfrey Arundell Esquire, Iames Rosogan, Iohn Rosogan, Iohn Walkock, Iohn Payne, Thomas Vnderhill, Iohn Soleman, and William Segar. There were eght Priests gouernours of the Campes and principall stirrers, be∣side multitude of other Popish Priests, there was ten thousand stout traytors in this rebellion. Commotions likewise beganne to broyle in Oxford-shire, Yorke-shire, and especially in Northfolke and Suffolke, these aforesaid hearing thereof, tooke cou∣rage, hoping they should well aue fortiied the same quarrell: their intent was to inuade the Citty of Exeter, and twise they burned the gates thereof, but gayned
thing but shotte, beeing put from Exeter, they fell on spoyling and robbing, where or howsoeuer they might catche, then laying their heads together, they consul∣ted of certaine Articles to be sent vp to the King as followeth. First they would haue that their Curats should minister the Sacrament of baptisme, at all times of néede as well in the weeke dayes as on the ho∣lydayes, and their Children confirmed of the Bishop whensoeuer wee resort to him. Secondly because they did constantly beléeue that in the Sacrament, after con∣secration there is the very body and blood of Christ, and no substance of bread and wine remaineth: therefore we will haue the Masse celebrated as in times past, without any man communicating with the Priests, because many presuming vn∣worthy to receiue the same, put no difference betwixt the Lords body and other bread, and wée will haue the consecrated body of our Lord reserued in our Churches. Thirdly wée will haue holy bread and holy water, in remembrance of Christs body and blood. Fourthly we will that our Priests shall sing and say with an audible voyce, Gods seruice in the Quire of the Parish Churches, and not to haue it set forth as a Christmas play. Fiftly because Priests be men dedicated to God to celebrate the blessed sacra∣ments and preaching of Gods word, wee will that they shall lie chast without marriage. Sixtly we will the sixe Articles shall stand in force. To which Articles the King did particularly answer and set forth reasons a∣gainst them in writing, and shewed that he would spend his life and all that hee had to maintaine the Godly reformation which was begun, yet hee offred them pardon if they would desist from the deceitfull counsell of the séekers of dissention who sought for nothing els but to vnde them, their wiues and children: and if they would not be moued to repentance with his fatherly kindnes shewed vnto them, hee would procéed against them as against the Heathen with force and Armes. Ad because they would not accept mercy, Sir Iohn Russell Knight, Lord pri∣uy seale, was sent by the King and councell against them, and next to him were ioyned Sir William Harbert, Sir Iohn Paulet, Sir Hugh Paulet Sir Thomas Speck with the Lord Gray and others. Thus the Lord Priuy seale accompanied with the Lord Gray aduancing his power against the rebells, yet by Gods prouidence they gaue them the repulse, who recouering themselues againe, encountred the second time the Lord priuy seale, but by Gods helpe they with their whole cause of false religion were vtterly vanquished, the popish rebells not onely lost the field, but a great part of them lost their liues lying slaine the compasse of two miles; diuers were taken as Hum∣phry Arundell, Berry, Thomas Vnderhill, Iohn Soleman, William Seger, and two Priests Tempson and Barret, and two Mayors Henry Bray and Henry Lee with di∣uers mo, all which afterward were executed. These rebells to make their part more sure by the presence of their con∣secrated God, brought with them vnto the Battaile the pixe vnder his Ca∣nopy riding and in a Cart, neither was there lacking Masses, Crosses, Banners, Candlestickes, with Holy-bread and Holy-water plenty to de∣fend them from Diuells, and all enemies which could not saue them from their enemies: but both the consecrated God and all the trumpery about him was taken in the Cart, leaing a Lesson of better experience how to put their confidence in such vaine Idolls. Like vnto this was the field of Musclebrough fought in Scotland the yeare before this when the Scots incamping thēselues against the Lord Protector & the Kings power sent into Scotland, they likwise brought into the field the Gods of their
Altars, with Masses, Crosses, Banners, and all their popish stuffe, hauing great affiance therein, to haue a great day against the English army, as to mans indge∣ment might seeme not vnlike. The number of the Scots armie farre excéeded ours: but the arme of the Lord so turned the vitory, that the Scots in the end with all their Masses and Trinkets were put to the wors, of whom were slaine betweene thirtéene and fourtéene thousands, and not passing a hundred English men: The cause of this warre was because the Scots had promised King Henry the eight, that the yong Scottish Queee should marry with King Edward, which promise they afterward brake and payed therefore: and this victory was the same day and houre, when the Images were burned openly in London. There was the like commotion in Oxford, and Buckingham, but that was soon appeased by the Lord Gray, of whom two hundred were taken, and twelue of them ringleaders deliuered to him; where of certaine were executed. In Norfolk & the parts thereabouts the Marquesse of Northampton, was sent to represse the rebellion, who was appointed to kéep the field and passages, to stop them from victuals, whereby they might the sooner be brought to acknowledge their fault, and séeke pardon, who pined himselfe within the Citie of Norwich, but the Rebels pressed vpon the Citie, and at length obtained it, yet there was but a hundred on both sides slaine, and the Lord Shefield, then the Earle of Warwick was sent against them, by whom the confused rabble was ouerthrown, to the number of foure thousand, and both the Kets, chiefe stirrers of that Commo∣tion▪ were put to death, and one of them hanged in chains. In this yeare likewise the like commotion began at Semer in the North-riding of Yorke shire,1549. and continued in the East-riding of the same, and there ended. The principall doers thereof were William Ombler, Thomas Dale, with one Ste∣uenson. They intended to stirre in two places at one instant, seuen miles from the o∣ther, and at the first rush to destroy such Gentlemen and men of substance as fa∣uoured the Kings proceedings, and to set the Beacons on fire to bring the people together: and hauing the ignorant people assembled, then to poure out their poy∣son, beginning with such as they thought were pinched with pouerty, and vnwil∣ling to labour, therefore the more readie to follow the spoyle of rich mens goods, blowing in their eares that Gods seruice was now quite laide aside, and new inuentions, neither good nor godly, put in their stead, feeding them with faire promises, to reduce into the Church againe their olde ignorance and abominable Idolatrie. Putting this practise in execution, they took one M. White, and one Clopton, and one Sauage a Marchant of Yorke, and one Bery, and cruelly murdred them, and took away all that was about them: then they ranged from Towne to Town and inlarged their and, leauing in no towne any men aboue the age of 16. yeares, vn∣till they had gathered about 3000. Then came the King pardon to them, which Ombler conumeliosly refused, and perswaded others so to de, and some excepted thereof; but shortly after, Ombler as he was riding from towne to towne, to charge all the Constables and Inhabitants in the Kings Namo, to resort to Humumby, hee was taken and im∣prisoned at orke. After him, Thomas Dale and Henry Barton, Iohn Dale, Robert Wright, William Peacocke, Wetherell, and Edmund Buttry, busie stirrers in this sedition, as they trauelled from place to place to draw people vnto their faction, were likewise apprehended and committed to Ward, and after executed at Yorke. The King of France bearing of the Insurrections of the Kings Subiects in diuers places, supposing to take the time, he made inuasion against the Iles of Ier∣sey and Gernesey, and thought to haue surprised the Kings Ships in the said Iles, with his shipps and Gallies, but he was so hotly saluted with the Kings Ships in the Iland, that the French-men lost at least a thousand men, and their Shippes
and Gallies were so spoyled, as they were forced to returne home, and not able to come out againe: and they brought into one Towne in one vessell, at least sixty Gentlemen to be burned, and the King gaue out a speciall inhibition, that none should speake of the successe of that iourney, so the arme of God mercifully fought for King Edward his Seruant, to defend and deliuer him from so many hard dan∣gers, all in one yeare, which is worthy of all posterity to be noted. The examination of Bonner. THE King sent forth his Commission vnder his broad Seale, to the Byshop of Canterbury, and the Bishoppe of Rochester, and other trusty personages and Councelors, appointing and authorising them, to examinine the Bishoppe of London, and to procéed against him according to law and Iustice, either to suspen∣tion, excommunication, committing to prison, or depriuation, if the qualitie of the offence so required. At Bonners first entring into the place, within the Arch-bishops house at Lam∣beth (where the Arch-bishop and the other Commissioners sat) to be examined: hée kept his hat on his head, making as though he saw them not, vntill one bad him reuerence the Commissioners, then laughingly he said; What my Lords are you there, by my troth I saw you not: No said the Archbishop you would not sée; well (quoth he) you sent for me, haue you any thing to say to me; Yea, said the Com∣missioners, we haue authority to call you to account for your Sermon you made lately at Pauls Crosse, because you did not preach to the people the Articles you were commanded to preach vpon. Then said Bonner; In good Faith my Lord, I would one thing were had in meereuerence then it is, What is that said the Archbishop, The blessed Masse (quoth he) you haue written well of the Sacrament, I maruell you doe no more honour it: The Arch-bishoppe said; If you thinke I haue wrote well of it, it is because you vnderstand it not. Bonner said, I thinke I vnderstand it better then you that wrote it: The Archbishop replyed, he would easily make a Childe of ten yeares old vnderstand therein as much as you. And when they had called forth Maister Latimer, and Iohn Hooper, Prea∣chers, to propound such matter as they had to say against him, he hearing them speake, fell to scorning and taunting them, calling one Goose, and the other Wood∣cocke, and denying their accusation to be true. Whereupon the Arch-Byshop asked him whether hee would credit the people there present, and because many of them that were there, were at his Sermon. The Arch-Bishoppe stood vp and read the Article of the Kinges authority during his young age, saying vn∣to them; How say you my Maisters, did my Lord of London preach this Arti∣cle, they answered, No, no: Then Bonner deridingly said; Will you beléeue this fond people. Then was shewed forth a ill of Complaint, exhibited vnto the King by the said Maister Latimer and Iohn Hooper, which was read; Then Bonner prayed that the Bill of Complaint should be deliuered vnto him, which when he had per∣vsed, he said; it was so generall, as hee could not directly answere vnto it: The Arch-bishop said, the speciall cause was, because he had transgressed the Kinges commaundement, in not setting forth in his last Sermon at Paules Crosse, the Kinges Hignesse Royall power in his minority: and for the proofe thereof, hee called Maister LATIMER and IOHN HOOPER, to whom BONNER saide; As for this Merchant Latimer, I haue wincked at his euill doings a great while, but I haue ore to say to him héereafter: But as touching this Merchant Hooper, I haue not séene him before, howbeit I haue heard much of his naughtie prea∣ching; Then he said, Ah my Lord, now I sée the cause of my trouble is not for the matter you pretend, but because I did preach in my late Sermon the true
presence of the most blessed body and blood of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, to bée in the Sacrament of the Altar: And as for these my accusers, they are notorious euill persons, and notable Hereticks and Seducers, especially touching the Sa∣crament of the Altar, and most of all this Hooper: for whereas I preached, that after consecration of the Sacrament, there is the selfe same body and blood of Christ in substance, that was hanged vpon the Crosse: hee in the afternoone ha∣uing a great rabblement with him of his damnable Sect, did preach to the peo∣ple erroniouslie against it, and vntruely expounded my wordes: for whereas I said the same substance that was hanged vpon the Crosse, hee like an Asse, (as he is an Asse indéede) turned the word That, into As, saying; That I said, as it hanged vpon the Crosse: Then the Arch-Bishoppe demaunded of him, whether Christ were in the Sacrament, Face, Nose, Mouth, Eyes, Armes, and Lips, with other lineaments of the bodie; whereat Bonner shooke his head, and said; I am right sorry to heare your Grace to speake those words which you haue done. Hee appeared seauen times before the said Commissioners, and euer vsed verie vnreuerent, vncomely, and frowar words and behauiours towards the Commissioners and others, and hee still shifted off the matter by subtile dilato∣ries, and friuolous cauiling about the Law, and with facing and rayling vp∣on the Denouncers, that hee thought to countenance out the matter before the people. But to conclude, for all his subtile, craftie, cautels, and tergi∣uersations, hée was iustlie imprisoned, and in the end most lawfullie depri∣ued. The first trouble of the Lord Protector,1549 was presentlie after the depriuation of Bishop Bonner, but shortly after hee was deliuered out of the same by the mighty working of GOD, the tractation whereof shall bee delayed, vntill the time of his second trouble, which was two yeares after. The vulgar people hearing of the apprehension of the Lord Protector, they began to brute abroad, that now they should haue their Latine Seruice, the holy Bread and holy Wa∣ter, and their other Ceremonies againe: Wherefore straite commaundement was sent to the Bishops of the Dioces, to warne the Parsons, Uicars, Curats, and Church-wardens of euerie Parish, to deliuer vp all Antiphoners, Missalls, Grayles, Processionals, Manualls, Legends, Pyes, Portuasies, Iournals, and Ordinals, and all other Bookes of Seruice: the hauing whereof, might be any let vnto the Seruice that now is set forth in English, commaunding all such persons as should be found disobedient in this matter, to be committed to ward. And because many refused to pay towardes the finding of Bread and Wine for the Communion, whereby the Communion in many places was omitted: the Byshops had charge for the redresse héereof, and to punish such as refused so to doe. In this yeare Letters were sent for the taking downe of Altars in Churches,1550. and setting vp a Table in the steed thereof, vnto Nicholas Ridley, who being By∣shop of Rochester before, was made Bishop of London in Bonners place. The Storie of STEPHEN GARDNER, Bi∣shop of Winchester. VVHereas the Kinges Maiestie made a generall visitation, as before is said, and appointed certaine iniunctions to be generally obserued, they
were obediently receiued, and reuerently executed of all men of all sorts, sauing onely of the Bishop of Winchester, who by conference with others, by open protestations and Letters also, shewed such a wilfull disobedience therein as might haue bred much trouble: Wherefore he was sent for before the Councell, before whom he denied to receiue the said Articles, and so misused himselfe before them▪ that he was sent to the Fléete: but vpon promise of conformity, hee was set at liberty againe, then he set forth such matters as bred more contention in that Shire, then in all the Realme againe, and he caused all his Seruants to bée secretly armed and harnised, to withstand such as he thought to haue béene sent by the Councell into those parts, and when Preachers were sent into that Coun∣trey by the Councell to preach the Word of GOD, the Bishop to disappoint and disgrace them, and to hinder his Maiesties procéedings, did occupy the Pul∣pit himselfe, and in his Sermons would warne the people of such new Prea∣chers, and to imbrace no other Doctrine then that which he had taught them. Wherefore being sent for againe before the Councell, yet in the end vpon his se∣cond promise of conformity, they left him at libertie, willing him to remaine at his house at London, yet he began afresh to ruffle and meddle in matters that tou∣ched the Kings Maiesty. Whereupon being once againe admonished, be promised againe conformity, and that he would declare his conscience to be well satisfied with the Kings pro∣céedings, to the satisfaction and good quiet of others; but at the day appointed he did speake of certaine matters contrary to expresse commaundement of the King: and in the Articles whereuto he had agreed before, hee vsed such a man∣ner of vtterance, as was vry like there presently to haue stirred a great tumult, and in great matters touching the pollicy of the Realme, hee so handled them, that he shewed himselfe a very seditious man, and that in the presence of his Maiestie, the Lords of the Councel, and of such an audience, as the like thereof hath not béene séene: whereupon he was committed to the Tower, and after iustly depriued for his obstinaey therein. Hee wrote a Letter vnto Maister Vaghan, in defence and prayse of Ima∣ges, which the Lord Protector answered very learnedly, as thou mayst sée in the Booke at large. He wrote another Epistle, wherein hee first rayled and findeth fault with the Paraphrase of Erasmus, which he calleth a Booke of abhomination: secondlie, hée sheweth, that he can in no case away with the Homily of saluation▪ set out by the Archbishop of Canterbury, which Article maruelously vexeth his Spirit. His third purpose whereunto his Letters cheefely draw, is to insinuate the Lord Protector, that no alteration should bee made of Religion, during the time of the Kings minority, but to let all thinges stand as King Henrie had left them. The iudgement of Doctor REDMAN on his death-bed, touching certaine points of Religion. 1 THE Sea of Rome in this last daies,1551 is a sinke of all euill. 2 Purgatory, as the Schoolemen vsed it, was vngodly, and there was no such kind kind of Purgatory as they phantasied. 3 That the offering vp of the Sacrament in Masses and treutals for the sins of the dead, is vngodly.
4 That the wicked are not partakers of the body of Christ, but receiue the outward sacrament only. 5 That the sacrament ought not to be carried about in procession, for it is taught what is the vse of it by these words, Take, eate and drink, doe this in remembrance of mee. 6 That nothing which is séen in the sacrament, or perceiued with any outward sense, is to be worshipped. 7 That we receiue not Christs body corporally, that is to say, grossely like o∣ther meats, and like as the Capernayts did vnderstand it. 8 That we receiue Christs body so spiritually, that neuerthelesse truly. 9 Touching transubstantiation, there is not in any of the olde Doctors any good ground and sure proofe thereof, or any mention of it, as farre as euer he could perceiue; neither that he doth sée what could be answered to the obiections made against it. 10 Being asked of Master Wilkes what that was which was lifted vp betwixt the Priests hands, he answered, that he thought that Christ could be neither lifted vp nor downe. 11 That Priests may by the law of God marrie wiues. 12 That as only faith doth iustifie, so that doth signifie a true, a liuely, and a faith resting in Christ, and imbracing Christ: and this is true, godly, sweet and comfortable doctrine, so that it be so taught that the people take non occasion of carnall libertie. 13 That workes had their reward and crown, but they did not deserue eternall life and the kingdome of God, no not the workes of grace; for euerlasting life is the gift of God. The historie of VVILLIAM GARDNER an Englishman, who constantly suffered in Portingall for the Truth. HEe was borne at Bristow,1552. and gaue himselfe vnto the trade of Merchandise, he was sent into Spaine by Master Paget, being sixe and twenty yeares old, the ship arriued by chance at Lishborne the chiefe Citie of Portugall, he tarrying there about merchandise, became a profitable seruant to his Master and others, yet he reserued his religion in that popish countrey: there were also besides him diuers good men in the same Citie, neither lacked he good books nor the conference of good and honest men, to whom he would often bewaile his weakenesse, that he was not sufficiently touched with the hatred of his sinnes, nor inflamed with the loue of godlinesse. There was a solemne marriage celebrated betwéen two Princes, the sonne of the King of , and the daughter of the King of Spain, to which marriage there was great resort of nobles, and there lacked no Bishops with Miters, nor Cardinals with Hats, to set out this royall wedding. William Gardner was there when they went forward to the celebrating of the Masse, for that alone did serue for all purposes: the Cardinall did execute it with much singing and Organ-playing: the people stood with great deution and silence, praying, looking, knéeling, and knocking, their minds fully bent vpon the external sacrament, which did grieuous∣ly prick and moe this young man, to sée so many noble personages and others so seduced with this Idolatri, that if the prease of people had not hindered him
he would that day haue done some notable thing in the Kings presence: he came home and made vp all his accounts of that was due to him, and that which was owing to others, that no man could aske any thing of him, he fell to prayer and meditation of the Scriptures: The Sunday came againe to be celebrated with like pompe and solemnitie: The said William was early present, and stoode as neere the Altar as he could: When the King with all his Nobles were come the Masse began, which was solemnized by a Cardinall, when hee began to osse the Host too and fro round about the Chalice, making certaine circles, The said William Gardiner not able to suffer any longer, hee ran to the Cardinall in the presence of the King, Nobles, and Citizens, with the one hand hee snatched away the Cake and trde it vnder his féet, and with the other hand ouerthrew the Cha∣lice: Wherevpon rose great tumult, and one wounded him with a Dagger in the soulder: The King commanded to saue him, whereby they abstained from mur∣dering him. When he was brought before the King: he demanded what country man he was, and how hee durst worke such a contumacie against his Maiestie, and the Sacraments of the Church: Hee answered hee was an English man, by birth and Religion, and am come hither for traffick of Marchandize, and when I saw in this famous assembly so great Idolatry committed, my conscience neither ought nor could any longer suffer, but must needs doe that you haue séene me doe, which was not done for any contumacy of your Maiestie, but of purpose, as before God I do confesse to séek the saluation of this people: then vnderstanding that king Edward had restored Religion in England, and thinking he had beene set on by some others: they would know who set him on; He answered he was not mooued thereto by any man, but by his owne conscience, but that hee owed this seruice first vnto God, and secondly vnto their saluation, and they ought to impute the act onely to themselues, which so vnreuerently vsed the holy Supper of the Lord vnto so great Idolatry, to the perill of their owne soules, except they repented. He was like to faint with the aboundance of blood that ranne out of his wound, and Surgeons were sent to cure it, then all English-men were committed vnto Prison, and one Pendigrace, because that he was his Bed-fellow, was greeously tormented and examined, and scarse deliuered after two yeares impri∣sonment. Then they caused a Linnen Cloath to bee sowed round like a Ball, which they violently put downe his throat to the bottome of his belly, tyed with a small string which they held in their handes; and when it was downe they pulled it vp againe with violence, so plucking it too and fro through the meat pipe. When all torments and tormentors were wearied, they asked him if he did not repent his wicked deed, he answered, if it were to doe againe he thought he should doe it, but he was sorie it was in the presence of the King: the fault ought to be ascribed to the King and not to him, in that he hauing power would not prohibit so great I∣dolatrie vsed amongst his people. Three dayes after they brought him to execution: when they had vsed all kind of torments against him, then they cut off his right hand, which he tooke vp with his left and kissed it; then they cut off his other hand, which he, kneeling downe, kissed, and so he was carried to the place of execution, where was an Engine, from the which a great rope comming downe by a pullie, was fastened about this Chri∣stian, which first pulled him vp: then there was a great pile of wood set on fire be∣neath him into the which he was by little and little let downe, not with the whole body, but so that his feet only felt the fire: then he was hoysed vp and so let downe againe; in the which torment he continued with a constant spirit, and the more terribly he burned the more vehemently he prayed. When his feet were burned the tormentors asked him whether he did not yet repent, and exhorted him to call vpon our Ladie and other Saints; he answered he had done nothing whereof he did repent, and needed not our Ladies nor Saints
help, and what torments soeuer they vsed: hee remained alwaies one, desiring them to leaue off such vanities and follies, for when Christ ceased to bee our Ad∣uocate, then he would pray our Lady to be his Aduocate: and when they sought to stop his prayers, he said Iudge mee O Lord, and reuenge my cause against the vnmercifull people, before he had ended the Psalme, pulling him vp & downe in the fire for the more torment, the rope was burned, hee fell into the middest of the fire, where he changed his Temporall paines, for eternall quietnes: Thus GOD by this message did prouoke the Portugales to the sincere know∣ledge. But this cruelty was not vnreuenged, for with a sparke from the fire of his burning, one of the Kings Shippes was burned, and the Kings Sonne that was married died halfe a yeere after, and the next yeare the King himselfe dyed. The Clergy appointed a solemne Fast certaine daies for penance to purge that fact: there be some yet as I haue heard diuers report, out of whose remem∣brance this constant Martyr can neuer be pulled, and is so fresh yet amongst them as if it were but lately done, his death as fruitfull seede hath taken such fruit in some that it is yet a linely, and diligent preaching vnto some against superstition and Idolatry vsed in their Churches. The tragicall History of the worthy Duke of Sommerset. KIng Edward had three vnckles by his mothers side: Edward, Thomas & Hen∣ry Semer: Edward was made protector of the Realme, and Thomas was made high Admirall of the same, so long as they were ioined together in amitie, they preserued themselues, and the King, and the Common-wealth: Sir Tho∣mas Semer high Admirall, married Queene Katherine, late wife of King Henry, as you haue heard; betwixt the said Queene, and the Dutchesse of Somerset, there fell great displeasure: And therevpon in the behalfe of their wiues grudge began betweene the brethren, after it was laid vnto the Lord Admirals charge, that hee purposed to destroy the yong King and transate the Crowne vnto himselfe, and for the same he was attainted and condemned, and did suffer at To∣wer Hill the twentith of March, one thousand fiue hundred forty and nine, ma∣ny reported that the Duchesse of Sommerset had wrought his death: whereby it came to passe, whether by Gods iust iudgement or no, In October after, that there was great consultation amongst the Lords, in the house of Maister Yorke, and at Baynards Castle, and in the Lord Mayor of Londons house, against the Lord Protector, remaining then with the King at Hampton Court: The King with his Councell hearing thereof, first Secretary Peter with the Kings message was sent vnto them, whom the Lords retained still with them, making no answer: wherevpon the Lord Protector writ vnto them, that the King was informed of your assembly: wherefore we sent Maister Secretary Peter vnto you: His Maie∣stie, and wee of his Councell héere doe not a little maruell, that you stay héere he said M. Peter, and haue not answered his Maiesty, and we are sory to sée your do∣ings bent with violence to bring the King and vs to these extremities: which if you will take no other way, we intend with violence to defend with death, and to put it in Gods hand, who giueth victory as it pleaseth him: as touching priuate matters o auoide the effusion of Christian bloud, and to preserue the Kings Maiesties per∣son, his Realme and Subiects, you shall finde vs agréeable to any reasonable con∣ditions that you will require, for wee esteem the Kings wealth, and tranquili∣tie of the Realme, more then other worldly things, yea then our life; praying them
to send their determinate answere by Maister Peter, or some other. Notwithstanding this Letter, the Lords persisted still in their purpose, and took aduice to kéep themselues in the Citie of London, as strong as they might, and willed the Mayor and Aldermen to prouide a substantiall watch by night, and by day, for the safegard of the Citie and gates. Then they demanded fiue hundred men to ayde them to fetch the Lord Protec∣tor out of Windsor from the King: and they published a Proclamation against the said Protector to this effect. First that the Protector by his euill gouernment was the cause of all the sediti∣on, that of late happened within the Realme: and of the losses of the Kings ordi∣nance in France: and that it appeared by the building of his sumptuous houses in the time of the Kings warre, that he sought his owne glory: that he esteemed no∣thing the graue counsell, of the Councellors, that he had sowed diuisions betwéen the Nobles, Gentlemen, and Commons. That the Nobles assembled themselues only to cause the protector to haue liued within limits, & to haue put such order for the surety of the King as was fit. That the protector slandered the Councell vnto the King: and that hee was a great traytor, and therefore the Lords defired the Citie & Commons to ayde them to take him from the King. Then the King sent a Letter vnto the Mayor and Citizens, commanding them to ayde him with a thousand men out of their Citie, well armed, and to send them with all speed vnto the Castle of Windsor. These contrary commandements comming both at one instant vnto the Mayor & Citizens of London: it séemed very doubtfull to them which way to take: at the last stepped vp a Citizen George Studlaw, and said. I remember in the time of Hen∣ry the third; the Barons as the Lords doe now, demanded ayde of the Mayor and Citizens of London, and the Citie ayded them against the King, and it came to an open battell, and the Lords preuailed against the King, and took the King and his son prisoners, and vpon certaine conditions, the King & his Son were restored a∣gaine, and the King openly granted his pardon to the Lords and Citizens, & it was ratified by Act of Parliament, but it was neuer forgotten during the Kings life: the Liberties of the Citie were taken away, and strangers appointed to be our go∣uernors, and the Citizens giuen away body and goods, and from one persecution vnto another were most miserably afflicted, such it is to enter into the wrath of a Prince: for Salomon saith, the wrath of a Prince is death: Therefore I would councell the Lords with vs, to make sute to the King, that he would please to heare the complaints that may be iustly proued against the L. Protector, and I doubt not but this matter will be pacified, and that the King, nor yet the Lords haue cause to seeke for further ayde, neither we to offend any of them both. Then the Lords sent Sir Philip Hobby, with their Letter of credence vnto the King, beséeching him to giue credit to that which he should say: who so handled the matter, that the Lord Protector was commanded from the Kings presence: and shortly committed to warde in the Castle of Windsor: The same day the Lords of the Councell resorted vnto the King, and the next day they brought the Lord Pro∣tector vnto the Tower. Shortly after the Lords resorted vnto the Tower, and there charged the Lord Protector with sundry Articles; the effect of them is contained in the proclama∣tion aforesaid: and although these purposes of man intended the spilling of his life; and the Lord so ordered the matter by the meanes of the Kings so laboring for his vnkle, that in short while he was let out of the Tower, and continued at liberty two yeares and two daies. After he was againe apprehended & committed againe to the Tower, after hee was brought to Westminister Hall to be arraigned, and there was charged with felony & treason: he put himselfe to be tried by his Péeres, who discharged him of treason, but they accounted him guilty of Felony, for purposing the death of the
Duke of Northumberland and others, and was returned vnto the Tower againe. When he was brought to his execution vpon tower Hill, he came with the same gesture which he vsed, changing neither voice nor countenance, and knéeling down he commended himselfe to God, and his prayers ended, he turned toward the peo∣ple, as it were with a certaine fatherly loue to children, and said: Dearely beloued friends, I am brought hether to suffer death, albeit I neuer offended against the King in word nor deed: and haue alwaies béene as faithfull as any man vnto this Realme: but because I am by Law condemned to die, to te∣stifie my obedience which I owe vnto the Lawes, I am come hither to suffer death: Wherefore I thanke God that he hath giuen me this time of repentance, who might so suddenly haue béen taken with death that I could not haue acknow∣ledged God, nor my selfe. I would something put you in minde of the Christian Religion, which so long as I was in authoritie I did alwaies diligently set forth, and I reioice therein, sith now the state of Christian Religion commeth most neere to the order of the Pri∣matiue Church, which I esteeme as a great benefit of God to me, and vnto you: most heartily exhorting you all, that you will most thankefully imbrace it, & set out the same in your liuing, which if you do not, no doubt great calamitie will follow. Upon these words there was heard a terrible noise, as it had beene of some great tempest from aboue, as if a great deale of Gun-powder, being inclosed in an armory, hauing caught fire, had violently broke out: or as if a great company of horsemen had been running together vpon them, whereby the people were so a∣mazed, that they ranne away; sme into Ditches and Puddles, and some into the houses; others with their Halberts fell vnto the ground: Crying out, Iesus saue vs, Iesus saue vs: and those which tarried in their places knew not where they were: It happened heere euen as when the officers of the High Priests came to take Christ: They runne back and fell to the ground, in so great slaughter of Dukes within this few yeares, there were neuer so many weeping eyes at one time, and the people seeing Sir Anthony Browne ride to the Scaffold: they con∣iectured that the King had sent his Unkle pardon, therefore with great reioycing they cast vp their caps, and cryed out pardon, pardon, is come, God saue the king. Thus the good Duke, although he was destitute of mans help, yet hee saw before his departure in what great loue and fauour he was with all men. Then said the Duke, dearely beloued friends, there is no such matter as you vainely beleeue: Therefore I pray you be contented with my death which I most willingly suffer; let vs ioine in prayer for the King, vnto whom I haue alwaies shewed my selfe a faithfull Subiect, and haue béen most diligent to seeke the com∣moditie of the whole Realme; at which words all the people cryed out and said, it was most true: And praying for the King and Councell, and exhorting the people to obedience, forgiuing all his enemies, and desiring forgiuenes of them which he had offended, and praying them to beare witnes, he died in the faith of Christ. Then he knéeled downe and prayed, and rising againe without any trouble of minde, he tooke them all on the Scaffold by the hand, and bid them all farewell: when he lay vpon the block he called thrice on the name of Iesus, saying, Lord Ie∣sus saue me: And as the name of Iesu was repeating the third time, in a moment, he was bereft both of head and life. The Lady MARY. THe King & his Councell had much trauell by Letters and messengers, to re∣duce the Lady Mary to obedient conormitie of Religion: yet she would not be reclaimed from her owne singuler opinion, fixed vpon custome, to giue any in∣different hearing vnto the word and voice of verity, the which set will of the said Lady Mary, the yong King, and also his Father King Henry, right well perceiuing they were both much displeased against her, insomuch that not only her brother did
sequester her in his Will, but also her owne father considering her inclination, did conceiue such a hate against her, that for a great space he did seclude her from the title of Princesse, yea, and seemed so greatly incensed against her, that he was ful∣ly purposed to haue procéeded further with her, as it is reported, had not the inter∣cession of Thomas Cranmer the Archbishop reconciled the King againe to fauour and pardon his owne daughter. And about the eighth of September 1552. Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, went to visit the Lady Mary, and was gently entertained of Sir Thomas Whar∣ton, and other her officers. About eleuen of the clocke the Lady Mary came forth of her chamber of presence: then the Bishop saluted her Grace, and said he was come to doe his dutie vnto her Grace; she thanked him, and for a quarter of an houre talked with him pleasantly, and said, she knew him when he was Chaplain to her father, and remembred a Sermon that he made before her father, at the Lady Clin∣tons marriage, and so dismissed him to dine with her officers. After dinner the Bishop being called, resorted againe vnto her Grace: then said the Bishop, Madam, I come not only to doe my duety to sée your Grace, but also to offer my selfe to preach before you on Sonday next, if it please you to heare me: she said, I pray make the answere your selfe, for you know the answere well e∣nough: but if I must make answere, this shall be your answere, The doore of the Church shall be open for you if you come, but neither I nor none of mine shall heare you. The Bishop said, Madam, I trust you will not refuse GODS word. She answered, I cannot tell what you call GODS word; that is not GODS word now that was GODS word in my fathers dayes. The Bishop said, GODS word is one in all times, but it hath beene better vnderstood and prac∣tised in some ages then in others. She said, you durst not for your eares haue a∣uouched that for GODS word in my fathers dayes that now you doe: as for your new books, I thanke GOD for it, I neuer read none of them, nor neuer will doe. After many bitter words against the forme of Religion then established, and a∣gainst the gouernment of the Realme, and the lawes made in the young yeares of her brother, which she said she was not bound to obey vntill her brother came to perfect age, and then affirmed she would obey them. Then she asked him whether he were one of the Priuie Councell; he answered no: you might well enough, quoth she, as the Councell goeth now-a-dayes: so she concluded, that she thanked him for his gentlenesse to come and see her, but for your offering to preach before me, I thank you neuer a whit. Then was the Bishop brought by Sir Thomas Wharton vnto the place where he dined, who desired him to drinke: after he had drunke he looked very sadly, and brake out in these words, Surely I haue done amisse, in that I haue drunke in that place where GODS word hath beene offered and refused, whereas indeed if I had beene mindfull of my duety, I ought not to haue stayed, but to haue de∣parted immediatly, and to haue shaken off the dust of my feete for a testimony a∣gainst this house. Touching the disputations of Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius, because they are only touching the Sacrament, which is so often handled in this book, for breuitie I referre thee to the book at large. The decease of King EDWARD. ABout a yeare and a halfe after the death of the Duke of Sommerset,1553. King Edward died, entring into the seuenteenth yeare of his age, and in the seuenth yeare of his raigne. As the time approached that it pleased Almighty God to call this yong King from vs, which was on the sixth day of Iuly, about thrée houres before his death his eyes being closed, speaking to himselfe, and thinking none had heard him, he made this prayer as olloweth.
LOrd God deliuer me from this miserable and wretched life, and take me a∣mongst thy chosen, howbeit not my will but thy will be done, for I commit my spirit vnto thee. O Lord thou knowest how happie it were for me to be with thée, yet for thy chosens sake send me life and health, that I may truly serue thes. O my Lord GOD, blesse thy people and saue thine inheritance: O Lord saue thy chosen people of England: O my GOD defend this realme from Papistrie, and maintain thy true religion, that I and my people may prayse thy holy name, for thy Sonne Iesu Christs sake. Then he turned his face, and séeing who was by him, he said vnto them, are you so nigh? I thought you had been further off: then smilingly he said; I was praying to God. The last words he spake were these: I am faint, Lord haue mer∣cie vpon me, and take my spirit. And thus he yeelded vp the Ghst, leauing a wo∣full kingdome behinde vnto his sister. THE TENTH BOOK, WHEREIN is contained the most memorable things done in the Raigne of Queene MARY. KIng Edward by his Testament did appoint Lady Iane,1553. daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whose mother was Mary, second sister of King Henry, who was first wife to the French King, and after to the said Duke, to succeed him in his Kingdome; all the Councell and chief Nobilitie, the Mayor of London, and all the Iudges and chiefe La∣wyers, sauing Iudg Hales, subscribed therto, who stood for Q. Mary. The matter thus concluded, King Edward died when he was sixteene yeares of age; then the said Iane was proclaymed Queene at London, and other Cities: she was about the age of King Edward; in learning and wit she might be compa∣red with the Uniuersitie men which haue taken many degrees of the schooles. Then Queen Mary wrote to the Councel that they should proclaime her Quéen, and she would pardon them for that which was done: they answered her, that by the Diuorse betwixt King Henry and her mother, she was made illegitimate and vnheritable to the Crowne. Then she speeded her selfe farre from the Citie, hoping vpon the Commons, whereupon the Councell sent forth the Duke of Northumberland, with other Lords and Gentlemen with an Armie, the Guard assisting the Duke. Mary withdrew her selfe into Northfolke and Suffolke, where she knew the Duke was hated; and there gathering such aide of the Commons as she might, kept her selfe in Fremingham Castle, to whom Suffolk-men resorted, and promi∣sed her their aide if she would not alter the religion which her brother had establi∣shed, to which she agreed, with such promises as no man could haue misdoubted her: and thus being guarded with the power of the Gospellers, she vanquished the Duke and all that came against her.
But after, the Suffolk-men making supplication vnto her Grace for perfor∣mance of her promise, she answerd, You shall one day well perceiue that members must obey their head, and not looke to rule the same: and one Dobbe a Gentleman for aduertising her of her promise by humble request, was three times set in the pillorie, to be a gasing-stock to all men; others deliuered her books and supplica∣tions out of the Scripture, to exhort her to continue the doctrine then established, who were sent to prison. The Councell at London, vnderstanding that the Ladie Marie increased in pui∣sance, and the peoples hearts mightily bent vnto her, they turned their song, and proclaymed for Quéen, the Lady Mary, eldest daughter of K. Henry the eight, and appointed by Parliament to succeed King Edward, dying without issue: the Duke of Northumberland with some of his sonnes, were left destitute at Cambridge, as also the Earle of Huntingdon, who were arrested and brought to the Tower as Traytors. Then the Quéen came to the Tower, where the Lady Iane and the Lord Gilford her husband were imprisoned fiue months, but the Duke within a moneth was be∣headed, with Sir Iohn Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer: the Papists promised the Duke pardon if he would openly recant vpon the Scaffold, which in hope of pardon he did, and yet he was beheaded; whose recantation the papists published not a lit∣tle, reioycing at his conuersion: but Sir Thomas Palmer confessed his faith in the Gospell, and was sorie that he had not liued more Gospell-like. Steuen Gardner was released out of the Tower, and made Bishop of Winche∣ster and Lord Chancellor, and Poynets displaced; and Bonner restored to his Bi∣shoprick againe, and Ridley displaced; and Day made Bishop of Chichester, and Storie put out; and Heath made Bishop of Worcester, and Hooper committed to the Fleet; and Vesie to Exeter, and Couerdale put out. Doctor Ridley Bishop of London had preached against Quéen Mary in Queene Ianes time: shortly after the Sermon Queen Mary was proclaymed; then he went to the Queen to salute her, who dispoyled him of his Dignities, and sent him to the Tower vpon a halting horse. Then Queen Mary directed forth an inhibition by proclamation, that no man should preach or reade openly in Churches the word of God. One Bourne, who after was Bishop of ath, preached at Paules Crosse so much in the praise of Bonner being there present, and in dispraise of King Edward, that his words sounded euill to the hearers, which caused them to murmur and stirre, insomuch that the Maror and others feared an vprore: one hurled a dagger at the Preacher, who for feare pulled in his head. Master Bradford stood forth and ap∣peased the people, and after he and Rogers conducted the Preacher safe into the Grammer-schoole, but shortly after they were both rewarded with burning. The next Sonday the preacher at the Crosse was guarded with the Queenes Guard; then men withdrew themselues from the Sermon, and the Mayor took order that the ancients of al Companies should be present, lest the Preacher should be discouraged with his small auditorie. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterburie, assisted with Peter Martyr and a few o∣thers, offered to defend the doctrine of the booke of Common Prayer by the Scriptures and Doctors; but whilst they hoped to come to disputation, the Arch∣bishop and others were imprisned, but Peter Martyr was suffered to return from whence he came. The first day of October the Queen was crowned, and the tenth day a Parlia∣ment began, where Taylor Bishop of Lincolne, & Harley Bishop of Herford after they saw the masse begin, not abiding the sight thereof, withdrew themselues from the company, wherefore Taylor was commanded to attend, but shortly after died, and Harley because he was married was exnded from the Parlament and his Bishoprick. Then all statuts in K. Hen. the eight, and K. Edwards time, which were against papistrie were repealed.
Sir Iames Hales Iustice of the Common pleas, notwithstanding he had ventu∣red his life for Quéen Mary in not subscribing to King Edwards Will, as before; for giuing charge vpon the Statuts against Papistrie, at the Assises, he was com∣mitted to diuers prisons, and so terrified, that he wounded himselfe, and meant to haue killed himselfe with a knife, and after was contented to say as they willed him; whereupon he was discharged, but he neuer rested vntill he had drowned himselfe. Then, according to the Quéens commandement, there begun a disputation in the Conuocation house about the Sacrament, which continued six dayes, where∣in Doctor Weston was the chiefe on the Popes side, who behaued himselfe outra∣giously in checking and aunting: the matter of the disputation was onely of the Sacrament, and the reasons no other then shall and haue beene set forth in this book, wherefore for breuitie I omit them. In conclusion, the Quéen to take vp the matter, sent her commandement to Bonner to dissolue the Conuocation, and such as disputed on the contrary part were driuen some to flie, some to denie, and some to die, though in most mens iudgements that heard the disputation, they had the vpper hand. In which Parliament also communication was moued of the Quéens marri∣age, which was very euill taken of the people,1554. and of many of the Nobilitie, who for this and for religion, conspiring amongst themselues, made a rebellion, wherof Sir Thomas Wyat was chiefe. News comming to London of this stirre in Kent, the Quéen caused Wyat and the Duke of Suffolke, who was fled to Warwick∣shire and Leister-shire, there to gather a power, and the two Carewes of Deuon∣shire, to be proclaymed Traytors; and Thomas Duke of Northfolke was sent into Kent against Wyat, but about Rochester Bridge the Duke was forsaken of all his men, and returned to London. The Earle of Huntington was sent post to apprehend the Duke of Suffolke, who entring the Citie of Couentrie before the Duke disappointed him, and one Vnderwood his man betrayed and bewrayed him, so that he was brought to the Tower of London. In time Sir Peter Carew hearing what was done, fled into France, but the o∣ther were taken: and the Quéen hearing of Wyats comming towards London, she came into the Citie to Guild-hall, where she made a vehement Oration against Wyat, and to incourage them to stand with her. Two dayes after the Lord Cobham was committed vnto the Tower; and Wyat comming to Southwark, being he could not enter that way into London, he went with his Armie by Kingstone, and came through the stréets to Ludgate, but returning he was resisted at Temple-barre, and there yeelded himselfe to Sir Cle∣ment Parson, and was brought to the Court: the residue of his armie were taken, and a hundred killed; for Sir George Harper and almost halfe his men ranne a∣way from him at Kingstone Bridge, and they which were taken were had to pri∣son, and many of them hanged, and he himselfe executed at Tower-hill and quarte∣red: his head was set vpon Hay hill, and after stolne away, but there was great search made for the same. Then the Lady Iane was beheaded, two dayes before whose death Fecknam was sent to her by the Quéen to reduce her to papistrie. The communication betwixt the Lady Iane and Fecknam. Feck. MAdam, I lament your heauie case, but I doubt not but you beare it constantly. Iane. I litle lament my owne case, but rather account it a token of Gods fauor vnto me, more then euer he shewed to me before, being a thing profitable for my soules health. Feck. I am com from the Quéen and Councel to instruct you in the faith, though
I trust I need not trauell ouer much in the performance thereof. Iane. I heartily thanke the Queene that she is not vnmindfull of her humble subiect, and I hope you will doe your dutie according to the message that you were sent on. Feck. What is then required of a Christian? Iane. That he should beleeue in God the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, three persons, and one God. Feck. What is there nothing else to bee required of a Christian, but to be∣leeue. Iane. Yes, we must also loue him with all our heart, soule, and mined, and our neighbour as our selfe. Feck. Why then Faith instifieth not. Iane. Yes verily, Faith as Saint Paul saith, onely iustifyeth. Feck. Why Saint Paul saith, if I haue all Faith, without loue it is nothing. Iane. True it is, for how can I loue him whom I trust not: or how can I trust him whom I loue not: Faith and Loue goeth both together: yet loue is compre∣hended in Faith. Feck. How shall we loue our neighbour? Iane. To feede the hungry, cloth the naked, and giue drinke to the thirsty, and to doe to him as we would doe to our selues. Feck. Why then it is necessary to saluation to doe good workes, and not suffici∣ent onely to beleeue. Iane I deny that: and affirme Faith onely saueth, but it is meet for a Christi∣an to follow Christ in good workes: yet we may not say that they profit to saluati∣on: for when we haue done all that we can, we are vnprofitable seruants: and faith onely in Christ bloud saueth vs. Feck. How many Sacraments are there? Iane. Two: the one of Baptisme, the other of the Lords Supper. Feck. No, there are seauen, but what are signified by your two Sacraments? Iane. By Baptisme I am washed with Water, and regenerated by the Spi∣t, and the washing is a token I am Gods Childe. The Lords Supper offered vnto me, is a sure seale, that by the blood of Christ I am made partaker of the euer∣lasting Kingdome. Feck. Do you not receiue the very body and blood of Christ? Iane. I neither receiued flesh nor blood, but Bread and wine; which putteth me in remembrance, that for my sins his body was broken, and his blood shed, and with it I receiue the benefit of his Passion. Feck. Doth not Christ say plainly, This is my body. Iane. So he saith, I am the Vine and the doore; and Saint Paul saith, Hee cal∣leth things that are not, as though they were: God forbid I should say I eate the body and blood of Christ, for then I should pluck away my Redemption, else there were two Christs: for if his Disciples eate his body, it was not broken vpon the Crosse, and if it were broken vpon the Crsse, his Disciples did not eate it, except he had two bodies. Feck. Could not Christ as possibley make his body to be eaten and broken, as to bee borne of a Woman without Man, and as to walke on the Sea and doe o∣ther miracles. Iane. If God would haue done a miracle at Supper he could, but he then min∣ded no miracle, but to suffer for sinne. Was not Christ at the Table and aliue when he said so, and suffered not vntill the next day & he took bread, brake bread, gaue bread, and they eate bread, and all this while he was aliue with them, or else they were deceiued. Feck. You ground your Faith on them that say and vnsay, and not vpon the Church. Iane. I ground my Faith on Gods word and not on the Church, for the Faith
of the Church must be tryed by Gods word, and not Gods word by the Church: shall I beléeue the Church that taketh from me the halfe of the Lords supper, and se deny the Lay-men part of their saluation, and I say that is not the spouse of Christ, but the spouse of Diuell, hee will adde plagues to that Church, and will take from it their part out of the booke of life: doe they learne that of Paule when bee ministred to the Corinthians in both kinds. Feck, That was done to avoyde an heresie. Iane. Shall the Church alter Gods will for a good intent, how did King Saule. Then Feckham tooke his leaue, and sayd he was sorry for her, and sayd hee was sure they two should neuer méete. Iane, that is true, if God turne not your heart you are in an ill case, I pray God send you his spirit, hee bath giuen you a great gift of vtterance if it please him to open your eyes. She wrote a letter to her father to comfort him, and to shew how ioyfull shee was to die, and she wrote another letter to one Master Harding, who was late Chaplaine to her Father, and fell from the truth of Gods word, and rebuked him, that hee put his hand to the plow and looked backe, and lost the comfortable pro∣mises that Christ maketh to them that forsake themseles to follow him, thou didst séeme to bee a liuely member of Christ, but now an impe of the Diuell, once tho beautifull Temple of God, now the filthy kennell of Sathan, once the vnspotten spouse of Christ, now the vnshamefast Paramre of Antichrist, once my faithfull brother, now an Apostata, once a floute Christian souldier, now a cowardly run∣away: thou séede of Sathan and not of Iuda, the Diuell, the world, and desire of life, hath made thée of a Christian an Infidell, thou hast taught others to be strog, and thy selfe dost shamefully shrinke, thou hast taught others not to tcale, and thy selfe hast committed most haynous sacriledge, and robbest Christ of his right mem∣bers and of thine own body and soule, thou chosest rather to liue miserably with shame in the world, then to die gloriously to aygne with Christ, in whm in death is life, how darest thou refuse the true God, and worship the inuention of man, the goulden Calfe, the Whore of Babilon, the Romish Religion, the abominable Idoll, the most wicked Masse, wilt thou teare againe the pretios body of our Sa∣uiour with thy fleshly teeth, and she exhorted him that the ft falling of thse Hea∣uenly showers might pearce his stony heart, and the two edged word of Gods word seare asunder the sinnewes of wordly respects that thou mayst once againe forsake thy selfe and imbrace Christ. The night before she suffered, the sent a new Testament to her sister Katherin, and wrote a letter to her in the end thereof, that though it were not outwardly trimmed with gould, yet inwardly it was more worth then precious stones. It was the last will that Christ bequeathed to vs wretches, it will bing you to eter∣nall life▪ teach you to liue, and learne you to die: you shall gaine more by it, then by the possession of your wofull fathers lands: thinke not that your yong years will lengthen your life, for soone, if God call, goeth the yong, as the old, deny the world, despise the Diuel and the flesh, reioice in Christ as I do, I exhort you that you ne∣uer swarue from the Christian faith, neither for hope of life nor feare of death, if you deny Christ, hee will deny you and shorten your dayes, put your whole trust in God: she made a prayer full of faith, which thou mayest sée in the booke at large. When she cam vpon the Scaffold, she protested her innocency in the cause shee was to die for, and prayed them to beare her witnesse that she dyed a true Christi∣an woman, and that she looked to bee saued by no meanes, but by the mercy of God in Christ, and my negligence of the word of God, and louing of the world brought this punishment vpon me, and I thanke God that hee hath giuen me a time of repentance, then she prayed them whilest she was aliue to assist her with their prayers: then she sayd the one and fiftih Psalme in deuout maner, then she made her selfe ready, and gaue her things to her Maides, and caused a handker∣chife
to be tyed about her face: the hang-man asked her forgiuenesse, and shee for∣gaue him most willingly, and prayed him to dispatch her quickly: then she laid her head vpon the blocke, and said, Into thy hands I commend my spirit, and so finished her life. With her also was beheaded the Lord Gilford her husband. Iudge Morgan, who gaue the sentence of condemnation against her, shortly af∣ter fell madde, and continually cried to haue the Lady Iane taken from him, and so ended his life. Not long after her death was the Duke of Suffolke, her father, beheaded at the Tower-hill: about which time also were condemned many Gentlemen and Yeo∣men, whereof some were executed at London, and some in the countrey, and Tho∣mas Gray brother to the said Duke was executed. The foure and twentieth of Februarie Bonner sent a Commission to al Pastors and Curats of his Diocesse, to take the names of all such as would not come the1554 Lent following to auricular confession, and to the receiuing at Easter. The fourth of March following the Queene sent certaine Articles to Bonner to e speedily put in execution: that the Canons in King Henries time should be v∣sed in England, that none exact any oath of any Ecelesiasticall person touching the supremacie, that none, defamed with heresie, he admitted to ecclesiastical benefice or office, that Bishops and other officers diligently trauell about for repressing of he∣resies, vnlawfull books and ballads, and that Schoole-masters and Preachers teach no euil doctrine; that they depriue all married Priests, except they renounce their wiues: but if they returne to their wiues to bee diuorced both from wife and benefice: that for want of Priests the parishiners goe to the next parish to seruice or one Curate serue diuers places: That processions in Latine bee vsed after the old order: for the obseruing of Holy daies, and Fasting daies, that the ceremonies of the Church be restored, that Ministers which were ordered in King Edwards time should be new ordered: that the parishioners bee compelled to come to their seuerall Churches: that Schoolmaisters be examined and if they be suspected, to place Catholick men in their roome, and that they instruct the children to answer the Priest at Masse. Shee sent likewise a commandement to the Lord Mayor of London, with the foresaid Articles to bee carefull with all his power for the performance thereof. Then the Queene sent forth a Proclamation, that the strangers which in King Edwards time were receiued into England for Religion, should  driuen out of the Realme. Wherevpon Peter Martyr, Ioannes Alasco, vnckle to the King of Poland, and many others, were banished, and many English men also fled into Germany▪ and were scattered in diuers places, where by Gods proidence they were sustained, and entertained with great fauour, to the number of eight hundred persons. The twenty fiue of March, the Lord Courtney and Lady Elizabeth were sus∣spected to consent to Wiats conspiracy: and therevpon apprehended and commit∣to the Tower. This was a politicke practice of Steuen Gardiner, which alwaies was an enemy to Lady Elizabeth, Wyat at his deat protested to the people, that the Lord Courtney and Lady Elizabeth were cleare from all suspition of Commo∣ion, but Doctor Weston cryed to the people, beleeue him not, or hee confessed o∣therwise before vnto the Cocell. The same day it was told in the Parliament house, that Wiat desired the Lord Courtney to confesse the truth, as he had done before. One Cut a Prentice of London, was sent for by Gardiner vnto the Star-cham∣ber, for that he should say that Wiat was constrained by the Councell to acuse the Lady Elizabeth and the Lord Courtney, to be consenters to his risng. When the Mayor brought him thither, Gardiner beganne to declare how miraculously God had brought the Queene to the Crowne: the whole Realme in a manner beeing against her, and it was that shee might reduce this Realme, ouerwhelmed with
heresies to the Catholike faith: and where she lued the Lady Elizabeth tenderly, and deliuered the Lord Courtney out of prison, yet they conspired trayterously a∣gainst her with Wyat, as he confessed; yet there are some in London which repor∣ted that Wyat was constrayned by the Councell to accuse them, yet you, my Lord Mayor, haue not seene the same punished. The partie is here, said the Mayor▪ Gard∣ner said, punish him according to his deserts, and take heed to your charge: the Ci∣tie of London is a whirle-poole of euill rumors. The Londoners not fauouring the Queens proceedings to their displeasure, summoned a Parlament at Oxford, because they would be forward in the Queens businesse, but after it was holden at Westminster, where her marriage with king Philip was agreed vpon. Bonner being Uicegerent of the Conuocation, in his Oration said that Priests were like the Uirgin Mary; as she by fiue words conceaued Christ, so the Priest by fiue words loth make the very body of Christ: and as immediatly vpon the consent of Mary Christ was all whole in her womb, so immediatly after the consecration the bread is transubstantiated into the very body of Christ; and as the Uirgin layed Christ in the anger, so the Priest lifteth vp the body of Christ, and carryeth it; and as Mary was sanctified before she conceiued, so the priest is ordained & anoin∣ted before he doe consecrate; for a lay-man though he be neuer so holy, and do speak the same words, yet he cannot consecrate: Therefore the dignitie of Priests pas∣seth the dignity of Angels, for no Angell can make the body of Christ, whereby the least Priest can doe more then the greatest Angell: therefore Priests are to bee onoured before Kings and Princes, and Nobles: for a Priest is higher then a King, happier then an Angell, and maker of his Creator. The effect of the communication between Doctor Ridley, and Secretary Bourne, and others at the Lieutenants table at the Tower. Feckham. WHo so doth not beleeue that which Scripture doth affirme is an eretick: as in the Sacrament of the Altar: Mathew, Marke, Luke and Paul affirme there to bee Christs body, and none denieth it: therefore to hold the contrarie is herese. Ridley, Whereas is a multitude of affirmations in scripture, and where is one affirmation, all is one in scripture, that which is spoken by one of the Euangelists is as true, as that which is spoken by al: for it is not in Scripture as in witnesse of men, where the number is credited more then one, and where you speake of so many, affirming without negation of any, if you take their words and leaue their meaning, they affirme, that you take. Feck. What circumstances can you shew, that should moue to thinke of any o∣ther sense, then as the words plainely say. Rid. By the next sentence; Doe this in remembrance of me: and you may as well say, the Bread is turned into Christs mysticall body, as that it is turned into his naturall body, for Paule speaking of the mysticail body saith: Many are one Bread and one body, because they are partakers of one Bread. Feck. This is confrmed by antiquity, vnity, and vniuersality, for none before Beringarius did euer doubt of this: then said Master Secretary, these be great mat∣ters, what say you to that? Feck. As for Unity, I doe beléeue it, if it be with veritie, and as for Antiquity at the first, Christs Faith was truely taught by Christ and his Apostles, and by
many good men which did succeed next them, and touching the Sacrament I am perswaded these old writers, before the vsurping of the Sea of Rome doe all a∣gree, if they bee well vnderstood in this truth, as for vniuersalitie if may haue two meanings, one that from the beginning in all ages hath beene allowed, or it may be vnderstood for the multitude of our age, or of any other singular age. Maister Secretarie: What authors haue you of the Sacrament to make a figure. Ridley. Tertullian saith, This is my body, that is to say a figure of my body: And Gelasius saith the substance of bread remaineth: And Origen saith, that which is sanctified as touching the matter passeth away in the draught: and I maruell Fecnam will alledge Melancton, for we agree there is in the Sacrament but one materiall substance: and he saith there are two. Maister Secretarie: You say truth, but we reade that in the old time the Sacra∣ment was so reuerenced: that the Catecumeni and many more were forbiddn to be present. Rid. Truth Sir, there were some called Audients, some Penitents, some Cate∣chumeni, and some Euergumeni, which were commanded to depart. Maister Sectetarie: How then can you make but a figure of the Sacrament as the Lord of Canterburies booke doth. Rid. Me thinkes it is not charitably done to beare the people in hand that any man doth so lightly esteeme the Sacrament, as to make it but a figure, which that booke doth deny, as appeareth by that booke most plainely: And as for mee I say whosoeuer receiueth the Sacrament, receiueth with it life or death: as S. Augu∣stine saith, manduca vitam, bibe vitam. Maister Pope. I doe beleeue the reall body of Christ is in the Sacrament, and I pray God I may euer so beleeue; and how can it bring life or death, if Christs bo∣dy be not there. Rid. When you heare Gods word truely preached; if you doe beléeue you re∣ceiue life: and if you beléeue not, it bringeth vnto you death, yet Christs body is not carnall in euery preachers mouth. Pope. How answere you this: which shall be giuen for you, was the figure of Christs body giuen for you. Rid. No Sir; but the very body it selfe whereof the Sacrament is a figure. Ter∣tullians exposition maketh it plaine: For hee saith the body is a figure of the bodie, now put too which shall be giuen for you, and it agreeth excéeding well. Maister Secretary: You know well that Origen and Tertullian were not Ca∣tholick, but erred. Rid. There is none of the Doctors but are thought to haue erred in some things, but I neuer heard that Tertullian, or Origen, were thought to haue erred in the Sacrament. Feck. Forty yeares agone all were of one opinion of this matter. Rid. Forty yeares agoe all held that the Pope was supreme head of the vni∣uersall Church. Maister Secretarie: That was but a positiue Law. Rid. It is in the Decrees that the Pope challengeth his supremacie not by any Councell, nor any way else, but by Christs own words; saying to Peter, thou art Peter: And in another place thou art Cephas, that is the head: and his Decree is that we must be obedient to the Bishop of Rome, vpon necessity of saluation.
Thomas Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, Rid∣ley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer Bishop of VVorster, were sent to Oxford, to dispute with the Di∣uines of Oxford and Cambridge. THere was thrée questions, First, whether the naturall body of Christ be really in the sacrament after consecration: secondly, whether any other substanc doth remaine after consecration then the substance of the body and bloud of Christ: thirdly, whther in the masse there be a sacrifice propitiatorie for the sinnes of the quick & the dead. Thirty thrée Commissioners being set in the Quire of S. Maries Church in Oxford before the Altar, Cranmer Archb. was brought to them with a number of Bill-men. When he had read ouer the Articles, he said they were all false and against Gods holy word. Then was Doctor Ridley brought in, who hearing the Articles read, answered they were all false, and that they sprang out of a bitter root. Then came in Latimer: when he had denied the Articles, he said he had read ouer the new Testament seuen times, and yet could not find the mais in it, nor the mary-bones nor sinewes of the same. All their arguments were of nothing but the reall presence in the Sacrament, which point is already sufficiently argued in many places of this book, and will more hereafter. If thou desire to sée the disputations, resort to the book at large; for the Commissioners were so clamorous that they could not be suffered to speak, as it appeareth by the report of Bishop Ridley. Bishop RIDLEY his report. NEuer did I see a thing done more vainly and contumeliously then the dispu∣tations with me in the Schooles in Oxford: I thought it had not been possi∣ble to haue béen found amongst men of learning and knowledge, any so brazen fa∣ced and shamelesse, so disorderly and vainely to behaue themselues, more like to Stage-players then Diuines. The Sorbonicall clamours, which in times past I haue séene in Paris, when Poperie most raigned, might be thought modestie in re∣spect of them, yea, and the chiefest did as it were blow the Trumpe vnto the rest, to rayle, rore, rage and crie out, whereby it appeareth they neuer sought for the ve∣ritie but for their owne glorie and bragging victorie. Much time appointed for Disputations, was vainly consumed in opprobrious checks, taunts, hissings, and clapping of hands. Whensoeuer I would make an end of my probations, they would euer crie out Blasphemies, blasphemies. I neuer heard or read the like, but by Demetrius the Siluer-smith, and them of his occupation, crying but against Paule, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: and except it be a disputation of the Arrians against the Orthodoxes, where it is said that such as the Presidents of the dispu∣tations were, such were the rest, all were in a hurly-burly; and the Arrians cast out such great slanders, that nothing could quietly be heard; and he concludes, thus ended this glorious disputation of the Sacrificers, Doctors, and Masters, which fought manfully for their God and goods, their faith and felicitie, countrey and Kitchin, and for their beautie and bellie, with triumphant applauses and fauour of the whole Uniuersitie. After seuerall disputations with euery one of them, the Commissioners sate in
Saint Maries Church, and Doctor Weston, vsed particular perswasions with e∣uery one of them, and would not suffer them to answere but peemptorily to say whether they would subscribe or no: Hee told the Bishop of Canterbury, hee was ouercome in Arguments, which he said was false, for hee was not suffered to oppose as he would, nor answere as he would, vnlesse hee would haue brau∣led with them, all denying to subscribe: then sentence was read ouer them, that they were no members of the Church, and therefore condemned for he∣reticks. Then the Archbishop Cranmer answered, from this your sentence I appeale to the iust iudgement of God, trusting to be present with him in heauen, for whose presence in the Altar I am thus condemned. Bishop Ridley answered, though I be not of your company, yet my name is written in another place, whither this sentence will send mee sooner then wee should by nature haue come. Bishop Latimer. I thanke God most heartily that hee hath prolonged my life to this end, that I may in this case glorifie GOD by that kinde of death. After they were all three called to behold a solemne procession, wherein Doctor Weston carried the Sacrament, and foure Doctors carried the Cana∣pie ouer him. In the last yeere one thousand fiue hundred forty and three, it is shewed how the Duke of Northumberland was apprehended by the Guard, and brought to London by the Earle of Arundell and others, these were committed to the To∣wer with the Duke, the Earle of VVarwick, the Earle of Huntington, Lord Am∣brose, and Lord Henry Dudley, Lord Hastings, who was deliuered the same night: Sir Iohn Gates, Sir Henry Gates, Sir Andrew Dudley, Sir Thomas Palmer, and Doctor Sands Chancelor of Cambridge, many were committed to diuers prisons about the same time. About this time Maister Bradford, Maister Beacon, and Maister Veron were committed vnto the Tower, and Maister Sampson was sought for, and because he could not be found the Bishop of Winchester fumed. About this time Doctor Weston preached at Paules Crosse, he willed the peo∣ple to pray for the soules departed, that be neither in heauen nor hell, but in a place not yet sufficiently purged to come to heauen, that they may be releeued by your deuout prayers: he named the Lords Table an Oyster boord: hee said the Cate∣chisme lately set forth was abominable heresie, and likeneth the setters forth of the same to Iulianus Apostata, and the booke to the booke of Iulianus Apostata, where∣in Christ and Pilate were the speakers, which Sermon was learnedly confuted in writing by Maister Couerdall. About this time a Priest of Canterbury said Masse on the one day, and the next day he came into the Pulpit, and desired all the people to forgiue him, for he said hee had betrayed Christ, but not as Iudas, as Peter, and made a long Sermon a∣gainst the Masse. In February one thousand fiue hundred fifty and foure, before the com∣ming of King Philip, vpon the fifteenth day, about nine of the clock in the fore∣noone, there was séene two Sunnes both shining at once: and that time was al∣so seene a Raine-bow turned contrary, and a great deale higher then it was wont. About this time at Saint Pancrase in Cheape, the Crucifixe with the Pixe were taken out of the Sepulchre before the Priest rose to the resurrection: so that when he put his hand into the Sepulchre, & said very deuoutly surrexit non est hic, he found his words true, for he was not there indéede, wherevpon being dismaide, and debating amongst themselues whom they thought likest to doe it: they layed it to one Marsh, which a little before had beene put from that parsonage be∣cause he was married, but when they could not proue it, being brought before the
Mayor, they burdened him to haue kept company with his wife since they were diuorced: He answered that the Queene had done him wrong to take from him both his liuing, and his wife: wherevpon he and his wife were committed se∣uerall Counters. About this time there was a Cat hanged vpon a Gallows at the Crosse in Cheape, apparelled like a Priest, ready to say Masse with a shauen Crowne: her two fore-feete were tyed ouer her head, with a round paper like a Wafer Cake put betweene them, where on rose great euill will against the Citie of London: the Quéene and the Bishops were very angry, and there was a proclamation in the afternoone, that whosoeuer could bring forth the party that hanged vp the Cat should haue twenty Nobles, which after was increased to twenty Markes, but none would are it, the occasion of this was, because the Bishop of Winchester had preached before the Queene for the straite execution of Wyats Souldiours: Wherevpon there was twenty Gibbets and Gallowes set vp, in and about the streets of London, which there remained for the terrour of others from the 13. of February, vntill the fourth of Iune, and at the comming of King Philip were ta∣ken downe. One Maister Walter Mantell, one of them which rose with Wyat, being priso∣ner in the Tower, the Quéene sent vnto him Doctor Bourne, to conuert him: he answered Bourne that he beleeued in the holy Catholick church of Christ, grounded vpon the Prophets and Apostles, but he tooke exception to the Antichristian popish Church: and hee said, hee thought the Masse not fit, both for the occasion of Idola∣try, and also the cléere  of Christs institution: and said it was not a pro∣pitiatory sacrifice for sinne: for the death of Christ was onely that sacrifice, and cer∣taine Collects therein are blasphemous. Then said the Doctor, see how vaine∣glory toucheth you; then I found fault it was not a Communion: Yes said he one Priest saying Masse heere, and another there, and the third in an other place is a Communion: Then he desired God to receiue him to his mercy, that he might die vndefiled in his truth, at vtter defiance with all papisticall and Antichristian Doctrine: and to defend all his chosen, from the tyrany of the Pope and Antichrist and from his subtilties: at his first casting off the Gallowes the rope broke, then they would haue had him reant, and receiued the Sacrament of the Altar, and then he should haue the Queenes Pardon: but Master Mantell, like a worthy gen∣tleman, refused their serpentine Councell, and chose rather to die then to liue for dishonouring of God. Maister Bradford, Maister Sanders, and diuers other good preachers hearing that they should be brought vnto a Disputation at Cambridge, sent a Declarati∣on out of prison, to the effect as followeth; That they did not purpose to dispute otherwise then by writing, except it be before the Queenes Highnes & her Coun∣cell, and before the Parliament houses, because we shall dispute against the things which already they haue determined, whereby it appeareth they seeke not the de∣rity▪ but our destruction, and their glory; otherwise they would haue called vs to shew our consciences before their lawes were so made: and againe the Censors and Iudges are manifest enemies of the truth, before whom Pearles are not to be cast by the commandement of Christ, and by his example: and because some of vs haue been in prison eight or nine monethes, where we haue had no Bookes, paper, nor Inke, and because we shall bee stopped of our Arguments, as the Bishops were at Oxford: and because the Notaries that shal write our Arguments shal be such as either doe not, or dare not fauour the truth, therefore must write to please them, or else they will put to, or take from, at their pleasure, as it appeared at Oxford: Yea if any man was seene there to write, he was sent for and his writings taken from him. If they will write, we will answere by writing, and proue by the word of God and most ancient Fathers, this our faith & euery péece thereof, and we are ready to seale it with our liues: First we confesse & beléue all the Canonicall bookes of the
Old Teament and the New, to bee truth written by the Spirit, and to bee the Iudge of all Controuersies of Religion: and we beléeue the Catholike Church is the Spouse and beloued Wife of Christ, and to imbrace the doctrine of these bookes in all matters of Religion, and therefore to bee heard accordingly, and those that will not heare her, are Heretickes and Schismaticks, according to the saying: He that will not heare the Church, let him be an Hereticke; and wee beléeue the Symbols of the Créede of the Apostles, and of the Councels of Nice, Con∣stantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and of Toletum, before the foure hundred fifty foure yeare, and the Symbols of Athanasius, Ireneus, Tertullian, and of Damasus, which was in the yeare thrée hundred seauenty sixe. We beléeue that Iustification commeth onely from the mercy of GOD through Christ, and it is had of none of discretion but by Faith: which Faith is a certaine perswasion wrought by the Holy Ghost, and as it lightneth the mind, so it suppleth the heart, to submit it selfe to the will of God. By this we disalow Papisticall Doctrines of free will, of workes of superero∣gation, of merits, of the necessity of auriculer confession and satisfaction: And we beléeue, that the exterior seruice of God, ought to be according to the word, in such a tongue as may be most to edifie and not in Latine, where the people vnderstand not the same: And we beléeue, that God onely by Iesus Christ, is to bee prayed vnto, and we disalow inuocation to Sants departed; and we beléeue, as a Man departeth this life, he is either blessed, or damned for euer; by reason whereof we affirme Purgatory, Masses of Scala Caeli, Trentals, and such suffrages as the po∣pish Church doth obtrude, as necessary, to be the Doctrine of Antichrist. And wee beleeue two Sacraments of Christ, Baptisme and the Lordes Supper, and that they ought to be ministred according to the institution of Christ, and that they bée no longer Sacraments then they were in vse, and vsed to the end for which they were instituted, and the mutilation of the one kind from the Lords Supper, from the Lay people, is Antichristian; and so is the transubstantiation; and so is the a∣doration of the Sacrament, and the reseruation and carrying about of the ame, and so is the Doctrine of the Masse, it to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead, or a worke that pleaseth God: and so of the inhibition of marriage in any state as vnlawfull; we doubt not but we shall be able to proue all these our verities by Gods word, and the Church which hath followed Gods word and Spirit: and we hartily desire all men to be obedient with vs vnto all that bee in authority, and not to cease to pray to God for them, that he would gouerne them with his Spirit of wisedome, and not to consent in any kind of rebellion against the Quéens High∣nesse, but where they cannot obey, but they must disobey God, there to suffer with all patience the pleasures of the higher powers, as we are ready to do, rather then we will consent to any doctrine contrary to this which we heere confesse, wee shall be iustly conuinced thereof. The Lord indue vs with his Spirit of truth, and grace of perseuerance. Upon the twentith day of Iuly, the Prince of Spaine landed at Southamp∣ton: He was the first that landed, and presently he drew his Sword, and carryed1554. it naked in his hand a prettie way, the Mayor of the Towne met him, and deli∣uered him the Keyes, which he receiued in his right hand, and put his sword into his left, then met him the Earle of Arundell, and Lord Williams, and brought him to his lodging. The twenty fiue day, He and Quéene Mary were married at Winchester, by the Bishop there, then they came to Windsor, and from thence to Southwarke, and from thence through the Citty of London to White-hall: by the way, many Pageants and glorious sights were made. Upon the Cunduit in Gracious-stréet, was painted King Henry the eight n harnesse, with a Sword in one hand, and in the other hand a Booke▪ whereon was written Verbum Dei, deliuering the Booke to his Sonne Edward painted by him: Whereupon the Bishoppe of Winchester sent for the Painter, and called him naue, ranke Traytor and villaine, for
painting a Booke in King Henries hand, and writing Verbum Dei thereon, he should rather to haue put the Booke in Quéene Maries hand, that was there also pictured, for that she had reformed the Church and Religion. Against this time Bonner in his Royalty, and all his Prebendaries about him, the doores of Pauls being shut, a new Roode being laid vpon the Pauemts, they sung diuers Prayers by the Roode, then they annointed it with Oyle in diuers places: After they crept vnto it and kissed it, after they wayed it vppe into his accustomed place, and the while the whole Quire sang Te Dum, and then the Bels rang for ioy. From White-hall they went to Richmond, then all the Lords had leaue to de∣part, and there remained no English Lord at the Court, but the Bishop of Win∣chester, from thence to Hampton-Court, where the Hall doore was continually kept shut, that no man might enter, vnlesse his arrand were first knowne, which séemed strange to English-men. Upon the fourth day of Nouember, ue Priests did peance at Paules Crosse, which were content to put away their Wiues, and take vpon them againe to mi∣nister: euery one of them had a taper in his hand, and a rod, wherewith the Prea∣cher did disple them. The twenty seauen day of Nouember, Cardinall Poole being but a littl before come into the Realme, came to the Parliament-House, the King and Quéene sitting vnder the Cloath of Estate, and the Cardinall sitting on the right hand. The Cardinall made a long Oration, shewing first how this Realme had euer béene forward to receiue Religion: first in the time of the Brittaines, and then in the time of the Saxons, and that the meanes came from Rome, in the Faith of which Church we haue euer since continued; and shewed what deuotion this I∣land hath had to Rome, that King Offa and Adulphus thought their obedience to the Sea not sufficient, but in their owne persons went to the place where they recei∣ued so great grace. And when Carolus Magnus founded Paris, hee sent into England for Alcuius, which first brought learning to that Uniuersity. I will not rehearse the benefits this Realme hath receiued from Rome, nor the miseries this Realm hath suffered by swaruing from that Unity, so all Countries that haue refused the Unity of the Catholike Faith, hath had the like plagues, as Asia, and the Empire of Gréece, by swaring from Rome, are brought into the subiection of the Turke: And Germany by swaruing from this vnity, are afflic∣ted with diuers Sects and factions: then hee praed the King for his greatnésse and riches, and the Quéen, as one in whose hart God had preserued the Catholike truth, when all light of the truth séemed vtterly to be extinct, whom GOD had most miraculously brought vnto the Crowne, being a helplesse Uirgin, naked and vnarmed, had the victory of all pollicies and armed powers, prepared to destroy her, and God hath appointed her to raigne ouer you, for the restitution of true Re∣ligion, and exterpation of errors and Sects. God hath deuided his power vnto two parts heare in Earth, that is; into th Imperiall and Ecclesiasticall power, the Seculer Princes and Ministers of God to execute vengeance vpon transgressors, and to preserue well doers, which is re∣presented in these two most excellent Princes, the King and Quéene. The other power, is the power of the Keyes, which belongeth by prerogatiu to the Sea Apostlike of Rome, from which Sea I am deputed Legate, hauing the Keyes committed to my hands, I confesse I haue the Keyes not as mine owne Keyes, but as the keyes of him that sent mee, but certaine impediments in you to receiue it must be taken away before my Commission can take place. I came to re∣concile, and not to condemne, and not to compell, but to call againe: My Commis∣sion is of Grace and clemency, to all such as will receiue it: touching the matter past, they shall be as things cast into the Sea of forgetfulnesse.
the meanes wherby you shall receiue this benefit, is by reuoking the lawes, wher∣by you haue disseuered yourselues from the vnity of Christs Church, therefore you, as prouident men for the weale of your soules and bodies, pouder what is to be done in this waightie cause. The next day the three estates sitting in the Par∣lament-house, all on their knees exhibited a Supplication to their Highnesses, the King and Queene, that their humble sute, by their Graces intercession and meane▪ might be exhibited vnto the Cardinall, declaring themselues sorie and repentant for the Schisme committed in this Realme against the Apostolike Sea, promising, in token of their repentance, to be readie vnto the vttermost of their power, to doe their endeauour for the repealing of the said lawes: and we desire that your Maie∣sties will so set forth this our humble sute, that we may obtayne from the Sea A∣postolike, by the sayd most Reuerend Father, as well particular as vniuersall ab∣solution, and that we may be receiued into the bosome of Christs Church, so that this whole Realme may in perfect obedience vnto the Sea Apostolike serue God and your Maiesties, to the furtherance of his honour and glorie. The king and Queene deliuered it vnto the Cardinall, who perceauing the effect thereof to an∣swere his expectation, hee receiued it most gladly: and after he had thanked Al∣mighty God for the prosperous successe of his comming from Rome, by the Popes authoritie he gaue them full absolution: Then they went to the Chappell & sung te Deum with great ioy of the reconciliation: the report of this was sent to Rome with great speed, as well by the King and Cardinals Letters, which thou maist see in the Booke of Martyrs: Wherevpon the Pope caused Processions to bee made with great ioy for the conuersion of England, and praising the Cardi∣nals deligence, and the deuotion of the King and Queene, on Christmas Euen by his Bulles hee set forth, a generall pardon to all such as did truely reioyce for the same. The Sonday following the second of December, Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester and Lord Chancellor preached at Paules Crosse: Upon the third to the Romans: It is time that we should awake out of sleepe, for our saluation is neerer then when we beleeued: First he shewed how the saying of Saint Paul was veri∣fied vpon the Gentils, which had long time slept in ignorance: therefore to stir vp their dulnes he desired them to wake out of sleepe: then hee compared our time to theirs. As the sacraments of Christ did declare Christ to come, our Sacraments de∣clare that he is come: now that hee is come the Iewes sacrifices bee done away, ad ours only remaine, they had him as a signe, but we haue his very body in our Sacrament: wherefore it is time that we now also awake who haue slept & rather dreamed this twenty yeares, as shall bee declared by the properties of sléepe or dreame. As we going to sléepe, separate our selues from company, so we haue separated our selues from the Sea of Rome, no Realme in Christendome like vs, and as Shepheards dreame sometimes of killing, mayning, or drowning, and sometimes of beastlinesse, so we haue not onely dreamed of beastlinesse, but also done it: and as in sléepe, all ones senses is stopped, that hee cannot see, not smell, nor heare; so the Ceremonies of the Church being to mooue our senses, are taken away, whereby our senses are stopped: and further, when a man would sleepe, he wil put out the Candle, least it wake him. So lately, all such Writers as did hold with the Apostolike Sea, are forbidden to be read, and Images, which were Lay mens Books, were cast downe and burned. Wee haue beene this twenty yeares without a head, for when King Henry first tooke vpon him the head of the Church, it was then no Church at all. After whom King Edward could not be head, but was onely a shaddow of a head: and in our Queenes time we had no head, for she alone could not be head, and her two Arch-bishoppes were both conuicted of one crime, and deposed in Henry the eights time, when the tumult was in the North, the King would haue giuen the supre∣masie
againe to the Pope, but the houre was not then come, least it had beene said he did it for feare. After Master Kneuet and I were sent Ambassadors to the Em∣peror, to be a means to reconcile the King to the Pope, but the time was not come, for it might be said it was done for policy: the matter was likewise moued in the be∣ginning of King Edwards raigne, hut the time was not yet come; for it might haue been said, the King was bought & sold in his infancy, neither was the houre come in the beginning of the Queens raign, for it would haue bin said it was done in weak∣nes, and if it had been done when the King first came, it might haue been said it had beene done by violence, but now, hora est, when nothing can be obiected, but that it is the prouidence of God. Now Pope Iulius the hath sent vnto vs this most reue∣rend Father the Cardinall, not to reuenge iniuries done, but to giue his benedicti∣on to those which defamed and perscuted him. And that they may be the meeter to receiue it, let vs acknowledge our selues of∣enders against his Holinesse, I doe not exclude my selfe of the number: I will wéepe with them that wéepe, and reioyce with them that reioyce. The King and Quéenes Maiesties haue restored the Pope to his supremacy, and the thrée Estates of Parliament haue also submitted themselues to his Holinesse, and his successors for euer, therefore let vs no longer stay. And as S. Paul saith to the Corinthians, He was their Father, so may the Pope say, he is ur Father; for we receiued our doctrine first from Rome, therefore he may challenge vs as his owne; he hath preuented vs before we sought him, he hath sent one of our Brethren to speake vnto vs, not as vnto strangers: and now let vs awake, which so long haue slept, and in our sléep don so much naughtinesse against the Sacraments, and pulling downe the Altars, which thing Luther would not do, but reproued them which did. In his prayer, he prayed for the Pope and Cardinals, and for the soules depar∣ted, liuing in paines of Purgatory. Upon Newyeares day at night,1555 thirty Men and Women, and one Maister Rose a Minister, were taken in a house in Bow Church-yard at the Communion, and committed to prison, and Maister Rose was examined before Cranmer, and com∣mitted vnto the Tower. Néere Lancaster in Lankishire, at Cockram, the Church-wardens and Pari∣shoners made bargaine with one for the framing of their Roode, who made them one, and set it vp in their Church, but they misliked his workemanship; and refu∣sed to pay him: the matter was brought before the Mayor of Doucaster▪ thy shew∣ed the Mayor, that the Rood they had before was a welfauoured man, and he pro∣mised to make vs such another, but this is the worst fauored thing that euer was séene, gaping and grinning that none of our Children dare looke on him and come néere him: the Mayor concluded the poore man must bee paid, for if it will not serue for a God, put a paire of Hornes on his head, and it will make an ex∣cellent Deuill: This the Parish tooke well a worth, and the poore man had his Money. On New-yeares day at night, was a great stirre betwixt the Spaniards and English men, the occasion was about two Whores, which were in the Cloyster of Westminster with a sort of Spaniards, whilst some played the knaue with them, others kept the entry of the Cloyster with Dags in harnesse, they discharged their Dags at the Deanes men that came into the Cloyster, and hurt some of them, at length almost the whole towne was vp, by reason of a Spanish Fryer which got into the Church and rung Alarum, so that many were afraid. At was publikely noysed, that Quéee Mary was with childe, there were diuers prayers made in euery Church, and processions for her deliuerance with a man child, and that it should be beautifull, comly, and wise: And there was an Act of Parlament made, that if the Quéene should die in the infancy of the child, that the King should haue the gouernment of it and the Realme, vntill it came of full age: uers were punished, for saying the Quéene was not with child. About Whitson∣tide
the time was thought to be nigh, and mid-wiues, rockers, and nurses, with tradle, and all were prepared in readinesse, and a rumor was blowne in London of the prosperous deliuerance of the Queene, so that the bells were rung, bon-fires and processions made, not only in the Citie, but in most parts of the Realme▪ and in Antwarp guns were shot off in English ships, and the Marriners were rewar∣ded with an hundred Pistols by the Quéen of Hungary. The Parson of S. Anns within Aidersgate, and diuers other Preachers took vpon them to describe how faire and beautifull the childe was: at length the people were certified the contra∣ry, that the Quéen was not deliuered, nor in hope to haue any childe. The two and twentieth of Ianuary all the Preachers in prison were called be∣fore Gardnor, at his house in S. Mary-Oueries: after communication, they were asked whether they would conuert and enioy the Quéens pardon, or stand to that which they had taught: they answered they would stand to that which they had taught: then they were committed to a straighter prison then before, with charge that none should speak with them. Iames George the same time died in prison, and was buried in the fields. Upon the fiue and twentieth of Ianuary, on the day of the conuersion of S Paul, there was a generall and solemne procession through London, to giue God thanks for their conuersion to the Catholike Church, wherein were foure score and ten crosses, and a hundred and sixtie Priests and Clerks, who had euery one Copes on, singing lustily: there followed eight Bishops, and last of all Bonner carrying the Pixe vnder a Canopie, and there was the Mayor, Aldermen, and all the Liuerie of euery occupation, and the King and the Cardinall came to Paules Chuch the same day, and after returned to Westminster: at the steps going vp to the Quire all the Gentlemen that were set of late at liberty out of the Tower, kneeled before the King, and offered vnto him themselues and their seruices: after the procession there was commanded bon-fires to be made at night. THE ELEVENTH BOOKE, wherein is discoursed the bloudy mur∣dering of Gods Saints. The martyrdom of Iohn Rogers. THe fourth of Februarie suffered M. Iohn Rogers.1555. His examination before the Lord Chancellor, and the rest of the Councell, the two and twentieth of Ianuary. Lord Chan. Wilt thou returne to the Catholike Church▪ and v∣nite and knit thy selfe with vs, as all the Parlament house hath don? Rog. I neuer did nor will discent from the Catholike Church.
L. Chan. But I speak of receiuing the Pope to be supreme head. Rog. I know none▪ other head of the Catholike Church but Christ; neither will I acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to haue any more authoritie then any other Bishop hath either by the word of God or the doctrine of the Church foure hun∣dred yeares after Christ. L. Chan. If Christ be the only head, why diddest thou acknowledge K. Henry supreame head of the Church? Rog. I neuer granted him supremacie in spirituall things, as forgiuenesse of snnes, and giuing of holy Ghost, and to be a Iudge aboue the word of God. L. Chan. There is no inconuenience to haue Christ supreme head and the Bi∣shop of Rome also. I was ready to haue answered, that there could not bee two heads of one Church: but he said, make vs a direct answere, whether thou wilt be one of this Catholike Church, or no. Rog. I do not beleeue that your selues doe thinke in your hearts that he is su∣preme head in forgiuing of sinnes, &c. being this twenty yeares you haue preached, and some of you haue written to the contrary. L. Chan. Tush, that Parlament constrained men by cruelty to abolish the pri∣masie of the Pope. Rog. Then you doe wrong, by cruelty to perswade mens consciences: if that cruelty did not perswade your consciences, how would you haue your cruelties to perswade our consciences? L. Chan. They were driuen by force to consent to that act, wheras in this Par∣lament it was vniformally receiued. Rog. It goeth not by the more or lesser part which condiscended vnto it, but by the wiser, truer, and godlier part: then he interrupted me, and bade me answere him, for we haue more to speake with then with you; for there were ten persons more. Then he asked me whether I would enter into the Church with the whole Realme: I said I would see it proued the Church: then I vndertook, if I might haue pen and ink, proue the contrary; but he said that should not be permitted, and told me I should be sure neuer to haue the Quéens mercie, if I would not ac∣knowledge the Pope supreme head of the Church, and said, Paule forbiddeth me to contend with hereticks. L. Chan. Do thou not say in the Créed, I beleeue in the Catholike Church? Rog. I find not the Bishop of Rome there: it signifieth the consent of all true teaching Churches of all ages. And the Church of Rome cannot be one of them, which teacheth so many doctrines against Gods word; can that Church that doth so be the head of the Catholike Church? When he would haue me proue wherein the Pope taught against the word. I said, to speake with strange tongues is against the scripture. L. Chan. Thou canst proue nothing by the Scripture: it is dead, it must haue a liuely expositor, for all hereticks haue alleaged Scriptures. Rog. The Scripture is aliue: all hereticks haue alleaged Scripture, but they were ouercome by it. Then he bade away with me to prison: then I stood vp, for I had kneeled all the while. Then Sir Richard Southwell said, I know well thou wilt not burne in this geare. I said I trusted in God yes. When they touched me with marriage being a Priest: I said the true Catholik Church did euer allow marriage to Priests. His second examination. L. Chan. TEll me, wilt thou returne to the Catholike Church all the Realme, and receiue mercy? Rog. Before I could not tell what this mercie meant, but now it is a mercy of the Antichristian Church of Rome, which I vtterly refuse: and your rising from error which you speak of, is a very falling into error. I can proue
the doctrie which I preach by the Scriptures, and the fathers that liued vntill foure hundred years after Christ: he answered, I was a priuate man, and was not to be heard, nor to be permitted to proue whether the whole realme had done right or wrong, when the Parlament had concluded a thing: I answered, no lawes of man must rule the word of God, but they all must be iudged therby, and obey ther∣to; and neither my conscience nor any Christian mans conscience could be satisfi∣ed with such lawes as did disagree from that word. Then I was asked of the reall presence in the Sacrament: I said I could not vnderstand really and substantially, but corporally, and corporally Christ is only in heauen, ad cannot be corporally in the sacrament also. When definitiue sentence was read against him, the Lord Chancellor sayd. I was in the great curse; what a vengable dangerous matter it were to eate and drink with vs accursed, or to giue vs any thing: for they that so did should be par∣takers of the same great curse. Well my Lord, quoth I, I neuer willingly taught false doctrine, and therefore haue a good conscience before God and men, and I shall be found a true member of the Catholike Church of Christ, and euerlastingly saued: you néed not excommu∣nicate me from your Church, the Lord be thanked I haue not been in t this twen∣tie yeares: now you haue done what you can▪ I am sure you and I shall appeare before Christ, and then I shall be as good a man as you. Then I earnestly desired my wife might com to me whilst I liued: for we haue ten children, and  would counsaile her what is best for her to do, which he would not grant, saying that she was none of my wife. Then I haue tried all your charity, said I: you make your selfe highly displea∣sed with marriage of priests, but you maintaine open whoredome; in Wales eue∣ry Priest hath his whore openly, and so the Pope suffereth all the Priests in the Low-countries and France to do the like. He prophesied truly of the destruction of Papistrie shortly in England, and the dispersed English flock of Christ shall be brought againe into their former estate, or better then in K. Edwards time, and the bloudy Babylonicall Bishop, and the whole crown-shorn company brought to vtter shame and destruction: for God wil not suffer their abominable lying and false doctrine, bloud-thirst, whordom, idlenes and poysoned stomacks which they beare towards poore and miserable Christians: some of them shall haue their iudgement in this world, and they that doe escape in this world, shall not escape in the world to come euerlasting damnation: this shall be your sauce, O yee wicked Papists, make merry as long as you may; and hee exhorted the faithfull to be carefull then to displace Papists, and to put good mini∣sters into cures, or else your end will be worse then ours. As he came to the fire he sang Miserere by the way: all the people wonderfully reioyced at his constancy: whilst he was burning he wash: his hands in the flame: his pardon was brought him at the stake, which he refused: he was the first mar∣tyr in Quéen Maries time that gaue first aduenture vpon the fire. The martyrdom of Laurence Sanders. HEe was parson of All-hallowes in Breadstret, and being minded to giue o∣uer another Church which he had in Leicester-shire, called Churchlangton: about that time came the broile about the clayme that Q. Mary made to the crown; by reason whereof he could not accomplish his purpose. In this trouble he preached at Northampton, & boldly vttered his conscince against popish doctrine, and Anti∣christs damnable errors, which were like to spring vp again in England, as a iust plage for the litle lue which the English nation did bear to Gods word, which had
béene so plentifully offered vnto them: the Quéens men which were there & heard, were highly displeased with him for his Sermon, and kept him amongst them as a Prisoner, but for the loue of his Brethren and Friends, which were chéee dors for the Quéene, and because there yet was no Law against him, they dismissed him. He being inflamed with the fire of godly zeale, preached with diligence at both his Benifices, as time could serue him, vntill the Proclamation was put forth as aforesaid: at which time he was at his Benefice in the Countrey, where contrarie to the proclamation, he aught diligently Gods truth, confirming the people there∣in, and arming them against false Doctrine, vntill he was commaunded to cease, and with force rested▪ then he returned towards London, to visite the flock which he had there in charge: and as he was comming nigh to the Citty, Sir Iohn Mor∣dant, a Counceller to Queene Mary, ouertooke him, and asked him whether hee went: I haue, said Sanders, a Cure in London, and I go to instruct my people ac∣cording to my duty. If you will folow my councell (quoth Maister Mordant) let them alone, and come not at them, Sanders answered: How shall I then bee dis∣charged before GOD? Did not you (quoth Mordant) preach such a day in Bread∣streete? Yes said he, That is my Cure, I heard you (quoth Mordant) and it please you, said he, you shall heare me againe in the same place to morrow, where I will affirme by the authority of Gods word all that I then said, and whatsoeuer I haue formerly taught them. I would counsaile you not to preach, sayd he. If you can or will forbidde me by law I must obey. Nay, quoth he, I will not forbid you, but giue you counsaile, and so they departed. Mordant tolde Bonner that Saunders would preach in his cure the next Sonday. One that was about Saunders perceiuing by him that he was troubled, asked him how he did: indeede, sayd he, I am in prison vntill I be in prison, meaning he was vnquiet vntill he had preached, and then hee should be in quiet though he were put in prison. The next day he preached vpon the second to the Corinthians, and the eleuenth Chapter. I haue coupled you a pure Virgin to Christ, but I feare as the Serpent beguiled Eue; so your wills should be corrupted from the singlenesse which you had toward Christ Iesus. He reioyced in the summe of that true doctrine whereby wee are coupled so Christ, and saued by free iustification by his bloud: he compared the papisticall doc∣trine to the Serpents deceauing; and left they should be deceiued by it, he made a comparison betwixt the voyce of Christ and the popish Serpent, wherein he shewed the difference betwixt the Seruice set forth by King Edward in the English tng, and the popish seruice then vsed in the Latine tong. And that the first was good, be∣cause it was according to the word of God, & the order of the primate church. The other is euill, because though some good Latine words be in it, yet was it but as it were a little hony and milke with a great deale of poison to drinke vp all. In the afternoone he being ready to preach againe to the Bishop▪ where was Sir Iohn Mordant. Boner aid vnto his charge the breaking of the proclamation, and also heresie: but his Charitie was content to let alone the Treason. But hee would proue him an heretick, and all such as taught the administration of the Sa∣craments, and the order of the Primitiue Church are most pure that come nee∣rest to the order of the Primatiue Church, for the church was then in her infancy and could not abide that perfection, which was after to bee furnished with cere∣monies, Sanders answered: Saint Augustine saith ceremonies were at first ordained for the weake infirmitie of man, therefore it was a token of the more perfection of the primatiue Church, that it had ew ceremonies, and a token of the  of the Church papisticall, because it had so many ceremonies,  blasphemous, some vnsauourie, and some vnprotable.
Then the Bishop bade him write what he beléeued of transubstantiation, which he did, saying, My Lord, you séeke my bloud and you shall haue it: I pray God you may be baptized in it, that you may after loath bloud-sucking, and become a better man: this writing the Bishop kept to cut his throate with. Then the Bishop sent him to the Lord Chancellor, who kneeling before him, the Lord Chancellor said, How happeneth it that you haue preached contrary to the Quéens Proclama∣tion? Saunders answered, as he was admonished by Ezechiel, because he saw per∣rilous times at hand, he exhorted his parishioners to perseuer in those things which they had learned, for by the example of the Apostles we must obey God before man: we doe only professe the sinceritie of the word, which although it be now forbidden vs to preach with our mouthes, yet our bloud hereafter shall manifest the same. The Bishop said, carrie away this frensie foole to prison. Saunders answered hee thanked God he had giuen him a place of rest, where he might pray for the Bishops conuersion. Saunders tolde one that lay with him in prison, that in the time of his examinati∣on he was wonderfully comforted, and receaued a taste of the communion of Saints: a pleasant refreshing did issue from euery part of his bodie to his heart, and from thence into all parts againe. He continued in prison a yeare and three moneths, and then he was sent for before the Lord Chancellor, who offered him his pardon if he would recant; which because he refused, he was condemned vpon his opinion against the Sacrament, with his hand in writing vnto Bonner, as before is related. Then he was carried vnto Couentrie, and one night he was put into the com∣mon Gaole amongst other prisoners, where he slept little, but spent the night in prayer and instruction of others: the next day he was ledde to execution into the Parke without the Citie, going in olde gowne and a shirt, bare-footed, and as he went he oftentimes fell flat on the ground and prayed. When he was come nigh to the place▪ the officer told him he was one of them that marred the realme with heresie, wherefore thou hast deserued death, yet if thou wilt reuoke thine he∣resies the Quéen hath pardoned thée. Then answered Saunders, It is not I nor my fellow Preachers that haue hurt the realme▪ but it is your-selfe and such as you are which alter Gods word, for I hold no heresies, bnt the doctrine of God and Christ vnto euerlasting life; and so full swéetly he slept in the Lord. He wrote many godly letters to Diuines during the time of his imprisonment, which thou mayest sée in the booke at large. The martyrdome of IOHN HOOPER Bishop of Worcester. ABout the beginning of the six Articles in the time of King Henry the eighth, being in danger for religion, he went beyond Sea, where he was louingly en∣tertained at Basill and at Zurick of Master Bullinger his singular friend, where he married his wife, which was a Burgundian; and in the raign of King Edward he repaired home, amongst many other English exiles: who being come to Lon∣don, vsed to preach twise, or at least once euery Sonday: and at his Sermons the Church would be so full that none could enter further into the doores thereof: hee was in tongue eloquent, in Scriptures perfect, in paines indefatigable: after hee was called to preach before the King, and soone after made Bishop of Gloster: in that office he continued two yeares, and behaued himselfe so well, that his very e∣nemies, except it were for good doings, and sharpe correcting of sinne, could find no fault with him: and after that he was made Bishop of Worcester, hee sustained
much vexation about his inuesting, because he would not weare the Priestly ve∣stures. In his Bishops palace in euery corner there was fauour of honest conuer∣sation and reading of the Scriptures, there was no Courtly roysting or idle∣nes, no pompe at all, no dishonest word nor swearing; euery day he had to din∣ner a certaine number of poore folke of the Citie by course, and before dinner they were examined by him or his Deputies of the Lords Prayer, the Articles of their Faith, and ten Commandements. In Queene Maries time hee was one of the first that was sent for to Lon∣don by a Purseuant: The Bishop of Winchester receiued him very appro∣briously rayling and rating him, accused him of religion, and committed him to the fleete. The next yeare hee was sent for before the Bishop of Winchester, of Lon∣don, of Durham, of Landaffe, and of Chichester; where after hee had suffered many checkes, taunts and mockes, that he could not be suffered to make any an∣swere: because hee said hee would not goe from his Wife, and that hee beleeued not the corporall presence in the Sacrament, he was depriued of his Bishopricks. By his committance he was to haue the liberty of the Fleete, and when hee had payed fiue pound for his liberty▪ the Warden complained to Gardiner and made him to bee committed close prisoner a quarter of a yeare, then hee had libertie to come to dinner and supper, and presently to returne to his Cham∣ber without speaking to his friends: the Warden, and his Wife, would euer bee picking quarrels with him, and after one quarter of the yeare fell out with him about the Masse: Then the Warden obtained of Gardiner that he should bee put into the Wardes, where hee continued a long time, hauing nothing to lye on but a rotten Couering with few Fethers in it: On the oneside was the stinke and filth of the house, on the other side, the stinking Towne ditch, so that the stinke infected him with diuers diseases, and beeing very sicke hee cried for help: but the warden, when he hath knowne me ready to dye, and poore men haue called to help him, he hath commaunded the doore to bee kept fast, and charged none of his men to come at him, saying; let him alone, it were a good rid∣dance of him. Untill he was depriued, he paid him twenty shillings a wéeke for his table, and since as the best Gentleman, and yet vsed worse then the veriest Slaue: he impri∣soned and stripped his man, to finde Letters, but could finde none, but a remem∣brance of their names that gaue him Almes, and to vndoe them, he deliuered the Bill vnto STEPHEN GARDINER, there hee continued almost eightéen monthes. The twentith of Ianuary he was brought to Gardiners house,1555. at Saint Mary-Oueries, where the Bishop of Winchester with other Bishops, moued M Hooper earnestly, to forsake his euill and corrupt doctrine, preached in King Edwards daies, and to returne to the vnity of the Catholike Church, and to acknowledge the Popes Holines the supreame head thereof, according to the determination of the whole Parliament, promising that as he himselfe and other his Brethren, had receiued the Popes blessing, and Queene Maries mercy, euen so mercy was ready to be shewed to him, and others, if hee would arise with them, and condiscend to the Popes Hones. Maister Hooper answered, for so much as the Pope taught doctrine contrary to Christs doctrine, he is no member of Christs Church, much lesse the head there∣of, therefore he could not condiscend to any such vsurped Iurisdiction, neither doth he esteeme that Church to bee the Catholike Church of Christ, for the true Church heareth onely the voyce of Christ her Spouse, and flyeth the voyce of Strangers. I desire the Queenes mercy, if mercy may bee had with safety of conscience, and without displeasure of GOD: answere was made, that the Queene would shew no mercy to the Popes Enemies, then hee was sent to the
Fleet againe for sixe dayes: then he was brought againe before the Bishop of Winchester and other Commissioners in Saint-mary-Oueries Church, and the next day condemned, together with Master Rogers, and then they were carried to New-gate, where he remained sixe dayes. Bonner and others resorted thither to him diuers times, to perswade him to be a member of Antichrist, and when they could not, Bonner disgraded him: then he was carried to Gloster to suffer death, whereof he did greatly reioyce that he should there confirme his doctrine that hee had instructed so many in, with his bloud. Sir Anthony Kingston, which was one of the Commissioners to see him execu∣ted, came to him and lamented his case, and desired him to consider that life is sweet, and death is bitter, therefore seeing life may be had, desire to liue; hereafter you may doe good: who answered, though death be bitter and life sweet, yet death to come is more bitter, and life to come more sweete; therefore for the desire and loue I haue to the one, and the terror of the other, I doe not so much regard this death or esteeme this life, but haue setled my selfe by the strength of Gods spirit rather to suffer any torments then to denie the truth of Gods word, desiring you and others to pray for me. He answered, Well my Lord I perceiue there is no remedie: I thanke God that euer I knw you; for whereas I was an adulterer, and a fornictor, God by your good instructions, hath brought me to the forsaking and detesting of the same. The same day a blinde boy got leaue to speake with Master Hooper: the boy a little before had beene imprisoned at Gloster for confessing the truth. After Ma∣ster Hooper had examined him of his faith, he said vnto him, Ah poore boy▪ GOD hath taken from thee thy outward sight, but hee hath giuen thee another sight much more precious: for he hath endued thy soule with the eye of knowledge and faith. When he was burned he was not suffered to speake to the people. Hee wrote many godly letters to diuers whilest he was in prison, which thou mayest see in the booke at large. Doctor Rowland Taylor. THe Towne of Hadley was instructed by Thomas Bilney so well, that you might haue found there many,1555. as well men as women, that had often read o∣uer the Bible, and could say a great part of Saint Paules Epistles by heart, and giue a godly learned sentence in any matter of controuersie, and there Children and Seruants were trained vp in the knowledge of Gods Word, that the towne seemed rather to bee an Uniuersitie, then a towne of clothing. In this towne the said Rowland Taylor was Parson: Hee most faithfully indeuou∣red himselfe to fulfill his charge: No Sunday nor Holiday passed, nor o∣ther time that hee could get the people together, but hee preached to them the Word of GOD; there was none so rich but hee would tell him his fault, with such earnest and graue rebukes as best became a good Pastor: Hee was ready to doe good to all men readily forgiuing his enemies. He was a Fa∣ther to the poore. Thus this good Shepheard continued all the time of King Edward. In the beginning of Q. Maries raigne he retained in his Church the Seruice which was vsed in King Edwards time▪ and faithfully preached against Popish cor∣ruptions, which had infected the whole Countrey round about. One Foster and one Clerke hyred one Iohn Aurth Parson of Aldam, a Popish Idolator and a whore∣monger, to set vp Masse againe at Hadly, and builded him an Altar: in the night their Altar was beaten downe, and they builded it againe and watched it; then
the Priest came thither with all his implements and garments to play his Popish Pageant and was guarded with weapons lest he should be disturbed from this sacrifice. Doctor Taylor seeing him, said, Thou Diuell, who made thee so bolde to profane this Church of Christ with abominable Idolatrie? To whom Foster said, Thou Traytor, why dost thou disturbe the Queenes proceedings? He answered, I am no Traytor, but the Sheepheard that Christ hath appointed to feede this Flocke. I commaund thee thou Popish Wolfe in the name of the GOD of heauen, that thu auoyde hence, and presume not to poyson Christs Flocke with thy Popish I∣dolatrie. Then Foster with his armed men tooke Taylor, and violently carried him whether he would or no out of the Church, and thrust his wife out after him, because shee kneeled downe and made humble supplication vnto God, to bee re∣uenged of one of them, and then they shut the doore, least the people should aue rent their sacrificer in peces, some that were without threw in stones, an missd him but little. Upon complaint to Gardiner, hee sent for Taylor, and though his friends and acquaintance perswaded him by all meanes possible they could to the con∣trarie: yet hee was resolued to goe to the Bishop, and to his Beard to tell him hee doth naught. I am old, though I suffer GOD will raise vp Teachers for his people: I shall nuer doe GOD so good seruice as now I may, what Christian would not gladly die against the Pope and his adherents, for I know the papacy is the Kingdome of Antichrist, and leauing one Richard Yeoman a god∣ly Priest in his cure, which after was burned at Norwich, He tooke his iourney with one Iohn Hull his seruant. There was in the towne of Hadley one Alcocke, who after Richard Yeoman was driuen away vsed dayly to reade a Chapter out of the Bible, and to say the English Letany in Hadley Church, they sent him vp to London, and there he died being in prison in Newgate. When Gardiner saw Doctor Taylor, according to his custome, hee called him knaue, traytor, hereticke, with many villanous reproches. My Lord, quoth he, I am neither Traytor nor Hereticke, but a true Subiect and faithfull Christian: My Lord, you are but a Mortall man, I trow, if I should be affraid of your Lordly looks. Why feare you not God? How dare you look any Christian man in the face, séeing you haue forsaken the truth, denyed Christ and his word, contrary to your owne oath and writing? With what countenance will you appeare before the Iudgement seat of Christ, to answere your oaths to Henrie the eight, and Edward the sixt. Gardiner answered, that was Herods oath, vnlawfull, and therefore worthy to bee broken, I haue done well in breaking it, and I thanke God I am come home vnto our Mother the Catholike Church, and the Pope hath dispenced with me, and so I would thou shouldst do. Taylor, Should I approue those lies, errors, superstitions, and Idolatries, that the Pope and his company this day approued: nay, God forbid, let the Pope re∣turne to Christ and his word, and leaue Idolatry, and then will we turne to him, the Pope nor no man else can assoyle you of that oath▪ I sée, quoth Gardiner, thou art a very knauish foole. Taylor said, leaue your reyling my Lord, it is not séemely for you. That art a married man quoth the Bishop. Taylor said, I thanke GOD that I am, and I haue nine Children, and I thanke GOD for the ordaining of Matrimonie, that wee should not liue in A∣dutery. Gardiner, Thou wouldst not suffer Masse in Hadley. Taylor. I am parson of Hadly, and it is against law and reason, that any should infect my flocke with Popish Idolatrous Masse. Then said the Bishop, thou art a blasphemous heretick, to blaspheme the blessed
Sacraments, and put off his Cap, and against the Masse, which is a Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. Taylor. Christ dyed for our Redemption, which is a sufficient propitiatory Sa∣crifice vnto saluation for al beléeuers, and no Priest can any more offer him, and we néed no other propitiatory sacrifice; therefore the Fathers called the Communion Eucharistia, which signifieth thankes-giuing. Then said the Bishop, thou shalt confesse it a Sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, ere thou and I haue done, and commaunded him to bee sent to the Kings Bench. Then Taylor knéeled downe and saide; Good Lord I thanke thee, and from the tyrannie of the Pope, and all his detestable errors, Idolatries, and abhomi∣nations, good LORD deliuer vs, and GOD be praysed for King Edward: so he was carried vnto the Kings Bench, where hee lay in Prison almost two yeares. Being in Prison, he spent his time in Prayer, Preaching, and Writing, within few daies after, were diuers learned and godlymen, in sundry Connrie in En∣gland, committed to prison for Religion: so that almost all the Prisons in England were right Christian schoole and Churches, so that there was no greater comfort to Christian harts, then to come to the Prisons. Now were placed in Churches blind Masse-mngers, with their Lattine bab∣ling and apish ceremonies, who like cruell Wolues, spared not to murder all such that did but whisper against Popery: the godly Preachers were other fled, or com∣mitted to Prison, where as Lambes they waited when the Butchers should call them to slaughter. Maister Bradford, that deuout and vertuons Preacher, who was a miracle or our time, was in the Kings Bench, Taylor exhorted him to constant perseuerance vnto the end: Maister Bradford praised God he had such a comfortable Prison-fellow. Taylor told his Friends that came to sée him, that GOD had graciouslie prouided for him, for to send him where he found such an Angell of God to bée his comforter. After Taylor had lyne in Prison a while, hee was sent for and depriued, be∣cause he maintained Priests marriage, and would not bee separated from his Wife. And after a yeare and thrée quarters, when they had gotten the lawes put down that were made by King Henry the eight, and King Edward, against the Pope: They sent for Taylor before my Lord Chancellor, and either Commissioners, the effect of whose communication with him, he described himselfe as followeth. First, my Lord Chancellor said, you amongst other, are sent for to enioy the King and Queenes mercie, if you will rise againe with vs from the fall, which we geerallie haue receiued in this Realme, from the which we are deliuered miraculousli: If you will not, you shall haue Iudgement. To this I answe∣red, That so to rise, should bee the greatest fall that euer I could receiue, for I should fall from Christ vnto Anti-christ: I will not decline from the Religion which was in King Edwards dais, which is according to the word of God, as long as I liue. My Lord Chancellor asked me, whether I had read his ooke vpon the Sa∣crament, I said I had read it: He asked mee how I liked it; My Lord said I, there are many things farre  from GODS truth in that Booke▪ then he cal'd me varlet; I said that was as bad as foole, then he called me ignorant Béele∣brow. I said, My Lord, you wrote a Booke De vera obedientia, I would you had béen constant in that, for you neuer did declare a good conscience, as I heard of, but in that Booke. How like you that said my Lord, I wrote against Priests mariage but y• pleaseth
not such as thou art. I answered their procéedings now against Priests mariages, is against naturall Law, Ciuill Law, Canon Law, generall Councels, Canons of the Apostles, ancient Doctors, and Gods Lawes. Then because I would not turne, I was sent to prison againe. After Doctor Taylor, Maister Bradford, and Maister Sanders, were called to appeare before my Lord Chancellor, and other Commissioners, where because they would not yéeld to papistry, they were condemned, and sentence was read a∣gainst Taylor. They reioyced that they were worthy to suffer for Christe▪ Word and truth, and they stoutly said vnto the Bishops, GOD the righteous Iudge, will re∣quire our bloud at your handes, and the proudest of you all shall repont this receiuing againe of Antichrist, and the tyranny you shew against Christes flocke. So Taylor was sent to the Clinke, hee said vnto the people that flocked about to sée him as he was going; GOD bée praised good people, I am come away from them vndefiled, and will cenfirme the truth with my oud. And at night hee was carryed vnto the Counter in the Poultrey, where hee lay seauen nights. Bonner came to the prison to him, to disgrade him, he said; Maister Doctor, I would you would remember your selfe, and turne to your holy Mother the Church, and I will sue for your pardon. Taylor answered, I would you and your fellowes would turne to Christ, as for me, I will not turne to Antichrist. Then Bonner had him put on the Uestures to bee disgraded, but hee would not, when they were put vpon him, he put his handes by his side, and said; How say you my Lord, am not I a goodlie Foole: How say you my Maisters, it I were in Cheape-side, should I not haue Boyes enough to laugh at these apish toyes and toying trumperie; and when the Bishoppe should strike him vpon the breast with his Crossier Staffe: his Chaplaines said; Strike him not my Lord, for he will surely strike you againe, That I will said hee, for it is our Sa∣uiour Christes cause, so the Byshoppe laid his curs oll him, but strucke him not. When he came to Maister Bradford, for they both lay in one Chamber, hee told him laughinglie, how he had made the Bishop affraid to strike him: that night his Wife, his Sonne Thomas, and his man Iohn Hull, were suffered to sup with him, after Supper, he thanked GOD, that hee had giuen him strength to a∣bide by his holie Word: Then he said vnto his Sonne; My deare Sonne, God giue thee his Spirit, truly to serue Christ, to learne his word, and to stand by it all thy life: my Sonne, feare God, fly sinne, pray to him, and apply thy booke, and sée thou be obedient vnto thy Mother, cherish the poore, and count that try chéefe ri∣ches, is to be rich in ames. Then he said, my deare Wife, be steadfast in the eare and loue of God, be not defiled with Popish Idolatries: wee haue béene faithfull yoke-fellowes together, the Lord will reward you for your faithfulnesse towards me, I now must be taken from you; and I would aduise you to marrie with some honest man that feareth GOD, he will prouide such a one for you, and he will bee a mercifull Father to you, and your Children, whom I pray bring vp in the feare of God and learning, and kéep them from Romish Idolatry, then with wéeping feares they prayed toge∣ther, and kissed each other. The next day he was carried away towards Hadley, to be burned there, diuers Gentlemen and Iustices came to him there, who laboured him to returne vnto the Romish Religion, shewed him his pardon and promised him great promotions, yea a Bishoprick if he would, but all was vaine, for he had not builded his Rocke vp∣on the sands, in perill of euery winde, but on the sure Rocke Christ. When hee went through Hadley to execution, the stréetes being full, they cried out with
lamentable voyces: Ah good Lord, there goeth our Shepheard from vs, that hath so faithfully taught vs, so fatherly cared for vs, and so godly gouerned vs, what shall wee poore scattred Lambes doe? What shall become of this wicked world? good Lord comfort him: wherefore the people were fore rebuked, and Do∣ctor Taylor euer said to the people; I haue preached vnto you Gods word and truth, and am come this day to seale it with my blood. Comming against the Almes-heuses, he cast to the poore people all the Mo∣ney which remained of that which good people had giuen vnto him in Prison, for his Liuing was taken away from him so soone as he was put in Prison, so that hee was sustained during the time of his imprisonment, by the charitable Almes of good people. When he saw the place of execution, and the multitude of people that were gathered together, then said he; thanked be God, I am euen at home. They had clipped his head ill-fauoredly, like a Fooles head, by Bonners per∣swasions, when he was disgraded: when he came there, all the people said; God saue thée good Maister Doctor Taylor, Iesus strengthen you, the Holy Ghost com∣fort you. When he would haue spoken vnto the people, one or other thrust a tip∣staffe in his month: then he desired license of the Sheriffe to speake, but he deni∣ed him, and had him remember his promise made vnto the Councell. It was a common fame, that the Councell sent for such as were condemned, and threatned them they would cut their tongues out, except they would promise them, at their deathes to kéepe silence, and not to speake vnto the people. When he was in his Shirt, hee was set in a Pitch Barrell to bee burned, then he said with a loud voyce; Good people, I haue taught you nothing but GODS Word, and those Lessons which I haue taken out of GODS blessed Booke, I am therefore come hither this day to seale it with my blood, then one Homes, a Yeoman of the Gard, who had vsed him verie cruelly all the way, gaue him a great stroke on the head. The Sheriffe called one Richard Doningham a Butcher to set vp the Faggots, but he would not, then he got others, and one of them called Warwicke, cruellie cast a Faggot at him and brake his face, that the blood ranne downe. Doctor Taylor said; Ah friend, I haue harme enough, what néedeth this? When the fire was set to him, he said; Mercifull Father of Heauen, for Iesus Christs sake, receiue my Soule into thy hands, and so stood still, without either crying or moo∣uing, with his hands folded together, vntill one Soyce strucke him vpon the head, that the Braines fell out, and his Corps fell into the Fire and was bur∣ned. The foureteenth of February,1555. the Lord Chanceller and the Bishops, cau∣sed the Image of Thomas Becket to be set vp ouer the Mercers Chappel doore in Cheape-side in London, in the forme of a Bishop, with Miter and Crosier: within two dayes after his two blessing fingers were broken away, and the next day his head was stricken off. Whereupon many were suspected, and one Maister Barnes, Mercer, being a Professor of the truth, was charged therewith, and he and three of his Seruants were committed to Prison, and though it could not be proued against him, he was bound in a great summe, to builde it vp againe, now, and as often as it should be broken downe, and to watch and keepe the same. The next day after that it was set vp againe, the head was the se∣cond time broken off, then there was a Proclamation set forth, that he that could tell who did it, he should haue an hundred Crownes, with thanks, but it was not knowne who did it. The vertuous and godly King Christianus, King of Denmarke, hearing of the captiuitie of Miles Couerdale, whom hee knew, by reason hee was in Den∣marke in King Henry the eight his time, and lamenting his dangerous case, made intercession by Letters to Quéene Mary, desiring the said Miles Couerdalo
to be sent vnto him: after the King had written two letters, Queene Mary after long delay, made full answer to the King of Denmarkes Letters; by which proui∣dence of God, Miles Couerdale was deliuered. ROBERT FARRAR Bishop of Saint Dauids in Wales. THis Bishop, by the fauour of the Lord Protector, was first promoted vnto that Dignity:1555 he may well bee said twice marired; first, for diuers iniuries and mollestations which he suffered most vnworthily of his enemies, in King Ed∣wards time, after the fall of the Duke of Somerset, and of his martydome in Queene Maries time. His Aduersaries in King Edwards time, were ames Constantine, his Register, to whom he gaue the Office by Patent, and a Doctor of the Law, and Canon of the Cathedrall Church of S. Dauids, and a Chanter of the same. They did exhibit to the Kings Councell certain Articles, to the insent to blemish the Bishops credit, and vtterly as they thought, and made their boasts to pull him from his Bishopricke, and bring him in a premunire. The cheefe effect of their Articles, which were fifty sixe, was, that he did not in his Proce that he made write the King supreame head of the Church, and that he tollerated other superstitions and Idolatries. After these wrangling Articles were giuen vp, then the Bishop was called to answere, the hearing whereof was committed vnto Sir Iohn Mason, Knight, and Doctor Woton. Then they had a Commission into the Country, where they examined sixscore and seauen witnesses, and during the time of the examination of these witnesses, the said Bishop was stayed at London, because his aduersaries said, if the Bishop should go into his Dioces, he would let them of their proues. During which trouble King Edward died, and in Quéene Maries time another named Henry, was made Bishop of S. Dauids, who sent for the said Robert Far∣rar, and committed him to prison, and afterward declared vnto the saide Robert the great clemency, that the King and Quéenes Highnesse pleasure was to bee offered vnto him, if he would submit himselfe vnto the Lawes of this Realme, and conforme himselfe vnto the vnity of the Catholike Church, and séeing the said Robert made him no answere, he ministred vnto him these Articles. First, whether he beleeue the marriage of Priests to be lawfull by the lawe of God and holy Church. Secondly, whether hee beleeued the very body and blood of Christ is really and substantially in the Sacrament, without the substance of bread and wine. Bishop Farrar would not answer, vntill he saw a lawfull Commission, so he was commit∣ted againe: then he was called againe after, and would answer no otherwise then as before; whereupon he was pronounced Contunax, and for punishment there∣of, to be counted Pro confesso, and committed him againe. The next day of ap∣pearance, the said Bishop Farrar craued time to answere, and at the time did an∣swer. Then the foresaid pretensed Bishop, gaue him a writing of certaine Articles to subscribe vnto: adding to the Articles before, that the Masse was a propitiatorie Sacrifice for the quicke and the dead, and that the generall Councels neuer erred, neither  erre: that a man is not iustified by Faith only, but by Cha∣rity also; and that the Catholike Church onely hath authoritie of interpreting of the Scriptures, and to compound Controuersies, and also to appoint such things as appertaine to publike discipline, and that the Church is visible, as a citty
vpon a hill knowne vnto all men, and not obscure and vnknowne, as the hereticks of our age doe teach. To these Articles he refused to subscribe: affirming that they were inuented by man, and pertaine nothing to the Catholick Faith: Then he assigned him a day to assigne them affirmatiuely, or negatiuely, which he would not do, but appea∣ed vnto the Cardinall: notwithstanding they gaue sentence against him. When they had put the priestly vestures on him to disgrade him; hee called them ragges and relicks of Rome: When he was brought to excution in the Ci∣ie of Carmarden, he was burned with Turffes and Soddes, which was to him a more greeuous torment, but praised be God he suffered it patiently. The next moneth a godly man named Rawlins White, was burned in Cardiffe in Wales. THOMAS TOMKINS. THomas Tomkins of Shordich in London Weauer, was brought before Boner, for all hitherto were condemned by Steuen Gardiner Lord Chancelor; but hee being weary, put off the rest vnto Boner, of whom this Tomkins was the first; who when by no meanes hee could bee driuen from the ruth, Boner caused a burning Candle to be brought to him: Then said he, come on naughty knane, if thou likest the torments of the fire so well; I will make thee feele in this flame what it is to be burned: then if thou be wise thou wilt change thy minde: Then he commanded his right hand to be put into the fire, but he indured the burning; yet was not Bo∣net therewith contented, but neuer rested vntill he had consumed the whole body to ashes in Smithfield. He was condemned vpon these points: First, that his beleefe , that the body of Christ is not truely and verily in the Sacrament of the Altar, but onely in hea∣uen, and so in heauen that it cannot be really in the Sacrament: and although the Church a low the Masse a wholesome and profitable sacrifice; yet my beliefe is that the Masse is full of Superstition and Idolatry, and vnprofitable for my soule: and the Sacrament of Baptisme ought to ee onely in the vulgar tongue, and without such ceremonies as are vsed in the Latine Church: and being exhorted to leaue his opinions: Hee answered hee was brought vp in ignorance vntill now of late yeares, and now I know the truth, wherein I will continue vnto death: and he said my Lord you would haue me forsake the truth, and fall into error and here∣sie: Then hee was condemned and deliuered vnto the Sheriffe; who carried him to Newgate, where hee remained most ioifull and constant, vntill hee was conuayed to Smithfield, and there sealed vp his Faith in the flaming fire. The constant suffering of Higbed and Causon. THese two were descended of worshipfull stocke in Essex, which of all Shires was most fruitfull of Martyrs; the one called Thomas Higbed of Horneden Hill; the other Thomas Causon of Thunderst, they were both in flourishing estate in riches, and much more flourishing in godlines. They were diuers times examined before Bonner, and defended the truth vali∣antly, and he and his fellowes did much labour to make them to recant, but could not preuaile: The substance of all their Arguments appeareth in a Confession
that they wrote with their owne hands, which was read in the Court of Paules, before the Mayor and Sheriffes, and all the people, not without great sure, before it could be licenced to be read. First we beleeue and professe in Baptisme to forsake the Diuel & all his works, and all the vanities of the world, and the lusts of the . 2 We beleeue the Articles of our Faith, and that wee are bound to walke in Gods Commandements all the daies of our life. 3 We beléeue the Lords Prayer containeth all things necessarie for soule and body, and that we are thereby taught onely to pray to our heauenly Father, and is no Saint nor Angell. 4 We beléeue there is a Catholick Church, euen the Communion of Saints, builded vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ being the head corner stone: for which Church Christ gaue himselfe to make it a glorious congre∣gation without fault in his sight. 5 This Church of it selfe is sinfull, and must needs say Father forgiue vs our sinnes, but through Christ and his merits she is fréely forgiuen. 6 Hee is our onely Mediator as Saint Paul saith, there is one God, and one Mediatour betwixt God and Man Iesus Christ: Therefore no other Media∣tour. 7 We beléeue this Church is, and hath béen persecuted according to the pro∣mise of Christ: as they haue persecuted mee, so shall they persecute you, for the Disciple is not aboue his Master. And Paul saith it is not giuen to you onely to beleeue in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake: for all which will liue godly must suffer persecution. 8 The true Church teacheth the Word of God truely, not adding thereto, nor taking there-from; and Ministers the Sacraments according to the Primitiue Church, and it suffreth all men to reade the Scriptures: as Christ saith: Search the Scriptures: And when Paul preached, the audience searched the Scriptures; whether hee preached truely: Dauid teacheth to pray with vnderstanding: Saint Paul saith, when the people vnderstand not what is said, how can they say A∣men at giuing of thankes: And Saint Paul saith, true Faith commeth by hearing the word. 9 The Church of Christ teacheth God ought to bee worshipped according to his word, and not after the Doctrine of men: as Christ teacheth vs, like∣wise Christ saith, you shall forsake Father and Mother and follow me, whereby we learne if our elders, teach otherwise then God commanded in that point we must forsake them. 10 The Supper of our Lord ought not to be altered, because Christ the wise∣dome of the Father did institute it: For it is written, cursed is he that changeth my ordinances, or taketh any thing from them. This Supper is sorely abused, it is giuen in one kinde, where Christ gaue it in both: it is made a priuate Masse, where Christ made it a Communion: He gaue it to all his Apostles in the name of the whole Church, & not to one alone: Christ ordained it for a remembrance of his euerlasting sacrifice vpon the Crosse once for all; and not againe to bee a dayly sacrifice both for them that are aliue, and them that are dead: And Saint Paul saith, where there is no remission of sinnes, there is no more sacrifice for sinne: and in that it is worshipped, where as nothing is to be worshipped that is made with hands: and in that it is giuen in an vnknowne tongue whereby the people are ignornt of the right vse thereof: besides this it is hanged vp and shut in a Boxe, many times so long that wormes breedeth in it, and so it putrifieth, they that abuse it bring vp the slander thereof and not we. 12 Concerning Christs words, This is my body, the minde of Christ must bee searched out by other Scriptures: for the Apostle saith no Scripture hath any pri∣uate interpretation, and the Scriptures are full of such figuratiue speeches: as the Cup is the New Testament, the Rocke is Christ: whosoeuer (saith Christ) re∣ceiueth
a Child in my Name receiueth me; which sentence must not be vnderstood after the Letter, as the Capernaites did which taught that Christs body should haue been eaten with their teeth; when he spake of the eating thereof, to whom Christ said, the Spirit quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing, for my words are spi∣rit and life: so we see Christs words must be vnderstood spiritually, and not lite∣rally: hee that commeth to this worthy supper must not prepare his iaw but his heart: neither tooth nor belly, but beleeue, saith Saint Augustine, and thou hast ea∣ten it: so wee must bring with vs a Spirituall hunger, and examine our selues whether our Conscience doe testifie that we doe truely beleeue in Christ according to the Scriptures, whereof if we be truely certified, beeing new borne from our old conuersation, in heart, minde, will and deed, then may we boldly with this ma∣riage garment of Faith come to the feast. And that there is no change but bread still remaineth, Christ saith, Doe this in remembrance of me: And Saint Paul, As often as you shall eate this bread and drinke this Cup, you shall remember the Lords death vntill hee come: heere is no change but bread still: And Christ saith, except I goe to my Father the Comforter cannot come: And Saint Peter saith, heauen shall keep him vntill the last day: in that he is God he is euery where, but in that hee is Man hee cannot be but in one place, as his body was not in all places at once when hee was heere: Hee was not in the graue when the women sought him as the Angell said: neither was hee at Bethania when Lazarus died by Christs owne words: and thus we con∣clude that the Christ is in the holy Supper sacramentally and spiritually, in all them that worthily receiue it: and corporally in heauen both God and Man. When they would not turn from the truth by no prswasions the sentence was read against them: In the reading whereof Higbed said, you speake blasphemie against Christs Passion, and goe about to trap vs with your subtilties and snares; and though my Father, Mother, and other my kindred doe beleeu, you say yet they were deceiud in so beleeuing: And whereas you say Cranmer and others in the said Articles were hereticks, I wish I were such an hereticke as they were and be. Then the Bishop asked him whether hee would turne from his r∣rour: To whom he said, would yee would recant, for I am in the truth and you in errour. Then they were deliuered vnto the Sheriffe and sent to Newgate, where they remained not so much in afflictions, as in consolations: Fourteene daies after they were carried to Essex: And Thomas Higbed burned at Hornden on th Hill: and Thomas Causon at Rayly, where they died most constantly. The Martyrdome of VVILLIAM HVNTER. THe said Hunter was at all times brought before the Bishop of London, with the aforesaid Thomas Tomkins, and had the same Articles, Reasons and per∣swasions obiected as the said Thomas Tomkins had and they made both the same answeres, sauing that Boner vsed these words onely to Hunter: Will you abiure and returne to the Catholick Church: He answered, I will stand to that which I haue said: And further he said it is false Doctrine & beliefe, to beleeue that Christs true body is in the Sacrament, which is onely in heauen, and that his friendes and kindred were deceiued if they otherwise beleeued, I will continue in the truth that is taught me as long as I liue, or if I doe otherwise I shall perish both body and soule, and I had rather my body perish, then my soule. Wherevpon hee was condemned, and after carried to Burnt-wood, where hee suffered most ioifully. He was a very yong man, borne of good parents, of whom he was not onely instructed
to godlines, but confirmed vnto death, a rare example to be had in admiration of all parents, where the naturall affection of parents were ouercome with godlines, wo like the holy mother in the Machabees, incouraged their sonne as much as they could to goe through valiantly, reioicing with wonderfull gladnes, and either of them dranke vnto him, confirming him in the Lord, I cannot tell whether I should praise the vertue of the Sonne or of the Parents. William Pygot, Steuen Knight, and Iohn Lawrence. AT the same time that Tomkins and Hunter were examined as before these three likewise were examined before Boner; the same reasons, Articles and perswasions that were vsed to them, were vsed vnto these also, and they made all answeres alke: and when by neither flatterie nor threatning they could bee brought from the truth, they were condmned, and were carried into Essex to bee burned: William Pigot burned at Braintree. Steuen Knight was burned at Mauldn, who at the stake kneeled downe and said this prayer: O Lord Iesu, for whose loue I eaue this life, and desire bittr death, with the losse of all earthly things, ather then to abide the blasphemie of thy name, or to obay men breaking thy Commandements, where I might liue in wealth to worship a false God, I chose rather the torment of this body, and haue counted all things but dung that I migh winns thee: which death i dearer to me then thousands of Gold and Siluer: such loue hast thou laide vp in my brests that I huger for thee▪ As the wounded Deare desreth the soy, snd hy holy comfor∣ter, to ayde, comfort, and strengthen me a weake peece of earth, empty of all strength of it selfe, of thy great loue thou ast bidden me to this banquet, accoun∣ted mee worth to drinke of  owne cup, amongst thine eletgiue me strength against this hine elemnt which is most irkesome to my sight, that it may be swéet and pleasant to my minde, that I may passe through this fire into thy osoe ac∣cording vnto thy pomie: accept this sacrifice, for thy deare Sonne Iesus Christ his sake, for whose Testimony I offer it with all my heart; forgiue me my sinnes as I forgiue the world: sweet Sauiour spread thy wings ouer me: O holy Ghost by whose inspiration I am come hither, conduct me to euerlasting life: Lord into to thine hands commend my spirit, Amen. Iohn Lawrence was brought to Colchester, and not being able to goe, for his legges were so sore worne with his Irons in prison, and his body so weakened with euill keeping, hee was faine to be brought vnto the fire in a chayre: At his burning the yong children came about the fire, and cryed Lord strengthen thy ser∣uant, and keep thy promise: which manifesteth Gods glory, which writ this in the hearts of these little ones, and their parents are to bee commended, that brought them vp from their youth, in the feare and knowledge of God. Gods Iudgement vpon the Parson of Arundell. VPon Shroue-Sunday the Parson of Arundell besides Canterbury, declared vnto the people all such Articles as were set forth by the authority of the pope, and commandement of the Bishops of this Realme, and when he had done he thanked God that euer he had liued to see that day, and straightway he fell sudde∣ly out of the pulpit, and neuer spake after.
The historie of Iudge Hales. SIr Iames Hales as before, tooke Queene Maries part, and would not subscribe to haue any other Quéene, though all the rest had subscribed to Edward the sixts Will. He was an vpright and conscionable Iudge. To these his gifts and qualities were linked sincere affection to the Gospell of Christ, shewing himselfe a true Gospeller by word and deed. At the beginning of Queene Maries raigne, the masse not being restored by law, diuers Priests presumed to say masse, and they were indited at the aises before Iudge Hales, and he gaue order therein as the law required: wherefore when the terme came, he comming to doe his office, was sent for by Gardner Lord Chancel∣lor, to whom he iustified that he did it both by the iustice of the law, and of his con∣science, wherein he was fully bent to stand in triall to the vtmost that can be obiec∣ted: and it therein I haue done any iniury, let me be iudged by the law; for I will séeke or desire no better defence for my selfe, considering chiefly that it is my pro∣fession. Ah Sir, said the Chancellor, you be very quicke and stoute in your answers, it seemeth that which you did was more of will, fauouring your opinion of Religi∣on against the seruice now vsed, then for any occasion of zeale of iustice, seeing her Highnesse doth set it forth as yet, but withing all her subiects to imbrace it accor∣dingly. My Lord, quoth Hales, I doe but shew my selfe as I am bound in loue to God and obedience to the Quéenes Maiestie, in whose cause willingly for iustice sake, I did of late, as your Lordship knoweth, aduenture as much as I had: and as for my religion, I trust it is such as pleaseth God, wherein I am ready to aduenture both my life and substance, if I be called thereto; and for lack of mine owne power and will, the Lords will be fulfilled. Shortly after he was committed vnto the Kings Bench, then he was commit∣ted to the Counter in Breadstréete, and from thence he was conuayed to the Fléet, where he endured most constantly for the space of three weeks: and when thus in diuers prisons being tossed and wearied, he could in no wise be subdued, there was in the prison where he was a Gentleman of Hampshire called Foster, who, ing suborned by the Bishops, vsed all kinde of perswasions whereby hee might draw him from the truth, which at length he brought to passe; then next morning early the Bishop of Chichester came to him into the prison, to comfort him therein, and after Iudge Portman came to him: but as soone as he had yeelded to them he rew into such an extreame desperation by the worme of his conscience, that hee eat little meat that night. When supper was done he gate him straight to bedde, where he passed the night with much anxietie of mind: about six of the clocke in the morning he sent his man for a cup of béere; his man was no sooner gone but with a pen-knife he wounded himselfe in diuers places, and would haue killed himselfe, but that his man méeting the Butler at the chamber doore, returned presently into the chamber, and let his Master from destroying himselfe. Upon this Cranmer straight-way took occasion to call the doctrine of the Gos∣pell openly in the Star-chamber the doctrine of desperation. M. Hales being with∣in a while after deliuered, getteth himselfe home to his house, whether it was for feare that if he should againe professe the Gospell he should be imprisoned againe and burned, and begger all his posterity, or if he should go to hearing of masses he should doe worse: hauing all things set in order a good while before that pertained vnto his Testament, desperatly he cast himselfe into a shallow Riuer, and was drowned in the yeare 1555.
IOHN AWCOCKE. THis yeare the second of Aprill, one Iohn Awcocke died in prison, who was buried in the fields, as the manner of the Papists was, for they deied them Christian buriall to such as died out of their Antichristian Church. Pope IVLIVS the third. THis yeare, about the end of March died Pope Iulius the third, whose deeds to declare it were not so much tedious to the Reader, as horrible to good eares. Iohannes de Casa was Deane of this Popes chamber, Archbishop of Beneuen∣tanus and chiefe Legat to the Uenetians, who well declaring the fruit of that fil∣thy Sea, did not only play the filthy Sodomite himselfe, but in Italian meetre set forth the praise of that beastly iniquitie, and yet his booke▪ was printed at Uenice by one Troyanus Nauus, and the Pope suffered this beastlines vnder his nose in his chamber, which could not abide the doctrine of Christ. This Pope delighted greatly in Porke flesh and Peacocks: by the aduice of his Physitians, his Steward ordered that he should set no Porke flesh before him; missing it▪ where, said he, is my Porke? the Steward answered, his Physitian had forbidden any Porke to be serued, the Pope in a great rage, said, Bring mee my Porke in despite of God. Another time he commaunded a Peacocke at the Table to be kept colde for his Supper: when Supper came, amongst hote Peacocks he saw not his colde Pea∣cocke, the Pope after his wonted manner, began horribly to blaspheme God: one of his Cardinals said, Let not your Holinesse, I pray you, be moued in so small a matter. Then said he, if God were so angry for one apple that he cast our parents out of Paradice, why may not I, being his Uicar, he angry for a Peacocke, which is a greater matter? This was he vnder whom Popery was restored in England in Quéene Ma∣ries time; and the affection that was borne vnto him heere may be séene by the Dirgs, Hearses, and Funerals commaunded to bee had and celebrated in all Churches by the Quéene and her Councell. At his death a woman séeing a Herse and other preparation in Saint Magnus Church at the Bridge foot in London, asked what it meant: it was told her it was for the Pope, and that she must pray for him; nay, quoth she that I will not, for he needeth not my prayers, seeing hee could forgiue vs all our sinnes, I am sure he is cleane himselfe: by and by she was carried vnto the Cage at London Bridge, and bade to coole her selfe there. GEORGE MARSH. THis Marsh was an earnest letter forth of true Religion, to the defacement of Antichrists doctrine,1555. in the parish of Deane, and elswhere in Lancasire, and he most faithfully acknowledged the same in Quéene Maries time, whereupon he was apprehended and kept in straight prison within the Bishoppe of Chesters house foure moneths, not permitting him to haue comfort of his frinds, but the Porter was charged to marke them that asked for him, and to take their names and deliuer them to the Bishop: shortly after he came thither, the Bishop sent for him, and communed with him a long time in his Hall alone, and could find no fault
with him, but that he allowed not transubstantiation, nor the abuse of the Masse, nor that the Lay people should receiue vnder one kinde: with which points the Byshop went about to perswade him, but all was in vaine, then hee sent him to Prison againe. Afterward diuers were sent vnto him, to perswade him to sub∣mit himselfe vnto the Church of Rome, and to acknowledge the Pope to be the had thereof, and to interpret the Scriptures no otherwise then that Church doth. George answered, hee doth acknowledge one holy Catholike and Apostolike Church, without which is no saluation: and this Church is but one, because it hath and beléeueth in but one God, and him only worshippeth, and one Christ, and in him only trusteth for saluation; and it is ruled onely by one Spirit, one Word, and one Faith: and that it is vniuersall, because it hath béene from the beginning of the world, and shall be vnto the end of the world; hauing in it some of al Nations, kin∣dreds and languages, degrees, ates, and conditions of men. This Church is buil∣ded only vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Iesus Christ being the Head-corner-stone, and not on the Romish Lawes and Decrees, the Pope being not the supreame head, and that it was before any succession of Bishops, general Coun∣cels, or Romish Decrees, neither was bound to any time or place, ordinary suc∣cession, generall Councels, or Tradition of Fathers; neither had any supremacie ouer Empires and Kingdomes. But that it was a little  flocke dispersed abroad as sheepe without a Shepheard in the middest of Wolues: or as a flocke of fatherlesse Chil∣dren, assisted, succoured, and defended onely by Christ Iesus their supreme head; from all assaults, errours, troubles and persecutions, wherewith shee is euer compassed about. He proued by the floud of Noah, the destruction of Sodome: The Israelites de∣parting out of Egypt by the parables of the sower: by the Kings sons marriage: of the great Supper: and by other sentences of the Scriptures, that this Church was of no estimation, and little in comparison of the Church of hypocrites and wicked worldlings. After the Bishop caused him to bee brought to the Chappell of the Cathedrall Church of Chester, where the Bishop with diuers others were set: After he had taken his oath for a true answering, the Chancelor charged him that he had prea∣ched heretically, and blasphemously in diuers places against the Popes authority and Catholick Church of Rome: the blessed Masse, the Sacrament of the Altar, and many other Articles. Hee answered, that e neither heretically nor blasphemonsly spake against any of the said Articles, but simply and uely as occasion serued according to his con∣science, maintaining the truth touching the said Articles, as it was taught in King Edward the sixth his time, whereupon they condemned him at the next ap∣pearance. And when he would haue perswaded them otherwise by the word of God, the Bishop told him he ought not to dispute with hereticks. Then he prayed the people to beare him witnesse, he held no other opinions then were by Law most godly established, and publikely taught in King Edwards time, wherein he would liue and die. As he came on the way towards the place of execution, some folke proffered him moey and looked that he should haue had a little purse in his hand, as the manner of ▪ was at their going to execution, to gather money to giue to a Priest to say trentalls of Masses for them after their death▪ whereby they might be saued: but Marsh said he would not be troubled with money, and hade them giue it to the prisoners and poore people. When he came to the re his pardon was offered him: he answered, being it tended to plucke him from God, he could not receiue it vpon that condition. They would not suffer him to speake to the people. He was somewhat long a dying by reason of the lacknes of the re, which hee bare wondrous patiently, in so much
as the people said he was a Martyr, which caused the Bishop shortly after to make a Sermon in the Cathedrall Church, wherein he affirmed that George Marsh was an hereticks, burned like an hereticke, and a fire-brand in hell: in short time after the iust iudgement of God appeared vpon the said Bishop, through his adulterous behauiour he was burned with a harlot, and died thereof. William Flower, alias Branch. THis William was borne at Snow-hill in the County of Cambridge: after he owelt at Lambeth, and comming ouer the water to Saint Margarets Church at Westminster, where he seeing a Priest at masse, being greatly offended in his conscience, hee wounded him on the head. whereupon hee was apprehended and layde in the Gate-house at Westminster and from thence beeing brought vnto Bonner, and being examined, he said he came of purpose to doe it, and when hee saw the people to kneele downe and giue the honour of GOD vnto a piece of Bread, hee could not possibly forbeare any longer, but drew forth his Hanger and smote the Priest: the Witnesses proued, that he smote him on the head, arme, and hand, and that he bled aboundantly, and that hauing a Calice full of consecra∣ted Hosts, the Hosts were besprinkled with the bloud: The Bishop offered that he should be pardoned, if he would recant his opinion of the Sacrament, and re∣turne to the holy Church: He answered, Doe what you will, I am at a point, for the heauens shall assoone fall, as I will forsake mine opinion. He was often called before the Bishop, but when neither by flatteries nor threatning he would not ▪ he was condemned. At his burning he was most cruelly handled, his right hand was hold against he stake and strucken off, at which striking hee in no part of his body did once shrinke: to his burning little wood was brought, not sufficient to burne him, but they were faine to strike him downe into the fire. Iohn Cardmaker, alias Taylour, and Iohn Warne Vpholster of Saint Iohns in Walbroke in London. THese two were condemned by Boner, for holding that there was no transub∣stantiation in the Sacrament, and denying the carnall▪ reall, and corporall pre∣sence of Christ in the Sacrament. This Cardmaker was one of the Prebendaries of the Cathedrall Church of Welles: Hee was apprehended and aken by the Bishop of Bathe, and committed prisoner vnto the Fleete in London, the lawes of King Edward be∣ing yet in force: but afterward when they had restored their old popish lawes by Act of Parliament, these two, namely, Cardmaker and Warne were brought to  Lord Chancellor, who offered them the Queenes pardon, if they would recant: Wherevpon they made such an answere as the Lord Chancellor and his fellowes allowed them for Catholicke, but it was but for a further aduantage, and that they might haue some forged example of a shrinking brother to lay in the  of the rest which were to bee examined: and to
all that after were examined: they commended Cardmaker, and one Barlow for sobernesse, discretion, and learning; which Barlow was, for all his good answers, led to the Fleete, from whence being deliuered, did by exile constantly bear witnes to the truth of the Gospell. Cardmaker was conuayed to the Counter in Breadstreet: the Papists hauing a certaine hope that Cardmaker was become theirs, diuers of them confrred with him; in the end he required them to put their reasons in writing, and then hee would answere them in writing, which was done, but they neuer came vnto our handes. When Warne and he were brought together to Smithfield to be burned, the Sherife called Cardmaker aside, and talked with him secretly so long, that Warne had made his prayers, and was chained to the stake, and wood and eeds set to him. The people thought sure Cardmaker would haue recanted: but when they saw him put off his clothes, and go boldly to the stake and kisse it, and shake Warn by the hand, and did him be of good comfort, they cried out for ioy, with so great a shoute as a greater hath not beene heard, saying, God be praised, the Lord streng∣then thée Cardmaker, the Lord receiue thy spirit; thus they both through the fire passed into the ioyes of heauen. William Tooly Poulterer of London. HEe was hanged for robbing a Spaniard at S. Iames, and in his prayer at the Gallowes, which was neere Charing-crosse, hee prayed God to deliuer vs from the tyrannie of Rome and all the Popes detestable enormities: to which all the people said Amen. And being hanged and buried, the Mitred Priests tooke this grieuously: and after consultations what was best to be done, there was a Mandate of Bonner set vp at Charing-crosse, on Paules Church doore, and at Saint Martins in the Fieldes, for the citing of Tooly, hanged a little before, to appear before the said Bishop for heresie; where, after many witnesses examined, he was suspended, excommunicated, condemned, and committed to the secular power, to wit, the Sherifes of London, who digged him vp, layde his dead body on the fire and burned it. THOMAS HAVKES. HEe was sent to London to Bonner for not suffering of his childe to be christe∣ned in three weekes: he tolde the Bishop the reason was because their bap∣tizing was against the word of God,1555. there being in it so many things which haue inuented by men, as Oyle, Creame, Salt, Spittle, Candle, and coniuring of water, &c. Bonner. The Catholike Church hath taught it, and your fathers and the whole world haue béene conteted therewith: he answered, I haue nothing to doe what they haue done, what God commandeth me, to that stand I. One said I was too curious, for ye will haue nothing, said he, but your little pret∣ty▪ Gods booke. I asked if it were not sufficient for our saluation. Yes, said hee, but not for our instruction. I said GOD send me the saluation and you the in∣struction. Bonner. Would you be content to haue your childe christened after the Order set forth in K. Edwards time?
Haukes. Yes said I, that is my desire: then he said, you are a stubborn young man, I must take another course with you. I told him he was in the handes of God, and so am I. Then the Bishop would haue had me to Euensong with him. I tolde him I would not pray in that place nor in none such. One of his Chaplaines said, let him goe, my Lord, and he shall be no pertaker with vs in our prayers. I told them, I thought my selfe best when I was farthest from them. The Bishop sent for me, and Harpsfield was with him; then the Bishop said, this is the man I told you of, that would not haue his childe christened, nor will haue no ceremonies. Harps. Christ vsed ceremonies when he tooke clay and spittle and made the blinde man sée. Haukes. Christ vsed it not in Baptisme: if you will needs haue it, put it to the vse that Christ did. Harps. Admit your childe die vnchristned, you are in a heauie case, your childe being damned and you also, séeing you would not christen him when you might; for he is borne in originall sinne. Haukes. The deliuerance of sinne standeth in the faith of the parents: he asked me how I proued it; Paule in 1. Cor. 7. saith, The vnbeleeuing man is sanctified by the beleeuing woman, and the vnbeleeuing woman by the beleeuing man, els were your children vncleane. Harps. Your great learned men at Oxford, in whom you put your trust, will be against you. I said if they doe it by the Scriptures I would beléeue them. Bonner. Recant, recant; for Christ saith, Except you bee baptized you cannot be saued. Haukes. I aked him whether Christianity did stand in outward ceremonie? He said, partly it doth. I said, S. Pet saith, Not the washing of water that purgeth the filth of the flesh, but a good conscience consenting vnto God, is acceptable to him. Bonner. How say you to the masse sirra? Haukes. It is detestable, abminable, and profitable for nothing. Then he said, what say you to the Epistle and Gospell? I said it was good if it were well and rightly vsed. Bonner. What say you to the Consiter? Haukes. It is abominable and detestable, and a blasphemie against God and his sonne, to call vpon any, to trust in any, or to pray to any, saue onely to Christ Iesus. Bonner. To trust to any we bid you not, to pray to them wee bid you; for you pray to God by them, as you cannot speake to the King and Quéene but by the meanes of one of the priui chamber. Haukes. You say we must not trust in them; and S. Paule saith, How should I call on them in whom I trust not? Bonner. Would you haue no body pray for you when you are dead? I said, so long as we are aliue the prayers of the righteous are aailable; but when we are dead they profit not▪ for Dauid faith, No man can deliuer his brother from death: and Ezechiel aith, Though Noe, Daniel, and Iob dwelt amongst them, yet can they ex∣ceed no further then them selues. Then he said to Harpsfield, you sée this man hath no need of our Lady, nor of any blessed Saints. An old Bishop that lost his liuing for arrying a wie, came to Bonner with a gift, and he sent for me, and tolde him how that I had a childe and would not hae it christned. I said I deie not baptisme. Then he said angerly, Thou oole, thou cannst not tell what thou wouldst haue. I said a Bishop must be not giuen to anger. Thou iudgest me angrie,  by my faith I am not. Then said the old Bishop, Alas yng man, you must be taught by the Church, and by your ancients, and doe as your fathers haue done. Bonner. No, no, he will haue nothing but Scripture, he will haue no ceremonies in the Church. But what say you to holy water?
Haukes. I say to it as to the rest, No, said he, that is proued by the Scripture, in the booke of Kings, when Elizeus threw salt into the water. I said the waters were corrupt, and by this he made them sweete and good; so when our waters be corrupt, if you by putting in salt can make them sweet, cleere, and wholsom we wil the better beleeue your ceremonies. Bonner. How say you to holy bread? I asked, what scripture haue you for it? he said Christ sed fiue thousand men with fiue loaes and three fishes. Haukes. Will you make that holy bread? there Christ dealt fish with his holy bread: then he said, looke how captions he is: and I said, Christ did not this mi∣racle because you should do the like, but to cause vs to credit and beléeue his word and doctrine. Bonner. You will beleeue no doctrine but that which is wrought by miracles. I said no: for Christ saith these tokens shall follow them that beleeue me, they shall speake new tongues and cast out diuels, and if they drinke poyson it shall not hurt them. Then he asked with what new tongues we speake. Haukes. When I knew not Gods word I was a blasphemer and filthe talker, but since I knew Gods word, I haue giuen laude, praise, and thankes to God with the same tongue. Then he said, how cast ye out Diuels? I said, whosoeuer doth credite and beleeue Gods word shall cast out Diuels. Then he asked me if euer I dranke any deadly poyson. I said yea forsooth, I haue drunken of the pesti∣lent traditions, and ceremonies of the Bishop of Rome. Bonner. Thou art an Hereticks, and thou shalt be burned if thou continuest this opinion: you thinke we are affraid to put you to death, there is a brother-head of you, but I will breake it I warrant you. Haukes. Christ nor his Apostles neuer killed any for their Faith: he said, Paule did excommunicate, I said, There is difference betwixt excommunicating and burning: he said, Peter destroyed the Man and his Wife in the Acts. I said, They lied against the Holy Ghost, which serued nothing for his purpose: Then he saide, well, you graunt one. I said, If you will haue vs grant you to be of God, then shew mercy, for he requireth mercy: so he went to dinner. The next day Fecknam tal∣ked with me. Feck. Are you hee that will not haue your child christned, but in English, and will haue no Ceremonies. I said, I refuse not that which the Scripture comman∣deth: he said, Cermonies are to be vsed by the Scriptures, how say you to Paules breaches. Hauks. I haue read, that there went Partlets and Napkins from Pauls body, is it that you meane? he said, yes, what say you to those Ceremonies: I say nothing to the Ceremonies; for the Text saith, It was God that wrought, and not the Cere∣monies. Feck. How say you to the woman that touched the hem of Christ vesture, did not her disease depart by that ceremonie: I said there went vertue from Christ as himselfe said: whether was it his vertue, or his besture that healed the woman: He said both, I said then is not Christ true: For hee said, Thy Faith hath made thee whole. Feck. How say you Sirrha, Christ tooke bread and brake it, and said, Take, eate, this is my body: is it not so: I said I doe not vnderstand it so: Then hee said Christ is a lyer: I said, I thinke you will prooue him so: for euery word that Christ spoke is not to bee vnderstood as hee spoke it: For hee said, I am a Doore, a Vine, a King, a Way, &c. Hee said hee spake this in parables. Haukes. No forsooth, then Christ would haue said, I am like vnto a Doore, to a Uine, to a King, to a Way: He said these plaes make nothing for you: but I perceiue you build vpon Latimer, Cranmer, and Ridley: I said they be godly lear∣ned men. Feck. Wilt thou trust to such dolts, one of them hath written in his booke
that the reall presence is in the Sacrament▪ Ridley preached at Paules Crosse that the Diuell beleeued better then you, for he beleeued Christ is able to make of stones bread, and you will not beleeue Christs body is in the sacrament, yet thou buildest thy faith vpon them. Haukes. What they haue done I know not, but what they do I know: I build my faith vpon no man. If these and many more should recant, yet will I stand to that which I haue said, and then they departed. The next day Doctor Chadsey comming to the Bishop, I was sent for into the Garden. Bonner. He thinketh there is no Church but in England and Germany. I said, and you thinke, there is no Church but at Rome. Chad. How say you to the Church of Rome? I said it is a Church of a sort of vicious Cardinals, Priests▪ Monks, and Friers, which I will neuer credit nor be∣leeue: then he said▪ what say you to the Pope? Haukes. From him and all his detestable enormities good Lord deliuer vs: he said so we may say, from King Henry the eighth and all his detestable enormities, good Lord deliuer vs. Bonner. He will not come into the Chappell, he cannot abide the masse, nor the sacrament, nor any seruice but in English: then Chadsey said, Christ neuer spake English. Haukes. Neither spake he in Lattine, but alwaies in such a tongue as they vnderstood. And Saint Paule saith, Tongues profit nothing, if a Pipe or a Harpe make no certaine sound, who can prepare himselfe to battaile: So if wee heare a tongue that we vnderstand not, we receiue no profit. Bonner. The Catholike Church ordred, that the Latine seruice should serue tho∣row the whole world, that they might pray in one tongue, that there be no strife. I say, this did your Councels of Rome. Chad. You are to blame to reprooue the Councells through the whole World. Haukes. Saint Paule reproueth them, saying; If any preach any other Doc∣trine then that which I haue taught, doe you hold him accursed: Then he said, hath any preached to you any other Doctrine. I said yes, since I came into this house, I haue beene taught praying to Saints, and to our Lady, and to trust in the Masse, holy Bread, and holy water, and in Idols: he said they taught him not amisse in that: I said, cursed bee he that teacheth me so, and I will not credit him nor beléeue him. Chad. What be those Idols you are offended with; I said the Crosse of wood, Siluer, Copper, or Gold, &c. Boner. I say euery Idoll is an Image, but not euery Image an Idoll: if it be an Image of a false God it is an Idoll: but if an Image be made of God himselfe it is no Idoll but an Image. Haukes. Lay your Images of your true God, and of your false God together, and both your Image and Idoll haue hands and feele not, eyes and see not, feete and goe not, mouthes and speake not; so there is no diffe∣rence. Chad. God forbid I should reioice in any thing but in the crosse of Christ: I as∣ked him whether he vnderstood Paul: so he answered me not. Boner. When can we haue a godlier remembrance when wee ride by the way then to see the Crosse: I said if it were such profit, why did not Christs Disci∣ples take it vp, and set it on a pole, and carry it in procession, with Salua festa dies. Chadsey said it was taken vp. Haukes. You say Elenor tooke it vp, and she sent a peece of it to a place of Re∣ligion, where I was with the visiters at the dissolution, and we called for the peece of the crosse, which was so esteemed, and had robbed so many, and made them com∣mit Idolatry; and it was but a peece of a Lath couered ouer with Copper, and double gilded, as it had béen cleane gold: Then the Bishop cryed fye on him, and
hey left me: And Chadsey said, it was pitty I should liue, and I said I had ra∣ther die, then liue in this case. The Bishop after writ somewhat that hee should set his hand too, and there was in it, that I Thomas Lankes had talked with mine Ordinarie, and with cer∣taine good, godly and learned men: Hee answered, hee would not grant them to bee good, godly, and learned men: After also hee told the Bishop, as for your cursings, raylings, and blasphemings, I care not for them: for I know the mothes and wormes shall eate you, as they eate Wooll or Cloth, and at length with diuers others in the month of Iune hee was condemned, and beeing carried into Essex, at Cophall, by martyrdome, he changed his life: His friends priuily desired him, that in the middest or the flame, he would shew some to∣ken that they might bee certaine whether the paine were so great that one can∣not keepe his minde constant therein, which hee promised to doe, and if it were tolerable to hold vp his hands ouer his head, and when his breath was taken away, his skin drawne together, his fingers consumed in the fire, and all men looked that hee would giue vp the Ghost, Hee mindfull of his promise made did lift vp his hands halfe burned, and burning with heate aboue his head to the liuing God, euen on a sodaine, and with great reioicing, striketh them three times together: by which thing, contrarie to all mens expectation béeing seene, there followed so great reioycing, and cry of the multitude, as though hea∣uen and earth would haue come together, and presently he sunke downe, and gaue vp the Ghost. THOMAS WATS. HE was of Billerica in Essex, beeing brought to the Bishop of London▪ hee put certaine Articles to him: The effect of the answere whereof fol∣loweth. That he hath and doth beleeue that Christs body is in heauen, and no where else: and that hee will neuer beleeue that Christs body is in the Sacrament, and that the Masse is full of Idolatry and abhomination, neuer instituted by Christ, and that he neuer did nor doth beleeue that a Priest can absolue him of his sinnes: but he beleeueth it is good to aske councell at the Priests mouth: and he confessed that he said openly in the sessions, that all that is now vsed and done in the church is abhominable, hereticall, and scismaticall, and altogether naught. And he doth beleeue, that the Pope is a mortall enemy to Christ, & his Church: and that hee prayeth as Tooly did, that we may be deliuered from the tyrannie of the Pope and all his enormities. And after he had been many times brought before Boner, and his company, and the Bishop perceiuing, neither his threatnings, nor flattering promises, nothing to preuaile: he condemned him, and after he was carried to Chemes-ford, & there most patiently and constantly sealed his faith with his bloud, by most cruell fire. The morning before hee died, hee said words to this effect to his Wife and Children. Wife and good Children, I must now depart from you; hence∣forth I know you no more, but as the Lord hath giuen you to mee, so I giue you againe vnto the LORD, whom I charge you to obay and feare, and be∣ware that you turne not to this abhominable papistry, against the which I shalll anoe by Gods grace giue my bloud. Let not the murthering of Gods Saints be any cause for you to relent: but take occasion thereby to be stronger in the Lords quarrell, and I doubt not but hee will bee a mercifull father vnto you, and then I kissed them all, and was carried vnto the fire. When he came to the stake hee kissed it, and then hee said so my Lord Rich,
beware, beware, for you doe against your conscience herein, and without you re∣pent, the Lord will reuenge it, for you are the cause of my death. Thomas Osmond, Fuller, William Bamford, alias Butler, Nicholas Chamberlain, Iohn Ardley, and Iohn Simpson. THese were sent out of Essex vnto Boner, to be examined, they had the same Articles ministred vnto them, and agreed all in the same answeres in sub∣stance, that Thomas Wats next aforesaid made, and when by no meanes they could be perswaded from their constancie, being many times sent for, they were at last condemned, and burned in seuerall places in Essex, Chamberlain at Colche∣ster, Thomas Osmond at Maning-tree, William Bramford at Harwidge. Iohn Ardley told Boner, my Lord neither you nor any of your Religion is of the Catholick Church, for you are of a false Faith, and shall bee deceiued at length, beare as good a face as you can, you will kill the innocent bloud, and you haue killed many, and▪ o gee about to kill more, if euery hayre of my head were a man, I would suffer death in the Faith that I am in. At he Examination of Simpson and Ardley, there were a great multitde of people assembled in the Church of Paules round about the Consistory: The Bi∣shop being angry with their bold answeres, cryed alowd, haue him away, haue him away: Whn the people in the Church heard these words, thinking the prisoners had their iudgements, they seuered themselues to make way, which caused such a noise in the Church, that they in the Consistory were amazed: The Bishop asked what was the matter: The standers by said there was like to be some tumul, for they were together by the eares: The Bishop with the rest of the Court ranne away to the doore that goeth into the Bishops house, but the rest being lighter footed then the Bishop, recouered the doore first, and throg∣ing hastily to get in, kept the Bishop out: and cried saue my Lord, saue my Lord: whereby they gaue the standers by good matter to laugh at, whereby thse were a little while stopped of  Iudgement: but not long after they were called to the fire: Iohn Simpson suffered at Rochford, and Iohn Ardley at Rayby. IOHN BRADFORD. HE was borne at Manchester in Lanaster:1555. On the 13. day of August, in the first yeare of Quene Mary: Master Bourne, Bishop of Bathe, made a beastly Sermon at Paules Crosse to set vp popery, as before is said: Boner being pre∣sent, the people were ready to pull him out of the Pulpit, and a Dagger was hurled at him, and being put from ending his Sermon, he intreated Bradford be∣ing with him, to speake and appease the people, when hee came into the place of the Preacher, all the people cryed Bradford, Bradford, God saue thee Bradford: And after they heard his godly exhortation they left off their raging. Bourne thought himselfe not yet sure of his life, vntill hee was safely housed, thugh the Sheriffe and Mayor were ready to help him. Wherefore hee desired Brad∣ford not to depart from him vntill hee was in safety, and radford went at his backe shaddowing him with his Gowne: Amongst whom one Gntle∣man said: Ah Bradford, Bradford, thou sauest him that will helpe to burne
thee: I giue thee his life for if it were not for thee, I would runne him through with my sword, within three dares after Bradford was sent for to the Tower, and there the Councell charged him with sedition for this matter, and committed him to the Tower, and from the Tower to the Kings Bench in Southwarke, and after his condemnation vnto the Counter in the Poultry, whilst hee remained in these two prisons he preached twice a day continually almost two yeares. After he was brought with Bishop Farrax as aoresaid, before the Lord Chan∣cellor, and the Queenes Commissioners: after the Lord Chancellor had laid vn∣to his charge the aforesaid sedition at Paules, and Boner had bore witnes against him, and Bradford had shewed his innocency, and affirmed that notwithstanding Boners seeing and saying, yet the truth I haue told, as at the day of Iudgement wil appeare, in the meane time because I cannot be beleeued, I am ready to suffer what God will licence you to doe to me. Chan. To leaue this matter, wilt thou returne againe, and doe as wee haue done, and thou shalt receiue the Queenes mercy and pardon. Brad. My Lord, I desire mercy with Gods mercy, but mercy with Gods wrath God keepe me from: Well said he, if thou wilt not receiue mercy offred vnto thée, know for a truth, that the Queene is minded to make a purgation of all such as thou art. Bradford answered, I would be glad of the Queenes mercy, to liue as a subiect without a clogge of Conscience, otherwise the Lords mercy is better to me then life, and I commit my life into his hands that will keep it, that none can take it away without his pleasure: There are twelue houres in the day as long as they last no man shall haue power thereon; therefore his good will be done: Life in his displeasure is worse then death, and death in his true fauour is true life. And after he had béen thrée times called before the Lord Chancellor, at all which times there was no arguments of diuinitie but about transubstantiation: For de∣nying whereof, and affirming that the wicked doe not receiue Christ, though they receiue the Sacrament he was condemned: after this the Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Chichester came to him, and argued this point▪ and after them two Spanish Friers, and diuers others at other times: The summe of his Doctrine herein followeth. Reasons against Transubstantiation, gathered by IOHN BRADFORD. 1 TErtullian saith that which is former is true, that which is later is false. Tran∣substantiation is a late Doctrine; for it was not generally defind vntill the Councell of Laterane, about the yeare one thousand two hundred and fifteene, vn∣der Innocent 3. before it was free to beleeue it, or not beleeue it: Ergo, the Doc∣trine of Transubstantiation is false. 2 That the words of Christs Supper be figuratiue: the Circumstances of the Scripture: the proportion of the Sacraments: the sentences of all holy Fathers: For a thousand yeares after Christ doe all teach: It followeth there is no Tran∣substantiation, 3 The Scriptures doe witnes that the Lord gaue bread to his Disciples, and called it his body: He took bread in his hands: hee gaue thankes ouer bread, he brake bread, and gaue bread to his Disciples: As Ireneus, Tertullian, Origene, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Augustine, and all the Fathers of antiquitie doe affirme: but in asmuch as the substance of bread and wine is another manner of thing: then the substance of the body and bloud of Christ, it is plaine there is no Tran∣substantiation. 4 The bread is no more transubstantiated then the wine: CHRIST cal∣leth that the fruit of the Uine, saying, I will drinke no more of the fruit of the Vine: Therefore by Christes wordes it was not Bloud but Wine:
therefore it followeth there is no Transubstantiation: Chrysostom vpon Mathew and Cyprian, doe confirme this reason. 5 The bread is called as well Christs mysticall body, as his naturall body: for the same spirit that saith the bread is my body; saith also, wee being many are one body, but it is not the mysticall body by transubstantiation, no more is it his naturall body by transubstantiation. 6 The words ouer the Cup are not so effectuall as to transubstantiate it int the New Testament: Therfore the words spoken ouer the bread, are not so migh∣ty to make Transubstantiation. 7 The Doctrine of Transubstantiation doth not agree with the Apostolick and mother Churches, which receiued there Doctrine of the Apostles, who re∣ceiued it of Christ, and Christ of God: as of Gréece, of Corinthus, of Philippos, Collosia, Thessalonica, Ephesus, which neuer taught Transubstantiation: yea, it agreeth not with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, taught in times past, for Gelasius the Pope doth manifestly confute the errour of transubstantiation, and reproueth them of sacriledge, which diuide the mysterie, and keep the Cup from the lay people: Therefore the Doctrine of transubstantiation agreeth not with the truth. Communication betwixt the Archbishop of Yorke, and the Bishop of Chichester, with BRADFORD in prison. York. HOw know you the word of God but by the Church? Brad. The Church is a meane to bring a man to the more spéedy knowledge of the Scriptures, as the woman of Samaria was a meane that the Samaritas knew Christ: but when as they had heard him speake, they said now wee know that he is Christ, not because of thy words, but because we our selues haue heard him: so after we come to the hearing and reading of the Scriptures, shewed vnto vs by the Church: we beleeue them, and know them as Christs sheepe, not be∣cause the Church saith they be the Scriptures, but because they be so, wee being assured thereof by the spirit which wrote and spake them. Yorke. In the Apostles time the word was not written. Brad. True, if you meane it for some bookes of the New Testament: but for the Old Testament, Peter telleth vs it is a more sure word of Prophesie, not that it is so simply, but in respect of the Apostles, which being aliue and compassed with infirmities: by reason whereof men might perchance haue found fault with their preaching, they attributed vnto the Prophets more firmenes, as wherewith no fault could be und: albeit in verity no lesse obedience and faith ought to be giuen vnto the one, then the other; both proceeding of one Spirit of truth. York. Ireneus and others doe magnifie much, and alledge the Curch, and not the Scriptures against the heretickes. Brad. They had to doe with such-hereticks as did deny the Scriptures, and yt did magnifie the Apostles: so that they were inforced to vse the authoritie of those Churches wherein the Apostles had taught, and which did still retaine the same Doctrine: then the alledging of the Church cannot be principally vsed against me, which am so farre from denying the Scriptures, that I appeale vnto them vtterly as to the onely Iudge. Yorke. A pretty matter that you will take vpon to Iudge the Church: where hath your Church been hitherto? for the Church of Christ is Catholick and visible, hitherto. Brad. I doe not Iudge the Church when I discerne it from the congregation, which is not the Church, and I neuer denied the Church to b Catholick, and vi∣ble; although at some times it is more visible then at other times. Chichest. Where was your Church forty yeares agone, which allowed your Doctrine: I said I would tell him, if he would tell mee, where the Church was in
Helias his time, when Helias said, he was left alone: he said, that is no answere. Brad. If you had the same eyes wherewith a man might haue espied the Church, then you would not say it was no answer: The fault why the Church is not sne of you, is not because the Church is not visible, but because your eyes are not cléere ough to sée it. Chich. You are much deceiued in making this collation betwixt the Church then and now: Yorke said, it was very well spoken, for Christ said, I will build my Church, and not, I do, or haue built it. Brad. Peter teacheth me to make this collation, saying: As amongst the people there were false Prophets, which were most in estimation before Christs comming, so shall there be false teachers amongst the people after Christs comming, and verie many shall follow them: and as for your future tense, you wil not conclude Christs Church not to haue béene before, but rather that there is no builder in the Church but by Christ onely, in that he saith; I will build my Church, for Paul and Apollo be but waterers. York. He taketh vpon him to iudge the Church, a man shall neuer come to cer∣tainty that doth so. Brad. I speake simply that which I thinke, and desire reasons to answere my Obiections: assuredly you did well to depart from the Romish Church, but you haue done wickedly to coupple your selues to it againe, for you can neuer proue it, which you call the mother Church, to be Christs Church. Chichest. You were but a Childe then, I was but a young man, come from the Uniuersitie, and went with the World, but it was alwaies against my con∣science. Brad. I thinke you haue done euill, for ye are come, and haue brought others to that wicked man which sitteth in the Temple of God, which is the Church, for it cannot be vnderstood of Mahomer, or any out of the Church, but of such as beare rule in the Church. Yorke. Sée how you build your Faith vpon the most obscure places of the Scripture to deceiue your selfe, as though you were in the Church which are not. Brad. Well my Lord, though I might by truth iudge you and others, yet will not I vtterly exclude you out of the Church, but I am not out of the Communion of the Church, for it consisteth in Faith. York. Loe, how you make your Church inuisible, for you would haue the Com∣munion of it to consist in Faith. Brad. To haue Communion of the Church, néedeth not visiblenesie of it, for Communion consisteth in Faith, and not in exterior Ceremonies, as appeareth by Paul, which would haue one Faith: and by Ireneus to Victor, saying; disagréeing of fasting should not breake the agréeing of Faith. Chichest. That place hath often wounded my conscience, because we disseuered our selues from the Sea of Rome. Brad. God forgiue you, for you haue done euill to bring England thither a∣gaine. Yorke. He read a Paper of Common places, how many things held Saint Au∣gustine in the Church, consent of people and Nations authority, confirmed with Miracles, nourished with hope, increased with Charity, established with antiqui∣ty: the succession of Priests from Peters Seat, to this present Bishop: lastlie, the verie Name of a Catholique doth hold me in. Paint me but your Church thus. Brad. This maketh as much for me as for you, but all this, if they had béene so firme as you would make them, might haue béene alledged against Christ and his postles, for there was the Law, and the Ceremonies, consented on by the whole people, confirmed with Miracles, Antiquity, and continuall succession of Bishops from Aaron. Cich. You make to much of the State of the Church before Chrss comming.
Brad. Therein I do but as Peter teacheth, and Paul very often; you would glad∣ly haue your Church héere very glorious, and as a most pleasant Lady, but as Christ saith, so may the Church say; Blessed are they that are not offended at me. Yorke. You thinke none is of the Church but such as suffer persecution. Brad. Paul saith, All that will liue godly in Christ, must suffer persecution: some∣time Christs Church hath rest heere, but commonly it is not so, especially towards the end her forme will be more vnséemly. York. Where is your Church that hath consent of people and Nations, as S. Augustine saith. Brad. Euen all people and Nations that bee Gods people, haue consented with me, and them in the Doctrine of Faith. Yorke. Saint Augustine speaketh of succession from Peters Seat. Brad. That seat then was nothing so much corrupt as it is now. York. Well, you alwaies iudge the Church. Brad. No my Lord, Christs shéepe discerne Christs voyce, but they iudge it not so: they discerne the Church, but not Iudge her, yet full well may wee iudge the Romish Church, for she obeyeth not Christs voyce, and Christs true Church doth. He asked me wherein: I said, in Latine Seruice, and robbing the Laity of Christs Cup in the Sacrament, and many other things, in which it committeth most hor∣rible sacriledge. Yorke. Latine Seruice was appointed to be sung and had in the Quire, where onely were those that vnderstood Latine: The people sitting in the body of the Church, praying their owne priuate prapers, and this may well be yet séene by ma∣king of the Chancell and the Quire, so that the people could not come in or heare them. Brad. In Chrysostomes time, and S. Ieromes time, all the Church did answere with a loud voyce, Amen. Whereby we may sée, that the prayers were made so, that the people both heard and vnderstood them. York. We léese our labour, you seeke to put away all things that are told you for your good, your Church no man can know: I said, yes that you may: He said, I pray whereby. Brad. Chrysostome saith onely by the Scriptures, and this he speaketh very of∣tentimes, as you know. York. That is or Chrysostome, In opere imperfecto, which may bee doubted of the thing, which the Church may be best knowne by, is succession of Bishops. Brad. Lira well writeth vpon Mathew, that Ecclesia non consistit in homibus ratione potestatis secularis, aut ecclesiasticae, sed in hominibus in quibus est notitia vera, & confessio fidei & veritatis. And Hilarius writeth to Auxentius, that the church is rather hid in Caues, then eminent in chiefe seats: then after they had been there thrée houres, they were called away. Iohn Leafe burned with Maister Bradford. THis Iohn, was an Apprentice with a Chandler in Christ-Church in London, eighteene yeares old, borne in Kirkley Meside, in the County of Yorke, hee was examined before Bonner: he said, that after the words of consecration in the Sacrament of the Altar, ouer the Bread and Wine, there was not the true and naturall body and blood of Christ in substance: and as it is now vsed and beleeued in the Realm of England, it is abhominable Idolatry: And he beleeued, that after consecration, it remaineth Bread and Wine as it was before, and it is receiued in
the remembrance of the death and passion of Christ, and so spiritually in Faith they receiue Christs body and blood. And he affirmeth, that Auriculer confession is not necessary to be made vnto a Priest, and it is no point of soules health to beléeue that the Priest hath any authority by the Scriptures, to remit sins. And being asked if he had béene Maister Rogers his Scholler, he graunted it so to be, and he did beléeue the Doctrine of the said Rogers, and the Doctrine of By∣shop Hooper, Cardmaker, and others of their opinion, which of late were burned for Christ, and that he will die in that Doctrine: and the Bishoppe moouing of him to vnitie of the Church, He said, My Lord, you call mine opinion Heresie, it is the true light of the Word of GOD, and hee would neuer forsake his well grounded opinion whilst breath was in his bodie: Whereupon he was condem∣ned. When these two came to the stake in Smithfield to be burned, Maister Bradford lay prostrate on the one side of the stake, and the young man on the other, praying a space, vntill the Sheriffes man bad Maister Bradford arise, then they both rose. Maister Bradford desired the Sheriffe that his man might haue his apparell, which he granted him. When he was vnready, he said; O England, England, repent thee of thy sinnes, beware of Idolatry, beware of false Antichrists, that they de∣ceiue thée not. Then the Sheriffe bad tye his hands, if he would not be quiet: He said, I am quiet, God forgiue you this. One of the Officers that made the Fire said; If you haue no more learning then that, you are but a foole, and were best to hold your peace: Then Maister Bradford answered no more, but asked the world forgiuenesse, and forgaue all the world, and prayed the people to pray for him, and id the young man be of good comfort, for we shall haue a merry Supper with the Lord this night, then he imbraced the Réeds and said: Straight is the way, and nar∣row is the gate that leadeth to eternall saluation, and few there be that finde it: In the Booke at large thou maist sée many godly Letters of his. This Maister Woodroffe, Sheriffe, as he would not suffer Maister Bradford to speake, but bad his hands to be tyed: so, or worse, he serued Maister Rogers, and all that were burned, where the other Sheriffe would weepe at their burning, he would laugh at it, and would restraine and beat the people, who were desirous to take them by the hand. In fine, the foresaid Maister Woodroffe, after the bur∣ning of Maister Bradford, as soone as he came home, was taken lame both arme and legge, so that after hee could neuer stirre out of his house, nor scarse mooue himselfe. WILLIAM MINGE. THe next day after Bradfords death, William Minge, Priest, died in Maidstone Iayle, being in bonds for Religion, and had suffered martyrdome if hee had li∣ued, for he died in great constancy and boldnesse. Iohn Bland, Iohn Frankesh, Nicholas Scheterton, Humphrey Middleton. THE twelfth of Iune1555 Iohn Bland, Iohn Frankesh, Nicholas Scheterton, and Humphrey Middleton, were all foure burned at Canterbury together: Fran∣kesh and Bland were Ministers of the Church there, and Preachers of Gods word. Bland was twice or thrice cast into Prison before for preaching the Gospell, and
was deliuered at the sute of his friends, and yet preached the Gospell againe as soone as euer hee was deliuered. His friends would againe haue deliuered him, if he would haue promised to abstaine from preaching: hee stood in it so earnestlie, that he would admit no such condition, expressing the example of Saint Paul, Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ, shall tribulation, or anguish, or hunger, or nakednes, or danger, or persecution, or the sword, &c. These were tumbled and tossed from prison to prison, from sessions to sessions, a yeare and almost a halfe, and at the last they were condemned for denying the re∣all presence in the Sacrament. The substance of a letter, written by Nicholas Scheterton to his mother: These are to wish you, increase of grace and wisedome, that you may sée the crafty bewit∣ching of Satan, our mortall enemy, which doth not onely openly, but vnder colour of deuotion, deceiue them which kéepe not a diligent eie vpon him, but hauing con∣fidence in mans traditions, & customes of the world, leauing the commandements of God and testament of Christ, do grow more into superstition and hypocrisy, then into wisdome and true holinesse. Sathan by his Ministers, maketh many beléeue, that those things which they compel vs vnto for their bellies sake, haue many godly significations, although they bee most contrary to Gods will: as the Serpent in Paradise said to Eue; hath God commanded you not to eat of the trée of knowledg, but you shall not die: so say our ministers, hath God commaunded you that you shall not make any Image. Tush say they, what harme can they doe, may we not remember God the better when we sée his Image, for they are good bookes for Lay∣men, (but indéed they are better for the Priests, because they receiue the offerings) and as true as the promise of the Serpent was kept with Eue; so is the perswas∣on of the Priests found vnto vs: for as Adam and Eue did become like GOD in knowing of good and euill, so are we in remembring God by his Images. For A∣dams eyes were so opened, that he lost both innocency and righteousnesse, and be∣came most miserable of all Creatures; so we, by remembring Christ by Images, haue forgotten his Commandements, and counted his Testament, confirmed with his blood, for starke madnesse or heresie. We haue so miserably remembred him, that of all people we are most blind, and this is because we wil presume to remem∣ber God by breaking of his Law, thereore except we repent, God will remember vs in his wrath: They will say, where went hee to schoole, is hee wiser then our great Doctors, that haue studied all their life? and they say it is good hay, although we our selues smell it musty, yet we must beléeue it is swéete, and then pay them well for their so saying, and then all is safe. But I may say to them, what Sir; you be wiser then Christ, and God the Father, or the Holy Ghost? what, wiser then the Prophets or the Apostles, and all holy Martyrs? where had you your high learning, it is a very strange learning, that neither God the Father, nor Christ, nor his Apostles could reach to the knowledge of it, but vaine men are neuer with∣out some shift, peraduenture they wil not be ashamed to say; that Christ comming on his Fathers message, did forget halfe his arrant by the way: for it is hard to find one thing in the Church as he left it, so Rumishlie hath Antichrist turned the Church vp-side-downe for lucre sake. Some will say, why should we condemne our Fathers that liued thus? they did according to their knowledge, therefore we condemne them not, but let vs take héede they condemne not vs: for if they had heard the word and béene warned as wee are, it is to be thought they would haue more thankfully receiued it, then we; yea, they were more faithfull in that which they knew, then now many are, therefore they shall condemne vs, if we do not em∣brace this grace now offered: our disobedience is greater then their ignorance, wherefore if we will méete our Fathers in ioy, let vs not refuse the mercy offered more largely to vs then to them, God will not beare it at our hands, to turn back being we are deliuered. Remember Lots Wife.
Iames Treuisam. HEe was of the parish of Saint Margarets in Lothburie: he was lame and kept his bedde, and could not rise out of it a long time; one Iohn Smale his seruant read to him on the Bible; in the meane time Berd the Promoter came in∣to the house, and went vp the Staires, where he found foure persons besides Tre∣uisam and his wife, which he carried to the Counter, where they remained a fort∣night, and he brought a Cart to the doore to haue the lame man to Newgate, but that his neighbours intreated for him, and put in sureties for his appearance. One Master Farthing the parson came to him, and communicated with him, and they agréed well. Then one Toller méeting the Priest, said, if you be agréed I will ac∣cuse you, for he denieth the Sacrament of the Altar: then the parson went to him againe, and then they could not agrée; whereupon the parson told Bonner, and hee said he should be burned, and if he were dead he should be buried in a Ditch; so when he died he was buried in More-fields, the same night he was digged vp, and his sheet taken away, and he left naked vpon the ground, then the owner of the field buried him againe, and fortnight after the Somner came to his graue, and summoned him to appeare at Paules before his Ordinary; but what more was done, I haue no certainty of. Nicholas Hall a Brick-layer, and Christopher Wayde of Dartford. THese were condemned by Maurice1555. Bishop of Rochester for denying the reall presence in the Sacrament, and saying the Masse was abominable, Hall was burned at Rochester, and Wayde at Dartford. Margerie Polley widdow. SHe was wife of Richard Polley of Pepingbery, and was condemned by the said Bishop of Rochester for saying he neither allowed the Deity of the sacrament nor the absurditie of their masse, and was burned at Tunbridge. Derick Caruer, Iohn Launder. CAruer was of Brighthamsted in Sussex, and Launder was of Godstone in Surrey, that together with Thomas ueson and William Veisie, with others to the number of twelue, being together at prayers, and saying the seruice as in King Edwards time, in the house of Dericke, they were apprehended by one Master Ed∣ward Gage. Dericke was condemned by Bonner for saying that after consecration of the Sacrament there remaineth Bread and Wine, and not the flesh and bloud of Christ naturally, and that there is no sacrifice nor saluation to a Christian in the Masse, except it were said and vsed in the mother tongue, and likewise also that
the ceremonies of the Church are not profitable for a Christian. And as touching Auricular confession, he said it was necessary to goe to a good Priest for counsaile, but the absolution and laying handes on a mans head by the Priest, as it is now vsed, is not profitable, and that the faith and doctrine now taught is not agreeable to GODS word, and that Hooper, Cardmaker, and others of their opinion which were late burned, were good Christians, and did preach the doctrine of Christ. Iohn Launder was coudemned by the said Bonner for affirming that whosoe∣uer doth teach or vse any other Sacraments then the Lords Supper and Baptis∣me, or any other ceremonies, he beleeueth that they were not of the Catholique Church, but abhorreth them, and that he himselfe is a member of the true Catho∣lique Church: he denied the reall presence in the Sacrament, but he beleeueth that when he receiueth the materiall Bread and Wine it is in remembrance of Christs death, and that he eates Christs body and bloud by faith, and no otherwise, and that the Masse is naught and abominable, and directeth against Gods word, and that the gloria in excelsis, the Creed, Sanctum, Pater noster, Agnus and other parts of the masse be of themselues good, yet being vsed amongst other things, are naught also, and that auricular confession is not necessary to be made to a Priest, but to God, and that none but Christ hath authoritie to absolue sinnes. Derick being asked whether he would recant: your doctrine, quoth he, is poy∣son and sorcerie: if Christ were here you would put him to a worse death then he was put to before. You say you can make a God, you can make a Pudding as well: your ceremonies in the Church are beggerie, and poyson, and auricular con∣fession is poyson and against Gods word: so they were condemned and burned. Derick was rich, but the raeners made such hauocke thereof, that his poore wife and children had little or none thereof: he was olde and past learning, yet when he was put into prison being ignorant of any letter in his booke, he could before his death reade perfectly. When he was burned they threw his booke into a barrell that he was burned in to be burned with him, but he threw it amongst the people, and the Sherife com∣manded vpon paine of death, in the King and Quéenes name to throw it into the fire againe: then he said, Deare brethren and sisters, as many as beleeue in the Father, the Sonne, and holy Ghost vnto euerlasting life, see you doe thereafter; and you that beleeue in the Pope or any of his lawes, you beleeue to your vtter de∣struction, for except the great mercy of God you shall burne in hell continually. The Sherife said, if thou dost not beleeue in the Pope thou art damned, there∣fore speake to thy God that he may deliuer thee now, or else to strike me downe to the example of this people; but he said vnto him, The Lord forgiue you that which you haue said. THOMAS IVESON. THis Iueson was condemned by the said Bonner for saying the Sacrament of the Altar is a very Idoll, and detestable before GOD as it is now-a-dayes ministred, and that the Masse is naught, and that auricular confession is not ne∣cessary, for that a Priest cannot forgiue sinnes, that baptisme is a token of Christ, as circumcision: he beléeueth his sinnes are not washed away therby, but only his body washed, and his sinnes washed only in Christs bloud, and that there is but two Sacraments, Baptisme and the Lords Supper, which now are not rightly v∣sed in England, & that all the ceremonies now vsed in the Church are superfluous and superstitios: and being earnestly labored withall to recant, said, he would not forsake his beléefe for all the goods in London. I doe appeale to Gods mercie, and
will be none of your Church: and if there came an Angell from heauen to teach me other doctrine then that which I haue now, I would not beleeue him, where∣upon he was burned. IOHN ALEWORTH. HEe died in prison at Reading for the testimonie of the truth, whom the Ca∣tholike Prelats, as their vse is, did exclude out of Catholike buriall. IAMES ABBES. THis Abbes beng examined by the Bishop of Norwich, he relented at their naughty perswasions: now when he was dismissed, and should go from the Bishop, he gaue him some money; but after he was pittiously vexed in conscience, he went againe to the Bishop and threw him his said money which he had recei∣ued, and said, it repented him that euer he had consented to their wicked perswasi∣ons: then the Bishop and his Chaplains laboured a fresh to win him againe, but in vaine, and so he was burned at Berry. Iohn Denley Gentleman, Iohn Newman, Patricke Pachington. AS Edmund Tyrell, a Iustice of Peace in Essex, came from the burning of cer∣taine godly Martyrs, he me with Iohn Denley and Iohn Newman, both of Maidstone in Kent, and vpon the sight of them (as he bragged) he suspected and searched them, and finding the confessions of their faith written about them, hee sent them to the Quéens Commissioners, who sent them to Bonner: the effect of the writing followeth; In the Sacrament Christs bodie is figuratiuely in the Bread and Wine, spi∣ritually he is in them that worthily eate and drinke the Bread and Wine, but re∣ally, carnally, and corporally he is in heauen, from whence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. Then Bonner ministred articles vnto them and vnto Patrick Pachington, who all answered alike, to this effect following. The Catholike Church is built vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ being the head corner stone: it is the Congregation of the faith∣full dispersed through the whole world; and two or three gathered together in Christs name are the members thereof. This Church doeth preach GODS holy word and minister the blessed Sacraments truely: the Church of England vsing the Faith and Religion which now is vsed is no member thereof, but is the Church of Atichrist, the Bishop of Rome being the head thereof; for they haue altered the Testament of GOD, and set vp a Testament of their own deuising, ful of blasphemy and lies, Christs Testament being that we should haue all things done for the edifying of the Church. The Masse now vsed is most abominable idolatrie and intollerable blasphemie: Christ ordained his Sacraments to be eaten together in remembrance of his death vntill he come, and not to bee worshipped and to make an Idoll of them; for GOD will not be worshipped in his creatures, but we must remember to praise
him for his creatures: what is kneeling, holding vp your handes, knocking of the breast, putting off the cap, and making curtsie, with other superstition to the bread, but Idolatrie? You obiect you worship not the Bread and Wine, but the body of Christ, borne of the Uirgin vnder the forme of Bread and Wine: but that is a very lye, for Christs body that was borne of the Uirgin is in heauen. Auricular confession is not good: if I haue offended God I must séeke to him for remission of sinnes by Christ: if I haue offended my neighbour, I must recon∣cile my selfe to him againe: if I were a notorious sinner, after the first and second admnition it ought to be declared to the Congregation, and the Minister hath po∣wer by the word to excommunicate me, and I am to be taken as a heathen, not for a day or for fortie dayes, but vntill I openly in the Congregation acknowledge my fault, and then the Minister hath power by the word to preach to me remission of sinnes by Christ. Touching Baptisme, Iohn Baptist vsed nothing but preaching the word and wa∣ter, as appeareth by Christs baptisme and others: the Chamberlaine said to Phi∣lip▪ Here is water, what letteth me to be baptized? hee asked not for Creame, nor Oyle, nor Spittle, nor coniured Water, nor coniured Waxe, nor Crysome, nor Salt; the like is to be said of the rest of the ceremonies of the Church. And he said there were but two sacraments, except they would make the Rain∣bow a Sacrament, for there is no sacrament but such as hath the promise annex∣ed vnto it. Bonner séeing their vnmoueable constancie, after all meanes they could were v∣sed, they were condemned, and Denley was burned at Uxbridge: he sang a psalm in the fire; then cruell Doctor Storie commaunded one to hurle a Faggot at him, which made him bléed on the face, whereat he left his singing and clapped his hand on his face: Doctor Storie said to him that flung the Faggot, truly thou hast mar∣red a good old song; then Denley put his hands abroad and sung againe. Not long after him Patrick Pachingham was burned at Uxbridge, and Iohn Newman was burned at Saffron Walden in Essex. RICHARD HOOKE. HEe neere about the same time and for the same matter that those formerly spoken of died forgaue his life at Chichester. William Coker, William Hopper, Henry Lawrence, Richard Colliar, Richard Wright, William Steer. THese being examined before the Bishop of Douer, and Harpsfield the Arch∣deacon of Canterbury and others, Henry Lawrence denied auricular confessi∣on, and would not receiue the sacraments because the order of the Scripture is changed in the order of the Sacrament; and when the Suffragan made mention of the Sacrament, and put off his cap, he said, you néed not reuerence the same, and he said the Sacrament of the Altar is an Idoll, and being required to subscribe his hand, he wrote, Ye all are of Antichrist, and him ye follow.
William Steere of Ashford being commanded of the Iudge to answere, bade him command his dogges, and not him, and said Dicke of Douer, meaning the Bishop, had no authoritie to set in iudgement against him, alledging that the Bishop of Canteburie that was in prison was his Dioccesan, and hee said he found not the Sacrament of the Altar in the Scripture, therefore he would not make any answer thereto. The Iudge speaking of the Sacrament put off his cap; he said he needed not re∣uerence that so highly, saying withall that the Sacrament of the Altar was the most blasphemous Idoll that euer was. The other also denied the Sacrament, wherefore they were all condemned, and burned all in one fie at Canterburie. Elizabeth Warne, George Tankerfield, Robert Smith, Steuen Harwood, Thomas Fust, William Hall, Thomas Leyes, George King, Iohn Wade, Ioane Leyshford. THe Prisons of London being replenished with Gods Saints, and still moe and moe comming in, wherefore these ten were sent for of Bonner to be exami∣ned, and rid out of the way. The chéefe point he examined them of, was touching the corporall presence of Christs body and blood in the Sacrament, as the profita∣blest foundation for their Catholike dignity. Many other thinges were obiected against them, as not comming to Church, for speaking against the Masse, and for dispising their Ceremonies and Sacraments. Elizabeth Warne answered vnto them, I deny them all, and if Christ was in an error, then am I in an errour, wherefore she was condemned. Doctor Story was of some alliance vnto her, who deliuered her once by his earnest sute, before hee was Commissioner, but after he was Commissioner, he caused her, Iohn Warne her Husband, and her Daugh∣ter, to be apprehended, neuer leauing them, vntill hee had brought them all to Ashes. George Tankerfield of London, Cooke, borne in the Cittie of Yorke, he vtter∣ly denied aurculer Confession, and Transubstantiation, and affirmed that the Masse was naught, and full of Idolatry and abhomination: and affirmed that there were but two Sacraments. He told the Bishop he cared not for his Diuinity, for you condemne all men, and proue nothing against them, and he said the church whereof the Pope is supreme head, is not Christs Church; and pointing to the Bi∣shop he said to the people beware of him, and such as he is, these be they which de∣ceiue you: Wherevpon he was condemned. ROBERT SMITH beeing asked by Boner when hee was Confessed: Hee answered, not since the time he had discretion: I am not commaunded of God to shew my sinnes to any of that sinfull number whom yee call Priests: He was a Painter, and hee told the Bishop hee had vsed his vocation better then hee had vsed his Bishoprick: Hee said hee neuer vsed the Sacrament, nor neuer would, because it hath not Gods ordinance, but rather it is directed to mocke GOD: I count it a detestable Idoll, and not GOD, but con∣trarie to GOD and truth: Then the Bishop said, hee should be burned: He answered, hee must not thinke thereby to quench the Spirit of GOD, nor make your matter good for your sore is too well seene to bee healed so priui∣ly with bloud, euen the Children haue all your deeds in derision: so that though
you patch vp one place with authoritie, yet it shall breake out in fortie to your shame: Then the Bishop said by my truth if thou wilt be shrieuen, I will tare this paper of thy examination: I answered, it would be too much to his shame, to shew it vnto men of discretion. Boner. Doe you not confesse there is a Catholick Church on earth. Smith. Yes verily: and it is builded vpon the Prophets ad Apostles Christ Iesus being the head Corner stone, which Church maintaineth the word, and bringeth the same for her authoritie, and without it doth nothing nor ought to doe, and I am fully assured I am a member of the same Church. Boner. If my brother doe offend, and will not be reconciled, I must bring him before the congregation, where may a man finde your Church to bring his brother before the same. Smith. In the Acts of the Apostles, when the tyranny of the Bishops was so great against the Church of Iewry, they were faine to congregate in priuy places as they now doe: yet they were the Church of God. Boner. There Church was knowne full well, for Paul writ to the Co∣rinthians to haue the man excommunicated that had lien with his Fathers wife. Smith. As the Church of Corinth was manifest to God and Paule, so is this Church in England, else you could not persecute it as you do. I being conuayed into the Garden, Doctor Dee, being one of the Bishops Chaplaines, came to me, and after much adoe about his God, I compelled him to say that it must needs enter into the belly and so fall out nto the draught: then hee said, What derogation was it to Christ, when the Iewes spit in his face? and I answered, If the Iewes his enemies did but spit in his face, and wee being his friends throw him in the draught, which of vs haue deserued the greater dam∣nation? Doctor. Then he would haue Christs humanitie incomprehensible, bringing to serue his turne which way Christ came amongst his Disciples the doores being close shut. Smith. I haue as much to proue that the doores opened at his comming as you haue to proue that he came thorow the doores: for God that opened the prison doores for his Disciples, was able to doe the like for Christ; but that maketh not for your purpose, for they saw, heard, and felt him, and so cannot you do in your sa∣crament. Then I was called for before Bonner, and my Lord Mayor was with him, and my articles were read, then said Bonner: Bonner. My Lord, they call me bloudie Bonner, where I neuer sought any mans blood, I haue stayed him from the Consistory this day, whither I might haue brought him iustlie: and heere before you I desire him to turne, and I will with all spéed dispatch him out of trouble. Smith. Why do you put on this visard before my Lord Mayor, to make him beléeue you séeke not my blood? Haue not you burned my Brother Tomkins hand most cruelly, and after burned his body, and the bodies of a number more of Christs faithfull members. Then he questioned with me about the Sacrament, and I said, as the body is dead if the blood be gone, so their Sacrament is a dead God, because they take away the blood of Christ from his body, being the Cup is taken from the Layty: for if the Brad be his body, the Cup must bee his blood. Then Bonner rose, and my Lord Mayor desired me to saue my soule: I said, mine was saued by Christ, desiring him to pittie his owne soule, and remember whose sword hee car∣ried: so with many foule farewels, we were sent to New-gate againe, and Boner gaue the Keeper charge to lay me in Limbo.
The second Examination. Boner. THou saést there is no Catholick Church on earth: I said I haue an∣swered you the contrarie, and it is written he said yea: but I must aske you this Question. Smith. Must you begin with a lye, it seemeth you determine to end with the same: but no lyer shall enter into the kingdome of God: I haue conessed a church of God, as well in earth as in heauen, and yet all one Church, and one mans mem∣bers, euen Christ Iesus. Boner. Well what saist thou by auricular Confession. Smith. It is needfull in Christs Church, but if it be needfull in your Church. it is to pick folkes purses, and such pickpurse matters is the whole rabblemene of your ceremonies, for all is but money matters that you maintaine: he said thou maist be ashamed to say so: I said I speake by experience, for I haue heard & seene the fruits of Confession, it hath béene a betrayer of Kings secrets▪ and others who bing glad to be discharged of their sinnes haue giuen to Priests great summes of money to absolue them, and sing Masses for their soles health. Boner. By the Masse if the Queene were of my minde, you should not talke before any man, but should be put in a Sck, and a Dog tyed vnto the sam, you should be throwne into the water. Smith. You and your predecessors haue sought by all meanes to kill Christ se∣cretly, as appeareth by Master Hunne, whom your predecessor caused to be thrust into the nose with hoe burning needles, and then hanged him, and said he hanged himselfe: and another of your predecessors, when he could not ouercome an inno∣cent man by Scripture, he made him priuily to be snarled, and his flesh to be torne away with pincers, and told the people the rats had eaten him. Bonner. Then came in M. Mordant, and then he said, How sayest thou Smith to the seuen Sacraments? Smith. I beleeue that in Gods Church there be but two Sacraments, Baptis∣me and the Lords Supper: as for your Sacrament of the Altar, and all your other Sacraments, they may well serue your Church, but Gods Church hath nothing to do with them. Bonner. Why, is Gods order changed in baptisme? Smith. Yes, in hallowing the water, in coniuring of the same in baptising chil∣dren, with annointing and spitting in their monthes, mingled with salt, and with many other lewd ceremonies: then be said, by the masse I was the shamelest hereticke that euer he heard speake: I said well sworne my Lord, you keepe a good watch. Bonner. Well Mister Controller, you catch me at my words, but I will watch thée as well I warrant you: then quoth Mordant, I neuer heard the like in my life. I pray my Lord marke well his answer for Baptisme, he disaloweth therein holi oyntment, salt, and other lawdable ceremonies. Smith. It is a shamefull blasphemy against Christ, to vse such mingle mangle in Baptisme. Boner. I beléeue if a child die without Baptisme, he is damned. Smith. You shal neuer be saued by that beléefe, I pray are we saued by water or by Christ: he said, by both. I said then, the water died for our sinnes? and must you say that the water hath life, and it being our seruant, and created for vs, it is our Sauiour. This is a good doctrine, is it not. Bonner. How vnderstand you these words, Except a man bee borne of Water and the Spirit, and Christ saith; Suffer little Children to come vnto me, and if thou wilt not suffer them to be baptised according to the lawdabl order, thou lettest to come vnto Christ. Smith. Paul to the Galathians, asheth whether they reciued the Spirit by the
deeds of the law, or by the preaching of faih, and concludeth that the Holy Ghost accompanieth preaching of faith, and with the word of faith entereth into the heart; so if Baptisme preach vnto me the washing in Christs bloud, the holy Ghost doth accompanie it: and Christ saith Suffer little children to come vnto me, and not vnto water; then if you suffer them not to com to Christ without the necessity of water, but condemne them if they die before baptisme, you condemne both the merits and the words of Christ. Bonner. Thou makest the water of no effect, and then thou mayest put away water. Smith. Peter saith It is not the washing away of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good conscience consenteth vnto God: and onely water bringeth not the Holy Ghost, for Simon receiued water, but would haue giuen money for the Holy Ghost, and Iohn had the Holy Ghost in his mothers wombe before Baptisme, and Cor∣nelius, Paule the Queen of Candaces seruant, with many others, receiued the holy Ghost before baptisme: and although your generation haue set at naught the word of God, and turned it vpside downe, yet must his Church keepe the same order which he left them, which his Church dareth not breake: and to iudge children daed dying without baptisme is wicked. Bonner. What say you to the Sacrament of Orders? Smith. You must call it the Sacrament of misorders, for all orders are appointed of GOD, but your shauing, annointing, greasing, poling, and rounding, no such things are appointed in Gods book: and my Lord, if you had grace or intelligence, you would not so disfigure your selfe as you do. Boner. What say you to holy bread, and holy water, the Sacrament of annoin∣ting, and the rest of such Ceremonies of the Church. Smith. They be bables for fooles to play withall, and not for Gods children: then Boner and Mordant departed, then certaine Doctors baited me halfe an houre: of whom I asked, where were all you in the daies of King Edward, that you spake not that which you speake now? they said, they were in England: I said, but then you had the faces of men, but now you haue put on Lions faces; you haue for eue∣ry time a visar: if another King Edward should arise, you would then say, down with the Pope, for he is Antichrist, and so are all his Angels, then I was all to re∣uild. Doctor. You allow not Auriculer confession; I said, it is, because the word of GOD alloweth it not: He said, it is written, Thou shalt not hide thy sinnes. I said, no more doe I when I confesse them to God: Hee said, you cannot hide them from God; therefore you must vnderstand, it is spoken to bee vttered vnto them that do not know them. Smith. Then must the Priest confesse himselfe to me▪ as I to him, for I know his faults no more then e knoweth mine: but if you confesse to a Priest, and not to God, you shall haue the reward that Iudas had: for hee confessed himselfe to the Priest, and yet went and hanged himselfe, and those that acknowledge not there faults to God, are said to hide them. Doctor. What did they that came to Iohn Baptist, I said that they confessed to God; he said, and not to Iohn: I said if it were vnto Iohn, as you cannot proue, yet it was to God before Iohn and the whole congregation: he said Iohn was alone in the wildernes. Smith. Yet hee made many Disciples, and many Saduces, and Pharisies came vnto his Baptisme: therefore if they confessed themselues to Iohn, it was vnto all the congregation, as Paul confessed openly in his Epistle to Timothy, that hee was not worthy t bee called an Apostle, because hee had been a tyrant, but as for eare Confession you neuer heard it allowed by the Word of God: For as Dauid saith, I will confesse my sinnes vnto the LORD, so all his Children doe and euer did: Then they called mee Dogge, and said I was damned: Then I said you are Dogges, because you will ay your friends for offering vnto
you all things. I may say with Paul, I haue fought with beasts in the likenes of men, for I haue béene baited this two daies of my Lord, and his great Buls of Basan, and in the hall I haue béene baited with the rest of his band. Bonner. Then he came and asked the Doctors whether they had done him a∣ny good, and they said no. And I said, How can an euill Tree bring forth good fruit: He said, Wilt thou neither heare me nor them? Thou shalt bee burned in Smithfield. Smith. And you shall burne in hell if ye repent not, I perceiue you and your Do∣ctors will not come vnto me, and I am not determined to come to you: then with many rayling sentences I was sent away. The last examination. Smith. THen I with my Brethren were brought into the Consistory, before Bon∣ner, the Lord Mayor, and the Sheriffes. Bonner. By my faith my Lord Mayor, I haue shewed as much fauour as any man liuing might do: but I perceiue all is lost n him, and all his company. I said, My Lord you must not sweare; then he said, I was Maister Controller, and poin∣ted to my Brother Tankerfield, and said, This is Maister speaker. Mayor. Thou speakest against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Smith. I deny it to be any Sacrament, and I stand here to make probation of the same: if my Lord or any of his Doctors can proue the name or vsage of the same, I will recant then. Then spake my Brother Tankerfield, and defended the proba∣tion which they call heresie. Bonner. By my troth Maister speaker, you shall preach at a stake: Then I said, well sworne my Lord, you kéepe a good watch; he said, well Maister Controller I am no Saint. Smith. No my Lord, nor yet a good Bishop: a Bishop saith Saint Paul, Should be faultlesse, and a dedicate vessell to God: and are you not ashamed to sit in idg∣ment, and be a blasphemer, condemning Innocents. My Lord Mayor, I would re∣quire you in Gods Name, that I may haue Iustice: we are heare to day a great many of Innocents, wrongfullie accused of heresie. I require but the fauour that Festus and Agrippa, Heathen men, shewed to the Apostle, which gaue him leaue to speake for himselfe, and heard the probation of his cause: then the Lord Mayor hanging downe his head, said nothing. Bonner. Thou shalt preach at a stake, and so Sheriffe Woodroffe cried with the Bishop, away with them. Thus came I in foure tim before them, desiring Iu∣stice to be heard, but could haue none: at length, my Friends required with on voyce the same, and could not haue it, so we were condemned, because they all ten held the same opinions in effect. Smith. When the sentence began to be read in Dei nomine. I answered he began in a wrong name, for he could not finde in Scriptures to giue sentence of death a∣gainst any man for his conscience. He was burned at Uxbridge, when hee was come to the stake, he mightily comforted the people, and told them; he doubted not ut God will shew you some token that I die in a good cause: at length he being ell-nigh halfe burned all blacke with fire, clustered together in a lump like a black le, all men thinking him dead, suddenly he arose vpright, lifting vp the stumpes of his armes, clapping them together, declaring a reioycing heart to them, and so did. He also wrote many godly Letters, as you may sée in the Booke more at lage. Stephen Harwood was burned at Stratford, and Thomas Fust was burned at Ware. When William Hayle of Thorpe in Essex was condemned: O good people said he, eware of this Iolater and Antichrist, pointing to Bonner. He was burned at Baret.
George King, Thomas Leyes, and Iohn Wade, sickned in Prison and dyed, and were cast into the fields, and buried by night of the faithfull, when none durst doe it in the day. Ioane Lashford, the Daughter of Iohn Warne, and Elizabeth Warne Martyrs, was repréeued to a longer day: her martirdome was next yeare. William Andrew. HE was sent out of Horsie in Essex by the Lord Rich, and Sir Richard South∣well, and being twice examined before Boner, he stood manfullie in the defence of his Religion: at length, through straight handling in the Prison in Newgate, he died, and after the Popish manner hee was cast into the fields, and in the night se∣cretly buried by the faithfull. Robert Samuell. IUstice Foster of Cobdocke in Suffolke, a deadly hater of the Professors of the truth, amongst many others that were also troubled by him, this Robert Samuell, a godly Preacher in King Edwards daies, was one: Hee was Mi∣nister of Barford in Suffolke, and beeing put from the Ministry, as others were, he taught priuilie, and when that the order came vp, that Priests should put away their Wiues, and bee compelled to single life, Samuell would not agrée thereto. Maister Foster sent out espials to apprehend him, and carry him to Prison if hée were found to come vnto his Wife: whereby he was taken, and put into Ipswich Iayle, from thence he was carried to Norwich, where Doctor Hopton the Bishop, and Doctor Donnings his Chancellor, exercised great crueltie against him. They kept in him strait prison, where he was chained bolt vpright vnto a great post, that hee was aine to beare all his bodie on tip-toe, and kept him without meat and drinke, onelie he had euery day two or thrée mouthfuls of Bread, and thrée spoone∣fuls of Water. He would often haue drunken his owne Water, but his bodie was so dried vp, that he was not able to make water. When he was brought forth to be burned, he reported, that after he had béen famished with hunger two or thrée daies together, he fell into a slumber, at which time one clad all in white, seemed to stand before him, which said; Samuell, Samuell, be of good cheere, for after this day thou shalt neuer be hungry or thirstie, which was performed: for spéedily af∣ter he was burned, and from that time vntill he suffered he felt neither hunger nor thirst: and he said, he declared this, that all might sée the wonderfull workes of God. He said, he could vtter many such comforts, as he had of Christ in his afflic∣tions, which modesty would not suffer him to vtter. As he was going vnto the fire, a Maid named Rose Notingham, took him about necke and kissed him, who being marked, the next day was sought for to bee had to Prison, and burned, yet by Gods goodnesse the escaped: yet two honest Women fell into the rage of that time; the one a Brewers wife, the other a Shoe-makers Wife, who were burned the next day after Samuell: the one was called Anne Pot∣ten, the other Ioane Trunchfield. The report of them which saw Samuell burned, is, that his body in burning did hine as bright and white as new tryed Siluer in the eies of them that stood by. In the booke at large thou maist sée a godly Letter of his, and a godly confession of his Faith.
William Allen. HE was a labouring man, sometimes Seruant to Iohn Houghton of Somerset, he was burned at Walsingham: he was imprisoned, for saying he would neuer follow the crosse on procession. The Bishop bad him returne vnto the Catholique Church: he answered, he would turne vnto the Catholike Church, but not to the Romish Church; and said, if he saw the King and Quéene, and all other follow the Crosse, and knéele downe to the Crosse, he would not. Roger Coo. HE was of Melford in Suffolke, a Sheare-man, an aged Father: after his sun∣dry conflicts with his Aduersaries, he was burned at Yexford in Suffolke, for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, and when the Bishop said he must obey the King, whether his command agrée with the word of God or no. He answered: If Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednago had done so, Nabuchadnezzer had not confessed the liuing Lord: and when the Bishop said he had charge of his Soule, he answe∣red, if you go to the Diuell for your sinnes, where shall I become. Thomas Cobbe. LIkewise Thomas Cobbe of Hauehill,1555. Butcher, was burned by the said Bishop of Norwich, for denying the reall presence in the Sacrament, and for saying he would be obedient to the King and Quéenes commaundement, as the Law of God would suffer, and no further. George Catmer, and Robert Streater of Hyth, An∣thony Burward of Calete, George Brodbridge of Bromfield, James Tutty of Breachley. THese were brought before Thorton Bishop of Douer,1555. where they being exa∣mined, they did all affirme the Sacrament of the Altar to be an abhominable Idoll, and George Brodbridge said, he would not be confessed of a Priest, because he could not forgiue his owne sinnes. And moreouer, as for holy Bread and holy Water, and the Masse, I do (quoth he) vtterly defie them, therefore they were all fiue burned as Heretickes at Canterbury. Thomas Heyward, and Iohn Gorway. VVE finde they were condemned and burned at Lichfield, in the Dioces of Lichfield and Couentry.
Robert Glouer, and Iohn Glouer his Brother, and William Glouer another Brother. IOhn was the eldest brother,1555 a Gentleman of the Towne of Mancetor, he was en∣dued with faire possessions and worldly goods, but much more enriched with hea∣uenly grace: He with his two brethren not only embraced the light of the Gospell, but most zealously professed the same. In King Henries daies, this Iohn fell into a dispaire of himselfe, vpon the occasi∣on of these words in the 7. to the Hebrewes, For it cannot be, that they which were once illuminated and haue tasted the heauenly gift &c. The Bishop sending a warrant for this Iohn, the Mayor of Couentry sent him a priuy watch-word, who with his Brother William conuayed himselfe away, but the Sheriffe found Robert lying sicke in bed, and although the Sheriffe would faine haue dismissed him, saying; Hee was not the man for whom they were sent, yet fearing the stout words of the Officer, he put him in Prison vntill the Bishops comming. Robert. Being brought before the Bishop of Couentry, he asked me wherefore I woud not come to Church, I said I would not come thither as long as Masse was vsed in their Churches, though I had 500. liues and might saue them all by going: and I asked if they could finde any thing in the Scriptures, whereby they could defend the Masse. Bish. He asked who should be iudge of the holy word, I said Christ. Robert. He refused not to giue his doctrie to be examined of the people, by sear∣ching of the Scriptures, and so did Paule, and if that would not suffice, I said I would stand to the iudgement of the Primitiue Church, which was next after the Apostles time, and that should be iudge betwixt them▪ He answered he was mine Ordinary, and therefore it was my part to beléeue as hee did. I said, what if hée should sa black is white, or darknesse light. Bish. Thou art gone from the Catholick Church, where was thy Church before King Edwards daies? I asked, where was the Church in Elias his time, and in Christs time? He said, Elias only complained of the ten Tribes. I said there was no Prophet at that time in the other two Tribes, then the Bishop commanded me to be caried vnto a more strait Prison, declaring that he would finde a meanes at his returne, to wéede such wolues out of the way. After the Chancelor, a Prebendary called Tensea came to him, and exhorted him by all meanes possible to submit himselfe vnto the Church. Robert. I would gladly submit my selfe vnto the Church, which submitteth it selfe to Gods word: but how (quoth he) can you come to the knowledge of the word of God, but as you be led by the Church. I answered, the Church is not aboue the word of God, because it declareth it, no more then Iohn Baptist is aboue Christ, by shewing Christs comming vnto the people, or if you should tell one this is the King, and therefore you should say, you were aboue the King. Bish. after he was sent for againe before the Bishop, he perswaded him to bee a member of his Church. Robert. I told him I was a member of the true Church that was founded vpon the Apostles and Prophets, the chéefe and principall piller beeing Christ Iesus. This Church was from the beginning, and no maruell though according vnto the course of this world, it doth not shew forth the externall light, for it is afflicted with continuall crosses, that it hath no respite from feare and tirannicall vsage: the Bi∣shop contended that he was of the Church; so said I, the whole congregation once cryed against the Prophets, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; but when I said any thing for my selfe, the Bishop commaunded me vpon my alleagi∣ance to hold my tongue, calling me proud and arrogant Hypocrite.
After for denying that there were any more then two Sacraments, and that the Masse was neither Sacrament nor Sacrifice, because it differeth from the true institution of Christ, and taketh it cleane away, and that he denied Confession to a Priest: he was condemned and burned at Couentree. Cornelius Bungey. IN the same fire which the said Robert Glouer was burned, Cornelius Bungey a Capper of Couentry▪ who was condemned by the said Bishop: First, for that he did maintaine that the Priest had no power to absolue a sinner from his sinnes, and that there be but two Sacraments: Baptisme, and the Lords Supper: And that there was not the Lords body and bloud of Christ in the Sacrament of their popish Altar: And that the Pope is not head of the Church. WILLIAM WOLSEY, and ROBERT PYGOT Painter. THese were condemned and burned by the Bishop and Chancellor of Ely, and both in one fire at Ely were burned. NICHOLAS RIDLEY, Bishop of London, and HVGH LATIMER Bishop of Worcester. NIcholas Ridley came of a gentle stock, borne in Northumberland; he was first Bishop of Rochester, and after Bishop of London, in which offices he so oc∣cupied himselfe in preaching the holsome Doctrine of Christ, that neuer child was so dearely beloued of his parents, as he was of his flocke: he preached euery Holi∣day or Sunday in some one place or other, to whom the people swarmed like Bées. He did carefully instruct his Family: hee gaue them euery one a New Testa∣ment, and would giue them money to learne certaine principall Chapters by hart, being maruellous carefull ouer them, that they might be a spectacle of vertue and honesty to others. He called Mistris Boner Bishop Boners Mother, his mother, and when he was at his house at Fulham, the dwelling there, he euer sent for her to meales, and pla∣ced her in a Chae at the Tables end, and shee was neuer displaced of her seate, though the Kings Councell were there, but hee would tell them that this place of right and custome is for my mother Boner: but he was well recompenced therfore by Boner, who was the destruction of him and his. He was immediately after the comming of Queene Mary committed vnto pri∣son and carried to Oxford like a most heynous traytor and heretick with Cranmer, and Latimer, accompanied with a band of Souldiers, as is before mentioned.
The Conference of RIDLEY and LATIMER, vpon the ob∣iection of ANTONIAN. Antonian. ALL men maruell why you goe not to Masse, which is a thing much esteemed of all men, and of the Queene her selfe. Ridley. Because no man that layeth hand on the plough, and looketh back is fit for the Kingdome of God. Saint Paul would not suffer Titus to be circumcised, that the truth of the Gospell might remaine with vs vncorrupt, and if I build againe the things which I destroyed, I am a trespasser: And another cause is least I should seeme to allow that which I know to bee contrarie to sound Doc∣trine, and to be a stumblig stock to the weake, so w should be to me by whom of∣ence commeth: it were better wee were cast into the Sea with a Milstone about our neckes. Anto. What is it in the Masse that so offendeth you, that you will not heare nor see it: haue you not in times past said Masse your selfe. Rid. I am sory therfore, and I trust God hath forgiuen me, for I did it ignorant∣ly, & these things in the Masse are contrary to Gods Word and offend me. The strange tongue, the want of shewing the Lords death, the Sacrament is not com∣municated vnto all vnder both kinds: the sign is worshipped for the thing signified: Christs passion is iniured, by affirming the Masse to purge sinnes, and there are manifold superstitions, and trifling fondnes in the same. Anto. It is a great crime to seperate from the Communion or fellowship of the Church and make a Schisme: you hated the Anabaptists, and impugned them: This was the errour of Nouatus, and of the heretickes called (Catheri) that they would not communicate with the Church, Rid. I take not the Masse for the Communion of the Church, but for a popish de∣uice, whereby the institution for the remembrance of his death is eluded▪ & the peo∣ple of God deluded: The sect of the Anabaptists, & the heresie of Nouatus are to be condemned, they separat themselues from the Communion without any ust cause, for they did not alledge that the Sacraments were vnduely ministred, but alwaies reprouing something, either in the Ministers, or in the communicants with them: for the which they abstained from the Communion, as from an vnholy thing. Lat. Caluin saith, the name of peace is beautifull, and the opinion of vnitie is fayre: But Saint Paul when he requireth vnity he oynes strait with all, according to Iesus Christ, and no further Piotrephes, now of late did much harpe vpon vnity, vnity, Yea Sir (quoth I) in verity, and not in popery. Anto: Admit there bee somewhat in the Masse that might be amended: Cy∣prian and Augustine say, Communion of Sacraments doth not dele a man, but consent of deeds. Rid. If it were a trifling ceremonie, or indifferent, for the continuance of com∣mon quietnes, I could be content to beare it: But the Masse tendeth openly to the ouerthrow of Christs institution, I ought by no meanes in word or deed con∣sent thereto: That of the Fathers, is ment of them that suppose they be defiled, if any secret vice be either in the Ministers, or in the Communicants with them, and is not ment of them which abhor Superstition, and wicked traditions of men, and will not suffer them to be in steede of the Gospell. Lat. The Mary bones of the Masse are detestable, and by no meanes to be borne with all, it cannot be amended, but by abolishing it for euer, for if you take away blation, and adoration, which hang vpon Consecration, and transubstantiation, the Papists will not set a button by the Masse, onely for the gaine that followeth therin, for if our English Communion were a gainefull vnto them, as the Masse, they would striue no more for the Masse. Anto: If you refuse to goe to Masse, you forsake the Church, for the Masse is the Sacrament of vnitie: without the Arke there is no saluation, the Church is the
Arke, and Peters ship: Augustine saith, he shall not haue God his Father, which acknowledgeth not the Church his mother: And he also saith, be thy life neuer so well spent out of the Church, thou shalt not inherit the Kingdome of heauen. Ridley. The Catholick Church is the Communion of Saints, the Ci∣tie of GOD, the spouse of Christ, the body of Christ, the pillar of truth, this Church I honour in the Lord, but the rule of this Church, is the word of God: as many as walke according to this rule, peace bee vpon them and vpon Israel that pertaineth to God: the guide of this Church is the Holy Ghost: the marks of this Church are these: The preaching of Gods word, & due administration of the Sa∣craments: Charitie and obseruing of Ecclesiasticall Discipline, according to the word of God; these are the heauenly Ierusalem, which consisteth of those which are borne aboue: This is the mother of vs all, I will liue and die the child of this Church, forth of this there is no saluation, it is onely knowne by the Scriptures which is the true Church: indeed the bread which we breake according to the insti∣tution of Christ is the Sacrament of the vnity of Christs mysticall body, for we be∣ing many are one bread and one body, because we are partakers of one bread, but in the Masse the Lords institution is not obserued: for there we are not all par∣takers of one bread, but one deuoureth it all. Lat: Yea, what fellowship hath Christ with Antichrist; it is not lawful to beare the yoke with Papists; Seperat your selues from them, saith the Lord, it is one thing to be the Church indéed, and another thing to counterfet the Church: not all that he couered with the Title of the Church are the Church indéed: When S. Paul saith, Seperate your selues from them: He addeth, if any man follow other doctrine, he is puffed vp and knoweth nothing: For it is ignorance to know many things and not Christ, but if thou knowest Christ thou knowest enough, though thou know no more: Therefore he would know nothing but Christ and him crucified, as many as be Papists and Masse-mongers, may well bee said to know nothing; for they know not Christ, they take much away from the merite of Christ. Anto. That Church which you describe is inuisible, but Christs Church is vi∣sible and knowne: For hee saith, tell it to the Church, which is in vaine to goe to the Church, if a man cannot tell which it is. Rid. If we cannot see the true Church, that is not the fault of the Church, but either of our owne blindnes, or of Satans darknes, but the word is a Candle vnto vs, and a light vnto our steps to shw the true Church. Anto. The Church of Christ is vniuersall dispersed through the whole world, the great house of GOD good and euill mingled together: Goates & Shéepe, Corne and Chaffe; it is the net which gathereth all kinde of Fishes: it cannot erre, for CHRIST IESVS hath promised it his good Spirit, to leade it in all truth, and the gates of Hell shall not preuaile against it, he will be with it to the end of the world: What it shall binde or lose in earth shall bee ratified in Heauen, it is the truth: Augustine saith, I beleeue the Gospell, because the Church biddeth me beleeue it: this Church alloweth the Masse, therefore it must be followed. RidI. The Church is taken three manner of waies in the Scripture: some∣time for the whole multitude of the professors of Christ, but as euery one is not a Iew which is a Iew outwardly: nor all that be of Israel, are counted the seede: So euery one that is a Christian outwardly is not so indeede: For hee that hath not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. The Church that Christ Ie∣sus is head of stands onely of liuing Stones: Christians in heart and truth, and not in worde onely: The multitude of the good are the true Church, the multitude of the euill is the malignant Church, and Synagogue of Satan: These be the three takings of the Church: and though there be seldom mention in Scriptures in this interpretation, yt in the greatest assemblies of the world, this Church hath borne the greatest swing. But▪ if any will affirme, that vniuersalitie doth so appertaine vnto the church,
that Christs promises to the Church must needes bee vnderstood of that; where was that vniuersall Church, in the times of the Patriarks, and Prophets: Of Noah, Abraham, and Moses, (when they would haue stoned him) of Helias, of Ie∣remy, in the times of Christ, and the dispersion of the Apostles in the time of Ari∣us When Constantius was Emperour, and Felix Bishop of Rome succeeded Lyberius, Lyra vpon Mathew saith, the Church doth not stand in men by reason of their power and dignitie, whether it be Ecclesiasticall or Seculer, for Princes and Popes and other inferiours haue fallen away from GOD: Therefore the Church consisteth in those persons in whom is true knowledge, and Confession of the Faith, and truth: euill men are in the Church in name, but not in deed. Latimer. Touching the vehement saying of Saint Augustine: I would not be∣leeue the Gospel, but for the Church. Melancton vpon this saith, the Church is not a Iudge, but a witnes, there were some that lightly esteemed the Iudgement of the Church, and preaching, and reiected the outward word, and stucke onely to there inward reuelations: This droue Saint Augustine into that vehemencie, in which he seemeth to them that vnderstand not his meaning, to prefer the Church before the Gospel, and that it had authoritie ouer the same, but that godly man ne∣uer thought so. Anto: Generall Councels represent the vniuerfall Church: and Christ hath promised to be in the middest, where two or three be gathered together in his name: Therefore much more where there is so great a multitude, but in generall Coun∣cels Masse hath been approued and vsed, therefore it is good. Ridley. It is true, that where so many be gathered together in Christs name, it is not credible, but two or three be gathered together in his name, but if there be an hundreth good, & two hndreth bad, being the Decrees & Ordinances goe accor∣ding to most voices, what can the lesse number of voices preuaile: It is a common prouerbe, often the greater part ouercommeth the better: but it is impossible that any such Councell of good men allowed such a Masse as ours was of late, in a strange tongue, and stuffed with so many absurdities, errors, and superstitions: for as there is no agreement betwixt light and darknes, Christ and Beliall: so su∣perstition and sincere religion, will-worship, and pure worship in spirit and truth, can neuer agree together. Latimer. Touching generall Councels, I refer you to your owne experience in our Parliaments, and Conuocations: the most part in my time did bring forth the six Articles, because then the King would so haue it: After the most part did repeale the same, because our good Iosias would so haue it: The same Articles now again the most part hath restored, because the Queene will haue it; after this sort most commonly are mens proceedings. Anto. If in generall Councels men should not folow most voces, then should the church haue no certaine rule to determin waighty matters, but it is not to be belée∣ued that Christ would leaue the Church destitute of so necessary a help. Rid. Christ the most louing spouse of his espouse the Church, did giue vnto it a∣bundantly all things necessary to saluation, but so that the Church should kéep her selfe within the obedience of his commandements, and not to séek any thing as ne∣cessary to saluation which he teacheth not: and for determination of all controuer∣sies in Religion, Christ hath left vnto the Church▪ Moses, and the Prophets, which he willeth the church to aske councell of, and all the New Testament, & that which is hard in Moses and the Prophets, is reuealed in them: so that wee haue no need to say, who shall clime vp to heauen, or who shall goe downe into the deepe to tell vs what is needfull to be done: Christ hath done both, and commanded the word of Faith; and if we walke diligently therein, by his spirit we shall out the truth▪ and obtaine euerlasting life: As in Esay 8. Shall men-aske of the dead for the liuing? Let them goe vnto the Law & the Testament: Christ Ioh. 5. biddeth vs Search the Scriptures: And Hierom saith, Ignorance scriptures is mother of errors vpon the 25. of Mathew, and in another place
he saith the knowledge of the scriptures is the food of euerlasting life, and we read not that Christ in any place hath aid so great a burden vpon the members of his Church that he hath commanded them to go vnto the vniuersal Church: it is true that Christ gaue vnto his Church some Apostles, and some Prophets, some Euan∣gelists, some Shepheards and Teachers to the edifying of the Saints, vntill we all come vnto the vnity of Faith. But that all, out of all parts of the world, should méet together in Councell, to define the Articles of faith, it is not commanded of Christ. Lat. There is diuersitie betwixt things pertaining to God or Faith, and politick and ciuill matters: for in the first we must stand only to the scriptures, which are able to make vs perfect vnto saluation: if by study and prayer we vnderstand them, and the most prudent men of the world are least apt to vnderstand them: but in ci∣uill matters being wee know not otherwise how to maintaine common peace and quiet, they doe ordaine that the most part shall take place. Anto. It is perilous to attempt any new thing in the Church, vnto which the example of the Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles, are contrarie: for in their time all things were most corrupt, the people were miserably giuen to superstition, the Priests despised the law of God, yet we neuer read that the Prophets made a∣ny schismes, and Christ haunted the Temples and taught in them daily, Peter and Iohn went into the Temple at the ninth houre of prayer, Paule after the reading of the law desired to say some thing vnto the people: neyther Christ nor his Apostles did refuse to pray with others, to sacrifice or be partaker of Moses law. Ridley. The Prophets, Christ, nor the Apostles did not communicate with the people in any kind of worshipping forbidden by the law, or repugmant to the word. Saint Augstine in his Epistle Ad Ianuarium, speaking of the ceremonies of the Iewes, he saith, They were burdens of the law which were deliuered by the word of God, and not by the presumptions of men; but now the ceremonies are of men, and contrary to the word of God, and therefore not to be borne. In the story of To∣bias, when all other went to the golden calues of Ieroboam to worship, hee alone went to the Temple of the Lord to worship In the third of Kings the man of God threatned terrible plagues to the Priest of Bethell, and to the Altar which Ieroboam had made, which came to passe by King Iosias. The Prophets vehement∣ly rebuked the people still for going a whoreing with their Hill-Altars: and this was the chiefe cause wherefore the false Prophets ceased not to maligne the true Prophets, therefore they beate them, and banished them. How otherwise can you vnderstand the saying of S. Paul, What concord hath Christ with Beliall, the beleeuer with the Infidel, & the temple of God with Idols: for we are said to be Gods temple because God dwelleth in vs: wherfore we are bidden to come out & seperat our selues from them, and to touch no vncleane thing, and God will receiue vs and be our Father, and we shall be his Sonnes and Daughters. In the 12. of Iudith, she would not defile her selfe with the meats of the wicked. The Machabees died man∣fully in the defence of the Law: S. Augustine saith, If we praise the Machabees for their stoutnesse for the Law of Moses, how much more ought we to suffer all things for our baptisme and the Lords supper, which the Masse vtterly abolisheth and corrupteth. Anto. I perceiue you are so obstinatly wedded vnto your owne opinion, that no wholsome counsels can draw you to a better mind, therefore you must be handled by the lawes, and be either compelled thereto, or suffer the punishment of the Law: he that refuseth to obey the lawes of the realme, is an enemy to his Country. This is the readiest way to stir vp ciuill wars, it is better you should beare your owne nne, then the common quiet to bee disturbed: how can you say you will bee the Quéenes subiects, when you openly professe you will not kéepe her lawes. Ridl. It is true, he that will not obey the Gospell, must be forced thereto by the law, but this ought not to be against them which cannot bear superstitions, nor the ouerthrow of Christs institutions, but detesteth such procéedings for the glorie of God, and they that loue their Country in God, will rather obey God then man, &
they that obey mans lawes against Gods lawes, in pretence of the loue of their countrey, they make their countrey fight against God, in whom consisteth, the very stay of the countrey: such are the most deadly eeemies and traytors of their coun∣trey, for they goe about to bring vpon ther countrey a present rue. Sathan had e∣uer this dart in readines to hurle against Gods children, so accuse them of sodition that he may bring them in danger of the higher powers, so he hath vp his ministers alwayes charged the Prophets: Acab said to Elias, Thou art he that troubleth Isra∣el, and the false Prophets complained to their Princes of Ieremy, that his wordes were seditious and not to be suffered▪ the Scribes and Pharises accused Christ as a seditious person, that spake against Caesar, and at length ryed, If thou let him goe thou art not Caesars friend: Tertullian accused Paule before Felix, that he was a pe∣stilent fellow and a stirrer of sedition. But these men were not so, but of false men falsly accused, onely because they openly reproued their guiles, superstitions and deceits. A man ought to obey his Prince, but in the Lord, and neuer against the law of the Lord: for he that louingly obeyeth his Prince against God, is a deceiuer of his Prince, and helpeth him to worke his owne destruction: wee must giue vnto the Prince that which is his, and vnto God that which is his. Valentinianus the Em∣perour chusing the Bishop of Millan, said, He set him in his seat for this cause, that if we doe offend we may submit our selues vnto him. Polycarpus the most con∣stant Martyr, when he ood before the chiefe Ruler, was commaunded to blas∣phme Christ, and to sweare by the fortune of Caesar; we are taught (quoth he) to giue honour vnto Princes, but such honour as is not contrary to Gods Religion. HVGH LATIMER. THis constant Martyr was the sonne of one Hugh Latimer of Thirkesson, in the Countie of Leicester, a husbandman of wealthy and good estimation: he studying Diuinitie in Cambridge, at the first was zealous in the popish Religion, and so scrupelous (as hee himselfe confesseth) that being a Priest, and vsing to say Masse, hee did so obserue the Romish Decrees, that he thought he had ne∣uer mingled enough his massing Wine with water, and hee was of the opini∣on that he should neuer be damned, if once he were a professed Frier, with diuers such superstitious fantasies, and in his blind zeale hee was a very enemy vnto the professors of the Truth, and when he tooke the degree of proceeding Batcheler of Diuinitie, he made his oration against Philpot, Melancton, & his works: Then Maister Bilney, as before is said, perswaded him to forsake his former studie of the Schoole Doctors, and such fooleries, and to become a true schol∣ler in true Diuinitie: so that where before hee was an enemy, and almost a persecutor of the Gospell of Christ, hee was now an earnest seeker after CHRIST IESUS, and became both a publike preacher, and a pri∣uate instructer of his brethren in the Uniuersitie two yeares, but Sathan neuer sleepeth when he seeth his Kingdome decay: he raised his Children to trouble him. Latimer in his Sermons before Christmas gaue the people certaine Cardes, out of the fift, sixt, and seuenth of Mathew: Wherevpon they might occupy the time, for the chiefe Carde he limited the Heart, as the principall thing they should serue GOD with, and thereby hee ouerthrew all hypocriticall, and externall Ceremonies, to that end he wished the Scriptures to bee read altogether in the English tongue, that the common people might thereby learne their dueties to GOD and their Neighbours: hereby hee wrought in the hearers much fruit, to the ouerthrow of Popish Superstition, and setting vp of true Reli∣gion.
The Sonday before Christmas day, in his Sermon he deliuered his Cards as aforesaid, making the heart the chiefe Carde, inuiting all men to serue the Lord with inward heart and true affection, and not with outward ceremonies, that in the seruic of the heart consisteth true religion, and not in the outward deeds of the letter, or in the glistering shew of mens traditions, of pardons, pilgrimages, ceremonies, vowes, deuotions, voluntarie workes, and works of supererogation, foundations, oblations, the Popes supremacie: you may sée two Sermons of his to this effect in the booke at large. Doctor Bucknam about the same time of Christmas, to deface Master Latimer, brought forth his Christmas Dice, casting to his audience Cinque and Quater, wherby to proue that it were not expedient that the Scriptures should be in Eng∣lish, lest the vulgar people by the occasion thereof should be brought to leaue their vocation, or to runne into some inconuenience; as the Plowman, when he heares that, No man laying his hand vnto the Plough and looking backe, is meete for the Kingdome of heauen, might perhaps cease from his Plough: likewise the Baker, when he heareth that a little leauen corrupteth a whole lump of dough, may per∣chance leaue our bread vnleauened, and so our bodies shall be vnseasoned: and when the simple man heareth, If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee, may make himselfe blinde, and so fill the world full of beggers. These, with other moe, he brought to the number of fiue: yet Master Latimer, notwithstanding all his aduersaries (which were man) together with Master Bilney, continued in Cambridge a certaine space: they vsed much to conferre and to walke together in the fields: the place of their conference was long time after called by the name of Hereticks hill. These two did often visit the prisoners, reliee the needy, and feed the hungry. There was a woman laide in prison for suspition of murdering her childe, she de∣nying it, they searching into the matter found that her husband loued her not, and therefore sought to make her away. The matter was thus: her childe hauing bin sicke a whole yeare, died in haruest, then she went to haue her neighbours to helpe to burie it▪ but all ware at haruest; whereby she was inforced to prepare the child to buriall her selfe: her husband comming home accused her of murthering the childe. Master Latimer thinking in his conscience that she was not guiltie, and being called to preach before King Henry the eighth, after the Sermon the King sent for him, and talked with him; at which time Master Latier knéeled downe and ope∣ned the whole matter to the King, and begged her pardon, which the King graun∣ted, and gaue it him when he went home. In the meane time the woman was brought a bedde in prison, and Master Latimer was God-father, but hee told her not of the pardon, but laboured to haue her confesse the truth. When the time came that she looked to suffer, she greatly lamented that she should not be purified before she did suffer, thinking she should be damned if she died vnpurified. Master Bilney and Master Latimer told her that the law was made for the Iewes, and not for vs, and how women be as well in the fauour of God before purification as af∣ter. And when they had brought her into a good way, they shewed her the Kings pardon, and let her goe. Many moe like good matters were wrought by him, but the more his vertues and good doings began to be knowne, the more his aduersa∣ries began to spurn against him. One Doctor Redman, of great authoritie in Cambridge, séeing the boldnesse of Master Latimer, in setting abroad the Gospell, he wrote to him earnestly, requiring him for charities sake not to stand so much in his owne conceit, nor to preferre his singular iudgement in matters of religion and controuersies, before so many lear∣ned men and the whole Catholike Church, hauing neither the word of God, nor the testimony of any authentike writer to make for you: consider you are but a man, therfore lying and vanity may quickly bleare your eyes, which doth somtime trans∣forme it selfe into an Angell of light: suffer not the Church to take offence by the
hardnes of your heart, let not the vnitie of Christs coat without seame be torne a∣sunder, trust not in your owne wisdome. To which he answered, it is enough for me that Christs sheepe heare no mans voyce but Christs: you haue no voyce of Christ against me: for my part I haue a heart that is readie to hearken to any voyce of Christs that you can bring me; so fare you well, and trouble me not any more from the talking with the Lord my God. At length M. Latimer was called before the Cardinall for heresie, by the procure∣ment of his aduersaries, where he was content to subscribe to such articles as were propounded vnto him. After he was appointed for one of them that laboured for the Kings supremacie, and remaining at Court, he preached often in London: after, at the sute of the Lord Cromwell, he was benefed at West-Kingston in Wilshire, where he was very diligent in teaching: his diligence extended also to all the countrey round a∣bout, but there also he could not escape without enemies. It so chanced that hee preaching vpon the Uirgin Marie, he proued that Christ was her Sauiour. Cer∣taine Popish Priests being therewith offended, drew Articles against him concer∣ning the matter of our Ladie, of praying vnto Saints, and of Purgatorie: to which Articles he answered in effect as followeth; 1 To reproue certaine Priests and beneficed men which giue so much to our Lady, as though she had not bin saued by Christ, which is the sauiour of her and of all that be or shall be saued. I did reason that either she was a sinner or no sinner; if a sinner, then she was deliuered from sinne by Christ, or if she were no sinner she was preserued from sinne by him, so he was her Sauiour which way soeuer you take it. 2 Images of Saints are called Saints: to pray to these Saints is Idolatrie. Saints in heauen doe of Charity pray for vs, but we are not commanded to pray to them, for Christ only is a holy Mediator for them and vs. 3 The scurfe must be taken away from pilgrimage before it be good, to wit superstition, Idolatrie, false faith, and trust in the Image, debts must be paide, re∣stitutions made, wife and children prouided for, duety to our poore neighbours discharged, and when it is at best, before it be vowed it néed not be done, for God commandeth it not. 4 I said the Aue maria was a greeting which the Angel brought from God to the Uir in Marie, but I said it was not a prayer, as the Pater noster, which our Sauior Christ made, and bade vs say for a prayer, not adding that we should say ten or twenty Aue Mariaes with it. 5 The torment of hell is not a materiall fire, no more then it is a materiall stinging of a worme or snake, but a metaphor signifying the paine, torment, an∣guish, griefe, miserie, sorrow, and heauines inexplicable and intollerable, whose na∣ture and condition none can tell. 6 That the soules that are not in hell, are in as great ioy as soules can be, and cannot be put from eternall ioy, and suffer no paine, of charitie they pray for vs, and haue no need that we should pray for them, and besides this there is no other Pur∣gatorie. I had rather be there then in the Bishop of Londons prison, though they call the fire thereof neuer so hote, yet if the Bishop with his two fingers can put away some of the fire, and a Friers Cowle the fourth part thereof, and Scala Coeli altogether, I will neuer found Abbey, Colledge, or Chauntery for that purpose. Prouision for Purgatorie hath brought thousands to hell, debts haue not beene paide, nor lands and goods euill gotten restored, poore people are suffered to pe∣rish for want, and all to builde religious houses to deliuer out of Purgatorie, and to pay for Dirges, Masses, and ringing of Bells to carrie vs to hell withall; who can purge pilgrimage from Idolatrie, and Purgatorie from robberie, but he shall be in suspition of heresie?
As for Pilgrimage, you would wonder what iugling there is to get Money withall, I dwell by the way, and you would admire how they come by flockes out of the West Countrey to many Images, but cheefly to the blood of Hayles, and they beléeue verily it is the blood of Christs body, shed vpon Mount Caluarie for our saluation, and that the sight of it doth certifie them out of doubt, that their sinnes are forgiuen, and they are in state of saluation. If you should common with them comming and going what faiths they haue, you would wonder, they cannot away with forgiuing their enemies, and reconciling themselues vnto their Bre∣thren, for the sight of that blood doth quite them for the time; they that did vio∣lently and miraculously plucke the blood out of Christs body, by whipping and wounding him, saw his blood, and yet were not thereby in cléere life. Christ doth suffer the Diuell to vse his craftie fashion for our probation: it were very little thanke to beléeue well, if nothing should mooue vs to beléeue superstitiously; it was not in vaine, when Christ had taught vs truly, that he had vs beware of false Prophets. These points following his Aduersaries preached, y• Christs blood is not suffi∣cient without the blood of Martyrs, Magdalene did not know Christ to be God be∣fore his Resurrection, there can be now no Idolatry: Rome cannot be destroyed, the Pope is Lord of all the World, whatsoeuer he doth, is well done: Pater no∣ster is to be said vnto Saint Peter: Pater noster is but a beggerly prayer, Aue Ma∣ria is infinitly better, there must be twentie Aue Mariaes for one Pater noster, Aue Maria was before Pater noster, and shall bee after: it was not necessary that the scriptures should be written: Christ saying, he that leaueth father or mother, pra∣ueth our pilgrimage, with many moe. Many dangerous hazards he suffered amongst the Popes friends and Gods e∣nemies, for the Gospell sake. When there was a Proclamation set forth for the calling in of the Bible in English, and many other good bookes, he hazarded him∣selfe to write to King Henry the eight to disswade him therefrom, which Letter thou mayest see in the booke at large: at length by the means of Doctor Butts and of good Cromwell, he was made Bishop of Worcester and continued so a few yeares, instructing his Diocesse according to a diligent Pastor, but (as before) both in the Uniuersitie, and at his Benefiee he was tossed and turmoyled by the wicked, so in his Bishopricke some sought his trouble, insomuch that he was accused to the King for his Sermons. Thus he continued in this laborious function of a Bi∣shop for certaine yeares, vntill the comming vp of the sixe Articles, and altering of Religion, so when he could not keepe his Bishopricke with a good conscience, of his owne free will he resigned the same: at which time Shaxton Bishop of Salesburie resigned also with him his Bishopricke. These two remained a great space vnbi∣shopped, keeping silence vntill the time of King Edward. A little after Latimer had renounced his Bishopricke, hee was sore bruised with the fall of a tree, and comming to London for remedy, hee was troubled of the Bishops, and at length was cast into the Tower, where he continued prisoner vntill the Raigne of King Edward, then the golden mouth of this preacher, shut vp long before, was opened againe, and beginning a fresh to set forth his plough againe, and continued all the time of the said King, labouring in the Lords haruest most fruitfully: hee preached for the most part twice euery Sunday to no small shame of vnpreaching prelates, which occupied great rome, to doe little good: he did most euidently prophese of all these kinde of plagues which after ensued: so plainely that if England euer had a Prophet, he might seeme to be one, and he did euer affirme, that the preaching of the Gospel would cost him his life, and he was certainely perswaded that Win∣chester was kept in the Tower, to be his death, which fell out right, for after the death of King Edward, and Queen Mary proclaimed, a Purseuant was sent down vnto him (by the doing no doubt of Winchester) Latimer had warning thereof six houres before the Purseuant came, whereby he might haue scaped, but he prepa∣red himselfe towards his iourney before the Purseant came, who maruelled to
sée him so prepared for his iourney, he told the Purseuant, he was a welcome guest, and be it knowne vnto you and the whole World; that I goe as willingly to Lon∣don at this present, being called of my Prince to giue a reckoning of my Faith and Doctrine, as euer I was to goe vnto any place in the world: and I doubt not, but that God which hath made me worthy to preach to two most excellent Princes, so he will able me to witnesse the same to the third, either to her comfort or discom∣fort eternally. When the Purseuant had deliuered his Letters, he departed, affir∣ming that hee was not commaunded to tarry for him: whereby it appeared, they would not haue him appeare, but rather to haue fled out of the Realme: they knew his constancy would deface them in Popery, and confirme the godly in the truth. When he came through Smithfield, he said merrily, Smithfield bad long groned for him: after he had béene before the Councell, hee was sent to the Tower, and from thence he was transported to Oxford, with Cramer Arch-bishop of Canterbu∣ry, and Ridley Bishop of London, there to dispute, as before is said: Of the order of the disputations, and bow they were condemned, thou maist sée before, where they continued vntill this time in continual prayer, godly conference and writing. Latimer sometimes continued so long knéeling at prayer, that hee was not able to arise without helpe: three thinges especially he prayed for in his Prayers: First, as God hath appointed him to preach his Word, so hee would giue him grace to stand to the same vntill his death: Secondly, that God would restore his Gospel vnto England againe once more: which once more hee inculcated oftentimes in∣to the eares of the LORD, as if he had spoken vnto him face to face: Third∣ly, hee prayed for the preseruation of Queene ELIZABETH, then but Lady ELIZABETH, whom with eares he still named, desiring God to make hee a com∣forter to this comfortles Realme, the Lord most graciously granted al these things which he requested. The twentith day of September, a Commission was sent from the Cardinall to the Bishops of Lincolne, Glocester, and Bristow, to examine Doctor Ridley, and Maister Latimer, vpon the points they were condemned for at Oxford: and if they would not recant there opinions, to disgrade them, &c. The first point was whether the reall presence of Christ was in the Sacrament: D. Ridley first appeared before them; when the Commission was read, he standing bare-headed, assoon as he heard the Cardinall named, and the Popes Holines: he put on his cap, the Bishop of Lin∣colne reprehended him for it, and told him if he would not of himselfe put off his cap another should doe it for him: He answered, that it was not done for any contuma∣cy that he bare vnto their own persons, nor for any derogation of the Cardinall in that he was borne of the Bloud Royall, & was indued with much lerning & excel∣lent vertues ut in that he is Legate to the Pope, (and with that he put on his cap) whose vsurped supremacie I vtterly renounce, which I will not onely denounce in words, but in gesture, beauiour, and all my doings expresse the same: where∣vpon by the commandement of the Bishop of Lincoln his cap was taken off: he ap∣peared twice, and thus he did at both times, their answeres were both to one effect in substance. First they made their protestation, that notwithstanding their answers, it should not be taken thereby that they would acknowledge any authority of the Pope, but that they answered as subiects to the king and Queene: to the first point they did confesse that in the sacrament, by spirit and grace, is the very body and bloud of Christ, because that euery man receiuing bodily the bread and wine in the Sacra∣ment, spiritually receiue the body and bloud of Christ, and thereby is partaker of the merits of his passion, but they denied the naturall body and bloud of Christ to be really in the outward sacrament. The second question was, whether after consecration of the sacrament of the Al∣tar there did remain any substance of bread and wine: to that they answered, there was such a change in the bread and wine, as no man but God can make, being the bread had that dignity to exhibit Christs body, yet the bread is still bread, and the
wine still wine, for the change is not in the nature but in the dignity, because that which was common bread hath the dignitie to exhibit Christs body, for now it is an holy bread sanctified by Gods word. The third question was, whether the masse were a liuely and propitiatorie sa∣crifice for them aliue, and for them that be dead: this article they denied to be true, because Christ made one perfect sacrifice for the whole world; neither can the Priests offer vp Christ againe for the sinnes of man; neither is there any propitia∣tion for our sins, but his Crosse only. And because neither for feare nor flatterie they could be made to recant, at their second sitting they were condemned, disgra∣ded, and deliuered to the secular power. Upon the North-side of the towne of Oxford, in the ditch, ouer against Baliol Colledge, the place of execution was appointed, Doctor Ridley came vnto the stake in a faire black gowne, such as he was wont to weare when he was Bishop, with a tippet of sables about his neck; M. Latimer came in a poore frize frock, in one they might behold the honor they sometimes had, in the other the calamitie whereunto they were now descended: after Doctor Ridley had prayed, seeing the chéerfulnes of M. Latimer he ran vnto him, imbraced him, and kissed him, saying, be of good heart brother, for God will either asswage the fury of the flame, or else strengthen vs to abide it. Then Doctor Smith began his Sermon vpon 1. Co. 13. If I giue my body to the fire to be burned, and haue not charity, I shall gaine nothing thereby: wherein he alledged that neither the holinesse of the person, nor the manner of the death, but the goodnes of the cause made a martyr; this he prued by the example of Iudas and many others, which then might be counted righteous because they desperatly sundred their liues from their bodies (as he feared these men that stood before him would do) and still he cried vnto the people to beware of them, for they were here∣ticks & died out of the Church: at last he exhorted them to recant and come home again vnto the Church, & saue their liues and soules, which else were condemned. They would haue answered him, but some ran to them & stopt their mouthes with their hands, & would not suffer them to speak. Then Doctor Ridley said, Heauenly father, I giue thée most hearty thanks that thou hast called me to be a professor of thée, euen vnto death: I beséech thée be mercifull to this Realme of England, and deliuer the same from all her enemies. When the fire was kindled he cried, Into thy hands I commit my spirit, Lord receiue my spirit, crying often, Lord, Lord re∣ceiue my spirit: M. Latimer crying as vehemently on the other side, O Father of heauen receiue my soule. Latimer died quickly, but Ridley was long a  by rea∣son of the bad making of the fire, yet he remained constant to the end. The death of Stephen Gardner. IN Nouember, the next moneth after the burning of Ridley and Latimer, in which moneth the Quéen died: thrée years after, Stephen Gardner a man hated of God1555 and good men, ended his wretched life. He was borne in Berry in Suffolk, and brought vp in Oxford: his wit, capacity, and memory were excellent if they had bin well applied: he was high-minded, flattering his own conceit too much to∣wards his superiours; he was politick and pleasant, to his inferiors fierce; against his equals stout and enuious if they any thing withstood him in iudgment: it was constantly reported that the nayles of his toes were crooked and sharp downward like the clawes of a beast: his death happened so opportunely that England hath a great cause therefore to praise God, not so much for the great hurt it had done in times past, in peruerting his Princes, in bringing in the sixe Articles, in murthe∣ring GODS Saints, and in defacing Christs most true Religion, but especially for that he had thought to haue murthered our noble and religious Quéene Eli∣zabeth; for hee was the cause of all her danger: and if it bee certaine which
we haue heard that a Writ came downe from certaine of the Councell to the To∣wer where the Lady Elizabeth was, for her execution: it is sure this vile wily Winchester was the only Dedalus and framer of that Ingine; but M. Brigs Lieu∣tenant of the Tower certified the Quéen of the matter, and there by preuented A∣chitophels bloudy deuices, as Bonner, Storie, Thornton, Harpsfield, Downing, with others, were occupied in putting the branches to death; so Gardner bent his deui∣ces in assaying the root, in casting such a plot to build vp his Poperie, as he thought it should stand for euer: whether he died with his tongue swolne out of his mouth, as Arundell Bishop of Canterburie did, or whether he stunke before he died, as Cardinall Wolsey did, who after he had vsed coniuration before, so after he had poysoned himselfe by the way; at his buriall he was so heauie that they let him fall, and he gaue such a sauor that they could not abide him, with such a suddaine tempest about him, that all the Torches went out, and could beare no light, or whether he died in dispaire, I referre all this vnto their reports, of whom I heard it. A great doer about Winchester reported that the Bishop of Chichester com∣ming vnto Gardner, began to comfort him with Gods promises, and with frée Iu∣stification in the bloud of Christ: he said, what, my Lord, will you open that gap now, then farewell altogether? to me and such other you may speake it, but open this window to the people, and then farewell altogether. Iohn Web Gentleman, George Roper, and George Parke. THese were condemned by the Bishop of Douer,1555 and Harpsfield, for deying the reall presence in the sacrament of the Altar, and were burned in one fire at Canterburie, abiding most patiently their torments, and counting themselues blessed that they were worthy to suffer for the Gospell. William Wiseman and Iames Gore. THis Wiseman died in Lollards Tower, being there for religion: the holy Ca∣tholike Church cast him out into the fields, and commaunded that no man should burie him▪ according as their deuout manner is to all that die in that sort, whom they account not worthy of buriall, but to be cast to dogges and birds, yet good men buried him in the night. Iames Gore being in the prison at Colchester for the truth of Gods word, died much about this time. IOHN PHILPOT. HEe was Sir Peter Philpots sonne in Hampshire, brought vp in new Colledge in Oxford: going from Oxford into Italy, comming from Uenice to Padua he was in danger through a Franciscan Frier accompanying him in his iourney, who comming to Padua accused him of heresie. In King Edwards time he had di∣uers conflicts with Gardner Bishop of Winchester: after he was made Archdea∣con of Winchester, where he continued during King Edwards time, to no small profit of those parts: in Quéen Maries time he being one of the Conuocation, with a few other sustained the cause of the Gospell manfully against the aduersary part, as is before recited, wherefore he was called to account before Gardner, and exa∣mined by him, and then hée was remoued to Bonner and other Commissioners, with whom he had diuers conflicts, as in his examinations hereafter following
may appeare, when he had lien a yeere and a halfe in the Marshalsey, being twice examined, but no point of Religion handled: then hee was committed to the Bi∣shop of Londons Cole-house, where he found a married Priest of Essex named Thomas Whittle, This Minister greatly lamented his owne infirmitie, for that through imprisonment hee was constrained by writing to yeelde to the Bi∣shop of London, and was set at liberty, and after felt such an hell in his conscience that hee could scarce refraine from destroying himselfe, and could not bee at quiet vntill he hauing got the Bishops register to see his Bill, hee tore it in peeces, and after he was as ioifull a man as any could be: When Boner heard thereof be sent for him, and buffeted him, and plucked off a peece of his Beard, but now he is ioyfull vnder the crosse. He was thirtéene or fourtéene times in priuate and publikely examined, his an∣sweres that concerne any point of Religion heere follow. The third examination. Boner. YOu must be of the Church for there is but one Church. Phil. I am sure I am in the Church, & I know by the Scriptures that there is but one Doue, one Spouse, one beloued congregation, out of the which there is no saluation: This Church is builded vpon the word of God. Bon. You are not in the same Faith, in which you were baptized. Phil. I was baptized into the Faith of Christ, which I now hold. Bon. You were twenty yeares agone of another Faith. Phil. I was then of no Faith, a wicked liuer, neither hote nor cold. Bon. Doe you not think we are of a true Faith? Phil. I am sure Gods word throughly, with the primitiue Church, and all anci∣ent writers doe agree with this Faith that I am ff. Bon. I maruell you are so merry in prison, singing and reioycing in your naugh∣tines, you should rather lament. Phil. The mirth we make is but singing of Psalmes, as S. Paul willeth vs to be merry in the Lord, singing together in Hymnes, and Psalmes, wee are in a darke comfortles place, therefore it becommeth vs to be merry, as Salomon saith, least sorrowfulnes eate vp our hearts: Then I was carried to the Cole-house: where I with my six fellowes rouse together in the straw as cheerefully we thank God as others doe in their Doune beds. The fourth Examination. Worcest. BEfore he beginneth to speak, it is best for him to call to God for grace to open his heart that he may conceaue the truth. Phil. Then I fell vpon my knees, and said, Almighty God, the giuer of wisedom, I beséech thée of thine infinit goodnes in Christ, to giue me, most vile sinner, the spi∣rit of wisedome, to speake and make answer in thy cause, to the content of the hea∣rers, and to my better vnderstanding, if I be deceiued in any thing. Boner. May my Lord of VVorcester, you did not well to exhort him to prayer, for they haue a singular pride heerein: they are heerein like certaine hereticks that Pliny maketh mention off: they did ing dayly praises to God, be∣fore the dawning of the day. Phil. God make me and you such hereticks, for they were right Christians, with whom the tyrants of the world were offended for their well doing. Col. Where can you proue that the Church of Rome hath erred at any time: Eusebius saith, the Church was established at Rome by Peter, and Paul, and Peter was Bishop there 25. yeares. Phil. I know Eusebius saith so, but if you compare him with Saint Paul to the Galathians, it will appeare manifestly to the contrarie: He liued not past fiue and thirty yeares after he was called to be an Apostle: and S. Paul maketh mention
of his abiding aboue eighteene yeares, and I am able to proue by Eusebius and others, that the Church of Rome hath manifestly erred, because shee agreeth not with that which the primitiue Church did vse according to the Gospel in their time as they write, there need no other proofe, but compare the one with the other. Bon. Ought we to dispute with you of our Faith: Iustinian in the Law hath a Title, De fide Catholica to the contrarie. Phil. That is true, but our Faith must not depend vpon the ciuill Law: Am∣brose saith, not the Law, but the Gospell hath gathered the Church together. Worcest. You are to blame, you cannot be content to be of the Church, which hath euer been of that Faith full of Antiquitie. Phil. I haue been at Rome, where I saw your Lordship. Worcest. I am sory you haue been there, for the wickednes which you saw there peraduenture causeth you to doe as you doe. Phil. I am taught otherwise by the Gospell, not altogether to refuse the Mini∣ster for his euill liuing, so that hee bring forth Doctrine according to Gods word. Worcest, Doe you thinke the vniuersall Church may be deceiued? Phil. Saint Paul prophesieth that there shall be an vniuersall falling away from the Faith in the later times. Col. That is not ment of Faith but of th'empire, the Greeke word so signifieth. Phil. The word  is properly a departing from the Faith, and thereof commeth Apostata, which signifieth one that departeth from the Faith. Worcest. I am sory you should be against the Christian world. Phil. The world commonly and such as be called Christians (for the multitude) hated the truth and be enemies vnto the same. Worcest. Doe you thinke the vniuersall Church hath erred, and you onely to be of the truth. Phil. The Church that you bee of was neuer vniuersall: for two parts of the world, Asia, and Africa, neuer consented to the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, not to this day, neither follow his Decrees. Glo. Yes in Florentines Councell they did agree. Phil. It was so said by false report, after they were gone home, it was not so indeed, as the sequell of them all hitherto doth proue the contrary. Glo. By whom will you bee iudged in matters of controuersie, which hap∣pen dayly. Phil. By the Word of God: For Christ saith in S. Iohn, the word that hee spoke shall be Iudge in the latter day. Glo. What if you take the word one way, and I another way, who shall bee Iudge. Phil. The Doctors of the Primitiue Church. Glo. What if you take the Doctors in one sence, and I in another. Phil. Then let that be taken which most agreeth to Gods Word. Worcest. It is wonder how he standeth with a few against a great number. Phil. We haue almost as many as you: We haue Asia, Africa, Germany, Den∣marke, and a great part of France, & dayly the number of the Gospel doth increase, and a multitude doth dayly come out of France through persecution, that the cities of Germany are scarce able to receiue them: Therefore your Lordship may be sure the word of God will one day take place, doe what you can to the contrarie. The fift Examination. Couen. DOe you not beléeue your Créed, I beléeue in the Catholick Church. Phil. Yes, but I cannot vnderstand Rome to be the same, nor the like to it. S. Asse. S. Peter builded the Catholick Church at Rome: And Christ saith thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the succession of
Bishops can be proued in Rome from time to time, as it can be of no other place so well, which is a manifest proofe of the Catholick Church, as diuers Doctors do write. Phil. You cannot proue the Rock, that Christ would build his Church on, to bee Rome; and though you can proue the succession of Bishops, it is not sufficient to proue Rome the Catholick Church, vnlesse you can proue the succession of Peters Faith? where vpon the Catholick Church is builded to continue in his successors at Rome: and at this present to remaine there. Couen. What meaneth this word Catholick? Phil. The Catholick Faith or Catholick Church is not that which is most vni∣uersall or of men receiued, wherby you de infer your Faith to hang vpon the mul∣titude, which is not so: We iudge (saith S. Augustine) the Catholick Faith, of that which hath been, is, and shall be: so that if you can proue your Catholick Church and Faith, hath been taught from the beginning, and is, and shall be, then may you count your selues Catholicks, otherwise not: Catholick in Gréeke is compounded of  which signifieth according and , a summe, or principle, or whole, so that Ca∣tholick Church or Faith, is as much to say as the first, hole, sound, & chéefest faith. Boner. Doe you thinke the Catholick Church hath erred, vntill within these few yeares some haue swarued from the same. Phil. I doe not thinke the Catholick Church hath erred: but I require you to proue the Church of Rome the Catholick Church. Curtop. Ireneus, who was within a hundred yeares after Christ, came to Victor Bishop of Rome, to aske his aduice about excommunication of certaine hereticks, which he would not haue done if hee had not taken him to bee supreme head, and Couentry bad him marke this Argument. Phil. This fact of Ireneus proueth no more for the supremacie then mine hath done, for I haue béen at Rome as well as he, and could haue spoken with the Pope and if I would: yet would there were none in England fauoured his supremacie more then I: And it is not like that Ireneus, or the primatiue church so take him, for I can shew 7. generall Councels after Ireneus time: wherin he was neuer so taken in many hundred yeres after Christ: These be the Councels; the Nicentine, E∣phesine, the first, & second: Calcedone, Constantinopolitane, Carthagenense, Aui∣lence. Couen. Wherefore will you not admit the Church of Rome to be the Catholick Church. Phil. Because it followeth not, nor agréeth with the Primitiue Church, no more then an Apple is like a Nut: it were too long to name all the disagréements: I will name but two: The Supremacie, and Transubstantiation. Curtop. Although transubstantiation were decréed for an Article of the Faith, not aboue 300. yeares, yet it was alwaies beléeued. Boner said, that was well said. Phil. It is true, it was but lately planted by the Bishop of Rome, and you can∣not shew any ancient writer that the primitiue Church did beleeue any such thing, with that Master Curtop shrunke away. Couen. Can you disproue the Church of Rome, not to be the Catholick Church. Phil. Yes that I can, but I desire rather to heare you proue it: First it doth not agree with the Primitiue Church, neither in Doctrine, nor in the vse of Sacra∣ments: And as you describe Catholick to be vniuersall; the Church of Rome was neuer vniuersall: For the world being diuided into three parts: Asia, Africa, Eu∣rope: Two parts Asia, and Africa, professing Christ as well as wee, did neuer consent to the Church of Rome, and the most part of Europe doth not agrée nor al∣low the Church of Rome: As Germany, Denmarke, the Kingdome of Pole, a great part of France, England, and Zeland, which is a manifest probation that your Church is not vniuerfall, Doctor Sauer. I am sory to sée you commune with so many learned men, and are no more conformable vnto them then you be.
Phil. I will be conformable vnto them that be conformable to Christ & his word: I pray (Master Doctor) be not so conformable to please men more then God, con∣trarie to your learning for worldly estimation, you are led away from the truth for promotion sake as many Doctors be now adaies. Sauer. Saint Cyprian, (an ancient Writer) doth allow the Bishop of Rome to be supreme head of the Church. Phil. I am sure he doth not, for he writing to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, cal∣led him his companion and fellow Bishop, and calleth him not Pope nor any other vsurped termes, which are now ascribed vnto the Bishop of Rome. Then they brought forth Cyprian, and turned vnto the third Epistle, where hee saith it goeth not well with the Church, when the High Priest is not obayed, which supplieth the steed of Christ, after Gods word, and the consent of the Bishops, and the agreement of the people. Sauer. How can you auoid this place which maketh so plaine for the Bishop of Rome his Supremacie. Phil. It maketh not so plaine: First heare you may see that he calleth Corne∣lius his fellow Bishop, as he doth also in other places, you do misconstrue that same to make the high Priest onely for the Bishop of Rome, and otherwise then it was in his time: for there were by the Nicen Councell foure Patriaches appointed: The Patriarke of Ierusalem, and the Patriarke of Constantinople: The Patri∣arke of Alexandria, and the Patriarke of Rome: of which foure the Patriarch of Rome was lowest placed in the Councell, and so continued many yeares for the time of seuen or eight generall Conncels: Therefore Cyprian writeth vnto Corne∣lius, Patriarck of Rome, because certaine hereticks, as the Nuatians which were excommunicated by him, went from his Dioces▪ to the Patriarcks of Rome, or of Constantinople, and there were receiued in the Communion of there congregation in derogation of good discipline, and maintaining of schismes: in that obedience is not giuen vnto the Priest of GOD, being in Christs steede, not meaning the Patriarck of Rome onely, but euery Patriarck in his precinet, who had euery one of them a Cathedrall Church of learned Priests, in hearing of whom by a Conuocation of all his fellow Bishops, with the consent of the people, all he∣resies were determined by the Word of GOD, and this is the meaning of Cyprian. Sauer. I wonder you will stand so stedfast in your errour to your owne de∣struction. Phil. I am sure we are in no errour, by the promise of Christ to the faithfull, that he will giue them such a spirit of wisedome, that the aduersaries therof should be neuer able to resist, and by this wee know wee are of the truth, because nei∣ther by reasoning nor writing your Synagogue of Rome is able to answere one of the learned Ministers of Germany, who hath disclosed your counterset Religion, which of all you is able to answere Caluins institutions: Then Doctor Story came in, to whom I said you haue done me great iniury, without Law you haue imprisoned me more like a dog then a man, and you promised mee I should be iud∣ged the next day after. Story. I am come now to kéep my promise with you, was there euer such a fan∣tasticall man as he is; may he is no man but a beast: yea these hereticks bee worse then beasts, for they will take vpon them to be wiser then all men; being very asse∣heads, not able to maintaine that which they stand in. Phil. I am content to abide your rayling Iudgement, God forgiue you: yet I am no heretick, neither you nor any other can proue that I hold any iot against the Word of God. Story. The Word of God: whom wilt thou appoint to be a iudge of the word? Phil. The word it selfe. Story. Doe you not sée the Ignorance of this beastly Heretick, hee willeth the word to be iudge of the word, can the word speake.
Phil. Christ saith in S. Iohn, The word which I haue spoken, shall Iudge in the last day: therefore much more it ought to iudge our doing now, and I am sure I haue my Iudge on my side, which shall absolue and iustifie me in another world, howso∣euer you iudge me and other vnrighteously, sure I am in another World to iudge you. Story. What, you purpose to be a stinking Martyr, and to sit in iudgment with Christ at the last day, to iudge the twelue Tribes of Israell. Phil. Yea, I doubt not thereof, I haue the promise of Christ if I die for righte∣ousnesse sake, which you haue begun to persecute in me. Story. When the Iudge in Westminster hall giueth sentence, doth the word giue sentence, or the Iudge, tell me. Phil. Ciuill men haue authority by the word of God, to be Iudges of ciuill mat∣ters: but the word of God is not subiect to mans iudgement, but ought to iudge al the wisedome, thoughts, and doings of men; therefore your comparison disproueth nothing which I haue said, nor answereth thereto. Story. Wilt thou not allow the interpretation of the Church vpon the Scrip∣ture. Phil. Yes, if it be according vnto the word of the true Church. Story. And not wee in possession of the Church, and haue not our fore-fathers this many hundred yeares, taken this Church for the Catholike Church, and if we had no other proofe, this were sufficient, for presumption of time, maketh a good title in Law. Phil. You doe well to alleadge prescription, for it is all that you haue to shew for your selues, but you must vnderstand, that presciption hath no place in mat∣ters appertaining vnto GOD, as I can shew you by the testimonie of many Doctors. Story. Well Sirs, you are like to go after your Fathers, Latimer and Ridley, who had nothing to alledge for himselfe, but that he had learned his heresie of Cran∣mer, where I came vnto him with a poore Bacheler of Art, & he trembled as though he had had the Palsie, as these hereticks haue alwaies some token of feare, where∣by a man may know them, as you may sée this mans eies to tremble in his head, but I dispatched them: and I tell thée, that there hath yet béen neuer a one burned, but I haue spoken with him, and béene a cause of his dispatch. Phil. You haue the more to answer for, you shall féele it in another world, how∣soeuer you do now triumph thereof. Story. I will neuer be confessed thereof, I cannot tarry to speake with my Lord, I pray one of you tell my Lord, my comming is to signifie vnto him, that hee must put of hand rid this Hereticke out of the way, and going he said vnto me; I tel thée thou must thank no other man but me for this. Phil. I thanke you with all my heart, and God forgiue you. Story. What dost thou thanke me, if I had thée in my study halfe an houre, I thinke I should make you sing another song. Phil. No, I stand vpon to sure a ground to be ouerthrowne by you now. The ninth examination. Harps. MY Lord hath sent you S. Augustine to looke vpon, I will read you an Epistle where you may heare the celebration of the Masse. Phil. Héere is nothing that maketh for the proofe of the Masse: Saint Augu∣stine meaneth of the celebration of the Communion, and the true vse of the Sacra∣ment of the body and blood of Christ, and not of your priuate Masse, which you late∣ly haue erected in the stead thereof, for this word (Masse) hath bin an old terme at∣tributed to the Communion, euen from the Primitiue Church. I pray you tell me what Missa doth signifie, I thinke many that say Masse cannot tell, but then Cou∣sins and the Masse-Priests were dumbe.
Harps. You think it commeth of the Hebrew word Massah, as though none were séene in the Hebrew but you. Phil. I take the communion to be called Missa, a mittendo, of such things as were sent by the rich to the reléefe of the poore, alwaies when the communion was ce∣lebrated: for this cause was it called Missa, as learned men do witnes, at the which celebration of the Masse, all that were present did communicate vnder both kinds, according to Christs institution, as they did in S. Augustines time: so being you cannot proue the Masse vsed at that time as you now vse it, you can neuer proue it a Sacrament by the name of the Masse, which name was giuen to the communion. Harps. What do you deny the Masse to be a Sacrament, it is a sacrifice which is more then a Sacrament. Phil. You can neuer make it a sacrifice, but first you must make it a Sacrament, for of the Sacrament you deduce your Sacrifice. Harps. Doth not Christ say, This is my body, and doth not the Priest pronounce the same. Phil. The pronuntiation of the words is not enough, except they be applied vnto the vse that Christ appointed them: for though you speake the words of Baptisme ouer the water, yet if there be none baptized, it is no Baptisme. Harps. That this is not like, for this is my body is an Indicatiue proposition, shewing the worke of God in the substance of bread and wine. Phil. It is not only an Indicatiue proposition, but an Imparatiue, or commaun∣ding; for he that said, This is my body, said also, take ye, eate ye; and except it bée taken and eaten, the words (This is my body) can haue no verification. Masse Chapl. Will you make the Sacrament to stand in the receiuing, and that the receiuing maketh it a Sacrament. Phil. I say the common receiuing must néeds be concurrant with the true Sacra¦ment, without which it cannot be a Sacrament, because Christ hath made this a principle part of the Sacrament, Take ye, eat ye; which you do not in your Masse, wherefore it can be no Sacrament, because it wanteth Christs institution. Cosins. Wee forbid none to come to it, but as many as list may be partakers thereof with vs at Masse, if they require it. Phil. Nay, you will minister but one kind vnto them, which is not after Christs institution, & ye ought to exhort them that be present, to make a sacrifice of thanks∣giuing for Christs Passion, and to bee partakers with you, and by preaching shew the Lords death, which you do not. Masse-priest. If the Sacrament of the Masse be no Sacrament, vnlesse all doe re∣ceiue it, because Christ saith, Take ye, eate ye, then the Sacrament of Baptisme is no sacrament, where there is but one baptized, because Christ said to his Apostles, Go preach the Gospell to all creatures, baptizing all Nations. Phil. Baptizing all Nations, is meant of all sorts of Nations, and to exclude none that beléeue, whether Iew or Gentile, not meaning all at once, for that were impos∣sible▪ and Christ alone was baptized of Iohn, and the Eunuch baptized Phillip, with many moe such like, but you haue no such example of the body and blood of Christ: but S. Paul commendeth to vs, to vse it in a Communion and participation of ma∣ny together, in the sixt to the Corinthians, As oft as you come together to eate the Lords supper, tarry one for another. And the Minister speaketh to all in Christs be∣halfe, to communicate with him, saying: Take ye, eat ye, therfore all that be present & do not communicate, break Gods commandements, & he is no iust minister that doth not distibute the Sacrament as Christ did, to al that are present, where Gods word is transgressed, Christ is not present, and therefore no Sacrament. Harps. Will you haue it no Sacrament except it be a Communion. Phil. Gods words teacheth so: Chrysostome vpon the Epistle to the Ephesians, saith, The oblation is in vaine where none doth communicate with the Priest, there∣fore your Masse, where none eateth thereof but the Priest alone, is a vaine Obla∣tion, and a vaine standing at the Altar. I pray tell me what the Pronoune This, in the words, This is my body, doth demonstrate.
Harps. It doth demonstrate the substance of bread, which by the omnipotency of God, and the words of the Priest, is turned into the substance of Christs body. Phil. Why, then Christs body receiueth daily a great increase of many 1000. pie∣ces of bread into his body, & his body is become that which it was not before: so you would make an alteration in Christs glorified body, which is a wicked thing to do. Harps. The substance of bread after the words spoken by the Priest, is vanished away by the omnipotency of God. Phil. This is another song, heere you may sée how contrary you are vnto your selues: your schoolemen hold, that the very substance of bread is really turned into the substance of Christs body, and now of late you perceiue the inconuenience of that opinion: you imagine a new shift, and say the substance of bread is euacuated, contrary to that your Church hath beléeued and taught, and all is to deface the sin∣cere truth. Harps. Is not God omnipotent, and can he not doe as he hath said? Phil. But his omnipotency will not do contrary to his word and honour, it is not Gods honour to include him bodily in a péece of bread, and of necessity tye him ther∣to: and for to make a péece of bread God and man, which you sée before your face, doth putrifie after a time, God is as able to giue his body with the Sacramentall bread, and it is contrary to the Scripture, which calleth it bread many times af∣ter consecration, you take away the substantiall parts of the Sacrament; as Take ye, eat ye, drinke ye all of this, doe this in remembrance of me: and place in their stéeds, heare ye, gase ye, knock ye, worship yee, offer ye, sacrifice ye, for the quick and the dead: Is not this blasphemy to God and his Sacraments, and contrary to the mind of all ancient Writers, and contrary to the example of Christ and his A∣postles; and this is the substance of all his examinations and Arguments. Hee did often tell them they were blind guides of the blind, and as I am bound to tell you, you are very Hypocrites, tyrannousy persecuting the truth: your owne Do∣ctors and euidences you bring, be directly against you; you must beare with me s∣ing I speake in Christs cause, and because his glory is defaced, and his people cru∣elly and wrongfully slaine by you, because they will not consent to the dishonour of God, and to hypocrisie with you, if I told you not your fault, it should be required at my hands in the day of iudgement; therefore know you (ye Hypocrites) that it is the Spirit of God that telleth you your sin: I passe not I thanke God of all your crueltie, God giue you grace to repent. Being brought to New-gate after he was condemned, when Alexander the kée∣per came in; Ah said Alexander, Hast thou not done well to bring thy selfe hither: Maister Philpot said, I must be content, it is Gods appointment, and I shall de∣sire you to haue your gentle fauour, for you and I haue béene of old acquaintance: Well said Alexander, if you will recant I will shew you any pleasure that I can Nay said Maister Philpot, I will neuer recant that which I haue spoken, for it is most certaine truth, in witnesse whereof I will seale it with my blood: Then hs commaunded him to be set vpon the blocke, and as many Irons put vpon his Legs as he might beare. Then the Clarke told Alexander, that Maister Philpot had giuen his Man Money; Alexander said to his man, what mony hath he giuen you And he searched him, and tooke money from him: Then said Maister Philpot, Good M. Alexander be so much my friend, that these Irons may be taken off, He said, Giue me my fées and I will take them off, if not thou shalt weare them still; Then said he, what is your fées? He said foure pounds, Ah said Maister Philpot, I haue not so much, if you will take twenty shillings I will send my man for it, or I will lay my Gowne to gage, for the time is not long I am sure that I shall be with you: then Alexander commaunded him to be had into Limbo, and so he was; Then his man tooke an honest man with him, and went and shewed the Sheriffe, one Mai∣ster Michaell, how maister Philpot was handled in Newgate, then the Sheriffe tooke his Ring from his finger, and deliuered it vnto the honest man which came with Maister Philpots man, and bad him commaund the Kéeper, by that token, to
take off his Irons, and handle him more gently, and to giue his man againe that which he tooke from him: when they told their message to Alexander, he saide, I perceiue Maister Sheriffe is a bearer with Hereticks, to morrow I will shew it to his betters, yet he went to Maister Philpot at ten of the clocke and tooke off his I∣rons, and gaue his man that which he tooke from him. He gaue God thanks when newes came he should be burned the next day: when the Sheriffe called him to go to execution, he came downe most ioyfullie; when he came to Smithfield the way was soule, so two of the Officers tooke him vp and carried him vnto the stake: Then he said merrily, what will you make me a Pope, then he kissed the stake and said, Shall I disdain to suffer at this stake, séeing my Redéemer suffered vile death vpon the Crosse for me, in the midst of the flames hee yéelded vp his soule vnto Al∣mighty God, and like a Lamb gaue vp his breath. Thomas Whittle Priest, Bartelet Greene Gentleman, Iohn Tudson and Thomas Went Artificers, Tho∣mas Browne, Isabell Foster wife, Ioane Warren, alias Lashford, Maid. THe Papists hauing this last years, murdred the learned and princiall mem∣bers of Christs Church,556. whereof there were now very few, which either were not consumed with fire, or compelled to flie their Countrey, they continued this yeare likewise no lesse cruelty towards the inferior sort of people; whereof these seuen were burned in Smithfield the 27. day of Ianuary at one fire, and they were condemned all in one day vpon one manner of Articles: the speciall points were for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, and the Masse. This Thomas Whittle was the Priest that Philpot maketh mention of, where you may sée how he recanted, and then became desperate, and could not be at qui∣et in conscience, vntill he had gotten to sée the Bill againe which he had subscribed and torne off his name; wherefore Boner buffeted him, and plucked off a peece of his beard, but after he had torne it he was in great peace of conscience, and stood out manfully for the faith, and sealed to the truth with his martyrdome. In an Epistle of his, he calleth the Bishops and Priests the sworne Souldiours of Sathan, the arch-enemies in whom so liuely appeare the very visage and shape of Sathan, that a man may well affirme them to be Diuels incarnate, as I by experience do speak; wherefore who so shall for conscience matterscome into their hands, had neede of the wilinesse of the Serpene saue his head, and to take heed how hee, consenteth to their wicked writings: sore did they assault me, and craftily tempt mee to their wicked wayes. Bartlet Greene was borne in the Parish of Bassinghall in London, being a Stu∣dent in Oxford at the first he was an vtter enemy to the truth, vntill God of his mercy opened his eyes by comming vnto the Lectures of Peter Martire, Reader of the Uniuersity Lecture in the said Uniuersity, wherof when he had once tasted, it came vnto him as the Fountaine of liuing Water, so that he neuer thirsted a∣ny more, but had a Well springing vnto eternall life; and though he were called by his Friends from the Uniuersity vnto the Temple in London, to study the Common Lawes, yet bee continued in his earnest study and profession of the Gospell. He writing a Letter vnto one Goodman, who was fledde beyond the Sea for Religion, containing a report of certaine Articles of questions which were cast abroad in London, and an answere to a Letter that Goodman wrote vnto him,
in which he required to haue the certainty whether the Quéene were dead, as it was reported beyond-sea. Whereupon Greene answered, that she was not dead. The bearer of this letter, and many other letters from others, was apprehended by the way, and the letters brought to the Councell. These words, The Queene is not yet dead, seemed heynous to some of the Councell: yea, they would haue made treason of them if they could by Law; but when they could not make it treason, they examined him vpon poynts of Religi∣on; and after they had long detained him in prison, as well in the Lower, as else∣where, they sent him at last to Bonner, to be dealt withall according to the Eccle∣siasticall Lawes: And being presented to Bonner, his Arch-deacon and diuers o∣thers sitting at the Table with him, who demanded of him the cause of his impri∣soning; which when he had shewed him, he asked him if he had not since written, or spoken against the naturall presence in the Sacrament. Then he desired to be charged according to the order of the Law to heare his accusers. Then Doctor Chadsey was sent for, who reported that before him, M. Mosly, and the Lieue∣tenant of the Tower, hee spake against the reall presence, and the Sacrifice of the Masse, and affirmed our Church to be the Church of Antichrist, which he con∣fessed, and said he would continue therein, and maintaine it. Then M. Welh arose, and desired to talke with mee alone: and hauing taken mee into another Chamber, he said he was sorry for my troubles, and would be glad to see me at li∣berty: and he maruailed that I, being a yong man, should stand against all the learned men of the Realme, against the determination of the Catholique Church from Christs time. I promise you, quoth he, I haue read all Peter Martyrs, and Cranmers, and all the rest of their Bookes, and haue conferred them with the con∣trary, as Roffensis, and the Bishop of Winchester, and the rest, and could not perceiue but that there was one continuall truth, which from the beginning had beene maintained; and those that any time seuered from this vnity, were answe∣red and answered againe. This was the summe of his talke, which lacked neither wit nor eloquence. I answered, I am yong, and lacke both wit and learning, but God is not bound to time, wit, or knowledge; but rather chuseth the weake things of the world to confound the strong: neither can men appoint bounds to Gods mercy: For he saith, I will haue compassion on whom I will: Hee hath no respect of persons, whether old or yong, rich or poore, wise or foolish, Fisher or Basket∣maker, God giueth knowledge of his truth through his free grace, to whom he listeth, Iames. 1. And I beleeue Christ hath his vniuersall Church, his Spouse, scattered through many Realmes, where hee list: the Spirit inspireth where it will, he is no more adicted to any one place, then to the person and quality of a∣ny one man of this Church. I know I am a member trusting to bee saued by the faith that is taught therein: But how this Church is knowne, is the end of all Controuersies; the true markes of this Church, is the true preaching of his Word, & ministring of his Sacraments: these markes were sealed by the Apostles, and confirmed by the ancient Fathers, vntill the wickednesse of Men and the Diuell, these markes were sore worne, and almost taken away, but God hath enued the Print, that his Church may bee knowne in many places: I would all that were of contrary opinion, would seeke the knowledge of the truth with prayer and teares, as I haue done. Now I am brought before a many of Bishops, and learned men to be made a foole and laughing stocke; but I weigh it not a rush. For God knoweth that my whole study is to please him, and I care not for mans pleasure or displeasure. Then we fell againe in long talke of the Church, wherin his learning and wit was much more then mine▪ and being diuerse times examined by the Bishop and others, standing stiffe in his opinion, and neither by flattery nor fear, could be wonne from the truth, hee was condemned, and burned, as before. Hee beeing in Prison in New-gate, hauing perswaded many of the common
goale to repentance and faith; hee, the day before he was executed, wrote to di∣uers Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, of his acquaintance in commendation of the true spirituall loue of Gods children, how that it is the chiefe fruite of the spirit, where it is the onely line that tieth Christs members to him, and one to another: and that neither prison, nor distance of place, nor time, can breake this loue, nor death it selfe: For Faith and Hope haue finished their course when we are come to heauen; but our loue to Gods children doth remaine there they in heauen loue vs, & pray for vs; and we loue them. Now for this loue sake he chargeth ye said Gentlemen his acquaintance, by all menes to séek the deli∣uerance of these prisoners that he had conuerted, & to helpe them with necessaries. Thomas Browne was borne in the Parish of Histon, in the Diocesse of Ely, and after dwelt in the Parish of S. Brides in Fléetstréet, & was brought to Bonner by the Constable, and was condemned, as before. Iohn Tudson was borne in Ipswich, in the County of Suffolke, and after hee was prentice at London in the Parish of S. Buttolph, and was sent by Story to Bonner, and was condemned as before. Iohn Went, borne at Langham in Essex, a Shere-man; he was likewise sent by Story to Bonner, and condemned, as before. Isabell Foster was wife to one Iohn Foster, a Cutler, of the Parish of S. Brides in Fléetstréet, she was sent to Bonner for not comming to Church, and condem∣ned, as aforesaid. Ioane Lashford, Alias Warne: there is mention before of Elizabeth Warne, with Iohn Warne her husband, were apprehended at a Communion in Bow-Church-yard, and both were burned for the same: and now the daughter follow∣ed the Parents in the same Martyrdome. Doctor Story procured their death, and after their deaths he was charged with forty pounds that he owed them: she confessed and protested there was no reall presence of Christs body and blood in Sacrament of the▪ Altar, and that auricular confession and absolution, after the popish sort, was not necessary, nor the Masse good, or according to the scriptures, and saith, that these & all other supertiuous Sacraments, ceremonies, and diuine seruice now vsed in this realme of England, was most vile, & contrary to Christs words and institutions, so that they neither were at the beginning, nor shall be at the latter end. The Bishop exhorting her to returne to the holy mother Church, she said boldly to him againe: If you will leaue your abhomination, so I will re∣turne, and otherwise I will not. These seuen were all burned together in one fire as aforesaid. Iohn Lomas, Anne Albright, Ioane Catmer, Agnes Snoth, Ioane Sole. IOhn Lomas of the parish of Tenderden in Kent,1556. was cited to appeare at Canter∣bury, being examined vpon diuers Articles, he answered still that he beléeued as it was contained in Gods Booke; and being examined whether hee beléeued the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament of the Altar really vnder y• formes of bread and wine after consecration: hee answered that hee beléeued no realty of Christs body in the Sacrament, neither vnder foorme nor trestle: wherefore he was con∣demned the 18 day of Ianuary. Agnes Snoth, Maid, of the parish of Smarden in Kent, was likewise examined before the Pharisaical Iudges; and for denying auricular confession, and for say∣ing none could receiue y• Sacrament of the Altar, as now it is vsed, without dan∣ger of damnation; and for denying penance to be a Sacrament, & for saying the popish absolution was not cōsonant to Gods word, she was likewise condemned, Anne Albright, alias Champnes, being examined, denied to bee confessed of a
Priest, saying, you Priests are the children of perdition, and can doe no good by your confession; and told the Iudge and his assistants, that they were subuerters of Christs truth; and she said, the Sacrament of the Altar was a naughty and a∣ominable Idoll, wherefore she was likewise condemned. Ioane Sole of Horton in Kent, was condemned of the same Pharises & Priests for not allowing Auricular confession, and for denying the reall presence in the Sacrament. Ioane Cormer of the parish of Hithe in Kent, the fifth and last of these heauenly Martyrs, shee denyed Auricular confession; she said, the Sacrament of the altar was now made a very Idoll, shee was likewise coudemned: these fiue were bu∣ned at two stakes in one fire together at Canterbury the 31. of Ianuary. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Cauterbury. HE was borne in Nottingham shire, his fathers name was Thomas Cranmer his ancesters were worthy Esquires,1556. his mother was a gentle woman named Agnes Htfield, he was of Cambridge in the time when good Authors were negle∣cted, and filthy barbarousnesse embraced in all schooles and vniuersities, onely the names and number of liberall Arts did remaine, the arts themselues were cleane lost. Logicke was gone into sophisticall trifles, Phylosophy both morrall and na∣turall was miserably defaced with infinite questions and subtilties: the vse of tongues and eloquent learning, was either small or none at all: and diuinitie was so laden with articles and definitions, that it serued rather for the gaine of a few, then for the edification of many. So hée was constrained to spend a part of his youth vntill he was twentie yeares old, in the péeuish questions of Duns and o∣ther masters of that sort, at length the tongs and other learning began a little to spring, and the books of Erasmus began to be much estéemed, with a number of good Authours besides, on which Cranmer rubbed away his olde rufinesse as vppon a whetstone, then Luther rose, the happy day of Gods knowledge, who wakened mens minds to the cléere light of the truth. At thirtie yeares olde he gaue his mind wholly to discusse matters of religion on both parts, and hauing performed the same, he spent thrée yeares in the study of the Scriptures, then he read the old wri∣ters, despising not the new, weighing all mens opinions with secret iudgment, he neur read any writers booke without pen and ink, in all controuersies hee ga∣thered euery authors sentence briefly: at 35. yeares olde hee procéeded Doctor of Diuinitie, he was chosen one of the 12 that should decide y• matter of kings Hen∣ries diuorce, and by his arguments, learning, and meanes it was brought to passe, then he was sent to Paris with diuers Noble men and Bishops, where he beha∣ued himselfe in that case, that he was commended by the Ambassadors to the king for his singular wisedome, grauitie, and learning, that he wonne such great credit that he was alone sent Ambassador to the Emperour to debate this businesse, but the Emperour refused to determine the matter, but remitted the whole question to the Popes court: after he was sent to Rome Ambassadour to the Pope, where he behaued himselfe with o lesse diligence, that he compelled the Popes chiefe di∣uines by arguments to grant the mariage to be against the law, but yet by the di∣spensation of the Pope it might be made lawfull. Warram Archbishop of Canter∣bury dying, he was sent for by king Henrie and made Archbishop of Canterbury, then came in the question of the Popes supremacy, and all the weight of the busi∣nesse was chiefly laid vpon Cranmers shoulders; he therefore alone receiued, an∣swered, and confuted all the obiections of the Papists, he proued that the Popes Lordship was not brought in by any authoritie of Scriptures, but by ambitious tyranny, and that the chiefest power on earth, belonged to the Emperor, to kings
and Potentates, to whom the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, by Gods com∣mandement were no lesse subiect then other men, and therefore it were best by the consent of the king, and other estates, the ambitious Lordship of the Pope, being driuen out of England, should keepe it selfe within his owne Italy, as a riuer is kept within his bankes, which was performed by act of Parliament, then by little and little he reformed the Church into a more wholesome discipline of Christ, and laboured to banish the Popes errours, heresies, and corruptions, and he obtained of the king, that certaine learned men should make a booke of Ecclesiasticall insti∣tutions, which was called the Bishops Booke: then the abolishing of Monasteries began to be talked of, the kings desire was, that all the Abbey lands should come vnto his coffers, the Archbishop and others would haue them imployed to other good vses, whereby the king being bent against Cranmer, especially by the instiga∣tion of Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, which sought all occasions to hinder the Gospel, he set forth the 6. Articles by full consent of Parliament, which contained the summe of Popish religion. What slaughter by the space of 8. yeares these Ar∣ticles made, is already declared: but after, he forgoing his anger with the Archbi∣shop: séeing he stood against him, in conscience, not in stubburnesse, he began to fa∣uour him, and thought to haue taken away the 6. Articles, and reformed other matters if he had liued; but Cranmer and the Lord protector brought it to passe in king Edwards dayes: his story how he was vsed in Quéene Maries reign is men∣tioned before, and his disputations at Oxeford, and how he was condemned there and left in prison vntill this time. And because the sentence was voyde in law, because it was giuen by per∣sons excommunicated, (for they were not then absolued by the Pope nor his au∣thoritie receiued in the realme) therefore there was a new commission sent from the Pope for the conuiction of Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, and the Bishop of Glocester was appointed the Popes delegate, and after they had condemned La∣timer and Ridley, as before is said. The said Legate and his company being set in Saint Maries Church apparelled in his Pontificalibus as if the Pope in person had bene there: the Bishop of Canterbury was brought before them, put∣ting off his cappe he did obeysance to the king and quéenes proctors, then looking in the Legats face, he put on his bonnet againe, making no obedience toward him, wherefore the Bishop sayd vnto him, that it might beséeme him well, waying the authoritie which he did represent, to doe his duety to him: he answered, hee had sworne neuer to admit the Pope into this Realme, and therefore he would com∣mit nothing by signe or token which might argue his consent to the reeiuing of him, and that he did it not to any contempt of his person. Then the Legate made an eloquent oration, to put him in remembrance, that from a meane gentleman he was raised to bee a Princes Ambassadour, and fur∣ther to be Archbishop and Primate of the Realmealmost 30, yeares, and s farre in trust with the king, that he made him president of his councel, and after left him in speciall trust for the gouernement of the young Prince during his minoritie, such blessing God had giuen him whilest he continued in the Catholicke faith. He exhorted, him on the other side, to consider how he was now fallen from his dignities and officices, and in high displeasure of the King and Quéene, iudged to die for high treason; and all these things to haue happened vnto him, only because he had seuered himself from the Sea of Rome, and was become a father of new de∣uised religion, and although your estate is so miserable, that the meanest in this as∣sembly will not change his condition and calling with you: yet further he was like to fall by the iust iudgement of God into hell and euerlasting damnation, if he did not repent of his errours and schismes, whilest he had time of repentance, whereunto he exhorted him earnestly, repeating many places of Christs mercies to them that repent, and shewed that to returne to the Church was the oely way to saue both body and soule, and I doubt not but the King and Quéene will per∣don your condemnation of treason if you will returne vnto the Church and
forsake your opinions, which I desire you to do. Then Cranmer desired license to speake, which was gently granted him: first he made protestation that hee did not answere to him as to a lawfull Iudge; be∣cause he was deputed for the Pope, but to giue a reason of his faith, which God hath commanded him to doe to euery one that shall demand a reason thereof. Then he said, My Lord you haue learnedly put me in remembrance of many things touching my selfe, which I will not answere: I acknowledge Gods good∣nesse vnto me, and thanke him as heartily for this estate that now I am in, as e∣uer I did for the time of my prosperity, shewing that his greatest griefe was, to sée the Popes Iurisdiction restored to England againe: Alas! what hath the Pope to do in England, whose lawes are so farre different from the Lawes of this realme, that whosoeuer sweareth to both, must néedes incurre periury in the one? And I am heartily sorry to thinke that her grace, the day before her Coronation, tooke an oath to obserue the lawes of this realme; and also tooke an oath to the Bi∣shop of Rome, promising to maintaine that Sea, which was impossible but shee must néeds be forsworne in the one. And as for the matter of Heresie, wherewith you charge mee, I call God to witnesse I know none which I maintaine: but if it be heresie to deny the Popes authority, and the religion which the sea of Rome hath published vnto the world these latter yeares, then all the ancient Fathers of the primitiue Church, the A∣postles, and Christ himselfe, taught heresie: And hee desired all them present to beare him witnesse, that he tooke the Traditions and Religion of the Pope to bée most erronious, false, and against the doctrine of holy Scriptures, which hee had often proued by preaching and writing; and the Pope to bee very Antichrist, so often preached by the Apostles and Prophets, in whom most euidently doth con∣curre all the signes and tokens whereby hee was painted vnto the world to bee knowne by: for hee aduanceth himselfe aboue all Emperours and Kings of the world, whom he affirmeth to hold of him, and to be at his commandement: and the stories make mention of his intollerable pride and tyranny vsed to them, as no King would haue done to his subiects, nor a good maister to his seruants, set∣ting his féet vpon Emperours necks, and making others to hold his stirrops, and remoued others from their Empires; & hath not onely occupied the highest places in the world aboue Kings, but hath presumed to fit in the seat of Almighty God, which is the conscience of man, & to kéepe the possession thereof, he hath promised forgiuenesse of sins, he hath brought in Gods of his own framing, and inuented a new religion full of lucre, quite contrary to the Scriptures, only for maintaining of his kingdome, displacing Christ from his glory, & holding his people in misera∣ble seruitude of blindnesse, to the losse of a number of soules which God at the lat∣ter day shall exact at his hands; boasting in his Canons & decrées, that he can dis∣pense against Peter, Paul, the old Testament, & New: & that in his fulnesse of po∣wer he can do as much as God. If any man can be aduanced aboue him, let him be iudged Antichrist. This enemy of God and our redemption is so euidently painted out in the Scriptuers, with such manifest tokens which all sée clearely appeare in him, that except a man will shut his eyes and heart against the light, hee cannot but know him; therefore I will neuer giue my consent to the receiuing of him into the Church of England: and my Lord sand you that be here, examine your own con∣sciences, you are sworne against him, you are learned and can iudge the truth, I pray God you be not wilfully blind, I haue discharged my conscience to the world & I will write my mind to her grace, which letter you may sée in the book at large. Storie and Martine diuers times interrupted him, saying, he spake blasphemy, and would faine haue the Bishop put him to silence, who notwithstanding suffe∣red him to end his spéech. Then they charged him that he was sworne vnto the Pope when he was made Archbishop; but he denied it, and said: It appeareth that he did not, by the record
of the countrey, which one of them confessed. Many maruelled that in so peri∣lous a time he had so sincerely proceeded, choosing rather to venture the losse of his life, and all his glorious pompe, then to do any thing that might spill his con∣science. Then they obiected, that he was married; which he confessed: Doctor Martine said, his children were bond-men to the Sea of Canterbury. At which he smiled, saying: If a benificed Priest had a Concubine, and had bastards by her, they are not bond-men to the benifice, I trust you wil make my childrens cause no worse. Then D. Martine demanded of him who was the supreme head of the Church; he said, Christ: Martine said, you made K. Henry supreme head of the Church. He said, of the people of England, Ecclesiasticall & Temporal, and not of the Church: for Christ is the onely head of the Church, and of the Faith and Religion of the same. The Articles of religion, touching the Sacrament, denying transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Masse, and the reall presence, he affirmed as he taught in his Booke. Then they cited him to appeare 80, daies after at Rome, and then sent him to prison; where thou maist sée their visored face of Iustice, as though the Court of Rome would condemne no man before hee answered for himselfe: but the same time the Pope sent letters executory vnto the King and Queene to dis∣grade and depriue him, which was done before twenty dayes were done: And though he were kept in prison, at the end of the 80 dayes hee was decreed Contu∣max, and thereupon condemned. Upon S. Valentines day next after, the Archbishop was disgraded, and condem∣ned by Bonner, & Thurlby Bishop of Ely, who sometimes was Cranmers Chap∣laine, and preferred by him: at which time Bonner, which a long time had borne great malice towards him, and reioyced greatly see this day wherein he might triumph ouer him at his pleasure, made an Oration to the people in this sort: This is the man who hath euer despised the Popes holinesse, and now is to be iudged by him: this is the man that hath pulled downe so many Churches, and now is come to be iudged in a Church: this is the man that contemned y• blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and now is come to be condemned before the said Sacra∣ment, hanging ouer the Altar: this is the man, that like Lucifer, sate in the place of Christ, vpon an Altar, to iudge others, and now is come before the Altar to bee iudged himselfe. Thus he continued halfe an houre heaping vp a number of lies together, beginning euery one with, This is the man, so lothsomly, that he made euery man weary. When they had disgraded him, they stript him of his gowne, & put vpon him a poore yeoman Bedles gowne thrid-bare, and as ill-fauouredly made as could be, and a Townsmans cap vpon his head, and so deliuered him to the secular power: in this filthie gowne he was carried vnto prison. The Queene & Bishops hauing kept the Archbishop now almost three yeares in prison, seeing by no means they could preuaile with him all this while, to turn him from his religion, they suborned certaine men which should, by intreaty, and faire promises, or any other means, allure him to recantation: so the wily Papists flocked about him, labouring to draw him from his former sentence to recantati∣on, especially Henry Sidall, and Frier Iohn, a Spaniard, they shewed him how acceptable it would be to the Kings & Queene, and how gainfull it would be both bodily & spiritually, they added that the Councell & Noble-men bare him good wil, promising him both his life & ancient dignity, saying the matter was but small, the setting of his hand to a few words; but if hee refused, there was no hope of pardon: for the Queene was purposed that shee would haue Cranmer a Catho∣lique, or else no Cranmer at all. By these and such like prouocations, they at last wnne him to subscribe: It may bee supposed that it was for hope of life and better dayes to come: But it appeareth by a Letter of his to a Lawyer, that the most cause why hee desired his life to bee delayed, was, that hee might make an end of a Booke against Marcus Antonius, a Papist, which hee had
begun; but it is manifest that it was against his conscience: it pleased God that so great vertues in this man should not be without some blemish; and that y• falshood of the Popsh generation by this meanes might be the more euident, and that we should haue the lesse confidence of our owne strength, presently this recantation was put in Print and published, notwithstanding it was decréed that Cranmer should be burned out of hand, and the Quéene commanded a funerall Sermon to be made for him by Doctor Cole; and hauing his lesson giuen him, he went spéedi∣ly to Oxford to play his part. The morning before hee should bee executed Cole gaue him 15 crownes to giue to y• poore. The Archbishop surmised whereabouts they went, after the Spanish Frier came vnto him with a paper of Articles which Cranmer should openly professe in his recantation before the people, desiring him to write his name vnto it: then he prayed him to write a Copy of it, and kéepe it with him, which he did, & knowing wherunto their deuices tended, he put secretly into his bosome his prayer with his exhortation written in another paper. Cran∣mer was brought from prison to S. Maries Church betwixt two Friers, which mumbled certaine Psalmes in the stréets as they went: when they came vnto the Church they sung Nunc dimittis: then they brought him to his standing, where they left him, there he stood all y• Sermon in a bare ragged gowne, & ill-fauouredly clothed with an old square cap, exposed to the contempt of all men. In this habite when he had stood a good while vpon the stage, he turned vnto a pillar, & knéeling & lifting vp his hands to heauen, he praied vnto God once or twice. After a while Cole came & began his Sermon, altogether to the disgrace of Cranmer, shewing that he was the onely man that began this heresie & schisme from the Catholique Church, that he was the cause of the diuorce betwixt the Quéenes father and mo∣ther: and that for these and other maine causes, the Quéene and Councell did thinke fit that he should be burned, although he had recanted. At the end of his Sermon he brought many scriptures to comfort him, that such as die in Gods faith, he will either abate y• fury of y• flame or else giue him strength to abide it, he glorified God much in his conuersin, because it appeared to be only his worke, shewing what great meanes was vsed to conuert him, but none could preuaile vntill God reclaimed him, saying; whilst he flowed in riches & honor, he was vnworthy of death; but lest he should carry with him no comfort, he promi∣sed, that immediatly after his death there should be Dirges, Masses, &Funerals executed in all the Churches in Oxford for uccour of his soule. But Cranmer, du∣ring the Sermon, lifted vp his hands & eyes to heauen: the very shape of forrow was liuely expressed in him, more then twenty times: he shed aboundant teares from his fatherly face, but especially when he made his prayer before the people. After Cole had done his Sermon, he had Cranmer performe his promise, to ex∣presse your faith, that you may take away suspicion from men, that they may vn∣vnderstand you a Catholique indéed. I wil do it said the Archbishop with a good will: then he desired y• people to pray for him, that God would forgiue him his sins: and one offence doth trouble me more then all the rest, whereof in processe of my talke you shall heare; and after he had made a very pithy praier with y• people, which you may sée in y• book at large, then he said, euery man at the time of his death, desireth to giue some god exhor∣tation vnto others: so I pray God at this my departing, I may speake somwhat whereby God may be glorified, & you edified. His first exhortation was, that we should not set our minds too much vpon this glozing world, but vpon God, & the world to come. His next exhortation was to obedience to y• King & Quéen. His third exhortation was, that they should loue together like brothers & sisters. The fourth was, that rich men would weigh three sayings in y• scripture: First Christ saith, it is hard for a rich man to enter into y• kingdome of heauen. Secondly, S. Iohn saith, he that hath this worlds goods, and shutteth his compassion vpon his needy brother, how can he say he loueth God. Thirdly, Saint Iames biddeth them weepe and howle for the miseries that shall come vpon you, your clothes be
moth-eaten, your gold and siluer cankred and rusty, and the rust shall witnesse a¦gainst you, and consume you like fire: you hoord vp treasure of Gods indignation against the last day. Let them that be rich ponder well these thrée sentences: for if euer they had occasion to shew their charity, it is now, the poore beeing so many, and victuals so deere. Now being I am come to the end of my life, whereupon hangeth my life past, and my life to come, either to liue with my Maister Christ for euer in ioy, or else for euer in paine with the Diuell: Therefore I will declare my faith vnto you without dissembling. I beleeue all the Articles of the Créede, and all the Doctrine of Christ, his A∣postles and Prophets in the new and old Testament; and now I come vnto the great thing that so much troubled my conscience more then all that euer I did in all my life; and that is in setting abroad a writing contrary to truth, which now I renounce, as written with my hand, contrary to my heart, for feare of death; and that is all such Billes and Papers which I haue written or signed with my hand since my degradation; and because my hand writ contrary to my heart, it shall be first burned. And as for the Pope I refuse him, as Christs enemy, and Antichrist, with all his false Doctrine. And as for the Sacrament, I beléeue as I haue taught in my Booke, and my Booke shall stand at the last day, before the iudgement of God, when the Papisticall doctrine shall be ashamed to shewe her face. It was a world to sée the Doctors beguiled of so great a hope, I thinke there was neuer cruelty more notably deluded; and when he began to speake more of the Sacrament, and of the Papacie, Cole cried to stop the Heretiques mouth: then the Friers pulled him from his seate, and led him to the fire: then they cried to him; What madnesse hath brought thee againe into this error, by which thou wilt draw innumerable soules with thee into hell. Hee answered them not, but directed his talke vnto the people: But the Spanish Barker raged, and foamed almost out of his wits; and he and the other Spanish Frier began to exhort him afresh, but all in vaine. When the fire began to burne neere him, he put his right hand into the flame, which he held so stedfastly, that it was burned before his body was touched, he abode the fire with such constancy, that he stood al∣wayes in one place without mouing of his members, with his eyes vpward, he off repeated his vnworthy right hand, saying, Lord Iesus receiue my spirit, and so gaue vp the Ghost. Agnes Potten, and another woman. ONe was the wife of Robert Potten of Ipswich in Suffolke,1556. the other the wife of Michael Trouchfield of the same towne shoemaker, they were burned at Ipswich the 16. of February, for denying the sacrament of the Altar: their con∣stancy in burning was wonderfull, they earnestly exhorted the people to credit and lay hold vpon the word of God, and to dispise the institutions of the Romish route, with all their superstitions and rotten religion. Robert Spicer, William Coberley, Maundrel. THese three were burned at one stake in Salisbury,1556. what their confessions were, and by whom they were condemned it appeareth not.
Robert Draks Minister, William Tims Ioyner, Ri∣chard Spurge Fuller, Iohn Cauell Weauer, George Ambrose Fuller, and Tho∣mas Spurge Fuller. THese sixe were burned at one fire in Smithfield the foure and twentieth day of Aprill: they were all of Essex, and sent at diuers times by the Lord Rich to Gardner, who sent them to prison, where they remained a yeare almost, and then they were sent to Bonner, to whom they all denied the reall presence in the Sacra∣ment of the Altar: after they were all sent for vnto the Consistorie; first Tims was sent for, and exhorted to conformity: he answered, we haue béene brought hither this day for Gods word, which we haue beene taught by the Apostolike Preachers in King Edwards time, whom you haue murthered because they preached the truth, and they haue sealed their doctrine with their bloud, whom I will follow. Then Bonner perswaded them not to stand to the litterall sense of the Scriptures, but to vse the interpretation of the Fathers. Then Tims said, what haue you to maintaine the reall presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but only the bare letter? We haue (quoth Bonner) the Catholike Church: no, said he, the Popish Church of Rome, for which you be periured, and the Sea of Rome is the Sea of Anti∣christ, therefore to that Church I will neuer consent; I confesse Christ is present with his Sacraments, but with your Sacrament of the Altar he is neither present corporally nor spiritually, for as you vse it, it is a detestable Idoll. Then the Bi∣shop séeing his constant boldnes, condemned him. Then Robert Draks was called, and being exhorted to returne to the Church of Rome, he said, he vtterly defied it and all the workes thereof, euen as I defie the di∣uell and all his workes; then was he likewise condmned. Then Thomas Spurge was demaunded if he would returne to the Catholike Church: and then he called the rest, and vpon the like demands he receiued the like answers: so they had all their iudgements, and deliuered vnto the Sherife, and af∣ter burned, as before. Iohn Hullier Minister. HEe was bured at Cambridge vpon the second day of Aprill for the profes∣sing of Christs Gospell, vnder Thurlby Bishop of Ely and his Chancellor: only a Praer and a Letter of his are recorded; his Letter is to proue the Romish Church Antichrist, and exhorteth from dissembling with God and the world, in comming to masse. Christopher Lister Minister, Iohn Mace, Iohn Spen∣cer, Simon Ioyne, Richard Nicoll, and Iohn Hamond. THese six were burned together at Colchester in Essex, where the most part of them did inhabite: the eight and twentieth day of Aprill: Bonner now waxing wearie, made a very quicke dispatch with these; for as soone as they were
deliuered by the Earle of Oxford and other Commissioners, vnto Iohn Kingstone the Bishops Register: Bonner caused them to be brought vnto his house at Ful∣ham, where, in the open Church he ministred vnto them articles, to which they an∣swered alike, as followeth: That the Church of Rome is the malignant Church, and no part of the Catho∣tholike Church, and that they beleeue not the doctrine thereof, and that they be∣léeue there be no mo but two Sacraments in the Church of Christ, to wit, Baptis∣me and the Lords Supper; that they learned the truth of their profession by the doc∣trine set forth in King Edwards time, and therein they would continue as long as they liued; they refused to be partakers of the Sacrament of the Altar, because it was vsed contrary to Gods word and glorie; they said the Popes authoritie was vsurped, and that he was an oppressor of Christs Church and Gospell, and that he ought not to haue any authoritie in England, and that they vtterly abhorred the Sea of Rome, for putting downe the booke of God, and setting vp the Babylonicall Masse, with all the rest of Antichrists merchandise; and that after consecration there remaineth in the Sacrament Bread and Wine as well as before; and that the reall flesh and bloud of Christ is not in it; and that the Masse is not propitia∣torie, neither for the quick nor for the dead, but méere Idolatry and abomination. And in the afternoone, when they would not recant, they were condemned and burned, as before. Margaret Ellice, Hugh Lauerock an old lame man and Iohn Apprice a blind man. SHe was of great Bursteed in Essex,1556 and was sent to Bonner by Sir Iohn Mor∣dant Knight, and Edmund Tyrrell Esquire: she died in Newgate the thirtéenth of May, being condemned to be burned before. Hugh Lauerocke an old lame man, and Iohn Apprice a blinde man; when they were examined, answered in effect as Christopher Lister, Iohn Mace, and others before mentioned had done: after they were brought to the Consistori, and being perswaded to recant their opinions of the Sacrament, Hugh Lauerock said, I will stand to my answere, I cannot finde in the Scriptures that the Priests should lift vp ouer their heads a cake of bread: then Bonner asked Iohn Apprice what he would say; he answered, your doctrine that you set forth is so agreeable with the world, and imbraced, of the world, that it cannot be agreeable with the Scrip∣tures; and ye are not of the Catholike Church, for ye make lawes to kill men, and make the Queene your executioner, whereupon they were condemned and sent to Stratford the Bow, and there burned, the ifteenth of May: at their deaths Hugh Lauerock comforting Iohn Apprice, said, be of good comfort, my brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physitian, he will heale thée of thy blindnes, and me of my lamenesse. Katharine Hutte widdow, Elizabeth Tharnell, and Ioane Hornes. IN the yeare 1556. these were burned in Smithfield, & were sent to Bonner, with Margaret Ellice and the blinde and lame man, for denying the reall presence in the Sacrament of the Altar, and for calling the Masse an Idoll. Katharine Hutte
being required to recant, and say her minde of the Sacrament, said, I denie it to be a God, because it is a dumbe God, and made with mens handes. Ione Hornes said, if you can make your God to shedde bloud, or to shew any condition of a liuely body, then will I beleeue you: but it is bread, and that which you call heresie, I trust to serue my Lord God in. And touching the Romish Sea, she said, I forsake all his abominations, and from them all good Lord deliuer vs: they died more ioy∣fully in the fire then some that burned them did in their beds. Iohn Harpole and Ioane Beach widdow. THese two were burned at Rochester for their constant perseuering in Christs truth,1556 about the first of Aprill. A blinde boy and another suffered martyrdome at Glocester: one of them was the blinde boy which came vnto Bishop Hooper, whom the said vertuous Bishop confirmed in the Lord, and the doctrine of his word, as is before mentioned, whose examinations are not come vnto our hands. Thomas Spicer, Iohn Deny, and William Pole. THese were broght before Dunnings, Chancellor of Norwich, and Minges his Register: the Chancellor perswaded what he could to bring them from the truth: and being he could not preuaile he burst out in teares, intreating them to turne againe vnto the holy mother Church. As he was thus labouring them, and seemed vnwilling to giue iudgement, the Register said, in what doe you make such ados? they be at that point they will be, therefore reade sentence and dispatch the knaues; whereupon he condemned them with teares, and the next day, being the one and twentieth of May, they were burned at Beckles by Sir Iohn Silliard high Sherife, without any writ from my Lord Chancellor. As the fire burned about them, they praised God with such an audible voyce, that it was wonderfull to all those that stood by. One Robert Bacon, and enemie to the truth willed the tormen∣tors to throw on aggots to stop the knaues breaths, but they confessed the truth, and gaue their liues for the testimony thereof very gloriously and ioyfully. Thomas Spicer was a labourer dwelling at Wenson in Suolke. The persecution of the townes of VVenson and Mendleson in Suffolke. AT the commandement of Sir Iohn Silliard High Sherife, and Sir Iohn Tyr∣rill Knights, these, whose names follow, were persecuted out of the said towns. From Wenson Alice Twayts & two of her seruants, Humfrey Smith and his wife, William Kachpoole and his wife, Iohn Mauling and his wife, Nicholas Bur∣lingham and his wife, and one Rought and his wife. From Mendleson Simon Harlstone and Katharine his wife with fiue children, William Whiting and Katharine his wife, Thomas Dobson and his wife, Thomas Hubbard and his wife, Iohn Poncon, Thomas Woodward the elder, one Rennolds wife, and a poore widdow, and one mother Semons maide, besides those that were constrained against their consciences, by the help of Iohn Brodish the Parish priest: the points of religion that they held, for which they were persecuted, were these; 1 They held the word of God to be sufficient doctrine vnto saluation. 2 They denied the Popes authority, & said their Church was Antichrist, and
Christs aduersary, they refused the abused Sacraments, defied the masse, and all Popish seruice and ceremonies, saying they robbed God of his honour, and Christ of his death and glorie, and would not come to Church, except it were to the defa∣cing of that they did there. 3 That Ministers of Gods Church might lawfully marry. 4 That the Quéene was chiefe head, and wicked Rulers were a great plagus of God sent for sinne. 5 They denied mans frée-will, and the Popes Church did erre, and many o∣ther in that point with them, rebuking their false confidence to be iustified by works and mans righteousnesse: when they were rebuked for talking so freely, they would answere, they acknowledge, confesse and beleeue, and therefore they must speake: they acknowledged that tribulations were Gods prouidences, and that his iudgements were right, to punish them and others for their sinnes, and that their troubles were of his faithfulnesse and mercy, and that one haire of their heads should not perish before the time, but all things should worke to the best to them that loue God, and that Christ was their only life and righteousnesse, and that only by faith in him, and for his sake, all good things were freely giuen them, as also forgiuenesse of sinnes, and life euerlasting. Many of these persecuted were of great substance, and had possessions of their owne. William Slech died the thirtieth of May 1556. being imprisoned for the doctrine of the Gospell, and the profession of the truth, in the Kings bench, and was bu∣ried in the back-side of the same prison, because the Papists thought him not wor∣thy to be laide in their Pope-holy Churchyards. Thomas Harland MillWright, Iohn Osward, Tho∣mas Reed, and Thomas Auington. T They were long prisoners in the Kings Bench for the confession of the truth, and were burned together at one fire the sixt of Iune, in Lewes in South-sex. Thomas Wood Minister, and Thomas Miles were burned likewise at Lewes in South-sex the twentieth of Iune, for resisting the erroneous and hereticall doc∣trine of the papisticall and faly pretended Catholiks. William Adherall Minister, and Iohn Clement-Wheele-wright▪ THese died in the Kings Bench the three and twentieth of Iune,1556 and were bu∣ried in the backside, being imprisoned for the profession of the truth. A Merchants seruant the next day was burned at Leicester for the like godli∣nes, by the cruell persecution of the Papists. About this time there were thirtéene burned in one fire at Stratford the Bow by London eleuen of them being men and two of them women, whose dwellings were in sundry places in , and whose names fllow: Henry Adlington, Law∣rence Parman, Henry Wye, William Hallywell, Thomas Bowier George Searle, Edmond Hurst, Lion Cawch, Ralph Iackson, Iohn Perifall, Iohn Roth, Elizabeth Peper, and Agnes George Their points of Religion doth better appeare by a Certificate vnder all their hands, which I haue here inserted, then by their exa∣mination which followeth.
Be it knowne vnto all to whom this our Certificate shall be feene, that whereas vpon Saturday the thirteenth of Iune, sixteene of vs were condemned to dye, by the Bishop of London, for the sincere truth of Christs verity, which truth hath bin continually defaced from the beginning by the wicked aduersaries, as it is slande∣red now by the Diuell and his Imps, which constraineth vs to manifest our be∣leefe, and the articles, wherefore we were condemned for auoyding the slanders that might happen by occasion of the flanderous Sermon lately preached at Pauls Crosse by Doctor Fecknam Deane of Paules, where he defamed vs to be of six∣teene sundry opinions. 1 We beleeue by Baptisme we were made members of Christs Church, and although wee erred for a time, yet the roote of Faith was preserued in vs by the Holy Ghost, which maketh vs certaine of the same, and we doe and will persist by Gods assistance vnto the end: And though the Minister were of the malignant Church, yet he did not hurt vs, because he baptized vs in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost; there was the word and the element; Godfa∣thers, and Godmothers, renouncing for vs the Diuell and all his workes, and con∣fessing the Articles of the Christian Faith. 2 There are but two Sacraments, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper, in these are contained the two Testaments: the effect of the Law is Repentance, and the effect of the Gospell is remission of sinnes. 3 There is a visible Church wherein the word of God is preached, and the Sacraments truely ministred: Uisible to the wicked world, although it bee not credited, and by death of Saints confirmed: as in the time of Elias as well as now. 4 The Sea of Rome is the Sea of Antichrist: The Congregation of the wic∣ked, whereof the Pope is head vnder the Diuell. 5 God is neither spiritually nor corporally in the Sacrament of the Altar, and there is no other substance but bread and Wine. 2 The Masse is not onely a prophanation of the Lords Supper, but a most blasphemous Idoll. We affirmed to beleeue all that the Bishop or any could proue by Scriptures: but he said he would not stand to proue it with hereticks, but said, they themselues were the holy Church, and that we ought to beleeue them, or else to be cut off like withered branches. When they were brought to Stratford the Bow they were deuided into two parts, and put into two chambers: then the Sherife came to the one part and tolde them that the other had recanted and were saued, and exhorted them to doe the like, and not cast away themselues: they answered, their faith was not builded on man, but Christ crucified: When he could doe no good with them, he went to the other place, and told them their Fellowes had recanted, and were saued, and counselled them to doe the like, and not willingly to kill themselues: vnto whom they answe∣red as their fellowes had done. When he saw he could not preuaile, he lead them to the fire, they ioyfully kissed the stake: the eleauen men were tyed to foure stakes, and the two Women loose in the middest, and so they were burned all in one fire, with such loue one to another, and constancy in our Sauiour Christ, that it was wonderfull. Thomas Free-man, William Stannard, and William Adames. THese were also condemned to dye with the other at the same time, and béeing in the hands of the secular power, Cardinall Poole sent his dispensation for
their liues, and by that meanes they were kept from martrdome. The fourteenth of Iune Iohn Colstoke of Wellington in Liechfield Dioces, for holding against the real presence and auricular confession, was compelled to recant and to beare a faggot before the Crosse bare-headed, hauing in one hand a Taper, and in the other a paire of Beads. The seuentéenth of Iune Thomas Barnes and Ellice Birth were accused that one wished to the other, in the beginning of Queene Maries raigne, his dagger in the belly of him that sung to the Organs he denied not but he spake these words, and that he then thought the masse abominable; and though he submitted himselfe hee was condemned to beare a faggot, with beads and his taper before the crosse. The seuen and twentieth of Iune Thomas Paret, Martin Hunt, and Iohn Norrice died in the Kings Bench, and were buried in the back-side: they were imprisoned for the profession of the truth. Robert Bernard, Adam Foster and Robert Lawson. THe 30. of Iune Hopton B of Norwich called Robert Bernard Heretick, because he said he would neuer be confessed of a Priest: he answered, it gréeueth me not to be called hereticke at your hand▪ for so your forefathers called the Prophets and Confessors long agoe: then the B: ad him follow him, and went and knéeled be∣fore the Sacrament of the Altar: and as he was at his prayers, he looked back and asked Barnard why he did not as he did, He answered, I cannot tell why you should doe so, the Bishop asked him, whom sée you yonder, pointing to the Pixe hanging ouer the Altar? Do you not see your maker there? He said, No, I see nothing but a few cloaths hang together in a heape: then the Bishop commaunded him to the Iayle, and ad put Irons enough vpon him. After one of the Guard had him to a Tauerne where many Priests were, when they could not perswade him, they threatned hm with whipping and stocking, and when they could peruert him by no meanes, then they carried him to the Bishop, who immediatly condemned him: Hee was a labourer, dwelling in Fanden in Suffolke. Adam Foster was a Husbandman, dwelling in Mendlesam in Suffollke: Hee was apprehended by Thomas Mouse, and George Reuet Constables, at the com∣mandment of Sir Iohn Terill, because he would not heare Masse: He was cast in∣to Aye dungeon, from whence he was sent to Norwich, and condemned by the a∣foresaid Bishop: Mouse presently after fell sicke, and pined away to death: the ∣ther came to the like end not long after. Robert Lawson a Linnen Weauer, was likewise apprehended at the comman∣dement of Sir Iohn Terill, and sent to Aye Dungeon, because hee would not come to Church, nor receiue their Popish Idoll. When they were carried to their deathes, they most triumphantly ended their liues in the fixe. Iohn Careles of Couentry Weauer. ABout this time he died in the Kings Bench, hauing beene long imprisoned there, hee was examined before Doctor Martine, one of the Masters of the Chancerie, a iolly stirrer in those matters: in which examination I finde no mat∣ters of religion, but that he answereth a popish opinion of election, that wee are elec∣ted
in respect of our good workes, and so long elected as we doe them, and no lon∣ger, but he beleeued that God of his infinite goodnesse (through Iesus Christ) did elect and appoint in him, before the foundation of the earth was laid, a Church or Congregation, which he doth continually guide and gouerne by his grace and holy spirit; so that not one of them shall euer finally perish, and that God hath eernally predestinated me to eternall life in Iesus Christ. I am most certaine and likewise sure that his holy spirit (wherewith I am sealed) will so preserue me from all he∣resies and euill opinions, that I shall die in none at all: I doe beleeue that Christ did effectually die for al those that repent, and beleeue, & for none other. At his first comming into prison, his conscience was ouer much oppressed with the considera∣tion of his sinnes, vntill he had a comfortable letter of Philpot, concerning the mer∣cie of Christ to them that repent: and although a sorrowfull spirit be a sacrifice ac∣ceptable to God, and the earnest pennie of election, yet the end of it must be comfort and ioy of the holy Ghost in assurance of the remission of sinnes, therfore he iddeth him be carelesse, according to his name, in assurance of the remission of sinnes in Christ. Wherefore Carles thanketh God heartily, and confesseth that Philpots sweete exhortations had brought much glad tidings vnto his tyred soule, and that it was greatly refreshed with the sweet sauor of his precious Nard. I will now according to your louing request cast away all care, & reioice with you, and pray God for you day & night, for now my foule is turned vnto her old rest again, & hath taken a swéet na in Christs lap, I haue cast my care vpon the Lord, which will care for mee, and will be careles, according vnto my name: as soon as I had read your comforta∣ble Letter, my sorrowes vanished away, as smoke in the wind: I am sure the spirit of God was athor of it: Good M. Philpot thou art a principal Pot indéed, filled with most precious liquor: Oh pot most happy of the high Potter ordained to honour, which doest containe such heauenly treasure in the earthen vessell: Oh pot most happy, in whom Christ hath turned water into wine, and that of the best, whereof the Master of the Feast hath filed my cup so full, that it hath made mee drunken in the ioy of the spirit: When martyrdome shall breake thee (oh vessell of honour) the fragrant sauour of the precious ointments will much reioyce the heay hearts of Christs true members. Iohn Gwinne, Askin, Iulines Palmer. THe 16. of Iuly these thrée godly and constant martyrs were burned at New∣bery in Barkshire. Iulines Palmer had been student in Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, and was Schoolemaister of Redding: all King Edwards daies hee was an obstinate Papist, abhorring all godly prayer and sincere preaching, and was ab∣horred and put out of the Colledge for the same, yet after in Quéene Maries time, suffered a most cruel death at the Papists hands. He was born in Couentry, his fa∣ther had sometimes béene Mayor of the Citty. When Quéene Mary came to her raign, he was receiued into the fellowship of the Colledge again, but his mind was o far altered, that hee would not come to prayers for feare of suspition: but when he should kéepe his bowing measures at the Confiteor, in turning vpward & downe∣ward, and knocke his breast with Idolatrous adoration, at the lifting vp of the Sacrament, his heart rose against it, that hee would get him out of the Church, wherefore he left the Colledge and became Schoolemaister in Redding, and béeing vexed with the consideration of the cruelty that was then shewed to the Christi∣ans, he made a testimony of his Faith, and deliuered it to Doctor Geffery in his visitation, who reading the same put him in Prison, and within a fortnight after burned him as before, where he yéelded vp as ioyfull a Soule to God, as euer any did.
Katherine Cauches mother and Paratine and Guillimiue her Daughters. THE said Katherine was a Widdow, they were of the Isle of Garnesey, the 10. of Iuly they were there burned for herticks for professing the truth: Paratiue being great with childe, and ready to bee brought a bed the wombe of the said Paratine being buned, there issued from her a goodly man Child, which by the officer was taken vp, and after most spitefull manner throwne into the fire, and most cruelly burned with her seely mother. The cause was thi; a woman had stollen a cup and pawned it to this Katherine for six pence, she perceiuing whose cup it was thought to haue carried it home: In the meane time the owner of the cup missed it, and charged ber with it that stole it, who confessed it and brought the owner of the cup to the Widdow who deliue∣red him the Cup: shortly after the Bayliffs hearing thereof, searched her house, they finding one Platter which had no marke, and another that had the mark scra∣ped out: Whereupon they brought her and her two Daughters to the Iustices, who committed them vnto prison, and the Bayliffs seized vpon all their goods, and when they could proue nothing against them, the Bayliffs accused them of heresie and caused them to be committed againe; and the Bayliffs wrote to Iaques Amy Deane of the Ile aforesaid, to desire him to proceed against them in the cause of heresie: whereupon the said Deane, assisted by the Curats there, did make an in∣quirie of the said widdow and her daughters, and condemned them for hereticks, the widdow and her daughters neuer hearing therof, and deliuered it to the Bay∣liffs and Iurats, whereupon when the Bayliffs did know that the said Deane and Curats had not examined the woman, they would not sit in iudgement that day, but ordained that the women should first be examined of their Faith before the Deane and Curats: wherefore the women were presented before the said Deane and Curats who answered that they would obe the Ordinances of the King and Queene, and the commandements of the Church, notwithstanding they were con∣demned, and thereupon burned, and the Bayliffs had all their goods, as before, but in the beginning of Queene Elizabeths raigne the Gerny men, and one Matthew Cauches, brother to he said two Sisters presented a supplication to the Quéenes Commissioners touching that matter, who sitting vpon the cause, found the mat∣ter probable, and commited the Deane to prison, and dispossessed him of all his liuings and possessions. Thomas Dungate, Iohn Forman, Mother Tree. THe 18 of Iuly these gaue themselues to the fire for righteousnes sake, patient∣ly abiding what the rage of man could say or doe against them: they were bur∣ned at Grinsted in Sussex. Ioane Wast was of the Parish of Alhallowes in Darby, shee was condemned by Radulph Bane Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, his Chancellor, and others, for that she did hold the Sacrament of the Popish Altar to be but a representation of Christs body and materiall bread and wine, and not his naturall body, vnlesse it were receiued, and that it ought not to be reserued from time to time ouer the Al∣tar, but immediatly to be receiued. She was burned at the aforesaid Darby: when she suffered she made her prayer to the Lord Iess to assist and strengthen her, and
being bound to the stake with flames about her, she suffered with ioy and triumph, as though she had rather béene going to a banket, then to yéeld vp her life. Edward Sharp was an aged man, borne in Wilshire, he was condemned the 8. of September, where hee constantly and manfully persisted in the iust quarrell of Christs Gospell, for misliking & renouncing the ordinances of the Romish Church. He was tryed as pure gold, and made a liuely sacrifice in the fire. Iohn Hart, Tho: Rauensdale, and two whose names we haue not, the one a Shomaker, the other a Coriar. THese foure were burned at Mayfield in Sussex the 24. of September, being at the place where they should suffer, after they had made their Prayer, they con∣stantly and ioyfully ended their liues, for the testimony of the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ. The next day, a yong man, a Carpenter, whose name we know not, was burned for the Testimony of Christ at Bristow: he died with much ioy, con∣stancy, and triumph. Thomas Horne and a woman. THe 25. of September thse two godly Martirs were consumed by the fire at Watton Underhedge in Glocestershire, who died very gloriously in a constant Faith, to the terror of the wicked, and comfort of the godly. A Shoemaker was a true Witnesse and Disciple of the Lord, he renounced the false coloured Religion of the Romish Sea, wherein many a good man hath beene drowned: he was burned at Northampton. Thrée in the Castle of Cicester being in like bonds for the like cause of Christs Gospell, died in Prison, and were buried in the fields, who had béene burned if the cruell handling of Papists had not made them away before. John Clarke, Dunstone Chittenden vncondemned, William Foster of Stone, Allice Potkins of Staple∣hurst, Iohn Archer of Cranbroke VVeauer. THe first of Nouember these fiue were macerate and pined to death by famine in the Castle of Canterbury: they answered all to this effect, that they beleeue the Articles of the Creed, but they beleeue no more Sacraments but two, that prai∣ers to Saints or soules in purgatory profit not, that faith only iustifieth; they deni∣ed the Popish ceremonies in the Church: that it was as good to carry a Dungfork as Candles on Candlemas day, and that it is as necessary to carry the Gallowes about if ones father were hanged, as to cary the Crosse; that they could not come to Church with a safe conscience. There was fifteene of them in prison, and it seemeth the Bishops and Priests had appointed to starue them al, had not a Certificate of the manner of their cruell handling bin throwne out of the Castle window, wherby their doings were made manifest: so the other ten were burned, as after appeareth. In the Months of September, Nouember, and December, there was a great persecution in Couentry and Lichfield: the cruell Bishop Radulph Bane, and his cruell Chancellor, Doctor Draycot, and nine Priests, and a number of others were compelled to recant, and one Hoke was burned at Chester, as thou mayst see in the Booke at large.
THE TVVELFTH BOOKE OF the Acts of the Church. TOuching the processe and whole discourse, concerning the condem∣ning, taking vp, and burning the bones and bookes of Bucer, & Paulus Phagius, by the commaundement of Cardinall Poole, with all the rites and ceremonies therunto appertaining, with all the ridiculous procéeding of the Commissioners whilst they were at Cambridge: and also the Oration of M. Acworth, Orator of the Uniuersitie: at the restitution of Martine Bucer, and Paulus Phagius in Quéene Elizabeths time, and also the dispitefull handling and madnesse of the Papists towards Peter Martires Wife at Oxford, taking her vp from her grau at the commandement of Cardinall Poole, and after buried in a Dunghil. Concerning the processe of these things, I refer thee if thou béest disposed to sée them, to the booke at large. The 18. of Ianuary the ten that remained of the aforesaid fiftéene, that were in prison in the Castle of Canterbury, whereof fiue of them were starued, the ther ten were burned, for the same points of Religion in effect as the other fiue held as before is expressed; the names of these ten follow. Iohn Philpot of Tenderden, William Waterer of Bedingdy, Stephen Kempe of Norgate, William Hay of Hith, Thomas Hudson of Sellenge: Mathew Bradbridge of Tenderden, Thomas Stephens of Bedingham, Nicholas Finall of Tenderden, VVilliam Lowicke of Cranbroke, VVilliam Prowting of Thorneham. The 8. of February a most bloody Commission was giuen forth by King Philip and Quéene Marie to prosecute the poore members of Christ. Whereupon twenty two were apprehended in Essex, and brought vp to London at once to Bonner, all of them tyed to a rope by two and two, and so lead in a rope through the stréetes to Bonner. Now the Bishops and Councell perceiuing the number, and fearing to put them to death, being so many together, least I some disturbance might rise vpon the same: they bad them make their submission and confession as they would them∣selues, that they might make a colour of recantation, wherupon they were dischar∣ged: for their names I referre thée to the Booke at large. Thomas Loseby, Henry Ramsey, Tho: Thyrtell, Mar∣garet Hyde, Agnes Stanley. THe twelfth of Aprill these were burned at one fire in Smithfield, Bonner fra∣med now Articles vnto them, and confessing these points of his Articles, they were condemned. 1 For speaking against the Faith, Religion, and Ecclesiasticall seruice, espe∣cially concerning the Masse and the seauen Sacraments, saying they agréed not wth Gods word.
2 For being perswaded that the English seruice in King Edwards time, was godly and Catholike. 3 That they did not thinke themselues bound to come to Church to heare the Mattins, Masse, and Euening song. 4. That they did not thinke themselues bound to go a Procession, nor to beare Tapers and Candles at Candlemas, nor take Ashes vpon Ashwednesday, nor beare Palmes vpon Palme-sunday, nor to créepe to the Crosse vpon daies accusto∣med, not to receiue and kisse the Paxe at Masse time, not to receiue holy water or holy bread, nor to except or allow the Ceremonies and vsages of the Church, as they are vsed in this Realme. 5 For thinking they were not bound to confesse their sinnes vnto a Priest, nor to receiue absolution at his hand, nor to receiue the Sacrament of the Al∣tar. 6 For thinking prayers to Saints, or prayers for the dead are not lawdable, profitable, not allowed by Gods Word, and that the soules departed goe straight waies to Heauen or Hell, so that there is no Purgatory. 7 For thinking all those that were burned in King Henry the eights time, and in Quéene Maries time as Heretickes, were no Heretickes, but faithfull and good people: and for approuing their opinions, and misiking their condem∣nations. 8 For thinking the Sacrament of the Altar to bee an Idoll, and to reserue it to be honoured, to be Idolatry: and likewise of the Masse, and luation of the Sa∣crament. After this, they were conuented againe before the Bishop, in the Constory, where these being asked what they had to say against iudgement, Thomas Losby said, God giue me strength to stand against you and your : your Laws a deouring Law, I perceiue there is no way with me but death, except I will be∣léeue in that Idoll, the Masse. Thomas Thirtle said, If you make me an Heretick, then you make Christ and al the twelue Apostles Hereticks: for I am in the true faith, and I will stand to it, for I know I shall haue eternall life. Rmsey said, my opinion is the very truth, which I will not goe from: There are two Churches, and we the Martyrs of Christ are the true Church, and yee be not. Margaret Hide affirmed, shee was in that true Faith, and would neuer for∣sake it. Agnes Stanly said, if euery haire of her head were neuer so much worth, I had rather they were reburned, then I will for sake my true faith. Then they were put off vntill the afternoone, then as Loseby his answere was reading, mention being made of the Sacrament, Boner put off his Cap, and Lose∣by put on his hat: and he said, I trust I haue the Spirit of truth, which you de∣test, for the wisedome of God is foolishnesse vnto you, whereupon they had iudge∣ment. Margaret Hide saide, My Lord, I will not depart from my sayings till I be bur∣ned: and she said,  would sée you my Lord instruct mee with some part of Gods word, and not to giue me instructions of holy Bread, and holy Water, for it is no part of Scripture. Agnes Stanly answered, I am no ereticke no man that is wise will beléeue as you doe: I beleeue those that you haue burned bee true Mar∣tyrs, I will not goe from my faith as long as I liue. Thomas Thirtle said, I will not beleeue your Idolatrous waies, your Masse in Idolatry, I wil stick to my faith as long as I liue. Henry Ramsey said, Your doctrine is naught, and not agreeable to Gods word, and I will stand to my Faith as long as I liue: So they were con∣demned and burned, as before. In May William Norant, Stephen Gratwicke, and one King,1557 were burned in S. Georges field in Southwarke.
Iohn Bradbridge of Stapleherst, Walter Apleby of Maydstone, and Petronell his wife, Edmund Allen of Fritendid, and Katherine his wife, Ioane Mannings of Maydstone, Elizabeth a blind Maid. THe 18. of Iune these seauen faithfull Martyrs of Christ, were burned at Maid∣stone: their answers were like in effect to the fiue that were famished to death in Canterbury Castle. The 19. of Iune Iohn Fishcock, Nicholas White, Nicholas Pardue, Barbara Finall Widdow, Bradbregs Widdow, Bendens Wife, and Wilsons Wife, were burned at Canterbury: their Articles were as the others, they ioyfully vndressed them∣selues vnto the fire, and all of them (like the Communion of Saints) knéeled down and prayed, with such zeale, as the enemies of the Crosse of Christ could not but like it. Ten they arose and went to the stake, where they yéelded their soules glori∣ously vnto the Lord. Richard Woodman, George Stephens, William May∣nard, Alexander Hosman his Man, Tomasine Awood his Maid, Margery Moris, Iames Moris hir Sonne, Denis Burges, Ashdownes wife, Groues wife. THese tenne blessed Martyrs were burned at Lewes in Sussex the 22. of Iune, without a writ from the Lord Chancelor. The first examination of RICHARD WOODMAN, before the Bishop of Chichester. Chichester. I Am sory for you, and so are all the Worshipfull of our Country, you haue béene of good estimation amongst the poore and rich; wherefore looke well to your selfe, your Wife and Children, and bee ruled: thinke not your selfe wiser then all the Realme. Woodman. I will be willing to learne of euery man the truth, and I know I haue giuen no iust offence to rich nor poore, and God knoweth how deare I loue my Wife and Children in him: but my life, my wife and Children are all in Gods hands, and I haue them all, as I had them not, but regard the pleasing of God more then al other things. I thought good to appeale to you mine Ordinary, for som goe about to shed my blood wrongfully, that if you can finde I hold any thing con∣trary to Gods word I will be reformed; and if my blood bee shed vnrighteouslie, that it may be required at your hands, because you haue taken vpon you to bee the Phisition of soules of our Country. Story. Thou art a peruerse fellow, thinkest thou that thou shalt be put to death vniustly? that thy blood shall be required? No, if he should condemne a hundred such Hereticks, I haue helped to rid a good many of you, and will doe the best I can to rid thee.
Chich. I am your spirituall Pastor, you must heare me and I will giue spi∣rituall Councell. Wood. You say you will giue mee spirituall Councell, are you sure you haue the Spirit of God. Chichest. No by Saint Mary, I dare not bee so bold to say, so I doubt of that. Wood. Then you be like the waues of the Sea tossed with the winde, and vn∣stable in all your wayes, (as Saint Iames saith) and can looke for no good thing at the Lords hands: You are neither hote nor cold: Therefore God will spue you out. Story. Hee hath the Diuell in him, hee is worse then the Diuel, thus all here∣tickes boast themselues. Wood. The Iewes said to Christ he had a Diuell, and was mad, as you haue said to me: but the Seruant is not aboue his Master: God forbid I should learne of him that confesseth he hath not the Spirit of God. Chich. Doe you beleeue you haue the Spirit of God, it is more then Paul or a∣ny of the Apostles durst doe, which is great presumption. Wood. I beleeue I haue the Spirit, and boast not my selfe, but of the gift of GOD: as Paul did in 1. Cor. 7. He said he beleeued verily that hee had the Spi∣rit of GOD, no man can beleeue that Iesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost: I beleeue Christ is my Redeemer, therefore I haue the Holy Ghost: and hee that hath not the Spirit of Christ is a cast-away and none of his, and wee haue not re∣ceiued the Spirit of bondage to feare, but we haue receiued the Spirit of Adoption which cryeth Abba Father: The same Shirit testifieth with our Spirits, that we are the sonnes of God: Héere are proofes enough that Paul was sure he had the Spirit of God: And Iohn saith, He that beleeueth in God, dwelleth in God, and God in him: So it is impossible to beleeue in God, except God dwell in vs, Chich. He bade me dine with him, and at dinner he asked me whether Priests may marry, and whether Paul had a Wife. Wood. Paul and Barnabas were not married, but all the Apostles else-were: For in the 1. Cor. 9. Paul saith, am I not an Apostle, am I not free, haue I not seene Christ: Mine answere to them that aske me this: Haue wee not power to eat and to drinke, or to leade about a Sister to Wife, as well as the other Apostles, and the Brethren of the Lord, or haue not Barnabas and I power thus to do: So this Text proueth that Paul and Barnabas were not married, but Paul declareth that the rest had wiues, and they had power likewise to haue wiues, but they found no neede thereof: But Paul in the seuenth to the Corinthians said, that hee that hath not power ouer his flesh may marry, for it is better to marry then to burne: wherefore to auoid fornication let euery one haue his VVife, and euery woman her Husband: Therefore Bishoppes and Priests may haue Wiues, because they are men, ra∣ther then burne, and commit Fornication: Paul declareth to Timothy, the first and niuth, that Bishops and Deacons should haue wiues. The second Examination before the Bishop of Winchester and others. Wine. LAst time you were with vs you were in an heresie, in saying Iudas re∣ceiued bread, vnlesse you will tell what more then bread. Wood. I say he receiued more then bread, for he receiued the Diuell, because hee presumed to eate the Sacrament without Faith: as Christ saith, after he eat the sop the Diuell entred into him: Hereby appeareth that the Sacrament is not the body of Christ, before it be receiued in Faith. Winc. What is thy Faith in the Sacrament? Wood. I beleeue when I receiue the body and bloud of Christ, if it bee truely ministred according to Christs institution; If I come in Faith, that Christ
was borne for me, and that he suffered death for the remission of my sinnes, and that I shall bee saued by his death, and eate the Bread, and drinke the Wine in remembrance of him: Then I receiue whole Christ, God and Man, mystically by Faith. The fat Priest. What afoole thou art, canst not tell what mystically is. Wood. God hath chosen such fooles as I am to confound such a wise thing as you are. Winch. Answere the Sacrament of the Altar, whether it bee not the body of Christ before it be receiued, and whether it bee not the body of Christ to whomso∣euer receiueth it; tell me, or else I will excommunicate thée. Wood. I will not answere you, you are not mine Ordinarie: Then Chiche∣ster said, I am not consecrated: No said I▪ yours bee all Cow Calues: meaning therby that hee had not his Bull from Rome: Th they called me all to naught, and said I was madde. Then I said, so Festus said to Paul when hee spake so∣ber words and truth of the Spirit of God as I doe: but you be your selues as you iudge mee, you will all goe to hell if you condemne me, if you haue not especiall grace to repent with spc. Winch. We goe about to saue thy soule if thou wilt be ruled. Wood. No man can saue my soule, for Christ hath saued it already, euen before the foundation of the world was laid. The Fat Priest. Here is another heresie, thou canst not tell what thou saist, was the soule saued before it was. Wood. I say the truth, looke in the first to the Ephesians and there you shall find it, where S. Paul saith, God hath chosen vs in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him through loue, and thereto we were predestinated. The Fat Priest. S Iames saith, Faith without workes is dead, and we haue free∣will to doe good workes. Wood. I doe not disallow good workes, for a good faith cannot be without good workes, yet not of our selues, but it is the gift of God, as S. Paul saith, it is God that worketh in vs both the will and the deed, euen of his good will. VVinch. Make and nd, answere to me: My Lord Cardinall hath appointed the Archdeacon of Canterbury thine Ordinary, he can appoint whom he will before the Bishop is consecrated, and so they all affirmed. Wood. I will beleeue neuer a one of you all, for you be turne coates & change∣lings, and wauering minded, neither hote nor cold, therefore GOD will spu you out: For in King Edwards time you taught the Doctrine that was set sorth then, and now you teach the contrarie, which words made the most part of them quake. VVinch. He is the naughtiest varlet and heretick that euer I knew, I wil reade sentence against him, but I spared them not but spake freely, they that stood by re∣buked me; saying, you cannot tell whom you speake vnto. Wood. They be but men I trow, I haue spoken to better men then they for a∣nything I see, except they repent with speed: Then I told the Bishop of Winche∣ster if you condemne me, you will be condemned in hell, if you repent not, for I am not afraid to die for Gods sake. Winchest. For Gods sake: nay for the Diuels sake: neither was Iudas a∣fraid to die that hanged himselfe, as thou wilt kill thy selfe, because thou wilt not be ruled: How say you will you confesse that Iudas receiued the body of Christ vnworthily. VVood. If you can prooue in all the Bible that any man euer eat the body of Christ vnworthily, then I will be with you in all things. Then a Priest said S. Paul saith, in the 11. of the first to the Corinthians: He that eateth this bread & drinketh this cup vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his own damnation: because he maketh no difference of the Lords body.
Wood. He saith not who so eateth this body vnworthily, nor drinketh this blood vnworthily: But he saith who so eateth this bread and drinketh this cup vnwor∣thily, eateth and drinketh his one damnation: because hee maketh no difference of the Sacrament, which representeth the Lords body, and other bread and drink: here good people you sée they are not able to proue their sayings true: Wherefore I cannot beléeue them in any thing they do: Then Winchester read sentence of excom∣munication against me: when hee had done I would haue spoken, but they cried away with him. The third examination. Chich. HOw say you to the Sacrament of the Altar: I said he ment the Sacra∣ment of the body and bloud of Christ, and not of the Altar of stone: He said▪ yes that he did: How vnderstand you the Altar otherwise? Wood. It is written in the 18. of Mathew, wheresoeuer two or three be gathe∣red together in Christs name, he is in the middest of them: whatsoeuer they aske in earth, shall be granted in heauen: And in the 5. of Mat. When thou commest vnto the Altar and remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leaue thine offe∣ring, and be first reconciled to thy brother, and then offer thy gift. In these two pla∣ces of Scripture, I proue Christ is the true Altar, whereon euery one ought to offer his gifts: First Christ being in the middest of them that are gathered together in his name, there is the Altar: so we may be bold to offer our gifts, if we be in Cha∣ritie, if we be not, we must leaue our gift, and be first reconciled vnto our Brother: Some will say, how shall I agrée with mine aduersary when he is not néere by 100. miles, may I not pray vntill I haue spoken with him: if thou presume to pray in the congregation, and thinke euill vnto any, thou askest vengeance vpon the selfe: Therefore agrée with thine aduersarie, that is make thy life agréeable to Gods Word; resolue in thy heart that thou aske God & the world forgiuenes, intending neuer to affend them more: all such may be hold to offer their gift. Chichest. I neuer heard any vnderstand it so, no not Luther that great here∣ticke, that was condemned by a generall Councell and his picture burned. I will shew you the true vnderstanding of the Altar and the offering: wee haue an Altar said Paul, that you may not eat off: meaning that no man might eat of that which was offered vpon the Altar, but the Priest: For in Pauls time all the liuing that the Priests had the people came and offered it vpon the Altar: mony or other things, and when the people came to offer it, and remembred that they had any thing against there Brother, then they left their offering vpon the Altar, and went and were reconciled vnto their Brother, and came againe, and offered their gift, and the Priest had it: this is the true vnderstan∣ding of it. VVood. That was the vse of the old law, Christ was the end of it; and though it were offered in Pauls time that maketh not that it was well done, but he rebuked it, therefore you are deceiued. Chich. Who shall iudge betwixt vs in the matter: I said the word, as it is in the 12. of Iohn: And S. Peter saith, the Scriptures haue no priuate interpretati∣on, but one scripture must be vnderstood by another: then he said if you vnderstand it one way, & I another who shal be Iudge: the true Church of God is able to dis∣cusse all doubts: He said the Church of God doth allow the sacrament of the Altar. VVood. What doe you offer now vpon the Altar? Chich. We offer vp the body of Christ to pacific the wrath of God in the blessed Sacrament, and there withall all put off their caps vnto the abhominable Idoll. Wood. S. Paul saith in the tenth to the Hebrewes, wee are sanctified by the of∣fering of the body of Christ vpon the Crosse once for all: and euery Priest is dayly ministring and offering one manner of sacrifice, which can neuer take away sins, and that it is the offering that you vse to offer as farre as I can see you be Priests
after the order of Aaron, that offer vp sacrifice for their owne sinnes, and the sinnes of the people. Chich. Aarons sacrifice was with bloud, which signified the death of Christ: but we are Priests after the order of Melchisedech, which offered bread to the King in remembrance, and signified the giuing of Christs body in bead & Wine at his last supper, which Christ gaue vnto his Disciples, and commanded to be v∣sed vnto the end of the world. VVood. Me thinke you haue made the matter very plaine, that as Christ was the end of the sacrifices, so he was the beginning of the Sacraments, willing them to be vsed in remembrance of him vnto the end of the world. Chich. The word saith, Take, eate, this is my body: it is not the signe one∣ly, but the thing it selfe: how say you it is not his body after the words be spoken by the Priest. VVood. If you say the words ouer the water, if there be no child, is there true Baptisme: He said there must be the Water, the Word, the Child: Then I said if the Child be baptized, in the name of he Father, the Sonne. Is it true Baptisme: He said it must be baptized in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost: Then I said there may be nothing added or diminished. Chich. How say you, Take, eate, this is my body, is not this Christs body as soone as it is said. VVood. As the water, the word, and the Child altogether make Baptisme: so the bread, the wine, & the word, make the sacrament, & the eater eating it in true faith maketh it his body: so it is not Christs body, but by the faithfull receiuer: For hee said, Take, eat, this is my body: He calleth it not his body before before eating: And S. Au∣gustine saith, crede manducasti, beleeue and thou hast eaten: And S. Iohn saith, he that beleeueth in God, dwelleth in God, and God in him: Wherefore it is impos∣sible to please God, and to eat his body without true Faith. Priest. If the Faith of the receiuer maketh it his body, and not his word, what did Iudas eat? VVood. He eat the Sacrament of Christ, and the Diuell with all. Priest. He eate the body of Christ vnworthily, as S. Paul saith. Wood. S. Paul speaketh not of eating his body vnworthily, but of the sacrament vnworthily: For he saith, whosoeuer eateth of this bread, and drinketh of this cup vnworthily, eateth & drinketh his own damnation: because he maketh no difference of the Lords body, and not because hee eateth the Lords body: if Iudas had eaten Christs body he must needs be saued: For Christ saith in the 6. of Iohn, Whoso∣euer eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud hath eternal life. Chich. Do you not beleeue that after the words be spoken, that there remaineth neither bread nor wine, but the very body of Christ really. Wood. I haue told you my mind without dissimulation, & more you get not of me except you wil talk by the scriptures, then I wil proue it more plaine 3. or 4. waies. Then they made a great laughing and said, this is an heretick indeed, it is time he were burned: Then I said as you iudge me, you shall be iudged your selues, for I serue God truely with that which you call heresie, as you shall well know when you are in hell, and haue bloud to drinke, and shall say in paine, this was th man we iested on, and whose talk we thought foolishnes, and his nd without honour: now we may sée how he is counted amongst the Saints of God, and wee are puni∣shed; these words shall you say being in hell if you repent not▪ with speed, if you consent to the shedding of my bloud. Pries You were at Baxell a tweluemonth agone, and sent for the Parson and talked with him in the Church-yard, and would not goe into the Church, for you said it was the Idols temple. Story came in pointing at me with his finger: I can say nothing to him but an heretick, I haue heard you talke this houre and a halfe, and can heare no reasona∣blenes in him.
Wood. As you iudge me you shallbe iudged your selfe. Story. What, be you a preaching? you shall preach at a stake shortly with your fellowes. Kéeper, carry him to the Marshalsey againe, and let no body come to speake with him. The fourth examination before Doctor LANGDAL. LAngd. Your childe was not Christned in a fortnight or in thrée wéekes after it was borne; and then the chifest of the Parish were faine to fetch it out of your house against your will, which declareth that you allow not Baptisme of Children: and if the childe had died, it had beene damned; because it was not Christned: and you should haue beene damned, because you were the let thereof. Wood. It was baptized as soone as it was borne, by the Midwife; and the cause I blamed my neighbour, was, because they fet my childe out of my house without my leaue, and did more to it then need was, the which was not well done. And where you said, if a childe die, and be not baptized, it is damned: be all damned that receiue not the outward signe of Baptisme? Lang. Yea that they be: For Christ saith: And baptise them in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. And he that beleeueth and is bapti∣zed, shall be saued. And he that beleeueth not, shall be damned. Wood. Then, by your saying, baptizing bringeth faith, and all that be bapti∣zed in the water, shall be saued. Lang. Yea, if they dye before they come to discretion, they shall be saued eue∣ry one of them: and all that be not baptized shall be damned. Wood. You vnderstand not the Scriptures but as farre as naturall reason can comprehend: the Scriptures are plaine, that they which beleeue not, shall be damned: But it saith not in any place, that they that are not baptized, shall be damned. And where you say, Faith commeth by the vse of the materiall wa∣ter in Baptisme, whether was Iocab baptised before he had faith? Paul saith in the ninth to the Romans, ere euer the children were borne, ere euer they had done good or bad, that the purpose of God, which is by election, might stand, not by rea∣son workes, but by the grace of the Caller, The elder shall serue the yonger: Iacob haue I loued, and Esau haue I hated. This proueth that Faith is before Baptisme: For Circumcision was before Baptisme: And Saint Peter fetcheth the proofe of Baptisme from Noes flood, saying: Whilst the Arke was a preparing wherein but eight persons were saued by water, like as baptisme now saueth vs; not in washing away the filth of the flesh, but in that there is a good conscience consenting to good. But you said, if they be baptised with water, if they die be∣fore yeares of discretion, they be all saued: the which S. Peter is cleane against, vnlesse you grant that Children haue faith before they bee baptized; but what consent of conscience haue Infants? you say they beléeue not before they bee baptized. Lang. The children are baptized in the God-fathers and God-mothers faith; and that is the good conscience that Saint Peter speaketh of, and the Christning is the kéeping of the Law that S. Paul speaketh of, saying: Neither is Circumcision or vncircumcision any thing, but the keeping of the Law is altogether; like as Circumcision was the keeping of the old law, so is Baptisme the keeping of the new Law. VVood. You confesse that neither circumcision nor vncircumcision auaileth not, which you haue coupled with baptisme, prouing that none of them preuaile, but the kéeping of the law, which law you say is kept by outward signes: which is nothing so; for Abraham beléeued God, and that was imputed vnto him for righteousnesse: and this was before he was circumcised, so the children beléeue before they be either circumcised or baptized, according to my first saying, Iacob haue I loued, and Esau haue I hated. This sheweth that Iacob had faith in his mo∣thers
wombe. Also Iohn Baptist was sanctified in his mothers wombe, therfore it was counted vnto him for righteousnesse: and I am sure, if they had died before they had either receiued circumcision or baptisme, concerning the outward déede, they had béene saued: for Gods gifts and calling are such that hee cannot repent him of; but by your saying he doth repent and change: for you say, kéeping of the outward law is all in all: and where you say they be baptised in the Godfathers & Godmothers faith, what if they be vnbeleeuers? In what faith then is the childe baptized? Lang. If one amongst the thrée God-fathers & God-mothers that baptize the childe be not a beleeuer, you would count that there were bery few beleeuers: If you would haue none beléeuers but them that be of your mind, then were Christs flocke a very little flocke. VVood. In the 12 of Luke Christ saith, his flocke is a little flocke: and where you make a question of one amongst thrée, there is not one amongst three hun∣dred as farre as I can sée, else there would not be so many which would séek their neighbours goods and liues. Lang. If Christs flocke bee such a little flocke, tell mee how many there bee of them. VVood. First, the Prophet saith, Follow not a multitude to do euill: for the most go the wrong way; and Christ saith, Math. 7. The way is brode, and the gate wide that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that goe in thereat: And straight is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth to life, and few there be that finde it. And in the 12 of Luke Christ saith; Come you little flocke, it is your Fa∣thers will to giue you a kingdome. And in the 3 of Mark, and 7 of Mathew, Christ saith; The tree is kowne by his fruits, a good tree bringeth forth good fruits, and a bad tree bad fruits: And euery tree that bringeth not forth good fruits, shall be ewne downe, and cast into the fire: Christ meaneth into hell, and your fruites declare you to be one of them. Lang. It was time such a fellow as you were taken indéed: such a one is enough to trouble a whole Countrey: you deny Originall sin, and Frée-will. Wood. What frée-will hath a man to do good of himselfe? Lang. All men haue as much frée-will as Adam had before his fall: for as by the meanes of Adam all became sinners, so by the obedience of Christ, all men be∣came righteous, and were set as free as they were before their fall. Wood. What an ouer-throw haue you giuen your selfe here in Originall sinn, and yet cannot sée it: for in prouing we haue free-will, you haue denyed originall sinne. For if we be set as free by the death of Christ, as Adam was be∣fore his fall, I am sure Adam had no originall sinne before his fall. If wee bee so frée now as hee was then, I maruell why Saint Paul complained thrice to God to take away the sting of it, GOD making him answere, My grace is suffici∣ent for thee. This proueth originall sinne, but not that it shall hurt Gods elect, but that his grace is sufficient for his. But you say in one place it is not without baptisme, and in another place you put it away quite by the death of Christ. And you haue spoken truer then you be aware of: for all that beleeue in Christ are baptized in his blood; and yet I say with Dauid in the 51 Psalme, I was borne in sinne, and in sinne hath my mother conceiued me: but no such sinne as shall be imputed, be∣cause I am borne of God by faith, as saith Saint Iohn: therefore I am blessed, as saith the Prophet, because the Lord imputeth not my sinne: and not because I haue no sinne; not of mine owne deseruing, but of his free mercy hee saueth vs. Where is now your free-will? If we haue free-will, our saluation commeth of our owne selues, and not of God, and his word. Saint Iames saith, Euery good and perfect gift commeth from the Father of light: of his owne will begat he vs. For the winde bloweth where it listeth, and wee heare the sound thereof, saith Saint Iohn, but wee cannot tell from whence it commeth, nor whither it goeth.
Euen so it is with euery one that is borne of God: For Saint Paul saith: It is God that worketh the will and the deede, euen of his good will; therefore our owne will is nought at all, except it be to wickednesse. After these and other Examinations, wherein there is no other materiall point of Religion handled, he was called forth to his condemnation: and so was depriued of his life with the other nine aforesaid, which were taken but the same day, or the day before. AMBROSE. HE died in Maidstone goale, who else should haue beene burned for his con∣science, in the truth, as the other were. Simon Miller, and Elizabeth Cooper. SImon dwelt at Linne,Iuly 13. he came to Norwich, where he standing in the prease, and hearing the people comming out of the Church, the Masse being ended, he asked them where he might go to haue the Communion: they maruailed to heare his boldnesse; and some said, if he would needes go to a Communion, he would bring him where he should be sped of his purpose: whereupon hee was brought vnto Dowing, Chancellor of Norwich; who, after a little talke with him, com∣mitted him to prison. As he was examined, a pece of paper appeared aboue his shooe: it was spied, and taken out, and it was a confession of his faith. The Chan∣cellor asked him if he would stand to that confession of his faith: he constantly af∣firmed he would. The Kéeper gaue him leaue to go to his house, whilst hee set all things in order: and then hee returned, and constantly abiding in his purpose, and defence of Gods truth, he was by the Bishop and his Chancellor condemned and burned. With him was burned the said Elizabeth, a Pewterers wife dwelling in Saint Andrewes in Norwich, where she had before recanted, and being troubled inwardly for the same, she came to Saint Andrewes Church, whilst they were at their Popish Seruice, and said, shee reuoked her recantation before made in that place, and was heartily sorry that shee euer did it, willing the people not to bee deceiued, nor to take her doing before for any example. Then Master Marsham, and one Bacon of the said Parish, cried, Master Shriefe, will you suffer this? Whereupon the Shriefe came to her house, at whose knocking she came downe, and was taken, and sent to Prison: shee was condemned and burned with the said Simon Miller. William Bougeor, Thomas Benold, Robert Purcas, Agnes Siluer-side, alias Smith, Widow, Ellen Ew∣ring, Elizabeth Folkes Maid, William Munt, Iohn Iohnson, Allice Munt, Rose Allen, Maid. WIlliam Bougeor was of the Parish of S. Nicholas in Colchester, he said the sa∣crament of the Altar was bread, is bread, & so remaineth bread, and is not the
Holier, but the worse for the Consecration. To this hee did stand, and a∣gainst all the rest of their Papisticall Doctrine: and so had sentence read against them. Thomas Benold of Colchester, Tallow-Chaundler, affirmed the like in effect, and so had sentence. William Purchas of Bocking in Essex, Fuller, said when hee receiued the Sacrament, he receiued bread in an holy vse, that preacheth y• remembrance that Christ died for him: he stood in this, and against other their Popish matters, ad also had sentence. Agnes Siluer-side, alias Smith, Widdow, dwelling at Colchester, said shee loued no consecration: for the Bread and Wine is the worse for it. She answe∣red them with sound iudgement, and great boldnesse to all things they asked her, and was condemned. Ellen Ewring, the wife of Iohn Ewring of Colchester, Widdow, answered to the like effect as the other did, denying all the lawes, set forth by the Pope, with her whole heart, she was condemned. Elizabeth Folkes, Maid-seruant in Colchester, being examined whether shee beleeued the presence of Christs body in the Sacrament Substantially or no, answered, shee beleeued that it was a substantiall lye, and reall lye. They cha∣fing, asked her againe, whether, after Consecration, there remained not in the Sacrament the body of Christ: she answered, that before consecration, and after it is but bread, and the man the blesseth without Gods word, is accursed and ab∣hominable by the word. Then they examined her of confession to a Priest, of go∣ing to Masse, and of the authority of the Bishop of Rome: she answered, shee would neither vse nor frequent any of them, but did abhorre them from the bot∣tome of her heart, and such like trumpery: so shee was condemned, shee kneeled downe and praised God that euer shee was borne to sée that blessed day, that the Lord would count her worthy to suffer for the testimony of Christ: and Lord forgiue▪ them that haue done this, if it bee thy will: for they know not what they doe: And rising vp, shee exhorted them all to Repentance, and bad the halting Gospellers beware of blood, for that would crye for ven∣geance. William Munt of Muchbentley in Essex, said that the Sacrament of the Al∣tar was an abhominable Idoll, and that he should displease God if he should ob∣serue any part of the Popish proceedings: and therefore, for feare of Gods ven∣geance he dare not do it. He was 61 years old; he was examined of many things, but he stood to the truth, and was condemned. Iohn Iohnson of Thorp in Essex was condemned, who answered to the same effect as the other did. Allice Munt, the wife of the said William Munt, 61 yeares old, answered as her husband had done, and was condemned. Rose Allen, Maid, the daughter, ofthe said Allice Munt, M. Edmond Terrell, which came of the house of them Terrels which murdered K. Edward the fifth, and his brother; when, with diuers others, hee was come into the house of William Munt, to search his house, and to apprehend him and his wife. Hee met with this Rose Allen going with a candle to fetch drinke for her mo∣ther, and willed her to giue her father and mother good counsel, she said, they haue a better councellour then I: for the Holy Ghost doth teach them, I hope, which I trust will not suffer them to erre. Why, said hee, art thou still in this minde, thou naughty house-wife, it is time to looke to such heretickes. She said, with that which you call heresie, I worship my Lord God. Then (quoth he) I perceiue you will burne with the rest for company. She said, not for company, but for Christs sake, if I be compelled. Then he tooke the Candle from her, and held her wrist, and the burning Candle vnder her hand so long, vntill the sinewes crac∣ked in sunder, saying often vnto her, Thou young Whoore, wilt thou
not crie: she answered, she thanked God she had cause to reioyce, hee had more cause to wéepe then she: when her synowes brake, all in the house heard them, hée thrust her from him and said, Ah strong whore, thou shamelesse beast, with such vile words; then she said, haue you done what you will? I (said he) if you thinke it be not well mend it: she said the Lord giue you repentance if it be his will, and you thinke it good begin at the féete and burne vnto the head also, for he that set you no worke will pay you your wages one day. She being examined of auricular confession, of going to Masse, and of the po∣pish seuen Sacraments: she answered that they stanke in the face of God, she said they were the members of Antichrist, and should haue, if they repented, not the reward of Antichrist. Being asked what she could say of the Sea of the Bishop of Rome, his Sea (quoth she) is for Crowes and Kites, Owles and Rauens to swim in, such as you be; for I by the grace of God will not swim in that sea while I liue, then she was condemned. These ten godly Martyrs were burned at Colchester, sire in the forenoone, and foure in the afternoone, when the fire was about them, they clapped their hands for ioy, & ioyfully ioyed in the fire, and thousands standing by, cryed generally all almost, the Lord strengthen them, the Lord comfort them, as was wonderfull to heare. Iohn Thurstone. HE was taken in the house of William Munt, with him he died in May in Col∣chester castle, a constant confessor of Iesus Christ. Thomas Moore. HE was a Merchant dwelling in Leicester about 24. yeares olde, for saying his maker was in heauen and not in the Pixe, he was apprehended, the Bishop said to him, what is yonder aboue the altar? he said, I cannot tel what you would haue me to sée, I sée fine clothes with golden tassels, and other gay geare hanging about the Pixe, what is within I cannot sée, why said the Bishop, doest thou not beléeue Christ to be there flesh and bone?  said he that I do not; whereupon the Ordinary condemned him, who suffred a ioyfull and glorious Martyrdome for testimony of righteousnesse in Leicester. George Eagles, alias Trudge-ouer. HE wandred abrode in diuers countries,August. 20. where he could finde any of his bre∣thren, did there more earnestly encourage and comfort them, now tarrying in this towne, and somtimes in that, certaine months as occasion serued; sometimes for feare lying in fields and woods, who for his vnreasonable going abroade was called Trudge-ouer, for thrée yeares he dranke nothing but water, and when hée perceiued that his body by Gods prouidence prooued well enough therewith, hée
thought best to inure himselfe therewithall, against all necessities: when he had profited the Church of God by this going abroade a yeare or two, diuers spyes were sent out for him, who had in commandement to bring him quicke or dead, wheresoeuer they found him; but when they could not take him, they sent out an Edict in the Quéenes name into foure shires, promising twenty pounds to him that should take him, at length he was séene at a faire in Colchester, and being pursued, he hid himselfe in a wood, and from thence got into a corne field, when they could not finde him, they returned, but one got vpon the top of a trée, to spy if he could sée him stirre, the poore man thinking all sure, because he heard nothing, rose vpon his knées, the lurker perceiuing him, came downe and tooke him, and brought him to prison to Colchester; notwithstanding, the Iudas-knaue which had so much promised him, was faine to take a little reward, this George within foure dayes after, was conuayed to Chelmester where he was so cruelly handled, that he had but two pound of bread and a little water measured to him, to serue him a wéeke together: after a while hee was brought out and indicted of treason, because he had assembled companies together contrary to the lawes in that case prouided to auoyde sedition, that if aboue sixe should flocke together, they should be attached of treason, which straight law was the casting away of the good Duke of Sommerset. This George, was led to be hangd, drawne and quar∣tered betwixt two théeues, the one of them did nothing but mocke him, and the more he was rebuked, the more he mocked him, but when he should die, he could not speake to vtter his mind, nor say his prayers, and one said the Pater noster to him word by word as to a childe, which he could not answer but fumblingly, ma∣ny did wonder at the iust iudgement of God vpon him for mocking the good martyr. He that apprehended the said George Eagles, his name was Ralph Har∣din dwelling in Colchester, who in the yeare 1561. was condemned at Chelms∣ford to be hanged, and being at the barre, he told the Iudge and a great multitude of people, this is most iustly fallen vpon me, for that I betrayed the innocent blood of a good and iust man George Eagles, who was condemned here in the time of Quéene Marie through my procurement, who sold his blood for a little money. Richard Crashfield of Wimondham. HE suffered at Norwich, whose examination before Downings the Chancel∣lour, written by himselfe as followeth: Chanc. Do you beléeue this, that aftee the consecration there is the substance of Christs body and blood in the Sacrament. Crash. I beléeue that Christs body was broken for me vpon the crosse, and his blood shed for my redemption: wherefore the bread and wine is a perpetuall me∣mory, the pledge of Christ mercie, the ring or seale of his promise, and a perpetual memory for the faithfull vnto the end of the world: then he was commanded vnto prison, and the next day he was brought forth. Chanc. Cannot you find in your heart when you come to Church, to knéele be∣fore the Roode and pray. I answered no, alledging the commandements of God to the contrary: he said, Haue you not read that God commanded the brazen ser∣pent to be made▪ I said, I haue read that God commanded it to be made, and like∣wise to be broken downe. Doctor Bridges. Wherfore did God command the Cherubins and Seraphins to be made? I said, I cannot tell, I would faine learne: he said, can you finde in your heart to fall downe before the Roode the picture of Christ? I said, I feare the curse of God, is yonder Roode the picture of Christ? It is written, God curseth the hands that made them, and the hands that made the tooles which carued them.
Chanc. When were you confessed to a Priest. I said, I confesse my selfe dayly the eternall God, whom I most gréeuously offend, I take confession to a Priest not be good but rather wicked: then he said, how say yo by yonder singing and playing on the Organs, is it not good and godly: I said, I can perceiue no god∣lines in it: he said, is it not written in the Psalmes, that we shall praise God with hymnes and spirituall songs. I said, spirituall songs must be had, but yonder is of the flesh and of the spirit of errour, for to you it is pleasant and glorious, but vnto the Lord it is bitter and odious: then he said, is it not written, My house is an house of prayer: I said yes, it is written also, that you made my house of prayer a den of theeues: then he said, haue we done so, then I was commanded to ward, and the next thursday sent for againe. Chanc. Are you a new man. I answered, I trust I am a new man borne of God: God giue you grace to be so, then he prayed Doctor Pore to talke with me. Doctor. Take eate this is my body: Do you not beléeue it is Christs body, what was it that Christ gaue? I said, Christ tooke bread and gaue thanks, and gaue it, and they tooke bread and did eate bread, and S. Paul saith, So oft as you shal eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup, you shall shew forth the Lords death vntill he come, S. Paul, doth not call it Christs body. Chanc. We will haue your minde more plainely, for we intend not to haue many words with you,: I said, my faith is grounded vpon Christ the Easter lambe, he hath offered his body a sacrifice to God the price of my redemption, by that onely sacrifice all the faithfull are sanctified, and he is our onely aduocate mediatour, and he hath made perfect our redemption, without any of your dadly oblations. Doctor Bridges: You take wel the litterall sence, but as Christ offered his body vpon the Crosse, which was a bloody sacrifice, and a visible sacrifice, so likewise we doe offer vp the selfe same body that was offered vpon the crosse, but not bloudy and visible, but inuisible vnto God, I said, then Christs sacrifice was not perfe∣cted, but Christ is true when all men be liers: then he saide, Thou shalt not feare him that hath power to kill the body, but thou shalt feare him (enterpreting him to meane the Church) which hath power to kill body and soule: Christ said, We should feare him (and not them) the hath power to cast body and soule into hel, meaning God, and not the Church, and if you will presume to offer Christs body dayly, then your power is aboue Christs power: then he was condemned, and with patience and constancie entred his blessed martyrdome, at whose burning one Thomas Carman was apprehended for words, praying with him, and pledg∣ing him at his burning. One Frier and the sister of George Eagles. THese suffered the like martyrdome by the vnrighteous Papists, whose tyran∣ny the Lord of his mercy abate and cut short, turning that wicked generati∣on to abetter minde. They were burned at Rochester. IOHN CVRD. HE was a Shoomaker of Sisam in Northamptonshire, hée was impri∣soned in Northampton castle for denying the Popish transubstantiation,Septb. 20.
for the which William Bruter Chancelour vnto the Bishop of Peterborrow did pronounce sentence of death against him: a popish priest standing by when he was to bee burned, one Iohn Rote vicar of S. Giles in Northampton, shewed him if he should recant he was authorised to giue him his pardon, he answered, he had his pardon by Iesus Christ. Cicelie Ormes. SHe suffered at Norwich; she was taken at the death of Symon Miller,September. 1. and E∣lizabeth Cooper, for that she said she would pledge them of the same cup they dranke of, one master Cobet of Sprowson tooke her and sent her to the Chance∣lour, he asked her what she said vnto the Sacrament of Christs body, and what is that the Priest holdeth ouer his head, she answered, it was bread, and if you make it better, it is worse; so she was sent to prison, after she was called and examined before the Chancelour, and master Bridges the Chancelor offered her, if she would go to Church & kéep her tongue, she should be at libertie, and beléeue as she would: but she tould him she would not consent to his wicked desire therein, and if shée should God would plague her: then he tolde her, he had shewed more fauour vnto her then euer he did vnto any, and when he could not preuaile, he condemned her; she was borne in East Derrham and was daugher vnto one Thomas Hawood Tailor, she was taken a twelue-moonth before and recanted, but was neuer after quiet in conscience: she had gotten a letter written to be deliuered to ye Chancelor, to let him know she repented her recantation, & would neuer do the like againe as long as she liued, but before she exhibited her bill, she was taken and imprisoned as before; when she was at the stake she told the people, I would you should not re∣port of me that I beléeue to be saued in that I offer my selfe here to death for the Lord cause, but I beléeue onely to be saued by the death of Christs passion, and this my death is and shall be a witnesse of my faith vnto you all, good people, as many of you as beléeue as I doe, pray for me: then she kissed the stake and sayd, welcome swéet crosse of Christ; aft the fire was kindled, she said, My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit doth reioyce in God my Sauiour: and so yéelded her life vnto the Lord as quietly as if she had béene in a slumber, or as one féeling no paine, so wonderfully did the Lord worke with her. Mistresse Ioyce Lewis. SHe was the wife of Thomas Lewis of Mancetter,September. 10. in the beginning of Quéene Maries time she went to Church and heard Masse, vntill the burning of Lau∣rence Saunders in Couentry, then she inquired of such as she knew feared God, the cause of his death, and when she knew it was because he refused to receiue the Masse, she began to be troubled in conscience, & she reforted to master Iohn Glo∣uer, a very godly man, of whom mentioned is made before, and desired him to tell her the faults that were in the Masse, who instructed her in the wayes of the Lord, approuing vnto her, out of Gods holy word, that the Masse, with al other papisti∣cal inuentions, was odious in Gods sight, so she began to hate the Masse, & being compelled by her husband to come vnto Church, when the holy water was cast, she turned her backe towards it: wherupon she was accused vnto the Bishop, and a citation was snt for her and her husband, the Sumner deliuered the citation to her husband, who willed him to take the citation away with him, or else he would make him eate it, and in the end he made the Sumner eate the citation by setting a dagger vnto his brest, and then he caused him to drinke, and so sent him away, but after they were commanded to appeare before my Lord, her husband desired my
Lord to be good vnto him: my Lord was content to receiue his submission▪ so that his wife would submit her selfe likewise, but she told the Bishop that she had ney∣ther offended God nor his lawes in refusing holy water: the Bishop gaue her a mo∣neths respite, binding her husband in a hundred pound to bring her to him at the mo∣neths end. When the moneth was almost expired, her husband was aduertised by the said M. Glouer and others, not to carry his wife to the Bishop, but to séeke some way to saue her; and if the worst should come, to be content to forfeit the Band ra∣ther then to cast his wife into the fire: he answered, he would not forfeit any thing for her sake, but carried his wife vnto the Bishop, who found her more stout then she was before: so she was sent to such a stinking prison, that a maid that was ap∣pointed to kéep her company did sound in the said prison. She was often examined, and euer found stout; at length she was pronounced an heretick. When the Bishop asked her, why she would not come vnto the masse, and receiue the sacraments and sacramentals of holy Church: she answered, because she could not find them in Gods word: he said, if thou wilt beléeue no more then is in the scriptures concerning mat∣ters of religion, thou art in a damnable case: she told my Lord his words were vn∣godly and wicked. After her condemnation she continued a year in prison. Wher the Writ came to burn her, she said▪ as for the feare of death I do not greatly passe: when I behold the amiable countenance of Christ my deare Sauiour, the vgly face of death doth not greatly trouble me. In the which time she reasoned most comfor∣tably out of Gods word of election and reprobation: in the euening before she should die, two Priests came to her to heare her confession; for they would be sorie, they said, she should die without it. She sent them word she had made her confession vn∣to Christ, at whose hands she was sure to haue forgiuenes of her sins: for the cause for which she should die, she had no cause to repent, but rather to praise God that he made her worthy to suffer death for his word, and the absolution that they were a∣ble to giue her by the authority of the Pope, she defied it. Well, said the Priests, to morrow her stoutnes will be tried. All the night she was wonderfull cheerefull and merry. About thrée of the clock in the morning, Sathan began to stirre himselfe bu∣sily, questioning with her, how she could tell that she was chosen to eternall life, and that Christ died for her: I grant he died, but that hee died for thée, how canst thou tell? She being troubled with this suggestion, they that were about her counsailed her to follow the example of S. Paule, to be faithfully perswaded that Christ loued her, and gaue himselfe for her: for S. Paule was perswaded that Christ loued him; and her calling, and true beléefe, and knowledge of Gods word was a manifest to∣ken of Gods loue towards her, and the operation of the spirit of God, in working in her a loue and a desire to please God: by these perswasions and the comfortable promises of Christ brought out of the Scripture, Sathan was put to flight, and she comforted in Christ. When she came to the stake, she prayed to God most instantly to abolish the vile masse; at which prayer all the people said Amen: then she tooke a cup of drinke that was brought vnto her, and drunk vnto all them that vnfainedly lo∣ued the Gospell of Christ, and wished for the abolishment of papistry: a great num∣ber of the women of the towne pledged her. When the fire was kindled about her, she neither strugled nor stirred: the Papists had appointed some of theirs to raile vpon her, and reule her openly as she went to execution; and whilst she was at the stake, amongst others there was an old priest which had writing tables, and noted the names of the women which drunke with her, and caused Processe to be sent for them, but God defended them from the hands of the Tyrants. Ralph Alerton, Iames Awstoo, Margery Awstoo and Richard Roth. ON the 17. of September these foure were burned at Iington néere London. Ralph Alerton comming to his parish Church of Bently, and séeing the people
sitting there idle, exhorted them that they would fall to prayer, and meditation of Gods word, wherevnto they consented: after prayer, he read vnto them a chapter out of the New Testament, and departed; In which exercise he continued vntill Candlemas: and then being informed that he might not doe so by law (because he was no Priest) he left off and kept himself close in his house vntill Easter: af∣ter he was constrained to forsake his house, and liue in woods, and such places vntill he was apprehended After his Examination, my Lord Darcy sent him vp vnto the Councell, who sent him to Boner; who tempted him openly to recant at Paules Crosse, and set him at liberty, which after wrought such a terrour in his conscience: but the Lord with his fauourable chastisement did raise him vp againe with Peter, giuing him vnfained repentance, and a most constant boldnes to professe his name, and glori∣ous Gospell: Wherefore at the procurement of Thomas Tye Priest, hee was ap∣prehended againe, and sent to Boner, before whom he was diuers times examined, which examinations written with his owne hand in bloud for lack of Inke, here∣after follow. His first Examination. Boner. AH Sirra, how chanceth it, that you are come hether againe in this fashion? Rafe. Forsooth, if your Lordship remember, I set my hand vnto a writing; the Contents thereof as I remember was, that I did beléeue all things as the Catho∣lique church teacheth, in the which I did not disburse my mind, but shamefully dis∣sembled, because I made no difference betwixt the true church▪ & vntrue Church. Boner. Which is the true Church: doest thou call the heretiques Church, the true Church, or the Catholiques Church. Rafe. I vtterly abhorre the hereticks Church as abhominable before God, with all their enormities and heresies, the Church Catholique is it that I onely im∣brace, whose doctrine is sincere, pure and true. Boner. By S. Augustine that is well said: Then a Priest said to my Lord, you know not what Church it is, which he calleth Catholick: Then hee said by Saint Mary he might a deceiued me: Sirra, which is the Catholick Church? Rafe. That which hath receiued the wholesome sound spoken of by Esay, Da∣uid, Malachy, & Paul, with many others me, the which sound as it is written hath gone throughout all the earth in euery place, and to the end of the world. Bon. Yea thou saist true before God, for this is the sound that hath gone foorth throughout all Christendome, and he that beléeueth not this Church as S. Cyprian saith doth erre: Hee saith whosoeuer is out of the Church, is like vnto them that are out of Noahs ship, when the floud came vpon the whole world: for the Church is not alone in Germany, or here in England, in the time of the late schismes, as the hereticks doe affirme: for then were Christ a lyar, for he promised the holy Ghost should come vnto vs, and leade vs in all truth, and remaine with vs vnto the end of the world: So if we wil take Christ for a true sayer, then the way that is taught in France, Spaine, Flanders, Italy, Denmarke, Scotland, and all Christendome ouer must needs be the true Catholick Church. Rae. I spake of all the world, and not of all Christendome onely, for the Gospell hath been preached and persecuted in all Nations: First in Iury by the Scribes and Pharisies: And since by Nero, Dioclesian, and such like: and in our daies by your Lordship knoweth whom: your church is no more catholick then was figured by Cain, Ieroboam, Ahab, Iezabel, Nabuchadonosor, Antiochus, Herod, with en∣numerable more the like: and Daniel, and Esdras prophesieth of these last daies, and that there shall come greeuous wolues to deuoure the flocke, is affirmed by Christ and his Apostles, Boner. Hee is the rankest hereticke that euer came before mee, by Alhal∣lowes
thou shalt be burned, thou whoron varlet and Pricklouse, the prophecie is of you: what is the saying of Esdras that you speake of? Rafe. He saith, the heate of a great multitude is kindled ouer you, and they shall take away certaine of you, and feed the Idols with Idols, and he that consen∣teth not to them shall be troden vnder foote, had in derision, and laughed to scorn, yea, they shall be like madde men, for they shall spare no man, they shall spoyle and wast such as eare the Lord. Bonner. Esdras speaketh of you hereticks, declaring the hate that you beare to the Catholicke Church, making the simple people beleeue that all is Idolatry that we doe, and so intice them away, vntill you haue ouercome them. Rafe. Nay, Esdras declareth it more plaine, saying, They shall take away their goods, and put them out of their houses, and then shall it be knowne who are my chosen; for they shall be tried as the siluer or golde in the fire: and it is come to passe as he hath said; for who is not driuen from house and home, and his goods taken vp for other men that neuer sweat for them? If he doe not obserue as you command and haue set forth, or else if he be taken he must denie the truth, as I did, in dissembling, or else he shall be sure to be tried, as Esdras saith, whereby all the world may know you are the bloudie Church, figured by Caine the Tyrant, and you are not able to auoyde it. Bonner. He is an Hereticke, let him be carried to London, and kept in little∣ase vntill I come. Rafe. And so I was vntill the next morning, and then I was brought before Bonner, the Deane of Paules, the Chancellor, and others. Bonner. How say you sirra, will you goe to Fulham with me, and there kneele downe at Masse, shewing thy selfe outwardly that thou diddest it not vn∣willingly but with a good will? I said I will not say so. He said, away with him, away with him. After I was brought before the Bishop, and three Noble-men of the Councell. Bonner. How say you sirra, after consecration there remaineth no bread, but the very body of Christ, God and man vnder the forme of bread? Rafe. Where find you that my Lord written. Bonner. Doth not Christ say, This is my Body? Wilt thou denie the words of Christ, or was he a dissembler, speaking one thing and doing another. Now I haue taken you. Rafe. Yea, you haue taken me, and will keepe me vntill you haue killed me: Christ said, Take you, eate you, this is my bodie; and if you will ioyne the former words with the latter, then I will answer you. Bonner. Then thou must say it is his bodie; for Chirst saith it himselfe. Rafe. He is true, and all men liers, yet I refuse to take the wordes of Christ so phantastically, for then should I conspire with certaine hereticks calld Ne∣storians, for they denie that Christ had a true naturall body, and so doe you, my Lord, if you will affirme his body to be there as you say he is, then you must néeds affrme that it is a phantasticall body, therefore let thee words goe before, Take ye and eate yee, without which words the rest are not sufficient, but when the worthy receiuers doe take and eate, euen thn is fulfiled the wordes of our Sauiour, to e∣uery man that so receiueth. Esay in his nine and fitieth Chapter saith, He that re∣fraineth himselfe from euill must be spoyled: and Amos saith the like wordes, for the wise must be faine to hold their peace, so wicked a time it is, neuerthelesse, hee that can speake the truth and will not, must giue a straite account. A Doctor. By my Lords leaue you speake like a foole: you must not iudge the Scriptures, but must stand to learne and not to teach, for the whole Congregation hath decided the matter long agoe: then was I carryed away. Rochest. Were you a companion of George Eagles, alias Trudgeouer. I had him once and he was as drunke as an Ape, and runk so of drinke that I could not a∣bide him.
Rafe. I dare say it was either your selfe or some of your companie: for he did neither drinke Wine, Ale nor Béere in a quarter of a yeare before that time. After, because he misliked the masse, calling vpon Saints, and carrying the Crosse on procession, with other their ceremonies, calling them Idolatry, and for singing in  against the Sacrament of the Altar, and other ordinances of the Church, so lowd that the people abroad might heare them, and delight in them, and for saying that he beleeued nothing that was contained in the Councell holde vnder Innocentius the third, and for affirming that those that were burned at Col∣chester were Saints in heauen. He was condemned, and he and the other thrée before mentioned were all burned as before. Awstoo being in the Bishops Chappell at Fulham, the Bishop asked him if hee knew where he was; he answered in an Idoll Temple: and he said he receiued the very body and bloud of Christ by faith in the Supper of the Lord, but not in the Sacrament of the Altar: and his wife said, she beleeued that the Religion then v∣sed in England was not according to Gods word, but false and corrupted, and that they which did goe thereto did it more for feare of the law then otherwise; and she said that she defied the Masse with all her heart, and that she would not come into any Church wherein was Idols. As she was in the Bishops prison, by his procurement there was sent a stoute Champion, as appeareth, about twelue of the clock at night, who suddenly opened the doore, and with a knife drawne, fell vpon her to haue cut her throat; but shee calling to God for helpe, he giuing a grunt, and fearing (belike) to commit so cruell a deede, departed without any more hurt doing: the next night they made a great rumbling like thunder ouer her head, to the intent to haue feared her out of her wits, but God be thanked they missed of their purpose. The aforesaid Richard Roth affirmed that there was not the very body and bloud of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, as it was then vsed, but that it was a dead God, and that the Masse was detestable and contrary to Gods word and will, from the which faith he would not decline. He said to Bonner, My Lord, be∣cause the people should not sée your doings, you cause me and others to be brought to our examinations by night, being affraide belike to doe it by day: and being perswaded to recant and aske mercie of Bonner; No (quoth Roth) I will not aske mercie of him that cannot giue it, whereupon he and the rest were condemned, as before, and most ioyfully ended their liues in the fire at Islington, for the testimony of Christ and his Gospell. Agnes Bonger and Margaret Thurstone. THese were condemned at the same time and in the same place that the tenne before mentioned were, which suffered Martyrdome at Colchester, and for the like cause, and answered also in their examinations the like in effect as the o∣ther did. When these good and godly women were brought vnto the place in Colche∣ster where they should suffer; after they had falne downe vpon their knees, and made their most humble and hearty prayers vnto God, they went to the stake ioy∣fully, where with great ioy and glorious triumph, gaue vp their soules vnto the handes of the Lord.
Iohn Noyes of Lexfield, in the County of Suffolke, Shoemaker. THe twenty two of September, he was taken by the Constables, and brought before Maister Thurstone,1557 Sir Iohn Tyrell, Maister Kene, Iustices, and Sir Iohn Silyerde, high Sheriffe, who cast him into Eye-dongeon: hee was carried from thence to Norwich, and so came before the Bishop, who condemned him, be∣cause he answered that he thought the naturall body of Christ to bee onely in Hea∣uen, and not in the Sacrament: as hee remained Prisoner in the Guild-hall of Norwich, one Nicholas Fiske his Brother in Law came to him to comfort him, he asked if he did not feare death when the Bishop condemned him: he said, hee than∣ked God, he feared not death no more at that time then when he was at libertie. When he was bound vnto the stake, he said, feare not them that ill the body, but feare him that can kill both bodie and soule, and cast it into euerlasting fire. When he saw his Sister wéeping, he said, Wéep not for mee, but wéepe for your sinnes: when the Faggots were set vnto him, he said; Blessed bee the time that euer I was borne to come vnto this, and kissed the Faggot. Then he said to the people, they say, that they can make God of a péece of Bread, but beléeue them not: Then said he, Good people beare witnesse, that I doe beléeue to bee saued by the merits and passion of Christ, and not by mine owne déedes, so the fire was kindled about him: then he said, Lord haue mercy vpon me, Christ haue mercy vpon me, Sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon me. In the Dioces of Chichester, diuers were martyred for the testimony of righ∣teousnesse in Quéene Maries raigne, in the number of whom were these: Iohn For∣man of East-Grinsted, Iohn Warner of Berne, Christian Grouer of the Arch-dea∣coy of Lewis, Thomas Athoch Priest, Thomas Auington of Erdingly, Denis Burgs of Burstéed, Thomas Rauensdale of Ri▪ Iohn Milles of Hellinglegh, Ni∣cholas Holden of Withiam, Iohn Hart of Withiam, Margery Moris of Hethfielde, Anne Try of East-Grinstéed, Iohn Osward of Woodmancote, Thomas Harland of Woodmancote, Iames Moris of Heathfield, Thomas Dowgate of East-Grinstéed, Iohn Ashdon of Retherfield. Thomas Spurdance Queene Maries Seruant. HE was examined before the Chancellor of Norwich, who asked him if hee had confessed his sinnes vnto a Priest: I said, I had confessed my sinnes vn∣to God, who saith: Whensoeuer a Sinner repenteth, and is sorry for his sinnes, and asketh him forgiuenesse, willing no more so to doe, he will no more reckon his sin vnto him, and that is sufficient for me: I deny that I should shew my sinnes vnto the Priest. Chancel. Haue you receiued the blessed Sacrament of the Altar at Easter: he answered: I dare not meddle with it as you vse it, for the holy Supper of the Lord serueth for the Christian Congregation, and you are none of Christs Mem∣bers, I dare not meddle with you, least I be like vnto you, for you teach Lawes contrary to Gods Lawes: then he said; Doe you not beleeue, that after the Sa∣crament is consecrated, it is the very same body that was borne of the Uirgine Mary, and I said no, that was a bloody sacrifice, and this is a dry sacrifice: And I said, Is the Masse a Sacrifice? a Doctor answered, it is a Sacrifice both for the
quicke and the dead: I said it is no sacrifice, for S. Paule saith, That Christ made one sacrifice once for all, I beleeue in no other sacrifice. Chancel. He is an Hereticke, he denth the Sacrament of the Altar: I said, I beleeue, that if I cme rightly and worthily as God hath commaunded me vnto the Supper of the Lord, I receiue him by Faith, but the Bread being receiued is not GOD, nor the Bread that is yonder in the Pixe is not God, God dwelleth not in Temples made with hands, neither will be worshipped with the workes of mens hands; therefore you do very euill to cause the people to kneele downe and worship the bread: for God did neuer bid you to hold it vp aboue your heads, ney∣ther had the Apostles such vse. Chanc. Write that Article: then said I; The Seruant is not greater then the Mai∣ster: your Predecssors killed my Maister Christ; the Prophets and Apostles, and holy vertuous men, and now you also kill the Seruants of Christ: so all the righ∣teous blood that hath beene shed from righteous Abell to this day, shall be requi∣red at your hands, then the Chancellor bad haue me away. Another Examination before the Bishop. Bishop. SIrre, dost thou not beleeue▪ that the Pope is supreme head of the Ca∣tholike Church: I said▪ I do not beleeue that he is aboue the Apostles, they disputing which of them should bee greatest when their M. Christ was gone, Christ answered their thouhts, saying; The Kings of the earth beare dominion aboue others, but you shall not doe so, for he that is greatest amongst you, shall be Seruant vnto you all. How is it then that the Pope will climbe so high aboue his fellowes? you cannot proue by the Scripture that he is head of the Church. Bishop. As the Bell-wether is head of the shepe, so is the Pope head of the Chuch, and as the Bees haue a master Bee to ring them home to the Hiue when they be abroad, so the Pope is ordained by succession of Peter to bring vs home againe vnto the rue Church when we are gone astray: as thou good Fel∣low, hast wandred long out of the way lie a scattered Sheepe, heare therefore the Bell-wether, and now come home with vs vnto thy Mother the Church a∣gaine. I answered, all this is but naturall reason; and no Scripture: he said, you are stout and will not e answered, you shall bee compelled by Law whether you will or no. Spurdance. So your forefathers intreated Christ and his Apostles, they had a Law, and by that Law they put him vnto death: so you haue a Law, which is ty∣ranny, whereby you would inforce me to beleeue as you doe, but I trust the Lord will assist mee against all your beggerly Ceremonies, and make your foolishnesse knowne to the world oe day. He told the Bishop, he neuer vsed the Ceremonies of the Church since he was borne, at the last he interpreted it, since, hee was new borne, as Christ said to Ni∣chodemus; Except you bee new borne you cannot enter into the Kingdome of Heauen: Then a Doctor said I was an Anabaptist, for that was their opinion: I said, I was no Anabaptist▪ for they deny Children to bee baptized, and so doe not I. Bishop. Why doe not you goe vnto the Church and Cermonies: I said; Be∣cause they are contrary to Gods word; as you your selfe haue taught, but now you say it is god againe: and I thinke if there were a returne to morrow, you would say it were false againe which you hold now; therefore I may well say, there is no truth in you: Then he said, I was a stubborne fellow, an Heretick, and a Traytor. Spurdance. There is no man I thanke God to accuse me iustly, that euer I was disobedient to any Ciuill Lawes, but I haue a Soule and a Bodie, and my Soule is none of the Queenes, but my body one goods are the Queens, and I
must giue God my soule, and all that belongeth vnto it, and in lawes contrarie to Gods lawes, I must rather obey God then man: you cannot proue by the word of God, that you should not haue any grauen Images in your Churches, for lay∣mens bookes, or to worship God by them, or that you should haue any ceremonies in the Church as you haue. Bish. It is a decent order to furnish the Church, as when you goe to dinner, you haue a cloth vpon the table to furnish it, so at these ceremonies, a decent order a∣mongst Christians, and if you will not doe them, seeing they are the lawes of the Realme you are an heretick, and disobedient, therefore confesse with vs that you haue been in errour, and come home. Spurd. The spirituall lawes were neuer truelier set forth, then in my Master King Edwards daies, and I trust in God that I shall neuer forsake them whilest so I liue: He was sent to Bury, where he remained in prison. Iohn Hallingsdale, William Sparrow, Richard Gibson. THese three were produced before Bonner Bishop of London: Iohn Halingsdale said, that neither in the time of King Edward the sixt, nor at that present he did beleeue that in the Sacrament is really the body and bloud of Christ, and he would not receiue the same, because he did beleeue that the body of Christ was onely in heauen: and he said that Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, and generally all that of late haue beene burned for hereticks, did preach truly the Gospel, and vpon their preaching he grounded his faith, and he said that the saying of Saint Iohn in the eighteenth chapter of the Reuelation, That the bloud of the Prophets and Saints and of all that were slaine vpon the earth was found in the Babylonicall Church, is vnderstood of the Church whereof the Pope is head: where upon hee was con∣demned. William Sparrow was charged with a submission made the year before vnto the Bishop: he said he was sorie that euer he made it, and it was the worst deed he e∣uer did: and being charged that he went to the Church and heard Masse; he con∣fessed he did so, but it was with a troubled conscience. He tolde the Bishop, that which you call truth I beleeue to be heresie: he confessed that since his submission he had preached against the Sacrament of the Altar, against auricular confession, and other Sacraments, and he said, If euery haire of his head were a man, hee would burne them all rather then goe from the truth: and he said, that the Ecclesi∣asticall Lawes and the Masse were naught and abhominable, whereupon hee was condemned. Richard Gibson was condemned for not comming vnto confession, and for not receiuing the Sacraments of the Popish Masse, and for that he would not sweare to answere vnto their intergatories laid against him: When sentence was read against him, he boldly affirmed, that he was an enemy vnto them all in his minde, though hee had kept it secret for feare of the Law, and hee said hee was blessed in that he was cursed of them: so these three were burned in Smithfield, where they yeelded gloriously and ioyfully their soules into the hands of God. Iohn Rowth Minister, and Margaret Mearing. IN King Edwards time he was a Preacher at New-Castle, Barwicke, and Car∣liel. In Queene Maries time he fled with his Wife into Friseland, and dwelled
at Norden, and liued by knitting of caps, hse, and such like things, but in Octo∣ber last he came ouer into England to buy yarne, and hearing of the secret societie of the congregation of Gods children their assembled▪ hee ioyned himselfe vnto them, and was elected their preacher, and hee taught and confirmed them in the truth of the Gospell: But on the twelfth of December, hee with Cuth∣bert Simpson, and others were apprhended at the Sarisons head in Islington: where the congregation had appointed to assemble themselues to pray, and heare Gods word: they were brought before the Councell, who sent Rowgh to New∣gate, and writ to Boner to examine him, and proceed according vnto the law, who vpon examination before Bonner, confessed that he had spoken against the num∣ber of the Sacraments, being perswaded that there were but two: Baptisme and the Lords Supper: and that hee had taught that in the Sacrament of the Al∣tar, ther is not really and substantially the body and bloud of Christ, but that the substance of bread and wine remaineth without transubstantiation, and that hee thought Confession to a Priest necessarie if hee had offended the Priest, but if the offence were vnto another, it was not necessarie, but the reconcliati∣on ought to bee made to the party so offended, hee denyed Laine seruice, and allowed the seruice of King Edwards time, and hee commended the opinion of Thomas Cranmer, Nicholas Ridley, and Hugh Latimer, and that they were godly learned men. He confessed he had béene familar with diuers Englishmen & women in Friese∣land, and agréed with them in opinion: as Maister Story, Thomas Yong, George Roe, and others, to the number of 100. persons, which fld thither for Religion, vsing the order set forth in King Edwards time. He said that he had béene at Rome about thirty daies, and he saw no good there, but much euill, amongst which he saw one great abhomination, to wit; the Pope being a man that should goe vpon the ground, to be carried vpon the shoulers of foure men, as though he had béene God and no man: also a Cardinall to haue his Harlot to ride openly behind him; and thirdly, a Popes Bull that gaue expresse licence to haue and vse the Stewes, and keepe open bawdery by the Popes au∣thority. And he confessed, that since his last comming vnto England, hee had in sundry places in London read Prayers and Seruice as is appointed in the Book of Com∣munion, and had willed others to doe the like: and he affirmed, that hee being a Priest might lawfully marry, and that his Children which hee had by his Wife were lawfull, and he vtterly detested the seruice then vsed, saying, that if he shold liue as long as Methusala, he would neuer come vnto the Church to heare the ab∣hominable Masse, and other seruice then vsed. Whereupon he was disgraded and condemned: he was a meanes to saue Docror Watsons life then Bishop of Lin∣colne▪ when he preached erroneous doctrine in the dayes of King Edward the sixt; and the said Watson beeing with Bonner at the examination of the said M. Rowgh, to requite his good turne in sauing his life, said there, that he was a pernicious he∣reticke, who did more hurt in the North parts then an hundred besides of his o∣pinion. M. Rowgh further said, he had liued thirtie years, and yet had not bowed his knee vnto Baall: and he affirmed that he had beene twice at Rome, and there hee had seene that which he had many times heard of before, that the Pope was the ve∣rie Antichrist: for he saw him carried vpon mens shoulders, and the false named Sacrament borne before him, yet was there more reuerence giuen vnto him then vnto it, which they accounted their God. Then Bonner rose vp, making as though e would hae torne his garments, saying, Hast thou seene our holy father, and do∣est thou blaspheme him thus? and flying vpon him hee plucked off a piece of his beard, and after made speedy hast to his death. He wrote this Letter to confirme the brethren the same day that hee was con∣demned: The comfort of the holy Ghost make you able to giue consolation to o∣thers
in these dangerous dayes, when Sathan is let loose to the triall of the cho∣sen to sift the wheate from the Chaffe, whosoeuer denyeth Christ▪ before men, hee will deny him before his Father and the Angels: and to saue the life corpo∣rall, is to lose the life eternall; and he that will not suffer with Christ, shall not raigne with Christ: Therefore I haue giuen ouer the flesh, with the fight of my Soule, and the Spirit hath the victory. The flesh ere it bee long, shall leaue off to sinne, the spirit shall raigne eternally: I haue chosen death to confirme the truth which I haue taught. What can I doe more, pray that I may continue vnto the end: I haue in all my assaults felt the present ayde of my GOD: bee not ashamed of Christs Gospell, nor of the bonds that I haue suffe∣red for the same: The holy ones haue beene scaled with the same marke: It is no time for the losse of one man, for the campe to turne back▪ vp with mens harts and blow downe the dawbed walles of heresies, let one take the banner, and an∣other the Trumpet, and I meane not to make corporall resistance, but pray and you shal haue Elias his defence, and Helizeus his company to fight for you, the cause is the Lords: Pray for me, and salute one an other with an holy kisse, the peace of God rst with you all, Amen. Margery Mearing said that the Masse was abhominable in the sight of GOD and all Christian people, and that it is the plaine cp of fornication, and the whore o Babylon; and shee beleeued that there was no such Sacrament as the Sacra∣mnt of the Altar in the Catholike Church: and she said she vtterly abhorred the authoritie of the Pope, with all the Religion obserued in the same Antichrists Church, and that he neuer meant to come vnto the Church during these Idola∣trous dayes. And being demaunded whether shee would stand to these answers; I will (quoth shee) stand to them vnto the death, for the very Angells in heauen doe laugh you to scorne, to se your abomination that you vse in the Church, wher∣upon shee was condemned. They were burned both together in Smithfield, where they most ioyfully and willingly gaue their lies for the profession of the Gospell of Christ. Master Rowgh had excommunicated this Margerie Mearing but the Sonday before he was taken, yet hee being in prison in the Gate-house at Westminster, where none of his friends could come vnto him to visit him, she gother a Basket and put a cleane Shirt in it, and fayning her selfe to be his sister, got into the prison vnto him, and did him no small comfort: then shee went to one Sergeants house, who betrayed Master Rowgh, and asked whet her Iudas that betrayed Christ dwelt not there: and she seeing Cluny come vnto her house, she went home, and asked him whom he sought, he said for you, you must go with me: she said, she would go with him, the Bishop cast her into prison▪ and the wednesday after she was burned with Master Rowgh. Cutbert Simpson, Hugh Foxe, and Iohn Deuenish. SImpson was Deacon of the said godly Congregation in London: he was faith∣full and zealous vnto Christ and his true flocke: the Friday at night before M. Rough the Minister of the Congregation was taken, he dreamed that he saw two of the Gard leading Cutbert Simpson, & that he had a book about him, wherin was the names of all them which were of the Congregation: so he told his Wife and made her light a Candle, and fell to reading, and falling asleepe again, he dreamed the like dreame. Then he said to his Wife, that his brother Cutbert was gone, and as Maister Rough was ready to go to see Maister Cutbert, he came in with the Booke, con∣taining the names and accounts of the Congregation: then M. Rough told him his
dreame, and bade him carrie the booke no more about him, so he left the booke with M. Rowghs wife; the next night M. Rowgh dreamed that be himselfe was carried vnto the Bishop, and that the Bishop plucked off his beard and cast it into the fire, saying, Now I may say I haue had a piece of an hereticke burned in my house, and so accordingly it came to passe, for shortly after they were both taken at the Sara∣cens head in Islington, as before. Here followeth the storie of his sufferings vpon the racke, and otherwise, for the Congregations sake, as he wrote it with his own hand: I was called before the Constable of the Tower and the Recorder of London; they commanded me to tell them whom I willed to come to the English seruice, I answered I would declare nothing, whereupon I was set in a racke of Iron three houres, then they asked if I would tell them, I answered as before: the Sonday after they examined me againe, and I answered them as before: then they bound my two fore-fingers together, and put a small arrow betwixt them, and drew it thorow so fast that the bloud followed, and the arrow brake, then they racked mee twice, and so I was carried vnto my lodging againe. Ten dayes after the Lieu∣tenant asked me if I would not confesse, I answered I had said as much as I wold: fiue wéeks after he sent me vnto the high Priest, where I was greatly assaulted, at whose handes I receiued the Popes curse for bearing witnesse of the resur∣rection. Bonner in his Consistorie gaue this testimony of Cutbert Sampson, ye, sée said he, what a personable man he is, and concerning his patience, I say vnto you, that if he were not an hereticke, he is a man of the greatest patience that euer came be∣fore me; he hath béene thrice racked in one day in the Tower, and in my house hee hath felt some sorrow, yet did I neuer see his patience broken. They all thrée answered Bonner, that the Church is grounded vpon the Apostles and Prophets, Christ being the head corner stone, and in that Church there is the true faith and religion of Christ: that there is but two Sacraments, Baptisme and the Lords Supper; they said that they haue and will speake against the sacrifice of the Masse, the Sacrament of the Altar, and the authoritie of the Sea of Rome, and Iohn Deuenish said that the Sacrament of the Altar, as it is now vsed, is no Sa∣crament at all. These thrée blessed witnesses of Iesus Christ, Simpson, Fox and Deuenish, as they were all together apprehended at Islington, so they suffered together in Smithfield. WILLIAM NICOLE. HEe was an honest simple poore man, apprehended the ninth of Aprill by the Popes Champions for speaking certaine words against the cruell kingdome of Antichrist: he was butcherly burned and tormented at Hereford west in Wales, where he ended his life in a blessed estate, and gloriously gaue his soule into the handes of the Lord. Willam Seaman, Thomas Carman, and Thomas Hudson. WIlliam Seaman was a husbandman dwelling in Mendlesam in the County of Suffolk: he was taken the ninteenth of May, by one Robert Balden his neigh∣bour, whom he greatly trusted: as they were leading him by night to Sir Iohn
Tyrill, there fell a light out of the Element betwixt them, and parted them: albeit this Balden was then in his best age, yet after that time e neuer enioyed good day, but pined away euen vnto death: Sir Iohn Tyril ased him why hee would not goe vnto Masse, and receiue and worship the Sacrament: He said it was an Idol, and therefore would not receiue it: Whervpon he was sent to the Bishop of Norwich, who condemned him: He had a wife, and three children, who because shee would not goe vnto Masse, all her corne and goods were taken away from her, by Chri∣stopher Cole, being Lord of the towne of Mendlesham. Thomas Carman was apprehended for pledging Richard Crashford at his bur∣ning: he was brought before the Bishop of Norwich, and answered no lesse in his maisters quarrell thn th' other, and he had the like reward. Thomas Hudson was of Aylesham in Norffolke a Glouer: hee bore so good will vnto the Gospell, that in the daies of King Edward the sixt, that when hée was thirty yeareo old, he learned to reade, wherein he so greatly profited, that in Queene Maries raigne auoiding all their beggerly ceremonies of superstition, he absented himselfe, and trauelled from place vnto place, and returning home vnto his owne house to comfort his Wife and Children: When hee perceiued that his continuance there would be very dangerous, hee and his wife deuised to make him a place in his Faggots to hide himselfe in, where hee remained all the day, reading and praying, for halfe a yeare. In the meane time came thither one Berry Uicar of the Towne, and inquired of his Wife for him: Shee said shee new not where hee was: Then hee threatned to burne her: because shee would not bewray her husband: After this, Hudson waxed euery day more zealous then other, and the people often resorted vnto him to heare his Sermons: at last hee walked abroad for certaine daies into the towne, cry∣ing out against the Masse, and all their trumpery: at the length one Iohn Crouch, his next neighbour, went with speed to the Constables to certifie them that hee was at home, who went about to catch him in the breake of the day. Whn Hudson saw them, hee said now mine houre is come: wel∣come friends: you bee they that shall leade mee vnto life euerlasting, I thanke GOD therefore, and the Lord inable mee for his mercy sake; Then they ledde him vnto Berry their Uicar, being Commissare as before, who as∣ked him where hee kept his Church, foure yeares before: Hee answered, where∣soeuer hee was there was the Church: Then hee asked him whether hee beleeued in the Sacrament of the Altar: He answered that was but wormes meate, my beliefe is in Christ crucified: Then he asked him whether hee did not beléeue that the Masse taketh away sinnes. Hudson. It is a patched monster, and a disguised puppit, more longer a peecing then euer was Salomons Temple: Then Berry seemed as a mad man, and said, wel I will write vnto my Lord, and thou shalt be handled according vnto thy deserts. Oh Sir said Hudson, there is no Lord but God, though there bee many Lords and Gods: With that Berry thrust him back with his hand, and bound Richard Clifford to the good behauiour for saying, I pray bee good vnto the poore man: Then the said Berry writ vnto the Bishop, and sent Hudson bound like a Theefe vnto him, who went thither with ioy, and singing, as merry as euer hee was, where he was condemned: These thrée were burned without the Bishops gae in Norwich, in a place called Lolords pit: aftor they had made their prayers they went vnto the stake, and standing with their chaines about them. Iohn Hudson being troubled in minde, went from them, and prayed his fellowes, exhorted him in the bowels of Christ to be of good chéere. At last the Lord, according vnto his old mercies. sent him comfort, and then rose e with great ioy, as a man new changed from death vnto life: and said now, I thanke God, I am strong, and passe not what man can doe vnto mee: at the length they all suffered most ioyfully together, to the terrour of the wicked, the comfort of Gods children, and the magnifying of the Lords Name.
After this Berry caused two hundred of the towne of Cylesham to creepe to the crosse at Penticost, besides other punishments which they suffered. This Betry vpon a time strooke a poore man of his parish with the swingell of a laile, for speaking words that hee presently dyed: And after hee méeting one Alice Oxes, going into his Hall (hee as before moued) he smote her with his fist, and the next day shee was found dead in his Chamber: to write how many Con∣cubines and whoores hee had none would beleeue but such as knew him where be dwelt: He was rich, of great authoritie, a great swearer, altogether giuen vnto women, and persecuting the Gospell, and compelling men vnto Idolatry, he trou∣bled sundry good men, burned all good books that he could get, and deuorced ma∣ny men and women for religion. When hee heard Queene Mary was dead, and the glory of his triumph quai∣led: On a Sunday hee made a great Feast, and had one of his Concubines there, with whom he was in his Chamber from dinner vntill euening song: then hee went to the Church, and after euening song in going from Church homeward, hee fell downe dead, made an heauy grone, and neuer stirred, and those that had his riches so consumed with them, that they be poorer now, then when they had his goods: which iudgement the Lord executed in the eyes of all men. At that time Dnning the cruell Chancellor of Norwich died in Lincolneshire, as sodainely as the said Berry died. Ioane Seaman, Mother of the said William Seaman. SHe was threescore and six yeares old: She was persecuted from her house by the said Sir Iohn Tyrill, because she would not goe vnto the Masse, nor re∣ceiue against her conscience: sometimes shee was glad to lye in the bushes, Groues, and Fields: but her husband beeing fourescore yeares old, and falling sick, she returned vnto her house, to shew her duety vnto her husband, vntill hee dyed: then she fell sicke, and died: and one Maister Simonds the Commissary com∣manded straightly that she should not be bured in any Christian buriall: Where∣vpon her friends were faine to bury her vnder a mote side. Mother Benet. THis old woman likewise was persecuted from Whetherset by the aforesaid Mendlesam, because she would not goe vnto the Masse, and other beggerly ce∣remonies, and returning home secretly vnto her house, shee dyed most ioifully: but Sir Iohn Tyrill, and the said Maister Simonds Commissionary, would not let her be buried in the Church-yard, but her graue was made by the high-way side: Her husband would say vnto her, that if shee had been sparing, they might haue been worth a hundred markes more then they were: She would answere, O man be content, I cannot barrell my Butter, and keepe my Cheese in the Chamber, to waite a great price, and let the poore want, and so displease God; but let vs be rich in good workes, so shall we please God, and haue all good things giuen vs.
William Harris, Richard Day, and Christian George. THe twenty sixe day of May these were burned at Colchester in Essex, when they were brought vnto the stake, and had ioyfully and feruently made their prayers, the fire was set vnto them, in the midst of the fire they triumphantly prai∣sed God. The same Christian Eagles Husband had another Wise named Anne, which likewise suffered for the truth, with the aforesaid thirteene at Stratord the Bow: after he married another Wife, and they both were laid in prison for the truth, where they remained vntill the death of Queene Marie, and were deliuered by Queene Elizabeth. Henry Pond, Reynald Estland, Robert Southam, Mathew Richarby, Iohn Floyd, Iohn Ho∣liday, Roger Holand. THe twenty seauen of Iune, these with others, to the number of forty Men and Women, were assembled together in a field by Islington at Prayer, and meditating vpon the word of God: at length the Constable of Islington, with sixe or seauen others came vnto them, and bad them deliuer their Bookes, and bad them stand and not depart: then they were carried vnto Sir Roger Cholmeley, by the way all sauing two and twenty escaped, which were sent to Newgate, where word was sent to them by Alexander the Kéeper, that if they would heare Masse they should all bee deliuered: seauen of them escaped, though not without much trouble, and two, to wit; Mathew Withers and Thomas Tyler died, the rest were burned, as before. They answered that they were not at Church since Lattine seruice was deui∣sed, becaue it was against the Word of GOD, and that Idolatry was com∣mitted in créeping to the Crosse, and because the Churches were furnished with Idols, and because they beléeued the Sacrament of the Altar to be an Idoll, and because the Customes, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church then vsed, are not a∣gréeable vnto Gods word. They said, that they beléeued that no Priest had power to remit sis, and that those that knéele vnto the Sacrament and worship it, commit Idolatry. Reynald Estland refused to be sworne to answer, alleadging that to end a strife an oath is lawfull, but to begin a strife an oath is not lawfull: thus they standing vnto their answeres, and refusing to acknowledge the Doctrine of the Romish Church, they were all together condemned. The aforesaid Roger Holand was a Merchant Taylor of London, he was some∣time Prentice vnto one Maister Kempton, at the Blacke Boy in Watling-stréete: In his prentiship hee was a Papist, and very licentious, and hauing plaid away thirty pounds of his Maisters Money, he purposed to haue conueyed himselfe be∣yond Sea, but a religious Maid in the house vnderstanding his minde, lent him thirty pounds to saue his credit, and made him premise her to refuse all leud and wilde company, and all swearing and ibaory talke, and to leaue Papistry, and to resort euery day vnto the Lecture of Alhollowes, and to the Sermon of Paules euery Sunday, and to cast away all his Papistry Bookes, and to pray to God for
remission of sinnes, and grace to feare and breake his lawes, and then shall God kéepe thée, and send thée they harts desire. Halfe a yeare after God wrote such a changing in this man, that he was become an earnest professor of the truth, and detested all Papistry and euill company: then he repayred vnto Lancashire vnto his Father, and brought diuers good Bookes with him, and bestowed them vpon his friends, so that his father and others began to ast the Gospell, and to detest the Masse, Idolatry, and superstition: and his fa¦ther giuing him a stocke of Money, he maried the aforesaid Maid, called Elizabeth, and hauing a childe by her in the first yeare of Quéen Mary, he caused Maister Rose to baptise his Child in his house, and being one into the Country to conuey away the Child, that the Papists should not haue it in their annointing hands: hee was bewrayed, and Bonner caused his goods to be seased vpon, and vsed his wife most cruelly: after this he remained closely in the Citty, vntill he was taken as before. When hee came before Bonner, who was acquainted with his friends, and for his friends sake and his, he perswaded him what he could to Papistry, and a Kinsman of his standing by, said; I thanke your good Lordship, your Honor mea∣neth good vnto my Cozen, I pray God he haue grace to follow your councell. Holand. Sir, you craue of God you cannot tell what, I beseech God to open your eye to sée the light of his word. Then the Bishop and others perswaded him to submit himselfe vnto my Lord, before he were entred into the Booke of contempt, Holand. I neuer meant but to submit my selfe vnto the Magistrate, as I learne of Saint Paul in the 13. to the Romaines. Chedsey. I sée you are not an Anabaptist. Holand. The Papists and the Anabaptists agrée in this point, not to submit themselues vnto any other Prince or Magistrate, then those that must first bee sworne to maintaine them and their doings. Bonner. I perceiue you will not be rul'd by any good councell, for any thing that either I or your friends, or any other can say. Holand. I may say vnto you my Lord, as Saint Paul said vnto Foelix, and to the Iewes, It is not vnknowne vnto my Maister, vnto whom I was Prentise, that I was of your blind Religion, vntill the latter end of King Edwads raigne, hauing that liberty vnder your auriculer confession, that I made no conscience to sinne, but trusted in the Priests absolution, and hee for money did some pennance for me; which after I had giuen, I cared no more what offence I had done, no more the Priest cared after he had got my money, whether hee fasted with Bread and Water for me or no: so I accounted Letchery, swearing, and other vices, no offtence of danger, as long as I could for my Money haue them absolued, I so frailty obseruedy our Rules of Religion, that I would haue Ashes vppon Ash∣wednesday, though I had vsed neuer so much wickednesse at night, and albeit I could not of conscience eate flesh vpon Friday, yet in swearing, drinking, or dicing all night long, I made no conscience at al. Thus was I brought vp, and continued vntill now of late, that God of his Grace by the light of his word called me vnto repentance of my former Idolatry and wicked life: for in Lanchishire their blind∣nesse and whoredome is much more, then may with chast eares be heard, yet these my friends, which are not cléere in these notable crinics, thinke the Priest with his Masses can saue them, though they blaspheme God, and kéepe Contubines be∣sides their Wiues as long as they liue; yea, I know some Priests very deuout, yet they haue sixe or seuen Children, by foure or fiue seuerall women. Now M. Doctor to your antiquity, vnity, and vniuersality (for these, Doctor Chedsie alledged as notes of their Religion. The antiquity of our Church is not from Pope Nicholas and Pope Ioane, but from the time that God said vnto A∣dam, That the seede of the Woman should breake the Serpents head, and so vnto faithfull Noah, to Abraham, Isaack, and Iacob, to whom it was promised, that their seed should multiply as the Stars in the sky, and so vnto Moses, Daniell, and
all the holy Fathers that were from the beginning vnto the birth of Christ, all that beleeued these promises were of the Church, though the number of them were oft-times but small, as in Elias his dayes, when he thought that there was none but he that had not bowed their knées vnto Baal, when God had reserued seuen thousand that neuer bowed their knées vnto that Idoll, as I trust there be seuen hundred thousand that haue not bowed their knees vnto that Idoll your Masse, and your God Maozim, which you vphold with your bloudie crueltie, daily persecuting Elias and the seruants of God, forcing them in their chambers and in the fields to pray vnto God that his word may be once againe preached amongst vs, and that he would shorten these Idolatrous and bloudy dayes: moreouer, our Church haue beene the Apostles and Euangelists, the Martyrs and Confessors of Christ, that haue at all times beene persecuted for the true testimony of the word of God; but for the vpholding of your Church and Religion, what antiquity can you shew? yea the Masse, that Idoll and chiefe pillar of your Religion, is not yet foure hundred yeares olde, and some of your Masses are yonger, as that Masse of S. Thomas Bec∣ket the Traytor, wherein you pray that you may be saued by the bloud of S. Tho∣mas Becket. The Laiety is neuer the better for your Laine Seruice: he that vnderstands Latine can vnderstand but few words; the Priests doe so champe them and chaw them, and poste so fast that they vuderstand not themselues: and the people when they should pray with the Priest, they are set to their Beades to pray to our Ladies Psalter, so crafy is Sathan to deuise these dreames which you defend, with faggot and fire to quench the light of the word of God, which as Dauid saith, should be a lantorne vnto our feete, and wherein should a yong man direct his wayes but by the word of God, and yet you will hide it from vs in a tongue vn∣knowne: Saint Paul had rather haue fiue words spoken with vnderstanding, then ten thousand in an vnknowne tongue, yet you will haue your Latine ser∣uice, and praying in a strange tongue to be of such antiquitie. Touching vniuersalitie: the Greek Church and a good part of Christendome besides, neuer receiued your seruice in an vnknowne tongue: nor your transubstaniation, nor your receiuing all alone, nor your Purgatorie, nor Images, The vnitie in your Church is nothing else but treason, murther, poysoning, one another: Idolatry, superstition, wickednes: What vnitie was in your church, when there was three Popes at once. Where was your head of vnity, when you had a woman Pope. Boner said, these they words are very blasphemous, and by the meanes of thy friends thn hast been suffered to speake and art ouer malapert to teach any here, therefore Keeper take him away: afterward, for that he said that the Masse, transubstantiation, and the worshipping of the Sacment, is méere impiety and horrible Idolatry, he was condemned: he prophessed before Bonner and all the peo∣ple that were there, that after this day in this place, shall there not bee any put to the tryall by the fire and faggot, and after that day there was neuer none that suf∣fered in Smithfield for the testimony of the Gospell, God be thanked for it: These seauen were burned at Smithfield. Robert Miles, Stephen Cotten, Robert Dynes, Ste∣phen White, Iohn Slade, William Pickes or Pikars. THe foureteenth of Iuly these sixe were taken at Islington, with the other sea∣uen as before, and were burned at Brainford: the Articles that were mini∣stred
vnto them were the same that were ministred vnto the other seauen, and their answers the same in effect as the others were. When they were brought vn∣to the stake they addressed themselues, and ioyfully went vnto the fire, and yelded their soules, bodies, and liues into the hands of the omnipotnt Lord. RICHARD YEOMAN. HEe was the Curate of Doctor Taylor before mentioned: he was a godly and deuout old man, being of the age of thréescore and ten years, and had ma∣ny years dwelt in Hadlie; with him Doctor Taylor left his cure at his departure, but as soone as M. Newall had gotten the Benefice be droue away good M. Yeo∣man, as is before said, and set in a Popish Curate to maintaine the Romish Religi∣on; then wandred he long time from place to place, exhorting al men to stand faith∣fully vnto Gods word, and to giue themselues vnto prayer, with patience to beare the crosse laid vpon them for their triall, and with boldnesse to confesse the truth be∣fore the aduersaries, and with vndoubted hope to wait for the crowne of eternall felicitie: and perceiuing his aduersaries to lie in wait for him, he got a Pedlers packe, and trauelled from village to village, selling such things, and thereby got somewhat to sustaine himselfe, his wife and children. At last M. Moyle a Iustice of Kent took him, and set him in the stocks a day and a night; but when he had nothing against him, he discharged him, so he came vnto Hadley, and tarried secretly a yeare with his wife and children, spending the time in prayer and reading the Scriptures, and carding of wooll, which his wife did spin; his wife also did begge bread and meat for her selfe and her children: thus the Saints of God sustained hunger and miserie, whilest the Prophets of Baall li∣ned in iollitie, and were costly pampered at Iesabels table: at last Parson Newall perceiuing this, came with the officers in the night, and broke open fiue doors vpon Yeoman, whom he found in bed with his wife and children: then he said he thought he should finde a knaue and a whore together, and he would haue pluckt off the clo∣thes, but that Yeoman held them fast, and bade his wife arise and put on her clo∣thes: then he said, Nay parson, no whoore, but a man and his wife, according to Gods ordinance, and blessed be God, for lawfull matrimony, and I defie the Pope and all his popery: then they led him vnto the Cage, and set him in the stocks vntill it was day. There was then in the Cage an old man, named Iohn Dale, who had sit∣ten there thrée or foure dayes for saying vnto Parson Newall and his Curat, Mise∣rable and blinde guids, will you euer be blinde leaders of the blinds, will you neuer amend, will you neuer sée the truth of Gods word, will neither Gods threats nor promises enter into your hearts, will not the bloud of Martyrs nothing mollifie your stony stomacks? O indurate, hard hearted, peruerse and crooked generation, O damnable sort, to whom nothing can do good. The said parson Newall caused them both to be carried vnto Bury Gaole, be∣ing pinioned and bound like théeues, and their legges tyed vnder the horse bellies; where they were yed in Irons: and because they continually rebuked Popery they were throwne into the lowest dungeon, where Iohn Dale died in prison, whose bodie was buried in the fields. He was a Weauer by his occupation. Then Ri∣chard Yeoman was remoued to Norwich prison, where he was straitly kept: hée boldly professed himselfe to be of the faith and religion that was set forth by King Edward the sixt, and from that he would in no wise vary. Being required to sub∣mit himselfe to the holy Father the Pope, I defie him (quoth he) and all his dete∣stable abominations; I will in no wise haue to do with him, or with any thing that appertaineth vnto him. The chiefe articles obiected against him were his marri∣age and the masse sacrifies, wherfore when he continued stedfast in the profession of the truth: he was condemned, & not only burned, but cruelly tormented in the fire.
IOHN ALCOCK. THis Iohn was a Shereman, which came vnto the aforesaid Hadley to seek worke: after Doctor Tayler was martyred, and Richard Yeoman was taken, he vsed to reade the Seruice in English in the Church of Hadley, as is touched be∣fore: at the length, because he would not moue his Cap, nor shew reuerence when Parson Newall went of procession: when Newall was almost out of the Church, he runne backe againe and caught him, and deliuered him vnto the Constable, say∣ing; hee is an Hereticke and a Traytor, and dispised the Quéenes proceedings. Wherefore I commaund you in the Quéenes Name, to haue him vnto the stocks: when he was brought vnto the Parson, he asked him▪ Fellow, What saist thou to the Sacrament of the Altar? I say (quoth he) as ye vse the matter, you make it a shamefull Idoll, and you are false Idolatrous Priests euery one of you: then the Parson committed him to Ward, and the next day rode vp to London, and caried the said Alcocke with him; and after he had long beene imprisoned in Newgate, after many examinations and troubles, because he would not aske forgiuenesse of the Pope, and be reconciled vnto the Romish Religion, he was cast into the lower Dungeon, where he died: His body was buried in a Dunghill. THOMAS BENBRIDGE. VPon the twenty nine of Iuly he was apprehended for an Aduersary of the Ro∣mish Religion, and was examined before Doctor White, Bishop of Winche∣ster, where he sustained sundry conflicts for the truth: The points of Religion that he stood vpon were these: That Baptisme is not administred at this present, as it was in the Apostles time, because it is not in the English tongue, that in the Sacrament is not the bo∣dy and blood of Christ; that he knoweth not whether Confirmation bee a Sacra∣ment or not, and whether the Bishop giueth Grace or not; that sinnes bee not for∣giuen by absolution pronounced of a Priest, and that it is not necessary for a man to confesse all his sinnes vnto a Priest: that he beleeued that the Bishops bee not the Successors of the Apostles, for that they bee not called as they were, nor haue not that Grace; that it is not the Pope but the Deuill that is supreme head of the Church which you speake of; that he will not beleeue touching Purgatorie as their Church doth; that Matrimony is no Sacrament, but a sacred order in signe of an holy thing; that Martine Luther died a good Christian, whose doctrine and life he did allow, for which he was condemned. He came vnto the stake very rich in apparell, when the fire was kindled, first it tooke away a peece of his Beard, whereat he nothing shranke, then it tooke his legges, and his stockings being Lea∣ther made the fire to pierce the sharper, and the intollerable heate made him cry I recent, and suddenly thrust the fire from him, and hauing two or three of his Friends by, they helped to take the fire from him: and the Sheriffe being Sir Ri∣chard Pecksall, of his owne authority tooke him from the stake, and sent him to Prison againe: wherefore the Sheriffe was sent vnto the Fleete, and his friends that helped him to prison. Before he was taken from the stake, Doctor Seaton made him to subscribe to certaine Articles touching the Pope, the Sacrament, and such other trash; but being in prison, he wrote a Letter vnto Doctor Seaton, and recan∣ted those words that he spake at the stake vnto which he had subscribed: whereup∣on the same day seanight he was burned, where the vile Tormentors did rather broile him, then burne him.
Iohn Cooke Sawyer, Robert Milles alias Plumer, Sheareman, Alexander Lane a VVheele∣write, Iames Ashly a Bacheler. IN August these were burned at S. Edmundsbury by the Bishop of Norwich, and Sir Edward Walgraue. Sir Edward said vnto Cooke, why come you not to Church? Cook. Because the Sacrament of the Altar is an abhominable Idol: and (sai he) the vengeance of God will come vpon all them which do maintaine it. Sir Edward. O thou ranke Traytor, if I had as good a Commission to cut out thy ongue as to heare thee, thou shouldst be sure to haue it cut out: then hée commaunded the Constable to haue him away, saying, hee was both a Traytor and a Rebell: Then he sked Robert Milles why he would not goe vnto Church. Miles. Because I will follow no false Gods: then Alexander Lane was asked why he would not come to Church, he said; his conscience would not serue him so to doe. After the like manner they passed also with Iames Ashly; so the next day they appeared and had their condemnations, and were burned as before. Alexander Gouch, and Allice Driuer. GOuch was a Weauer of Shreaden Coerlits at Woodbridge in Suffolk, and burned at Uxford: The Woman was Driuers Wife of Grosborough: One Maister Moone a Iustice searching for them, they were compelled to hide them in a Hay-ricke, but by gaging thereof with Pickforks, at the last they found them, and sent them to Melon Iayle: from thence they were carryed to Bury vnto the Assizes, and being examined of their Faith, they did boldly confesse Christ cruci∣fied, defying the Pope and all his Papisticall trash. And Driuers Wife likened Quéene Mary vnto Iezabell: Whereupon Sir Clement Higham Chiefe Iudge, adiudged her eares to be immediatly cut off, which was done, and shee ioyfully yéelded her selfe vnto the punishment, and thought her selfe happy that shee was counted worthy to suffer for Christ: then they were sent again vnto Melton Iayle, where they were examined, as followeth: When Driuers Wife came before Doctor Spencer to be examined, shee smiled: then he said; Why Woman dost thou laugh vs to scorne: shee said; Shee might well enough to sée what fooles you be. Then he said, Woman, what saist thou to the Sacrament of the Altar? Dost thou not beleeue that it is very flesh and bloud after the consecration. Dri. I neuer heard nor read of any such Sacrament in all the Scripture: I will grant you a Sacrament called the Lords Supper. I pray you tell me what a Sacraments is? Spens. It is a Signe: and Doctor Gascoyne confirmed the same, that it was a signe of an holy thing. Dri. It is a Signe indéede, and therefore it cannot be the thing signified also. Gascoyne. Doe you not beleeue the omnipotence of GOD? Shee answe∣red▪ Yes, Then said he; Christ said to his Disciples, Take, eate, this is my body, ergo it was his body, for he was able to performe that which hee spake, and God vseth not to lye. Dry. Was it not Bread which he gaue them? he said, no, it was his body; then (quoth she) it was his body they did eate ouer night, what body was it then that
was crucified the next day, when his Disciples had eate him vp ouer night, except he had two bodies, as by your Argument he had. Such a Doctor, such Doctrine, be you not ashamed to teach the people that Christ had two bodies. In the 12. of Luke he tooke bread and brake it, and gaue it to his disciples, saying; Take, &c. do this in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11. Doe this in remembrance of me, and as oft as you shall do it, you shall shew the Lords death vntill he come. Then Gascoyne held his peace, and the Chancellor commanded the Iayler to take her away. Dri. Now you be not able to resist the truth, you command me to prison, the Lord shall iudge our cause, vnto him I leaue it. I wis this geare will go for no paiment: the next day she came before them again, and their Arguments were vnto the same effect, wherefore she was condemned, so went she to prison againe, as ioyfull as the Bird of day, praysing and glorifying the name of God. Alexander Gouch was condemned, for that his beléefe was, that Christ is ascen∣ded into heauen, and there remaineth, and that the Sacrament was the remem∣brance of his death; and for refusing the Masse, and the Pope to be supreame head of the Church, they were both burned at Ipswich: They ended their liues with earnest zeale, nothing fearing to speake their consciences, when they were com∣maunded the contrary. Sir Henry Dowell Sheriffe would not suffer them to make an end of their prai∣ers: then Gouch said, take héede M. Sheriffe, if ye forbid prayers, the vegeance of God hangeth ouer your heads: when the Iron chaine was put about Allice Dri∣uers necke, O (said she) here is a goodly Neckercher, blessed be God for it. Diuers shooke them by the hands, the Sheriffe bad lay hands on them, with that a great number ranne vnto the stake, he seeing that, let them all alone. One Bate a Barber was a busie deer against them, who being in a fréeze gown sold it, saying; it stunk of Hereticks, with other foule words, within thrée or foure weeks after, he died miserably in Ipswich. Phillip Humphrey, Iohn Dauid, and Henry Dauid his Brother. THese were burned at Bury, in the same moneth that Quéene Mary died, Sir Clement Highama, bout a fortnight before the Quéene died, did sue out a writ for the burning of these three godly and blessed Martyrs, though the Queene was then knowne to be past remedy of her sicknesse. Good-wife Prest. SHe was the wife of one Prest, dwelling not far from Launceston in Erecester Doces. She told the Bishop, that she would rather die then worship that foule Idoll, which with your Masse you make a God. Bishop. Will you say that the Sacrament of the Altar is a foule Idoll? Woman. Yea, there was neuer such an Idoll as your Sacrament is made of your Priests, and commanded to be worshipped of all men, where Christ did com∣mand it to be eaten and drunken, in remembrance of his Passion. Bishop. Dost thou not see that Christ said ouer the Bread, This is my body, and ouer the Cup, This is my blood: she said, but hee meant not carnally, but sacra∣mentally, if you will giue me leaue, I will declare the reason why I will not wor∣ship the Sacrament.
Bishop. Mary say on, I am sure it will be good geare. Woman. I will demaund of you whether you can deny the Créede, which saith, that Christ perpetuallie sitteth at the right hand of his Father, both Bodie and Soule, vntill he come againe, if it be so, he is not in the Earth in a péece of bread: If he doe not dwell in Temples made with handes, but in Heauen, what shall we séeke him héere? If he did offer vp his body once for all, why make you a new offering? If with once offering hee made all perfect, why doe you with a false offering make all vnperfect? If he be to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, why doe you worshippe a péece of Bread: If he be eaten and drunken in Faith and Truth: If his Flesh be not profitable amongst vs, why doe you say, it is profi∣table both for Body and Soule: rather then I would doe as you doe, I will liue no longer. Bish. I promise you, you are a holy Protestant, a foolish woman, who wil wast his breath vpon thée, and such as thou art: but how chanceth it that you went from your husband, and run about the Country like a Fugitiue. Woman. My Husband and my Children did persecute me, for when I would haue him to leaue Idolatry, and worship god in heauen, hee would not heare me, but he with his Children rebuked and troubled me: so I went from him, because I would be no partaker with him and his of that foule Idoll the Masse, God giue me grace to goe to the true Church. Bishop. What dost thou meane by the true Church? Wom. Not your Popish Church, full of Idols and abhominations, but where three or foure are gathered together in the name of God: some perswaded the Bi∣shop that she was out of her wits, therefore they consulted that she should goe at large; so the Kéeper of the Bishops prison had her home vnto his house, where she fell to spinning & carding, and did al oher worke besides as his seruant, and went whether she list. Diuers had a delight to talke with her, and euer she would talke of the Sacrament of the Altar, which of all things they could least abide. Then diuers Priests perswaded her to leaue her wicked opinion of the Sacra∣ment: but she answered, that it was nothing but bread and wine, & that they might be ashamed to say, that a péece of bread should be turned by a man into the naturall body of Christ; which bread doth sennew, and Mice oftentimes do eate it, and it doth mould, and is burned, Gods owne body will not be so handled or kept in pri∣son or Boxes: let it be your GOD, it shall not be mine, for my Sauiour sitteth at the right hand of God, and doth pray for me, and to make it the very body of Christ and to worship it, is foolish and deuillish deceit. Then an old Frier ased her what she said of the holy Pope, I say (quoth she) he is Antichrist, and the Deuill, then they all laughed; ay said she, you had more néed to weep then laugh, in that you are Chaplaines vnto that whre of Babylon: I defie him and all his falshood: you damne soules, when you teach the people to worship Idolls, and to worship a false God of your owne making, of a peece of Bread: and that the Pope is Gods Uicar, and can forgiue sinnes, and that there is a Purgatory, when Gods Sonne hath by his Passion purged all, and say you make God and sacrifice him, when Christs body was a Sacrifice once for all: you teach the people to number their sinnes in your eares, and say they bee damned f they doe not confesse all, when GOD saith, Who can number his sinnes? You promise them Trentalls and Dirges, and Masses for Soules, and sell your pray∣ers for Money, and make them buy pardons, and trust in such foolish inuntions: you teach vs to pray vpon Beads, and to pray vnto Saints; you make Holy bread and holy water to fray Deuils, and you do make a thousand moe abhominations, yet you say you came to saue my soule; no, no, one hath saued me, farewell with your saluation. In Saint Peters Church shee beheld a cunning Duch-man how he made new Noses, to certaine Images which were disfigured in King EDVVARDS time, What a mad man art thou (said she) to make new noses, which within a
few daies shall all loose their heads: thou & thine Images are acccursed: hee called her whore, nay said the thine Images are whoores, and thou art a whoore-hunter: For God saith, you goe a whoring after strange Gods: Then she was clapped fast, and after had no liberty, and not long after she was condemned: Then she said, I thanke God this day I haue found that which I haue long sought, and being then exhorted to recant: she said I will neuer lose eternall life, for this short life: I will not turne from my heauenly husband, to my earthly husband, from the fellowship of Angels, to mortall Children, God is my Father, God is my Mother, God is my Sister, my Brother, my Kinsman, God is my Friend, most faithfull: shee was burned at Execester. Iohn Sharpe, Thomas Hall, Thomas Benion. THese were burned in the towne of Bristow, for saying that the Sacrament of the Altar was the greatest and most abhominable Idol that euer was: and Thomas Benion denied fiue of their Sacraments, and affirmed two: that is, the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, and the Sacrament of Baptisme: they died godly, constantly and patiently. Iohn Corneford of Wortham, Christopher Browne of Maidstone, Iohn Herst of Ashford, Alice Snoth, Katherine Knight, alias Tinley. THese were the last that suffered in Quéen Maries raigne: They were burned at Canterbury, but six daies before the death of Queene Mary: The Arch-dea∣con of Canterbury being at London, and vnderstanding the danger of the Quéene, made post-hast home to dispatch these. They were condemned for not beleeuing the body of Christ to be in the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, vnlesse it be receiued, and for confessing that an euill man doth not receiue Christs body: and that it is Idolatry to créepe to the crosse, and that we should not pray vnto our Lady and other Saints: when there sentence should be read against them, Iohn Cornefield excommunicated the Papists in these words as follow. In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Son of the most mighty God, and by the power of his holy Spirit, and of the authority of his holy Cathothick and Apo∣stolick Church: wee doe giue here into the hands of Sathan to bee destroyed, the bodies of all those blasphemers and hereticks, that do maintaine any error against his most holy word, or doe condemne his most holy truth for heresie, to the maint∣nance of any false Church, or fained religion, so that by this thy iust Iudgement, O most mighty God, against thy Aduersaries, thy true religion may be knowne, to thy great glory, and our comfort, and to the edifying of all our Nation, good Lord, so be it. This procéeded, as it seemed, from an inward faith, and harty zeale to Gods truth, and it tooke such effect against the enemies, that within six daies Queene Mary died, and all tyranny with her. These godly Martyrs, in their prayers which they made at their martyrdom, de∣sired God that their bloud might be the last that should be shed, and so it was. Katherine Tinley, was the mother of one Robert Tinley, dwelling in Maidestone.
The Story of Nicholas Burton, Marchant of London dwelling in little S. Bartholomew. THe fift of Nouember, he being in the Citie of Cadix, in the parts of Adoa∣zia in Spaine about his marchandize, there came one of the inquisition vnto his lodging, who fained to hue a Letter to deliuer vnto his hands, when he came vnto him, he inuented another lye; and said that he would take lading vnto Lon∣don in his ships, delaying the time vntill the Alquisyell or Sergeants of the inqui∣ition might apprehend them, and seeking to know his ships that they might at∣tache them, when they had arrested him, he boldly asked them what cause they had against him, and he would answere them: They carried him vnto a filthy common prison of the towne of Cadix, where he remained in Irons amongst theeues thir∣teene daies: all which time he instructed the poore prisoners in the word of God, that he had reclaimed sundry of them from superstitions to embrace the Word of God, which being known they conuayed him thence vnto the Citie of Siuill, into a more cruell prison called Triane, where the Fathers of the inquisition proceeded a∣gainst him secretly, that neuer after he could be suffered to speake or write vnto a∣ny of his Nation: And the twentith day of December, they brought him with a great number of other prisoners into the Citie of Siuil, into a place where the In∣quisiion sate in Iudgement: they put on him a Canuas coat, wheron was painted in diuers parts the figure of a huge Diuell tormenting a soule in fire, and on his head a long cap of the same worke: his tongue was forced out of his mouth, with a clouen sticke fastened vpon it, that he should not vtter his Faith and conscience vnto the people: and so he was set with an other Englishman of Southampton, and diuers others condemned for Religion, as well Frenchmen, as Spaniards, vpon a Scaffold ouer against the inquisition, where they were condemned, and they most cruelly burned him for his most constant Faith: Hee shewed such a cheerefull countenance, patience and gladnes in the flames of fire, that the tor∣mentors said, that the Diuell had his soule, before he came vnto the fire: there suffe∣rd with him another Englishman, and thirteene more; One a Nun, another a Frier constant in the Lord. Iohn Baker, and William Burgate. THey were both Englishmen, and apprehended the second of Nouember, at Cales in Spaine, and were burned at Siuill. Marke Burges, and William Hooker. THey were both Englishmen: Burges was Maister of a Ship called the Mini∣on. He was burned at Lysborne in Portugall. Hooker was about sixteene yeares old, and was stoned vnto death of certaine yong men in the Citie of Siuill for the confession of his Faith. Franciscus Euzenas wrote to Philip Melancton, as followeth. In Sant Lucar in Spaine dwelt a Brabander, called Rochus, a maker of Images: Hee liked not his science, because he maintained Idolatry, yet he was aine to vse it for mainte∣nance
for excellent workmanship he was commended of all men. Upon a time he had framed the Image of our Lady in wood, with singular dexteritie, setting it out to be sold: One of the Inquisitors offered money for it: He answered, he had rather breake it, then to sell it at his price: Hee bid him breake it if he dare. At which word he flung a toole at the Image, and blemished the face thereof: By and by he was carried away vnto prison: May I not said he make and marre mine owne worke, as I thinke good: perhaps I did not well like the countenance of it, and therefore did intend to make it better vnto my minde: Notwithstanding, within three daies he was carried vnto the stake and burned, because he was an he∣retick against the blessed Lady. Touching the Treatise and names of them who by reason of persecution, we forced to forsake their houses and goods in the time of Quéene Mary. I haue omit∣ted it, and the Reader that is desirous to reade them, may repaire to the booke at large. Likewise I haue omitted the Treatise, concerning such as were scourged and whipped by the Papists, in the true cause of Christs Gospell, because all the Sto∣ries of them be elsewhere in the Booke. Likewise touching the story of such as by the prouidence of God, haue been pre∣serued from danger in the time of persecution: I referre the Reader to the booke at large. THE ACTS THAT HAPPENED in the flourishing Raigne of Queene ELIZABETH. HAUING by the power of Almightie God truely displayed the cruell practises of Queene Maries Raigne: now orderly comming to the flourishing and long wished for Raigne of the most vertuous, and religious Queene Elizabeth, who can number the singular ornaments and noble graces, giuen of God vnto this so princely a Lady, and puisant Princesse: the mildnes of her Nature, the clemencie of her Royall estate, the peaceablenes of her Raigne: who a Uirgine so mildely ruled her subiects, kept all things in order, quieted forraine Nations, recouered townes, inlarged her Kingdome, nourisheth and reconcileth amitie, vniteth hearts, and loue with forraine enemies, helpeth neighbours, reformed Religion, quenched persecution: Shee was feared with loue, and loued with feare: how can we but giue vertue her commendations, which in all persons as Plato saith, stirreth vp great loue, but especially in a Prince▪ and what cause haue all wee Englishmen to render most ample thankes to the mercifulnes of God, who hath granted, conser∣ued, and aduanced vnto the Seate Regall of this Realme: so good godly and ver∣tuous a Queene: such a chosen instrument of his clemencie, through whom wee cannot deny, but that God hath made amends, and recompence now vnto Eng∣land, for the cruell dayes that were before, for as then moderation had no place,
but all was ruled by rigour: Contrary now clemencie hath all the operation, as then was no end of butcherly killing: now is no bginning of spilling any drop of bloud: She came in like a mother, not like a stpdame, like a Lambe, not lie a Lyon. First i begin with her princely birth being borne at Greenewich, Ann 1534. of the victorious Prince King Henry the eight, and of the Noble and most vertuous Lady Queene Anne her mother▪ She was Christened in the Gray-Friers Church of Greenewich, hauing vnto her Godfather Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury: after shee was committed vnto godly Tutors, vnder whose institution, her Grace did so greatly increase in vertue, and knowledge of learning, so that she vnderstood all tongues, and spake all languages: she was well learned in the liberall arts and sciences, and her noble brest was gernished, with all vertue, councell and wisedome, that none of her Councell could goe beyond her ma∣iestie: it is wonderfull in euery mans conscience, to behold in that age, that sxe, in such state and fortune, in so great occasions, so many entisements, in all these to refaine so sober conuersation, so temperate condition, such mildnes of manners, such humblenesse of stomack, such clemencie in forgiuing, such trauelling in stu∣die. Tully saith, a good man in other places is no matter, but in Asia to keepe a sober, and temperate life, that is indéed a matter praise worthy: But shee in th middest of Asia, did so much degenerate from all Asia, as hath not lightly been in Europa. Her first schoolemaister, reported of her to a friend of his, that he learned euery day more of her, then she of him, which hee expounded thus: I teach her words (quoth he) and she teacheth me things: I teach her tongue to speake, and her mo∣dest and maidenly life teacheth me to doe, for I think she is the best disposed of a∣ny in Europe, and an Italian that was her teacher, said he found in her to qua∣lities, which are neuer lightly yke-fellowes in one woman, which are a singular wit, and a maruellous meeke stomack. But none of her princely qualities are more worthy of commendations, th her Christian patience, shewed in her afflictions, and her incredible clemencie de∣clared towards her enemies: for though she was such a high Princes, and a Kings Daughter and a Queenes Siser, and heyre apparant vnto the Crowne, could she not escape without the rosse: Yea her troubles were far aboue the condition of a Kings Daughter: for there was no more behinds to make a very Iphigenia of her, but her offring vp vpon the Altar of the Scaffold, It was no small iniury that shee suffered in the Lord Protectors dayes by certaine venemous vipers: And after the death of King Edward, the Councell sought to defeate both her and her Sister from the naturall inheritance and right of the Crowne. And in the daies of Queene Mary, into what trouble of minde, and feare of death was she brought vnto. First with ands of hanished men to bee fet∣ched vp as a great Traytor, and clapped into the Tower, and to bee tssed from thence from prison to prison, from post to piller: at length also she was prisoner i her owne house, garded with a sort of cut-throates, which euer gaped for the spoil of her. In the beginning of Quéene Maries Raigne, the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lord Courtenay were charged with false suspition of Sir Thomas Wiats rising, and the Lady Elizabeth being at her house at Ashredge, Quéene Mary sent her two Lords, and Sir Iohn Williams, afterward Lord Tame, with their retinue and troupes of horsemen, to the number of two hundred and fifty, who found her sore sick in her bed and very feeble and weake of body: and at ten of the clock at night they rushed into her Chamber without leaue: whereat her Grace beeing not a little amazed, She said, my Lords is your hast such that it might not haue plea∣sed you to haue come to morrow in the morning: They answered, that they came from the Queene for her, and that she must be at London the seuenth day of
that month: she answered, that no Creature was more glad then shee to come vnto her Maiesty, and that she was sorry she was not able to goe with them; they answered, That their Commission was such, that we must needs bring you with vliue or dead. In conclusion, they willed her to prepare against the morning at nine of the clocke to goe with them, and on the next day morrow at the time prescribed, they had her forth as she was, very faint and féeble, and in such case, that she was ready to sound thrée or foure times betweene them. From Ashridge all sicke in the Litter, she came vnto Redborne, where shee was garded all night: from thence to Saint Albons, to Sir Raphe Rowlets house, where she tarrid all night both feeble in body, and comfortlesse in minde: from thence shee came to Maister Dodds house at Mimmes, where also they remained all night, and from thence to Highgate, where she being very sicke, tarried all night and next day. During which time of her abode, there came many Purseuants and Messengers from the Court vnto the Lords, but about what I cannot tell: from thence shee was conuayed vnto the Cort, where she was straitwaies shut vp, and kept as close prisoner a fortnight. The Friday before Palmesunday, the Bishop of Winchester with nineteene others of the Priuy Councell came vnto her Grace, and brdened her with Wiats Conspiracy, which she vterly denid: then they charged her with the bu∣sines made by Sir Peter Carew, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the West coun∣try, which also shee vtterly denied: Then they told her that it was the Queenes pleasure that shee should goe vnto the Tower, vntill the matr were further tryed: Then shee desired them to bee a meane vnto the Queee that shee would be gracious vnto her: declaring that sheee was innocent in all the matters wherein they had burdened her, and that shee was a true woman vn∣to to the Queene, in thought, word, and deede: that shee might not be commit∣ted vnto so notorious and dolefull a place: The Lords answered, that there was no remedy, for the Queene was determined that she should goe vno the Tower, wherewith the Lords departed, with their hats hanging ouer their eyes, but a∣bout an houre after, foure of the aforesaid Lords of the Councell with the Guard, who warding the next chamber vnto her, secluded all her Gentlemen, Yeomen, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, & one Gentleman Usher, thrée Gentlewomen, and two Groomes of her Chamber, were appointed in their roomes by the Quéene to giue attendance vpon her that none should haue accesse vnto her. At which time there was 100. of Northen souldiers in white coats, watching a∣bot the Gardens all night, and two Lords with their bands & companies watched in the hall: The next day two Lords of the Councell, certified her Grace that forthwith she must goe vnto the Tower: the Barge being prepared for her, & the tyde now readie, which tarrieth for no body, but she got leaue of the Earle of Sus∣sex, which was one of the two, to tarrie till day to write to the Q. and he promised to deliuer it, contrary to the will of the other: the next day, being Palm-sonday, about nine of the clock, she took her Barge, with the said two Lords, houering vpon the water an boure, because they could not shoot the Bridge, & when they did shoot the bridge, the strn of the  strook vpon the ground the fall was so bigge & the water so shallow: then her Grace desired the Lords that she might not land at the staires where al traytors & offendors vse to land, whih they would not grant; then she pro∣tested that here steppeth as true a subiect as euer was towards the Queens high∣nesse; and before thee, O God, I speak it, hauing none other friends but only thee: when she came into the Tower she rested her selfe vpon a colde stone, the Lieu∣tenant said, Madam, you were best come out of the raine, for you sit vnwholsom∣ly: she answered it was better to sit there then in a worse place, for God know∣eth I know not whether you will bring me, then her Gentleman Usher wept, and she asked him what his meaning was in that be vsed her so vncomfortably? so she went into the prison and the doores were locked and boulted vpon her: then she called to her Gentleman for her booke, desiring God in no wise to suffer her
to build her foundation vpon the sands, but vpon the rocke, whereby all blasts of blustering windes should not hurt her: the Lords consulting about her straight keeping, the Lord of Sussex said, My Lords, let vs take héed that we doe no more then our Commission will warrant vs, whatsoeuer shall or may happen hereafter; for shee was the King our Masters daughter, whereunto they all agreed and departed. It would make a strange storie to recite what examinations and rackings of poore men there were to finde out that knife which should cut her throate: what gaping amongst the Lords of the Clergie, to see the day wherein they might wash their white Rochets in her innocent bloud, but most especially Steuen Gardner Bishop of Winchester then Lord Chancellor, and then rulr and gouernour of the rost, who within few dayes after came vnto her, with diuers of the Councell, and very strictly examined her about a purpose that she had to remoue to her house at Donnington Castle, and likewise they examined Sir Iames Acroft about the same matter: She answered, what is that to the purpose, my Lords, but that I may go vnto mine owne houses at all times? but my Lords, you doe examine euery meane prisoner concerning mee, wherein you doe me excéeding great iniurie: I beseech you ioyne not me in this sort with any of these offendors. When they were departing Sir Iames Acroft kneled downe, and said, hee was sorie to bee brought as a witnes against her Grace, and that hee had beene meruiously tossed and examined touching her Highnes, but I take GOD to record be∣fore whom I stand in your honours sight, I know not any thing of that crime that you haue laide vnto my charge, and will take my death thereon if I be driuen to so strait a tryall. When her officers had prouided her diet, and brought it to the vtter gate of the Tower, the common rascall souldiours receiued it. Wherefore they complai∣ned vnto the Lord Chamberlain Constable of the Tower, and desired that her dyet might be brought in by them, which were apppointed therevnto: Hee answered, I assure you for that she is a prisoner, shee shall be serued with the Lieutenants men, as other he prisoners are: and they seeming to be offended at this answere: Hee sware that if they did either frowne or shrug at him, he would set them where they should neither see Sunne nor Moone; but after they obtained their request of the Councell with much adoe: Then he would haue had his seruants to haue serued with them, and he would haue had his meate rosted with her Graces meat, & that his Cooke should come thither to dresse it: Her Graces Cooke would suffer no stanger to come about her dyet, but her own sworne men, neither would they suf∣fer any strangers to come into any other of their offices. When she had lien a month in close prison, and was ill at ease, she requested the Lord Chamberlaine and the Lord Shandoys to haue liberty to walk in some place: they said they durst not graut it, because they had commaundement to the con∣trary: but the next day the Lord Sandoys obtained of the Councell, but with very much adoe, that she might walke in the Queenes lodging, in the presence of the Lord Chamberlaine and the Lord Shandoys, the Windows being shut, wherewith she contented her selfe, and thanked him. Afterward she had libertie for to walke in a little Garden, and the Doores and Gates being close shut: during which time there vsed a mans Childe in the Tower many times to bring her Grace Flowers, but certaine suspitious heads thinking to make some great matter thereof, called the Childe, promising him Figges and Apples▪ as∣ked him when he was with the Earle of Deuonshire, he answered he would goe by and by thither: then they asked him when he was with the Lady Elizabeth, he answered euery day: then they asked him what the Lord of Deuonshire sent by him vnto her Grace, he said; I will go know what he will giue me to cary her. This is a crafty boy (quoth the L. Chamberlain) I pray you (quoth the boy) giue me the figs you promised me: no (quoth he) thou shalt be whipped if thou come any more vnto the Lady Elizabeth, or the Lord Courney, and the childs Father was commanded
to suffer the Boy to come no more vnto their chambers: the next day, as her Grace walked in the Garden, the Child péeping in at a little hole, cryed vnto her, Mi∣stris, I can bring you no more Flowers; whereat she smiled, perceiuing how the matter went. The sixtéenth day of May she was remooued from the tower, where Sir Henrie Benifield being appointed her Iayler, did receiue her with a company of Rakes to guard her, besies the Lord of Darbies Band: to whom the Lord of Tame was ioyned in Commission: the first day they conducted her to Richmond, where she was sclded from her Seruants, and Souldiers were appointed in their roomes to giue attendance vpon her person, whereby shee was in dispaire of her life, and desired her Gentleman Usher and the rest of his company, to pray for her. Then the Genleman Usher desired the Lord of Tame, to tell him if there were any danger meant toward his Mistris this night, saying; certainely I and my fellowes will rather dye, then she should secretly miscarry: the Lord of Tame answered, rather then it should be so, I and my men are ready to die at her foote also. The next day shee was carried to Windsor, and by the way she saw cer∣taine of her men, then she bad one goe to them, and say these wordes; Tanquam Ouis, She lay that night in the Deane of Windsors house: The next night shee was brought to Maister Dormers house, where many people presented vnto her gifts. Wherefore Sir Henry troubled the poore people very sore for shewing their kindnes vnto her, calling them Rbels and Traytors: as shee passed the villa∣ges the townes-men▪ rang the Bels for Ioy: Sir Henry sent his Souldiers, and put some of the gers into the stocks, and otherwise misused othersome the next night they came to the Lord of Tames house, where she was princely intreated of Noble men, Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen. Sir Henry told them that they could not tell what they did, and they were not able to answere their doings. The Lord of Tame said hee was well aduised of his dooings, and that her Grace might or should be merry at his house. Then Sir Henry (whereas there was appointed for her Grace, a Chayre, two Cushions, and a foote Carpet very Prince-like) wherein presumptuosy hee sate whilst his Bootes were plucked off: Wherefore the Ladies and Gentlewomen did laugh him to scorne: The next day she was brought to Woodstock, where she was inclosed as in the Tower, threescore souldiers euery day warding within the walles and without, and fortie euery night without the walles during the time of her imprisonment there, when she went into the Garden to walke, shee had fiue or six lockes locked vpon her, betwixt her lodging, and her walkes. Sir Henry himselfe keeping the keyes: Wherevpon shee called him her Goaler: He desired her not to call him so, but her Officer: from such Officers, quoth she, good Lord de∣liuer me. At the last, by earnes suite she was permitted to write vnto the Queene, so that Sir Henry did stand by whilest shee wrote (which hee straightly obserued:) when she was wearie he would carrie away the Letters, and bring them againe when she called for them: he would haue been the messenger to cartie the Letters, but she would not giue him leaue, but said one of her owne men should carry them: he said e rowed none of them durst be so olde: yes (quoth shee) I haue none so dishonest, but wll as willingly serue me nw as before, but he would not permit her Letters to be carried foure or fiue dayes after the writing therof, but in fine, he sent for her Gentlman, demanding whether he durst enterprise the carrying of the Letters to the Queen: he answered yes that he durst and would, whereupon Sir Henrie halfe against his stomack, gaue them him. Doctor Owen and Doctor Wendie were sent for by the Queens Grace, for that she was sickly, who ministred vnto her and let her bloud, tarrying with her 5. or 6. daies: they reported to the Q. and Councell of her Graces behauior and humblenes towards the Q. which her Maiestie took very thankfully, but the Bishops repned,
and told the Quéen that they maruelled that she submitted not her selfe vnto her Maiesties mercie. About this time her grace was requested by a secret friend to submit her selfe vnto the Quéen, which would be to her great commoditie: she answered, she would not submit her selfe vnto them which she had not offended: if I haue offended, I craue no mercy but law: I would I were as cléere out of the perrill of mine ee∣mies, as I know my selfe out of the danger of the law. About this time there was great consulting amongst the Bishops and Gentle∣men touching a marriage for her Grace, which some of the Spaniards wished to be, with some stranger that she might goe out of the Realme with her portion: then a Lord said, that the King should neuer haue quiet Common-wealth in Eng∣land, except her head were striken from her shoulders: the Spaniards answered, God forbid that their King and Master should consent to such a mischiefe. From that day the Spaniards neuer left good perswasions vnto the King, that he should neuer obtaine the like honour as he should in deliuering the Lady Elizabeth out of prison, whereby at length she was happily released of the same. Shortly after she was sent for to Hampton Court, Sir Henry Benifield and his souldiers, with the Lord of Tame, and Sir Ralph Chamberlaine guarding of her: the first night she came to Ricot, the next to M. Dormers, house and so to Colbrook, where she lay at the George all night: as she came thither, thréescore of her Gen∣tlemen and Yeomen met her, which had not séene her Grace a long season before: but they were commanded in the Quéens name to depart the towne, and shée was not suffred to speak with them: that night al her men were taken from her but her Gentleman vsher, thrée Gentlewomen, and two Grooms, & one of her Wardrop: the next day her Grace entred Hampton Court, where she lay a fortnightere euer any had recourse vnto her; at length came the Lord William Howard to er, who vsed her Grace maruellous hanourably: she requested him to be a meane that shée might speak with some of the Councell. Not long after came to her Gardner Bi∣shop of Winchester, the Lord Arundel, the Lord of Shrewsbury, and Secretary Pe∣ter, who with great humility humbled themselues vnto her Grace. My Lords, quoth she, I am glad to sée you; for me thinks I haue bin kept a great while from you desolatly alone, wherefore I would desire you to be a meane to the King and Quéens Maiesties, that I may be deliuered from prison, wherein I haue bin kept a long space. Then Gardner knéeled down, and requested her to submit her selfe to the Quéen, and then he doubted not but her Maiestie would be good vnto her: she answerd, rather then she would do so she would lie in prison all the dayes of her life, adding, that she craued no mercy but the law, if euer she did offend her Maiesty in thought, word or déed; and in yeelding I should confesse my selfe to be an offendor, which I neuer was towards her Maiesty, by occasion wherof the King and Quéen might e∣uer hereafter conceiue an ill opinion, therefore it were better for me to lie in prison for the trth, then to be abroad and suspected of my Prince. So they departed, pro∣mising to declare her message to the Quén. The next day Gardner came again vnto her Grace, and knéeling down, declared that the Quéen maruailed that she would so stoutly vse her selfe▪ not confessing o haue offended, so that it should séeme the Quéens Maiesty wrongfully to haue im∣prisoned her Grace: Nay, quoth she, the Quéen may punish me as it pleasth her: Nay, quoth Gardner, her Maiesty willed me to certifie you, that you must tell her another tale ere that you be at liberty: her Grace answered, that she had as liue be in prison with honesty and truth, as to be abroad suspected of hr Maiesty: this I will stand vnto, for I will neuer bely my selfe. Then he knéeled down, and said, then your Grace hath aduantage of me and other the Lords for your long impri∣sonment: I take God to record, quoth she, I séeke no vantage at your hands for your so dealing with me: then the other kneeled downe, and desired her Grac that all might be forgotten, and so they departed. A seuen-night after the Queen
sent for her at ten of the clocke at night: then she desired her Gentlemen and Gen∣tlewomen to pray for her, for that she cold not tell whether she should euer se them againe. When she came vnto the Quene she kneeled downe and desired God to preserue her Maiestie, not in any wise doubting but that she should proue her selfe as true and faithfull a subiect towards her Maiestie as euer did any, and therefore she desired her Maiestie so to iudge of her, and said she should not nd other of her, whatsoeuer report had gone of her: the Queen answered, you will not confesse your offence, bt stand stoatly in your truth, I pray God it may so fall out. It it do not, quoth she, I desire no fauour nor pardon at your Maiesties hands. Wel (said the Queene) you stiffely still perseere in the truth, belike you will not con∣fesse but that you haue bene wrongfully punished. I must not say so (if it please your Grace) to you; why then, said the Queene, belike you will vnto others: no, quoth she, I haue borne the burden, and must beare it: I humbly beseech your Maiestie to haue a good opinion of me, and to thinke me to be your true subiect, not only hitherto, but as long as life lasteth, and so they parted with a few comfortable words in English, but what she said in Spanish God knoweth. It is thought that King Philip was there behinde a cloth, and not seene, and that he shewed himself a very friend vnto that matter. Thus her Grace went vnto her lodging againe, ad the seuen-night after she was released of Sir Henry Benifield, and was set at libertie from imprisonment: she went into the Countrey, and had appointed to goe with her. Sir Thomas Pope one of the Queens Councellors, & M. Gage one of her Gentlemen Ushers. And thus straightly was she looked vnto all the time of Q. Maries raigne. Then there came vnto her house Maister Ierningham, and Norris Gentleman Usher, Quéene Maries Men, who tooke from her Grace Mistris Ashly to the Fléet▪ and thrée other of her Gentlewomen vnto the Tower, which was no little trouble vnto her Grace; saying, That shee thought that they would fetch all away in the end: but God be praysed shortly after was fetched away Gardiner, whereby the life of this so excellent a Princesse, the wealth of all England was preserued: for the said wicked Gardner had long laboured his wits, and bent all his deuises, to bring this our deere Soueragne out of the way, as by his words and doings did well appeare. After the death of this Gardner, followed the death also and drop∣ping away of other her enemies: whereby by little and little her iopardy decrea∣sed, and more gentle entertainmant did daily grow vnto her, vntill in the moneth of Nouember, the seauenteenth day. Three yeares after the death of Stephen Gardner, followed the death of Quéene Mary, as is before declared, the same day Queene Elizabeth was proclaimed Queene, with as many glad hearts of her sub∣iects, as euer was any King or Queene in this Realme. The next day after the death of Queene Mary, Cardinall Poole died: and shortly after Christopher Bi∣shop of Chichester, and Hopton Bishop of Norwich died, and Doctor Weston, which was the cheefe Disputer against Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. First, fell into displeasure with the Cardinall, and other Bishops, because he would not depart from his Deanerie of Westminster vnto the Monks: being remoued from thence, he was made Deane of Windsor, where being apprehended in aduoutry, was by the sad Cardinall put from all his spirituall liuings: wherefore he appea∣led vnto Rome, and flying out of the Realme he was taken by the way and clapt in∣to the Tower, where he remained vntill Queene Elizabeth was proclaimed, then being deliuered, he fell sick and died. The fifteenth day of Ianuary Queene Elizabeth was crowned with trium∣phant and honourable entertainment of the Citie of London, with such celebritie, praers, wishes, welcommings, cryes, tender words, Pageants, Interldes, de∣clmations and verses set vp, as the like hath not been seene: arguing a wonderfull affection of louing hearts towards their Soueraigne, and many Letters gratula∣tory were sent vnto her Maiestie, from sundry forraine places▪ as from Zuricke, Geneua, Basil, Berne, Wertenberge, Argentine, Franckfort, &c.
It pleased the Queens most excellent Maiesty to haue a conuenient chosen num∣ber of the best learned of either part, to conferre together their opinions and rea∣sons, and thereby to come to some good and charitable agreement: For the Papists were appointed the Bishops of Winchester, Lichfield, Che∣ster, Carlile, Lincolne, Doctor Cote, Doctor Harpsfield, Doctor, Langdall, and Doctor Chedsey. For the Protestants were appointed the Bishop of Chichester, Doctor Coxe, M. Whitehed, M. Grindall▪ M. Horne, Doctor Sands, M. Gest, M. Aelmer, M. Iuell, The matters which they should talk of follow: 1 It is against the word of God, and the custome of the auncient Church, to vse a tongue vnknowne to the people, in Common-prayer, and the administration of the Sacraments. 2 Euery Church hath authority to appoint, take away, & change ceremonies, and Ecclesiasticall Rites, so the same be vnto edification. 3 It cannot be proued by the word of God that there is in the masse offered by a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead. It was resolued by the Quéens Maiesty, with the aduice aforesaid, that it should be in writing on both parts, and that the Bishops should first declare their mindes touching the matters, with their reasons in writing; and they on the other part should the same day declare their opinions in like manner, and each of them deli∣uer their writings vnto the other to consider what were to be improued therin, and the same also to declare in writing some other day: the parties of this conference were to put and reade their assertions in the English tongue, before the Nobles and States of the Realme, that thereupon in the Court of Parlament, consequent∣ly following, some lawes might be grounded. The first méeting was the last of March, in Westminster Church: the Lords and others of the priuie Councell were present, and a great part of the Nobilitie: the Bishop of Winchester and his Colleagues alleadged that they had mistake that their reasons should be written, but they were readie to argue and dispute; this séemed somwhat strange to the Councell, yet it was permitted, so Doctor Cole Deane of Paules was appointed the vtterer of their mindes, who partly by spéech, and partly by reading authorities written, and somtimes was informed by his Colleagues what to say, made a declaration of their meanings and reasons to the first proposition; which being ended, they were asked by the Councell if they had any more to say, and they said no: so the other part was licensed to shew their minde, which they exhibited in a booke written; which after a prayer made most humbly vnto Almighty God for the induing them with the holy spirit, and a pro∣testation to stand to the doctrine of the Catholike Church, builded vpon the doc∣trines of the Prophets and Apostles: the effect of the protestation i as here fol∣loweth. We referre the whole iudgement of the controuersie vnto the holy Scriptures, and the Catholike Church of Christ▪ whose iudgement vnto vs ought to be most sa∣cred; notwithstanding by the Catholike Church we vnderstand not the Romish Church, whereunto our aduersaries attribute such reuerence, but that Church which S. Augustine and other fathers affirme ought to be sought in the holy scrip∣tures, and which is gouerned and led by the spirit of Christ. It is against the word of God, and the custom of the primitiue Church, to vse a tongue vnknowne vnto the people in the common prayers, and in administration of the Sacraments: by the word of God wemeane the written word of God, or Canonicall Scriptures; and by the custome of the primitiue Church, we meane the order most generally vsed in the Church for fiue hundred years after Christ, in which time liued Iustine, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Basill, Chrysostome, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, &c. This assertion hath two parts: first, that it is against the word of God; and secondly, that it is against the vse of the primitiue Church. The first is proued by
Saint Paule in 1. Cor. 14. where he intreateth of this matter, ex professo, purposely: and though some say that he there meaneth of preaching and not of prayer, it ap∣peareth, by the exposition of the best writers, that he speaketh of prayer and thanks∣giuing, and of all other publique actions which require any speach in the Church: of prayer he saith, I will pray with my spirit, and with my vnderstanding: and of thanksgiuing he saith, Thou giuest thanks wel, but the other is not edified, and how can the vnlearned say Amen at thy giuing of thankes, when hee vnderstandeth not what thou sayest? then he concludeth, that all things ought to be don to edification; and he vseth the similitude of a Trumpet, If it giue an vncertaine sound who can prepare to battell? so if thou speake with vnknowne tongues, you speake in the ayre, that is, in vaine. In the old Testament all things belonging vnto publike prayers, benedictions, thanksgiuings, and sacrifices were alwayes in their naturall tongue: if they did so in the shaddowes of the law, much more ought we to doe the like. S. Augustin in his fourth booke De doctrina Christiana, and the tenth Chapter, saith, If they, for whose cause we speake, vnderstand not our speaking, there is no cause why we should speake. The barbarous Heathen of all nations and sorts of men euer made their pray∣ers and sacrifices to their gods in their mother tongue, which sheweth that it is the very light and voyce of nature. Touching the second part of the assertion, that it is against the custome of the primitiue Church: it is a matter so cléere, that the deniall of it must néeds procéede either of great ignorance, or els of wilfull mallice. Iustinus Martyr, Apol. 2. describeth the order of the primitiue Church, saying, Vpon the Sonday, assemblies are made both of the Citizens and Countrey-men, where the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are read as much as may be: when the Reader doth cease, the head Minister maketh an exhortation to follow honest things, then we rise altogether, and offer prayers, then bread, wine, and water are brought forth, then the head Minister offereth prayer and thanksgiuing as much as he can, and the people say Amen. He liued about the yeare 160. This declareth plainly that the Scriptures were read, and prayers and administration of the Lords Supper were done in a tongue vnderstood. Both the Lyturgies of Basill in Chrysostom declare that the people were appoin∣ted to answer to the prayer of the Minister, sometime Amen, somtime Lord haue mercy vpon vs, somtime With thy spirit and truth we haue our hearts lifted vp vnto the Lord, which they could not haue done if they had not vnderstood the long the prayers were said in. Basilius Epist. 63. saith, That their Psalmes which they sing, being diuided into two parts, they sing by course together, one beginning the song, and the rest fol∣lowing. Ambrose vpon the fourtéenth of the first to the Corinthians, saith. This is that S. Paule saith, Because he that speaketh in an vnknowne tongue speaketh to God, for he knoweth all things, but men know not, therfore there is no profit of these things; and further he saith, The vnlearned hearing that which hee vnderstandeth not, hee knoweth not the end of the prayer to say Amen. And againe he saith, If an Infidell or one vnlearned come in, if he heare in a language which he vnderstandeth God to be praised and Christ to be worshipped, he seeth perfectly that the Religion is true, nothing to be done colourably nor in darkenes as amongst the heathen, whose eies are blinded, they not perceiuing themselues to be deluded with diuers vanities, for all falshood speaketh darknes, and sheweth false things for true, therefore with vs nothing is done couertly, for if there be none that he can vnderstand he may say there is some deceit, because they are ashamed to open it: further, thus he conclu∣deth, Let all things be done to edifying: this thing ought chiefly to be labored for, that the vnlearned might profit, lest any part of the body should be darke through ignorance: and further he saith, He that speaketh in an vnknowne tongue, and hath
no interpreter, let him pray secretly to God, which heareth all dumb things, for in the Church he ought to speake that which may profit all men. And S. Hierom vpon that place of Paul, Quomodo qui supplet locum idiotae, and vpon other places vseth the very same arguments that S. Ambrose did; and like∣wise Chrysostome vpon 1. Cor. 14. vseth the like arguments, and Dionysius, Cypri∣an and S. Augustine agrée in the same, and Iustinian the Emperour, who liued 527. yeares after Christ, made a Constitution that all Bishops and Priests should ce∣lebrate their holy oblations and prayers, not speaking low, but with a loude voice, that the mindes of the hearers may be stirred vp with greater deuotion, for so saith the Apostle in the first to the Corinthians, saying, If we only blesse and giue thanks in the spirit, how doth he that occupieth the place of the vnlearned say Amen? Thou verily giuest thanks well, but the other is not edified: And in his Epistle to the Romans he saith, With the heart a man beleeueth vnto righteousnes, and with the mouth confession is made vnto saluation. When this was ended, certaine of the Bishops began to say contrary vnto their former answer, and that they had much more to say vnto this matter, whereupon it was agreed that vpon the Monday following the Bishoppes should bring their mindes in writing vnto the second assertion, and to the last also, if they could, and that they should first reade the same; and that the other part likewise should bring theirs, and being read each of them shoud deliuer to the other the same writings, and that in the meane time the Bishops should put into writing all that Doctor Cole had that day vttered, and whatsoeuer they could more thinke of for the same, and that they should send it vnto the other partie, and receiue that which they had written. At which day the Bishops were concluded to reade that which they had to say to the first question, and would not procéede then vnto the rest; and after they ca∣elled because they should reade their writings, first saying that if the aduersaries should end the talke, then should the veritie on our sides not be so well marked, for they should depart speaking last, with the reioycing triumph of the people, where∣upon grew much contention betwixt the Bishops and the Councell, because they obserued not the order which they were agréed vpon the day before: when there could be nothing done for contention all that day, the Lord Kéeper said, My Lords, sith you refuse to reade the writing after the order taken, wee will breake vp and depart; and for that you will not that we should heare you, you may perhaps short∣ly heare of vs. Here you may perceiue what the Papists be, if the sword be taken from them, how soone all their cunning lieth in the dust, or else why would they not abide the triall of writings, and stand vnto the order agréed vpon? And because they gaue such an example of disorder, stubbornnesse and selfewill as hath not bin séene in such an honourable assembly, whereby the godly and Chri∣stian purpose of the Quéens Maiestie was made frustrate; the Bishops of Win∣chester and Lincolne were committed vnto the Tower, and the rest were bound daily to make personall appearance before the Councell, and not to depart the City vntil further order was taken for their comtempt, and Bonner about the same time was committed vnto the Marshalsie. About this time was a Parliament holden at Westminster, wherein a great many of the Papists and Protestants were imployed, the one to retaine still, the o∣ther to impugne the doctrine established in Quéene Maries time. Amongst others, the words of Doctor Story, the stout champion of the Pope in the Parlament house, are worthy to be knowne of posterity. He said, whereas he was much complained of to haue beene a great setter forth of such Religion, orders, and procéedings, as of Quéen Mary were set forth in this Realme: he confessed it to be true, and protested that he therein had done nothing but what his conscience did leade him vnto, and his Commission commanded him, and that he was no lesse readie now to doe the like, and more, if the Quéens Maie∣stie
would authorize him therevnto: and hee said hee was sorie for nothing but that hee had done no more then hee had done, and that they had not beene more seuere in executing those lawes, wherein there was no default in him, but in them, whom hee both oft and earnestly exhorted vnto the same, beeing not a little greeued with them, for that they laboured onely vpon the yong and little springs and twigges, whereas they should haue striken at the roote, & cleane haue rooted it out: and he said that he was once at the burning of an herewigge at Uxbridge, meaning Maister Denley, where he tossed a Fagget at his face, as hee was singing of Psalmes, and set a bush of thornes vnder his feete, and he named Sir Philip Hobby, and another Knight in Kent, with such other of the richer and higher degree, whom his Councell was to pluck at, wherein if they had followed my aduice they had done wisely. In this Parliament through the goodnes of the Lord the true cause of the Gos∣pel, had the vpper hand, the papists hope was frustrated, & their rage abated: The proceedings in K Edwards time was reuid, and the bloudy statutes of Q. Mary repealed: The old Bishops were deposed for refusing the othe, in renouncing the Pope, and not subscribing vnto the Queenes lawfull supremacy. In the place of Cardinall Poole, succeeded Doctor Mathew Parker, Archbishop of Can∣terbury: In the place of Heath, succeeded Doctor Yong; Insteed of Boner, Ed∣mund Grindall was Bishop of London: For Hopton, Thurleby, Tunstall, Pates, Christopherson, Peto, Coats, Morgan, Feasie, White, Oglethorpe, were placed Doctor Iohn Parkust in Norwich: D. Cox in Ely: Iuell, in Salisbury: Pilkinton, in Duresme: D. Sands, in Worcester: Benton, in Couentry and Lichfield: Dow∣nam, in Westchester: Dauid in S. Dauids Ally in Exeter: Horne, in Winchester: Story, in Lincolne: Scamler, in Peterborough: Bartlet, in Bathe: Gest, in Ro∣chester: Barlow, in Chichester. The seuere punishment of God vpon perse∣cutors and blasphemers. STephen Gardiner, the Arch persecutor, whom the Lord tooke away in the middest of Queene Maries Raigne: of whose poisoned life, and stinking end mention is made already: He said in his death-bed; I haue denied my Master with Peter, but neuer repented with Peter. Bishop Morgan, who condemned Master Farrar, Bishop of Saint Dauids, and vsurped his roome: not long after he was striken in such a strange sort, that the meate he eat would not goe downe, but rise vp againe; sometimes at his mouth: sometimes blow out of his nose most horrible to behold, and so continued vnto his death. Also when Doctor Leyson the Sheriffe had fet away the said Bishops cat∣tell, diuers of the Cattell would neuer eate meat, but lay bellowing and roaring, and so dyed. One Richard a Priest of Carmarthen, a little after the martyrdome of the said B. Farrar, standing vpon the top of a stayre, in one Maister Downings house, iest∣ing at the death of the said B. Farrar, fell downe suddenly, and brake his neck. Iustice▪ Morgan, after he had set vpon the death of the Lady Iane, fell mad, and so died, hauing euer in his mouth Lady Iane, Lady Iane. Doctor Dunning, the cruell Chancellor of Norwich, was striken wish sodaine death as he sate in his chayre. Berry, the wicked Comissary of Norfolke, foure daies after Queene Maries death, made a feast, and had one of his Concubines; therein the afternoone com∣ming from Euensong, he fell downe by the way and neuer sirre. Bishop Thorneton, Suffragan of Douer, who was a most cruell tyrant: hee
fell in a palsey, as he looked vpon his men playing at Bowles, and so was had to bed, he was willed to remember God: yea so I doe said he, and my Lord Car∣dinall, and so he dyed. After him succeeded another Bishop or Suffragan, who was Suffragan before vnto Boner: he brake his neck downe a payre of staires in the Cardinals chamber at Greenewich, as he had receiued the Cardinals blessing. The Parson of Crundall in Kent, hauing receiued the Popes Pardon: hee ex∣horted the people to receiue remission of sinnes, as he had done: And hee said that he stood now, as cleere in conscience as when he was first borne, and cared not if he should die the same houre: in so saying he was suddenly striken in the pulpit, and leaning back he was found dead. Not long after the death of Queene Mary, dyed Doctor Capon Bishop of Sa∣lisbury, and the cruell Chancellor of Salisbury: Doctor Geffrey about the same time in the middest of his buildings was suddenly taken with the mighty hand of God, and so ended his life: The day before he departed, hee had appointed to call before him 90. persons, to examine them by inquisition. Cruell Maister Woodroofe Sheriffe of London, which reioyced at the death of the Saints of Christ: A weeke after he was out of his office the one halfe of his body was striken by the hand of God, that hee was bedrid, and not able to moue himselfe, and so he continued seuen or eight yeares vntill he dyed. Rafe Sardine, that betrayed George Eagles, was attached himselfe, arraigned and hanged. Maister Swingefield, an Aldermans Deputy in Thames stréet, vnderstanding a Midwife which absented her selfe from the Church to bee at the labour of one Mistris Walter at Crooked Lane end: he apprehended her being great with child, and carried her vnto Boner, who sent her vnto Lolards Tower: where for fere she was deliuered of a child, & could haue no woman to help her: after she had lien there fiue wéekes, she was deliuered vpon sureties. Doctor Story hearing thereof, charged her with felony, and sent her vnto Newgate: shortly after the said Master Swingfield and three more that came to take her died. One Burton a Bayliffe of Crowland in Lincolneshire, who made shew to be a great friend of the Gospel in King Edwards time, but in Quéene Maries time he moued the parish to shew themselues the Queenes friends, and set vp Masse speedily, and he called on them still in the Queenes name: and when hee saw his words were not regarded, he got him to Church vpon a Sunday morning, when the Curate began to say seruice, according vnto King Edwards time: he came to him and said: Sirra, will you not say Masse, buckle your selfe to Masse you knaue, or by Gods bloud I will sheath my Dagger in your shoulders: The poore Curate for feare setled himselfe vnto Masse. But not long after, riding from home with one of his neighbours, as he returned home a Crow flew ouer his head, singing after her wonted manner, knau, knaue, and dunged vpon his nose, which ranne downe vpon his mouth & beard; The poisoned sauour thereof so annoyed his stomack, that he neuer ceased vomi∣ting vntill he came home, whereof within few daies he dyed, without any toen of epentance. As Iames Abbes was a leading to be burned, poore people asking almes, hee pulled off all his apparell vnto his shirt, and gaue it amongst them, to some one thing, and to some another: and he exhorted them to stand stedfast in the truth of the Gospel▪ which hee (with Gods help) would seale with his bloud in their sight: Then a seruant of the Sheriffes cryed out, beléeue him not good people, he is an he∣retick & a mad man, and it is heresie that he saith, and thus he did vntill hee came vnto the stake: but as soone as the fire was put vnto Abbes, this blasphemer was striken with madnes, wherewith he had charged the good martyr, & he cast off his shooes & the rest of his clothes & cried out thus did Abbes that true seruant of God, who is saued, but I am damned: Thus hee ranne about the towne of Berry,
still crying Iames Abbes was a good man and saued, but I am damned: The Sheriffe tyed him vp in a darke house, but he continued his old note, and being brought to his Masters house in a Cart, within halfe a yeere he died: And beeing ready to die, the parish Priest came to him with the Crucifix, and the Host of the Altar: but he cryed out of the Priest, and defied all that baggage, saying that the Priest, ad such other as he was, were the cause of his damnation: And that Iames Abbes, was a good man and saued. Clarke, an open enemie of the Gospell, and all good prechers in King Edwards dayes, hanged himselfe in the Tower of London. The great and notable Papist called Troling Smith, of late fell downe suddenly in the street, and died. Dal the Promoter was eaten in his body with Lice, and so died. Cox a Protestant in King Edwards daies, and in Quéene Maries daies a Papist and a Promoter, being well when he went to bed, he was dead before morning. Alexander the keeper of Newgate, who to hasten the poore lambes vnto the slaughter, hee would goe to Boner, Story, and Colmley, and others: crying out rid my prison, I am too much pestered with hereticks, and he dyed very miserably, be∣ing swollen and so rotten within, that no man could abide the smell of him: and Iames his son being left very rich, in three yeares brought it to nght, and short∣ly after as he went in Newgate market, he fell downe suddenly and died. Iohn Pether, sonne in law to this Alexander, ad horrible blasphemer of God, and no lesse cruell vnto the prisoners, rotted away, and so died: who commonly when he affirmed any thing, he would say, if it be not true, I pray God I rot ere I die. Iustice Lelon, persecutor of Ieffrey Hurst, died suddenly. Robert Baulding, a the taking of William Seaman, was striken with lightning: wherevpon he pined away and died. Beard the Promoter, died wretchedly. Robert Blomfield▪ persecutor of VVilliam Browne, consumed away miserably. In K. Henries time, Iohn Rockwood, who in his horrible end cried All to late, which were the words that he vsed in persecuting Gods children at Callice. The Lady Honer a persecutor, and George Bradway, a false accuser, were both bereft of their wits. Richard Long a persecutor, drowned himselfe. Sir Rafe Ellerker▪ as he was desirous to see the heart taken out of Adam Dam∣lip, he being slaine of the Frenchmen: after they had mangled him, and cut off his priuy members, would not leaue him vntill they saw his heart cut out. Doctor Foxford, Chancelor to Bishop Stokely, a cruell persecutor, died sud∣denly. Pauier, or Pauie, towne Clarke of London, a bitter enemy vnto the Gospel, han∣ged himselfe. Doctor Pendleton died miserably, and at his death he repented that euer he had yeelded to the Doctrine of the Papists. Iohn Fisher, Bishop of Rochest, and Sir Thomas Moore; after they had broght Iohn Frith, Bayfield, and Bainham, and diuers others to death: shortly after, they themselues were made a publike spectacle of bloudy death at tower hil. These persecuting Bishops died a little before Quéene Mary: Coates, Parfew, Glune, Brookes, King, Peto, Day, Holiman. After Quéene Mary, immediately followed Cardinall Poole, and these persecu∣ting Bishops: Iohn Christopherson, Hopton, Morgan, Iohn VVhite, Rafe Bayne, Owen Oglethorpe, Cutbert Tonstall, Thomas Raynolds: And about the same tim died Doctor VVeston, Maister Slethurst, Seth Holland, VVilliam Copinger, and Doctor Steward great persecutors The residue that remained of the persecuting Clergy, and escaped the stroke of death, were depriued, and committed vnto prisons; these Bishops were commit∣ted vnto the Tower: Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of Yorke, Thomas Thurlby,
Thomas Watson, Dauid Poole, Gilbert Burne, Richard Pates, Troublefield, and Iohn Fecknam Abbot of Wesminster, and Iohn Boxell Dean of Windsor and Pe∣terborough, were committed with the said Bishops vnto the Tower. Gouldwell, Bishop of Saint Asse, ad Maurice Elect of Bangor, ranne away. Boner, & Thomas Wood Bishops, were committed to the Marshalsey: Cutbert Scot, Bishop of Chester, was in the Fleete: from whence he escaped to Loane, and there dyed. These were committed vnto the Fleete: Henry Cole, Deane of Paules: Iohn Harpsfield, Arch-deacon of London: Nicholas Harpsfield, Arch-deacon of Canter∣bury: Anthony Draycot, Archdeacon of Huntington: William Chadsey, Archdea∣con of Middlesex. One Iohn Apowell, mocke one William Maulden, as he was reading an Eng∣lish Seruice Booke in a Winters Euening, mocking him at euery word, with contrari gaudes, and flouting words: Wherefore the said William checked him; saying, hee mocked not him, but God: As the said William was reading these words: Lord haue mercy vpon vs: Christ haue mercy vpon vs: The other with a start suddenly said, Lord haue mercy vpon me: The said William asked him wher∣fore he was afrayd: He answered, when you reade Lord haue mercy vpon vs: me thought the hayre of my head stood vpright with a great feare that came vpon me: The next day in the morning he fell mad, and after that hee lay day and night, and his tongue neuer ceased crying out of the Diuell of hell, I would see the Diuell of hell, there he is, there he goeth, and such like words: Thus he lay six daies, that his Maister and all the rest of the house was weary of the noise, and sent him to Bedlam. At Waltamstow six miles from London, certaine children were talking what God was, and one said he was a good Old Father: and a Maide of twelue yéeres old, named Denys Benifield said what he is, an old doting Foole: The next day she was suddenly striken by the hand of God, that all one side of her was black, and she speechlesse, and so she died the same night. Some beeing in communication about Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, in an house of Abingdon in Barkeshire: One Lear  plowman, dwelling at Bright∣well said that he saw that euill fauoured knaue Latimer, when hee was burned, and that he had téeth like a horse, at which time and houre, the son of the said Lea∣uer most wickedly hanged himselfe in Shepton, a mile from Abbington. Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury gaue sentence against the Lord Cobham, and died himselfe before him, being s striken in his tongue, that he could neither swallow nor speake, a good while before his death. When Patrick Hamelton was burned for the truth in Scotland, in the fire hee cited and appealed Frier Campbell, that accused him to appeare before the High God, to answere whether his accusation was iust or not, betwixt that and a day of the next moneth, which he named: The said Frier dyed immediatly before the day came. Haruy a Commissary which condemned a poore man in Callice, was shortly af∣ter, hanged, drawne and quartered. VVilliam Swallow, the cruell tormentor of George Eagles, shortly after all the hayre of his head, and nayles of his fingers, and toes went off, and his eyes so closed, that he could scant see, and his wife was striken with the falling Sicknes which she neuer had before. And Richard Potto, the other troubler of George Eagles, was suddenly taken with sicknes, and falling vpon his bed, like a beast dyed, and neuer spake. Richard Denton a shrinker, whilst hee refused to bee burned in the Lords quar∣rell, he was burned in his owne house with two moe. The wife of Iohn Fetty, which was the cause of the taking of her husband im∣mediately fell mad. Thomas Mouse, & George Reuet, two persecutors were strike miserably with
the mighty hand of GOD and so died, as is mentioned in the Story of Adam Foster. In the same Story is mention made of Robert Edgore, for being a Popish Clarke against his conscience, was bereft of his wits, and kept in chaines and bands many yerres after. Iohn Pankney, and one Hanington, fellowes of New Colledge in Oxford, both stubborne Papists, drowned themselues, with Crucifixes about their neckes. Christopher Landesdale, a Yeoman of the Gard, dwelling in Hackney in Mid∣dlesex, he suffered a poore man to die in a ditch in his ground, for want of harbour and reléefe, hauing much out-houss to spare; but shortly after hee being drunke, died himselfe in a ditch. In King Edwards time there was a lusty young Gentleman in Cornwall, wh riding in the company of twenty Horsemen, began to sweare and blaspheme the Nae of God most horribly, one checking him for it, he bad him take thought for his winding shéete, and not for him: amend saith he, for death giueth no warning, Gods wounds, said hee, care not thou for mee, raging still worse and worse in words: They rode ouer a great Bridge, vppon which Bridge this Gentleman swearer spurred his Horse in such sort, that hee sprang ouer the bridge with the man vpon his backe, and as he was falling he said; Horse and man and all to the Deuill. Henry Smith, a Student of the Law in the middle Temple, he was peuerted to Popery by one Gyfford, then hee went to Louane, and there was more rooted therein, and brought from thence with him pardons, a Crucifixe, with an Agnus Dei, which he vsed to weare about his necke, and he had Images in his Chamber to pray before, with diuers other Popish trash. After this Henry Smith, with Gyfford his companion, was returned from Lo∣uane, he was a foule Gyrer, and a scornefull scoffer of that Religion which he had professed: at length he tyed his shirt, which he had torne for that purpose, about his priuy places, and with his girdle fastned vnto the bed-post, he strangled himselfe: The place where he had fastned the Girdle was so low, that his hippes well neere touched the floure: his legs lying a crosse, and his armes spread abroad, hauing his Agnus Dei in a siluer tablet, with his other Idolatrous trash in a window by him. He was buried in a Lane called Foskew Lane. Twyford was a busie doer in King Henries daies by Bonners appointment, to set vp stakes for the burning of poore Martyres: When hee saw the stakes con∣sume so fast, he said; I will haue a stake, I trow, that shall hold, and so hee proui∣ded a big Trée, and set it vp in Smithfield, the top being cut off, but ere the Tree was consumed, God turned the state of Religion, and he fel into a horrible disease, rotting aliue aboue the ground before he died. Forraigne Examples. HOfmester the great Arch-papist, and cheefe piller of the Popes falling church, as he was going to Ratisbone, to dispute against the Protestants, he mise∣rably died, horribly roaring and crying out. Examples of what inconueniences commeth by Popish desperate Doctrine. IN the Uniuersity of Louane was one Guarlacus, after hee had stoutly main∣ned the corrupt errors of Popish doctrine, when he was sicke he cryed out how
wickedly he had liued, and that he was not able to abide the iugdment of God, and casting forth words of miserable dispaire, he said; his sins were greater then hee could be forgiuen. Likewise Arnoldus Bomelius, a Student of Louan hee: framed himselfe after the rule of the vnsauory Doctrine of Papists, to stand in feare and doubt of Iu∣stification, and to worke saluation by merits, he began more and more to grow in∣to doubtfull dispaire: at length, being ouercome with dispaire, not hauing in that Popish Doctrine wherewith to raise vp his soule, he going a walking with three other Students; he singled himselfe from them and stabbed himselfe, they séeing him shrinke, ranne vnto him, and found that he had stabbed himselfe with his dag∣ger, then they tooke him and brought him into a house, and he espying one of his riends very busie about him, hauing a knife hanging at his girdle, he got out the knife and stabbed himselfe to the hart. Iacobus Latomus, a principall Captaine of the Uniuersity of Louan, after hee had béene at Bruxels, thinking to doe a great act against Luther and his fellowes▪ hee made such a foolish Oration before the Emperour, that hee was laughed to corne. After in a publike Lecture at Louan, hee vttered such words of despera∣tion, and blasphemous impiety, that the Diuines were faine to carry him away as he was rauing, and shut him into a Chamber: from that time vnto his death, he had nothing in his month but that he was damned, and that there was no hope of saluation for him, because he had wittingly against his knowledge withstood the truth. Ex Epist. Senarclaei. A Dominick Fryer of Munster, as he was inueighing in the Pulpet against the Doctrine of the Gospell, was stricken with a suddaine flash of lightning and so di∣ed. Ex Pantal. Manlius in his Bke De dictis Philip Melancton, reporteth that a Taylors ser∣ant in Lipsia, first receiued the Sacrament in both kinds wlth the Gospellers, and after by the Papists perswasions, hee receiued it with them in one kinde, and afterward being admonished by his Maister to goe againe vnto the Commu∣nion of the Gospellers, he stood a great while and made no answere, and at last crying out vppon a suddaine, hee cast himselfe out of a Window and brake his ncke. The same Manlius maketh mention of a Gentleman of authority, who hearing these words in Psalme 46. Our only hold and fortresse is our God: he said; I will help to shoote against thy stay or fortresse, or else I will not liue: and within thrée daies he died without repentance. Sadoleus the learned Cardinall, died with great torments of conscience and desperation. The Commendator of S. Anthony, who sat as spirituall Iudge ouer that god∣ly learned man Wolsgangus, burned in Lotheringe in Germany, fel suddenly dead shortly after he had condemed him. And the Abbot Clariocus his fellow, at a cracke of Gunnes saddenly fell downe and died. Dauid Beaton▪ Archbishop of S. Andrewes in Scotland, shortly after the burning of M George Wisard, he was wretchedly slaine in hi owne Castle, as you may sée in the discourse of this Story. Crescentius the Popes Legate, and Uicegerent in the Councell of Trent; he was sitting from morning vntill night writing Letters vnto the Pope: at his ri∣sing there appeared vnto him a mighty blacke Dog, his eyes flaming lie fire, and his eares hanging almost downe to the ground: the Cardinall being amazed, cal∣led his Seruants to bring in a Candle and seeke for the Dog, and when the Dog could not be found, the Cardinall was strucken with a concit, and fell into such a sicknesse, as all his Phisitians could not cure, and so he dyed. By Iohannes Sleida∣s in his twelfth Booke, he saith, his purpose was to recouer againe the whole authority and doctrine of the Romish Sea, and to set it vp for euer. The Councell
of Trident was dissolued by the death of this Cardinall. Two adulterous Bishops belonging vnto the said Councell of Trident, one haunting vnto an honest mans Wife, was slaine with a Boare-speare: the other Bishop, whose haunt was to créepe through a window, was hanged in a Ginne laid for him of purpose, and so couayed, that in the morning he was séene openly in the stréete hanging out of the window, to the wondermnt of all that passed by. Ex protestatione conceonatorum Germa. Iohn Eckius, the most vehement impugner of Martine Luther; as his life was full of all vngodlinesse, vncleannes and blasphemy, so was his end miserable hard and pittifull: his last words were these; In case the foure thousand Guilders were ready, the matter were dispatched, dreaming belike of some Cardinalship that he should haue bought. Ex Iohn Carion. fol 250. Iohn Vaueler Warfe, the next in office to Magraue, he was of Antwarpe: hee was a sore persecutor of Christs flocke; he had drowned diuers good Men and wo∣men, for the which he was much commended of the bloody Generation, being ve∣ry rich, he gaue vp his office, intending to passe the rest of his life in pleasure, and comming vnto a banquet at Antwarpe to be merry, being well laden with Wine, he rode home in his Wagon with his Wife, a Gentlewoman, and his Foole, the Horses stood still vpon a bridge, and would by no meanes goe foreward: then he in a drunken rage cryed out; Ride on in a thousand Diuels name, by and by rse a mighty whirlewind, and tossed the Wagon ouer the bridge into the Towne ditch, where he was drowned, and when he was taken vp his necke was broken: his wife was taken vp aliue, but died within thrée daies: the Gentlewoman and the Foole were saued. Bartholomeus Chassaneus, a great Persecutor, died suddenly. Minerius, the Bloudy Tormentor of Christes Saints, dyed with bleeding in his lower parts: the Iudge that accompanied him in his persecution, as hee returned homeward was drowned, and thrée more of the said company killed one another. Iohannes de Roma that cruell Monke, that deuised such hellish torments for the poore Christians at Augrowne: the Lord paid him home againe with the like tor∣ments, who rotted to death, and could finde no euemie to kill him, nor friend to bury him, he could not abide his own stinking carrion, nor any man else that came neere him could abide his stench. The like persecutor was the Lord of Reuest, and after his furious persecution he was striken with the like horrible sicknes, and with such a fury and madnesse, that none durst come neere him, and so most wretchedly di: The like greeuous punishment happened vpon one Iohn Martine a persecutor, as appeareth in the History before. In the yeare 1565. in the towne of Gaunt in Flanders, one VVilliam de VVe∣uer was imprisoned for religion by the Prouost of S. Peters: In Gaunt the Pro∣uost sent for one Giles Brackelman, the principall Aduocate of the Councel of Flan∣ders, and Borough-master, and Iudge of Saint Peters, with others of the Rulers of the Towne to sit in Iudgement vpon him: as the said Borough-master reaso∣ned with the said VVilliam de VVeauer vpon diuers Articles of his Faith: And be∣ing about to pronounce his condemnation, the Borough-Master was suddenly stri∣ken with a Palsey, that his mouth was drawne almost vnto his eare, and so hee fell downe and died: The Lords that stood by shadowed him, that the people should not see him, and commaunded the people to depart, yet they burned the said Willi∣am de Weauer within thrée houres after the same day. The fift of March 1566. Sir Garret Trieste Knight, hee had promised the Re∣gent to bring downe the preaching; wherefore the Regent promised him to make him a Graue, which is an Earle: when he had brought with him to Gaunt tidings of the death of the Preachers; he receiued from the Regent a Commission, to swear the Lords and Commons vnto the Romish Religion: and being at supper, he bad
his Wife call him an houre the sooner in the morning, for that he should haue much businesse to doe, to sweare the Lords and people vnto the Romish Religion: but going to bed in good health, in the morning when he should be called, he was found dead: and as the Lords of Gaunt procéeded to giue the Oath the next day, Master Martine de Pester the Secretary being appointed, and about to giue the Oath; as the first man should haue sworne, the said Martin de Pester was stricken of GOD with present death, and uer spake againe. These Examples were contained in a Letter writ∣ten vnto HENRY the second French King, which is in the Booke more at large. THE Lord Poucher Archbishoppe of Tores, who sued for the Court called Chambre Ardente, there to condemne the Protestants to the fire, who after was stricken with a disease called the fire of God, which began at his lower parts, and so ascended vpward, that one member after another was cut off, and so he di∣ed miserably. Castellanus hauing inriched himselfe by the Gospell, and returning from pure Doctrine vnto his old vomit againe, became a Persecutor at Orliance, but God strucke him with a sicknesse vnknowne vnto the Phisitians, one halfe of his body burned as hot as fire, and the other halfe was as could as Ice, and so most miserably crying, he dyed. Du Prat, was the first that opened vnto the Parliament the knowledge of He∣risies, and gaue out Commission to put the faithful vnto death: he died swearing, and horribly blaspheming God, and his stomacke was found pierced, and gnaune asunder with Wormes. Iohn Ruse, Councellor in the Parliament, comming from the Court, hauing made report of the Processe against the poore innocents, was taken with a burning in the lower part of his belly, before hee could be brought home the fire inuaded all his secret parts, and so he died miserably. Claude des Asses, a Councellor in the said Court, the same day that he gaue his consent to burne the faithfull. After dinner he committed whoredome with one of his Seruants, and in doing the act, he was stricken with a disease, that he died out of hand. Peter Liset Chiefe President of the said Court, and one of the Authors of the said burning Chamber, fell mad and was put from his office. Iohn Morin, after he had beene the death of many Christians▪ was striken with a disease in his legs, called the Wolues, wherewith he lost the vse of them, and died out of his wits, denying and blaspheming God. Iohn Andrew, the Booke-binder of the Pallace, became a spy to find out Prote∣stants, died in madnesse. The Inquisitor Iohn de Roma in Prouence, his flesh fel from him by péece meal, and so stinking that no man might come neere him. Iohn Minerius of Prouence, which was the death of a great number of men, wo∣men, and Children at Cabriers and Merindoll, died with bléeding in the lower parts; the fire hauing taken his belly, blaspheming and dispising of God. Thus farre out of the Letter. Henry the second the French King notwithstanding the aforesaid examples
might giue him sufficient warning, yet would he not surceae his cruell persecuti∣on against Gods Children: but being at the Parliament house, which was kept at the Fryer Augustines in Paris, because the Pallace was a preparing or he marriages of his Daughter and his Sister: and hauing heard the opinion in Re∣ligion of Anne du Bourg, an eloquent and learned Councellor: he caused him and Loys du Faur another Councellor, to bee committed Prisoners vnto the Count Mongomery. The King said to the said Anne du Bourg; These eyes of mine shal sée thee burned; and a day was appointed for the hearing the cause, at which day the King employed all the morning in examining, as wel the Presidents as Coun∣cellors of the said Parliament against the Prisoners, and other their Compani∣ons that were charged with the same Doctrine: then they went to dinner, after dinner the King went to running at the Tilt, and brake many staues as well as could be; whereupon he was highly commended of the Lookers n, and being in∣flamed with hearing his yraise, he would néedes runne with Montgomery, who knéeled downe and asked pardon not to runne with him: the King commaunded him vpon his Alleagiance to runne, and himselfe put his staffe into his hand, and as the King and he met the vizard of his helmet suddenly fell downe, whereby the King was stricken in one of his eyes, so that his braines perished, and it so estered, that no remedy could be found, so that the eleauenth day after hee dyed. He said he feared he was stricken for casting poore Christians wrongfully in Pri∣son, but Cardinall Lorraine said, that it was the enemy that tempted him to think so: By this meanes the hall that was prepared for a place of ioy and gladnes, was now a place to keepe the dead Corps, beeing hanged with mourning-cloath, and there was heard mourning for the space of forty daies. In the yeare 1561. there were certaine Gentlemen put to death at Amboyse, for taking rmes against the house of Guise. The last that was put to death, thrust his hands into the blood of the others which were beheaded, and lifting them vp vnto heauen, cryed with a loud voyce; Lord behold the blood of thy Children, thou wilt in time and place reuenge it. Not long after Councellor Oliue, the con∣demner of them, through great remorce of conscience fell sicke, and shriked vpon a suddaine with an horrible cry, and said to the Cardinall of Lorraine: O Car∣dinall, thou wilt make vs all to be damned! and shortly after died. Francis the second, succéeded his Father Henry the second in the Kingdome of France: he, at the perswasion of the Cardinall of Lorraine and others, assembled the Estates of the Realme in Orleance to maintaine the Papall Sea, to the ouer∣throw of those that should liue after the Gospell, but being sicke of a Feauer tho∣row an Impostume in his left care, he died. The Emperor Charles the fift, being an enemy and a great terror vnto the Gos∣pell, was cut off from doing any more hurt vnto the Church. Anno 1558. but thrée months before the death of Quéene Mary, and ten months before the death of Hen∣ry the second. Not long after Anne du Bourgs death, the President Minard, who was a sore Persecutor, and the Condemner of the said Anne du Bourg, as hée returned from the Councell Chamber vnto his owne house, was flaine with a Dagge, and it was neuer knowne who did it. The King of Nauarre, Brother vnto the Prince of Condie, after a while maintained the Gospell: hee was perswaded by the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall of Lorraine his Brother, in hope to haue his Lands restored againe which the King of Spaine detained from him, to be entented to alter his Reli∣gion, and to ioyne side with the Papists: and being in Campe with the Duke of Guise at the siedge of Roane, he was shot in with a Pellet, after which wound he did vehemently repent his back sliding from the Gospel, promising earnestly vnto God, that if he might escape that hurt, hee would bring to passe that the Gospell should be preached freely throughout al France: notwithstanding within fiue or six daies he dyed.
And the Duke of Guise himselfe, the great Arch-enemy of God and his Gos∣pell, with the whole Triumuirat of France, that is▪ three the greatest Captaines of Popery were cut off for doing any more hurt: The Duke of Guise before Or∣leance; the Constable of France, before Paris; the Marshall of Saint Andrew, before Drewx. THE ABRIDGEMENT OF A Christian Dialogue, called PASQVINE in a Trance. THE Author of this Treatise, was called Caelius Secundus Curio, an Italian, a zealous, godly, learned man, by whom, vnder the witty and pleasant inuention of Pasquines going to Heauen, Purgatorie, and Hell, the whole packe of the Popes pedlary wares is laid open, that we may sée what stuffe it is. It was written in the time of pope Paule the third, the cheefe substance whereof breefely followeth. Superstition and Hypocrisie are the diuels Rhetorick, by which Friers make the world beleeue so many falsehoods and toyes, for by nothing else can Faith so ea∣sily be ouerthrowne. The apparell of the Fryers was deuised of the Deuill, that by these shéeps skins they might not séeme Wolues, but by the strangenesse there∣of to make the simple people to thinke them holy. Their Monasteries are a true representation of the qualities of the World; their raigneth nothing but passions in euery one to aduance themselues, and driue out others: their pictures of Saints being Gods of stone, very much differ from that which they were when they were vpon earth. The Uirgin Mary was not ho∣nored with so many chaines, bracelets, perfumes, gold, siluer, and wax, as she is now vpon the Altar, with paintings on her face, and on her head crownes full of Iewels. She is attired with costly and many sorts of garments, like a yong gyrle, they make her most couetous and niggardly, and to giue nothing to the poore, but to bestow all that is giuen her, (which is aboundance) vpon Cardinals and Hipo∣crites, to be bestowed vpon Whores, Dogs, and Horses. The Popish manner to get Reuelations. FIrst he must fast eight daies, then hee must bee confessed, during which time he must not medle with any flesh of male or female, then he must heare seauen Masses of the holy Ghost, and vpon a Friday at midnight, when the Moon is in the last degree of Cancer, he must lay himselfe downe vpon a Mat, which some Fryer in a traunce hath slept vppon, and in such a Fryers Hood, and a Stole on his Necke foulded, with a Crosse on his breast, and these wordes In principio erat verbum written in Red Letters, and he must perfume the place with Holie Per∣fume, hauing a Lampe burning by him with Holie Oyle, then hee must make circles about the Mat of redde earth and white: Betwixt the circles must bee written these words, Pater filius & spiritus sanctus, nox visionis, nox reuelationis, nox
veritatis, with a Crosse made betwixt euery Word: then he must say a certaine Charme which coniureth all spirits that are for Reuelations to bee there and to tell the truth. The Spirts must be called by Hebrew names, because they vnder∣stand no other language. The name of the cheese Spirit for Reuelations, is Heru∣satanaell, and when all this is done he must fall on sléepe, and that which hee desi∣reth to know, shall be reuealed vnto him. Calamichaell, and Saint Anthony of Padua are Spirits to be sought vnto for things stolne, who appeareth in the shape of the Theefe: and S. Helene Mother of Constantine, is to be sought vnto for loue matters, who if the loue be true, ap∣peareth to the fasting Fryer with faire Damsels, at a table richly decked, and ea∣teth with him: but if the loue be fained, the feareth him with weapons and fires, and changeth her selfe into a wilde Boare, a Lyon, and an Asse, and cryeth ilfauo∣redly. This loue is not to be trusted. The Franciscan Fryers had gotten such estimation, that they were counted GODS Kinsmen: they onely had the handling of the Gospell, they tooke out heere and there a peece, and mixt it with lies, false miracles and dreames of Purgatory: they kept the people more in feare of their Commaundements then of Gods: that Towne was counted vnhappy where one of their Monasteries was not néere: men thought to weare their apparell, or of their colour, was good against the Ague, and other diseases, and for one to be burned in their habit, was the right way to heauen. Longolius was burned in their habit, and so was Carpi a Noble man, and Rodulphus Agricola, and diuers others: If thou consider their Lawes with what burthens they haue laden mens shoulders, thou wilt sweare that the Iews Law is an hundred times more pleasant and easie then theirs. Be∣cause the Israelits forsook the trust in God, and made themselues a Calfe to wor∣ship it, God laded them with Ceremonies that none could beare: so now, because Mans folly could not be content with Christ onely, the diuine iudgement suffered them to fal into a Sea of Ceremonies and superstitions, that except Christ had bin gracious to defend vs, and had receiued the truth, we should haue béene drowned therein. A Gentlewoman of Pulia hating her Husband, made her selfe of the order of Saint Francis, and of the same order took a yong lusty Fryer vnto her adopted Sonne, who handled her in such sort, that he made her hart to faint, and her purse to shrinke, that shee was faine to leaue but halfe builded a Monastery to Saint Fauncis which was building: and this being complained of vnto the Lordes of Bonony, there was good laughing thereat, but she could haue no remedie at all. Saint Katharine (as the Papists affirme) promised vnto him that would re∣member her Passion, to deliuer him from Lightning and Thunder, and that Saint Barbara maketh Souldiours to kill their Enemies: Many deuout Soul∣diours haue her painted vpon many parts of their Armour to defend them from Gun-shot. Saint Ierome did so much (but falsely) extoll virginity, that hee made this con∣clusion: it is good for a man to be without a Wife, therefore it is wicked to be ma∣ried vnto a Wife, and that God promiseth heauen vnto Uirgines. And Origen mistooke himselfe when he gelded himselfe, that he might be chast for the kingdom of heauen. The Sorbones or Inquisitors of Paris, said; if they had S. Paul in their hands, they would burne him. Wheresoeuer a number of Nunnes is, the Fryers be of the one side, and the Confessors be on the other side: the Fryers teach them how to coniure the Di∣uill into Hell, and to fight with him, and to be in a trance; and the Confessors vnderstanding all that they doe, with their hands vpon their heads, and their displing Roddes assayle them. The Monkes can bring them vnder when they list.
Vastalla a Widdow being very rich, ordained a sect of Women and men, who must séeke to attaine vnto that purity that was in Adam and Eue before their fall: the means wherby they should attaine hereunto, was long prayers, much silence, continuall fastings, to be shréeuen euery day, and to receiue their maker euery 8. daies: there meanes to know their perfection is, as Adam for shame grew from akednesse, to be more and more clothed; to these must go om being clothed, to be more & more naked, vntill they were not ashamed of their nakednes, whether they were Man or Woman; then they put Adam and Eue to bed together, and if they touch not, nor think vpon the forbidden fruit, of which they must be straitly exa∣mined, then they are Angels; but if they do otherwise, as the virgin is for the most times sped, then are they cast out of Paradice. S. Camella, to shew that she was of high blood, said, that Lewis King of France warring in Italy, had to doe with her Mother, and begat her. She had a Religion of her owne making, she vsed to be accompanied with thrée women as superstiti∣ons as her selfe. They abide in no Monastery, but in a priuate house, and frequent solitary and pleasant places; her house is haunted with Women, Gentle∣men, and Lords, as vnto an Oracle; sometimes shee shutteth her selfe vp, to bee more familiar with Angels to talke with them: vpon the Friday she will not be séene nor speake with any, but contemplats the Crosse and nayles of Christ, and thereby obtained the print thereof in her hands and féete, which she kept couered: she hath beene seene to drop Malinesie into the markes. An Ambassador thought she had the pore, she loued well the Franciscan Fryers, she got much by contrac∣ting marriages, and by making medicines. In Bernia a Towne of Switchers, certaine Fryers did séeke to make the prints of Christs wounds in a simple soules hands and feete: the newes whereof was brought to Pope Iuly the second, yet escaped they not vnpunished therefore, for foure of them that were priuy to this and other so great sacriledges, were burned aliue, before those of Berna had the Gospell, but they were euer eemies vnto the knauish deuises and deceits of the Fryers. A Priest of Placentia was accused vnto the Pope, that he had a wife & children, the Pope depriued him of his Benifices, and he went to Rome and shewed that she was another mans wife, and but his Concubine, and neuer married vnto him nor could be, and though he was a vile Adulterer, he was restored vnto his Benifices againe. If any Iew become a Christian, the Pope confiscates their goods according to a Law of the Iewes, else many Iewes would become Christians. S. Anthony is the Papists Saint to pray vnto for fire, S. Rock for the plague, S. Bastion for the pestilence, S. Apolinia for the tooth-ache, S. Blase for the disease of throat. S. Anthony and S. Rocke were called Martires, because they went from Citty to Citty to desire men to offer them by death, and could get none. Saint Christopherus. THE Christians in old time, pictured a Christian in the forme of a great Gyant, because he must be strong to beare Christ and his truth before men: they feig∣ned he carrieth men ouer the water: by water they mea our life, which we can∣not come ouer to come vnto heauen, except we be taught by a Christian the truth, they pictured him with a tree in his hand to stay vpon, by the which they meant faith, without which we should often fal: after hee vsed this tree it grew greene: to signifie that Faith exercised with Charity is liuely. His name was called Chri∣stopherus, which signifieth bearing Christ: Hee was painted at the entrances of the Churches. The Papists haue conuerted it vnto a Saint, and pray vnto it.
Saint George. LIkewise Saint George that killed the Dragon, to deliuer the Kings Daugh∣ter from that terrible beast which had destroyed all Capadocia: By Capado∣cia is ment the world: The Dragon signifieth the Diuell: The Kings Daughter the Church: And Saint George represents Christ: of which fable the Papists haue made a great Saint and pray vnto it. The Papists haue trantfsormed all the heathen Gods of Rome to be their Gods onely by giuing them other names. Pantheon in Rome which was the house of all Gods, is Maria Rotunda, the house of all Saints: In the place of Cibile, mo∣ther of Gods▪ is now placed to Mary. The Temple that was dedicated to Pallas Minerua a Uirgine, is now dedicated Minerua a Uirgine. The Temple of Romu∣lus and Rheimes is now the Temple of Saint Cosmus, and Damian. The tem∣ple that was ef Castor and Pollux, is now of Saint Geruais and Protheys, the Heathens had Lucian to heale their eyes: the Papists in stead thereof haue Saint Lucy, and in steed of Ceres God of Corne, now is Saint Pancras: The Hea∣thens had Mars, and Pallas, Gods of Warre: in steed of them the Papist haue Saint George, and Saint Barbera: The Heathen Sea men saw Castor and Pol∣lux at the end of a tempest: the papists in such case see Saint Erenius: as Vesta Virgines could not marry, so the Nunnes may not marry, in the old time they washed to clense sinnes, and now they fillip Holy Water vpon their foreheads to clense sinnes: For the Heathens, Iuno Feronia, they haue Iuno Lucina: For the heathens Iuno Saturnia, they haue Iuno Curies; For the Heathens Lady of Grace, and Lady of Myracles: the Papists haue our Lady, our Lords Mother, and our Lady of People: The Papists fill their Churches with tables, containing vowes for the help that the Saints haue done for them, as were in the old time, in the hea∣then Churches, containing the myracles that their Idols had done. Calapine, saith, that Cardinall is the selfe-same that Carneuale; neither the one nor the other doth attend to any other thing; then to eate, drinke, sleepe, com∣mit whooredome, banquet, and doe other wicked acts, so many that no tongue can expresse. In place of the foure Gospels, the papists haue put the foure Councels: Nice, Constntinople, Ephesus, Calcedon: Then foure Doctors: Ambrose, Augustine, Ierome, Gregory: and foure Bookes, to wit, of Decrees, of Decretals, of Sects, of Clementines, and whosoeuer had a Coule, or a shauen Crowne, might write what they would and it should goe for Gospel; whereby the Pope hath drawne all things to himselfe, and made himselfe aboue Christ. They will haue Bels, carued Images, Crosses, Lights, Wax, Uessels, and Garments to be o vs in steed of Euangelists. Saint Peter was made Pope after his death, which neuer was Pope, nor neuer could be, nor yet was at any time at Rome: so was Saint Ierome made a Cardi∣nall: Saint Iohn Baptist, a Patriarck: And Saint Dominick, and Saint Frances Patriarcks long time after their deathes. They picture Iohn Baptist a terrible fellow, with a fayre sharpe sword in his hand, and all in armour, followed with a number of Sea Rouers called knights of the Rhodes: they baptize no otherwise but by drowning men in the Sea: they doe not make men repent of their sinnes as Iohn Baptist did, but they make them repent that euer they were borne, and driue them for necessitie to dwell in the wil∣dernes: They weare crosses on their breasts, because they cannot beare them in their heart, and to shew them selues crucifyers of others: Iohn dwelt in deserts, but they make deserts: Iohn Baptist liued in Fasting and Prayer, but these in plea∣sure like Sardanapalas, when they had the Isle of Rhodes, they did that which Turkes would not haue done: Therefore they were driuen thence by Gods
iust iudgement: they marry not like Iohn Baptist, but they haue the more har∣lts. Dominick, by the procurement of Innocent the third: Hee at Tholosa quen∣ched the heresie of the Lutherans with maruellous speed: Hee said hee must not dispute, but fell to the busines with fire and sword; and for this cause he was made a Saint A Spaniard of the inquisition for heresies, accused certaine of the best Spani∣ards for Lutherans, and said he smelt them, because they gaue almes vnto the poore, and not vnto Fryers: And because they left swearing, and blaspheming of GOD and his Saints, and playing, whore-hunting, and other vices, applying themselues to things graue and profitable, and all day long reade in the Scriptures. Saint Francis was required of his Disciples to giue them a rule of liuing, and he gaue them the Gospell: but his Fryers haue set forth a Booke of conformities, which is preferred before the Gospel; with the whith if thou compare the Aloran of Mahomet, thou wilt say the Alcoran is more holy, although in many things they agree: His Fryers were bold to preach, that a Frier once desired to knew in what place Saint Francis was, and therewith ran out of his wits, and was led about all parts of heauen and found him not: at last he came vnto the throne of Diuini∣tie: where demanding for Saint Francis Christ rose vp from his seate, on the right hand of the Father, and opened his clothes vpon his brest, and S. Francis came out of his side: Then the Fryer came to his wits againe, In the strife for the supremacie, Constantinople said to him it belonged, because with him was the Sea of the Empire: Ierusalem would haue it, because the high Bishop Christ had triumphed there: Antioch would needs haue it alledging that Peter the Apostle there had kept his Sea, and was neuer at Rome, as it may appeare by the booke called quod Petrus nunquam Romae fuit: Hee of Rome, not regarding the saying of Saint Gregory, that he should be Antichrist, that would be vniuersall ouer Bishops, by deceits, gifts, and force, obtained to bee called the chiefe Bishop, the greatest, the highest, vniuersall; most blessed, most holy, and lawfull successor of Peter and Christ. The Fryers of Dominick and Francis, dee chiefely apply themselues to sorcery, and witchcraft, and thereby learne euill diuellish Arts: A man may reade that Sil∣uester the second, one of them, got to be Pope, by the help of the Diuell, vpon con∣dition that after his death he should be his: and in our dayes Paul the third, called Pope Farnese, hath not left his like in Astrology, and diuination: it is certain∣ly said, that he beleeued that the soule was mortall: so did Pope Lewes, and Car∣dinall Chitty. A Gentleman of Uenice and his wife, were in doubt vpon a case of conscience: The woman confessed her selfe in the Church of the Chittines, and opened the matter, praying to bee resolued: The Frier did it as well as hee could: and then hee opened the whole matter to Cardinall Chitty, as it is their old vse to doe: hee commanding him to bee secret, and finding the resolution of the case in the Can∣non Law, the morrow the Gentleman came vnto Chitty, and opening the matter, hee commanded him to hold his peace, and tooke him by the hand, and put it into the booke, in the place which hee before had marked for that purpose: Then he bad him tell his tale, & when he had ended, he said, look there where your hand is: The Gentleman read there, and found that which he sought: then forth∣with hee fell downe, and worshipped him, as it had been another Christ which knew all secrets. Pasquine saith, hee knoweth ten thousand such trickes by them. Saint Ioyce is patron of fruitfulnes of Children, she hath a Church in France: the Flemings goe vnto her to haue Children and speede of their purpose, for whilst they be on their voyage, she vseth the Priests and Friers, as instruments with their wiues.
The Pope in policie sends flattering Courtiers to Francis King of , to flatter him in all his actions, to remember him of that Title of Most Chrian King, which his Progenitors receiued of the Pope, and that therefore hee shuld defend the Dignitie of them that gaue him so goodly a Title: and to exhort him, that he should not fale to persecute the Lutherans, and that he should fail to Dan∣cing and Banquetting, and to serue Venus, and to Hunting, rather then to sauour Learning, as it seemed he would doe. In the Popes Policie it was decreed, That of all the chiefe Houses in Italie, or elsewhere, there should one euer be a Cardinall, to keepe them in deuotion of the Church of Rome, which they began to forsake for the Gospell, but aboue all things there should be six, or foure at the least, of the Uenetians Cardinals, because a umber of those Senators be wittie, and of profound iudgement, least they should slip their heads from the Pope. It was decreed by the Pope concerning Spaine, That the Inquisitors should not be seuere with the Marraines, who denyed the Diuinitie of Christ, but that they should be most cruell against the Lutherans, who denie the Diuinitie of the Pope. They haue made Peace with the Turke, that they may the bet∣ter maintaine Warre against the Gospell, and to keepe the Christian Princes in Warres and Businesse, that they may not seeke for a Generall Councell for Reformation. There is not one man condemned by the Uenetians, but he is adiudged by fortie Iudges, and the offendor may alledge for himselfe the best he can, yet they suffer a Legate onely to condemne whom he list for the Gospell, and the person accused cannot come vnto his Purgation. Cardinall Fernese made the liuely Picture of his Sister ouer his Chamber dore; shee was Pope Alexander Borgias his Concubine, and by her honourable meanes, shee made her said brother Cardinall, and after to be made Pope: Her Image goeth currant for the Picture of our Ladie, and the Pictures of our Ladie be made thereby. By the Papists Tradition, the Soule for euerie deadly sinne is to abide seuen yeares in Purgatorie: Moses ordained many Sacrifices for the sinnes of the li∣uing, but none for them in Purgatorie; he chideth for weeping for the dead: It is deuised onely to deceiue the people with Trentals and Quarentals, and other foolish Inuentions, full of Couetousnesse: The Scripture biddeth vs remember the poore that be aliue, the Papists bidde vs bring hither for the Soules of your dead Friends and Parents, with crie Miseremini: These Priests and Religious are the Prophets Sake, neuer full; and Solomons Horse-leaches, and the fire that neuer saith hoa: if thou shouldst giue them the world, they will not be satisfied. The places of Scripture that they ground Purgatorie vpon, are the fift of Ma∣thew: Agree with thine Aduersarie by the way, least thou be cast into Prison, &c. And in the 18. of Mathew; Hee that owed thee tenne thousand Talents, was de∣liuered vnto Prison, &c. And in the 12. of Mathew; The sinne against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiuen in this World, nor in the World to come. And in the 1. Cor. 13. Stubble and trash, builded vpon Christ, shall be tryed by Fire. And 2. Machab. 12. Macabeus offered two thousand drammes of Siluer for the dead, which bought Beasts which were sacrificed. And Reuelation 14. 21. Those that follow the Lambe are without spot, and no vncleane thing shall enter into heauen: Therefore we must be purged with Purgatorie before we can come there. Tho∣mas Aquine confessed hee could not finde Purgatorie in the Scriptures, yet hee would haue it beleeued. The Doctrine of Purgatorie is the greatest Blasphemie that is vnto Christ. Boniface the  eight made a Decree, That euery worldly creature should be sub∣iect vnto the Pope, vpon paine of Damnation. Pope Alexander Borgias lay with his naturall Daughter Lucrece, with whom also Duke Valentine, his brother, lay.
The Friers lay with the Nunnes, and with Lay-sisters, and taught them to murder yong Babes, least they should be discouered; or teacheth them how they shall not conceiue with child, or to destroy it in her body: Some of them make Women to poyson their Husbands: some of them haue giuen meate to a whole household to make them to sleepe, that he might not be seene to goe to the good wife, and thereby hath killed them all: One faineth our Ladie doth Miracles, to get Of∣ferings; another persecuteth the Truth, because he would be a Bishop: Another false knaue, in Confession, caused a woman to giuen him her money in keeping, and then denyed it. They sit toting in the bosome of simple yong maids which come vn∣to them to shrieue: others, in confessing the sicke, cause them to leaue their goods vnto the Monasterie, and depriue their wiues and children. A Cann of urney after his death left a Booke, wherein hee had noted the Names and Houses of two hundred women of the chiefest of that Citie, whome he had enioed at his pleasure. A Fryer in Frisland had put into the hads of foolish women this opinion, That they must giue vnto the Church the tenth Night, as they doe vnto their Husband. A Fryer, with a poysoned Host, brought vnto his death Henrie, the seuenth Emperour of that Name. Thus much out of Pasquine in a rance; wherein, if thou be disposed, thou shalt find euery thing that I haue set downe, and much more: which, least I should be too tedious, I haue omitted. The Trayterous Practises of the Papists against Queene ELIZABETH, during her Raigne, and of Gods Preseruations towards her. THe most iust and apparant Iudgements of God vpon persecuting Papists, which haue shed the innocent bloud of poore Protestants, hath beene de∣clared: Wherein not onely in other Countries God hath manifested his indig∣nation against them, but most especially in this Realme, you haue seene the Uiall of Gods wrath powred vpon the most part of the Persecutors in Quéene Maries time; especially vpon the Persecuting Clergie, who all fell into the pit that they had digged for others. As for Bonner, whose Iudgement is not yet de∣clared, hee dyed in Prison, and was buried in a Dunghill: And as for Doctor Story, as great a Persecutor as Bonner, you may reade of his iust Iudgement in this Historie following; how he was drawne from the Tower to Tyburne, and there hanged and quartered for Treason. Tyburne was long time after called Stories Cappe. If wee doe but consider the vnhappinesse of Q. Maries Raigne, together with the prosperous and long Raigne of Queene Elizabeth, it is easie to see the louing countenance of God uer the Protestants, and how God bendeth his browes against the Papists: And as sure as God hath ouerthrowne them heere in this Realme, beyond the expectation of any man, so certainely will the Almightie God nfound the whole Pope-ome at his time appointed; how vnlikely soeuer it seemeth vnto the carnall-eyed Papist, that will not see the Prophesies of the Spirit of God, which most plainely fore-shew the same. But now touching the Historie of Queene Elizabeths Raigne.
In the yeare 1569, Pope Pius the fift sent Nicholas Morton Doctor of Diui∣nitie, an Englishman, into England, to admonish certaine Noblemen that were Papists, That Queene Elizabeth was an Heretike, and therefore by Law hath lost all Dominion and Power, and may freely be accounted as an Heathen and Publican, and that her subiects are not from henceforth bound to obey her Lawes and Commandements. Whereupon presently the Earles of Northumberland and Westmerland rebel∣led against the Queene in the North: but the Earle of Suffex was sent into the North, being appointed the Queenes Lieutenant generall, who proclaymed them Traytors: and he sent out to all such Gentlemen as he knew to be her Maiesties louing subiects; which came vnto him with such a number, as he was able to make aboue 5000. horsemen and footmen: and being accompanied with the Earle of Rut∣land, his Lieutenant; the Lord Hunsdon, Generall of his Horsemen; William Lord Eure, leader of the Footmen; and Sir Raph Sadler, Treasurer; Sir George Bowes was made Marshall of the Armie. When the Armie was comming to Durham, the Rebels fled to Exham▪ The night before they came to Exham, the Rebels were gone to Mawarth; where they counselled with Edward Dacres concerning their owne weakenesse, being they were pursued of the Earle of Sussex, seuen thousand strong: and moreouer, the Earle of Warwicke, the Lord Clinton, Lord Admirall of England, and Lord Uicount Herford, with an Army of 12000. ut of the South, being not farre behind them at Browne-bridge. The next night the Garles of Northumberland and Westmerland, with sundry principall Gentlemen, fled vnto Hatlew in Scotland: The other Rebels were shortly after taken by the Earle of Sussex, and 66. of the name of Constables, and others, executed at Durham; amongst whom was an Alderman of the Towne, and a Priest, called Parson Plomtree. Then Sir George Bowes Marshall executed ma∣ny in euery Market Towne and other places betwixt New-castle and Wetherby, six myles in length, and foure myles in breadth. And Leonard Dacre hauing raysed a great number of people, the Lord Hunsdon set vpon him, and slew manie of his people, and orcd them to flye into Scotland. Symon Digby, Iohn Fulthroppe Esquire, Robert Peniman, and Thomas Bishop Gent. were drawne from the Castle of Yorke to Knaueser, and there hanged and quartered. Then they went with all their power into Scotland, and burnt, ouerthrew, and spoyled all the Castles, Townes, and Uillages before them, aboue fitie strong Ca∣stles and Piles, and aboue three thousand Townes and Uillages, and they tooke many Prisoners, and returned saely. Also a Conspiracie was made by certaine Gentlemen and other in the Countie of Norfolke, whose purpose was vpon Midsummer day, at Harlstone Faire, with the sound of a Trumpet to haue raysed a number, and then to proclayme their pre∣tence. This matter was vttered by Thomas Kete vnto Iohn Kensey, who sent the said Kete vnto the next Instice, before whom he opened the whole matter; where∣upon Drew Drewrie apprehended Iohn Throgmorton, and many Gentlemen of the Citi of Norwich and the Countrey of Norfolke: at the next Sessions ten of them were indited of Treason, and Iohn Throgmorton, Thomas Brooke, and George Dedman hanged, drawne, and quartered. Doctor Sanders de visibili Monarchia, lib. 7. pag. 730. sayth, That the purpo∣ses and endeuours of these Noblemen were to be praysed, which wanted not their certaine and happie successe; for though they were not able to draw the Soules of their Brethren out of the pit of Schisme, yet both they themselues nobly confessed the Catholike Faith, and many of them gaue their liues for their Brthren, which is the highest degree of Charitie: the rest of them rescued themselues from the Bondage both of Schisme and Sinne vnto the Freedome wherewith Christ hath made v free.
And in his Booke of Motiues he calleth these Martyrs; to wit, the Earle of Northumberland, Doctor Story, Felton, the Nortons, M. Woodhouse, M. Plumtree, and so many hundreds of the Northerne men. The said Nortons were Thomas Norton and Christopher Norton of Yorkeshire, and they were hanged, beheaded, and quartered for Treason, for the late Rebellion in the North. The said Felton was one Iohn Felton, which this yeare was drawne from Newgate to Paules Churchyard, and hanged before the Bishops Pallace Gate, cut downe aliue, bowelled, and quartered, for hanging a Bull from the Pope for the Excommunicating of the Queene, at the Gate of the Bishop of Londons Pallace. And the afore-mentioned Doctor Story was that cruell Story that burned so manie in Queene Maries time: who the first of Iune, this yeare 1571. was drawne from the Tower of London to Tyburne, and there hanged and quar∣tered. And in his seuenth Booke, page 734. he sayth, The fulnesse of the Apostolike Power hath declared the said Elizabeth an Hereticke, and a fauourer of Here∣tickes, and that such as adhere vnto her, haue incurred the Sentence of Anathe∣ma: And that she is depriued of her Right of her Kingdome, and of all her Domi∣nion, Dignitie, and Priuiledge, and that the Nobles, People, and Subiects of the Realme, and all others that haue made Oath vnto her▪ are assoyled for euer from such Oath, and all dutie of Allegeance, Fidelitie, and Obedience, by the Au∣thoritie of the Popes Sentence, whereby he hath depriued her of her Kingdome, and forbidden all the Nobles, People, and Subiects, and others aforesaid, that they be not so bold to obey her or her Lawes, and whosoeuer doth otherwise, hee hath bound with like Sentence of Curse. And Bristow in his sixt Motiue, fol. 31. They miserably forget themselues, who feare not the Excommunications of Pius the fift, in whom Christ himselfe hath spo∣ken and excommunicated, with as great power as S. Paul excommunicated: and Christ hath done Miracles by him, euen as S. Paul did Miracles. And in his 40. Motiue he sayth: When the Pope doth duly discharge vs from subiection, and the Prince offender from Dominion, he doth it with such griefe of heart, as if a man should cut off from his bodie, to saue the wholesome most princi∣pall, but rotten part thereof. And Sanders, lib. 7. fol. 744. he calleth Felton an honorable Martyr; for he was led with the loue and zeale of the Catholike Faith: when hee saw that the despe∣rate health of his Country could not be restored but by some most bitter medicine, would not suffer the sentence of the Pope should be hidden from his Countrymen: And there he calleth Doctor Story a noble Martyr▪ saying: When he was arraig∣ned of high Treason, for conspiring with certaine of Antwarpe against the Quéene, attempting to change the schismaticall Religion, which now raigneth in England, vnto the Catholike Religion; being brought vnto the Barre, he onely pleaded vnto the Iurisdiction of the Court, denying that the English Iudges had any power o∣uer him, being no Subiect to the English Queene, but rather to the King Catho∣like; and hee expounds his meaning to be, because hee very well knew, that the Queene of England, by the declaratorie Sentence of the Pope, was for manifest Herese depriued from all Right of Kingdome, and that therefore no Magistrate created by her, or adhering vnto her, could be acknowledged by him, least himselfe also should be bound with the same Curse. And further, there were many Seminarie Priests, which laboured by all per∣suasions that might be to iustifie the foresaid Excommunication of Pope Pius, and to withdraw the Quéenes subiects hearts from their true obedience: of whom, ma∣nie of them were taken and committed vnto Prisons, as follow:
Edmund Campion. EDmund Campion, was a chiefe champion for the pope: he was committed vnto the Tower: he would neither deny nor confesse the Quéenes supremacy nor iu∣stie, neither deny the power & iustice of the popes excōmunication, nor commend, nor discommend the doctrine of Sanders & Bistow, as before: but answered so cun∣ningly, that nothing could be made thereof: He was after disputed withall touch∣ing all points of Religion, by the Deame of Paules, and the Deane of Windsor, and diuers other diuines, but because all their arguments and reason in this book before are moresuff cently handled many times: I referre the Reader vnto the booke of the report thereof. Thomas Forde, Iohn Shert, Robert Iohnson Priests. THese were executed at Tyburne the 28. of May, because they were sent as in∣struments, for, and in the behalfe of the Pope, in the aforesaid disloyall & tray∣erous cause: they were drawne vpon hurdles from the Tower vnto the place of execution: when they were come beyond Saint Giles in the field, there approched vnto the hurdle one of their fect, a Priest as himselfe hath confessed, who said vnto the prisoners, O Gentlemen, be ioyfull in the blond of Iesus Christ, for this is the ay of your triumph and ioy: and further he said vnto the prisoners, I proounce a pardon vnto you: yea I pronounce a full remission and pardon vnto your soules: Wherevpon he was apprehend, and▪ th Sheriffe asked him what he was, he an∣swered, that he was the voice of a cryer in the wildernes, and that hee was sent to prepare the Lords way: whrevpon h was carried to Newgate: where he con∣fessed himselfe a priest, and that he had long so dissembled, and that he would now doe so no more. When they were brought vnto the place of execution, Thomas Ford, was first brought vp into the Cart: He said, he did acknowledge the Queenes Maiesties su∣premacie in all things temporall▪ but as concerning Ecclesiasticall causes, I deny her, that onely belongeth vnto the Uicar of Christ the Pope: Hee granted to no∣thing, but shewed himselfe an impious and obstinate Traytor: he refused to pray in the English tongue, mumbling a few Latine prayers, and desired those that were ex domo Dei, to pray with him and so died. Iohn Shert, was brought from the urdle vnto the gallowes, as Ford hanged there, he held vp his hands vnto him, and said, O swéet Tom! O happy Tom! O blessed Tom! Then Ford was cut downe, and brought vnto the place where hee should be quartered: Then looking downe from the Cart, vnto the dead body, hee knéeled down, & held vp his hands vnto it, saying againe: O blessed Tom: O hap∣py Tom: thy swéet soule pray for me: O deere Tom, thy blessed soule pray for mee. Then the Sheriffe had him aske the Quéene forgiuenes, and he might receiue her princely mercy: He answered, what M. Sheriffe shall I saue this fraile & vile car∣kasse, and damne mine own soule: No, no, I am a Catholick, in that faith I was born, in that faith I will die & heare shal my bloud eale it: Then said M. Sheriffe, is this the fruits of your religion, to knéele vnto the dead body of thy fellow, & desire his soule to pray for thee: What can it profit or hinder thee, pray to God, & hee will help thee: he answered, this is the true Catholick religion, and whosoeuer is not of it is damned: I desire his sole to pray for mee: The most glorious Uirgine Mary pray for me; and all the holy company in heauen to pray for mee: Then the people cryed away with the Traytor: Then the Sheriffe said: O Sherte, for∣sake the whoore of Rome, that wicked Antichrist, with all his abhominable blasphemies and tracheries, and put thy whole confidence in Iesus Christ:
Then he said, O Master Sherife, you little remember the day when as I and you shall stand both at one Barre, and I shall witnesse against you that you call that holy and blessed Uicar of Christ, Whore of Rome: then he said his prayers in La∣tine▪ and the Cart was drawne away. Robert Iohnson likewise would not aske the Quéen pardon, affirmed the Pope to be the head of the Catholike Church, and would not say his prayers in English; and when he had said them in Latine he died. Luke Kirbie, William Filbie, Thomas Cottom, and Lawrence Richardson. THese were executed at Tyburne: vpon the thirtéenth day of May they were brought from the Tower of London vnto the place of execution: first, William Filbie was brought vp into the Cart, being asked whether he would acknowledge the Quéen supreme head of the Church of England; no (quoth he) I will acknow∣ledge no other head of the Church then the Pope onely. He prayed that God wold incline the Quéens heart to be mercifull towards the Catholikes, of which societi he was one. They opening his bosome ound two crosses in it, which were holden vp and shewed vnto the people, and besides that, his crown was shauen; so after a few Latin prayers, the Cart was drawne away. The next was Luke Kirbie: one charged him, that when he was at Rome he de∣liuered him certaine silke pictures, which he said were hallowed by the Pope; and you told me what indulgences were allowed by thm one of them, which was a Crucifix, you gaue mee, the other you willed mee to deliuer vnto your friends at Reimes and in England, and you gaue me two Iulios to goe into the Citie to buy more, and when I had bought them, you tooke thrée or foure of the fairest from me, promising to get them hallowed at the next benediction, which he confessed to be true: he affirmed that the Pope had power to depose any Prince from his King∣dome, if he fall by infidelitie. He would not repent and aske the Quéene pardon though vpon that condition he might haue bin discharged: he would not pray in English: the preacher desired him to say a prayer after him, and if he could find any fault therein he should be resolued; O (quoth he) you and I be not of one faith, therefore I should offend God if I should pray with you; so saying his Pater noster in Latin, he ended his life. Then Lawrence Richardson was brought vp to be executed: he confessed him∣selfe a Catholike, and that he would beléeue in all things as the Catholike Church of Rome did, and he allowed the only supremaie vnto the Pope; and after certain Latin prayers said he died. Then was Cottom brought vp: he looking vpon the bodie of Lawrence Richard∣son, lift vp his eyes and hands, and said, O blessed Lawrence pray for me, thy bles∣sed soule Lawrence pray for me. The Preachers and people rebuked him, saying, that he ought to pray vnto none but God; he answered, he was assured that Law∣rence will pray for him: he denied to repent and aske pardon of the Quéen. When he had said his Pater noster and an Aue Maria he ended his life. As before is declared the rebellions in England by the seducing of wicked spi∣rits, so not long after followed an open rebellion in Ireland: they tooke armes and came into the field against her Maiesie, and her Lieutenants with their forces vnder banners displayed, inducing many simple people to follow them in their trayterous actions, being bent to haue deposed the Quéens Maiestie from her crowne, and to haue trayterously set into her place some other whom they liked, yet by Gods power giuen vnto her Maiesty they were quickly vanquished, some few of them suffered by order of the law, but the greatet part vpon confession of
their falts were pardoned: some of the principall escaped into forreine countries. These notable Traytors and Rebels informed many Kings Princes, and States, especially the Pope, from whom they all had first secretly their comfort to rebell, that the cause of the flying was for the religion of Rome, and maintenance of the Popes authoritie, whereas the most of them before they rebelld, liued notoriously euill: out of England fled Charles Neuill Earle of Westmerland, who was vtter∣ly wasted by loosenes of life, and how afterward his body was eaten with vlcers of lewd causes all his companions did see. Out of Ireland ran Thomas Stukely a de∣famed person thorough out all Christendome: he fled out of England for Pracies, and out of Ireland for treason: these two were the first ring-leaders to the rest of the rebells, the one for England, the other for Ireland; yet it liked the Pope to fa∣uour their treasons, and to animate them to continue their wicked purposes, to wit, to inuade Queen Elizabeths Realme with forren forces: hee thundred out Blls, excommunications▪ & other publike writings, denouncing her not to be the Queene of the Realme, commanding her subiects, vnder paine of excommunication to de∣part from their alleageanes, authorizing and prouoking all persons within both her realmes to rebell; and vpon this vnhristian warrant all those that were fled, and such as had forsaken their natiue countrey haue many yeares runne vp and downe from countrey to countrey to gather forces and money for forces, and to Princes to make warre vpon their natiue countrey, some practising secretly to murther the Quéene, and very many with publike infamous Libels, full of poysoned lyes, did séeke to vphold that Antichristian warrant of the Popes Buls. And for better furtherance of these intentions, they deuised to erect certaine schooles, which they called Seminaries, to nourish persons disposed to sedition, that they might become séedmen, in the illag of sedition, and to send them secret∣ly into England, and Ireland, vnder secret maskes, some of priesthood, some of other inferior orders of the meaner sort, being called Seminaries; and the ancor sort, Iesites, bringing with them, hallowed Wax, their Agnus Dei, many kind of beades, and such like, labouring secretly to perswade the people, to allow of the popes foresaid Buls▪ and of his absolute authoritie ouer all Princes & Countreyes: And if this trayterous and crafty course, had not by Gods goodnes been espied, and stayed, there had followed horrible vprores in the Realmes: for as many as should be perswaded to obey the Popes warrant, must needs be secret traytors, & there should haue wanted nothing but power and opportnitie to be open traytors: but God of his goones discouered some of these seditious seedmen of rebellions: and when they could not be moued to repent of their trayterous determinations, they were iustly condemned, for adhering vnto the capitall enemy of her Maiestie, and her crowne: The Pope who hath not only been the cause of two rebellions already in England, and Ireland: but in Ireland did manifestly maintaine his owne people: Captaines and souldiers vnder the banner of Rome against her Maiestie. And further those Traytors prouoke newly other seditious persons se∣crty to enter into the Realme to reuiue the execution of the Popes Bulles, pretending when they are apprehended, that they came into the Realme onely by the commaundement of their Superiors the heads of the Ieuits, to whom they are bound by Ooth against either King or Country, and that their comming is to informe, and reforme mens conscience from errors, in some points of Reli∣gion as they shall thinke meete: but it is manifestly prooued, that their labour is secretly to win al people, with whom they dare deale, so to allow the Popes Buls and Authority, and be discharged of their Allegeance, and to be well warranted to take armes against her Maiesty when they shall bee thereunto called, and to be ready secretly to ioyne with any Forraine force that can be procured to inuade the Realme: whereof they giue great comfort of successe. And because most euident perils would follow, if these virmine were suffered to creepe by stealth into the Realme, and spread their poyson therein, therefore doe they most iustly sufer death as Traitors.
One of their compaine, Doctor Sanders a lewd Scholler and subiect of England, a fugitiue, a principall conspirator with the traytors and rebells at Rome, was the Popes Legat and commander and treasorer for those warres aforesaid, passing in∣to Ireland, openly by writing he gloriously auowed the Popes Bull, as is before de∣clared; but God plagued him with a strange death, who wandring in the monn∣taines in Ireland without succour, died rauing in a frensie. The miserable Earle of Desmond being a principall doer in the rebellion in Ireland, secretly wandring without succour, as a miserable beggar, was taken by one of the Irishrie in his Cabbin, and his head cut off from his body: an ed due to such an arch-rebell. Iames Fitz Morrice the first traytor in Ireland▪ next vnto Stukeley, was slaine by an Irish yong Gentleman as he went to burne his fathers countrey. Desmount brother vnto the Earle a blondie faithlesse traytor and a notable mur∣therer of his familier friends, who likewise wandring to séeke some prey like a Wele in the woods, he was taken and beheaded, as he had vsed others, being, as he thought, sufficiently armed with the Popes Bulls, and an Agnus Dei, and a no∣table ring hanging about his neck, sent from the Popes ger. Iohn Someruile a furious yong man, of Warwick shire: of late he was discoue∣red and taken in his way, comming with a full intent to haue killed the Quéen: he confessed his attempt, and that he was moued thereunto in his wicked spirit, by inticements of certaine seditious and trayterous persons his kinsemen and allies, and by often reading of sundry seditious vile bookes, lately published against the Quéenes Maiestie. William Parry his treasons against Queene ELIZABETH. HEe had committed a great outrage against a Gentlemn, one M. Hare of the Inner Temple, meaning to haue murdered him in his owne chamber, for which he was iustly conuicted; wherefore he went beyond Sea, and subiected him∣selfe vnto the Pope, and vpon conference with certaine Iesuits, he conceiued his detestable treason to kill the Quéene, which he vowed himselfe by promise, letters, and vowes to performe it, and so returned vnto England in Ianuary 1583. and put in practise diuers times to execute his diuellish purpose. Pretending that he had matter of great importance to reueale vnto the Quéen, he obtained secret accesse vnto her Maiestie, she hauing then but one Councellor with her, who was so farre distant as he could not heare his spéech: he shewed her Maiestie his procéedings with the esuits, and one Thomas Morgan a fugitiue at Parris, who perswaded him to kill her Maiestie, saying that his only intent of pro∣céeding so farre with hem was but only to this end, to discouer the dangerous prac∣tises deuised and attempted against her Maiestie, by her diloyal subiects, and other malicious persons in forren parts; but afterward it appeared most manifestly by his owne confession, and by his dealing with one Edmund Neuill Esquire, that his intent in discouering the same in such sort as he did, was but to make the way the easier vnto his most diuellish purpose. The Quéen suffred him diuers times to haue priuate conference with her, & offe∣red him a most liberal pension, yet notwithstanding he did vehemently importunat the said Neuill to be an associate vnto his wicked enterprise, as to an action lawfull and meritorious: but the Almighty God that was protector of her Maiesty, euen from her cradle, so wrought in Neuils heart, as he was moued to reueale the same vnto her Maiesty, whereupon the examination of the matter was committed vnto the Earle of Leicester, and Sir Christopher Hatton; vpon the examination where∣of,
when Parrie saw the said Neuill so to declare the truth, and so constantly affirme the same, he confessed all, saying: that comming vnto the chamber of Thomas Mor∣gan aforesaid, one greatly beloued and trusted in the Papists side; he broke with me that I should vndertake to kill the Quéen, I told him it would be easily done if it were lawfully done and warranted in the opinion of som learned Deuines: then I was resolued by Deuines, and I went so farre by Letters and conferences in I∣talie, that I could not goe backe, but promised faithfully to performe the enterprise, if his holinesse would allow it, and grant me remission of my sinnes: then I confes∣sed my selfe vnto a Iesuite, and tooke his aduice in the matter, who most louingly imbraced and commended me: then I wrote a Letter vnto the Pope to require of him absolution of my sinnes, in consideration of so great an enterprise vndertaken, without promise or reward: then I went vnto the Popes Nuntio, and read the let∣ter vnto him, and inclosed and sealed it, he promised me to procure answer from the Pope, and louingly imbraced me, wished me good spéede, and promised me that I should be remembred at the Altar. Then he said he comming to England, hee got accesse vnto the Quéene, as before: then came Letters into England vnto me from Cardinall Como, whereby I found the enterprise commended and allowed, and my selfe absolued in the Popes name of all my sinnes, and willed to go forward in the name of God. That Letter I shewed vnto some in Court, who imparted it to the Quéene, notwithstanding it confirmed my resolution to kill her, and made it cleere in my conscience that it was lawfull and meritorious. When I looked vpon her Maiestie, and remembred her many excellencies, I was greatly troubled, yet I saw no remedie, for my vowes were in heauen, and my letters and promises in earth: after Doctor Collens book was sent me out of France, it redoubled my former con∣ceits; euery word in it was a warrant to a prepared minde: it taught that Kings may he excommunicated, depriued, and violently handled: it proueth that all wars, ciuill or forren, vndertaken for religion, are honourable, whereupon hee was con∣demned of treason, and drawne vpon a Hurdle from the Tower vnto the Pallace of Westminster, where he was executed. Francis Throgmorton. HIs confession was to this effect: When I was at Spaw in the Countrey of Liege, I entred into conference with one Ienney a notorious traytor, touch∣ing the altering of the State of the Realme here, and how the same might be at∣tempted by forreign inuasion, and to the like effect I had sundry conferences with Sir Francis Englefield in the Low Countries, who daily solicited the K. of Spaine to inuade the Realme, and I continued practising against her Maiestie and the State by letters betwene Sir Francis Englefield and my selfe, and I acquainted Sir Iohn Throgmorton my father with my trayterous practises, who disswaded me from any further medling with these practises, but by my fathers aduice I made a Catalogue of all the Noblemen and Gentlemen that were Catholiks, and did discribe the hauens of this Realme for landing of forces. He confessed that he was acquainted by his brother Thomas Throgmorton with a resolute determination for inuading of the Realme, and that the Duke of Guise should be the principall executor of that inuasion, to the intent to prepare by force the Quéens tolleration in religion for the Catholiks; and if her Maiesty should re∣fuse so to doe, to remoue her from her crowne and state, and that the Duke of Guise had prepared the forces, but there wanted money and assistance of the Catholiques in England, to ioyne with forreigne forces: for money messengers were sent, both to Rome and Spaine, and the Spanish Ambassadour gaue out that the King his Master would not only make some notable attempt against England, but would beare halfe the charge thereof; and an especiall messenger was sent into England,
vnder a counterfeit name from the confederats in France, to signifie here the plot and preparation that was there, whereupon I tooke vpon me to be a follower and meanes for the effecting thereof amongst the confederats in England, with the helpe of the Spanish Ambassador, knowing that he being a publique person might deale therein without perill, and that the Duke of Guise made speciall choice to land in Sussex, about Arundell, for the néere cut from Fraunce, and for the assured persons to giue assistance, and I shewed the whole plot of the hauens for landing to the Spanish Ambassadour, who did incourage me therein: also there was sent o∣uer from the confederates beyond Sea, into ussex, Charles Pager, vnder the name of Mope, alias Spring, and that the Spanish Ambassador was made priuie vnto his comming, and it was to view the hauens and countrey for landing such forreigne forces about Arundell, and to conferre with certain principal persons for assistance, and he confessed that there was a deuice betwéene the Spanish Ambassador and him, how such principall Recusants within the Realme as were in Commission for the peace in sundry countries, might vpon the bruit of landing the forreigne forces, vnder colour of defence of her Maiestie, leuie mn to ioyne vnto the forren forces; whereupon he was iustly condemned. The Earle of Northumberland. HEe had a hand in the rebellion in the North, as well as his brother, and beha∣ued himselfe diligently in the managing of those treasons, yet the Quéen was content to remit all, and accept him againe, both in honour and fauour, yet he after entred into a new plot for the inuading of the Realme, and ouerthrow of the go∣uernment of religion, and to endanger her Maiesties person, and put her from her Kingdome, being a conspirator in Throgmortons treasons: it was concluded by the Pope that the state of Christendome stood vpon the stoute assayling of England, and that it should be inuaded with twenty thousand men, at the charge of the Pope and other Princes, and that her Maiestie should be deposed, and some English Ca∣tholike elected King, and that many Priests should come into the Realme to win a number vnto the Catholike faith to ioyne, if opportunity serued, either with for∣rain inuasion, or with tumults at home. The head Preacher at Narbon in Prouence, told an English-man that England should be inuaded by a forrain King, and the Popish Religion restored, and that Priests dispersed themselues in England for the better strengthening of the parties. One Paine executed for treason, confessed that this Realme could not continue in the State wherein it was, because the Pope had a speciall care therof, and would in short time, eyther by forren Princes, or by some other meanes, worke a change of things here. The Duke of Guise two yeares did solicite the Pope and other Princes, to sup∣ply him with forces to inuade this Realme. There was found about a Iesuite that was taken vpon the Sea, a discourse that the Earle of Northumberland, and all the Catholike Lords and Gentlemen in the North parts will assuredly ioyne with forren forces, and therein it is also affirmed that the Priests, dispersed within the Realme, can dispose of the Catholikes of the Realme, as they shall be ordered, and that the Popes excommunication should be renued and pronounced against her Maiesty, and all those which shall take her part, and that all such should be holden as traytors which did not ioyne with the Army by a day. It was proued that the Earle had conference with the foresaid Charles Pager, comming ouer about the practise and prosecuting of the said enterprise, and that the arle secretly receiued him into the Gallery at Petworth, where the Earle
conferred with him an houre, from whence Paget was conueyed backe into the towne, where he lodged all night, and the next night he was conueyed secretly vnto a Lodge in the arls Park at Peworth, where he was kept with all secrecie eight dayes, and the seruant which conueyed him was enioyned by the Earle in no wise to discouer him, and Charles Paget returning from Petworth, took shipping again to goe beyond Sea. Paget tolde William Shelley of Michelgroue in Essex▪ Esquire, that forreigne Princes would seeke reuenge against her Maiestie, of wrongs by her done against them, and would take such opportunitie as might  serue them, and that the Duke of Guise would be a dealer herein, and that the Earle of Northumberland would be an assistant vnto them, willing Shelley whatsoeuer should happe, to fol∣low the Earle of Northumberland, and that the Duke of Guise had forces in rea∣dinesse for the altering of religion here in England, and that the Catholikes would all ioyne for so good a purpose, for that it would be a meanes to reform religion: he said the stirre would be in the North parts▪ because Sussex was not conuenient in regard there was no safe landing there▪ and that it was so  Londn, and that when any stirre should be the Earle of Northumberland would goe into the North parts, and when the Earle perceiued that all this was come to light, he killed him∣selfe in the Tower, with a Pistoll charged with thrée Bullets. Anthony Babington, with thirteene young Gentlemen more. THese conspired the death of Quéene Elizabeth: they swore they would set the Pope in hs former state in England, or else die the death, and they combined and confederated themselues by vow and oath, in a most horrible enterprise, by murther to take away the life of her Maiesty, wherefore they were iustly condem∣ned, and executed. The story of the Spanish Fleet, Ann. 1588. THe said Fléet was a preparing thrée or foure years, and being in full perfection came into our seas, with such mighty strength, as no nauy of England or Chri∣stendom could abide their orce. And to make the intended conquest of this realme sure, to the same should also haue ioyned the mighty armie which the Duke of Par∣ma had made ready in the Low-countries, which Army should land in this realme, and so both by sea & land this realme should be inuaded, and a speedy conquest made thereof, whereupon it was gathered that neither by sea nor by land there could be much resistance made, & that there would be a strong party in this realme of papists to ioine with the forrein forces; but within eight or nine daies of the appearance of the popish so great a nauie vpon the coast of England, it was forced to flée from the coast of Flanders neer Callice, towards the vnknown parts of the cold North, and all their hope of an imagined conquest was quite ouerthrowne. It could procéed of no reason of man, nor of any earthl power, but onely of God, that such a worke, so long time a framing, to be so suddenly ouerthrown. Before this Army of Spaine was ready to come forth vnto the seas, there were sundry things printed, and sent into this realme, to notfie vnto the people that the realme should be conquered, the Quéene destroyed, and all the Noble men & wealthy that did obey her, & would withstand the inuasion, should be with all their families ooted out, and their liuings bestowed vpon the Conqueors, and a new Bull was published at Rome by the Pope, whereby the Quéen was accursed, and pronounced
to be depriued of her Crowne, and the inuasion and conquest of the Realme com∣mitted by the Pope, to the King Catholick, which was the King of Spaine, to exe∣cute the sam with his armies, both by Sea and Land, and to take the crowne vnto himselfe, and there was a large explanation of this bll, written by Cardinall Allen, calling himselfe therein the Cardinall of England, and a number of them were sent ouer ready printed into England, most bitterly written against the Queene, and her Father King Henry the eight, and her Nobiitie and Councell. In the Fleet were aboundance of Princes, Marquesses, Condez, and Dos, which came to haue possessed the roomes of all the Noble men in England, and Scotland. Don Brnardin Mendoza, in an open assembly did say in a brauerie, that the young King of Scots, whom hee called a boy, had deceived the King of Spaine: but if the Kings Nauy might prosper against England: The King of Scots should loose his Crowne, when the brute was brought of the Spanish Fléet, and of the Armie of the Sea coast of Flanders, with their shippings. Charles Lord Howard, Lord High Admirall of England, who is of the most Noble house of the Duke of Norffolke, had the charge of the greatest company of the Quéenes Ships: an other company were appointed to remaine with the Lord Henry Seymer, second Sonne to the Duke of Somerset, and brother to the Earle of Hertford: these continued in the narrow Seas betwixt England and Flanders, to attend the Duke of Parmas actions. A third company were armed in the West part of England towards Spain, vn∣der the conduct of Sir Francis Drake, but after it was vnderstood, that the great Nauy of Spaine was ready to come out of Libne, my Lord Admirall was com∣maunded to saile with the greatest ships to the west parts of England to ioyn with Drake, whom he made Uice-admirall, and the Lord Thomas Howard, second Son vnto the Duke of Norffolke, and the Lord Sheffield, with a great number of Knights, went with the Lord Admirall. When the Popish Army came vnto the Coasts of England, it séemed so great, that the Englishmen were astonied at the sight of them; yet the Lord Admiral and Drake hauing but fifty of the English ships out of the hauen of Plimouth, they u∣riously pursued the whole Nauy of Spaine, being about 160. ships: so that with the continuall shot of the English one whole day, the whole Nauy fled without re∣turning: and after the English Nauy being increased to an hundred ships, renued the fight with terrible great shot all the whole day, gaining alwaies the winde of the Spanish Nauy, and for nine daies together forced them to flye, and destroyed, suke, and tooke in thrée daies fight, diuers of the greatest shippes, out of which great numbers were brought to London, besides many that were killed and drow∣ned, and many were brought vnto other parts of the realme▪ to the great disshnour of Spaine: in which fight the Spaniards did neuer take nor sinke any English ship or boate, or breake any mast, or tooke any one man prisoner, so that some of the Spaniards let not to say, That in all these ghts Christ shewed himselfe a Luthe∣ran. The King of Scots gaue straight commaundement vpon all his Sea coasts that no Spaniards should be sufferd to land in any part, bt that the English might be relieued of any wants. The Popish Fleet was by tempest driuen beyond the Ises of Orkay, in an vn∣accustomed place, for the young Gentlemen of Spain, which had neuer felt storms and colde weather: about those northerne Islands their Marriners and Souldiers died daily by multitudes, as by their bodies cast vpon the land, did appeare. And after twentie daies and more, hauing spent their time in miserie, then as they returned homeward the Lord ordained the windes to be so violently contra∣rious, that the Nauy was disseered vpon the high Seas, west vpon Ireland, and a great number of them driuen vpon sands, dangerous bayes, and rockes, all along vpon the north and west parts of Ireland, in places distant aboue an hundred miles asunder: whereby we may see how God fauoured the iust cause of Q. Elizabeth,
in shewing his anger against those proud boasting enemies of Christs peace, and she and her Realme professing the Gospell of Christ, are kept and deended: accor∣ding to the Psalme, vnder the shadow of his wings from the face of the wicked that sought to afflict her, and compasse her round about to take away her soule. Iohn Weldon, William Hartley, and Robert Sutton. IOhn Weldon Priest, was borne at Tollerton in Yorkshire: he was indicted of reason in Middlesex; first he took exception to the indictment that it was false, then to the Iurie, that they were vnfit men to try him, because they were Lay men, and vnto the whole Bench as vnworthy to bee his Iudges, because hee did know them to be resolued before hand to condemne all Catholikes brought before them: He acknowledged himselfe to bee a Priest, and therefore not triable by the Common Lawes. Whereupon persisting in that hee would make no answere, and his Treasons manifest, he was condemned to be hanged, drawne and quar∣tered. William Hartly Priest was condemned for the same treasons that Welden was: it was proued that he sent a Letter to Paris to Seminary Priests, importing the full resolution of the said Hartly and some other of his confederats (immediatly vp∣pon the landing of the Spaniards) to haue surprised the Tower of London, and to haue fired the Citie: he affirmed, that if the Pope doe depriue the Quéene and dis∣charge her subiects of their obedience, and send an armie to restore the Roman Re∣ligion in England, he would pray that the Roman armie might preuaile in that case, and in that faith he would spend ten thousand millions of liues, if hee had them, whereupon hee was likewise condemned to bee hanged, drawne and quar∣tered. Robert Sutton Priest was indited for the same treasons: he said the Quéen was supreme gouernour within her Highnesse Dominions, ouer all persons, but not o∣uer all causes: he was found guiltie▪ and had his iudgement as the rest. It was proued that Welden was sent ouer into the Low-countries to kill the Earle of Leicester, who apprehended him, and sent him ouer into England; to which he an∣swered he had done nothing but as a Catholike Priest ought to doe by the direction of our most holy Father the Pope, being the head of the Church, who onely hath au∣thority ouer all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiasticall, and in this Roman Reli∣gion. I will die. Then he prayed all Catholikes to pray for him, and so mumbling certaine Latin prayers, he died. The other likewise died as obstinate traytors as himselfe. Doctor Lopez, Stephano de Ferrera de Gama, Manuell Lewis Tyuaco Portugalls. DOctor Lopez was fauourably receiued into the Quéens house a long time, as one of her physitians, the other two were Portugalls lately receiued to the ser∣uice of the King of Spain, yet colourably resorting into this Realme. Lopez confessed that hee was of late yeares allured secretly to doe seruice vnto the King of Spaine, and from one of his Priuie Councell he receiued a Iewell of gold of good value, garnished with a large Diamond and a large Rubie, and after∣ward he assented to take away the Quns life by poysoning, vpon reward promi∣sed him of fifty thousand crownes, for which purpose hee sent a messenger ouer to
Callice to confer with the Count uents for this practise, and that after he sent an other messenger vnto Ibarra, the King of Spaines Secretary, and to the said Count Fuentes, promising to poison the Queene, if hee might haue the fifty thousand crownes that were offered deliuered vnto him: and he confessed the other two were his messengers: in the aforesaid messages, and conspired with him to execute the same: and they all confessed, that the stay that it was not done, proceeded much against their mindes, for want of the deliuerie of the said fifty thousand crownes, which was promised by a day: But the King of Spaine finding fault that the mes∣senger, which should carry the money, was too base a fellow to be trusted wh so much deferred the sending thereof: but after billes of Exchange were deli∣uered by the Count Fuentes, for the money, by the direction of the King of Spaine, at the very instant when it should haue been done, it pleased God of his goodnesse towards her Maiestie, to suffer this conspiracie to be very happily dicouered by the diligence of one of the Lords of her Maiesties Priuy Councell: so all the thrée offenders were taken with their Letters and writings, expressing their owne ac∣tions and Councels, and the directions of the King of Spaines Councellors, and the other two confessed the like in effect, as Lopez had done: wherevpon they were all three condemned for treason, and executed accordingly. Manuel Lewis, repented at his death, and prayed God that all those things that are atchieued by the King of Spane, against the Quéenes Maiestie, might take none effect, and that all the treasons which are wrought may bee discouered, & that God would prolong the life of the Quéenes Maiestie, as shee deserueth, and her faithfull subiects desire. Edmund Yorke, and Richard Williams. NOt long after Lopez his treason, another like conspiracie was concluded at Bruxells to murder the Queene, whereof Stephano Ibarra, the King of Spaines Secretary▪ procuring the sme to bee done by the said Yorke and Williams, and others: and Hugh Owen an English Rebell: a Spanish Pen∣tioner, deliuered vnto the said Yorke an assignation in writing, subscribed by the said Secretarie Ibarra his hand, for assurance of payment of forty thousand crownes to bee giuen vnto him from the King of Spaine, if hee would kill the Queene: or if hee would assist Richard Williams, or any other that should haue performed the same; and the assignation was deliuered vnto Holt a Iesuit, an old English Rebell, who produced the Sacrament and kissed i, and sware in the presence of Yorke and other Rebels, that he would surely pay the same Money vnto him as soone as the fact should be committed: and vpon this matter were three seuerall consultations of Englishmen, being Rebels and Fu∣gitiues, and Pentioners of the King of Spaine. The names of the principall parties of the consultations, are, William Stanley, the said Holt a Iesuit, Thomas Throgmorton, the said Hugh Owen, Doctor Gifford, Doctor Worthington, Charls Paget, one Tipping, Edward Garret, and Michaell Moody, but b Gods good pro∣uidence, the said Yorke and Williams were taken comming into England, and con∣fessed the whole matter as aforesaid. Holt said to Yorke, many Englishmen haue failed to perform this enterprise, but if it should not be performed by you, he would after imploy strangers in it. Patricke Cullen an Irishman HE was likewise a Pentioner of the King of Spaine, and a Fencer: he was perswaded by William Stanley, and one Iaques who was his Lieutenant, and
one Shirwood and the said Holt to come secretly into England, and to kill her Ma∣iestie, and he assented thereunto, and had thirty pound of Stanley & Iaques towards his iourney, with offer of great reward; and comming into England, he was taken, and by good proofes charged there with, he confessed the same in the manner as is before here expressed. Richard Hesketh. HEe was a Gentleman of Lancashire, well acquainted with the Lord Strange? he was sent into England by Cardinall Allen, William Stanley, and Thomas Worthington to intice Ferdinand, the Lord Strange, sonne and heire to the Earle of Darby, to take vpon himselfe the title to be heire vnto the crowne of England, and to shew him the opinion of the Cardinall and many others, that he should take vp∣pon him the title of King, with assurance of treasure and forreine forces, to main∣taine the same, which the said Hesketh did very diligently performe, with many reasons, as he was instructed, but the Lord Strange being at Heskeths comming newly Earle of Darbie, by the death of his▪ father, was so wise and dutifull, that he stayed Hesketh, who vpon the Earles report was apprehended, and confessed the whole matter, wheupon he was condemned, and shewed great repentance, and cursed his instructors, and was executed. SQVIRE. THis Uiper Squire was likewise sent by the inticement of the aforesaid Ser∣pentine generation, beyond Sea, to kill her Maiestie: his plot was to so poy∣son the pummell of her Saddle, that if she did lay her hand vpon it, her whole bodie should be therewith poysoned, but by the sure prouidence of God, which euer did preserue her, and oreshew vnto her▪ all her dangers, to the preuention of them, this practise came to light before it was executed, and the said Squire had the same most iust reward of his foresaid treason, as his predecessors in like plots had. The Earle of Essex Conspiracie. LAstly, I will conclude with the conspiracie of the late Earle of Essex: for al∣though it is not to be doubted but that his heart, with many of his followers, was vpright vnto the Quéene, yet notwithstanding hee had many Papists in the plot with him, whose hearts he knew not, and by whom, if his practise had tooke ef∣fect, the Queene should haue beene in as great trouble and danger as euer she was in her life; but the Lord of his accustomable wonderfull mercie, deliuered her Maie∣stie from this danger likewise, who both by his holy spirit of comfort preserued her mind, still ioyfull without feare of her enemies, and also her royall person and her realme, by the safe custodie of his holy Angels, from all wicked practises and trea∣sons whatsoeuer, vntill her olde age, and vntill he at his time appointed called her Maiestie vnto himselfe, out of her bedde in peace, from a blessed Kingdome, wherin she had long raigned in great glory in this world, to raigne with his Sonne Iesus Christ in the Kingdome of vnspeakeable and eternall ioy and glorie in the world to come. By this storie of Queen Elizabeth, the Papists that haue any eie-sight of true vn∣derstanding, may see by what wicked meanes the Pope and their Catholik Church
hath alwaies gotten and maintained their most vnlawfull supremacie ouer kings. And although they haue wonderfully preuailed against all superstitious Empe∣rours and Kings, by such like excommunications▪ warres, murthers, and treasons as he vsed against Queene Elizabeth, yet as God preserued her heart purely to sicke to his sincere word, and to despise all the Popes errors, superstitions, and trash, so God mercifully preserued her and her Kingdome from all the Popes trea∣cherous practises foure and fortie yeares, fiue moneths, and odde dayes, with such glorie and peace as neuer Christian King had more: her manifest protections of God were as apparant and as manifest as Dauids; and as he and Salomon builded a most glorious materiall Temple in despite of their enemies, most gloriously did she build vp the spirituall Temple and Spouse of Christ, in despite of the Papists and the Pope, and all kings that tooke their part: her outward glorie and honour was quall wth Salomons, and she omatched him in that: neither her glorie in this world, nor any other means could withdraw her from her true zeale in setting forh the pure word of God; wherefore all honour and glorie be giuen vnto God by this Realme of England and all his Church world without end. Amen. OVR MOST GRATIOVS King IAME. WHen the Papists triumphing that their long xpected houre was come by Gods taking away th most blessed Quéen Elizabeth, yet the Lord of his great mercie brought their ioy to nought, by pan∣ting our deare Soueraigne, Iames, by his especiall grace, to succeede Queene Elizabeth in these Realmes, one that is as zealous of the word of God as she, and one whom the Lord hath beene as prouident ouer in all his wayes, as ouer her, and indued with the like ioy in the Holy-Ghost, in the assurance of Gods prouidence in time of danger, wherefore no doubt but as the Lord hath, so he will couer him and his Realmes with the shdow of his wings from all papisticall treacheries, euen as he did Queene Elizabeth. This is wor∣thie to be recorded vnto the perpetuall honour of his Maiestie, that hee being hire apparant vnto Quene Elizabeth, could neuer be inticed by any Prince or Papist, to oppose himselfe against her. When the rising was in the North, and the rebels were led into Scotland, he tooke the Quéens part, though it were to the great ru∣ine of much of his Kingdome: he made a Proclamation in Anno 1588. that none of the pansh Fléet should land vpon his coasts, but that the English should be re∣lieued of any thing they néeded, and in the yeare 1592. hee executed as traytors in Scotland, diuers for conspiring with the King of Spaine against England▪ and be∣fore the comming out of the Spanish Fléet Don Barnardin Mendoza in an open As∣sembly did say in a  that the young King of Scots, whom hee called a boy, had deceiued the King of Spaine, but if the Kings Nauie might prosper against England, the King of Scots should lose his crowne, whereby it manifestly appea∣reth how true and faithfull his Maiestie was ur vnto the late Quéene of famous memorie. Touching GODS wonderfull preseruations ouer his royall person; who hath safely preserued him a King almost this eight and fortie yeares, in despite of all his enemies, forreigne and domesticall, and no doubt but he had many, ye it
doth most manifestly appeare in some great and vnheard of dangers, out of which the Lord hath most miraculously deliuered him, as from Gowries Treason and the Gun-powder Treason, and others. GOWRIES conspiracie against his Maiestie the fift of August, being Tuesday Anno Dom. 1600. MA. Alexander Ruthwen, second brother vnto the late Earle Gowrie, came to his Maiestie as he was a hunting, and told him that it chaunced the night before, as he walked about the Towne of S. Iohnstone, hee met a base fellow vn∣knowne vnto him, and hauing suspition of him he narrowly looked to him, and ex∣amined him, and he said he found a great wide pot to be vnder his arme, full of coi∣ned gold in great quantity, whereupon he took him, no body knowing thereof, and bound him in a priuie darke house, and locked many doores vpon him, and said that he came in haste to aduertise his Maiesty thereof according to his bounden duety, earnestly requesting his Maiestie with all diligence and ecrecie to take order ther∣with before any know thereof, swearing that he had concealed it from all men, yea, from the Earle his brother; whereupon the King suspected that it had béene some forreigne golde, brought thither by some Iesuits for practising Papists to stirre vp some new sedition, as they had often  before, and that the fellow that carried it was some Seminary, so disguised for the more sure transporting thereof: and with many earnest perswasions he got the Kings Maiesty as soone as he had done hunting, to ride with him to the Earle Gowres house to dinner, with a very small number with him, and after dinner his Maiesty being ready to rise from the table, and all his seruants in the hall at their dinner, M. Alexander standing behinde his Maiesties backe, pulled him softly, rounding in his Maiesties eare, that it was time to goe, but that he would fain haue been quit of the Earle his brother, wishing the K. to send him out into the hall, to entertain his guests, whereupon the K. called for drink, and in a mrrie and homely manner sayd to the arle, That al∣though the Earle had séene the fashion of entertainment in other countreyes, yet he would teach him the Scottish fashion, séeing he was a Scottish man: and therefore since he had forgotten to drink to his Maiesty, or sit with his guests, and entertayne them, his maiesty would drink to him his own welcom, desiring him to take it forth and drink to the rest of the company, and in his Maiesties name to make them wel∣come. Whereupon as he went forth his Maiesty rose from the table, and desired M. Alexander to bring Sir Thomas Erskine with him: who desiring the K. to goe forward with him, and promising that he should make any one or two follow him that he pleased to call for, desiring his Maiesty to commaund publikely that none should follow him. Thus the K. accompanied only with the said M. Alexander, comes forth of the chamber, passeh through the end of the hall, where the Noble∣men and his Maiesties seruants were sitting at their dinner, vp a Turnepeck, and through three or foure Chambers, the sayd Master Alexander euer locking behinde him euery doore as he passed: and then with a more smiling countenance than hee had all the day before, euer saying he had him sure and safe enugh kept, vntill at the last, his Maiesty passig thorow three or foure sundry houses, and all the doores locked behinde him, his Maiesty entred into a little studie, where he saw standing with a very abased countenance, not a bond-man but a free man, with a dagger at his girdle: but his Maiesty had no sooner entred into that little study, and Master Alexander with him, but Master Alexander locked to the study doore behinde him, and at that instant changing his countenance, putting his hat on his head, and
drawing the Dagger from that other mans girde, held the point of it to the Kings breast, auowing now that the King be hooud to be in his will▪ and vsed as hee list: swearing many bloody oths, that if the king cryed one word, or opened a window to look out, that the dagger should presently go to his heart: affirming, that he was sure, that now the kings conscience was burthened for murthering his father. His Maiey wondring at so sodaine an alteration, & standing naked, without any kinde of armour but his hunting horne, which he had not gten leysure to lay from him, betwixt these two traytors which had conspired his life: the said maister Alexan∣der standing (as is said) with a dagger in his hand, and his sword at his side, but the other trembling and quaking, rather like ne condemned, than an executioner of sch an enterprise. His Maiesty begun then to ilate to the said M. Alexander, how horrible a thing it was for him to meddle with his Maiesties innocent blood, assuring him it would not be left vnreuenged, since God had giuen him children and good subiects, and if they neither, yet God would raise vp stocks and stnes to punish so vile a deed. Protesting before God, that he had no burthen in his conscience, for the execution of his father, both in respect that at he tie of his fathers execution, his Maiesty was but a minor of age, and guided at that time by a faction, which ouer-ruled both his Maiesty and the rest of the countrey, as also that whatsoeuer was done to his fathr it was done by the ordinary course of Law and iustice. Appealing the saide Master Alexander vpon his conscience, how wll hee all times since had deserued at the hands of all his race, not onely hauing restored them to their lands and dignities, but also in now ishig and bringing vp of two or three of his sisters, as it were in his own bosme, by a continuall attendance vpon his Maiesties dearest bed-fellow in hr riuie chamber. Laying also before him the terrors of his conscience, especially that he made pro∣fession, according to his education, of the same religion which his Maiesty had euer professed; and namely his Maiesty rmembred him of that holy man Mast. Robert Rollocke, whose scholler he was, assuring him that one day the said Master Roberts soule would accuse him, that he had neuer learned of him to practise such vnnatural cruelty: his Maiesty promising to him, on the word of a Prince, that if hee would spare his life, an suffer him to go out againe, he would neuer reueale to any one li∣uing what was betwixt them at that tme, nor neuer suffer him to inur any harm or punishment for the same. But his Maiesties feare was, that he could hope or no sparing at his hands, ha∣uing such cruelty in his looks, and standing so irreuerently couered, with his at on: which forme of rigorous behauiour, could prognosticate nothing to his Maiesty but present extremity. But at his Maiesties perswasiue language, he appeared to be somewhat amazed, and vncouering his head againe▪ swore and protested that his Maiesties life should be safe, if he would behaue himselfe quietly, without making any noyse: and that he would only bring in the Earl his Brother to speak with his Maiesty: whereupon his Maiesty enquiring what the Earle would doe with him, since (if his Maiesties life were safe according to promise) they could gaine little in kéeping such a prisoner. His answere onely was, that he could tell his Maiesty no more, but that his life should be safe, in case he behaued himselfe quietly, the rest, the Earle his brother, whom he was going for, would tell his Maiesty at his comming. With that, as he was going forth for hi brother, as he affirmed, he turned him a∣bout to the other man; saying these words vnto him, I make you here the Kinges kéeper, tul I come backe againe, and see that you keepe him, vpon your owne perill: and therewithall said to his Maiesty, you must content your selfe to haue this man now your keeper, vntill my comming backe. With these words he passeth forth▪ locking the doore after him, leauing his Maiesty with that man he found there before. Of whom his Maiesty then enquired, if he were appointed to be the murtherer of him at that time, and how farre he was vpon the onsel of that conspiracy, whose answer with a trembling and astonished voice and
behauiour, was, that as the Lord should dge him, he was neuer made acquainted with that purpose, but that he was put in there perforce, & the doore lockt vpon him, a little space before his Maiesties comming: as indeed all the time of the said M. A∣lexanders menacing his maiestie, he was euer trembling, requesting him for Gods sake, and with many other attestations, not to meddle with his maiesty, nor to doe him any harme. But because M. Alexander had before his going forth, made the King sweare he should not cry, nor open any window, his maiesty commanded the said fellow to open the window on his right hand, which he readily did, so that al∣though he was put in there to vse violence on the King, yet God so turned his hart, as he became a slaue to his prisoner. While his maiesty was in this dangerous estate, & none of his owne seruants nor raine knowing where he was, & as his Maiesties train was arising in the Hal from their dinner, the Earl of Gowry being present with them, one of the E. of Gowries seruants comes hastily in, assuring the Earle his maister, that his maiesty was hor∣sed, & away through the Insh, which the Earle reporting to the Noble men, and the rest of his Maiesties traine that was there present, they all rushed out together at the gate in great hast: and some of his maiesties seruants enquiring of the Porter when his maiesty went forth? The porter affirmed, that the king was not yet gone forth? Wherevpon he Earle looked very angerly vpon him, and said he was but a lyar: yet turning him to the Duke, & to the Earle of Mar, said he should presently get them sure word where his Maiesty was, and with that, ran through the close, and vp the staires. But his purpose indéed was, to speake with his brother, as ap∣peared very well by the circumstance of time, his brother hauing at that same in∣stant left the king in the little study, & ran downe the staires in great haste. Immediatly after, the Earle commeth back, unning againe to the gate, where the Noblemn and the rest, were standing in a maze, assuring them that the king was gone long since out at the back gate, and if they hasted them not the soo∣ner, they would not ouertake him, and with that called for his horse, whereat they rusht all together out at the gate, and made toward the Inshe, crying all for their horses: passing all (as it was the prouidence of God) vnder one of the windows of that study, wherein his maiesty was. To whom M. Alexander very speedily retur∣ned, and at his in comming to his Maiesty, casting his hands abroad in a desperate manner, said, he could not mend it, his Maiestie behooued to die: and with that, offered a garter to bind his Maiesties hands, with swearing, hee behooued to bee bound. His maiesty at that word of binding, said, he was borne a frée King, and should die a frée King. Wherevpon he griping his Maiesty by the wrest of the hand, to haue bound him, his Maiesty releeued himself sodainly of his gripes: wherevpon as he put his right hand to his sword, his maiesty with his right hand seazed vpon both his hand and his sword, and with his left hand clasped him by the throat, like as he with the left hand claspt the King by the throat, with two or three of his fingers in his Maiesties moth, to haue stayed him from crying. In this manner of wrest∣ling his Maiestie perforce drew him to the window, which he had caused the other man before to open vnto him, and vnder the which was passing by at the same time the Kings traine, and the Earle of Gowry with them, as is said, and holding out the right side of his head and right elbow, cryed, that they were murthering him there in that treasonable forme: whose voice being instantly heard and knowne by the Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Mar, and the rest of his maiesties traine there: the said Earle at Gowry euer asking what it meant? and neuer seeming any wayes to haue seene his Maiesty, or heard his voice, they all rushed in at the gate together, the Duke and the Earl of Marre running about to come to that passage his Maiesty came in at. But the Earle of Gowry and his seruants made them for another way vp a quiet Turnepeck, which was uer condemned before, and was onely then left open, (as appeared) for that purpose. And in this meane time, his Maiesty, withstrugling and wrastling with the said M. Alexander, had brought him perforce out of that study, the doore wherof, for hast, he had left open at his last in-comming, and his Maiesty hauing gotten, (with long
strugling) the said▪ M. Alexanders head vnder his arme, and himselfe on his knees, his master droe him back perforce hard to the doore of the some Turne-pike, & as his maiesty was throwing his sword out of his hand, thinking to haue striken him therewith, and then to haue shot him ouer the stairs, the other fellow standing be∣hind the kings back, & doing nothing but trembling all the time, Sir Io: Ramsey, not knowing what way first to enter, after he had heard the Kings cry, by chance findes that Turn-peck doore open, & following it vp to the head, enters in into the chamber, & finds his maiesty and M. Alexander strugling in that forme, as is before said: and after he had twise or thrise stricken M. Alexander with his dagger, the other man withdrew himselfe, his Maiesty still kéeping his gripes, & holding him close to him: immediatly thereafter he tooke the said M. Alexander by the sholders, and shut him down the staire: who was no sooner shut out at the doore, but hee was met by Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hew Hereis, who there vpon the staire ended him: the said Sir ho: Erskine being cast behind the Duke & the Earl of Mar that ran about the other way, by the occasion of his medling with the said late Earle in the stréet, after the hearing of his maiesties, cry. For vpon the hearing therof▪ he had clasped y• Earle of Gowry by the gorget, & casting him vnder his féet, and wanting a dagger to haue striken him with, the said Earles men rid the Earle their maister out of hs hands: wherby he was cast behind the rest, as is said: and missing the company, & hearing the said Sir Iohn Ramseys voice vpon the Turn-peck head, ran vp to the said cham∣ber, & cryed vpon the said Sir Hew Hereis & another seruant to follow him: where, méeting with the said M. Alexander in the Turn-peck, he ended him there, as is said the said M. Alexander crying for his last words, Alas I had not the weight of it. But no sooner could the said Sir Thomas, Sir Hew, and another seruant win into the Chamber where his maiestie was, but that the said Earl of Gowry, before they could get the doore shut, followed them in at the back, hauing cast him directly to come vp that priuy passage, as is before said: who at his first entry, hauing a drawn sword in euey hand, and a stéele bonet on his head, accomanied with seuen of his seruants, euery one of them hauing in like manner a drawne sword, cryed out with a great oath, that they should al die as traitors. All the which time his maiesty was still in his chamber, who séeing the Earle of Gowry come in with his swords in his hands, sought for M. Alexanders sword which had fallen from him at his out shut∣ting at the doore, hauing no sort of weapons of his own, as it is said  but then was hut back by his own seruants that were there, into  little study, and the doore shut vpon him: who hauing put his maiesty in safey, re-encountred the said Earle and his seruants, his maiesties seruants being only in number ure, to wit, Sir Hugh Hereis, and Sir Iohn Ramsey, & one Wilson, a seruant of Iames Erskins, a bro∣ther of the said sir Thomas, the said E. hauing 7. of his own seruants with him: Yet it pleased God, after many strokes on all hands, to giue his maiesties seruants the victory, the said E. of Gowry being striken dead with a stroke through y• hart, which the said sir Io: Ramsey gaue him, without once crying vpō God, & the rest of his ser∣uants dung ouer the staires with many hurts, as n like maner y• said sir Tho: Ers∣kin, Hugh Hereis, & sir Iohn Ramsey, were all thr very sore hurt and wouded. But al the time of this ight, the D. of Lnnox, the Earl of Mar, & the rest of his Ma∣ieties traine, ere striking with great hammer at the vtter doore, whrby his ma∣iesty pat vp to the chamber with the said M. Alexander which also he had lockt in his by-comming with his maiesty to the chamber: but by reason of the strength of the said double doore, he whole wall being likewise of boords, and yéelding with the strokes it did bide the  space of half an houre & more, before they could break it hau entree: who  with his maiesty, found (beyond their expectati∣on) his Maiesty deliuered from so imminent a perill, & the said late Earle the princi∣pall conspirator lying dead at his Maiesties éet. Immediatly thereafter his maiesty knéeling down on his knées, in the middest of his own seruants, & they all kneeling round about him: his maiesty out of his own mouth thanked God of that miracu∣lous deliuerance and victory, assuring himselfe, that God hath preserued him from so dispaied a peril, for the perfecting of some greater work behind, to his glory, and
for procuring by him the weale of his people, y• God had committed to his charge. In the first beginning of the Kings Maiesties raign ouer England, William Wat∣son, & William Clarke Seminary Priests, and George Brooke, brother vnto the Lo: Cobham, had most traiterously deuised a plot, whereby the Kings person should haue ben surprised, and the whole kingdome ouerthrowne, and they had entised to the imbracing their trayterous Machinations: Anthony Copley Gentleman: Sir Griffin Markam Knight, the Lord Cobham,▪ the Lord Gray. Sir Walter Rawleigh, and others: But before they had brought their Conspiracies vnto ffect: the Lord of his accustmed goodnes, and carefulnes ouer his Maiestie made all their Con∣spiracies apparant vnto the King and his Councell, and about the middest of Iuly, in the first yeare of his Highnes raigne, proclamations were made out for the apprehension of them, whereby they were taken, and in Noumber after they were all condemned of High Treason: and the nine and twenty day of Nouember, the two Priests were executed: and sir dayes after George Brooke was eheaded, and the ninth of December Sir Griffin Markam, and the Lord Cobham, and the Lord Gray, after they had been seuerally brought vpon the scaffold, in the Castle of Win∣chester, and had made their Confessions, and prepared themselues likewise seue∣rally to die, vpon the sudden, the Kings warrant written with his own hand, was there deliuered vnto Sir Beniamin Tichborne, high Sheriffe of Hampshire, com∣manding him to stay execution: these three and Sir Water Rawleigh, were retur∣ned prioners vnto the Tower, the fifteenth of December. The Gunpowder Treason. THomas Pearcy, Robert Catesby, Thomas Winter & others in the last yeare of the raigne of Q. Elizabeth, by the inigation of certaine Iesuites, practised with th King of Spain, to send a well urnished Army vpon England, promising him great ayde to entertaine them at their arriuall at Milford Hauen, and to that purpose the King promised to  them fify thousand pound for leuying of horse and foote, and preparation of Munition in England to second them: but whilst this was in a man∣ner concluded, Q. Elizabeth dyed, & the King of Spaine vpon certaine knowledge that K. Iames was established, dispatchd his Ambassadors and Commissioners for England, or cofirmation of a lasting Peace between them, yet neuerthelesse the said Rob. Catesby sent Tho: Winter againe to the King of Spaine to resolicite their former proiect, but the King answered him, your old Quéens is dead with whom I had wars, and you haue a new King with whom I haue euer bin in good peace and amity, and for continuance thereof, I haue sent my speciall Commissioners, and vntill I sée what will become thereof, I will not hearken vnto any other course whatsoeuer. When Winter returned, and made this knowne vnto Catesby, Pear∣cy and the rest, then they began to cast about what they might doe of themselues to aduance the Romance Catholick Religion, but first they would see the euent of the first Parliament, if that would mittigate any former Lawes, and try what good the Conclusion of Peace with Spaine would doe vnto them before they attempted any further: but when they perceiued that neither Parliament, nor publike Peace sorted in any part to their desire, and that the Peace concluded was rather a more ready meanes for the Law to procéed against them then otherwise, because the Peace concerned onely the Amitie of Christian Princes, for the generall good of Christendome, without any particular or priuat respect: then Catesby told the rest, he had a deuice in his head that should free them, and the rest of the English Catho∣liques from their oppressions, and when he had found out it Ministers for executi∣on of his deuice, after they had taken oath and Sacrament for secresie, hee told them hee had deuised the meane to vndermine and blow vp the Parliament house, at the instant when the King, Queene, Prince, Peeres, and Commons were all
assembled, which proiect they presently embraced, and forthwith Pearcy hired cer∣taine lodgings close to the Parliament house: and then they appointed Miners, who with great difficultie digged and vndermined a part of the wall, but after a while they vnderstood that the Uat right vnder the Parliament house was to bee let to hyre, then Guydo Fawkes went and hyred it: this Fawkes was late a Soul∣diour in Flanders, and for this purpose was sent for, who by consent of the rest changed his nam, and was called Iohn Iohnson Maister Pearcies man: after they had hyred the Uaut▪ the secretly conuayed into it thirty and sir barrels of powder, and couered them all ouer with Billets and Faggots. bout ten daies before the Parliamnt should begin, an vnknowne party in the Euening met a seruant of the Lord Mounteagles in the stret, and deliuered him a Letter, charging him speedily to giue it vnto his Lord, which he did: when his Lord had read it, and obserued the dangerous cntents, with a speciall caueat, not to appeare the first day of Parliament, he was amazed, and forthwith deliue∣red it to the Earle of Salisbury the Kings Principall Secretary▪ a chiefe Counselor of Estate: when the Earle had iudiciously obserued the strange Phrase and Te∣nor thereof, with the terrible threats therein against the whole State, he acquain∣ted the Lord Chamberlain therewith, and then they cnioined vnto them the Lord Admirall, the Earles of Worcester and Northampton, who instantly consulted what was fittest to be done, omitting neither time, diligence or industry, all which nowithstanding, they could not as yet finde out the depth of this mysterie, and were therefore much troubled in minde, bcause the appointed day of parliament drew neare, which was Tuesday the 5. of Nouember: vpon the Saturday before, the King being returned from hunting, the said Lords acquainted his Highnesse with what had past, and when his Maiesty had well noted the strange contents of the Letter, which purported the sodaine ruine of the State, the King said notwith∣standing the small respect and slight regard which might bee giuen to Libels scattered abroad yet ths was more quicke and pithy then was vsuall in Libels, and willed them to search in all places, as well not dayly frequented, as of vsuall repayre▪ and concerning any forraine disturbance or inuasion, hee well knw the present force and preparation of all Christian Princes, and that whatsoeuer prac∣tise of treaon was now in hand, it must be perormed in some vnsuspected place, and by some hom-bred traytors: therevpon new search was made in all places a∣bout the Court and the Parliament house, but could not as yet finde any thing wor∣thy their labours: all which earchs were performed with such silence and discre∣tion, as there rose no manner of suspition, eyther in Court or City▪ the Lord Cham∣berlaine, whose office it most concerned, neuer rested day nor night, and the night before the Parliament, as Sir Thomas Kneuet with others scowted about the par∣liament house, espied a fellow standing in a corner very suspitiouly, and asked him his name, what hee was, and what he did there so late, who answered very bluntly hi name was Iohn Iohnson Master Pearcies man and keeper of his lodg∣ings. Sir homas Kneuet continued still his search in all places thereabouts, and returning thither againe▪ found him lingring there still, searched him, and found vnder his cloke a close Lanthorne, and a burning Candle in it: and about him other signes of suspition, that hee stood not there for any good: then the Knight entered the Ua, where they found the powder couered with Billets and Fagots as afore-said, and then the Lord Chamberlaine caused the Traytor to be bound, and being now about three a clocke in the morning ee went vnto the King, and with excee∣ding gladnesse told his Maiestie the Treason was discouered and preuented, and the Traytor in hold, the King desired to see Fawkes, who when hee came before the King vsd like trayterous and audacious speeches, as hee did at his first ap∣prehension, affirming himselfe was the onely man to performe the Treason, say∣ing, it sore vexed him that the deed was not done, and for that time would not confesse any thing touching the rest of the Conspirators, but that himselfe onely and alone was the contriuer and practiser of this Treason.
Betweene fiue and six a clocke in the morning the Councell gaue order to the Lord Mayor of London to looke to the City, and in very calme manner to set ciuill watch at the Citie gates, signifying therewithall that there was a plot of Treason discouered, and that the King would not goe to Parliament that day: and the same day in th afternoone, the manner of the Treason was by Proclamation made known vnto the people, for ioy wherof, there was that night as many bonsires in and about London as the stréetes could permit, and the people gaue humble and hearty thankes vnto almighty God for their King & Countries right blessed escape. Within thrée dayes after two other proclamations were made, signifying vnto the people who were the chiefe conspirators, with commandement to apprehend Pearcy and Catesby, & to take them aliue if it were possible, which said Pearcy and Catsby were gone to Holbach in Warwickshire to méet Winter▪ Gaunt, and others: where vnder pretence of a great hunting▪ they meant to raise the country, and sur∣prise the Lady Elizabeth from the L. Harington, whom they meant to proclaime Queens, and in whose name they meant to enter into Armes, being perswaded that the King, the Prince, and Duke of Yorke were by that time blowne vp in the Par∣liament house: but when they knew their treason was known and preuented, and saw the Kings forces round about the house, so as they could not escape, Pearcy and Catesby very desperately issued forth, and fighting back to back were both slain with one Musket shot. Saturday the ninth of Nouember the King went to Parliament, where in the presence of the Queene, the Prince, the Duke of Yorke, the Ambassadors of the King of Spaine, and the Arch-duke, and all the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and Commons of the same, hee made a very solemne oration, manifesting the whole complot of this Treason. The 27. of Ianuary at Westminster were arraigned, Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes, Robert Keyes and Thomas Bates for plotting to blow vp the Par∣liament house, digging in the mine, taking oath and Sacrament for secresie, &c. and Robert Winter, Iohn Graunt, Ambrose Rookewood, for being acquainted with the treason afterward, giuing their full consent thereunto, and taking oath and Sa∣crament for secresie, and sir Euerd Digby for being made acquainted with the said Treason, yeelding assent, and taking his corporall oath for secresie: all which inditements were prooued against them, and by themselues confessed, and there∣vpon had iudgement giuen them to bee drawne, hanged and quartered, their limbes to bee set vpon the Citie gates, and their heads vpon the Bridge: accord∣ing to which sentence the thirtieth of Ianuary, Sir Euerard Digby, Robert Win∣ter, Iohn Graunt and Bates were executed at the West end of Paules Church, and the next day after the other foure were executed in the Parliament yard, six of the eight, acknowledged their guiltinesse in this horrible treason, and dyed very pe∣nitently, but Graunt and Keyes did not so. Out of these and many other destructions, the Lord of his aboundant mercie hath deliuered his most faithfull Seruant, and our dread Soueraigne King Iames: and still will preserue him according to his promise, so long as he putteth his trust in him: and it is not to be doubted, but God hauing giuen him the Spirit of con∣fidence in him, and also fortified and builded vp this his hope and trust by the experience of ennumerable preseruations of his person and State and such ones as could be attributed to no meanes, but onely to Gods handy workes: Nay, I will conclude by the warrant of Gods word, that it is impossible for the Diuell by any temptation in the world to steale this heauenly treasure out of his Royall heart, no more then he could steale it out of Iob his heart: for although from them that haue not the true grace of God, that which they haue shall be taken from them: yet according to Christs promise, which is truth it self, he that hath truly Gods Spirit, be it in neuer so little manner, more shall be giuen him, and that which he hath shall neuer be taken from him. And touching these blessed Realmes of Great Brittaine and Ireland, ouer
which the Lord hath appointed him supreme head next vnder his Sonne Iesus Christ ouer all causes spirituall and temporall, being that he maintaineth and de∣fendeth the very same Doctrines, and no other, which Christ, the Apostles, and the Priitiue Church taught: as the Lord hath most wonderfully blessed and po∣spered them by the hands of Queen Elizabeth, and his Maiestie, this many yéeres, so vndoubtedly his wings of most safe preseruation shall be still ouer this realme so long as no Idolatry is in Israel. I meane maintained by the Lawes of the Realme: For though there bee many Idolatrous Papists, yet the Law is against them, and though there bee many sinnes and wickednesses in England, yet the Lawes of the Realme are most strict against them: therefore the Realme is holy and righteous, because the lawes bee holy and righteous, and al∣though there bee aboundance of wicked and abhominable people in this Realme yet there bee as many both holy and righteous men and women as euer were in them: Therefore certainely the LORD will not destroy or plague this Realme for their sakes that bee wicked and prophane i them, but most surely still blesse and preserue them for their sakes that be righteous and holy therein, as hetherto hee hath done: wherefore vnto him bee all honour, praise, glory, po∣wer and Dominion of all the inhabitants of this Realme, and of all his Church world without end. The last but not the least vse of these precedent Stories is therein diligent∣ly to mark the vnspeakeable cruelty, tyranny, and most subtill and wicked prac∣tises of Papists in many ages before Queen Mary, but then it was at the heigth and then papists shewed their hearts truely without dissimulation, and from them haue come all the treacherous practises against Queene Elizabeth, and all the treacherous practises against our dread Soueraigne K. Iames: onely Gowries treason excepted, but they neuer deuised a more vngodly and inhumane tragedy, most abhominable to God, and odious in the iudgment of all men, as their most diuellish practise to blow vp the Parliament house with Gunpowder, to the destruction of his Maiestie, his Queene, and all his Royal issue: with all the Nobi∣litie, Bishops, Iudges, and chiefe of the Commons of this Realm, with many thou∣sands besides, to the vtter vndoing of this most noble Kingdome. Their cruelty in Spaine. LIkewise of this their cruelty which no tongue is able to expresse sufficient testi∣mony would appeare by the most cruell murders vpon Gods Saints commit∣ted from time to time in innumerable abundance both vpon our country men, there own and others, by the most diuelish and cruell inquisitos of the Spaniards, but these serpents are become so wise and subtill that there is no certaine record to bée found in any writer of their doings therein, since the booke of Martyrs, but for all their subtilty they cannot hide it from Christ Iesus, at the day of Iudgement, The cruell practises of the Papists in France. LIkewise there helish cruelty hath been declared in no place in the world, so plainely as it hath been in France, by the innumerable massacres, and mur∣ders of Gods Saints, that they haue there committed. I will onely recite one massacre, and the death of their two last Kings of France, for by these and other
such like crueltyes alreadie declared out of the Booke of Martyrs, it is easily séene that they are the Brothers of Caine, and Children of the Deuill. In the yeare one thousand fiue hundred seauenty two, the Duke of Guise by the aduice of the French King Charles the ninth, came with a great company of Soul∣diours at midnight into the stréetes of Paris, to massacre the Protestants: the marke of the Executioners should be a hankerchéefe tyed about their Armes with a white Crosse in their Hats, and the Pallace Bell ringing at the breake of the day, should giue the Signall: they beganne by knocking at the Admirals Gate, who was a Protestant, they stabbed him that came to open the Gate, then they entred the Admirals Chamber: one thrust him through the body, and striketh him on the head; another shot him thorough with a Pistoll, another wounded him in the legs, and euery one of them giue him a blow: then the Duke of Guise commanded them to cast him to him out of the Widdow, then the Duke spurned him with his foote, and going into the stréete, said; Courage Companions, we haue begunne happily, let vs procéede to the rest, the King commaunds it. One carried the Admiralls head vnto the King, and Queen his Mother, who sent it imbalmed vnto the Pope, and the Cardinall of Lorraine: for assurance of the death of their Capitall enemy, one cut off his head, another his priuy members, and three daies they dragged his carkase with all indignity thorough the streetes, then they hanged it vppe by the feete. They murdered all his Seruants and Gentlemen in his quarter, with like fury they murdred all the other Protestants throughout the Citty and Subburbs, of all ages, conditions, and Sexes, Men, Women, and Children, rich and poore. There was heard in Paris a lamentable cry of people going vnto death, a pitti∣full complaint of such as cryed for mercy: the streete were strewed with carkases, the pauements, market place, and riuer, was died with blood: they destroyed that day aboue ten thousand of innocent Protestants. Henry the Third. HENRIE the third King of France,The History of France▪ of the house of Valois, a milde and trac∣table Prince: courteous, wittie, eloquent, and graue, but of easie accesse; deuout,Iohn Serres, & Edw: Gimston. Anno 1588. louing, learning, aduancing good wits, a bountifull rewarder of men of merit, a friend to peace, and a Prince who deserued to be placed amongst the wor∣thiest of that Monarchy: was trayterously murdered by a deuillish Monke on this manner. When as the Suisses and Lansquenets of Sansie, and Pontoise were by force reduced to the Kings obedience: The Duke of Longuevill gathered an Army of twenty thousand men and ioyned with them. Whereupon the Kings forces being about fortie thousand men, lodged about Paris, and tooke Saint Cloud, and made the Parisians ready to yeelde; Whereat the Popish Monkes and Priests of that Citty were so much displeased, that they vowed reuenge thereof. And one Iames Clement, a Monke, an excrament of hell, a Iacobine by profession, of the age of twenty two or twenty thrée years old, vowes to kill the Tyrant, and to deliuer the Citty besiedged. This damnable proiect he imparts to Doctour Bourging, Prior of his Co∣uent, to Father Commolet, and other Iesuits, and to the heads of the League, to the cheefe of the sixeteene, and to the forty Councellors at Paris. All encourage him to doe this happy designe: they promise him Abbaies and Byshopprickes, and if hee chance to be made a Martyr, no lesse then a place in heauen aboue the Apo∣stles.
They caused the Preachers to perswade the people to patience seauen or eight daies, for before the end of the weeke they should see a notable accident, which should set all the people at libertie. The Priests of Orleance, Rouan and Amiens, clatter out the like at the same time, and in the same termes. The first of August the Monke goes out of Paris towards Saint Cloud: vp∣on his departure, they take aboue two hundred of the cheefe Cittizens and others Prisoners, whom they knew to haue goods, friends, and credite with the Kinges partie, as a precaution to redeeme that cursed murderer, in case he were taken be∣fore or after the deed. In his way hee was taken by the Regiment of Coublan, which was then in gard, telling them that hee went then vnto his Maiestie, to let him vnderstand something which concerned his seruice. Coublan caused him to be conducted by two Souldionrs vnto the Kinges quarter, which was at Saint Cloud, commaunding him that (if happely the King were not there) they should bing him to some one of the Counsell: Whom the Monke giues to vnderstand, that the first President, and other of the Kinges Seruants had sent him, to ad∣uertise him, that there is a good number of Partisans at Paris, who if it please his Maiestie to giue them a day and houre, will keepe him a Port open. And to purchase the more credit vnto his wordes, he shewes a certaine Paper writ∣ten in Italian Characters, the which hee said was a Letter of credit from the first President, accompanied with a Pasport from the Garle of Brienne, sign∣ed Charles Leuxemburge; and faines that he had obtained it to goe out of Paris vndr colour of going to Orleance, and that he had many priuate instructions which he might not deliuer but to his Maiesty alone. The King beeing aduertised by La Guesle, the Proctour Generall, com∣maunds he should bee brought the next day, but hee is examined first by Por∣taile. The next day, being come to the Kings lodging, they were called by Du Io∣tall, the first Grome of his Chamber. At the first La Guese caused the Iaco∣bin to stay neere the doore, and taking his Papers, hee presents them vnto his Maiestie, who hauing read them, commaunds the Iacobin should approach, whom he asked what hee would say, to whom hee answered; That it was a se∣cret thing. Some distrust made La Guesle to speake, beeing betwixt the King and him. Speake aloud (said hee, twice or thrice) there is not any one héere but the King trusts. His Maiestie seeing him make diffcultie to speake, commands him againe to approach. The Baron of Bellegard, Maister of the Kinges Horse, and La Guesle (who were alone in the Chamber) retired two or three paces. The King bends his eare, but instead of hearing what hee expected, this wretch drawes a Knife out of his sleeue, made of purpose, thrusts his Maiestie into the bottome of the bellie, and there leaues the Knife in the wound. The King drawes it forth, and with some striuing and strugling of the Monke, strikes him aboue the eye: many ranne in at this noyse, and in the heat of choller, killing this vile and cru∣ell Monster of men, preuented the true discouery and finding out of this enterprise, and the authors and actors thereof, worthy to be noted with a perpetuall blot of dis∣loyalty and treason. The Phisitions held that the wound was curable: and the same day the King did write of this attempt, and of his hope of recouery, to the Gouernours of Prouinces, to forraigne Princes, and to his Friends and confederats. But fee∣ling that the King of Kings had otherwise determined of his life, he did first comfort himselfe in foreséeing, that the last houres of his crosses, should bee the first of his felicities. Then lamenting his good and faithfull Seruants, who suruiuing should finde no respect with those, whose mindes had beene so abandoned to mischiefe, as neither the feare of God, nor the dignity of his person could disswade them from this horrible sacriledge.
One thing (said he) doth comfort me, that I read in your faces, with the gréefe of your hearts, and the sorrow of your soules, a godly and commendable resoluti∣on, to contiue vnited, for the preseruation of that which remaines whole of my estate, and the reuenge which you owe vnto the memory of him, who hath loued you so déerely. I séeke not the last curiously, leauing the punishment of mine ene∣mies vnto God. I haue learned in this schoole to forgiue them, as I doe with all my heart. But as I am cheefely bound to procure peace and rest vnto this realm, I coniure you all by that inuiolable Faith which you owe vnto your Country, that you continue firme and constant defenders of the Common liberty, and that you neuer lay downe Armes, vntill you haue purged the Realme of the troubles of the publike quiet. Thus and other such things hee spake, as the last pangs of death carried him within few houres vnto another world. By his death he extinguished the second parcel of the third Race of Capets, in the branch of Valois, leauing the Crown to the third Royall branch of Burbons: wher∣vnto the order of the Fundamentall Law did lawfully call him. And thus you may see the damnable proiects and dissignes of these Iesuiticall Popish Spirits, a∣gainst the Lord and his annointed. The death of Henry the fourth. HENRY the fourth King of France,Iohn de Serres in the French History. of the Royall Race of the Burbons, who for his famous rescues and victories, and martiall exploits, had purchased vnto himself amongst his owne Subiects, the sur-name of Great, whose life and actions,Ed: Grimston. An: Christi. 1589. future ages may reade with admiration, was likewise trayterously mur∣dered by the disloyall and vngodly practises of the Papists. A Parliament being holden at Paris, haning disanulled the Buls of Cardinall Caietans Legation, and other Bulls come from Rome the first of March, together with their procéedings, excommunications, and fulminations, made by Marcellin Landriano, tearming himselfe the Popes Nuntio: The said Bulls, and all their procéedings an edicts being burnt in the Market place, which contained a pardon of that most cruell paracide on Henry the third lately murthered: the King was first therefore excommunicated by Pope Gregory the 4. of that name. Afterward the Iesuits vnderstanding that the King did purpose something against them, for the cruell murder committed on the person of the late King, and for other their ex∣orbitant and deuillish practises daily intended and contriued, the Deuill stirres vp another of his deerely beloued Sonnes to murder his Maiestie on this manner fol∣lowing. On Friday, the day after the Quéenes Coronation, the King being aduertised of some omninous prediction, he went into his Chamber and fell on his knees and prayed: and thus he did thrée times, in the end he went and walked in the Gallery vntill dinner time. After dinner many Noble-men came into his Chamber, and began to tell some tales to put him out of his melancholly humor, and to make him laugh: hauing miled a little with the rest (being by nature of a pleasant dispositi∣on) in the end he said: We haue laughed enough for Fryday, we may well weep on Sunday. Héereupon he sent to the Arcenall at foure of the clocke; whereupon, they say that the Duke of Uendosme told him that he had beene warned to beware of the foureteenth day; yet making no account thereof, hee went downe into the Court, whereas a man of a meane condition detained him a quarter of an houre, then hee went into his Caroch, by the Duke of Espernon (who sat in the first place of the Boote, vppon the Kinges right hand) Montbazon, the Marshall Lauardin, La Force, and Praulin, being followed by two Foote-men, and one of his Guard on horsebacke, hauing commaunded Mounsier de Vitry, and the rest of his Guard to stay behinde.
Being betwixt the draw-bridge and the poole, this miserable wretch, who watched his opportunity, drew néere vnto the Caroch on the right side, thinking his Maiesty had béene there; but seeing he was on the left hand, and hearing them commaund the Coachman to go on, he went the néerest way by the narrow lanes, and met with his Maiesty in the stréet called Ferroneire, neere vnto S. Innocents Church, wher staying to make way for a Cart to passe, the King leaned downe on the one side to∣wards Mounsier Esperon, pressing him to reade a letter without spectacles. The Duke of Montbazon turned towards them, and one of the footmen was busie tying vp his garter on the other side: so as this monster had opportunity to stab the King into the left pa, but the wound was not great, whereupon crying out: O my God I am wounded, he gaue him manes to giue him a second blow which was mortal, the knife entring betweene the fift and sixt rib, it cut asunder the veine leading vnto the hart, and the wound was so déepe, as it entred into caua vena, the which was piercd, wherewith the King did presently spit blood, losing all apprehension and knowledge, for any thing they could perceiue. They had great diffculty to saue the murderer from killing presently, yet in the end hee was conuaied to the house of Retz. The King was carried backe vnto the Louure, vpon the way they met with the Dolphin, who went to take the ayre, but they caused him to returne, and be cari∣ed into the Quéenes Chamber. The King was laid vppon a Couch in his Cabinet, whereas presently after he gaue vp the Ghoast. In that these Papisticall and trayterous attempts, tooke effect vnto the murthe∣ring of these two French Kings, when the Lord of his infinite goodnesse still pre∣serued Quéene Elizabeth, and our now dread Soueraigne King Iames from so ma∣ny, and from more dangerous practises: It may certainly be concluded, that if they had no worse feared the Papists then they did, and put their trust in God as wel as they, and had according to their example purely purged their Realmes from Papi∣stry, the sure prouidence of God would haue beene as sure their Castle, strong hold, and defence, as it was to them and their Realmes at all times, and in all occasions and needs. NOw by the especiall Grace of God, and the assistance of his blessed Spirit, I haue sayled vnto my expected Port, al laud and praise, and thanks therefore be giuen, vnto the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost: And I most hartily beseech him, that this Booke may beget in the Readers a true dislike of all ceremonies, supersti∣tions, and false Doctrines of Papistry, and to make them truely zealous of Gods word and commandements. O Lord conuert all Papists that belong vnto thee, and hasten according to thy promises to gather all Kings together to destroy the Pope∣dome: in the meane time, grant all Kings, Princes, and others Grace, to beware of him, that he corrupt not the soules of them nor their subieces, nor hurt their per∣sons or estates. And lastly, I beséech thee to gather together the number of thine elect, and ha∣sten thy comming to iudgement, that thou mast take thy beloued Spouse from the miseries of this World, vnto thy eternall glory prepared for her: com Lord Iesus come quickly. FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table, containing the principall mat∣ters, and all the Martyrs that suffered for the truth, from the Primitiue Church to the end of Queene Mary. A AGrippa cast into prison by Tyberius. page 2 Andrew, Peters Brother crucified. 3 Anthia martyred. 5 Ant. Pius Edict in fauour of the Christians. Ibid Attalus burned on an Iron chaire. 6 Aurelius fauours the Christians. 9 Affaires of the Church of England and Scot∣land, beginning with King Lucius. 19 Austin with aboue forty Preachers, sent into England. 22 He goes in procession to Canterbury. Ibid. Consecrated Arch-bishoppe in France, by the commandement of Gregory. 23 He assembled the Bishoppes, charging them to preach the word of God. Ibid Hee baptiseth 10000. in the Riuer Swale on Christmas day. 24 His death. Ibid. Abbaies erected. 29 Alfride opprest by the Danes: his misery: hee makes Dunwolphus a Swineheard, Bi. of Win∣chester: he is comforted by Gods prouidence, and ouercomes the Danes, causing them to be christned. 33 Adelstane crowned King at Kingstone, forceth the Brittaines to pay him tribute: sends his Brother to Sea in an old Boate, builds Mona∣steries for the release of his sins. 35 Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, accuseth Henry the first King of England, to the Pope: he is turned out of his Bishopricke and goods. 50 Anacletus Pope. 51 Arnulphus a Priest put to death, for preaching against the Auarice and incontinency of the Cleargy. 51 Adrian the fourth an Englishman, Pope. 52 Choakt with a fly. 54 Auarice of the Popish Prelats. 80 Amadeus Duke of Sauoy, chosen Pope. 138 Abraham of Colchester burned for maintaining the truth. 142 Alexander the sixt poysons the Turkes brother for 2000. Florins. 151 Abiurations in Henry the eight his time, refer∣red to the Booke at large. 126 Adulphus Clarbachus burned, for maintaining the truth at Colen. 170 Articles against Cardinall Wolsey. 171 Andrew Hewit a Prentise burned, for maintai∣ning Frths opinions. 183 Anne of Bullen, her charitable & good works. 184 Articles agreed vpon in Parliament. 196 Abell hanged for the supremacy. 200 Anthony Pierson burned at Windsor. 201 Adam Damlip, his persecution and martirdome at Callis. 205 Anne Askew, her confession, condemnation, persecution and martyrdome. 207. 208. Adam Wallace martired in Scotland, for hold∣ing the masse to be Idolatry. 215 Altars in Churches puld downe. 226 Anne Potten burned the next after Samuel, for professing the truth. 290 Anthony Burward of Callice, for saying the Sa∣crament of the Altar was an Idoll, burned at Canterbury. 291 Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, his crueltie to M. Philpot and his man. 311 Agnis South, about the Sacrament of Penance, condemned and burned. 314
Anne Albright for denying the realty in the Sa∣crament, condemned and burned. Ibid. Agnes Potten burned at Ipswich, 320 Adam Foster Husbandman, Martyr. 326 Askin a constant Martyr. 327 Alice Potkins starued to death. 329 Agnes Stamley burned. 331 Alexander Horsman Martyr. 332 Ambrose died in Maidstone Goale. 339 Agnes Siluerside, alias Smith, condemned. 340 Agnes Banger martyred. 348 Anne Try Martyr. 349 Alexander Lane Martyr. 362 Alexander Gouch martyred. Ibid Alice Driuers a constant Martyr. Ibid. Alice Snoth burned at Canterbury. 365. B BArtholmew crucified and beheaded. 3 Bzaes Register of Martyrs vnder Decius. 11 Boniface the forerunner of Antichrist. 24 Beda Priest wrote 37. vollums. 27 Boniface an Englishman, Archbishop of Mentz and Martir. Ibid. Bohemians suppresse Idolatrous Temples. 127 Basill besiedged by the Dolphi of France. 145 Barnes a Fryer beares Fagots, for eating flesh on a Fryday. 166 Bilney a great Preacher of the truth, his articles, abiuration, and martyrdome afterwards. 177 Bayfield a Monke of Berry, a valiant Martyr, his cruell vsage and martyrdome. 179 Baynham a Lawyer whipt, rackt, and martyred for maintaining the truth. 181 Bartrucke a Scottish Knight, confutes certaine Articles of the Papists, for which he is con∣demned, and his picture burried. 193. 194. 195. Byble at large set vp in euery Church. 200 Bonners examination, his pride before the Com∣missioners. 225 His vnreuerent and forward words: his imprison∣ment and depriuation. 226 Bner compares Priests to the virgin Mary. 240 Bradfords declaration of the manner of disputa∣on he meant to hold. 244 Beckets Image twice set vp at Mercers Chappell and throwne downe. 256 Bishoppe of Chester, who condemned George Marsh, burned with a harlot, dies therof. 268 Barlow for bearing witnesse of the truth, sent to the Fleet. 269 Berd the Promoter, his cruelty to Iames Treui∣sam, and other Professors. 281 Bartlet Greene Gent. in trouble, for writing the Queene is not yet dead, meaning Queene Mary, and afterwards for denying the Sacra∣ment of the Altar, condemned & burnt. 313 Blind Boy martyred at Glocester, 323 Bloudy Commission granted by King Philip and Queene Mary, to prosecute the poore mem∣bers of Christ: whereupon 22. are brought before Bonner out of Essex. 330 Barbara Final burned at Canterbury. 332 Bradbregs widow burned at Canterbury Ibid Bends wife burned at Canterbury. Ibid Berry a Priest and Commissary, a Persecutor of the faithfull, his suddaine and fearefull end. 356 Bate a Barber, a persecutor of the faithfull, his suddaine death. 362 C CAligula Caesar. 2 Commodus Son to Verus, Emperor. 7 Contention between the East & West Church, for the obseruation of Easter day. Ibid Constantine the Emperor borne in Brittaine. 18 His prayers to his Souldiers. Ibid. His immunity to the ministry, his prouision for liberall sciences. 19 Constantine with the helpe of three legions of Souldiours out of Brittany, obtains the peace of the vniuersall Church. 20 Councell at Sternhalt for the obseruation of Easter. 25 Councell of Constance. 26 Carolus Magnus proclaimed Emperor. 25 Cambridge erected by Sigisbert. 29 Chester built. 33 Cloud halfe blood, halfe fire, seene in England. 39 Canutus succeeds Siranus, and erects the mo∣nastery of S. Edmonsbury. 40 Councell at Vercellis. 43 Councell at Mentz vnder Pope Leo 9. Ibid. Councell at Latteran. Ibid. Councell at Mantua against Priests marriages. Ibid. Controuersie betweene Canterbury and Yorke for the Primacy. 45 Calixtus the second Pope. 50 Complaints of sundry abuses in the Church. 51 Contention betweene the Bishop of Yorke and Canterbury. 68 Conclusions put vp to the Parliament. 93 Councell of Constance for pacifying a schisme betwixt 3. Popes, in which Iohn the Pope was
deposed, & proued to be an hereticke, a mur∣therer, a Sodomite, and many others: in the 8. Session Iohn Wickliff and his forty Articles were condemned. 112 Councell of Basill send Ambassadors to the Bo∣hemians, with their answers. 130 Councell of Basil begun. 137 Contention between two Popes. 145 Constantinople taken. 146 Clement the seuenth Pope, his wicked life and death. 162 Collins for holding vp a little Dogge when the Priest was at Masse, burned, and the Dogge with him. 190 Cowbridge after he was almost starued, marty∣red at Oxford. 191 Cardinall Poole attainted of high treason, flyes to Rome. 200 Commotions in Oxfordshire, Yorkshire, Nor∣folke, and Suffolke. 222 Commotions in Oxford and Buckingham, ap∣peased by the Lord Grey. 224 Commotion in the North. ibid. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury offers to defend the book of common-prayer. 235 Communication between Doctor Ridley and Secretary Bourne in the ower. 240 Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury sent to Oxford to dispute. 242 Cat apparelled like a Priest, hanged at the Crosse in Cheapside. 244 Cardinal Pools Oration in the Parlament-house 246 Christianus king of Denmark his Letters to Q. Mary for Miles Curdale. 256 Causon of Thunderst in Essex for maintayning the truth, burned at Kayley. 262 Christopher Wade burned at Dartford for deny∣ing the reall presence in the Sacrament. 281 Cornelius Burgie burned. 295 Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury his paren∣tage and education hee is sent Ambassador to the Emperour, he is sent Ambassadour to the Pope, he seekes to banish Popish errors, and to reforme the Church, he is charged with heresie for denying the Popes power, he is condemned and disgraded by Bonner, Bonners Oration in disgrace of him he is al∣lured to recant by fair promises and entreaty, his martyrdome, from fol. 315. to 32▪ Christopher Lier burned. 322 Cisley Ormes burned. 343 Cuthbert Simpson Martyr. 354 Christian George burned. 357 Christopher Browne burned at Canterbury. 365 D. DEscription of the Primitiue and later times of the Church. 1 Domitius Caesar. 2 Dcius tyrannie against Christians. 11 Danes enter England, and burn the Ile of Shep∣pey in Kent. 30 Danes take Yorke. 32 Dunston Abbot of Glastenbury banished by E wine. 36 Danes arriue and do much spoile. 39 Danes suddenly slaine vpon S. Brices day. 40 Danes begin to be Christians. 41 Diuers Popes at one time. 52 Dominicans or black Fryers order instituted. 78 Diuorce of K. Henry the eighth, and Q. Katha∣rine. 174 Duke of Norfolk committed. 201 Destruction of Merindall, & Cabriers in Fr. 202 od, alias Scot burnt at Callice. 206 Daid Beaton Archb. and Cardinal in Scotland his miserable end, and buriall in a dunghill. 215 Duke of Sommerset▪ protector his history, pro∣clamation against him, sent to the Tower, discharged againe, committed to the Tower again, arraigned at Westminst. and condem∣ned, beheaded at Tower-hill, 230, 231, 232 Duke of Northumberland beheaded. 235 Dagger throwne at the Preacher at Paules crosse. ibid. Disputations in the Conuocation house about the Sacrament. 256 Duke of Suffolk brought to the Tower. ib. Duke of Suffolke beheaded at the Tower-hill. 239 Derick Caruer condemned. 281 Dunstone Chittenden famished in the Castle of Canterbury. 329 Denis Burges Martyred at Lewis. 332 Denis Brigs martyred. 349 Dunning the cruell Chancellors sudden death. 356 E. EVstachius a Captain, with his wife & family martyred. 4 England troubled only with the tenth persecu∣tion. 16 Ethelbert King of Kent. 21 Edwine conuerted by Paulinus, and christened at Yorke. 25 Ethelwood conuerts the people of South-sax. 26
Empire translated from the Grecians to the Frenchmen. 28 Egbert sole King. 30 Ethelwolph Bishop of Winchester, succeedes K. by the Popes dispensation, his superstition. ibib. Edw. the elder subdues Wales and Scotland, and is alwaies victorious. 35 Edmund expels the Danes, and is slaine at Glas∣senbury. 36 Edwine crowned at Kingstone. ibid. Edward succeds Edgar, and is murthered. 39 Egelred King. ibid. Elphegus Bishop of Canterbury, put to▪ death at Grenwich. 40 Eldred driues out Canutus. ibid. Edmund, sirnamed Ironside chosen King by the Citizens of London and Nobles. 41 Edricus kills Edmund. ibid. Edward the sonne of Emma chosen King, and crowned at Winchester. ibid Elinor Cobham banished into the Isle of Man. 147 Elizabeth Sampson conuented for speaking a∣gainst Pilgrimages. ibid. Elizabeth Burton called the holy-maid of Kent, a notable imposter put to death. 184 Edward the sixt King of England, restores the Scriptures in the mother tongue. 220 Edward the sixt dies, his praier at his death. 233 234 Elizabeth Warne Martyr. 285 Edward Sharpe like pure golde tried in the fire. 329 Edmund Allen and Katharine his wife martyrs. 332 Elizabeth a blinde maide Martyr. ibid. Elizabeth Hooper burned. 339 Ellen Euring denying the lawes set out by the Pope, condemned. 340 Elizabeth Falkes examined and condemned. ibid. F. FRedericke the Emperour ouerthrown by the Venetians, and taken. 54 Franciscans order begun. 78 Fredericke the second Emperour, persecuted by Popes. 83 Foure and twenty burned in Paris. 185 Fiue burned in Scotland. 186 Fetherston for denying the supremacie, hanged. 200 Frier burned at Rochestr. 343 G. GOdwin forswearing himselfe choked. 42 Gregory the eighth Pope. 50 Grosthead Bishop of Lincolne. 84 George Carpenter burned. 167 George Constantine apprehended for heresie. 171 Gefferey Lon for dispersing of Luthers bookes forced to abiu. 178 Giles Germae burned at S. Giles in the fields. 192 George Blage Knight imprisoned, and condem∣ned for speaking against the Masse, but par∣doned. 209 George Wisard of Scotland, his persecution and martyrdome. 214 Gardner Bishop of Winchester sent to the To∣wer. 220 Gernsey and Gersey inuaded by the French. 225 Gardner an Englishman cruelly tormented at Lisbon in Portugall for maintayning of the truth. 228 Gibbets set vp for Wiats souldiers. 244 Gardner Bishop of Winchester his Sermon at Paules crosse. 247 Gardner calls the Preacher before him at Saint Mary-Oueries. 249 Gods iudgement vpon the Parson of Arundell. 264 George Marsh cruelly vsed and burned. 267 George Tankerfield of London Cook, condem∣ned. 285 George King died in prison. ibid. George Catmer burned. 290 George Broadbridge burned at Canterburie. 291 Gardner Bishop of Winchester, his historie and death. 303 George Soper burned at Canterburie. 304 George Parke burned at Canterbury. ibid. George Ambrose Fuller, burned in Smithfield. 327 George Stephens martyred. 332 George Eagles, alias Trudgeouer, hanged, drawn and quartered, betweene two Theeues. 342 George Eagles sister burned. 343 H. HIeraclius cuts off the Popes hands & feet. 24
Harold last King of the Saxons. 42 Hildebrana Pope, a Sorcerer. 45 Honorious the second Pope. 51 He is taken with whores. ibid. Henry the first king of England dies. ibid. Henry the second his pennance, for the death of Becket. 67 He diuides the Realme into sixe parts, and or∣daines Iustices of Assizes. 68 His great fame and large Dominions. ibid. Henry the Sonne of Henry the second, his disobe∣dience and death. 69 Hildegris is a Prophesse. 79 Henry the third King of England. 81 Henry the fift crowned. 104 Hugh Pie of Ludney, for holding sundry opini∣ons contrary to the Church of Rome, accu∣sed and purged before the Bishoppe of Nor∣witch. 141 Henry the fifts cruell commition for ataching sundry suspected of Lolardy. ibid. Harman Peterson committed to the Counter for not being confessed in Lent. 161 Henry Voz burned at uxels, for maintaining Luthers opinions. 161 Henry Sudphen of Breame, his piety, persecution and martyrdome. 163. 164. Henry the 8. entitled defender of the faith. 170 His solemnity at the receiuing of the title of de∣fender of the faith. ibid. Henry Finmore Taylor, burnt at Winsor. 201 Haruy a Commissary, a persecutor, hanged, drawne and quartered. 206 Homes a Yeoman of the Guard, his cruelie to Doctor Taylor. 261 Higbed of Horden, burnt at Horden. 262 Humphry Middleton martired at Canterbury. 280 Henry Laurence burnt at Canterbury. 284 Hugh Latimer Bishoppe of Worcester, his confe∣rence with Antonian: his parentage, his godly Sermuns, his charity to the poore and needy, accused of heresie, his subscription to certaine Articles propounded vnto him, he is committed to the Tower: his prayer for the Lady Elizabeth: his martyrdome at Oxford, with Bishoppe Ridley: from folio 293. to 303. Hugh Lame Rock an old lame man, burned at stratford the Bow. 322 Hooke burned at Chester. 329 Hugh Fox burned in Smithfield. 354 Henry Pond burned in Smithfield. 362 I IErusalem destroyed by Tytus & Vespasian. 2 Iohn banished to bathmos. 3 Iudas Thadeus slaine. ibid. Iraeneus with many others martired. 8 Ignatius martyr. 4 Iue King of West Saxons goes to Rome. 26 Innocentius the second Pope. 51 Iohn King of England. 71 Iohn Claydon a Currier burnt in Smithfield. 104 Iohn Hus his History: his Articles put to him: his answer, his constant end, 113. 114. 115. Ierome of Prag his hard vsage and marryr∣dome. 125. 126. Iohn Wadden Priest burned. 142 Iohn Wendham of Alborough cruelly handled for maintayning the truth. ibid. Iohn Beuerley whipped for the truth. ibid. Ihn Stelley of Flixton forced to abiure. 143 Iohn Burrell forced to abiure. ibid. Iohn Finch forced to doe penance. ibid. Iubilee at Rome. 145. 146. Iulius the second Pope exceedes all his predece∣sors in iniquity. 151 Iohn Coyns for contemning the Sacrament of the Altar, and not receuing at Easter; died at Saint Martins. 160 Iames Gossen Dutchman, committed for not re∣ceiuing at Easter. 161 Iohn Wicock a Scotish Frier committed for prea∣ching against, holy water and purgatory, ibid. Iohn Esry burned. ibid. Iohn Athelane burned. 165 Iohn Thewxbury burned in Smithfield. 179 Iohn Randall found in his study, hanged in his girdle. 180 Iohn Frith Martyred. 18 Iohn Lambert martyred. 187. 188▪ Iohn Painter burned. 192 Iniunctions set out in the 38. yeare of King Henry the eight. ibd. Iohn Porter a taylor famished to death. 200 Idolatry suppessed. . Iames Morten burned. ibid. Iohn Marbeck condemned and pardoned by the King. 211 Iohn Athee indited for speaking against the Sa∣crament. ibid. Iohn Adams burnt. 209 Iohn Lacels a Gentleman, burnt, ibid. Iohn Browne burnt. 219. Iohn Hun troubled about the Sacrament. 221 Ioh. Alasco vncle to the k. of Poland banisht. 239 Iests of a Roode at Cockram in Lancashire 248 Iames George dies in prison, and is buried in the fields. 249 Iohn Rogers, first Martyre in Q. Maries daies. 249. 250
Ihon Hooper his martyrdome. 254. Ihon Laurence burned at Colchester. 264. Iudge Hales his History and death. 265. Iulius the third Pope, his wicked life and pro∣phanenesse. 266. Ihon Awcoke died in prison. Ibid. Iohannes de casa a Deane of the Popes chamber, playes the Sodomite and defends it. Ibid. Iohn Cardmaker his martyrdome. 268. Iohn Warne burned. Ibid. Iohn Hardley his martyrdome. 274. Iohn Simpson suffered at Rochford for maintay∣ning the truth. Ibid. Iohn Bradford, his reasons against transubstanti∣ation, and his martyrdome. 275, to 278. Iohn Lease a prentice, burned with Maister Brad∣ford. 278 Iohn Bland martyred. 279. Iohn Franbesh martyred. 280. Iames Treuisam persecuted, and after his death buried in More fields. 281 Iohn Lanuder of Godstone, martired for the truth. 282. Iohn Aleworth dyed in prison. 283. Iames Abbs burned at Bury. Ibid. Iohn Denley martired. Ibid. Iohn Newman burned. 284. Iohn Wade dyed in prison and was buried in the fields. 285. Iohn Leishord Martyr. Ibid. Iohn Trunchfield Martyr- 290. Iames Tutty of Breachley burned. 291. Iohn Gorway martyred at Lichfield. Ibid. Iohn Glover persecuted. 292. Iohn Webbe burned at Canterbury. 304 Iames Gore died in prison at Colchester. Ibid Iohn Philpot accused of herisie after twice ex∣amination comitted to Bonners cole house, his third examination before Bonner: his fourth examination before the Bishoppes: his ninth examination: he is condemned and brought to Newgate, his patient and constant end: from folio 304▪ to folio 312. Iohn Tucson burned in Smithfield. 312 Isabell Foster burned in Smithfield▪ Ibid. Iohn Warne burned in Smithfield Ibid. Iohn Warne of Tenterden in Kent, about the Sacrament of the Altar, condemned. 314. Ioane Sole of Harton about the Sacrament of the Altar and auriculer confession, condemned. 315 Ioane Cotmer burnt at Canterbury. Ibid. Iohn Cauel burned in Smithfield. 321. Iohn Huillier Minister, burnt at Cambridge. 321, Iohn Mace burned at Colchester. 322 Iohn Spencer burned at Colchester. Ibid. Iohn Hammon burned at Colchester Ibid. Iohn Ap Rice a blind man, burned at Stratford the Bow. Ibid. Ioane Hornes martyred. 323. Iohn Hartpoole burned at Rochester. Ibid. Ioane Bache widdow, burned at Rochester. Ibid. Iohn Osward martyred at Lewis. 324. Iohn Clement Wheelewright persecuted Ibid. Iohn Colstocke of Wellington, for denying the reall presence forced to recant. 326. Iohn Norres dies in the Kings Bench, and buried on the backside. Ibid. Iohn Carelesse of Couentry, after long imprison∣ment, and many examinations, dies in the Kings bench. 327. Iohn Guyn a constant Martyr. ibid Iulines Palmer a godly Preacher in K. Edwards dayes, martyred. ibid. Iohn Forman martired. 328 Ioane West burned. Ibid. Iohn Hart martyred 329 Iohn Clarke pined to death in the Castle in Can∣terbuy. Ibid. Iohn Archer of Cranbrooke weauer, pined to death at Canterbury ibid. Iohn Philpot of Tenterden Martyr. 330 Iohn Bradbridge of Staplehurst Martir. 332 Ioane Mannings of Maidstone in Kent, Martyr, Ibid. Iohn Fishcocke burnt at Canterbury. Ibid. Iames Morris martyred at Lewis. Ibid. Iohn Iohnson about the Sacrament condemned. 340. Iohn Thurston a constant confessor of Iesus Christ dyed in Colchester Castle 341. Iohn Cures Shoomaker of Sisam in Northamp∣tonshie, burned. 343. Iames Astoo burned at Islington 345. Iohn Ioyes of Lezfield in Suffolke martired. 349 Iohn Forman Martyr. Ibid. Iohn Weauer Martyr. Ibid. Iohn Milles Martyr. Ibid Iohn Hart Martyr Ibid. Iohn Osward Martyr. Ibid. Iohn Ashdon Martyr. Ibid. Iohn Hallingsdale burned in Smithfield. 351. Iohn Rowth Minister, for affirming the Pope to bee very Antichrist, after many persecutions for the truth burned. Ibid. Iohn Deuenish burned in Smithfield. 354. Ioane Seaman persecuted for the truth of the Gospell. 356
Iohn Floyd Martyr. 357 Iohn Holyday Martyr. ibid Iohn Slade burned at Brainford. 359 Iohn Vale died in prison, and buried in a dung∣hill. 360 Iohn Alcocke cast into a dungeon, dies, and is buried in a dunghill. 361 Iohn Cook Sawier burned at S. Edmunds Burie. 362 Iames Asley Martyr. ibid. Iohn Dauid burned at Bury. 362 Iohn Sharpe burned at Bristow. 365 Iohn Cornford burned at Canterbury. ibid. Iohn Herst burned at Canterbury. ibid. Iohn Baker burned at Siuill in Spaine. 366 K. KNights of Rhodes instituted. 51 Katharine Par, Henry the eighth his last wife, her troubles for the Gospell. 209 Kathaerine Knoches and her two daughters mar∣tyred for the truth. 228 Katharine Hut widdow Martyr. 323 Katharine Knight, alias Tinley, burned at Can∣terbury. 365 L. LVcan put to death. 2 Lawrence broiled. 12 Licinius ioyned with Constantine, calls learning the vice of Princes, hangs Theodorus on a crosse. 16 Lucius his letters to Elutherius Bishop of Rome. 20 London burnt. 39 Lurdanes why so called. 40 Letters between the Emperour and the Pope. 53 Lewes the French Kings sonne comes into Eng∣land, and takes himselfe to be King. 77 Lodouicus King of Hungary drowned in a bog. 167 Leyton for affirming both kindes in the Sacra∣ment burned at Norwich. 191 Lancelot one of the guard burned. 192 Lady Iane beheaded. 236 Latimer Bishop of Worcester sent to dispute at Oxford. 242 Lawrence Sanders Parson of Al-hallowes in Breadstreet his examination & Martyrdome. 252 M. MArke the Euangelist burned. 3 Matthias stoned. ibid. Mahomets beginning and lawes. 26 Monasteries erected. 29 Martin crowned Pope: the Emperor on foote, leading a horse on the right hand, and the Marquesse of Brandenburg on the left hand. 112 Margery Bacster for disswading the people frō Idolatry and superstition sore troubled. 143 Martin Luther a stout champion of the church against the Pope; his History. 154 Matthew Ward about the Sacrament commit∣ted to the Counter. 161. Myracle of a Iew Christned in Constantinople 160 Mekins a boy burned in Smithfield. 200 Mustle borow field, where thirteen or fourteene thousand Scots were slaine. 224 Mary Queene of England. 234 Morgan a Iudge troubled in conscience for sentencing the Lady Iane, fals mad and dies. 239 Marsh accused to haue taken the Pixe and cru∣cifixe out of the Sepulcher, he and his Wife committed to the Counter. 243 Margery Polley widdow, burned at Tunbrigde. 281 Michael Trunchfields wife burned in Ipswich about the Sacrament. 320 Mantrell burned at Salisbury. Ibid. Margaret Ellis condemned to bee burned, but died in Newgate. 322 Martin Hunt imprisoned in the Kings Bench for the truth dies, and is buried in the backe∣side. 326 Mother Tree martyred. 328 Mathew Bradbridge of Tenderden, martyred. 330 Margaret Hide burned in Smithfield. 331 Margery Awstoo burned at Islington. 345 Margaret Thurstone martyred at Colchester. 348 Margery Mearing for affirming the Masse to be abhominable burned. 353 Mother Bennet an ancient woman, persecuted for the truth. 356 Mathe Rcrby Martyr. 357 Marke Burges burned at Lisbon in Portugall. 166. N. NEro Caesar. 2 Nunneries erected. 27 Normans aduanced in Church and Common∣wealth. 44
Nicholas Canon pennanced and thrise whipped. 144 Nine millions of gold leuied in Fraunce of the Prelats in fourteen yeare. 146 Nicholas South committed to Newgate for not being shriuen in Lent. 161 New Testament translated into English by Wil∣liam Tindall. 167 Nicholas Chamberlaine burned at Colchester. 274 Nichlas Ha burned at Rochester. 281 Nicholas Finall of Tenderden Martyr. 330 Nicholas White burned at Canterbury. 332 Nicholas Padue burned at Canterb. ibid. Nicholas Holden Martyr. 349 Nicholas Burton Merchant of London, cruelly persecuted and burned at Cadix in Andalou∣sia. 366 O. OSwald by praier vnto God ouercoms Cad∣wallo. 25 Ostright rauisheth the wife of Brwer a Noble∣man, in reuenge wherof he cals in the Danes 32 Otho the Emperour puts out Pope Iohns eyes, and hangs Cressentius the Consull. 39 Old-Castle: Lord Cobam his historie. 131. the King secretly admonisheth him to submit himselfe to the holy Church: his answere thereto: the Archbishop sends his Sumer to him with a sittion: he is arrested and sent to the Tower. 133. his later examination and answere to the Archbishops questions, 135. 136. hee is led againe to the Tower, and e∣scapes into Wales: he is condemned of he∣resie and treason, and drawne to S. Giles in the fields, hanged by the middle & burned. 137 Ocolampadius testimony of diuers good men. 166 Oldman of Buckingham burned for eating Da∣con in Lent. 181 Ombler a rebell in the North refuseth the kings pardon, is afterward taken and executed at Yorke. 224 P. PIlt slew himselfe vnder Tiberius. 2 Parmenias put to death. 3 Persecution, the first by Domitius Nero. ibid. Persecution, the second by Domitian. ibid. Persecution, the third vnder Trayanus. 4 Phocas Bishop of Pontus cast in a hote Furnace. ibid. Persecution the fourth vnder Antonius Verus. 6 Polyarpus his constancie and death. ibid. Persecution the fift vnder Pertinax. 7 Parmachus with his wife and children put to death. 9 Persecution the sixt vnder Maximinus. ibid. Persecution the seuenth vnder Decius. ibid. Persecution the eighth. 12 Persecution the ninth vnder Aurelian. 13 Persecution the tenth vnder Dioclesian. 14 Pauls Church in London built by Ethelbert K. of Kent. 21 Phocas kils Mauritius the Emperor. 24 Popes work masteries against the Greek Empe¦rors. 27 Paschalis Pope dies. 50 Popes Pall instituted. 69 Pope by his policy leuies a great summe of mo∣ney in England. 83 Prophecies of the Popes persecutions. 91 Pope Martins death. 137 Pope Eugenius the fourth. 138 Paule Craws a Bohemian, for holding Wickliss opinions, deliuered to be burnt. 144 Printing, the ruine of the Pope and Antichrist, inuented in Germany. 145 Philip Norrice an Irishman, sore troubled for the truth. 147 Pope a Weauer in Eye martyred about the Sa∣crament. 148 Peake burned in Ipswich for giuing a Sacra∣ment cake to a Dog. ibid Pius the second Pope his prouerbes. 150 Paulus secundus Pope, a hater of learning & learned men. 151 Petrus Ruerrius in two years spent 200000. fl∣rins &, permitteth the Cardinals to play the Sodomits the three hote moneths. ibid. Prodigies and Prophecies, shewing the fall of Antichrist. 154 Petrus Flistedius burned at Collen. 170 Packington, a fauourer of Tindall, deceiues the Bishop of London. 171 Patrick Hamilton a Scottish man, of the bloud royall, burned for the truth. 175 Pauy a persecutor hanged himselfe. 182 Puttedue for taunting a Priest, condemned and burnt. 191 Peter a German burnt at Colchester, about the Lords Supper. Ibid. Powell hanged for denying the kings suprema∣ciy. 200
Persecution in Callice. 204 Persecution in Scotland. 218 Peter Martyr banished for religion out of Eng∣land. 239 Priest of Canterbury saies Masse one day, and the next preacheth against it. 243 Philip Prince of Spaine lands at Southhamp∣ton: maried at Winchester. 245 Priests doe penance at Paules Crosse. 246 Procession through London for their conuersi∣on to the Catholick Religion. 249 Patrick Packington martyred. 284 Persecution at Wenson in Suffolke: 323 Persecution at Mendlesam Sufflke. ibid. Persecution in Couentry and Lichfield. 329 Philip Humphreys burned at Berry. 362 Q QVeene Mary crowned Qarrels betweene the Spaniards & Eng∣lish, about two whoores. 248 Queeene Mary said to be with child. Ibid. R RAenna giuen to the Popes by Pipinus king of France. Richard Ceur de Lyons rebellion against his Father. 69 Richard the first King of England▪ 70 Richard the second deposed. 95 Richard Turmin a Baker burned in Smithfield. 104 Rebels ouerthrowne and executed. 223 Ridley made Bishop of London. 226 Redman his iudgement rouching certain points of Religion on his death-bed. 227 Ridley Bishop of London visits the Lady Mary, and offers to preach before her which shee refuseth. 233 His conference in the Tower with Secretarie Bourne. 240, 241 He is sent to Oxford to dispute. 242 His report of the vanity of the disputation at Oxford. ibid. Rose a Minister, with thirtie men and women taken at communion in Bow Church-yard. 248 Rowland Taylor Doctor▪ his disputtation with Gardner, his cruell vsage and constant Mar∣tyrdome. 255 Robert Farrar Bishop of  Dauids in Wales, for reusing to subscribe to certaine Popish articles, burned at Carnaruan. 260 Rawlins White burned in Cardiff. 261 Richard Hooke for the truth ended his life at Chichester. 284 Richard Collier burned at Canterbury. ibid. Richard Wright burned at Canterbury. ibd. Robert Smith his examination and conference with Boner, and martyrdome, 285. to 289. Robert Samuel a godly preacher burned. 290 Roger Coo burned at Yxford in Suffolk. 291 Robert Swater of Hith burned at Canterbury. ib. Robert Glouer Gentleman burned at Couentry 292 Robert Picot Painter, burned at Ely. 293 Ridley Bishop of London, his parentage: carri∣ed to Oxford like a traytor: his conference with Antonian: his protestation against the Popes authoritie: his prayer at his Martyr∣dom, from folio 292. to 303. Robert Spicer burned at Salisbury. 32 Robert Drakes burned in Smithfield. Richard Spurge Fuller, burned in Smithfield for denying the reall presence. Ibid. Richard Nicoll burned at Colchester. 322 Robert Bacon a persecutor, and an enemy to the truth. 323 Robert Lawson Linnen Weauer, Martyr. 326 Robert Bernard martyred for the truth at Aye. Ibid. Richard Woodman his martyrdome. 332 Ralphe Hardin, a persecuter of George Eagles, hanged. 342 Richard Crashfield, his examination and martyr∣dome. Ibid. Ralphe Alberton his examination before Bonner, and martyrdome at Islington. 345 Richard Roth burned at Islington. Ibid Richard Gibson burned in Smithfield. 351 Richard Day burned at Colchester. 357 Raynald Eastland Martyr. Ibid Robert Southam Martyr. Ibid Roger Holland Marchant taylor, his conference with Bonner: his prophesie of the ceasing of persecution and martyrdome. 357. 358. 359 Robert Miles burned at Brainford. 359 Richard Yeoman persecuted and martyred. 360 Robert Miles, alias Palmer, burned at S. Ed∣mundsbury. 362 S SEneca put to death. 2 Stephen martyred. 3 Simon burned. Ibid Simon Zelotes crucified. Ibid Simon the Brother of Iude saine. Ibid.
Sulpitius and Seruilia martyred. 4 Simproniss with her seuen sonnes martyred. 5 Seuerus the Emperor slaine at Yorke. 8 Sands of the Sea, as easie to bee numbered as the names of those that suffered vnder Deci∣us. 10 Six thousand, six hundred, and sixty Christian souldiers martyred vnder Mauritius. 14 Simon Zelotes spread the Gospell in Britaine. 19 Sinode at Aquisgrane. 31 Swanus spoile and cruelty. 40 His sudden death. ibid. Steuen Langhton Archbishop of Canterbury. 77 Saunorala a learned Monk of Florence burnt, and his ashes cast into the Riuer. 147 Sixtus the fourth Pope, builds Stewes of both kinds in Rome, reduceth the Iubilee from 50 to 25. years, institutes the feasts of our Lady, canonizeth Bonauenture & Francis for Saints. 151 Scholler of Abbeuill burned for taking the host from the Priest at masse. 162 Solimans Letter to the great master of Rhodes. ibid. Senate of Bearne assigne disputation, and pro∣pound their Articles. 168 Solian the Turkish Emperour, enters into Au∣stria with a great Army, and besiegeth Vien∣na. 171 Schisme in Holland about the Pater-nster. 216 Stories of certaine Friers of Orleance in France 218 Storie of certaine Monks of Sueuia. 219 Sanders declaration for disputation. 244 Steuen Knight his martyrdom, and his prayer at his death. 264 Steuen Harwood burned at Stratford for the truth. 289 Simon Ioyne burned at Colchester. 322 Shoemaker burned at Northampton. 329 Steuen Kemp of Norgate martyred. 330 Simon Miller condemned and burned. 339 Steuen Cotton burned at Brainford. 359 Steuen White burned at Brainford. ibid. T. TIberius Caesar willed Christ might be ado∣red as God. 2 Thomas slaine with a dart. 3 Thousands die for the faith. 4 Tribute called Dane-gilt paid. 40 Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury his history contayning the contention between him and Henry the second King of England, from Folio 59. to 65. he is slain by 4. souldiers in the Church at Canterbury. 66 Thomas Pye of Albarogh inioyned six whip∣pings sixe seuerall Sundaies. 141 Thomas Bagley Priest burned in Smithfield. 144 Thomas Rheydon a French Carmelite Frier, con∣demned to be burned. 145 Thomas Norrice burned at Norwich. 147 Thomas a Priest of Norwich burned. 148 Thomas Bingy burned at Norwich. ibid. Thomas Becket his prouerbe. 155 Thomas Lancaster for bringing in prohibited bookes, committed. 161 Thomas Hittin burned in Maidstone. 175 Thomas Garnet Curate of All-hallowes in Hun∣nie lane for dispersing of Luthers books, for∣ced to abiure. 178 Thomas Cromwell Earle of Essex his history and death. 198 Thomas Barnes Doctor of Diuinitie, for preach∣ing against the Cardinall, burned. 199 Thomas Gerrard Martyr. ibid. Thomas Forret a Scotish Deane his troubles and martyrdome. 212 Thomas Tunstone Bishop of Duresme cast into the Tower. 220 Thomas Dobs for inueighing against papistry, committed to prison, and there dies. ibid. Thomas Grey the Dukes brother executed. 239 Two Sunnes both shining at once. 243 Thomas Hawkes for not christening his childe after the popish manner, apprehended, his conference with Bonner, Harpsfield Fecknam and others, at Copthall in Essex, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273. Thomas Wats of Billirrikies in Essex his confe∣rence with the Bishop about the Sacrament, and martyrdom. 273 Thomas Osmond for maintaining the truth, bur∣ned at Maningtree. 274 Thomas Iueson burned. 282 Thomas Fust burned at Ware. 289 Thomas Leys died in prison for the truth. 285 Thomas Cob of Harehill Butcher, burned. 291 Thomas Heyward burned at Lichfield. ib. Thomas Whittle troubled in conscience for yeel∣ding to the Bishop of London, gets his Bill and teares it in pieces. 305 Thomas Whittle Priest, after conflicts with the papists, martyred. 312 Thomas Went burned in Smithfield. ibid. Thomas Browne burned in Smithfield. ibid. Thomas Spurge burned in Smithfield. 321 Thomas Spicer burned at Beckles. 323 Thomas Harland burned at Lewis. 324
Thomas Reed burned at Lewis. Ibid Thomas Auington burned at Lewis. Ibid. Thomas Wood Minister burned at Lewis Ibid. Thomas Miles burned at Lewis. Ibid. Thirteene burned at Stratford the Bow. Ibid. Thomas Free-man condemned, but saued by Pooles dispensation. 325. Thomas Barnes condemned to beare a faggot. 326. Thomas Paret dyed in the Kings Bench, and burien in the back-side Ibid. Thomas Dangate Martyr at Grinsteed in Sussex. 328. Thomas Rauensdale Martyr. 329. Thomas Horne and a woman consumed with the fier at Watton-vnderhedge in Glocester∣shire. Ibid. Three in the Castle of Chichester dyed in pri∣son for the truth, and buried in the fields. Ibid. Thomas Hudson of Selling Martyr. 330 Thomas Steuens of Bedingham, martyred for the truth. 330 Thomas Loseb burned. 331 Thomas Thirtell martired. 331 Thomasine Awood martyr. 332 Thomas Perald martyr. 340 Tyrrell one of the race of those that murthered King Edward the fift: His cruelty to the faith∣full. Ibid Thomas Moore for saying his maker was in hea∣uen and not in the Pix, burned at Leicester. 341 Thomas Carman for praying with Crashfield and drinking with him when he was burned, ap∣prehended. 343 Thomas Athoch Priest, martyr. 349 Thomas Auington Martyr. Ibid. Thomas Rauensdale Martyr. Ibid. Thomas Spurdan examined before the Bishop and Chancellor of Norwich sent to prison. Ibid. Thomas Carman Martyr. 355 Thomas Hudson affirming the Masse to bee a patcht monster, martired. Ibid. Thomas Benbridge for maintayning the truth ra∣ther broyled then burned. 361 Thomas Hall burned at Bristow. 365 Thomts Benion burned at Bristow. Ibid V VSkatell driues the Danes out of England. 40 Vicount of Melun his counsell to the English. 77 Valentine Freese burned at Yorke. 181 Vsher Tunstall for hauing the Pater-noster and Creed in English, forced to abiure. 143 W VVInchester Church founded. 29 Westminster Abby begun by a Citizen Ibid. William Conquerour enters the land. 42 Receiued for King, and crowned on Christ∣mas day: driues the Danes out of the North: forceth Malcolme King of Scots to pay tri∣bute, 44. Waldenses their beginning and progresse. 55. the Articles they held. 56. 57. Wickliffe beginning to preach the Gospell of Christ, 85. his conclusions in a conuoca∣tion at Lambeth, 86. his conclusions con∣demned of herisie and error by William Archbishop of Cantery, 88 his bookes condemned by the Councel of Constance, his letter to Pope Vrban the sixt, Ibid diuers of the Nobilitie and Vniuersitie fauour him. 90. 91. William Santrey martyr 95 William Thorps examination before Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury from follio 95. to 103. William Taylor for fauouring Wickliffs opinon burned in Smithfield. 104. William White, a follower of Wickliffe forced to recant. 141 William Wright a persecutor. 143 Wolsey Cardinall his graetnesse and pride. 166 William Tracy for affirming in his will that hee trusted onely in God, after his death was ta∣ken vp and burned. 185. William Button his merry Questions to Papists. 206 Weston preached at Paules Crosse to pray for souls departed 243. Walter Mantell for constantly maintaining the truth hanged. 244 Warwick his cruelty to Doctor Taylor. 256 William Pygot burned at Braintree. 264 Woman put in the Cage for speaking against the Pope. 267 William flower alias Branch martyred. 268 William Tooly Poulterer hanged for robbing a Spaniard his body oster buriall taken vp and deliuered to the seculer power to be burned for heresie. 269 William Bamford burned at Harwich for the truth. 274
Wodroffe Sherife of London, after his crueltie shewed to M. Bradford, taken lame and so continued. 279 William Minge, a constant Confessor, dyed in Maidstone layle. Ibid. William Coker burned at Canterbury. 284. William Hooper burned at Canterbury. Ibid. William Steere of Ashford, for saying the Sacra∣ment of the Altar was an abhominable Idoll, burned at Canterbury. Ibid William Andrew for defence of his religion died in Newgate, and cast into the fields. 290 William Allen for refusing to follow the Crosse in procession, burned at Walsingham. 291 William Glouer persecuted for the truth. 292 William Wolsey burnt at Ely. 293 William Wiseman dying in Lollards Tower, cast into the fields, but buried by good men. 304 William Times Ioyner, burned in Smithfield. 321 William Poole martyr. 323 William Slch dyed in the Marshalsey, and buri∣ in the backside of the prison. 324 William Adherall Minister imprisoned. ibid. William Saennard condemned, but saued by Car∣dinall Pools dispensation. 325 William Adams condemned, but saued by Car∣dinall Pools dispensation, ibid. William Foter of Stone, starued to death in the Castle of Canterbury▪ 329 William Waterer of Bedgdy, martyred. 330 William Hay of Hith martyred. ibid William Lowick of Cranbrook, martired. ibid. William Prouting of Thorneham, martyred. ibid. Walter Appleby of Maidstone in Kent, and Petro∣nell his wife martyred. 332 Wilsons wife burned at Canterbury. ibid. William Maynard martyred at Lewis. ibid William Purcas about the reall presence con∣demned. 340 William Munt for speaking against the Sacra∣ment, condemned. ibid. William Sparrow burned in Smithfield. 351 William Nichol cruelly tormented and burned for the truth, at Hereford West in Wales. 354 William Seaman martyr. 355 William Harris burned at Colchester. 357 William Hooker stoned to death at Siuill. 366 Z ZIsca gathereth an Army to reuenge the death of Iohn Hus and Ierom of Prage. 127 Zwinglius Minister of Zurick slaine, and his body burned. 171. FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing. Pag. lin. Errata. Correctio. 2 54 to reiect not to reiect 5 2 thrusting thrusten 12 22 Fex Felix 13 37 Sapres Sapores 15 18 in Troy in Troy 360. Rhe∣ginus. 15 22 put 360. Rheginus put out the eyes 17 5 Barla Barlaam 17 18 Grigotius Gregorius 17 33 they had. the fire had 23 52 Ethelbert Ethelfride 26 13 Haarines Agarens 27 38 Ethelbert Ethelbald 34 26 Cluniensis Cluniacensis 35 6 Binford Bainford 37 8 Pracontium Dracontium 39 39 Gregory the 1. Gregory the 5. 41 1 & 5 Eldred Egelred 43 50, 51 Carolus Cadolus 45 9 Fgamus Faganus 49 53 Iudicat Indicet 51 5 destruisti destruxisti 51 12 within houres with whores 58 5 Henry the 5. Henry the 1. 66 24 he hath I haue 66 39 haruest harnessed 71 28 thy my 73 6 to from 93 26 excersised exorcised 97 7 now not 102 19 Bishop Thorp 117 29 Agnes N. 120 22 did not Christ did Christ 123 26, 30 Canonicalls Canticles 125 7 the part the vpper part 141 24 Communications Excōmunications 153 1 Wesalia Wesalianus 155 23 Domine Domini 165 14 crultie heresie 168 23 without with 192 23 Bortruck Borthwich 192 55 Emperor Empire 209 5 Mayor: Mayor were pre∣sent. 213 15 Hellen Sirke Hellen Stirke 225 3 burned buried 229 16 contumacy contumelie 235 25 Storie Scry 238 43 for soone for as soone 248 30 Cranmer Winchester 248 45 Doncaster Lancaster 252 40 primate primatiue 264 50 Arundell Croudall 265 46 Cranmer Gardiner 272 51 Elenor Helena 273 4 Lankes Hawkes 273 10 Cophall Coxhall 278 50 Kirkley Kirkby 290 7 Horsce Horsley 291 2 Somerset Somerton 307 32 Auilence Aquiliense 333 39 ninth third 351 3 not haue haue 351 44 Rowth Rough 356 1 Cylesham Aylesham 357 7 Christian Aegles. Christian George 365 28 Cornefield Cornford 377 23 Benton Bentam 377 25 Story in Lincolne Scory in Hereford 378 21 Rafe Sardine Rafe Lardin 382 45 George Wisard George Wichard 388 38 Bastion Sebasti FINIS.
