18267 99845685 10601
Chruso-thriambos. The Triumphes of GOLDE. At the Inauguration of Sir IAMES PEMBERTON, Knight, in the Dignity of Lord Maior of London: On Tuesday, the 29. of Octo∣ber. 1611. Performed in the harty loue, and at the charges of the Right Worshipfull, Worthy, and Ancient Company of Golde-Smithes. Deuised and written by A. M. Cittizen and Draper of London. Imprinted by William Iaggard, Printer to the Honourable Citty of London. 1611.
Chruso-thriambos. The Triumphs of Golde. THE ancient Romaines, who were the first Creators of Consuls and Senators for publike rule and honorable gonernment, vsed yearelie triumphall showes and de∣uises, to grace their seuerall Inauguration. From which famous and commendable Custome, London (as well as other Magnificent Citties of the World) hath (from time to time) both deuised and conti∣nued the like loue and carefull respect, at the Cre∣ation of her worthy Consuls and Magistrates: As instant occasion may serue to testifie, for the ho∣norable enstaulment of Sir Iames Pemberton, knight and Alderman, in the high and eminent office of Londons Maioralty. For the better effecting where∣of, the Ancient, Worthy, and Right Worshipfull Company of Gold-Smithes (sparing no cost; that might expresse their loue to so Honorable a Bro∣ther) added to his day of Triumphe, diuers deuises. First then, concerning the seruices performed on the Water, when he tooke Bardge, with all the
other Companies towards Westminster; suppo∣sicion must needes giue some gracefull help to in∣uention; and bee as ready in apprehension, as the other in action. Imagine then, that from the rich and Golden Indian Mines, sundry Ships, Frigots, and Gallies, are returned home; in one of which, Chorison the Golden King, with Tumanama his peerelesse Queene, are (at their owne entreatie) brought into England, with no meane quantity of Indian Gold, to behold the Countries beauty, and the immediate day of sollemne tryumph. Diuers Sea-fights and skirmishes re actiuely performed, both in the passage on to Westminster, and backe againe, each Gallant hauing his Indian Page atten∣ding on him, laden with Ingots of Golde and Sil∣üer, and those Instruments that delued them out of the earth. In which manner they march along by Land likewise, the Indian King and his Queene beeing mounted on two Golden Leopardes, that draw a goodly triumphal Chariot. No sooner landeth the Lord Maior at Baynards Castle, but there he is saluted by Leofstane a Gold-Smith, the first Prouost that bare authoritie in London, who likewise is guarded by ten Halber∣diers, to expresse the Martiall gouernment then in vse. His speech being ended, hee conducteth the Lord Maior and his worthy train on, till he comes to an ancient Toombe or Monument, standing in apt place appointed for it: and by it is ordered the Triumphall Chariot, to performe the seruices thereto appointed. In the Chariot we suppose the shapes of king Richard the first, sirnamed Cordelion,
and King Iohn his Brother, that succeeded him in the Kingdome, and each hath his seuerall atten∣ding Vertue. Richard was the first that gaue Lon∣don the dignity of a Lord Maior, reducing it from the rule of Portgreues, Prouosts, and Bay liffes, to that more high and honourable Title: yet with this restriction, that the election of the Maior con∣sisted then in the King himselfe, as it did all King Richards life time, and so continued til the fifteenth yeare of King Iohn, who then (most graciously) gaue the Cittizens of London absolute power, to elect a Lord Mayor amongst themselues, in which worthy condition it hath euer since conti∣nued. The seruices at the Tombe performed, doth sufficiently speake it selfe in more meete place ap∣pointed; and therefore needeth heere no further relation. The Orferie, or Pageant. ON a Quadrangle frame, of apt constructure, and answerable strength, we erect a Rocke or Mount of Golde, in such true proportion, as Art can best present it with clifts, crannies, and passa∣ble places, such as may best inlustrate the inuenti∣on, and expresse the persons therein seated, accor∣ding to their seuerall Carracter and Office. The Pioners, Miners, and Deluers, doe first vse their endeuour and labour, to come by the Oare of gold and Siluer hidden in the Rock; which being (from them) conuaied to the industrious Finer, it is by him framed into Ingots of diuers formes, accor∣ding
as further benefit is to be made of it, and the same applyed to most necessary vses, as likewise is apparantly discouered, in the Mint-Maister, Coy∣ners, Gold Smithes, Ieweller, Lapidarie, Pearle-Driller, Plate-Seller, and such like, all liuely acting their sundry professions. To distinguish those pre∣cious Mettals of Gold and Siluer, from base adul∣terating or corruption, wee show there also an in∣genious Say-Maister, with his Furnaces, Glasses of parting each Mettall from other, his Table, Bal∣lance, and Weightes, euen to the very smallest quantitie of true valuation, in Ingots, Iewelles, Plate or Monies, for the more honour of the Prince and Countrey, when his Coynes are kept from imbasing and abusing. On the top or height of our Orferie, because the Societies creast or supremest Embleme, may hold some correspondency with our inuention (their Motto or word being, Iustitia Virtutum Regina.) As Queene of all other Vertues, we figure Chthoon, or Vesta (Mother to Saturn, and called likewise Terra, the breeding and teeming Mother of al Golde, Sil∣uer, Mineral, and other Mettals, and seate her in the cheefest Soueraignetie. On her right hand sits Chrusas, Gold, her eldest Daughter, and Argurion, Siluer; the youngest, richlie suted, according to their seueral Natures and qualities. After a suppo∣sed long and tedious iourney, which al her daugh∣ters, Gold and Siluer may seeme to haue had, tho∣rough their Mothers large limits and Rocky king∣dome, leauing in euery Vaine, Sinnew, & Artery, the rich and valuable vertue of their splendour:
they are returned againe, and seated by her, to ful∣fill this sollemne day of Triumph, prepared for her eldest Daughter, Golde. Now, that it might bee publikely discerned, how vnpartiall an Empresse she is, and vncorruptible in her rich bounty to the World; thus she reueales it. That greedy and ne∣uer satisfied Lydian King, who desired, that what∣soeuer he toucht might turne to Golde, finding his own couetousnesse to be his ruine, & he (imagina∣rily) Metamorphozed into a Stone: Our Chthoon, finding this Lydian Stone fit for her vse, tearmed it Lithos; and because (in his life time) the King was so immeasurably affected to Golde, shee imposed this vertue on the Stone, that it should (for euer after) be the Touch-Stone and Trier of both Gold and Siluer, to warne other Worldlings of the like auaritious folly. By this Stone shee tries the ver∣tue of her Ingots, Iewels, Monies, &c. and poy∣zing them afterward in her euen-handed-Ballance, that euery Mettall might be iust and perfect: shee not onely gaue that Stone to her golden Sonnes, the Gold-Smiths, but her Daughter, Goldes figure likewise, appointing her to sit on their Armories creast, with the Touch-Stone in the one hand, and Ballance in the other, to represent her owne sacred person in Iustice, and to verify their word; Iustitia Virtutum Regina. Now, least the insatiable World (which neuer is surficed with guifts of greatest esteeme) should rob her againe of her two precious Daughters, Chrusos and Argurion: she linckes them fast to her Chaire of State with a Chaine of Gold, fastned in
the middest with a Golden Ouch or Buckle, the tongue where of hath so intricate a vertue, as none but her selfe is able to vntye it. On them also doe attend two beautifull Ladies, Philoponia and Mnae∣mae, Antiquity and Memory, who make discoue∣ry of Empetria, or graue Experience in the Golde-Smiths auncient profession, by the imagiued Car∣racter of learned Dunstane, who beeing Byshop of Worcester, London, and Arch-Byshop of Canterbu∣ry, had no little delight in the Arte of Cold-Smi∣thery, and shewes himselfe now (as then) acting that profession. The Emblems going before this Orfery, a Mare∣man, and Mare-Maid (each quartered with a gol∣den Vnicorne) do figure the long continued loue and amity, which (time out of minde) hath helde betweene the Gold-Smiths and Fish-Mongers, as Time (in his speech for that purpose) more at large declareth. Leofstane his first speech at Baynards Castle, after the Lord Maior is Landed. IF it seeme strange vnto yon (Ho∣nourable and woorthy Lorde) that in this manner I presume to saluce yee; the Iustice of the present cause, and the Suffrages due to such daies of Triumph. shall instantly veild you ample satisfaction. First for my selfe, I was sometime as you are now, Lieutenant
or Gouernour of this famous Citty, albeit not in so milde a forme or temper; in regarde that those dayes of disturbance and rough combustion (after foure seuerall Conquests of the whole Land, and vnsetled assurance in the very last) required a stear∣ner straine of awfull rule, then now these sweeter singing times are able to endure. Portgreues, Pro∣uostes, and Bayliffes, were Londons first Mgi∣strates, and (of Prouosts) I the first, beeing named Leofstane, and a Golde Smith by my proession, as the powerfull commaund that raised me from my Graue at Bermondsey, enstructes mee that you are, and thought it fit, that the first honoured Brother of our auncient Fraternity, should attend this day of your solemne Inauguration, hauing a Brother Sheriffe also of the same Society. For these my fol∣lowers that attend mee now, as in my time of au∣thority they did: hostile still, to Londons enimies or rude disturbers, but peacefull to all her friendly louers. Then honorable Lord, and Brother Gold-Smith, seeing Time priuately tels me, that he hath further employment for mee in this your day of Triumph, as best occasion shal giue way thereto: heere endes my first salutations to your selfe, and these graue Senators your worthy brethren, who (in my time) were styled by the Name of Domes∣men, Elder-men, or Iudges of the Kings Courts, & were then assistant to me, in care, counsel, and fa∣therly prouidence, for this Citties good, as these reuerend men haue bin to others; and now will be the like to you. And so I leaue ye to your further progression.
The speeches at the Toombe. Time. Leofstane, I charge thee stay. Leofstane. What art thou, that dar'st bar me of my way? Time. He that suruaies what euer deedes are done, Abridges, or giues scope, as likes me best; Recalling to the present sight of Sunne Actions, that (as forgot) haue lien at rest, And now, out of thy long since buried Chest At Bermondsey, raisd thee to see this day: Leofstane; tis he, that dares compell thy stay. Leofstane. See in how short a while a quiet Soule, Hid from this world fiue hundred years and more, May be forgetfull of great Times controule, By such gay sights as nere I saw before. My selfe yer while could tell this worthy Lord, Time had reuiu'd me, to attend this day: Pardon me then, that I durst breath a word In contestation, where all ought obey. needs must these gaudier daies yeild greater crime, When long gran'd Ghosts dare thus contend with Time. Time. Enough, no more; Now honourable Lord, For whose instalment in this Dignity, Thy louing Bretheren liberallie affoord, Out of their loues their glad harts simpathie, And what may else thy triumph dignifie:
As thus I turne my Glasse to Times of old, So tune thine eares to what must now be told. In this triumphall Chariot thus attending, Sit the supposed shapes of two great Kings, That to this Citty gaue no small befriending, Aduancing it from meane to mightier things, From whence thy very instant honor springs: For where before, stearne, Martial-Regiment Bare sole command, grew this graue gouernment. Richard the first, Sur-named Lyon-heart, For his vndaunted courage and great minde, When in Gods cause he plaid a Champions part, In faire Iudea, where the Pagane blinde In Gods house would his mawmetry haue shrinde And full defac'd Star-bright Hierusalem: This royall Richard foild his forces then. But ere he vndertooke that holy war, This Citty (his cheefe Chamber) did he grace With Dignity, beyond the former far, For Portgreues, Prouosts, Bayliffs held best place, Such, and no other (then) was Londons case. Till he bethought him of a Lord-Maiors name: And so the Title of Lord Maior first came. And shall I tell ye what that first Lord was? Ex Ioh Ston A Gold-Smith, of thine owne profession, Henrte Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Leofstane, of honourable race, Iudicious, learned, and of such discretion, That euen by Richards owne direction, All his whole time, he held the State still on; And so, vntill the fifteenth of King Iohn. Which did exceed full foure and twenty yeares, That this graue Gold-Smith held authority
Of the Lord Maior, as by Records appeares, Nineteene whole yeares this stile of dignity Came from the King: but then most graciously Iohn gaue the Cittizens free leaue t'elect Yearely their Maior, whom best they should re∣spect. Fiue yeares (each after other) til they chose That graue Fitz-Alwine to his dying day, When he was called hence to blest repose. Then iustly may we be thus bold to say, Foure hundred years & three, the L. Maiors sway Hath held in London, vnder their command, Who stil assignd that office to their hand. How many Gold-Smiths haue enioyed the place, Were needlesse to recount. Yet heere sleepes one, Whom in this ging and important case, (He being Gold Smith too, and long since gone Out of this world, old Nicholas Faringdon, Foure times Lord Maior) I may not wel omit, Because I thinke him for thi triumph fit. These gates he built, this ward of him took name, A fat stalled Oxe, 24 s. A ft Mutton, 20 pnce. A fat Gooe, 2 d, ob, A fat Capon, 2 pence A fat Hen a peny Two Chickns▪ a peny Three pigeons a peny. 24 Egges a peny. A bushell of Wheae, ten pence sold for ten shil∣lings before. And three and fifty yeares he did suruine After his first being Maior What plentie came To greete his daies, with former times did striue, And nere the like as when hee was aliue: Arise, arise I say, good Faringdon, For in this triumph thou must needs make one. Time striketh on the Tombe with his Siluer wand, and then Faringdon ariseth. Faringdon. AStonishment and frightful wonder, Shakes and splits my soule in sunder.
Cannot graues containe their dead, Where long they haue lien buried, But to Triumphs, sports, and showes They must be raisd? Alacke, God knowes They count their quiet slumber hlest, Free from disturbance, and vnrest. Time I know it well good man. Yet looke about, And recollect thy spirits free from feare, Note what thou seest. Faringdon. How? Whence? or where May I suppose my selfe? Well I wot, (If Faringdon mistake it not) That ancient famous Cathedrall, Hight the Church of blessed Paul. And that this Ward well witnesse can, Once thereof I was Alderman, And gaue it mine owne proper name. I built these gates, the verie same. But when I note this goodly traine, (Yelad in Scarlet) it should sayen (And soothly too) that these are they Who watch for London night and day, Graue Magistrates; of which faire band, When second Edward swayd this land, Foure seuerall times the chiefe was I, And Lord of Londons Maioralty. As by the bearing of that sword, It seemes that ye are Londons Lord: To whom becomes me loute full lowe, Old dutie yet (methinkes) I know.
Turne now thy Glasse to instant day, And let old Faringdon thee pray: Good Time, resolue him, what is he, Grac'd with this day of Dignitie? Time. A Brother of the Gold-Smiths Company, Whose vertues, worth, and speciall loue of all, Hath raisd vnto this high authority. Moreouer note, how fit his lot doth fall, That time should likewise at this instant call, A Sheriffe of the same Society: To beare a part in this Solemnity. See how the Bretheren of that worthy band, Abound in loue and liberality; To grace this Iouiall day; On tip-toe stand Their iocond Spirits: Ioying mutually, In Maior and Sheriffe of their Company. How can thy Ghost then, but reioyce to see: This honour of thine owne Society? Faringdon. Ioy and gladsome iouissance, Doth old Faringdon in-trance, To heare the tale that Time hath told, Since those reuerend daies of old, Vnto this great Solemnity, For Brethren of my Company. Glad and golden be your daies, Liue in Prince and peoples praise: Honour London with your care, Study still for her welfare: And as Gold-Smiths both you are, Such good and golden deeds prepare,
That may renowne our Mystery, To times of vtmost memory. My minute cals, and Ghosts must go. Yet loath I am to leaue ye so. For I could well spend out this day, And doe what seruice else I may; Were Time but pleasde that I might stay. Leofstane. Time, that in this daies honour raisde vs both, Meanes not (I trust) so soone to sunder vs: To see that separation, I am loath, Be then to both so kind and gracious; That we may waite vpon this worthy man: And do him yet what seruice else we can. Time. You haue your owne desires. Goe Faringdon, There in that Chariot is thy place preparde: Heere, I (as Coach-man) meane to guide yee on, So long as well our respit may be sparde. On then, away, for we haue held ye long: And done (I doubt) your worthy Guests great wrong. Leofstans speech at S. Lawrance Lane. HEere, my Lord, my charge was limited, to de∣scribe this rich and beautious Monument vnto yee, with all relations thereto appertaining. But Time hath told me, that Guests of great State and Honour are come to feast with you, and the least delay now, may be both offensiue and troublesom; therefore it is referred to more apt conueniency, when wee (with much better leysure) may attend yee.
Leofslane. THis Orferie, so styled by the auncient Epithite of your Companies profession, or Gold-Smi∣thery, doth speake it selfe vnto your honor in this manner. Heere doe the Miners and Pioners delue into the Earths entrailes, to gaine the Oare, both of Gold and Siluer; and hauing attained thereun∣to in plentifull measure, the ingenious Fyner pur∣geth him from his first Nature, and shapes him in∣to to Ingots of variable forme, according as his Art best guids and enstructs him. From him, these pre∣cious Mettals descend to diuers other dexterious Artezans; as the Mint-Maister, his Coyners, and diuers others, who make them to serue in publike passage for generall benefit, both in Coyne, Plate, and Iewels, as occasion best discouereth the iust necessitie. Beeing brought into these variant sub∣stances, to preserue those pure refined bodies from base adulterating, the Essay-Maister or absolute Tryer of eythers vertue, makes proofe of them in his Furnaces, and of their true worth or value. So are they commended to Soueraigne Iustice, atten∣ded by her gracious Daughters, Golde and Siluer, who bountifully hurle abroad their Mothers trea∣sures, after she hath (yet once againe) tried them, by the Touch of vndeceiueable perfection. The rest, that do sufficiently speake themselues in their distinguished places, as the Ieweller, Lapidarie, Pearle-Driller, Golde-Smith, and such like, your
eye of heedefull obseruation may spare their fur∣ther relating. Onely I may not omit these two ver∣tuous Ladies, Antiquity and Memory, who, present (in apt place) Graue Iudgement or Experience in the Golde-Smiths ancient facultie, by the suppo∣sed shape of venerable Dunstane, a man, sometime very practique, & so well skild in Gold-Smithery, as (notwithstanding his more Diuine profession) being Bishop of Worcester, London, and lastly Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, delighted therein to his vt∣most date of life. Time. So much for that; There Leofstane make a pause, Till Time haue certified this honoured Lord Concerning these faire Emblemes, And the cause Of their combining in this kind accord. The Argument doth instantly affoord, The ancient loue and cordiall amity Between the Fishmongers & Gold-Smiths Com∣pany. At Feasts and solemne meetings, on each side, A Fish-Monger and Gold-Smith, hand in hand Haue long time gone, and nothing could deuide The rare continuance of that louing band: Which (doubtlesse) to the end of time will stand. And therefore, these Impreses are thus borne: The ones Fish, with the others Vnicorne. Yet let no censure stray so far at large, To thinke the reason of that vnity Makes Fish-Mongers support the Gold-Smithes charge, And their expences shared equally: No, ti's the Gold-Smiths sole Society.
That in this Triumph beares the Pursse for all: As theirs the like, when like their lot doth fall. Their loues (herein) may not be thought the lesse, But rather virtuall, and much stronger knit, That each to other may the same expresse, When honour (in each Science) makes men fit On such a Seat of Dignity to fit. Then Peters Keies, with Dauids Cup of Golde: May freely march together, vncontroulde. Faringdon. Now, as custome wils it so, On to Paules Church must ye goe, To blesse God for this bounteous day. Till you returne, heere will we stay, And vsher then a gladsome guiding, Home to the place of your abiding. For such is your kind Bretherens will: And Time hath tyed vs therevntill. At night at my Lords Gate. Leofstane. THus (honoured Lord) haue wee dutiously at∣tended ye, till Time appointeth our departing, who hath tutourd Leofstanes tongue how to take his leaue, with some remarkeable obseruations, not altogether vnfitting your attention. First, the day of your Election, falling out in such strange manner as it did, exceeded the memory of Man to speake the like. And yet, notwithstanding, so great a Snow, Sleete, and rough winde; at the ve∣ry instant of your choyce, the Sunne did as readily
thrust foorth his Golden beames, to guilde the in∣stant of your Inauguration, as harts and hands did cheerefully applaud it with free and full confirma∣tion. Next, three Names, all of equall sillables and sound, to happen in the immediate choice; is a matter deseruing regard, and (from the Maioral∣ties first beginning) neuer was the like. Pemberton, Swynnerton and Middleton, Names of three most worthy Gentlemen, but of much greater worth in sence and significancie, as your own (my Lord, for breuitie) may yeilde an instance. Pemberton deriues it selfe from the auncient Brittish, Saxon, and eldest English, each Sillable suted with his apt meaning. Pem, implyeth the head, cheefe or most eminent part of any thing; Bert, beareth the Charracter of bright shining and radiant splen∣dour; and Tun, hath continued the long knowne Word for any Towne or Citty, as most Shires in England (to this day) dooth deliuer the expression of their Townes; As London, sometime tear∣med Ludstun, or Luds-Towne, may serue as an ex∣ample. A bright head of this famous Citty, in∣terpreting it selfe in the Name of Pemberton, and he being enstaulled in the gouernment, to bee her bright-shining Head vnder his Soueraigne, Leof∣stanes desire is; Since Pemberton doth beare so bright a Name, And that from gold & Goldsmiths grew his fame, His deedes may prooue to be like burnisht Golde: By no dim darknesse any way controulde.
Time. Well hast thou wisht, therein Time ioynes with thee, And tels this Lord, that such a goodly name, Requires bright actions, from pollution free, In word and deede to be alike, the same, For then life standeth on her fairest frame. And when the Head in splendour seems deuine, The people learne (by his cleare light) to shine. Contrariwise, obscure and misty deedes, Do giue a harsh and hatefull president: And of faire flowers begetteth stinking Weedes. For ill example, harmes the innocent; And makes him (in bad life) as violent. Be to this Citty then, so bright an Head, That all may say, it nere more flourished. Consider likewise, Iames thy gracious King, Sets Iames (his Subiect) heere his Deputy. When Maiesste doth meaner persons bring To represent himselfe in Soueraignty, I'st not an high and great authority? Let it be said, for this high fauour done: King Iames hath found, a iust Iames Pemberton. Let me not now they Bretherens loue omit, So worthily (this day) to thee declarde, If with like loue thou kindly welcome it, Their hope is to the highest pitch preferde, For thus they wish, as Time himselfe hath heard: That Pemberton, and Smithes, may both be, An endlesse honour to their Company.
Faringdon. So wish I too, with all my hart, And seeing now we needs must part, From Faringdon one farewell take, Who giues it for the Gold-Smiths sake. You are Lieutenant to your King, And tis a very worthy thing, To minde Gods blessing, and his grace, That brought yee to so high a place. Oh soyle it not with any blame, That, may impeach it, or your name. For they haue told ye well before, That whereof I need speake no more: You are a Gold-Smith, Golden be Your daily deedes of Charitie. Golden your hearing poore mens cases, Free from partiall bribes embraces. And let no rich or mighty man Iniure the poore, if helpe you can. The World well wots, your former care Forbids ye now to pinch or spare, But to be liberall, francke, and free, And keepe good Hospitality, Such as beseemes a Maioraltie, Yet far from prodigality. To be too lauish, is like crime As being too frugall in this time. I say no more, but God defend ye, Many daies of comfort send ye, To whom (with all these) I commend ye. FINIS.
