18472 99848010 13082
A Proclamation or Edict. Touching the Opening and resto∣ring of the Traffique, and Commerce of Spain, with these Countries: Although they haue seuered themselues from the obeisance of the Illustrous Arch-Duke, As also with all Vassals and Sub∣iects of Princes and Common-weales, being their friends, or Neu∣trals. Faithfully Translated out of the Nether-landish tongue according to printed Copy. Imprinted at Brussels. Imprinted at London for Thomas Archer and are to be solde at the little shop by the Exchange. 1603.
By the Arch-Duke. To our trustie and wel-beloued, the Chancellors and Persons of our Coun∣saile in Brabant: health. IT is so manifest, with what desire, zeale, and care, the King (our beloued Lorde & brother,) hath euer and yet doth seeke to further our helpe and assi∣stance of the good will which wee beare to the furtherance and welfare of our good Sub∣iects: for, as much as in vs lyeth to redeeme and discharge them of the miseries, inconueniences and suppressions which they haue & do endure through the continuance of these long-lasting warres, pro∣curing them all benefites and easements, in ac∣knowledgement of their fedilitie. Wee then desi∣ring like wise the quiet and aduauncement of the other our Vassals of the Iles of Holand and Zeland, and other Prouinces, seperated from the obedience, which as their Soueraigne and naturall Princes they owe vnto vs, being deceiued and seduced by some ill-willers, who for their owne benefite haue and doe yet hold them in so great oppression.
And marking the miseries & oppressions which they endure, with all the intollerable taxes which they wring from them, vnder the false collour of warre, into the which they haue cast themselues, vnder the pretence of the preseruatiō of their Priui∣ledges, taking away their substance and meanes, and reducing them to an vtter pouertie & dispaire, ouer shadowing & concealing the good will which we haue to the furtherance of their welfare and qui∣etnesse, and to draw them out of the bondage and oppression wherein at this present they remaine: for it is certaine, that all the euils and mischiefes which are hapened by reason of these saide warres and disobediences (together with the bloodsheades which to our great griefe hath ensued thereon, and as yet are continuing) do not proceede from the will of our Vassals, but from the bad heartes of such as haue taken and vsurped all authoritie and Soue∣raigne gouernment, as also from the subtilties and lyes wherwith they entertaine them, sucking and drawing all their meanes and substance from thē: therewith to make their owne priuate benefite and gaine, to the great disaduancement of the Commi∣naltie, and to maintaine themselues in the afore∣saide authority. To the ende therefore that they may manifest∣ly see and perceaue, what loue and affection wee beare them, wee haue resolued to suffer and permit them the trade and Nauigation which we hereto∣fore haue prohibited them, in the Prouinces of our obediences: As also at our request and in our fa∣uour and respect, they haue beene done by his Ma∣iestie in his Realmes of Spaine, according to the Declaration, published by his certaine command and Edict, and sent vnto vs in the spanish tongue: whereof the translation followeth from worde to worde.
By the Kings Maiestie. Whereas I haue taken regarde that through the continuation of the wars risen in the Neither-lands and Pro∣uinces of Flanders, by some subiectes, the which by bad counsell are with∣drawne from their due obedience, drawing to them a great number of the good and obedient Vassals, there haue ensued great hurtes and effusions of blood since these 36. yeares past, and that thereby hath beene introduced great and dangerous muta∣tions in the Policie and good gouernement. Also that the old and auncient traine and course of trade hath thereby beene greatly broken and inuerted, drawing the same out of the hands of the good & obedient subiects of the said Prouinces: whereas heeretofore was vsed to bee the greatest trade as well of the marchandises which were brought out of these our Realmes, Lands, and Dominions, to∣wards the North partes, and others: As also for those which from the aforesaid parts were brought into the said Neither-lands: and these our sayde Realmes, Dominions, and others whereout are sprung manifest disorders and inconueniences.
And as wee desire to restore and renewe the Commerce, and to set it in his forme, trayne, and order as heertofore it hath beene in the said Prouin∣ces, & especially, in the hauens & townes as yet re∣maining vnder the due obedience of the illustrious Arch-duke, Albertus, and the Infanta, Lady Isabella, my brother and Sister, to the wel-fare and profite of their obedient subiects as for the good and wel∣minded loue of the common good: seeing heerein the clemencie & kindenes vnto which I am bound by the place whereunto it hath pleased th' Almigh∣tie GOD to call me. And by the effects, to shewe the desire which I haue alwaies had, to the wel∣fare of the common good, & especiallie of the afore∣said Nether-lands: hauing communicated all the same vnto my abouenamed Brother and Sister, and thereupon receaued th' aduice of our Counsaile of State, I haue resolued to open and againe to raise vp, the aforesaid trade of Marchandise, vpon the conditions and manner following. 1 INprimis, I am content and ordaine, that all per∣sons of what quallitie and condition soeuer, as well of my Vassals and Subiects, as of other Princes & Common-weales, my Friends, Allies, and Neutrals, although they were borne & dwel∣ling in the Iles of
Holland and Zealand, and in the other Prouinces, which are fallen from the obe∣dience & alleageance of my before-named Brother and Sister, which still come to trade, traffique and negotiate in my said Kingdomes, and in the Ha∣uens thereof (the East and West Indies and the Iles of Barlouent, with others by the Lawes for∣bidden excepted) may quietlie and marchant like come to vse their trade and traffique, according to the lawes & customes of these Kingdomes, in pay∣ing for the wares which they shall bring thither, such dueties as haue beene imposed therevpon vn∣till they day of the publication heereof, conditio∣nally and vpon expresse charge, that they haue not nor shall not pay directly, nor indirectly any due∣ties to the enemies of this Crowne, of my said bro∣ther and Sister, nor also to these of the Countries of Holand and Zeland, and other Prouinces their adherents, fallen from their alleageance: vpon payne, that if at any time it shall bee prooued, that they haue payed any duetie to the saide disobedi∣ents or to our enemies, such marchandises shall be forfaited: and if in case they were solde or made a∣way, the factor or person to whom they should haue beene directed, and that should haue solde the same, shall bee forced to repay the woorth of the same, without any acquitting, nor exception of persons whatsoeuer. 2 In like sort, I will and ordaine, that all Mar∣chandises not prohibited, which shalbe carried forth of these my Realmes, whether by Strangers or by the Naturalls thereof, towards any Countrey whatsoeuer, the places here-vnder specified onely excepted, shall pay me 30. in the 100. The which I impose for a newe duetie of that which they shall conuay out, without any exceptions of persons nor Marchandises, and this ouer and aboue the ordi∣narie dueties established vpon them vntill the day of the publication of this my Edict, all which Mar∣chandises that shall bee conuayed out of these Realmes, shall be of such, as by the lawes thereof shall not be forbidden or prohibited.
3 As for the Traffique and Comerce with the Kingdomes, Countryes, and Estates, bordering vpon the Mediterranean-sea, as well myne, as of my Friends and Allyes: my will is, That there be no Nouelties nor change made from that which hath bene heretofore vsed, as well in regard of the Mar∣chandises, as for the dueties which are accustomed to be paide: vpon this condition alwaies, that all such as shall lade for those Countries and King∣domes, shall bee bound to put in security, within sixe Moneths after the day of their departure from the Ports of this Realme, to present certificate of the Consuls and persons thereunto appointed, or to be appointed in the Portes of the saide Realmes, Countries and Estates of myne, my Friendes and allies, bordering vpon the Mediteranean-sea, to haue liuered and discharged the saide Marchandises in those partes for the which they had laden them, by meanes whereof they shall bee discharged of their sayd suretieship or caution, without paying ought but the ordinary dueties, imposed before the date hereof. And in default of presenting the saide certificate, the saide sureties shall be bound to pay 20. in the 100. of all the Marchandises which they shall haue remained out. And to the ende therein be no fraude vsed, it is declared that the Naviga∣tion and Commerce of the said Kingdomes, Coun∣tries and Estates of the Mediterranean-sea, and of my Friends and allies, shall be from the Streights of Gibraltar, towardes the partes of Leuant, and from them of the North vntill the said Streights, for that if those of the saide Mediteranean-sea, doe passe aboue the saide Streightes, and doe lade in these Realmes of
Spaine and Iles thereof, for the North Countries, they shall not enioy the sayde Freedome, but shall be subiect to the charge decla∣red in the former chapter. 4 In like maner, shall be free from the duetie of 30. in the 100. the Iron and Steele which shall be shipped out of the Prouince of Guipuzcoa, and Lordship of Biscaye, the Mountaines and King∣domes of Nauarres for France, paying only the or∣dinarie dueties, at the charge alwayes of the selfe same caution declared in the Chapter aboue. 5 My will and pleasure is, that all & euery per∣son & persons, which in the forme aboue said man∣ner shall come to trade in these my Kingdoms with their Shippes and Marchandises, and shall bind themselues to conduct and discharge those which they shall lade in them, in the Ports of the townes vnder the obedience of my sayde Brother and Si∣ster, without paying any thing directly or indirect∣ly to our enemies and disobedient Subiects, shall be free and exempt of the saide duetie of 30. in the 100. without that they shall bee bound to pay any other but the ordinary dueties.
6 And to the end that they may more easily do it and inioy the sayd freedome, without paying the sayd 30. in the 100. I command and ordaine, al Of∣ficers of Iustice of these my Realmes and Lord∣ships, freely to suffer all persons to ship without paying any other then the ordinarie dueties, for all sorts of marchandises, those onely excepted which by the lawes of these Realmes are prohibited, vp∣on condition that they set good & sufficient caution or securitie before such persons which hereunto by me shall be ordained in my Portes: to present certification from the persons which my said Bro∣ther and Sister there vnto shall appoint, to haue discharged the saide Marchandises franke and freely, in the sayd Ports and Townes of their obe∣dience, or such part thereof, as they shall haue vnladen there, and that within sixe moneths after their departure from my sayd Ports: that then by vertue thereof, they shall remaine freed and ab∣solued of the said caution or securitie: By reason that by the said certificate shall appeare that one∣ly they shall haue discharge there, and for the re∣maynder their Sureties shal pay the aforenamed duetie of thirtie in the hundred, which Certificate, shall bee giuen vnto them by the afore-named per∣sons without any trouble, or without demanding any duetie of them for the same. 7 I defende, and ordeine expressely, that in these my Kingdoms by what meanes or way so∣euer, be not brought either directly or indirectly, the Marchandises heere vnder declared, vnlesse they be made and wrought in the obedient Prouinces of the Nether-lands. (To wit:) Hondscote Sayes, and all maner of Sayet wares. Little Cushions to sowe, or otherwise. Points, and pinnes. Starch. Buratoes, and Taffatyes. Cow-hydes, Mokadoes. Tryplt-Veluets. Sarges, or Worsteds. And other workes, the which are made at Lille, and Tournaye, Carpets.
Kettels, and Basens. Which are made in the said Neither-lands, and at Axe, so farre foorth as they beare the marke of my sayd Brother and Sister. Red Copper wrought. Cambricke. Woolen Stockings. All manner of Kniues. Chests or Coffers. Pewter. Wyer of Iron, and Copper. Linnen-cloth, with all sorts of Linnen-drapery counterfeit to those which are made in the sayd o∣bedient prouinces. Fine threed, called Spinall. Sowing threed, of all colours. Table-clothes, and Napkins. Woollen clothes. Al maner of Pictures, either in oile or wa∣ter. Lace of threed, or Silke. Narrow canuases, & Tapistries of al sorts. All maner of smal Haberdasherrie-wares, coun∣terfeit to those yt are made in the obediēt prouinces. Tykes, or Quiltes for bed and feather. And to th'entent the said wares be known, to be the workmanship of the said obedient Countries, they shall be verified by signes of such persons, as by my seale, & my said brother & sister therunto shal be deputed which shalbe giuen to thē yt shal require it, without paying any thing therefore, vpon paine that those which shalbe found to be without ye said my signe or mark, or knowne to be other countrey∣work, shalbe confiscated & made good lawful prise.
8 I Ordaine, that in my sayd Kingdomes shall not bee suffered to come nor bee brought in those Marchandises following, without the Seale of my Brother and Sister, and the Pasport or War∣rant of those which wee shall appoint thereunto. But it is withall to bee vnderstood that the sayde Seale and Pasport shall be giuen them gratis, and without any cost. Buckarums. Bayes. Dyed and dressed in the said obedient Prouin∣ces, the which aboue the aforesaide Seale, and Pasport, shall bring with them a priuat Seale from the place where they are dyed. Nayles, and all manner of Iron-works. Molten VVaxe. Sheepe Skinnes. Buff-skinnes. Fustians. All manner of Marchandises, and smal wares, comming from Norinbregh. (To wit:) Of all sorts. Spangles and graine worke of Glasse. Copper curtaine Rings. Sayle Needles. Al manner of Spectacles. Scalles, or Ballances. Buttons. Pincers, and Nayles for Shoomakers.
Chafing-dishes of all sorts. Horne for Lanthornes. Glew of all sorts. Matches for Gunnes. White waxe. Claspes and Eyes of all sorts. Tape of all fashions. Strings for all Instruments. Tallow Candels. Waxe to seale Letters. Chamblets of all sorts. Bed-pannes. Clockes. Broken clockes. Belles of Mettall. Hogs Bristles for Shoomakers. Small Bels of al sorts of mettall Pad-lockes of all sorts. Nayles of mettall. Shooing-hornes of all sorts. Candlesticks of all sorts. Sawes. Whissels of all sorts. Pennes or quilles to write. All manner of printed Images vpon Paper. Looking Classes, of all sorts. Tinne-foile, Writings, Boxes, or Cabinets of all sorts. Inck-hornes of all sorts. Bruses of all sorts. Horne bottels of all sorts.
Buckles for Girdles, of all sorts. Carued Images of all sorts. Wyer of mettall. Wyer of all sorts. Instruments of all sorts. Copper in rolles. Flaxe of all sorts. Table-bookes. All manner of Fyles. Maskes of all sorts. Wrought English Alabaster of all sorts. Mettals wrought of all sorts. Millan sceanes. Gold, and Siluer to guild. Counterfeit gold, of all sorts. Lace of Cruel, of all sorts. Lead wrought of all sorts. Presses, and wooden listes, or ed∣ged of all sorts. Horse-haire. Weights of marke of all sorts. Watches or smal clocks of al sorts Beades of all sorts. Wheeles of all sorts of mettall. Smal nailes for stooles or chaires. Steeles of all sorts. Cabidge-seede. Caffas, and of all sorts. Hatbands of all sorts. Toonges and shoouels of all sorts. Bone wrought of all sorts. Broken mettall of all sorts.
And my will is, that these Marchandises that shall come with the said Seale and Pasport, shall bee free and exempt from the saide duetie of 30. in the 100 and all such as shall shew themselues with the said Pasport and Seale, before my Iu∣stices, Customers, or to the persons which I shal appoint thereunto, in my Hauens and Ports, may freely trafficke vpon the sale of such commodities, paying only the ordinarie duties, without that any hinderance shall be done vnto them by any, but ra∣ther shall be giuen vnto them all assistance, at the hands of the Iustices. And all Marchandise that shall not come with the sayd Seale and Warrant, shall pay the aforesayde duetie of 30. in the 100.
9 And to yeeld the trade of Marchandises the more easie our will is, that the Captaine or Ma∣ster of what Ship soeuer, as soone as hee shall be aryued, shall immediatly deliuer vp, his carga∣zin, or contents of his lading, of the Marchan∣dises or Packs which he shall haue brought, with their markes and declaration to whom they are directed, vnto the Iustices of the Hauens for the which he shall be fraighted, the which being done, he shall bee permitted to discharge his Marchan∣dises and deliuer them vnto their owners, or vn∣to whome they shall belong. And if in case any de∣ceipt or trespasse be found to bee vsed against my orders, those which shall haue receiued such Mar∣chandises, shall be constrained to make good the vallew thereof, without that in this behalfe any hinderance or molestation shall bee done vnto the saide Shippes, Captaines, or Ma∣sters of the Shippes, the which shall freely be suffered to lade and reurne, vnlesse they haue themselues concealed the same and beene partici∣pant in the deceit and falshood. 10 And to the end that there be a difference, and a distinction betweene our enemies & those which are withdrawn from their lawfull obedience and will stil continue in their errors, and betweene our good Vassals and Subiects of the sayd Neither∣lands: and of all others that will trade freely and securely within thse our Realmes, and that desires in sinceritie without fraude or guile to enioy this grace and benefite. And to the ende that the Shippes, Shipper, Marchants, and other persons of like sort and qualitie, at this presence holding their residence in the aforenamed Prouices of Holand &
Zeland, and other being out of the obedience of my aforenamed Brother and Sister, may be knowne by my Cap∣taine, Generals of the Armies, Gallyes and all other sorts of Ships of Warre, I am content and command: That in bringing Pasport in due man∣ner and forme, from my aforenamed Brother and Sister, or from the persons which wee, and they shall appoint thereunto, in the aforesayde Lands, shall freely, and frankely passe, enter, remaine, deale, and quietly and freely exercise their trade, according to the Lawes and customes of these a∣forenamed Realmes, by vertue of the aforesayde Passeport, without offering them any let or hin∣drance, but that all ayde, fauour and assistance be∣giuen them, and that they be defended against all enemies, as well Pyrats as Armyes at sea which should seeke to disturbe this their free trade, and that as well in these my saide Realmes, as in the said obedient Prouinces of my Brother and Si∣ster, & the said Pasports shal be giuen vnto al such as shall require them, without any delay, or with∣out taking any duetie or other thing whatsoeuer. 11 And to the ende that it may bee knowne with what assurance they shall remaine and exer∣cise their trade, in these my sayd Realmes, all such as shall intend to remaine and trade therein, by vertue of this present Edict, and how well they shall be receiued, and how secure their persons and goods shall be therein: I promise vpon my King∣ly word; that ouer and aboue th'accomplishment of all the Premisses aboue written, that if at any time it were found conuenient, or that vnto me it might seeme good to change, or recall this my ordi∣nance, they shall be warned thereof a yeere before hand, that within the said time they may depart freely and securely with their goods and dispose of their matters, and to transport themselues to such places as they shall desire, and those which shall be absent from thence, may be able in like sort, to dispose of al their goods within the aforesaid terme of one yeere, as to themselues shall seeme most meete and conuenient, without that either in the one or in the other any let shall bee done vnto them.
12 And for the accomplishment of what is afore∣sayd, touching the aforenamed trade of Marchan∣dise, I commande and ordaine all Iustices and Of∣ficers of these my Realmes, that they suffer to en∣ter in all the Hauens thereof all sorts of Shippes, Shippers, and Marchandises of the aforesaide Prouinces of Holland and Seland, & other their ad∣herents, also of the Subiects of all Princes, Poten∣tates and Common-weales, my Friends and Neu∣trals, which shall come with Pasport from my said Brother and Sister, or from the persons which I, and they shall appoint thereunto, and that they permit them to enter, remaine, and exercise their trade, freely and frankly, following the orders and customes of my aforenamed Reamls: maintaining and framing themselues in all things, according to the tenor of this my present Edict, without doing there against in any maner: the which I command to be proclaimed, and published with the accusto∣med solemnities, as well in my Court, as in all the Cities, Townes, Villages, and Hauens of my a∣forenamed Realmes of Spaine, and the Ilands thereof, to the ende that it may come to the know∣ledge of euery one. And all what therein is contained, be perpetu∣ally to be mainetained, performed, and obserued, as the like shall be done by all persons to whom it may appertaine. Vpon paine of falling into my heauie indignation, and others reserued to my ar∣bitration, whereof I haue caused these presence to be made. Signed with my owne hand, and Sealed with my Priuie Seale, and Subscribed by Andreas de Prada, my Secretarie of State. Giuen in Valladolid, the 27. of February. 1603.
By the Arch-dukes. ANd deliuering of our presents, to follow and put in execution, the good and mercifull intent of his a∣forenamed Maiestie: Wee graunt, and giue leaue and licence, to al and euery one, as well our Subiects, (although there were of the aforenamed Iles of Holland and Zeland, and other Prouinces, with∣drawen from our alleageance) as also vnto all o∣thers, of what Princes and Common-weales, and of what qualitie, Nation, or condition soeuer they bee, our Friends, or Neutrals, after the publication heereof, to bring & discharge in our Lands on this side beeing vnder our obedience, either thorough the Hauens thereof or through the Hauens, which at this instant are held and occupied, by those of our aforenamed Ilands, or by the way of Fraunce, and Germany, as well by themselues, as by inter∣position of persons, all sorts of Marchandises, and all other things whatsoeuer or howsoeuer they be brought, or that they shall drawe out of the King∣domes and dominions of Spaine, the which we de∣clared, as well in entering as in going out, to bee free and francke from all dueties, which haue beene raysed, imposed, and augmented thereupon, with∣in these thirtie yeeres, so far forth that they haue not neither shall not, either directly or indirectly pay a∣ny impositions, customes or other dueties, in what nature soeuer, vnto ye aforesaid disobedient Prouin∣ces nor vnto our enemies, vpon the paine yt hauing paid any such duties, they shalbe forfeit & cōfiscated
to wit, onely such as shall haue payde the same. In like maner, & vpon ye same condition, we giue leaue & licence vnto al persons of what Nation ∣euer of our friends, & Neutrals with the same free¦dome & libertie, to bring into the Hauens of our o bedience, & also to transport from thence thorough what place soeuer all manner of Marchandises: onely excepted these, which his Maiestie by his a∣foresaid Edict doth prohibite, because they are not made nor wrought in these obedient Prouinces, being those same which are specified in the seuenth Article of his royall Commandement aboue inser∣ted, forbidding, & interdicting, that neither direct∣ly nor indirectly, nor by any meanes whatsoeuer, they be not brought in the aforesaid Lands of our obedience: Vpon paine of confiscation, and that the transgressors of this Ordinance shall be pun∣shed with all rigor. And to the ende that each one, the better may enioy this grace and benefite of his Maiestie, and of vs, and make their voyages towards the king∣domes of Spaine: Wee will at all times cause to be giuen and granted the Pasports, which they shall neede for their securitie, at what times they shall require them free and francke, without paying a∣ny duetie therefore. In like manner, touching the Marchandises, which his Maiestie by this his sayd Edict are com∣prehended, & forbiddeth not to enter in his realms, vnlesse they were made in the Lands of our obedi∣ence, or haue passed there thorough with cerifica∣tion from the persons, the which in his Maiesties, and our behalfe thereunto shall be appointed, ac∣cording
to the tenor of the afore-named Edict, to the en, that the same doe not disturbe the course of the trade, and that all such persons, freely ma come without any peril or danger, in the aforena∣med Realmes, the said Certificate, or Warrant shall be graunted vnto them, yea, without paying any thing for the same, by the handes of Iohn de Gauna, or of such other persons, as we shall name there vnto, to the assistance of those which his Ma∣iestie shall depute, and appoint thereunto, and be∣ing the said certificate or Warrant signed by them both, it shall bee valeable, and other wayes not. And to the end that, that is aboue written haue his whole and lawfull effect, and that each one, so much the better, may know our good heart and af∣fection, we giue leaue and licence, to all trading Marchants, Shippers or their Factors, Officers, Handecrafts-men, & all other persons of he lands withdrawne from our obedience, to returne into these of our alleageance, and there to liue and en∣ioy these goods being in the hands of the Fiscall, in such maner as at this present they are, without power to sell or allienate the same, vnlesse with our consent, so farre foorth they maintaine the Lawes of the aforesaid Lands: and such persons as shall come in this manner, wee will receiue them into our grace and mercie, with vtter abo∣lishment of all forepassed matters, the which is to be vnderstood, to be done, in regard of such as shal haue absented themselues by reason of the wars, without any other priuate offence, and that shall not preseuer nor intermeddle further therein.
Therefore, wee will and commaund you, that immediatly and without delay, you are to pub∣lish these presents with all solemnitie, throughout all the Townes and places of our Countreys and Countie of Artoys, where the Proclamations and Edicts are usually published, to the ende they may come to the knowledge of each. Ordaying and Commanding, vnto all Gouer∣nours, Iusticies, Officers and men of Lawe of your iurisdicting the strickt obseruance, and mayn∣tenance thereof, vsing all good entertainment, and kinde vsage, vnto all such as shall bee willing to accept of this ordinance and fauour, receiuing them in their Townes and Offices respectiuely, although that at this present, they doe holde or haue helde their residence, in the Prouinces di∣stracted from our obedience, or in any other pla∣ces, so farrefoorth as they behaue themselues ac∣cording to the Lawes and Customes there vsed, euen as the like is done by these which are resi∣dent in the places of our said obeissaunce, and vp∣on the charge, that before hand shall present themselues, vnto the Magistrates of the Citties, and Townes where they shall desire to dwell, without that they shall neede at any time to shewe any other diligence nor duetie, neither be∣fore nor after. And all this to bee effected, without dooing of suffering to be done vnto them, for the fore pas∣sed matters: any trouble, disturbance or hinde∣rance, vpon paine that the trangressors shall en∣dure our heauie indignitie and to bee rigourously punished, for that such our pleasure is.
Giuen in our Cittie of Brussels, vn our Counter-Seale: Imprinted thereon in forme of Edict. The fifth day of Aprill. 1603. Signed, by the Arch-dukes and their Counsaile, and subscribed. And thereon standeth imprinted their High∣nesse Counter-Seale, in forme of Edict. The like Edicts, mutatis mutandis, haue beene dis∣patched in the Netherlandish-tongue, for Gelder∣land, Flanders, and Malynes: And in the French tongue for Luxenbrough, Artoys, Hainault, Na∣mur, Lille, Douay, and Vrchids, Tournay, and Dour∣nesay, and Valencienne. FINIS.
