18674 99854709 20146
THE GVNNERS DIALOGVE. With the Art of great ARTILLERY. BY ROBERT NORTON, Enginier. and Gunner. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Tap, and are to be sold at his shop at Saint Magnus Corner. 1628.
diagram
TO THE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS PRINCE the DVKE of Buckingham His Grace, &c. SEeing that amongst all the Arts (most Ex∣cellent Duke) that adorne the life of Man vpon Earth. Warre is that highest, wor∣thiest, and most commodious Science that great Princes ought to preferre before all others, were it but for Cicero his reason, Vt sine iniu∣ria in pace viuamus; Peace being by instinct of Na∣ture of all men most desired, And warre by the greatest Emperours and Princes of the world euer with Sword and Pen most highly magnified, ingenuously finding there∣in innumerable inuentions, and diuers subtill secrets, and admirable deuices, Engins and Stratagems to ouer∣come their Enemies with; yet none comparable to the Art and Practice of Artillery, comprehending in it the greatest matter of importance of our Militia at this day. And fin∣ding also (Great Duke) many ardent magnanimous minds to coole, for want of speculation to inuent, and diuers He∣roike actions to passe by vnatchieued, for want of practice to performe, I, the meanest of many, hauing with long
practice, and no small study, and some cost, beene somewhat instructed and conuersant therein; and seeing the penury of expert Gunners, and vnderstanding men, and the weaknesse of the present meanes to breed more hereafter, I haue for aid formerly offered my poore Talent, called the Art, and the Practice of Artillery. And now also depending vpon your Graces fauour, presume to offer these few lines, called the Gunners Dialogue, vnder your Excellencies Patronage, as well to further others therein, as herein to shew some part of my thankfulnesse for your Graces fauour, that it pleased you to imploy my seruice, were it but to view and censure other mens workes (I be∣ing not naturally scrutinous) wherein I protest I faithfully related to your Grace, my poore opinion truly, if not iudi∣ciously, the effect, if they be put in practice will manifest, but certainly cleere it was from all partiality or enuy, as might appeare by my preferring Salinors Booke Lesson, he a Forreiner, before my Country man Iones his vnexperi∣enced inuentions, both strangers to my acquaintance. Ac∣cept therefore, I beseech your Excellencie, this small vn∣worthy Present; so shall I be encouraged with your High∣nesse fauour and leaue, to publish my Treble Archite∣cture, Ciuill, Military, and Marine, almost ready for the Presse; if these speed with fauour, which will imprest my seruices, to attend your Graces future pleasure, and en¦gage me to rest Deuotedly ready at your Excellencies command, ROBERT NORTON.
THE GVNNERS DIALOGVE. Question 1. HOw many things ought a Gunner to vn∣derstand, and bee able to performe, be∣fore hee take vpon him the charge of Ordnance? Answer. Very many, as to know the Force and Nature, Refining, Cleansing, Rectifying and Receits of the Materialls, for the making and re∣newing of Gun-powder. The Names, Proofes, Vses, Pore, Length, Weight and Fortification of euery Peece, and each part thereof. The Vent and Weight of all manner of Shot of any height, Metall, Stone or Re∣ceipt named; what quantitie of any sort of Powder is due for the loading of each Peece, for any Shot as∣signed, to shoot effectually at any Marke within the Peeces Right Range, called Point blanke, or Dead∣range, or vtmost randon Leuell, Mounted, or Imba∣sed, and many others.
Quest. 2. How ought he to be qualified, and goe pro∣uided? Ans. With many good parts and needfull things, as reading, writing, Arithmeticke to cast vp propor∣tions, Geometry to measure lines surfaces and bo∣dies, with Discretion to gouerne his many affaires and occasions, with vigilant and diligent care to keepe safe his powder and Ordnance from vntimely mischances and dangerous accidents: he should not be amongst his Guns without his Horne furnished with Priming powder, and his Case with all sorts of Priming irons, his Sword, Steele, and Tinderbox to light a match at pleasure, ready to defend himselfe and his charge from iniuries. Q. 3. What are the names, and vses of our vsuall Eng∣lish Ordnance? A. First, the double Canon or Cannon of eight in∣ches high, and the whole Canon or Cannon of seuen inches high in bore, and the Di. Canons, and secondly the whole and Demy Culuerings, all which are vsed in Batteries, especially the Canons, by reason the grea∣ter weight of their shots doe batter and shake a wall or defence, more than lighter shot could doe; the Culuerings are most commonly to reach sarre off, and yet to beat into a strong opposing marke or obiect, with a large Orafice. Thirdly, the Saker, Minion, Fal∣con, or Falconet &c. shooting also iron cast shot (as all the forenamed Peeces doe) are to shoot at strong and hard resisting obiects and markes also farre off, but the latter being of lower height in bore shoo∣ting lesser shot, do consequently pierce smaller holes then the former. Fourthly, the Periors, as the Canon
Perior, Periera, Fowler, Port Peece &c. that shoot ei∣ther stone shot, murdering shot, or Fire-workes, ei∣ther Cambred, that is, hauing a lesser bore back∣wards, wherein the charge of Powder is to lye, as the Bambard, Canon Periors, and our Drakes haue. Or else they are chambred, and hauing Chambers to put in behind their chases to load them with, as the Fowler Port-peece, Slings, Portingale Bases haue. Q. 4. What and how many are the Simples or Mate∣rialls of Gun-powder, and their qualities, and how are they to be Refined and proportionally Mixed or Compounded to∣gether? A. The Simples whereof Powder is made and compounded, are only three, namely, Salpeter, which is the soule, and Sulpher, which is the Life, and Cole, which is the Body thereof. For the qualities, Salpeeter will rarifie, being fired, and turne into wind, which causeth the force. The Sulpher will kindle, and take fire quickly; and the Coale will maintaine the fire and carry them vp together. Salpeter is best refined, being dissolued in a little water, and boiled & scum∣med, being set to congeale, it will in part shoot like Isicles into roch, which is the best; the rest may be either so refined again, or cleansed from the Feces of grease, Alum and salt which accompany it. Sulpher is cleansed by melting it often, and straining it tho∣row a strong canuas cloth. The Coale if it be well burned of Alder, Hazle, birch and young wood with∣out barke or knot, will also be rectified for the pur∣pose. When a quantity of Powder is to be made, first resolue of the vse, whether it be for Ordnance, Musket, or Pistoll, for Ordnance, called Canon Powder grease,
or the Receit called foure, one and one. And for the Musket, called Hargubusse Powder, and for Pistoll fine Powder, the first is of fiue, one and one, the latter of six, one and one, by which is meant foure, siue, or six parts of Peeter, to one part of Sulpher, and one part of Coale. Q. 5. How much Powder is it fit to allow each Peece for proofe, and for Action? A. For the Cannons proofe ⅘ and for seruice ½ of the weight of her iron shot, for the Culuering and les∣ser Ordnance, the whole weight of their proper shots for proofe, and for Action for the Culuering ⅔, and for the Saker and Falcon ⅘, and for lesser Peeces the whole weight in Action vntill they grow hot, for then must abatement be made with discretion. But in proofe the small Peeces should haue once and ⅓ of Powder that the shots weigheth. Q. 6. What if Ordnance Powder of 4.1.1. be wanting, and yet Hargubusse or fine Powder be in store, how will you then proportion your Charge? A. For the   4.1.1. 5.1.1. 6.1.1. Canon Double of 8 40 l 37 l ¼ 35 l 6 oz Whole of 7 33 l ¼ 31 l ⅓ 29 l 7 oz Demi Cannon 20 l 18 ⅔ 17 l 9 oz Culuering 15 l 13 l ¾ 13 l Demi Culuering 7 l 6 5 ¼ Saker 4 3 ½ 3 ¼ Minion 3 ½ 3 ¼ 3 l Falcon 2 l 1 ¾ 1 l 9 oz Cannon Per. ⅓ of the stone shot in powder with discre∣tion abating 5 li pro Cent.
Q. 7. If Scales and Ladles be wanting, how many Dyameters of the shots height in powder will make a rea∣sonable charge for any Peece assigned? A. For the Canon 2 ½, for Culuering 3, and for the Saker 3 ½, for lesser Peeces 4 Diametres of the Cillin∣der. For 3 Diametres make ⅔, and 3 ⅔ make ⅘, and 4 Diametres and ½ make the whole weight of a cast iron shot, it being corne powder; which length will also serue for the measure of Cartredges for the like Peeces. Q. 8. What proportions are betweene each of those sorts of powder, namely betweene 4.1.1. and 5.1.1. and 6.1.1. concerning their Forces? A. From the first of 4.1.1. to the second of 5.1.1. the proportion is as 6 to 7, viz. 1/7 difference. And from the first to the third of 6.1.1. is as 6 to 8, which is ¼, and the second to the third, is as 7 to 8, which is ⅛ in Force augmentingly more. Q. 9. What are the vsuall weights of each shot being either of Lead, Iron, or Stone? A. I haue here set them seuerally downe in man∣ner of a Table, wherein the first Columne signifieth the height of the Diametre of any shot between two and eight inches height, and the parts proceeding from quarter to quarter successiuely.
Inches, Lead, Iron, Stone. 2 1li. 11oz. 1li. 1oz. 0li. 7oz. 2 ¼ 2—0 1—9 0—9 2 ½ 3—0 2—2 0—12 2 ¾ 4—3 2—14 1—0 3 5—0 3—12 1—4 3 ¼ 6—9 4—12 1—8 3 ½ 8—1 6—1 2—0 3 ¾ 9—14 7—5 2—7 4 11-5 8—15 2—13 4 ¼ 15-15 10-10 3—10 4 ½ 17-15 12-10 4—3 4 ¾ 21-5 14 14 5—9 5 24-12 17-5 6—3 5 ¼ 30 0 20-1 7—8 5 ½ 35-10 23-2 8—14 5 ¾ 39-9 26-6 10-10 6 45-0 30-0 11-4 6 ¼ 51-0 34-0 12-12 6 ½ 57-0 38-0 14-3 6 ¾ 63-0 42-0 15-12 7 72-0 48-0 17-10 7 ¼ 79 8 53-0 19-14 7 ½ 87-0 58-0 21-12   7 ¼ 96-0 64 0 24-0 8 106 72-10 26-12 Q. 10. How much is the height of the Bore, length of the Chace, weight of the Peece, weight of the powder, and length of the Ladle, proper to each Peece? A. I haue here also set them downe in a Table for the keeping them the better in memory, as followeth.
Names of the Peeces, Height of Bore, Inches, Length in Dia∣metres, Weight in Metall, Pounds, Weight of Powder, Length of the Ladles Inches. Cannon of 8 8 15 8000 40li 24 Cannon of 7 7 16 7000 25li 22 Demi Cannon 6 ½ 18 6000 20li 21 Culuering 5 ½ 28 4500 15li 20 Demi Culuering 4 ½ 32 2500 9li 18 Saker 3 ½ 36 1500 5li ¼ 16 Minion 3 ¼ 30 1200 3li ¾ 15 Falcon 2 ¾ 42 700 2li ½ 14 Falconet 2 ¼ 48 500 1li ¼ 12 Cannon Perior 9.10.12 8 3500 3li 3li ⅓ 4li 3 Demi Can Drake 6 ½ 16 3000 9li 4 ½ Culuering Drake 5 ½ 16 2000 5li 4 ½ Demi Cul. Drake 4 ½ 16 1500 3li ½ 4 ½ Saker Drake 3 ½ 18 1200 2li 4 ½
Q. 11. How and what is it to Tertiate and measure any Peece, and how much ought they to be in thicknesse of Metall at their Touch-holes, Truions, and Neckes? A. There are three differences in Fortification of each sort of Ordnance, be they of the kindes of Can∣nons, or of Culuerings; For they are either ordinarily Fortified, or lessened, or double fortified, and com∣mon or Legitimate Peeces, Bastard Peeces, or Extra∣ordinary Peeces. For the Cannon double Fortified, hath fully one Diametre in thicknesse of Metall at her Touch-hole, and 11/16 at her Trunions, and 7/16 at her Necke, whereas the ordinary fortified Cannons haue but ⅞ at at the Touch-hole, and ⅝ at the Trunions, and but ⅜ at the Necke. And the lessened Cannons haue at the Touch-hole but ¾, and at the Trunions 9/16, and at the Necke 5/16. Now all the double fortified Culuerings, and all lesser Peeces of that kind, haue one diametre and ⅛ in thick∣nesse of Metall at the Touch-hole, and 15/16 at the Truni∣ons, and 9/16 at the Necke. And the ordinary fortified Culuerings haue like to the double fortified Cannons, but one diametre of Metal in thicknesse at the Touch∣hole, 11/16 at the Trunions, and 7/16 at the Necke. And the lessened Culuerings haue ⅞ at the Touch-hole, and at the Trunions ⅝, and at the Necke but ⅜, as the ordinary for∣tified Cannons haue. Q. 12. What are the difference betweene the Com∣mon or Legitimate Peeces, and the Bastard Peeces, and the Extraordinary Peeces? A. Common or Legitimate Peeces are such Ord∣nance as haue a due length of their Chases propor∣tioned according to the height of their proper Bores, euen as they are expressed in the last prece∣dent
Table, Bastard Peeces are such as haue shorter Chases than the proportion of their Bore doth re∣quire: and Extraordinary Peeces, are such Ordnance as haue longer Chases than the proportion of the Bore alloweth. And they are called Bastard Culue∣rings, and Extraordinary Culuerings, and so Bastard Sa∣ker Faulcons, or Extraordinary Sakers or Faulcons, &c. accordingly as their Bores come nearest to the Cul∣uering, Saker, or Falcon Bores, &c. Q. 13. How will you finde whether a Peece of Ord∣nance be cleare from Flawes, Crackes, and Hony combe? A. Hauing first clensed and cleared the Peece with a Wad-hook and Ladle, from all loading, foule∣nesse, dust and stones, which you may know by put∣ting in the Rammer head vp to the Breech, and with a priming iron put downe into the Touch-hole, if it take hold of the Rammer head, it is cleare of loading and stones, then the Ladle and spung will get out the dust. But to know whether any Crackes, Flawes, or Hony-combes be within her Chase or Chamber, put in an vsuall Searcher, made with two or three springs with points like great pinnes heads, bending out∣wards, which being bended together with your hand, vntill it will enter into the mouth of the Peece, and that put vp to the bottome of the Bore, and tur∣ned round in the motion of pulling it in and out of the Chase; so if any Hony-combes be therein, it will sticke with the points in the said Flaw, Crack or Ho∣ny-combe. Also in a sun-shine day, with a looking-glasse, the Sunne beams may so be reflected into the Chase, as that all flawes, crackes and spungie Hony∣combes may be discerned. Or if the Sun shine not, a
Wax candle lighted and put vpon the end of a halfe Pike, or a bright Sword, will also reflect the Sunne-beames, as afore-said. Now if no flaw be found, you may proceed to her proofe, but if any be therein, that Peece is dangerous for breaking, and second lading, and had need to be carefully proued, and respectiue∣ly handled, lest in Lading the second time, any fire remaine therein to enflame the second Charge. Therefore, if any such Peece must needs be vsed, you must notneglect to spunge her well first, with a wet spunge. And also after spunging, aduisement taken, not to allow such Peeces the ordinary lading of pow∣der, but with discretion an abatement must be made, more or lesse, according as the fault or defect is found to be more or lesse. Q. 14. What if the mouth of a Peece be growne wi∣der then the rest of her Chase within, by meanes of wea∣ring, how will you choose shot sit for her? A. I will trie with seuerall Rammers heads, or if need be, Face them by little and little, vntill I there∣by finde the lowest bore within the Chase (except the Camber be Taper-bored, as the Drakes and some Periors are) and then fit my shot to that lowest bore, alwayes allowing 1/20 of that height for vent. Q. 15. What if you be commanded to serue with a Peece that hath lyen long charged, that either the shot is growne fast to the inside of the Peece with rust, or the shot being torted too high, or ouall doth sticke by the way, and so may be dangerous for Peece, and Gunner dis∣charging it? A. I wil not aduenture to discharge a Peece so long loaded, as I may not know what accidents since haue
hapned, but with a Wad-hooke will draw the Wad, and try with the Ladle to draw or moue the shot; which if I cannot doe, I will first eleuate her, and powre warme water in at her mouth (and stop the Touch-hole) to dissolue the Petre, and eight or ten houres after, I will vnbase her, (setting a vessell vnder her mouth) to receiue the liquor that shal drain out; then a day or two after I will put in a small quantitie of drie powder at the Touch-hole, and try if I can blow out the shot therewith, if not, I will then powre in warme oyle and vineger, and turne her round, so that the vpper side may be side-wise and downwards in that motion; then with her Ladle or Rammer, or both, I shall doubtlesse loosen the shot, and so draw it, or blow it out, otherwise the Peece will be euer af∣ter vnseruiceable without new founding. Q. 16. What Instruments are most fit for a Gunners vse? A. The Callibre Compasses, Height-boord, Inch sight-rule, Gunners Scale, Gunners Quadrant diui∣ded into ninetie degrees, and into twelue points and their minutes, with a Geometricall square to take mountures, leuels, heights, breadths, and distances, and a paire of straight pointed Compasses. Q. 17. How doe you dispart a Peece or Ordnance, what is it, and to what end vsed? A. To dispart a Peece, is to finde the difference betweene the Diametres or thicknesse in metall be∣fore at the Muzle-ring, and abaft at the Base-ring, for in true bored Peeces the halfe of the difference of their Diametres is the due dispart. Those Diametres are readily found by the Callibre Compasses opened
and applied to the opposite sides of those Rings, and to a Scale or Inch-rule of small equall parts, where∣by the difference will soone appeare, which halfed is the dispart found. Their Diametres differences also may bee found by guirting them with a labell of parchment or cord, that will not shrinke nor stretch, diuiding the guirt in three equall parts at each time, ⅓ may be tollerably accepted for the Diametre. Also in true equall bored Peeces, putting in a Priming iron at the Touch-hole, to the bottome of the bore, and marking a place vpon it equall in height to the Base-rings highest part, which applied vpon the bot∣tome of the bore at the mouth, perpendicularly, will shew the length of the dispart aboue the highest of the Muzle-ring. Likewise you may finde both those Diametres by laying a rule or straight staffe leuelly, making a Tangent on each of those Rings seuerally, and on each side of the Peece holding a plummet line, so that it onely touch the sides of the metall of each Ring, the differences betweene those Diame∣tres so found halfed, is the dispart sought. It may be found many other wayes, but these being sufficient, I will only answer concerning the end and vse there∣of. It serueth to direct the shot to the marke, or so neere as is the distance betweene the two parallels that are made by the two continued lines, the one the Axis of the bore, the other the visuall line that pas∣seth from the Gunners eye by the highest part of the Base-ring and top of the Dispart vnto the marke. For seeing the Breech of the Peece is of solid metall, not so transparant that the Gunner can visually ap∣ply the Axis of the bore precisely to the marke, it
must suffice to finde the other visuall line, being the neerest that can parallelly betaken thereunto, and ac∣cept it, for the same. Q. 18. How much will you allow for vent, comparing the height of the shot with the height of the bore of the Peece assigned? A. One twentieth part will be sufficient, approued so to be by the best Gunners of late times, although many Gunners of England generally allow a quarter of an inch for each shot to be lower then the bore of of euery Peece, which is too little for a Cannon, but too much for a Falcon, and for lesser Peeces. Q. 19. What difference is there betweene shooting by the metall of the Peece, and by the Dispart, to direct a Peece to a marke leuell or eleuated? A. Their differences are somewhat vncertaine, because there are seldome any constant proportions held in founding Ordnance, concerning the eminen∣cies of their Base and Muzle-rings; but in most Pee∣ces they are so, that first laying the Peece to the mark with a due Dispart, and then by the metall, obseruing with a Quadrant, you shall sometimes finde that the Peece will be eleuated more by the metall, then by the Dispart, foure degrees, fiue degrees, yea some∣times six or seuen degrees. And so accordingly will the Randons of the metall bee more then the Ran∣dons of the Dispart, which (by the Table of dead Ranges for each degree here annexed, or by the Gunners Scale) may for euery eleuation be made cer∣tainly knowne. But on the leuell the metall rangeth neare double the distance of the Dispart, in most Peeces.
A Table of Randons, or Dead Ranges, for euery degree vnto the best Randon, or fortie degrees. Degrees, Paces Degrees, Paces Degrees, Paces Degrees, Paces   1 500 11 1487 21 2225 31 2712   2 610 12 1575 22 2285 32 2747   3 717 13 1655 23 2342 33 2780 Degr. Paces. 4 822 14 1735 24 2397 34 2810 41 2990 5 925 15 1812 25 2450 35 2837 42 3000 6 1025 16 1887 26 2500 36 2872   7 1122 17 1960 27 2547 37 2195   8 1218 18 2030 28 2592 38 2920   9 1310 19 2097 29 2635 39 2955   10 1400 20 2162 30 2675 40 2988   Q. 20. How shall a Gunner know how the Range of his Peece encreaseth, or decreaseth, from degree to degree? A. First, hee must finde by the Table or Right ranges, exprest in the Art of Great Artillery, or other∣wise; how much the leuell right range of your Peece is, which number of paces diuide by 25, and multiply the Quotient by 11, and the product will be the first and greatest digression, which is betweene the first and second degrees, which diuide by fortie the de∣grees contained betweene the first degree and 42 de∣grees, the best or vtmost Randon, and the Quotient shall be the number of paces that the shot shal lose at euery digression from degree to degree to the best Randon, and contrariwise for their increasing digres∣sion from 42 degrees, the vtmost Randon downe to the first degree.
Q. 21. At how many degrees of Mounture, will any Peece conuay her shot farthest, called her vtmost Randon? A. At about 42 degrees, neuerthelesse, that 45 hath formerly beene generally taken for the best or vtmost Randon, being the middle or meane degree betweene the leuell and the perpendicular, namely, the halse of ninety degrees: But because the Peece on the leuell Rangeth a shot about one tenth part of the vtmost Randon, as it doth also at 84 degrees of Mounture; therefore it stands with more reason, and experience also hath found, that the vtmost Randon of any Peece should be (being duly charged and dis∣charged) at 42 degrees, the halfe of 84 degrees of eleuation. Q. 22. How doe you direct your Peece to shoot at a warke, being for distance, within the Straight line, or Right range of the Peece, and lying leuell with the Horizon? A. Hauing placed the due Dispart vpon the Muzle∣ring, as in my 17 Answer before is shewed. Then (both my thumbs being placed close ouer the vpper∣most point or part of the metall of the Base-ring) I will cause the Peece to be trauersed, and coined more or lesse, vntill I espie (thorow betweene my thumbs) the top of the Dispart and the marke to be in one, and then I giue fire and expect a good and faire shot. Q. 23. But how will you direct a Peece of Ordnance to shoot at a marke that lieth leuell, but is further distant then the Peece can reach vpon her leuell Range, you hauing only some certaine dead range, and the distance from that Peece to the marke giuen; what aduantage will you take to reach the marke, to make a faire shot at the first time? A. Hauing a certain Dead range for any eleuation
of that Peece giuen, I repaire to my Gunners Scale, or to the last precedent Table of Randons or Dead ranges, with the Rule of Proportion, saying, if the number of the Paces of the Dead range giuen, doe giue the eleuation giuen, what shall the Distance gi∣uen, giue; multiply the third number by the second, and diuide the product by the first, and the Quotient will be the number of degrees that the Peece must be mounted vnto, to reach that marke. Q. 24. What if the marke be eleuated aboue the leuell, and be farther distant then the Peece vpon that mounture can reach in a Right range: How will you direct your Peece for aduantage, hauing the Distance and some cer∣taine Dead range of that Peece giuen? A. First, either by my Gunners Scale for degrees, or by the Table following, for the six points of the Gunners Quadrant, whereby you may see the vtter∣most Dead range being 3000 Paces, that the as∣pect of the first point cutteth the Range of the se∣cond point at 1880 Paces of the leuell, and the third Range at 2330 Paces, &c. And that the aspect of the second point intersecteth the Range of the third point at 1950 Paces.   Ranges           Aspects 1 1 2 3 4 5   2 1880 0 0 0 0   3 2330 1950 0 0 0   4 2650 2340 1890 0 0   5 2860 2650 2330 1900 0   6 3000 2960 2500 2090 1650
And the Range of the fourth point at 2340, &c. And that the Aspect of the third point doth interfect the fourth Points Range at 1890, and the fifth Points Range at 2330, and the sixt at 2500 Paces. And that the Aspect of the fourth point intersecteth the fifths Range at 1900 Paces, and the sixths at 2090. And lastly, that the Aspect of the fifth point cutteth the sixths Range at 1650, As the Diagram doth also ocularly shew. Q. 25. How make you vse of the Scale and Table? A. As in the former by the Rule of Proportion, saying, if the dead Range giue the Tabular number of dead Ranges proper thereunto, what shall the number of the Scale Diagram, or of this Table, pro∣per to the Aspect and Range cut, giue; multiply the third number by the second, and diuide the product by the first, and the Quotient will be the number of Paces proper for the Peece and marke assigned. Q 26. How will you endeuour to shoot farther then ordinary in one and the same Peece, with like quantities of powder and shot? A. First I will gently put home all the Powder, and wad the same; then the shot being inuolued with paper, leather, okam, or such like, to fill close the con∣caue of the Bore, I will driue the shot close to the Powder with a good wad, putting after it a Tempion of corke, and with a spunge a little moistened with an oyle, I will anoint the vacant Cillinder of the rest of the concaue Chase; and will so baricado the Breech of the Peece with a Pile, wall, or such like, as that it shall not reuerse in the discharge: But especial∣ly, if I haue time, I will stop the Touch-hole, and
drill a new one more forwards, which will make the Powder all to fire, and sooner together, and the Peece reuerselesse, if it be rightly done. Q. 27. What Peece would you choose to shoot at a sin∣gle marke, and what course will you obserue? A. I would choose such a Peece as I had sormer∣ly practized to shoot in, and yet examine her to know her qualities: then in loading her, I will not ramme home her Powder too hard, lest it in taking fire lye first blowing, and cause the Peece to start from her position, duly directed by a true disparture, that the Axis of her Bore may precisely respect the marke. And lastly endeuour to preuent all impedimentall Accidents. Q. 28. If you were to make a shot in the night, at a marke shewed you in the day, how would you prepare for it? A. I would first lay the Peece in her Carriage pre∣cisely to the marke in the day, then with a Chalke-line dipt in Gum-water, I will strike a right line on the vp∣per part of the metall from Breech to Muzle (while the line is yet moist) vpon which I will apply a good and sure Magneticall needle or flye, with a Chart ex∣actly diuided, and note the intersecion, then from the ends of the line that was marked or striken vpon the metall I let fall plum-lines vpon the Platforme, and at the places where they touch, I knocke in at each a small naile. Lastly, with a Quadrant I obserue the ele∣uation of the concaue; or else with some Staffe take the perpendicular height of some certaine place or marke made in the metall, as well at the Breech, as at the Muzle aboue the said two nails: And so you may
againe lay the Peece thereby, alwayes to haue the selfe-same position, and so shoot as certaine at that marke by night as by day. Q. 29. How would you make a shot at an Enemies light, in a darke night, not hauing any Candle, Lanthorne, or other light by you? A. I would light two peeces of match, the one as much longer then the other as the quantity of the dispart of the Peece, & set the longer vpon the vpper part of the Muzle-ring, & the shorter vpon the vpper part of the Base-ring, trauersing or coining the Peece vntill I haue brought the light of the Enemies, and the lights of the two matches, all three in one; and so I doubt not but to make a good shot thereat. Q. 30. How would you choose and order a Peece, to make a good shot at a moueable marke; as at an enemies Ship vnder saile, Boat rowing, or Horse-man riding? A. First would I choose such a Peece (as in re∣gard of the distance, will be able in a straight line to reach the marke) whose qualities I know. Second∣ly, hauing loaded the Peece, I obserue how the Marke moueth. Thirdly, I will obserue the wind (if it blow much) whether it be against, or with, me, or side-wayes, and accordingly take aduantage, for the impediment it may produce otherwise. Then will I, with the Dispart considered, duely obserue some cloud, or marke some point of Landskip that lieth in the course of his motion; and when according to the swiftnesse thereof, he is come so neere it, as I guesse the shot and hee may meet at the marke, I so giue fire, wherein I may remember this secret of Na∣ture, that any Peece will shoot further from Sea
to Land-ward, then from Land to Sea-wards. Q. 31. What say you to shooting at a marke vnder the leuell from aboue downwards, how would you order mat∣ters to make an effectuall shot? A. That kinde of shooting is farre more vncer∣taine and difficile then any other, by reason of the smaller resistance the shot makes against the force of the powder, naturally working vpwards, which is to∣wards the Breech, if it were not there restrained, it therefore of all other wayes shooteth least distance in a straight line, vnlesse it be perpendicularly down∣wards, or neerely so; besides, no Author or Practi∣tioner else, to my knowledge, hath diuulged any good vse or order for the same. But I haue obserued that the Randons for Imbasures do somewhat neere∣ly decrease from degree to degree vnder the leuell, with a double proportion to the decrease of the Morter Peeces mounture, aboue from the best Ran∣don vnto ninetie degrees. Out of which obseruation and experience I haue framed this Table, and for bet∣ter helpe added an example. A Table for Imbasures. Degrees, Paces 0 150 1 149 2 147 3 145 4 142 5 139 6 137 7 133 8 129 9 125 10 120 20 90 30 60 40 40 50 18 60 10 70 6 80 1 90 0
The vse illustrated by example. At eight degrees Imbasement a shot at a marke be∣ing to be made with a Saker (for which Peece the Ta∣ble was made) if the distance were lesse then 129 Pa∣ces, then the Peece being able to reach the marke needs no aduantage: but supposing it to be 140 Pa∣ces, a lesse Imbasement must be then giuen, namely, at about seuen degrees, to reach the marke, as reason will conduce. Q. 32. Can you make a reasonable shot at a marke, which by reason of interposition of some hill, house, wall, Rampart, or other impediment, you cannot see it? A. Yes, with a Morter Peece it is vsuall, if it be with∣in her reach. And although the catriages of other Peeces, will few, admit to mount them so high as 20 degrees, yet by sapping the Breech of the Peece, that is, by making a trench for the taile of the carriage to reuerse in, being descended thereinto the wheeles standing alost: or by preparing a Timber-frame, so that the taile may be suncke, as betweene two Tim∣ber-logs squared, the wheeles reuersing vpon them, any Peece may be so mounted to shoot at a mark out of sight, further then any Morter Peece can reach, or by taking a Peece out of her carriage, and moun∣ting her accordingly vpō skids at pleasure to the ele∣uation desired; these may shoot Granadoes, Flaming or Venomous bals, and Hedge hegs or such like most ne∣cessarily. But amongst them the Canon Periors, Pe∣rieraes and Bombards, are chiefly to be therefore pre∣ferred. Hauing then the distance giuen, Stales and Signals are to be placed, to shew where the marke is,
which way, and how the shot lighteth short, ouer, or wide, that such errour may at the next time be re∣formed. Q. 33. How would you order things, to shoot at a Squa∣dron of the Enemies Souldiers, and what Peeces would you choose? A. According to the distance I would choose a Peece that in a straight line can shoot home, if I may, be it with Demy Culuering, Saker or Falcon, and plant my Peece as neere parallel to the champion Plaine as I can, that the shot may range, and shoot at girdle height, vnlesse the ground be stony, for then would I place my shot short of them, that grazing amongst the stones, that stones may doe them more spoile then the shot of it selfe can doe, by farre; but in no case would I shoot wide, or ouer them, for that were both losse and shame also. Q. 34. At the time of ioyning of two Armies in Bat∣tell, how would you plant and mount your Ordnance? A. There are diuers opinions therein; some say it is best to plant them in the Front, to disorder the E∣nemie, and cause them to breake their Ranks at first; which others disliking, say, that will hinder their own party from many aduantages, and difficult to retire them: some would plant them in the Flanckes: And some would haue some of them in the Front, & some in the Flanke: And lastly, some would haue them be∣hinde the Armie, that vpon a signe giuen, their owne Squadrons may open a way for the Gunner to play vpon the Enemies Troops or Squadrons. But where∣soeuer they are planted, care must be had, that the Musketiers, appointed for guards, nor any other fire
armes, approach within 100 Paces of the Ord∣nance, lest vntimely firing them worke mischiefe to the party. But hauing viewed before-hand the place appointed for the Battell, if any eminent rising-place be there neere, to lodge the Ordnance thereon, they may thence most safely play vpon the Enemie in Front, Flanke and Trauers, with wonderfull aduan∣tage and hope of victory. Q. 35. Hauing found the first shot faulty, to the right or left hand, ouer or short, how will you at the next amend it, to make an effectuall shot? A. If it were wide, towards the right or left hand, I would place my eye on the Base-ring, at the next time, a little more to the same side, accordingly more or lesse: if it were too high, direct the top of the Dis∣part vnder the marke as much: if too low, lay some small stone or straw on the highest of the Base-ring, and by that, bring the dispart and the Mark into one with discretion. Q. 36. What if the Peece by often shooting be growne so hot that it is dangerous, vnlesse it be rested or refreshed; how will you coole her? A. If the seruice be such, as she may not haue time to rest, in that case, she must be cooled with Spunges wet in Lee, which is best, or in vrin and water, or wa∣ter and vineger, or with the coolest fresh or salt wa∣ter; bathing and washing her within and without, vntill she be come to her due temper againe; but if I may, I will rest her one or two houres in twelue, and between whiles coole her euery tenth or twelfth shot. Q. 37. If the Touch-hole be cloyed with spikes, stones or such like, and necessitie requireth the vse of the Peece, what would you doe therein?
A. Not trust to that which some appoint, by bea∣ting her on the Muzle with a woodden mallet, ha∣uing powred warme oile in at her Touch-hole, to ex∣pect her doying to fly out; nor to the setting of her Breech vpright, with her mouth ouer a fire, vntill she be red-hot, and then (her metall being soft) to get out her cloying; but if I cannot blow it out, nor haue time to drill another new touch-hole more forwards, I must load her with powder and shot without wad∣ding, and by a fusee, wet vent, or powder moistned into paste, placed at the mouth, so as it may fire a traine within the Chase that I will there make to fire the charge, to auoid danger as much as I can, so I will giue fire to the vent, hauing formerly laid my Peece to the marke, as I haue already said. Q. 38. If you be so driuen, that of necessitie you must leaue your Ordnance to the Enemie, what would you doe either with hope to recouer them, or else to make them. vnseruiceable, or breake the next time they shall bee dis∣charged? A. If I haue no conueniencie to hide them so se∣cretly, by burying them vnder ground, as that the Enemie shall not finde them, or be past hope that we may neuer come to the place to recouer them: Then would I lay all the Peeces crosse a narrow ditch or trench, filled so with char-coales, or other dry fewell, to kindle, and heat them thorowly red-hot a good space, which will cause the metall to become so bri∣tle afterwards, being cold, that they will not be able to endure the due charge of powder to be fired in them, but will break in peeces at their next discharge; or I can break them either in that britle place, by ap∣plying
them with hard strokes of a heauie comman∣der, or by loading each Peece with more than a dou∣ble charge, and vnder and about the shot driuing steele wedges with rammers of hard wood, so that hauing fired the Peece with a fusee or slow pyramid of powder moistned like paste; the shot in discharge running vpon the thicker parts of the wedges will constraine the Peece to breake: I know diuers other wayes with a touch to breake or spoile the Enemies Ordnance, but I thinke it not fit to speake of it pub∣likely. Q. 39. Being besieged, to resist assaults and defend the place, what Ordnance are best, and where placed, and how vsed? A. All Ordnance are vsefull, but for defence at a breach or narrow passage, Canon Periors, loaded with Lanthornes, filled with pible stones, Cases of Base and Burre, old iron trash chaind, langrell, crosse bar, plugs, or any other tearing or murdring shot, or with a mine in their way to blow vp & the like; & planting the Ordnance couert so, as to scower the passage from a Flanker Cassamat or other defence, or before the Breach. Also my new inuented Murtherers, that haue long square tapering concaues, wch are double or treble in breadth to their heights, and will spread their murthering shot, Musket or Pistol bullets, side∣wise far, but little vp and downwards (without feare of stop or cloying the Chase, as in equal round Peeces oft hapneth, when they are charged with small loose shot or trash.) Also I will carefully prouide to haue in store, spare Carriages, Axtrees, Wheeles, Cordage, Match, Powder, and Shot sufficient; the rather, be∣cause
alwayes the Enemie will chiefly endeuour to ruine our Defences, embouch our Loops, beat downe our Parapets and Defences, cloy our Plat-formes, dismount our Ordnance, teare our Carriages, Ax∣trees and wheeles with their Peeces, by all the means they can possible. Q. 40. You hauing beleagerd or besieged a Fort or Towne, how would you shoot to ruine, anney, or take away the enemies Defences; and what would you chiefly ende∣uour to doe? A. First, I would make choice of places to plant my Ordnance, or make my Batteries so against the weakest parts, to make a Breach in the most conue∣nient place, bringing them by Trenches, as neere as I can, within lesse then two hundred Paces; and then hauing raised and plained the Terraplenes and Para∣pets, made the Plat-formes, cut and set out Loopes, or placed the Gabbions the whilst, and planted Pee∣ces where they may most offend the Enemie, endc∣uouring to ruine and embouch their Defences, ply∣ing them so hard, that they may not haue time to re∣paire the old, nor build new, nor retrench, as they else would doe. And also make what slaughter I can, to weaken the Aduersary: and from each Battery fit, to shoot at the place for Breach, as many Peeces at once as can be brought to beare thereon: and I will ob∣serue what Peeces of theirs, most endammage vs & ours, and endeuour to dismount them, and amaze and hinder their workes all I may. The distances of the Batteries must be according as the situation of the place will permit, but if possible, at eighty, an hun∣dred, or an hundred and fifty Paces at most, auoiding
the danger of the Enemies Musketiers with conue∣nient Defences: the number of Peeces and the sorts of them, are to be according to the place and the oc∣casions to vse them; Cannon, Demy Cannon and Cul∣uering for Breach, and a Demy Culuering or two, to play vpon the Enemies Defences, with a Field-peece or two for single markes. The Breadth of a Battery must be according to the length of the Curtin, and the number of Souldiers that must giue the assault, that nine in a ranke may at least enter together. Q. 41. What Fire-workes are most ordinary and fit for warlike seruice, to spoile or annoy the Enemy most? A. Granadoes or hollow breaking balls of seuerall sorts, Fire-balles for diuers vses, as to enlighten the champion, sticke and burne combustible obiects, burne and breake poison, or blinde the Enemy, burne in the water, or pierce the flesh to the bone, where it fired, toucheth, Powder-pots simple and compound, Armed Trunkes, with Pistols, Fire arrowes, barbed Garlands, Rowlers, Fire-pikes, and such likeinuen∣tions. Q. 42. Of what materialls are the Granado bals made, and what receits are they loaded with, and how armed? A. As they are for diuers ends (though all to de∣stroy the Enemie) so they are made of seuerall mate∣rials, as of Bell-metall, spelter, Iron, or any hard and britle metal. To be shot also out of a Mortar Peece or Perior, & may also be thrown with the hand amongst the Enemies: some are made of baked Potters clay, or of Glasse, and some of Canuas coated and armed: The receits are also diuers, as Powder foure ounces, Sulpher two ounces, Salpetre twelue ounces, finely
beaten and well mixed; sometimes Antimoney and glasse, and Scales or Iron: but let a britle ball be filled with powder, one pound, within two fingers height, and the rest with Cannon powder foure ounces, and Salpetre twelue ounces, mixt and driuen close toge∣ther, inclose this in Canuas, with the mouth or pri∣ming-hole downwards, and fill it, as a ball, with pow∣der two parts, Sulpher one part, and Salpetre three parts; pierce a hole to fire at, and put into it a pinne of wood, and coat it with Roch-fire, or Roch sulpher: also Powder ½ li, Peetre 1 li & ½, Sulpher foure ounces, is an vsuall receipt: they may be made of two hollow Demy Globes of wood, bored full of holes almost thorow, hauing thence a touch-hole, each hole loa∣ded with a Pistoll bullet, the concaue filled with fine powder, and a pipe of wood coated to reach to the bottome, filled with slower receipt, they may be loa∣ded with Pistoll-pipes of iron, and powder, and bul∣lets at each end, and a touch-hole in the midst, their coatings may be stucke full of stones, nailes, shot, or such like: These are of great execution, but must euer be so prouided, that the slow fire must be sure to burn vntill the ball fired be arriued at the place where it is to doe its execution; of this kinde there are infinite diuersities and inuentions. Q. 43. What is that Roch-sulpher, and Reeh fire? A. Receipts of much vse; Roch-sulpher is made with one pound of Sulpher molten on a slow fire, and ¼ li of mealed powder, put thereto by little and little, and stirred wel together, and in the cooling put three ounces more of corne powder, mixing them well to∣gether. Roch-fire is made of three pound of Sulpher
grosse beaten, and slowly molten, to which put one pound of mutton sewet, and therto Powder & Salpe∣tre equally mixed, with these you may couer or coat Granadoes, Pikes, Circles, Balls, Trunkes, and Arrowes. Q. 44. What receipts for Lances, Trunkes and Fire∣pikes vse you, and how make you them? A. The formes and receipts also are diuers; for one may bee of Powder and Sulpher, of each one pound, Salpetre three pound, Quick-siluer molten with Sulpher foure ounces, Glasse three ounces, each beaten to powder, and tempered with Linseed oile, boiled vntil it wil scald a feather, put therin; these put in Canuas, narrow at both ends, fitting for Pikes or Arrowes, must after be put on, and armed either with Wire or Marline, and coated with Roch-fire, or other coatings, or Canuas dipped in Pitch and Tallow molten, Sulpher, Rozen, and Turpentine. Lances are little different, only lesse; Trunkes are also of ma∣ny sorts, most commonly made of wood, armed with iron hoopes, they may be eighteene inches long, be∣sides six inches bored in for the staffe, wch is to be ten or twelue loot long, the eitghteene inches bored, two inches and ½ may be filled with Sulpher and Powder, of each one pound, Quick-siluer two ounces, Cam∣phere one ounce, which beat with the Sulphere will become powder, mix these with Linseed oyle, boiled as afore-said, wowld it with Marlin, coat it and fill it with a handfull of this receipt, then with a handfull of powder, then with a button or with small shot; co∣uer the end with a waxed or pitched Canuas, hauing a Match or Sulpher threed goe through all. Another receipt is Cannon powder fiue parts refined, Petre
three parts, Sulpher two parts, Rozen one part, Cam∣pheer, Glasse, Amber, and Masticke mealed and searced, of each ½ part, well mixed with oiles of Turpen∣tine, Petre, Linseed, and liquid varnish, of each ½ part. Another, take Powder three parts, Sulpher one part, Salpetre three parts, Masticke one part, Vitrioll, white Wax, of each six parts, Amber, Orpiment, Arsenick, 4 parts, Verdegrease, Salarmoniak, each 2 parts, mixt with oiles of Linseed, Petre, Varnish, and Aquauitae, of each six parts, and well wrought, will be a receipt of great vehemencie in burning. Q. 45. What are your Fire-balls? A. They are also of sundry sorts and vses, some to light so, in the night, as to see what the Enemie wor∣keth abroad; make a round ball of Canuas, and fill it either with Powder mealed, Sulpher, Salpetre, and Roch-sulpher, of each one pound, mixed and pressed hard & close, and made round, it being sewed, armed, pierced, primed, & coated with Roch-fire, rowled in corne powder, or with Roch-sulpher molten, 1 li, Sal∣petre 2 li, Powder 1 li, and ½, Rozen and Turpentine each ½ li; these primed through in foure places, and shot out of a Morter or Perior without wad, will take fire and burne very light. Some balls are to burne in the water, for which take of Powder 12 oz, Sulpher 6 oz, mixt, Campheere 1 oz, pasted with boiled Linseed oile, and oile of Turpentine and new Wax, of each 4 oz mixt with coale 4 oz, Salpetre and Roch-fire, of each 1 oz, and ½; this made in a ball, armed, primed, and coated, will not be exstinguished by Aire, Wind, nor Water. Another, for a Morter Peece, take a stone shot, lower far then the Bore, dip it in molten Pitch,
Sulpher, Rozen and Turpentine mixed equal parts; then being warme, rowle it in corne powder, with a couer of Fustian dipt in molten Roch-fire, and dip it as at first, rowle it and couer it, vntil it be of fit height for the Peece: lastly, dip it in Roch-fire, and rowle it in fine corne powder, and shoot it out of the Peece without a Wadd, loaded with 8/10 of its weight in powder, and priming it downe to the shot with quicke powder. Q. 46. What are Powder-pots, Pluggs and Cressets? A. Powder Pots are of baked Potters Clay, or thicke glasse made with foure eares; vnto which Mat∣ches lighted at both ends are to be fastned, which fil∣led with powder or quicke receipt, throwne among the Enemie, breakes and takes fire, and makes spoile. Pluggs are to be shot out of Ordnance like billets but at one end, haue barbed heads of iron to sticke, and at the other, Ropes dipt in Sope-lee and dried to fly, and not fire; yet the former receipt placed neere the bar∣bed head, will fire any combustible thing it touch∣eth or stickes in. Cressets are iron hoopes hanged on poles, to be leuell in all motions, and they are filled with toosed match, soaked in Sulpher molten 3 li, Sal∣petre 1 li, Rozen 12 oz, Olibanum, and Antimony of each ½ li, and Linseed oile to incorpotate them toge∣ther; if you will haue them resist wind and raine, fill the hollowes with match well beaten, and soaked in Sulpher and Powder moistned with boiled Linseed oile, and powder of quicke Lime and Campheere mixed; And fired, it resists wind & water: but to hurt the Enemies eyes, or to poison them, or make flesh fall from the bones, is not fit here to be published.
Q. 47. What are Fire-workes of Triumph, for plea∣sure, and how, and with what receipts and conceits made? A. The fashions, inuentions, and compositions of them are infinite, but yet they may be doubly distin∣guished as their actions are double, either in the aire or water: those that make their operation in the aire are either moueable or fixed; the moueable are either simple or compounded: the simple moueable, are the Rockets, the simple fixed, are the Truncks, Lanthorns and Lights, with seuerall sorts of each: The mouea∣bles compounded, are the Wheeles, Trillers, Court∣laces, Clubs, Targets and flying Dragons: The com∣pound fixed, are the Towers, Castles, Arches, Cilin∣ders, Pyramides, and others, which of euery sort are as infinite, as the variety of inuentions may be infinit∣ly conceiued and wrought. Those that worke their effect in the water, either are fired and placed in it, or kindled by the water it selfe, and they do either swim on the surface, as the Rockets, Tumbling-balls, Ser∣pents, Dolphins, Ships, &c. or else burne at the bot∣tome, as many weighty workes doe; some of which, when they are lighted, and become lighter then so much water, they ascend, swim, and burne aboue. Q. 48. How are those that operate in the aire, vsually to be made and compounded? A. The moueable airy Fire-works are either Roc∣kets, or made and contriued with Rockets, they being the substructure of all the other motions: Rockets are diuersly framed, either of paper six or seuen times double, rowled about a former, or they may be of strong light timber turned hollow, or bored, or they may be made of Canuas, in length 6 times the height
of their hollownesse (if they be vnder the weight of one pound) but if they be of more weight then soure and ½ or fiue Diametres, long will be better. Also for small Roc∣kets they must haue the quicker receipts, and for great, flower: As for example, the receipt for Rockets of foure ounces, may be of Powder 4 li, Salpetre 1 li, Coales 4 oz, Sulpher ½ oz; but for Rockets of a pound weight or two, take Salpetre 12 oz, of Powder 20 oz, of Coale 3 oz Sul∣pher viue and Scales of iron, each 1 oz, and Rockets of 8, 9, or 10 li. weight, to 8 li of Salpetre, put 2 li 12 oz of Coale, and 1 li 4 oz of Sulpher; For in the great ones no Powder must be put, note that these materials must be finely beaten & sifted thorow a Searce, and wel mixed & driuen into the Rocket hard, and filled almost to the top euery third or fourth driuing, dipping your drift in Gum Dragagant, and Campheere, dissolued and mixed with spirit of wine or good Aquauitae (if the Rockets be to be fired in three or soure daies) but if it must be a moneth or more first; then, in stead thereof, dippe the drift so in oyle of Petre or liquid Varnish and Linseed oile mixed; if you would haue therein any breakers or Buttons, you must within one Diametre of the top driue a bottom of leather, or six or seuen double of paper, vp to the receipt, and pierce and prime it thorow, therunto in soure or fiue places; and you must also arme your Cane and bored Rockets lest they split: and your flyers must haue a straight rod fastned so, that within one or two fingers breadth of the Rocket it may counterpoize the same, for the Runners swiuels or a Cane fastned is sufficient. Q. 49. How make you the Starres? A. Take ½ oz of Gum-dragagant and lap it in Croo∣ked-lane blacke iron plate, and rost it in the embers, till it may be beaten to powder, then dissolue it in Aquauita
till it be viscous or slimie, then straine it, and also take 4 oz of Campheer, steep it 24 houres in other Aqua∣uitae vntill it be dissolued, mix the dissolutions together, and by little and little sprincklingly, therewith mix these, powdered Salpetre 1 li, Sulpher ½ li, Powder 3 li, Coales ½ li, Amber and Scales of iron, of each 1 li, and mix them all ouer a gentle fire of Charre-coales, and make them in balls as big as you would haue them, and rowle them in mealed powder and Sulpher: you may without the Gumme and Campheere moisten the same powder, only with liquid Varnish, Linseed oile, or oile of Petre; but the first, is the fairer fire for Starres. The heads of Rockets may be loaded with many things, as with powder strongly lapped and armed in Paper or Parch∣ment, with raining fire, with morcells of Roch-fire or horse-haires dipped therein molten, Rockets may also be made with Barbes, to sticke and burne whatsoeuer they light vpon, and as a shot, they may by a deuice be directed to any place within distance assigned. Now in regard that all moueable Fire-workes, in Aire or Water, haue their motions from the force of the Rockets ap∣plied accordingly; I need not speake of them particu∣larly, but leaue each practiser to his owne ingenious in∣uention. Q. 50. What are your compositions or receipts for Water, Fires, to burne as well at the top, as at the bottome, and of those that water will kindle, or that will last long fired? A. Take Masticke one part, white Incence, Gumme Sandrach, quicke Lime, Sulpher, Bitumen, Camphere and Gun-powder, of each three parts, Rozen two parts, and Salpetre nine parts. The Campheer must be beaten either with Sulpher, Salt, Almonds, or water, else it will not be mealed. This will burne and feed vpon in the
water. But to make a receipt to burne at the bottom, fill a ball with this receipt, Take Sulpher, ½ li, mea∣led powder nine ounces, refined Salpetre one pound, and ½, Campheere beaten with Sulpher and Quick-sil∣uer, put and stirred into the Sulpher a little molten, all mealed and mixed by hand, and filled into a round Canuas ball, by little and little, and well driuen, being first moistned with oile of Petre, or Linseed oile boiled vntill it will scald a feather; then arme the Ball, and prime it, balast it with Lead at the bottome, that the vent may burne vpwards, or a stone to sinke it, and (hauing fired it well) throw it into the water, and it will burne at the bottome thereof, and fume and boile vp slow. Now for as much as all the before-named fire∣workes, both moueable and fixed, are but by the ap∣plications of these or the like, I shall not need (neither is it possible) to particular all the inuentions and va∣rieties that may be made therein: I will therefore con∣clude, omitting also perfumed sauours and venomous sents that may be made in Fire-workes, as not fit to be here reuealed. Next for such receipts as the water it selfe will kindle, they are made of oyle Benedict one pound, boiled Linseed oyle three pounds, oyle of the yolkes of Egges one pound, new Quick-lime eight pounds, Sulpher two pound, Campheer foure ounces, and Bitumen two ounces, Or else Roch-Petre one pound, Flowers of Sulpher nine ounces, Coales of Rotten-wood six ounces, Campheer one ounce and ½, oile of Egges, and oile Benedict sufficient to paste the mixture, with new burnt Lime vnsleyked two pound, Or vnsleikt Lime, Tutia, Roch-Petre, Loadstone, of each one part, Sulpher, Viue and Campheer, of each
eight parts, put these things in a pot filled with quick∣lime in powder and lute, and arme it well with strong wires, and set it in a Lime-kill a whole burning time, and the materialls will become a stone that any moi∣sture will kindle. A receipt to carry fire alwayes in a mans pocket, is this; Take Cow-dung steeped soure or fiue times in spirits of Wine or Aquauitae, three times distilled, wherein Campheer must be dissolued; this must be well dried, being made into a Ball and kindled, it will last many dayes; it must be couered halfe an inch thick with vnsleiked Lime, and the white of Egges well mixed, and when you will vse it, make a hole with a priming iron, and put a Sulpher match vnto it, and it will light: And so Salpetre mixt with the powder of the coales of Iuniper, and the white of an Egge, wil a long time last kindled. The Practice of Artillery is to bee sold by Humfrey Robinson at the signe of the three Pigeons in Pauls Church-yard.
