19165 99849209 14347
THE Third and last part of Palmerin of England. Enterlaced with the loues and fortunes of ma∣ny gallant Knights and Ladies: A historie full of most choise and sweet varietie. VVritten in Spanish, Italian, and French, and translated into English by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Maiesties Chamber. Patere, aut abstine. I liue to dy. I dy to liue. printer's or publisher's device AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for VVilliam Leake, at the signe of the Greyhound in Paules Church-yard. 1602.
To the right Worshipfull, Maister Iohn Swynnerton, Esquire: And to the most vertuous Gentlewoman his wife: the compleate issue of their owne harts desires intirely wished. THis long labour (right Worshipfull, and my most affected) hauing cost me so many late and earlie houres, among other mishaps of much bodilie sicknesse: beeing nowe fully perfected, and past through all contrary oppositions, comes to kisse the hand of my most gentle Patrone, and to honour him with his very vttermost seruice. If you finde the translation to come short of such absolute perfection, as a worke of so much merit in right might challenge: burie that blemish in your euer-knowne affable nature, & prize my good will beyond all other ability, which gladly would attaine to higher sufficiencie. Againe, where a man is abridged of so necessary a helpe, as not to haue the reperusall of his owne rash-written papers, which an after iudgement may easilie checke and controule: many errours may escape, & grosse slyps be committed, all which I must now beare the burden of, and endure the sentence (as I may) of euery strict censure. But if your Wor∣ship countenaunce my endeuours with your wonted kindnesse, and hold them any way worthy your very meanest acceptation: I haue all I desire, and which I will further studie to deserue, remaining to you and yours for euer obliged, and (in what I may) continuallie to be commaunded. Your Worships poore, yet vnfained wel-willer. A. Mundy.
❧ To Maister Iohn Swynnerton Esquire. TO thee true friende and fauourer of learning, The foster-father of my meane desarts: Great Palmerin perfected, now imparts His worth and mine, to passe by thy discerning. Spayne, Italie and Fraunce, haue entertainde him, And made theyr greatest Peeres to write his praises: But now his natiue Countries loue him raises, And that high zeale hath home to England wainde him. Long trauaile rest him of his language quite, Therefore he is constrainde to speake by me: This then he saies: He onely comes to thee, To entercourse some matter of delight, Whereof his History affoordeth store: Then bid him welcome, and he craues no more. A. Mundy. Finis.
❧ TO THE TOVVARDLY young Gentleman, Maister Henry Swynnerton. AN ODE. FAire issue of a worthy Sire (like Rose in bud) O let thy blood Taste the true Promethian fire Of sacred Arte: twill beare thee boue thy birth, So many times is Learning tried from earth. Thou second Patrone of my Muse, Guild thy browes VVith Laurell bowes, Perfection shall be thine to vse. And liue a happy heire (being thus inclinde) To the sweet treasure of thy Fathers minde. A. Mundy. FINIS.
To his good friende, Ma. An. Mundy. IF pure translation reach as high a glory As best inuention: (to denie't were sinne) Then thou (deere friend) in publishing this Story, Hast grac'd thy selfe, and thy queint Palmerin, Thou much by him, he most by thee shall win. For tho in courtly French hee sweetly spake, Influent Thuscane, graue Castillian: A harder labour thou doost vndertake Thus to create him a fine Englishman, VVhose Language now dare more then any can. Nor thou, nor Palmerin in choice doe erre: Thou of thy Scholler, he his Schoolemaister. Tho. Dekker. FINIS.
¶ To my kinde friend, Ma. An. Mundy. THe sighes of Ladies, and the spleene of Knights, The force of Magicke, and the Map of fate: Strange Pigmey-singlenes in Giant-fights, Thy true translation sweetly doth relate. Nor for the fiction is the worke lesse fine: Fables haue pith and morall discipline. Now Palmerin, in his owne language singes, That (till thy studie) maskt in vnknowne fashion: Like a fantastick Brittaine, and hence springs, The Mappe of his faire life, to his owne Nation. Translation is a traffique of high price: It brings all learning in one Paradise. Io. VVebster. FINIS.
To his very kinde friend, Ma. An. Mundy. FReend, if thy Booke allowe me so much grace, Though no such merit, I must needes confesse: Yet (if thou canst) affoorde these lines a place, More in thy loue, then theyr owne worthines, Let greater spirits speake by richer pennes, Plaine poore affection hath as true a tongue: And though his voyce be vnder other mens, Yet highest keyes haue lower noates among. Of Languages I skill not, whence thy paines, Hath now at length compleated Palmerin: Praise is a true Translatours worthie gaines, T'abridge thee of it then, were halfe a sinne. Yet no such torture is there (in my minde:) As when great paines haue no reward but winde. An. Gybson. FINIS.
The third Booke of the two valiant Knights, Palmerin of England, and Don Florian his brother. VVherein is likewise discoursed, the hardie attempts of Primaleon the second, and of many other young Knights, with their strange aduentures and wonderfull fortunes. CHAP. I. How the bodies aliue and dead, of the Princes, Dramusiande, and others, (supposed slaine) were con∣uayed vnto the Perillous Isle. THE wise Aliart, who (giuing credite to his fore-knowledge, that all the Princes would mis∣carie, & the Pagans gaining the victory, should beare the sway in Cōstantinople) hauing made such prouision as for the purpose was conuenient, when hee noted, that the highest Power woulde not permit, yt man shoulde cer∣tainlie knowe what was to ensue: comforted himselfe by some of the Princes, who beeing yet aliue, (though voyde of sence or feeling) might yet recouer. And therefore deter∣mined, by meanes of his arte and singular medicines, to giue them hope of life: albeit they coulde not speake one
word, through the extreame losse of their blood, yet by lift∣ing vp their eyes, and gesture of countenaunce, they seemed to intreate helpe: which was with such diligence admini∣stred to them, that howsoeuer theyr mindes were afflicted, yet their bodies amended. Héereupon his ioy excéedinglie increased, séeing their weaknes so diminish, and their out∣ward appearance so pleasing: as nowe hee hld no longer doubt of their death, which was verilie expected in the end of their last battaile. And as his minde was thus busied a∣bout their recouerie, he heard of the ship which brought the dead, wherein was Argentao with heauie countenaunce: which was the lesse to be meruailed at, in regard of the small comfort there to bee expected: and sending to vnder∣stand some tidings, suddenlie issued forth certaine persons in two small boates, crying, good newes, good newes. At which noyse, Aliart, as one wakened out of sleepe, knewe not well what to say, or how to conceiue thereof. But bée∣ing come neere this Ship, he heard them all say, that Dra∣musiande (who for two daies had lien as dead) was cme to himselfe againe, and lying with his eyes wide open, sée∣med to request remedie for his wounds. These tidings were so ioyfull to them all, especiallie A∣liart, that intending presentlie to succour Dramusiande: hée entred where the Princes aliue were, who though they spake not, yet in their traunce could they vnderstand what was said or done to them. My Lordes (quoth Aliart) take comfort, for one of your louing friends, who hath hartilie bemoned the dead, liueth, and hopeth yet to restore them, that you may reioyce in their liues so déerelie loued of you. But hee would not name Dramusiande, fearing least the weake bodies of the princes, by such matter of so great and suddaine ioy, should bee the more shaken and endangered. As he was going to medicine Dramusiande, some of the o∣ther persons turned backe, crying: Sir Aliart, succour the liues of these Princes, whom we suspect for dead, that wée loose not all hope, which this good aduenture hath perswa∣ded.
Aliart hauing about him all necessaries, that are required in such an vrgent néede, went to Argentaos ship, wherein béeing entred, he found Dramusiande, Almaroll, Francian prince of Thessaly, Dragonalte king of Nauarre, Don Rosu∣ell, with Dirdan sonne to Maiortes, in whom appeared ve∣rie little shew of life. Then beginning to annoynt thē with a certaine vnguent, thought powerfull enough to reuiue their weakened forces: Dramusiande and two of the Prin∣ces séemed somwhat restored. But Almaroll, whose heade was in a manner cleft, as one not to be hoped of by any out∣ward testimony: the other holding him déere in friendship, could not but shew themselues highly contented, to sée him raised from death, the want of whose companie might be a hinderance to their health. These businesses thus procee∣ding (as in like cases of miserie) somewhat prosperouslie, the ships béeing vnder full saile, attained néere to the Peril∣lous Isle, where none else coulde discerne them but the sage Aliart, who had couered thē with a cloude, that they might not be séene by anie other: because the Pagans remaining victs (as they thought) might haue no power to violate this royall Signorie, neither that they might extinguish all hope yet remaining, of preseruing the memorie of so many wounded Princes. Wherefore causing the shypps thus to enter the Isle in this cloude, he commaunded that Dramu∣siande, with the Princes Francian and Dragonalte, should be brought into the shippe, where Primaleon and the rest a∣liue were: but seperated them from the other, because as yet no expresse signe appeared in thē, whether they should escape the danger or no: and the rather, that the extreame affliction of the one, might raise no discomfort in the other. Afterward he appointed, that the shippe which brought the dead, should enter the néerest Bay to the Fountaine where the beasts of mettall were, like them which Palmerin slew when he conquered that Isle: and thence they were caried into a faire Pallace, where they remained til he could giue them sufficient buriall. All which he did, to the end, the Ladies (whose husbands were dead) should not offend the
liuing with theyr dolorous complaints: intending by little and little to make them forget theyr losses, and with pati∣ence to beare their ouer-hard fortune. The shyppe béeing thus come into the Bay, immediatly the newes of theyr arriuall was knowne to the Ladies, where-upon, accompanied with the men of the Isle, they came in great fury running thetherward, each of them thinking to finde her husband aliue, not déeming how soone they should rue theyr mishaps. When they were come to the shippe, Aliart, who best knew the estate of the wounded Princes: with chéerefull countenaunce met them, and bée∣ing round enuironed with them, taking Gridonia and Fle∣rida each by the hand, said: Ladies, I am glad of a deceite happening to me in mine owne arte, which vntruly tolde me, that all the defenders of the Grecian Empire, should perrish, and the Cittie of Constantinople be in the enemies possession: but (praysed be the diuine bounty) the Pagans are discomfited, & all your Lords in good hope of life. But thus I would aduise, that without any noyse, or your di∣sturbance, they might be brought foorth of the Shippe, and each one quietly carried to his Ladies lodging: For thys I must tell yée, there is another Shyppe at hand, wherein commeth Argentao with many other, among whom are they that died before you were conueyed to this Island. All the Ladies, betwéene hope & dread, departed thence, each to her Cabinet, because they would not contrary what Aliart had appointed. Then caused he to be caried Primale∣on to Gridonia, Florendos to Miragarda, Platir to Sidelia, Don Edward to Flerida, Palmerin to Polinarda, Florian to Leonarda, Berolde, Gracian, and Dragonalte, seuerallie to their wiues: Floraman to a Pallace hard by, and Blandi∣don to his mother. And one thing most notable happened, when Palmerin was brought to his Lady, the loue which betwéene them had euer beene equall, wrought now a contrary effect. For Polinarda, seeing her husband not able to stand on his féete, in great amazement was depriued of her speech: And hée
that had not the power to speake a worde while hee was in the Shyp, when hée beheld his loue thus ouer-gone with gréefe, suddainly said: Feare not swéete Lady, for I shall soone be well. Aliart gaue order to the Princesses, how they should dresse and regard their wounded husbands: then taking with him Cardigea, Bernarda, and Arlencea, hee conducted them to the Shyp, where they might looke to their Lords, because as yet they were not in case to be brought out of the Shippe. Ioy intermedled with feare, made these La∣dies diligent & carefull each of her charge: but they whose husbands were not there present, neither dead nor aliue, were wondrously afflicted with gréefe, and had not ye place béene so enchaunted, that thence they could not depart, ma∣ny of them would haue aduentured by land and sea to haue found them. But Aliart by faire promises still gaue them hope, that shortlie they would be there, all which auailed not: For when they sawe so many Princes, which were the verie flower of all the Christian Knights, so dangerously woun∣ded, & in such perill, they had little hope of their husbands liues. And this was partlie occasioned, by one of the prince Beroldes seruants, who comming in the Shippe with Ar∣gentao, where the dead were, happened to steppe in at the same instant, when Aliart laboured to continue the hope of the widdowed Ladies, & said, that Argentao had brought back the Knights dead. These wordes did so dampe and vtterly dismay theyr mindes, that beeing nowe more then certaine of theyr se∣uerall losse, in rage they would presentlie haue runne to séeke their dead bodies: But Aliart, who by the skilfulnes of his Arte sought to quallifie their discontentment, caused certaine spirits spéedily to appeare before them, resembling in shape and proportion the knowne seruants to theyr Husbands, and they to each Lady deliuered such nde Embassages, as they then verilie beléeued theyr Knights were liuing.
Thus pacified he this impatient furie of the Ladies, and attended to the curing of the other Princes: who (with the helpe of their kinde wiues companie) began to be indiffe∣rentlie recouered, and now all spake chéerefully one to an∣other. CHAP. II. VVhat Targiana did, after the Campe was dissol∣ued, and the Soldane Albayzar her husband dead. TArgiana & the Princesse of Ar∣menia, when the third daies fight began, considering yt in so many battailes, not any of the Chri∣stians (most famous for armes) were dead: began to perswade themselues, that ye Pagan part woulde be ouerthrowne and dis∣comforted, where-vppon they with-drew thēselues into a ship: which from her Father was thether sent well prouided, and wherein likewise were manie of her friendes, where hearing the successe of the battaile, and the death of Albay∣zar, they lanched out into the maine, attended on by some other ships, that prepared themselues to returne with her towards Babylon. But her vnkinde starres, not satis-fied, first with her scorning by Prince Florian, then to sée her husband baselie led prisoner by Florendos, to present him before faire Mi∣ragarda, (as is declared in the second part of this historie,) and now lastly, that he was slaine by the same Florian, of whom shee had béene so greatly despised: but that nowe a new disgrace as prepared for her. Wherefore, conten∣ding inwardlie with her pride of minde, where-with her former conceits had alwaies béene ledde, when she beheld her selfe to be his widdow, who by so many Trophies had
renowned her beautie: shée nowe sate amazedly mourning at her wonderfull mis-fortunes. Hauing sailed on tenne leagues and more, they were met with an Armie of twen∣tie shippes, guided by Ristorano her Cosin, who (after the decease of his vnckle the great Turke) imagined how hee might signorize ouer that state: and taking this to bee his best way, prouided himselfe of the afore-said Nauie, when comming within an hundred miles of Constantinople, hee made stay, awayting from time to time, what newes hee could heare of Albayzar and his power. When he vnderstood of the Pagans discomfiture, he set on towards their Campe, to disclose some secrets to the vn∣aduised Albayzar: holding for certaintie, that if hee were aliue, hee was conquered and in great distresse: thus with a gentle gale he sailed onward. Targianas Nauie béeing surprised, that little expected any such fierce encounter, and therefore rode on at pleasure: were all boorded and seazed on, ere they had any libertie to prepare themselues for fight. When the prisoners were brought before him, and that he behelde Targiana among them, he was so ioyfull that he could not dissemble his déep contentment. Then began he to scorne the Lady, casting in her teeth what she had doone in fauour of the Christians, how greeuously shée tooke it, when Polendos and the rest were her Fathers prisoners, & how she fled (vnrequested) with Florian of the Forrest. The Lady, who was of a great spirite, dismaied not a iote, albeit shee was his prisoner, of whose intent before hand shée could easilie diuine: Wherefore, shee aunswered him sternly, as one dreadlesse of death, for life (among so manie losses,) was not by her regarded. Heare me (quoth she) Ristorano, I confesse I haue fauoured the Christians, in repaiment of infinite curtesies frō them receiued, while I remained in Constantinople, not that I did negligently ca∣rie my selfe, in any thing that might or did displease my husband. But for I am assured, that in vaine I doe excuse my selfe to thee, were all true where-with thou couldest
charge me: dispose of me as thou wilt, but looke for warre from the Christians, in regard of the loue they beare mée. And though I haue béene absent from my hereditarie king∣dome, (which thou vniustlie séekest to vsurpe) yet haue I a childe, as is well knowne through all Babylon: and those people, who for their loue to Albayzar, desire to haue his sonne their Soueraigne, will chastise thee as thou well de∣seruest. Ristorano (who willinglie would haue slaine her, the ea∣sier to compasse what hee desired) considering on her spée∣ches, thought it better to deferre her death, till with more security he might effect it: and séeming to shew no outward signe of feare, with angry lookes thus he replied. Thy of∣fences merrite more then a common kinde of death: wher∣fore so lightlie will I not kill thée, as I sée thou wishest I would. Héere-vpon, hee commaunded her with the Armenian Princesse, into a priuate roome of the shippe: and hee was in a thousand opinions, whether he should land, and take the Cittie of Constantinople, or turne backe into Turkie, and rule that kingdome. For it was the Citties good hap, that Ristorano, not hearing what had happened to the principal Knights, who had defended the Cittie, (as the wise Aliart so procured, who likewise knewe of this Armies making thitherward) but beléeuing that the Christians were con∣querers, and therefore doubtful of his owne fortune: durst not goe on shoare, the rather, because his owne men were more willing to be gone then tarry. So contenting him∣selfe, that Fortune had deliuered Targiana into his hand, and hearing by his spials, that Brundo, sonne to Don Rosi∣ran de la Bronde, with foure thousande horse, lay before Constantinople, expecting if they durst land or no: fearing to be taken, with all spéede possible, he made hast to be gone from thence. When Targiana behelde her selfe in his power, whom vndoubtedly she knew intended her death, albeit her mind was inuincible, yet sate shée very pensiue, not giuing a
word to the Armenian Princesse: who likewise gréeued to see her selfe a prisoner; neuerthelesse, because she expected not death, shee laboured her thoughts the better for her e∣scape, and turning to Targiana, said. I remember good Princesse, that when I was to depart from Persia, a wise Enchauntresse named Drusa Velona, gaue me a Ring of such vertue: that being sent in a Letter to any Knight, whom I should make choyse of for my de∣fence, he would presently come to helpe me. Thinke then what Knight may be most conuenient for your purpose, and I will write the Letter: for the Ring is of such force, as to wound the hart of any Knight, and make him loue ye, although before he hated ye neuer so much. Targiana right ioyfull to heare Drusa Velonas name, whose Art had before auailed her, when she conducted her away, and enchaunted the Princesse Leonarda: began to thinke with her selfe, what Knight she should determine on, to deliuer her from the hands of Ristorano. But a∣mong so many opinions not knowing how to resolue, the Nauie entred Turkie, where Ristorano secretly conuayed her to a Castle, accompanying her with certaine Ma∣trones, who had charge that she should send no Letters a∣broade. For he feared, that if the Turkes should vnder∣stand, howe their Lady Targiana was imprisoned in her owne Kingdome: they would stirre in her behalfe. This hindered their former desseignment, of sending the Letter with the Ring: and which by reason of the companie ap∣pointed to attend them, could not be performed.
CHAP. III. VVhat they did in Constantinople, after the depar∣ture of the sage Aliart. VEry sorrowfull remained all the Cittizens of Constantinople, for the departure of the sage Aliart, who had caried with him thence the Knights aliue and dead: but because on the contrary side they were some-what fearefull, least the Pagans should renue their forces, seaze on the Citty, and so all hope be vtterly lost in repos∣sessing it: they began to strengthen their walls, and take order for matters concerning gouernment. And studying to elect one, who might be fit for such affaires: there thi∣ther came (as hath beene declared) Brundo accompanied with foure thousand Horse, who slewe and put to flight all the Pagans remayning there-about: wherefore it was generally iudged, that God had sent him to be Gouernour of their Citty, vntill such time as their owne Prince re∣turned. Héere-vpon, by publique voyce he was elected, to his owne no little contentment: not so much for desire of the gouernment, as that he estéemed it a matter glorious, to preserue the Grecian Empire to the progenie of Palme∣rin. Being thus enstalled as Gouernour, he gaue himselfe to refortifying the walls, and leueying summes of money for maintenance of the state. To this end he would often assemble his forces, and accompanied with people of the Citty likewise, would sack and destroy the enemies holds neerest the Sea: for therein were found abiding many Pa∣gans, which had not as yet beene dealt withall by the peo∣ple: there likewise were hid great summes of treasure, which brought much benefit to the weale publique, hel∣ping well to enritch both the Souldiours and Cittizens.
The walls being fully perfected, and the ruined buildings in better forme then before they had béene: such diligence on all sides was vsed, that within two moneths, the Citty was as beautifull as euer it was, so yt nothing else wanted, but the noble presence of the absent Knights, which made it most of all to be regarded: but by the assembly of people from all parts, it séemed to excéede the former populous e∣stimation, and Brundo with soundest iustice still preserued them in peace. Yet often was the breach héereof endan∣gered, by the Embassadours from Spaine, Fraunce, and other Kingdomes, who came to demaund the dead bodies of their Princes, and not finding them there, lamented excéeding∣ly, because they would not credite what was said, concer∣ning their carrying thence. But Aliart fore-séeing this danger by his Art, suddenly shewed himselfe amongst thē, when by vertue of his authority and vnreprooueable rea∣sons, he vrged them to rest satisfied, saying: That he had prepared for their Lords more honourable buriall, then e∣uer could be bestowed on Princes: euen as the wise Vr∣ganda, who in the time of Amadis & his sonne Esplandion, fore-seeing what would be the end of the passed battailes, had prouided the like. The Embassadours contented with this aunswere, returned to their seuerall Countries: and Aliart confirmed the Regiment of Brundo, giuing order for many matters, that might redound to the Cittizens profit. He likewise told them newes of the Princes, who being caried thence with so little hope of life, were yet now redu∣ced into so good estate, as within little while they should haue their Emperour Primaleon, though no more he might aduenture the life of a Knight at Armes. The people of Constantinople were very ioyfull of these tydings, because now they were assured to see their Prince againe, whose vertues they did both loue and reuerence. So abiding in prouident cae for their Citty, they entreated Aliart, that (so soone as might be) he would send their Prince Primale∣on: which he promised to doo, and so returned to the Peril∣lous Ile.
CHAP. IIII. How the Princes that were in the Perillous Ile, were now recouered past any danger: And what happened to Madam Leonarda in child-trauaile. How the other Princesses in like manner were deliuered of children: and how the Prince Florian of the For∣rest departed thence. ALiart being gone from Constanti∣nople toward the Perillous Ile, per∣ceauing by his skill, that there would happen a mischaunce, suf∣ficient to disturbe the Princes quiet: made his arriuall there the sooner, finding all things wel as yet, that the Knights had in∣differently recouered their great losse of blood, and walked about the Iland, albeit their wounds were not thorowly healed: which some-what offended them, & made them (in a man∣ner) scorne Aliarts wisedome, as the like they did in fore∣iudging the issue of the perillous battaile, handled at large in the end of the second booke of this History. But tenne dayes were not fully expired, till they found themselues in better disposition, ioying more entirely in each others a∣mendment. Nowe the Quéene Leonarda, ouer-charged with the irksome panges of child-bearing, hauing foure dayes toge∣ther endured the bitter agonies incident thereto, was at length deliuered of a faire daughter named Victoria: who being no sooner borne, but the weake Mother (folding her armes together, and lifting her eyes to heauen) departed this life. This her suddaine death, which the wise Aliart before suspected not, very much troubled all the royall com∣pany: but especially Florian, who was wonderously ena∣moured
of her, he ranne about in such fury, as at euery in∣stant he would haue slaine himselfe, and he had done it, but that Palmerin, Pompides, and Aliart his brethren, were still enforced to kéepe him company. At length, growing into extreame hate of the Iland, because he had lost the compa∣ny of his beloued Leonarda: one day taking Aliart aside, he thus began. My Lord and brother, eyther giue me leaue to dispatch my selfe, that I may not out-liue her, whose beauty remē∣bred makes life loathsome to me: or let me depart this I∣land, to the end I may not sée the place, which daily renu∣ing the memory of my loue, wil vrge me but to the greater impatience. All the Princes liked wel this determination of Florian, who was not yet perfectly healed, albeit his dex∣terity vsed in the battaile, hindered his hurts from being so déepe as others were, by meanes whereof he was the best recouered amongst them all. All the Lords & Ladies great∣ly laboured to comfort Florian, & pacifie his greefes, but all their endeuour amounted to nothing: for hée was so tran∣sported with griefe & passions, as he liued the most despised life that euer malcontent did. When Aliart made proofe of his Art and industry, and saw all was in vaine to remooue these humors: he prouided him a Ship, and causing him to put on like Armour as hée was went to weare, as also a shield with his former sauage mans deuise: accompanied him foorth of the Iland, to the great griefe of all the Prin∣ces, especially Don Edward his father, whose age made his wounds more offensiue to him. His brethren would gladly haue borne him company, but hee (reiecting all comfort) would not permit them: so taking his leaue of them all, & lastly of Aliart, gone is he for all aduentures whatsoeuer. The griefe for Florians departure, was partly qualified, by ioy of ye princesses, who now were to behold ye fruits of their labors. Miragarda was deliuered of a son, so like her selfe, as in beauty he excelled all the youth of those times, & was named Oliuanto. Polinarda had a sonne likewise, who was called Leonato. Claricia, wife to Gracian Prince of France,
brought foorth a sonne, hee had to name Caro. Onistalda, wife to Berolde Prince of Spaine, was brought to bed of a daughter, who was named Argentina: in beauty shee see∣med another Miragarda, but for honest curtesie much more affable. Bernarda, wife to the Prince Francian, and daugh∣ter to Belcar, had a sonne, who was called Belcar after his Grandfather. Sidelia, Platirs wife and Primaleons daugh∣ter, brought foorth a sonne, named Estrellant. Denisa▪ wife to Belisart, had twinnes, a male and female: the sonne was called Fortenbracio, the daughter Candida. This Lady grew so faire, that she excelled all the dames of Greece, and made the minds distracted both of Palmerin and the Empe∣rour Primaleon: because each of them for this rare and sin∣guler beauty, without regard of honour or kindred, made choyse of her as their chiefest Patronesse. Clariana, wife to Dramian, she had a sonne named Orino Leonida, daugh∣ter to the Duke of Pera, & wife to Frisoll, brought a sonne, called Arguto. This was no lesse an enemie to Primaleon the second, (then was Frisoll his Grandfather, who was named in those times the Knight of the Sunne, to Palmerin d'Oliua) according as in fit place shall be declared Arlen∣cea brought her husband Dramusiande, a sonne of great stature, who had to name Franardo, excéeding his father in valure, and dooing seruice like him to the Empire of Con∣stantinople. Cardigea, daughter to the Giant Gatarin, and wife to Almaroll, had likewise a sonne, who became no lesse faithfull and valiant then his father, and therefore af∣ter his name was called Almaroll. Florenda, daughter to Arnedes King of Fraunce, and wife to Germaine of Orle∣aunce, had a daughter named Spira: who was so faire, but yet arrogant withall, that not contenting her selfe with a∣ny Knights offer to her seruice, thinking her selfe to be the onely woman: remayned without a husband, as shall be declared when we come to speake of her. Clariana brought to Guerin a sonne, who was called Armindo. The ioy was great through the whole Iland, for these Princesses good successe in child-birth, and when the children came to
be christened, they were all named as ye haue heard alrea∣die: but as for those Ladies whose husbands were dead, they remayned in griefe, as they had good cause: For the kinde harted woman being bereft of her husband, can take no true delight in any thing else what so euer. CHAP. V. VVhat happened for the buriall of the dead Prin∣ces bodies. ALiart beholding the wounded Princes so well recouered, pre∣sently began to bethinke him on buriall for the dead, that due ho∣nour might be done to each one, to remayne for all their succée∣ding posterity. And that the La∣dies might not knowe whether he went, hee secretly tooke ship∣ping, and so passed to the place where the dead bodies were. Comming néere the shoare, he espied Argentao, with others accompanied (who noted the Ships making thitherward) hastning to the Port, and there they met together euen as Aliart landed. Argentao with a loud voyce told him, how Satrafort, Gouernour of the Castle, had taken into his custodie the Princes dead bo∣dies, by reason of a strange accident there happening in this manner. The day before, in the chamber where Ali∣art found the bookes of the skilfull Vrganda, was heard a wonderfull noyse, and going to know the reason thereof: they beheld round about the chamber many faire Toombs, equalling the number of the dead Princes, whereby they found themselues disburdened of their former care, which was, how they might finde meanes to interre the Princes, with such honour as they had all highly deserued. And hol∣ding this aduenture to be very important, they stoode con∣ferring
héereon with Alfernao at the Castle, euen as they beheld this Shippe comming vnder saile, when Satrafort meeting Alfernao on the bridge, and ioying to be accompa∣nied with so wise and woorthy a Lord as Aliart, began to acquaint him with the whole accident. It nowe remayneth sir (quoth Argentao to Aliart) that your arriuall héere in so happy an houre, may thoroughly resolue vs in many doubtfull cases: because▪ though all these Toombs are of most beautifull Marble, yet know we not how to appoint each Prince the place best beséeming him. As for you my Lord, to whom farre greater aduen∣tures then this are reserued in knowledge: you can best appoint how matters shall be ordered, in that you are to dispose both of them and vs. Aliart very ioyfull of these good newes, perswading himselfe, that whosoeuer prepa∣red these Toombs so ready, had likewise appointed them to the dignity of each person: without shaping them any aun∣swere at all, entred the Castle, where being conducted to the Toombs, and assaying to remooue them thence, but could not: he meruailed not a little thereat, and standing in a solemne conceite héereon, he bethought himselfe, that it were necessary to haue al the other liuing Princes there, in defence of whom all they had lost their liues: but espe∣cially the wiues of these slaine Knights, that they behol∣ring their honourable buriall, should take their losse the more contentedly. Héere-vpon he dispatched thence Satrafort, by whom hee aduertised Primaleon, Don Edward, and the rest, that with conuenient spéede they should come thither, and bring with them all the Princesses. Within two dayes following, they had there personally present, the Emperour, Don Ed∣ward, Florendos, Palmerin, of England, Platir, Gracian, Be∣rolde, Floraman, Francian, Dragonalte, Blandidon, Pompi∣des, Dramusiande, who now began to walke a little, lea∣ning on a speares trunchion, and Dirdan with him. But Almaroll could not be there, by reason of his weakenes, marrie all the Princesses were there together: with ioy
and great kindnes did Aliart welcome them, that all their passed gréefes were vtterlie forgotten: and each had their lodgings seuerallie appointed, that such as were not sound∣lie healed, might haue the better attendance. CHAP. VI. How the seuerall Tombes were made manifest, with the Epitaphs belonging to each of them. THE Ladies whose husbandes were dead, did not as yet behold where they should be buried: but imagining it would be in ye Ca∣stle, grewe into the greater pen∣siuenes, and wept as women in like case will doo. Which when Aliart perceiued, hee gaue order the next day, that all the Prin∣ces with the Ladies, should come into the chamber, where hauing caused the dead bodies to be brought, they flocked all together to beholde the euent. No sooner were they there assembled, but appeared foorth of the wall the figure of an old woman, who holding a rod in her hand, made signe by her lookes bent on Aliart, that he should commaund to bee brought into the midst of the Chamber, the bodie of Arnedes king of Fraunce, which no sooner was done, but a goodly Tombe like a bed, presented it selfe vnto them, which was bedect with flowers of golde so curiously formed, as it was most meruailous to beholde, and in the midst of a cloth rarelie wrought thereon, was written this Epitaph. The honour of Fraunce is not heerein enclosed, Which nor to time nor place can be disposed. Policia, the wife and Quéene to Arnedes, standing before this Tombe, with Flerida & the other Ladies, made great
lamentation ouer the Kings dead bodie: which they would haue continued both that day and the next, if the Sepulcher (after it was closed) had not béene suddenly taken away, they knew not by whom, and then againe beheld if placed in the midst of the wall, vnder the féete of the figure of the same Policia his Queene. When presentlie another tombe most richlie wrought, was séene to stand in ye others place, hauing this Epitaph on it. Spayne, grieue not thou, sith death cannot depriue Thy fame and honour which thou heldst aliue: For thou in greater glory doost suruiue. Melissa his Quéene would haue stept before it, to witnes her inward gréefe by her teares: but the third Tombe (as pleased the power that sent it, to hinder her laments) in∣truded it selfe, and the second was likewise conueyed to the other in the wall. Each one meruailed at this third Se∣pulcher, séeing there was nere a Crosse thereon, nor anie Christian signe vsed on such monuments, yet béeing verie huge & great: wherefore they imagined, that it was made for the Graund Cane Maiortes, who was a Pagan, and the doubt héereof was fully resolued, so soone as they read the Epitaph, which was thus. From man, became a dogge, then changd to humane state, He seru'd me with a dogs firme loue, for times to wōder at. All the Princes shed teares, when faithfull Maiortes was layd in his Sepulcher, especially Don Edward, who had him with him in the forme of a dog, and afterward a man, (as in Primaleons historie is declared) coulde not refraine from weeping. It pleased Aliart to behold all these testimonies of loue, and hee laboured to conuert all this gréefe to ioy, in regard the totall ruine of Constantinople had not happened, but that the other Princes, whose death were once as much to be doubted, were now to be séene in so good estate. But (as in like cases) gréefe is not easilie remooued, so still they helde on, till this Tombe was lifted vp and conueied thence:
marie foorth of the Chamber, because hee was not a Chri∣stian. And then was placed another Tombe before them, so roially adorned: as they were verie desirous to knowe for whom it was, when looking on the Epitaph, they read thus. Belcar heere sleepes, heauen hath his soule by right, The world his spoyles, all won in fayrest fight: With such rare honour as became a Knight. Belcar enclosed in his hearsse, with many silent passions of his wife Alderina, his sonne, and all the rest (because A∣liart had intreated no more accesse to the bodies) it was cō∣uaied thence, and (as the former) placed at the foote of his wiues figure, the statue séeming to shed lifelie teares, such wondrous arte had the skilfull Vrganda vsed on them all. Then appeared to them another Tombe, the fore-part whereof was ingeniouslie formed, and béeing couered with a sumptuous cloth all of golde, they read thereon this Epi∣taph. Frisols fayre deedes doe merrite more regard Then earth can yeeld, true fame is his reward. The successe of this Tombe, resembled the former, whē another was immediatly presented, not one iote lesse beau∣tified or adorned: whereon appeared the instability of For∣tune, and thus the Epitaph. Belysart dyed, but not infamously, His vertues conquer deaths blacke obloquie. This Sepulcher taken away before Denisa could do her dutie to it: there was another intruded, whereon in verie faire letters this Epitaph was engrauen. Onistade, dreadlesse of deaths crueltie: With fame hath wonne faire lifes eternitie. Quickly was this tombe conuaied thence, and in steede thereof another, containing this motto. Albanis hath wonne what neuer can be lost, Then death how canst thou of thy conquest boast? This likewise being remoued, another more rich & preci∣ous was presented, with this Epitaph.
Mourne not Bohemia though thy King be dead, His life and death, hath made thee famozed. King Rodamont béeing in his graue, and bemoned gene∣rallie, it was taken to place appointed for it, when Aliart séeing another alreadie in roome therof, perusing the deuise, found thereon this inscription. Estrellant fought not for an earthly crowne, Immortall life trode those affections downe. The Ladies and Princes could not cease from wéeping, beholding the losse of so many hardie Knights, but when this Tombe was caried to the wall, the next approching had this Epitaph. Vassiliards fayth did testifie his end, Whose deeds, whole worlds of time shall still commend. Next, followed the Sepulcher for Duke Drapos of Nor∣mandie, with these two lines thereon. Normans, it is in vaine to weepe for mee, Country farewell, my fame shall liue with thee. Another faire Tombe was next presented, with this sen∣tence to be read thereon. Tremoran no better way could finde to die, Then in stoute warre, by fairest chiualrie. Euerie one stoode silent, except such as sighed, not know∣ing what to say, seeing the Tombes so strangely carried from place to place, and yet not discerned by whom, vpon the next were these lines. Fierce Tenebrant, when death had him in chase, Turnd manfully, and died with deaths disgrace. His bedde of honour béeing couered and gone, another as magnificent was produced, deliuering these verses. No blame can Orleaunce to my death impute, That lost my life in honours swift pursute. Then Luymans Tombe was the next in course, bearing this testimonie of his vertues.
Ʋertue the obiect of my high desire, Bestowed on me what most I did require. Next was to be seene another Sepulcher, not of white stone, as all the former were: but more red and bloody cul∣lored, containing this Epitaph. Though Rosiran were not the greatest Lord, His honour heere doth with the rest accord. Nowe euen at the dayes shutting vp, Dramians hearsse presented it selfe, with this deuise. So sweetly Dramian dyed among the rest, That now he liues as famous as the best. And when it was conuaied thence, as all the rest had béene, Aliart looked about, and behelde no more Tombes thus to be offered, wherein the greater states were to bee enclosed: then looking on the old Womans figure, it tur∣ned the face thereof toward the wall, as if it séemed to com∣maund them now to depart. Heereupon he caused the La∣dies whose husbands were liuing, to lead the widdowed Princesses by the hand, and hee followed, comforting them in this manner. Fayre Ladies, séeing it pleased GOD, that your Lords should loose their liues in defence of his faith, you ought to conforme your selues to his will, and with-drawing yée to more quiet of minde, be carefull of your owne health, least your losse be a greater endamagement to Christendome. To morrowe we shall sée, in what manner these greater Lords are to be buried, for I cannot beléeue, that the wise Vrganda would prouide such rare Sepulchers for these, and haue no care of them of higher desert. Héere-with they departed the chamber, meruailing at the strange accidents they ad séene.
CHAP. VII. How Pandricia, hauing hid herselfe in the Cham∣ber among the Tombes, was found dead by the bo∣die of her husband Bellagris. BEeing all of them greatlie gréeued for the death of so many woorthy Lords, Pandricias sorrowes grew to extreamity, for she béeing hidde among the Sepulchers, with resolued minde to pursue her intent, and weeping to die ouer her husbands dead bodie: when shee perceiued that by the time of night they were all asléepe, she came to the bodie of Bellagris, and ouer it made the most wofulst la∣mentation, that euer did woman for her husbands death. Recounting the tedious time of misery, wherein not long they had liued, which béeing ouer-blowne with a little bet∣ter comfort, had now so small continuance. Then remem∣bring Blandidon her sonne, whose life she likewise feared, because his great expence of blood still made him keepe his bed: this double corsiue of gréefe so laboured her thoughts, that ouer-come there-with, closing hand in hand, shee fell downe dead, ouer her husbands body. CHAP. VIII. How the other Princes were buried the day fol∣lowing. YEt was not Blandidon so greatly weakened, but that he remembred his mother, who was wont to stand very pensiue by his bedde side: but séeing all had betaken themselues to rest, loth was hee to trouble so honourable a com∣panie,
and therefore passed ouer this night, suspecting what he found too true in the end. The morning following, they rose not ouer-earlie, by reason of the Princes weake dispo∣sition, and the greefe they endured the day past, in burying the dead. Aliart, who stoode pondering with himselfe, where the Princes of greatest merrite should be interred, because hee sawe no Sepulchers as yet there appointed for them: ear∣lie that morning went where the other had béene buried, and beheld all the chamber was changed into the forme of halfe a Theater, with degrées and pillers of Alablaster so beautifull, as at midnight cléere day might there be discer∣ned, and the Tombes which had béene vsed the day before, aunswered in order to the persons enclosed in them. Now in the midst of a place more high and spacious, and vnder the féete of Polinardas figure, was a Sepulcher wrought in∣to the wall, held vp by pillers of Porphirie, and arched o∣uer the head most richlie, where on the couerture stood (in pure golde) the statue of the Emperour Palmerin, holding Fortune by the locks, and out-brauing her power, as see∣ming to threaten her if she parted from him. On the side before, was engrauen in Letters of golde these verses fol∣lowing. By valour and good hap I ouercame All mine attempts: To kindred of my name, Leaue I perpetuall memory and fame. On the right hand was another Tombe, little lesse diffe∣ring in beautie, béeing placed vnder the féete of Agriola, and in the midst thereof was two Epitaphs, the first was thus. The state I ioyde, made mee not feare to die, Because I knewe that shame and infamie, Followeth a life not led heroycallie. The other, which was some-what lower, and written in lesser Letters, was thus.
Tis endlesse death to liue without content: Die then like me, who will the same preuent. This second Epitaph made knowne, that Polynard was buried with the Emperour Vernar his Brother, whereat they all meruailed. Now on the left hand of the Emperour Palmerin, was another Sepulcher richlie adorned, hauing this Epitaph thereon. Yeeres did not let me from desire to die, Wanting the life my father got thereby. The description thus engrauen on this Tombe, made it apparant to euerie one, that therein lay enclosed, Polendos King of Thessaly. Then vnder that of Palmerin, there was another of redde Marble: but the Epitaph thereon was written in Gréeke, and is thus interpreted. It was ill hap for me to end my daies, Not spending of my blood, as others haue: To guarde the walls and gates got me no prayse, They did me wrong that sent me so to graue. Euery one gathered, that this was King Tarnaes, who in regard of his graue yéeres, was left to guarde the Citty of Constantinople. Nowe stande all the Princes and Lords dumbe (as it were) at so many meruailes, and nothing else coulde bee heard, but earnest and profound sighes, sent from the mel∣ting harts of the widdowed Ladies. And Aliart, to knowe certainlie whether the bodies, which were not buried the day before, remained as they had beene left, went to the chamber, and finding that of Bellagris, as also Pandricia ly∣ing dead by it, he stoode as one agast thereat, the Princes∣ses likewise, when they beheld her in that case, deliuered forth such lamentations, as might easily be heard thorowe the whole Castle: which raised such admiration in them that lay wounded, as made them forsake their lodgings, to the great perill of their liues: especially Blandidon, whose mind misgaue him of some ensuing ill, not hauing all that night seene his wofull mother.
Aliart by his words could not pacifie their complaints, but worse was like to haue ensued thereon, if the olde wo∣mans figure had not made a suddaine noyse with her rod: where-with they all turned about, to vnderstand the cause thereof, and beeing in a generall meruaile, immediatly they behelde a goodly Sepulcher woorthily wrought, ha∣uing two Epitaphs engrauen thereon: the first in this ma∣ner. I liu'd a Pagan, but for truth I know, That following time will blisse on me bestow. The other which was fastened to this former, with ma∣ny braunches (as it were) was thus. Life full of griefe, with little ioy or none, Welcome sweet death that knits two harts in one: For with Bellagris is my hope alone. In this Sepulcher were they both layd together, & with∣out any one putting hand thereto, it was taken vp, and placed vnder that of King Tarnaes: for Pandricia, albeit she was nominated amongst the fairest in the world, yet was she not pictured in this chamber, the reason was, she led such a sorrowfull kinde of life, as hindred the perfection of her beauty from sight. These Princes buried thus with such glory, as the wise Vrganda in her prouidence thought méete, preseruing by her in readines so many Toombs, as might serue such great Princes to take their latest rest in. Aliart (hauing brought thither from the Profound Ile, diuers Priests and religious persons) caused their obsequies to be celebrated, as in a Countrey so farre from Christendome could be performed. Which being done, he brought them all back to the Pallace, hauing first séene the old womans Image take her leaue: who with her wand made certaine signes to them, which séemed by Aliarts signifying the same, that, that Theater of Toombs should there continue, while any of Palmerins blood should suruiue, whose race and fortune for euer should be most famous, and to the very last not vtterly abolished. Blandidon, in whom could not be hid the sad hap of his Mother, vsed such passions of griefe,
as séemed to menace him with death: but that Aliart got some mittigation thereto by his Art, causing him in sleepe to see his father Bellagris, who spake to him, that he should abandon all other thoughts, studying onely to recouer his health, that so he might goe gouerne the state of Niquea: because a bastard sister of his, by the fauour of some Bar∣rons confederating with her, one whereof expected her to be his wife, were practising how to enioy it. And this vi∣sion was not a dreame, by reason these affaires were there in good forwardnes: but the young Lady named Tirena, would not consent to any Barron of that Kingdome, be∣cause she was déepely enamoured on Dirdan, sonne to Ma∣iortes the great Cane, and meant to deny her faith so lately receaued, thereby to make him Soldane of Niquea. Nor was this hidden from Dirdan, who because he was young and amorous likewise, looked not so much at the friendship of a Christian Princesse, for satisfying her loue: as per∣haps he did to the ioyning of so great a neighbouring Sig∣norie to his owne Kingdome. Blandidon giuing credite to his dreame, and perceauing if hee slackt the redresse héereof, hee might remayne still a priuate man as he was: began to consider aduisedly there∣on, for he knew right well, that albeit he was sonne to no∣ble Don Edward, yet coulde hee expect no gouernment in England, therefore he tooke truce with his thoughts, and attended his health.
CHAP. IX. How the Knight of the Sauage man following aduentures, there happened to his hand a Letter with a Ring. TArgiana and the Armenian Prin∣cesse, who attended no other o∣portunity, but howe to write, concluded to put in trust there∣with a young mayden daughter to one of her néerest kindred, who at this time should serue in¦sted of a Squire, she hauing good knowledge of Targiana, yet fai∣ned not to know her, for feare of Ristorano. But on a day following, when the Matrones were busily bathing themselues, they called her a-side, and Targiana at full disclosed herselfe, and what shee sought to compasse by her: promising her no meane aduauncement, if by her meanes she might recouer her liberty and King∣dome. The Mayden, who was discréete, and so loued her La∣dy, as for her helpe shee would make venture of her life: made ready one euening such a kinde of wine, that distri∣buting it frankly amongst the Matrones, they all went to sléepe, and not one of them boudged till the next morning. Targiana setting her selfe to write, among many other, made choyse of sending her Letter to Florian, because shee loued him before Albayzar: and bestowing the flower of her honour on him, it could not be, that in this her great mishap he would forsake her, albeit the vertue of the Ring shold faile her. Beside, she conceited another helping hope, that Leonarda might be dead, because Drusa Velona, (when
she enchaunted her into the Serpent) said withall, that Florian should not long time enioy his faire Leonarda: ac∣cording as the constellation gouerning at her birth decla∣red, that she should liue but a little while, and when that happened, she might promise her selfe Prince Florian to her husband, in that she could not beléeue, that her curtesies v∣sed toward him were vtterly forgotten. On this conceite she framed the Letter, and folding the Ring therein, the Princesse of Armenia commaunded it to flie to the hand of Florian of the Forrest: and opening the window, the Let∣ter with the Ring mounted in the ayre, betaking it selfe as it was directed. Florian (as you haue heard) being parted from the Iland, with intent to come in no place of humane resort, sought with his Shippe to kéepe aloofe from land, where he might discerne either Citty or Castle: and holding on a solitary course of Nauigation, he came to a desolate and ruined Ha∣uen, so vnfrequented in his owne opinion, as he imagined himselfe highly beholding to Fortune, for bringing him to a place so fitting his desire. Héere going on shoare, he left the Ship, and because he coueted to be alone, walked on into a Wood: where ouer-taken by the night, weary, trou∣bled, and burdened with many thoughts, he lay downe vn∣der a trée to repose himselfe. Héere, redoubling gréefe on gréefe, because he had so soone lost his faire Leonarda; at length toward morning, his eyes (ouer-charged with wat∣ching) began to folde downe their lids, yet still dreaming on his conceites waking: but pausing a while, he felt him selfe lifted from the ground, and inwardly touched some∣what amourously. This was by a Néece of Eutropa, Aunt to Dramusiande, who when Florian combated with her brother, became so enamoured of his valour, as euer afterward she laboured to get hold of him, and make him tractable to her desires: She being som-what skilfull in Magicall sciences, know∣ing thereby, that Florian (after the death of Leonarda) was in desperate humours departed from the Perillous Ile: by
her cunning conducted him to this vast Desert, meaning thence to guide him to a Pallace of hers, which stoode som∣what further within the Land. Florian féeling himselfe lifted vp in such manner as hath béene declared, said: what mayst thou be that thus troublest my quietnes? thinke not that any amorous thought hath power to enter my breast. Then Dorina, for so was the mayden called that burned thus in loue, forgetting to helpe her selfe any more by Art: came in person to be séene, and said. Sir Knight, take pitty on the loue of a young Damosell, who not able to repaire the hurt by thine eyes and her owne committed: desires to bestow her selfe on thée, not as a Louer, but to be thy Seruant. At these swéete spéeches, which auaile very much in generous minds, and could not be quite extinct in Florian, who was (by nature) to women enclined: he be∣gan some-what to yéeld, not as one disposed to graunt what she requested, but with an intent to hold her in some hope, till he could better compasse to be rid of her, whereon hée thus replied. Such are my fortunes (faire creature) as my heart can hardly yéeld to loue any woman: neuerthelesse, your passi∣ons haue vrged me to some pitty, and makes me willing to depart hence with you, hoping that when your selfe shall behold me in like manner afflicted, and with such amorous torments as I now behold in you, you will the sooner desist from this ouer-fond humour. The Damosell being wise, was highly contented to haue him with her: perswading her selfe, that hardly could hote young blood defend it selfe, from the swéete enticements of an amorous Lady. So ta∣king him by the hand, shee conducted him to her Castle: where he was so gallantly entertayned by light of Tor∣ches, as scant could he imagine how to deny loue to so gen∣tle a creature. Being entred a goodly hall, he was seated at a table right against Dorina: who séeing him so often looke babies in her eyes, supposed him thorowly vanqui∣shed by her loue, making the lesse account to vse any more enchauntments. The houre being come of going to rest,
a chamber most sumptuously adorned was prepared for Florian: where by reason the night was very far spent, he laid him downe and slept right soundly. Dorina, eyther weary with so long watching that night, or making her selfe certainly assured, to be beloued where she thought her selfe neuer enough pleased: would not then goe sée him in bed, because she imagined not that a victory sufficient. But arising the next morning, very richly decked, she went to awake the Knight: who being glad he had no further that night béene tempted by the Lady; arose, with intent to de∣part thence, that hee might no more be assailed the next night following. But he found his hope fore-stalled, for as he issued foorth of his chamber, Targianaes Letter with the Ring came flying into his hand: the vertue whereof was such, that suddainly he felt himselfe enamoured on her that wrote it. So being further pressed on by force of the en∣chauntment, he went to the Stable, where mounting on horse-backe, he departed without taking leaue of Dorina: who had no power to hinder him, by reason Drusa Velo∣naes Art was of such perfection, as no other Magitian (how skilfull so euer) could withstand it. CHAP. X. VVhat Florian did, after his departure from Do∣rina. FLorian, when he was gotten about a stones cast from the Castle, opened the Letter, and began to reade it, the tenour thereof béeing thus. Targianaes Letter to Prince Florian of the Desert. IF sincere loue (by gentlenes onely occasioned) may neuer be al togeher quite forgotten: then I perswade my selfe, albeit you are (in effect) fully estraunged from me, yet some
little sparke of loue may be remayning, that will be your con∣ductour to my abiding, if the same be not vtterly quenched in your heart. By this perswasion I am mooued, to sollicite you with an honourable enterprize, which is; to free mee from the hands of Ristorano my Cosen, who holds me as pri∣soner within mine own Kingdom. Take pitty then on Tar∣giana, who heere-to-fore hath been not ingratefull to you, & (by these meanes) win to your selfe eternall glory. The way how to deliuer me, you shall vnderstand when you come in∣to Turkie, to the Citty of Tubante, where I will take know∣ledge of ye from a windowe; if you weare a greene plume in your helmet, pointed with gold, whereof you shall finde very many in this Citty. Desolate Targiana. The Letter, which of it selfe was enough to wound a firmer heart then Florian had, with the strong enchaunt∣ment thereto applied: so wrought with the Prince, that for∣getting altogether his late Leonarda, he became enflamed beyond reason toward Targiana: remembring her mani∣fold curtesies vsed to him, when beeing prisoner, he com∣bated with Arduramet. Setting forward on his way, hee might heare behind him many dolorous exclamations: to wit, of Dorina, who séeing her selfe thus forsaken, & hope∣lesse of recouering him againe, fell into such fury, that ta∣king a knife, shee would haue slaine her selfe there-with, and being some-what wounded, she was espied, and stayed by her Damosells, who altogether railed on the discourte∣ous Knight. But he making no reckoning thereof, got to the Sea-side, where finding a Shippe of Turkie, which by fortune had made stay a while by this desolate Wildernes, he speaking Turkish very readily: was by them receaued into the Ship, imagining him verily to be a Turke. With this Shippe went Florian for Turkie, making them beléeue, that he had béene at Albayzars warres, the successe where∣of he rehearsed so perticulerly, as euery one delighted much to heare him.
Thus sayling with a prosperous winde, at length they reached the Citty of Turbante, where Targiana remained imprisoned. Nowe was Ristorano gone against certaine Barrons of ye Kingdom, who disdaining his Regiment, rai∣sed warre vpon him: knowing withall, that Targiana was enthralled within the Castle, and now was likewise come thither with a great power, Sucusano brother to ye Armenian Princesse, and to the Soldane of Persia, that died at Con∣stantinople. By meanes héereof, Florian might the more fréely shew himselfe before the Castle, and bearing his ap∣pointed notice of the gréene plume: hée was knowne by Targiana, who not a little glad of his arriuall, deuised how she might get him lodged néere the Castle, so to expect the houre when he best might frée her. CHAP. XI. How Ristorano returning to Turbante, prouided good guardance for Targiana, deliuering the Arme∣nian Princesse to Sucusano: and what Florian did for Targiana. RIstorano beeing aduertised, that Sucusano (with a mighty Army of Persians) was entred Turkie, to recouer the Armenian Prin∣cesse: returned in hast to Tuban∣te, where séeking to pacifie the people, who knew Targiana to bee there imprisoned, hee sent word to the Persian, that he shold haue the Lady without further contradiction, prouided, he would passe on no further: so causing her to be brought from the Castle, with a very small traine he sent her to her brother, because hee else su∣spected nothing. But Florian, whose thoughts were busied
howe to deliuer Targiana, perceiuing that Ristorano (fea∣ring she should be recouered by the people) had manned her with a very strong guard, when hee heard the Armenian Princesse was sent to Sucusano, intended an enterprise (o∣uer-venturous indeede) but that hee was still fauourablie protected by Dorina, who in so many perrils gaue him help. And this was his determination, to take ye Princesse forci∣bly from them that conducted her to Sucusano: so to procure warre betwéene the Turkes and Persians, when restoring her againe to them (his owne turne beeing serued) it must needes sort to eyther of their contentments. Making thys knowne to Targiana, who not imagining what to hope of this doubtfull enterprise, remained betweene ioy & feare: but referring all to the good or ill successe, sent him worde, that he should compasse what euer he thought good for her escape. Florian arming himselfe for the purpose, went to pursue the tract of the Armenian Princesse, who by an hundred Turkes was sent toward her brother, and béeing come to them, he cryed: Abyde, and let goe the Lady, except ye all meane to die by my hand. The Captaine of these Turkes, who was a man verie arrogant: turning to his followers, sayde: This fellowe séemes as though he would fight with men made of strawe, that he is so liberall (at first sight) in his threatnings, but we shall see what he can doe: then turning to him, he thus spake. Braue man, I will try my selfe with thée, because I will not sée so many of mine perrish by thy strong hand: but yet thus I condition, that if thou ouer-come mee, thou shalt leade me whether thou pleasest: but if I foyle thée, Ile keepe thée as my laughing stock, to smile at in my bra∣uerie. Florian hearing himselfe thus scorned, in déepe disdaine (without speaking a worde) turned his horse, and met the proude Turke on the breast with such an incounter, as his Launce ran a handfull & more thorow his shoulder, where∣by he tombled dead to the ground. When his followers
saw their Captaine so suddainly falne, and remembring how this strange Knight had threatned them all, without any regard of shame, they ranne altogether fiercely vppon him, some wounding him, others his horse, because hee should haue no meanes to escape. Thus Florian beeing on foote, and wounded, séeing death imminent before him, leant his shoulder against an olde withered trée, minding yet to sell his life a little déerer. And byding the battell for a good space, he grew so wearie, as nothing was to be expected but death: if enamored Do∣rina, who had no power to kill him, had not at his depar∣ture intended especiall care of him. And albeit by her arte shée vnderstoode, what effect the Letter and Ring had wrought, as also that Florian afresh sollicited by his former loue borne to Targiana, endeuoured greatly for her deliue∣rance: notwithstanding all hope of euer enioying him, the more resolued and soundly grewe her affection to loue him. Now seeing in what perrill he was to loose his life, by res∣cuing the Armenian Princesse from the Turkes handes: shee changed her selfe into the shape of Palmerin of England his brother, prouided of horse and armour accordingly, and aloude shée cryed to Florian, saying: Feare not Brother, I am come hether for thy defence: so placing herselfe by him, performed such deedes of valour, as the Turkes began to retyre, as resolued that thys Knight would be the death of them all. But because Florian had lost much blood, she gaue helpe to mount himselfe vpon his horse, that he sate behind toward the crupper, and so the Armenian Princesse was placed before him: and she was so suddainly carried thence into a wood, as the Turkish Knights stoode in amazement thereat. Dorina, when shée had Florian safe from his enemies, shewed her selfe to him what she was: and perceiuing that hée affected not the Armenian Princesse, without any re∣gard of her, shee thus spake to him. Most gentle Knight, loue, that hath made mee altogether yours, enforceth an opinion contrary to all hope, of ioy, when no likelihood is
that euer it will be: for I knowe yee to be enamoured of a Ladie, who strictly by enchauntment bindes ye to loue her, when perhaps her beautie might faile in other meanes of preuailing, all which makes me the more desirous of yee: and to witnesse my inward inflamed loue, sée heere the wound I gaue on this breast with my knife, as willing to haue slaine my selfe vpon your vnkinde departure. The Lady was young and beautifull, her wordes like∣wise vttered so effectually, as Florian woulde haue yeelded her loue, if the other enchauntment had béene no let there∣to. But he vnable to vse any mercie to her, and the Ladie (béeing wise) considering all this was occasioned by the Ring, determined to awaite fitter opportunitie, till Florian should be released from that enchauntment, and taking or∣der, that one of her Damosels should cure his wounds, shée thus beganne againe. Thou canst not let me from louing thee for euer, albeit thou takest no pitty on mine affliction: and so she departed. Florian, without regarding her speeches, suffered what soeuer was applyed for his recouerie: and by reason Dori∣na holpe him by her arte, in foure daies he was able to sitte his horse againe. Then conferring with the Armenian prin∣cesse, he excused what had béene done in hindering her from her brother Sucusano, disclosing likewise what he was, as also to what end this iniurie was offered her, as not able by any meanes else to redéeme Targiana. It displeased the Princesse, that thus her returne into Persia was fore-stalled, but when shee knew him to be the Prince Florian, so farre famed, and noted withall his gentle behauiour, she accounted her selfe indebted to Fortune, for letting her fal thus into his hands, with whose loue she felt herselfe suddenly amated. Then remembring that she sent the ring in Targianaes name, she had little hope of winning him to her loue, so long as that enchantment lasted: wher∣fore she pacified herselfe, and Florian desirous to returne to∣ward Tubante, had newe Armour and horses for conduct of the Princesse, all right after the Tartarian manner.
And this was doone by Dorina, that Florian might goe backe to Tubante, and was not knowne to be he that fought with the Turkes in rescue of the Princesse: whose habite was likewise in such sort trans-formed, as none in all the cittie could know her. Thus béeing in Tubante, often times hee shewed himselfe to Targiana by meanes of his greene plume, but hee could no further preuaile, because of the watchfull guard appointed by Ristorano, for which (good Lady) shée was euen ready to die. And the Armenian prin∣cesse so curbd in her gréefe, that she might not enioy the be∣nefit of Florians loue: as day and night she offered to sléepe by him, yet would hee mooue towards her no more then a stone. CHAP. XII. VVhat Sucusano did, when he heard that the Ar∣menian Princesse was forcibly rescued from them, that had charge of conducting her to him: And fur∣ther concerning the Prince Florian. THe Turkes that had fought in this manner with the Knight of the Sauage man, seeing they had gotten them-selues so farre onward, as they needed not to stande in feare of their enemie: because they had lost ye Armeni∣an Princesse, they made no hast of returning to Ristorano, but in∣tended their iourney to Sucusa∣no, to let him vnderstand what had happened them in pur∣suite, so to excuse their Lorde who had sent him his Sister. Béeing come to his Armie, and newes spread that the prin∣cesse came not with them: it was expected that they should all presently die, but yet on more deliberation, they were
admitted to his royall Pauillion. Sucusano séeing them without his Sister, with sterne countenaunce demaunded from whom they came. They fearefully falling on theyr knees, reported their whole successe, and in what sort shée was taken from them. But it seemed so disagréeing with truth, that one Knight alone shoulde performe so much, in taking the Lady frō them, though (néedlesse) another came at length to helpe him, as it was méerely scoft at: but for better assurance héerein, he sent many of his owne men to the place, where the Turkes declared that their Captaine lay slaine. Dorina, who marked all these procéedings, to binde her louer to her so much as might bee, hoping one day the en∣chauntment should be dissolued, and then hee woulde take compassion on her, by her arte conuaied all the dead bodies thence, yea, all signes that any fighting had béene there at all. Where-vpon, the Persians returned to Sucusano, say∣ing, they found no shew of any such matter as the Turkes had told him: when hee (starting vp furiously) without ad∣mitting any more wordes, commaunded them all immedi∣atlie to be hanged, and raysing his Campe, consisting of an hundred thousand braue Souldiers, beside a most gallant troupe of Infanterie: went and assailed Tubante so sudden∣ly, as they could not prouide themselues of victuals to with∣stand the siedge, though otherwise the Citty of it selfe was strong enough. When Florian saw what he desired to take such effect, he earnestly intreated the Princesse of Armenia, that faining her selfe to be escaped from the Knight who tooke her from the Turkes, shee would get into the Castle where Targia∣na was, so might she be out of danger of her owne life, and a meane likewise of Targianas libertie. The Princesse sée∣ing her brother so neere to deliuer her, and louing Florian so earnestly as she did, was well contented to performe his request: so slipping with him foorth of the Citty, entred a wood neere adioyning, where letting her horse run loose on his bridle, like one escaped from an enemy, shee entred the
Citty, dissembling extraordinarie feare, and comming to the Castell gate, where Ristoranos guard gaue their atten∣dance, was quickly knowne by them, and soone conueyed in at the wicket, shee still seeming doubtful of her securitie. And comming to Targiana, so artificially she continued her feigned feare: as shee verily imagined her to bee escaped from Florian. But when time came that they might more safely conuersse together, shee then reuealed all: whereby Targianaes hope very greatly increased, seeing now an en∣trance to her freedome so soundly begun. Florian perceiuing that the Princesse was got into the Castle, and hauing with his presence (a farre off) comfor∣ted Targiana, armed Turke-like, he went and offered his seruice to Sucusano, who séeing him so brauely disposed, and but young withall, would needes haue him sit downe by him, but Florian dooing him double reuerence, beganne in this manner. Most mightie Lord, I am sonne to a Turke, who serued most faithfully the great Emperour deceassed, and thereby receiued of him no meane benefits. I that de∣sire to doe you as loyall seruice, hearing that my Princesse is imprisoned by Ristorano in the Castell of Tubante, and that he would vsurpe the state from her, am minded to ad∣uenture my life for her deliuerie. Let me then entreat your highnesse, to doe some-what for so great a sister as your owne, and my Soueraigne: wherein, beside eternall fame following so glorious an enterprise, shée will acknowledge herselfe deeply indebted vnto you, when she shall be seated in her kingdoms of Babilon and Turkie. And might it please yee but to fauour me in thys enterprise, I offer my selfe bo∣die to bodie, against so many as dare maintaine Ristorano to be no traytour: trusting more in iustice of the cause, then any hardiment or valour in my selfe. Sucusano very respectiuely noted Florian all the while he spake, and iudging him to be a man very valiant, replyed: that seeing him so loyally inclined towards his princesse, he woulde gladly haue both the Ladies set at libertie, because his sister was likewise prisoner with her, and therefore hee
wished to them both alike. Then presently he sent one of his Captaines well accompanied, to the citty to Ristorano, requesting to haue deliuered him his Sister and Targiana, whom he laboured to dispossesse of her estate: and if anie of his would iustifie Ristorano not to be a traytor, hee shoulde meete a Knight in field, who would make it good vpon him by sword and Launce. Ristorano offended at this demaund, which dissolued all his former dissignes: would haue satis-fied Sucusanos Em∣bassadour, that he did send him his Sister, and knewe not how his purpose was impeached. But now, his demaun∣ding of both the Ladies, droue his sences into such a confu∣sion, as hee knew not what to imagine concerning the Ar∣menian Princesse. And in regard a Turkish Knight, backt by Persians, would fight against the Citty, and requested combate: he intended to prouide for the present perrill, ly∣cencing the Embassadour to depart, saying: His Sister he had already sent him, but with Targiana he had not to med∣dle. The Embassador bringing this aunswere to his Lord, and Florian beeing aduertised thereof, made hast to the field, to loose no time, and least the Persians mind should hap to be changed: hearing that his sister had beene sent him before, and taken from the Knights, as hath béen before declared. Ristorano, fearing no lesse the Turkes then the Persi∣ans, turning him to his Knights, said: Which of you dare goe combat this companion, & bring his head to me? Many valiant Lords profered themselues in hast, and great con∣tention there was who should goe first: but the lot falling to the Prince of Tharsus, he armed himselfe for the purpose, and came so disdainfully forth of ye Citty, that without spea∣king any word to Florian, hee ranne against him with his Launce: wherewith Florian being mooued, met him in the midst of the course, the Turkes staffe hitting on his shielde, made him loose a stirrop, but Florians passed with such force through his breast, that he fel downe dead to the earth. The Persians seeing a victory so easily obtained, both ioyed & mer∣uailed thereat. Contrariwise, they of the citty stood amazed.
Neuerthelesse, the Lord of Antioche, (a man of great mind and opinion) presented himselfe, & encountring with Flo∣rian, hurt him a little on the arme, albeit himselfe had such a salutation on the pate, as he was liker to lie along, then keepe his saddle. Then Florian determining, either to die this day, or regaine Targiana, smote at him with his sword, which lighting on his shoulder, cleft him downe to the sad∣dle, and cut off his horses head likewise. This was such a fearefull astonishment to Ristoranos Knights, as no more beeing willing to aduenture them∣selues, they drewe backe into the Citty: where Ristorano (fearefull of the people) sought by what meanes Targiana might be slaine, as alwaies before hee aymed thereat: but because he knew not who to trust, and sawe euery one en∣clined to fauour their naturall Soueraigne, hee resolued with himselfe vppon spéedie flight. Then hearing what a great rumor was at the walls, the Persians fully perswa∣ded of successe, hauing him for their Captaine, who had so soone ouer-come two such valiant Turkes, hée drew neere (with diuers of his trustiest folowers) to make head against them, & going to a false posterne of the Castle, caused Tar∣giana to be fetched foorth, that he might haue her along with him: hoping in extremitie, to yeeld her for safegarde of his owne life, or else by béeing still possest of her, to haue vse and gouernment of the state. This could he not performe so secretly, but hee was dis∣couered by the people, who cryed out with loud voyce, that Targiana was led away to death: whereon he was pursued by so great multitudes, that hee (hauing worke enough to doe to escape aliue, and knowing howe fewe of his owne people did affect him,) left Targiana behinde him. Some fearing least the Citty should bee taken and spoyled by the Persians, hung foorth their flagge of truce, and opening the gate, receiued in Florian and foure thousand Knights with him, according as Sucusano had before appoynted, who behaued himselfe on the other side very valiantly. But Florian fearing least some disaster shoulde betide Targiana,
ranne presently to the Castell, where he found her in com∣panie of them that Ristorano left her withall, who percei∣uing the Tyrant fledde, laboured to kéepe her from perrill, and so were returned backe with her thither againe. Of him they grewe all afraide, and in danger had they béene, but that Targiana knewe him by managing his weapon, thē stepping forward: Sheath your sword my Lord (quoth shee) for these Knights are for my safetie, and at your ser∣uice. Florian, séeing his intent accomplished, full of ioy, tooke Targiana by the hand, but shee trembled, as shewing the great loue shee bare him, from the beginning when he was in her Court. Thence was shée conducted by the people to her Pallace, and béeing placed in the royall seate of her Father, was publiquely proclaimed and confirmed theyr Queene. Sucusano, glad for recouerie of his Sister, and that hee had doone so speciall seruice to Targiana, without the losse of any of his people, entred that night into the Citty, with an hundred of his worthiest Barons: and because it was late, as then hée could not goe to sée the Ladie, by reason Targiana had withdrawne herselfe aside, none in her com∣panie but Prince Florian, as not béeing able to satis-fie her selfe with embracing him, and yéelding him thanks, as his great paines had well deserued. But thus far they procée∣ded, that promising shée would become a Christian, they were affianced together, in presence of the Armenian Princesse, and the Damosell that holpe her when she wrote the Letter. Afterward, by other kinde of ceremonies (in such cases required) they so ratified theyr marriage, as it was past recalling: but nowe returne wee to the Perilous Ile.
CHAP. XIII. How the Princes in the Perilous Ile, beeing reco∣uered to their former health, would haue returned thence to their seuerall estates: but they were stayed there for a while. And of a newe accident that sud∣dainly happened. THe Emperor Primaleon, beeing thorowly healed of his wounds, had yet his right arme benum∣med in such sort, as it was great paine to him to vse his sworde, and little helpe any way coulde it yeeld vnto him▪ Don Edward, by meanes of a wound receiued through his necke, held his head awry, leaning to one shoulder, so that it gréeued him to beare armour thereon. The other were well recouered, and of indifferent strength, except Florendos, who went some-what lamely on his right leg: and Dramusiande, who was (as it were) beside himselfe, although of his hurts he was very wel amended. Almaroll could not be throughly sound in a long time. Floraman was better recouered then all the rest, because nowe he had lost the remembrance, of his former earnest affection to Altea, finding himselfe quite deliuered from that vaine humour: yet soone enough ouer-taken with another, when casting his eyes on the widdowed Ladies, he most regarded Clari∣ana, who in his conceite was a thousand times fairer, then any other amongst them all. But afterward, his silent thoughts shewed him much more enamoured on Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian: but because he might not enioy her, he desperatly slew himselfe, as shal be declared in place conuenient.
Aliart, séeing these Lordes so mindfull of their seuerall homes, sitting one day conuersing with them, hee entred into these speeches. Great Princes, I reioyce that mine own arte hath so deceiued me, which made me beléeue, that all you should die in the passed warre, and Constantinople fall into the Pagans power: but most of all this deceite de∣lighteth me, that I behold yee so well recouered, and the Grecian Empire yet at libertie. Therefore you shall doo ve∣rie well, that each of you returne to his proper state, to giue order for prouiding men in readines, and fortefying your Citties: because it may so fall out, that the Heathen renu∣ing their forces, will on a suddaine seeke your endamage∣ment. The Emperour Primaleon very glad héereof, caused a Galley to be made ready, when calling all the Princes and widdowed Ladies, with large protestations, hee gaue them thanks for the losse they had suffered to maintaine his estate: offering himselfe for euer a Father to the widdows, as also a defender of them and their children. So embra∣cing altogether, hee went aboard, with Florendos, Alma∣roll, Dramusiande, and their Ladies, who greatly desired to visite their owne homes, and to be in their former estate of dignitie. As they were setting off from the shoare, they descryed a little Barque a farre off, which (as swift as a byrd) came flying toward them: they expecting what it might be, be∣held it no sooner néere neighboured with them, but thereout leaped the most mishapen olde woman, that euer in anie time had béene seene: shée making toward the Emperour, who as yet stoode vpon the decke, thus spake. Most power∣full Lord, meruaile not that I appeare so spent with yéeres, and yet at this instant hazard thus the perrill of my life, for the cause of my present comming hether, is to make proofe among thy Knights, of an aduenture which holdes these conditions, that who soeuer can finish it, shal haue promise of a boone from mée: but attempting & failing, is presently to goe along with mée. The Emperour, who was loth to see any of his oppose themselues to perrill, being not yet so
strong and lustie, as when they attempted the last dreadful battaile, thus answered. Perhaps the late vnfortunate bat∣taile is not knowne to thee, wherein the most woorthy a∣mongst all Christian Princes haue perished: and wee that yet remaine are in so weake estate, as I could gladly wish thee chuse some other time, both more fit for thee and them in this case. The old Woman, very disdainfully, and with a counte∣naunce seeming none of the best, thus spake to the Empe∣rour. Blessed for euer be the constancie of the royall Em∣perour Palmerine, that neuer made shew of any basenesse, albeit himselfe past through many miseries. These words so pierced the Emperours princely minde, that his choller arising, he craued pardon of the old woman for his vnkind aunswere: desiring her to declare the aduenture. Then she withdrew herselfe toward the Barque, shewing as if shee were gréeued beyond comparison, for not hauing founde what shée sought in so many Princes Courts: yet beeing still mooued by his highnesse intreates, and Don Edwards likewise, who would not leaue her, shee drewe the small Barque alande, vsing certaine wordes to her selfe: when suddainly issued foorth a Monster of very strange shape, ha∣uing the head of a Serpent, the necke of a Lyon, the bodie of a Bull, the feete of a Horse, and the tayle deuided in two parts, so piercing withall, as it woulde passe through anie Armour. With this beast (quoth the hagge) must thy Knights combat, vnder condition before expressed: so many as shall be vanquished by it, must goe with me to an enter∣prise as honourable, as pleasing to themselues. The Knights, whose spirits were heated with high re∣solution, cōtended amongst themselues who should be first: but the Emperour willed, that Don Edward, who coulde make no proofe of himselfe, by the reasons before rehear∣sed, should nominate them after his owne liking. Don Ed∣ward, highly thanking the Emperour for this great honor, not to shewe himselfe ouer-ruled by affection, as might be iudged if hee should name anie of his owne Sonnes: gaue
the first battaile to Dyrdan▪ in honour of his Father Maior∣tes, so faithfull alwaies to the Grecian Empire. The young Lord, glad of so speciall a fauour, hoping beside of glorious victorie, came foorth armed, with his sword ready drawne, and drawing neere the Monster, smote him ouer the heade with his sword: but he found it so impiercible, and rather damageable to his weapon, as he grew doubtfull of the ho∣nour, belonging to this enterprise. Neuerthelesse, turning againe to the beast, he was caught within the deuided taile, and throwne thrée times about so furiously, as his memory failing him, he fell to the ground greatly astonied. But hée beeing of a very valiant spirit, quickly recouered footing a∣gaine, and offered once more to make proofe of himselfe: but the old Woman thus preuented him. No more Sir Knight, because if well yee vnderstand mée, the condition by mée propounded was thus: that if a∣nie Knight were ouer-throwne by the Monster, hee should be admitted to fight no longer. The Emperour perceiuing the olde Womans intent, gaue a signe to Dirdan that hee should with-draw himselfe, and Don Edward caused Pom∣pides to present himselfe: who very boldly assailed ye Mon∣ster with his sworde, reaching him such a thrust in the flanke, as wel neere had made him to tumble ouer. But the beast gaue him such a blow on the breast with his foote, as made him fall downe backward: Whereat each one both greeued and meruailed, séeing two so good Knights so soone disabled. Dragonalte, by Don Edwards licence, was the next that assayled the Monster, and hee beeing very nimble at all ad∣uantages, gaue the beast diuers hurts, which (by reason of his slothfulnesse) hée coulde not shunne: But catching at length the sworde betweene his teeth, snatcht it out of his hand, and made at him so furiously, that striking him rude∣lie against the ground, very hardly could hee arise to with∣drawe himselfe. Floraman, hauing receiued his signe from Don Edward, deliuered many rough strokes to the Monster, but coulde not by anie meanes wounde him:
and trauersing about to kéepe him foorth of danger, still v∣sing his sword for his best aduantage, at length hee was caught betweene the monsters taile, which cast him vp the height of a Launce, when falling downe, he lay as if he had béene dead, to the great griefe of euery one, who doubted least this strange aduenture, would serue as a shame to the Grecian Court. Don Edward, fearing this monster would sley some of the Knights, called for Palmerin, who staying a little to gird on his sword, was preuented by Dramusiande, who though he stoode before as one amazed, meruailing at these strange encounters: pricked forward by valour, hee sette himselfe against the beast, and not séeking how to hurt him otherwise, caught fast holde on his great tayle, which hee held so strongly, as the beast could not recouer it from him: for such was the Giants greatnes, as hee could neither lift him vp, nor cast him downe. During this contention, to the great paines of Dramusiande, who woulde not let goe the tayle, neither could haue other kinde of victorie: euery one was very pensiue, not knowing what issue of these af∣faires to hope for. Dramusiande, endeuouring with all his strength to cast the monster, became so wearied, as he was not able to striue any longer: whereupon, entring into better aduise, with a leape hee threwe himselfe vppon the beasts backe, and holding him with his hande at the vaun∣tage of the chaine, gaue him such prouokings with his legs, as the monster to be disburdened of so great a weight, ran to the shoare side, & at one skip mounted into the Sea: where Dramusiande, not terrified with feare, though hee beheld himselfe but dead as it were, kept still his holde vp∣pon the beast, as if afterward he should chaunce to leape on shoare againe. Arlencea, when shée beheld her husband in this danger, for whom she had shed so many teares when he was repu∣ted dead: fell on her knees at the olde womans féete, & thus bespake her. Sweet Lady, if euer thou didst vouchsafe loue to any one, I pray thée suffer not my husband to be drow∣ned.
The olde woman, hearing herselfe coniured in thys manner, beeing herselfe (as you shall heare) deeply enamo∣red, made a signe, and the monster mounted backe with Dramusiande into the Barque, which stood ready for pur∣pose at the Land-side. Afterward, by her arte shee caused the other foure Knights that receiued the foyle, to be there∣in likewise conuayed: then entring the Barque herselfe, shée launched so far into the Sea, as shee could be but heard to speake in this manner. My Lord, I must haue these Knights with me, because I may by good reason claime them, and Dramusiande shall beare them company likewise, for I am Dorina his Coosin, that preserued him, as now your selues haue beheld: him haue I great occasions to employ in, and shortly shall hee returne againe in the same estate, as when hee was young and eyghteene yéeres old. Then causing him to come vpon the decke with her, they were hearde conferre together ve∣rie familiarlie, to the great liking of all the beholders, though loth to haue them thus caried thence. Arlencea (aboue the rest) séeing her husband with such a light Damosell, as nowe shée shewed herselfe, was al∣most dead with iealousie: but that shee had heard Dramusi∣ande often sweare shée was his Coosin, and therefore she had the lesse cause of feare. Dorina bidding them adiewe, sette sayle and departed. The cause of her comming thus, and carrying away the Knights with her, the sequell of the historie shall make manifest: for now we must returne a∣gaine to Targiana, at Tubante.
CHAP. XIIII. How Sucusano became enamoured of Targiana, and knowing Florian to be Nephewe to the Empe∣rour Primaleon, layde hold on him: suspecting like∣wise euill betweene him and Targiana. ON the next morning, when Sucu∣sano was entred Tubante, as yee heard before declared, Targiana with the Armenian Princesse, en∣tred the great Hall, shee likewise leading Florian by the hand: and so sumptuously was she attyred, as the Persian (giuen more by nature to martial affaires, thē loues wan∣ton allurements) seeing her such a princely and beautifull creature: became foorth-with ena∣moured, and so much the rather did hee promise successe to his loue, in that the supposed Turke which came to him, to wit, the Prince Florian, had by his strength freed her, and was nowe in her companie. Therefore, at the first to make knowne his loue, he tooke her by the hand, and pla∣cing her in her Fathers seate, there pronounced her to bee rightfull Queene: of which fauour before she had but little hope, when it was generally suspected, yt Sucusano sought to signorize ouer all Turkie himselfe. The Persian made many amourous semblances to Tar∣giana, but yet so simply, as none of the beholders tooke anie heede thereof: except Florian, who diligently noted all, and ruminating with himselfe, what successe was likely to en∣sue vpon this newe loue, grew in some sort fearefull of vio∣lence, that might be offered him by this Pagan. Another while he was surprized with doubts, least Targiana, moo∣ued by so great a state as the Persian, should alter her mind. So floting on this varietie of opinions, Sucusano embraced
his Sister, who knowing that Florian was married to Tar∣giana, whereby herselfe was disappointed of all hope, shee began to conuert her loue into hatred, and séeing howe her Brother was likely to growe franticke for Targiana, shee imagined this the best way to trouble this marriage, alrea∣die celebrated with such loue. But like one very subtile, she dissembled her intent, and shewing nothing but chéerefull disposition, offered to sitte downe by Targiana: who not dreaming at all on her fond affection, cōmitted to her trust her neerest secrets. A supper of great pompe was prepared, whereat Sucu∣sano would sit right before Targiana, where-with Florian was so highly offended, as many times he thought to haue slaine him: and he had doone it, but that he knewe not how to defend the Citty from so great an Armie, and Targiana béeing so lately seated, had no people in readinesse to backe such an enterprise. Sucusano, not minding Florian, repu∣ting him a Turke but of meane quality, set downe his rest, to enioy Turkie, and the Souldanesse of Babylon, considering withall, that when he was become Lord of such a strength, he might be reuenged on the Christians for the death of his Brother. Tenne dayes together the feastes and banquetting en∣dured, in which time Sucusano courted Targiana to ye proofe, as making himselfe assured, that shee shoulde be his wife: and among other amourous ceremonies, placing his rude hand vpon her delicate breast, sayd: I loue thée, and yet am silent. The Lady, yt abhorred him more then death, shewed herselfe so disdainfull, as the Persian beganne to perswade himselfe, that the Ladies thoughts were else-where addic∣ted. Betwéene this loue and disdaine, stept in the Armenian Princesse, who séeing Targiana so scornful toward her bro∣ther, knowing also what had past betweene her and Flori∣an, her thoughts labouring twixt loue and hatred, would, (and yet she would not) declare to Sucusano what Florian was, whom hee imagined to be a Turke. Continuing in
these imaginations, a matter hapned, that made her ene∣mie with Targiana, and thus it was. Targiana one day bu∣sied about affaires concerning the estate, the Armenian Princesse finding Florian alone and pensiue: reputing her∣selfe no way inferiour to Targiana in beautie, she came and sate downe by him, entring into these speeches. Knewe I not that your selfe hath made proofe of loues soueraigne for∣ces, I should forbeare to reason with you in amourous dis∣course: but your gentlenes, and my hard fortune constray∣neth, that albeit I know your thoughts are deuoted to Tar∣giana, yet must I intreat one graunt of loue, yéelding my selfe wholie to your power. And as shee deliuered these words, a sea of teares streamed from her eyes, her hart stil trembling, expecting his aunswers. Florian, ouercome with gréefe, for the loue he sawe Su∣cusano vse toward Targiana, made her no reply: and shee (by his silence) conceiuing some hope that hee would loue her, threw her armes about his neck, when it hapned that Targiana (hauing ended her busines) suddainly stept in, and séeing in her such vnseemely behauiour, thus spake. Ah shamelesse Damosell, whether hath thy luxurious appetite transported, thus to insult vppon anothers right? And into worser termes would she haue growne, but that the Ladie (as one confounded) without returning any answere, stept forth of the Chamber, leauing both them so astonished, as neither of them well knew what to say: especially Florian, who considering the great perrill and doubt wherein Tar∣giana stoode at this instant, had not the power to comfort her, himselfe being oppressed with what he most feared. The Princesse of Armenia, conceiuing déepe disdaine at Targianas wordes, and seeing herselfe despised by Flo∣rian, went directly to her Brother, and there declared, that the dissembled Turke, who had doone so much for Targia∣na, was Prince Florian of the Forrest, termed the Knight of the Sauage man: who was maried to Targiana, not with∣standing yt by his hand her former husband Albayzar was slaine, yet had she made a lasciuious choyse of him.
Sucusano perceiuing within his power, the very greatest enemie that Heathenesse had, reputed himselfe most hap∣pie, saying: Since Targiana had committed an offence so vnpardonable, hee thought her vnwoorthy to be his wife. But because he would not loose so rich a bootie, hee caused the chamber to be round engirt where Florian was, whence Targiana but little before was angerly departed, and was busilie talking with certaine of her chiefest Barons, howe Sucusano intended to take away her Kingdome from her. The Persians beeing entring the Chamber, assailed Flori∣an, finding him vnarmed, but onely with his Rapier: nor sought they to kill him, but thronged round about him, to take him aliue, so in the end he was bound, & carried forci∣bly to Sucusano. Targiana, hearing the rumour and noyse, ranne to the Chamber, and diuers with her, whom shee had made to arme themselues: but ouer-late was her comming, for they had thence conueied her louer, and doubting nowe what might become of him, attyring herselfe like a man, and ac∣companied with an auncient Knight, shee got presently foorth of the Citty. Sucusano hauing thus gotten Florian, intended a sol∣lemne reuenge, for all the iniuries before receiued, but yet hee was much offended, that he had not Targiana: where∣fore hée sent to search the Pallace, and not finding her, hee vnderstood by a Damosell committed to torment, that two howres before, shee was departed in habite of a man, gi∣uing diuers other signes beside, whereby she might be soo∣nest knowne. Nowe was not the Persian slacke in sending foorth his Knights by sundry wayes, to pursue her, that they might bring her backe againe vnto him: and perceiuing howe the Turkes were addicted in loue to her, hee mindid as yet no violence toward her, till first hee were fully possesse of her Kingdome: then hee concluded to satis-fie his lust with her, and afterward (to despight her the more) to giue her as a spoyle to his very worst boy.
The Knights posting about euery way, toward Sun-setting, they found her by a Fountaine, where (being wea∣ried with riding) shée stept aside to refresh herselfe, mind∣ing to haue ridden all that night. When shee beheld her∣selfe ouertaken by the Persians, without any on her behalfe to make resistance, shée was so strangly distracted with gréefe, as the Knights setting her on horse-backe, had car∣ried her more then a mile, before shée made any signe of re∣uiuing: but béeing come to herselfe, shee vttered ye wofulst lamentations that euer was heard from any Lady. The Knights, who little knew her case, vsed some com∣fortable spéeches, that Sucusano, the great Lord of Persia, earnestly desired to make her his Wife: so that shee had more cause to reioyce, then to offende her selfe with greefe and wéeping. These reasons little auailed with her afflic∣ted thoughts, in that shee well knewe to what end Sucusa∣no sent to take her: so recommending all the Christians to God, in whose faith shee had firmely promised to continue, shée rode on quietly, remembring she had often heard some of her Christian slaues say, that Christians calling onelie to their God in time of their tribulation, receiued helpe by him: as likewise she did, as shalbe declared in the Chapter following.
CHAP. XV. How Dorina, with the foure Knights and Dramu∣siande, arriued at the Cittie of Tubante, and deliuered Targiana, with whom they entred the Fortresse. THe Knights that had the charge of Targiana, not suspecting anie thing, rode on disorderly, iesting among themselues to delight the Ladie. But Dorina, who knew the successe of all that had happened, qualified her course of nauigation in such sort, as she made choyce of time for deliue∣rance of Targiana. And this she did, to the end Sucusano might not prooue the marriage by her testimonie, that she had taken Florian to her husband: for the Persian (by this accusation) might lawfully depriue her of her kingdome, and put Florian to death as he had de∣termined, though the Turkes knew nothing what he was before his taking. Afterward, when they vnderstood more of him, in re∣gard of the seruice hee had doone their Soueraigne, they would not consent that hee should bee slaine: but rather in∣stantly desired, he might safely be sent into Christendome, because they had receiued certaine tydings from Constanti∣nople, that the Emperour Primaleon, with all the most fa∣mous men at Armes, were aliue and recouered. But when it was tolde, that Targiana their Quéene had made thys Knight her husband, with promise likewise to refuse her fayth: they would presently haue both him and her torne in a thousand peeces. Dorina then, that Florian might not perrish by this occasion, bethought her on these Knights, suspecting what danger was like to ensue, & brought them (as you haue heard) from the Perilous Ile, conducting them
on to the rest of the enterprise. And hauing particulerlie conferred with Dramusiande, knowing the especiall loue he bare to Florian, who had aduentured many perrills for him: shee would not disclose that he had married Targiana, but laboured him with earnest perswasions, that nowe hee would stand her louer in some steede, euen as hee had anie pittie of her, shewing him likewise the wounde shee gaue her selfe, when Florian so vngentlie departed from her Ca∣stell. Dramusiande, who well knew how intirely she affected the Prince, had compassion on her, and promised his vtter∣most on her behalfe: but (in his opinion) it would very lit∣tle auaile her, such was his conceit for losse of the Princesse Leonarda, after whose death desperatly hee left the Perilous Ile. So bringing her Barque on shoare, shee mounted all the Knights, disguising them after the Turkish manner, to the end they might (without suspition) fall in companie of Targiana. From midnight rode on these fiue Knights, till morning appeared, and then they ouertooke the Persians, as they were entring at a secrete gate of the Castell, that Tar∣giana might not publiquely be seene of the Turkes. Dramusiande, getting neere Targiana, lifting vp his beuer, spake to her in the Greeke tongue, (which shée very well vnderstoode, by meanes of her aboade in the Empe∣rours Court:) Feare not Lady, for héere is come in your defence Dramusiande, with these foure Knights of Constan∣tinople Court: so taking her by the arme, set her before him on his saddle. The Persians seeing onely fiue Knights take the Ladie from them, ranne all to assaile Dramusiande, on whom they had bestowed manie Launces, but that they feared to kill Targiana, whom they had speciall charge to bring backe aliue, yet receiued shée a little hurt on her backe. Floraman, Pompides, Dragonalte, and Dirdan, circkling her about, defended her all the way toward the Castel, kil∣ling with forcible strokes many Persians. The croude was so great, that very hardly coulde they get onward, yet get∣ting
neerer the Castell side, one of the Guarde, who some∣time had beene Page to Targiana, knew her by her habite, and crying, Behold our Princesse, without longer stay, let downe the Bridge, when Dramusiande and his foure com∣panions, though well neere wearied with vsing their wea∣pons, got themselues vppon it: and Dorina (by her arte) hauing the gate readie open, permitted them entrance, but aboue an hundred Persians entred with them, who standing in feare of theyr Lord Sucusano, if they did not bring back Targiana with them: cōcluded to regaine her aliue or dead, for ere long an infinite number more would come to assist them, because all the Persian Campe was hereon in an vp∣roare. Dramusiande, hauing gotten in the Princesse, returned on the Bridge with a mightie Mace in his hand, which hée found by chaunce at the entrance of the gate: and dealing his blowes about him, so many hee sent headlong into the Ditch, that the rest beholding their manifest perrill, were gladde to giue backe: so the Bridge was drawne vp, euen as Sucusano (hearing of these newes) came thether with the flower of all his Armie. Dirdan, and the other Knights, with the men of the Ca∣stell, gaue such entertainement to the Persians which got in with them, as they dispatcht them all, not leauing one aliue. Targiana, when shee had considered with herselfe, that thorowe want of victuals shee could not keepe long in that Castell: shee went to the gate next to the Cittie, where causing a Trumpet to be sounded, great concourse of peo∣ple was immediatly assembled, and shee comming herselfe vpon the Porte, spake to them in thys manner. You see (my faythfull friendes and louing Countrimen) howe Su∣cusano, vrging false slaunders against mee, hath sought to inflict sharpe torments on mee, to make mée confesse what neuer entred into my thoughts, and afterward (by that ex∣cuse) vniustlie to defeate mee of my lawful right and king∣dome, and to enioy it himselfe. I am certaine, that you
would not willingly be vnder the Persian gouernment, and my selfe doubting you shoulde bee in subiection to forraine rule: will rather yeeld the kingdome to Ristorano, who is of the royall progenie of your owne Princes. Now, seeing in what estate I am, if you respect my life, haue care of me and of these Knights, who haue aduentured themselues for defence of my libertie: and because ye are likewise behol∣ding to Florian, who (onely mooued by his owne gentle na∣ture) put himselfe into so many perrils, to deliuer me from imprisonment: goe therefore with your power to the Pal∣lace, so soone as ye shall be conducted the way, and frée him from prison, that enfranchised your Quéene. By chaunce there was then present in hearing heereof, a great Signior of Antioch, beeing subiect to the Crowne of Turkie, who bearing some affection to Targiana, and ima∣gining, by accomplishing a seruice of such import, it was the readiest way to attaine her loue: forth-with hee called together a very sufficient troope, and to the Pallace they went, where they could not finde Florian, because the Per∣sians, (doubtful of maintaining themselues in the Citty) had secretly led him with them to their Campe. Which tidings greatly displeased Targiana and the Knights, but especially Dramusiande, who was ready to die with conceit of greefe. Now because the Persians had forsaken the Cittie, they issu∣ed foorth of the Castell, leauing Targiana & Floraman still to keepe it, so running to the Pallace, they gaue order for defence of the walls: intending likewise to aduertise the Emperour of these affaires thus happening in Turkie, but by reason of the multitude of Persian horesemen, as yet they knew not how to compasse the meanes. Dramusiande, to shewe what perrill should ensue on Su∣cusano, if hee durst put to death the Knight of the Sauage man, went armed into the fielde to demaund battaile: car∣rying this opinion, that if he could kill any great Cōmaun∣ders of the fielde, or take them prisoners, he should vrge dis∣may in the rest, and so the easier recouer his friende. The Persians hearing the battaile called for, and not knowing as
yet against whō to wage it, fell in contention among them∣selues on the matter: contrary to the liking of Sucusano, who reputed Dramusiande one of the most signall Christi∣an Knights, that euer searched after aduentures. After his Persians had long importuned him, he gaue them licence for the fight, and the first that came forth was a Gyant, discen∣ded frō the progenie of Darmaque, who was slaine by Pal∣merin d' Oliua, for which, hauing mortall hatred against all Christians, he declared his discontented moode, and ma∣king his signe for the Ioust, without speaking one word, he procéeded to encounter him. Alfiero, for so was hee named, beeing a hardie man at armes, wounded Dramusiande vppon the shoulder, bearing away with his Launce the péece of Armour that couered it, but the Christian piercing him thorow the shielde, passed on through his arme, bearing both horse & man to the ground, when easily he might haue slaine him before he could gette from vnder his horse: but vsing knightly curtesie, he stayd his leysure till he could arise. The Giant, who neuer knew what curtesie meant: imagined, that this fauour procéeded from his enemies slender skill in chiualrie, whereupon hée said: Foolish Knight, séeing thy wit serued thee not, to o∣uercome me when I could not defend my selfe: Ile teach thee better iudgement by the temper of this sword. Dramusiande, returning no aunswere, dismounted from his horse, and aduauncing his weapon, began to hacke and hew Alfiero: which strokes were so well replyed vnto, as both of them were very sore wounded. Mary Dramusiande bestird himselfe about so nimbly, as his hurts seemed but little to offend him: and now he began to beate his enemie round about the field, euen at his owne pleasure, and the o∣thers great disaduantage. Alfieros two Brethren, no lesse couragious then him∣selfe, séeing their brother grow into such extreame weake∣nes, hauing purposely hid themselues in a wood néere hand, suddenly rushed forth together vpon Dramusiande, who fin∣ding himselfe much wearied, and béeing now so ouer-mat∣ched,
could not defend himselfe against these thrée, but they buckling round about him, tooke him prisoner. For which Targiana was at deaths doore, yet the other foure Knights renued her comfort: albeit they greatly reprooued them∣selues, because they were not as then armed in the fielde, trusting but shallowly the Pagans faithfulnesse. Sucu∣sano feyned, that this Knights imprisonment, rather dis∣pleased him, then otherwise, and would not that he shoulde be ledde to his Tent: yet made he no other shew, of setting him at libertie againe. Dorina, when she beheld matters fall from ill to worse, repented that she had not brought Palmerin and Florendos with her: but that nothing might want which shee was a∣ble to performe, she would personally goe to Constantinople, and thence bring with her the most famous Knights, that Florian might not die, whose griefe was incomparable, be∣cause hee coulde not heare what was become of Targiana. And Sucusano many times would haue slaine him, not so much for reuenge of his Brothers death, as vtterly depri∣uing Targiana of all hope, to enioy him as her husband, were he so or not: or if shee were not married to him, then her minde might alter, and chuse him for her husband. But still herein his Counsell diswaded him, saying: That when neuer so many Pagan Lords preuailed by their powerfull Armies, euermore the most valiant of the Christians were permitted to liue: as not to incite those spirits forward, that before were animated to pursue reuenge. Notwithstanding, he might cause it to be noysed abroad, that Florian should bee beheaded, and placing a Scaffolde neere the Cittie, engirt it rounde with his owne Cauale∣rie: then to bring thether some other malefactor, yt shoulde be of his height, and apparrelled so like him, as it might be generally reputed to be he. By these meanes he should per∣ceiue the disposition of Targiana, and yet kéepe the Knight in pryson still, for all accidents that after might ensue. Su∣cusano was highly pleased with this aduise, and caused a Scaffolde to bee raised in sight of the Cittie, and the day
following, a prysoner was brought thether after the order appoynted: who by the distaunce of ground, and multitude of horsemen hemming it about, could not otherwise be dis∣couered but to be Florian. But now we must needes turne to the Perilous Ile, where (as you knowe) wee left the Em∣perour. CHAP. XVI. How the Emperour Primaleon returned to Con∣stantinople with Don Rosuell, and what hapned to the rest. Likewise, how the wise Aliart, aduertised Pal∣merin, Florendos, and other more, of Prince Florians case, who needs would depart to giue him succour. PRimaleon the Emperour, béeing now in full readines, set saile for Constantinople, hauing Don Ro∣suell with him, which else had not beene permitted, but that the danger of death was past him. The morrowe following, Don Edward, very malecontent that hee could not weare his Armour, embarqued himselfe for England, and left the Perilous Ile. Wise Aliart, who while the Em∣perour and Don Edward remained there, would not dis∣close to what end Dorina had led away ye Knights, because greefe for the Knight of the Sauage man, as also their vna∣blenesse to trauaile, béeing vnapt to beare Armes, would haue hazarded their liues: but they beeing gone, calling Palmerin and Florendos aside, he made knowne vnto them Prince Florians case, who was taken but the day before. Hee tolde withall, howe Dramusiande, and the other foure Knights, was conducted thether by Dorina, for hee stood in great need of helpe, and all was for the safetie of Targiana.
The Knights, béeing very pensiue at these newes, ar∣med themselues in all hast, and without taking leaue of a∣nie other but Aliart, with a ship are sayling toward Turkie. This their sudden departure, not a little moued the other Princes, and desirous to know the cause, they importuned Aliart: who as yet would not let them goe, for although theyr wounds were thorowly healed, yet were they weake and feeble: but béeing vnable to contayne, such was his feare of Florian, hee told the whole discourse, whereon the Knights prepared themselues presently. Platir, Berolde, & Gracian, were in such hast to be gone, to be there in time for helpe of their friend, that desiring no more company, (for they thought it a shame to goe so many together) they set on toward the place where Aliart had ap∣pointed them. Blandidon very angry that they woulde not stay for him, was faine to goe alone, and so did Francian likewise: but leaue we them to their iourney, and speak of some matters doone in the Perilous Ile. Aliart, who tooke care to maintaine the familie of Pal∣merin, caused the chyldren of these Princes to bee brought vp very industriously: that when occasion serued, it should appeare they were well gouerned, wise, & apt to armes. A∣mong whō, the second Primaleon was of such fierce courage, as hee terrified Aliart, doubting least afterward hee would not be benigne to other Knights, but proue as sterne as his Graundfather Palmerin. Wherfore Arguto, sonne to Fri∣soll, who declared himselfe to be some-what proude, when he came to deale with him at his weapon, woulde fight dis∣dainfully, and was desirous to kill him: but Aliart, who di∣ligently regarded them, would suffer them to fight no more together, for héereby he gathered, that when these Princes came to yeeres, there woulde be mortall hatred betweene them. The like strife was in Leonato and Tarnaes, by reason they both delighted in Candida, daughter to Belizart, whose very name obscured euery one, that sought to be famous by beautie. For these reasons Aliart was desieous to seperate
them, but he could not send the one away, except he did the like to the other: therefore (though against their wils) they abode there together: and he likewise desired as yet to kéep them there, till matters were better established in Chri∣stendome, for Fraunce, Spayne, Almayne, and most of the o∣ther Kingdomes (hauing lost their Princes) were subiected to mutinous seditions, whence great ruine was likeliest to ensue: beside, hee was the more willing to stay them still there, that they might not séeke after their order of Knight∣hoode, vntill they were growne in yeares more strong and able. Oliuanto, brother to Primaleon, beeing yet very young, gaue assured testimony that he would become valiant: but Leonato, sonne to Palmerin of England, shewed himselfe so forward to chiualrie, & was so like in countenance to great Palmerin his father, as wonderfull matter was expected of him, because he gaue himselfe to so braue disposition. Caro, sonne to Gracian, kept in secret by his Nurse, was conuay∣ed thence into Spayne. Belcar, sonne of Francian, Estrellant of Rosuell, Fortenbracio of Bellizart, and Orino of Dramian, were all of great towardlines: but Tarnaes sonne to Pla∣tir, was so vnlike the other in managing Armes and other behauiour, as there séemed to shine in him a kind of Lacede∣monian seuerity, for whosoeuer had marked the image of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian law-maker, euen the same that was to be séene on his Tombe: haue sworne that he rather resembled his figure, then that of Platir his father. Franar∣do & Almaroll of young Gyants stature, declared the same spirits remained in their fathers: but being children as yet, no other iudgment could be made of them. Now leaue we them, to goe sée with what loue the Emperour Primaleon entred Constantinople. The people being aduertised of their Lords returne, came vppon the bridge with such sportes and feasting, as neuer was the like séene in Constantinople before, for Brundo the Gouernour suffered nothing wanting, that might any way serue to honour him withall. At the gates and crosse-wayes
of the stréetes, were placed triumphall arches, whereon was presented the passed battailes against the Pagans: to wit, the death of the enemies, but not of the Christian prin∣ces. Both great & small there humbly submitted thēselues, all weeping for ioy, which made the Emperour and Gry∣donia shed teares: and according as it was appointed, in the first Church of the Citty they came at, the Emperiall Crowne was set on their heads, to make the solemnitie more royall, and this the onely ioyfull day that euer before was séene in that Citty. The Emperours walke continued from morning till night, not able to satis-fie himselfe, seeing each ruined place newly reedified: so that now hee might spend his time in ioy, but for the paine of his arme. Yet the death of so manie Princes was greeuous to him, to whose children therefore he confest himselfe the more indebted: chiefely to the Em∣perour of Almaigne, who died, both hee and Polinard his brother. Wherefore, by sending his Embassadors into that Kingdome, there came to his Court Bazilia very aged, and with her a sonne of Polinards, named Trineus, which he be∣got on a Lady of that Country, whom he tooke to wife onely for her beautie. The Emperour was excéeding ioyfull to beholde the young Prince, who was about the age of thirteene yéeres, apt and towardly to receiue his charge of the Empire. Af∣ter solemne welcomes vsed to his sister, and the Princes that were come to the coronation of their Emperour: hee caused young Trineus to sitte downe in a chayre of estate by him, and with all royall pompe to bee annoynted Empe∣rour: then setting the Crowne on his head, in magnificent state hee rode with him thorough the Cittie, to the end hee might the better be knowne, and more publiquelie honou∣red. All the ceremonies beeing accomplished, hée gaue him∣selfe to the hearing of weightie causes, such as Brundo wanted authoritie to perfect: for hée beeing but a Lieuete∣nant, would not put his hand to euery businesse, but reser∣ued
them of most importance for the Emperour himselfe, whose comming was from time to time so long expected. CHAP. XVII. VVhat hapned in Turkie, when the prisoner dis∣sembled in the steed of Florian was led to death. SVcusano, according as hee had béene councelled, commaunded, that fifty thousand horsemen (rea∣die prepared for fight, should cir∣cle the Scaffold: where each of them verily beléeued, that iustice was to bée performed on Prince Florian, and the very same opini∣on was conceited in the Cittie. With much adoe the prysoner was brought thether, and the Christian Knights (full of gréefe) armed thēselues to goe to death with him, for nowe they were voyd of all hope to free him. Targiana, because Dorina was gone to Constantinople for ayde, seeing shee now shoulde remaine alone in the Ca∣stell, began to be dismaied: and though her fréendes labou∣red to comfort her, yet would shee not remaine as a pray to her enemie, but prouiding herselfe with Armour accor∣dingly, would needes beare them companie, considering, that séeing she must needs die, shee could neuer haue better occasion, then to spende her life in giuing helpe to her hus∣band. So she with ye foure Knights mounted on horseback, hauing about a thousand Turkes with them: who percei∣uing that their Princesse went to this dismall stratageme, were the more willing to beare her companie. Great was the rumour amongst the Persians, and the crowde so won∣derfull, as hardly could they bring their dissembled prisoner to the Scaffold: but Targiana and her traine shouldering in among them, got into the way where they must passe with the prisoner.
Dirdan fearing they would ouer-soone attaine the Scaf∣fold with his friend, made such spéede forward, & outstript his company so farre, that he was knowne by the Persians, who fiercely assailing him, slew his horse vnder him, and at length (after he had slaine about fiftie of them,) he was ta∣ken prisoner. They neuer minding to carry him before Sucusano, but taking him by his Armour to bee a Pagan, that was a fauourer of the Christians, led him along with the other to behead him. Pompides, Dragonalte, Floraman, and Targiana with the rest, hauing lost the sight of Dirdan, and hearing the meruailous noyse among the Souldiers, imagined what was to true: then striuing to get onward, the preasse was so innumerable, they could make no way, but still were driuen back by such a shock of people, as they knewe not well how to stirre themselues. Dragonalte, béeing gotten hand to hand with a Giant, brother to Alfiero, that had taken Dramusiande, so sepera∣ted the companie, that beeing alone with him, hee founde small curtesie at the Giants hands, who béeing assisted by many of his followers, tooke him likewise, and led him on with the other prisoners to the Scaffold. Floraman, Pom∣pides, and Targiana, carying themselues very valiantly, did very much with their weapons, but to small auaile: be∣cause they were so hemd in with enemies, as they coulde not hope to get forth aliue. Wherefore, procéeding on so farre as they could, Targiana, who laboured to attaine the place, where shée imagined her Florian to be, pricked still forward, but béeing kept backe by the Persians, that kept the prisoners in a round, after shée had defended herselfe so wel as she could, (hauing on an enchaunted Armour, that som∣time belonged to her great Graundfather) shee was taken vnwounded, and led bounde to suffer death with the other prisoners, because shee was not knowne, and shee herselfe, perceiuing this was no place to make her selfe knowne, kept silence, least she should be further tormented. These affaires falling out thus vnfortunately, it came to passe, that (the night before) Palmerin and Florendos,
were arriued at the Castel of Albayzo, which was held by the Christians, (as is declared in the booke of Primaleon) and that it was conquered by Polendos. Heere they were giuen to vnderstand, that the next morning, Prince Florian should loose his head: it was no need to bidde them ride all night, and such spéede they made, that (by the ninth howre the next day) they reached the Persian Campe. When they heard such a mighty noyse as was made, they thought the Christian to be dead, or in extreame perrill, wherfore put∣ting spur too lustily, they hapned on that side, where Pom∣pides & Floraman, with about thrée hundred Turkes, were strongly borne backe. Then running into the crowde with full carrire, not hiding their signall at Armes, they began so to lay about them, that the Persians amazed, to see a man sliced through the midst, and some-time both horse and man hewen thorow at a blow: beganne to make way for them. Beside, when some noted the Armes imperiall, and others the badge of the Serpent, both which they feared so much in the war at Constantinople, gladlie they with-drew them∣selues. So got these two Knights into company of Pompides and Floraman, who reckoning thē but in state of dead men, onely sought to sell their liues so deerely as they could: and béeing both on foote, Palmerin (knowing Pompides by his Scottish Armes) cryed to him: Feare not Knight, for héere is Palmerin of England. Then killing a Giant that stoode contending with him for the maisterie, he tooke the Giants horse, and gaue it to Pompides: who because hée would be no longer troden among the people, mounted thereon quic∣lie. Florendos, sided his friend Floraman, & dealt his almes so bountifully about him, that he had soone got him on hors∣backe to. Thus these foure Knights kept theyr owne squa∣dron, defending their Turkish assistants, who were verie wearie, and but fewe in number: yet seeing what valiant Captaines fought for them, they stoode to it manfully eue∣rie one.
A Persian that knew Palmerin and Florendos by theyr Armes, went presently to acquaint Sucusano there-with, who imagining the game were absolutely wonne, if hée could be possessed of these two Knights, beside, that not on∣lie the Grecian Empire were conquered, but all Turkie like∣wise assuredly his owne: cōmaunded all his whole power foorthwith in a readines, determining so to enclose them with Armed men, as they shoulde compasse no meanes to escape. So busily was euery one arming himselfe, as Dramu∣siande was quite forgotten, who beeing shut vp in a Cham∣ber in the Tent, had bound vp his woundes and recouered good strength. Hee séeing each one so earnestly imployed, and that little or no care at all was had of him, couering himselfe with a Persian cloake, as if hee meant to lay him downe and sléepe: watched opportunitie, when stealing foorth, hée went along lymping like a wounded Persian, holding downe his head on his hand, as hiding a hurt, and béeing thus gotten foorth of the Campe, made hast toward the Citty, where making himselfe knowne, he was let in, there compassing the meanes to Arme himselfe anew. All this while the prisoners were in leading forward, and now they had attained neere the Scaffold, when sud∣denly a Turkish Knight, one of them that went forth with Targiana, returned to the Cittie, bringing newes that the Princesse was taken, and should be beheaded. At these ty∣dings, all the people arose, and arming themselues imme∣diatly, went and ioyned with tenne thousand Souldiours, which came vnder the conduct of the before named Lord of Antioche. Dramusiande, not a little gladde of this supply, led the way out of the Citty, hauing thirty hundred horse in his companie, and so soone as he reached the Persian power, hée made toward the Scaffold so neere as he could, bearing a Mace, yt sometime belonged to Alfiero, which hee brought with him foorth of the enemies Campe, because it was strong, and well knotted. Such hauocke made hée there∣with
amongst the Persians, that where he came, euery one gaue him place, and nowe had the Turkes recouered the prisoners, but ye fiftie thousand horse, with a braue troope of Infanterie suddainly came vpon them: these so enuironed the Turkes on euery side, as not a man could deuise how to get away. Palmerin, Florendos, and the other twaine, being ear∣nestly fighting on the contrary wing, knew nothing of this stirre, by reason whereof they had greatly béene endange∣red: but that the Persians (sore weakened by their mightie strokes) shunned so much as they could, from dealing with them at the swords poynt any longer, but sent Launces, darts, and arrowes to them very thick from a farre off, ha∣uing no other helpe left to defend their owne liues. By this time was there arriued from the Sea, Platir, Berolde, and Gratian, who hauing met a footman wounded to the death, heard, that this battaile was in rescue of a Knight, in danger to be executed, his name béeing Florian: and three other (thrusting themselues in for his defence) were likewise in the fight taken prisoners. These Knights, seeing the Armie (in a manner) num∣berlesse, not able in ten dayes space to be discomfited, when likewise they beheld mountaines of slaughtered men, they thought it impossible to recouer Florian: yet not to fayle one iote in Knightly dutie, they set vpon the Campe, euen where they imagined the skirmish to be hottest, & that was where Dramusiande was circled in with the enemie, yet chéerefully fighting to encourage his followers. This smal handfull of vnited harts preuailed so successefully, as the Persians (seeing such a fresh charge come backward, ima∣gined themselues assailed with Turkes both before and be∣hind: so beginning more and more to loose the fielde, the Turkes compassed the meanes to get néere the Scaffold, whereon already they had mounted the dissembled prisoner to behead him. Florendos and the rest séeing him on the Scaffold, made such hast to helpe him, as beating downe euery one that
stood in the way to resist them, they got neere the other pri∣soners: and cutting the cordes where-with Dirdan, Dra∣gonalte, and Targiana were bound, holp to mount them on horseback againe, prouiding them of swords and shieldes for their defence. Targiana, giuing the spurres to her horse, rode on with such furie to free her Florian, that shee beeing the first which got vpon the Scaffold, at one blow slew the executioner, and cut the halter where-with the prisoner was bound: but when shée saw it was not Florian, she was greatly astonished, neuerthelesse, finding him in such dan∣ger, shee vsed all meanes shee could to saue him, calling to the Christians, not to forsake him, but seeing Florian was not there, to rescue him. When Dramusiande sawe the prisoner vnbound, and perceiued what had béene performed by the valour of Pal∣merin and Florendos, without making any reckoning of his owne life, perforce he got him selfe vp on the Scaffold, ta∣king the prisoner vp vnder his shielde, to beare him to the Citty, he knowing no other but that it was Florian: but by reason the prisoner was vnarmed, he could neuer haue ca∣ried him foorth of the Armie aliue, had not Platir, Berolde, and Gracian made toward him, who layd so valiantly eue∣ry way about them, as Dramusiande got thorow ye throng, and went to the Citty. When he beheld the prisoner not to be Florian, he stoode awhile as one amazed, but to help the rest of his friends a∣gainst the enemie, hee returned foorth-with againe to the fielde: where the Persians seeing the prisoner was carried away, and that such losse had ensued on them beside, full gladly would they haue retyred, but standing in feare of their Lord, and beeing so strictly hemd in, they stoode still to it valiantly, to the great hazard of the Christian Knights liues, but that Blandidon and Francian came to helpe at a dead lift, who as they passed by Constantinople, had receiued of the Emperor a band of foure thousand Souldiers, wher∣with hauing winde & Sea at will, they came in good time to ioyne with them thus distressed: and entring on that side
where the Tents stoode, they gaue such a sudden terror to the Persians, (who well knew the Grecian power, and that few of them were too many to be resisted) as they began to retyre: so this new supply ioyned with Palmerin & the rest, conuaying Targiana into the midst among them, because shee should be no more endangered, yet were they all dis∣contented, because they had not recouered Florian. Sucusano, seeing such a fresh supply there arriued, and doubting now the destruction of his whole Armie, sounded a retreat: which was not a little pleasing to the Christi∣ans, who beeing wounded and wearied, especially the Turkes that were their assistants, let the enemy gladlie goe, and withdrew themselues likewise to the Citty. There did they ioyfully feast and banquet together, giuing charge that the wounded should be carefully respected: afterward, they called for the dissembled prisoner, & knowing by him the subtil drift of Sucusano, desired to vnderstand of whence and what he was. Hee séeing himselfe in the handes of Christians, lifting his eyes to heauen, thanked God, that had ordained so hap∣py a meane for his deliuerance, and thus aunswered. My Lordes, I am called Mirante, discended of Maulerino, the famous Magitian, that did so much in fauour of Palmerin d' Oliua, and because I delighted to conferre with Christi∣ans, Sucusano at his comming into Turkie, hearing of my inclination, tooke mee prisoner, threatning to kill mee at Constantinople in presence of the Christians. Right gladde were the Knights of méeting with this man, both in regard of his discen from Maulerino, as also to haue firme instruc∣tions from him, concerning all occurrences of the King∣dome. But minding more earnestly the fréedome of Flori∣an, they perceiued ye Sucusano purposed to sley him: there∣fore they shoulde bestirre themselues the better for his deli∣ueraunce.
CHAP. XVIII. How Sucusano raised his Campe to be gone: and beeing followed by the Christian Knights with their power, yeelded Florian. AFter Sucusano beheld, that on e∣uery side so many Christians were entred the fielde, and theyr certaine number coulde not be discerned, by the confusion they made amongst themselues, hée purposed a present returne into Persia: for séeing ye most famous Princes of Christendome were so soone arriued there, hee feared that in short time no meane strength would be sent them, and so their Armie might growe to an infinite multitude. But that which most of all dismaied him, was the shallow disposition he found in his Knights, who though they had doone good seruice in the late warre at Constantinople, yet nowe they wexed hartlesse or voyde of all spirite, by verie beholding the Knights of the Grecian Court, whose behaui∣our was as an vnrecouerable daunting to them all. Ouer∣swayed with these varying & piercing thoughts, that night he raised his Campe, and very silently made away with his Armie: leauing Tents and Pauilions good store be∣hind him, yt their base flight might not suddenly be knowne or perceiued. The morning ensuing, the Christian Caualierie armed themselues, to try what they could doe for the freedome of Florian, and drawing neere the Tents, where they coulde neither see man nor heare any noyse: vppon theyr further entrance into the fielde Trenches, they perceiued that the Persians were fled, and had carried away the Prince Flori∣an with them. This mishap was so displeasing to all those
generous spirits, as it made them to excéede in vehement impacience: especially Palmerin, who could restraine his rage within no boundes or limits, because he had so negli∣gently lost his noble brother. Héereupon, they called a counsell very suddenly, wherein they concluded to turne backe to the Citty: and taking so many Christians and Turks with them as they could make choyse of, pursue the flying footsteps of cowardly Sucusano. Beeing come to the Cittie, they found a fresh reioynder of tenne thousande Turkes, who were but nowe come in the ayde of Targiana theyr Soueraigne. Them they tooke along, as also the Grecian and, and diuers others, amoun∣ting to the number of an hundred thousand horse: and so they put themselues in pursute of the Persians, taking like∣wise with them Mirante, the Nephew of Maulerino, who promised to conduct them by so néere a way, as they should soone ioyne with the Persian Armie. So setting forward with good prouision of victuals, be∣cause it was a very desert Country, they were faine to ad∣uenture by such dangerous passages, as they were much troubled with defending themselues from manie wilde beastes: but the Captaines and Leaders being careful and diligent, made slaughter of diuers, and guarded all in safe∣tie. Palmerin, who would needes stray further from the Ar∣mie then any of the rest, to track more narrowly the footing of Sucusano, was assailed by two very furious Lyons: that slewe his horse vnder him, and by reason of his foote hang∣ing fast in the stirrop, had likewise slaine him, but that Pla∣tir & Blandidon came in good time, for one Lyon had grap∣pled him by the shoulder, and very easily had dragd him a∣way, but that by the woundes these Knights gaue them both, they were disappointed, and made such loude out∣cryes on their hurts, that their cry called thether two Ly∣ons more. Platir wounded deadly the Lyon that had fastned on Pal∣merin, and cutting off one of his leggs, made him fal downe
along vpon the earth. Blandidon cut the other Lyon quite thorow the reynes of the back, which made the beast med∣dle no more with Palmerin, but turne to reuenge that hurt on him which gaue it: so closing with Blandidon, the Lyon had intreated him very curstly, but that he plyed his hande with his short sword, and pierced so farre into his entrailes, as the beast tumbled backward ouer and ouer. In this time had Palmerin freed his foote out of the stir∣rop, and it hapned well that he did recouer himselfe so soone, because of the two other Lyons, that were come at the cla∣mour of them now slaine, and a shée Beare beside, the very fiercest that was in all that desert Forrest, and hauing but little before béene robbed of her whelpes, made her to be much more violent and furious. The Lyons ranne, the one at Palmerin, the other at Platir, and the beasts finding them as yet not to be crowned (for they neither can nor will of∣fend any of royal progenie) assayled them somewhat sharp∣lie. The shée Beare onely dealt with Blandidon: but hee ordered her in such sort, as there hee made her to leaue her life, where-vppon there came running at him two other huge Beares, and they had well néere layde him along on ground, but that Florendos (enuying that these Knights should séeke glory alone by themselues, in a place where strange aduentures were to be found) hauing committed the Armies care to Floraman, spurred amaine thether, bée∣ing followed likewise by Dramusiande, Gracian, & Berolde. Pompides, Dirdan, & Dragonalte, could not so readilie hast along with them, by reason of the wounds they receiued in the last battaile, whereof as yet they were not thorowlie recouered. These Knights came and ioyned with the other, euen as they were so hardly beset by the Lyons and the Beares, so that the issue of this encounter might very well be doubted. The Lyons (according to theyr nature) were excéeding fu∣rious, and the Knights béeing dismounted, spared not to let them feele the goodnes of theyr weapons: but Dramusiande perceiuing Blandidon in very great perrill, went to helpe
him, and gaue the Beare such a wound vpon the head, as part of it fell there-with to the ground: yet for all this the beast made hard at him, and got him by the bosome, griping hard his right hand with his rude pawes, and but that the Beare was much weakened by his former hurt, hee had béene brought into very hard distresse, wherefore the other Knights beholding the necessity, & that Dramusiande was so narrowlie bested, came to rescue him, euen as Dramusi∣ande hauing got his sword into his left hand, made there∣with the beasts right pawe fall to the earth. And so the Gi∣ant being now out of danger, went once more to giue suc∣cour to Blandidon, who was mightily disaduantaged by the other Beare: and running mainly at him with a ful thrust, the sword passed quite thorow him, and the beast tumbled ouer dead to the ground. Palmerin, who had now vnbuckled his Cuirasse, founde himselfe sore wounded in the left flanck: but an vndaunted minde béeing his onely supporter, he drew his hand-kircher through the beastes belly, and clapping it to the hurt, so bound it vp as an especiall medicine. Florendos, who in enuie was come to this bickering, had almost founde the iust punishment to such a sin: for one of the Lyons caught hold on his Creast behinde, and threw him so violentlie a∣gainst the ground, as the Helmet flew off his head, and had not Dramusiande stept to him in time, his life had béen dis∣patcht for euer. But he smiting the Lyon vpon the buttock, made him past abilitie of further going, and lying spraw∣ling along in raging manner, he roared so extreamely, as the cry brought thether aboue an hundred Lyons, Wolues and Beares: and they had very spéedily deuoured these Princes, but that by hap the Armie was neere at hande, where beholding an occasion offered of such desert, they slew most part of the beasts, and the rest fled: notwithstan∣ding, Blandidon, Palmerin, and Berolde, were so hurte in theyr first encounters, as for certaine dayes they continued in weake disposition. Mirante went still before the Armie, and now began to get intelligence of the Persian forces, so
that determining vppon more speedie iourneyes, within eight dayes they could easily discerne them from a Moun∣taine, which seruing as a safe Sanctuarie to the Christi∣ans, allowed them nowe some rest after so teadious la∣bour. Soone after, Floraman who had béene created Captaine of the whole power, gaue order for entrance into a Woode neere adioyning, where quietly reposing themselues till t were night, they might then take the Persians vnprouided and in their sleepe: for otherwise they did so exceed them in multitude, as there could be but slender expectation of vic∣tory, nor stood they so much vpon slaughter of the enemie, as onely the recouering againe of Prince Florian. So pacing on very silently, about midnight they came close to the Armie: which stoode vpon small guarde or de∣fence, because they were voyde of all suspition. Our Chri∣stian Knights woulde not assaile the weaker forces, but made way for themselues to the Tent of Sucusano, where then giuing out the voyce of battaile, they gaue a valiant assault, & slew at the first closing aboue ten thousand Persi∣ans. But because Sucusano had before giuen order, that fiue and twentie thousand should attend euery night the guarde of his owne person, and those now, though very sléepie, had their bodies vnarmed, and their horses not sadled: yet sud∣denly put themselues into so good sort, as they resisted the Christian power very resolutely, and among them was the Giant Alfiero with his two Brethren, and they bestird themselues with no meane furie: for, hauing Maces of vn∣reasonable weight & greatnes, they made hauocke enough of all that durst come neere them. Dramusiande, hearing the report of these Giants, ima∣gined it was they that before had taken him: wherefore, rushing through the prease, he encountered Alfiero face to face, saying: Behold how Fortune hath once more made vs meete, because at my handes thou shouldst receaue thy death. Alfiero, who had soundly felt his blowes before, could gladly haue béene rid of him: notwithstanding, as it was
now no time for cowardly frights or feares, so he gaue for∣ward boldly to buckle with him, and there they two were at it alone by themselues. Dramusiande, whose onely desire was Prince Florians fréedome, fought with such furie and earnestnes together, as within a small while Alfiero was brought into such e∣state, that falling downe ouer-laboured among the horse féete, there the huge Giant was troden to death. The Per∣sians did what they could to resist this hote assault, but what with the suddennes, & frighted amazement, neither could they arme one part of their people, nor endure in any de∣grée against the Christians. And (which most dismayed them) Sucusano, who supposed so slender a strength of his e∣nemies, durst not thus so haue persued and assailed him: could now determine on nothing but flight, so causing Flori∣an forthwith to bee horsed, with about two thousand of his trustiest followers, away both he and they fledde toward a Castell. This was not doone with such cunning or secrecie, but it was discerned by his owne Souldiers: who falling into the like affright as their Lord before had doone, and imagi∣ning the number of their foes to be more then they coulde possibly withstand, began likewise to leaue the field, and so the Christians remained victors. But when they came to Sucusanos Pauillion, & founde that hee was escaped and gone: they grew very desperate, and fearing least they should loose his track, pursued imme∣diatly with all possible spéede. But to no purpose had thys labour sorted, had not Dramusiande (by good hap) light on a Dwarffe by the way falne into a Ditch, whom hee help∣ing out, and taking vp before him on his saddle bowe, vn∣derstood by him whether Sucusano was fled. Hee aduerti∣sing Floraman and the rest heereof, without taking any pro∣uision, or great part of the Campe with them, they spurrd speedily after, and came thether at the instant, when Sucu∣sano was comming foorth of the Castell, with intent to post toward Persia presently.
But séeing his enemies thus come vpon him, hee retur∣ned in againe, where nowe hee meant to make himselfe strong, and send for fresh supply to be his deliuerance. But by reason of the Countries barrennes, not affording victu∣all or other prouision: they grew to articles of agréement, which were, that Florian should be rendered safe & sound, and he passe without molestation into Persia, vpon promise, neuer to mooue more warre against the Christians, nor a∣gainst the royall Lady Targiana. Thus was Prince Flo∣rian deliuered, and Sucusano departed thence, after hee had assembled his scattered forces together. CHAP. XIX. How Dorina left of her loue to the Prince Florian, with intent to aduaunce the honour of Primaleon the second, sonne to Florendos: not because she bare any immodest affection to him, but onely to make him famous through the world. DOrina, after her departure from the cittie of Tubante, for demaund of further helpe, when shée was alone within her Barque, began to thinke with herselfe, that all her labour was but in vaine, in séeking to gaine any grace from Prince Florian: because, beside her beeing farre lesse faire then the Princesse Targiana, shee was likewise but poore. In thys regard, herselfe helde it as a matter most vnreasonable, that shée should labour him to a∣nie such indignitie, considering his strict bond of affection to the Turkish Ladie: wherefore, béeing ashamed of what shée had already doone to him, and much reprehending her former wanton desires, shée altered her thoughts nowe to
doo somewhat woorthy good repute, without any more sub∣iecting her minde to carnall inclinations. And entring into consideration with herselfe, vpon what person shee might imploy this industrious purpose: immediatly she apprehen∣ded, that Primaleon the sonne of Florendos, was an apt sub∣iect to worke matter of worth vpon. Then looking aduised∣lie into his natiuitie, she saw, that hee was borne to finish manie high aduentures, and shoulde likewise suffer verie sharpe trauailes for a Ladies loue: wherefore, being now come to the yéeres of fifteene, and the wise Aliart hauing so ordered all matters, that all the young Princes should be sent to their seuerall estates, Dorina caused a young beau∣tifull Damosell, to appeare to young Primaleon in his sléepe, and shée taking him by the hand, spake in this man∣ner vnto him. My beautie (if any) is onely dedicated to be thine, nor can I otherwise choose but loue thée: neuerthelesse, I haue very many great perrils to passe, which because thy valour must be the onely meanes of, they shall make thée glorious. For proofe héereof, thou shalt sée a young Virgine, which héereafter shal bring a Monster into this Iland: and when thou séest thy selfe crowned with the conquest thereof, goe whether shée shall guide thee for my beauties sake, and ac∣cording as thou findest thy desires enflamed with my loue. This dreame so delighted the young Princes minde, that hee found himselfe presently to be enamoured, but knewe not of whom: for the Damosell that thus saluted him in his sléepe, he could not now discerne waking, & therefore could not deuise howe to be further satis-fied heerein. Heereupon his thoughts became much altered, and daily would hee walke downe to the Sea shoare, to try if he might gaine a sight of her, that should be his conduct to so woorthy an en∣terprise. Not many dayes were past, but as he stoode alone vpon the strond, hee saw a farre off a little Barque making the∣therward: whereon, imagining that this might be it which should bring the Monster, he stayed in further expectation,
within an howre or little more, Dorina put in her Barque to Land, and stepping foorth on shoare, went vp directlie to the Pallace: where was Aliart, and all the other young Princes, who beholding her there arriued in such sort, troopt together to vnderstand of whence she was. The Lady falling on her knee before Aliart, spake in this maner. Mighty & most discreet Lord, once more am I come hether with my Monster, to try if I can conclude an enter∣prise of mine: but nowe I partly repent my comming he∣ther, because (turning and looking about her) I sée none heere likely to conquer the Monster, for he that could per∣forme it, is to goe with me to a greater and much more ho∣norable aduenture. Aliart, who was not now accompanied with any Knights likely to vntertake a matter of such moment, thus aunswe∣red. Good Lady, the aduenture of your Monster could not haue failed héere, when we had such Knights as your selfe haue made proofe of: but nowe you come at a very vnapt time, for heere are none now but youthes onely, and such as yet haue neuer beene knighted. Dorina, interrupting Aliarts aunswere, said: My Lord, I am not come hether by chaunce, but directed by a vehe∣ment desire, which I haue to make famous this gallant Infantrie, whom Fortune may fauour with vanquishing the Monster. And albeit they are not knighted as yet, that may very easily be prouided for: let them but be had to Constantinople, where the Emperour is readie to knight a∣ny woorthy deseruer, and there they may be ready for all good haps whatsoeuer. Aliart, who could not wel gaine-say her reasonable spée∣ches, (for all the young Lordes longed to bee exercising armes, & wearied with practizing vsuall feates of defence, began to murmure that they were thus long hindered) and hoping the best of theyr towardly forwardnes, forth-with commaunded a ship to be made in readines, and sending all the young Princes aboard, with prouision conuenient for such a voyage, vnder the conduct of Argentao, and with li∣cence
of their mothers, though loath to leaue them, they were thence dismissed. Dorina who woulde not goe to Constantinople, dealt so subtilly, as she made her Monster to appeare, euen as Pri∣maleon the second was ready to step into the shyp: where∣of hee béeing desirous to haue a further sight, without anie longer tarrying, leapt into the Barque, which suddenlie was seene to put off from the shoare, and got more then halfe a leagues distance, ere they coulde see what was be∣come of Primaleon, and afterward it sayled so swiftlie, that quickly had they lost the sight of it altogether. The Shyp with the young Lords, made on for Constantinople, and in meete place shall be shewen what after became of them. Dorina was not a little gladde shee had got this young Prince, made him promise of horse and Armour, and after∣ward he should vndertake an aduenture: which although it would prooue dangerous, yet he should accomplish it, and attaine to as great glorie and renowne, as euer had the Emperour Primaleon, Don Edward, or Florendos his Fa∣ther. Primaleon, who had mind on nothing else but horse, Ar∣mour, and knighthood, made liberall promise of his lyfes hazard in any attempt what soeuer, as thinking it a death most glorious, to be afterward eternized famous. So say∣ling on, the Barque at length put in at an Iland, which seemed rather a receptacle for wilde beastes, then any ha∣bitation for ciuill people: there hee (forsaking the Barque) stepping foorth on Land, walked a little along by himselfe, and hauing not béene accustomed to such accidents, the vn∣couthnes of the place some-what dismaied him. But after∣ward, making better remembrance of himselfe, conside∣ring also what Dorina had sayd vnto him, & doubting least shée should discerne any deiected spirit in him, hee entred a wood neere adioyning, and not farre had hee paced along therein, but hee had a glimpse of bright Armour hanging there on a high trée, and beeing not a little glad that hée had found what he sought for, he hied him to the place, cōming
so neere to it, that hee might easily take it downe with his hand, which as hee made offer to doe, intending to arme himselfe therewith, hee felt a forcible strength to restraine him from it, whereat meruayling in his minde, and some∣what offended that hee could not arme himselfe so soone as he would haue done, he made a more violent proffer, when suddenly hee hearde a voyce from the trée, saying: Fond youth, since thou thoughst to haue this Armour so easilie, thou must knowe thou art deceiued therein, for this is the Tree dedicated to Fortune: and who soeuer will haue this Armour, must sweare and vow, to proceede without anie feare or distrust, in all such actions as Fortune shall as∣signe vnto him. All which attempts shall make him much more famous, then any that hath sprung from the familie of Palmerin d' Oliua: and shall likewise bestow on him the fayrest Ladie, that in all ages past hath beene seene to this day. Primaleon, who thought there was no occasion so perri∣lous, but by his courage hee shoulde out-goe it: tooke his oath immediatly, and protesting the same with strict asse∣uerations, to sée what further might thereon ensue, hee be∣held the Armour to be taken from the trée, and the tree to extend it selfe into such largenes, as by little and little it for∣med it selfe into a goodly Pallace, after the shape & resem∣blance of a Theater. In the midst whereof appeared a seat royall, and thereon sate a Quéene very maiestically, with fayre goodly tresses of haire before, but all bald behind: af∣terward shee tooke a wheele vnto her, whereon there see∣med to be many men and women, who changed from place to place as often as the wheele turned about. There were alwayes some, (though very fewe) entreated as fauorites, that stoode neere the footesteps of the state, and other so neere, as they might easily touch it: but at no time durst a∣ny make offer of dooing it, nor hold they this happines for any long continuaunce, but euer as they grew proude of thse graces by Fortune, shée whéeled them about into farre more lowlines.
The place was figured foorth in very liuely cullers, where might be discerned the foure Monarchies in theyr first flower and beautie, afterward, how the three (alreadie ruined and destroyed) fell into their ouerthrow, and the fourth (to wit, the Romaine) tossed vp and downe by the whéeles turnings, now aloft, then as lowe, was yet still in the warie eye of Fortune. There were infinite Kings and Princes together on a heape, striuing and contending for her fauouring counte∣naunce: but all their labor was in vaine, for the more they stroue, the lesse she respected them. The young Prince Primaleon, who had care of nothing else but how to compasse the Armour, made no regarde of all these apparitions, but pressing on a little more, hee be∣helde Fortune to discend from her seate, and shewing him very kinde lookes, as to one whom shée especially fauou∣red: by her owne hands he was armed Knight-like in all respects, with such loude applause of all the other by-stan∣ders, as it appeared hee held no meane roome in her grace, which afterward altred into some shewes of enuie, because he alone was regarded, and they helde as neglected, then thus she spake to him. Henceforth be thou called Fortunes Knight, and verie aptly art thou so entiteled, because thy desires shall neuer aime at any thing: but for euery drop of sweat thou spen∣dest therein, thou shalt haue infinites of fame and glorie, and my selfe alwaies to be thy soueraigne Patronesse. Pri∣maleon, who onely thirsted after honour, as also to reach the height of his hope in loue, thought this (as well hee might) a blessing beyond all other to be thus armed, and fauoured by Fortune: then gaue shée him her forelockes to hold in her hand, as a signe, that by such progression was his likeliest way of preuailing. So taking her seate againe, she made a signe of his de∣parture, when presently all vanished; the trée closed again, and the wood appeared as it had doone before: whereat hée meruailing not a little, saw a goodly horse cōming toward
him, with a faire shielde fastned at the saddle-bowe, the horse gently cōming to his hand, he mounted on his back, and looking on the shielde, hee behelde a Knight portrayed thereon, holding Fortune (in the habite of a beautifull wo∣man) by the forelocks. So pleasing was this deuise vnto him, as now he con∣cluded to call himselfe the Knight of Fortune: and looking somewhat lower vpon the sheelde, he perceiued the face of a Lady, but couered with a vaile in such manner, as hee could not apprehend the forme of her beautie, but there ap∣peared a hande as pointing to her, and vnder it was writ∣ten this motto, Proude beautie. Thus rode the Knight on, his minde still hammering on loue, and desire of glory, and then he espied Dorina com∣ming toward, who before had stoode inuisible by, and shee causing him to goe on board againe, set sayle immediatlie for Constantinople. CHAP. XX. How the young Princes arriued at Constantinople, where they receiued their order of Knight-hoode: and how preparation was made for a Tournament. THe Shyp that was embowelled with the gallant young Prin∣ces, casting Anchor in the Port at Constantinople, they were by the Emperour & Empresse verie louingly entertained: and vn∣derstanding by Aliarts Letters the cause of their comming, it was appointed that they should be Knighted the Sunday folow∣ing, and each one hauing watched in his Armor the night before, accoring to the custome in such cases prouided, there
appeared certaine signes vnto them, which gaue notice of important matters to diuers of them. Leonato the sonne of Palmerin beeing deuoutly at prayer, he beheld an aged Em∣perour enter the Chappell, who laying his hand vpon his breast, said. Behold, I take all feare from thee, that may be iniurious, or hurt thee in any perrillous enterprise, & make thee Knight of the Sword: which deuise he bare while he li∣ued, atchiuing manifold honours thereby, and it was ima∣gined, that this old man was the shadow of the Emperour Palmerin d' Oliua. These spéeches were plainly heard by diuers of the rest, and others entring the Chappell, founde him both armed and girt with a Sword: which made them suppose, that hee should neede no doubt of arming by the Emperour. To Ar∣guto, who was at his deuotions in another place by him∣selfe, appeared a King with a Shielde, which had figured in it a goodly Sunne, and taking him by the hand said. I know that thy fortune, will heereafter cause thee to offende one, whō thou rather oughtest to honour: but because thou shalt not be the meanest in those seruices which thou art to vndertake, I giue thée my shield of the Sunne, which shal be impenetrable, part therefore from hence, after thou hast thy title of Knighthoode. No other hearde what this King had sayde to Arguto, but sawe howe hee armed him as a Knight. To Tarnaes the sonne of Platir, came an old man in ve∣rie short garments, who wanted one eye, and in breefe termes he spake thus to him. I giue thee this Armor, which once belonged to King Phillip of Macedon, which shall make thee famous in all thine enterprises: and arming him therewith, presently departed. Many that saw him at his departure, iudged him to be Lycurgus the Law-maker of Lacedemonia. In the morning, the Emperour not a little wondering at these strange accidents, gaue the other Knights theyr degrees: whereat Oliuanto, the second sonne of Florendos, was much discontented, because the Emperour had not in
like manner knighted him, though indeed his young yéeres was his onely hinderance. The feasting was very pompous, and the Emperour shewed himselfe exceeding ioyfull, as beholding his Court now begin to flourish againe, which had béene before very sad and solitarie, in regard of the mighty losses sustained: and the case of Prince Florian caused some discontentment, albeit a little glimmering of good hap appeared, in that so many Knights was departed in quest of him, and doubtlesse would defend him from any perrill of life. The new created Knights, to giue some presage of their hopefull valour, concluded a Tournament among them∣selues, at the Launce onely, and it was free for all com∣mers what soeuer: onely it was in this manner ordained, because if any Pagan Princes should chaunce to be there, no treason or villainie could then be offered. The fame of this Iousting flew through diuers parts of the world, yea, euen into Turkie, where the Christian Knights were in great ioy and feasting, for the happy deliuerance of the Prince Florian. And Targiana omitted no gracious kind∣nesse what soeuer, that might auaile for his delight or con∣tentment: so that the Turkes thought shee had made him her husband, whereat they grewe sad, and much displea∣sed, expecting euery howre when they should be forced to deny their fayth, and be subiected to a Christian Prince, the thought wherof to them was worse then death. Very glad∣lie would these Christian Lordes be present at Constantino∣ple, as well to see the behauior of their Sonnes, as to make proofe of them by their owne experience: for at these yeres men ought endeuour to make themselues glorious, and (in imitation of their Fathers) contend who should be most fa∣mous. But they could not as yet get away from that Country, because Ristorano, hauing mustered together many Persi∣an Knights, collected from diuers parts of the Prouinces, that came not in time for the ayde of Sucusano: were repu∣ted to be a very great Armie, and they were making spee∣dilie
to Tubante, hauing foure crowned Kings in their com∣panie, who were to be knowne by these descriptions. Ca∣rino King of Illium was ye first, who had with him two huge Giants, and thirty thousand armed Souldiours. Drago King of Memphis, the second, who had a Monster in hu∣mane shape, the very strangest that euer was séene before. It went both on two feete, and likewise on foure, the heade like a Goate, with foure long bending hornes, two tur∣ning toward the face, and two forward: with the first hée wounded when hee stoode on his two féete, and with the o∣ther when he went vpon his foure. His armes were hairie bristled, and more long then they that bore his bodie, ha∣uing nayles or talents so sharpe & piercing, as they woulde enter through any Shielde: in all the rest hee resembled a man, except his feete, and in stature greatly he excéeded a∣ny Giant whatsoeuer. Vlderino King of Tanais was the third, a man very va∣liant of himselfe, hauing twentie thousand followers, and two Sonnes of a Giantlike stature. The fourth was Stu∣pendo, the most cruell King of Scithia, with fiftéene thou∣sand of his armed people: according as theyr custome is to goe, onely with Launce and bow, mounted on horsebacke, but without any bridle. All these ioyned their forces with Ristorano, who like∣wise had an hundred thousand men, what with his Persians and those of Turkie, who marching disordredly, cumbred much ground, and were greatly feared all the way they went: for now no other newes ranne any where abroade, but that their Princesse Targiana was married to Florian King of Thrace, and thereby they doubted subiection to the Grecian Empire, which was very yrkesome to them but to heare. When the Christian Knights heard what a power was comming against them, and that so many Kings had ioy∣ned their strength with Ristorano, fearing least theyr sup∣porting this present occasion in Turkie, might abridge them from euer beholding their owne Countries, they dispatched
thence certaine Turkes to perswade the Kings, that the Christians had no other busines there, but onely to seate Targiana their naturall borne Lady in her Kingdome. And ths perswasion had past for currant with them, but that Ristorano (hauing no meane care to keepe those Kinges firme vnto him) got intelligence of this treatie from the Christians: and causing the Turkes to be quickly appre∣hended, commaunded them forth-with to be hewen in pée∣ces. This dissigne thus miscarrying, the Christian Knights prouided for their best defence, but they founde all thinges out of orer that should auaile them: for all the Turkes were in a mutinie about the marriage of Targiana, and she (beeing altogether transported with her affection to Florian) made such outward appearance of but an inward suppositi∣on, as the matter suspected grewe to be soundly assured, so that not daring to build any trust vpon the Turkes, and themselues prouided of very fewe people, they stoode in an amazement, not knowing what to say or doo for theyr owne aduantage. Blandidon, perceiuing he was not farre from his King∣dome of Niquea, promised to write thether, that so many ar∣med men should be sent him as they could make, and Dir∣dan the Graund Cane was vrged to the like, that he would also send to his kingdome of Paraz. But he that stoode ra∣ther disposed to make conquest of Niquea, and take to wife the beautifull Lady Tirrena, béeing thereto before sollicited by sundry inuitations: alleaged such excuses, which al∣though they were slenderly credited, yet none knew direct∣lie how to obiect against them. The messengers from Blandidon béeing come to Nequea, there they vnderstoode by diuers good friendes of his, howe matters stood already accorded cōcerning Tirrena: wher∣fore, without deliuerance of their Embassage, they retur∣ned backe againe, and certified the Christian Lords of their ill successe. This disastrous chaunce much troubled Pal∣merin and the rest, but especially Blandidon beyond them
all, who remembring the dreame he had in the Perilous Ile, and telling the same to the Knights, they all founde it not fit to contend with so mighty a puissaunce, but to take the best course for the safetie of the Cittie, which not beeing so intirely furnished with prouision, they thought it best, day by day to deale by single fights, vntill they had made ha∣uock of the Leaders and Captaines. In these hopes and determinations, they expected the enemies approch, who founde as they came but small resi∣stance, by reason of the fault imputed to Targiana: and the Turkes were very desirous and thirsty after newes, be∣cause they heard that Targiana (with Prince Florian) was with-drawne into the Castell, and daily they endeuoured to fortifie Tubante. Héereupon, Ristorano béeing come within a league of the Citty, and there deuising on his best and aptest meanes in procéeding, to besiedge it was the generall conclusion. Palmerin, to giue a beginning to their former intention, ar∣med himselfe, and comming foorth of the Citty, staying a place farre enough from the enemies Campe, gaue them to vnderstand by an Heralde at Armes, after what manner they demaunded battaile. Ristorano, who was wise and prouident found very rea∣dily the purpose of the Christians: and knowing that these were the flower of all the Grecian Caualierie, would not a∣grée vpon such single combate or fight, alleadging, that in regard they were but few, they had no other way more ex∣pedient for their owne defence. For, they coulde not expect any further assistance, because the Empire of Constantino∣ple was so emptied of her Souldiours in the late battaile, as thence could come no supply: and therefore it was meetest to engirt the Citty with strong sledge, which was the one∣ly way to vanquish without any damage. This indéede was the soundest counsell and aduise, but the Kings beeing youthfull and gallant, vnexperienced in the proofe of the Christian warriours: would not allow of any thing but Combate, and because they contended who
should be formost, to conclude all further iarring, it was de∣termined, that Carino, with one of his Gyants, Drago King of Memphis, and Stupendo King of Scithia, shoulde combate with any foure Knights of the Citty. This aun∣swere was returned to Palmerin, that he and three other should prepare themselues, to deale in Combate the day following, neere to the Citty, and in meane while shoulde no wayes by them be iniured. These newes were not a little welcome to the Christi∣ans, seeing theyr desseignment sort to so good effect: heere∣vpon they made theyr preparation, and because that all of them were willing to goe forth, they were commaunded to be in readines, according as afterward should more aptlie be concluded vpon. So Palmerin, who already had accepted the Combate, (Floraman remaining still as Captaine generall) Floren∣dos, Dramusiande, and Berolde, were to be the other with him, whereat the Prince Florian was greatly offended: and this was a good helpe of preseruing the Cittie from losse, as in the successe heereof shal be declared. But leaue we them now in their former preparation, and returne a∣gaine a while to Constantinople.
CHAP. XXI. How they proceeded to the Tournament, where∣in Arguto would haue slaine an vnknowne Knight, because he could not endure his company. ALiart, who trusted not a little to his arte, sent diuers of his Ma∣gicall messengers, to vnderstand by them how the affaires went in the enemies kingdome: and when he was resolued, that there was no Armie prepared to come against the Christians, but one∣ly that of Ristoranos, (who would much more willingly haue held his gouernment in quiet, then hazard it by medling with the Christians, whom he verily imagined to be inuincible) he grew excéedingly desirous, to send all the Princesses with their daughters into their owne iurisdictions. And as they conferred héereon together, they concluded to goe for Constantinople, especially such as had lost their husbands: because theyr sad mindes would not admit them to sée their natiue homes, where they were assured to find nothing but greefe and desolation. This their determination displeased not Aliart, where∣fore causing a Ship to be very well prouided, they all went aboord, and himselfe was the more willing to beare them company, because no sinister chaunce should befall them by Sea: which vsually was wont to be perrillous by rea∣son of the enemies forces béeing abroade, but nowe in bet∣ter quiet by their late disabling. Safely they sayled along to Constantinople, where the newes of their arriuall ranne quickly through the Cittie, and the Emperour cōmaunding the young Knights forth∣with
to Arme themselues, accompanied with ye Empresse Grydonia and Basilia, went to giue welcome vnto the La∣dies. The Quéenes Palitia, Melissa, Francellina, Arnalte, Mi∣ragarda, and Polynarda, were the first that went on Land, the three formost in their widdowed attires, but Arnalte more pompous and proude then euer before: there followed them Alderina, Leonida, Bramaciana, Denisa, Sidelia, Oni∣stalda, Clarissima, Bernarda, Clariana, and Florenda, who because shee was high minded, would needes be the last, and went alone by herselfe from all the rest. Then follo∣wed the younger Ladies in such sumptuous ornaments, as they drew all eyes to behold and admire them. Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian, because she was eldest, was admitted the priuiledge of landing first, seconded by Argen∣tina the Spanyard, so excelling in beauty, as it delighted all harts to behold her. Candida came next, whose perfections aunswering her name, made her much wondred at. Spyna woulde haue gone with Florenda her mother, béeing of such a haugtie proude disposition, that though her singuler beautie made many to commend her, yet her coy disdainfulnes, gaue iust cause of as great condemning her. Then followed Arlen∣cea, with her Sonne Franardo, that was left with her in the Perillous Ile, and Cardigea likewise with her Sonne Al∣maroll. The newe created Knights led the young Ladies Pal∣frayes by the bridles, and the younger men the Palfrayes of the maried Princesses: whereat the Emperour laughed indifferently, and many pretty frumps and iests were bro∣ken on the elder Ladies. Arguto, whose expectation was at the Kingdome of Hungaria, as giuing place to no one in iustice of his title, presented himselfe forward, and taking Victoriaes Steede by the bridle, shewed her the greatest kindnesse hee coulde possibly vse, with spéeches swéetly couched, and very effec∣tuall: but the young Lady, not acquainted with such salu∣tations,
nor vnderstanding the youthful gallants purpose, by naturall curtesie returned him a very accomodate aun∣swere, which he entertayning as a good presage of future happy fortune, thought him blessed in so faire a beginning. Oliuanto was the leader to Argentinaes Palfray: but be∣cause he was yet ouer-young, and not endued with knight∣hood, he did not behold her with the eye of affection. Tarnaes laying hand on Spynaes bridle, was welcomde so sullenlie by her that knew no course of kindnes, as she shewing ap∣parant signes of discontentment, and the young Lord blu∣shing at such discourteous behauiour, stept backe againe, very much amated in his thoughts: & this repulse of hers béeing generally noted, raised a present imagination a∣mong them all, that this scornefull pride, would keep Spy∣na long enough without a husband. When the Emperour Primaleon had well beheld the beautie of Candida, albeit hee was olde, hee could not con∣taine, but needes he would goe and be the guide to her pal∣fray: whereat the Princesses smyled a good among them selues, but his sister Basilia (to thwart their intended ie∣stings herevpon) called Arlencea, and giuing her roome to ride in the midst of them, began to talke pleasantly concer∣ning Dramusiande, and howe if hee had not departed with Doryna, what little hope remained of his longer life. So entred they the Cittie in very great tryumph, and wonder∣full preparation made by the inhabitants, vnable to con∣ceale their ioy and contentment, hauing their Emperour so royally among them, and matters reduced into their for∣mer dignitie. And in this manner they came to the Pallace, where the Empresse Grydonia hauing richly furnished many ta∣bles, euery one was seated according to his woorth and e∣stimate: the newe Knights and other Princes, at Tables by themselues, and the Ladies with their daughters, at o∣ther by themselues. The feast was aunswerable to such a time of solemnitie, and the tables beeing withdrawne, the newe Knights went ioyntly to the Emperour together, de∣siring
that now they might procéede to the Tournament: for diuers Pagan Princes were already there arriued, with especiall intent to make knowne their hardines, and some of them hauing seene the forementioned Ladies, were in theyr heat of affection become so amourous, as they prac∣tised all meanes to be possessed of these beauties, and haue them thence with them into their owne Countries, if by theyr chiualrie they could attaine to such happines. Thether was come a sonne of Sucusanos the Soldane of Persia, who was called Salaman: and from Romata came the young King Gorgoneo, who forgetfull of the benefites his Graund-father receiued by Palmerin d' Oliua, ioyned in confederacie with Sucusano, & both these Princes were purposely come thether, to pry into the procéedings of the Christians, and thereby to catch occasion of a newe com∣mencement of warre. There was also arriued a King of India, called Tamer∣co, who had brought his Sister with him, a Lady of such beauty, as shée was enuied of very many, and thought to be fayre by the Christians themselues: this he did as moo∣ued thereto by a vaine opinion, thinking to equall any Christian Lady with his Sisters beautie. Tinto King of Armenia was likewise there, the onely valiant man of his person, and most famous amongst the Pagans: and had he not died by mishap in the Tourney, the victory had not gone on the newe made Knights side. Thether came also the Prince of Apuglia, the Earle of Antwerpe, who was a Christian, and many other great personages of Christen∣dome, whose names shall be reported in theyr apt time and place. The Emperour gaue authoritie to the Duke of Pera, to sée the Lists prepared, and to take care for the obseruati∣on of the lawes to a Tournament belonging, wherein it was prouided, that neither Sword, Mace, nor Poleaxe should be brought within the Lists, but onely the Launce, whereof tenne were allowed to euery Knight, who hauing runne and broken their staues, should depart & giue place
to all fresh commers. The new Knights came with their attendants in costly liueries, to make the shewe appeare more pompous, the like obseruation was among the stran∣gers: and the limitted day béeing come, they entred accor∣ding to appoyntment within the Listes. Leonato and Arguto had the honour to beginne, the first with Salaman, and brake their Launces brauely, parting thence without any aduantage discerned, more on one side then another. The second encountred Tinto of Armenia, and by ouer-much hast failed in the breake: neuerthelesse, their Shieldes so mainly met together, as the horses (not able to endure the shocke) fell downe, that belonging to Tinto, breaking one of his legges behind in the fall, and Leonatos three of his ribbs in the side. The Knights quick∣ly leaping from their sadles, and hauing no swords to enter further tryall, stoode as men discontented: but the Empe∣rour (some-what displeased that two such Knights were thus excluded the Ioust, without any fault by themselues cōmitted) gaue this sentence, yt the foyle of the horses, cau∣sed by the hardiment of the Knights, did not depriue them of fame or reputation, and therefore with fresh horses they should once more try their fortune. While these two Knights were gone to prepare them∣selues, Tarnaes entred the Listes, against whom Gorgoneo aduaunced foorth himselfe, this encounter was with such fiercenesse performed, that Tarnaes bare away the Pagans shoulder-plate, and Gorgoneo brake his Shielde in two parts: then turning to recouer other Launces, they inten∣ded to approue which of them exceeded the other in valour. But the Emperour, who would not that any one shoulde miscary in this Tournament, hauing an especiall and pro∣uident care, that no Pagan Prince should be offended, and thereon to ground a newe occasion of warre, the Grecian Empire béeing yet but in weake estate, and hauing heard likewise of the procéedings in Turkie, ordained immediatly, that the Knights should take newe Armes for thē lost, and so without any blame to enter the Listes againe.
Tamarco was nowe prepared for the Ioust, and Belcar the man hee was to cope withall, who beeing as yet but ve∣rie young, could not withstand the shock, but fel backward ouer the crupper of his horse: when presently Fortenbra∣cio made against Tamarco, and such was his successe, that Tamarco lost his stirrop, and nodded forward verie neere falling: but Fortenbracio had such a stroke on the side, as he had kist the ground, but that very quickly hee recouered himselfe againe. Franardo, who beheld a Giant of Trebisonde preparing himselfe to the Ioust, made forth to encounter him: but by reason of his great strength, & more agility to armes then the Pagan had, he made him try his length along vpon the earth, hurte both with the Launce, as also the fall. Thys highly did content the Emperour, to behold shining in him the vertues of Dramusiande his Father: and Arlencea his mother, who among the other Ladies stood to sée the sports, was not a little delighted to see this sight, to behold her son so especially honoured, and to beare away the victory from his enemy. A brother to the Giant so lately dismounted, woulde néedes reuenge the others disgrace, but hee dealing with Almaroll, the sonne to valiant Almaroll, though small ine∣qualitie séemed to be betwéene them, yet the Giant felt his braines somewhat dizzied and distracted. Caro encountred with the Prince of Apuglia: Estellant with the Earle of Antwerpe: Orino and Armindo with two Kings, one of Lamech, the other of Cusco. Estrellant afterward Iousted with an vnknown Knight, who tooke disdaine to be shooke in his saddle, albeit he saw it apparantly noted, and therefore it stood him to sit the su∣rer. He gallantly managed his horse about the Listes, vn∣horsing euery one that came to deale with him, and the mixture of the Knights was nowe in such a confused man∣ner, as he could not suddenly apprehend which part was of most valour, nor to which side he might best appoynt him∣selfe: wherefore at aduenture hee tooke the Pagan side,
which euen then was ready to forsake the place, because that Tinto of Armenia, the onely flower of all the Pagans, had receiued a blow, not seene from whom, and hee lifting vp his arme, as it were to aunswere his enemie that had wounded him, he felt his strength faile him, for his hurt had entred his very hart, so downe hée fell dead: a sight no lesse offensiue to the Emperour then to the Pagans. Arguto, beholding that the Knight vnknowne had dis∣mounted Estrellant, Belcar, Armindo, and was now to giue the like curtesie to Almaroll, gaue forth himselfe to reuenge their mis-fortunes: and the vnknowne gallant perceiuing him, they ranne three Launces with such furie, as all the beholders expected nothing but death on each side, and no aduauntage as yet could be discerned, but that Arguto was somewhat dazzeld at the third shocke, whereas the Knight vnknowne, sate still fresh and lustie, to the admiration of all the Knights which had runne already, expecting nowe some matter of great valour to be performed betwéen these two Knights. Arguto, who little dreampt on so sharpe an entertaine∣ment, grew excéedingly ashamed of himselfe, that the In∣fant Victoria, who was in the window with the other La∣dies, should sée him so disgraced: therefore to amend that mischaunce, he verily purposed the death of the vnknowne Knight, who stil demeaned himselfe so worthily in Armes, as the Pagans (thinking him to be the like) greatly tri∣umphed ouer the other. So comming with a péece of a ve∣ry sharpe poynted Launce, hée gaue a thrust there-with at the flanck of the Knight vnknowne, which happening where the Vaunt-plate was not well ioyned, might much haue endamaged him: and but that he rarely shunned it, by an encounter of Franardo, who at that instant was coping with him, he there had slaine him. This discourteous deed so displeased the Emperour, and all the by-standers, as presently there grew a generall murmure, euery one saying: that a Knight neuer ought to sake aduantage by trecherie, or by any base meanes to
dishonour his owne reputation. The vnknowne Knight, foreséeing the harme intended, made forward to Arguto, and hauing nothing to hurt him withall, caught fast hold about his middle, the like did the other by him: and tugging so together for an indifferent while, their striuing was so troublesome to their horses, (much wearied with Iousting) that they both fell downe vnder their maisters, but themselues recouered footing a∣gaine very quickly, and catching like fast hold on each o∣ther as before, the strength of all the by-standers in the Listes could not part them, no nor the out-cries made to them by the Emperour: who fearing to sée the death of two so valiant Knights, forsooke his Scaffold of state where hée sate, and entred the Listes with his weapon drawne, ac∣companied with Tryneus Emperour of Almaine, who could not make one in this Tournament, because hée found him∣selfe very vnapt and sickly. The Knights beholding the Emperours so néere, let goe theyr hold of theyr owne accord, and stepping forward to him to request his departure thence againe, the Helmet fell off from Primaleons head: for Arguto still pursuing his intent of aduantage, in the time of their so strict bustling to∣gether, had cut the laces in sunder. But when the Empe∣rour had knowledge of him, very graciously he embraced him, and taking him by the hand, conducted him to the Em∣presse Grydonia and the other Ladies, who were not a lit∣tle desirous to know of whence he was. Nowe they perceiuing him to be the young Primaleon, the Empresse caught him by the hand, and plucking him gladly to her, kissed him oftentimes: but Miragarda, bee∣ing ouer-come with excéeding ioy, could not brooke with patience his so long stay from her, and therefore without excuse or otherwise, shée went and tooke him in her armes, and that in such manner, as she wrested him quite out of the Empresses hand, whereat both the Emperour and all there present, laughed hartily. The mother satis-fied with her kinde embracings, gaue him leaue else where to dispose
himselfe, and he who was not meanely instructed in court∣ship, went first and kissed the hand of his Aunte the Em∣presse Bazilia afterward to the Quéenes and all the Prin∣cesses: but when he came to doe that curteous office to the Infant Victoria, he felt himselfe suddenly surprized with an vnaccustomed passion, and noting wel her face, remem∣bred that he had elsewhere beheld her, but neuer bethought him of his dreame. The Lady, who as yet had neuer felt any amourous fire, was so well pleased with his affable presence, as shée forgot to with-draw her hand backe from him, but continu∣ed on such kinde discourse with him, and amiable gestures, that Arguto, who stood and aduisedly marked this behaui∣our, thought he should haue died with extremitie of afflicti∣on. For albeit hee had made many signes of loue to her, yet shee as yet had neuer requited him with any, or declared that he was estéemed by her at all. And heere began a hatred of long continuaunce, till ma∣rying with a Sister to the said Primaleon, which Miragar∣da was deliuered off in Constantinople, and named Concor∣dia, whose name and nature afterward wrought that hap∣pie effect: for by her were Primaleon & Arguto drawne to amitie: likewise was borne of Polynarda a beautiful may∣den, who at the same time was called Fior-nouella. The caresses and embracings on all sides finished, and euery one departed frō the Listes, the Pagans came with theyr Helmets off into the Pallace, to behold the Court of the noble Emperor, but especially the Ladies, whose beau∣ties were blazed thorow the whole world: and Tamerco led Auriana his Sister with him, a young Lady, but of fif∣téene yéeres of age, so faire and richly adorned after the In∣dian manner, that all began to grow in admiration of her, forsaking their opinion of them whom they saw daily. And indeed shee carryed herselfe with such a stately gesture, that the Ladies of the Court (noting theyr loue seruants to eye her so entirely) beganne to wexe iealous and doubtfull of them.
The feasting endured with great sollemnitie, and eue∣rie ne might freely discourse with the mistresse of his af∣fections: among which goodly beie of Ladies, Tamerco hauing iudicially viewed them all, reckoned Polinarda to surpasse the rest in beautie: and became so earnestly affec∣ted to her, yt he deuised how he might best steale her thence, and leaue his Sister there in sted of her: such was his in∣discréete and ouer-fond desire, whereof what ensued, shall heereafter be spoken in place more expedient. CHAP. XXII. How the Knights of Tubante combatted against the Pagane Kings, and howe the Citty was neere hand loosing, by a trecherous deuise that Ristorano wrought. PAlmerin, Florendos, Dramusi∣ande, and Berolde, who were to fight the Combate with the Pa∣gane Kings: armed themselues earlie the morning following, and went foorth into the Fielde, whether soone after came the thrée Kings and the Giant, who because they rather fought for de∣sire of glory, then any couetous affection after rule and Emperie, saluted our Christian Champions very kindly, as if they had béene friendes and acquaintance, perhaps more to sée ye faces of those Knights, whose fame and reputation was reckoned so great, then a∣ny other respect of affabilitie, when beholding their lookes to be so gentle and debonnaire, they made the lesse account of whatsoeuer might be in them. The Pagane Giant, who was farre greater in stature then Dramusiande, came with a smile and tooke him by the
hand, thinking with a by-wrest to ouerthrowe him on the earth: but he béeing of a very great spirit, and not so easie to be ouerturned, vnawares (with his yron Gauntlet) gaue the other such a blow on the face, as made him stagger to and fro. So beganne the fight betwixt them without anie Iousting, and embracing strongly together, fell both be∣side their horses: but béeing recouered vppon their feete a∣gaine, stoutly with their swords they hackt and hewed each other. Palmerin and the rest perceiuing the fight was begun, challenged them foorth whom they were to deale withall: Carino, King of Illium, went against Florendos, and they combatted in the midst amongst the other. Drago of Mem∣phis vndertooke Palmerin, and Stupendo the Scithian, en∣countred Berold. The Launces which Carino and Florendos ranne with∣all, were so tough & boystrous, that they would not breake, but bare both the Champions to the ground, with the sad∣dles betwéene their legges, but quickly getting foote a∣gaine, they drew their swords and cheerefully fell to it. Palmerin receiued such a salutation from Drago, as hee (minding more Dramusiande who was down on ye ground, then the perrill whereto hee apposed himselfe) had almost kist the grounde for his negligence, and fayled of any suc∣cesse with his owne Launce. But comming afterward to try it by the sword, he deliuered such forcible strokes at his enemy, that Drago béeing glad to make his shield his best shelter, had it cleft in two parts, and his Helmet shrewdly battered beside. Drago, who neuer dreampt of any such vallour in a Christian, began to consider with himselfe, that if now hée did not declare his very vttermost man-hood, hee sawe no way but immediat death: wherefore bringing his sworde ouer his head with a backe stroake, it lighted so shrewdlie on the side of Palmerins head, that it made him reele about in such sort, as if he had not suddenly sette his sword to the ground with his right hand, he néedes must haue tumbled
ouer and ouer. But that helpe seruing him in his need, as a good support, and he now soundly acquainted with ye Kings strength, shewed himselfe not slacke in aunswering stroke for stroke, so the fight as yet continued betwixt them with∣out any great difference. Stupendo was valiantly encountred by Berolde, both of them in the shocke beeing dismounted, and referred to the combate of the sword: wherein the King behaued himselfe very gallantly, but Berolde by his more agill turnings and windings, caused many of his huge blowes to be spent but in vaine. Florendos had hurt Carino in the sword hand, by béeing more skilfull in his weapon then he: and Palmerin founde Drago so desperate and resolute, as he very much doubted the issue of their Combate: but all this might iustly be ter∣med as nothing, in respect of the fight betweene Dramusi∣ande and Lamiro the Giant, for they fought more by force and meere might, then any engenie or cunning, whereup∣pon, Dramusiande séeing his enemie obserue no order of Combate, which hindered him often from many proffered aduantages, began to chéere himselfe with this hope, that this immoderate furie would at length tyre the Giant, and so he held him play vpon so faire a likelihood: beside, he had already wounded him in the left side, whereout the blood did issue aboundantly, both which confirmed his not long continuance. Stupendo had slightly hurt Berolde in two places, and he had awarded his aduersarie so well, that himselfe receiued a wound vpon his eye-brow: so the blood tricking downe, much hindered his sight, and aduantaged Berolde in his further procéeding. The Knights in the Citty grewe suspitious of some tre∣cherie, because they beheld diuers betake them to theyr Launces, whereon they forth-with armed themselues, set∣ting downe this order: that Platir, Pompides, Dirdan, and Blandidon, should goe forth of the Citty, accompanied with fiftie other valiant Knights, as a defence to them yt fought
the Combate, and that Florian, Dragonalte, Gracian, Fran∣cian, and Floraman, should be readie armed in the Cittie with all the Caualierie, beside fiue thousand Turkes sworne faythfull to Targiana, and many of them secretlie baptized. Ristorano, who beheld the fight to faile on theyr side whom he trusted, when he saw Platir and the rest issue forth of the Citty, commaunded tenne thousand horse to be rea∣die within halfe a mile of the field, cloaking his intent with this excuse, that they were but to guard the Kinges from treason: likewise he placed an ambush in a wood, which was not aboue a bowe shoote from the Combattants. All which béeing doone, hee caused a great huge stone to be ta∣ken vp, that couered the mouth of a Caue or vault, from whence was a passage vnder the Citty. This conueiance was long before made by a certaine Lord, as a meanes for his owne escape, when any harme should happen to the Citty, and Targiana béeing a woman of no such suspect, knew nothing of this vault, nor any about her. His armed Souldiours entring this Cauerne, they were to rise in the house of the Prince of Antioche, who percei∣uing he could not ioyne in marriage with Targiana, feyned himselfe to be sicke, as no way willing to impeach ye war, but expecting still some occasion of treason. Hee hearing them breaking the ground in his house, and that there sée∣med a vaulte to be vnderneth, whereby might growe some matter of consequence, called certaine of his faithful atten∣dants vnto him, and commaunding them to breake open the vault aboue, beheld vnderneath the Ensignes of Risto∣rano, which on purpose were carryed formost, for the spée∣die knowledge of his people. This aduenture so highly pleased the Prince of Anti∣oche, that he suffered them gladly to come forth, and there now appeared to be a full Court. But a Christian Knight, who vsed to walke euery way of the Citty, to note what the Turkes eyther sayd or did, leaning to a wall that abut∣ted on this place, heard what a murmuring so many people
made within, and causing very softly a litle rift to be made, beheld of what a multitude they consisted, where-vpon hee posted immediatly to Floraman, and to him discouered thys vnlooked for accident. The Captaine, béeing a man of mighty courage, dis∣maied not a iote, but hauing imparted these newes to Prince Florian and the rest, they all went presently to the Prince of Antioches Pallace: prouiding that so many men should not come foorth into the Citty, neither that theyr number should be any further increased, by that or any o∣ther passage vnder the ground. Then aduertising Targia∣na to fortifie herselfe in the Castell, without any noyse they gathered their strength together, those foure thousand vn∣der the conduct of Blandidon, and two thousand which were in the Castell of Albayzo, leauing the Turkish power for guarde of the Castell: so marching softly to the Princes Pallace, they found the gate open, where presentlie they entred, and nowe intended to make proofe of theyr va∣lour. Florian méeting the Prince of Antioche, calling him him Traytor, slew him at one blow, by reason he was vn∣armed: his death gaue the victory to our Christian forces, because the Pagans béeing there thus suddenly amazed, and ignorant of further proceeding into the Citty, whereof the Prince of Antioche had before receiued the ful charge, they fell to a confusion among themselues, and the Christi∣ans to discréet and orderly care of their charge. Dragonalte, Francian, and an hundred more with them, were gotten vp on the battlements of the Pallace, and thence tumbled downe huge stones so mainely, that the Courts béeing full of the enemies Souldiours, they bray∣ned them in great multitudes together. Floraman, with Florian, Gracian, and their followers, sawe that diuers sought to saue themselues thorowe the vaults passage againe: but that was quickly rammd vp with dead bodies, and no way nowe left for them but pre∣sent death, thus was the safetie of the Citty assured, and
many throwing downe their weapons to the ground, vpon their knees intreated pardon. Ristorano, who not knowing of this ill successe, but ima∣gining the sight to be as then scarce begunne in the Citty, and that all things would fall out to his contentment, cau∣sed the tenne thousand and those ambushed in the wood, to rush foorth vpon the Christian Combattants, to make them sure for euer séeing theyr Countries any more, and him∣selfe with thirtie thousand men very well appointed, in∣tended to goe and beleager the Citty walls, Platir behol∣ding such a power to appeare, prepared to succour his friendes, and founde that Palmerin (to frée himselfe from further danger) had cleft both the Helmet and head of Dra∣go, and there hee lay gasping and sprawling vppon the earth. Dramusiande hauing the Giant fast about the middle, got him downe vnderneath him, but could not kill him, be∣cause he béeing fearefull of death, had got him fast by the hand wherein he held his weapon, and able to remooue no further, there they lay both tumbling ready to be trodden on. Carino held out indifferently against Florendos, who by reason of his lamenes, cou ot so readily bestir himselfe on foote: as for Berolde and Stupendo, they had so ouer-laboured one another, as their strokes did little harme to either. Palmerin perceiuing the treason toward, and the danger of Dramusiande, gaue the Giant such a stroke on the side, as making him let goe his hold, gaue Dramusiande libertie to recouer his feete againe, and so together they prepared for their enemies approching. Carino, beeing a Knight of an honourable disposition, calling Stupendo to him, excu∣sed the Christian Combattants very much, as no way de∣seruing to be thus intrapt by treason, & so withdrew them among their people. Florendos and his companions, seazing on such horses, as were neerest hand, first killing their riders, made after∣ward
with what speede they could to the Cittie, but find∣ing at their backes aboue twentie thousand to withstand them, could hardly gesse what should now become of them. Ristorano beeing gotten to the Cittie wall, vnregarded of any within to resist him, because as yet the stirre was not ended at the Prince of Antioches Pallace, and the Turks had shut vp themselues in their houses, expecting to sée the Christians so weakened, as man to man might sley them safely: euen as they were passing along the ditches, cer∣taine Squires belonging to Platir, that watched vpon the gates by his appointment, to espy a farre off any trecherie intended, beholding the imminent perrill, one ran present∣ly to Floraman to acquaint him there-with, who leauing there Florian, Gracian, Francian, and two thousand armed men, went with Dragonalte and the rest of the Souldiers to defend the walls, calling likewise those Turkes along with him that guarded the Castell, and his comming the∣ther was in very apt season, because an enemie Banner was already spred on a Turret adioyning. Dragonalte made no meane hast to bee there, where mounting his Turkes so fast as he could, and cutting him quite through the midst that held the Banner, it encoura∣ged all the rest to mount chrely after them. Ristorano, séeing the wall in that quarter so stronglie manned, caused his men to get vp in diuers other places, and (despight of all the Christians could doe,) aboue tenne thousand Turkes were got vpon the walls, who began to descend downe into the Cittie, by the helpe of diuers false-harted Cittizens, that rather then the Christians should be Conquerers, were content to take part with the enemy. Florian, Gracian, and Francian, behaued themselues wonderfully, but when they heard the enemies had assay∣led the walls, and danger appeared of yeelding in the Cit∣tizens, they could not readily determine what to doe: for they which had yéelded before at the Pallace, beholding the Christians now in so narrow a straight, forgot all former receiued fauour, and ioyned with the rest to murder theyr
preseruers, but all this sorted to very slender effect, so wor∣thilie did our Christian Knights withstand their procee∣dings. Floraman, Dragonalte, and their followers, fought ve∣rie valiantly, and the Pagans thronged together in such huge troopes, as they hindered one another from mount∣ing the walls: and but for those Turkes that were friends and sworne to Targiana, the Citty doubtlesse had béen lost. For they tooke away certaine vnder-shoaring Rampiers and supporters, which on the inside vpheld the maine strength of the wall: and when it was loaden with aboue thirtie thousand persons, downe fell they into the ditches, and the battlements vpon them, and there they all perished without one escaping. This mishap not a little displeased Ristorano, whereup∣on he thought best to make toward the Christian Knights, as hoping by their deaths to end this controuersie, much more the sooner be possessed of the Cittie. The Pagans that opposed themselues against Prince Florian, when they sawe what a losse had succeeded, by the walls fall, they were so affrighted, that hurling downe their wea∣pons, they humbly intreated for safetie of their liues: but they that had experience of theyr former trechery, and how bloodily they procéeded in all their actions, would lende no eare to them, but slew them apace on euery side, and quick∣lie had they made an end of them all, if a messenger had not come from Floraman, who gaue them to vnderstand, that Florendos and his friendes were shutte vp in the ene∣mies Campe, and no meanes for their escape was nowe to be had, but by thrusting foorth part of those Turkes to suc∣cour them. These newes saued the liues of sixe thousand Turkes, who perceiuing Targianas affaires to spéede better then theyrs, lifting vp theyr hands all disarmed, made a signe that they would fight faithfully for the Christians. Florian, although he could not well trust them, yet beholding the necessity of their owne extremity, gaue them their Armes,
and promised them many great rewards if they proued loy∣all, appointing them also the charge of that part where the wall was falne, as the best way to make triall of their con∣stancie. So ioyning with Floraman, and leauing Dragonalte with two thousand for safetie of the Citty, they issued foorth on the enemie, finding in one part Platir, Pompides, Dir∣dan, and Blandidon, who had made themselues way tho∣row the crowde, with no meane slaughter of theyr ene∣mies: after them followed Palmerin and the other three, so wearied with their combate and fighting all day, that ve∣ry hardly could they lift theyr swordes: yet were they for∣ced to stand vppon their owne defence, because Vlderino King of Tanais, with two sonnes of his that were two Gi∣ants, continually pursued them, and had preuailed shrewd∣lie against them, if Florian, Floraman, and Platir had not béene neere, who vndertaking the quarrell with Vlderino and his sonnes gaue roome for the foure to passe the prease, though enclosed with the enemie still on euery side. Platir buckled close with Vlderino, and at the first stroke cleft his Shielde through the midst, himselfe receiuing a small hurt in the left hand. Florian encountred Arabo one of the Giants, and had a blowe from him that made him stagger: but Florian loth to die in his debt, returned him such a requitall for it, as he wounded him some-what déepe vppon his right shoulder. Traccio the other Giant, gaue Floraman a thwarting stroake, and therewith had borne him to the earth, but that his Launce kept him vp in his saddle, by the rude shock hee gaue the Giant: notwithstan∣ding, he was a little giddied, at which aduantage the Gi∣ant tooke fast hold of him, and lifting him quite beside his horse, thought thus to beare him away to his Pauillion, and there to teare him in peeces at his pleasure, but that the crowde of people was his onely hinderance. Palmerin being by this time somewhat refreshed among the Christians, when hee heard the case of Floraman, hee tooke a Launce to pursue Traccio, who yet had gotten no
great distance of ground: and running him in at the shoul∣der, quite through the breast, had likewise slaine Floraman before him, but that the Launce brake. This accident beheld by the Pagans, made them so fearefull and dismayed, that they began to retire, some one way, some another, and Floraman falling to the earth vn∣der the slaine Giant, was very sore prest with his heauie weight vpon him, yet made hee good shyft to get from vn∣derneath him, and taking hold of a strayed Courser moun∣ted vpon him. Vlderino was so full of rage for the death of his sonne, that Platir (amongst all the rest) hee chose to reuenge his furie on, and indeed had handled him very vnhappily, but that Dramusiande hauing bound vp some small woundes of his owne, interposed himselfe with Berolde betweene the danger intended, and nowe the fight began to alter other∣wise, for thether flocked all Vlderinos Caualierie, & Flo∣rian with Arabo were shouldered in among them. The battaile grew to be very dangerous, for Ristorano came fresh vpon them, with forty thousand men, which he had gathered from the vttermost margents of the Armie, against which multitude fought valiantly Pompides, Dir∣dan & Blandidon, shewing vnexpressable deeds of valour. When Arabo beheld his Father in great danger, with his Mace he gaue such a blow at Florian, (who had an eye to succour his Brother Platir, beholding that the blood gu∣shed out at his nose, by a stroke which he had receiued from Vlderino) that it wounded him in such sort, as had not Pal∣merin stept in to succour him, he had falne among the horse féete, and there beene trodden to death. Dramusiande hauing cleft Vlderinos Helmet through the midst, had likewise slaine him, if Carinos other Giant had not béene his hinderance, for he strooke Berolde with his Mace quite out of his saddle, and falling downe, he was reputed for dead. Palmerin, béeing loth to loose any of the Christian Princes, noted the Giant at his first intrusion, and had stopt his way, but for the peoples concourse, before
that Berolde was in such perrill: but being compeld to stay for better aduauntage, thrust by where Florian fought with Arabo, and wounding the Giant first vppon the left shoulder, gaue him next such a gash vppon the head, as hee had forthwith died of that terrible hurt, but for immediate succour which came to rescue him: and they perceiuing him to be likewise sore wounded in the side, aduised him to get a while out of the throng, for very hardly could he stand on his leggs. Vlderino, séeing his Helmet split about his eares, would gladly haue fled, but Gratian meeting with him, (for Dra∣musiande beeing wounded by Vlderino in the throat, was with-drawne vpon that hurt) beholding his Helmet off, cleft him downe to the brest. Arabo grew starke mad whē he saw his Father fall downe dead, and therefore thrust in with such rage amongst them, as wounding Florendos first on the side of his head, hee made toward Gracian, on him to reuenge his Fathers blood: and questionlesse had preuai∣led in his purpose, but that Florendos, scorning to receaue such a hurt without requitall, gaue him such a thrust in the bottome of his belly, as his guts began to fall foorth there∣at, & the Giant perceiuing himselfe past all hope of escape, caught Florendos besides his horse in his armes, intending so to haue crusht him to death. This great danger of Florendos, and rauing out-cryes of the Giant, made the people on both sides to troope to that place, as iudging the fight to be there most cruell: but Pla∣tir, hauing now well recouered his former faintnes, behol∣ding his brother in such a desperate estate, stept forward to succour him, and finding one of Carinos coosins there, ready to kill Florendos, he smote him downe dead at the very first stroke. Gracian béeing likewise by, and séeing Florendos downe vnder the Giant, whose burdenous weight was enough to stifle him, hee gaue him such a cut vpon the chine bone, as he tumbled dead from off Florendos, who had his wind wel neere tweakt out with so heauie a loade, which made him
lye still a good while without any moouing, and this bée∣ing seene by diuers, was at last reported to Palmerin and Prince Florian, who cut foorth way with their weapons, to be resolued in this feare of their friende. Palmerin catch∣ing him vp in his armes, gaue him to Dramusiande, who layd him before him vpon his horse, and so like friends they conuaid him among the Christian Caualierie. Blandidon, Pompides, Dirdan, and Francian, had much adoe to get on toward the Cittie, because one of Ristoranos brethren, and others of his kindred, had so narrowly beset them in euery place, as they were oftentimes in very great hazards. Dramusiande hauing borne Florendos foorth of the squadron, he began to recouer his sences againe, and imagining he was carried by the Giant his enemie, strooke backward at him with the dagger he held in his hand, and wounded Dramusiande in the side, who sayde vnto him: How now my Lord, respect you not your friends? Floren∣dos, perceiuing the fault he had committed, leapt downe on his feete, and would haue desired pardon, but Dramusiande thus spake: It is no time now my Lord to vse complement of wordes, rather get to horse againe, and let vs into the battaile, and redéeme our deere friendes, whose liues are in danger. Palmerin hearing the terrifying noyse, where Ristorano and his friends had so beset Blandidon and others, imagi∣ned there to be most neede of his presence, and Pompides followed him, there he found Blandidon hardly engirt with two valiant Knights, who still had fresh supply to backe them, and there hee had béene slaine, if Florendos had not stept in amongst them, who at the first stroke kild one of the Knights, and they together made such hauock of the o∣ther resisters, as the Pagans (not accustomed to endure such blowes) stroue who should get furthest from this mas∣sacre. Dramusiande with Dirdan, succoured Blandidon & Pla∣tir, who had made such slaughter on euery side about them, as méere wearines would not permit them scarce to lyft
their weapons: there slewe they in short while so manie Pagans, that their death bréeding a dismay in such as be∣held it, made them giue way for the Christians to rest thē∣selues a little, which time of breathing renewing their for∣mer courage, they followed freshly on them with Dramu∣siands squadron, making a mighty spoile of the enemy. But an other multitude of Pagans, such as had not seene the sharpe strokes of the Christians, came vppon them with a fresh charge, and Ristorano not dismaied with all that had happened, prouoked them forward with all his endeuour. There now began a very hote encounter on either side, for the Pagan Knights, béeing fiered with mightie disdaine, to see so many of theyr greatest Signiors slaine, procéeded on with such violence and furie, as making no estimation at all of death, they gaue a very sharpe assault vpon the Chri∣stians, who seeing what a huge number more they had to kill, would gladly haue returned to the Citty, for nowe small hope of life was promised. But now to make the vt∣most proofe of valiant defending their liues, they put them selues in rancks, with their faces toward the Citty: Pal∣merin, Platir, Floraman, and their traine leading before, Florian, Berolde, Gracian, Francian and theyr followers be∣hind: and albeit they were very curstly handled by the e∣nemy, yet in despight of them they got forward still, and made such way for themselues with theyr weapons, that at last they came where Ristoranos forces had round beset them. Florendos and Dramusiande with their attendants did very great seruice, to support the seuerall rancks of theyr friends and Countrimen, for euer as they smit downe ten men to the ground, an hundred would immediatlie make freshly vpon them. The squadron that was guided by Pal∣merin and his part, brake the ring or circle of Souldiours which had inuirond them, and forward they marched tho∣rowe the throng: but béeing pursued by a strong Pagan squadron, they were suddenly shut vp againe in such man∣ner, as their estate stoode then much more desperate then
before. Florian, who purposed to die or saue his people, sée∣ing Dramusiande had slaine a great Pagan Lord, stept to his horse and mounted vpon him, then gallopping fierceie vppon the enemie, and Floraman (newly mounted) gal∣lantly following, they layd so about them on euery side, as the huge crowde of Pagans were glad to giue them pas∣sage. So dooing incredible déedes all the way as they went, they came where Ristorano had caused his men to giue a fresh charge on the Citty, with vndoubted hope that nowe they should obtaine it, because our Christian forces were sore wearied with fighting, and béeing taken now at thys aduauntage, no hope could remaine for safety of their liues, but there to be vtterly slaine and vanquished. Our two former named Knights, held on theyr intended course, and an hundred chosen men very stiffely withstoode them, who because they deerely loued theyr Lorde Ristora∣no, would make proofe of their valour vpon those two: and so strictly had they beset Florian, & Floraman, as there theyr liues had perrished, but that Florendos and Dramusiande breaking through that quarter by chaunce, beheld theyr hard distresse, and doubting the danger which might ensue them, they got thorow the throng, resolued to assist them, hauing left Pompides & the other twaine with their squa∣dron, which making head as boldly vpon the other part, did mightily disappoint Ristoranos great hope. Florendos assayled that route where the two were in∣closed, and meeting with Ristorano, tooke so strong hold of him, as in the strugling and resisting, both fell beside theyr horses: but Ristorano was downe vnder him, to the great perrill of Florendos life: for many darts and Launces were cast at him by the Turkes, that in huge troopes stil flocked about him. But in a happy houre came thither Dirdan, Pompides, & Blandidon, who allighted on foote with Dra∣musiande, and hauing quitted the place where their friends were so endangered, afterward engirt Ristorano as it had béene in a circle, who beholding nowe no other way but
death, for safety of his life yeelded himselfe prisoner. Pal∣merin and his compeeres were some-what further off, but hearing the rumor, and seeing howe in numbers they floc∣ked to that place, where they vnderstood their Lorde to be in such distresse, they likewise would needes thether, and Palmerin hauing changed his horse, came at last where hée sawe Florendos holding Ristorano by the arme, but by no meanes could he get into ye circle, because so many Knights had ringd it round, though the others made what meanes they could for his entrance. Florian & Floraman came thither at that instant, where the one helping his Brother, the other his friends Gracian and Francian, they waded through a streame of blood and dead bodies, and none durst stand before them but they died the death. Afterward, Palmerin béeing dismounted, tooke the Helmet from off Ristoranos head, who imagining his life to be now at an end, sought what meanes hée might to haue it yet prolonged: and therefore, both with signes and words to his Souldiours, commaunded them to giue ouer the fight, for hee was not able to make any longer resi∣stance. Now because the battell was not as yet ceassed in all pla∣ces, Dramusiande set Ristorano before him on horsebacke, hauing with him Pompides, Dirdan, & Berolde, who were sore wounded, the rest rode on toward the Flagge or Stan∣dard, about which (for defence) stood the flower of the Ar∣mie, and till that were downe or recouered, they could not determine on any conclusion. Florian stroue for the honour of beating downe the Banner, which he could not so easily compasse as he thought to haue doone, but by multitudes of Launces was often in great hazards: whereuppon Palme∣rin and his vndaunted followers, regarding honour more then life, brake through in despight of all that withstoode them, and valiantly smote the Ensigne royall down to the ground, which was the discomfiture of the whole Campe, according to the Turkish custome. So betaking them∣selues to flight, some one way, some another, ye Christians
had the fréer meanes of withdrawing thence together, and entring the Citty, Ristorano was bounde as prisoner on a silly poore Nagge, for Dramusiande coulde no longer take the charge of him, by reason of the dangerous hurt hée had receiued in his throate. Beeing come within the Citty, they went to be disar∣med and haue their wounds dressed, whereof not one had scaped free: but Palmerin, Floraman, and Florendos, by rea∣son they were in the best estate, they shewed themselues daily with such as could be armed, because ye people should not grow into weake oppinion of them, nor the enemy ga∣ther any stomacke of fresh assayling the Cittie. CHAP. XXIII. VVhat followed vpon the warre at Tubante, and how the Monster was ouercome. THE day ensuing after the bat∣taile, Ristorano (who hourelie expected nothing but death, was as a prisoner led to the Castell: but first Targiana came forth to see him, because he had vsed her so farre vnkindly, yet was shée aduised not to goe vnarmed, nor durst she repose any assurance in the Turks, because there can be no greater alteration then changing of fayth, especially be∣ing false, as is the Mahumetane, and in this regarde shee would not goe vngarded. Prince Florian kéeping his bed by reason of his wounds, wrought so with his wife, that for her lesse trouble in thys case, Ristorano should be there kept imprisoned, and refer∣red ouer for iudgement to the Emperour Primaleon, all which accordingly was agreed vnto. Carino, (who as no
pertaker in Ristoranos treason, refused to enter the day be∣fore into the battaile) when he saw the fielde was lost, vsed all diligence he could deuise to get his troopes together, all of them within compasse of his owne lodgings & quarters, because the lame and wounded which were left in the field, slew as many as offered to hinder their flight. And finding himselfe to be fourescore thousand strong, beside the Mon∣ster before described, he grew into some hope of conquering the Citty, and thereby to gaine the whole gouernment of Turkie, in which oppinion he there continued, expecting the recouery of his sicke and hurt, which were many. Thys fell out most commodious for our Christian Knights, who were wounded so dangerously, especially Dramusiande in his throate, as hardly a months space could serue for theyr recouerie: but that Dorina (who abode secretly in Constan∣tinople, to conclude the aduenture of her Monster) resoning on this case with young Primaleon, and the desperate ha∣zard of so many good Knights, the onely support of the fa∣mous Grecian Empire, was intreated by him to haue care of their liues, least the enemy shoulde assaile them againe before they were cured. The young Lady, remembring how déerely shee had af∣fected Florian, and yet all hope lost of euer enioying him, would not her selfe goe thether, to grow amourous againe and all to no purpose: for they that determine not to sinne in luxurie, should shunne all occasions thereto inciting, the acte beeing so easie, and the will so weake in resistance, therfore (by her Arte) shée sent a Damosell to Tubante, gi∣uing her most powerfull vnguents and emplaisters, but expresse charge not to reueale who sent her thether. Shee came to the gates of Tubante the third day after the battaile, and béeing seene alone by the guardians with her Surge∣rie boxes, shée was brought first to the Chamber where Florian lay, according as herselfe had before desired. After very Lady-like and modest salutations, shee dressed his woundes, and comforting him with sundry precious resto∣ratiues, his hurts did heale with wondrous expedition: the
like shée did to Dramusiande, though at first shee was some∣what doubtfull of his life, by reason he had lost such aboun∣dance of blood, so dealt she with all the other, albeit Berolds sences were greatly bereft him. Dragonalte hauing no hurts, had charge of the Citties safetie, and therefore daily would he walke abroade with two hundred Knights, that had likewise escaped hurting in the battaile, and they vsed still to march about the walls, (laboriously repayring where the ruine had falne) least the enemy should gather any means of fresh inuasion, and that doubt was especially respected by Floraman, who by secrete spyes had notice of the enemies purposes, and therfore they were the readier for all occasions whatsoeuer. Carino, whose woundes were not cured by such extraor∣dinary meanes as the Christians had, as yet kept his bed, full of great anguish, and expresse charge had hee giuen to all his folowers, that they should not attempt any skirmish at all, because hee could not gather by his spyes, in what e∣state as yet the Christian Princes were: but such was the diligent care of Floraman, albeit hee was sore hurte in the left arme, that the fourth day after the battaile, hee put on his Armour, and walked about thorow the Citty, which much terrified the Turks that hated Targiana. Such successe had the Damosell in her curing the woun∣ded, as within eyght dayes they could all beare Armes, ex∣cept Berolde, and Dramusiande, who stayed eyght dayes longer before theyr hurts were healed, and then they were but in so weake estate neither, as they might not safely ad∣uenture the fight. Palmerin, who greeued to be thus long coopt vp in the Citty, and beholding likewise their store of victuall to de∣crease, committing the Citties charge to Pompides, Dir∣dan, and Gracian, armed himselfe with the rest, and issued foorth: and béeing come within a bow shoote of the enemies Campe, he sent a Herald to demaund a single fight. Carino knowing well the stoute courage of the Christians, thought how to returne an indifferent aunswere, and thus replyed:
that in his Campe were not Princes sufficient to vndergoe a Combate, & they beeing all Captaines of so great worth, did not wel in vrging a matter so farre vnequall, nor knew he how Fortune would determine of him, in the safetie or perrishing of his people. Notwithstanding, if they were of such mettle as Fame published them to be, hee had a Monster in his Armie, with whom they might aduenture body to body: Thys offer made Carino, as thinking for certaintie, that no one of the Knights alone could preuaile against his Monster. Our valiant Caualiers hearing this aunswere, began to conceiue this opinion among themselues, that this prof∣fer was the very vttermost refuge of the Pagans, and the Monster béeing vanquished, they were for euer foyled: so withdrawing aside to further consideration, euery one stroue who should be the formost, and who should first be armed for this encounter: for in those times, neyther kin∣dred, friendship nor dignitie was respected, in any attempt where honour was to be atchiued, but euery one would make way to his owne aduauncement: but Floraman bee∣ing their elected Generall, though good to set downe some discreete order among them, and therefore hee beganne in this manner following. Honourable and generous spirits, in matter of so maine and important consequence, rash forwardnes may be as preiudiciall, as dull slacknes thought base and ignomini∣ous. First, consider therefore the Country wherein wee are, and vpon what termes of hazard we haue béene, and yet doe stand in: if then you would haue the enemy vnder∣stand the true weight of your worth, and howe farre you out-pace Pagans in resolution and courage, let the care of lyfe and honour be coupled together, for to loose eyther a∣mong Infidels, were inglorious, and to be respectiue of neyther, degenerate and infamous. I would therefore ad∣uise yée, that such of you shall first fight with the Monster, against whom the beast shall first oppose himselfe, and so what soeuer happen, let the blame be imputed to fortune:
be ready then euery one in seuerall distances, and happie man by luck and successe in the tryall. This counsell did highly content them all, and thereup∣on aunswere was carried to Carino, that they would com∣bate his Monster seuerally, as himselfe had propounded: each man appointing him selfe to his place, where he ima∣gined the Monster would be neerest to him, but each one a bow shoote from the other. Carino beholding all this, beganne to doubt the issue of his proffered fight, as thinking that these vnuanquishable spirits, could runne thorowe any enterprise what-soeuer: neuerthelesse, hee caused his Monster to feede on nothing but strong meates and mixed wines, which made him so full of stomack & furie, as hee could not be restrained with∣in any limits. And béeing brought where he might behold these valiant Champions, the beast made first of all at Dra∣gonalte, getting so suddenly vppon him, as he had not the power to wound him: but béeing rapt vp between his rude armes, he would haue carried him to his Pauillion, till the Knight (doubtfull of imminent death) punched ye beast in the sides with his dagger, which though it pierced not through his hard skinne, yet did the blowes so painefullie grieue him, as casting Dragonalte against the ground, hée returned mainly against Gracian, who thought to giue him a sound welcome because he was neere him, but the Mon∣ster falling on his foure féete, so affrighted the horse where∣on the knight rode, that being vnable to hold him in, he was violently carried among the enemies, and there detayned as a prisoner. The Monster next made out at Floraman, who hauing his sword ready drawne, bestowed many rough stroakes vpon the beast: but all to no end, his hide was so impierci∣ble, and the Monster smote him with his horne so rudelie on the breast, that downe hee fell backward along on the ground. Palmerin was the next he offered to deale withall, who running at him with his Launce, gaue him such a forcible
stroke, as albeit it wounded him not to outward fight, yet it made him to writhe aside, as feeling shrewd paine, and runne againe at the Knight so furiously, that catching fast hold on his Launce, he got it from him, and had he beene possest of so much knowledge, as to haue turned the poynt vpon the owner, the strife betweene them had soone beene concluded, for the beast was of such powerfull strength, as no Armour could haue resisted his blowes. Notwithstan∣ding, with his hoofes and hornes hee much molested the Knight, and many times brought him to very desperate ha∣zards, till Palmerin perceiuing, that his horse bestird not himselfe so nimbly, as in such an aduenture was held most expedient: he quickly leapt from him, and with sterne cou∣rage came against the Monster, who beganne to expresse signes of ioy at his béeing thus on foote, as hoping the easier to carry him away. Wherefore, hurling away the Launce, which he could not well graspe in his long tallents, hee fell againe on his foure féete, fighting one while with his hornes, another while with his long clawes, whereby hee shrewly brused and battered the Knights Armour. Palmerin, who by his sprightly agilitie well defended these sharpe strokes, with a downe right blow deliuered at the beast, cut off his left horne that bended backward, and this stroke was giuen with such violence, as the sword falling out of Palmerins hand, stucke ight vppon the poynt a good way in the ground: but the Monster perceiuing hee had lost his wea∣pon, rose vpon his hindmost féete, and running hastily vp∣on him, caught him fast in his armes. When Palmerin see∣ing himselfe thus strongly griped, got some-what thwart the beasts breast, and then began to struggle and writhe to get from him. The Monster still held him with such strength, as the valour of foure Palmerins auailed not with him, if hee had béene prouided of discretion to gouerne his might, but hee had no other kinde of industrie, but how to gripe his claws into the Knights Armour: which Palmerin féeling verie
sore to afflict him, gaue so many stabbs to the beast with his ponyard, as beeing glad to rid himselfe of his burden, hee ranne mainly at Florian, who minding more the strange manner of these seuerall encounters, then any perrill that might happen to himselfe, receiued such a stroke with the beasts forth-right horne, as despight of his hart feld him downe to the ground. The Monster procéeded no further with him, but went and assayled Florendos, who standing prepared vppon his owne guarde, defended himselfe very gallantly: and the fight had continued long betweene them, but that Florian beeing recouered, and hauing drawne his sword, least hée should be as vnaduisedly taken as he was before, the beast left Florendos, and set againe vpon him, where now began a very fierce conflict, full of craft in the Monster to auoyde his strokes, and expressing an vndauntable spirit in the Prince. Florian, full of nimble changes from place to place, esca∣ped still the horne and fangs of the beast, but he belaboured him with blowes on euery side: as what with wearinesse and extremitie of paine he felt, his fiercenesse was nothing so violent as at the first. When Carino beheld the knightly skill of Prince Flo∣rian, hee verily thought the day would be lost, for the Mon∣ster (in whom hee had no meane opinion of preuailing) ap∣parantly he saw to grow weaker and weaker: wherefore, as his very latest refuge in this distresse, he sent tenne thou∣sand of his souldiers into a wood neere adioyning, with an appoynted signall when they should mooue thence: to wit, when himselfe with an hundred disarmed Knights, not ha∣uing eyther sword or Launce, should enter the publique place of Combate, then should the tenne thousand issue forth of the wood, and suddenly set vpon the Christians. Thus Carino, who would haue no hand in the other bat∣tailes treason, as hating to support anothers trechery, and loth to mangle his honour for another mans interest: yet now in a matter tending to his owne benefite, had his eare
shut vp to all respect of shame and disgrace. And yet thys policie of his was to very slender purpose, espyed in the ma∣naging and therefore mard before effecting: for Blandidon with his troope béeing neere the wood, met with the chiefe leader of those ambushed forces, and running him thorowe with his Launce, there he fell downe dead. This to the Christians prooued very aduantageable, for when those in ambush saw theyr Captaine slaine, and what danger de∣pended vpon the issue of this fight, that Targiana was liker to preuaile then Carino attaine to what hee desired: they would not prepare themselues for any further resistance, but onely referred all to the successe of the Monster, which by this time was brought into such estate by Florian, as the Pagans were now out of all hope of preuailing. The Prince had cut and mangled the beast in diuers parts of his body, driuing him vp & downe the fielde at his pleasure, vntill hauing lost all vigour and strength, he fell flatte on the ground, where Florian bound his armes and legges together, intending to send the beast to Constantino∣ple. Carino at his fall was strooken into such amazement, that hauing no minde at all of his owne further perrill, hée was taken prisoner by Palmerin, and all the Turkish soul∣diours in the enemies Campe, came & yeelded themselues disarmed, promising true vassailage to Targiana, and so re∣turned they backe to the Citty in tryumph, causing the Monster to be carried along with them. But Fortune permitting no man to enioy any perfect happines, thwarted this successe in such sort, as they had not long beene in the Citty, before Pompides and Gracian came to certifie the rest, that Dirdan, with tenne others whom he especially trusted, leauing open a gate of the Cit∣tie, was departed thence toward Niquea: whereupon Blan∣didon immediatly gathered, that Dirdans intent was to surprize Niquea, and to enioy his Sister Tirrena & the state, therefore in hast hee would haue pursued him, but that his hurts in the late conflict did onely hinder him. But Palme∣rin and the rest gaue him this comfort, that all matters
béeing established, which nowe were in indifferent good forwardnesse: they would then assist him against Dirdan, and doubtlesse hee should easily preuaile against him: by which perswasions Blandidon was very well pacified. So Carino beeing imprisoned where Ristorano was detayned, they all began to resolue on mirth and iollitie, cheefely the faire Princesse Targiana, who lately had béene brought to bedde of a Sonne, begotten by Albayzo her former hus∣band: but shee nor any other mistrusting the Barons of the kingdome of Babylon, who secretely had stolne into her ter∣ritories, and because Targiana was married to Florian, and was in short time after to be baptized, they grewe héereon so malicious against her, that one morning they came and stole away the childe, departing there-with presently to∣wards Babylon. Targiana, greatly gréeuing to haue her child so borne a∣way, would gladly haue had her Knights to pursue them: but by better aduise it was cōsidered, that this might moue the people of Babilon to rise in armes, and oppresse the king∣dome of Turkie with warre, which already was greatlie weakened, as the late passed troubles apparantly witnes∣sed. Beside, hauing occasion of going to Niquea, according as before they had promised Blandidon, they were content as yet to endure the losse of the Childe, setting downe de∣crees for better establishing their owne estate: for Princes euermore should haue this respect, to take the most proui∣dent courses for their state affayres, labouring by their ve∣rie vttermost meanes for the weale publique.
CHAP. XXIIII. How Dorina presented her Monster in the Listes at Constantinople, and how Tamerco carried away the faire Polinarda. DOrina, who determined to con∣duct young Primaleon to some at∣tempt of great glory, entiteling him by the imprese on his shield, the Knight of Fortune, and pur∣posing that all the Grecian Court should haue knowledge, because his fame might appeare in the brighter luster: when they were all seriously busied in their sol∣lemne feasting, presented her Monster in the same place where the Tournament had béene before performed, the report whereof was presently noysed through the Cittie, which foorth-with drew thether the Knights in generall, to behold a matter of such importance. When the Emperour in person was likewise come the∣ther, he knew it to be the same Monster which hee had be∣fore seene in the Perilous Ile, when Dramusiande and the o∣ther foure Knights were thereby drawne thence, where∣vpon calling Dorina vnto him, in the hearing of all he thus spake to her. Fayre Lady, you ought to consider, that my Court is now vnfurnished of those Knights, that scorned to giue place to the greatest aduenture what soeuer, and these young Princes may easily perrish in medling with your Monster: therefore I hold it very requisite, that the tryall of this case be deferred till the arriuall of their Fathers, who are able euery way to aunswere your desires. The Lady somewhat offended with these spéeches, thus replyed. Full well I perceiue, that the passed battell hath
frozen vp your blood, since you séeke deferring of thys small aduenture: I pray you let these young Knight make proofe of their valour, and vnderstand withall, that the aduenture is no way dangerous, because they are not to combate with my Monster, but he shall be held to haue finished the same, that can mount vpon his backe, and then salute you. This séemed to the Emperor no matter of impossibilitie, and therefore hee consented the sooner to Dorinas request, whereupon the day following, all the young Knights of the Court, as also the strangers, (except Don Rosuell, who was falne into such debilitie of sence, as his speeches ap∣peared to be silly and peeuish) resorted to the place appoin∣ted for tryumphs, and thether came likewise all the La∣dies, who mounting vppon the Scaffolds, made readie to entertaine thē, bringing with them Auriana, whose beau∣tie glittered like a bright splendant starre. The monster was there already in the fielde, and Do∣rina had taken vp her place, to iudge who should accom∣plish the aduenture, and the formost man appoynted was Franardo, who made his vaunts to be more nimble in lea∣ping, then any foure Knights there present. After his reue∣rence doone to the Emperour, he prepared himselfe for the enterprise, and cōming so néere the Monster, as he thought immediatly to be vppon his backe, hee was suddainly cast backward with his héeles ouer his head, of which apparant repulse he seemed so ashamed, as without vsing any words he went quietly foorth of the Lists. Almaroll, who was brother-like affected to Franardo, presented himselfe to make tryall of his fortune, and ma∣king an agill offer to be quickly aloft, the Monster turning quite side-ward from him, gaue the young gallant such a kick with his foote, as he was likewise downe, and depar∣ted disgraced. These mishaps made the young Lordes to thinke with themselues, that this aduenture would proue of some diffi∣cultie in the finishing, and whosoeuer should haue the ho∣nour of ending it, must out-goe all the rest in the height of
his good happe. Trineus the Almaigne Emperour would gladly haue aduentured, but the Emperour Primaleon, ha∣uing more respect of his dignitie, by no meanes would yéeld that he should attempt it. Armindo was so forward to get vpon the Monster, that he was cast quite ouer on the other side, as though hee had neuer come neere the beast at all, which he tooke in no meane scorne I warrant yee. Orino performed his attempt in such sort, and béeing smitten by the Monster vpon the breast, he fell downe very strangely amazed and giddied. Gorgoneo King of Romata, desirous to essay what luck he should haue, procéeded in his attempt quite contrary to the former aduenturers: but the Monster catching fast hold on his legge, cast him with his head so rudely against the ground, that he lay still in a traunce for a great while, and so was carried forth of the Lists. Fortenbracio would néedes be the next after Gorgoneo, but hee was so slightlie cast off by the Monster, as though it made him blush, yet euery one laughed a good at the conceite. Leonato, seeing Arguto preparing himselfe, was so hastie to be before him, that the Monster made a shewe as if hee feared him: but when he drew neere him, and the young Knight was halfe perswaded he should end the aduenture, he gaue him such a fall vpon his back, that Polinarda his Mother was there∣at much displeased, and forsaking the Scaffolde whereon shée stoode, shée went to the very entrance of the Lists, and there embraced her Sonne in her armes. Tamerco was highly pleased at the sight heereof, think∣ing this a happy meanes to compasse his intent: for when a man is resolutely bent to commit an offence, he wil serue his owne turne with the very slendrest occasions. Among the rest, Salaman the Persian had the foyle in his tryall, and gréeued not a little to bee so disgraced. Caro and Belcar su∣stayned the same mishap, and so did Estrellant part without any honour. But Arguto, whose eye was still fixed on the Knight of Fortune, knowing howe well Victoria fauoured him, expressing more loue then hee thought conuenient
should be bestowed vpon him, especially, where hee iudged himselfe to be farre more woorthy: departed foorth of the fielde deepely discontented, for he saue no honour for him to be had by this enterprise, but beeing so dis-fauoured by his Mistresse, he thought his stay there could no way aduaun∣tage him: nor did this departure any iote imbase him, by reason his stoute courage was sufficiently knowne to all, but none coulde truly gesse ye cause of his leauing the place, neyther did any Knight follow to be inquisitiue thereof. Béeing entred the Citty, he went to the Pallace of Fri∣soll his Graundfather, and deuising what signall he might beare whereby to become famous, hee sawe in a lodging hanging on a wall, the Shield of the Sunne, and hee re∣membred it to be the very same, which was promised him at his enstaulement in Knighthood, and had crowned with so much glory the first Frisoll, so taking downe the Shield, he sent for an excellent Painter, to flourish ouer againe the Sunne with his Pensill, which he either by skill or chance so well performed, that it appeared as fresh and liuelie as flaming fire. Arguto had many matters busying his braines, what successe might befall him on this his suddaine enterprise, and to kéepe him the more from knowledge of any, he cau∣sed a fayre Ladies face to be likewise painted in his shield, with some signe of discontentment in her lookes: then ar∣med and well mounted, he left the Citty, and set on toward Thrace, where leaue we him to his trauell, till we heare of him againe, in such a strange aduenture as will bring per∣rill to his life, and that an vnknowne Knight came to assist him, with whom afterward he goeth to battaile. Tamerco, hauing made his preparation for the rape of Polinarda, a Galley béeing likewise readie hard at hand to carry her away: the Knight of Fortune came to make proofe of his ability, and leapt vpon the Monsters backe so lightly as he had beene a byrd, where-uppon the Monster immediatly vanished, because no more should afterward meddle with him: for such was ye qualitie of the enchaunt∣ment,
that any one Knight hauing béene vppon his backe, euery one might then very easily performe as much. Miragarda, Grydonia, & all the Princesses greatly ioyed heereat, but especially Victoria was not a little pleased, so that to such as narrowly noted her behauiour, it plainly ap∣peared how earnestly shee affected the Knight of Fortune. Nowe in the confused departure of the people, the Empe∣rour with the Princes were descended from the Scaffolds, to accompany his Nephew with such glory to the Cittie, as his happy successe had worthily merrited. Tamerco, seeing Polynarda withdrawne into a Tent, where her Sonne (by her comforted) had newly left her, went suddainly thether with twenty armed Knights, and laying his hand on her mouth, least she should call for help, ripping vp the hinder part of the Tent, they stole forth soft∣lie, leading along two Damosels whom they found with her, and them they threatned with death, if they kept not silence. They had gotten neere the Sea side, when a seruaunt of Leonatos, sent from him to his mother about some busi∣nes, seeing her and her Damosells thus violently hurried: cryed out aloude, that his Lady Polynarda was carried a∣way, which called a number of Knights to rescue her, with∣out any other defence then their swords onely, because the tryall of the Monster was not to be performed in Armour. Tamerco opposed himselfe against all commers, and first hurt Tarnaes in the arme, likewise Armindo in the left hand: but béeing closed with Franardo, the Knights woun∣ded him in two seuerall places, so without any more resi∣stance he got into the Gallie, hauing Polinarda fast in his arme, and setting sayle, left tenne of his Knights on Land behind him, sixe of which were quickly bereft of their liues, for Franardo and Almaroll had recouered certaine huge Maces, where-with they brayned all withstanders about them, but the other foure yeelded themselues as prisoners. When Leonato heard how his Mother was carried away, he ranne in great hast with his sword and shield, and béeing
come to the place, he saw the Gallie was put off a good way from the shore, and his mother lifting vp her hands desiring helpe: whereon in a rage he would haue leapt into the sea to rescue her, as she made many the like offers for her own deliuerance, but that Tamerco with-held her from it. Leonato was so immeasurably outragious, that laying about him without any discretion, he slew two more of Ta∣mercos Knights, and likewise had dispatched the other twaine, but that the Emperor Trineus, beeing by this time come thither armed, taking him by the arme, said: Holde your hand my Lord, except you will disappoynt your selfe of meanes, how to follow him that hath borne hence your mother. These speeches made Leonato to temper his an∣ger with more mildnes, and deliuering those two Knights ouer to custodie, sought all the meanes he coulde to pursue Tamerco, but finding no Ship or Frigot there ready to fur∣ther his intent, was forced to abide the leysure of better oc∣casion. CHAP. XXV. How Dorina carried away with her the Knight of Fortune, and how Polynarda was recouered againe by the valour of Arguto. MIragarda, not meanely proude of her sonnes glory obtained, went home-ward with such a gate of maiestie, as euery eye admired to behold her: when shee sawe Dorina approching neere her, and heard her say that her sonne was to depart thence with her, shée grew into great affliction of minde, and began to deuise with her selfe, how Dorina might by threatning be enforced to leaue the Court, but the Emperour desirous to doe iustice
euery way, went to her, saying: What heare I Madam? would you hinder your Sonne from the atchiuement of ho∣nour? Shall not he assist the Lady in her aduenture, that gaue this Empire to the familie of Palmerin? that were an act of great iniustice, vnbeséeming your vertues any way to impeach, or your Sonne (but in a priuate thought) to gaine-say. Nature and loue (I confesse) pleades some excuse for you, but no iust meanes of deniall is left for him, because desire of glory is circumscribed within no bounds, nor any affection should be preferd before the loue of our Countrey: for howe can that Knight be reckoned truly famous, that dooth not daily oppose himselfe against the chiefest dan∣gers? And as he would haue further proceeded, Miragarda, perceiuing her folly did but blemish her sonnes desire of ho∣nour, kneeled downe and kissed her Fathers hand, for the gracious aduise he had thus giuen her, and calling Dorina to her, sayd. Lady, I vnderstand that in honour you affect the For∣tunes of my Sonne, and séeke to crowne his head with the wreathes of many high good happs, whereto hee hath no possible meanes of attaining, but by the desperate hazards of his life, and your fauourable regard: let it suffice you thē I rest contented, that you guide him where your arte and desire shall conduct him, and as his fame increaseth by your furtherance, so may your vertues be renowned by his en∣deuours. Dorina humbly falling on her knées, kissing her hande, returned this aunswere: Madame, the desire I sometime had to a Knight of this Courte, gouerned then by loose thoughts & idle dispositions, is long since altered to a more chaste determination of life: since when, my fauours haue haue shone vpon the Knight of Fortune, whereof he hath found some effects, and of such mine arte likewise: and as many great aduentures doo especially challenge his pre∣sence, so (to his eternall honour) shall hee effect and finish them.
Then stepping from her, shee went to the Emperour and said. Right high and mighty Lord, my onely request to you, is, that within sixe houres I may haue the Knight of Fortune hence with me, to vndertake an action that one∣ly stayes his comming: whereto the Emperour cheereful∣lie replied. Your demaund by no meanes is to be denied, therefore both hee, and his time of departure, remaines at your appointment. The Lady hauing kissed the Emperours hand, went to the Knight of Fortune, who stoode betweene the Empresse and his Mother, and the beautifull Victoria very néere vn∣to them, but her eyes full of teares, and hartfull of greefe, hearing that her affected Knight was to depart so soone, Dorina thus spake to him. Time fits not now Sir, to stand thus idely discoursing with these Ladies, therefore prepare yee with some expedition, because your presence else-where is more néedfull then here, & your horse and Armour stayes ready for you. The youthfull gallants thoughts combatting with loue and thirst of honour, coulde gladly haue wisht that his de∣parture might two dayes longer be deferred, for further assurance of the Infant Victoriaes loue, whose verie eye la∣uishly blabd the true passions of her soule: but Dorina still calling him away, hee had no better excuse to hide his loth-depart from his Goddesse Victoria, but onely that there hée would be armed in the Presence, which was accordinglie performed to his owne desire. After he was armed, hee humbly tooke his leaue of the Emperour, the Empresse, his Mother, and the other prin∣cesses, and comming to the young Infantrie, it happened fayre Candida then to be neerest him, who had such a sud∣daine apprehension of ye young Knights louely lookes, and vnable to checke the present entrance of an amourous de∣sire, though to this instant shée neuer held him worthy anie respect, yet nowe her thoughts founde themselues strangly altered. Hée taking his leaue verie reuerently of her, shée suddenly lost her cullour and spéech in such manner, as shée
was not able to vtter one worde: whereat the Emperour grew so displeased, that he could not imagine what to con∣ceiue thereof: and but that reason restrained him frō rash∣nesse, hee would haue stept to her as shee stoode before the Knight, to haue knowne if his departure were so displea∣sing to her, as shée could not affoorde him a kinde farewell. Arising from before Candida, he went and kneeled to fayre Victoria, béeing both strooken with such an amorous dumbe silence, as sighes were more plentifull then any speech: Onely the young louer said, I am your Knight, and shee re∣plied, so doo I accept you, at which wordes hee gaue her a iewell, which she presently fastned in the pleites of her haire. Heere-hence it happened, that betwéene Candida and Victoria grew a long dissention, each iniuring other as their aptest occasions serued. The Knight of Fortune, after hee had doone his dutie to the Emperour, and the other Princes there present, descen∣ded downe the stayres, and béeing mounted on horsebacke, left Victoriaes thoughts cumbred with a little iealousie: for it seemed to her a matter disagréeing with reason, that Dorina, (who indeede was a woman sufficient enough to be liked) should fixe her desire onely vpon her louer, and carry him away with her, whether she pleased, but heerin shee apparantly expressed her ignorance, that she knew not how déerely the Knight affected her, and the firme resoluti∣on of the Lady, whose affection could not be chained to any man whatsoeuer, since shée fayled in her choyce election of Florian, and lost the fruite of her hopes in her younger dayes. But let vs leaue Dorina gone with the Knight, & speake now of Tamerco the Indian King, who sayling in the high Seas with Polynarda, thought himselfe happy by his beau∣tifull purchase, and hauing brought her into his Cabinet, began to embrace and kindly entreate her: but she that ra∣ther desired death, then to consent to his vnchast desire, con∣sidering her distressed estate, & that violence might wrong her beyond compasse of sufferance, thought better to dissem∣ble
a little with him, then hazard neglectly the vnrecoue∣rable losse of honour: whereuppon she vsed these speeches vnto him. My Lord, I am not to learne, that misery is made much worse by crueltie, and sad greefe doubled by opposed extre∣mitie: my wretched estate the true mappe of the one, your violent will firme instance of the other. I coulde say, that this course of yours is farre vnkingly, & that honour bindes you to better respect of a Ladie: but that were for the priso∣ner to controule his Kéeper, or the deiected slaue to checke his commaunder. Héere am I in your power, deseruing ra∣ther to be pittied then rigorously intreated, and you may gaine that by force▪ which otherwise you are assured to faile of: yet violence to women is no badge of man-hoode, for chastities spoyle, is tyrannies tryumph. But admit (as men in their oppinion of women are soone perswaded) that time may yeeld hope better successe in your séeking, and that my minde may be altred from this strict course of seuerity: I cannot tell, I am no Saint to assure aboue mine owne power, nor so certaine of my fortune in a case so desperate, for as yet my blood is chill with the feare wherein you sur∣prizde me, and my thoughts as distracted as at that very in∣stant, but vpon further quiet, I shall haue more abilitie of my selfe, both to iudge of mine owne distresse, and of anie gentlenes you shall bestow on me. Tamerco, who loued her very earnestly, was so highlie pleased with her speeches, that hée grewe halfe perswaded ere long to compasse his loue: wherefore, without any fur∣ther molestation, taking her by the hand, he brought her vp vppon the decke againe, vsing many amourous curtesies vnto her. But the iust heauens, neuer permitting violence to that faire body, wherein so chaste a soule was enclosed, suddainly raised such a turbulent tempest, as diuers times they were in danger of perrishing: and Polynarda, seeing so good meanes for preseruation of her chastitie, namely by imminent and still expected death, lesse gréeuous to endure then Tamercoes prostitution, to whom shee could haue no
will to consent, made this her ioy and onely comfort: for death desired by any to escape a diaster, is lesse feare then the extremitie of the others conflict. The Gallie drawing neere to the shore of Thessalie, at last put to shore, Tamerco béeing not a little glad hee had so well escaped, though some of his men were lost in the tempest, but by the helpe of such as were there with him, he brought Polinarda on land vpon a little table, for which the Pagane looking shée should be thankfull to him, & find∣ing no returne of gratitude at all, hee fell into such an out∣ragious furie, as once he purposed there to haue slaine her: but conuerting his intent to rauish her immediatly, had e∣uen then accomplished his wicked desire, but yt the Knight of the Sunne chaunced to passe by at that instant, who par∣ted (as you heard before) in so desperate a case from Con∣stantinople, and hauing ridden many miles, founde no ad∣uenture worthy of remembrance, which made him of thys oppinion, that by Land he should light on nothing to make him famous, therefore he would goe try his fortune on the Sea: and spying a farre off the sayle of Tamerco, made to∣ward the poynt where hee landed, and came thether at the very time, when Tamerco villainously would haue deflow∣red Polinarda. Where albeit he knew her not, because the Sea had much altered her pure complexion, yet he scorned that a Knight should so abuse a Ladie, and therefore called to him, but hee who little thought with whom hee was to deale, said: Foolish Knight, if thou hast no better aduaun∣tage then I se to combate with me, let mee but lace on my Helmet, and I shall soone shew thee, howe much better it had béene for thée to haue held on thy way, then thus to vn∣dertake this womans defence. I will suffer thee to arme thy selfe, answered the Knight of the Sunne: in which while, Polinarda beholding either her immediate death or shame, in teares thus spake. De∣fend mine honour, thou faire-séeming Knight, for I am the wofull stolne wife to noble Palmerin of England. Arguto knowing her very well by her voyce, replied: Feare not
déere-estéemed Lady, the sword of iustice is come to deliuer you. So dismounting from his horse, because Tamerco was on foote, a very sharp battaile began betwéene them, which because it séemed doubtfull on either side, possessed the thoughts of Polinarda with such feare, that standing in su∣spence of her Knights successe, shee fledde into a wood there∣to neere adioyning, vnseene by either of the Combattants. When Arguto had lost the sight of the Lady, he feared least Tamercoes followers had carried her away, which raising a more violent furie in his resolution, made him reach Ta∣merco such a cruell stroke ouer the temples of his head, as he fell downe amazed to the earth: then mounting on hors∣backe, he fiercely assailed Tamercoes men, & hauing slaine one of them, demaunded who had borne thence the Ladie. Another of them, béeing so wounded that hee could not flie, shewed which way the Lady had taken: whereupon Ar∣guto leauing them, gallopped amaine after her, and before he had ridden the space of a mile, hee espied her running, with her haire disheueled about her shoulders, & calling to her, shée looked back, with some small ioy to behold it was he, and not the other that had so misused her. Arguto, who conceiued some good hope, that by the meanes of Polinarda, he might gaine Victoria in mariage, very kindly comforted her, promising not to forsake her, till hee had brought her backe to Constantinople. So taking her vp behind him, rode onward so spéedily, that Tamerco, who had now recouered footing, was out of hope to regaine her by pursuing: beside, the wound on his head was verie painfull to him, but there hapned an occasion to hinder these disseignes, as shall be declared in the Chapter fol∣lowing.
CHAP. XXVI. How Arguto was assailed by three Giants, which tooke the faire Princesse Polynarda from him: How she was afterward recouered by the Knight of For∣tune, and giuen by him to Leonato, that hee might goe onward to the Ile of Fortune. TAmerco, béeing set downe in a shade, while his seruaunts holpe to binde vp his hurts, sawe three Giants comming toward him, armed all in blacke, with Ma∣ces of yron and swordes of huge length: these Giants demaun∣ded of him, if hee had not séene a Lady of theirs, scaping frō them that way? Hée replied, hée had séene such a one, & shee could not be far gone from them, but he saw a Knight likewise that offered her defence, and it might be he had carried her away behind him. This aunswere made Tamerco, as well knowing that the Giants sought not after Polinarda, but some Ladie to them belonging: yet this would serue as two reuenges at once, both on the Princesse & the Knight her rescuer, iudg∣ing it impossible for him to escape from men of such might. The Giants giuing credite to Tamercoes aunswere, & see∣ing the new passed footing of the horse, prepared thēselues presently to follow after, and running with all the spéede they could make, they tore downe the trées that stoode in their way to let them: and such a noyse they made all the way they went, that Arguto and Polinarda heard thē more then a mile off. Polinarda would faine haue had Arguto put the spurres to his horse, for his better escape from so great a danger:
but Arguto, who would not flée, if death himselfe had stoode before him, by no meanes coulde be wonne to amend his pace: where-vpon the Giants still following by the track, at length ouer-tooke them, and the youngest Giant called to them, that they should stay. Arguto, causing Polinarda to alight, couering himselfe with his Shield, said: If any sparke of true valour doe re∣maine in yee, then let vs single deale man to man, so shall your conquest of me be the more glorious. These Giants, (who were of the progenie of the Giant Lurcon, sometime reputed a bolde and hardie Knight, and was slaine by the Emperour Primaleon) hauing well learned all kindes of knightly curtesie, thus forth-with ordained: that the youn∣gest, who indéede was the most agill and actiue, should first try his fortune against the Knight of the Sunne, and so the combate was agréed vpon betweene them. The Giant gaue many vnmercifull blowes, such as had surely preuailed euen to the death, but that the Knight a∣warded them by dexteritie and nimblenes, and wounded the Giant in thrée seuerall places, though little to any sound purpose, because his Mace brake off their spéede in the fall: at last, the Knight beeing hardly beset, and dangerous∣lie indeede, deliuered such a forcible stroke at the Giant, as he cut the Mace in sunder very neere to his hand, which made him in a rage draw forth his sword, and nowe began the fight to be fierce and cruell on both sides. The two other Giants standing by, aduisedly looking vpon Polinarda, perceiued that this was not shée whō they sought, but seeing shée was of excellent beautie, they became so amourously affected to her, as they purposed to be possest of her, and speaking in their language to their brother that combatted, to leaue off the fight and follow them, the el∣der Giant dissemblingly drawing neere her, rapt her vp vnder his arme, the other making the way before him, for sooner carriage of her to his Caue. The third, that fought with Arguto, turning his backe, ranne away with such spéede, as the Knight by no meanes could ouer-reach him:
thus séeing at one instant Polinarda borne away, and al the Giants borne quite out of his sight, himselfe now ignorant which way he should take, he got vp on horsebacke, riding as he thought the same way the Giants had taken, but in lesse then halfe a myles trauaile, hee had vtterly lost the tract of their footing, so pacing on carelesly till it was night, and yet altogether ignorant whether he went, at last hee layd him downe to sleepe vnder a tree, all woe begon that he could not recouer Polinarda▪ to whom he had (by the small way they rode) imparted his loue, and receiued likewise a promise from her, to doo her vttermost in his behalfe: not∣withstanding, very slender fruite was to be expected by her paines, because Victoria in her soule affected young Prima∣leon. But the Knight of the Sunne conceiued such hope by her gentle speeches, as he made certaine account to enioy the Ladie hee loued: a propertie incident o louers to deceaue themselues, by beléeuing assuredly the follie of their owne desires. Thus all that night he fed vppon those perswasiue hopes, not hauing any thing else to satis-fie his hungry ap∣petite withall, and in the morning mounted on horse-back againe, with intent either to finde Polinarda, and be her de∣liuerer, or end his owne life by the crueltie of the Giants. The Giants, after they had brought Polinarda to theyr Denne, were each of them seuerally so enflamed with her loue, as each one would haue her alone to himselfe, with∣out admitting any fellowshippe in so rich a purchase: the elder Giant would haue carried her into the furthest nooke of the Caue, there to possesse the benefit of his lasciuious de∣sires, but the other two came running vpon him with their weapons, and there had slaine him, but that hee caught vp Polinarda in his armes, as a buckler betwéen them. When the two Giants saw they could doo nothing against ye third, but that Polinarda was still in perrill of her life, they fell to him by handy gripes, charging him to let the Ladie goe, or els they would kill both him and her together: and then the two fell at strife amongst themselues, which of thē should
first haue her when shée was frée from the other, and being both vnarmed, the youngest thrust the other quite thorowe the body, that there he fell downe dead at his foote, and in the same furie he ranne the elder in vnder the arme-pit, as minding to kill both him & the woman, because hee should not vaunt of carrying her alone frō him: and this his pur∣pose had beene effected, if the Knight of Fortune had not e∣uen then arriued at the Caues mouth, beeing led along that Coast by his fauourer Dorina, without telling him of anie action there to be performed. Hee hearing the noyse the Giants made within, and lending his listning eare to be further resolued, heard the dolourous complaints of some distressed woman, which made him suddainly dismount from his horse, and boldly enter into the Caue. The young Giant beholding an armed Knight thus en∣ter, left the other to deale with him, and then the elder Gi∣ant threw Polinarda so rudely against the ground, that hée had almost kild her with the falls violence: then drewe hée foorth his sword to succour his brother, and although they were both vnarmed, yet was their power and puissance such, as the Knight had there béene slaine betwéene them, if he had not made meanes to get out of the Caue, for there hee coulde not so nimbly bestirre him, but still felt his ene∣mies strokes much to offend him. But drawing still backward, like the Lyon in his figh∣ting, till he found himselfe where he had more commoditie of place, by his quicke and agill turnings to euery offered aduauntage, hee made the Giants strokes to be bestowed but in vaine, and had giuen to them both diuers dangerous wounds. The Giants full of furie to be thus ouer-maistered by one onely Knight, layd at him like deuils, without any in∣termission: but during the fight, such was the Knights suc∣cesse in deliuerie of his blowes, as one of them was verie sore hurte in the breast, and the other vnder his right side: whereupon the younger Giant thought to haue closed with him, but the Knight ranne his sworde quite thorowe his
shoulder, and the other (offring to flie) had one of his leggs cut off. Dorina, who had béene inuisibly present all this while, to the end it should not be said, that by the power of her en∣chauntments the Knight did these admirable deeds: made herselfe to be séene, and running into the Caue, founde Po∣linarda newly risen vp, sitting on a little rock, but greatlie bruised with her fal, then putting a certaine sirrop into her mouth, it very much comforted her. By this time was the Knight himselfe come thether, who presently knowing her to be Polinarda, he offered to kisse her hand: but Dorina sée∣ing his blood issue forth at two or three places, would needes disarme him, and both they together bound vp his wounds. So there they remained thrée dayes in that place, feeding on such prouision as the Giants had there prepared, and the Knight of Fortune grew much perplexed in his minde, not knowing how to conuay Polinarda to Constantinople again: for his desires led him to a second sight of the Ile of Fortune, where he was armed Knight, and thether likewise Dorina intended to guide him, for the perfecting of a very strange aduenture. So fetching his horse, which was tyed by the bridle to a tree when he entred the Caue, and afterward let at liberty to feede till occasion was to vse him, they set on their iour∣ney: but Dorina as yet led them toward Constantinople, and as they softly paced on, they met a Knight riding so sadlie, as it séemed his thoughts were greatly perplexed, for hys Launce lay quite ouer-thwart before him, & the end there∣of gaue Polinarda such a push on the side, as it had almost set her beside the horse. The Knight of Fortune offended at so vnciuill a parte, caught the horse by the bridle, & forcing him to stand, spake in this manner. Discourteous Knight, thou must make a mends for the iniurie thou hast doone this Lady: for shee (as her iust merrite) deserueth to be honoured, and in my sight there is no man liuing shall wrong her. The Knight, who was Leonato, Sonne to the same Polinarda, béeing angry
to sée his horse so helde by the bridle, without regarding what Lady it might be, and shée likewise ignorant of him as yet, by reason of his strange habite and Beuer beeing closed: gaue the spurres to his horse, returning no aun∣swere, but prepared to haue a race with the Knight of For∣tune. They encountred together in such fierce manner, that Leonato lost one of his stirrops, and the other founde him∣selfe indifferently well shaken: whereat Polinarda began to be agréeued, béeing especially mooued with some kinde compassion toward the strange Knight, for their conformi∣tie in blood vrged her to this pitty, albeit as yet she knewe no manifest reason why shee shoulde respect him. The Knights drew theyr swordes, and so buckled together, in which bickering, the Knight of Fortune wounded Leonato on the left arme, whereat Polinardo was so vehemently af∣flicted in minde, as if the hurt had lighted vppon her very hart, and compelled her in teares to cry out aloude after thys manner. Forbeare fayre Knights, and kill not one another for a∣ny cause concerning me, I fréely pardon any iniury what∣soeuer, rather then to see the ruine of such rare vertue. But shée could not so suddenly speake these words, as Leonatoes sword lighting vpon Primaleons Shield, slided downe the saddle bowe, and entring where the Armour was ioynted, wounded him a little vpon the thigh: and afterward lend∣ing eare to the voyce, perceiued that it was his mothers speech, wherefore, without any further contention, he cast his sworde from him to the grounde, admiring who his ad∣uersarie should be, yet with no such inferiour resolution, as to yeeld or submit him to any Knight whatsoeuer. Leonato hauing lifted vp his Beuer, embraced and knée∣led to his mother, who presently knew him, and lifting vp her handes to heauen, praysed God that no greater harme had befalne him: and the Knight of Fortune perceiuing it was Leonato, cast from him his sword likewise, and ranne and caught him in his armes, desiring pardon for his so rash
assayling him, when Leonato embracing him, said. Noble Primaleon, well haue you witnessed your selfe, to be deri∣ued from the race of that famous Palmerin, who made so many desperate hazards of his life, rather then to loose the least title of his atchiued honour. During these speeches, Dorina had made ready her vn∣gents & restoratiues, and causing both the Knights to be vnarmed, bound vp their hurts and highly comforted them, but they abode all that night vnder faire trees there grow∣ing, feeding on such viands as they had brought with them from the Giants Caue. The next morning they sate in counsell among themselues, howe Polinarda should be con∣ducted back to Constantinople, Leonato affirming, that the Knight of Fortune, was the meetest man to doe it, because by his vertue she had beene deliuered: but he whose minde was opposed to all aduentures what soeuer, and desirous to goe where Dorina should conduct him, replyed, that Leo∣nato had the greatest reason to be her guide, because, bee∣ing her Sonne, meere dutie challenged that interest in him. Polinarda, perceiuing howe the Knight of Fortunes thoughts were addicted, and that nothing more displeased him then to be hindered in his iourney, vsed these speeches. Sonne, the charge of helping me backe againe, dooth most necessarily belong to you, and no disparagement any way imputed to you, albeit by your meanes I was not recoue∣red: but rather it declares a child-like office performed to your Mother, and a curteous kindnesse bestowed on thys Knight, to whom no paine séemes greater then hinderance in his voyage. Leonato, not knowing well how to gaine-say his Mo∣thers reasons alleaged, agréed to returne with her to Con∣stantinople: so changing his horse with the Knight of For∣tune, and mutually thanking each other for all kindnesse expressed, they parted on their seuerall iourneyes. Leonato dooing all things hee could best deuise to please his Mother, (who trauailed still with feareful and distracted thoughts)
by the time hee had ridden about the space of two leagues, happened on a small Foist, whereof Almaroll was Cap∣taine, the sonne to Almaroll: who hearing great report of the Iland belonging to Dorina, would needes saile thether to seeke the Knight of Fortune, as desirous (with him) to vndergoe some great enterprise, and in regard of the intire affection he bare him. Leonato, riding without his Helmet on, was the easier knowne a farre off by Almaroll, who was walking vp and downe vpon the shoares side, and gotten vp at last vppon a little rising bancke, to see what occasion might befall him from the Land, or any accident which might be offered frō the Sea. The young Giant, not a little glad of his pre∣sence, went & met him with very chéerefull countenance: but when he beheld the Princesse Polinarda, hee could not be much more iocond then before he was, because all hope was lost in Constantinople of euer séeing her againe. Almaroll made them a banquet sufficiently, of such pro∣uision as he had aboard in his Foiste, and hauing with foode and sléepe that night well refreshed themselues, the next day they fell in some discoursing together, Polynarda ear∣nestly entreating Almaroll, that with his vessell, he would bring her to Constantinople. The Giant (desirous onely to méete with the Knight of Fortune, and hearing howe lately they had parted from him,) stoode a while pondering with himselfe: and but that he had respect to the Ladies great degrée, and his Fathers Castle béeing likewise in some subiection to her, hee could hardly haue béene diswaded from his former purpose, but perceiuing it was in vaine to denie her, foorth-with they set saile, with intent to kéepe off farre from the Land, least they should méet with any accident to be their hinderance: but matters hapned beyond their expectation, as shal be de∣clared in the Chapter following.
CHAP. XXVII. Of the fight that chaunced at Sea, betweene these guydes to the Princesse, and an vnknowne Knight. POlinarda was nowe not a little contented, seeing her-selfe in so faire likely-hood to reuisite Con∣stantinople, but giddy & vnconstant Fortune, who will permit no confidence in any worldly blisse, of what apparant securitie soe∣uer it seeme, troubled the Sea with such furious and tempesti∣ous windes, as the Foist beeing in no safetie if it should saile néere the shoare, they were in∣forced to launch out into the height of the Sea, where tos∣sing vp & downe, till by a storme of raine the rough windes began to be more calme, they were at last carried toward Turkie, and farre off they might discerne a Turkish Shippe, which mainly made toward them with ful spredde sayles, whereupon they prepared themselues for the fight, and the Ships béeing ioyned, they encountred together. Leonato, doubting least feare might be hurtfull to his Mother, especially if the Turkes should happen to boorde the Foiste, leapt into the enemies Shippe, where killing euery one that durst stand against him, at last he chaunced to meete with the Captaine, who boldly comming forth a∣gainst him, there chaunced a very sharpe conflict betweene them. The Turkes, seeing with what valour their Cap∣taine defended himselfe, hauing another Captaine in com∣panie among them, they would néedes goe fight with them in the Foiste: which Almaroll perceiuing, came forward to withstand them, and to kéepe them from entring into his Foiste, he likewise leapt foorth into their Ship.
The Captaine that led the way to fight with the Foiste, doubting least his fellow Captaine should be slaine by Leo∣nato, forsaking his owne Ship, got into the Foiste, where setting sayle quickly, and the winde aptly seruing, they were twentie leagues off from the other in a verie short space. The Marriners beeing but few in number, he me∣naced them with present death, to tell him of whence their Foiste was, and what other passengers they had aboorde: whereupon, they told him that they were Christians, and that Polinarda the Emperour Primaleons daughter was there aboord. The Knight right glad to meete with so great a Ladie, putting off his Helmet, bad one of them goe and comfort the Princesse, telling her, that he was Dragonalte King of Na∣uara, and in the other shippe where Leonato and Almaroll were, was King Platir her brother: they by commission of the Princes that remained at Tubante, were sent to require ayde of the Emperour in fauour of Blandidon. The Prin∣cesse, doubtfull of euer seeing Constantinople againe, or en∣ioying the long desired presence of Palmerin her husband, lifted vp her head at these tydings, and taking truce a little with her disturbed cogitations, came forth to the Knight, who curteously taking her by the hand, said. Reioyce faire Princesse, that from suggestion of feare, so great hope is thus deriued: & mistrust not danger of your sonnes life, for there can no such sinister chaunce happen, but one signe or other will disclose him to the King of La∣cedemonia. So breaking off conference, they turned back againe to recouer the Shippe, wherein they left Platir and Leonato fighting. Almaoll, hauing put all the slaues and Mariners vnder custodie, because they yeelded themselues for safety of their liues, stoode to behold the successe of this combate, and loo∣king aduisedly on the Knight of the Ship, vnder his Creast he discerned a little golden Crosse, which giuing him cause to thinke he was a Christian, made him steppe betwéene thē, vsing these words. Stay your weapons a little gentle
Knights, and heare me but speake: then turning to the Knight of the Ship, he thus proceeded. Woorthy Sir, I know not whence or what you are, but the Crosse that I haue espied in your Helmet, perswades me you cannot but be a Christian as we are. Platir hearing these wordes, and thinking the Giant might be Franardo, or Almaroll, lifted vp his Beuer, and before he spake, they knew him. Leonato perceiuing how he had iniured his vnckle, threw his sword at his féete, and falling on his knée to kisse his hand, was staied vp by Pla∣tir, who smiling, thus spake. I would neuer desire better proofe of your valour, then in this tryall you haue made on mée: and now I sée the Empire of Constantinople may hope of long continuance, when her young Knights deliuer such assurance of theyr man-hood and chiualry. Leonato blushed to heare himselfe so praised, but retur∣ning then no aunswere (because gréefe had surprized his thoughts for the losse of his Mother) at last hee demaunded what Knight it was yt had departed thence with the Foist: but when he heard it was Dragonalte, he became greatlie comforted, knowing him to be a man of no meane valour. So they set saile for Constantinople, and hauing a prosperous winde for their purpose, within two dayes both the Foiste and they arriued there together, where Polynarda béeing gone first on lande to passe to the Citty, looking backe by chaunce, shée saw her brother followe after, accompanied with her Sonne and Almoroll. You may gesse that this sight was very pleasing to her, especially after so many greefes before endured, and béeing entred into the Shyppe againe, till newes of this good hap was carried to the Pal∣lace, ere long they beheld the Empresse Gridonia, Miragar∣da, Bazilia, Arnalte, and all the other Princesses, riding ha∣stily thether to welcome Polinarda. The ioy of a Mother for recouerie of his lost daughter, I doubt not but you can better conceiue then I expresse, as also the mutuall ioy and embracings betwéene newe met friendes, after so sad and disastrous a seperation: all which
on eyther side was effectually performed, nothing wanting that might declare the true feeling of affection, nor no prai∣ses fayling to those Knights for their great deseruings. By this time was Polinarda clad in other abiliments, and ledd onward by the hand of her Mother, exceeding ioyful for her so happy recouerie: there met them the Emperour, and those of elder yéeres with him, among whom was olde Al∣maroll, whose vigour was nowe very sufficiently restored. The Emperour embraced Platir, & Dragonalte afterward, beeing a King: then folding Leonato in his armes, said. I now see the fortunate successe of our family, since the young men doo not degenerate from the steps of their Fathers and Grandsires. So riding on betwéene Platir and Dragonalte, Sydelia and Cardigia agreed pleasantly to iest with his Highnesse, and putting themselues forward, so trauerssed the streete with their lustie Palfraies, that hee could by no meanes passe along: and béeing disposed to hold on their merry be∣ginning, quoth one of them. My Lord, if we were armed, there's not one of vs but would challenge ye seuerally to the fight, and punish yée for vsurping on our prerogatiue. The Emperor smiling to sée the Ladies so shut vp the way, said: Beleeue mee faire soules, Ile kéepe my selfe well e∣nough from warring with any of you, when yée declare so many signes of courage, but tell mee I pray yée, what pre∣rogatiue of yours doo we vsurpe vpon? The Ladies not willing to aunswere him by wordes, tooke each of them her husband by the hand, and one of thē welcomming hers with kisses, and the other with kinde embraces, declared that their prerogatiue consisted in those fauours, from which they were bard before, by the Empe∣rours conuersing with them. All the company laughed at the Ladies pleasant disposition, and the Emperour confest his errour, in kéeping their husbands so long from them: but since the faulte grew through the great loue he bare to his Knights, hee iudged it might be the sooner pardoned, whereon the Ladies resigned them to his maiestie againe,
saying, though he had power to commaunde their presence in the day, yet they hoped to desire their company at night, whereat such as were maried, laughed hartily, and the maidens blushed very modestly. So breaking wittie iest vpon iest, they entred the Cit∣tie, Almaroll and Cardigea then riding with their sonne be∣twéene them, and they founde the tables ready couered in faire Fleridaes garden, where they dined with great pompe and royaltie. But when the tables were withdrawne, the Emperour sate in sad conference with Platir and Drago∣nalte, of all the passed accidents at the Citty of Tubante: wherein was at large discoursed, all matters betwéen the Prince Florian and Targiana, what successe the war had, as also the sudden flight of Dirdan, suspected to vsurpe the kingdome of Niquea: adding, to fill vp the full compleat honour of their Embassie, that all the Knights (by them) acknowledged their duties to his Highnesse, but more e∣specially Blandidon, who fearing least Tirenna his bastard Sister intended forestalling of his dignitie, would labour his mightines by some meanes for her supporting. The Emperour discoursing diuersly on the passed wars, was greatly gréeued to loose so good a Knight as Dirdan, but much more offended at his giuing this occasion of fresh strife: neuerthelesse, not forgetfull any way of Blandidons good deseruings, (to whom in choyse regard of his Fathers faithfulnes, and sufficient proofe of his owne vertue, the Grecian Empire was so much obliged) immediatly he tooke order, that good assistance should bee sent him by the same Knights. And this occasion very fitly made offer of it selfe, for the new created Knights remaining idle at home, and displea∣sed at the Knight of Fortunes departure from the Court, he altogether séeking honour by search of aduentures, and they (as willing) yet no way imployed: they tooke it as a note of shame imposed vpon them, and reputed themselues vnworthy of the dignitie they held, hauing no meanes to expresse theyr worth of that office, and therfore by seuerall
wayes they disclosed their discontentments. Oliuanto, the second sonne to Florendos, hearing that ayde was to be sent into Turkie, he fell at the Emperours feete, holding his vn∣kle Platir fast by the hand, and said. High and mightie Prince, I humbly beséech you, that you kill me not by too much loue of kéeping mee in your Court, letting my young yéeres loose the flower of their owne felicitie: for were I possessed of my Knight-hood, I might share a part of that honourable reputation, which makes my companions so famous and glorious: and if they make a full conclusion to all actions of merrite, what shall I say I was borne for, or iudge of mine owne condition? The Emperour smiling on Platir, who entreated fauour on his Nephewes behalfe, returned Oliuanto this aun∣swere: Feare not faire Sonne, time falls out fit to thine owne contentment, goe and performe your watch for Knighthood, and be religiously deuout in your prayers, that that sacred order may be woorthily receiued by you, to the honour of our Christian fayth, and fame of your selfe. Oliuanto departed, and béeing in the chappell to accom∣plish his vigill, about the midst of night, hee heard a voyce procéeding frō the high Altar, saying: I make thee Knight of the Lyon, beeing mine owne Armes and Ensigne, & thou heereafter shalt be King of Macedon. This was supposed to be the ghost of Florendos, sometime King of Lacedemonia, and Father to the famous Palmerin d' Oliua. The voyce was heard of many that were without the Chappell, who suddenly entring, founde Oliuanto armed, and bearing a Shield, with the figure of a Lyon in it passant on his feete. In the morning the Emperor was aduertised hereof, who came with great pompe on horsebacke to the Chappell, where a very reuerend Bishop celebrated the Masse: and so returning thence to the pallace, they heard that Leonato was newly thence departed, vnder the title of the Knight of the Sword, as the old Knight had béen before called that armed him Knight, whereat his Mother was much displea∣sed, but the Emperour perceiuing that this was the way,
whereby his Court should grow great againe in former re∣putation, comforted her thus. Grieue not faire Daughter for your Sonne Leonatos departure, if you desire hee shoulde resemble his famous Graund-father, by whose hands we beleeue he receaued his knight-hoode. So taking further order for sending ayde in∣to Turkie, made Oliuanto expect his employment thether, and within eyght dayes tenne great Ships, with as many Foystes were prepared, whereinto entred fifteene thousand hardie spirits, with Platir, Dragonalte, Oliuanto, and Al∣maroll the younger, with his Father: who seeing his sonne of so honourable towardlines, would needs beare him com∣panie, that he might the better learne by him, with what discretion to guide himselfe in any dangerous battaile. The Shyps put off from the shoare, but scantly with the good liking of Auriana, who hauing thus long conuersed a∣mong the Christian Princesses, and learned the misteries of our fayth, beholding no likelihood of her returne to India, Tamerco her brother hauing committed such an errour as the rape of Polinarda, was the willinger to be baptized, and so was presented at the holy Font, Platir and Miragarda be∣ing her sureties. Shée béeing thus become a Christian, sought how to haue a husband aunswerable to her quality, and noting Oliuanto with the piercing eye of iudgement, what high and especiall hope was held of him, and how in all fayre parts he resembled his mother: shee grewe verie much enamoured of him, neuer manifesting her loue but now at his departing: when the young Knight taking his leaue of her, as before he had doone of the other Princesses and Infantries, seeming very gracious as hee was on his knee before her, the Lady tooke the spirit to speake in thys manner. Although I am a stranger, yet I may challenge one of this royall assembly, whom I may boldly entitle by the name of my Knight. Oliuanto, remembring howe many times Auriana had affably eyed him, and suspecting that loue might be the spe∣ciall reason thereof, repented hee had béene so slacke in ex∣change
of kindnesse, according as such a beauty in dutie deserued, wherefore taking her softly by the hand, and sea∣ling his affection with a sweet kisse, said. There is nothing (faire Lady) by mee more desired, then to be called the Knight to so great a Princesse, that all my enterprises bee∣ing performed vnder the name of your beauty, might proue the more successefull and fortunate. So after he had expres∣sed, what loue in time might be equally entertained, hee arose with a Diamond in his hand, which shee had giuen him as a remembrance of her affection: but because it was now vpon the very instant of departing, and Miragarda had gathered some suspition of this new commenced loue, shee pleasantly brake this iest vpon him. Alas Sonne, you must first make your vertue cleare in Armes, and thereby be∣come famous, before you learne the idle offices of loue: of which frumpe Oliuanto was so ashamed, as to cut off fur∣ther entrance into such imaginations of him, hee mounted on his horse, and so rode downe with the rest towards the Shippes. CHAP. XXVIII. How Franardo found Belcar, Fortenbracio, & For∣cino hand to hand with three Giants, that dwelt at the foote of the Mountaine Arteferia in Macedonia, and hauing slaine two of them, they went toward the Iland of Carderia. ALl the young Knights (as wée haue alreadie declared) beeing departed from the Emperours Court, by deedes of woorth so make themselues famous, and amongst them Franardo: whose fierie heate could not endure the search of meane aduentures, or any slender occasion that might
befall him on the way. So posting on in hast, at last hee came to the Kingdome of Macedon, very neere vnto the Mountaine Arteferia▪ & musing seriously in his thoughts, in what place hee might light on some aduenture, which might beseeme his valour, he suddainly heard a great clat∣tering of weapons, and following directly to the place by his eare, he sawe three Knights combatting with three Gi∣ants, who had with them twenty armed men beside, and all they together, had set vppon those thrée, and doubtlesse had there slaine them, but that this Giant by so good hap chaunced to come thether, who although hee knewe them not, yet seeing they were so villainously intreated, hée stept in to assist them, and drawing his sword, spake thus aloud: Knights be of good courage, for I purpose to ayde you. Fortenbracio béeing neerest him, knewe him by the im∣prese of a Castell which hee bare in his Shield, and there∣vpon said: Welcome is my Lord the woorthy Franardo: which words cheered the other to haue so good helpe. One of the Giants making at Franardo with a great yron mace, was so encountred againe by him with his Sword, as hee cut off the Mace in the very midst, and gaue him a dange∣rous wound in the breast, whereat the Giant beganne to stagger, and not knowing which way to betake himselfe, made offer of escape away: but foure of his Knights rush∣ing in to defend him, hee was the willinger to abide by it, where the fight continued very sharply for more then halfe an howre, and the young Knights, who had fought there foure whole howres together, were growne very wearie, and Forcino hurt to his great disaduantage. But Franardo béeing fresh and lustie, when he sawe the battaile endure so long, said within himselfe: If I doe no greater good then hetherto I haue doone, I may accompa∣nie these Knights in death. Héereon he buckled to ye woun∣ded Giant, and making a larger entrance, where hee had before opened his Cuirasse at his first hurt, he made such a window in his body, that his hart might be seene panting for life. But minding him no more, hee smote off the head
of one of his Knights, & smit two other dead to the ground. When the two Giants saw their third companion slaine, they stroue to get behind Franardo, and there they had slain him ere he could be aware of them, if Belcar and Fortenbra∣cio had not runne quickly to resist them, for now hee was very narrowly beset, and had receiued two blowes beside, which did astonish him in such sort, as if Forcino had not lightly leapt to him, hee could not chuse but must needes there haue falne. But hauing well recouered himselfe againe, hée looked about him, and sawe Fortenbracio runne another Giant thorow the shoulder, and afterwarde cleaue him downe to the left flancke: which made the third, seeing both his com∣panions dead, throw downe his sword and gauntlet on the ground, desiring truce and mercie at their hands, as in like manner did such of his Knights as were left aliue, where∣on they were afforded grace and fauour. The Giant béeing named Forzato, humbly embraced Franardo, saying: Sir Knight, so highly hath your vertue pleased me, as I meane to leaue a little Castell, which I hold in yonder vally (pointing to it with his finger) and at∣tend vpon you to a very strange enchauntment, which I am verily perswaded will be concluded onely by your va∣lour. Franardo would gladly haue gone vp the Mountaine Arteferia, thinking there to make proofe of himselfe in some hardy aduenture, because the place was very famous, by high déedes of great honour there doone by noble Palme∣rin: but hearing now of this other aduenture, by consent of the other thrée Knights he thus determined, that the Giant should first conduct them to his Castell, where they meant that their wounds should be respectiuely cured, for Forcino, sonne to the King of Nauara, (not remembred before in the calender of their names borne in the Perilous Ile,) had re∣ceiued a dangerous hurt in his flancke. Beeing come to the Castell, a Sister to the Giant, who was named Grando∣nia, hauing heard of the death of the other twaine, and fea∣ring
least her Brother should likewise follow them, was now not a little glad to see him returned: and entertaining them very curteously, caused them to be vnarmed, taking Forcino first to dresse his wound, assured them that none of his entrailes were touched. Afterward shee dressed the o∣ther two Knights, but when shee came to tooke on Franar∣dos hurts, shee felt a worser wound strike her to the verie hart: for the young gallant, though the shape and mem∣bers of his body were as a Giants, yet had hee a very gra∣cious and amiable aspect, and knew withall, so well howe to demeane himselfe, as might incite a setled oppinion to grow amorous of him: but himselfe hauing not as yet made experience of any loue cases, let slip all such occasions in a dreame as it were. The Giant Forzato, who beganne to affect Franardo in his very soule, and grew desirous of accompanying him to the Emperours Court, left nothing vnattempted that best might honour him, and shewed himselfe very seruiceable to the thrée other Knights likewise, vnderstanding that they were Princes of very royall discent. Eyght dayes were thus spent in phisicke & Surgerie, in which time the young Giantesse vsed kinde cherrishings to Franardo, and beeing one day alone with him, spake in this manner. I knowe not (Sir Knight) what to conceite of my selfe, or howe to take this strange alteration of my thoughts: except it be thus, that Fortune hath béene your conduct to this place, onely to make mee so much yours, as I can no longer be mine owne. Franardos dll conceits were so wakened with these words, that seeing her to be of so goodly a shape, and with∣all so deepely enamoured of him: he began to consider with himselfe, that when his Father applyed himselfe to mar∣riage, he could finde no other Giantesse then Arlencea, and when he should intend to take the same course, hee knewe not what fortune might betide him, if he should now make no estimation of her, who he beheld to affect him with such seruencie of loue, whereupon he thus replied.
Lady, you are young, and I vnwoorthy yet of the estate of marriage, not hauing doone any thing worthy the name of a Knight, as my Father did before he was married. But because you shall not loose the hope of enioying me as your owne, if I may remaine as assured of you, I promise you héere vppon my faith, neuer to match with any other wo∣man then your selfe: and taking her by the hand, conten∣ted himselfe onely with a kisse, which perhaps was not so pleasing to the Lady, who might expect other kindnes from him: for the beginning of loue is neuer firmely suffised, without the efficient cause that makes both parties best contented. The Lady returned to her lodging, gladde of this good fortune, since it succéeded no further, and Franardo in like manner, whose thoughts hammered on the aduenture pro∣pounded by Forzato, seeing the Knights were now in state to were shortly their Armour, tooke his leaue of them and the Lady: & beeing departed thence, before they had ridden any great distance of ground, the Giant began thus. My Lord Franardo, the aduenture whereunto I am your guide, is in the Iland of Carderia, which the famous King Polen∣dos of Thessalie conquered, to obtaine the faire Princesse Francellina: but to him remained no more, then what one∣lie serued for purchase of the Lady. Nowe concerning this matter of honour reserued for you, let me tell you that it is a wondrous enchauntment, wrought by a wise Enchauntresse, second to none for her excellent Arte, and one of the Fairies of the Mount Arte∣feria: but withall, so dreadfull and horrid in effecting, that many Knights haue lost their liues in triall of the aduen∣ture: and if any haue hapned to returne backe aliue, hee hath béene so forgetfull of what soeuer he there sawe, as hée could giue no information at all of dangers nature: there∣fore such as are minded to try it by their vertue, must goe without direction of what may betide them. Franardo, whose bolde hope perswaded him able to finish the greatest aduenture, made no reckoning at all of the
Giants spéeches, and ryding on foure dayes together, at last they came in sight of the Ile Carderia, to the high content∣ment of Franardo, for vnexperienced young men are feare∣lesse of perrills, but when they haue passed thorowe some proofe of such cases, they then are content to proceede more considerately: let it then suffise, that his late arriual there, allowed him no other lodging then vnder a trée for that night, expecting what might befall him in the morning. CHAP. XXIX. Howe Arguto arriued at the Ile of Carderia, and combatted with Franardo, and how they were sea∣zed on by an enchaunted Knight. NOt long had the faire morning saluted the worlde, before an ar∣med Knight, mounted vppon a pied-roane Courser, came riding toward the Giant, and saluting him curteously, receiued backe from him the like forme of kind∣nes, demaūding afterward what they did in that place? When Franardo hearing with what hu∣manitie hee mooued the question, returned him this aun∣swere. Sir Knight, (for lesse you cannot be by your out∣ward appearance,) this place is called ye Iland of Carderia, where is said to be a very perrillous enchauntment, and hether came I to make proofe of my courage. That shall not you doo, replyed the Knight, because I intend my selfe to aduenture it first. By reason (quoth Fra∣nardo) hee shoulde be first, that first was possessour of the place. Words, aunswered the other, serue not to try that lawe by, but weapons, and they will quickly discide thys controuersie.
While thus they parled together, the day grewe out brighter, so that they had knowledge of one another, which was as much as nothing, because in disputation and strife for honour, a priuate Knight respects neither King nor Em∣perour, whereon (béeing both mounted) they gaue the car∣rire and met together. Arguto, (who was the other new∣come Knight) beeing some-what disdainfull, failde in the encounter, but Franardos Launce met him so stronglie on the breast, as he was tumbled ouer the crupper of his horse, and had not his Shield béene impenitrable, this encounter had slaine him. Arguto, highly displeased with this bad successe, came vpon him quickly with his sword drawne, and wounded Franardo in one of his armes: but hee whéeling about his ouer-long weapon, glided in such sort downe his Shield, as lighting vpon his pouldrous, it made a little entrance, and slightly hurt him. When each of them had felt the waigh∣tie strokes of his aduersary, they began to order themselues with more discretion, managing the fight with such regard, as they might the better vndertake the aduenture of the I∣land, yet held the battell very long and fearefull, their hor∣ses béeing so wearie as they coulde scarce lift their legges, whereupon they both dismounted, to make euident proofe which was most valorous. And albeit their Squires (well knowing either by their impreses) vsed spéeches sufficient to haue them giue ouer, alleaging the Emperours deepe displeasure to them, yet would not Arguto listen to any one word, notwithstanding, hee could not laugh at any great lucke he had in this difference, for but that his Shield was impiercible, hee had gotten little aduantage by this bar∣gaine, the strokes of Franardo were so waightie and dan∣gerous. While thys fight endured, suddainly there appeared a bridge vppon the firme land, and a Knight couered with blacke Armour, hauing the image of death portraied on his Shielde, hee comming vnto them, said. Foolish Knights, what will yee kill one another, in hope of that which ney∣ther
of you can make proofe of? Come turne to mee, and leane this follie. Héereon Franardo first assailed him with such a strke, as he thought he had seuerd him quite in the middle, though indeede he toucht him not, for this was but the illusion of the enchauntment: and as he offerd againe to smite at the Knight, he was layd hold on by his Helmet, and griped in such sort, as hee thought that his head had béene rift in sun∣der, and béeing quite out of all sence, was taken vp by the enchaunted Knight very lightly, and carried as easilie a∣way as it had béene a lambe, yet was hee a Giant of great hugenes, and the other séemed a Knight but of common stature. No sooner had the Knight of the Iland fréed himselfe of Franardo, but he presently returned againe to Arguto, and without giuing him any word, so griped him in the flanck, that Arguto thought his very bowels were falne forth, and hee stabd at the Knights Shielde, but did no harme at all, whereon the Knight grypt him vppon the other legge, at which Arguto felt such paine, as he imagined that it was quite smitten off, and falling downe, was taken vp by the Knight, and carried into the Iland. Forzato and the Squires, would haue departed thence, but they were immediatly turnd backe by a wheeling cloude, and before they could gesse how, or which way, they were in the Ile of Carderia with their Maisters, who found no lacke of any thing but libertie onely, nor could they tell to whō they were prisoners: but theyr imprisonment grew the more offensiue to them, when they saw brought thether to them by the same Knight, Belcar, Forcino, and Forten∣bracio. Then they called to minde, that this might prooue the like case to them, as hapned at the Castell of Dramusi∣ande, for there had béene other Knights held as prisoners, and yet they could not know to whom. But leaue we them héere in durance, to speake awhile of the Knight of the Sword, and the other Knights which had betaken them∣selues to trauaile.
CHAP. XXX. How the Knight of the Sword vanquished a Sa∣uage Monster, and afterward found Caro and Estrel∣lant combatting together: likewise what hapned to them, and diuers other Knights. LEonato, who (as you haue heard) tearmed himselfe the Knight of the Sword, according to the no∣mination giuen when hée was knighted, after hee had brought his mother to Constantinople, de∣parted without vsing speech to any, enuying both Arguto & the Knight of Fortune, because hee imagined, that they woulde in∣grosse vp all aduentures to themselues, and none would re∣maine whereby he might be glorious. As he rode thorowe woods & vnknowne deserts, he met a wilde Sauage man, holding an angry Beare by the taile, and wrastling with him so violently, that the beast féeling himselfe ouer-mai∣stred, did what he could to get frée from him: but when the Sauage man had espied the Knight, hee left the Beare, (which ranne away mainely into the thickest wood) and came running at him, with a knotted young trée as his weapon. The Knight made no regard of encountring this Mon∣ster, because (as we haue saide before) no feare or terrour lodged within his bosome, but experience now taught him, that nimble agilitie was his best defence: for the Sauage gaue him such a thrust with his trée in the flanck, that (his breath failing him) hee fell backward into a shallow pit, and the Sauage, (who sometime had béen a humaine crea∣ture, and indifferently skild in managing a fight,) would
not take him vp in his armes, because béeing naked and vndefenced, the Knight might stab or wound him beeing so neere him, wherfore lifting vp his tree, he purposed to beate out his braines, and indeede had doone it, but that ye Knight (awaked from his traunce) recouered footing, and putting by the blowe, reached him such a sounde salutation on the head, that the Sauage reeling heere and there, at the last fell flat on his backe. Then thought the Knight surely to haue smitten off his head, but by reason the stroke fel some-what short, the hurt was the lesse, and the Sauage starting vp, auoyded another blow, that came with much more furie. So by reason of the Monsters strength, and the Knights skilfull agilitie, the fight continued without inequalitie for a long space, nor could it easily be discerned, to whether side the victory in∣clined: for the Sauage deliuered such blowes with his tree, that if (by good hap) it had not the sooner beene cut off in the midst, the Knight questionlesse had perrished. And albeit the Sauage had receiued some small hurts, yet expressing himselfe carelesse of them, hee layde about him with such rage and madnes, as hee would not permit the Knight the very least breathing while. This fell out very offensiue to Leonato, and therefore, to end life, or winne victory at an instant, he got neere the Sauage, and giuing a full blow at his face, wounded him so déepely in the fore-head, that beeing no longer able to sée the light, because the blood issued forth so aboundantlie into both his eyes, he ranne about groaping for his way to flie. The Knight of the Sword lifting vp his weapon, with in∣tent to kill him, heard suddainly a voyce call to him from farre off, and to his iudgement it seemed to be a womans spéech, saying: Oh holde thy hand faire Knight, for it is a∣gainst thy dutie to kill. Heereupon he stept back, imagining this Sauage might be some friend of ye Emperor of Constantinoples Court, so en∣chaunted, and looking a while about, there came to him a Damosell with a very sorrowfull countenaunce, but other∣wise
beautifull and gracious, who beganne to him in this manner. Vnderstand thou honourable and most famous warriour, that this Monster was the sonne of the Giant Seluaggio, and the comliest youth that euer was seene a∣mong Giants, it was then my fortune (being Neece to the wise Filesmena) to become so earnestly enamoured of him, as, finding no other helpe for my curelesse malady, I was cōstrained to mooue loues sute vnto him: but he, who made regard of any other saue me, cast mee off with such scorne∣full and opprobrious disdaines, as, not contented alone in such base sort to repulse mee, gaue out in euery eare howe much I had importunde him. Nowe I doubt not (faire Knight) but thou very well knowest, that the loue is very vrgent which makes a wo∣man become a suppliant to a man, which vnhappy conditi∣on falling to my lot, and I noting his daily frequented lux∣uries, reproouing him for them with all modest demeanor, yet all this returning no benefite to mee: neuer Serpent sweld with more venim in his bowels, then will a woman so extraordinarily iniuried. Wherefore, without any thought of after repentance, I wrought in such manner by mine arte (which is with mee in highest perfection) as by one of my Damosels, I made him to be brought into this Forrest, where trayning him into a circkle, I neuer cea∣sed by my Carracters and iuyce of fatall hearbes, (the hea∣uenly influence béeing likewise very liberall in assisting) that from the shape of man I brought him into this forme, but left him so much vnderstanding withall, as hourely to remember how much he had wronged me. But for my selfe, so extreamely was I bent in disdaine against him, as rather then I woulde consent to let him haue his former shape againe, I could haue cast my selfe headlong into the Sea: yet loues passion at length appea∣sed this choller, and I became so sad to see him in this ougly forme, as no rest could take hold of me, especially, when by his pittifull gestures, I noted howe truly penitent he was become.
Whereuppon, not to throw by all hope of enioying his shape again, by arte I framed a great vault or Caue, whose depth doth stretch vnder the bottome of the Sea, and there∣in I enclosed foure Giants, in such sort, as no mans power can hinder them from turning a wheele, which continual∣ly there they must keepe going, till such a one chaunce to happen thether, whose good fortune shall manifest appa∣rantly vnto him, in what thing consisteth the force of the enchauntment, and such a one easily shall conclude it, but all others else remaine there dead. If nowe thy courage serue thée to vndertake such a danger, I will be thy guyde thether, for no meanes else is left, or can be found, where∣by this wretched man shall euer recouer his former shape againe. The Knight of the Sword, who made no reckoning of any perrill, offered himselfe very readily, and riding on the way, before they had past halfe a league in the wood, they heard a noyse of swords clattring vpon Armour, and draw∣ing somewhat neerer, they saw two Knights fighting very fiercely together, but neither as yet wounded, because each stoode vpon his best defence, onely to attempt the aduen∣ture of the Vaulte, the fame whereof was greatly noysed through that country. The Lady entreated the Knight to step betwéene them, for they were of the Court of Constan∣tinople: whereon Leonato thrusting in betwéene them, said. My Lords, I dare be so bolde as to stay your combate, be∣cause ye are my déere and best estéemed friends. The Knights, who had not their proper deuises on theyr Shields, which partly was the cause of their quarrell, im∣mediatly knew noble Palmerins Sonne: and each raising his Beuer, became better acquainted, the one beeing Caro the Prince of Fraunce, the other Estrellant, the Prince of Durace, all right ioyfull of méeting in that place, declaring the reason why they combatted together, which was for supremacie in attempting the aduenture of the vault, which when the Lady heard, she said. Knights, it auailes not who is first or second in triall of the case, for fortune with valour
is more necessarily required: therefore let vs all ride on to∣gether, for my minde perswades mee that one of you will prooue famous by this aduenture. This made the Knights much more desirous of attay∣ning their iourneyes end, and ryding on a pace, they sud∣denly heard a Knight call to them, who with like enflamed zeale of this great enterprise, made hast to be there as soone as they: but by reason his Beuer was not closed, they had the sooner knowledge of him, to be Don Rosuell, the father of Estrellant, who though hee was well stept into yeeres, could not content himselfe with the déedes he had done, but béeing in good estate of health, and hearing in Constantinople the fame of an aduenture called the Vault, would needes goe thether to prooue his vallour. The gladnes of this encounter was great on all sides, especially in Estrellant, who very dutiously expressed his loue to his Father, the rather, because it had before past in cōmon opinion, yt he would neuer be able to beare armes a∣ny more. So riding on & discoursing kindly together, they came at last within hearing the noyse of the whéele, which was of such a dreadfull nature, as it was able to affright a very bold resolue: yet failed it of yt power in these Knights, who when they receiued their order of Knight-hood, made a full opposition of their liues to all perrils whatsoeuer, e∣specially, where honour was to be expected. Drawing néerer and neerer vnto the Vault, on the right hand side they heard the footing of a horse, and staying a while to sée who it was, they beheld a Giant, whose Armor resembled an Ashe-couller, & the deuise of his Shield was a whéele broken in péeces, because hee came with a resol∣ued intent to breake the enchaunted whéele: but when hée beheld the Knights, hee cryed out aloude to them: Let no man to venture a foote before mée, for I am the man that must and will breake the Whéele. As some of them prepared to aunswer him, Don Rosuell who alwaies vsed to beare him company, during the time of both their weake estates, knewe him presently by his
voice, and saide: My Lord Almaroll, neuer menace them that are your true intire friends. So lifting vp his Helmet, Almaroll came & embraced him, and did the like to all the other Knights, then rode they on toward the vault togea∣ther. And béeing come thether, Estrellant entreated his Fa∣ther, that he would permit him to be the first, and without any tarrying to attend his aunswere, through his ouer for∣wardnes in desire to finish the aduenture, before hee came neere it by a stones cast, one of the Giants that turned the whéele, was come forth of the Vault, armed in bright shi∣ning yron, bearing a white Sickle in a blacke Shield, for his deuise, and hauing neither Mace nor Sword, but a ve∣ry long rope made all of sinnewes. The Knight meruailing at this kinde of fight, gaue his horse the spurres, and smote the Giant with his Launce in such sort vpon the head, as made him stagger somewhat a∣mazedly: but in his passage by, the Giant casting his corde abroade, by a sleight bound it so fast about him, as lifting him lightly from beside his horse, in his armes thus carried him into the Vault. Don Rosuell, séeing his Sonne thus made a prisoner, would needes be the next in triall of his fortune, and ano∣ther Giant in like Armour came forth against him, but the couller of his Shield was yellow, and a mountaine turned topsie turuie as his deuise, because hee vaunted of ouertur∣ning mountaines. This fierce fellowe held a great hooke in his hand, with foure poynts (Drag-wise) bending to∣ward the staffe, and hauing béene soundly saluted by Don Rosuells Launce, that neere hand he was ready to be ouer∣throwne, the Giant strooke at him with his hooke, & catch∣ing fast hold vnder one of his shoulder plates, drew him be∣side his horse euen in the full carrire, and béeing quicklie snatcht vp by the Giant, in like sort was carried into the Vault. These accidents were highly displeasing to the rest, but because a Giant of farre greater stature was issued foorth, (clad in blacke Armour, a Serpents head in his Shield, of
rustie yron couller, & figured in a bloodie field, also a migh∣tie huge Holbard in his hand) Almaroll went against him with his sword drawne, because hee had no Launce at all. Betwéene them continued a fierce fight for halfe an houres space, but with some disaduantage to Almaroll, who, by rea∣son of his youth, could not withstand the others immeasu∣rable strokes: and therefore when they came to closing, Almaroll felt himselfe rapt vp in the Giants strong armes, and (whether he would or no) carryed prisoner to the vault. The selfe same mishap befell to Caro, albeit he carried him selfe very valiantly. The Lady, standing aside with her Sauage Monster, to behold these battailes, wondred that these Knights could hold out against the Giants the very least moment, for ouer and beside the enchauntment, whence they receiued an ex∣traordinarie power, she had chosen them amongst the very fiercest that could be found in India, & séeing Leonato nowe left there alone, shée went vnto him with these spéeches. As for you, Sir Knight, this day I would not haue you to vn∣dertake thys enterprise, not for any doubt I make of your abilitie, but because to morrow morning, two full yeeres will be finished since I made this enchauntment: and it wil better agrée both with the time and purpose: for incan∣tations are oftentimes sooner ouer-come by happinesse in fortune, then outward strength, or humaine possibilitie.
CHAP. XXXI. Howe the Knight of the Sword vndertooke the aduenture of the Vault. THe Lady of the Sauage Mon∣ster, hauing by good reasons per∣swaded the Knight of ye Sword to deferre his attempt vntill the day following, and then to vn∣dertake the perrill of the vault: conducted him to a Pallace of hers neere adioyning, where hée was both greatly honoured and curiously serued. At his entrance into this Pallace, he tooke off his Helmet, and his daintie curld locks so swéetly adorned his amiable countenaunce, that the Lady waxed wearie of her Monsters presence, and fearing he was ouer young to hazard the aduenture, as al∣so to endure against the Giants, began in méere compassi∣on to be enamoured of him, willing withall, to hinder him from the danger she feared. When night was come, shée imagining with herselfe that so young and sweete blood would easily be heated, and not despise the loue of a beautifull Lady, such as shée tooke herselfe to be, and indeed might iustly so reckon of herselfe: when shee saw all safe, and euery one in the dead of sleepe, she went to his Chamber, where waking him with a mild and gentle touch, shée thus began. Meruaile not thou faire young blood of chiualrie, that I (made a prisoner to thy per∣fections) thus willingly come as yéelded to thy power: for thy conquering features haue the soueraigne priuiledge, to enforce any Nimph or Goddesse immortall, yea, though they had abiured loues mighty controulment, to be ena∣moured on a man so extraordinarie in merrite. Take pitty
therefore on a distressed Maiden, who not able to resist so vehement a fire, as thy bright eyes burne vp and consume my soule withall, is come thus alone to offer thee her loue. As the Knight of the Sword would haue made her aun∣swere, the Sauage Monster that loued the Lady, percei∣uing when she left her chamber, softly followed, and euen as the Lady awaked Leonato, and sate downe by him hold∣ing him fast by the hand, suddainly he leapt vpon the bedde, ano there had meanes good enough to haue slaine him, but that Leonato presently started out of the bed, and drawing foorth his sword, the Sauage kept off with great feare and terrour, as hauing before felt it deerely to his cost, running backe, and falling downe for safetie at his Ladies féete, whereon shee entreated the Knight, that hee would not be displeased at the Monsters furie, but in his knightly pittie to forgiue and forget it. At her entreaties, the Knight of the Sword stept backe from hurting the Sauage, because also vpon his life depen∣ded the finishing of the Vaults aduenture, which made him the sooner to shewe himselfe pacified: and to frée himselfe from the Ladies importunitie, hee rose and got on his Ar∣mour, which done, he departed forth of the Pallace, laying him downe on a mossy bancke vnder a trée, where he slum∣bred away the time vntill the mornings rise, charged with many thoughts and suspitious doubts, that the Lady would performe as much as in her lay, to hinder him from fini∣shing the aduenture, because he had made such light regard of her loue: yet referring all to God, and his owne good fortune, hee determined there to abide and to try the vtter∣most. The morning no sooner put on her bright maiestie, but a stranger noyse was heard then euer before had béene, and the reason was, because that day the enchauntment should be ended: also the Giants sawe by manifest signes, that their liues was to end with the enchauntment, and there∣fore they turned the wheele with such fury, as the horrible
terror thereof, might be heard more then a hundred miles of. The Knight not a iote dismaied for all this garboyle, la∣ced on his Helmet, and went somewhat neerer to ye vaults mouth, where neuer was heard such a terrible noyse: and thence he saw to issue forth the fourth Giant, armed all in great broade plates of Maile, which in diuers parts shotte out sharpe piercing poynts of steele, but hee had neyther Sword, Shield, nor Launce. Leonato seeing him no better prouided for his owne de∣fence, was the more cheerefully comforted, but the Giant stauking toward him with mightie large stepps, and catch∣ing fast hold on him betweene his armes, wrung him so hard together, that hee could compasse no meanes of hurt∣ing him with his sword: and the sharpe pointed steeles vp∣pon his coate of Maile, brused and rent the Knights Ar∣mour in many places, whereby he receiued certaine small wounds. Very much stroue the Knight to get out of his hold, but béeing euery way disappointed, he beganne to haue respect to himselfe, least the Giant should get off his Helmet, and giuing him wounds about the head, be so vtterly disappoin∣ted of ending the aduenture: wherefore, making meanes to get out his dagger, he perceiued that the Giant was most affrayd of his face, and defended it with all the cunning he could deuise. In this strange kinde of fight, the Knight was so dan∣gerously afflicted by the pointed steeles, that very faintlie he was ready to fall downe, but that the Giant (feareful of the many offers he made with the dagger at his face) for∣got himselfe, and opening his armes, Leonato leapt from him, kéeping then the Giant off the length of his Sword: but all this auailed not, for as hee made a full thrust at his face, thinking assuredly that way to conclude this trouble∣some fight, he was suddainly caught fast in ye Giants armes againe, and farre worse oppressed then he had béene before. In this miserable state he knew not what to doe, but be∣gan to bethinke himselfe, that in some especiall matter con∣sisted
the onely strength of the enchauntment, which hee imagined to be the Giants face, because he was feareful of no other part but that: wherefore watching a happy ad∣uauntage to get vp his Sword, with the poynt he gaue him a suddaine stab in the mouth, which made the Giant im∣mediatly to let him goe, but there-with he got hold of Leo∣natos Sword, and writhde it with such a violent power, as at last he wrung it quite out of his hand. Now was the Knight in extreame and pittifull distresse, not knowing what defence hee should vse for himselfe, nor how to keepe out of the Giants armes, whereinto if he got againe, béeing depriued of the helpe that best would stedde him, vpon the sharpe steeles hee should be crusht to death. But as good fortune fell out, this prooued the very last re∣fuge the Giant had, for béeing thus wounded in the mouth, he was able to holde out no longer in the tryall, but ranne from him with all the hast he could vse into the Vault, the Knight following after him, hard at the heeles. Downe they descended a very long paire of stayres, without seeing each other till they came in sight of the wheele, which sud∣dainly gaue thrée turnes with such noyse & terror, as brake the earth aboue it, and so the light of the Sunne might pre∣sently be discerned, whose beames no sooner shone vppon the whéele, but forthwith it stood still. But the Giants (who were not as yet voyde of their ma∣gicall helpe, though disburdened of their labour at the wheele) calling this last Giant to them, (who in his flight had let fall Leonatos Sword,) prepared altogether against him, the formost beeing he that had the Holbard, to whom Leonato gaue such a stroke, as hee let fall the Holbard out of his hand, and the strife betwéene them had quickly béene concluded, but that the Giant with the hooke caught him fast by the Helmet, and the other with his cord got him fast by one leg, and so together they lifted him vppon ye whéele, which then beganne to goe againe, where betweene them and the violent turnes of the wheele hee had perished, but that hee shewed the admirable fortitude & courage of one of
noble Palmerins of-spring: and nowe it stoode him highly vpon to declare no lesse, because his life was in such excee∣ding hazard, wherefore, with all the strength hee had, hee flung from them, and stoode vpright on his feete vppon the wheele, and setting one of his handes firmely against the wall, stayde it so strictly, that the Giants with all theyr might could neuer more mooue it. The Giants doubting theyr deaths to be at hand, could gladly haue wished themselues further off from that place: notwithstanding, he with the corde still held his hold, and so did the other with the hooke in his Helmet: but the Knight with a reuersse blow cut the corde in twaine, which made that Giant forsake his hold on the whéele, and the o∣ther with the hooke he did so belabour, driuing him to ma∣ny hard and narrowe shyfts, that béeing past hope of anie longer continuance, when hee sawe the staffe of his hooke cut in sunder, he strone yet to outbraue the Knight if hee could, and shewed all the vttermost he was able to deuise: whereto the Knight had likewise a very speciall care, and marking all the fetches and slights of the Giant, that hee had now got the mangled hooke into his left hand, yet al∣waies made his proffers with the right, thought surely to giue him such a maime as should cleerely acquite him. But heerein he found himselfe very much deceiued, for the Gi∣ant watching his aduantages at euery turne, at last pre∣uailed so much in his policie, as he caught hold of him a∣gaine by one of the branching fangs, and so would haue pu him from off the whéele againe, but by maine strength he got loose from his hooke, and nimbly turning him, at one stroke with his Sword smote off his left hand. At this very instant, came in the Lady with her Sauage Monster, who be holding what had happened, thus spake vnto him. Right woorthy Knight, well maist thou vaunt of ending the rarest aduenture that euer was, if now in the very last attempt thou prooue as fortunate: for thou must cut the beame whereby the wheele turnes, and fight with such as shall hinder thée from it, hauing still an especiall
care to the Giants, for they will withstand thée so much as in them lyes. The Knight of the Sword, to whom no aduenture see∣med beyond possibilitie, boldly strooke at it to cut it with his weapon, labouring himselfe excéedingly till he was al∣most out of breath, and yet all his blowes prooued not to a∣ny purpose: whereat the Lady laughed hartily, knowing well no Sword was able to enter it, which the Knight per∣ceiuing, and resting himselfe a while, espied at last the Gi∣ants Holbard lying vpon the ground, and gessing it serued to some purpose about the enchauntment, suddainly catch∣ing it vp in his hands, there-with he presently cut it in two parts, and forth of it came a new strange kind of Monster, resembling a great Eagle crowned, with tallents long and straite, but meruailous piercing, hauing leggs so large and long, as her very breast reached as high as his helmet, her beake extended the length of ones arme, but fashioned like a Smithes paire of sheeres, and her wings appeared like two spred sailes, hauing arrowes in them in sted of quills, which she vsed to dart frō her as she flapt her wings. This Monstrous Fowle, at the very first seazed vppon his arme with her beake, and bit him in such piercing manner, as he verily imagined she would haue bit it quite off: whereon striking angerly at her with his Sword, he cut away halfe of one of her wings, which forced her to let goe her hold on his arme. Nowe wexed the Eagle extreamely furious, and the blood did issue aboundantly from her, which made her let flie the arrowes from her other wing like haile, and gaue him wounds in diuers parts of his body, which though they were not deepe, yet they much pained him: besides, she did greatly annoy him with her tallents, for she had torne one side of his Cuirasse, which made him refraine from hazar∣ding himselfe ouer desperately, least she should get off the rest of his Armour: notwithstanding, as she stoode thus ty∣ring vpon him, with a winding stroke about his head, hée cut off one of her leggs, when shee leaping from him, and
lighting on the legge, seemed to féele the torments of ensu∣ing death, yet would she not giue him ouer so, but hopping from place to place, bit him sometimes by the leggs, other∣whiles by the armes, albeit the Knight had sore hurt her in many parts of the body. At last he got hold of her fast by the necke, & with méere strength had neere hand stifled her, but that by biting his hand she got away from him, when beeing thus releast shée mounted on the whéele, where sprinckling both it and the Giants with her bloode, by meanes thereof the whéele be∣gan to turne round againe a little, and the Giants recoue∣red part of their former vigour, according to the nature of the enchauntment, and so at one instant they all began a fresh to oppose themselues against him, though but slender∣ly prouided for their owne defence. The speede of the Knight in his passed actions, made him imagine the aduenture to be almost ended, and being with∣all very much wearied, he grew the more desirous of a lit∣tle ease and rest, which perceiuing he could not as yet wel compasse, but that the whéele was set on going againe, and the foure Giants prepared a new to assaile him, which ad∣mitted no place of quiet for him, he cast by his Sword, and taking vp the Holbard againe, began to lay about him in such furious manner, that the Giants, who were no longer secured by power of the enchauntment, had many gréeuous wounds giuen them, so that hee which before had lost his hand, fell downe dead at his foote. Now stoode the whéele still for euer moouing more, and Leonato feeling his strength increased with very great courage, intended with the Holbard to kill the other Gi∣ants, least by their former slights they should take hold of him againe: but they (not a little wondring at his dexteri∣tie and valour) feigning to set all thrée vpon him together, suddainly turned theyr backs and ranne out of the Vaulte, which hee perceiuing, & béeing more desirous to perfect the labour, then to follow after them, went and sate downe on a stone to rest himselfe a while, when presently hee heard
the whéele broken in péeces, but could not discerne by whō it was doone. So béeing of good hope, that now hee had not to deale with any other, séeing the wheele was thus broken in péeces, the Ladies Sauage Monster (who coulde not re∣couer the shape of man againe, vntill a bone was taken out of his head, which in her former furie shee had therein in∣closed, when shee intended to let him liue and die in that monstrous deformitie) getting néere to the Holbard which Leonato had layd by the stone whereon he sate, tooke it vp, and gaue him such blowes there-with, as shewed he had forgot how the other had conquered him. Leonato, who for any treasure desired not to bee his death, gently bare off his stroakes, till féeling his arme much pained by the Holbards waightines, he lifted vp his Sword against the Monsters head, with intent to kill him, for indeed he supposed he had too long forborne him: and entring into like consideration (as like Champions in such cases cōmonly vse to doo) in what part of him the enchaunt∣ments force consisted, saw the Monster defend no place a∣bout him but his head onely, wherefore he laboured to be his death there, & giuing him a glenting blow on the head with his Sword, out fell ye enchaunted bone on the ground. And then was a wonderfull sight to be séene, howe the Sa∣uage writhing his head about him, beganne to receiue his former manly shape: the head and face first, next all the o∣ther members in their seuerall dimensions, and that with such suddaine swiftnes and spéede, as it was impossible for sence to comprehend, how he became thus despoiled of his monstrous forme. Then founde they themselues all thrée deliuered out of the Vault, the Lady expressing her selfe highly contented, that her loue had recouered the shape of man againe, then by a mighty winde was the whéele brought thether, which as he stoode studying how to conuay it to Constantinople, hée espyed the thrée Giants standing by a Trée, so sore brused with the blowes and wounds they had receiued, that they were hardly able to stirre themselues, and fearing he was
now come to kill them out-right, they cryed out to him, say∣ing: For Gods sake Sir Knight haue cōpassion on vs, and we will deliuer all your friends and companions safe and aliue. When Leonato saw them in subiection vnder checke of his Sword, hee aunswered: I will first haue all my priso∣ned freends restored me, and next you shall promise mee, to beare this whéele hence to Constantinople. This iniunction seemed very hard vnto them, but seeing in what desperate state they stoode, eyther to die presently by the Knights Sword, or of the hurts they had in fight without spéedie cure, they made promise to fulfill what hee had enioyned them. So all of them going to the Pallace together, they were there with very great diligence cured, so were the Giants likewise, by a Squire of their owne, that was the sonne to Arisdeno, sometime the Emperour Primaleons Dwarffe. In eyght dayes space they were all well recouered, which made them very iocond and merry: for then they began to talke of nothing else, but the aduenture in the Ile of Car∣deria, the fame whereof was noysed farre and neere, and that many woorthy Knights of the Grecian Court, were there likewise detayned as prisoners: so they tooke order for carriage of the Whéele thence to Constantinople, but there hapned a hinderance, by an accident which shall be héereafter declared.
CHAP. XXXII. How Tarnaes comming to try his fortune in the aduenture of the VVheele, combatted with Leonato, and how by Orino they were friendly pacified. NO sooner were the Giants cured of their hurts, but they set for∣ward with the Wheele, beeing bound to beare it thence to Con∣stantinople, when instantly there arriued Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, who came thether in hope to end the aduenture of the Whéele, but when hee saw it in such readines to be caried away, he grew mer∣uailously offended at the losse of such an honour, and wex∣ing some-what arrogant in oppinion of himselfe, he called out aloude to them in this manner. Whosoeuer hee be a∣mong you, that hath accomplished an aduenture of so high esteeme, let him prepare to fight with me: for I shall gaine greater glory by the conquest of him, then if I had in person concluded the enchauntment. The Knight of the Sword, who knew him very well to be Tarnaes by his faire armes and deuise in his Shield, re∣turned aunswere, that the Knight which had finished the aduenture, would quickly be with him: so returning to the Pallace, he put on his Armour, and commaunding two Launces to be brought foorth, sent one of them to his aduer∣sarie, and kept the other for himselfe. Then without vsing any words at all, because he would not be knowne by his voyce, (which at first hee so dissembled as no one could de∣scry him:) they met together in the carriere with such vio∣lence, as either loosing their stirrops, were glad to catch holde about their horses neckes, and the beasts meeting
breast to breast, tumbled ouer backward with their Mai∣sters beside them, when both of them enraged to be thus disgraced, lightly leaping on their féete drew foorth theyr Swords, vowing inwardly no peace, till each man was reuenged. The blowes fell as thicke as Sommers haile, but by reason of eythers nimblenes & good defence, they had not as yet receiued any hurt. Tarnaes was more gouerned by furie then discréete regard, but Leonato, who in all points resembled his Fathers kinde of combatting, went to work more aduisedly, which kept his Armour still more sounde and whole, and made him holde out the fresher and lustier. Neuerthelesse, his enemy at last gaue him a shrewd wound vpon the arme, by reason the buckle leathers of his Shield were broken, and so he was faine to let it hang before him: but feeling himselfe hurt, he cast a thrust at his aduersaries Beuer, which breaking a little open, he gaue him a wound full in the forehead. Now began the battaile to be much fiercer then before, that the Knights standing by to behold it, thought it the most cruelst fight that euer they had séene, making certaine account, that both of them would perrish ere they gaue o∣uer: yet durst they not offer to step betwéene them, because they knewe how offensiuely eyther would take it. At one instant were two shrewd hurts receiued, Tarnaes had his in his left side, and the Knight of the Swords was on his head, when the fight continuing in this desperate estate, at last was séene a far off a Knight come gallopping, in gréene Armour, figured full of golden flowers, and a mans head in his Shield with faire spreading locks, signifying a victo∣rie he had, against a Sauage shagge-haired man. Beeing nowe come neere them, hee vnderstood by the other what these Knights were, who likewise knew him to be Orino: whereuppon hee would néedes aduenture to part them, as loth to see ye death of two so worthy men, whose losse would be great to the Empire of Constantinople, so stepping in be∣twéene them, he said.
My noble Lordes, Leonato and Tarnaes, endanger not by your deathes the famous Grecian Empire. Tarnaes, who imagined all this while hee had fought with the Knight of Fortune, to whom he bare a certaine hatred in emulation of honour, when he heard it was Leonato, whom hee euer déerely loued, desired pardon for his so rash prouoking him to the combate, and so letting fall all iniuries on either side committed, they went to the Ladies Pallace to be cured of their wounds: where she vsed such carefull diligence vnto them (for her Giants sake fréed from enchauntment, and now deerely affecting her) as in very short while they were perfecty recouered. Tarnaes stayed there foure daies with the Knights, spen∣ding the time in discourse of diuers aduentures, till he saw himselfe past all perrill of death, and afterward (although not thorowly well) they would sette forward to the Ile of Carderia, where they vnderstood so many Knights to be im∣prisoned, and there make proofe of their fortunes in that perillous aduenture. So leaue we them on their iourney, because it is very necessary, to remember in this place, the Christian Armie that went to Tubante, with Platir, Drago∣nalte, and Oliuanto, who tooke in no meane case of displea∣sure, that Almaroll their friend was so departed frō them, contrary to the order giuen them by the Emperour: but knowing not howe to helpe it, they went on quietly with the Armie, and were aboue an hundred leagues and more from Constantinople, without encountring any thing to be their hinderance: so the Knight that had parted Leonato and Tarnaes, immediatly left them, departing whether his owne occasions guided him.
CHAP. XXXIII. Howe the Armie of the Christians met with Ta∣merco and his power, where hee was taken, and his men ioyned with the Christian forces. TAmerco, after yt Polinarda was taken from him by the Knight of the Sun, remained in no meane greefe for the losse of such a beau∣tie, but yet ashamed withall, be∣cause his sister Auriana was left in the Christians handes, whom nowe he practised howe to get a∣gaine by subtiltie, since all his strength would prooue to no pur∣pose, and thereupon made ready twenty sayle of Shippes, with men sufficient for the burden, hauing likewise two of his Brethren in his company, men of great vallour and approoued hardiment, the one named Torneo, the other Sa∣cro, and thus hee woulde Pirate like proule on the Seas, watching occasion to take some Knight of esteeme of the Grecian Court, for whose exchange hee might recouer his Sister. This Armie was descried a farre off by the Christian Fléete, and because they sailed scatteringly abroade, they seemed to be farre more then they were. Platir gaue order that his Nauie should draw together in a narrowe straite, where hardly two Shyps should front each other, appoin∣ting the choycest of his Souldiers to be formost, onelie for preseruation of his men: for any Captaine that is desirous to passe through enterprises of perrill, will vse all his best meanes for safetie of his men, because they are to sticke to it in the heate of the triall. The enemies Armie came with full saile against the Christians, and séeing into what a narrow course they had
drawne themselues, that they could by no meanes get into the midst among them, beganne to take aduantage as best they might: Tamerco and Torneo fastning on two Chri∣stian Shyps, in one of which was Platir and Oliuanto with two hundred of the best tryed Souldiers in all the Band, in the other Dragonalte & olde Almaroll, with so many more, and seeing themselues at handy gripes with such a puissant strength, stoode vpon their defence with no meane resolu∣tion: yet got the Pagans into the Christian Shipps, and all the valour in the other not able to withstand thē, where Tamerco fighting with Platir, expressed rather a dallying of the time, then any rough hast to ouercome him, the like did Torneo with Dragonalte, for the Pagans béeing thirty thousand in number, made full assurance of vanquishing the Christians. Oliuanto made admirable proofe of his vallour, slycing men downe right thorow the midst, which with such terror amated the Heathen, that falling on euery side slaine a∣bout him, the rest stroue who should still kéepe himselfe the hindmost. Old Almaroll béeing in one of the other Shyps, and seeing the Pagans there to preuaile extraordinarilie, gathered together the better of the men that were in the o∣ther Shipps, and came to assist where the heate of the bat∣taile was. Torneo, who could not temporize so well with Drago∣nalte, as Tamerco did with his aduersarie, beganne to set him so hard, that Dragonalte loth to perrish cowardly, be∣gan to aunswere him againe in warres rough language, which speaking ye resolued courage of eithers hart by theyr keene edged weapons, at last Torneo was sore wounded in the head, whereon he would haue drawne back, but Sa∣cro seconded him, and made so sternely at the King of Na∣uarre, as he had enough to doo to defend himselfe. Yet no∣thing daunted with dismay (though he sawe theyr Shipps so ouer-burdened with Pagans, as in very deede they see∣med likelier to sincke then otherwise) hee so astonied Sacro with a violent stroke, that séeing him fall as hee had beene
dead, he catched at him by the Helmet, then by the armes, thinking to haue tumbled him into the Sea, but others op∣posin themselues to his reske, hee threwe thm into the Sea so fast as they came: and no man durst put forth him∣selfe against the King, but presently hee was ouerturned headlong into the Sea, so that a number to escape this pe∣rill, fell downe before they would come neere him, for safe∣tie of their liues. This strange kinde of successe in fight still vsed by the Knig, gaue no meane encouragement to the Christians, when they saw him drowne so many, and so expeditiousie withall, and terrified the Pagans in such sort, that they se∣uerally cried out: I thinke this deuill heere wil drowne vs all. Oliuanto beholding this stratageme vsed by Drago∣nalte, followed his example in the same kinde, which proo∣ued the onely meanes of discomfort to the Heathen, for Sa∣cro and Tamerco béeing left alone on the Christian Shyp, saw thēselues in desperate estate, yet had Tamerco woun∣ded Platir vpon the eye-brow, which Oliuanto perceiuing, and that his vnekles sight was much hindered by effusion of his blood, he stept in before him, where he brought Ta∣merco into so weake case, by reason of wearines and much expence of blood, that he fell downe at his feete, and Platir offered to smite off his head, but Oliuanto would not per∣mit it, for feare of offending his beloued Auriana, whose excellent perfections euen then surprizing his thoughts, for her sake, and because she had entiteled him her Knight, hée holpe vp Tamerco, and taking both his Sword and Hel∣met from him, committed him prisoner vnder safe custo∣die. Sacro, who was now come to cope againe with Drago∣nalte, when he saw his brother led away as prisoner, at one leape he cast himselfe out of the Ship, as willing rather to drowne himselfe in the Sea, then to remaine a prisoner a∣mong the Christians: but his good hap was to light into a Foyste, where likewise was his brother Torneo, and see∣ing all hope frustrate of recouering their brother, deter∣mined
to prepare for their owne best safetie, and sailed a∣way with such extraordinarie spéede, as it was impossible to ouertake them. Thus these two Brethren, though sadde that Tamerco remained prisoner, hauing (to their cost) made proofe of the Christians vallour, thought this course best in such an ex∣treamitie, and so sailed away towards India, leauing theyr Armie to the Christians curtesie: and they on the contrary part, beholding their Leaders conquered and fled, without any great losse on their owne behalfe, caused it publiquelie to be proclaimed among the Pagans, that free libertie of departure was graunted to them all, but such as would serue the Christians, should haue kinde entertainement, without any compulsion of denying theyr faith: Neuerthe∣lesse, if any one among them would become a Christian, he should haue no meane degrée among the Grecian Caualie∣rie. The Pagans, who before were possessed with a gene∣rall feare, that they should all be cast ouer-boord and drow∣ned, as they had seene Dragonalte and Oliuanto vse manie of their companie, hearing so liberall and kinde an offer, with-drew to counsell, and electing a Cosin to Tamerco, (named Oltrando) as theyr Captaine, concluded to follow the Christian forces, because indeede they verilie doubted, that if they should haue made choyce of departure, the con∣querours (in whose power it consisted) woulde not haue graunted it. So Oltrando, with two hundred of the woorthiest men amongst them, came to the cheefe Shippe, where by our Knights they were embraced and welcommed as freends: and so much wrought this curtesie in the minde of the Indi∣ans, neuer vsed to sée men so sterne in time of warre, and yet so affable now in peace, as all of them desired to be bapti∣zed, the like afterward did the rest by their example. Thus vniting both the Armies together, they siled on toward Turkie, where leaue we them, and returne we nowe to the Knight of Fortune.
CHAP. XXXIIII. How the Knight of Fortune chaunced on a strange aduenture, and what ensued to him thereon. THe Knight of Fortune, who de∣parted with Dorina, to seeke ad∣uentures in the Ile of Fortune, ridde on with her diuers dayes together, vntil at last they came to an vncouth coast of the Sea, and there Dorina (as euer shee was wont to doe, when shée brought him where any aduen∣ture was to be attempted) vani∣shed out of sight, when the Knight looking on the water, to sée what there was likeliest to become of him, espyed a ship a farre off riding at Anker, but yet beheld no person in her. Whereupon he called thereto so loude as he could, to try if any would make him aunswere, and hauing called thrise without any reply, hee beheld two Lyons come vp on the fore-decke of the Ship, and two other on the poope behind, and descending into the boate that was fastned to the Ship, loosed it, and set onward to him. His Squire began to quake and tremble, when he sawe the Lyons draw so neere his Lord, wherefore he said, Alas Sir, let vs not abide the cōming of these rauenous beastes, for doubtlesse they wil teare vs in péeces. I will not boudge a foote, aunswered the Knight of Fortune, but sée the vt∣most end of this aduenture, and conquer these Lyons, were they as many more: but I aduise thee to goe hide thy selfe in yonder wood, and doubt not but I shall returne to thee well enough: so lacing on his Helmet, he stoode looking on the boate, which ioyned close to the shoare, and the Lyons without making any motion of assailing him, stoode verie still and gently.
When the Knight noted this, hée imagined that the Ly∣ons looked he should enter the boate, and they would be his conduct to the Shippe, which made him presently mount vpon his horse, whom he could hardly gouerne through his feare of the Lyons: but hauing at last got him into ye boate, the Lyons made it returne backe againe, and brought it close vnto the Shippes side, where they mounting vp first, made signes to the Knight that hee shoulde come vp after them. He that held himselfe not meanely fauoured by For∣tune, without any regard what perrill might befall him, mounted vp presently, when the Lyons immediatly rising vp on their hindmost feete, caught him vp in their clawes, as if they would haue deuoured him, & carried him so sud∣dainly vnder the hatches, that hee had not the verie least meanes offered how to defend himselfe, and there leauing him, they returned vp to the decke againe. Primaleon considering with himselfe, that there might happen some matter well worth the noting, went on fee∣ling for his way, thorow a darke passage, and came at last into a faire Cabbin or Chamber, the walls whereof was richly hung round about with cloth of golde, & all the roofe or vpper part, was of Crimosin silke, very curiously em∣broydered with siluer Starres, and the Sunne and the Moone therein wrought so artificially, as they gaue a shy∣ning splendour to all the Chamber. In one part of the roome stoode a goodly bed, hung round with purfled curtaines of gold and silke, wherto presuming to aduaunce his steppes, and drawing one Curtaine some∣what aside with his hand, he saw there lie sleeping a Lady of such wonderfull beautie, that albeit his loue was deuo∣ted to Victoria, yet this faire face séemed so highly pleasing to him, as if they both had stoode in person before him, hée could hardly determine where he should place his election. Standing thus transported in his sences for a long space, he grew so desirous to behold her bright eyes open, as tou∣ching lightly her snowie breasts with one of his hands, hée made her to start & awaken: but then her heauenly lookes
did so mightily preuaile with him, as hardly could hee ab∣staine from that which honour forbad him, till remem∣bring himselfe, that thether he was brought about some ad∣uenture of moment, which made him modestly refraine: and lending her his hand to helpe her rise, thus he spake to her. Beautifull Lady, I wonder as much at your rare per∣fections, as the strangenesse of my aduenturing hether: therefore, (so pleased you) I would gladly know of whence and what you are, and why among Lyons you haue made choyse of dwelling thus on the Sea? The Lady seeming no way discontented with his demaund, replyed in this man∣ner. Aduenturous Knight, whose vallour hath ledde thée to what others durst neuer attempt, but when they haue seene the Lyons bring the boate to the shoare, would cowardlie flie away into the Woods: I account you the onely man, who dreadlesse of any perrill whatsoeuer in the aduenture, are desirous to vnderstand the full nature thereof, where∣fore, if Fortune be so gracious a Mistresse vnto you, you shall finish the onely aduenture of regard, that euer anie Knight alone accomplished. Know then faire Knight, that I am the daughter to king Frysoll, who sometime gouerned the Morning Ilands, til age setting heauie foote vppon his backe, made him elect a ser∣uaunt of his owne education, whom he had made Lord of the Flowrie Ile, and in whom hee reposed speciall trust and confidence: to his care and custodie was I and my brother committed, with such allowance of subiects homage, and other dignities beside, as might well suffise to haue made him very respectful of vs. All matters beeing so established, that when death was controuler of the King our Father, my brother should remaine vnder his protection, till such time as by benefite of yéeres hee coulde lay claime to his kingdome, and then hee should haue it honourably resigned to him. Garnides, (for so was ye Knight put in trust called) promi∣sed much more then our dying father could vrge: so giuing
him the Ring and Staffe of Protectorship, the King (our Father) closed his eyes and died. Nowe was Garnides in full possession of the gouernment, hauing at his commaund all the Forts, Castels, Treasuries, and euery thing, there wanted nothing but the title royall, and thereto ambitious∣lie he began to aspire. My Brother, being the maine sum∣bling blocke in his way, within few dayes hee was bereft of life, and then in all the hast he would call himselfe king: but séeing things not succéede yet to populare satis-faction, but that more eyes and tongues went on his procéedings then he willingly would haue: then woulde hee haue mee (ouer-young in yeeres as then) to be his Wife, to sette a more substantiall ground on his tirannous vsurpation, yet happily (when time serued) to rid the world of me to. An Earle named Bernuccio, in whose Castle I was at that time kept by the vsurpers appointment, whē he heard that Garnides laboured to make himselfe King, and knew himselfe ouer-weake to vse any resistance, he béeing a mer∣uailous expert Magitian, thought yt the best way to keepe me from the Tyrant: wherefore he brought me hether in this Shyppe, enchaunting héere likewise the foure Lyons which conducted you aboard, limitting his Arte to such pro∣portion, that none should be so bold as to come to this ship, except his courage serued him to vndertake a great aduen∣ture, vntill which be ended, I cannot be married, and Ber∣nuccio, fearing least Garnides (for this) would put him to death, enchaunted himselfe in his Castell in a very strange manner, and he must combate with variable shapes, that shall be his deliuerance. At this instant (Sir) there remaineth nothing else for you to doo, but to fight with those two Lyons on the prowe of the Shyp: nor is there any necessity of their death, but onely to binde them fast, which perhaps will appeare so toylesome a taske vnto you, as may make you repent the vnderstanding of the enterprise. But that once doone, the other two Lyons will be obedient vnto you, and keepe yée company thorow a Wood which we are to passe, and they
will stand vs in very great sted, kéeping vs from being de∣uoured of strange wilde beasts, whereof you shall see there such aboundance, as els it were impossible to escape with life. The Knight of Fortune, stoode with great pleasure to heare this strange aduenture, and was on fire till he came to try his vallour in it, wherefore, séeing the Lady in that sort to pause, he said. Procure (swéete Lady) that we may be set an shoare againe, if I binde the Lyons: for I know not how my strength shall preuaile beeing thus on the wa∣ter. Doe (aunswered the Lady) that which appertaineth to you, and leaue the rest to my direction. Hée hearing this reply, went vpon the decke, and ere he was halfe mounted, the Lyons on the prow beganne to as∣saile him, one of them catching holde with his teeth on his armes, the other grasping his Helmet with his clawes, but Primaleon got one of them fast by the legge, and puld him in such sort, as he made him tumble ouer backward, and to the other he gaue such a blow with his left hand, as one of his eyes fell out of his head. Yet for all this, when hee would haue stept vppon the decke, where hee was to binde the Lyons, one of them caught him fast by the thigh, and griped him so hard, as the Armour which he wore on that part for his defence, was rent in péeces, and the paine of the gripe entred to the very bone: but to auoyde further op∣pression by these beasts, he caught one of them by the shag-hairde maine, and the other by the taile, wherein appea∣red his admirable strength, for lifting them both thus from the ground, he stept vp with them vppon the hatches, and there would haue throwne them into the Sea, till remem∣bring himselfe, that hee was but to binde them, and not to kill them, hee stoode there still, holding them fast in that manner, in despight of all the resistance they could vse, till the Lyon which had lost his eye, fell downe vpon the deck, and if the Knight had béene prouided of any thing where∣with to haue bound him, the fight betwéene them, had then béene concluded, but while he loosed the corde that bounde
the boate to the Ship, the Lyon recouering himselfe, made at him againe in farre fiercer manner then before, that hée was glad to snatch vp a club which lay on the sterne of the ship, yet therwith he had care how he fought, least he should chaunce to kill them, lamming them both on the backe and sides with such blowes, as made them keep back from com∣ming néere him, yet had they wounded him on the shoulder and on the breast, and torne his Armour very shrewdlie, which enforced him diuers times to ye greater furie against them, and many times he could haue cast them into the sea, but he onely desirous to conquer with the least harme, so handled the fight, as he got bound the beasts feete that most annoyed him. All which while, the other bit and scratcht him in such sort, as the leathers of his Cuirasse was bro∣ken, and he receiued a hurt in the flanck, whereof he made no reckoning at all, but séeing he had but that one beast to binde, made at him with such extraordinary courage, as the Lyon seeing he wanted his companion, became quite out of hart, and so he bound his legges with such facilitie, as the Lady admired it very much, albeit at the beginning of the fight she shed many teares, as fearing least so good a Knight should miscarry. But now when shee saw both the Lyons fast bound, shée grew thorowly confident, that there was no enterprise (howe dangerous soeuer) but by his vertue and vallour it would be accomplished: where-vppon shee said. Trust mée Sir Knight, you haue gone greatlie beyond mine expectation, because I helde it as a matter most cer∣taine, that it was possible for no one man alone to binde these two Lyons: but since you haue so wel therein preuai∣led, the other two wil be obedient to you. As she spake these wordes, the other two Lyons came from the poope of the Ship, and falling downe at the féete of the Knight of For∣tune, permitted him gentlie to binde them both likewise, which pleased him not a little to beholde: So returned hée with the Lady into her chamber, where with precious vn∣guents she dressed his wounds.
CHAP. XXXV. How the Ship went to the shoare, and how the Knight of Fortune, accompanied with the Lady & the Lyons, departed thence to the aduenture of the Castell, and what chaunced vnto them by the way. THe next day following, the La∣die béeing very desirous to goe on shoare, and perhaps the rather for haste of her marriage: made certaine Carracters, which the County Bernuccio in secrete had taught her, whereby the Shyp had power to stirre and mooue, when suddainly one of the Lions (creeping along to the sterne) as if he had béene a skilfull Marriner, gouernd it very or∣derly, while another of them spred the saile, and in this sort they sailed onward, and came to the shoare, when one of the Lyons leaping foorth on land, held fast in his mouth the Cable that was tied to the Ship: another of them shaking off his bands, tooke vp ye Lady lightly betwéen his pawes, and in that manner carried her easily on Land, then follo∣wed the Knight after, gladde that he had so well recouered the shoare againe, where taking his horse out of the boate, he began to looke about him for his Squire, & at last espied him come forth of the Wood, running toward his Lord ve∣rie iocondly, the rather because he saw the Lyons so obedi∣ent, whom now he had the lesse reason to feare, in that hée beheld how gently they were ruled. Some little discourse passed betwéene Primaleon & his Squire, of those occasions which had befalne him, then mounting on horsebacke, they rode on towards the Earles Castell, beeing called Trasino, and built in a place of verie
great strength. There was another noble Countie, who neuer shewed any willing obedience to Garnides, but al∣wayes continued loyall to his deceassed Lord King Frysoll, and was now become so poore, by the long and tedious war of the Tyrant against him, that oftentimes he determined to flie from thence, and implore assistance in the Court of Constantinople. But as he stoode one day looking foorth at a window of his Castell, he espied the Knight, the Lady, and the two Lyons comming thetherward, wherein hee knew consisted some great misterie, especially because for twenty dayes space together before that instant, a walking fire had likewise gone round about the Castell, which witnessed some apparant signe of ensuing good successe. Héere-uppon arming himselfe, least it might be some traine of the Kings to entrap him withall, hee purposed to sée the effect of this meruaile, and going downe to the gate let fall the drawe bridge, whereon the Knight approching with his horse, and gessing him to be the Lord of the place, he curteously saluted, desiring that hee might haue lodging in the Castell, because hee was wounded, and some-what sicklie. The Lord of the Castell seeing him so young, and the Lyons to walke so gently by him, sawe no reason why he should be afraid, but guided them into his Castell, where after some little conference together, & the Knight of For∣tunes woundes viewed and bound vp, they sate downe to meate there prepared for them. The Lord of the place, musing in his minde what La∣die that should be, carrying noate of high and honourable discent, marking her aduisedly, espyed betwéene her locks of haire a little rosie cullord spot, wherwith she was borne, and which was well knowne to all that inhabited the Ile, whereon he knew for certaine, that this was the daughter to his deceassed Knig, and Maister. The dinner béeing en∣ded, and all the seruaunts commaunded thence, falling humbly on his knée before her, he thus began. Gracious Princesse Filena, your hap and mine I account most fortunate, that your first arriuall héere should be thus
in my Castell, which I haue euer defended against the ty∣rant Garnides, as the true loyall Standard bearer to the King your Father, which yet you may behold displaied vp∣pon my Castell. I am verily perswaded, that this Knight hath deliuered you from the enchauntment in the Shippe, and now goes with you to the Castell of Bernuccio, there∣fore let me tell you, that you can hardly passe thether but by mine aduise: for the Tyrant Garnides, hauing vnderstoode by his Soothsayers, that the aduenture once finished at Ber∣nuccioes Castell, hee foorth-with shall be dispossest of the kingdom, hath caused to be brought into a Forrest (through which you must passe if you goe thether) such aboundance of Lyons, Beares, Tygars, Leopards, Panthers, & other wilde beasts, as a huge mighty Armie is not able to with∣stand them, therefore if you would passe in safetie, it be∣hooues you to defend your selues with these Lyons, as I wil direct you. You shall méete some pretty distance hence, with aboue an hundred Lyons, & as many other beasts, against which you haue no other defence, but to make an Armour both for your selfe and horse, all thicke sette with sharpe steele poynts a handfull long round about, which couering your body, you shall passe by them safely, for when the beasts feele themselues hurt, eyther in the mouth or pawe, with∣out daring to endure any other wounds, they will present∣ly with-draw from further offending you. This counsell seemed scant pleasing to the Knight, for he held it base and vile to proceede by pollicie, in any action where vallour farre better beseemed it: but cōsidering that he could conduct the Lady in no other manner, and her pre∣sence must needes be had, else Bernuccios enchauntment was not to be ended, hee gaue order for making him such a kinde of Armour, and in meane while attended the healing of his wounds. Within eyght dayes the Armour was finished, accor∣ding to the forme deliuered by the Lord of the Castell, and the Knight béeing thus armed, and the Lady and Squire
also after the same manner, the Lyons were brought forth∣with armed to them, who séeing that strange kinde of Ar∣mour vpon them, began to roare with such extremitie and furie, as all the people in the Castell were greatlie afraide of them. The Lord of the Castell séeing euery one prepared, was readie himselfe likewise at the staires foote, both he and his horse armed according to the rest, and thus rid they on to∣ward the Forrest: whereinto they were no sooner entred, but they presently beheld infinite numbers of wild beasts, that without any shewe of feare at all, immediatly set vp∣pon them, & doubtlesse they could not by any meanes haue escaped, but onely through that strange inuented kinde of Armour, which neuerthelesse grewe yokesome and burde∣nous to them, both by the weight and labour of making re∣sistance. And albeit the beasts founde by very good proofe, that their best safetie consisted in kéeping furthest off from these passengers, yet such as had not made this experience, in heate and rage would needes runne vppon them, although they sawe theyr fellowes sore wounded, and themselues to spéede no better as fast as they came. The Knight of Fortune hauing his Sworde drawne, layd fiercely about him vpon the wilde beasts, and the Ly∣ons that attended on them, séeing their Maister bestir him∣selfe in such sort, ranne likewise vpon the beasts, but could not teare many of them, by reason the Armour they had on was a let to their nimblenes, onely they went secure from hurting, & besides did wound as many as came néere them. So béeing rid of these, they rode on very quietly together, and at last descried such a huge troope of beasts before them, as they imagined the number to excéede twenty thousand, which made them doubtfull how to escape from all these, where-vppon, riding close with the Lorde of the Castell, while the Lyons made way for thē among the beasts, they found themselues much troubled and tormented by them: for the Lady beeing falne from her horse among the heard,
thought verily now to be bereft of life, for two Lyons had caught her fast by the feete, and dragger her along after them vpon the grounde, but the Knight with his waiting Lyons tooke to her in time, for the beasts had got open the sight of her Helmet, and had they not come to ayde her at the very instant, no meanes was left for her to escape with life. Now beganne the Knight so to bestirre himselfe among these wilde beasts, that the Lyons left the Lady, and made directly at him: but see a strange accident happening in na∣ture, and for their great good in this extremitie, for the Ly∣ons seeing themselues so wounded by the others of theyr owne kinde, they began to be fearefull and timerous one of another, so that they refrained to come néere each other, as thinking they receiued no greater harme then frō them∣selues. By which successefull chaunce, they rode on freelie without their disturbance, yet fought they with diuers Ser∣pents by the way, which by reason their skinns were hard and impiercible, their poynted Armour did them but slen∣der seruice: and here were they now in most danger of all, for when their owne Lyons saw that Armour auayled thē not, as it had doone before against the other beastes, they held backward as fearefull of the Serpents poyson, and their horses were so affrighted with the fire & smoulder, as (doo what they could) they would no further onward. This made them more dismaide then all the rest had doone, in which desperate case, the Lady (by good hap) re∣membred herselfe of a Ring, which the Countie Bernuccio in former time had giuen her, to stedde her in a dangerous and doubtfull extreamitie: no sooner had shee put it vppon her finger, but the Serpents (beeing not naturally bred in that place, but onely brought thether by the force of en∣chauntment,) came all gently to her hand, and grewe in such strife who should be formost, that they fell vpon one an other with wonderfull violence, and had so torne each o∣ther in peeces, that in very short while not one of them re∣mained aliue.
This fell out to no meane aduauntage of the Knight, who questionlesse else had neuer escaped with life, for an hundred as valiant men as himselfe, were not sufficient to haue vndertaken this dangerous passage. The way thus well cleered, they allighted at a fountaine to refresh themselues awhile, and hauing fed on such viands as they brought thether with them, lay downe on the mosse and leaues to take a little sleepe. Bernuccio, who from his Castell saw the Knight of For∣tune first binde the Lyons, and afterward how he had come along with the Lady euen to that very Fountaine, turning himselfe into the shape of a Satyre, came thether suddenlie vpon them, and taking the Lady vp vnder his arme, shée béeing in a swéet and pleasant sléepe, carried her somewhat further of, and then with his shoutes and cryes made her to awake: which the Knight hearing, and by casting his head vp suddainly espying, albeit hee slept with his Helmet on, least any Serpent in sléepe might offend him, mounting presently on horse-back, pursued the Satyre, who (as if he made a scorne of him) one while ran, another while leapt, then would he stand still till he were som-what neere him, and suddainly with a skyp be a great way from him. Thus the Satyre flying with her, and all the other fol∣lowing him, they came at last within sight of the Castell, whereinto entred the Satyre with the Lady in his armes, wherat the Knight of Fortune was so displeased, that step∣ping on the Bridge, with iniurious spéeches he challenged the fight, threatning to ruinate all ye whole Castell, except hee might haue the Lady deliuerd him againe: such is the humour of a minde enraged, to speake often-times beyond the bounds of reason.
CHAP. XXXVI. How the Christian Armie, before they could take landing in Turkie, were constrained to deliuer Oli∣uanto to a Dwarffe, that came and demaunded him at theyr hands. ON sayled ye Christian Armie, with a prosperous winde, and those that belonged to Tamerco in their cō∣panie, when entring into the Tur∣kish Seas, a strange vnlookt for tempest suddainly arose, which most of all wrought vpon the Ad∣mirall Ship, wherein the Lordes and chiefest princes were, bearing it so farre off from the rest, that a little more it had quite lost the sight of all the Nauie, there were they in danger euery minute to be lost, for the Shyp ranne twise or thrise against a Rocke, and still they feared to be bruised in péeces. Béeing in this perrill, there suddainly ioyned with them a little Barque, wherein was the most ill shapen Dwarffe that euer had béene séene, who stepping aboord the Christi∣an Ship, closely put a Letter into Oliuantos hand, saying he must performe what therein was cōtained, the contents of the Letter was as followeth.
The Letter which was brought by the Dwarffe, to the young aduenturous Knight Oliuanto. The Superscription. ¶To the onely, and faire flower of Chiualrie. YOung bud of honour, a namelesse friend is bold to salute thee, and beleeue it as infalli∣ble, that in vaine thou thinkest to enioy the Lady, whom thou hast elected as patronesse of thine affections, till first thou hazard thy life in an honourable aduenture, which re∣newes his owne worth wheresoeuer it is noysed: Aduertising thee moreouer withall, that he which loues the Lady with as endeared regard, will make like war against thee at all times. And so fare-well. Thy friend, the vnknowne. Platir, who had promised Miragarda to bring backe her Sonne with him, by no meanes would consent yt he should leaue them: but the Dwarffe vrging important spéeches, and threatning their present miscarying except they con∣sented, made Oliuanto to arme himselfe, and entreating li∣cence of his vnckle, without more adoe leapt into ye Barque with the Dwarffe, who immediatly vanished, & the tem∣pest ceassed about the Christian Shippe, but continued still violent with the little Barque, so that Oliuanto séeing no other likelihood but imminent death, knew not how to be∣haue himselfe, and so mainely was hee carried along the Ocean, as he thought he should be borne to the Antipodes. Platir was so full of griefe, to sée him carried thus away, as oftentimes hee woulde haue throwne himselfe into the Sea, but béeing comforted and perswaded by Dragonalte,
they shaped their course to their intended Turkish voyage, and gathering the dispersed fleete together, without any o∣ther hinderance they came to the Port of Tubant: where they landed, to the great contentment of the Knights, that daily expected the cōming of this supply, for their speedie de∣parture to the conquest of Niquea, but especially Blandidon, as well in hope of regaining his kingdome, as for the great esteeme he apparantly perceiued, which the Emperor Pri∣maleon made of him, whereupon he made prouision for the warre, where now a while we meane to leaue them. Oliuanto, perceiuing he suffered no other disaduantage, but onely that he was carried he knew not whether, began to be of the better comfort, and before night drewe on, hee saw himselfe in the view of an Iland, which séemed to him in shape of a Theater, thrusting two armes forth into the Sea, with such an admirable constructure and building, as the like was neuer séene before. The Barque put it selfe into this Iland, & béeing fastned to the shoare, the Dwarffe (who all this while had béene inuisible in the Ship) appea∣red in his former likenes, saying: Nowe is to be manife∣sted the reason of the name that was giuen you, at the in∣stant when you receiued your Knight-hood, which though then perhaps you tooke no notice of, yet now vnderstand it for your further benefite. You are entiteled the Knight of the Lyon, and must now oppose your selfe to such an enter∣prise, which if you preuaile in, you shall haue your desire, but failing in it, neuer shall further tydings bee hearde of you: goe then accompanied with your owne vallour, and I (if Fortune so much fauour you) shall be better knowne to you. Oliuanto, dreadlesse of any perrill whatsoeuer, which by the hand of man was to be vndertaken, when hée sawe himselfe so well on Land, and freed from the blustering ha∣zards on the Seas, began to climbe vp the bancke, where (the way of passage béeing very steepie and narrow) before hee could come to the sight of any house, hee was enforced oftentimes to sit downe and rest himselfe.
Hauing recouered the height of all, he saw himselfe en∣compassed with so many faire Pallaces, as humane eye had neuer beheld any comparable to them, and the more did he admire them, because he discerned no inhabitants in them: yet heard he peoples whisperings, and saw the tract of their footing, euen as in a frequented and populous Cit∣tie was to be noted. Beside, he heard ye knocking at doores, as if some were inclosed that would bee at liberty, and was diuers times shouldered as he went along, as if the stréete had béene full of people to hinder his way, yet could he not sée any liuing creature. Passing thus on thorow the very chéefe stréete, he came to a sumptuous Pallace, which stoode very solitarie to his eye, yet heard he much muttering & whispering of people, and some that were indifferent plaine to bee vnderstoode. Standing still awhile to listen what he could heare, he saw the Pallace gate open, before which was a long payre of stayres, and a huge Lyon came foorth, as high in stature as a great tall Cammell, the beast grumming and grinning at the Knight, began to menace him with his pawe. Oli∣uanto remembring the Dwarffes wordes, that the reason of his knighted name was now to be manifested, imagined that he was to combate with this Lyon, wherefore moun∣ting vp the stepps, and béeing vnskild in the nature of the enchauntment, neuer stayed to try whether the Lyon would assaile him or no: but hauing his sword drawne in his hand, stept by the beast and entred the gate, where, in the midst of a goodly Hall hee beheld a bright shining Pil∣ler, with a faire Idoll on the top thereof, holding an engra∣uen labell in his hand, containing this inscription. Such as seeke honour heere, are sure of death. And another whereon was written thus. Vertue may conquer mee, but force will faile. The Knight, making no account at all of these two in∣scriptions, passed on further, and sawe in a high mounted chaire of estate a very aged King, who seemed as if hee sate
and slept, and the Knight not knowing of whō to demaund the qualitie of the place, meant to awake him for further resolution. But as hee aduaunced his foote vppon the first step, suddainly rushed foorth at a doore standing halfe open by the King, the Lyon, and caught hold of him so vnproui∣ded for resistance, that at one thrust hee ouerthrewe him a long on the grounde, and then walked ouer him twise or thrise, that he thought he should die with the weight of the beast: but remembring himselfe howe cowardly it were to die in that manner, he leapt vp on his feete, & brandishing his sword against the Lyon, the beast declared no feare at all of him, because hee could not thus preuaile against the enchauntment, and out of the Hall al his blowes were be∣stowed but in vaine. The young Knight séeing his sword thus still to rebound backe, without any offence doone to the Lyon, beganne to grow doubtfull of his fights successe, wherefore, shifting his steps from place to place, to auoyde the gripes and pawes of the beast, he gaue backward in ground the value of some tenne paces, so as he was come iust before the doore where the staires descended. There arose the Lyon vp on his two hindmost feete, & with both his pawes gaue him two such blowes on the breast, as made him tumble backward about nine or tenne stepps, when if the Lyon had followed vpon that aduantage, the strife betweene them had soone beene concluded. But the Lyon returned backe againe into the Chamber, and the Knight (béeing in open ayre) recouered fresh vigour, seeming to himselfe so freely disposed, as if hee were now but to begin an encounter. So entring into the Hall where the aged King sept, hée sawe he was turned now vpon his right side, which gaue him encouragement of better speede then before, and re∣commending himselfe to God, in whose feare & reuerence he purposed to hazard his life, he set his foote againe vppon the nethermost step, and as he would haue ascended the se∣cond, the Lyon rushed foorth againe, but the Knight nowe experienced by his former assault, knew the better how to
preuent him, and casting a full thrust at his hindmost part, the Lyon nimbly turned, and with his taile beate by the blow, without receiuing any danger at all, so did he twise or thrise award his strokes, and made all his labour be but bestowed in vaine. Oliuanto, labouring in his thoughts very busily, which way he might soonest attaine to wound the Lyon, thought if he could hurt him in the side, then hee should easily com∣passe the victory, which made him bestowe his strokes in that manner: but the Lyon perceiuing the Knights intent, was so ready in his turnings and windings, that he could by no meanes preuaile in his purpose, for one while with his pawes, another while with his teeth & taile hee so ouer-laboured the Knight, that he felt himselfe in great extremi∣tie, whereupon, he drew backe toward the doore againe, to rest himselfe awhile, béeing vnable to giue one stroke more he was so wearie: but the Lyon, vnwilling he should haue so much as a breathing space, stoode ouerthwart the doore, still laying mainely at him with his feete and taile, hauing now brought the Knight into such weakenes and debilitie, as it was very doubtfull what should become of him. Not∣withstanding, he intended, since he must needes die there, yet to die valiantly, & casting a manly thrust at the beastes side, he could not so well award it, but that thereby he re∣ceiued a small hurt, which making him stagger halfe out of the doore, and the sworde continuing still within the wound, striking with his foote to get out the weapon, the beast threw himselfe quite out of the doore, whereby he lost all the power of the enchauntment. Oliuanto, glad that hee had found the wayes to preuaile against the Lyon, stept forth of the gate, where hée founde himselfe so refreshed, as if he had not combatted at all with the beast, & because he saw the night approching on, which hee knewe not how dangerous it might prooue to him, hee went into the Hall againe, and going toward the King, hee found that he remained still fast a sléepe, but had lift vp his head, & leaned it vpright, backward to the Chayre wherein
he sate. Oliuanto béeing ignorant howe to interprete thys meruaile, would now needs mount vpon the third steppe, when suddainly hee was againe assailed by the Lyon, who caught him so furiously by the shoulder plate, as the buckles breaking in sunder, that part was quite disarmed. Euen in this instant the sleeping King awaked, and al∣beit his white beard declared him to be very aged, yet star∣ted he vp so lightly and nimbly, and wounded the Knight so often with his royall Scepter, as he now thought himselfe quite lost for euer, the Lyon one way assailing him, and the King another, his case was very dangerous and desperate: at last, giuing a full blow at the Kings Scepter, it present∣lie fell out of his hand, and hee distressed of further force, with easie steps departed thence into a chamber adioyning. The Lyon feeling more and more the griefe of his wound, as béeing in the place most offensiue vnto him, went away lamely, and because he had hurt the Knight sore vpon the shoulder disarmed, it made him reach another stroke at him in his departing, which made the Lyon fall downe to the ground, deliuering such a fearefull cry in his fall, that hée made other Lyons that were in the Pallace, roare to him againe: which when the Knight heard, and doubting least he should be newly assaulted in that wearie estate, he stept out againe at the gate, and presently returned as cheereful as at first, yet coulde not put on his Pouldron, which lay there before him. As he stoode awhile deuising with himselfe what were best to be done, he heard his name called by a woman, at which voyce hee suddainly started, because it seemed as if she had beene violenced, and passing through the Hall, hee sawe there a goodly Lady, who at first sight hee tooke to be the beautifull Auriana, but when hée came a little neerer her, he perceiued his error, and refused to accost her: be∣cause whosoeuer loueth a Lady intirely in his hart, is not easily carried away with the pleasing baites of any other new intising beautie. The Lady (with very chéerful coun∣tenaunce) tooke him by the hande, and led him into a very
rich Chamber, whereas a sumptuous table was prepared, and sitting downe, they feasted very kindly together. Sup∣per beeing ended, he sawe enter at the doore the aged King with his Scepter in his hand, accompanied likewise with a Giant, the King vsing these speeches following. Knight, well maist thou boast of thy good fortune, that thou hast combatted in this house in the night time: but if thou doost not fulfill whatsoeuer this Lady giues thée coun∣sell in, to morrow morning thou shalt loose thy life by thys Mace, poynting to that which the Giant carried in his hand, and so they departed againe. Oliuanto was some-what abashed at their first appea∣rance, but hearing that he should not fight in the darke, hée was the better pleased: then the Lady shewing him a very rich bed prepared for him, departed thence very pleasantly, though much suspected by the young Knight, who feared he should be further assailed by her, for her lookes séemed to him somewhat wanton and lasciuious. CHAP. XXXVII. Of whence and what this King was, and what passed betweene Oliuanto & the Lady, likewise how he accomplished the aduenture. THe Indian Histories doo report, that a King, the graund-father to Tamerco, hauing a daughter of excéeding beautie, he did not re∣spect her with that care and dili∣gence, as was necessary to be v∣sed to a Lady of such merit: and her selfe beeing likewise lesse mindful of her owne reputation, then became those perfections wherewith she was endued, grewe amorous of a Prince, (yet a subiect to her father) and permitted the follies of idle
loue to procéede so farre, that the key of virginity being lost, shée grew with childe by him: but when she could conceale her shame no longer, by reason of the apparant witnes de∣liuered by her grossenes, shée concluded to trust a Nursse of hers with this secrete, who as shee was willing to pleasure her Lady in such an vrgent necessitie, yet shee handled the matter with such indiscretion, that when the very exigent came of best stedding the poore Princesse, it fell out to be her greatest hurt, for the childe beeing heard to cry, onelie through the Nursses negligence, from diuers parts of the Pallace the Ladies and Gentlewomen (not accustomed to heare so vnlookt for an accident,) came running to the chamber, and chaunced to méete the King by the way, who demanding the reason of their running so amazedly, though they were in a manner much daunted with his presence, yet they told him what a cry they had heard, whereat hee not a little meruailing, offred to enter the chamber where his daughter was, yet modestly staying till the Women were entred: and standing where he was not easily discer∣ned, he heard the Nursse speake, (as standing nowe vppon her owne iustification) & these or the like were the wordes she vsed. Alas Madame, what haue you doone? haue you had no more regard of your honour, but thus to shame your father, and staine your owne credite for euer? Hath your priuate conferences with Rouino, (for so was the other partie of∣fendour called) sorted to this ende? Why then you may boldly make this conclusion, that his shame and lyfe shall end together, and your blame and life depend vpon the king your Fathers sentence. The King (vppon these spéeches vttered by the Nursse) became acquainted not onely with his daughters offence, but likewise with the man that had so heauily trespassed, which made him enter the Chamber with more then com∣mon rage, and catching her fast by the haire of the heade, drew her from off the bead along vppon the ground, and so would haue strangled her with her owne locks, but that
the Ladies by, séeing the young Princesse in such a dange∣rous case, cryed all out so loude, as their noyse was easilie heard through the Pallace. This cry brought the Quéene with all spéede thether, where hearing the wretched estate of her daughter, she fell into such extremitie of passion, knowing well how impla∣cable the King her husband was, and pittying the seuere castigation he would inflict vpon his daughter, as the verie conceit heereof rent her hart strings in sunder, and so shee fell downe, and presently died. The King confounded with this lamentable spectacle, left his daughter, and ran to em∣brace his Quéene & comfort her, but finding life gone, and no hope of recouerie, hee appointed his daughter to be pre∣sently imprisoned. Newes heereof was presently carried to Rouino, who béeing in suspect of some strange disaster, that might be in∣flicted on his elected Princesse: in rage and mad fury went directly to the Court, where beeing foorth-with apprehen∣ded, he was cōmitted vnto another close prison. The next day following, the Nursse was brought face to face before the Princesse, where shée remaining as the sole accuser, at length Rouino was sent for, who stoutly denying all mat∣ters alleaged, was enforced afterward by torments to con∣fesse, and the childe béeing brought in publique presence, re∣sembled the true father in all such euident manner, that as the fault caused in sort a iust detestation, yet ye childs good∣lie forme, and the parents kinde loue, pleaded on the other side as much compassion. Neuerthelesse, the King ouerswayed by too much furie, taking the infant by both the feete, made it be cleft through the midst before the Father and Mothers face, whereon, forgetting all dutie of a daughter, in heate of blood shee v∣sed these speeches to her Father. Thou monster and mur∣derer of thine owne flesh & blood, why with life didst thou let me see so inhumane a spectacle? In iustice of the cause, thou shouldst first haue slaine me, rather then after ye death of my infant to leaue me perpetually tormented.
Rouino likewise, séeing his childe thus bloodily disseue∣red, dreadlesse of any extremitie, (for hee knew some vio∣lent nd was intended him) gaue all the iniurious spéeches he could imagine to the King, that hee might ashly in his mad moode fe vppon him, & murder him to with the wea∣pon which he held in his hand. But the King, who coulde not be contented with so speedy a dispatch of them, commit∣ted them both againe to prison, and sent for a skilfull Ne∣gromancer, which dwelt in a vast place of old ruined Babi∣lon, where, though hee was enuironed with numberlesse wilde beasts, yet liued he securely among them all. The Wizard vnderstanding the minde of the King, that these two Louers were to suffer a lingering kind of death, to ye end they should not endure such implacable torments, went thether with the Messenger, where béeing by the King entertained with great honour, and very serious dis∣course past betweene thē vpon the matter already reported, the Sorcerers aduise was required concerning the offen∣ders, and in his aunswere replied as followeth. My Lord, if you would punish this offence according as it deserueth, yet not to kéep from your sight their bodies in affliction, be∣cause your spleene will hardly be satis-fied with tormenting them, I will enchaunt them in such sort, that you shal euer behold them before any punishment be imposed, and yet to eithers greefe be with violence endured. Your Maiestie is now so aged, that I gather by the ce∣lestiall aspect at your natiuitie, you cannot liue aboue the space of two yéeres, yet will I make you suruiue an hun∣dred yéeres by an enchauntment which I will order in ma∣ner following. Rouino will I first trans-forme into a most fierce Lyon, of whom the Princesse your daughter shall e∣uer liue in feare, and when time comes that he shalbe van∣quished by a Knight, then shall he assume the shape of a Gi∣ant, and the Lady be changed into a Vper or Serpent, by which meanes they shal neuer haue any kinde community together: for altering their shapes so often, and then ouer∣come by that warriour himselfe, they shall alwayes liue in
such dissimilitude, as the one shall euer abhorre the other. As for your selfe, because you haue no hande in this trans∣gression, you shall spend your dayes in this Pallace and in the Garden: but when any one comes to combate with the Lyon, you shal be fast a sleepe in your Chayre of estate, and the Knight whose fortune shall fauour him so much as to mount the third degree of your throne, that man shall giue end to the whole aduenture. The King, desirous to sée Rouino and his daughter in continuall torment, yeelded the more willingly to be thus enchaunted, taking hold of his former promise withall, to enioy the benefite of life for so long space: and leauing the kingdome to a Nephew of his, the Graund-father to the Princesse Auriana, came thus into the Castel. But by rea∣son this aduenture continued long time, and fewe Knights were so hardie as to vndertake it, he would needes haue all the people of the Castell enchaunted to in such sort, that they might sée and negotiate their affaires among them∣selues, yet not to be seene or heard of any, but onely by soft murmurings and whisperings: which strange kinde of in∣uisible noyse, made many so timerous, as when they were engirt with these audible whisperers, they would present∣lie turne backe againe, without attempting the aduen∣ture. The Lady that was daughter to the fore-named King, endued with exquisite beauty and behauiour, hauing seene (for many yeeres together) no other liuing person but her aged offended Father, who alwayes vsed threatnings of worse and worse extremities to her, and the fierce Lyon, of whom shée liued in continuall feare: durst neuer be so ad∣uenturous as to walke about the Castell, onely to auoyde the causes of her terror, and yet Rouino, albeit he was thus trans-formed into a Lyon, loued the Lady still exceedingly, offering diuers times to sport and play with her, but shee would flie from him in regard of feare: so much to acquaint you with the whole course of the historie, now returne wée to the place where we left before.
When the Lady had well noted this gallant young Knight, seeing him to be of such vertue and admired valour, shée grew greatly enamoured of him, hoping by his means to get out of that enchauntment: wherfore, about the mid∣night houre shée went to the bed where he slept, and laying her hand gently vpon his breast, awaked him, and then v∣sed these spéeches. I come to doo kinde offices to thee fayre Knight, whose good starres haue béene thy guide to so high an aduenture, which when thou hast finished, thy recom∣pence is to enioy me in mariage, being daughter to a king, and onely heire vnto the Crowne of India. Oliuanto, who neuer let slippe the least minutes space, without continuall remembrance of his beauteous Auria∣na, perceiuing this Lady so much to resemble her, grewe halfe perswaded that it might be shée indéede, till viewing her more aduisedly, and checking his owne error, he thrust her aside from him, which shée taking very vncurteouslie, and hardly restraining her womannish furie, beeing like∣wise now vpon the instant of her trans-formation, (because Rouino was already become a Giant, & shée to alter with∣in certaine houres after) which happened euen then in this discontented moode, for shée felt her necke to shoote foorth in length, and her parts to change in aunswerable proporti∣on, so that suddainly shée was become a very fierce Ser∣pent, when without any intermission of time, shee leapt vp∣pon the Knight, and doubtlesse had staine him, but that by good hap he quickly drew his sword, wherewith he deliue∣red so many strokes at her, as shee was glad to shift for her owne safetie, without any further damage to the Knight, then immediatly hee armed him, as expecting to be further assailed. The old King and the Giant came running thether vp∣on this tumult, and finding the Knight armed, the King stood and leaned himselfe against the doore, but the Giant entred with his Mace, yet otherwise quite disarmed, wher∣at Oliuanto meruailed not a little, but when he came to be∣labor him with his sword, he found his body impenetrable,
and himselfe very strangely beaten with his Mace, because he had not in the beginning well lookt to himselfe. Heereon, growing some-what doubtfull of his life, hée leapt forth of the Chamber, to try if in larger compasse hee could better resist his enemie: at which instant he bagan to imagine in his thoughts, that the Lyon had thus assumed the shape of a Giant, which made him ye more diligent and respectiue, in what part of his body he might soonest attaine to wound him, as not doubting but some place or other was to be offended: but the blowes of the Mace so showred vp∣pon him, that he needed Argos eyes in attendance to auoid them. The fight continued betwéene them about two houres, and Oliuanto finding his breath to faile him, remembred his former helpe in that case, which was, to get foorth at the Hall gate, & then he should be as fresh as euer hee was, whereupon, he laboured thether so much as he might: but the Giant perceiuing it, hindered him from it so much as possibly hee could: neuerthelesse, Oliuanto casting a full thrust at the Giants face, by good hap sore wounded him, which put him in good hope that the aduenture was fini∣shed, for the Giant did nothing nowe but stand wiping a∣way his blood, which gaue Oliuanto the better meanes to get out of the Hall, where hee felt his courage in such sort restored, that he thought himselfe able to conquer two Gi∣ants. Béeing entred the Hall againe, hee met the olde King comming towards him with his Scepter, and the Viper or Serpent with him, which diuers times offered to wind her selfe about him, whereby she did endanger him very often, but still the young Knight preuented her valiantly, and al∣beit the King gaue many maine strokes, yet by his dexteri∣tie he still so auoyded them, that hee coulde not fasten one stroke vpon him. The Serpent, notwithstanding all her subtile slights, was yet glad to kéepe off from the kéene ed∣ged sword, and one blowe happening to strike the Scepter out of the Kings hand, he presently vanished: whereupon,
because he would loose so little time as might be, he made at the Serpent very resolutely: but she leaping vp sudden∣ly at his Helmet, byting the laces thereof in sunder, grypt him so violently by the throate, as his immediat death was much to be doubted. Oliuanto, seeing himselfe in such extremitie, so stronglie gryped her about the necke with his hand, that the Viper in humane voyce thus cryed out: Put me to no more paine, for indeede thou canst not kill me, but if thou giue ouer and let me goe, the aduenture for this time is concluded. By the voyce, Oliuanto knew the Serpent was the Lady, that was before so enamoured of him, wherefore, pittying her hard fortune, he let her goe: when presently the King came with the Giant into the Hall, and mounting both vpon the Viper, flew altogether foorth of the window, but the King first vsed these speeches to him. Thinke not (Sir Knight) that thou hast fully finished with vs, nor that our patience can permit, that Auriana, discended of our Indian blood, shall euer be thine, if wee can hinder it. So fled they thence to another enchaunted Ca∣stell, where Oliuanto had afterward toyle enough with them, as in his owne history is more at large declared. Great comfort in minde brought these words to Oliuan∣to, yt yet hee might hope to enioy Auriana at length, though some difficulties might long time be his hinderance. Now began the Castell to shake and tremble, yea, and ye whole Iland likewise, as if it woulde haue suncke into some bot∣tomlesse depth, and within lesse then an howres space, hee might sée out at the windowes the people of the Ile, walk∣ing and talking vpon the Market-place, & heare the noyse of diuers artificers at theyr handy trades, whereby it ap∣peared manifestly vnto him, that the enchauntment there was fully ended. So descending downe the stayres, he met the Dwarffe which had béene his conducter thether, who vsing great reuerence to the Knight, guided him backe againe to the Barque, whereinto they were no sooner entred, but the
Dwarffe vanished as before, and in one night the Barque arriued at the Porte of Tubante, among the Christian Ar∣mie, and béeing come on Land, by Platir and the Christian Princes he was most kindly entertained, and they desirous to know the reason of his absence all this while, at large he discoursed to them the whole aduenture: so entred they the Citty together, and then tooke order for the warres pre∣paration. CHAP. XXXVIII. How Leonato caused the wheele to be carried to Constantinople, and afterward went to the Ile of Car∣deria, where hee remained enchaunted for defence of the place. THe wise and learned Aliart, of whom much is chronicled, which in this History is omitted, when he perceiued that his Arte had so outstript him, as many thinges fayled of his expectation: hée grew into such dislike of his own iudgement, that hee would by no meanes nowe goe to Constantino∣ple, fearing least his ignoraunce should be obiected to him, which made him oftentimes rea∣die to burne all his bookes, but that Argentao disswaded him to the contrary, so there they continued in the Perillous Ile, expecting the passage of some enuious and ill opposed in∣fluence of the heauens, wherby the skilfull man was much crost and encountred, and hoping one day to worke the ad∣uauncement of the Grecian Empire againe. But leaue we him to his studies, and returne we nowe to Leonato, who béeing departed from Tarnaes, commaun∣ded
the Giants to carry the whéele to Constantinople, with charge that it should be presented to the Emperour, and af∣terward, that the Giants (as conquered by him) should humble themselues before fayre Candida, and there re∣maine at her further appointment. Great ioy was thorow the Court at the arriuall of thys wheele, especially Polinarda his mother was not meanelie pleased, and ye young Lady Candida, who séeing such a pre∣sent come from her Louer, could not conceale with all her cunning, but plainly expressed how enamoured she was of him: but the Emperor not respecting his owne aged estate, affecting this Lady very intirely, shewed slender accep∣tance of the present. Leonato, with Don Rosuell, Almaroll, Caro, and Estrel∣lant, taking leaue of the Giant and the Lady, rode towarde the Ile of Carderia, where (as it was famed abroade) they should finde diuers Knights of the Grecian Court impriso∣ned. And it so came to passe, that Tarnaes likewise com∣ming thether, after hee had expressed great vallour in the fight, was by the enchaunted Knight carried also in as pri∣soner: this hapned before the other Knights arriuall there, Tarnaes thinking to forestall them in the honour of the ad∣uenture, but speeding as you haue heard, and the Knight returning to looke for more fresh customers, espyed all the other making toward the bridge, and Caro béeing the fore∣most, alighted from his horse, because he saw that the other was on foote. When they buckled together, and that Caro (as others had doone before) thought one of his sides to be quite parted from him, though indeede he receiued no wound at all: his hart began to faile him, and not able any longer to weilde his sword, was caught vp by the Knight, and carried into prison. He stayed not long but returned againe, and com∣ming hand to hand with Estrellant, so confounded his sen∣ces with his blowes and gripes, that hee knowing no way how to auoyde them, was likewise carried into the Iland. When Don Rosuell sawe his sonne so borne away, ouer∣come
with griefe, he ranne to assist him, and passing quite ouer the bridge, entred the Iland, where he was suddainly taken of his horse: but by reason he was taken perforce as the others were, hee was not carried to prison, but remai∣ned there neere to the bridge, which indéede proued a great helpe to the finishing of the aduenture, as you shal perceiue in place conuenient. Almaroll presuming of himselfe, would néeds gallop o∣uer the bridge, where loosing all vnderstanding, entred of his voluntarie accord into the Ile, and was there found on foote where Don Rosuell abode: so did Orino enter after the very same manner. Leonato nowe onely remained, with whom the Knight of the Iland comming to handie grypes, and he feeling (as the others had doone) a kinde of tearing his body in diuers parts: Neuerthelesse, it was gi∣uen him as a naturall instinct at his knight-hoode, that his hart should no way be daunted with feare, and béeing of such inuincible courage, he buckled with the Knight in such honourable manner, as he made him glad to shunne and a∣uoyde him, for his good sword had pierced through his Ar∣mour, and wounded his body in diuers places, whereby he séeing himselfe ouer-come by this Knight, said. It is ill for thée that thou art of such vallour, because the nature of the enchauntment is such, as whosoeuer hath ye power to van∣quish mee, must remaine héere enchaunted for the Ilands defence. Much displeased was the Knight of the Sworde with these words, as gathering by them, that hee should not ac∣complish this aduenture: whereupon, he stroue with him∣selfe not to conquer the Knight, because hee would not re∣maine there enchaunted: yet giuing a stroke (against his will) at the Knights head, it séemed to him as if he had cleft it in twaine, whereby he fell backward vppon the bridge, and suddainly was carried away hee knew not by whom. Now began the Knight of the Sword to grow forgetfull of the cause why hee came thether, and desired that Knights good store and numberlesse would come to the Ile, that hee
might hinder them all frō concluding the aduenture. Sud∣dainly he beheld a goodly Tent erected for him at the foote of the bridge, with all things necessary and behooueful in it, whereinto beeing entred, great store of Launces were reared vp by him against trees: then went he to search fur∣ther into the Iland, but he coulde not passe any distance of grounde, because the enchauntment fild his minde full of doubt, least any should come to end the aduenture. Diuers Knights came thether in short while after, among whom were none of noate or name materiall to our history, yet all detained among the rest as prisoners. But leaue we Leo∣nato héere for the Ilands defence, and returne wee to the Knight of Fortune, whom wee left before the Castell of Bernuccio, desirous of recouering the Lady againe. CHAP. XXXIX. How the Knight of Fortune entred the Castell, where, by aduise of the Lady, he accomplished the aduenture. BErnuccio, after he had carried the Lady into his Castell, returned to his former shape, to comfort the Lady in her extreame feare, where he let her behold, that hée coulde change himselfe into infi∣nite formes, by meanes where∣of the Knight should neuer ouer∣come him. Then told he her, that hee would first send a defiance to Garnides, and when he had slaine him, he would make such scorne of the Knight of Fortune, (béeing so assisted by his varietie of shapes) that he (voyde of all hope to finish the ad∣uenture) should depart thence againe with losse of his la∣bour:
then would he enioy her quietly in marriage, and so come to the absolute gouernment of the kingdome. The Lady, who intirely affected the Knight of Fortune, and was in good hope to possesse him as her husband, dis∣sembled to be well contented with all his spéeches, & cun∣ningly obtained this secrete of him, that whensoeuer hee should be wounded in ye right eye, he had no further power of trans-formation. The Knight of Fortune stoode calling without the Ca∣stell, to haue the gate opened, and entrance admitted, which he vrged with many threatning spéeches, and Bernuccio craftily intending his death, by sending him vnarmed to Garnides, let him enter the Castell: where taking him ve∣rie kindly by the hand, he brought him vp into the Pallace to the Lady, where he was very ioyfull to behold her, but much more was she contented with the sight of him. Ber∣nuccio perceiuing it, grew greatly displeased there-with, and but that he could not make himselfe King before Gar∣nides were dead, he would there haue murdered the Knight in the night time. But to preuent them of any suspition, hee left the Ladie there with him, where shee acquainted him with Bernuc∣cios intent, and what multitudes of shapes hee could trans∣forme himselfe into: the helpe whereof onely consisted in wounding him in the right eye, whereby the enchaunt∣ment would fully be concluded, and no other meanes left of affecting the aduenture, because the Magitian coulde as∣sume so many shapes, and was not to be wounded, but in the eye onely. Bernuccio, in the meane while caused a sumptuous sup∣per to be prepared, and hauing gathered by his Arte, that the Knight was Nephew to the Emperour of Constantino∣ple, he thereby stoode in the greater feare of him: but Sup∣per béeing ended, after much table talke and familiar dis∣course, he spake in this maner. Sir Knight, you may now (so please you) goe take your rest, and call vp all your man∣lie spirits together, for to morrowe you are to vndertake
such an enterprise, as if Fortune fauour you with accom∣plishing thereof, then shall you easily conclude this aduen∣ture. Primaleon, béeing by the Lady fore-warned of all, aun∣swered: that he was ready to vndergoe any labour what∣soeuer, where (honour beeing the obiect) he should find em∣ployment. So departed he to rest, but the Lady, imagining herselfe right kindly affected, by him who expressed such af∣fabilitie to euery one, when shee perceiued that all in the Castell could not but be fast asleepe, she went to ye Knights chamber, where disrobing herselfe of all her garments, she lay downe by him, and with her soft hand gently awaked him. Now, whether the heate of youth, or her swéet intisings most preuailed in this amourous skirmish, I knowe not, but she quickly was trans-formed from a mayde to a fayre young woman: belike with no great vnwillingnes in her selfe, receiuing this fauour as an earnest of further hope, that hauing beene so liberall of this kindnesse to her, hee would not refuse to accept her in marriage. But herein she deceiued herselfe, not knowing how deerely he loued Vic∣toria, the daughter to Don Florian, and Leonarda the fayre Queene of Thrace: whereof the Knight likewise remem∣bring himselfe, became so penitent for his passed follie, that willing to haue the Lady stay there no longer, he sayd. Be wise, fayre Lady, and returne to your Chamber, least any suspitious eye should beholde you, and so I be the cause of your scandle and infamie. The Lady, ouer-swaied with her owne imaginations, after many swéete kisses and kinde embracings, departed from him, and the Knight thus left alone, beganne in this manner to chyde with himselfe. Oh diuine Victoria, with what face can I craue pardon of thee for this offence, which indeede dooth merrite no forgiuenes at all? Sentence mee therefore in the seueritie of thy iustice, deny mee thy loue, and hide from me thy heauenly beautie, which is the surest and readiest way to my death: for what can I otherwise
iustly expect at thy hande, but the rightfull doome & award of death, for this treason to thy beautie, & trecherie in mine obliged faith? In these and such like passions hee spent the rest of the night, euen as if his Lady had béene there present with him, but when the morning appeared, he arose and armed himselfe, expecting whē the time of his imployment should come: and Bernuccio entring the place where hee was, said: Sir Knight, you can neuer attaine the height of thys aduenture, till first you haue slaine the Tyrant Garnides, for he remaining aliue, little shall it auaile the Ladie, if you could disinchaunt this Castell: therefore prepare your selfe to goe thether, in such secrete manner as I will ad∣uise you. Primaleon knowing how the enchauntment was to be ended, thus aunswered: I had rather first conclude thys perrillous enterprise, and afterward let mee alone for kil∣ling Garnides. Bernuccio suspecting by these wordes, that the Lady had instructed him for his carriage in the aduen∣ture, grew timorous of his owne successe, and willinglie would haue beene rid of his company: wherefore rushing forth of the roome, before a man could thinke the very least thought, he was in the broade Court beneath in the shape of a Satyre, with two drawne Rapiers in his hand. The Knight, not a little ioyfull héereof, because he ear∣nestly desired to try his fortune in the fight, that hee might set free the Lady, enstall her in her kingdome, & so auoyde all further dallying with her: descended the staires, and comming against the beast, he found him to leape so lightly heere and there about him, as hee could not deuise howe to fasten a blow vppon him, for knightly courage and skill in weapon, séemed nothing to him, wherefore, all hee coulde doo, was to shunne the slights and tricks of his seueral sub∣tile offers, which seemed indeede very meruailous to him. The Satire hauing the aduauntage of his two long Rapi∣ers, let flie his thrusts so quick at the Sheeld of Fortune, as all the Knight could doo would hardly award them: wher∣vpon,
hee séeing that the fight might thus continue all day, and yet no benefit to him thereby, marking withall, howe the beast still defended his face with one of the weapons, with a maine stroke he cut one of the Rapiers through the midst, and so it fell out of his hand to the ground: so ye the Satyre beeing now very fearefull of his face, and not da∣ring to fight any longer with one weapon, turned his back and fled. Soone after he returned in a contrary shape, séeming a very strange deformed Giant, with a huge broade hande which serued him as a Sworde, and a mightie Club in the other, both seeming incorporate, as growing naturally out of his body. Hee was all naked, which Primaleon shamed very much to behold, and thought it small manhood in him, if he should fight with him vpon this aduantage, and ther∣fore made offer of disarming himselfe, to the end hee might not be disparaged by any inequalitie: but the Lady, stand∣ing in a window aboue to behold the fights successe, adui∣sed him to the contrary. The Giant seemed thereat to be very wroth and angry, & albeit he seemed naked, yet was his flesh so hard and impenetrable, as the Knights Sword rebounded still backe againe, as if it had falne on Armour or stéele: but Primaleon héedfull of the Giants defence, still noted that hee best garded the right side of his face. For more then halfe an howre the fight endured, and the Knight had so well awarded the strokes of his enemie, as hee felt very little endamagement by them, wherefore giuing a suddaine thrust very néere his right eye, the Gi∣ant séemed so amazed thereat, that Primaleon aduantage∣ously running vppon him, forcibly wrested the Club quite from him: then had he nothing but his broade hand left, to make resistance withall, which hee likewise striking at with the Club, thought he had smit it quite off, when find∣ing himselfe deceaued, hee gaue a snatch at it with his Gauntlet, and pulling it strongly frō the body, founde that he had it fast in his hand. Now the Giant hauing nothing to defend himselfe withall, turnd and fled againe, & stayed
not so long as one would goe twentie paces, but he heard a doore suddainly rush open, and sawe a Collomne therein with an Idoll vppon it, holding a labell with this inscrip∣tion. Except thou cast mee downe, thou art but dead. Presently came foorth a huge beast like an Elephant, but farre more agill and nimble in shew, with ten swords by his sides, which were helde directly out by certaine hands, turning and winding euery way with meruailous facilitie, as if they had naturall vse and motion, and the beasts body had certaine bones resembling scales, fashio∣ned after the manner of an Armour. This beast went di∣uers times about the Piller, appearing to be the Gardian thereof, & handled the swords euery way with such admira∣ble dexteritie, as Primaleon could not deuise where best to offend him: but remembring his right eye was the place of certaintie, as hee made his ayme thereat, hee foorth-with sawe two swords suddainly shoote out of his fore-head, and two other out of his temples on each side, hauing like agi∣litie and motion as the other swords had. Notwithstanding all this, commending himselfe to God, couragiously he went and assailed the Monster, and it was his good hap, that at the very first stroke hee smote off two swords, of those which were vpon ye beasts side, which gaue him some hope of victory in the end. But yet it stoode him on to be very heedfull, otherwise by those swordes his death was threatned, for should he haue stept betwéene the Collomne and the beast, both those starting vp, and the o∣ther making directly at him, it had béene impossible for him to haue escaped with life: therefore, euer as he came neere the Piller, he felt himselfe thrust backe hee knewe not by whom, and when he made at the beast, then all the swords were opposed against him: so that at one instant hée was brought to such distresse, that he thought the huge Monster would haue falne vpon him, and so haue nailde him to the earth with the swords: which to auoyde, and loth to be so violently murdred, by vertue of his generous and vncon∣querable
spirit, hee threw himselfe at one leape vppon the necke of the beast, and was so suddenly prepared withall, that with a slicing blow hee cut off the swordes that serued as a defence to his temples, and to his right eye. Now began cheerefull comfort to seaze vpon his soule, which made him send stab after stab directly to ye part, but the beast nothing oppressed with his burden, turnd the left side of his head with mad furie toward him, and there hée saw two other swords newly started foorth, which put the Knight to worse perrill then the other before had doone: nay more, the beast began nowe to take the aduantage of his backe, so that Primaleon was enforced to get away frō him, least with his fall vppon him, hee should be prest to death, yet forgot he not still to ayme at his eye, which the beast well perceiuing, vsed the more circumspection. Notwithstanding, hauing but thrée swords now left to make resistance withall, he got néere to the Piller, and set∣ting his head close to it, put out his hinderpart to be his de∣fence, whereon Primaleon layd innumerable strokes, but all to no purpose: which when hee plainly perceiued, and that he might hold on so God knowes how long, yet reape no benefite by all his endeuour, he purposed now to hazard life, or winne the victorie, and taking another leape, cast himselfe vpon the right shoulder of the beast, & as hee made an offer to fall that way on the ground, to the end he might so get the Knight vnder him, he hapt to turne his head to∣ward him, which opportunitie not neglecting, as being the especiall occasion he had so long striuen for, he stabt him in the right eye, and the huge beast staggering forward and backward, had falne with the Knight vnder him, but that he gaue a sudden leape toward the Piller, and ran against it so mainely with recouering of himselfe, as hee fell quite ouer backward, where lying in some little quandarie for a prettie while, had not the beast béene manfully dispatched before, his life had perrished at that instant. But comming to himselfe againe, hee went to the Pil∣ler, with intent to hewe it downe in peece, but the Ladie
cryed to him that hee should forbeare, because the Piller was to be kept whole and sound: onely hee should bring it into the Pallace, and set it on a goodly base, where a thou∣sand before it had béene set by a King of that Iland, who was a meruailous skilfull Nigromancer, then would en∣sue out of the place a furious mad dog, whose nailes would pierce his Armour as easily as woode, and if ouer him hee could get the victory, then the aduenture was fully accom∣plished. The Knight without more adoo went straite to the Pil∣ler, and taking it vpon his shoulder, it séemed as if hee had béene loden with a Mountaine: notwithstanding, to per∣fect the glorie of so great an enterprise, hee lustily ascended the staires, but before he was halfe way vp, he was met by a man in the likenes of death, who caught hold on the Pil∣ler behind, and held it so strongly, as had hee not béene en∣dued with extraordinarie vallour, hee had béene tumbled o∣uer backward with it. But because hee would conquer all impediments whatsoeuer, hee layd about him cheerefullie with his sword, that the fleshlesse bones flew all in squan∣ders diuers wayes, and beeing so ridde of that disturbance, he went vp the staires, where iust at the doore as he would haue entred, he met with a furious dog of wondrous huge∣nesse, which snarled at his legs, tore and rent his armour, and would not let him set a foote forward: all this beeing doone to make him let fall the Piller, which when he could not compasse, he leapt vpon his shoulder and got vpon the Piller, where standing vpon the head of the Image, hee counterpoizde it in such sort, as himselfe could hold no lon∣ger footing. Then ranne he to the base where the Collomne should be set, where, when all his labour prooued to no purpose, the dogge leapt out at a window of the Pallace, and fell downe broken all in péeces. So set he vp the Piller, and so ended the enchauntment, whereat the Knight receiued such excéeding contentment, as it seemed to him that he had endured not trauaile at all.
The Lady very ioyfully came running to embrace him, but he (not vnmindfull of the former wrong he had offered his owne Mistresse, repulsed her so disdainfully, that shee, who was in hope before to enioy him as her husband, be∣gan to conceiue such hatred against him, as her vehement affection toward him, was now quite forgotten, and chan∣ged to a plotted peece of treason, to haue him murdered by the Tyrant Garnides: for women loath extreamely, where they loued extraordinarily, especially when no more fruite followes their amourous purposes. CHAP. XL. How as the Christian Knights at Tubante were set∣ting forward to the conquest of Niquea, Florendos despayring because hee coulde haue no cure for his lamenes, departed away with a Damosell, and what he vnderstoode by her. FLoraman beeing confirmed Ge∣nerall of the whole Army, which should goe to the conquest of Ni∣quea, prepared all his forces in readines that were to accompa∣nie him thether, appointing eue∣rie Officer his charge and limi∣tation, according as he thought it most conuenient. But Florendos, to whō his impediment of lame∣nes séemed very offensiue, could giue no patience to his di∣sturbed thoughts, because whensoeuer he ran at ye Launce, hee founde his right knée so to faile and deceiue him, that withdrawing himselfe from the others company, as inten∣ding to vnder-goe no charge at all, hee purposed priuately to depart and leaue them. But euen in the heate of his de∣termination,
there suddainly entred the Pallace gate a Damosell Dwarffe, hauing two men Dwarffes with her that were her Bretheren, and dooing a duteous reuerence to all there present, thus shee began. I (a poore and wretched Lady) doo bring hether no ty∣dings of any aduenture to be accomplished, but séek means to be reuenged on the very strangest iniurie, that euer was offered to any Lady. The Knights beholding her to be of most admirable beautie, although in stature so low & little, had the more compassion of her cause: and Oliuanto, béeing the youngest Knight of all, made tender of his seruice on her behalfe: but his father deliuering a discontented coun∣tenaunce thereat, caused him to sit downe againe, and re∣turned this aunswere to the Lady. I take it as most agrée∣able with reason, that my selfe, béeing the onely vnfortu∣nate man in this assembly, should bee your companion in this cause, either that wée may both remaine in equall mi∣sery together, or both be fréed at once of so insupportable a burthen. The other Knights, who had long noted the disconten∣ted state of Florendos, thought it ill-beseeming courtship to crosse and disswade him: whereuppon, the Knight arming himselfe immediatly, tooke leaue of them all, hauing first in secrete aduised Oliuanto, to sette his eye on the admired chiualrie of Palmerin, and Don Florian his brother, where∣by they had attained to such a height of reputation. The Lady not a litle pleased that she had such a Knight of worth in her company, embarqued her selfe with him and his at∣tendants, and sayled thence with such swiftnes, as in short while, they which stayed had lost the sight of thē. And floa∣ting on the billowes of the maine Sea, the Lady imagined in her owne thoughts, that the Knight could not chuse but be very desirous, to know whether she intended to conduct him: whereupon, sitting downe very modestly by him, she began to deliuer her minde in this manner. Sir Knight, that you may vnderstand the iniurious dis∣grace doone to me, first let me tell you, that I am daughter
to a King of India, and that part of the country which is vn∣der his gouernment, is peopled with none other then Dwarffes, such as we are. Long time did peace liue and florish among vs, without any wrong offered to a nation of such weakenes: till another Indian King of great stature, descended (as he vaunts himselfe to be) from that king Po∣rus, which was conquered in battaile by great Alexander, hearing some fame spred abroade of my beautie, made meanes to enioy me in marriage, promising to make mee Queene of his Land. The King my Father, diuining be∣fore hand what might ensue heereon, and perceiuing more perrill therein, then my shallow discretion could reach vn∣to, in silence shewed himselfe vnwilling of such an alli∣ance: yet was hee loth to withstand what-soeuer pleased me, because I (as all women are wont to doo) could not cō∣tent my selfe with one of mine owne condition, but thirst∣ing after change, contrarie kinde and noueltie, thought e∣uery howre a yéere till I was with him. Oh how can mens golden promises beguile weake wo∣men? My poore selfe, crediting too much his liberall pro∣testations, in no place could enioy any quiet of minde, vn∣till the match were thorowly concluded: then sollemnelie hee came (with thirtie of his chéefe attendants) to espouse me, a thing vnlikely in my simple opinion, that with so fewe people he aymed at vsurpation of a kingdome, which hee shadowed with all smooth semblances that might be, and had continually twentie of them about him, armed af∣ter their custome in platted coates of shells. The wedding was sollemnized, and hee so full of humanitie and curtesie, that my Father began to repent his former hard cōecture, and thought it a happy and fortunate marriage, no way to be doubted or feared afterward. After wee had spent some two monthes in feasting and delights, to generall contentment, but especiallie mine, fiue hundred of his people, armed after the same manner as the other were, entred my Fathers kingdome, pretending that they came to waite on him home, because some dissen∣tion
had hapned among his subiects during his absence, and could hardly be pacified but by his presence. Saboco, for so was this Indian King my husband named, when hee saw that he had men sufficient there to kill vs all, (for I was the tallest in stature in all our Country, beeing a cubit and a halfe in height, and euery one feared me in re∣gard of my greatnes) he laboured to haue mee home to his owne kingdome, whether (God knowes) I went with no little willingnes, little suspecting any trecherie towarde me: and this he hastened with the more spéede, because hée had gotten intelligence, that my Father (by these armed troupes growne suspitious of his sonne in law,) had helde conference with a neighbour Nation confining vppon vs, requesting assistance if occasion should vrge it. Our departure was celebrated with all possible ioy and triumphs, and béeing come to his kingdome, I was recei∣ued with exceeding honour, and all maiesticall dignities be∣séeming a Quéene. But eyght daies were not fully past, till I beheld my husbands countenaunce strangely chan∣ged, which pierced my hart with such inward affliction, that in his lookes I might reade the presage of my ruine. Within some fewe dayes following, I sitting alone with him in his Chamber, and doubtfull of some imminent ill fortune, he suddainly caught mee by the haire of the head, and pulling me from my seate, after he had shaken & tugde me as himselfe pleased, he threw me against the grounde, giuing me so many spurnes with his féete, as the breath was readie to flie out of my body. When hee sawe mee in such an affrighted & distracted estate, as hee iudged I durst not denie what soeuer he demaunded, with wordes full of furie and bitter despight, he spake to me in manner follow∣ing. Isota, (for so am I called) looke what I enioyne thee, performe vpon thy life, as thou will auoyde worse torture then I haue yet inflicted on thée. Write to thy Father, af∣ter thine accustomed course of enditing, and tell him thou lyest sickly at the very poynt of death: in regarde whereof
this is thy desire, that accompanied with thy eyght Bre∣thren and foure Sisters, he would come and sée thée before thy death. And because thine owne attending Dwarffe, who (in respect of his credite with the King thy father) shal carry the Letter, may the better assure him by worde of mouth likewise, that he saw thée very sick: when thou hast written and sealed the Letter, thou shalt betake thee to thy bed, feigning and dissembling extreame sicknesse indéed. I perceiuing at what marke Saboco made his leuell, though I was shrewdly shaken, and very sore with stripes, tolde him, that the vnnaturall dealing he had vsed toward mee, might well enough suffise his vnkind inclination, without making mee the meanes to betray mine owne kinred and Father. Then like a mad man, he flew into a more violent fury, excéeding the former crueltie extended to me, and haled me by the hayre along the ground so outragiously, treading on me, and beating me so vnreasonably, as hee brake diuers vaines in my body and armes: and bringing mee in his armes to a great bay window, proffered to cast mee head∣long out thereat, saying: Thus diest thou, if thou yéeld not to what I haue enioyned thee. So much preuailed with me the feare of death, yt I cryed out to him, saying: Deere Lord, saue my life, and I will performe what soeuer you would haue me. Héereuppon, setting me on my feete againe, he shewed himselfe to be highly contented, and with a countenaunce pleasing, and words most perswasiue, he brought mee pen and incke: then on such a leafe as the Indians vse to write, I set downe the purpose of what soeuer he willed mée: and the Letter beeing closed vp, I was conuaied to my bedde, where I needed not to counterfet or dissemble sicknes, his rough vsage had brought mee into extreame sufficiencie, both in bodies debilitie, & affliction of minde. Then bring∣ing the Dwarffe to me, in whom I reposed no meane con∣fidence, I gaue him the Letter, with speeches sutable to my present estate and his appointment, desiring him beside, to
be very earnest with my Father, to delay no time, least I dyed before his comming. The King my Father, beléeuing the Letter, and the messengers testimonie that brought the same, within ten dayes space was come vnto mee, and finding mee in that weake estate, expressed a kinde Fathers true sorrowe for his childe. Saboco dissemblingly entertained him with great honour, till so many dayes were out-worne as his fu∣rie could allow, in which time, diuers Lords that came in company with my Father, by his direction were returned to theyr owne houses, (because my Father would attende my death or recouery) and the Lordes fayled not to report theyr royall vsage by Saboco, which made euery one free from mistrusting his trecherous intention. When hee sawe time fitting with his long expectation, he caused my Father, with sixe of my brothers to be layde hold on, and likewise my foure sisters: but these two, fore∣warned by me at that instant to respect themselues, and la∣bouring to aduertise the other, but coulde not compasse it, whereupon they fledde with all possible spéede, not a little gréeued to leaue theyr Father & brethren in a tyrants cur∣tesie. Saboco, bringing my Father and Bretheren to my beds side, with menaces & torments did enforce them, that my Father should write to the chiefest in his kingdome, to deliuer the Castels of defence, treasuries, and what soeuer else him pleased, to such as Saboco should send to demaund them. Now, because the Indians neuer vsed to contradict anie thing theyr King commaunded, all that the Letter impor∣ted, was forthwith performed, and those Princes who be∣fore were our confederates, by this meanes remained de∣sperate of theyr owne iurisdictions. Newes being brought to Saboco, that euery thing sorted to his owne direction, hée brought my Father and his sixe sonnes into my Chamber, where before my face he first murdered the aged King, and afterward his sonnes without any compassion: then cau∣sing my Sisters to be seuerally brought thether likewise,
he deflowred them one after another in my fight, and my selfe, which had deliuered such a wealthy Kingdome in∣to his hands, he deliuered ouer to ye rascalitie of his Court, to dishonour me first with abhorred luxurie, and afterward with wilde beasts to be torne in peeces. But heauen beholding my intollerable iniuries, excee∣ding the abilitie of any liuing creature to endure, raised me vp one friende among so many monstrous inhumaine vil∣laines, a Gentleman of his Chamber, who séeing mée left to violent prostitution, pittying a Kings daughter shoulde be so brutishly disgraced, considering my beautie pleaded for farre better respect, deuised this shift in hope to doo mée good: that (to auoyde contention who shoulde enioy mee) fortune should be descided by lotterie, and lots beeing cast, his was the honour first to possesse me, which hee (crauing that the eye of day might not looke on an act so detestable) purposed to performe me (as he said) the night ensuing: but indeede he promised me to conuay me thence, and sette me safe with some tryed friende in my Fathers kingdome. But Fortune yet not satis-fied with my so many iniu∣ries, crost vs againe in this determination, for by the way as we rode (with all circumspection wee could deuise) wee met with certaine of Sabocos friendes, returning from ta∣king possession of my fathers Realme in his behalfe. They knowing me, and out-facing mee that I laciuiously fledde from my husband with the Gentleman of his Chamber, who (for my defence) had brought twentie friendes along with him, fell to such discention with vs, that in the fight few on either part were left aliue, and I beeing mounted on a tame Hart, (according as the Queenes vse to ride in those Countries) doubtfull how the issue of the fight would prooue, fled into a wood not farre distant, for I had no rea∣son to expect good of Sabocos followers. As I rode on still, looking where I might most conue∣niently hide my selfe, it was my good happe to meete with these my two brethren, that by my meanes had escaped with safetie of life: they espying me a fare off, & knowing
mée to be their poore distressed Sister, met mee with the greatest ioy that among so many miseries coulde be expres∣sed, especially, by my wretched and despised selfe, who ne∣uer thought (after our parting) to see them any more, and the like oppinion held they of mee, imagining I coulde no way escape with life. They mounting vpon the Hart behind mee, because in such neede no time was to be lost, wee gallopped away a∣maine thorow the wood, and came at length to a certaine Cittie of my Fathers kingdome, where Sabocos people, as yet had taken no possession. There wee assured our selues of some securitie, for when wee had aduertised the people, what had happened to the King and his sonnes, we founde them so loyall, ready, and diligent, that they made liberall offer of theyr owne liues, for preseruation of ours. The newes of our arriuall there, was soone spred tho∣row the kingdome, which was extreamely ruined by Sa∣bocos followers, yet in mightie troopes (abandoning theyr goods and houses) they flocked to vs daily, with mindes re∣solued to maintaine vs in the iustice of our cause. Certaine Lords belonging to Saboco, who held the royall Citty and forces thereto belonging, in short time gaue intelligence to their King heereof: and he falling to his wonted mad fu∣rie, slew thrée of my Sisters vpon report of the newes, but the fourth, beeing the fayrest, he kept still with him as his Concubine, and leuied tenne thousand of his subiects, to get vs againe once more into his possession. All which notwithstanding, our people continued theyr faythfull resolution, desiring rather a thousand times their vndooing and deaths, then that we should fall againe into the Tyrants hands. Yet we, perceiuing our strength to be small, and doubtfull beside least any treason might bee wrought, in conference with ye chiefest of the Cittie where we were: wee thought it most conuenient for vs to escape thence, so might they finde grace and fauour of Saboco, but detayning vs, and fighting for vs, endanger both the Cit∣ties ruine and their owne destruction.
Vpon this consultation, the next night ensuing, disgui∣sing our selues in garments for our purpose, and mounted all three vpon my Hart, wée tooke our leaue, departing whether good fortune might guide vs. The Hart, who na∣turally shunnes the haunt of men, especially those of great stature, because hée had béene bred and made tame among our little race, brought vs safely through whole Armies of our owne Nation, but auoided all resort of greater people. In this manner we escaped safely, and comming to ye Sea∣side, turned off our Hart into a wood adioyning, and hit∣ting by good hap on this little Barke, directed our course thether where we foūd you, vnderstanding that the flower of the Grecian Knights were then in Turkie. This most dishonourable iniure, kindled such a desire in Florendos to reuenge ye Ladies wrongs, that he thought he should neuer get soone enough into India: but after they had sailed diuers dayes together, at last they put to shoare, where shée with her brethren first tooke shipping, and loo∣king awhile about them, they sawe the Hart to come a∣gaine to them out of the wood: which they taking as an argument of some good successe to ensue, mounted on the beastes backe as before they had doone, and so set forward with the Knight on their iourney.
CHAP. XLI. Howe Florendos met with a strange enchaunt∣ment, and afterward ouer-came Saboco, with great perrill of his owne life. SAboco, hauing doone diuers odi∣ous and barbarous trecheries to the Indians, grewe to be so gene∣rally hated of euery one, that for getting an others kingdome in such bloody manner, hee was now in good forwardnes to loose his owne. Wherefore, hearing how the Lady was so secretly de∣parted, to prouide her selfe of some Knight that might pu∣nish his villanies, growing suspitious withall of the Greci∣an Caualierie, whose fame was dispersed quite thorow the world: fearing to enter combate in so vniust a cause, hée went to a Magitian of an hundred and foure-score yeeres old, liuing there in his kingdome with good estéeme and fauour, and held with ye best as a man of great experience, to him he imparted his minde, setting this downe as a full rest and conclusion, that who soeuer should come to combat in the Ladies defence, must by his skill be kept backe and impeached. The olde Wizard, who knewe that no enchauntment could continually endure, but that iustice will preuaile a∣gainst all sorcery whatsoeuer, aduised Saboco to restore the Lady to her kingdome, and flie all occasion of resisting a∣gainst right: but hee, more respecting worldly authoritie and pompe, then the punishment due to deedes of iniustice, with a sterne countenaunce returned him this aunswere. I come not to demaunde any counsell of thée, but helpe, therefore spéedily determine with thy selfe, that least anie
Knight should come to check my hopes, that thou hinder his passage by some powerfull incantations: and because I see thee scant willing to pleasure mée, I will not let thée depart, vntill I see my selfe free from all dread of danger. The old Magitian, séeing himselfe in power of the Ty∣rant, performed such an enchauntment as shall héereafter bée declared, but with small hope of life, because he knewe it by sound experience, that against the progenie of worthie Palmerin, the greatest enchauntment would prooue of no force: thus much as an inducement to that which follow∣eth. Florendos béeing mounted armed vppon his Courser, and the Lady with her Brethren vppon the Hart, which they found by chaunce there attending for them, rode di∣rectly toward the kingdome of Saboco, and scarely had they ridden the length of two leagues, but they beheld before them a farre off, a Mountaine so shining, as if it had beene of the purest siluer: whereat the Lady not a little meruai∣ling, because shée sawe none such in the time of her flight, desired the Knights oppinion thereon, who béeing well ac∣quainted with Magicall illusions, immediatly gessed what it should be, and said. Faire not Lady, Knights haue many times met with such enchauntments, and they are borne to conclude farre greater aduentures. The Lady perceiuing him to make no more reckoning thereof, beganne to forsake her former dismaied counte∣naunce, so rode they on still, vntill they came to the foote of that glittering Mountaine, where Florendos saw about some halfe a miles distance aboue him, a woman, that see∣med of thirtie yeeres in age, and a young mayden of fiftéene whom shee held by the hand, both of them crying out aloude to him for help. The Knight noting them very aduisedlie, thought the one to be Miragarda his wife, & the other Vic∣toria, daughter to Prince Florian, going along together hand in hand. Florendos could no longer containe himselfe, but dis∣mounting from his horse, prepared to climbe vp the moun∣taine
after them: but by reason it was of fine pollished sil∣uer, when hée seemed to haue attained the height of tenne paces, he slid downe againe to the foote where he ascended. Yet still he heard the voyces call vnto him, the one of them hee tooke assuredly to be his wiues: and so standing deui∣sing how he might get vp, hee espied a poore fellowe with such shooes as they vsed in that Country, hauing diuers sharpe poynted stéeles fastned to the soles, which would pierce into stones, or any thing whatsoeuer. Taking holde on that benefit, hee presently prouided himselfe a payre of the like, and so clambred vp much better then before, albeit oftentimes with very great perrill: and cōming néere the place where he heard the voices call him, he felt the moun∣taine to tremble vnder him, and the siluer to breake in pée∣ces, as though it would haue opened to swallow him. The sight heereof made Isotas hart to dismay, fearing least the Knight should there perrish: but Florendos trust∣ing in GOD, who neuer forsakes him that vndertakes a cause of iustice, still held on his way, & comming to a fayre plaine, he could not sée the women whom he hoped to finde there, but there onely stoode a goodly Collomne or Piller, with this inscription grauen vpon it. Heere, death for honour maist thou soone exchange. Florendos reading this bréefe, and scorning all friuolous threats of Magicall charmes, sate downe on the bases that supported the Piller, to rest himselfe awhile, and to try if he could get a sight of the women once more or no. He had not sitten there halfe a quarter of an howre, considering with himselfe what he was to doo, but hee felt himselfe puld backward, as if some mans hand had shot forth of the Pil∣ler and doone it: and starting vp to see the reason thereof, hee beheld that the great Collomne was changed into a Giant of like height in stature, leading two Griffons in a leash, as if he had béene a Hunter. This Giant flew vppon him so fiercelie, as the Knight reputed himselfe but a dead man, but yet to loose nothing of what was in him, hee purposed to sell his life at a verie
déere rate: one while deliuering some assurance of his val∣lour to the Giant, and then seuerally to the Griffons, who much annoyed him with theyr sharpe gryping tallents, yet such was his strength and nimble dexteritie, as hee got frō them still, though they held him nere so strongly. The Gi∣ant followed him so eagerly with his Club, that hée knew not how to shunne his manifold heauie stroakes, til watch∣ing fit aduantage, striking by a blowe meant very dange∣rously at him, he got within him, & gaue him such a wound in the throate, that he fell downe there-with, as if hée had béene slaine. When the Griffons saw the Giant fall, and themselues gotten at libertie out of the leash, they seazed vpon the Knight with such rauenous furie, as if they meant to teare him in péeces. But he, perceiuing himselfe in such extreame perrill, by good hap smote off the right wing of one of them, and wounded the other vpon the legge, as they could no longer keepe aloft vppon him: so the one béeing vnapt to flie, and the other to hold footing vpon the ground, hee was in good hope he had gotten the victory. But suddainly hee heard a great doore open, which séemed to shut vp the mouth of a huge deepe cauerne, and the Griffons entring thereat, hée behld the Giants body likewise taken vp, and carried into the selfe same place. Then setting him downe vppon a great stone there ly∣ing, to marke the end of so strange a meruaile, as he looked round about him, there rushed foorth a cōtrary way a great wilde Boare, with two doggs eagerly pursuing him: the Boare running mainly at the Knight, rent a peece of his Armour off, and hurt him in the side, and one of the dogges catching hold with his foote on his Shield, brake it off frō his necke, by reason the buckled leathers had no strength hold, the other dog caught fast his Sword with his teeth, and hld him from vsing it with wonderfull might. Florendos, seeing himselfe in this desperate estate, per∣force got loose his sword from the dog, but the Boare com∣ming fiercely vpon him againe, so labourd him with his
sharpe clawes and tuskes, that he was constrained to fall downe, and the dog got the Sword againe, tugging it so violently, that the chaine which helde it fastned about his arme, brake in twaine, and so hee was forced to let it goe out of his hand. The Boare trampled vpon him, euen as he pleased, and one of the dogs getting fast hold on his foote, trayled him vp and downe along on the ground whether he listed: in which extremitie, albeit Florendos could haue but little hope of life, yet did not his courage faile him a iote, and getting the Boare by one of his tuskes, by meere strength pluckt it out of his head, which made the beast, see∣ing himselfe disarmed in that part, to bee lesse extreame then before he had béene, & to keepe a little further off from the Knight. Nor stept hee vppon this fortunate aduantage, but fast∣ning holde with his hand vpon one of the dogges legges, it prooued to him very successefull: for the dogge pulling and tugging to get his legge loose, by that meanes pluckt the Knight vp on his feete againe, where looking for somwhat to defend himselfe withall, hee espyed the Giants Club ly∣ing on the ground, which as hee stooped to take vp, the o∣ther dogge got hold vpon his Helmet, and the laces break∣ing through the violent pulling, doo what he could it fell off his head. This needes must be very displeasing to the Knight, to be thus disarmed where was most danger, but hope of vic∣torie still comforted him, and the Giants Club at libertie in his hand, he first layd at one dogge, and then at ye other, with such maine strokes, that they ranne toward the Ca∣uerne so fast as they could. Florendos looking in at ye Caues mouth, espyed there his Sword and Helmet, which he bée∣ing desirous to enioy againe, without more adooe stept in to fetch them, when presently the doore shut, and enclosed him within it. As hee went groping in the darke to finde his way, hee heard great clattering of Armour, as if there were some multitude of armed men, and that hee should bee there en∣forced
to fight with them: héereupon there hapned sudden∣lie a mightie earthquake, which made the Caue to open very wide behind him, where he did discerne twentie ar∣med Knights, all prepared with their naked Swordes to come & assaile him, which hee awaiting when they would doo it, and they not moouing at all, hee perceiued it was but a Magicall phantasma, to terrifie such as were not skilful in the like accidents. Now began he to imagine in his mind, that (since they stirred not any way to molest him) that aduenture was fi∣nished, whereupon, stepping to them, they gaue him each one a light touch with their Swords, and presently vani∣shed he knew not which way: when Florendos saw him∣selfe off from the Mountaine, which séemed Siluer no lon∣ger as it had doone before, going on a little further, he found his Sword and Helmet lying together, as before he had ta∣ken them from the dog: then arming his head, and taking his Sword ready drawne in his hand, hee went about de∣uising with himselfe, where Miragarda & Victoria might be, whom he thought to be the women whom he had seene before. As hée looked about him héere and there, he beheld tenne Knights vpon the plaine, and one who séemed as Lord and commaunder of them, all riding a pace toward the Moun∣taine. This was Saboco, who vnderstanding by the aged Nigromancer, what Florendos did from time to time, and how he proceeded thorow the enchauntment, whē he heard that he had finished the aduenture, in a mad rage hee kild the old Wizard, because he did no better protect him by his skill. Then riding on toward the Mountaine, hee came thether euen as Florendos had newly discended, not know∣ing readily which way to take, but desirous by all meanes he might to shunne the man, who had brought to end so strange an aduenture. Florendos, by reason of his late passed turmoiles, being wearie, went a softly pace, and finding his horse there at the Mountaine foote, and mounting on his backe, rode to
vnderstand what Knights those were, as also to enquire for his Wife and Niece, which very curteously hee enqui∣red of Saboco himselfe. But hée béeing very much trou∣bled in his mind, as willing to auoyde all occasions of dan∣ger, returned him this aunswere. Thou shouldst be some pretty youthfull Ganimede, that demaundest for women a∣mong Knights in Armes. These scornefull words made Florendos check his horse with the bridle, and giue the signall yt hee would ioust with him, which Saboco made no refusall of, thinking him to be a man of no merrite at all. But such was the encounter, as Saboco bare away Florendos his Helmet, because (the laces béeing broken) he could not well fasten it on, and he was run quite thorowe the arme with the others Launce. The other Knights wondred at this valiant course, & made offer of assistance to their Lord: but he, who imagined him selfe not meanely honored, if he could get the vpper hande of such a braue gallant, cryed out to them to stay & not stir, and drawing his sword, he went against Florendos, vsing these words. Thou shouldst be hee that hath finished mine enchauntment, if thou be the man, before wee part, Ile make thée to repent it. Florendos would returne him no aunswere, but deliue∣ring a downe right blow at him, cleft his Shield, & woun∣ded him a little in the breast, and immediatly after in the side. These two hurts comming so together, made Saboco vse all his cunning at the head of Florendos, which beeing vnarmed, he defended with his Shield & his sword thwart ouer it, because hee perceiued Saboco had vallour in him: Neuerthelesse, the stroke giuen was such, as cut quite tho∣row his Sword, pierced part of the Shéelde, and hurt him a little vpon the head. When Florendos felt himselfe wounded, and but halfe a sword left him, he perceiued death apparantly before his eyes, if slothfully hee neglected to make conclusion of the fight: wherefore, giuing the spurres to his horse, hee got hold of Saboco in his armes, & Saboco did the like by him,
so tugging and pulling by very meere strength, they fell beside their horses to the ground, where Saboco falling with his wounded arme against a great stone, brake it in shiuers, by meanes whereof, Florendos got aboue him, and in vnlacing his Helmet, was hurt by him in ye throat. whereon, lifting vp his dagger to haue stabb him, the Pa∣gan humbly entreated for life, which Florendos (beeing much offended at his last hurt) had not graunted, but that he saw the other tenne Knights preparing themselues to reskue their Lorde in such a necessity. And as they were going toward him, Saboco (sore greeued that he had lost the honour of the day,) taking holde on his coate of Maile, said. Ah worthy Knight, I repent nowe my base begging of life, therefore I pray thee kill mee, since thou art the first that hast obscured all my passed glory. Florendos, who was glad of any occasion to pardon him, aunswered. I will ne∣uer kill the man that is desirous of death, as wel to shunne infamie, as to let him beholde the miserie of his owne con∣dition, and what it is for men to doo such things as are vn∣beseeming them. When the Indian saw hée would not kill him, hee disp∣sed himselfe to doo whatsoeuer the Knight pleased, and sub∣mitting to his mercie, they all mounted on horsebacke, ry∣ding to haue their wounds bounde vp and cured: where a while let vs leaue them, and nowe returne to the Knight of Fortune.
CHAP. XLII. How the Knight of Fortune went to combate Garnides, and being taken of him, was by one of his Daughters set at libertie againe. PRimaleon, after he had ouercome Bernuccio, and fully ended the enchauntment, prepared him∣selfe suddenly to depart thence, because he would offer no more iniurie to his Mistresse: and ha∣uing rested him sufficientlie, without returning vp the staires any more, he had fare-well vnto the Lady, who stoode beholding him with very disdainfull lookes. So parting thence with Trasino, Lord of the Castell where hee was first entertay∣ned, and accompanied with his Squire onely, he purposed to goe finde out Garnides: and make him restore the king∣dome to Filenia, béeing the true and rightfull heyre thereof, and comming to a Fountaine, he allighted from his horse, to féede on such prouision as his Squire had brought with him. Héere he felt himselfe so weary with his passed trauaile, as béeing vnable to keepe open his eyes, he layd him downe to sléepe: which aptly fitted the purpose of discontented Fi∣lenia, who hauing conuerted her former affection to vnap∣peased hatred, intended to fore-warne Garnides of the Knights comming, that hee might haue the more time to prouide for himselfe, whereupon shee wrote to him in man∣ner following.
The Letter of Filenia the displeased Princesse, to Garnides, for betraying the Knight of Fortune to him. ¶ The superscription. To her royall and kingly friend, Garnides. WEll may I curse that Traytor Bernuccio, (high, mightie, and most honourable Lord) who so long hath beene the hinderer of my happie fortunes, shutting me vp in his deuillish and damnable enchauntment: wheras els I might haue beene your Queene diuers yeeres since, and wee two haue swayed the Kingdome in peace and tran∣quilitie. But nowe there is come a Knight inuinsible, who hath finished the magicall charmes of Bernuccio, and comes by force of Armes to compell you, (as at his commaund) to deliuer mee my Kingdome, which I had rather ioyntly en∣ioy with you, making you Lord both of it and mee. Hazard not your selfe in a single fight with him, but promise him whatsoeuer he shall demaund of you, to the end you may the better get possession of him, which beeing cunningly com∣passed, you shall afterward heare more from me. Yours▪ Filenia the Princesse. This Letter was conuaied to Garnides, two dayes be∣fore Primaleon could get thether, and not a little welcome to him I warrant yée, but when the Knight came, kéeping off from his Castell a bow shoote and more, hee sent his faithfull Squire to challenge him the fight. Garnides dis∣sembling, as if hée had receiued no former intelligence, ar∣med himselfe onely, and comming into the field, gaue faire salutations to Primaleon, whose errand béeing other mat∣ters
then bare talke onely, some-what roughly thus hee spake to Garnides. I know not Sir, what reason you haue, to vsurpe ano∣thers Kingdome, without any intent (me thinks) of resto∣ring it againe: I am therefore come to tell you, that ey∣ther you must winne it, or die, iustice sits on my sword, in∣tending to restore right, and punish wrong. Garnides pulling off his Gauntlet, shewed his naked hand, which was a signe that he would peaceably conferre with Primaleon, and Primaleon perceiuing it, dreadlesse drew néere, when Garnides returned him this aunswere. With patience (Sir Knight) I hope you will heare me, I haue held the kingdome belonging to Filenia, by such order as the King her Father appointed me, because her brother dyed by a fatall accident, which Bernuccio falsely and ma∣liciously imputing to me, as if that I had either done or pro∣cured it, got hence the Princesse, then but very young, and enchaunted her in a Ship with certaine Lyons, which (it should appeare) you haue by your vallour ended. If then I haue not doone what you déeme expedient, herselfe béeing now at liberty, I will performe what soeuer you woulde haue mée: for by no meanes will I aduenture the combate with you, both in regard of your renowned vertues, as also because no good successe attends on ill actions. These spéeches deliuered with very good lookes & calme∣lie, so preuailed in the minde of Primaleon, that beléeuing faithfully what he said, he went very kindly with him into his Castle, though much against Lord Trasinos mind that was there with him: neuerthelesse, he was very graciously entertained, and the Knight expressed equall curtesie, bee∣ing glad Filenia should haue her kingdom quietly restored, without combatting with a man so ful of affability, as Gar∣nides outwardly declared himselfe to be. The dinner was serued in most sumptuously, and the more to secure him from any imagination of ill meaning, hee sent for a Lady his Daughter of very exquisite beautie, commaunding her to sit right before Primaleon, which so
highly pleased him, séeing her so beautifull and vertuouslie modest withall, as suddainly he became much enamoured of her. Dinner beeing ended, a fayre Violl de gamba was brought her, whereon the Lady so rarely and cunninglie playd, and sung thereto with a voyce so sweet and heauen∣lie, that Primaleon, though his thoughts forbad him to af∣fect her, yet was hee well contented to heare her, & the bet∣ter to hold out conference with her, oft would hee vrge her to play some lessons twise or thrise ouer, and to sing againe diuers of her ditties, especially these two following, wher∣in he very much delighted. ¶ The first Dittie of Laurea, daughter to Garnides, sweetlie sung to her Violl de gamba, in the presence of the Knight of Fortune. In loue there is no greater blisse, Then when desires doe kindly kisse. EYes and thoughts, why doe yee gad From the bounds are you assignde? You that made your Mistresse glad, Will you now peruert her minde? Then my mothers words be true, Greater foes are none then you. In loue there is no greater blisse, Then when desires doe kindly kisse. Eyes, you first did tell my minde, There could come no harme by gazing; That my thoughts too false doth finde, Madly now they runne amazing. Neuer felt I this before, Ile neuer trust a lyer more. In loue there is no greater blisse, Then when desires doe kindly kisse.
Make amends for eithers wrong, Eyes, when as my thoughts doe sterue, Feede your selues with looking long, Lend them hope, they may deserue. So eyther shall prooue others friend: And in peace this warre shall end. In loue there is no greater blisse, Then when desires doe sweetly kisse▪ FINIS. ❀ Her second Dittie to the Knight. LOue of late lay all alone, begging almes at Beauties gate: Hee was aunswerd: There was none, all was gone, he came too late. Yet hee would not from the doore, begging still for pitties sake: But the rich vpon the poore, would but little pitty take. Yet would Loue not so leaue off, hoping pitty still to moue: Then he aunswerd was in scoffe, Beautie had no looke for loue. And shee cast him such a frowne, as did such a fixing proue her: That hee fell in such a swoune, as hee neuer could recouer. While in silence sorrow cryes, in behalfe of his behoue: Curssed be those cruell eyes, that will hide a looke from loue▪ FINIS.
With these, and sundry other well composed Ditties, did the Ladie both please her owne thoughts, & the Knights attention, béeing not onely very skilfull in hand, but as ex∣cellent and delicate in her voyce: and these songs agréeing with her owne conceits, soupled also with some perswasion of the Knights affable nature, that hee was not made of Adamant, but by such allurements might bee drawne to loue, caused her to spende the whole day in those amourous deuises, hoping to enioy him as her husband. At night, Garnides, (lesse aduised then he was aware off) suffered his daughter to come againe into the Hall, when among other passages betweene her and Primaleon, not béeing heard by any, she said thus to him. If any disaster doo happen to you by my Fathers meanes, it shall cost my life before you be iniuried. These words mooued some suspition in the Knight, that doubted no inconuenience or trechery at all, vntil he heard these spéeches from the Lady. Supper was prepared with most royall pompe, which béeing past ouer, and some pret∣tie space spent in Musique, songs, and other pleasing pa∣stimes, Primaleon was afterward conducted to a princelie Chamber, where the King, purposing to be surely posses∣sed of the Knight, stayed holding discourse till he sawe him in bed, and then with a dissembled conge departed. Primaleon, bethinking himselfe of the Ladies wordes, lay awake till past midnight to sée what might ensue: but not hearing the very least noyse or stirring at all, disposed himselfe to rest, and slept so soundly, that the doore was ope∣ned, and fiftie men entred encompassing his bed, before hee knew any way howe to defend himselfe, and there mena∣cing him with their drawne weapons, they tooke him, and bringing him before Garnides, he was threatned with ma∣ny iniurious speeches, and cōmitted thence to a close strong Chamber, where hee purposed to haue him secretely mur∣dered, because he would not loose his kingdome, nor be pu∣nished by the Emperour of Constantinople for so great an of∣fence.
That day, and the two next ensuing, hée spent in consi∣deration, which was the safest way for him to take, & Lau∣rea, for so was his Daughter named, hearing that her Lo∣uer was imprisoned, was ready to die with very conceit of gréefe: but setting a smooth brow vpon her sad sorrow, the best way to labour for him and further her owne loue, shée began to studie how he might be deliuered. So calling one of her seruaunts to her, shée sent her for Trasino the Lord of the Castell, which had accompanied Primaleon thether, but by no meanes would come into the sight of Garnides, by reason he stoode doubtfull of his life. Shée aduised him, that he should suddenly get the horses into a woode néere adioy∣ning, because shée intended to flie thence with the Knight, whom her Father so trecherously had made his prisoner. Afterward, getting vnseene into her Fathers study, shée found a Letter lying open which had lately béene sent him, wherein she read these words: Primaleon, Nephewe to the Emperour of Constantinople. Then her thoughts diuined, that this was the name of the Knight whom shee loued, so taking it with her into her chamber, shee read it at large, and found it was written by Filenia, the Daughter to King Frisoll, who layd the platforme of the treason whereby the Knight was taken. Now began a certaine kinde of iealousie to apprehende her thoughts, afflicting her beyond all sufferable course, suspecting that Filenia affected her Louer, because hee had done so much in her deliuerance, and perhaps through de∣nying her kinde solicitations, shee entred into this displea∣sure against him, which made her now the more earnest in procuring his libertie. Héere-uppon, shée called a trustie Cosin vnto her, who waited on her as her neerest gentlewoman, and promising her rich and stately aduauncement, if things might sort to her expectation, they both became confederate in this en∣terprise. So the night following, they went to a windowe but of slender strength, whereof her Father (it séemed) had no knowledge, yet it abutted vppon his daughters lodging,
and therein was Primaleon enclosed as a prisoner: where knocking softly on the glasse, Primaleon beeing awake, and remembring the promise which Laurea had made him, star∣ted vp to sée who it was that knocked, and stepping vpon a table before the window, layd his head close to the glasse, when the Lady (without holding him in any tedious su∣spence) said. Behold my Lord, now am I as good as my word, heere am I ready to die for your deliuerance, take this Pikaxe, and imploying it as by your strength you very wel can, get forth of this ill harbour, & for the rest leaue mee to prouide. Primaleon, beholding the Lady before him, and so happie a meanes to free him from death which he hourelie expected, was both glad and sad: glad of his owne safetie, but sadde withall, when he considered, that when he was escaped, he could not requite the Lady to her expectation, hazarding her fame and life so prodigally for him. Notwithstanding, bée∣ing bound to the best aduantage in a case so desperate, hee tooke the instrument, and wrested out the yron barres in such sort, as hee made a faire large wide window, & there∣out came foorth. So all thrée together getting vp on the Ca∣stell wall, by the helpe of certaine cordes fastned together, which purposely had béene left there by the King himselfe, if a dangerous hazard should betide him, so to escape away vnséene of any. The Women discended with very great difficultie, and mounted the déepe ditch againe with as much labour, but hauing with safetie passed both, they entred ye wood, where they founde Trasino attending with the horses, and to pre∣uent all losse of time, away they galloped toward his Ca∣stell. Now it came to passe, that Garnides (considering what a great person hee had seazed on) all the next day was so doubtfull in his minde, as hee forgot to giue the key as hee was wont to doe, for carriage of foode to the prisoner: be∣side, Laureas waiting woman, séeing her Chamber shutte that was gone with her Lady, imagined her Mistresse to
be there with her Cosin, about a curious péece of embroide∣rie whereon they wrought, and often vsed to be thereabout so alone by themselues. All things thus continued on till dinner time, when sée∣ing they came not forth, neither made aunswere to such as knockt, vpon a sudden an out-cry was made, which calling the King thether, the doore béeing opened with certaine en∣gines, no body there founde, and the chamber windowe (though cunningly closed againe) yet appearing to be bro∣ken, the Pikaxe there lying, and the barres of yron that had béene wrested out, thē he perceiued, that by his daugh∣ters meanes the Knight was deliuered. Nowe was hee in more extreame suspition then before, not knowing what course was now best to be taken, yet at last hee concluded, that he would not send after them, but thus discoursed with his thoughts: Since Laurea had doone so much for a Knight of such nobilitie, it séemed likely, that doubtlesse hee would accept her as his wife, and so in marriage shée shoulde be highlie aduaunced: then flying from this conceite, by craft hee would make out to catch him if hee coulde, so was hee blinded with feare of loosing his kingdome. Primaleon, with a company thought conuenient, pur∣posed to returne and ambush themselues in the Woode, to take Garnides if hee should stirre out of the Castell: so lea∣uing Laurea safely in the Pallace, he caused Trasino to se∣lect twenty valiant Knights, euery one béeing allied to him in blood, and so they parted thence into a wood, which was foure miles distant from where the King lay. Not fullie two dayes had they there remained, but they tooke a Spy that affirmed to them, that Garnides was not displeased at the Knights losse or his Daughters, but prepared his men to depart from thence. Primaleon fore-thinking what the King shoulde intend thereby, kept it to himselfe, and about some two houres af∣ter, hee beheld an hundred Knights, which deuided them∣selues into thrée parts or companies, because Garnides (not knowing that Primaleon had recouered Trasinos Castell)
imagined, hee had hid himselfe in those woods adioyning, and beeing vnarmed, he might there the easier be once more possessed of him. These three bands of Knights, hauing diuers houndes attending on them, searched all about, dispersing them∣selues so farre each from other, as they coulde heare what was doone by the noyse they made. The Kings companie hearing the hounds at a bay, made hast to the place, where Primaleon couching his Launce against Garnides, who knew not him, pierced quite through his Armour into his shoulder, and cast him quite beside his horse. The King thus wounded and layd on the ground, so a∣mazed all his other followers, that séeing Trasino come vp∣pon them with his twentie Knights, they betooke them∣selues to flight, leauing their King behinde them: who bée∣ing taken by Trasino, and bound vpon his owne horse, they conducted him safely to his Castell, where béeing commit∣ted to his daughters custodie, for care and dressing of the hurt hee had receiued, they would afterward determine what was to be done with him. CHAP. XLIII. Howe Primaleon caused Laurea to be married to Trasino, making him King of the Morning Ilands, & gaue Filenia likewise to Garnides. GArnides, séeing hee should be de∣tained as a prisoner in Trasinos Castell, to whom he had doone in∣numerable iniuries, thought ve∣rily nowe there was no way but death with him: but when hee was committed to his daughters custodie, hée conceiued the better hope of life, importuning her ve∣rie often & earnestlie, to intreate
the Knight for safetie of his life. The Lady, desirous to shielde her Father from death, albeit he had most worthily deserued it, at night first shewed Filenias Letter to Prima∣leon, wherein was set downe all the treason deuised by her against him, and afterward sollicited him very instantlie, to spare the life of the King her Father. This Letter was highly welcommed to Primaleon, as béeing an especiall meanes to further his purpose, and to quittance both the Traytors in theyr due kinde, euen with such chastisement as hee déemed most conuenient: Neuer∣thelesse, hee caused Laurea to dissemble with her Father, that he must suffer death according to his treasons deserts. The next morning, he wrote vnto Filenia, that she shoulde come to Trasinos, where he held Garnides as a Traytour: these newes were nothing pleasing to the Ladie, yet ima∣gining that Primaleon knewe nothing of her plotted tre∣cherie, and hoping to repossesse her Kingdome againe, shée iournied thether, securing herselfe with her Lyons: but they were no sooner out of ye Castel, when presently the Lyons forsooke and left her, in regard shee was become a traytresse, and broken her princely faith, and like enter∣tainement found she there at her arriuall, béeing shutte vp like an offendour in a close Chamber, and vsed as if she had beene a prisoner. Now in the time of ordering these occasions, and the Ladies expectation for repossession of her kingdome, when Garnides was indifferently recouered, Primaleon taking Trasino with him, and Laurea with Filenia, who gaue the other many a scornfull and iealous looke, in regarde of her former loue to the Knight of Fortune: they all entred the Chamber of Garnides, where suddenly he became so full of gréefe to beholde them, in that all his cruell hopes were so crost and ouerthrowne, as his sences failing him, hee fell downe in a swoune. Laurea beeing present at this gréeuous spectacle, moued with naturall compassion of her Father, went & recouered him, preuailing so well with diuersitie of good arguments,
as shée pacified his perturbations in very reasonable man∣ner, when Primaleon taking Garnides by the bosome, and Filenia by the hand, thus spake. Let me now tell yee, that like two Traytors you ought to be dismembred aliue, which the rather I should consent vnto, more for obseruation of iustice then any reuenge of mine owne iniuries: but confessing my selfe in some sorte obliged to Filenia, for her good aduise in the enchaunted Ca∣stell of Bernuccio, makes me the more willing to saue her life, and the debt I confesse as due to Laurea, for so kind de∣liuering me from imprisonment, commaunds that I like∣wise pardon her Fathers life. Neuerthelesse, because nei∣ther of the trecheries may passe without some punishment, this is the sentence that I impose on Garnides: heere doe I disgrade him of his title and kingdome, because hee neuer held possession thereof by any iust claime or right, and the like award set I downe for Filenia, for in practising to de∣stroy his life, who with no meane perrill thereof laboured to regaine it for her, shee hath made herselfe vtterly vnwor∣thy of any such dignitie. But because in her Letter (which he then tooke foorth and openly read) shee hath elected Gar∣nides to be her husband, shée shall haue her desire, and both of them enioy the Castell which was enchaunted by Ber∣nuccio, paying yéerely homage to the King of the Morning Ilands. Filenia was hardly contented with this deuision, but sée∣ing how her liues perrill stoode on vrging the contrarie, she willingly condiscended: the like did Garnides, who thought his desperate aduenture had made a happy returne, in gai∣ning faire Filenia whom he déerely loued. Héereupon, they were immediatly espoused together, and sent to the Castell which he had assigned them, all which beeing finished, hée called Laurea to him, saying: I will neuer deny, but that my life is a due debter to you in any occurrences whatsoe∣uer, but because I cannot satis-fie your harts desire, which (in plainer termes) is to be your husband, and a reason of importance doth directly stand against it, namely, my boun∣den
and dutiful seruice to a Lady long since engaged, wher∣in, though hetherto my deserts haue beene slender, yet since my fortune is no better, I must rest content there-with. Notwithstanding, because I would acknowledge in part, though vtterly vnable to come néere your merrit, my for∣ward readines to doe you seruice, let me intreat you to ac∣cept a person more worthy then my selfe, the noble Coun∣tie Trasino, discended of the royall progenie, and for his loyall fayth kept to King Frisoll his Lorde, farre better be∣seeming you then any other: with him shall you enioy the faire kingdome of the Morning Ilands, and holde me in duti∣ous seruice euer as your Knight, so farre as I offende not my gracious Lady and Mistresse. Laurea, who little expected such an aunswere, with the teares in her eyes, said. My Lorde, you haue such power and soueraigntie ouer mee, as not daring to deny whatsoe∣uer you commaunde, I rest satis-fied with your appoynt∣ment: and albeit your promise gaue me greater hope, I will burie all in silence. For I know by experience of my owne loues fire, that you cannot easily giue ouer affection, where the chaine of especiall liking hath intirely lincked you: keepe this then in memory, that héereafter I may boldly call you my Knight. Primaleon was exceedingly contented, hearing the La∣die so kindlie to accept his offer, because he should now wel reward the Countie Trasino, (to whom as yet hee had not made this knowne) for all the fauour and good wil he had found by him: and hauing Garnides his Ring, wherby all the Forts should bee surrendred vp, they leuied two thou∣sand men, with whom they went from Iland to Iland, ha∣uing Laurea likewise in their company, the people dooing great honours to her, because there was neither Citty, nor Castell, but helde firme remembrance of some benefite or other, which by meanes of her intercessions they had be∣fore receiued. Hauing thus the full state in their owne power, and bée∣ing entred into the cheefe royall Citty, ye night they lodged
in the Pallace, where Primaleon lying that night with the Countie Trasino, none béeing neere but themselues alone, he thus spake. I haue daily labored in my thoughts, which way to requite so honourable loue and kindnes, as to me a poore vnknowne Knight you haue extended: wherein yet at length the heauens haue fauoured mee, and though it reach not to your woorthy deseruings, yet accept it as an earnest of a greater good will. You sée how Madame Lau∣rea is beloued of these people, who notwithstanding can ne∣uer rule them well without a husband, therefore will I be∣stow her on you in marriage, and the kingdome likewise with her as her dowrie. Trasino hearing such an offer made him, whereof hee neuer had hope or expectation, suddenly fell on his knee, and kissing his hand, said: Nowe is it seene for an euident truth, that the famous race of Palmerin d'Oliua, is not on∣ly powerfull in gaining kingdoms, but euen as prompt in giuing them: it were dishonour in mee to refuse the gyft, comming from so royall a hand, enioying thereby so fayre a Lady, and a kingdome so wealthy and populous. Primaleon béeing well pleased with this aunswere, the next morning wrought so with Laurea, that shee caused to assemble there many armed Knights, those in whose trust shée might best relye, least the people should enter into any commotion, and in two dayes they had gathered in one cō∣panie aboue two thousand, who ioyning with them belong∣ing to Trasino, cast themselues in a Ring about a Scaffold erected before the Pallace, whereon Primaleon soone after shewed himselfe, hauing the Ladie Laurea and Trasino in his company, with more then twenty of the chiefest Lords in the kingdome, who were well contented to haue such a King, beeing familiarly acquainted with his fayth and ho∣nourable disposition, as also that he was descended of the progenie royall. The people there in this manner assembled, and Prima∣leon commaunding silence by a signe made with his hand, he thus began. You haue already found by very good proofe,
what difference is betwéene a good King & a Tyrant, and albeit I could acquaint yée with the benefits ensuing by the one, and sad desasters attending on the other, yet doo I not now hold it so necessary, because your owne last tryal of ey∣ther is sufficient. It is enough for mee to tell yée, that the Tyrant is chased hence, and shée to whom the Kingdome in right appertained, turning Traytresse to her owne iust ti∣tle, and her defenders damage, stands likewise depriued of her prerogatiue: and that you néede make no doubt of File∣nias treason, héere is the Letter written to Garnides vnder her owne hand, which whosoeuer shall make any scrupu∣lous question of, at any time the sight thereof shall more at large resolue him. Nowe, in regard I would not leaue you subiected to anie other Kingdoms emperie, though partly by desert, but most of all by iustice, the disposing of this estate consisteth in mee: I commit both it and you to the noble Countie Trasi∣no, whom you all know to be a man of especiall merrit, fa∣uoured and estéemed by this Lady, wel loued of you all, and these doo I appoynt to be your King and Quéene. No sooner had he thus spoken, but the Crowne of leaues and flowers (vsed of long antiquitie in those part) was brought vnto him, where-with hauing first dignified the King, he afterward placed it on the Lady Laureas head: to the no little contentment of all the people, right glad to sée themselues so freed from the Tyrant, and likely now to en∣ioy much peace and tranquilitie, so with loud shoutes they celebrated the names of their King and Quéene. This was as pleasing to Primaleon, because his minde ranne still on the aduenture of Fortune, which Dorina was to conduct him vnto: wherefore, he would needs haue them immediatly married, and passing on royally to the cheefe Church, after a solemne Masse sung by an Arch-bishoppe of very holy life, the marriage was performed, with greater content of the King then the Quéene, who with much bet∣ter will would haue had Primaleon. But after better consi∣deration, that she could not enioy him whom she so deerelie
affected, Trasino, béeing the very noblest and most estéemed Knight of the Kingdome, she beganne to respect him with a more regardfull eye, and in their returne backe to the Pal∣lace, she shewed him such gracious and delightsome lookes, that Trasino (doubtfull before of her grace and fauour, be∣holding an alteration so strange yet pleasing) accounted his happines beyond comparison. The feasting was sollemnly performed at the expence of the treasure royall, euen that which Garnides had (with mighty taxations) gotten toge∣ther: for hee beeing still doubtfull what should befall him, made prouision of treasure to carry with him when neede shold require, euermore thinking to escape thence by flight, but it sorted not to his expectation. The feast continued for eyght dayes together, and lon∣ger the King would haue had it in the honour of Primaleon, but he whose minde was labouring else where, ful of heate and hastie expectation, that he might the sooner sée his Vic∣toria, first made the King and Queene swear to execute iu∣stice, and that Garnides nor Filenia should raise any more commotions, but iustly and truly performe theyr homage, likewise, all the people vowing to doo their loyall allege∣ance, he prepared to depart on his iourney. Many meanes were made for his longer detayning, yet all would not serue to hinder his determination: but ye next morning following, taking the King by the hand, and kis∣sing the Quéenes fore-head, as the custome there is, shee shewed herselfe much displeased for his departure: Which she perceiuing the King to noate, turned backe to him with these speeches. Be not suspitious my Lorde, if at the departure of thys Knight, (whom indeede I once loued farre better then you) I expresse some outward discōtentment, because I thought to haue enioyed him as my husband: but my fortune there∣in failing me, by reason of his loue else where addicted, giue me leaue a while to grow forgetful of him, which by little and little I shall easily attaine vnto, & then let this be your setled perswasion, that I shall affect you as intirely, as I do∣ted
on him fondly. These words were deliuered with such gesture and maiestie, that the King both admired and high∣ly commended her: so, after some small discourse concer∣ning state affaires, he descended with Primaleon downe the stayres, where after an honourable kinde embracing, hee mounted on horsebacke, and so departed. CHAP. LXIIII. Of that which Florendos did with Saboco & Isota, and how after he had subdued a Serpent, hee retur∣ned to Tubante, euen as the Christian Army was pre∣paring to depart. FLorendos and Saboco had theyr wounds well looked vnto, and the danger of life on neither side now to be doubted, whereuppon, Isota was sent for and her Bro∣ther, who came together, yet ve∣rie fearefully, as timerous of Sa∣bocos cruell handling: but when they came to the chamber where they both lay wounded, Saboco shewed such affable signes of loue and kindnes, as the La∣die grewe into good securitie of her selfe, hearing that hee would fulfill what-soeuer was enioyned him, and restore the Kingdom of Dwarffes to her elder brother named Pig∣meo, the other to haue honourable respect beside. While thus they attended theyr hurts recouery, Floren∣dos was very desirous to know, whether any Ladies were hidden in the Mountaine or no, because that two had there appeared to him, whom he thought to be his wife Miragar∣da and the young Lady Victoria: but béeing resolued by the Lords there present, that all those illusions were doone by the Magicall wizzard, he forbare to question any further in the matter.
Before ten dayes were fully passed, by good care and dil∣ligence they were thorowly recouered, then were diuers Chariots of Ladies prepared, onely to accompany and at∣tend on Isota: so rode they honourably to the chiefe Citty of the Kingdome, where their feasting and entertainement was beyond comparison, and Florendos (as a man going beyond all other in famous deserts) welcommed, and very honourably respected. Thence departed they to the King∣dome of the Dwarffes, where Pigmeo was created King, and there they gaue themselues to all kind of pleasures, but most of all they delighted in hunting: wherein Florendos still bore the chiefest praise, for killing the fiercest and wil∣dest beasts. One day among the rest, when they were preparing to goe to the woods, Pigmeo ordained that euery man should arme himselfe, because there liued a Serpent so bloody and cruell, as of whole multitudes that had gone to encounter him, not one could be known to returne back againe. That morning, Florendos, being desirous to deliuer the Country of such a deuouring Monster, sent for an yron maule that Saboco had, with certaine pykes extended out at the clubbe end, about some foure yards long, and making it fast at his saddle pommell, on he rode with them towardes the place: huge numbers of people following very ioyfully, not a little proude of hauing the Knight in their company, by whose va∣lour they had good hope to be fréed from the Serpent. Dis∣persing themselues seuerally thorow the woods, it was Pigmeos hap to meete first with the Serpent, from whom he prepared himselfe spéedily to flie, for he was mounted on the Hart he had vsed to ride on: but by ouer-much hast hee fell beside his beast, and so the Serpent got him vp in his mouth, till perceiuing he was a man of so little stature, as scorning a pray of no bigger moment, hee threw him from him againe, so that what with feare and force of the fall, he lay still as quite bereft of sence, beeing hardly able to reco∣uer him selfe againe. When the Dwarffes at first sawe theyr King in the Serpents mouth, they gaue such a lamen∣table
out-cry, that Florendos and the rest presently gallop∣ped thether: where the Serpent came very proudly against them, all the Indians not daring abide to behold him, but onely Saboco and a Cosin of his, who were gotten vp into a high standing, to sée how Florendos should speed against the Serpent. Hee, hauing the fore-named Maule in his hand, and the Serpent making furiously at him, scaped the Monsters first proffer, and wounded him in the left wing, striking off di∣uers of his hard scailes: whereat the Serpent grew so an∣gry, that suddainly fetching his taile about, he got ye Knight fast by the Helmet there-with, & making him turne round giddily three times together, smit him down at last against a great stone on the Mountaines side, and such was the vn∣happines of the stroke, that hee fell downe backward, and the Serpent (as vaunting of already gotten victory) passed quite ouer him, thinking (as others had sped before) that he had giuen him his latest payment. But the Knight, nimbly recouering footing againe, nothing at all dismayed with the stroke he had receiued, made out into a more spacious part of the wood, where by his actiue dexteritie, he might the bet∣ter helpe himselfe. The Serpent perceiuing his labour not ended, followed him with exceeding rage and furie, where the Knight so plyed him with the poynted Maule, that strewing ye ground plentifully with his hard scailes, he gaue him diuers little hurts and wounds, albeit the Monster helde out so against him, that he would not permit him the very least breathing while. At length, by ouer-much labour & expence of blood, Florendos perceiued the Monster to waxe weary, whereon, hee aduaunced himselfe the boldlier before him, and gaue him a very shrewde wound in the face: whereat he shewed himselfe so enraged, that whéeling againe his long taile a∣bout, he got the Knight fast by the midst, and throwing him on his backe betwixt his winges, ranne so away with him. Saboco béeing much grieued to behold him in this danger, prepared to follow him, but it auailed nothing, for the Ser∣pent
ranne excéeding swiftly, leaping ouer bushes, rocks and hillockes, where a horse had not the power to pursue. Florendos, feeling no other discommoditie, but that hee was thus borne from the ground, after he had with much a∣doe vnwound himselfe out of the Serpents tayle, leapt va∣liantly on his feete, and gaue ye Monster such a stroke with his Maule on the head, as, though it slaunted some-what a∣side, yet it smitte him to the grounde: and thinking then to steppe vpon him and dispatch him, the Maule fell out of his hand so neere the Monster, that hee coulde not recouer it without manifest perrill, which made him then to vse the benefite of his sword: and comming therewith against the Serpent, he ound him risen vp so madde and furious, as had not the Knight stood well vppon his guard, his case had then béene very desperate: For the Monster (making no reckoning at all of his sword) caught him with his teeth a∣bout the head, and much did the goodnesse of his Helmet steede him, for else he had vndoubtedly bitten his head quite off. Florendos féeling this gripe to be (in a maner) mortall, florished about with his sword he could not tell how, but by good hap it lighted vpon the Monsters throate, where the skinne was some-what tender & voyde of scailes, and pas∣sing quite thorow it, they both fell downe together, the one starke dead, the other in a traunce or swoune. Saboco, who with his Cosin had followed the poysoning smoulder of the Serpent, came at the instant, when a farre off hee sawe the Monster fall, but not séeing Florendos, his hart became so full of griefe, that mending his pace with greater hast, he came and found him lying like a man dead. Taking off his Helmet, and perceiuing that hee breathed not, he gaue forth many dolorous complaints: whereat his Cosin breaking forth into a laughter, sayd. Now doost thou euidently prooue thy selfe to be a foole, in bemoaning his death, that depriued thee of all thy former honor: me thinks thou shouldest rather draw forth thy weapon, and smite off his head, then abuse time thus with childish lamentations: if I were as thou, I would do it immediatly. And so would
I, (said Saboco) if I were as thou art, a man of no honour nor respect at all: canst thou imagine it any way resonable, that I should vanquish him by villanie, who ouercame mée by manly valour? and once more loose my good name by breach of fayth, in murdring an honourable man alreadie murdred? During these spéeches, Florendos recouered, and Isota with the other Ladies were likewise assembled, whence they parted with Florendos in a royall Litter to the Cittie, where Isota vsed many comfortable spéeches to him, such as indeede did well content him: and Saboco caused the Ser∣pent to be brought thether, and the skinne to be taken off, that Florendos might sende it to Constantinople, as a monu∣ment of his perpetuall honour, and the body beeing deuided into seuerall parts, was hanged vp in diuers especiall pla∣ces of the Cittie. Isota, who till this time was very doubtfull, least her husband should faile in his promises to Florendos, when she saw, with how much loue hee shewed the care of the o∣thers life and honour, she cast off all suspition, and the day following they had another kind of disporting, wherat Flo∣rendos (being not wounded ouer-dangerously) was likewise present, the Dwarffes shewing all the delights they could deuise after their manner. Some few dayes being spent in these contentments, a booke was strangely brought into the Court, by a Nephew to the olde Nigromancer yt was slaine by Saboco, & making a present therof to Florendos, told him that he must not read therein, vnlesse vpon some important occasion, whereof hee could not otherwise resolue himselfe. Now Florendos, whose lamenes was not a little displeasing to him, & being minded neuer to sée Christendom again, vn∣til he found some meanes for his recouery, would needs sée how he should gaine the happines to become wel again, and finding his own name in the Booke, read vnder it written these words. Knight, all thy searching is in vaine, For (who most ought) shall ease thy paine.
This misterie wrought so in the minde of Florendos, that presently hee concluded on his departing, and causing the Serpents skinne to be stuffed full of strawe, commaunded that it should be brought to the Sea side, where (with teares trickling downe the chéekes of euery one present) he went aboorde a man of warre belonging to Saboco, and hoysed saile, hauing the Dragon so stuft, lying on the prow of the Shippe, which strooke terrour in all they met by Sea, for the dead shape shewed as fearefull, as if hee had béene still lyuing, so sayled they on with a prosperous gale of winde. Now the wise Aliarte, who had a long time kept him selfe in silence, vntill a crosse encounter of the starres should be past ouer, which he found very contrary to his great know∣ledge, and had made him varie in diuers rules and princi∣ples: would once more yet haue an eye to the Christians safety, and reuoluing ouer both precedent and the present occasions, & finding the newes were already come to Con∣stantinople, how Florendos (in a desperate humour) was gone to India, since when no other tidings could be heard of him, which made the Emperour and all the whole Court very malecontent, but most of all Miragarda was depriued of all comfort, hearing no newes of her sonne Primaleon, and now likewise all hope lost of euer séeing her husband again, the teares streaming aboundantly downe her faire chéeks, she could doo nothing but swéetly embrace her yong daugh∣ter Concordia, speaking wordes of extraordinarie passion and affection to her, whereat all the hearers were much mo∣ued to compassionate her case. The wizzard perceyuing them in this confused alterati∣on, purposed to send the Serpent to the Grecian Court, with∣out imparting any knowledge thereof to Florendos, who intended to bring it thether in manner of triumph: and fra∣ming a Letter, which euery one that knewe the writing of Florendos, should absolutely rest perswaded to be by his owne hand done, then snatching the Serpent from off the Shippe, without perceauing by whom it was taken thence, and tying the Letter fast about the necke thereof, he caused
to be carried thorowe the ayre in such sort, that it appeared to euery eye as if it had flowne. I leaue to your conceites, to thinke with what admira∣tion it was séene to passe ouer the walls of Constantinople, and what amazement the people were in, beholding the winges to flap together, in all respects as if it had béene ly∣uing, iudge then the feare and dismay that was suddainly among them. And more to augment this terrour, they be∣held it to direct his full course to the steppes ascending the Pallace, where it squatted downe with an vnexpressable noise, which made many Knights come foorth to vnderstand the occasion, where (at first sight) they were resolued that it wanted life, so, some returning to aduertise the Emperour thereof, he came immediatly thether, accompanied with the young Emperour Trineus, (whom as yet he held in kind association in his Court, till certaine disordered commoti∣ons in Allemaigne were qualified) and all the faire young Queenes and Princesses: where beholding how strange an accident had happened, the Letter was first taken off that hung at the Serpents neck, and being commaunded to be publiquely read, the sum thereof in briefe thus followeth. The Letter sent from the wise Aliarte, as if it had come from the royall Florendos. To the high and mighty Emperour Primaleon, at Constantinople, &c. SAcred Maiestie, and you most gracious endeared Em∣presse, with her that is my lyfes and loues intirest compa∣nion, receaue in your royall acceptance this infallible in∣telligence, that in my going to Tubante, I was otherwise drawne to a part of India, where in the seruice of an iniuried Lady, I haue accomplished a very important aduenture of a
siluer mountaine: and afterward preuailing in fight against this Serpent, as a witnesse of my labour. I send you his case. But because I am presently to prepare for Tubante, let me en∣treate you to expect thence, more certaine and assured tidings of me. Yours onely, Florendos. The Emperour, who well knewe his sonne to be more ready, in vnder-going the very greatest enterprises, then publique report or talke to be made of them: gaue no cre∣dite to this Letter, but silently sate quiet. Miragarda, who expected some other intelligence of her husband, taking the Letter into her owne hand, read it to her selfe very conside∣rately, which being done, she spake thus openly. Florendos my husband is either dead, or in such estate that he cannot write, and this Letter is sent but onely to comfort vs in the case, else why should this dead Serpent be brought hether, no one being able to render a reason for it? thus was the Court in a farre greater confusion then before. Trineus séeing that there was now in the Court none of the young Knights, that might haue vndertaken to cleare this doubt, crauing licence of the Emperour, went present∣lie and armed him selfe, because he was enamoured of faire Argentina the Infant of Spaine, and returning againe to them, after he had taken farewell of all the other Princes∣ses and Ladies, he came and fell on his knee before her, and requesting her hand to kisse, spake in this manner. Ma∣dame, my spéeches to you must be after the blunt Allmaigne fashion, such is your beauty, as it giues mee courage, to maintaine against any that dare denie it, that you are the very fairest Lady this day liuing, and worthy the seruice of all other whatsoeuer: grace me then with so much fauour, that I may entitle my selfe by the name of your Knight, on∣lie to add luster to the first enterprise that I shall vnder∣take, wherein I doubt not, but being armed with your gra∣cious regard, I shall gaine immortall renowne, all which
you may iustly claime as your owne, because it was at∣chieued vnder the vertue of your name. The Infant, in the déepe reach of her owne discretion, perceauing the young Emperour to eye her with affectio∣nate regarding, began to dispose her thoughts to the like, as well in respect of his faire and gentle demeanour, as also to reach the height of an Empresse: for women are ambiti∣ous by nature, and often times doo striue to out-goe others in beauty and rich ornaments, rather then in discréete and vertuous reputation, but returning to Argentina, thus shee replied. My Lord Trineus, vnwoorthy is my beauty, to be re∣spected, and by so great a personage as your selfe, but séeing you please to confesse it of such estéeme, as it merrits in your eye an affectionate opinion, and in your selfe more then any other: I were no Lady of ciuill demeanour, if I should not accept you as my Knight, whereof that you may haue the more chearefull assurance (taking a Diamond that hung bound in her tresses, with foure great pearles thereto pen∣dant) I giue you this iewell. But thus farre vnderstand me, that I will not endanger any iote of mine honour, by whatsoeuer courtesie I vse to you at this instant: for all my fortune remaines in the hands of the Emperour Primaleon, and the sacred maiestie of the King my Father. This her most honest and courteous behauiour, was generally com∣mended, and the other Ladyes, who had expressed little kindnesse to their amourous seruants, disposed them selues to a more gentle humour after this, especially respecting the care of their honours. Trineus departed highly pleased, and embarqued him selfe with a thousand followers, men ready to aduenture on any occasion: but leaue we him to his iourney, and returne to Florendos, who after he saw the Serpent was caried a∣way, grewe full of doubtfull suspitions, but not knowing what to think of it, followed his voyage, and arriued soone after in the port at Tubante.
CHAP. XLV. How the Christian Armie departed from Tubante, and what happened to them by the way, in their go∣ing toward the Kingdome of Niquea. DIrdan, otherwise named Eduar∣dan, (for the loue which Maiortes the graund Cane alwayes bare to the Prince Don Edward,) af∣ter hee fled from Tubante, went first of all to his Kingdome of Pa∣raz, where (in the place of his fa∣ther) hee was created the great Cane, a title onely belonging to those Kings, and setting the state in firme condition, hee mustered together fiftéene thousand men, and had likewise a younger brother of his with him, named Cagnino. With these men he ariued in the Realme of Niquea, where by Tirrena (who had the generall fauour of the people) he was receaued into the Citty: which kind∣nesse was the sooner affoorded him, because he had renoun∣ced his Christian faith, a Religion which in all those parts was greatly abhorred. So Dirdan espousing the Lady, and ruling ouer the whole state, enioyed the same peaceably for two moneths space, albeit he daily expected warre, for resistance whereof, hee made all prouision possible. And that he might haue some other good Knights in his company, hee wrote to a Gyant called Palurdan, who was King of Turben and his Cosen, sonne to Brondione the Giant, that was brother to his fa∣ther Maiortes: entreating him to come in his assistance, re∣membring him beside, what slauerie his kindred had endu∣red by the Grecian Empire, and that now in recompence of their blood shed, as also his owne father slaine in their ser∣uice, the very chéefest of the Empires Caualierie was com∣ming
vpon him, to depriue him of a Kingdome, which not onely his good fortune, but likewise the loue of a beautifull Lady had enriched him withall. Further aduertisements he thereto annexed, as to be for∣ward in his ayde to his vttermost, least him selfe should chaunce to repent it, for if they ouercame him, meaning him selfe, yet could they not but account him also as their enemie, because he stoode as a neuter, and leaned to neither side in assistance: which yet would returne him but slender aduantage, because the Christians being naturally foes to Pagans, if they should once be possest of Paraz, they would hardly be drawne to pardon Turben. Palurdan, who was further entred into yéeres then Dir∣dan, considered with him selfe iudicially on this motion: but the true kindnesse of the Christians, more preuailing with him then the alliance of Dirdan, made him resolue to send him no ayde at all. Notwithstanding, by reason hee kept the Letter in no greater secrecie, two stearne and moo∣die Giants his sonnes, the one named Lanfranco, the other Broco, all on fire in their thoughts till they were séene in armes: whether their father would or no, prouided them selues of ten thousand Souldiours, & all in hast they would goe ayde their Vnckle. But first they aduertised a bastard sonne of the Giant Gataru, called Gargante, who tooke pos∣session of his fathers Signeuries, after that Cardigea was married to Almaroll. Hee and three thousand of his follo∣wers, ioyned with them, and with this strength they came to Niquea, where Dirdan very gladly entertained them, not doubting but by the valour of these thrée Giants, boldly to withstand the Christian forces. Neuerthelesse, remembring that there was Palmerin, Florian, Florendos, and Dramusiande, of especiall courage among the other braue gallants, hee thought it requisite to be fore-guarded by a strong enchauntment, wherein if they found some intricate labour, he might finish his hopes with the lesse contention. Héere-vpon, bethinking him selfe of Drusa Velonna, (the same Enchauntresse that set the ma∣gicall
spells, for carrying away the Princesse Leonard, where Florian (notwithstanding the wise Aliarts helpe) sweated sufficiently ere he could get her thence, as is decla∣red in the second part of this History:) he wrought such meanes, as he preuailed for her comming to Niquea. Now, because it was a fruitlesse labour to offer her ri∣ches or treasure, in regard shée made no reckoning thereof, as beeing able by her Arte to store herselfe sufficiently when she pleased, he promised her what she much more estéemed, to wit, to keepe her in his Court secure from all perrill, so that shee would prouide him of such an enchauntment, as should hinder those so farre-famed Knights from dooing him iniury. Drusa, béeing a deadly enemy to the Christians, an∣swered, that she would fit his turne in such manner, as him selfe should rest contented therewith: but shee knew very well, that all opposed resistances whatsoeuer, coulde not keepe the Grecian Knights from successe in the end. Dyrdan replyed, that hee would rest satis-fied with her vtmost imployment of Arte: so without any more wordes, Drusa departed thence, and in the mid-way betweene Tu∣bante and Niquea, she wrought the strangest enchauntment that euer was heard of. The Christian forces, that daily thirsted after the warre at Niquea, séeing Florendos returned to them againe, be∣came so desirous of their departure, as no other voice could be heard, but away to Niquea. Wherefore Floraman com∣maunded, that the very next ensuing morning, the Armie should set forward, and leauing Dragonalte King of Nauara to gouerne and take charge of the Cittie with Targiana, they mustered in open field thirtie thousand in Armes toge∣ther, and so trauailed on sixe dayes in martiall equipage, without any occasion worthy rehearsall. Vpon the seauenth day, they might discerne a farre off, a thing like a greene Curtaine, séeming to be two hundred paces in length, and thrée hundred in height, which beganne in such sort to raise and spread it selfe, as the light of the Sun could not be per∣ceiued, by reason of the obscuritie this Curtaine made.
Oliuanto, who stroue to make himselfe famous, by any aduenturous attempt whatsoeuer, imagined (as well he might) that this would proue to be some strange enchaunt∣ment: whereupon, with-drawing aside on the left hand of the Armie, hee aduaunced himselfe forward beyond all the rest, and then he might discerne it like the shape of a Tent, wherof none of the Christian Knights but himselfe (as yet) had any such sight. When he had strayed from the rest about a bowe-shoote, he gaue his horse the spurres, & riding all night very hard, the next day by noone hee came neere to the Tent, where beholding nothing but certaine poynts of Launces, which were thrust thorow a doore that séemed fast shut, hee would needes yet venture so neere to ye Tent, that he might heare (as to him it seemed) the rustling of men at Armes beyond it some small distance. Héereupon he stoode still, and called out aloude, but neither seeing any body, nor hearing anie aunswere returned, hee could no longer containe himselfe, but coueting to end this aduenture before the other Knights arriuall, he knocked hard at the doore, which presently hée beheld to open, and with-draw the Launces backe in such sort, that his entrance was very easily admitted. No sooner had he stept into the Tent, but he felt himselfe changed by force of the enchauntment, and nothing else could enter into his thoughts, but that the onely reason of his cōming thether, was to kéepe the passage there, against all commers, and to try theyr valour by iousting, whatsoe∣uer they were. And such indéed was the intent of Velonna, to prooue if these Knights (whom none els could ouercome) would héere worke the wrong one of another: and God knowes how earnestly Oliuanto thirsted, yea, and thought euery howre a long yeere, till he might méete with any one, whose valiant courage durst offer to deale with him in this action. The next day following, as hée stood armed in the doore of the Tent, hée might a farre off, easily behold the Armies Launces, before whom (some pretty distaunce) brauely
managing his horse, came Berolde, King of Spayne, & draw∣ing néere the Tent, he knewe Oliuanto, by the Lyon in his naturall collour figured on his Shéeld, wherby he was cal∣led the Knight of the Lyon: but hee was nowe growne for∣getfull of his friend, such was the nature of the enchaunt∣ment, to bereaue a man quite of his former knowledge, e∣specially, such as came the way from Tubante. Berolde, riding toward him with his Launce in his hand, cast it from him on the ground, as thinking it no curtesie to violence his friend: but Oliuanto drewe his sworde vpon him, as intending to kill him except he yéelded, which in∣deede the other in méere kindnesse did, and was no sooner entred the doore with him, but he became altered in minde like to Oliuanto, striuing to be the first, that should defende the Tent against the Christian Armie. Forth came hee a∣gaine gallantly, as the other before had doone, and meeting Pompides at the Launces ful carriere, both were dismoun∣ted, and Pompides beeing offended at this iniurie, drewe forth his sword, and beganne to lay about him so furiously, that Berolde was quickly drawne backe by the enchaunt∣ment, wherein the death of any Knight was not purposed: for such incantations haue not the power to kill any man, but onely to astonish, and take them prysoners, as was the Sorceresse drift in this: so Pompides séeing the other to re∣tire so fast, would needes pursue him into the Tent, & there became as forward as the other, to maintaine the ioust for defence thereof. By this time the whole Army was there arriued, which (by reason of the hastie approche of the night) lodged them∣selues very neere to the place enchaunted: but Dramusiande going forth vnarmed to behold the Tent, knewe Oliuanto, and the other two in his company: who taking no know∣ledgement of his nakednes without Armes, made all very furiously against him, euen with as great violence as if they would haue slaine him. But he would not abide them with so great disaduauntage, but retired backe from them, and they, as earing least any other should take guardance
of the Tent, betooke themselues likewise to their vnderta∣ken labour. Dramusiande gathering by apparant likelihood, that these Knights (béeing his true affected & endeared friendes) were depriued of all knowledge of him, by the force of en∣chauntment: was glad that he went forth so vnprouided of armes, & returned againe in such safety, without any pre∣iudice either to his or their honour. And being come backe to the royall Pauillion, where Floraman (their chiefe Cap∣taine generall) had conuocated all the Princes together, as holding a sollemne councell about the view of this strange Tent: he found Florendos to be much troubled in minde a∣gainst Oliuanto, fearing least he had strayed abroad to take notice of the Tent, and so vnhappily remained therein en∣chaunted. In the depth of their weightie and serious rea∣sonings, Dramusiande discoursed all concerning the three Knights, and how hardly hee had escaped with life, by rea∣son he was vnarmed. This strange and vnaccustomed kind of enchauntment, gaue all the Princes matter of déepe and ponderous consi∣deration, wherein they coulde not set downe any certaine resolution. As for Florendos himselfe, this was his groun∣ded and setled opinion, that his owne sonne would neuer dare to come against him, whereon hee determined to goe forth the next morning. No sooner did bright day péepe her fayre fore-head foorth, but beeing armed by his Squire, he mounted on horseback, and trotting brauely before the Tent, Oliuanto with his other two companions (enforced thereto by the enchaunt∣ments vigour) all thrée together encountred him with their Launces, so that he fell on the ground vnder his horse bel∣lie, and before he could frée himselfe out of their power, hée was carried in prisoner, and possessed with the selfe same humour as they were, yet none of them there all this while knowing one another. Our braue resolutes amongst the Christians, were not a little offended, when they vnderstoode that Florendos was
taken prisoner, but much more it displeased them, whē they beheld each one to stand amazedly looking vpon another, as strayning curtesie, who should next aduenture the combate at the Tent: and albeit these accidents séemed so strange and vnaccustomed to them, yet the chiefest distraction a∣mongst the Christians, was the generall care they had of their Army, which being bereft of all their chiefest knights, might so much the sooner be endangered by Dyrdan. Blandidon, perceiuing so faire an Armie in such hazard for his cause, desired licence, that hee might vndertake the Ioust: but Floraman would not consent thereto, but gently returned him this aunswere. My Lord Blandidon, I am perswaded that this enchauntment is onely deuised for the spéedier and safer apprehension of your person, and wee ha∣uing commission to seate you in your right, what aunswer can we honestly goe backe withall, suffering you to fall in∣to Dirdans power? Let mee therefore intreate you to rest pacified, for I (as being Generall of the Armie) will hold ye more strictly to mine owne companie. Dramusiande who could not endure to stand so long idle, obtained licence to goe thether, where hee found himselfe smitten with foure seuerall Launces, and in so strange a manner beside, as he beganne to repent his ouer-much for∣wardnesse: but he had vnhorssed Oliuanto, by shouldring in so rudely ouerthwart amongst them, and no sooner was he falne to the ground, some prettie distance out of the Tent, but the enchauntment had left him, where knowing his fa∣ther, Dramusiande and the rest cryed out aloude to Floren∣dos, that hee should forbeare to hurt him, but all was to no purpose, his rage was great, because they thrée had woun∣ded Dramusiande, so they returned back againe toward the Tent, and Oliuanto with them, vsing mighty perswasions to his Father: So all fiue entring the doore of the Tent together, they became all of one minde, resolued to stay there in defence of the Tent. Palmerin and Florian would very gladly haue gone the∣ther likewise, but that they were loth to incurre the displea∣sure
of Floraman their Commaunder, who paused thereon very aduisedly, for better apprehension of this enchantmēts danger: and so much the rather, because if they two should oppose themselues against Florendos, Dramusiande, Oli∣uanto and the other twaine, nothing else could be expected, but that some one either part were sure to miscarie, and of such a perrill it behooued him to haue no meane care. This day passed on without any more combatting, and Florendos (with the rest of his company) would often come to challenge the chiefe of the Armie: but they neuer went further then a small trench which was but a little distance from the Tent, whereat our hardie Caualiers did verie much meruaile, but returne we now to the wise Aliarte. CHAP. XLVI. How Palmerin & Florian would needes goe com∣bate with them of the Tent, and how the enchaunt∣ment was concluded: Also of a strange accident that suddenly happened. THe learned wizzard Aliarte, sear∣ching by his skill into the nature of this enchantment, found hard∣ly any immediate remedie for it: because Drusa Velonna well re∣membred, that the spells where∣with she had before exorcized the Princesse Leonarda, was disap∣pointed and defeated only by his arte, which made her now to or∣der this Magicke in such manner, that except he could find out an absolute remedie in déede, his vttermost endeuour would serue him to no purpose. Wherefore, finding him∣selfe this extraordinarily hindred, he grewe into great im∣patience,
vntill at length hee happened to remember those Bookes, which he found hidden in the garden of his Iland, and going to the place, where with no meane care hee kept them, turning them ouer one after another, he chaunced at last to light on this very same enchauntment, receiuing thence such rules and directions in the case, as were suffici∣ent to make it of no account, whereof thus prouided, he de∣parted well pleased. Nowe come we againe to Prince Palmerin, who could not beare so many challengings and prouocations to the fight, but (fired with vexation) would needs goe arme him∣selfe, the like did noble Florian his brother, both earnestlie striuing which should be the formost, not dreading any dan∣ger that might befall them from the other, and when they were armed, Floraman, Gratian, Blandidon, and Francian, came to disswade them, vsing these or the like spéeches. My Lords, doo ye not account it as a matter wel worthy blame, for you two to goe hazard the combate against so many hardie Knights? And looke you with no more iudge∣ment into this enchauntment, which differs from all other in so strange a qualitie, that it requires as many resisters, as shall be found defenders of the Tent? Be better aduised wee intreate yée, and let vs take this course: Lord Blandi∣don, whom we ought most especially to preserue from this Magick, hee shall abide heere for Commaunder of the Ar∣mie, and we thrée (béeing armed) will goe along with you to the Tent, so shall wee be sure to equall our friendly ad∣uersaries in number. This counsell, as beeing indeede very discréete and reso∣nable, was by euery one commended, and when they had put on their Armour, they went toward the Tent, beseech∣ing God to guard them all from perrill. Florendos and the other with him (without giuing any attention to Palmerin, who wafted them towards him with his hand vnarmed, as desirous first to haue some speech with them) placed theyr Launces in their rests, and ran against the other with the very swiftest carriere of their horses, when Palmerin, ha∣uing
no respite at all to receiue a Launce, was taken tardie by Florendos thus vnprouided, and loosing his stirrops, lac∣ked but little of being dismounted. Florian encountred with Dramusiande, and lay both along on the ground, with their saddles betwéene their thighes: Floraman with Oliuanto, receiuing by him some small disaduantage: Gracian with Berolde blowe for blowe, but meeting very roughly with theyr Shieldes, both horses & men tumbled all on a heape, and recouering footing againe very hardly, prepared to combate with theyr swords: Francian and Pompides brake their Launces, and drew their weapons for further tryall of manhood. The fight grew to such tearmes on either side, as the death of some of them must needes ensue, yet Palmerin and his company, remembring that they fought against theyr blood and friendes, vsed the more milde and gentle respect: but the Knights enchaunted, grew to all extremitie, so that euill successe must one way needes be expected. For, Flo∣rendos, cutting in sunder ye bridle of Palmerins horse, woun∣ded him also on the left hand very shrewdly: which making him forgetfull of his former patience, returned such angry strokes backe againe in requitall, as Florendos was sore hurt on one shoulder, and likewise on the left side. The like hurts passed betweene Florian and Dramusiande, so was Floraman wounded in the right arme, and Oliuanto in the face, and as much mishap befell the other foure: the fielde beeing indifferently dyed with their blood, and pret∣tily spred with the peeces of broken shieldes and mayles of theyr Armour. Floraman still cryed to those on his part, that they should but onely award theyr aduersaries strokes, as hoping of help from some one quarter or another, that would disturbe and breake of this fierce conflict: albeit it was nowe an houre and more past noone, in all which time they had ne∣uer respited, so that eyther side was growne so wearie and ouer-laboured, as hardlie could they weild theyr weapons with any disposition.
As thus the case continued, suddenly at the doore of the Tent, appeared an armed Knight, hauing the beuer of his Helmet lifted vp, who was no sooner espied by the Knights enchaunted, but they made furiously toward him, as hoping right speedily to be his death: but herein they found them∣selues much disappointed, for the nature of the incantation was such, as it wrought not against them that came from Niquea, but onely stoode in force for such as came toward it, for otherwise it might haue offended as wel friends as ene∣mies. When Florendos and his consorts had better know∣ledge of their friend, they ranne and embraced him, which Palmerin with his part perceiuing, and knowing him for his noble brother and friende, they followed the other in kindnes and embraces, the like did more then an hundred of the chiefest Knights in the Armie, who had stood all this while beholding the combate. Florendos and his crew (who first sawe him enter out of the Tent doore) would haue returned in againe with him: but Aliarte calling to Floraman, willed him, that hee, and the hundred Knights there with him, should seaze on the Knights which were enchaunted, to preuent what else might happen worse to them, and afterward he would find the meanes to frée them from the enchauntment. So cir∣kling them round as in a Ring, they tooke and vnarmed them, dressing theyr wounds, which being somewhat dan∣gerous and chilled with cold, made them scarce able to stir themselues, and nowe they séemed as if they had no know∣lede one of another. Palmerin and his companions, had their hurts likewise lookt to, for they knew not how soone they should haue néed of employment, then caused they the Armie to passe on by the aduise of Aliarte, least Drusa Velonna shoulde worke some worse impeachment, and hinder them from passing any further. That night, Aliarte by certaine of his carracters and spells, wrought so studiously, as hee founde wherein the strength of the enchauntment consisted: Whereupon, the
next day, as Knights came still toward the Tent, and were enchaunted for defence thereof against all other commers, he caused them to be taken and bound, then did he make the earth to be digged in the same place, so deepe as it might cō∣taine the stature of a man, when suddenly there started forth an huge angry Beare, which immediatly had there rent Aliarte in péeces, but that by good hap Blandidon stoode armed by, who onely of all the chiefe Lordes had not beene wounded. He interposing himselfe with his sword drawne, had a very strange kinde of fight with the beast: for diuers times he was fast betweene his pawes, and griped with such strong and intollerable pinches, that well might hee doubt the issue of his bold enterprise. In this time, Aliarte brake certaine glasses, which fu∣ming there continually, maintained the enchauntment, but leauing to fume or smoulder any more, the Tent vanished, so did not the Beare, but onely grewe by the exorcismes weakening, to be spent and wearied with contending a∣gainst the Knight: and being vnable to vse any longer resi∣stance, Blandidon thrust his sword thorow his belly, which made him forth-with fall dead at his foote. No sooner was the Beare dead, but Florendos and the rest enchaunted with him, recouered their former sences, and knewe their kinde friends, who praising greatlie the wisedome of Aliarte, grewe carefull now of their hurts re∣couerie: and this they found by good experience, that if A∣liarts comming thether had béene deferred but two houres longer, Drusa Velonna might safely haue vaunted, to haue vtterly ruined the Court of Constantinople. Before foure daies were fully passed, by Aliarts diligence and skill they were soundly recouered: whereupon hee ad∣uised them, with all spéede now to set on toward Niquea, be∣fore Drusa Velonna should cōpasse a worse enchauntment then the former, whereto alreadie she had giuen an indiffe∣rent assay and beginning. Floraman chiefe Captaine of the forces, the next mor∣ning commaunded the Armie to march on, and (by Aliarts
counsell) kept in so narrow a compasse together as possibly they coulde, because Velonna practised by her vttermost meanes to mollest the Christians: and béeing able to sted them no further by his arte, Aliarte departed home to his Iland. But Drusa Velonna perceiuing hee was gone, wrought a very rare and admirable stratageme: for Miragarda bée∣ing ridden abroade from the Courte to solace herselfe, with Victoria and Argentina in her companie, in the night time as they slept, she tooke them so softly out of their beddes, as neither was shee discerned by any, nor had they the power to awake. Hether she brought them, where Palmerin was with the Armie, and sette them downe before him in such apparant manner, as they were seene and knowne of al the Princes, but immediatly rapt out of sight, & carried away againe. Florendos, Florian and Berolde, beholding them thus borne thence, the first his Wife, and the other two theyr Daughters, became incensed with such rage, as taking their Armes, but asking no licence, because so short time would not admit it, they pursued the Enchauntresse, who conuaied the Ladies to ye abyding of Quéene Melia, where the Princesse Leonarda had béene before enchaunted. But let that matter passe for thys time, and returne wee to our Armie, riding on in good order toward Niquea, and Oli∣uanto waiting for apt occasion to followe his Father, that the one or other might be so happy, as to regaine his Mo∣ther and the Ladies. Floraman fearing, least the principall Knights of the Armie would pursue this aduenture, as a matter impor∣ting no meane quest of honour, caused it publiquelie to be proclaimed, that no man (on paine of his heads losse) should presume to depart without his licence. So became they the better quieted, that in theyr thoughts had before purposed speedie departure: and then came they within two myles distance of Niquea, where as yet they intended to lodge themselues.
Gargante of whom we spake before, a deadly enemie to the Christians, suddenly rushed foorth of a wood where hée lay ambushed, and foure thousand hardie followers at his héeles: where, had not our principall Leaders béen armed, and two thousand of their boldest spirits well appointed stil in the vaw-ward, all the whole Armie had beene in a con∣fusion. For Gargante, in regard of his great stature, and waight of the Armour he daily wore, finding no horse able enough to beare him, rode vppon a fierce angry Beare, where-with he ranne vp and downe among the squadrons, none beeing able to hinder his way, but throwing both men and horse to the ground, and meeting at last with Palmerin, gaue him such a rude ouerthwart encounter, that hee and his horse tumbled ouer quite backward, and soone after hée did the like to Pompides and Oliuanto. Floraman beholding such a disordered procéeding, made forward with a squadron of well appointed Pikemen, who placing themselues in due order of resistance, abated the fu∣rie of the Giants forwardnes, which gaue the dismounted frée libertie of horsing themselues againe. Palmerin full of anger and high disdaine, went vp and downe seeking the Giant Gargante, to pay him some recompence for his for∣mer fall: but Dramusiande beeing of higher stature, sooner (then hée) got eye of the Gyant, and making foorth manful∣lie to encounter him, gaue a full proffer of resistance, ad∣ding for further testimonie thereof, a verie furious & strong thrust directly at his breast: but the Cuirasse falsing the ex∣pectation, though not so much as the other wished, yet was hée in two places indifferently wounded. Gargante, who (till this instant) had neuer beene so pro∣digall of his blood, came speedilie against his aduersarie with such fell and impatient outrage, that aduauncing his huge vnweldie Clubbe of Leade, hée smote therewith Dra∣musiande full on the Helmet, forcing him with the blowes strength so to wheele about and stagger, as verie hardlie coulde hee defende himselfe from falling. This set such a scarlet shame on Dramusiandes chéekes, that how he grew
to a resolued spleene, eyther to die with more disgrace, or at least to be the death of his enemie: but at this verie in∣stant the bridge of the Cittie was let downe, and thence issued forth the Gyant Lanfranco, with fiue thousand strong and able fighting men in his company, who béeing all fresh and vnwearied gallants, spared not to sette cheerefully on the ouer-laboured squadrons. Dramusiande perceiuing thys vnexpected supply, and willing (as much as in him lay) to imbolden the courage of his followers, gaue suddenly a maime to the Giant Lan∣francos horse: whereby he was driuen of necessity to make vse of his feete, and could not gadde so dangerouslie about the fielde, nor vrge such disaduantage to the Christians as when hee was mounted. But Lanfranco was so spéedie on foote, that notwithstanding all ye hast Dramusiande made, he recouered him, and got his horse fast by the bridle, for∣cing him to kicke and fling with such vnrulines, that Dra∣musiande (not to be controuled by his horsses stubbornnes,) threw himselfe quite beside him, and then beganne a hardie battaile between the two Giants, with no spare of Armor, flesh and all. Blandidon, who stoode like a prouident Sentinell, to preuent the large extent of this warre, got to him foure thousand of his owne natiue Countrimen of Niquea, who béeing all faythfull and endeared to theyr Lorde, vpon this his personall appearance before the Cittie, came and sub∣mitted themselues to him: and hée ioyning them immedi∣atlie to sixe thousand of the Armie, went with them to the guardance of a gate, which because it allowed the road-way to Paraz, had slender eye of watch (or none at all) vpon it, and so much the rather, because cōtinually came that way, such people as were ayders and assisters to Dirdan. Hauing made themselues thus Maisters of that bridge, Gorgoneo King of Romata, the Nephew to Tomano, who was with Palmerin in the war against the Soldane: came that way marching onward with his men, and making passage for his troupes as he went along, perforce he would
thorowe their strength that kept the Bridge, and beeing come hand to hand with Blandidon, cried out to his Soul∣diours, there to kill him, vsing these perswasions to this end: that if he were slaine who pretended this right to Ni∣quea, this trouble and warre would soone be finished. These spéeches so preuailed in the ready yéelding minds of the Pa∣gans, that Blandidon (beeing suddainly engirt with two hundred good bold Knights) had there instantly perished, if Pompides, Gracian, and Francian, had not immediatly ioy∣ned with him, who compelling the hardiest withstanders to giue them way, stept close to Blandidon, cirkled in (as yee haue heard) with Gorgoneo and his men, and where he had breathd his last, but for the showers of blowes their swords rayned downe on them. Pompides, who was formost with his shéeld well aduan∣ced, awarded the sharp thrusts of many Launces, and slew Knights euery way round about him, or made them tumble headlong from off the bridge. Francian sided him with like valour and performance, and Gracian on the other wing kept euen course with them both, all of them bearing such a breadth with their manly blowes, that but for some im∣mediate fresh resisters, they had cut the laces of Gorgoneos helmet: which (in despight of all contrary opposition) at last they performed, and one of them had stabd him to the hart with his dagger, but that he entreated his life for Pal∣merin d'Oliuaes sake, for whose honour and his friends, the Kingdome of Romata was euer to be commaunded. When Blandidon heard that name, as yet so gratefull to all the Grecian band of Knights: he let him liue, and ad∣uauncing him selfe to further imployment, entred vpon a fourth part of the Citty, which stoode deuided as into foure seuerall Citties, with walls, bulwarks, and ditches, and therefore required time to take the whole, part after part. Gargante and Lanfranco, perceauing the maine aime to be now at the Citty, began to shift for them selues, both being sore wounded, for Palmerin would neuer suffer Gargante to be out of his sight, but turnd and winded him many times
together: till at last Palmerin was shrewdly astonied with the Giants huge Club, and Gargante dangerously hurt in the right hand with his sword, which wound then holpe to saue Palmerins life, for the blowes with the Club had so a∣mazed him, as Gargante might haue slaine him at his owne pleasure, but that hast to be gone, but more especially his hurt in the hand, made him saue him selfe with the rest that retired into the Citty. And the like did Lanfranco, albeit Dramusiande was euermore at his héeles, yet now he tooke this opportunity of safety. Floraman withdrew the Armie, to that part of the Citty which Blandidon had before surprized, where the people (in great triumph) elected him their King, & gaue entrance to the Christian Armie: for which, no mans life whatso∣euer was called in question, eyther for former disobedience, or reuolt to the aduersarie, and this prooued to be the vtter ruine of Dirdans cause, for he had there born him selfe with extreamest cruelty, to such as he knew any way did fauour Blandidon. CHAP. XLVII. Howe Oltrando and his men of India, came and ioyned with the Christian forces: how Niquea was besieged and Tirrena taken. OLtrando, who was vanquished by Platir and his power in the warre at Tubante, did not come thence a∣long with Floraman, because hee stayed in expectation of more ayde, which should haue com from those parts of India, where him selfe cō∣maunded: but when he sawe that his stay was fruitlesse, with those forces hee had, hee departed from
Tubante, and arriued at the Christian Armie, euen as the Giants were newly entred the Citty. Héere-vpon the siege began at three seuerall places, ma∣king still their entraunce on the quarter where Blandidon had preuailed: which (by aduise of all the Princes) was daily supplied and stronger fortified, because Dirdan held it as the place of weakest ability, and that there hee could controle euen as him selfe pleased. The next day follow∣ing, Broco, the other sonne of Palurdan, came foorth verie néere to the Christian campe, in an Armour of Ash-colour, without any bases, and the deuise in his shéeld, was a Gi∣ant strangling a Serpent, because him selfe being assailed by a Serpent, strangled it. Hée excéeded his brother in mightines of stature, and because there could be found no Horse to beare him, he vsed continually to fight on foote. The newes of this wondrous Giants approach, was quickly spread through all the campe, and Dramusiande (beeing one of the first that heard it) presently armed him selfe, and by lycence obtained of his Captaine, ranne vali∣antly against him: but when he perceaued the Giant was on foote, and a huge strong Halberd in his hand, turning back his Horse, he entred his Tent againe, where taking a kéene battell-axe, which hee vsed to beare euer when hee hunted, being dismounted from his Horse, he turned coura∣giously toward his enemie, and without any other Drum or warlike noyse then their owne blowes, they began to hack and hewe one another, slicing their Armour off in such large scantlings, as their flesh felt the temper of their kéene edged weapons. After that Dramusiande had tasted two of Brocos strokes, which made him stagger giddily here and there, he purpo∣sed to shunne them as much as he might, for Broco deliue∣red the heauiest strokes, that any Giant in those times was able to doo: marie hee was more surly minded then Dra∣musiande, and also by nature much more chollericke, for when so euer he faild a blow at his enemie, he would bite his hands with rage and anger.
Dramusiande taking aduised note of this his furious dis∣position, receaued thereby the better hope of good successe, and therefore helde him play with tracings about, mana∣ging his Axe still with such sleights & dexterity, that euer∣more he put by or rebated his blowes, and hauing a sharpe long pike in the head of his Axe, by vnexpected doubled stroakes, often wounded the Giant, renting the Cuirasse and flesh in many places on his left side. All which Broco séemed to make no reckoning of at all, but continued his fu∣rious and madde manner of fight, till at last it was Dra∣musiandes ill hap, in auoyding a very dangerous blowe of his aduersarie, to haue the staffe cut in two péeces by the Halberd, so that now (perforce) he must stand brest to brest with a deuillish enemie, a mishap which would haue daun∣ted a very resolute spirit: but hee chearing his hopes with this comfort, that Christian Knights are most admired in extremities, bated not an inch of courage, but kept Broco off so valiantly with the pike of his Axe, that at length it was his good hap, to stab it into the sight of his helmet, and wounded him iust betwéene both the eyes: nowe as great an inconuenience followed this successe, for he could not re∣couer his Axe backe againe, but was constrained, to leaue it there sticking in his helmet, which losse of his weapon did much displease him. Notwithstanding, to make vse of time (as he thought for his best aduantage,) he ranne and caught the Giant about the midst, of which boldnes he had but little cause to boast, for Broco, whose embrace was larger then his by a whole armes length, gaue him such knocks on the helmet with the pommell of his Halberd, as but that it was of excéeding pure temper in déede, he had cleft it, and then you may gesse the others danger: for with these blowes he was so giddied and amazed, that if the Giant had had the reason but to haue perceaued it, Dramusiande had falne, but that his ad∣uersarie onely supported him. Neuerthelesse, recouering him selfe so well as he could, while thus the Giant had him within his enclosure, he gaue him so many stabs with his
dagger in the left flanke, that he was glad to let him goe at liberty: and beside, he recouered his Axe againe, where∣with hee once more wounded him in the very same place, that the issue of blood blinding his sight, made him raue with madnesse, and runne vp and downe stamping like a despe∣rate lunaticke. Then drew he forth his sword, because in this raging he had lost his Halberd, and his sword excéeded Dramusiandes a full yard in measure, whereof it stoode the other vpon to be wary and circumspect, because such an ods was beyond all indifferencie: notwithstanding, Dramusi∣ande auoyded all perrill with good discretion, and for anie one wound receaued, returned his enemie thrée. Lanfranco standing on the Citties battlements, and per∣ceauing his brother to be in very desperate hazard, stagge∣ring, and almost vnable to stand, but that by setting his swords poynt to the ground, hee made thereof often vse as his best supporter: with an hundred bolde Knights issued foorth of the Citty, to recouer him backe againe least there he should perish. At which very instant, Oliuanto fell on his knée before Palmerin, who was pressing forward to be gone, but that the young Knight stayed him, saying. Most honourable Lorde and Vnkle, suffer me to gaine that glory, which you now goe for, and are certaine to en∣ioy: as euer you respected chiualrie, or will further the de∣sires of a hopefull spirit. Palmerin, who knew not wel how to gaine-say him, graunted his request, so trotted hee foorth with his Launce to méete Lanfranco, whose Beare caried him with such wilde and giddie trauerses, that the Christi∣an Knights Horse startling at sight of him, caried his Mai∣ster amazedly quite thwart the Beares passage, whereof Lanfranco taking the aduantage, with a crosse thrust woun∣ded him a little, beside dismounted him from his Horse. But the young Knight was so ashamed of this fall, that quickly recouering footing againe, with bolde courage he turned to the Giant againe, who still imagined to affright him with his Beare: and making him to raise his former paws, as coueting to seaze fast hold on the Knight, Oliuanto
with his kéene edgde sword, wounded the beast in both the féete at once, so that as the Giant would haue turned him in hast for better opportunitie, he fell downe on a heape and his Maister vnder him, which good hap admitted ye Knight to reuenge his former fall, and to quittance the Giant be∣side with two hurts, one on the shoulder, and the other vn∣der his right arme, albeit they were wounds of slender im∣portance, in regard of his mightie stature and corpulence of body. After that Lanfranco had got on foote againe, he layde a∣bout him with his long sworde, that Oliuanto had worke enough to doo, by nimble turnings & sleights to award and defend them: till at length, the Giant beeing a huge bodie, and very vnweldie, found himselfe so ouer-wearied with the Knights actiue windings and abouts, that indeed it tur∣ned to his great disaduantage, for Oliuanto by his agil dex∣teritie, gaue him woundes in sixe seuerall places, though not so deepe and mortall as had béene more necessary, and his hurts prooued the slighter in giuing, because the Knight had care to shun the Giants long heauie sword, the proofe whereof had beene so dangerous to him, that it had robbed him of the better part of his Shield, and giuen him (beside) a wound in the right thigh. Dramusiande also on the other side, intreated Broco in such sort, as the victorie twixt them, was most apparant on the Christians side: but they were both so ouer-wearied with fighting, as little harme could they doo to one another with theyr swords. Gargante, with two noated Knights of the Kingdome of Paraz, who were Cosins by affinitie to the reuolted Dirdan, came foorth of the Cittie, and grewe so forward in theyr bold enterprise, that at length they were in hand with Palmerin himselfe, little thinking to be so roughly encountred: for the Knight with his Launce, had pierced quite through Gargantes armour, & wounded him some-what though little to effect, and contrariwise, him∣selfe was well astonied with the shocke, albeit, by reason of his admired valour, he quickly recouered his sences again.
Gracian iousted with one of those Knights named Ma∣meo, & Francian with the other, called Tresino, but Fran∣cian was dismounted, & so was Mameo by his horses fault, the other, passing the encounter with equall successe, with theyr Swordes fell to the combate very stoutly hande to hand. Nowe was the battaile betweene fiue and fiue, and continued with such eager violence, that they of the Cittie, (finding themselues not handled to their liking) withdrew (as it were) with one consent together, the better to shéeld themselues from our hardy Knights: and speaking in their owne language, concluded to retire into the Cittie, where∣vpon they resisted very sparingly, euer-more giuing back∣ward, as theyr best aduantage. Floraman, perceiuing our Knights thus to pursue theyr enemies, and doubting least theyr retire intended some tre∣cherie, caused Pompides to make forward with tenne thou∣sand in theyr rancks, and part of them grewe so hardie in theyr procéeding, that they came to the bridge foote, where∣on the Pagans stood proudly aduauncing themselues. Our Knights likewise would needes vp on the bridge, and bee∣ing thus seconded by Pompides and his men, stroue to enter the gate, where Dirdan with diuers hardie gallants stoode to make resistance. Now heere you must thinke was worke enough to doe on all sides, for Dirdan considering with himselfe, that al∣ready the fourth part of the Cittie was surprized, had made a strong Bastione within the Cittie, which reached in a roundure as a forefence to the gate: and this was the onely hinderaunce to our men, that they could not goe onward as before they purposed, but were there compelled to fight con∣fusedly. Palmerin knew Dirdan by his imprese of the Dog, whereon he cryed out to him, saying: Ah trayterous Rene∣gado, & gaue him such a stroke vppon the Helmet, as tum∣bled him to the earth in great amazement. A Knight of Niquea, who before had béene a seruaunt to Tirrena, beholding him fall, ran presently with the report
thereof to his Lady, who as one newly falne beside herselfe, went with him to sée where her Louer lay, and not know∣ing then whether to betake her course, because Dirdan (be∣fore her comming) was recouered, and with-drawne for new prouision, to keepe the Christians from entrance: she happened into the hands of Floraman, who fastning hold on her disheueld haire, which in her madding moode herselfe had so dispersed, threatned her with immediate death, ex∣cept she forth-with declared of whence and what shee was. I am (quoth she) the infortunate Tirrena, which Floraman hearing, and perceiuing it was a thing impossible to take the Cittie, being defended by such multitudes of people, and night now drawing on, the enemy would worke to fortefie his strength: caused retreate to be sounded, and then with∣drawing toward the Castell, tooke Tirrena with him to his Pauillion, where leauing her vnder assured guarde, hee went backe to call in his men together. There found he Palmerin, Oliuanto and Francian (wea∣rie and wel neere spent with trauaile) shouldred off from the Bridge by the as wearied enemies, Pompides and Gracian still backing them onward, which doubtlesse had ensued to their great daunger, if Dirdan (fearing that part where Blandidon kept, to whose ayde was Oltran∣do newly come) had not retired to make that sure. Which béeing doone, and he come thether againe ere this contenti∣on was ended, the taking of Tirrena was reported to him, whereof hee séemed to make but slender account: not vn∣like that man, who taking a wife for her worth and digni∣tie, enioying what he would haue, cares not how quicklie he is ridde of her againe. So he, eyther in this respect, or perhaps reputing it as a matter impossible, to recouer her backe from so many har∣die Knights, because indeed he wanted his Giants & kinse∣men, who in this last conflict were all sore woūded: would venture no further vppon the Bridge, but turned backe a∣gaine like one despayring. Our Knights, so manie of them as were wounded, tooke the best order they could for the
more speedy recuring of themselues, and Dirdan (to with∣stand further danger) shut himselfe vp within the Cittie. CHAP. XLVIII. Howe Primaleon went to the aduenture of For∣tune, and what happened in the first dayes attempt. PRimaleon desirous to sée Dorina, for conducting him to the aduen∣ture of Fortune whereof shée had made him promise: tooke his farewell of King Trasino & Lau∣rea his Quéene, leauing them much discomforted by his depar∣ture. And comming to the Sea∣side with his Squire, hee found there the Shyp, wherein Filenia had beene before enchaunted, and going aboorde, Dorina, who had there a whole day awaited his presence, forbare to chide him, but entertained him in this manner. Fayre and right fortunate Knight, on whom good hap giues attendance as a seruaunt, thys Ship hath héere wai∣ted in expectation of your arriuall, to carry you to that part of the world, where your company wil be very welcome: for which, my selfe haue heare attended, to guide you to the aduenture of Fortune, whence you shal eyther depart with honour, or perrishing in the enterprise, liue for euer eter∣nized. No sooner had she thus spoken, and hee returned her kinde gratulations, but striking the Mast of the Ship with her wand, the sailes were spred immediatly, and they rid at pleasure cutting through the waues, without any interrup∣tion for two dayes together. Dorina at last looking vppe into the ayre, beheld it with some shew of admiration, and vsed these speeches to Prima∣leon. Young Prince, now shalt thou discerne the strength of incantations, for thrée great Ladies of royall parentage,
are by a Sorceresse shut vp in the strangest enchauntment, that at any time hetherto hath euer been heard of: and one of them shall be released by you, but it will be long first, therefore you must expect the helpe of the wizzard Aliarte, which at this present you cannot haue. These Ladies, were they of whom we spake before, that were carried away by Drusa Velonna: but she would not impart so much to the Knight, who so déerely affected the faire Infant Victoria, that should he haue had knowledge of her imprisonment in such sort: he would haue put off all hope of this enterprized aduenture, and immediatly haue followed the recouerie of his loue: wherefore being asked of him what Ladies they were, shee was glad to aunswere him, that she could not tell. So sailed they on still with a prosperous wind, and it happened one day, euen in the very blush of the mornings arise, the Ship closed with the Isle of Fortune, which presently he knew, and (not a little ocond thereat) leapt foorth vpon the land neuer dreaming what dangers were there prepared for him. After they had likewise brought their Horses on shoare, they mounted, and rode on thorowe the wood, vntill they came to the selfe same place, where Primaleon first beheld the Trée changed into the forme of a Theater: which as he nowe looked for to finde againe, hee espied there a very fearefull grotte or vault, for Fortune was departed from that place, and had made this Cauerne before the track of her foote-steps, to sée who durst be so bold as to follow her. When he came to the mouth of this frightfull hollowe, he felt himselfe suddainly dispoiled of his Armour, & left there in his doublet with his sword onely, whereat he grew very highly offended, and séeing no way to get thence againe, he beheld a famished Lyon start out of the vaute, the beast (lif∣ting vp his foote to a piller standing there by) shewed him this briefe fixed there-vpon. Seeke not thy death in this vnhaunted Wood. Primaleon knowing how easily he could conquer a Lyon, because as he vsually hunted, he euermore killed and ouer∣came
them, stepping boldly to the beast, gaue him an an∣gry stroke with his sword on the head, which rebounded back againe as lightly to him, as if he had smitten on a rock of marble, whereat the Knight began to meruaile not a lit∣tle. The Lyon caught hold of him about the middle, and caried him so swiftly into the vault, that the Squire stan∣ding by, (fearing when the Lyon had deuoured his maister, hee would returne againe and fetch him too:) foorth-with fled thence, leading along with him his Lords horse, and so rode he directly to Constantinople, as in more méet place shall at large be declared. Primaleon, who for all this strange rapture of the beast, failed not in the very least iote of his courage, hauing drawn his dagger, thought there-with to wound the Lyon in the throat, but the beast (like one possessed of a reasonable soule) in the voyce of a man thus spake vnto him. My death will be thy destruction, because of my blood shall arise so many Lyons more, as thou canst not defend thy selfe against them: Permit me then to carry thee to the place, where thy lost Armes shall be restored againe vnto thee. It seemed a matter of no slender moment to the Knight, to heare a Lyon speake in this manner, but yet hee helde it much more strange, that he should suffer himselfe to be car∣ried away in this sort: neuerthelesse, not dreading the im∣putation of any vile esteeme, either by neglect of courage, or other behauiour best beseeming a man, hee thus replyed. Carrie me whether thou wilt, for in all occasions whatso∣euer that may happen to me, faire Fortune and mine own valour shall sufficiently defend me. The Lyon holding him fast betwéene his fore-pawes, bare him aboue a miles length through a mightie darknes, vntill at last they came to a goodly large plaine, so thicke beset with high spreading trées, that they hindred ye sight of a round bright-shining Tower neere adioyning, to which the Lyon brought him so neere, that he wondred he had no sooner espied it, there did the Lyon set him downe, and sud∣denly departed.
The Knight not séeing any bodie, by whom he might be informed what was there to doe for him, stoode sadly pon∣dering to himselfe, and hauing so continued for a good halfe houres space, yet neuer the neerer of his expectation, hee coasted about to come to the Castell, and more then an hun∣dred paces had he spent about it, yet could not discerne any gate for entrance, but onely diuers high-built windowes, out of which he seemed to heare a disordered noise of people, resembling rather to be of Giants, then such as were of his owne stature or proportion. Standing doubtfull awhile what hee should doe, two Siluane young men, cirkled and wrethed with Iuie both alike, came suddenly before him, and one of them spake in manner following. Indiscréete & ouer-audacious Knight, know that Fortune hath conducted thée hether to thy death. This which thou seest, is called the Dreadfull Tower, for the faire Quéene Melia, Sister to the King Armato, who in his soule abhorred Christians, and contended in the Ma∣gicall Sciences with the wise Vrgando, erected this tower where thou séest it stand, the place all solitary and vnfre∣quented, and circkled with such a powerful enchauntment, that whatsoeuer Christian dares to enter it, immediatly he falls downe dead, except hee first be possessed of the meanes, to make voyde and of none account this incantation, which wee estéeme to be impossible, because many Knights haue alreadie come hether, and suffered themselues to be carried into the Tower, (as annon thou shalt sée by vs the maner how) and died so soone as they set foote within it, whereof least thou shouldest make any doubting, looke in that large ditch vpon thy left hand, and see the bones of the dead that héere haue perrished. No sooner had hee thus spoken, but a strange kinde of Tunne or Dryfat descended downe the Tower, whereon the two Siluanes presently mounted, and in a trice were rapt vppe immediatly. This meruaile made Primaleon to studie a little one it, but yet fearelesse of it, or any thing els whatsoeuer, he walked on againe about the Tower, to try
if hee could finde any helpe for the finishing of this aduen∣ture. As thus he went on, hee heard the treading of a man directly before him, yet could discerne nothing at all, but a great yron Sledge lying iust in his way, which he helde to be very conuenient for his purpose, either for compassing his entrance into the Tower, or for expelling such as hee should finde within it. So taking vp the hammer, which séemed to him to be very weightie, he beganne to knock there-with against the wall, with as loude strokes as a Smith vppon his Anuile, and the wall being of bright shining mettall, deliuered such a strange high kind of sound, that the beasts which were in the wood néere adioyning, hearing ye noise, fled thence with feare. The wall (with his long battering vpon it) began to o∣pen a little, but not to any purpose for entrance, albeit (by the rift) it appeared not aboue a fingers bredth in thicknes: nor could he make any larger rupture, notwithstanding he vsed his very vtmost strength, and laboured till he was all on a sweate, when suddainly he saw the Tunne descend a∣gaine, and out of it started a huge Giant, with his face like a dogges, and of horrible stature, not hauing any vse of spéech, therefore his language was barking onely. As hee was going toward him, one of the young Siluanes descen∣ded againe, crying aloude to the Giant, that he should stay, whereon he presently stoode still, and the young man being come to the ground, went to the Knight with these spéeches. Sir, the feare of your perrill by this monster, dooth much afflict me, for this is a Caniball, a people of that part of the world, where the Antipodes are, and fifty such as he is, are within the Tower, with all which you must hazard your selfe, if you abide there. Quéene Melia fetcht them from that Countrey to this place, enchaunting them in such a sort, as they cannot die till the Tower be taken: all which may séeme no more then a iest in the eye of your valour, but farre greater dan∣gers will assaile ye, then you are aware of. This spake the
young man, as thinking with great wordes to sende him thence: but euer when the Knight strooke on the wall, the Siluane trembled, doubting least ye aduenture would now he concluded. Primaleon remembring he was vnarmed, consulted a∣while with his thoughts, whether he should deale with this strange creature thus hand to hand, or stay in expectation of his Armour, which (as you haue heard before) was pro∣mised him againe. As thus hee stoode musing, there came forth of the woode a Knight in yellowe coloured Armour, with a border or list or blacke about it, in his Shielde was a hammer or sledge as his deuise, and Primaleons Armour he bare vpon a Launce, in manner as Trophies are borne before Conquerours, and beeing come to him, hee said. Heere Knight, take your Armour, and this young man shall helpe to arme yée: as for my selfe, expect no fauour at my hands, but fiercest hatred. Neuerthelesse, I will not see you in any such perrill, that you may haue any iust ex∣cuse to colour your vanquishing, and hauing thus saide, he parted thence againe. The young man (with lookes full of gréefe) foorth-with armed him, & then was quickly drawne vp into the tower. When Primaleon saw himselfe armed so soone, hee wished to haue present dealing with the Caniballs, rather then to loose time against that one, and aduauncing his weapon, went to assaile him, thinking to kil him at the very first en∣counter: but he found himselfe deceiued, for the Giant, al∣beit he was vnarmed, had such a massie Clubbe, as would endure against the keenest edgde sword, without any har∣ming: beside, hee was so quicke and nimble, yt the Knight spent many stroakes in vaine, before he could wound him. Which when he perceiued, he began to make better vse of his labour, and watching apt occasion for his owne aduan∣tage, striking at the vpper hand that held the Club, cut it quite off: so the Giant was nowe both without hande and Clubbe, which made him runne rauingly vpon the Knight, and thinking to murder him, bit gréedily his Armour, but
to little purpose, for Primaleon gaue him so many stabs, that at last he fell downe for dead at his foote, and then he tooke vp the hammer againe, beating therewith on the wall, as he did before, which séemed to open wider then it did, al∣though indeed it was very little, neuerthelesse it somewhat increased his comfort. While thus hee stood beating against the wall, two Gi∣ants were let downe together out of the Tower, and they came very suddenly vpon the Knight, who was so extream∣lie wearied with lifting the hammer, that one would haue thought he had beene dead: for the one gaue him a mightie stroke vpon the Helmet, and the other smote him so sound∣ly vpon the right shoulder, that he staggerd and réeled from thē aboue twenty paces. But recouering his spirits quick∣lie, and perceiuing two such fierce enemies vpon him at once, he brauely buckled to them, and ran one of them with his sword through the right side: at the other hee reached a slaunting stroke, which hee very well auoyded with his Club, and returned him such a requitall vpon his Shield, as if it had not béene that belonging to Fortune, it would haue béene squandred in many péeces. Now was he beset with much extremitie, and indéed had falne into vnresistable perrill, but that good hap so well be∣friended him, as from the one hee smote of his doggs head, and the other (béeing wounded before) had little abilitie of defending himselfe, but fell downe dead after his fellowe. This successe made him so desirous of entrance into the Towre, that againe he ran to his hammer, and charging the wall with no simple strokes, beheld a farre larger ope∣ning of the breach: but he saw it defended by thrée furious Caniballs, which from the Towers toppe were let downe on the other side, and they with huge Maces stood raysing vp the wall against him. But he whose desire was on nothing but victory, seeing them to be vnarmed as the other were before, threwe his hammer at one of them, which breaking his bulke, made him fall downe dead: then with his sword he recouered the
sledge againe, and spurned it by him, not willing to be dis∣possest thereof as yet, because he expected good successe ther∣by, he cleft another of them from the shoulder to the bellie, and he fell downe as spred in two part. The third shewed himselfe so gallantly disposed, that Primaleon (beholding the night to hast vpon him) doubted least he should be most troubled with this Caniball: and looking vp to the toppe of the Tower, hee sawe a number of them stand barking at him, which made him the lesse reckon what his enemie could doe, but doubling his stroakes couragiously vpon him, at last he fell downe dead among the other. Nowe began all the Caniballs aloft on the Tower, to howle and cry in very fearefull manner, because this last Caniball which Primaleon had slaine, had there his Wife and eyghteene children, who would all haue descended snarling together to reuenge their Fathers death in theyr doggish furie: but the Knight before spoken of, who (albeit inuisibly) brought him the hammer, came againe out of the wood, and made such a signe to the Giants aboue, that they left whyning, and with-drew themselues, then stepping to Primaleon, thus hee spake. Although the nature of the en∣chauntment be such, that no kindnes or curtesie should bee shewne vnto you, neuerthelesse, Fortune reseruing you to more glorious enterprises, commaunds me to bridle all dis∣pleasure, and not to vse you as in iust rage I might: with∣draw your selfe therefore into that little Cottage, and there you shall finde what is conuenient for you. Primaleon feeling the last Caniballs blowes most offen∣siue to him, the more gladlie yéelded to this inuiting, and being entred the Cottage, hee found there a table daintilie furnished, and a goodly bed for him to rest in: there supt he without any dread of suspition, and seeing none to hinder him, went afterward to bed, and there slept soundly.
CHAP. XLIX. Howe Primaleons Squire arriued at Constantinople with his horse, and there witnessed, that a Lyon had deuoured his Lord in his presence: and of another sad newes there happening also. THE Court of Constantinople was full repleate with gréefe, for Mi∣ragardaes losse, and the two fayre young Ladies that were with her: the Emperour beside was much malecontent, because hee could haue no vse of his Armour, onely through the lamenesse of his right arme, which thus (on meere constraint) kept him in Constantinople, quite contrary to his knightly resolutions and desires, albeit both the wise Aliarte and Dorina, had giuen him hope of recouerie, and still hee remained in ex∣pectation of that promised good fortune, nor did any imbe∣cilitie or age abate one iote of his courage, but continuing his former youthfull disposition, often wished himselfe in the fiercest and bloodiest battailes. Now in this idle loytering from the exercise of military imployment, a softer temper had beleagerd his affections, and carrying them in doating errour toward fayre Candi∣da the Daughter of Belisart, prouoked him to diuers priuate visitations of her: all which notwithstanding, the discréete and fayre natured Empresse Grydonia, (neuer minding the becks, nodds, and other ceremonies of an olde enamoured husband,) deliuered apparantly that shee discerned no∣thing, whereat the Emperour was not a little contented, albeit he would not for all his Empire, yt the world knew his vaine desires, as his in very deede Empresse did.
Time passing on in these and such like occasions, the Knight of Fortunes Squire happened to arriue at the Court, leading in his hand his Maisters Courser, and ty∣dings he brought of certaintie withall, that he sawe when a Lyon deuoured his Lorde. These heauie newes flewe quickly through the Court, and the Empresse, with the fayre young Lady Concordia, (who duly kept within her loging, euer since the losse of Miragarda her Mother) ran as bereft of theyr wits about the Pallace, finding the Em∣perour (in like manner) neerer death then life. But the Empresse Grydonia, beeing of great spirit & womanly dis∣cretion, weighing in the equall ballance of her thoughts, what greefe a man might take for losse of such a Nephew, kindly embracing the Emperour, spake vnto him in thys manner. Right royall and my most esteemed Lord, by the vertue of that loue which you truly declared, when deliuering mée your sword, and laying your head on my lappe, you prostra∣ted your selfe to death, and bad me reuenge my wrongs for Perequin of Durace: let me intreate you to forget these pas∣sions, and liue with me in honours league as you ought to doe. Admit you haue lost a noble Nephew, yet comfort your selfe in Oliuanto his brother, & doubtlesse his Mother will also be well recouered againe: for assurance whereof, take this as a testimonie, that in the heauiest and most disconso∣late afflictions of all, the Diuine fauour preserued and re∣stored you to your Empire. The Emperour beeing come to better patience, was so inwardly comforted with these pleasing speeches, that folding her in his armes, hee declared himselfe to be con∣tentedly satis-fied: commaunding all the other Ladies and young Princesses to his presence, with whom hee sate dis∣coursing on matters beseeming theyr assembly, the better to expell these sad tydings which so much afflicted him, yet the death of his déere Nephew often interposing it selfe, cō∣pelled many broken (yet well shadowed sighes) which (ne∣uerthelesse) the Empresse with heedfull eye obserued, and
made her very hardly to refraine from teares. But nowe the houre of dinner beeing come, a generall feasting toge∣ther in the hall was commaunded: whereto the Emperour was the rather induced, because hee helde it as a matter woorth generall respect, that a Knight so fauoured of For∣tune, and so full of fayre hopes, should so vntimely be tane away, euen in the freshest flouring of his youth. This dinner was very sumptuous, and honourably per∣formed, in which time, many iocond humours and fanta∣sies ranne in the Emperours thoughts, that he could hard∣ly beleeue his Nephew was dead: and dinner beeing en∣ded, hee called to him sundry Princes of good yeeres, to whom he imparted his priuate oppinion, which sauouring as likely in their coniectures as his, they fell to this con∣clusion, that the Squire should be deliuered ouer to tor∣ments, thereby to vnderstand the truth of his Maisters death. So without any long delaying, hee was taken and tor∣mented in such sort, that hee confessed the reason of his say∣ing so, was, because hee thought him for certaintie to be dead, and in excuse of his owne returning thether without him: for how could it be otherwise? his eyes were witnes∣ses, how a Lyon carried him into a deepe vaulte, against which beast he could not well defend himselfe, his Armour being before taken from him at the Tree of Fortune. The Emperour aduertised the Empresse heereof, and sending kindly to entreate her company, so soone as she came, thus he began. Madame, cherrish your good hopes, for questionlesse my Nephew is liuing: for I dare affirme (according to some Magicall incantations, which I haue both seene and heard of,) that the Lyon is so friendly a beast to the progenie of Palmerin, that this carriage away of our Nephew by a Li∣on, will sort in the end to his fame and glory. Now began all former sad oppinions to be quite bani∣shed, and nothing but courtly pleasures onely prosecuted: but sée a suddaine vnexpected change againe, Franardos
Squire (whose Lord neuer parted from the Ile of Carderia, since his surprising there by the Knight) awaiting his frée∣dome by some other man of merrit, and perceiuing Alma∣roll with the other Knights there to be taken likewise, and Leonato enchaunted for defence of the place, the Squire (bereft of all hope that any one nowe could deliuer them:) returned also to Constantinople, and there reported how ma∣ny Knights were there thus strangely retained in the Ile of Carderia. This fresh allarum of vnfortunate tydings, raised such a new discontent in the Court, that nowe they began to cre∣dite the former report, comparing present successes with passed accidents: that Fortune now stroue to weaken the Court of Constantinople, and reduce it into the like desperate estate, as when Don Edward the Prince of England was im∣prisoned: but this new crosse stoode on farre worse conditi∣ons, by reason these Knights could not be deliuered, with∣out the intended death of Leonato, which admitted no hope in so hard an extremitie, but rather caused a more confusi∣on in griefe generally thorow the Court. The Empresse outstanding the first affliction, with more then manly courage, being assaulted now againe with such a waightie oppression, could no longer containe her former disposition, but lauishly sent foorth a whole Sea of teares, and the Emperour likewise fell downe halfe deade with griefe: so that the Cittie was in such a sad turbulence, for the losse of so many famous Princes, as it neere hand now resembled an vnfrequented desert place, all bemoaning in∣tirely Trineus the Emperour of Allmaignes departure, and the wanting of the other flourishing companie, for if nowe an Armie had set vpon Constantinople, it had béen no matter of difficultie to take it, beeing thus dispossessed of all her de∣fenders. These gréefes growing to more discréete moderation, and the Emperour (making a better recollection of his thoughts) beganne to consider, that the strongest inchaunt∣ments which in those times could happen, did but giue ap∣parant
instances of such Knights future valour, as should (by them) eternize their names to posteritie: which might sort out as well to his Courts honour, as any other, and make it as much feared, as euer it had beene before, there∣fore he beganne to be of better comfort, knowing that true noble Knights would not fayle in execution of their duties, as for all care else, he referred it to heauen. In which resolution, hée chéered vp the Ladyes young and olde, but Polinarda the mother of Leonato, and fayre Candida, (who was deepely enamoured of him,) they could take little truce with theyr teares, and the heauier was this crosse to the other Princesses, who albeit theyr sonnes were prisoners, and nature made them as desirous of their libertie, yet none of them woulde purchase the same at so deere a rate, as to buy her sonnes life with Lenatos death. The Emperour séeing himselfe thus left alone, and the Empire standing on tearmes of hazard, if any hostile ene∣mies should arise against it: wrote to Don Edward then King of England, that hée should bring what power he could with him to Constantinople, for the better withstanding all dangers what-soeuer: but he did not acquaint him with the case of Primaleon, neyther the disaster allotted to Leonato, because hée might iourney the more contentedly. And till the time of his arriuall, he gaue order for the for∣tifying of such places as were weakest in strength, so that (in a maner) the walls were newly reedified: but returne wee nowe to Tubante, to declare a molestation that there chaunced to happen.
CHAP. L. How the Monster released himselfe and Ristorano in Tubante, after that Tirrena was sent to Constanti∣nople. FLoraman, after that the whole Army was drawne back to their place of lodging, appointing a prouident and carefull watch, commaunded euery man to his rest: but the next morning hee called the Princes to counsell with him, & Blandidon also, who leauing Oltrando to his charge in the Citty, came to consult on these affaires with the rest, where euery man should fréely deliuer his minde, what was to be done with the impriso∣ned Tirrena. Blandidon, whō this case did most of all concerne, would haue his Sister put into the hand of iustice, and punished as her offence had worthily deserued: vpon which opinion he stoode so peremptorily, that Palmerin grew some-what dis∣pleased thereat, but Floraman being discréete and wise, re∣turned Blandidon this aunswer. I must confesse my Lord, that a iust cause of griefe mooues you to the chastisement of your Sister: but let me entreate you to remember, that the Lady is become prisoner to the Emperour of Constantinople, not to you or me, and I being by him and you deputed as generall commaunder, (surprizing her my selfe) doo hold it most conuenient, that shee be sent hence to Constantinople, there to endure what shall please his Maiestie to appoint her. Blandidon knew not howe to aunswere this sentence, perceauing how euery one leaned to that course, therefore it being thus concluded on, and wanting but execution, so
soone as Pompides was well of his hurts receaued, with two hundred for her guard, they were dispatched thence to Tubante, where afterwarde they should embarque them∣selues for Constantinople. In their marching, they were dis∣cerned farre off from the Citty, and Dragonalte (being on the chiefest Turret) not well acquainted with the Scottish Armes they beare, armed him selfe to preuent the woorst, going more then halfe a mile out of the Citty to méet them, where knowing each other, and kindly embracing, as they walked on, Pompides reported the whole successe of the warre, as also the present case concerning Tirrena, and how she should be sent to Constantinople. Thus passed they along into the Citty, where Targiana awayted their comming, with longing desire, to heare ty∣dinges of the Christian Princes, but most of all of noble Florian. Pompides in his serious & well couched discourse, came at length to tell her, howe Victoria, with two other Ladies, were caried away to be enchaunted, & that Prince Florian followed for their recouerie. So full of gréefe did these newes make Targiana, that shee was ready to fall downe dead, but bearing it out (with a good spirit) so long as shee could, at last shee tooke leaue of the Knights, with∣drawing into her priuate chamber, where giuing more scope to her hearts oppression, shee remembred the hatred which Drusa Velonna bare to ye Christians, holding it now for most certaine, that she had thus caried away those La∣dies, to endaunger the Knights by some hellish enchaunt∣ment, and knew not héerein how to comfort her selfe. Dragonalte and Pompides, not knowing Targianaes in∣ward agonies, gaue them selues to rest, and so did the other that came with them, because there appeared no perrill to be suspected. But Fortune, the daily enemie to the very least quietnes, wrought in such sort, yt the Monster (which was taken before by our Knights, when they combatted the Kings that came with Ristorano) had laboured so suc∣cessefully with his sharpe nailes, that the strong giues were broken which bound him fast by the féete: beside, he had
wrenched out the yrons which grated the window, where Ristorano was kept prisoner with too much courtesie, for he was neither manackled on hands nor féete: and then passing so on together, thorow doore and doore, they came at last to the vttermost, which (by good hap) they found open, and not guarded at all, where Ristorano assuring him selfe now on liberty, gaue signes to the Monster to be very quiet. So escaped they thence to a kindsman of his, whom he be∣fore had acquainted with his meanes of fréedome, hoping that but fewe Christians were as then in Tubante, (for hee knew nothing of Pompides arriuall) and now was the time for the deliuerance of his Countrey. But his kindsman, hauing already séene the two hun∣dred valiant Souldiours when they came, and a Captaine of so woorthy reputation withall, stoode a while doubtfull what were best to be done: but being ouer-weyed with Ri∣storanos bold spéeches, he would néedes make venter of his fortune, and dealing closely with tenne other of principall reckoning (secret sworne enemies to the Christians) they wrought with such politique subtilty, that they were assu∣red of two thousand Turkes in their assistaunce, making this course their hope, that if a tumult were suddainly rai∣sed, they should want no harts nor hands to help them. Ristorano (with his elected company) went to the place where he had left the Monster, and engirting the Pallace where the Christian Caualierie were, (onely such excepted as guarded the gates and kept the Castell) crying out, mur∣der, murder, murder the false Christians: they forcibly brake through the doores where the Knights lodged, and there had suddainly murdered them all, but that the Mon∣ster (ouer-gréedy in his forwardnes) shooke the doore of the roome where Dragonalte & Pompides slept. Now was there heard such a terrible noise, as if the Pallace had béen shatte∣ring in péeces, so that the Princes awaking, & their Armour euermore by them, they were immediatly armed: Targiana likewise armed her selfe, & perceauing shee could repose no trust in her Turkes, hence-forth would secure her selfe a∣mong
the Christians. Thirty of the best knights in the Pal∣lace were spéedily in a readines, & fifty more came by a se∣cret vault vnder the Castel to them: Dragonalte with these fourescore resolutes, hauing left Targiana in Pompides charge, with twelue of her best affected seruants in compa∣nie, all vowing to loose their liues in her defence: went on to the gate, where néeded no labour to open it, for the Mon∣ster had made so large an entrance, that our men might ea∣sily rush forth vpon them, but the Monster could not get in thereat, being only hindered by his huge greatnes. When Dragonalte beheld such a wide rupture, which (though the night was dark) he too plainly perceaued, he imagined such a breache could not possibly be made, but doubtlesse it was the Monster that did it, wherefore, holding it not requisite, to respect a beast with manly curtesie, he caused thrée Laun∣ces to be bounde together, because the Monster had such strength in his hands, as with ease he could cracke one in péeces: and as the beast stoode crouding for entrance, he ran with the Launces against his side so strongly, yt gashing his ribs, it rent away a good deale of his flesh. This wound was so full of paine to the Monster, that he forsook the dore, & run∣ning down ye staires, ouerthrew euery one he met withall. Dragonalte with his followers issued foorth on the staires, and here he found work enough to doo, for Ristorano had set down his rest on death, rather then longer to liue in prison: therfore (well armed) he was amongst the formost, & defen∣ded ye passage with such bold resistance, that Dragonalte by no meanes could descend the staires, albeit hee heard the Christians pittifull shriekes, who were mercilesly slaine beneath by the Turkes. Pompides regarding the liues of his Souldiours, left Targiana with her trusty seruants, and went to company him selfe with Dragonalte, where in litle while they made such a lauish slaughter, as ye enemies were glad to giue them away, and there did Pompides wound Ri∣storano in the sword hand, yet neuerthelesse the fight was fiercely continued, for foure thousand Turks more were rai∣sed in his aid, & ioyned there with ye rest euen at that instant.
Our Caualieres with their handy blows had so disharte∣ned the formost rancks, that with very good will they gaue them passage, and (thereby) releast their passage into the open Court, where being seconded with new supplies of fresh friends, and comfort of others which were in readi∣nes preparing, the enemy made a present recuile out again, so that there might be easily numbred two thousand slaine, euen in this forcible retire of the enemie and his troups. The Monster being starke mad with the wound he had receaued, ranne thorowe the Citty, ouerthrowing and kil∣ling all that he met withall, making such a confusion a∣mong them which fauoured Ristoranos procéedings, as ve∣rie many of them (growing doubtfull what successe would ensue) drew back closely into their houses, as fearing now to be held rebellious, by reason wherof, Ristorano made not his part so good as before he hoped of: neuerthelesse, very fiercely and desperatly he maintained still the fight, and the Monster returning againe where he was, crowde in so fu∣riously among our troupes, that before he could be with∣stoode, he was in the midst of all the Horse-men, where hee did mischiefe enough, beating men and horses on euery side to the ground, but hee was wounded in many places with their sharpe pointed Launces, whereof still he seemed to make no reckoning, but procéeded in as much outrage as euer he did. Pompides séeing such damage done to his men, came in person to encounter him, but the Monster running at him with all his might, thwarted his passage so vnluckily, that tumbling his Horse and him quite ouer backward, the beast fell likewise vppon him, and there (with his huge waight) he had béene pressed to death, but the Monster (hauing lost much blood out of his side and other hurts) fell faintly beside him, when Pompides, hauing quickly recouered footing a∣gaine, commaunded him to be taken by méere strength. While thus the heate of the broile continued, Ristorano re∣membred Carino King of Illium, who was close detayned in an other prison: his company he thought would now great∣lie
sted him, where-vpon he caused him to be fetcht from prison, and armed with as much spéede as possibly could be. Now began the skirmish in farre fiercer manner then be∣fore, for Carino was a bold hardy Knight, and many well-willers of his dwelled in Tubante, obtayning such fauour in the time of his imprisonment, onely to waite opportunity for his deliuerance. Pompides being very weary, and somewhat sore with his vnhappy fall, meeting with Carino, had there by him beene slaine, if Targianaes good hap had not conducted her thether, attended by her twelue faithfull followers: where beholding her state and rule in a very desperate hazard, if our Knights of repute should so be discomfited, both she and they fought so gallantly, clearing their way with such va∣lour before them, as they saued Pompides life, euen in the narrowest perill, and brought him where he might breathe and rest him selfe. Dragonalte (on the other side) labourd with such suc∣cesse, that wheresoeuer he smote about him, at euery stroke it cost a life: neuerthelesse, the enemie came still so freshly vpon them, that euery moment their ruine was expected. But Targiana, like an aduised and prouident Princesse, hel∣ping where most néede required with new supplies, cried out all the way as she went with her troupes, that who so euer had taken Armes against her in the fauour of Ristora∣no, if now they would forsake him, and witnesse true duty to their lawfull Princesse, frée pardon was graunted, with∣out any after remembrance of their passed offences, so that euery one might safely betake him to his abiding. And Targiana was reputed so faithfull of her promise (as indéede it becommeth any Prince to be,) as therefore shée deserued highly to be reuerenced: and (except the kindred or néere friends of Ristorano and Carino) all the rest depar∣ted presently to their habitations, so that those two Princes were there left nowe, with not aboue an hundred men to helpe them. When Dragonalte saw the people part thence in such sort, he spent no time in vaine against the small re∣mainder,
yet Ristorano and Carino were withdrawne to∣gether, and stoode vpon their owne guard with very spright∣ly courage: but when Pompides and Targiana came with fresh enforcement vpon them, then they began to think the day lost, and Carino, who meaned to be imprisoned no more, leaping foorth of the circkle wherein he was round engirt, ranne into the thickest of the Christian squadron, calling with loude voyce for Dragonalte and Pompides, that hee might die by the hand of one of them. But because a Tray∣tour deserues no honourable end, such was the loude clat∣tering of swords vpon Armour, and the out-cries of them which were doone round about him to death, as he was not heard at all, but falling downe among an hundred Laun∣ces, was there very cruelly slaine by them. Ristorano defended him selfe so well as he could, hauing no more then twelue men now left with him, for the rest were departed to their houses, as loath to loose their liues and possessions: but Targiana hauing round ringd him with her power, considered with her selfe, that if he should yéeld, and be sent thence to Constantinople, the Emperour was so benigne and full of clemencie, that (in time) his life and li∣berty might be graunted, whereof would arise a following affliction to the Turkish estate: therefore, to preuent such an after daunger, shee set vpon him with forty of her best Souldiours, and there cut him in an hundred péeces, with all the other that stoode in his defence, and thus the hurley burley was concluded. Dragonalte and Pompides summoning their troupes to∣gether, found that they had lost three hundred men, which could not but be some gréefe vnto them: neuerthelesse, they were content that the rebels should be pardoned, for other∣wise there was no assurance in holding of the Kingdome. So order being giuen for regard of the wounded, and good watch appointed for the Citties safety, the Captaines and Commaunders went to haue their hurtes drest: the like did Targiana, who albeit she were wounded, yet grew she so affectionate to the following of Armes, as quite giuing
ouer the néedle and distaffe, shee would trie the fortune of sword and Launce like a warrionnesse, and became famous for chiualry, as héereafter shall be shewne. The next day following, the Princes held a counsell to∣gether, to send Tirrena and the Monster to Constantinople, and prouiding a Shippe ready for such a seruice, sent them a boorde, committing the trust thereof to Mirante, the Ne∣phewe of Maulerino, who went the more willingly, be∣cause he would make him selfe knowne to the Emperour. The Ship set saile, hauing therein Letters from Floraman the Generall, with others from the Princes and Targiana, which gaue intelligence of all successes and occasions, euen to that instant. Nowe began no little ioy thorowe the whole Court, e∣specially for so happy an attayning to knowledge, in whose custodie Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina were, where∣at Onistalda her mother much reioyced. The Monster was generally beheld with wonder, because no such sight had beene vsuall to them, and Mirante had royall welcome of the Emperour, remembring what his Graundsire had doone in fauour of his Father, and this ioy qualified the gréefe for the former ill tidings. Tirrena was deliuered to the change of the Empresse, who kept kinde company with her in her owne lodging, without her enduring any other discontentment, but that she might not part thence at her owne pleasure.
CHAP. LI. How Trineus arriued (by chaunce) with his Ship on a strange Iland, where hee found labour enough to doo: And how his Armie sayled on to Niquea. TRineus the Allmaigne Emperour, who parted with the Armie from Constantinople, to goe for Tubante, when he had sailed diuers dayes with contrary windes, there a∣rose at last such a furious tem∣pest, that the Shippes (for feare of breaking one against another,) were glad to make way as best they could. Trineus sorry to sée the Seas distemper, was suddainly caried farre off from the Fléete, and borne away with such celerity, that a quar∣rie neuer did flie swifter from a bowe, séeming to him, as if he had in short while dispatched sixe dayes sayling together. At length the Shippe entred a port made onely by nature, and casting Anker where most conueniently they might, Trineus was the first that would step a shoare, being follo∣wed by three other Knights of his owne Nation. Passing on long, there was neyther trée, hearbe, nor plant to be séene, but onely vast and naked grauell, which led on directly to a great water, wherein there appeared to be both men and women, who seemed as if they knewe not how to liue vpon land, and on the bancks that enclosed this water, grew certaine little grafts or trées, the fruite whereof was like to Quinces, but much lesse and very lit∣tle indéede, yet passing pleasant and nourishing in tast. This Countrey séemed to Trineus commodious enough, and dreadlesse of any harme to harbour there, he put off his helmet, so did the other that were with him, to refresh them selues with the swéet ayre. Standing to solace them selues
by this water, there suddainly came on the further side a huge number of wilde beasts, as Lyons, Beares, wolues, Tygers, Panthers, and other such like: and because there was no other water in the Iland for them to drinke of, the∣ther they came alwaies to quench their thirst. Trineus was not tardy in clapping on his Helmet, nor ye other Knights neither, to defend themselues from violence, but such resi∣stance was of no reckoning, for there were aboue thirtie thousand of the beasts. Trineus béeing of an vndaunted courage, made little care of so imminent a perril: but such was the subtile quality of the enchauntment, consisting on the other side of the riuer, that a little boate came floating toward him, guided by a goodly Damosell, who spake vnto him in this manner. My Lady and Mistresse, beholding (a farre off) your comming hether, intreates you to come and sée her, that she may giue you such instructions, as may make your vertues for euer immortall. These last wordes carried such weight in the thoughts of young Trineus, that without returning any aunswere, both hee and the other Knights stept into the boate, béeing conuaied thence with vnspeakable spéede: and they beheld the men and women in the water, expressing very passio∣nate and mournfull gestures, as signifying that they were carried to some fatall misery. Trineus, not regarding these signes of gréefe at all, stept foorth on the other shoare, and presently was surprized with such passion, that hee must néedes cast himselfe headlong into the water: and indeede he had doone, but for a Iewell he had about him, giuen him by his Aunte Bazilia, which defended him from the force of the enchauntment: but the other thrée Knights that went with him, threw themselues into the water, where they stoode dispoiled of their Armour. Trineus much lamented the losse of his companions, but remembring the vertue of his Iewell, comforted himselfe thereby: because (it fréeing him from any magicall oppres∣sion) chéered his hopes with likely perswasions, that hee
might accomplish this strange aduenture. So going on∣ward, he came where the Sorceresse had taken out of the water two fayre young women, to traine him (as was her custome) to lust and dalliance, then should they tumble in∣to the flood againe: where loosing all former remembrance (of what-soeuer they had knowledge of) to that instant, they could not declare what had happened to them by the Enchauntresse. This comming thether of Trineus, was so displeasing to the Witch, that shee started vp on foote, and forgetting to cast the young Women into the water againe, she came to Trineus with these words. Thou rash and too bolde aduen∣terous Knight, ouer-late wilt thou repent this foole-hardie enterprise: then suddainly with-drawing herselfe into a Tower, shée so plyed her spells and hellish exorcismes, that immediatly all the ayre was couered with darknes, with such terrible breakes of thunder and flashes of lightning, as if the whole world should foorth-with haue béene ruined. At the first, Trineus began to be a little daunted, but when hée called to minde, howe the Emperour Primaleon had often told him, that enchauntments (in their first apparition) de∣liuered foorth seares, but afterward would sort meerely to nothing, hee concluded to see the end of what-soeuer might happen. The two young Women, who had recouered theyr for∣mer vnderstanding, by reason the Witch forgot to throwe them into the water againe, accosted Trineus, reporting to him the base lasciuious life, wherein the Sorceresse spent all her daies, shée being descēded of Malfada the Enchaun∣tresse, that was slaine by nob Palmerin, when shee had conuerted his men into diuers skapes of beasts, as in the storie is at large sette downe: bede, they told him manie strange perrils, depending on the finishing of the aduen∣ture. Come what may (replyed Trineus) for the exercise of a dreadlesse courage, I shall be readie (through Diuine assistance) to award the very vttermost, therefore I care not, come what can.
Now beganne the ayre to cléere it selfe againe, and the storme and rough winde was more mildly calmed, when the Damosell, which before receiued Trineus into the boat, comming once more to him, thus spake. The powerfull Lady Dircea my gracious Mistresse, taking kinde compas∣sion on thy towardly youth, giues thée to vnderstand by mee, that if thou wilt depart hence with thy company, thou shalt be safely brought to thy scattered Nauie: so shalt thou fréely escape the ineuitable daungers, included in thys past-compare enchauntment, which to bring to a full period or conclusion, the whole race of Palmerin are not suf∣fiicient. Trineus gathering by these spéeches, that the Hag grew fearefull of her enchauntments ending, boldly thus aun∣swered. Signifie from me to thy Lady and Mistresse, that I haue set downe my lifes rest and final determination, but I will breake through her deuillish charmes and coniura∣tions, detaining so many Knights and Ladies in so wret∣ched a state of life, onely to please and glut there-with her owne sensuall appetite. No sooner was the Damosell returned backe to the Tower, but a mightie yron doore was heard to open, and that with such a dreadfull roaring, as if it had béene a long rowle of thunder, after which, issued foorth of the Tower the strangest mishapen Monster, that euer any eye before had beheld: for to the girdle-sted he séemed like a man, but in such wondrous sort altered and deformed, as no wilde beast could be more fierce and hideous: his téeth stoode out like the tushes of a saluage Boare, but much more stret∣ched foorth in length, and backe turning againe at the ends thereof: his armes verie huge, and extreamely strong, bea∣ring for his weapon, a long sharpe poynted Forke made of yron on one of his shoulders: and his féete were armed with such horrible crooked bending tallents, as they could little he differed from those of a Griffon: beyond all this, hee ap∣peared to be very spéedy of foote, and most agile and readie to performe the intended combate.
Trineus beholding a shape of such strangenesse, making the signe of the Crosse on his breast, and aduauncing his Shield for his defence, stoode to defend what this deformed Monster durst doe: who lifting vppe his tridented forke, strooke it quite thorow his Shielde, and the blowe falsing along his pouldrone, wounded him a little in the arme. The Knight learning heerby the Monsters fortitude and strength, purposed to ward his charges with nimble slights of defence, so that hauing a more heedfull eye to his blows, hee breathed him well about with shifts and escapes: yet could he not auoyde a hurt now and then: for the Monster was so readie in his turnes euery way, and so skilfull in handling of his Forke, as it stoode the Knight vpon to bee very circumspect, if he meant to preserue both his life and honour, neuerthelesse, hee gaue the Monster a shrewd wound in the left hand. Whereat he waxing very spleene∣full, stabbing the fangges of the forke into the earth, hee grapled and caught Trineus by the shoulder, griping him so strongly with his sharpe tallents, that brusing his Ar∣mour very much, hee made him feele extreame affliction, both with his huge weight and forcible pinching, for ease whereof, the Knight thrust his sword at him, but the mon∣ster grasping fast holde vppon it, leaping lightly off from him, bare away the sword with him. Trineus hauing thus lost his weapon, caught vp the Forke to guarde himselfe there-with, so that theyr former manner of fight was now quite changed: for the Monster layde lustilie about him with the sworde, which Trineus still well awarded with the Forke, the length whereof did greatly auaile him, and hee gaue the Monster there-with such a stabbe in the bellie, that hardly could hee make any more resistance. The Witch (standing all this while at a window, to sée what successe this combate would sort to) had in such sump∣tuous ornaments attired herselfe, that shée séemed a verie goodly and beautifull creature: aloude shee cried out vnto the Knight, not to kill the Monster in any case, promising
in recompence of sparing his life, that she would deliuer to him all the men and women which shee there detained in the enchauntment. Trineus beeing moued both with her beautie and plea∣sing spéeches, stoode still to condiscend to her request: but one of the young women thus cryed to him. Faire Knight, giue no credite to the fained glosings of this damned Hagg, for shée will not performe whatsoeuer she promises, but on∣ly delude you with friuolous deuises, to hinder yée from fi∣nishing so important an aduenture. These words made Trineus step againe to the Monster, hoping by his foyle to conclude the enchauntment, but hee caught the Knight so strongly within his armes, that hee had much adoe to fetch his breath: and in this manner hee ranne with him toward the water, as purposing there to throw him in, to the end he might be bereft of all vnderstan∣ding. But the Knight strugling mainely with him, gotte at last out his dagger, where-with he gaue him so many stabs, that he was glad to let him goe, & then the Monster made offer of casting himselfe into the Lake, but Trineus mistru∣sting no good meaning therein toward himselfe, caught him fast by one legge, and held him so violently, that downe fel the beast and he together: then did the Monster catch him fast by the Helmet, and had so brused him with the fall, as also with his heauie burden lying vpon him, that hee was well néere past all remembrance of himselfe, and with his sharpe tushes he so beate him about the Helmet, that hee shiuerd it in very many places. At last, recouering his sences againe, by méere extremi∣tie of anguish hée felt in his head, hée gotte the Monster so stiffely by the throate, that hée compeld him to tumble be∣side him, and then with his dagger hee quickly dispatcht him: When suddenly the earth beganne to tremble verie strangely, and opening with a wide gaping rift, immedi∣atly swallowed the Monster and his Forke, nor could the least droppe of blood be discerned, but it was likewise de∣uoured in this opening of the ground.
Trineus béeing sore laboured and spent with trauaile, sought for some conuenient place where he might sit to rest himselfe, and espying a lowe seate a pretty way from the Lake, went presently thether: where hee beheld the gar∣ments and Armes of such, as had béene before despoiled thereof, and afterward were throwne into the flood. There did he put off his owne Helmet, because it was brused and battered with many sore blowes, and taking vp an other, made proofe thereof, by diuers strokes giuen with his dag∣gers pommell, and not knowing where to prouide him∣selfe better of a sword, tooke vp a goodly one, which indéede belonged before to one of his owne Knights. No sooner was hée in this manner prepared, but hée sawe comming against him, a Beast of an vnaccustomed strangenesse, béeing in stature as great as a Camell, with two hornes, which hée turned euery way at his owne plea∣sure: his feete and clawes were like to a Lyons, his tayle aboue foure times the length of ones arme, and fashioned round like vnto a roape, where-with it séemed hee made good vse of seruice, by binding such Knights as should enter combate with him. Trineus stoode awhile considering with himselfe, more doubtfull of the beasts tayle then of his hornes, though in∣deede both gaue matter enough of admiration: but because that was no place for fruitlesse expence of time, hee prepa∣red himselfe in action for safeguarde of his life, practising which way victory was likeliest to be obtained. The beast made at him furiously with his hornes, and perceiuing hee could not catch him within compasse of his tayle, because by his heedfull eye-sight and nimble leaping off he very well preuented it, hee turned aside at him with his left horne, and smote him so forcibly there-with on one side of his head, that he tumbled quite ouer and ouer on the ground: and surely if the Beast had had so much power as then to haue stayed himselfe, the fight had there béen ended on Trineus behalfe, but holding on his course, as vnable to stay so suddainly, returning backe againe, hee founde the
Knight gotten vp on his féete, but yet so greatly astonied with the stroake and fall, as if the Beasts capacitie coulde haue reached to the vnderstanding thereof, the case had stoode very hard with the Knight. But Trineus, perceiuing (by this former triall) the Beastes assaults to be very dangerous, with most circum∣spect and watchfull care stood well vpon his guarde, that by no meanes hee should come to close with him: and as the Beast had knit round his taile, thinking to catch him fast there-with about the necke, the Knight intercepted it with a reuersse blowe, that cutte it off aboue an armes length. Nowe was Trineus in greater perrill then before, for the Beast béeing mightily enraged through the anguish of this wounde, beganne to flie aloft aboue the Knights height, as séeking that way to seaze vppon, and gette him fast bounde within his taile, so that nowe if he had not a very prouident fore-sight and héedfull respect to him, there was no remedie but he must be slaine. Aloft therefore aboue his head did Trineus wheele his sworde, with many sharpe thrusts amongst his flourishes, which wounded the Beast often as hee soared aboue him: yet still he perseuerd on craftie aduantages, and chaunced to fling his tayle so vnluckilie, that hee bound the Knights legges so fast there-with as he could not stirre, and moun∣ting vp so aloft with him, gaue his head diuers dangerous blowes against the ground: but the extreame payne hee felt by losse of part of his tayle, made him not able to holde him long in that sort, and Trineus féeling himselfe at liber∣tie, quickly recouered his footing, following the Beast at so apt an opportunitie, that hee quite cut off one of his hin∣der legges, and (hoping of further successe) still followed vppon him, but the Beast hurt him in the breast with his horne, and vnder the ribbes with one of his pawes, where he had rent his Cuirasse open, but the wounds were not of any great validitie. The Knight giuing the beast as little respite as might be, gaue him a great hurt in the head, which hee awarded
indifferently with one of his hornes, and with the other wounded Trineus againe in the breast, racing the Armour with such a terrible graspe, as if he had rent it quite off from his body, and indeede very much indangered the Knight thereby, who neuerthelesse helde out with inuinsible cou∣rage. Now the Monster perceiuing his death to be néere, rose vp on his thrée féete, and leaping vpon the backe of Trineus, got him fast within his leggs, & writhde his tayle so strong∣ly about him, as hee could deuise by no meanes to get from him: where-upon hee was compeld to take holde on his hornes, which hee held with such a violent power, as both grewe wearie of continuing in that grapling: beside, the beast lacking one of his legges, could not so well guide his footing as before, but béeing drawne euery way by the hornes, at last tumbled backward, falling with Trineus directly vnder him, where, though he opprest him mightily with his huge weight, yet gained the Knight so fayre an occasion, that hee lay stabbing his dagger into his belly, making a prettie large entrance into it, in agony whereof, he gaue him such a blow with his paw on the Helmet, that brusing it to his head, he made him lie still as if he had béen slaine, and the Monster (albeit his death hastened on) so dragde and halde him along on the ground, as this verie tugging had beene sufficient to kill him, but yt the Knights valour béeing beyond compare, gathering his better spirits to him, and beholding in what extreame perrill hee was, got from the beast againe vp on his feete. And nowe beganne the ayre to be so obscured againe, as nothing at all could be there discerned, which darknes con∣tinued the space of an houre, and then recouered the former brightnesse: but no where was the Monster to bee séene, then turning himselfe about, hée sawe the people which were in the Lake, to arise out of the water so high as theyr breasts, deliuering outwarde signes of inwarde reioycing. Trineus gathered by this alteration in them, that the ad∣uenture now was néere conclusion, and hoping still of full
effecting it, the Enchauntresse Dircea came royally toward him, with such a garish and glittering pompe, as it might be wel reckoned for a miracle, that so young a Prince could bridle loose wanton thoughts, and (as one quite forgetfull of honour) not make estéeme of such beauty and woorth, as in outward appearance was there presented to him, which o∣uer many doo séeke with too much earnestnes, and afterward pay the price of it with yeres of repentance: she being thus come to him, fell on her knées at his féete, deliuering these spéeches. Thou perfect Idea of honour and chiualry, beholde me héere obedient to thy disposing, without any further oppo∣sing thy life to perill. But he who had written on the table of his hart, the graue aduertisements of the Emperour Pri∣maleon, in such cases of allurements by magicall phantas∣maes, stearnely returned her this aunswere. Labour not so artificially, in making me a witnesse of your counterfai∣ted beauty, for I know you haue no reall perfections in you, or any thing worthy the respecting: but admit you had, yet were there no reason why I should make any esteeme of you, that detaine so many héere captiue in most wretched condition, declaring your selfe therein a vile detestable wo∣man. Dircea, who made full account to enthrall ye thoughts of Trineus, by shewing her selfe so beautifull and tractable, when she found him so farre off from amorous perswasions: swolne big with spléene and disdaine, she arose on her féete, saying. Thou base and villainous Knight, knéele I at thy féete to be so slaue-like scorned? soone shalt thou repent thy vnmanly behauiour: then grasping her curled locks anger∣lie with her hands, suddainly it began to raine down stones of such hugenes, as there had braind him, but that he quick∣lie stept into the house where the Armour was kept. No sooner had this storme of stones giuen ouer, but all the men and women came forth of the water, and ranne to the place where their Armour and apparrell was reserued: which Trineus beholding, he went foorth least he should be smothe∣red with their multitude. And surely it was a wonder to
behold, with what spéede they were all cloathed and armed, and how quickly in warlike maner they issued forth again, as if they meant to assaile some aduersary. Trineus being sore wounded and weary, when he saw so many returne like enemies, (for they were aboue ten thou∣sand in number,) he reckoned him selfe as a dead man: but not to loose his life fondly and rashly, he stood prepared what euer might happen, a testimonie of his vnconquerable spi∣rit. The armed Knights, prouoked by the enchauntment, went on against him, but he mooued not from his place, and when they came néere him, they stood all still, as if they had not the power to hurt him. The Witch, thinking verily to murder him among such a multitude, when shee sawe not one of them stirre to strike him, shee ranne to her spelles, and finding that he had a Ie∣well, which defended him from her charmes, contriued another stratagem to endaunger him withall, and made a large bridge appeare ouer the water, whereon the wilde beastes on the further side of the lake, might haue liberty of passage whether they would. No sooner was this bridge to bee séene, but the wilde beastes (roaring and crying through extremity of hunger) espying so many people toge∣ther, ranne a maine ouer the bridge toward them, and the Hagge stepping for her owne safety into her Tower, (ne∣uer remembring to warrant the armed men against the beastes, nor them against the violence of their weapons) they beeing thus mette together, euerie man stoode on his best defence against them, and Trineus stoode securely as a méere looker on, till beholding the beastes to haue torne some fewe in péeces, hee came to their assistance, aduaun∣cing him selfe formost as their Captaine, and there hee made sch a bloodie slaughter, that the beastes began to kéepe more backward, the whole band of men meruailing at his gallant behauiour, and beeing mightily encouraged by so valiant a Leader, they kild such a mighty multitude of them, as by good happe all the rest were forced to flight. The beasts beeing driuen away, nothing nowe remained,
but onely his entraunce into the Tower, which was all of fine Marble, and so smooth, as no holde might any way be fastened on it. The men, who by the Witches commission came out of the lake, and receaued their Armes for her defence: by this foyle of the beasts, were fréed from enchauntment, and nowe desired to be reuenged on her, who had helde them so long in such a wretched state of life: and electing Trineus as their Generall, went on toward the Tower, but Dir∣cea, perceauing her imminent case of perrill, threwe a de∣uillish spell abroade, that euery one of them were strucken blinde, sight remayning onely but to Trineus, by the Ie∣wells vertue which safely defended him. Where-vpon, hee studying howe he might soonest vnenchaunt this place, and driue the Witch thence to some other hellish habitati∣on: espyed on a Trée hard by him, a horne hanging so low, as verie easily he might take it downe, which when he had done and put about his necke, he began to winde it so loude as he could. Nowe was this the last and most dangerous acte of the enchauntment, because (soone after) issued foorth of the rockie Tower, a Knight hauing the stature of a Giant, his Armour beeing blacke, his Shielde without any imprese, and mounted on a darke bay Courser, with a Dwarffe fol∣lowing him, and armed in all respectes like him. This Knight, without vsing any other courtesie to Trineus (who was one foote) ranne proudly at him with his Launce, of∣fering many thrustes and blowes at him, but none came néere him: for our gallant Champion, desirous to conquer nowe or neuer, auoyded all his attempts with nimble dex∣teritie, deliuering diuers fierce strokes at the Horses legs, to the ende he might fall downe with his Maister, but eue∣rie blowe seemed as smitten vpon brasse, rebounding backe without any other successe, which made him growe doubt∣full of the aduentures conclusion, because he felt him selfe excéedingly wearied, and the wounds in his breast did very much annoy him.
As thus he stood wayting some better opportunity, for his readiest departure thence with honour, the Horse passing somewhat néere him, he caught fast hold on his bridle, and turning him often about, gaue so many stabbs at the moun∣ted Knight, that hee made him fall beside his backe to the ground, casting him selfe vp presently into the saddle, but had no Launce to helpe him withall. The Dwarffe, who all this while stoode beholding this battaile, when hee sawe the Giant on the ground, and the Knight seated in the saddle: hee leapt vp on the crouper of the Horse, & troubled Trineus about his neck very strange∣lie, and hee (to rid him selfe of this apish burden) made di∣uers proffers with his hands to take holde of him, but the Dwarffe was so skittish euery where about him, that hee did nothing but hold him daliance, till the Giant had got vp on foote againe, and came a fresh to charge him with his Launce, which euermore as hee made a thrust forwarde, withall with a quicke hand, he still drewe it back againe, whereat Trineus began not a little to meruaile, procéeding on to this coniecture, that therein the force of the incantati∣on consisted, and making no respect of any trauaile what∣soeuer, hee opposed him selfe to the Dwarffes shiftes and sleights, the rather because hee had no weapon to defende him, and being watchfull withall of the Giants Launce, as he thrust it at him and puld it back againe, he made vpon him with the Horse, and by good hap caught hold of it with his right hand, when presently the Dwarffe skipt iust be∣fore him, onely to impeach his hold of the Launce, and with the other hand hee fastened on him also: but the Giants strength was so powerfull in drawing back the Launce, as he felt great paine in the with-holding it: neuerthelesse, he purposed rather to forgoe his life, then leaue his hold of the Launce, and (catching the Dwarffe at an aduantage, be∣twéene his arme and his body) hee fastned his left hand on the Launce likewise, and so haling it to him with both his handes, still looke howe much the Knight recouered of the Launce, so much did the Giant loose of his magicall strength
giuen him by the Witch, so that forgoing it all at last, he fell downe backward along on the ground, & the Dwarffe then getting loose from Trineus, ranne a pace toward the Tower, which began to smoulder and smoke in such man∣ner, as if it burned, and getting entrance, the Dwarffe was neuer after séene. Trineus leauing the Giant there lying, went néerer to the Tower, where beholding the windowes and gate to be open, he imagined that the Enchauntresse was fled: the ra∣ther, because all the people which before were smitten blind, had now recouered their sight againe, and came run∣ning altogether to the Tower, but being vnable to enter, by reason of the smoke, some of them returned back where the Giant lay, and stabbing at him with their Launces, least hee should arise againe, found nothing there but the empty Armour. Within an houre after, the Tower fell, and the smoke ceased, to the no little ioy of Trineus, when he perceaued the aduenture to be finished, so (with-draw∣ing him selfe to bind vp his wounds) Dircea the Witch, fly∣ing aloft in the ayre ouer his head, stayed her hast a while, and thus spake to him. I am not willing Trineus, to tarry any longer in this Iland, which thou hast gotten badly from me: but hold it for most certaine, that to whatsoeuer place thou shalt betake thy selfe, I will still be by thée to hinder thy desseignes: but especially I will so plague the course of thy loue, as thou shalt neuer quietly enioy it: and hauing thus said, away she fled. Trineus made no account of all these threatnings, but calling some of them, who had beene held by the Witch in such a wretched kinde of life, enquired further of their con∣dition, but could learne no otherwise of them then he had done before. So remaining a while there vnder cure, those Knights and their associates which had so long béen there, were very desirous of visiting their own natiue Countries: and standing on the Sea shoare, they discerned farre off di∣uers spread sailes, which (on their call) comming thether to them, thanking Trineus and taking leaue of him, many
of them parted thence, so that in foure dayes space, all the Mahumetists were euery one gone: two hundred Christi∣ans remaining there with him, some belonging to the Em∣pire of Constantinople, others to Rome, and most of Italie. A∣bout ten dayes after, albeit Trineus was not thorowly re∣couered, yet went he aboord with these people into his own Shippe, which all this while had saild about the Iland, the Mariners meruailing what was become of their Lord and Maister. CHAP. LII. How Trineus found his Armie in the port of Ni∣quea, and how they gaue battaile to the Citty. THe Fléete and Armie belonging to Trineus, after the rough tem∣pest was more mildly becalmed, not séeing their Admirall with their chiefe Commaunder, hul∣led vp and downe two dayes in expectation of him, and neyther farre nor néere discerning any sayle, prepared for departure thence, because other windes threatned more stormes were toward, and shaping their course directly for Niquea, in foure dayes space they put into the Port. Floraman hauing beheld a farre off on the Sea, a Fléet of so many Shippes together, began to grow doubt∣full, that they were people of Persia or India, and came in ayde of trecherous Dirdan: wherefore to impeach their landing, the Armie was presently put in readines, & com∣maunded to méete place for such imployment, leauing Ol∣trando with his Indians, and Blandidon with foure thousand hardy men at Armes, to hold the Citty enemie play, while the rest of the Armie went to withstand these fresh com∣mers, as prouidence and policy necessarily required.
Dirdan being on the toppe of a Turret, and beléeuing that these Shippes were come in his defence, gaue order for his peoples present readines, to trouble our forces with some light skirmishes, while his supposed friends might the better be landed: which charge being referd to Mameo and Tresino his Cosin, they issued foorth with the thrée Giants, and a bastard sonne to the Souldane of Persia, named Leo∣uino, who was come thether without his fathers commis∣sion, with two thousand bolde Knights in Dirdans fauour, and to approoue his chiualrie vppon the Christians. Hee would néedes be the first that should set vppon our Campe, and méeting with Blandidon, gaue him such a hurt in the right arme, as he could fight no longer that day, but with∣drew him selfe for cure into that part of the Citty which he held. Leouino vnhorsed Oltrando, and dealt very stearnely with his Indians, where-vpon Oliuanto, Gracian, and Pom∣pides came to succour him with their troupes, in which time Gargante and Broco were entred the vaw-ward. O∣liuanto encountred the Giant Broco, and they met with such fury, that they were both dismounted together, but quickly they recouered them selues againe. Pompides had such a shock giuen him by Gargante, that hee fell from his Horse vpon his backe, where he had béene trodden to death among the Horses féete, but that Francian stept in with fif∣tie men in his ayde, and got him spéedily mounted againe: Gracian came hand to hand with Leouino, and kept very e∣uen quarter with him. By this time the Fléete was come so forward, as Flora∣man and the rest could discerne the Crosse in their banners, and the Armes imperiall of Almaigne, diuers noble Barons likewise making out in a Foyst, who were well knowne vnto our company. Now Palmerin and Dramusiande, fea∣ring least some disaster might befall those troupes, which were in hotte encounter with Dirdans men, among whom were three such mighty Giants, drew backe with a fewe followers to helpe their friends.
Dirdan by his farre distance vpon the Turret, being not able to discerne whether this supply was of friends or ene∣mies, when he beheld Palmerin & Dramusiande make for∣ward with their wing: sent Lanfranco in their resistance, who did much iniurie among our men with his Beare, vn∣till he came face to face with Dramusiande, where hee was compeld to abide his blowes, and Palmerin singling foorth Leouino, (who already had wounded Gracian, and made way to méete a man of greater valour,) at his very first stroke hurt him with his sword, and so cleft his helmet, that he was ready to fall downe in a traunce: nor did Palmerin escape a light hurt in the arme, and being on both sides sun∣dred by their people, drew backe to breath a while, which respite prooued well for Leouino, who hauing felt such stur∣die blowes, began to credite for certaine, that the fame of the Grecian Knights valour was not causelesse reported, and finding his helmet quite cleft, with-drew for another. Dir∣dan perceauing no resistance at the Port, but that the Fléet had mildly strooke saile, began to imagine that they were Christians, and fearing least by them he might be surpri∣zed, or his forces in fight suddainly disaduantaged, hee sent to aduertise Gargante and the rest thereof, willing them to get into the Citty againe, till better opportunity might be∣friend them: but he being incredulous that dealt with Oli∣uanto, and hauing receaued by him a shrewd wound in the side, would lend no eare to Dirdans aduise. Lanfranco and Broco began to retire with their men, but Palmerin and Dramusiande so néerely pursued them, as they could get their troupes into no order, for Gracian, Fran∣cian, and Pompides were on the one side, and Palmerin with Dramusiande on the other, making such hauock and slaugh∣ter as was strange to behold: at which very instant, Tri∣neus forces came and ioyned with them. Floraman beeing their leader, and thinking the game stoode nowe vpon the winning or loosing, made vp with this new supply against the Citty, to try if he could kéepe the two Giants from pas∣sing the bridge: but Gargante, who by no meanes would
retire, was so beaten about the head by Oliuanto, that fal∣ling in a swoune, he was taken prisoner. Dirdan with a thousand of his valiantest Knights, among whom were Mameo and Tresino, stoode for defence of the Bridge, for the better retiring of his troupes: but on the arriuall of Dramusiande, who nowe was on foote, with a great battaile-axe in his hand, there was found busie work enough to doe, because on the other side did thrust in Pal∣merin, Oliuanto and Oltrando, who now to recompence the blame of his fall, stept boldlie on the Bridge, dealing hand to hand with Mameo, as Pompides did the like with Tresino. When Floraman saw these two Knights on the bridge, and in such present dangerous perrill, hee gaue a sddaine summons with a trumpet, wheron all the rest of his Soul∣diours immediatly made forward. Lanfranco stood at the bridge-foote with a huge yron shielde, awarding the migh∣tie strokes which Dramusiande gaue him with his Axe, the like play did Palmerin hold his brother Broco: but Oliuan∣to hauing his eye still fixed on Dirdan, when he beheld him giue backe toward the Cittie, stept resolutely more for∣ward vppon the Bridge, and béeing hindered by Mameo, with his sword he cleft his head to the téeth, and Oltrando béeing there wounded, presently retired. When Lanfranco and Broco saw the people rush in such heapes vppon them, fearing to be ouer-borne by their mul∣titude, they gaue somewhat backward on the Bridge, and defending the passage so well as they could, still withdrew by little and little into the Cittie, béeing closely pursued by Oliuanto, who in the heate of a youthfull spirit, presumed on more forwardnesse then wisedome required, and (in a vaine oppinion) thought himselfe able to surprize the Citty. No sooner was he entred, but immediatly the Bridge was drawne vp, and there (as he with his enemie) so was Pom∣pides fighting with Tresino, where the Giants and Dirdan making fiercely vpon them, they were constrained to yéeld themselues.
Palmerin, who by reason of the peoples vnrepellable croude, could neuer get footing vpon the Bridge, when hée heard that Oliuanto and Pompides were taken prisoners, doubting least Dirdan would bloodilie dispatch their liues, drew on the freshest troupes of the Armie, and being quar∣tered in such order as beséemed, hee sent Francian and Ol∣trando (who came both but newly from the Chirurgians hands) to beleager that part of the Cittie next to Blandi∣dons possession, and then himselfe with the rest of the Ar∣mie, (commaunding Saling-ladders and other engines of warre to be brought) gaue a strong and valiant assault vp∣pon the Cittie. Dirdan, not missing Gargante tell nowe, fell into such an impatient furie, that hée would needes procéede with vi∣olence aganst Oliuanto and Pompides: but perceiuing that the Citties defence stoode him vpon, the Giants were com∣maunded so mount the walls, where casting downe great stones and logges of timber, they calmed the ouer-forward approche of their enemies. Notwithstanding, Dramusi∣ande, taking a great Ladder, & aduauncing a large shielde aboue his head, mounted vp the wall so hastilie, that Lan∣franco espying him, was once in minde to meddle no more with him: yet hee caused so many huge stones to bee cast downe vpon him, that euen as hee thought to get vpon the wall, by his maine strugling & striuing, the ladder brake, and Dramusiande hanging by one hand vppon the battle∣ment, might there haue perrished, but that he gotte footing in a rift of the wall, and there defended himselfe so well as he could. All the Christian Armie, séeing Dramusiande in such danger, gaue a meruailous loude out-cry, which mooued Palmerin foorth-with to catch at another Ladder, and hee ascended the wall with such spéedinesse, that hee séemed to some as if he had flowne vp, and finding he was resisted by Broco, thought yet to make his part good enough, but then he was in perrill to be cast downe with diuers Launces, which out at the loope-holes were bent against him: Ne∣uerthelesse,
hée layde so valiantly about him with his wea∣pon, that hee sliced the Launces in sunder as fast as they came néere him, and getting vp at the last hard by Dramu∣siande, defended him from the danger of his enemies, with incomparable courage. Now indéed, because the wall was well furnished with men, which came still in fresh supplies, to preuent our Souldiours from their entraunce: the multitude of Laun∣ces darted at them, and showers of stones falling euerie way on them, had questionlesse there concluded their liues, but that it fell out so well and luckilie, that Blandidon had begunne a fresh charge in his quarter, whereto Francian and Oltrando (neighbouring with their forces) raised an vnexpected assault on those parts of the Cittie. This sud∣daine allarum so amazed Dirdan and his men, that they were constrained to seeke helpe for them, which there la∣boured to maintaine resistance, by meanes whereof, Gra∣cian, (with aboue fiftie Knights) mounted on the wall, which they the more easily compassed, because Lanfranco and Broco, were very greatly busied with Palmerin and Dramusiande, and in some good hope there to haue slaine them both. Dirdan accompanied with Leouino & others, were gone in succour of the place where Blandidon assay∣led, as striuing that way to conquer the thrée other parts of the Cittie. Nowe beganne the rumour and noyse to waxe verie great, and euery way came the enemies troupes violently vppon our forces, so that (despight theyr harts) they were still kept backe: but sée how graciously Fortune fauoured them, euen in this heate of trouble and perrill, Trineus with his Ship was arriued in the Port, where without a∣ny trifling or vaine expence of time, both hee & his Knights marched toward the Armie, which he beheld had besieged the Cittie on each side, and iudging it to small purpose to mount the wall, went directly to Floraman, who by reason he was the generall Commaunder, did not himselfe inter∣meddle in the skirmish, but (to auoyde all disorder that
might happen,) gaue directions still to supply with fresh power where most neede required. Vpon some conference had betwéen them together, Tri∣neus vsed these spéeches to Floraman. My Lord, vnder con∣troule of better aduise, I am of this minde, that héere wee may make a breach thorow the wall, and gaine our en∣traunce with securitie, considering so many of our men are alreadie ascended, and none of them as yet dismounted a∣gaine, it is a signe no doubt of theyr good successe, and wée are much too blame if we no way second them. Floraman, not disliking this aduise, caused certaine Rammes and other engines to be brought, which béeing imployed against the wall, with such sufficient strength as was requisite, in a little while they made so large a breach, that the Pagans in the Citty (béeing no way able to hinder them) the Christians forcibly entred like to a maine cur∣rent. Lanfranco and Broco, séeing they were thus entred the Citty, leauing the former taske they had in hand, pre∣sently forsooke the Wall, beginning to make spoyle among our people: but Floraman and Trineus so valiantly with∣stoode them, that Palmerin, Dramusiande, and Gracian, had leisure to descend, and came to assist them with their friend∣ly succour. When Dirdan had gotten intelligence héereof, leauing Leouino and Tresino to defend theyr quarter, hee hastened to helpe where was more neede, and seeking for Palmerin to die by his hand, he ranne like a furious mad man vp and and downe, till at length méeting with him, he thus spake. Thou cruell enemy, I come to die on the poynt of thy wea∣pon: but first, I purpose to let thee know, how much I hate both thée and thy race: with which words, he began to lay furiously at him. Palmerin béeing willing to saue his life, because Prima∣leon had so requested him, vsing no other resistance but de∣fence of his strokes, deliuered many gentle spéeches to quiet him withall: but perceiuing his kind labour was spent all
in vaine, and furie getting the vpper hand of longer forbea∣raunce, striking a maine blowe at him, hee cleft him from the shoulder downe to the breast, which grieued Palmerin more for so dooing, then it did Dirdan in the suffering, con∣demning greatly his own rashnes in the act, knowing that the Emperour would much bemoane the death of Dirdan, because his Father Maiortes, died in seruice of the Grecian Empire: but who would take it more grieuously then hys Father Don Edward, who had so well knowne the fidelity of Maiortes, since hee went vnder the shape of a dogge, but seeing now it could be no otherwise, he suffered his Souldi∣ours to carry him into one of theyr Moscheaes, where verie soone after he gaue vp the ghost. When the Warriours for the Cittie sawe the death of their Lord, and that Blandidon had gotten entraunce like∣wise in the quarter which he held, they would very gladly haue desired mercie: But Lanfranco, Broco, and Leouino, cruelly menacing such as offered to yéeld themselues, made forward among the thickest, béeing lothe to fall into the the Christians power, as knowing that they iustly merri∣ted the names of Traytours, because theyr Father Palur∣dan, held his Kingdome by fauour of the Grecian Empire, all which they now made no account of, but hartened on the Souldiours that were vnder theyr charge, and continued the fight with vndaunted resolution. Gargante, hauing béene all this while bound in the Ge∣neralls Pauillion, by a Pagan Page, (of whom no man had any suspition, watching his apt and conuenient oppor∣tunitie) was suddenly let loose, and spéedily armed, then came he running along through the Cittie, and entring a∣mong the thickest of the Christians, made hauocke of them in pittifull manner, which Trineus with griefe beholding, albeit he was so weary with fighting, that hardly he could stand vppon his legges, yet would he needes steppe foorth against him, but he had such a stroke with the Giants huge Mace, that he fell downe astonied, and Gargante made for∣ward, to encounter with a stronger enemy.
Lanfranco hauing a farre of discerned him, beganne to buckle close to Palmerin, because (indéed) he knew not wel howe to gette from him, and the Knight knowing what a tough companion he had, gaue with all his might such a ful blow at his enemie, that seuering his shield in two parts, it did likewise quite cut off his right arme. This maime was so full of anguish to the Giant, that making now no more reckoning of his life, with his other hand hee got Palmerin fast by the Helmet, shaking him forward and backward in such rude manner, as by no meanes hee could gette loose from him, but there had had his breath shaken out of his body: for the Giant (féeling sharpe death approching) so boystrously flung and threw him about, as if Francian by good hap had not béene neere, who gaue him a spéeding stab in the flancke, (which wounde comming altogether vnloo∣ked for) made him leaue Palmerin, and vse what extremitie he could to Francian, when grapling fast with him, his weakenesse (with expence of blood) did quite ouer-beare him, so that downe fell Francian and the Giant vpon him, where hée had vndoubtedly died vnder his heauie weight, but that certaine Knights being by, and espying the danger wherein he was, did quickly recouer him. Broco, combatting this while with Dramusiande, yet séeing when his Brother fell downe, spake as followeth: Braue Knight, if thou be as curteous as valourous, permit me to goe and comfort my Brother, whom thou seest yon∣der falne to the grounde, and wounded (to death I thinke) by one of thy company. Dramusiande, béeing euer of a gentle nature, stepping backe from him, sayd: Goe, and (if thou canst saue thy bro∣thers life) doe, thou shalt not say, but thy foe can affoorde thée that honest curtesie. This kinde aunswere, did Broco as kindly commend in his hart, and kneeling downe by his Brother, founde hée was dead: whereupon, knowing that was no place for fruitlesse lamentation, hee returned backe againe to Dra∣musiande, & thus spake to him. I féele not my selfe to spent
or wearied, but that I can stand boldly breast to breast with thée, and hard it is to gesse, which of vs two shall be victor: notwithstanding, so highly doe I prize thy kindnes shewne mee, that I am enforced to loue and honour thée, offering thée my company, and very best abilitie of seruice, so that my brothers dead body may be no further mangled. At these spéeches Dramusiande threw by his sword, and catching him fast in his armes, accepted him as his louing Brother, agreeing thence-forward to holde constant amitie together. By this time was Palmerin face to face with Gargante, betwéene whom grewe such a fierce battaile as the like was neuer séene, and Leouino, (after he forsooke the wall towards Blandidons quarter) came and met with Dramu∣siande, against whom a while hée bare himselfe valiantlie, but in the end, hee was so ouer-laboured with the Giants sturdie blowes, and so faint with long continuaunce of the fight, beeing also wounded vnder the short ribbes, that hee fell to the earth, when Dramusiande (quickly vnlacing his Helmet) had smitten off his head, but that hee cryed out: Sir Knight, for Gods sake spare my life, (and kill me not) doe with mee otherwise whatsoeuer séemeth good in your owne liking. The Giant tooke from him his sword and Shielde, or∣daining that hée should be carried thence to Broco, and then afterward they went together to the place, where Oliuan∣to and Pompides were detained as prisoners, where the doore of the Chamber béeing opened vnto them, they were both foorth-with armed as before. So returning backe a∣gaine to the fight, making passage with theyr swordes a∣long as they went: the already dishartened enemie, behol∣ding Lanfranco lie there slaine, and Broco with Leouino yéelded to the Christians, held vp theyr vnarmed handes in signe of submission, so ceased the battaile, onely Palmerin and Gargante excepted. For Palmerin hauing fought from Sunne-rising, til now the néere approch of the euening, and so wearied withall, that he could hardly regard the Giants
blowes, his Horse and he falling downe backward, one of his hind legs by mishap trode vpon him, whereof Gargante taking the aduantage, deliuered a very fierce stroke at him, thinking to make him sure from rising any more, but Oli∣uanto perceauing such a discourteous part, receaued the blow vpon his Shield, saying Well doost thou shewe thy selfe to be a bastard and a vnine, that wouldst harme so good a Knight at so apt an aduantage: leaue him, and turne to me, and thou shalt finde that I am not faint or wearie. Gargante returned no aunswere, but fetching a furious re∣uerse stroke, had feasted Oliuanto but little to his liking, had not the Knights knowledge in Armes right héedefully preuented it, and turning with a chéerefull spirit on his ad∣uersarie, requited his offer with so sound a gréeting on the helmet, that hee batterd it close vnto his head. But Gar∣gante, being altogether gouerned by his great valour, with∣out any sight or iudgement in euident perrill, continued his fierce rage of laying about him, till in deede he was so farre ouer-gone with trauaile, that whatsoeuer blowes he smote, could doo no more domage. Oliuanto (all this while) making vse of the others fury, and knowing assuredly what it would sort to at last, spared his owne labour till occasion better serued: and then his blowes (like thunder) fell on his enemie, that making him to réele and stagger round about the place, at last hee fell backward, when Oliuanto, taking off his helmet, and de∣maunding whether he would yeelde or no, perceauing no aunswere was returned, presently he parted his head from his body. And thus was the battaile fully concluded, with absolute possession taken of the Citty, which being perfor∣med with the nights arriuall, each man (as néede requi∣red) betooke him selfe to rest. Floraman hauing first visited the wounded Princes, and tooke good order for their quick recouerie.
CHAP. LIII. Howe Tarnaes combatted with Leonato, and re∣mained there prisoner, and how many other Knights were taken, and of a disgrace which happened to the wise Aliarte. THe next day following, Floraman created Blandidon King of Ni∣quea, in name of the Emperour Primaleon, but bound him not to pay anie homage, because the Emperours of Constantinople, de∣sired not to haue Princes to be as theyr vassailes, but rather their louing friendes and famili∣ars, binding them rather by gifts and kindnesses, to all kingly entercourse of league and ami∣tie. All things being ordered to the benefit of the Kingdom, and Blandidon seated in quiet possession, the rest returned thence to Tubante, where they found, that Dragonalte had reduced the state of Turkie, vnder the quiet obeysance of Targiana, with pardon and fauour to such former enemies, as had béene drawne to rise with Ristorano. When Gracian saw the warrs were thus ended, he tooke his farewell of the other Knights, saying, he would nowe returne home to Fraunce, and so parted thence with a Foist, which was giuen him there by Tarneus. Pompides would likewise set thence for Scotland, and so would Francian, Pal∣merin, and Dramusiande, euen whether their owne affecti∣ons best guided them: but Dragonalte, his minde was most to Constantinople, to be in company of the faire Quéene Ar∣nalte, which made him the gladlier stay with Floraman, who gréeued not a little, that hee might not goe thether, where (as his thoughts diuined) the others mindes were addicted. Therefore he would haue sent home Oltrando to
India, promising him, when the Emperour had conquered those Kingdomes, he should be made chiefe Ruler of them: but he, eyther to see the maiestie of the Greekes Empire, or else to free his Cosin Tamerco from imprisonment, (as af∣terward the successe manifestly witnessed) would needes goe along to Constantinople, so, taking two thousand of his worthiest men with him, he sent the rest back againe into India, to those places which were vnder his iurisdiction, and putting to Sea with the Armie, they had so prosperous a wind, as brought them within sight of Constantinople, where Trineus (suspecting that the Emperour would kéepe him, in regard of the great loue he euer bare vnto him) suddainlie turned his Galley toward Macedonia. But leaue we them, and come to other, who haue béene somewhat ouer-long omitted, namely Tarnaes, who after he departed from Leonato, passed by an aduenture of two villainous Knights, that had taken a Horse well munited from a Damosell, and dissembling as if they meant to re∣store it againe, conducted Tarnaes to a fountaine, where sit∣ting downe and putting off their helmets, they gaue such words of assurance to Tarnaes, as he made no doubt of their formall promises. So spending a little while in pleasant discoursing, and some pretty quips slighted toward the Da∣mosell, who remained nowe more then halfe perswaded, that she should haue her Horse deliuered her againe: one of the Knights (drawing from his side a long Poniard) thought to stab it into Tarnaes head, which very easily he might haue performed, because the man that is ignorant in complots of treason, is farre from the thought of any treasonable action. But the Damosell perceauing the villaines intent, cryed out aloude: Beware Sir Knight, whereat Tarnaes star∣ting a side, receaued the stab on his right arme so violently, that he could scarsely tell how to stir it. Wherefore step∣ping vp vpon his féete, and getting his sword forth with his left hand, couering his head with his other wounded arme, stoode boldly against them vpon his defence. One of these false Knights (being the valiantest of them both,) buckled
against him with such fierce following, that hee had good reason to stand in doubt of his life, & albeit the paine of his arme much hindred him, yet was hee forced to shift hands with his sword, and (forgetting his wounds anguish) stept iust betwéene them, where thrusting one of them thorowe the side, he rent his sword forth with side and all, so that fal∣ling downe along on the ground, his companion was now left to looke to him selfe: who being daunted with the bad successe of his fellow, desired pardon of Tarnaes, but he ey∣ther not hearing him, or reputing so vile a person vnwoor∣thie of life, that made no more reputation of honour and Armes, stabbing him quite thorowe, there left him also dead. Afterward, taking his Horse by the bridle, he moun∣ted vp into the saddle, helping the Damosell vp behind him, giuing her the reines of her owne Palfray in her hand, and then he desired her to tell him, her cause of her trauaile tho∣rowe those Woods, with a Horse so costly and ritchly fur∣nished. The Damosell, who began to wexe amourous of the Knight, with a cheerefull countenaunce thus replied. Ho∣nourable Sir, I am Sister to a youthfull Knight, Lord of a Castell, which anone you shall see, who being disposed to combate with these Knights which you haue slaine, sent me to a Castell of mine Aunts, to fetch this Horse of excéeding rare proofe, and they most discourteously tooke the same from me. When she had thus spoken, she vsed diuers affectinate signes to the Knight, who hauing directed his fancie to a place of more height, meant quickly to leaue her, when he had brought her into better security: beside, his Squires Horse had started astray, at the first affrighting of the gar∣boyle, and hee was not yet returned with him: moreouer, his arme beginning to wexe colde, the anguish of the wound the more did paine him, so that hee was compeld to goe with her to her brothers Castell, where hee was with great honour entertayned, but indéede his welcome the more excéeded, when hee vnderstoode how he had slaine the Knights in his Sisters defence. Being vnarmed, the best
experienced Chirurgians were sent for, who applied such precious vnguents to his arme, that within thrée dayes he could weare his Armour, and then he tooke leaue of the Da∣mosell and her brother: who held it as a matter almost in∣credible, that hee alone coulde vanquish two such hardie Knights, for resolution whereof, him selfe would néedes ap∣prooue him, limitting his intent to apt time and place. His amourous Sister, perceauing the purpose he went about, would needes behold the issue of this attempt, and fearing by wast of time to be preuented, her brother taking the fur∣ther way about, she made a néerer cut for her way, to be be∣twéene them when they should meete together. Encountring at last vpon a crosse way, the young Knight cried to Tarnaes, that he should stay, thē taking his Launce, which he had reared vp against a tree, he came toward him vsing these spéeches. Sir Knight, whosoeuer passeth this way, must pay a tribute, and yéeld contentedly to these con∣ditions, either to leaue héere his Sheeld and name, or that which he more dearer prizeth, I meane his life and honour. These prouoking words of the Knight, so fired the generous thoughts of the braue Lacedemonian, that without shaping any aunswere at all, giuing the spurre to his Horse, he gal∣lantly ranne to méete his enemie, who making no refusall, as gallantly encountred him, breaking his Launce on Tar∣naes Shéelde, without stirring him a iote: but the young Knights hard aduenture was such, that falling backward from his Horse, he vnfortunatly brake one of his shoulders. The Sister to the Knight, bearing mighty hatred to Tar∣naes, for reiecting her earnest proffered loue, stepping forth of a little thicket where all this while she had hid her selfe, began to crie out against him in this manner. Thou vil∣aine, and no Knight, shamest thou not so vnkindly to en∣treate thy friendly Host, who gaue thee so honorable enter∣tainment in his house? my tongue shall not let to report thy villanie, and acquaint the world with so inhumaine a discourtesie, exciting all Knights errant whatsoeuer, to re∣uenge such an important case of iustice.
Tarnaes would haue defended him selfe, by allegation of not knowing him, and that her brother had highly wron∣ged him, in assayling him without any cause of offence: but the Damosell, whose tongue ranne a little at too much ran∣dome, multiplied her iniurious spéeches in such sort, and went so farre in womannish weakenes, that he (not to be seene in so shamelesse a contention,) turning his Horse, left her there rayling at her owne pleasure. The Damosell, being named Pandina, causing her brother to be caried to curing, mounted on her Palfray and pursued Tarnaes, arri∣uing before him at the Ile of Carderia, whereas she fell in arguing with Leonato, and boldly desired him to reuenge her on a Knight, that bare for his deuise a mans head in his Sheeld, declaring withall, that he wanted an eye, and sha∣ped such a sound tale to him, as Leonato verily beleeued it for an vndoubted truth, and there-vpon grew so encensed a∣gainst Tarnaes, as nothing but death was his determinati∣on, and (within lesse then an houre after the Damosels de∣parture) Tarnaes came trotting his Courser thether. Leonato seeing him make toward the Iland, being ready armed for all commers whatsoeuer, rode forth to meet him, saying. Knight, it was ill done of thee, to offer wrong and gréeuance to a harmelesse Lady. Tarnaes, who vnderstoode not this word gréeuance, declaring the bolde spirit he euer caried about him, replied. I come to vndergoe the aduen∣ture of this Iland, and to conquer thée, except thou knowest how better to forbid me. I can and will forbid thée, aunswered Leonato, and so (without any more words) they fell to the encounter, fin∣ding little difference in the vertue of eithers strength, saue onely Tarnaes appeared to haue the most disaduantage, by a slight hurt receaued on the shoulder, which onely happened by power of the enchauntment: which he neuer minding, came to try his enemie at the swords point, saluting him so soundly on the helmet, that it seemed as if he had cleft it in twaine. Nowe albeit his strokes were giuen with great manhood, and able enough to stagger a setled iudgement:
yet the false appearance of beléeuing thēselues to be woun∣ded, grew to such a perturbation of minde betwéene them, that eyther fell into a mighty suspition, which way the vic∣torie was likeliest to encline. Heere-vpon, Leonato gaue back still toward the Iland, and Tarnaes with vndaunted courage followed, so that be∣fore he was halfe aware of it, he found him selfe to be vpon the Bridge, and there he was surprized with a suddaine vio∣lent winde, which caried him to the abiding of Don Rosu∣ell and Almaroll, where changing his former thoughts to a contrary alteration, with the rest, hee gaue him selfe to so∣lace and pastimes. Scarsely was Leonato returned to his Tent, but Gracian was come thether, and required the com∣bate, when the other (leauing his Pauillion) ran presently against him: but Gracian, who had more néede to let his Horse haue rested, then in such hast betake him to the Ioust, at the Launces encounter fell to the earth, and Leonato stept vpon him, where threatning him with death except he yéelded: hée (which could doo no otherwise by the force of the enchauntment,) gaue him selfe as prisoner, and so by the other was led into the Iland. Euen in that instant Pompides arriued there, and very soone after him did Fran∣cian also, both beeing conquered by Leonato, and both led prisoners in to the other. Many Knights came thether from diuers Prouinces, sustayning the like fortune at Leonatoes hands, and caried by him into the Iland. So farre spread the fame of this ad∣uenture, that from all Countries came gallants to combate Leonato, who maintayned his vndertaken charge with such hardy valour, as whosoeuer hazarded his fortune, hee remained still the conquerour. But leaue we him thus busied in this bold imployment, comming now to noble Florendos and Berolde, who hauing beheld Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina led away, fol∣lowed in their rescue, and were aduertised by the wise Ali∣arte, that their endeuour was spent in vain, because the con∣clusion of so high a labour, was onely reserued for him, who
should enioy Victoria as his wife. So promising them no further assistaunce, hee returned backe to the Perillous Ile, where hee bent his care against the so-suddaine Drusa Ve∣lonnaes drifts: who awayted but oportunity to be reuenged on him, because he gaue such ayde to Prince Florian, in en∣ding the dangerous enchauntment of the Princesse Leo∣narda. One day as he was riding about his Iland, she had made ready a Cage of yron, and seeing his comming, hid her selfe closely, and raised such a suddaine dark cloud, as he (being vnable to sée which way he rid) was glad to alight, as fea∣ring least his Horse should cary him into some steepe down∣fall. Héereat began Drusa Velonna to chéere her spirits, and glad of this good hap, issued foorth of the thicket where she had hid her selfe, and taking him by the hand, shaping her voyce man-like, thus shee spake. Goe with me courte∣ous Knight, and I will bring thee to rest vnder a faire Pine trée, till this muddy darke receaue cléerenesse againe. Ali∣arte who nowe began to distrust him selfe, because hee re∣membred how his skill was crost, in the bloodie warre at Constantinople, as at large is declared in the end of the second volume of this History: permitted her to guide him, and she led him to the Cage of yron, locking him vp so fast with car∣racters and charmes, as he should neuer get out againe but by force of armes, and none but the best Knight that euer guirded on sword, could be the meanes of his deliuerance. Then fastened shee the Cage to a huge high Rocke, and so leauing him hanging there in hourely dread, least the Cage and he should fall together into the Sea, she parted thence about her other serious affaires.
CHAP. LIIII. How Florian, Florendos, & Berolde sundered them selues, for better recouerie of the Ladies, and how (thinking he had found the Pallace of Queene Me∣lia) Berolde arriued at the Ile of Carderia: And how Florian finished a strange enchauntment, FLorendos, Florian, and Berolde, when they had lost the sight of the Ladies, followed their pur∣suite two dayes in vaine: because Drusa Velonna, (after shee had let the Knights once haue but a sight of them,) engirt them with such a coale-blacke cloude, as it was impossible any more to be∣holde them, vntill the Witches pleasure were woone thereto. So seating them selues all thrée by a Fountaines side, vpon an aduised consultation, they concluded each man should trauaile alone, not doub∣ting but it might fall to one of their haps, to finde the place where the Ladies were enchaunted: so, hauing well re∣freshed themselues, with such prouision as their Squires could get, friendly they tooke farewell one of another. Berolde not knowing in what Countrey he was, tooke (by chaunce) the way toward Macedon, and in very fewe dayes (without any questioning after the soile, because hee rode on sad and melancholly) he arriued at the Ile of Car∣deria: where suddainly beholding a goodly Pallace, and an armed Knight prepared to the Ioust, hee thought hee had found the enchauntment of Velonna, so riding to the man, to be resolued in his hope, he thus spake. Sir Knight, let it séeme no matter offensiue to you, to let me vnderstand the quality of this place, and whether any passage must be bought by the perrill of your power, or no.
The qualitie of the place (aunswered Leonato) you may not know, but concerning the danger of your passage, that consists in your selfe: either by turning backe againe, or leauing (as vanquished) your Shield and name. Neither of these conditions (said Berolde) can I accept of, except my hands were bound behind mee, and with these wordes, hee turnd his horse for the tryall. The encounter was sharpe and furious, Leonato loo∣sing his stirrops, but Berolde was dismounted, imagining that hée receiued a hurt in his side, and béeing on foote a∣gaine, prepared to enter combate with the sword, but a vi∣olent winde carried him into the Pallace, and there staied he prisoner in Carderia. Florian tooke toward the Mountaine of Stéele, onelie through the bruited fame of that enchaunted place, where looke howe many hapned thether, were trans-formed into Stéele, yet kéeping the shape and forme of men, and al such Knights as coasted this Country, remained there in like sort enchaunted. The difficultie of this hazardous aduen∣ture, so laboured the forward desires of Florian, that hoping to finde his daughter there, hee went to the Sea-side, and finding conuenient passage, hee should be brought within a miles distance of the Mountaine, but further they durst not bring him, as dreading (if they went neerer) to be changed into stéelie shapes. Two dayes they sayled, beholding the Mountaine to glitter where the Sun-beames touched, and the next day in the morning, they found themselues so néere, that the Marriners cryed out with feare, doubting they should ne∣uer more part thence againe, and therefore by no meanes would put to shoare: but Florian, not willing to be thwar∣ted in his desseignes, séeing they would beare him backe a∣gaine whether hee would or no, drewe foorth his Sworde, threatning the Marriners with immediate death, except they landed him where he appointed thē. The Marriners little dreading with whō they contended, prepared to stand vpon their owne defence, but a Turke of Tubante béeing in
company, that very well knew Florian, and (for his owne safetie) had helde his peace: aduertised the Marriners, that this was one of the high estéemed Knights of the Gre∣cian Court, and there was no wisedome in medling with him, except they were all a-wearie of their liues. This counsell preuailed in such white-liuerd fellowes, so that (in great terrour) they put to the shoare, where hée with his horse and Squire went quickly a-land, preparing toward the foote of the Mountaine: but the Ship foorthwith departed, and the Turke wrought so aduisedly, yt he stoode still vpon the Anchor, to sée what would become of Florian, that he might giue intelligence thereof to Targiana his La∣dy, who he knew had accepted him for her husband. Flori∣an, who tooke no héede of such idle matters, leauing his Squire some-what short of the Mountaine, where was no danger of alteration, went on about his busines, and as hee set foote vpon the Mount, all those Knights, (which had been there before metamorphosed to stéelie shapes) began to stir theyr armes, as if they purposed to oppose themselues a∣gainst him: but when he perceiued they mooued not out of theyr places, hee smilde at so vaine and causelesse a feare, hoping all the rest would prooue no otherwise, wherein hee soone founde himselfe deceiued, for hee had not gone vp the quantitie of halfe a mile, but he came to a quadrant plaine, of thirty paces euery way, where before his face he beheld a doore of Steele, which seemed to belong vnto a Caue, and ouer it was a Tombe of the selfe-same mettall. Standing still to regard a matter of such admiration, as that hollowe vast place appeared to be, the couerture of the Tombe was suddainly lifted vp, and throwne to ye ground, when presently arose vppon her feete, a Lady with disheue∣led hayre and moodie lookes, hauing a Sworde thrust tho∣row her necke, tearing a wounde that seemed freshlie to bléede, and shée leaping foorth vppon the ground before Flo∣rian, began to vtter these speeches. Foole-hardie Knight, right ill for thée is this thy blde comming hether, except thy valour be equall to thy pre∣sumption:
Know that thou art to combate with mée, and vntill I am vanquished, make thou full account to enioy no rest. So concluding her spéeches, shee drew another sword from her side, and beganne there-with lustily to lay at Flo∣rian, who (blushing as ashamed of so infamous a conflict) awarded her strokes with his Shielde, not drawing foorth his sword to strike againe: but one blowe béeing giuen by her at his knée, hee felt it to cut quite through his Armour, whereon hée imagining her to be no Woman, but rather some infernall Hagge or Furie, drewe likewise his wea∣pon, and gaue the Lady such a stroke vppon the shoulder, as might easily haue entred those men of Stéele, yet made no signe at all of hurting her, whereat the Knight meruailed not a little, feeling his body in many places payned, where the Ladies blowes had lighted on him, and when theyr swordes chaunced to méete together, he feared least his own would fall out of his hand. Greatly did it abash and disgrace Florian (in his owne thoughts) to holde this kinde of difference with a Lady so long, yet since his wonderment in bootlesse resistance, and also her weighty strokes in sufferance, perforce constrained him so to doo: hee shaped an aduantageable blowe at the wound in her necke, which the Lady with agile and right spéedie defence auoyded, whereupon, the Knight in present iudgement gathered, yt in her necke lay the hidden meanes of her conuincing, which made him ayme euery stroake di∣rectly at that part, forcing thereby the Lady to cunning retires, which Florian ouer-slipped not, but with heedfull care and dilligence followed, vntill hee had driuen her to the doore before remembred, which (suddenly of it selfe) o∣pened, and the Lady catching Florian fast about the mid∣dle, carried him with her into the Caue, and presently the doore closed againe. When Florian saw himselfe in such a hellish darknesse, and on euery side smitten all the way he went, he began to flourish his sword about him, yet féeling nere a stroke of his to light on any thing: but still the more hee went forward,
the more it séemed to him he descended, and still the Ladie layd on him, whom in this darknes he could by no meanes discerne, yet at last, his fayre starres so fauouringly smilde on him, that his weapon happened into the wound in her necke, and hearing her fall, at the instant he heard these speeches deliuered: Fortune hath fauoured thee, but Arte shall ouer-come thee. Florian, whose high spirit aymed onely at victorie, spurnd at these threatnings, as matter of no moment, but passing on still, and still descending, he beganne to discerne a great light, which very much comforted him in this obscuritie, hoping now to be deliuered frō so long a stay vnder-ground: but his apprehension was erronious, for it was a Basiliske which thwarted his way, and came mainly against him beating his winges, flying round about him with such cele∣ritie, as Florian could fasten no blow to offend him, yet did the Basiliske swéepe at him in such sort, as hee was enfor∣ced to fall downe back-ward, when houering stil euer him, and flapping him with his winges, hee tumbled him still downe and downe, aboue fiftie steppes in estimation. All which not diminishing a iote of his valour, at last hee gotte footing, and awayted the Basiliske, that came with a fresh intent to ouerthrow him againe, but the Knight standing aduisedly on his guard, scaunced aside, and (in his passage by) gaue him such a stroke, as seuerd from his bodie one of his winges: which maime was so gréeuous to the Basi∣liske that turning furiously vpon him againe, hee gotte fast hold on him betwéene his feete, and terribly cut his Helmet with his sharpe beake, though that was nothing (in respect) to the venim that came foorth of his eyes. Florian well perceiuing, that except hee bestird himselfe the spéedier, he must néedes end his life betwéene the Mon∣sters féete, whéeled his sword about with all the nimblenes he could vse, & chaunced to giue a blow at the bright stone, which the Basiliske bare on his head in stedde of a creast, which falling downe on one side of him, so did the Basiliske on the other, quite bereft of all sence and power of further
offending. Florian caught vp the stone, and placing it in the fore-part of his Helmet, procéeded onward, beeing no more impeached by the dim darknes. The way euer-more descending by degrées, made him grow suspicious, that he should at length goe downe to hel, but suddenly hee espied a Chamber doore open, whereinto boldly entring, he saw that it was hung round with black, and in the midst thereof a couerd Tombe, out of which ap∣peared the handle of a Sword: there stood like-wise beside it a goodly bedde, with Curtaines drawne round about it of black Veluet, which he presuming to open a little, beheld the Lady there lying, with whom he had fought before, ha∣uing the sword still thrust thorow her necke, which vrging him to excéeding compassion, made him deliuer foorth these spéeches. Alas swéete Lady, if there be any thing, that may re∣déeme you from this wretched condition, doe but declare it, and rest vndoubtedly assured of it. Sir aunswered the La∣die, it is in you onely to ease my miserie, now you haue ob∣tayned that rich Stone frō the Basiliske, and if your fayre seeming courage aunswere but the shape, to imbolden you against a Monster which will appeare to you, you shall de∣liuer from vnexpressable affliction, the two most loyall Lo∣uers that euer liued: to wit, a curteous & faithfull Knight, enclosed in that Sepulcher, with a sword stabd through his breast, the handle whereof presents it selfe to eye, and my selfe am the other, whose drieriment more at large you shal then heare discoursed. Florian defying all daunger what-soeuer, opposing his life to the very vttermost perrils, for fréedome of any that suffered distresse, as hée stoode leaning himselfe against the bedde, there entred with a dreadfull noyse into the Cham∣ber, a Monster hauing the face of a man, his armes and breast like to a Lyon, but his clawes much longer then that beastes, then (in all respects like to a Griffon) was his body couered ouer with great broade scailes, surpassing a∣ny Stéele in hardnesse, his legges were longer then anie
mans, but in like manner armed as his body, and a huge taile he had, which euer (as he mooued it) flung forth smoke: but farre worse then all this, he ledde a dogge in a leashe, of strange forme and stature, the most mishapen and ilfauou∣redst Curre that euer was seene. The Lady séeing the Monster, beganne to tremble, en∣treating the Knight to defend her from the dogge, as béeing the deadliest enemie she had. Florian kéeping them both off at his swords poynt, went first to the dogge (béeing the for∣most) and smiting him on the heade at his owne pleasure, made him giue backe, but did him no hurt, whereat he be∣gan to meruaile not a little. The Monster leapt vpon Flo∣rian, and hitting him with one foote iust on the breast, made him stagger so strangely backe to the Tombe, that the co∣uerture thereof fell quite beside it, where he might beholde the sword fixed in a Knights breast, which had so continued the space of thirtie yeeres, and he still breathing forth most doleful lamentations. Florian blushing to be so weakely thrust backe, deliuered many sounde strokes on the Monsters scailes, but coulde make no entrance whereby to wound him: and the dogge rising vp vppon his hinder féete, caught holde with the for∣most on the Knights Helmet, byting him by the shoulder, then snarling at his legges, and racing his Armour with his horrible pawes, that it pained him very much to endure it. Much trouble did he endure in this fierce fight, and saw no likelihood of any good successe to ensue, for the fierce rage of ye Monster was such, as no humane strength could haue conquered him, if the meanes wherein the enchauntments force consisted, were not by good hap first found out. Ther∣fore hauing made proofe of many stroakes, but all to no pur∣pose, he now would doo nothing else, but onely giue thrusts and foynes at him, whereof both the dogge and Monster séemed to be fearefull: which Florian well noating, gathe∣red that this might be the way to ouer-come them, where∣fore continuing his foynes and thrusts still, hee found him∣selfe
not so sharply assayled by them as before. The Lady seeing the Knight to take so good a course, sayd: Holde on so still, thou honourable spirit. The Monster hearing these wordes, let loose the dogge out of his leash, which presently catching the Ladie by the foote, drew her beside the bedde, and dragd her along with him foorth of the Chamber, the Monster likewise stepping to the Tombe, tooke the Knight vp on his shoulder, and went away with him. Florian séeing them both borne thus away, whom he had so resolutely purposed to defend, prepared to follow them, and the bright stone still guiding him the way, brought him where the dogge and Monster were in a Meadow, which had but one onely entrance into it, and was so rounded with stéepe hills on euery side, as whosoeuer was once en∣tred, could not get foorth againe but by the same entrance. Florian made little account of this passage, but entring the Meadow, went toward the dogge and the Monster, who had put the Knight and Lady into a corner of the Fielde, where they stoode wayling for the grieuous hurts they had receiued. The fight began nowe againe more dreadfull then be∣fore, Florian perswading himselfe, that his strength was re∣doubled, and defending himselfe couragiously both against the one and other, remembred his former aduantage of thrusting, whereby his enemies gaue backe to the Moun∣taines, but turnd againe vppon him more freshly then be∣fore: therefore when he likewise wexed wearie, as he saw the dogge and Monster leane against the rampirde hills, euen so did hee, and founde his courage much thereby in∣creased. Thus came he to be acquainted with the meanes, how the Monster and dogge renewed their violence, so the fight holding on still in this manner, his Armour was so brused about him, what with the Monsters pawes and the dogges sharpe téeth, that hee felt himselfe much afflicted thereby. Wherefore, vpon a breathing aduantage against ye hill, not
regarding the dogge, hee went against the Monster, and it was his good hap to hurt him in the throate, and the sworde passing quite thorow, made him fal along backward, when Florian made offer to smite off his head, but the Lady cried to him, not to doe so: and presently the sword fel out of her necke, where nowe no hurt or wound could be discerned, but she appeared right iocond and ioyfull, hoping to sée her Knight likewise deliuered. Vpon the Monsters fall, the dogge began to flie so furi∣ously on the Knight, that hee thought the strength (of both together) was now in the dogge, but seruing his necessitie with stoute thrusts and foynes, and resting him still as oc∣casion gaue libertie: at last, (resolued to liue or die) after a conflict of some long continuance, the dogge rising vp to catch him by the Helmet, and biting him in diuers places as before he had doone, the Knight espying apt aduantage, made a full stabbe at the dogs breast, which pierced quite thorow on the other side, whereon the sword fell out of the Knights breast, and hée was then in as good estate as euer he was before. The Lady beholding Florian full of painfull appearan∣ces, by the oppressing blowes and gripes of two such ene∣mies, conducted him thence into a Chamber, where stoode thrée sumptuous beddes, the Curtaines of Crimosine Vel∣uet frindged with gold, and such were the hangings about the Chamber, in signe of chéerefull ioy and gladnes. Into the richest bedde was Florian layde, and his wounds right carefully drest by the Lady, who was strangely altered frō her former condition, when at first shee fought against the Prince, for she appeared now to be of incomparable beau∣tie, and also of right royall behauiour. Soone after, were the dog and Monster, brought like∣wise into the same chamber, where (before theyr eyes) they both suddenly changed, the Monster to a man of forty yeres age, and the dogge to a youthfull gallant, about foure and twentie, the one wounded in the throate, the other in the breast, and both so féeble, that they began to lye downe.
The Lady expressed no pitty at all toward them, albeit the olde man called her Daughter, and the youth Louer: but bending all her care to the cure of Florian, cheered him kindly with hope of his health, and made no account of the two other at all. CHAP. LV. VVhat and who the Monster, the dogge, the wounded Knight and Lady were, and how the en∣chauntment was fully concluded. THE day ensuing, Florian felt his hurts lesse painfull to him, and the Lady with the Knight, standing by his bed, holding fa∣miliar discourse with him: hee earnestly entreated them, that they would tell him of whence they were, and the reason of the strange estate wherein he found them. The Lady, béeing desi∣rous to doo him any honourable seruice, saide: Stay my Lord a little. And going to a corner of the Chamber, ope∣ned there a little doore, out of which came a Serpent some fiue foote long, of a very fresh gréene colour, and when it drew nere the bedde it leapt vpon it, putting the head ther∣of néere to Florians face, thinking to terrifie & affright him: but hée who was neuer capable of feare, mooued not at it, but taking it to be some house Serpent, began to stroke it with his hand, and looke where his hand had toucht, the Serpents skinne immediatly fell off, and humane flesh be∣ganne to appeare, so that by passing all thorowe his hand, the Serpent altered to a very beautifull Lady, but younger then the other, yet very like in countenaunce to her. No sooner was this strange mutation made, but the first Lady thus beganne. Understand (thou perfect mirrour of
honour and Armes) that I and this my Sister, are daugh∣ters to the King of Carpatia, which is the olde man that lieth there, and by our guilty destenie it was appointed, that we should both become enamoured, my selfe, of this Knight na∣med Cauno, and my Sister, of him lying by my father, cal∣led Spinalo: folly, loue, and ignorance so farre preuailing with vs, that to them wee were not sparing of our honour and persons. Two yéeres together our practise continued, but with such secrecie, as no eye could blab our sweete felicity, till Fortune, the common enemie to happy quiet, made Spinalo grow regardlesse of my Sister, and with such fierie temper become affected to me, that he sought all meanes possible to compasse his desires. I, who had dedicated my whole loue to Cauno, and held it as woorse then abhorred sacriledge, that one man should haue knowledge of two naturall Si∣sters: with discontented lookes, and thoughts as spléenfull, thus aunswered him. Thou shouldst (Spinalo) remember, how furtherous I haue beene vnto thée, in the silent posses∣sion of my Sisters loue, of whom (beyonde opinion) thou didst séeme enamoured: but now I see thée so farre different from thy selfe, that contrary to all law of honour and respect, thou labourest, to make me turne traytour, to mine owne déere-reckoned delight: distast not thy (reputed good iudge∣ment) with such inciuilitie, nor suffer thy earst-moderate temper, to be swayed by so base and vnmanlike behauiour: but kéepe thy faith vnstaind to my Sister Silinga, whose e∣steeme of thée, is beyond my weake ability to expresse: so shalt thou iustly performe the office of manhood, & we (with∣out impeach) still enioy the benefits, of that which Fortune priuately hath enriched vs withall. These honest and effectuall perswasions, might haue re∣mooued him from so vile a sinne, if but with discretion hee had ballaunced his owne woorth or ours: but they rather spurd him on to a more violent prosecution, exceeding the limits of any respect at all, so that turning to me (with an ill-appearing countenance) he sayde. Imagine not, that
thou canst escape me so, or that my desseignes will brooke this anticipation: rather will I aduenture the King thy fathers indignation, by beeing the trumpet of our secret stolne pleasures, to inflict the heauier punishment on thee and Cauno. Now thinke (gentle Knight) what extreames assayled me, eyther I must doo a déede of damnation, or loose louer, life, and honour together: héere-vpon I flung from him, and went to acquaint Silingo with these vnwelcom newes, appoynting time, place, and apt conuenience, when her owne eares (twixt him and me) should drinke this balefull potion. When shee (too euidently) perceaued, howe farre Spinalo was become estraunged from her, hauing hid her selfe in a litle thicket, while thus the traytor assaild my cō∣stancie: he gone, she issued forth, and came vnto me with a minde so shaken, as very little differd she from the pale I∣mage of death. One conclusion was, to aduertise Cauno thereof, that hee might the better forestall his perill: but this course of ours prooued, as (for the most part) womens counsels doo, woorse and woorse, for Cauno, who in his Loues priuation could cary no patience, made his iustly-conceaued displea∣sure knowne to Spinalo, charging him to desist from so vn∣honourable a pursuite. But he who aymed still at his pur∣pose with me, made no outward note of any such prohibitiō, but goes and works with my Sister Silinga, that she should labour me on his behalfe, vowing neuer to forget so great a kindnesse: protesting withall, it was but a capricious humour that thus ouer-ruled him, which if (but for once onely) hee might enioy, he would neuer mooue it after any more: where contrariwise, if shee could not winne me to affoorde him this grace, he would publish our stolne sports to the King our father. The miserable young Mayden, beset on each side with such weighty oppression, promised to vndergoe so vnkinde an office, and awayting fit opportunity, prooued so preuay∣ling an Oratour, alleadging the vnauoydable perill, wher∣in
we both stoode, that (as heauen knowes) with mighty vnwillingnes, I yéelded to her importunate perswasions. Behold into what state loose loue now brought me, my Si∣ster gaue intelligence to Spinalo, that (at her entreates) I had condiscended, and he (not a little proud thereof) thought euery minute a moneth till the time, which was concluded to be the morning following, when Cauno had appointed to ride on hunting. The houre being come, a most vnhappy houre for vs, she brought Spinalo by an vnusuall passage, be∣ing a priuate way thorowe my Garden, and then Silinga (whose loue I know not how iustly to tearme, that (for his sake) would so highly thus offend her selfe) hauing likewise accompanied me to the place: without vsing any wordes, with-drewe into her owne adioyning lodging, to bemoane her owne hard hap and my disgrace. Spinalo hauing shut the doore, enioyed of me what he most desired, and as I lay by him vpon the bed, he loath to leaue my company so soone: Cauno, who had purposely staid from hunting, to awaite an occasion so hatefull and accursed, ha∣uing a key, which euermore brought him to me, without the knowledge of any one, suddainly rusht in vpon vs. How pleasingly he tooke it, to finde me in that sort, you can bet∣ter imagine then I expresse, but I leaping from the bed, and he ayming all his mallice at me, ranne his Rapier through my neck, as your selfe lately beheld: and Spinalo, hauing likewise his weapon drawne, with enraged fury past it through his breast. My Sister (whose sorrowing thoughts fore-told her some fatall mishap,) vpon my crie, came run∣ning into the chamber, and séeing the sword so thorowe my necke, lamenting my hard lot, cried out aloude: Oh come and helpe vs miserable wretches. This noise drew present concourse to vs, first our wayting Gentlemen, and after∣ward the Guard of the Court, who foorth-with layd hands on the vnfortunate young Lords. And the King being cal∣led thether by so great a rumour, beholding an accident so vnexpected and vnpleasing, would néedes be immediatly satisfied therein: when, euery one being silent, I like one
desperate, from the very originall declared the whole dis∣course, whereat the King grewe so displeased, that (for a while) he séemd like one distraught of his sences: but reco∣uering better iudgement, breathing foorth a sigh (as if his hart had broken,) he began in this maner. I will not with present death finish your offences, but inflict more paine for a further punishment, vntill such a Knight of valour may be found, as dare to vndertake and accomplish the ending of a fierce enchauntment, which shal be right suddainly and strangely deuised: then turning him selfe to me, he sayde. Thou that art falne in the very greatest offence, which no shames blush can serue for, nor wil euer be forgotten: shalt haue that weapon so thrust through thy necke, vntill my magick spells can be confounded. And thou Cauno, for of∣fending against thine owne honour, and concealing the vile purpose of Spinalo from me: shalt likewise haue that sword abiding in thy breast, till like date of time may expire thy punishment, then calling Silinga, he sayde. As for thee Si∣linga, reaping the iust haruest of thy fonde sowne folly, and wounding thy Sisters soule, to sheeld thy selfe from thy idle fancies reiection: shalt become a Serpent, but so timo∣rous and hurtlesse, as thou shalt shunne euery ones sight, and desire to approach néere none, yet shall the Knight be of vnequalled courage, that shall dare to touch thée with his hands, and thereby make thée receaue thy womans shape againe. For thée Spinalo (whom he could not beholde but very impatiently) that according to the brutish nature of a dogge, hast made no distinguishing of humaine society, but had the knowledge of two royall borne Sisters: I will haue thée trans-formed into the shape of a foule ill-proportio∣ned dogge, but to with-hold thée from so brutish straying, re∣straine thy liberty vnder check of a leash. Now come I to my selfe, to whom I will not be parti∣all, in a case so mightily and mainely importing: but for my too-much neglecting the office of a father, not carying a stricter eye on my daughters loosenes, I will metamorphise my selfe to an vgly Monster, for the safer defence of mine
owne enchauntment, and haue the charge of thée Spinalo in my leash. No sooner had hee spoke these wordes, but making cer∣taine signes and carracters about vs by his Arte, he caused this mountaine to appeare as couered with stéele, bringing hether the Basilisque which you haue slaine, and carying vs all in an obscure cloude, brought vs to our seuerall pla∣ces, me into the Toombe before the gate: Cauno in the o∣ther Sepulcher in the chamber: Silinga in the little en∣closure where shee came foorth: him selfe and Spinalo in those other monstrous shapes, to the place where they as∣saulted and set on you: and so for many yéeres haue wee continued, in which time sundry woorthy Knights haue heere arriued, but beeing vnable to accomplish the aduen∣ture, haue béene changed into the forme of Stéelie men, but yet may recouer their former shapes againe, if you will binde my father to breake the force of the enchauntment. More then an houres space, lasted the discoursing of this Historie to Florian, who when he sawe the Lady had fullie concluded, rose out of his bed, and taking the aged King by the beard, sayde. How farre hast thou swarued from a fa∣thers discretion, in punishing thine owne children to the hurt of others? thou mightst haue chastised them in other maner, then by the ouerthrow of so many valiant Knights: but end all now, and let them be deliuered, or (despight thy deuils) I wil be soundly reuenged on thée. Solco, for so was the King named, séeing he grew so ha∣stie with him, replied thus. Thinke not Sir Knight, that albeit (by mine Arte) I haue wrought so rare an enchaunt∣ment, I can therefore finish it at mine owne pleasure. No Sir, your valour as much as my skill is required therein: for there are two fierce Lyons, which guard a little Tur∣ret, where they kéepe a Glasse continually smoaking, and thereby is the enchauntment maintayned: you must first conquer those Lyons, and afterward doo somewhat else be∣side, which perhaps will be troublesome enough vnto ye. A Gods name, said Florian, let vs goe to it when thou wilt,
and likewise (to him) commit our whole successe: héere∣vpon the Lady sayd to Florian. Oh my Lord, giue no beleefe to this spéenfull olde man, who would haue vs (poore soules) continue still in this his hellish enchauntment: beside, be be very carefull of your selfe, that you part not with the Basiliskes bright stone, for then we are all in danger of de∣struction. Florian tooke the leash, wherewith before Spinalo was led bound, & fastened the one end about the Kings neck, reseruing the holde of the other part to him selfe, so did hee driue him along before him, commanding Spinalo likewise to follow iust behind him, who (alas) did so, but with no little gréefe, as knowing the fatall houre drew néere, when hee must (for euer) be trans-formed to a continuall Statue of Stéele. Hauing thus left the chamber, they went vp on the very highest of all the Mountaine, where (a far off) they dis∣cerned the little Turret, & drawing néere vnto it, the other two began to stay, and Florian now went formost him selfe, but could not perceaue the Lyons to stir, vntill he had attai∣ned a little neerer them. Forth-with (together) they set vio∣lently vpon him, one of them catching such holde with his pawes on the Knights shéeld, that he rent it from about his neck, & the other disarmd one of his shoulders with his téeth: this fierce assault damped Florian a little, yet knowing that death could but be the woorst, would set some deere price on it ere he parted with his life, returning such a manly stroke to the first beast, that he gaue him a déepe wound on ye shoul∣der, and bestowed the like hurt on the other in his flanke. These two wounds did put him in present perill of his life, for (at one instant) both the Lyons so graspt him about the legges, that down he fell whether he would or no, and then they so trode and scratcht him with their pawes, as the like was neuer séene before: but he beholding him selfe in such danger, gaue such a glenting blow with his sword, that (frō the angriest beast) he cut off one of his féet, then holding vp his leg, as expressing his sore paine, he gaue back & ran into the Turret. The other Lyon caught the Knight fast by one of his feete, & dragd him so violently along vpon the ground,
as his sword could doo him now but slender seruice, he found such mighty inconuenience by the beasts haling him. In this wonderfull perill, occasion yet so fauoured Flo∣rian, that he caught holde about the stump of an olde Trée, whereto kéeping fast with all his strength, he suffered much distresse and anguish, by the Lyons stretching him forth to his vtmost length, as if hee had béene drawne out vpon a Rack: yet hoping this way to preserue his life, so long hee held, till the Lyon growing weary of his strong tugging, let goe his gripe, to get some better hold of him, when pre∣sently the Knight leapt vp vpon his féete, and gaue so vali∣ant a stroke at the beast, that it pared away a good part of his head, and questionlesse had foorth-with slaine him, but that he ranne backe and got into the Turret. Beholding now none other to gaine-say his passage, he went on to the Turret, where he found the Lyons grinning and murmu∣ring at him, but séeing they were so hurt, as they could doo him litle harme, he began to enter: where-vpon, the beasts (hauing lost all power and vertue of the enchauntment, e∣uen at the Knights setting foote on the Turrets foundation) ran away with all possible hast vpon the mountaine. Florian hauing broken the bolts and locks of the Turret, opened the doore, and as hee put foorth his hand to take the Glasse which hee sawe smouldring, there appeared a man with a huge Axe in his hand, who when Florian made offer to lay holde on the Glasse, smote such blowes at him with the Axe, as not onely had béen sufficient to cut off his arme, but likewise to cleaue him quite thorowe the midst. Then heard he Solco (being behind him) shut the doore of the Tur∣ret, locking him in, in such a manner, as he was not to get out againe during the enchauntment. Now was the Knight very hardly bested, when he knew neither how to come by the Glasse, nor how to recouer his Sheelde for his defence, for still as hee profferd to take the Glasse, he with the axe boldly resisted him: and there might he haue so continued for many yeeres together, but that (by good hap) he remembred him selfe, that he which thus with∣stoode
him, might be a liuing man, and subiect to the danger of his weapon, defending the Glasse by treason and deceite. As this happy thought had thus possest him, taking his sworde in the one hand, and making offer as before with the other to the Glasse, when the man made resistance, hée gaue him a stabbe directly in the forehead, that the blood is∣sued forth and blinded his sight: by meanes whereof he had libertie to seaze the Glasse, and giuing him other stabbes in the meane space, made him fall downe along at his foote. Nowe were Solco and Spinalo come to the grated win∣dow of the Turret, where with cunning spéeches they la∣boured him, that by no meanes he should breake the glasse, assuring him that if the glasse were broken, there was no way for him to get out of the Turret. Florian taking vp the huge great Axe, aunswered: Then this shall serue mee as a key, and make an end of the enchauntment, which hee had no sooner said, but hee dasht the glasse in péeces against the yron grate, when suddenly was felt such a terrible Earth-quake, as if all the Mountaine had split in sunder, which béeing ceassed, all the Knights (before trans-formed into Steelie-shapes) returned againe to their former condi∣tion: but Spinalo, as one well woorthy of all seuere chastise∣ment, was presently set on a piller of the Mountaine, and there conuerted into a Stéelie substaunce, with a spacious briefe fixed ouer his heade, declaring the whole historie at large of his lewdnesse, as a méete example for all wicked men, forewarning them thereby to abstaine frem such base and luxurious desires. These thinges béeing thus doone, and none remaining there now but Solco, reioycing at the metamorphosing of false Spinalo, Florian tooke the great Axe, and began to lay such loade there-with vpon the grate, as (in little while) he made a window large enough to get out at, and béeing not so warie of Solco as the case required, (who dissembled ab∣solute contentment at all which had hapned) he snatcht frō him suddenly the Basilisks stone, and ran away so spéedily there-with, that Florian (little inured to swiftnes of foote∣manship)
scant knew how or which way to follow him. Solco stayed not till hee came where the Basiliske lay, vpon whose head he first placed ye creast, and then also fixed the stone therein, where-upon it returned to life againe, but much more furious then it was before. The Lady with Cauno & Silinga, quickly came thether, and knowing that this would prooue a harder conflict, then any that ye Knight had yet endured, they stoode all very pensiue, neuerthelesse, Silinga said: Now my Lord, raise vp your very sprightfull valour, for this is the last action of the enchauntment. When Florian heard those words, he felt such a chéerfull vigour disperse it selfe through his veines, as if (before) hée had not trauailed at all, and assayling the Basiliske in de∣spight of all his furie and fiercenes, he made him giue back aboue twentie paces: for hauing made triall before suffici∣ently of the Knights vertue, hee betooke him to his wonted flying aloft, and swéeping often ouer him, at last, smote him in the Helmet with his tallents in such sort, that hee fell downe groueling vppon the ground, and but that his flight carried him away so swiftly, as he could not turne quicklie to seaze vppon the Knight, hée must néedes haue kild him, ere he could haue risen vp. The qualitie of these flights altred the condition of the battaile, the Knight béeing still belowe, and the Basiliske aloft, whereby Florian sustained many disaduantages, and lost diuers good blowes deliuered to no purpose: notwith∣standing, lothe to leaue a labour (of such consequence) vn∣perfect, and hauing runne through the maine, it were end∣lesse shame to shrink now in the rere, he began now to cast a warie eye on all opportunities, suffering the Basiliske to beate out his furie, whereof hee had so emptied himselfe in lesse then an houre, and so lagd his wings with ouer tedi∣ous labour, that very often hee was readie to fall downe flat. Florian (not héedlesse of so faire an occasion) perceiuing him not to bounde aloft with his wonted violence, nor his winges to beare him with so ready a flight, pursued euerie
aduantage, still as it was offered, and (in his turnings) so sliced away his hard scailes, that the sworde made incision through flesh and all. When the Basiliske felt himselfe mortally wounded, and that his former strength was much impaired, he would now part with his life at a very disperate aduenture, and flewe against the Knight with so maine a vigour, as if the blow had hit him, it could not be otherwise but he had béene slaine: but he auoyding it very dexteriously, and séeing the Basiliske falne to the ground, gaue a spéedy stroake at his creast, and downe fell the stone againe, whereupon, as hée made offer to flie away thence, Florian intercepting him, seuerd one of his wings from the body, and likewise smote off one of his legges, whereat Solco growing desperate to see his enchauntment fully concluded, fell downe and dyed with extremitie of gréefe. Daria, for so was the eldest Sister named, with Cauno and Silinga, were greatly agréeued, to sée Solco theyr Fa∣ther die so suddenlie, but ioy, for safe possession of their own libertie, excéeded the impressure of griefe & passion. Gladly would they haue had Florian gone with them to the King∣dome of Carpatia, but he, after he had reposed himselfe there foure dayes space, and questioned with the Knights resto∣red to their right shapes, who (admiring his memorable vertues) were not sparing of thankes for so inestimable a benefit receiued: departed thence in search of his daughter, and not knowing which way he rode, tooke directly toward the Ile of Carderia, where he remained prisoner among the rest, onely by the force of the enchauntment.
CHAP. LVI. Howe Florendos combatting with Leonato, was carried captiue into the Ile of Carderia. FLorendos, who stil followed that way which his mind perswaded him his Wife was ledde before, trauailed in vain for many daies together, lighting still on some aduentures, but none of noate∣worthy marke or qualitie: and finding himselfe at length to bee in Macedonia, he remembred the so far-famed aduenture of Car∣deriaes Ile, and to try if he could giue end thereto or no, hée shaped his course that way. Nowe it happened, that his Sonne Oliuanto, whose minde ranne on the accomplishment, of all occasions what∣soeuer the worlde yeelded, or dye with disgrace in fayling thereof, chaunced likewise to iourney that way: but with∣out any ensigne or imprese, because hee would passe as one vnknowne, as in like manner did his Father Florendos, and so they met both together at the entrance of a Woode, where curteously they saluted one another. Oliuanto, who knew his father to be a good Knight, albeit he little thought that this was he, doubted of this mans going to the Ile of Carderia, yet desirous therein to be resolued, entring into discourse with him, sayd. You (Sir Knight) that beare so faire a presence, what, are ye trauailing to the Ile of Carderia? Yea marie am I Sir, aunswered Florendos: whereupon, Oliuanto (sudden∣ly laying hold on his arme) sayd. Then Knight you verie much erre and mistake your selfe, if you thinke to be there before me. Florendos, not wonted to be so iniuried, foorth∣with gaue back, saying: Thou shewest thy selfe a villaine,
and no Knight of gentle bloode, in offering to fore-stall the forwardnes of any mans vertue, but I will so chastise thys presumption in thee, as thou hadst béene better (with quiet∣nes) to haue suffered me passe from thée. So turning quick∣lie his horse, he ranne against his sonne, but yet with a sud∣daine inward attaindour of griefe, fore-telling some fu∣ture sadnes to ensue. Oliuanto, by béeing more furious then néeded, fayled in the encounter, but receiued such a welcome, as made him forgoe his stirrops, and set him in a pretty forwardnesse of falling: but courage quickning his spirits in the shocke, kept him still in the saddle, and turning gallantly with his sword drawne, made him giue his Father a wound verie shrewdlie, which afterward he not a little lamented, when he came to knowledge of whom he fought withall, for the blow entred some-what déepe into his arme, yet he escaped not without a iust requitall, himselfe receiuing as much in the right side. For two houres space the combate continu∣ed, both theyr horsses being so wearied, as they could hard∣ly stirre vp and downe, and Florendos horse had receiued a hurt in the head, so that both were glad to alight, and settle themselues to theyr best behauiour. Now began they to hacke and hewe their Armour, often catching each other fast about the middle, to try whethers strength could cast his enemy: in all which appeared no o∣ther difference, but that Florendos had his arme most hurt, and by reason of his lamenesse, he séemed to treade a little more stiffely. Notwithstanding, both theyr liues had que∣stionlesse there perrished, but that the Enchauntresse, who supported the misticall spell of Carderiaes Ile, made an ir∣ruption in this hote skirmish, sending Leonato to the place where the Knights fought, who stepping betweene them, said. Lords, it neyther agrées with honour nor armes, that Father and Sonne should sley each other, therefore all this toyle of yours is fruitlesly bestowed: for eyther of you is to combate me, who doe guarde the passage, where none must
obtaine what is onely due to me. Oliuanto, béeing vnable to make any euasion, from the fault which he had so peremptorily committed, perceiuing his aduersary altered to a Father, and compassion (for his hurts) to flowe aboundantly from him: supprest with na∣tures inward touch, & true feeling of so manifest a disgrace, he threw his sword from him, and prostrately offered to kisse his Fathers foote. But he who was double wounded, both in body & affection, the one not streaming more blood, then ye other the intire pitty of a Father: chaining him fast in his armes, desired reference for such accomplement till sitter leysure, and their Seruaunts (hauing prepared two knightly Béeres) carried them along into Leonatos Tent, where the Sorceresse caused them with all dilligence to be cured, because she would haue none to miscarry in this ad∣uenture. Eyght daies were scarcely past, but theyr lost blood was thorowly recouered, and they found themselues in ful state of health, so that now they began to cast lotts, whether of them first should combate Leonato: it fell to Florendos, who béeing soone armed, came foorth in hope to finish the aduenture, and passing the Ioust with Leonato, both were dismounted: then going to the tryall of the swordes fight, they hurt one another without regard, which outward ap∣pearance of wounding, at length so mooued Florendos to distraction, that (coueting onely the aduentures conclusion) hee séemed then to fight with much more discretion. And because he would hazard his hopes together, hee caught his aduersarie about the middle, and carrying him about with∣out any prouident respect, they fell both together (beside the Bridge) into the Riuer, where Leonato getting loose from him, suffered him to be carried into the Iland, and hee re∣turned againe, swimming to Land: where hardly had hee gotte on shoare, but Oliuanto, gréeuing that his father was surprized by the enchauntment, with his sword sette vppon Leonato, where now happened as firce a battaile between them two, as euer had beene séene before.
And although it appeared to Oliuantos iudgement, that euery stroke of his enemy right sharply wounded him, yet resolute courage made him carelesse thereof, because he felt not his breath to faile him: but earnestnes swaying him more then heedfulnes, and his aduersary still driuing him toward the Ile, no sooner set he footing vpon the Bridge, but the wonted violent winde seazed vppon him, and quicklie conueied him into the Iland, where seeing himselfe among so many good Knights together, hee coulde not deuise what was best for him to thinke of it, albeit this was the general supposition and doubt among them, that this imprisonment of theyrs, would prooue the ruine of the whole Grecian Em∣pire. The Squires that attended on Florendos and Oliuanto, noating such successe as others before in theyr Maisters had séene, returned to Constantinople, where they declared the mishaps befalne to theyr Lords, which caused such dis∣quiet thorow the whole Court, that the Emperour Prima∣leon was readie to die with conceite of griefe, séeing he had so lost his Sonne and his two Nephewes. But thys sad storme was indifferently ouer-blowne, when the Armie from Turkie arriued there, with Floraman and Dragonalte, who first of all aduertised the Emperour, of the warres suc∣cesse at the siedge of Niquea, the death of Dirdan, and pacifi∣cation of all troubles in Turkie: letting him vnderstande withall, the departure of Florendos, Florian, and Berolde, for regaining of Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina, who were strangely shewne to them, by an Enchauntresse cal∣led Drusa Velonna, according as the wise Aliarte before had told them. Then did the Emperour requite their sad discourse, with report of his Nephewe Primaleons reputed death, as also such Knights, as were before imprisoned there, among whom Florendos and Oliuanto now holpe to make vp the number. Oltrando of India was brought to the Emperour, and kissing his hand, sware loyall alleagiance to the Em∣pire of Constantinople.
During the time of these so little pleasing reports, there arriued from the Perrillous Ile a Sonne of Argentaoes, na∣med Sarasto, and hee gaue addition of the heauie tydings, howe the wizzard Aliarte, was by a Witch shutte vp in an yron Cage, and fastened to a Mountaine hanging ouer the Sea, whereas no other Land could be discerned: and when any Shyppe came to succour him, if they drew within lesse then halfe a miles distance of him, suddainly hee would be snatcht away in such strange manner, as no way could be imagined howe to come at him. These newes toucht neerer then all the other, and made his Maiestie readie to droope downe dead: nor could the Empresse and the Ladies conceale theyr passions, ha∣uing lost the onely anchor-hold of their comfort: and doubt∣lesse some strange inconuenience had happened in ye Court, but that at thys very instant (as good happe would haue it) a Letter was séene come floating on the Sea into the Port, which béeing directed to the Emperour, was (by the finder of it) brought straite to his Maiestie, who knowing it to be the wise Aliartes hande writing, right ioyfully opened it, the contents whereof in order followeth.
The Letter that came floating on the Sea, from the wise Aliarte, into the Port of Constantinople. THE DIRECTION. To the high and mightie Monarch Primaleon, Em∣perour of Constantinople. ❀ The Contents. TRouble not your Princely thoughts (most powerfull Emperour) for mine imprisonment, which can last no longer, then the expiation of certaine maleuolent a∣spects, which a while will ecclipse the faces of my fay∣rer-shining starres. Your Nephew Primaleon liues, and is he that shall enritch you with future ioyes and felicities. But as for the Ladies, their recouerie cannot so expeditiously be per∣formed, because my assistaunce will greatly be wanting: ha∣uing heare such a powerfull spell set vpon me, as no humaine might can preuaile against it, without enforcing Drusa Ʋe∣lonna her selfe first to vndoo it, or awayting her more serious imployment, all which will be accomplished in time. The aduenture of Carderiaes Ile, is full of perill: but he onely must finish it, for whom it is reserued. So humbly kissing your royall hand, I take my leaue. Yours euer, Aliarte. This Letter caused such a generall comfort through the Court, that all gréefe and melanchollie was quite abando∣ned, euen as if (the promises in writing) had béene already performed, when the Armie, being for a respite discharged, they had leasure nowe to meditate on good happes ensuing. Floraman being greatly enamoured of Clariana, the beauti∣full
widdowe so deceased Dramian, was ouer-swayed by the extreamest folly which lightly hath beene séene, equalling his cariage  this new affection, as when hee despised all loue and  vpon his dead Altea, which you may reade  at large in the first part of this Historie. agonalte also grewe as affectionate  his fare Arnalte,  ten dayes being now already past, & his owne thoughts  his honour in question, taing it with losse of time and slothfull negligence, in omitting his vtmost imploy∣ment for their release, that were detained in the Ile of Car∣, or (at least) to suffer imprisonment with them: a∣ing licence together of the Emperour, likewise of the Em∣presse, the other Princesses, & their harts-deuoted Ladies, they purposed their iourney toward Macedonia. But when Floraman tooke his farewell of Clariana, entreating that she would terme him her Knight: he was publiquely by her so scornfully reiected, that (casting by all hope of euer com∣passing her loue,) he departed with this resolution, to seeke some such way of death for his fruitlesse loue, as his memo∣rie (thereby) might neuer be forgotten. But come we now againe vnto Primaleon, whom we left at the Tower of the Caniballs. CHAP. LVII. How Primleon, otherwise called, the Knight of ortune, accomplished in two dayes the aduenture of the Tower. SCarse was the morning wedded to the worlde, when Primaleon heard such a barking and howling from the Tower, as would quite haue dis∣mayed any heart but his: notwith∣standing, he whose courage was al∣together enclind to conquest, began to meditate with his thoughts, by
what meanes hee might vanquish so many Monsters, and gaine his entrance into the Tower. As thus he stoode pon∣dering on the likeliest perswasions, the Knight how the Wood came to him againe vnto him, saying. Prepare your selfe Sir, in regard you are forth-with to be assayled: and because your life is not to miscarie in this enterprise, take this direction from me: these Caniballs defence consists on∣lie of their faces, therefore make thereat your marke and ayme, and so be assured to part with victorie. Primaleon presently armed him selfe, & taking his ham∣mer, went forth of the Cottage, where beholding not any one to offer him resistance, hee stoode beating against that part of the wall, where before hee had made some slender rupture, and such were the blowes he gaue, that the fracture extended it selfe now aboue an hand breadth, more then be∣fore it had done, from which labour he was quickly coun∣termaunded, by sixe Caniball brethren, who were come to reuenge the death of their father: wherefore bethinking him selfe of the Knights former aduise, he made a thrust full at the nose of one them, passing the sword quite vp into his braine, whereby he fell downe dead at his foote. The other pestered about him terribly with their Clubbes, but still as they were hurt in the face, they fled away from him toward the Wood, where turning back at the very entraunce, they did nothing but stand barking at him, so that there he slew two of them, and the rest ran away wounded. Soone after were descended aboue twenty Caniballs to∣gether, which set all vppon him at once, offering to engirt him round as in a circkle: but he setting his backe against the wall, defended him selfe still with speedy thrusts, where∣of they expressed feare, and kept off from him, neuerthelesse his labour tooke so good successe, that tenne of them he had wounded in their faces, all which retired, and would no more come néere him. In little while after, the rest were glad to flie with bloody faces, and he remaining now alone, leaning to breath him selfe against the wall, was  snatcht into the Tower, but by whom he knew not, and the
the whole shape being scattered on the floore, each part (of it selfe) went thether whence it came. Not long had he stoode still, but (from vnder the Toombe) came creeping foorth a very long Serpent, so fierce and furious in assayling him, as his lofty leapes and snatches at him, made him scarse quick enough in his owne defence: and still the Serpent , to winde his taile about the Knights legges, which o well auoyded by his manly strokes, for the Serpents in∣nt was to make him fall, which if it could haue done, the night had immediatly béene there enchaunted, and thereof was he forewarned by the Lady, during this sharp conflict, Fortune (euermore fauourable to Primaleons enterprises, nd willing to make him generally famous,) caused him to giue such a stroke on the Serpents head, that it réeling fell downe, when passing his weapon quite through the paunch thereof, it suddainly vanished out of his sight. As hee stoode leaning a while to rest him selfe, the doore opened, and the Lady taking him by the hand, went forth with him, but there came a huge beast against him, little lesse then an Elephant, which hee hardly knew how to re∣sist, because he could scarse reach his belly with his sword, Then he bethought himselfe of the great Partezane, which he fetching in hast, came againe toward the beast: who had two hornes, each of them aboue three yards in length, as  as brasse, and very sharpe, with one of them he hurt  in the shoulder, forcing him to stagger, and very , but supporting him selfe with the Partezane,  it as he could, in regard of the weightines,  blow he smote there-with, the beast stil rebated with his long hornes, often making the Partezane ready to fall out of his hands. Primaleon wel perceauing the beasts fury and strength, thought it best to temporize his owne resistance, till he could  some place of this Monster aptet for wounding: so keeping him off as conueniently he might, till his vnweldi∣es and violence soonest should wearie him: at length, be∣ sed face to face with the beast, he gaue such a thrust
at his browes betwéene the hornes, that blood issued foorth in great aboundance. This gladded him (not a little) that he had wounded the beast, hauing giuen aboue twenty o∣ther strokes at him, yet could by no meanes enter his skin, which putting him now in some hope of victory, made him watchfull of like aduantage, for his further hurting: but by reason his hornes were still dangerous to him, he was con∣straind to keepe off, and spend many a stroke in vaine, till more auayling successe might better sted him. Now grew the battaile to such desperate condition, that Primaleon (like one prodigall of life and honour) set downe his rest on the vtmost hazard, and holding his Partezanes staffe on the ground, with good regard to the beasts fury, his minde halfe perswaded him, that good hap would direct his swords point, to the very tendrest part of the Monsters skin, as in deede it followed in the proofe: for the weapon entred vnder the blade of the shoulder, and passed along to his very heart, whereon the beast staggerd toward him, which the knight perceauing, leapt off from him, else had he falne full vpon him, and so might haue endangerd him by his huge weight: the Lady not a little glad of such successe, sayde. Sir Knight, let vs returne the same way we entred, so shall we get forth of the Tower, otherwise, there is no place for resting you, but the Caniballs wil fiercely againe set on ye. Primaleon followed her direction, and then they beheld the Tower to open, iust on the same side where he had entred, so they issued forth, and went into the afore-said Cabben or Cottage, euen as the Sunne was at his descending: fin∣ding there the table ready furnished, and two goodly beds seuerally to rest in, which (to him) seemed highly pleasing. Then entred hee into consideration of the Lady, reputing her to be of quality and greatnes, by making such esteeme of him in this enchauntment: but hee might not knowe of whence or what she was▪ because the force of the Magicke would not admit it: notwithstanding, among some other gentle conference, she spake to the Knight in this manner. Most euident and apparant is it, what happy fortune Pal∣merin
d' Oliua left to his of-spring, in that your gracious starres pleased to guide your hand, to the onely direct place for confounding the beast, which else, all the strength in the worlde could not haue conquered. But to morrowe, there remaines a farre greater aduenture for ye, as neuer could you desire a matter of more esteeme: thereby may you gaine an vnguent, which can cure the Emperour Primaleon, Don Edward of England, and your father Florendos, marie the purchase of it, will cost you much labour and perill, & per∣haps will make you repent, that euer you vndertooke it. So excéeded Primaleons ioy, that these Princes (by his meanes) might be recouered, as he thought euery houre a yéere till the next day came, and hauing supped, he went to his rest, vntill the bright morning early saluted him, when beeing risen, hee found the Lady in deuoute prayer for his safety. Nowe began he to consider with him selfe, that the Sledge or Hammer might stand him in some sted, where∣fore taking it vp on his neck, he went to the place where he issued foorth, which he found to be open, and (dreadlesse of any perill) he entred with the Lady, who (for her security) kept still by his side. No sooner were they entred, but the wide-open rift clo∣sed againe, and then began the terriblest noyse that euer was heard, which all the remayning Caniballs made to∣gether, as they came descending downe the staires: but Primaleon, to kéepe so many brutish sauages off him, laid at them with his Partezane, opposing him selfe at the foote of the staires, where making his ayme still at their faces, at last he wounded the oldest of them, vpon whose life depen∣ded the enchauntment of the Tower, and the weapon pas∣sing quite thorowe his braines, immediatly he fell downe dead, where presently the wall of mettall sunke déepe vn∣der the ground, and Primaleon stoode with the Lady on the lowe pauement, some-what abashed, because they behelde such a strange alteration. As they staide there still to see what would ensue, they sawe the top of a goodly house arise out of the earth, and afterward the walls & gate appeared,
ouer which was written in golden Letters as followeth: The house of the fayre princesse Melia, wher-into whosoe∣uer enters, looseth his life. Primaleon smyled at this seuere threatning, and taking vp his great hammer, went to beate against the gate there∣with, whē pausing a little, he heard a noyse of people with∣in, as if it were of such as meant to defend it: neuerthelesse, the strength of the blowes he layd on it were such, that the gate shaking and tottering euery way, at last fell downe, and Primaleon receiued such a sounde gréeting on the head, as (if he had not suddenly set the hammer to the ground, for his support) he had lyen along, but stout courage neuer for∣saking him, boldly made him leape forward in at the gate, where he was immediatly snatcht vp in the armes of two Giants, who carried him by méere strength to an Altare, which stood not farre off from the entrance, and then one of them sayd. Let vs sacrifice this man héere, to the soule of the Princesse Melia. Agréed (quoth the other) and his hammer that lyes yon∣der, will greatly stedde vs, to breake his bones in péeces at a blow. Thou saist true (quoth the first Giant) therefore goe fetch it, and leaue the Knight alone to mée. Primaleon perceiuing in what danger he was, drawing suddenly his dagger, gaue the Giant (that held him) a stabbe in the side, which made him let goe his holde, and Primaleon recoue∣ring his feete, got foorth his sword, and layd about him so fu∣riously there-with, that the Giant found hee had no idle la∣bour in hand. By this time was the other come with the hammer, which séemed of no poyse or weight in his hand, so hée with that, and the other with his huge Club, layd at the Knight with such furie and violence, as neuer before was he in the like perrill: for he beheld it most euidently, that if he auoy∣ded not the blowes of the hammer, his life must there im∣mediatly perrish, beside, the other so canuast him with his Clubbe, that hee staggard héere and there like a drunken∣man: and scarce knowing in this extremitie howe to be∣haue
himselfe, he set his backe against the Altare, to kéepe both his enemies directly before him, when calling to re∣membraunce, howe much héere-to-fore thrusts and foynes had befriended him, hee did nothing else but giue out-right thrusts and stabbes, which made the Giants kéepe the far∣ther off from him, but hee was so spent and ouer-laboured in this combate, that the end of the fight séemed doubtful vn∣to him. The Giant that fought with the hammer, grewe so out∣ragious and transported with violence, that his blowes flew about without any discretion, beating the ground, and dooing no harme else, till meere furie made the hammer slippe suddenly out of his hande, so that then hee was con∣strained to be-take himselfe to his Clubbe again: in which small opportunitie, Primaleon (with a thrust) had hurt the other Giant in the face, where-uppon hee retired backe to the Altare, and vanished presently out of sight. Then to kéepe play with the other, least by breathing he should grow fresh and lustie, he followed him close euerie way about: but he séeing his companion was gone, and that the Knight very hardly set him, did what hee could to with-stand his enemie, till receiuing likewise a maine thrust in the face, he quickly fled after his fellow. Nowe went Primaleon (as glad of a little rest) to leane awhile against the Altare, but thereof hee was preuented, for he sawe come foorth from vnder the Altare, two Ser∣pents hissing, appearing as if they were knit together. Pri∣maleon considered with himselfe, that as the one Giant fledde, so the other fayled in his strength, therfore he would fight with one of the Serpents first, hoping his successe that way would prooue the like: but they were so closely com∣bined together, as he knewe not by what meanes to com∣passe his intent, whereupon, hée aymed with thrusts at them both, which with theyr winges they still put by, and gaue him many a violent stroke. While this fight thus continued, he heard the clattering of Armour, as if he were to be assailed by an hoste of men,
a matter wrought by force of the enchauntment, onelie to dismay and terrifie his thoughts: but hee made no recko∣ning of all this terrour, because he was prepared for anie danger whatsoeuer, séeking first to end the taske he had in hand, and deliuered such a stroke at the one Serpent, as (lighting where the winges were ioyned to the bodie,) did cutte them quite off, and then redoubling the blowe with a thrust, ranne him quite through the head, whereby hee fell downe, past all abilitie of harming any more: which did so lagge and wearie the other yet liuing, to defend himselfe, and dragge the other Serpent about to, as the Knight (ta∣king aduantage offered) dispatcht him after his fellow for company. Nowe thought Primaleon that his labour was conclu∣ded, and going to the Altare, he espied (in an yron Chest) a Boxe of stone, preserued there from the knowledge of any one, which (when he had broken the yron Chest) he purpo∣sed to beare thence away with him: and as hee procéeded with this intent, hee beheld the figure of a Woman vppon the Altare, whose yéeres of age séemed to be about fiftie, which as he stoode awhile beholding, the figure beganne to speake to him in this manner. Perhaps thou thinkest (Sir Knight) to carry hence this vnguent, which I neuer made for any Christians helpe, but for the race of Armato, King of Persia, and my brother: if such be thy perswasion, it is méerely in vaine. At which words, suddenly arose a Table before the Altare, where vnder (as in a déepe Cauerne) were to be seene Beares, Li∣ons, Wolues, Tygers, Panthers, & diuers wilde beasts, then spake the Image againe, saying: Thou must first fight with these and ouer-come them, before thou canst ob∣taine thy desire. When Primaleon perceiued such an ineuitable danger, he conferred with his thoughts, which way were the like∣liest to compasse victory, then did the Table on a suddaine descend againe, and he beheld there a locke with a key, and a Trumpet hanging by it: Héere-vpon came the Ladie to
him, who had learned many particularities (concerning the enchauntment) of two young Ladies shee met withall in the Tower, and therefore spake thus to him againe. Locke downe the Table with that key Sir Knight, be∣cause it onely is the doore of the Cauerne: then sound the Trumpet, for therein consists the meanes of ending the en∣chauntment. Primaleon was not slowe in locking it downe with the key, and taking the Trumpet in his hand, meant to sound it: but a Spirit excéeding any humane stature, came and caught hold of him, and a very strange kinde of wrastling grew betweene them, for Primaleon could fasten no hold on the Spirit, but was so violently hurld about eue∣rie way by this phantasma, as very hardly could he keepe himselfe on his féete, but supporting himselfe so well as hée could, he sounded the Trumpet, and then the Spirit vani∣shed in a smoake, likewise all the wilde beastes beneath in the vault, breaking a doore on the Mountaines side, ranne altogether mainly thence, to be out of the trumpets dread∣full noyse. Nowe remained the Altare without any defender, and Primaleon turning to thanke the Lady for her good aduise, presently knew her to be his Mother Miragarda, whom the enchauntments force would not let him know till now, and shee not a little ioyfull of his presence, sayd. Most honoura∣ble and aduenturous Sonne, heauen and thy faire fortune hath highly blessed thée, how many times did I feare to sée thée dead, when (albeit I knew thée not) yet had I a Mo∣thers compassion on thee: nowe maist thou safely take the vnguent, and afterward I will acquaint thee with ye estate of my fortunes. Primaleon layd his hand on the Chest, but could not finde the way how to open it, whereat wexing som-what angry, he would haue broken it with the great hammer: but Do∣rina and the two young Ladies of the Tower, came pre∣sently to him, saying: Hold your hand Sir, and breake not the Chest, for then you will sincke downe whether the Towre is falne.
The one of the young Ladies stept vnto him, and shewed him how he should vndoe (by strength) an yron barre, that was fastened a hand breadth aboue the Chest, and there he should find the key to open it. Primaleon, though he thought it vnpossible by might to vndoo it, yet because he was there∣to thus aduised, kneeling downe close to it, hee beganne to pull thereat with such force, as was fore-graunted to the race of great Palmerin, euen as if his veines and sinnewes had crackt in sunder, and getting off the barre, a little key started foorth, which Dorina tooke to her, because Prima∣leon was falne into a swoune, by the extreame labour of o∣pening the barre. When Miragarda saw her Sonne in such a traunce, shée was readie to die with conceite of griefe, cursing the vn∣guent to be bought so déerely: but beeing in short while come againe to himselfe, he called for the key, which was no sooner put into the little lock, but it immediatly opened, and easily he tooke foorth the boxe of oyntment, whereupon the Altare and all things else vanished, except the old Pal∣lace. So Primaleon with his Mother, the two young Da∣mosells, and Dorina, went forth againe to the Cottage, be∣cause it was late, where they founde the Knight that first gaue him directions, who in regard of some enmitie be∣twéene him and the Princesse Melia, made his continuall aboade there in the Wood, vntill such time as the onelie knight should come, (descended of Palmerins noble race) to make a finall end of that enchauntment: the Knight (bée∣ing now without his Helmet) they perceiued him to be ve∣ry aged, there hee inuited them to a sumptuous supper, and afterward hee prepared seuerall beddes for them, whereto each one went and quietly reposed.
CHAP. LVIII. How Primaleon vnderstood that the faire Ladie Victoria was kept in an enchauntment. And howe (vpon the arriuall of Trineus,) Primaleon preuailed so much with him by perswasion, that hee graunted to turne backe to Constantinople, for the conuoy of his Mother, and the precious vnguent. FAire Aurora, beeing fréed from the murkie mantle of the sadde and sullen Night, raised the olde Knight, and guiding him to the lodging of Primaleon, Miragar∣da, Dorina, and the rest, after a kinde mornings salutations, hée sate down by them, and thus be∣gan. Sir Knight, I knowe that your desires are boundlesse, and carrie you to search of matters which no limits can contra∣rie: therefore (though not to whet the Rasor, already kéene enough) vouchsafe attention to what I shal tell yeu. Know then, if you would finde the faire Lady Victoria, shee remaines enchaunted in the Pallace of the Princesse Melia, euen there, where the Lady Leonarda was so long detained: but if you would (you cannot) be her deliuerance, till first you haue fréed frō imprisonment, almost the whole band of the Grecian Knights, as also ye wizzart Aliarte, who is kept in such a hard and narrow straite, as except he be sette at libertie, and his ayde mightily assisting you, no hu∣mane power can compasse what you are to passe thorowe. And because occasion is offered of your returne to Constan∣tinople, in regard of this Ladies happie deliuery, know like∣wise, that a Knight wil ere long arriue here, of whom when you haue begd the grant of one boone, you shall send him backe againe to Constantinople, and with him your Mother
and the precious oyntment. It grieued Primaleon not a little, to heare his beloued Victoria was enchaunted, and that her deliuerance might not foorth-with be vndertaken, wherfore, when the houre of dinner was come, they feasted againe merily together, and no sooner were they risen from the Table, but they espied a Knight come riding vnder the wood side, whom Primaleon (vnarmed) went forth to méet: the Knight béeing Trineus, when Primaleon drew néerer him, he presently knew him, and raising vp his beuer, alighted frō his horse, enterchan∣ging kind embraces and salutations together. Primaleon remembring the olde Knights wordes, and couetous to at∣taine the height of his disseignes, said: Most honoured Tri∣neus, if euer you loued me, expresse it now, in granting me one request, which not onely will much enlarge your repu∣tation, but likewise redound to my Lord the Emperours e∣speciall contentment. Trineus, not knowing what hee would enioyne him to, without any exception, franckly graunted it: whereupon, Primaleon taking him by the hand, walked on with him to the Cottage, where hee greatly meruailed to behold Mira∣garda, but beeing resolued in all the passed accidents, Pri∣maleon thus procéeded. My Lord Trineus, be not displeased with me, if I binde you to the performance of your promise: because I stand in some right of dutie obliged, to goe & frée our déere friend the learned Aliarte, out of an yron Cage wherein he is imprisoned, the trust then imposed on you, is to conduct the Princesse my Mother to Constantinople, and likewise to take with ye this precious oyntment, the vertue whereof is, to cure my Lord the Emperour, Don Edward of England, and my Father Florendos. This so spéedie returne, greatly discontented Trineus, because his thoughts laboured on the aduenture in the Ile of Carderia: but respect of honor strictly tied him to his pro∣mise, whereupon the old Knight made ready two faire Lit∣ters, placing the Princesse Miragarda in one of them, and the two Ladies in ye other, himselfe likewise mounted on a
milk-white Palfrey, to accompany Trineus in his iourney. Thus Miragarda (showring downe teares, to part in this sort with her sonne Primaleon,) cōmended him to the guard of Dorina, and sollemne leaue being seuerally taken, they heauily parted, holding on two daies trauaile by Land, till the old Knight had prepared a good Foist, well stored with victuals & all things necessary, whereinto they were no soo∣ner entred, but of it selfe it put frō shoare, and in foure daies space arriued at the Port of Constantinople, where right soone was bruted abroad the newes of Trieus and Miragardaes landing, which prooued so highly pleasing to the Emperour and the whole Court, as without any scrupulous obserua∣tion of state order, they ran on heapes to méete them, the Emperor himselfe being the first that came thether, where méeting with his deere esteemed daughter in law, right ioy∣fully he tooke her by ye hand, saying. Heauen be praised (faire Daughter) that I see thée in safety, nowe hope I that my Court shall recouer her former floure and maiestie. By this time Don Edward was come likewise to them, who (not a month before) arriued there from England, and Trineus stepping forward to salute his most estéemed friends, taking either of them by the hand, thus spake to the Emperour. Be of good comfort (most sacred Maiestie,) for your Nephew Primaleon is in good estate of health, and hath sent vnto ye the soueraigne vnguent, which the fayre Princesse Melia her selfe did make, for the cure of her bro∣ther Armato King of Persia and his race: and hath wone it by no meane hazards and endeuour, wherefore he sends it, to heale Prince Edward and your selfe, of those vnrecured hurts which doe yet annoy you. These spéeches (beyond measure) cōtented the great Lords, but especially the Em∣presse Grydonia, Polinarda, Arnalte, & the other Princesses, who cirkling Miragarda in the midst of them, could neuer be satis-fied with kissing and embracing her, and so walk∣ing along into the Cittie, shée declared to them, howe the young Ladyes Victoria and Argentina, were enchaunted in the place where Leonarda was so long time detained.
Neuerthelesse (quoth shée) beleeue it as a matter most certaine, that they shall both be set at liberty: the one by Primaleon, after he hath giuen end vnto two great enter∣prises, and the other, by the noble Prince Florian. Then presented they to his Highnes the auncient Knight, whose name was Helizabat, sometime the husband to the wise Enchauntresse Vrganda, and now so aged, that his yéeres amounted to aboue two hundred: as he made offer of knée∣ling to the Emperour, his Maiestie (mooued by so reuerend an aspect) helde him vp in his armes, desirous to knowe of whence and what he was, wherein him selfe so discréetly resolued him, as both he and Don Edward were highly plea∣sed, vnderstanding by him so many strange matters past, as also diuers other that were to ensue. These and such like discoursings beguiled the time, vn∣till they were arriued at the Pallace, where the Emperour and Don Edward, to honour the reuerend age of olde Heli∣zabat, would néedes (by each hand) guide him vp the steps, when happened (by the vnguent) a matter almost miracu∣lous: for within lesse then an houres space, the Emperour stird at pleasure his stiffe benummed arme, féeling it in as good estate as euer, and Don Edward turning to see the Em∣perours happy recouerie, felt his head (leaning before a side vpon his shoulder) to stand vp right and mooue as readily, as if it had neuer beene in any such condition, to the wonder and amazement of all the beholders. Now to expresse the feasting and reuelling thorowe the Citty, for ioy of these so happy euents, is a thing whereof I am no way capable: but let it suffise, that Princes (ruling by iustice and humanity) doo reach so far into their subiects harty affections, as continually they receaue from them the tribute of so gracious deseruing, yea, sometimes with an ouer-flowing largesse and bounty, as people right proude of their Soueraignes loue and kindnes. Such was the gene∣rall ioy in Constantinople at this time, man, woman, and child applauding Trineus, for bringing thether that vertu∣ous oyntment: but much more they extolled the Knight of
Fortune, whose honourable labours had obtayned it. Tri∣neus, whose desire was after strange aduentures, the next day conferred with Bazillia, concerning the gouernment of Allmaigne, and taking leaue of her, without vsing a word to any other, being armed, he departed from the Citty, cary∣ing no deuise or imprese, because hee purposed to trauaile vnknowne: so rode hee toward the Ile of Carderia, where hee arriued within fewe dayes after, ioyfull and glad be∣yond conceite, that Primaleon was not come thether before him, making no doubt of finishing the aduenture, by helpe of the Iewell he bare about him, which kept him safe from all enchauntments. Staying some little while a-loofe from the place, to ease his Horse (well néere spent with trauaile) at length when he sawe time best befitting him, he went toward Leonatos pauillion, euen as he had newly vanquished a strange er∣rant Knight. Without any idle or talking daliance, they made triall of the Ioust, and such was the encounter, as Leonato lost his stirrops, and Trineus was lifted out of his saddle on the trooper of his Horse, very hardly kéeping him selfe from falling: but recouering his seate againe quickly, he came against his enemie with his sword drawne, who entertayned him with as chéerefull a spirit, Trineus hauing this aduantage in the fight (beyonde all the rest) that no hurts or wounds appeared to him, as to the former aduen∣turers they vsually did, which onely was caused by the ver∣tue of his Iewell. The combate continued aboue two houres, and there might they haue fought two dayes toge∣ther, or else haue miscaried by wearines, their equality of valour was so correspondent, and their knowledge in fight so aunswerable, as (albeit they did little harme to each o∣ther) yet grew they breathlesse and quite tired. Now the Sorceresse, not coueting the death of any knight in this aduenture, knowing no other meanes to appease this contention, sent forth a Damosell heauily countenan∣ced, wrapt in a mantle of white Satten, ritchly fringed with gold, sitting in a saddle of gréene veluet, on a very gal∣lant
Palfray sumptuously caparisoned, and comming to them with mournfull deiected lookes, she spoke in this man∣ner. Which of you (faire Lords) will take pitty on an vn∣fortunate Lady, to whom hath happened a disgrace beyond comparison, and onely through the fault of a false and most disloyall Knight. Leonato, being tied by the enchauntments power to that place, least any should come to end the aduenture, tooke no héede of her wordes: but Trineus, (exempt from such an o∣uer-ruling oppression) taking compassion on the Damosels teares, said. Sir Knight, since I perceaue no such readines in you, I will goe reuenge the wrong of this iniuried Lady. Thats nothing to me (aunswered Leonato) nor will I be offended whether you goe or stay: onely the charge imposed on me, is to kéepe any man whatsoeuer from concluding this aduenture. Vpon this reply, Trineus turnd his Horse, and rode thence with the Damosell, of whom he could ne∣uer learne whether she would conduct him, but still she en∣ticed him on a whole moneth together, and so farre from the Ile of Carderia, as he could not returne thether againe, before the expiration of the aduenture. But come wee nowe to Primaleon, who parting with his Mother, as you haue already heard, entred conference with Dorina, concerning his best meanes, for arriuing at the Ile of Carderia: shee (as one well acquainted with the nature of the enchauntment) tolde him, that hee shoulde haue néede of the great Hammer, which taking with them, and entering afterwarde into their little Barque, they sayled thence away, and came to the Riuer which en∣girted the Ile of Carderia. But before theyr departure, Primaleon well liking Dorinaes aduise, made a déepe search before the Pallace, and founde there a huge wide Caue or pitte, wherein hee behelde a number of the dead Cani∣balles, as also a Golgatha of dead mens bones: by it lay the great Hammer, which hee casting on hys shoulder, went aboorde with Dorina, launching out thence into the maine Sea, with earnest desire to reach the Ile of Carderia:
and scarsely were they entred the Barque, but the waters grew so outragious and turbulent, as Dorina knew not by her Arte the reason thereof: yet more and more the tempest encreased, the Shippe often times ready to split in sunder. At length, drawing néere vnto the Iland, where Primaleon reputing more safety to be on land then on the water, hee suddainly leapt out on the shoare, the Barque putting off againe very expeditiously, and he espying a goodly Tower in the midst of the Ile, walked on thether-ward: but re∣membring he had left the great Hammer behinde him, and that Dorina tolde him he should haue néede of it, he turned back to goe fetch it. As thus he walked on, Leonato espied him, who meruailing to sée him passe thus a-long the Iland, contrarie to any of the other before enchaunted, began to thinke with him selfe, that this man was likely to finish the aduenture, where-vpon, he began to giue him very in∣iurious spéeches, challenging him to the triall of the com∣bate. For all this, Primaleon was not offended, but com∣ming to the Bridge, tolde him his name and cause of com∣ming thether: for he so déerely affected Leonato, as he was loath to enter the fight with him, where-vpon they conclu∣ded not to combate at all. But the Enchauntresse, percea∣uing the finishing of her Magick spells so néere at hand, to preuent the same as long as she could, shée came in person betwéene them, saying. Knights, farre off are you from the valour of Polendos King of Thessalie, who made no ex∣ception of any person whatsoeuer, to attaine the height of his owne disseignes. These prouoking wordes stirred a desire in eyther of the Knights, presently to vndertake the combate, and it had likewise followed in action, but that Dorina, being acquain∣ted with the mighty spléenes of them both, which might so farre endanger their lyues, as the aduenture thereby would remaine vnperfected, suddainly raised the Iland water so high, as all the bridge was couered there-with, so that they had no place for their difference, when the Enchauntresse (thus ouer-taken in her owne intent) grewe so displeased
thereat, as shee could not deuise what to doo or say. The Knights were very willing to haue come together, & practi∣sed all the wayes which possibly they could: but seeing the high water woulde not permit them, Primaleon went to∣ward the Iland, and Leonato held it now for certaine, that Primaleon was so respected by Fortune, as he onely should extirpate the enchauntment, for this enchauntment of Do∣rinaes (fore-stalling the other) gaue him good reason so to i∣magine, so went he to his Tent againe. CHAP. LIX. How Primaleon slew the sauage wilde Beare, and finishing the aduenture, set all the famous Knights at libertie. PRimaleon perceauing there was no passage for him, and that Leo∣nato returned back as one male∣content, because hee coulde not procéede to the combate: it great∣lie contented him, to haue so wel auoided the peril of his very deere friend, so taking the way toward the goodly Tower, the Enchaun∣tresse smilingly met him, accom∣panied with the Knight that combated Leonato first of all, who was his sonne, that Polendos left there as Lord of the Iland, when he deliuered the faire Francelina frō enchaunt∣ment, and walking along with Primaleon, she thus began. Think not Sir Knight, that this great enchauntment was made to ruinate the Court of Constantinople, but this is the reason of it: the last of those thrée Fairies, which holy great Palmerin to the precious water, kept on the mountaine Ar∣tiferia, was our Aunt, and left héere as strange an enchaunt∣ment as euer was heard of, yet with such a condition, that it should be concluded by one of Palmerins progenie, and
there are other aduentures beside left by that Fairie, which will renowne that family to all posterities. After our aboade was appointed in this Iland, we stroue to get hether so many Knights as possibly we could, because it appeared by manifest proofe, that no one man was suffi∣cient for so important an enterprize: and wee expected the comming of Palmerin of England, with Don Florian his bro∣ther, the Knight of the sauage man, the Emperour Prima∣leon and Don Edward, who are recouered to their former condition, hoping that one of them would cease this long dated trouble. But séeing you are so happily come hether, if you purpose to vnder-take a matter of such moment, it were good that you tooke your rest this night, and to morrow morning begin an attempt of great honour, wherein wee will giue ye no discouragement, but wish that all good suc∣cesse may attend ye. Primaleon seeing that night drew on a-pace, the gladlier yeelded to take his rest, and entring with them into the To∣wer, they brought him to a ready prepared table, placed by the goodly sumptuous Fountaine, where Polendos first had a sight of Francelina: there was he serued very royallie, and when hee desired to knowe somewhat concerning the en∣chauntment, shee aunswered him that hee might not, for (quoth she) such is the nature and quality of it, as no man must be acquainted with the estate of his perill, but at all aduentures must vnder goe it. Supper beeing ended, they betooke them selues to rest, and Primaleon rising early the next morning, remembred what Dorina had sayde vnto him, concerning his imploy∣ment of the great Hammer, wherefore going for it, he found it lying vppon the shoare side, and returning with it on his necke, he was forth-with armed. Then did the Enchaun∣tresse and the Knight guide him from the Tower, to a cer∣taine quarter of the Iland, where (without bidding him a∣diew) they suddainly left him, as fearefull of a sauage wilde Beare, which kept in a Wood very néere adioyning. Pri∣maleon helde on his way into the Wood, which he found to
be maze-like and full of turnings, thicke sette with great Oakes, broade spreading Elmes, and other goodly trées, as if no Axe had euer come neere them: and because their thick braunches hindered his passage, he beate them downe be∣fore him with his Hammer, so that his blowes were easily heard quite through the Iland, and when (by much labour) he had gone about halfe a mile by estimation, he came forth into a faire plaine, about forty paces euery way in large∣nes, where standing to beholde a curious Fountaine, sud∣dainly rushed foorth the sauage Beare, which hee neyther hearing nor perceauing, the beast reard vp vpon his shoul∣ders, & gript him so strongly about the midst, as he thought there was no way now to escape with life, because he could not turne to hurt the beast in any place, he held him so forci∣bly betwéene his huge pawes. As hee strugled and stroue to get loose from the Beare, by chaunce he got vp one of his armes, and catching one of the beasts eares fast in his hand, he hung thereon so maine∣lie, as willingly the Beare let goe his holde: but he had so soyled and anoyed the Knight with his frothy foame & slaue∣ring, that he was ouercome with the foule sent and dampe thereof, falling to the ground bereft of his sences. But For∣tune protecting him as her déere estéemed fouorite, made the Beare drag him along to the Fountaine, and tumbling him into it, such was the vertue of the water, as the filth being washed off him, hee found him selfe very fresh and lusty, whereby hee gathered, that this water would sted him a∣gainst the Beare, whensoeuer he sought in that manner to stifle him again. So leaping out of the Fountaine, he made toward the Beare, which now held off, and would not come néere the water, then assayling him with his sworde, the beast ranne at him on such an aduantage, that passing be∣tweene his legs, he once more ouer-threw him, giuing him many violent strokes with his pawes, & foaming vpon him as he did before, had almost choakt his sences again, but that recouering vpon his féet, he threw himselfe quickly into the water, & becam quite altered from his sencelesse surprizing.
This strife thus continuing the space of two houres, the Knight grew doubtfull of his successe, because he could giue no wound to the Beare, his course of aduantage preuailed so still against him: at length, he deuised howe to cast the beast into the water, thinking that way to rid him of his so noysome foaming, and determining héere-vpon resolutely, he trauersed about, awayting opportunity, till the Beare was reard vp againe on his hindmost legges, when taking him at that aduantage about the middle, the beast likewise caught him fast about the neck. Heere found he now work enough to doo, and neuer in all his life did hee endure like trauaile, for the Beare vsed all his might not to come néere the Fountaine, and Primaleon stroue as stifly to bring him thether. Aboue halfe an houre this kinde of wrastling la∣sted, and Primaleon being face to face with the Beare, his breath and filthy driuell entred through the sight of his hel∣met, making him almost as mad and furious as the beast, which prooued the onely way for him to gaine the victorie: for seeming nowe rather like a franticke body, then a man possessed of any ciuill parts, he tooke vp the Beare by very méere strength, and carying him forcibly to the Fountaine, they both fell together into the water, where each of them forsaking his former hold, the water caried them one from another, and tooke away all their fury and madnes. The Beare was the first that got out of the Fountaine, resting him selfe vpon the bank side, but with such a milde and gen∣tle look, as witnessed his sauage nature to be quite changed. Primaleon came out of the water farre off from the Beare, and prepared once againe to assaile him, but beholding him to sand so still and quiet, he drew the néerer him, when he might perceaue the beast to beckon him with his pawe, as seeming that hee would haue the Knight to followe him, which he not refusing to doo, tooke vp his Hammer vpon his shoulder, and the Beare (leading him a narrowe crooked path) brought him at length to an auncient building, which seemed to haue beene sometime a goodly Tower or Castell, but it was now déepe sunke into the earth, so that not aboue
the ground was to be séene of it, the quantitie of more then sixe foote in height. Passing round about it, he espied a doore made all of Glasse, with a key ready placed in the lock, by the transparance whereof, they discerned within, a Chap∣pell furnished round with Idols, in the midst of it stood the statue of a Giant, with a mightie Axe in his hand, and sée∣med to menace such as durst offer to enter at the doore. Primaleon being thorowly perswaded in his minde, that he should absolutely finish the aduenture, since hee had so well ridde the Beare of his wilde saluage nature: went to the doore and tooke downe the key, and scarce had hee halfe turnd it in the locke, but the doore opened, & he felt a beast to glide in betweene his legges, but saw not what it was, wherefore he went toward the Image with the Axe, which at the first sight seemed to be immooueable, neuerthelesse, it stirrd and came against him, and smiting with the Axe vp∣pon his Shield, brake his imprese of Fortune quite thorow the midst, which Primaleon tooke as a bad presage or augu∣rie, imagining thereby that Fortune had forsaken him, whereas (indeede) the reason of it was, that he should now stand vpon his valour and manhoode, without expecting a∣ny fauour from Fortune, who (notwithstanding) left him no more now, then before shée had doone in his very grea∣test perrils. This blow shewed him how he should gouerne himselfe against the Idole, wherefore bestirring himselfe rounde a∣bout as occasion best serued, and deliuering diuers stroakes at the Idoll, the sword still rebounded backe, and did no o∣ther harme, albeit the Image was vnarmed: but hee per∣ceiuing the Axe had too much aduantage against his sword, began to awaite some apter meanes of help, doing nothing in meane while but defend the Idols maine strokes, and when the fight had continued aboue an houres space, and no more benefite receiued by his labour, then he had at the first, he found himselfe to be so ouer-trauailed, yt hee could not shunne a blow which smote him on the head, and made him fall backward in a swoune.
Vpon this aduantage, the Idoll caught him vp in his armes, and ran a pace with him behind an Altare, where was a great fire readie prepared, and there the Idol stroue to cast him in: but by this time his sences were wel againe restored, and his good happe was such, that (in the fall) he lighted on his feete, and leaping quickly out of the fire, layd about him lustily vppon the Idoll, who wanting the Axe, stoode still and stirrd not, like an Image of stone. The Knight hauing bestowed many blowes and thrusts, and séeing all his endeuour prooued but in vaine, he went toward the Altare, where, as hee offered to ascend vp the rising steps, he saw a fierce dog come foorth from vnder it, and after him another of like resemblance, but both of them were armed all ouer. At one instant they flew very eager∣ly vppon him, and sought to gnaw in sunder the buckles of his Armour, which he preuented so well as he could, though euer-more one of them was vppon his backe, and theyr Ar∣mour appeared to be stronger then stéele. He sawe that his sword now serued him to small vse, the dogges did cling so neere about him, wherefore he fought with his dagger on∣ly, which hee could by no meanes pierce thorow theyr Ar∣mour: but one of them rauenously gaping before him, hee stabd him in at the mouth, and the weapon passing through his hart, made him fall downe dead at his feete, and the o∣ther dogge by béeing thus alone, wanted the strength of the enchauntment, which made him draw backe to the great Idoll, as accounting there his place of safely. Primaleon againe began to mount the steps, and when he came néere the Altare, hee beheld a Knight to lie there wounded, humbly desiring mercy at his hands, and he not thinking it to be a phantasma, gaue forth his hand to raise him on his feete, and bring him neerer to the Altare: but as he stoode vpon the pauement, his former weake estate was suddenly changed, and he getting vp the Axe in his hand, began to lay lustilie at the Knight, with quicker spéed and greater cunning, then any the Idoll before had vsed. It much displeased Primaleon, that he had raised vp so fierce an
enemie, but séeing his owne folly iustly scourged, he must amend it as he can or may, till some better occasion might happen to end all this labour. The Knight with the Axe was so wondrous ready, that Primaleons skil very hardly could auoide his strokes, which (albeit they entred not but slightly) yet did they paine him very gréeuously, and perceiuing he could not get the Knight from the Altare, but when himselfe retired, the other refu∣sed to follow, and the fight (this way) would neuer be con∣cluded, he (at last) so doubled and trebled his blowes on the Knight, that hee constrained him to mooue from his place, pursuing him still with such sprightly courage, that the Knight (ayming a dangerous stroke at Primaleon) ye blow glaunced by in vaine, and the Knights legs slipt vnder him, by reason the pauement was very slippery, so fel he downe the steppes, and the Axe tumbling out of his handes, he lay there depriued of all further power. Primaleon aduaunced his foote vppon him, with full in∣tent to smite off his head: but he crauing mercy once more, said: Sir Knight, if (with life) you meane to escape this en∣chauntment, take vp the Axe, which was made to be the ru∣ine of this place, for by no meanes else can it be compassed. Primaleon taking the Axe in his hand, felt himselfe so sud∣denly fréed from his former wearines, as if he had not com∣batted at all, and passing through the Temple or Chappell, without any other offence or resistance, hee went behinde the Altare to the fire, where-into the Idoll so faine would haue cast him: there hee beheld it gather it selfe together, and (by little and little) receiue the shape of a Lady, the saddest in countenaunce that euer was seene, shée falling on her knées before him, said. Most euident it is (right woorthy Knight) that in you is contained the whole worlds vertue, for the Enchauntresse would not permit till this instant, that any of Palmerin d' Oliuaes race should come to this aduenture: yet would you haue found toyle enough to vnder-goe it, if you had not béen possessed of that Axe, which will be ye meanes of your happy
victory. While thus shee spake, the Beare (which lost his former wildnes) standing vp on his hindermost feete, was changed to a Knight, who taking vp a batte of wood which leaued behind the doore, it altered likewise to a fayre long sword, and the humbled Knight (that twise before had cra∣ued mercy) became more fierce and violent then euer hée was: with these came also the dogge and Idoll, and set al∣together very furiously vppon Primaleon, who vsing one while his Axe, another while his great hammer, kept in∣different good play with them, enforcing them to kéep faire and farre off him, till hitting the dogge on the head with his hammer, he tumbled backward and stird no more, heereby hee gathered, that all the rest must be wounded in theyr heads, (which he perceiued them to defend with very spe∣ciall care) or else he should neuer compasse his intent. But the first Knight was smote on the head ere he was aware, and presently hee fell downe bereft of his sences, now the Idoll, in regard of his great stature, had the bet∣ter meanes for his defence, the other Knight also held out as furiously, as when he was before in the shape of a Beare, till Primaleon striking at him with the Axe, by good hap smote the sword out of his hand, which he stooping to reco∣uer, another blow lighted vppon his head, which made him fall downe as if he had béen dead. Now none remained but the Idoll onely, who made the readiest turnings and win∣dings, that euer in any fight had beene discerned, cunning∣ly auoyding euery blow that made any proffer at his head. The battaile betwéen them lasted til the euening, when Primaleon (perceiuing the Sunne was neere setting, and doubtfull least Leonato should come thether, and robbe him of some part of the honour) hee beganne to labour the more earnestly, and plyed the Idoll with so many quicke doubled strokes, that hitting (at length) where he most desired, hee staggerd diuers wayes, and falling, smote Primaleon on the shoulder, as if a huge Collomne or Colossus had light vpon him, so that very hardly he kept on his féete, but réeled about as if hee were sencelesse, when the Lady (ioyfullie
running vnto him, and opening his beuer to giue him aire) spake thus cheerefully to him: Nowe Knight take courage, for the aduenture is accomplished. These wordes reuiued him, and as they were going to∣ward the Altare, they saw it was vanished, & after it sunck downe the Idoll, whereuppon, the two Knights came to theyr sences againe, and perceiuing the vaile of the Tem∣ple fall toward the Tower, they knew that Primaleon had ended the enchauntment, wherefore comming to him with great humanitie, they kindly embraced him, and guiding him forth, commended his rare vertues as they woorthilie merrited. Béeing come neere the Tower, all the imprisoned Knights right ioyfully met him, onely Arguto excepted, who had rather haue ended his life there in prison, then to acknowledge any such benefite at the hand of his enemie: therefore very sadly he kept behind the rest, and while they were busie in their salutations and embraces, hee slipt by ouer the Bridge, and so departed thence. These newes were highly displeasing to Primaleon, and in all hast he would haue followed him, but for his Father Florendos, and his Brother Oliuanto, who forcibly kept him backe with mightie perswasions. Florian, Forzato, Franardo, Almaroll and the rest, could neuer enough ex∣presse theyr kindnesse to him, but béeing all conducted to a ready prepared Table, Don Rosuell, who was next in yeeres to Florendos, desired the Enchauntresse to acquaint them with the originall of this enchauntment, which had so distracted the Emperour Primaleons thoughts, and left his Court emptie of so many gallants: to which request she aunswered as followeth héereafter.
CHAP. LX. The reason why this enchauntment was first framed. And how Primaleon (going to set the VViz∣zard Aliarte at libertie) entred the combate with Pal∣merin of England, and howe they were parted by Dramusiande. THE Enchauntresse hauing assu∣med her Fayerie shape againe, abandoning nowe her spells and exorcismes, turning to her knight (who was Lorde of the Iland) said. Let it not séeme offensiue to you, if I discouer the secretes of this soyle to this Knight, whose honour and vertue so woorthily deserues it, beyond all other that yet haue come hether: so sitting downe with the two young Ladies, shée commaunded the elder of them to tell ye whole storie, whereto she obeying, began in this manner. Sir Knight, the hard allotted destenie to this Damosell my Sister, whom you deliuered out of the Temple, hath beene the cause of your so late-passed trauaile, to frée her frō the Ile of Francelina, which albeit (in some sort) it was wel procéeded in, when Polendos gaue beginning to the enter∣prise: yet neither did his worth extend so farre, nor her for∣tune merrite so much happines, as that all his paines could conclude a matter so important, such was the weight of her transgression, and such the penaltie thereon imposed. For her ouer-fond transgression in neglect of her honour, first gaue beginning to the enchauntment, as briefely I wil tel you the manner how. The Knight whom you beheld in the shape of a Beare, became so deepely enamoured of her, that (in hope of friend∣lie
aduise and furtherance) he disclosed his affection to ano∣ther Knight, béeing the same with whom you lately combat∣ted. During the progresse of this amourous purpose, wher∣to my Sister gaue kind cōsenting, the second Knight (that knew his friends election in loue) neuer minding the faith and obliged dutie in such a case required: became himselfe extreamely affected toward my Sister, and because he was better practised in loues negotiations, and could handle queint dalliances with more pregnancie then his friende, he preuailed so farre, that shée, like a light-headed wench, (as for the most part young Damosells are no other, wan∣ting the experience in so dangerous a kind of traffique) left off her first Louer, and gaue entertainement to the se∣cond. Héere now (Sir) is a little leysure admitted ye, to spend some smal yet néedfull consideration, in imagining the iust griefe of the Knight reiected, (hauing before receiued so ma∣nie faire promises, and goodly instances of her loyall mea∣ning, that now the day of marriage beeing appointed, for farre were his thoughts from any other base purpose:) to behold his hopes so apparantly abused, his intire affect de∣spised, his true meaning bafled, and his choyce now so rea∣die at anothers commaund, euen his, in whose trust he had reposed his loue and life, gesse (I say) but the sorrow of so highly a wrongd soule. Yet neuerthelesse, bearing all this with more then manly patience, he dissembled his distem∣per, and kept outward appearance of his loue as earnest as euer, onely to sée what it would sort vnto. The other false and periurd Knight, his ayme was one∣ly at base lubricitie, contaminating the fayre and spotlesse chéeke of chastitie, without regard of my Sisters honour, or any due respect to his owne life. Shee continuing in this haplesse kinde of course, affecting earnestly the one, and feigning cunningly with the other, vppon a certaine day, when the Enchauntresse had betooke herselfe to reposed thoughts, after some former serious imployment: my Si∣ster went with her Louer into a little thicket, where being
set downe together, and shee crowning his temples with a flourie chaplet, they fell to amourous purposes & pursuites, and (enterchange of faith beeing equally plighted, action confirming theyr former arguing,) the first Knight chaun∣ced to steale vpon them, where seeing his simplicity so hay∣nously iniuried, in a violent fury he would haue slaine them both, but the false Knight escaped, with a hurt in his breast onely, and she making away so fast as she could, was nar∣rowly pursued by him with his Rapier drawne. The peo∣ple knowing her to be their liedge Lords Daughter, arose in her defence, and while they layd hold on the Knight, she got with safety into the Castell. Now did the rude multitude so threaten the Knight with death, yt he (more ouer-come with true sence of his wrong, then any terrour of theirs could any way else mooue him:) fell mad and franticke, byting euery one that held hand vp∣on him, and they likewise became mad by ranckling of his byting. The rumour of my Sisters feare, and the Knights madnes, awaked the sléeping Sorceresse, and she comming foorth at the gate of the Castell, euen as my Sister was pas∣sing by, commaunding her to stay, woulde néedes know of her the cause why she fledde: which she either could not, or would not manifest, as lothe to blabbe her owne shame, or else ouer-poysed with so desperate an affrightment. Whereupon, the Enchauntresse going in with her, cau∣sed the frantique Knight to be brought before her, beeing strongly fettered with cordes & manacles, least any more should be bitten by him: there did hee reueale his true loue to my Sister, and how immodestly hee found her with the false Knight, to whom hee had imparted his affection, and said, though not so sufficiently reuenged, as he could haue wished himselfe, yet had hee left him wounded to death in the Garden. No sooner had hee thus spoken, but the wounded false Knight was brought before the Sorceresse, and to appease the confusion of iudgements in this case, to three distinct se∣perate places the offenders were appointed, vntil the mor∣ning
of the next day ensuing, which beeing come, the En∣chauntresse pronounced this sentence folowing. First, that my Sister, for hauing no more respect to her female digni∣tie, should be confined to burne in a quenchlesse fire, as a iust punishment to the heate of her loosenes: and her wounded false Louer, should so continue without any cure. As for the poore wronged and distracted Knight, who (mooued by the méere iustice of his loyaltie) was falne into this misera∣ble frenzie, past any present recouerie, because his madnes had assumed the very height of violence: he should be trans∣formed into a wilde Beare, whose nature leanes much to furious madnes. So the Wood and Temple were his as∣signed haunts, and the Fountaine (in compassion of him) was there erected, to frée him frō that furious frenzie, when such a Knight should happen to come thether, whose valour would embolden him, to drag the beast into the water. Now as concerning the huge Idoll of stone, the spell al∣lotted thereto, was in this manner, that whensoeuer any one came thether to end this enchauntment, it should haue the motion of a lyuing man, and the strength of a Gyant. Thus were the Knights assigned a lingering death in life, the one by his mortall wound, the other in his trans-formed madnes, and my Sister (who indéede should iustly suffer for them both) had continually remayned in that fire, except your vertue had allayed the vigour thereof, which ceased so soone as you tooke her foorth of it. Thus haue you briefely heard the sum of this aduenture, after which, may it please you to goe take your rest, because you must returne to com∣fort the Emperour Primaleon. Euery one tooke great pleasure in the Ladies report, vn∣derstanding thereby the scope of the aduenture: so supper being ended, they seuerally went to take their rest. In the morning, euery man armed him selfe to depart thence, and the Knight of the Iland (knéeling before Florendos) would be instituted by him (who was sonne to the Emperour) a Deputie gouernour of the Iland, which was performed on both sides with great loue and kindnes.
Primaleon, dreaming still on the wizzard Aliartes deliue∣rance, to serue him selfe with his ayde in enfranchizing Victoria, especially in such occasions appertayning to the enchauntment, as his courage and valour would but little sted him in: after that he had aduertised his Father, how he had set frée his Mother from an enchauntment, and sent her by Trineus to Constantinople, taking his gentle farewell of them all, he parted thence, and arriuing where Dorina expected him, he entreated her to leaue him a while to him selfe, and meete him at the Perillous Ile, if he should stand in neede of her helpe concerning the enchauntment. The reason why he would not now haue her companie, was because he hoped to méete with Arguto againe, to re∣concile him from his péeuish obstinacie, but he found a quite contrary hinderance in his way: for Palmerin of England, whom Fortune had conducted to Constantinople, entred there vnknowne to any but his Lady Polinarda, and shée percea∣uing his close intent, was as secret to him as his part desi∣red. There heard he of the Grecian Knights imprisonment, also the mishappe and disgrace befalne the wise Aliarte, his brother, and hauing stayed eight dayes thus secretly with his wife: he determined first to deliuer his brother, and af∣terward goe to the Ile of Carderia, holding it for most cer∣taine and assured, that all these things happened but by en∣chauntment, wherein his brother Aliarte would highly sted him: so, causing his Horse and Armes to be closely caried out of the Citty gates, he proceeded according to his resol∣ued purpose. Drusa Velonna, who still awayted mishap toward the Court of Constantinople, and to further it by her vttermost endeuour, so crost this intended course, that Palmerin being transported quite from his determination, vnwittinglie, came first of all into the Realme of Macedon: where shun∣ning all walled townes or places of accesse, one day (about three a clock in the after noone) he saw a Knight come riding toward him, bearing (as he did) the imprese of Fortune in his Sheeld, but figured after a stranger fashion.
Hée meruailing who durst be so bolde as to cary his de∣uise, when he was come néerer him, spake in this manner. Doo ye heare me Sir? What, are you of my blood or alli∣aunce? or holde you some inward respect to me, that you are so familiar with my Ensigne of Fortune? Primaleon, who had approoued his valour so often, and against so many in other occasions, thought if he could nowe well cary the case with Palmerin, he néeded to dread no passage whatso∣euer: and dissembling as if he knew him not, returned this reply. You should Sir, be but simply séene in the profession of chiualrie, that you dare offer to forbid any man the bea∣ring of your deuise, I neuer yet combatted with any that caried this imprese, nor will I be so arrogant, to impeach any mans frée liberty in such a case: notwithstanding, sée∣ing your so vnciuill and apparant discourtesie, I haue a will to trie, whether I can take that Ensigne of Fortune from you or no, to the ende you may liue afterward out of her fauour. These wordes incensed Palmerin beyond all meanes of sufferance, and because (for very anger) hee could returne him no aunswere, he gaue present way to his Horse for the Ioust. Primaleon repented, that he had so furiously prouo∣ked him, as well in regarde of his great valour, which he had neuer approoued, as also because he was his Vnckle, to∣ward whom (indéede) hee ought to haue béene somewhat more dutifull: but being vnable now to shunne the tryall, without blame and disgrace, committing him selfe to his euer-fauouring Mistresse, he gaue the spurres to his Cour∣ser to méete him valiantly. In the encounter, the earth trembled as if it had opened, and the Horses met with such violence together, that they both were set on their buttockes on the ground, and rising againe by the quickning of the spurre, the Knights Laun∣ces beeing shiuerd in péeces to their hands, they were both mightily astonned, Palmerin réeling twise, as if he would haue falne beside his Horse, and Primaleon so shaken, as if his sences were quite bereft him.
In this amazement they continued a quarter of an houre, and recouering againe both at one instant, that it coulde not be iudgd which was the first, they came against each o∣ther with their swords drawne, giuing blow for blow, and hurt for hurt. Palmerins first stroke was vpon the helmet, which being of approoued very good temper, was notwith∣standing cleft a little: and Primaleon had a blowe on the right side, which pierced quite through the Armour, and wounded him somewhat. Thus continued the combate a∣boue two houres space, and by reason eyther of them stoode vpon his skill and experience, the blowes did enter the shar∣per where they lighted. Palmerin conceiting inwardly with him selfe, what hee might be that set him thus hardly, could not thinke it to be Don Florian his brother, nor yet Florendos, because he ca∣ried no such corpulence of body: where-vpon, he grew into such fury, that crossing his sworde arme ouer Primaleons back, & thwarting the other directly before him, he thought so to get him forth of the saddle. But when Primaleon per∣ceaued the perill, and what shrewde girdes his aduersarie gaue him, he caught fast hold about him likewise, their Hor∣ses waxing so spent and wearie, as hardly could they lift a foote from the ground, but réeled euery way, as their Mai∣sters strength drew them, till at last they fell on a heape together: when either (being carefull of his best aduantage) recouered footing quickly againe, and fell to the combate as freshly as before, making the fielde to ecchoe with the clanching of their weapons, and both of them were woun∣ded very dangerously, sorting néere to Velonnaes damnable intent, that they should haue bereft each other of life, but that (by good hap) it came to passe, when they were able to welde their swords no longer, a friend came and kindly parted them. Dramufiande beeing the man, (who after his departure from Tubante, to goe for the aduenture of Carderiaes Iland, where he heard so many famous Knights were imprisoned, Franardo his sonne being one among them:) hearing the
noise of this fight a farre off, followed the weapons sound, till hee came to the place where hee found the Knights at handie gripes together, vsing all their skill and strength to ouerthrow each other, and seeing in eythers Shéelde the de∣uise of Fortune, albeit with the blowes they were pittiful∣lie mangled: hee presently knew Palmerin, but hauing no guesse or apprehension of the other, he spake thus aloude to him. Beleeue me Sir Knight, you may well presume on Fortunes kinde inclination toward ye, that ye haue out∣stoode the valour of noble Palmerin of England. Primaleon, who could not denie within his own thoughts, but that he knew his Vnckle well enough, hearing the Gi∣ant thus to name him, let fall his sword, and offering to kneele, humbly desired pardon for his ouer-bolde transgres∣sion: but Palmerin sustayned him in his armes, and as they grew lauish in complement and courtesie, they felt them∣selues so faint and weake, by the ouer-prodigall expence of their blood, that they were constrayned to sit downe toge∣ther, Palmerin falling into a straunge swound or traunce. Dramufiande with his owne Squire, and the other twaine belonging to the Knights, had quickly got ready two com∣lie Beeres, whereon (very softly) they laide the wounded Knights, and hauing bound vp their hurts so well as they could, guided them to the neerest hospitable part of Mace∣don, where they remayned aboue twenty dayes, before they could be able to beare Armes againe.
CHAP. LXI. How Florendos with Oliuato returned to Constan∣tinople, where hee found remedy for his lamenesse. And how the other Knights betooke them selues to seuerall parts, finishing diuers strange and memora∣ble aduentures: among vvhich is expressed, vvhat happened to Arguto in his trauaile. AFter Primaleon was departed from the Ile of Carderia, his Fa∣ther Florendos hauing heard (by him) of the soueraigne oyle or vnguent, would néedes returne to Constantinople, to recouer his amenes, Oliuanto was desirous to beare him company, not alto∣gether so much for his sake, but rather to see faire Auriana, to tell her the successefull aduenture of the King and the Lady, whereby he should be the more welcome to her. Franardo with Forzato and Almaroll, would néedes iourney toward the bottomlesse Lake, to conquer that Iland, because his fa∣ther Dramufiande could not compasse it, being interrupted by Palmerin of England, who made an end of the aduenture. Don Rosuell, Florian, and the rest, went whether them∣selues pleased, and Dramufiande, after he had accompanied the Knights foure dayes together, in which time he sawe the dread of perill to be past, he iourneyed thence to see his sonne, and kéepe him company along in this conquest, be∣cause his desires were thereto inuited. Thus so many Knights strayed after aduentures, en∣countring with diuers Ladies and Knights, that endured wrongs in many seuerall kindes, and were by their prow∣esse right happily deliuered. But as the thrée Giants rode
thorow a Forrest, they held an earnest discourse to each o∣ther, about a noyse of hammers which they heard, and la∣boured (by separating themselues) to finde out the reason thereof: but all their endeuour was to no purpose, because this aduenture appertained to neither of them. Franardo not knowing whether he went, turned direct∣ly backe the same way he came, and meeting with his Fa∣ther, the sudden ioy in either at their encounter, smothered spéech a while in dumbe embraces: and riding to meet their other companions, to take the course before concluded on, they chaunced to heare the voyce of Almaroll, and so in short while met altogether. But speake we now of Florendos a∣gaine, who méeting by the way with no notable aduenture, arriued in a morning with his sonne Oliuanto at Constanti∣nople, where the Emperour, Don Edward, and diuers Knights being in company, welcomd them with no meane ioy and feasting. Florendos, perceiuing the Emperour his Father, and Don Edward of England to be both in sound estate, was ex∣ceeding glad, in regard of the loue he bare to them, & good hope he had of his owne recouery. Passing on along the Pallace, his Mother Grydonia the Empresse, Miragarda his wife, and fayre Polynarda his si∣ster, came all and embraced him, each contending who shoulde expresse most affection in theyr kinde embraces. These curtesies being growne to a milder kindnes, Floren∣dos entreated the Empresse his Mother, that shee would vouchsafe to annoint the place, where the nerues of his leg were contracted numly together: which was no sooner ba∣thed with the oyntment, but his legge became as nimble as euer, each one reioycing at so pleasing an accident. After that Oliuanto had tasted the kindnes of his grand∣mother, and the other Quéenes, hee went and fell on his knee before Auriana, who nothing ashamed of the honest loue she bare him, made the lesse outward spare of her in∣ward affection. When he had tolde her his mighty labour at the enchaunted Pallace, she fetched a déepe inward sigh,
as knowing that such an enchauntment was neuer begun, (the King beeing a Magitian of so great experience, and able still to renew it at his owne pleasure) but that hee pur∣posed seuere reuenge vpon Oliuanto. Nowe come we to Arguto, who was ready to die with very enuie, because so many famous occasions fell to Pri∣maleon, and stil were concluded by his princely valour, hée happened into the Woode, so soone as the thrée (before na∣med Giants) were departed thence on theyr iourney, and hearing what a noyse the hammers made, drew directly to∣ward the place: but euer as he attained neerer and néerer, so much the louder and more violent he heard the noise, ma∣king the very earth to tremble vnder him, yet his bold cou∣rage could not be dismaied, but still guided him onward, til hee came where hee might beholde a goodly Sepulcher or Tombe, which appeared by the principall image or figure made in the midst thereof, to be prepared for some King, there to enioy his royall enterment. Now by reason the hammers noise exceeded in violence, his horse (by no meanes) would endure it, whereby he was constrained to allight, and going néerer, found the place hemd in with a wall thrée pearches high, but not any doore to be discerned: as he stoode musing heereon a while to him∣selfe, vppon a suddaine a great gate opened in the Wall, whence issued foorth a Knight, armed from heade to foote in blacke Armour, with a short Arming sword in his hande, who spake to Arguto in this manner. Proud Knight, hard is thy hap in seeking this Sepulcher, which was made for Alexander the great, though hée dying soone after in Persia, could not héere receiue his buriall. Neuerthelesse, the wise Magitian that builded this place, was willing that no eye should beholde it, as ashamed of his owne mightie errour, that hee should be crost in the buriall of Alexander: there∣fore I sée no other remedy, but thou must needes venture the combate with mee, and if it be thy happe to ouercome mee, thou wilt afterward wish that thy selfe had been van∣quished.
These words daunted not the hart of Arguto, where va∣lour and arrogancie shooke friendly handes together, but drawing forth his sword, assailed the Knight, to get within the gate, least it should be shutte against him when hee had conquered his enemie, and many blowes he deliuered, but the other Knight was so quick and expeditious, as he could not fasten one stroke vppon him: neuerthelesse, so manie thrusts were returned vppon him, as if hee had not broken them readily with his Shield of the Sun, the least of them had béene of force to haue past quite thorow him. Arguto could not deuise what to thinke of the Knights agilitie, which made all his labour sort to no effect when he smote at him, nor did he deliuer any downe-right or siding blowes, but onely foynes and thrusts, which still hée drew backe againe so farre as hee could, by reason they stoode so close to each other, which prooued but little aduantageable to the strange Knight, for now when he saw he could make no more thrusts, he was glad to smite any way as best hée might: whereof Arguto made no reckoning at all, because his aduersaries foynes had not hurt him, and these other strokes fell so lightly on him, as if they had béen the blowes of a child, whereupon, letting fall his weapon, hee caught Arguto fast about the middle, and drew him into the gate, where the Knight vanishing, left him shutte vp within the wall, and nowe no gate nor signe thereof, was any more to be séene. This raysed some suspition in Arguto, that there he was enclosed to be famished to death, and walking about to see what might betide him, hee beheld a great yron doore to lift it selfe vp, which couered a déepe hollowe vaulte that went vnder the Tombe, and he looking into it, sawe that it was full of rauenous Serpents, lifting vp theyr heads, as if they would presently haue deuoured the Knight: hee not know∣ing in this case what was best to be done, a Lady appeared to him, looking foorth at a little window in the Sepulchers side, and thus she spake. Sir Knight, héere art thou like to die with famine, except thou cast thy selfe into this hollow
vault, where (except heauen be the more propitious to thée) thou art assured likewise to be eaten vp of Serpents. These two extreame choises séemed somewhat difficult, a present dispatch by gréedy Serpents, or a lingering death by hunger-starued famishment, nor blame him, to consider a while on so hard an election: to yeeld to famine, beside the shame and infamie of the death, it would bereaue him of christian and charitable patience, which is a mans chiefest glory in so fierce an agony: to cast him selfe downe among the Serpents, therein appeared a manly resolution, and the dispatch of life would be immediate, but how reported of af∣terward, there the question remained. Hauing thus consulted with his silent thoughts, which were guilty rather of too much forwardnes, then any base feare or sléepy cowardise, the selfe same courage seazed on his spirits, which neuer left his Graundfather Frysoll, and without any dread of the very greatest danger, he cast him selfe at one leape into the Caue: No sooner had hee thus done, but he found him selfe so writhd about with the Ser∣pents, as he could stirre no part of him but his hands only, wherefore in such a strict distresse, he trusted onely to God and his manuall strength, catching the Serpents fast by the neckes, and wroong them about with such facility and ease, as he had kild aboue an hundred of them very quickly, which could not but be great comfort to him, séeing his la∣bour thriue so successefully, and him selfe not so much mole∣sted as at his first entraunce: notwithstanding, there was one Serpent excéeding ye rest in greatnes, that had a crowne vpon his head, and he held the Knight to so busie a taske, as by no meanes he could get from him, yet did he often catch hand fast on the Serpents necke, but all his strength was not able enough to hold him. While this busie conflict thus continued, the Knight which before had vanished from his sight, appeared now a∣gaine aboue at the mouth of ye Caue, hauing a goodly Launce in his hand, and there-with he gaue so many thrusts at our Champion, as he would not affoord him the very least brea∣thing
while. Nowe began Arguto to despaire of his life, thinking no meanes were left for him to escape, for still as he turned to resist the Serpent, that he should not writhe his taile about his legges to ouerthrow him: the Knight aboue molested him mightily with the Launce, putting him often times to very hard extremities. The great Serpent hol∣ding out stil fiercely against him, at last caught the Knights head (helmet and all) in his mouth, so that Arguto was rea∣die to fall: and had he not stifly graspt the Serpents necke, whose filthy breath & sauour well-neere choakt him, he had presently falne down dead, but this gripe made the Serpent let goe his hold, & flying off from him to recouer breathing, the Knight aboue then layd at him with the Launce, so that he could stir no way without intricate trouble. At last, he thought it his best course to close with the Serpent, and try if by méere strength he could ouercome him, but soone did he repent so fond an opinion: for the Serpent suddainly spread out his wings, and wroong him so painfully betwéene their gripe, that he neuer felt the like agonie before. Neuerthelesse, Arguto well remembring with himselfe, that his life & honour stood now on the very last cast, caught once more the Serpents neck betwéen his hands, & griping it with like strength as he had done before, he quickly got loose forth of his wings, which prooued no great aduantage to him, for the Knight with ye Launce as cruelly vexed him, and made him endure a miserable torment, wherof to be rid one way or another, & either end his life or the aduenture, he got fast hold of the Launce, which he puld vnto him with so maine violence, as (being wholy possessed of it) the Knight was gone againe, & not to be séene. When he saw ye Launce thus in his owne custody, by which he had suffered so much paine & trauaile, his mind halfe perswaded him, that in it re∣mained some secret vertue▪ wherby ye enchauntment might be brought to conclusion, & beginning to smite the Serpents with the Launce which nowe came about him more furi∣ously then before, so many of them as the Launce lighted vppon, presently turned about and fell downe dead.
But the great crowned Serpent, making no account at all of his strokes, put him to more perillous trouble then all the rest did, therefore he was glad to wayte opportunities, and by many leapes and turnes to keepe still aloofe, defen∣ding him selfe so well as hee coulde with the Launce, the length whereof was diuers times discommodious to him. At last, watching aduantage that might prooue to some pur∣pose, euen when him selfe least expected such good luck, the Serpent (waxing weary of the blowes he receaued by the enchaunted Launce) giuing back a pretty distance from the Knight, made proffer of a suddaine leape vpon him, to catch his head once more in his mouth, & shooting forth his necke, lay gaping to expresse what he intended. Arguto (loath to loose time so apparantly offered) thrust his Launce into the Serpents throate, and driuing it on∣ward to his hart, tumbled him ouer and ouer starke dead, which good occasion (had it not thus happened,) hee might sooner there haue lost his owne life, then gained the victory against the Serpent. Being now sore laboured and very weary, he sate down and rested him selfe vpon the dead Serpents, and not drea∣ming of any further danger to ensue, suddainly a Serpent gript him by the belly, and dragging him along downe a paire of staires, his head hung still vpward, receauing ma∣nie knockes and thumps all the way hee was thus caried. When he was come to the hethermost step of all, he would haue risen vp, but he could not deuise how, when presently there came a sauage man, with a strange fashioned sword, ready drawne in his hand, and smiting a mighty blowe a thwart the Serpent, seuerd it in sunder iust in the midst: but Arguto was almost dead with his dragging downe the staires, and doubtlesse had perished, but that his good Ar∣mour did very much sted him, but being deliuered from so painfull a griping, he started vp on his féete, preparing his sworde to encounter with the sauage man, who vsing no words at all, but making signes to haue him stand on his best guard, they buckled close together, Arguto wounding
the sauage man in many parts of his body, because he had no skill in defending him selfe, nor diuers times could hard∣lie kéepe vp on his féete, which made Arguto the more hope∣full of victory, and stepping vpon him at an aduantage, offe∣red to haue slaine him: but that the first Knight came again crying to him, that he should hold his hand and not kill him, because of his blood would arise vp more Serpents, then all those he had slaine before in the vault. Arguto presently drew back his sword, & deuising how he might otherwise ouercome him, saw fixed in the marble wall of the Caue, a great Ring of yron, with a long chaine hanging downe and fastened thereto, which he immediatly imagined, was purposely kept there to binde this furie. With much a-doe he haled him to it, where at length hee bound him very strongly, & finding no other encombrance to hinder him, he came forth of the Caue, on the other side of the Sepulcher, which he perceaued to be fairer and richer then that he had first séene. Héere began he now to glut his gréedy eye, with sight of the seuerall statues in order, which declared the admirable deedes of Alexander: first, how he fought with Darius King of Persia, and ouercame him: next, his battaile with King Porus of India: as also his artificiall passage of the Riuer Indus. And as hee stoode noting a very dangerous hazard, which happened to him at a Castell where he fought: hee heard him selfe called by his name, and turning to see who was so familiar with him, hee espied close by him two strange Monsters, hauing the heads and breasts of a Viper, and all their other parts like to a Lyon, except the clawes, which rather séemed like the tallants of a Griffen. These two catching fast holde with their téeth on his arme, gript him so strictly, as for a good while he could hardly stir him∣selfe: but when they saw that he shrunk no more, neither fell downe (as they expected) they let goe their hold, and he recouering quickly the Launce, accounting it his best wea∣pon to fight with against them, layde at each of them with such skill & readines, as if he had not that day béene wearied
at all. In short time he had so wounded both the Monsters, that they (as their latest refuge and helpe) got on each side so néere him, that rising together on their hinder féete, they fastened their former fangs about him, and their tallants so pierced through the closing of his Armour, as thereby he re∣ceaued sixe little hurts, and lost the benefit of his Launce, wherefore a while he must make vse of his hands, catching either of them so strongly by the legges, and bending them violently (as if he meant to breake them) made them at last to giue him liberty, when perceauing he could not regaine his Launce, he drew forth his sword, where-with defending him selfe, more then offending the Monsters, he trauersed about a while, as ayming at the likeliest means for victory. Suddainly he apprehended this resolution, eyther to make a spéedy dispatch of his life, or by one way or another con∣clude his enterprise, where-vpon, he fell downe flat on his back, with his sword in the one hand, and his dagger in the other, that the Monsters might imagine him to be fully vanquished. Which sorting to his expectation, & they step∣ping ouer him to teare him with their tallants, he found his hope almost quite frustrated, for stabbing at their bellies, which he supposed to be tender, he found that their skinnes were of exceeding sound proofe, till chauncing at last vpon the nauell, he made such a large incision with his sword, as the bowels of one of them dropt out on the ground, and the other sled away he could not tell whether. So soone as the Monster was thus fied and gone, all the seuerall Statues began to mooue and stir, especially that of Alexander the great, framing such actions and comely ie∣stures, cach after his Countrie quality and fashion, as if they expressed signes of thankfulnes to him, which (despight the Magitians vtmost malice) they still continued, to his no  wonder and admiration. Heereby Arguto vnderstood, that the aduenture was now fully concluded, whereof his thoughts growing greatlie proud, he thus resolued, that this his conquest was of as much fame and glory, as Primaleons was at the Ile of Car∣deria:
then turning him about, the Knight that was the Magitian, and could not die while the enchauntment endu∣red, appeared before him very sadly, & in regard of the imme∣diate death he now expected, he spake vnto him in this man∣ner. Sir Knight, well mayst thou vaunt of the worthiest enterprise, that any Knight errant durst euer vndertake, yet nowe by thée right nobly accomplished: for I am the man that made this Sepulcher, hoping to haue had ye whole world wonder at it, but errour beguild me, and baffuld the height of my chiefest hopes, for Alexander dying so farre hence, and his absolute rule deuided into foure faire Mo∣narchies, I forthwith framed this enchauntment, to the end no mortall eye might euer behold it. But thou art come, and hast disappointed my determination, which, as it cuts the threed of my life, so shall it inflict this punishment vpon thée, that thou shalt neuer haue her whom thy heart longs most after. And this (beside) I tell thée that all my dessignment is not frustrated by thée, for in this Tombe shall be buried the only vertuous and renowmed Emperour, that euer the future ages shall affoord: hauing thus spoken, he died, and immediatly the noise of Hammers ceased. Arguto was displeased at this sad prognostication con∣cerning his Loue, but such was his present ioy for his victo∣rie, as hee suffered other thoughts the easier to passe his re∣membrance: and searching further about the Sepulcher, at last he espied two huge Giants of yron, with each a migh∣tie Hammer in his hand, whereby he gathered, that their knocking had maintained the enchauntment. So finding nothing else there to doo for him, he prepared to part thence, when presently he beheld his Squire to enter bringing him such prouision as he could get, because he thought his Lord had neede of refreshing: when the Squire had bound vp his wounds receaued in the fight, they sate downe to eate, and afterward betooke them selues to rest, where a while wee must leaue them, returning nowe to Palmerin and Prima∣leon.
CHAP. LXII. Howe Palmerin (so soone as his hurts were hea∣led) went straite to Constantinople: And howe Pri∣maleon went to the Perillous Ile, and what happed af∣terward, for deliuerie of the wizzard Aliarte. PAlmerin, hauing recouered his health in such manner, that hee was well able to weare his Ar∣mour, tooke a kinde fare-well of his Nephew Primaleon, and par∣ted alone from him, very much discontented in his minde, to sée the only palme of valour (which hee supposed to be borne by none but himselfe) trans-ferred nowe vnto another, which made him desirous once more to ap∣prooue his Nephew, for a more absolute and cléere distin∣guishment, which of them was most to be estéemed in chi∣ualrie: for the Knights (in those times) were so addicted to fame and reputation, that (for purchase thereof,) they re∣spected neither parentage, friendship, nor ought else what∣soeuer. In these distempred thoughts, he iournied toward Con∣stantinople, where béeing arriued, he was by the Emperour, and all the other great Lords and Princesses so louinglie welcommed, as his noble vertues right worthily merrited: but more especially, and indeede (as it ought to be) his wife entertained him with all gracious kindnesse, acquainting him now with an important matter, which (at his late se∣crete being there) was thought meete to be concealed, I meane the trechery of Tamerco, and how far hee preuailed in her carriage thence, which raised such a wrathful spleene in Palmerin, as presentlie he determined Tamercoes death.
And séeing him by chaunce passe thorow the Hall, he ranne vpon him with his weapon drawne, where (but that his Cosin Oltrando stept suddenly betwéene them, of whose well-deseruing Palmerin made great regard,) Tamercoes life had there perrished: and this happened to be the occa∣sion, that mooued these two Indians to practise theyr flight thence, as héereafter more at large shall be declared. Leaue wee Palmerin awhile héere to ease and rest him∣selfe, and let vs speake now of Primaleon, who iournying toward the Perillous Ile, and riding the way which to him∣selfe séemed most conuenient, at the entrance of a Wood he espied Dorina, as attending there for him, whereof he was not a little ioyfull, because by her he might compasse the better meanes, in vnderstanding what appertained to the enchauntment, wherein the wise Aliarte was detained, which indéede was of such powerfull strength, as (without her helpe) he could neuer haue compassed the end thereof. Dorina riding along with him, fell into this discoursing, that it best became him now, to omit all other néedlesse oc∣casions, and ride directly to the Ile whereas Aliarte was imprisoned, to ioyne there with happy opportunitie, while Drusa Velonna, (beeing now else-where very seriously bu∣sied,) could not interpose herselfe to crosse his purpose. So riding on along the Sea-coast, they came at last to a Ca∣stell there builded on the shoare, where they made a newe deuised kinde of boate, with a broade bottome, two large paces in widenes, the sides very low, for such imployment as shall be reported: then prouiding himselfe of hammers, and grapling yrons to open the strong made Cage, as also certaine great sharpe hookes, made after no common or or∣dinarie manner, with great strong ropes fast knit  them, hauing put all his prouision aboard, and leau  ¦rina at the Castell, away hee went in his boa  his no little wonder) did cut through the  ¦ding swiftnes, Primaleon béeing so  hardly could he containe himsel  euen as if he had already set
The learned Wizzard, knowing by vertue of his skill, how neere the houre of his deliuerance drewe, had (in this time of his aboade there) called vnto ye people of the Iland, and giuen them aduise to build a little Tower, neere to the rockie cliffe where the yron Cage hung, in expectation of some successe that was to ensue, whereto they yéelded, and accordingly performd it. Primaleon, who thought hee should neuer come soone e∣nough to this labour, when (a farre off) he had a sight of the Cage, went on the merrier, and being come within a bow∣shoote of it, hee suddenly felt vnderneath his boate, some∣what resembling a huge great Fish, that earnestly labou∣red to ouer-turne it: and some-time he saw it lifted so high on the one side, that he verily thought it would haue suncke to the bottome, neuerthelesse, his minde still continued in∣uinsible, and onward went the boate, vntill it attained so neere to the Cage, that hee casting foorth one of his corded hookes, by good hap it fastened & caught hold on the Cage, whereat Aliarte became a little discomforted, fearing least the violent current of the water, would driue the boate a∣way so mainely in the streame, yt the Cage thereby might be drawne into the Sea, and so they both be drowned toge∣ther. Primaleon, whose braine was some-what giddied, and his stomack likewise sickishly altered, with the fogge and damp of this troubled water, sitting downe to rest himselfe awhile, suddenly beheld in the stearne of his boate, an olde aged man, so weake and féeble in outward appearance, as if each minute he should giue vp the ghost: he sate & laugh∣ed a pretty while at Primaleon, who (though with kind cō∣ of his yeeres) did the like at him, saying within him  t if there came no greater resistance, right soone  he set at libertie. Scorning to offer iniury to  we the stearne of the boate (as if the old  extremitie of weight) to sinck vn∣  ereof prouoking his patience,
What wilt thou doo, thou foolish olde man? Forbeare to sinck my boate, least I take thée by the beard, and cast thee head-long into the Iland. This beard of mine, (answered the olde man) shall put thée to more paine then thou art a∣ware of, and rising vp against him, he spredde his beard a∣broade in such a large compasse, that twise the length of a mans arme it equalled euery way, and looke wheresoeuer it toucht Primaleon, it sette his Armour on fire in the same place, which fire hauing continued some little space, would then againe extinguish of it selfe. The Knight heereat grew greatly displeased, yet reputed it no lesse then basest villanie, to draw his sword on an aged man, and flight (on the contrary) was as shameful: wher∣fore taking vp a little club that lay by him, and there-with bearing backe his beard when he offerd it toward him, the old man at length was so mad angry, that leaping vppon Primaleons backe, he wound his long beard about his neck, and set such a flame about his head, that the olde man star∣ting from him for safetie of himselfe, left the Knight in such a wonderfull perrill, as Aliarte himselfe was fearefull of his death. But the flame being extinct, and Primaleon wel perceiuing that all the olde mans power consisted in his beard, he drew his sword, and there-with cut it close by his chinne, where-upon the olde man fell downe bereft of his sences, and ye fire (which in this bickering had caught hold on his Armour) immediatly vanished. Beeing thus at libertie from any impeachment, he cast out another corded hooke, which likewise linckt fast about abarre of the Cage, so that now by helpe of both the ropes, hee could drawe himselfe the néerer to it: but as hee busily thus bestowed his time, the great Fish, which at first made proffer of ouer-turning the boate, leapt now into it, lading it with such an incredible poyse, that euery minute it stoode vpon the sincking. The Fish opening a wide huge mouth, swallowed vp the old man aliue & lustie, which some-what terrifying the thoughts of Primaleon, (séeing himselfe in so helplesse a place, where hee knew not how to imploy his
paines, but either he must ouercome that monstrous Fish, or serue for foode to his vnsatiable mawe, or else be drowned by his boates sinking) made him step forward with his pre∣pared weapon, deliuering many sharpe strokes at the Fi∣shes mouth, which still kept wide open as ready to deuoure him, and albeit he vsed his vttermost force, yet such was the Fishes strong pressure vpon him, that (in despight of what soeuer he could doo) he swallowed him vp, as before he did the old man, and he felt such pinching gripes in his throats passage, as now he could build on no assurance of life. Ne∣uerthelesse, by the Knights mighty stirring and striking a∣bout him, at last he grapled holde on the olde mans chinne againe, which lay against the very tendrest part of the Fi∣shes belly, and there the Knight so labourd with his dagger, that at last he made a large wide passage, out at which hee slipt very easily, and after him came foorth a Beast some∣what bigger then a dogge, but of such a strange deformed shape, as he could not imagine of what kinde he was: this beast caught the great Fish by one of his finnes, and cast him out of the Boate into the water, but such was the dan∣ger of the Boate in the Fishes turning ouer, that the Boate was ready to sinke flat downe. This feare beeing ouer-blowne, and the Boate in bet∣ter estate of stayednesse, the beast began proudly to walke vp and downe, and Primaleon still expecting when he should be assayled, was not vnready in the like to the beast, and blowes he felt to light vppon him selfe, but euer when hee returned requitall, he sawe the beast to leape euery where about him, but no stroke of his to fasten vppon him: so that Primaleon (very much wearied with labouring thus in vaine) the more willingly desired to sitte downe and rest him, but then the beast leapt very swiftly about him, and the beast hauing the pawes of a Lyon, as also the tushes of a wilde Boare, had rent off some part of his Armour be∣neath, and with his téeth hurt him vppon the right thigh. The strife thus continued betwéene them for two houres space, with no meane vexation and trouble to Primaleon,
who perceauing the beast to offende him so harmfully with his teeth and pawes: concluded vpon a quick speedy dispatch of life, or else to break through the Ice of the dangerous en∣terprise. Which he could not accomplish while he kept vp∣pon his féet, wherefore he fell flat on his back all a-long, ex∣pecting when the beast should offer to make his seazure to kill him. As he thus lay awayting his aduantage, with no silly care to auoyde the beasts dangerous proffers, he gaue a foorth-right thrust with his sword, which happening full in∣to the beasts mouth, cutte quite in sunder his longest teeth, and many of the other beside, so that they falling out of his mouth on the ground, and the beast thus despoyled of his chiefest Armour, with his feet kept a treading on the throat of Primaleon, wounding him in diuers places very daunge∣rously. But because hee scorned to be slaine in so seruile a manner (his hopes thereby ayming at much better successe) he recouered footing againe, making many gallant assaults for dispatch of ye beast, who being defeated of his teeth, could not annoy him so much as he did before: for nowe his best fight consisted in his formost feete, which the beast lifting vp both together, to seaze on the Knight withall, with a glen∣ting stroke he smote them off both together, which making the body to réele about confusedly, at last it tumbled into the water. Now began the Sea to swell in such sort, that the boat was driuen neere to the Rock, and was iust vnder the Cage of Aliarte. Heere giue me leaue to tell you, that the wizzard himselfe stood now doubtfull of two apparant perils, one of them, least the rough winds agitation should breake the Cage against the Rock, mooued by the continuall force vpon the water: the other, least the boate should strike so strongly against it, as (driuing it from the fixed hold) might presently drown it: whereupon, Aliarte cried out to Primaleon, with his hooks & ropes to hold off a while, because the last proof remained yet vnattempted, & that (perhaps) wold fal out to be ye worst of al. Primaleon, who could not but be wondrously weary with so long labour, being now scarse able to fetch his breath, sate
downe to rest himselfe a little: but fearing least his wounds would grow starke and chillie, he iudgd it better for him to walke vp and downe the boate, his minde still seriously la∣bourd & busied, how he should get the Cage from the cliffe. So long his thoughts were thus imployed, till (had not A∣liarte cryed out the sooner to him, to beware of a Monster of the Sea, which softly had stolne vp into the boate) he had beene pluckt backward into the water: but turning him∣selfe vpon this warning, he beheld the strangest forme and shape, that euer any man had seene before: nor was this a∣ny faigned Monster, but a meere abortiue of ye Sea, which Drusa Velonna (by her arte) had brought out of the widest Seas, to prohibite the freedome of Aliarte by any man. This strange Sea-monster, béeing indeede called a Tri∣tone, to wit, a man (after the Sea-kinde) composed of flesh and fish in his seuerall substances, came sternely vpon him, grasping him so strongly betweene his armes, with flings and wrestlings euery way, that Primaleon hardlie knewe howe to helpe him selfe, the Monster still dragging him to the boates side, strugling very hardly to throw him ouer∣boorde, and the boate kept such a dauncing on euery side, as Primaleon could hardly stand vpon his féete. Hée not knowing in this extremitie what was best to be done, perceiued the long beard which he cut from the olde man, to grow vppon the chinne of the Monster, wheron he tooke fast hold, and dragd him about the boate after him in such manner, that seeing he vsed no furder contention, hee cast off the Monster to his owne libertie: whereuppon, be∣cause he would come no more in so strict handling, hee lay still a while very seruilely, but started vp afterward verie quicke and sprightly, and leaping about him, to catch him within the cōpasse of his beard, the Knight as nimbly kept aloofe off from him, so that all the Monsters slights prooued but in vaine. Now because this conflict shewed not as yet, on which side the victory was likeliest to fall, a crimo blush of shame dyed Primaleons chéekes, yt his labour prooued fruit∣lesse,
when his hart assured him of happy successe: for hee had wounded the Triton in diuers parts of his body, which made his furie to raise it selfe with the greater violence, be∣ing nothing else indeede, but the meere induction to his death ensuing. And let me tell ye withall, that our Cham∣pions lauish expence of his blood, abated his courage and very much weakened him, so that while the Monster drew backe to breathe, he (as gladly) leaned on his sword to en∣ioy a little rest. As thus he stoode, a sudden flawe of the Sea smote the boate against the rocke, and made the sterne end to split a little, which rush of the boate casting Primaleon backward, the Monster caught him by the feete, dragging him along so rudely and spéedily, that hauing gotten him halfe out of the boate, the Monster leapt into the water, still holding him fast by the feete, but the weight of his body so counter∣pozd the Monsters tugging, that he could not hale him out into the Sea. Primaleon, beholding the extremitie of his perrill, strugled toward the ropes that held the hookes fast in the Cage, and catching holde of them, one of them (to which hee most of all trusted) loosed in the knot, and so cast him quite out of the boate into the Sea, where beeing hea∣uily loaden with his Armour, he would not forgoe the cord, but kept it still in his hand: for a man when hee is in the greatest perrill, will neuer faile in some part of hope, ha∣uing any thing that may but appeare to sted him. When the Monster saw him thus in the water, he came violently vppon him, & casting his armes about him, stroue (all hee might) to diue and drowne him: but men (neerest death) being most couetous of life, make what meanes they may to auoyde the detriment, so did Primaleon in this de∣sperate agonie, for suddenly hee tooke the Monster by the beard, and getting aloft vppon him, kept him strongly vn∣derneath him, then fastening the cord about his girdle, and afterward to the side of the boate, hee drew foorth hi ¦ger, and wounded the Monster in so many seuerall p, that there he quite kild him.
But nowe came the greatest danger of all, for the Mon∣ster dying, gript him the more strongly betwéen his armes, and as he suncke, he drewe him downe likewise, where it had béene impossible for him to haue escapt, but by the cord at hs girdle fastened to the boate, whereby (with much a∣doe) he got vp againe, and then the Boate proued his grea∣test enemie, for his owne weight had almost ouer-turnd it vppon him, beside, his wounds wexed stiffe and festering, when, euen as (by méere weaknes) his hold was like to de∣ceiue him, there came a mightie billow of the Sea, which skansing the heauier side of the boate, threw him the easier iust into the midst of it, where finding himselfe frée from a∣ny perrill, he praysed God on his knees, for deliuering him out of so manifest a danger. No sooner was the Monster suncke into the Sea, and he vppon his feete within the boate, but the storme and tem∣pest immediatly ceassed, and the enchauntment béeing en∣ded, the wise Aliarte (by his skill) caused a great fire to flame in the boate, which seruing as a warning to Dorina that now the aduenture was accomplished, shee came pre∣sently in a little Skiffe, and in short while was with Pri∣maleon, where binding vp the wounds he had receiued, and pouring in oyles of precious soueraigntie, they sate downe and rested after this long labour. CHAP. LXIII. Heere followeth the deliuerance of the wise Ali∣arte, and vvhat Drusa Velonna did in hinderaunce thereof. THE people of the Iland, hauing noated the angry rough windes, and mightie tempest on the Sea, remained in hourely expectation, what would ensue concerning Aliarte: and albeit he had caused them to build the tower,
assured them of his spéedie deliuerance, yet not one of them durst enter into such hardines, as to come and beholde the prosecution of the act. But when they sawe the ayre more mildly calmed, and no rough stormes were stirring abroad, then they ranne forth vppon the Rocke, and others of them came thether with a faire goodly Shippe, to try if now they could attaine to the Cage. The Ship arose in such a height, that her sides came close to the Cage, whereby Primaleon the easier compassed, to loose the holde that fastned it to the Rocke, labouring with his hookes and hammers, till at last it was at perfect libertie: to the no little ioy of the people, which they expressed by loude shoutes and chéerefull accla∣mations, then went they all vpon the shoare, carrying (by Aliarts direction) the Cage along with them. Drusa Velonna, was all this while very busily imploi∣ed, in recouering Tirrena by enchauntment from Constanti∣nople, for she being now growne great with child, the Sor∣ceresse intended, to bestowe the Kingdome of Paraz vppon the infant, as in right discent from his Father Dirdan, and therby to bring a fresh affliction vpon the Christians. This made her ye lesse respectiue of Aliarts imprisonment, which questionlesse she had else further prolonged, if not hindered Dorina in the déede dooing. But when by her Arte she was informed, that her enemy enioyed his full fréedome and li∣bertie, in lesse then foure houres shee conuayed herselfe to the Perillous Ile, where shée beheld him to be newly arriued with Primaleon, who hauing put off his Armour, because his hurts were greatly offensiue to him, by Aliarte hée was layd in a sumptuous Litter, and so carried along toward the Citty. Velonna, to crosse them in theyr course, and to kéepe A∣liarte from comming where his bookes were, wrought a very strange stratageme: for shee slung a certaine powder among the people, which droue them into an immediat er∣ror of oppinion, that Aliarte and Primaleon were two huge fierce Giants, and came trechorously to take seazure on the Iland, which made them fall to furious resistance, & there
they had béene murthered among them, but that Serasto the Sonne of Argentao, who (with diuers other that had felt none of this hellish powder, and therefore were frée from so grosse a conceit) came and appeased theyr violence, shut∣ting vp many of them in a new erected Tower, and safelie conuaying the other from them. When Drusa Velonna sawe her last hope thus frustra∣ted, fearing least Aliarte should seaze vpon her, shée speedily fledde thence to Paraz, where shée attended for the Childes creation in the Kingdome: & shee béeing thus gone thence, the enchauntment of the powder ceassed, and the people plainly perceiuing theyr errour, humbly desired pardon of theyr Lord, who well vnderstanding what had béene done, could not but hold them iustly excused. Primaleon béeing brought to the Cittie, such soueraigne medicines were applyed to his woundes, as within tenne dayes he was perfectly cured, in all which time, Aliarte in∣treated him right nobly and kindly, knowing how helpfull his valour would prooue to all Christendome. During these dayes of theyr repose, Aliarte perusing his Bookes of arte, vsed a little more circumspection then be∣fore hée had doone, and perceiuing that Primaleon desired nothing more, then his help in the fréedome of his faire loue Victoria, hee resolued to assist him: but hée did not remem∣ber, that the time yet was contrary to such an attempt, which should with greater care haue béene respected. But leaue we them awhile, and come nowe to Floraman, who intending to worke wonders for the loue of Clariana, be∣came on a sudden quite changed and altered.
CHAP. LXIIII. Howe Floraman seeing himselfe but slenderly re∣garded by Clariana, became enamoured of the fayre Princesse Victoria, concluding to goe & deliuer her out of the enchaunted Pallace. FLoraman, hauing recouered at one instant, both his hurts recei∣ued in the fore-remembred bat∣tailes, and also forgetfulnes of his fruitlesse loue to Altea, per∣ceiuing him-selfe to be despised by Clariana, who was alreadie married to Guarino: became as a man méerly desperate, and sud∣denly departed with Dragonalte from Constantinople, but vsed not one word all the way as he rode, whereat Dragonalte meruailing not a little, and wea∣rie of so vnsociable a companion, letting him alone (for the first day) in this sullen humour, the next morning he began with him in this manner. Lord Floraman, what the reason may be of your mindes molestation, I can neither gesse, nor doo couet to knowe, onely this I am certaine of, that if any amourous passion haue surprizde yée, another mans company will scarce be pleasing to yee, therefore, when it shall seeme good to you to trauaile alone, I will shape my course some other way, as lothe to impeach your amourous priuacies. Floraman, because he would not be offensiue to his friend, hauing (vnwillingly) endured the King of Nauaraes com∣panie so long, returned him this aunswere. Royall Lord, my hard fortune is such, as I cannot kéepe euen quarter of kindnesse with my friendes, onely through an inward se∣crete vexation: therefore, not to be burdenous to you or my selfe, you may (at your pleasure) dispose of your owne tra∣uaile,
and let me and melancholly wander alone together. Dragonalte being of good apprehension, quickly conceaued the intent of Floraman, where-vpon, turning his Horse, and bidding him very kindly adiewe, he rode away from him, crossing many Countries and Prouinces, without any ac∣cident worthy rehearsall, till at length he came home to his owne Kingdome of Nauara. Floraman seeing him selfe left thus alone, alighted from his Horse, and sitting downe vnder a faire spreading Oake, commaunding his Squire to walke aloofe off: he began to meditate with him selfe, by what meanes he might soonest compasse his owne death, but with some high and apparant example, that his fatall hap grewe onely by loue. Among infinite various discoursings with him selfe, at last his ca∣pricious humour thus resolued, to become enamoured of the faire young Lady Victoria: not with any hope of euer com∣passing his affection, but to hasten the spéedier occasion of his death. For right well he knew, how déerely the second Primaleon loued her, and Arguto likewise as vehement in his choise: both of which beeing so famous for Armes, hee might the sooner be slaine by one of them. Vpon this deter∣mination, he returned secretly to Constantinople, where (in the Garden belonging to the Princesse Flerida) hung the liuely counterfeite of Victoria: which he earnestly gazing vpon, grew so déepely enamoured of, as his former intent of death was quite abandoned, and his loue to her so addicted, that now (in hope of enioying her) he more especially desired to liue. Thus turmoyld in loues labourinth, he closely de∣parted the Citty againe, and riding along through vnfre∣quented Plaines and Forrests: at last he came to the Sea side, where he espied a small Barque dauncing on the bil∣lowes, as if it purposely stayed there in expectation of him. His melancholly thoughts still guiding him on, hee sawe a Lady standing on the Ships beake head, whose lookes much resembled his Altea: but hee hauing nowe let passe her re∣membrance, séeing her wafting him toward her with her hand, made what hast he could thether, which shée behol∣ding,
immediatlie vanished. Floraman somewhat abashed at this strange augurie, began to imagine, that he was cal∣led thether to die: but his amorous passions, transporting him with desire to finde out Victoria, quickly rid his braine of this suspition. Where vpon, aduauncing him selfe née∣rer to the Barque, he stept into it, when presently it laun∣ched off from the shoare, with an easie gentle gale of winde, and so struck vp into the maine Sea. Then suddainely happened a violent tempest, which made him euery minute in daunger of perishing: but his minde despising all perill whatsoeuer, cheared his hope in the very sharpest agony, and the Barque ioyned at length close to a vast mountaine. Where stepping forth armed as he was, he went on foote vp such an high ascending hill, that slipping oftentimes vpon the smooth stones, hee slid downe often backward, & made very slender riddance of his way. This kind of labour lasted him all that day, with much vex∣ation, & but to little purpose, as séeming that he should neuer attaine the height of the hill: so, night ouer-taking him, he made a better supper of sad conceites, then any other viands which could content him: his mind still ayming at nothing else, but how he might soonest finde the faire Lady, and then (if she likewise disdained to loue him) to practise some pre∣sent dispatch of his life, but with a memorable testimonie, that he died for loue. The morning shaking off his dumpish cogitations, he coasted along the side of the mountaine, and came at last to a pretty large Plaine, which round was en∣girt with big rising hils, & in the midst thereof stoode a won∣derfull goodly Pallace. Now albeit he had neuer séene this place before, yet he called to remembrance, some former re∣port of ye Princesse Leonarda, & that (in all respects like this) such another was the Pallace belonging to Quéene Melia: heereupon, his hart began to leape with conceite of ioy, & he held it as a matter most certaine, that here the Lady Victo∣ria was enchaunted. As he directed his course on toward ye Pallace, he beheld a Knight, with two goodly blood-hounds walking by him,
come (as it were) with intent to méete him, and suddainly the Hounds began to runne toward him, where doubtlesse (being hunger-starued & gréedy) they had torne him in pée∣ces: but that the Knight, (who indéede was Drusa Velonna thus trans-formed, to guide Floraman into ye Pallace with∣out any combate,) reclaimed them back, and then stepping to him, he vsed these or the very like spéeches. Sir Knight, I sée that you are a straunger in these parts, wherefore, if loue haue béen your conducter hether, especially to the Lady enclosed in this Pallace: you may account it as no meane fortune, yt it is your good hap to méete with me, who bids you boldly to rest assured, that here is ye choisest beauty enchaun∣ted, which euer mortall eye as yet hath lookt vpon, therfore, if it please you to goe along with me, your owne eyes shall be apparant witnesses, that the world containes not a com∣parable beauty. Floraman being fully confirmed in opinion, that it was the faire Lady Victoria, without any further protracting of time, followed the guidance of the Knight, & he was no soo∣ner entred the Pallace, but hauing a sight of Victoriaes per∣son, he became (by power of the enchauntment) so iealous of her, as he would néeds vndertake ye Ioust, against any that durst presume to come thether. But quickly was she rapt a∣gaine from his sight, which enflamed his desire with ye grea∣ter vehemencie, & bound him most officiously to her seruice. But leaue we him, and come againe vnto Arguto, who ha∣uing vnderstood in his trauaile, of diuers matters cōcerning Drusa Velonna, & that the beautifull Lady Victoria remai∣ned enchaunted, where the Princesse Leonardo had béene before imprisoned, hearing also, that Primaleon had deliue∣red Aliarte out of the yron Cage, & fearing least by the helpe a counsell of him, he would likewise enfranchise the Lady Victoria: he purposed to iourney thether before him, hoping that Fortune would be as furtherous to him in his loue, as she was renowned by most part of his enterprises. Being thus resolued, he trauailed (according to such informations as were giuen him) for his spéedier attaining to the Pallace of Quéene Melia.
CHAP. LXV. How Arguto arriued by strange occasion, at the Pallace belonging to the faire Queene Melia, & how he remained there enchaunted. DRusa Velonna, awayting all pos∣sible meanes still to disturbe the Christians, wrought (by her Art) this trauaile of Arguto into those parts, to the end that when Pri∣maleon shoulde happen thether, they might be the death of one a∣nother: for Arguto was of such dauntlesse valour, that if he might compasse the death of Primaleon, he cared not on what desperate termes his owne life stoode. Being then thus summoned to the search of Victoria, and he loath to loose any time in vaine, directed his course as be∣fore you haue heard, and riding through a queachie thicke Wood, an angry wilde Beare came mainely against him, as meaning to staunch his hunger vpon him: but he hauing his Launce still ready charged, defended him selfe with such skill and manhoode, as the Beare (not daring to endure his blowes) began to runne from him a softly pace, euen as if (through méere wearinesse) hee coulde spéede no faster. Arguto pursued the track of the Beare, till it brought him directly to the Sea side, where the beast still holding his course a-long, met by chaunce with a Damosell vppon the way, whom hee catching vp betwéene his pawes, ranne with her into a little Pynace, which lay at Ankor there hard by the riuage. No sooner had the Beare caried his pray a boord, but the Pynace launched (of it selfe) into the water, Arguto riding his Horse still after, where suddainly he espied the Beare on the hindeck of the Pynace, and the Damosell sitting downe close by him, without any touch or offer of violence. This gaue the Knight a present apprehension, that héerein
consisted some strange aduenture, wherefore, riding néerer to the Pynace side, he gaue his Horse the spurre, and moun∣ted into it: the vessell putting off immediatly from the shoare, before the Squire could gaine his entrance, and so it rode out into the maine déepe, hauing neither the helpe of Oares or sailes. Hauing (by his owne estimation) gone aboue a thousand miles, at length the Pinace drew néere to a stéepy moun∣taine, whose discent fell downe into the Sea, affording no easie place for landing: which he not regarding, at all ad∣uenture mounted forth on shoare, & the Pinace strooke back againe into the Sea. Being thus alone there by him selfe, he happened vpon a narrow path, which guided him along the side of the mountain, where riding on with what hast he best could, he came at last to the quadrant plaine, where he soone had a sight of the fore-mentioned Pallace: there met he also the Knight, & his two rauenous blood-hounds, one of them flying so fiercely vpon him, that he caught his Horse by the nosthrill, and made him fling about very distempe∣ratly, which Arguto perceauing, & loath to be ouerthrowne by his Horse, leapt out of the saddle, opposing him selfe a∣gainst the Hounds & the Knight, who hauing a kéene edged Axe in his hand, deliuered thrée or foure such rude strokes there-with, as Arguto réeld about twise or thrise, & (at last) was glad to leane himself against a trée. The blood-hounds still made violently at him, & fastning holde vpon one of his legs, dragd him along as purposing to kill him: but his cou∣rage contemning all dangers whatsoeuer, & scorning to die in so vile a maner, being got vpon his féet, he drew forth his sword, & aiming a maine stroke at the Hounds, they flew off from him, & then the Knight set to him with his Axe, which in short while after slipt out of his hand, & Arguto doubling stroke vpon stroke, had brought ye Knight into weak estate, but that the blood-hounds leapt vpon his backe, and (by ill hap) rent in sunder the laces of his helmet, which falling off his head to the ground, and he (still fiercely set vpon by them) began to imagine his case somewhat desperate.
Now, albeit he would more gladly haue parted with his life, then vse any base meanes for safetie thereof: yet sée∣ing his head in this sort disarmed, it coulde not but make him the more warie of himselfe: wherefore, auoyding the blood-houndes so well as he could, and the Knights assaults which grew troublesome to him, hee found that he had no loytering worke in hand. For such was the agilitie both of the houndes and the Knight, as they got aduantage still on him, but he could not fasten a blow vppon them: yet grew they (at length) to retire from his strokes, and hee (shun∣ning a dangerous proffer of the Axe) followed the houndes as they tooke toward the Pallace, intending to accomplish some noble act, or else to die in the height of his presumpti∣on. And as the Knight came vppon him with the Axe, with a full intent to haue cleft his head, the hounds caught holde on the lappets of his Armour, and hald him forward so con∣fusedly, as at last he was drawne within ye Pallace, wher∣of the Knight beeing very ioyfull, that he had him within compasse of the enchauntment, hee came to Arguto with these speeches. Be not offended Sir Knight, that thou art thus brought into this Pallace: for héere thou shalt sée the richest beauty of the world, and it may be thy good happe to be possessor thereof. Arguto perswading himselfe, that he meant the beauti∣full Victoria, tooke this as a happy welcome to him, and answered. To me (Sir) can come no greater good fortune, then so rare a beautie as you haue spoken of: which I am the more desirous to behold, to know whether it be shée or no, that is the onely cause of my trauaile. Euen shee it is, (replied the Knight) and for your better assurance héerein, goe along with me, and you shall sée her. So walking on∣ward into a Chamber, hee there beheld the faire Victoria, and as he offered amourous parlance and seruice to her, she vanished from him, leauing him so full of passionate tor∣mentings, that now hee wisht himselfe hand to hand with Primaleon, to try which of them could best deserue her.
In that very instant came Floraman to him, who (by meanes of the enchauntment) had no knowledge of him, neither Arguto had any of him: and thus wrought Velon∣na, because they should not combate together, by reason the nature of the enchauntment was such, that so soone as any mans blood was spilt in the Pallace, immediatly the en∣chauntment ceassed. So fell they into kinde communicati∣on, each of them so déepely affected to the Ladie, that they thought each houre a yeere till some errant Knight came, to contend with them for so rich a Iewell: eyther of them ac∣counting her absolutely his owne, & in this oppinion there let vs leaue them. CHAP. LXVI. Howe Florian still pursuing in quest of his daugh∣ter, was (vnwittingly) brought to the pallace of Queene Melia. AFter Florian was departed (a∣mong the rest) from the Ile of Carderia, in search of his Daugh∣ter, he came one morning earlie to the Sea-coast, where hée espi∣ed a great Fish halfe way vppon the grauell: and drawing néerer to beholde it more perfectly, hee was suddenly caught vp betwéen a griping paire of tallants, which (in the water) serued the Fishe as finnes to swim withall, and (on Land) for legges and feete to goe vppon. This strange Fishe, (casting Florian vppon his broade backe) ranne swiftlie with him into the Sea, to his no lit∣tle amazement at the first: but when hee saw the Fishe to beare him aboue the water, hee grewe the lesse doubtfull, but expected what might be the end of this aduenture. The Fish floating on, with the swiftest speed that euer was séen,
hee beheld a Griffon come flying from a Mountaine, that houered aboue him a little while, and snatching him vp at last in her tallants, carried and sette him vppon the firme land. Walking on musing alone by himselfe, at last he came in fight of the Marble Pallace, which yet was perfect in his remembrance, and shaping his course toward it, Argu∣to was the first that espyed him, who beeing wondrous ioy∣full to see his Ladies Father, went foorth to meete him, hoping (by his meanes) to compasse his earnest desire. Be∣ing come together, Florian demaunded of him, what he did there, whereto Arguto returning no aunswere, conducted him onward to the Pallace, telling him that the Lady Vic∣toria was there: which reuiued Florians spirits so cheerful∣ly, that he mended his pace to come where shee was, and entring into a Chamber, did there behold her, but when (as a Father) he would haue embraced her, the enchauntment altered his minde in such manner, that hee would permit no man to come thether, to carry his Daughter from that place. Passing the time in this determination, with much entercourse of kindnes betwixt him, Arguto and Florian: at last Oliuanto hapned thether, who albeit he was not en∣amoured of Victoria, yet (to finish an aduenture of so high estéeme,) his forwarde desires had drawne him into those parts. But here you must remember the aged King, where he vndertooke his painfull enterprise, by him (indeed) he was guided to this Iland: for (if you remember) hee then fore∣told him, that hee should suffer diuers disastrous chaunces by him, before he could compasse his faire Auriana. He be∣ing entred into the Pallace, mt first with Floraman, who knowing Oliuanto to be no riuall of his, right curteouslie welcomd him, and brought him where he beheld Victoria: but by reason his affection was elswhere setled, he made no ceremonious regard of her, only the enchauntment restrai∣ned him from parting thence, with this perswasion, that there he should accomplish some weightie enterprise.
Not many houres had past through Times sandie glasse, but Tarnaes of Lacedemonia chaunced thether, he being like∣wise frée from any affection to Victoria. And because Drusa Velonna verily intended, the vtter ruine of the Grecian Mo∣narchie, in short while shee drewe thether all the gallant young Knights, and would haue preuailed in like manner vppon Florendos, the Emperour Primaleon, Don Edwarde and the rest, but that the wizzard Aliarte (finding the hea∣uens now more auspicious to him, and his arte to appre∣hend directer course then before) thwarted her disseignes, by interposing the young and hardie Primaleon, whom (in despight of all that euer shee could doo) hee directed to that course. Which the Witch perceiuing, and that he onely would finish the aduenture, shee stroue to send him into the remo∣test parts of the world, till she had gotten into her custodie, the chiefe warriours & defenders of Christendome, which then might fall the easier into the Pagans possession. And shee grounded this purpose of her on the sonne of Albayzar, who (as you haue heard before) was closely carried away from the Princesse Targiana, and béeing nowe growne a good hardie Knight, was created and enstalled Soldane of Babilon: and youthfull courage daily prouokte him, to com∣passe reuenge for his Fathers death, with mighty hatred to his Mother, for marrying him that slew her husband, and confidently he builded on Velonnaes promises, by whose di∣rection he was altogether guided. But (as we said before) Aliarte hauing an eye vppon all her procéedings, sent first aduertisement thereof to the Em∣perour, and afterward ordained, that the Knight of For∣tune should haue newe Armes made him, wrought all of Diamonds, with sharpe Ponyards sticking foorth quite o∣uer it, the better to breake the Knights blowes when they came to combate, and that the Griffon (which we spake of before) being naturall and not magicall, might not so easi∣lie seaze vppon him. And because by subtile meanes they must enter the Iland, where all the worlds strength would
nothing auaile them, they made a little Barque, séeming to be one whole peece of wood, and closed ouer in such sort, that Primaleon being in it, could no way be offended by the water, and when it was lanched into the Sea, it appeared not like to the forme of a Barque, but rather like a huge vnweldie péece of Timber, béeing driuen by the waues vi∣olently vpon the Iland, where suddenly it opened, and Pri∣maleon stept foorth vppon the shoare, armed as hath béen al∣readie declared, and with a kéene edgd Axe in his hand. Drusa Velonna hauing espied him, imagined herselfe now quite vndone, but to let nothing lack of what she could doe, she ranne to her spells, and raised such a hellish mist or fogge, as the Pallace by no meanes could be discerned: in which time, shee caused the Knights to arme themselues, and sent them forth against him, perswading them that hee was no man, but a huge monstrous enchaunted Hedg-hog. Whē Primaleon saw so many armed Knight come against him, and all of them well knowne to him by their impre∣ses, he grew doubtfull what his successe would sort vnto, yet prepared neuerthelesse to assaile them. CHAP. LXVII. How, and what the wizzard Aliarte wrought, a∣gainst the enchauntment of Drusa Velonna, and what ensued to Primaleon. THe learned Aliarte, standing in∣uisible on the shore of the Iland, and perceiuing that these vali∣ant Knights knew not Primale∣on, whereby might ensue the death of one another, threw like∣wise a Magicall fume vppon the Ile, which béeing carried by the wind vppon the Knights faces, wrought this effect, that they dis∣cerned
him to be a man, and not a Hedg-hogge, as before he séemed, where-upon they went toward him with theyr swordes drawne. But Arguto, Floraman, and Florian, suspecting that hee came for the rape of Victoria, as (by the enchauntments force) they were verily perswaded, beganne furiously to as∣saile him: and hee well auoyding their blowes with his Axe, returned them such sharpe repayments, that they finding theyr swords ouer-weake for resistance, vsed what skill they could for theyr owne defence. Now it happened, that Arguto (shunning a blow of the Axe) ranne vpon Primaleon, and giuing him a thrust ful in the sight of his Helmet, made it flie open that his face was seene: whereupon, Florian knowing the Prince, and howe déerelie he affected his Daughter, desiring to make her his wife in mariage, gaue backe, & offered no more resistance. But Arguto and Floraman, respecting him as theyr riuall in loue, ranne both very violently vpon him, and had hand∣led him hardly, but that Primaleon passing his sword quite through Floramans Beuer, wounded him in the fore-head, and the blood running downe into his eyes, so hindered his sight, as he was constrained to retire, and leaue Arguto a∣lone with him, hand to hand. The battaile betwéene them lasted aboue-two houres, with very great disaduantage to Arguto, because Primale∣on shrewdly mangled his Armour with his Axe, and in the end had staine him, but that Oliuanto, Florian and the rest, stept between them, causing them to giue ouer the combate, when presently they felt themselues freed frō the enchant∣ment, which before had restrained them to ye place. Wher∣vpon the wise Aliarte (beeing still inuisible) wrought so by his learned skill, that diuers Ships closed immediatly on the Iland, and Arguto suddenly would haue stept into one of them, in rage & spléene to haue parted thence, as hee did before at the Ile of Carderia: but Aliarte perceiuing his en∣uious intent, shewed himselfe to him, and suddenly styed him, when taking him aside from the rest, he thus spake to
him. My Lord, you are too froward and malicious, and he∣ther am I come onely for your good, for by mine Arte I fore-saw that Primaleon would giue end to this aduenture, as in right and reason it belongs best to him, and that Vic∣toria should loue him beyond all other, by whom she enioy∣eth the benefit of libertie: wherfore neuer pursue that ob∣stinately, whereto the heauens are no way agréeable. Bt because your loue shall receiue some answerable requitall, and to continue kindnes between men of so high deseruing, Primaleon hath a sister named Concordia, of no lesse beau∣tie then her Mother Miragarda, whom (leaguing your selfe in loue and friendship with Primaleon,) you may the easier obtaine in mariage. Arguto being both wise and valiant, and no fault in him, but only emulation in matter of honour, tooke no little plea∣sure in Aliartes friendly aduise: and albeit his loue to Vic∣toria presently ceased, as reason & respect thought it most con∣uenient, quickning his desires to see faire Concordia, yet prizing his Knightly repute before the weight of affection, he returnd him this aunswere. Discreete & learned father, it can be no disparagement to me, to accept Primaleons faire sister as my wife, but rather therby my state shalbe aduan∣ced, in being thought worthy of so rich a beauty. Neuerthe∣thelesse, because Frysoll my grand-father, would neuer giue superiority to Palmerin d' Oliua, vntil he had made proofe by chiualry, which of them deserued to be accoūted worthiest: I sée no reason, why I may not hold the same opinion, con∣cerning him whom I hold as my honorable enemy. Ther∣fore graue father, vntill I haue tried by euident proofe, whe∣ther he or I am the ablest man at armes, I will not graunt to loue his faire Sister, or any other Lady whatsoeuer: in which humor I am determined to part hence, to expect apt occasion for the combat betwéen vs, since Fortune hath fa∣uoured him with the end of this aduenture. Aliarte percei∣uing the scope of his purpose, accompanied him to the Barque, where commending him to God, Arguto depar∣ted much troubled in his minde: For albeit hée would not
as yet resolue to affect the fayre Concordia, yet her beautie and honour caried so generall commendation, as he iudgd it no meane grace for him to enioy her in marriage, and these thoughts wrought more and more with his stronger purpo∣ses, in which humour let vs leaue him to his trauaile, till more needfull time require to remember him againe. The other Knights (Florian onely excepted) beeing de∣uoted in their loues to diuers Ladies, finding themselues fréed frō the force of the enchauntment, (after kind thanks to Primaleon & Aliarte,) departed whether themselues best pleased, Primaleon staying (as reason required) behind thē, to performe a further seruice depending on the aduenture. Drusa Velonna, to supply the cast so much as in her lay, not knowing certainly whether Aliarte was departed thence or no, made a great fire to appeare before the Pallace gate: but as great a storme of raine (raised by the skill of Aliarte) as suddenly did extinguish it, so that Primaleon going née∣rer the gate, and offering to enter, it closed and opened a∣gaine so suddenly, that if hee had rashlie stept into the pas∣sage, he might haue beene caught betwéene the gates, and so his life very greatly endangered, it opened and closed so many seuerall times together. At last, when it stoode open and not closed againe so fast as before, he beheld a Griffon and a Lyon, which seemed as if they would issue foorth vppon him: when musing a little with himselfe, what was best to be doone, the wise Aliarte came to him, and spake in his eare as shall héereafter more at large be declared.
CHAP. LXVIII. How Primaleon entred into the Pallace, and ac∣complished a great part of the aduenture. PRimaleon, or our famous knight of Fortune, perceiuing his en∣traunce into the Pallace almost impossible, beganne to be much troubled in his minde, when A∣liarte stepping inuisibly to him, whispered him thus in the eare: that if he smote with his Axe at a certaine parte of the gates, his strength would be such, as hee should easily keepe them both open, and hinder them from closing againe. Primaleon, not a little longing to see his Victoria, strooke foorth-right at one of the gates, which did shutte with the other so strongly and violently, as it made him stagger backward aboue sixe paces, and tumbled him into a pit of such clammie mudde, as very hardly did he get out againe: but hauing recouered footing, and striking a∣gainst the other gate, he had falne backward as before, but that his Axe head staied him vp against a great stone, which stoode vpright on one side of the gate, and hee being glad of so good successe, went forward to enter: but the Lyon and Griffon came so furiously vpon him, and assailed him with such eager violence, that he scarce knew how to defend him selfe against them. But hee scorning to serue for foode to two such rauenous Beasts, layde at them chesrefully with his sword, albeit the nimblenes of the beasts was such, as doubtlesse they had slaine him, but that the sharp ponyars in his Armour did highly sted him: for the Lyon grasping with one of his pawes at the Beuer of his Helmet, one of the ponyards past quite thorow it, his other pawe (soone af∣ter) sustaining the like hurt, which made the beast hold off
the furder from him, and be lesse troublesome to him then before. The Griffon likewise houering aboue him, made many proffers at him with her sharp tallents, and striuing to gripe him thorow the Armour, wounded her selfe in ma∣ny parts vpon the ponyards, so that she was constrained to let him fall, hauing him aloft, as intending to flie thence a∣way with him, and in the fall, Primaleon hit his head a∣gainst the great stone, so that he lay there stil in a traunce, and might right easily haue beene depriued of his life, but that the Lyon and the Griffon were both sore wounded. So soone as he was vpon his feete againe, (somewhat ashamed of his fall) he layd about him so couragiously with his wea∣pon, that both the beasts whose hurts grew num and stiffe with cold, lagd about very lazilie, and still receiued wound after wound. The Griffon, to make her vttermost aduantage, moun∣ted once more aloft, and soaring about as waiting opportu∣nitie, though she durst fasten no more hold vppon him, yet she compeld him to waste time in séeking to shun her: and often did she beate her wings about his head, till at last shée ouerthrew him, when suddenly the Lyon catching him by the legge, where none of the poynted ponyards were pla∣ced, dragd him along vppon the grounde, making him to féele extreame affliction, but freeing himselfe at last by his thicke doubled stroakes, and preparing to auoyde a dange∣rous proffer of the Griffon, his blow hapned iust betweene the closing of her wings, cutting one of them quite from the body, whereby she being disabled from mounting aloft any more, made what hast shee coulde to gette away from the Knight, the like did the Lyon, (hauing laboured so long in vaine, and receiued many hurts) kept backe, as willing to come no more neere him. So Primaleon, going on to the Pallace gate, and find∣ing no other contradiction to his passage, he holdly went in, and because he knew not how he might be encountred, or what dangers might assaile him within the Pallace, hee tooke his Axe with him, when presently the gates clapt to∣gether
behind him, and he was in such a hellish darknesse, that he knew not how to direct his footing, and there did hée heare such cryes and mournings, as if many soules were in that place most cruelly tormented. Yet (for all this) he stil went onward, knocking his heade oftentimes against the walls, as if hee descended downe into some vaulte or Ca∣uerne, till at last he saw a light a farre off from him, and it séemed as if a torch were cōming toward him, which some∣what chéering his spirits, hee made the more hast to come neerer to the light. Being come to it, he saw that it stoode ouer the doore of a Chamber, wherein hee beheld a beauti∣full young Ladie, euery way resembling his fayre Victo∣ria. This Lady was dragd along despightfully by a rude vn∣ciuill villaine, and she (with loude exclaimes) cryed out in this manner: Helpe me (for Gods sake) any man that can, and let mee not be violenced by this discourteous Knight. Primaleon perswading himselfe, that this was his Ladie, would haue stept into the Chamber: but as hee toucht the torch, he sawe a great fire suddenly flaming before ye cham∣ber doore, by the light whereof he beheld the Lady cruellie beaten, because she would not yéeld to the Knights perswa∣sions. This yrkesome spectacle, so offended him to sée it, that (dreadlesse of the fire) hee leapt quite through it into the Chamber, where he could discerne neither the Knight nor the Ladie: but looking round about him, hee espied an Ad∣der of huge greatnes craule along vppon the floore, contay∣ning some sixe foote in length, & hauing two heads, casting foorth a redde poyson at the eyes and mouth, which stil was kindled by the Adders breath, so that fire flew euery where round about the Chamber. This sight was so hideous and dreadful to behold, that it would haue daunted any gallant spirit whatsoeuer, Primaleon onely excepted, who (beeing Fortunes darling) made no regarde at all of the fire, but went on along through it, and neuer was hurt or offended by it: so, comming to the Adder, and lifting vp his sworde
to smite off one of the heades, it spake aloude to him in this manner. Ah gentle Knight, doe not kill mee that neuer of∣fended thée, but go a long with me, and I will shewe thee the faire young Lady Victoria, whō thou (and none other) must frée from this enchauntment. Primaleon preparing himselfe to follow the Adder, stood awhile pondering to himselfe, that this might be but some cunning deceit, as indeede it was: for Drusa Velonna had assumed this shape, with intent to guide him to a stéepie downe-fall, where shee (acquainted well enough with the meanes for her owne safety) would no way be endangered, but he (suddenly falling downe) should be squandred into numberlesse péeces, according to the nature of the place. Béeing thus doubtfull of trecherous dealing, hee profferd once more to kill the Adder, but she (perceiuing that he ve∣rily purposed her death) glided so swiftly from him, as hee could not fasten a stroake vpon her: and now his thoughts became some-what distracted, because the fire beeing quite extinguished, he remained in the like darknes as he did be∣fore. Neuerthelesse, to sée what this aduenture would sort vn∣to, he went on so well as he could, cōming at last to a place, where (by diuers little windowes) he discerned some light, which guiding his stepps with better securitie, hee heard a Lady call behind him, saying: Suffer mee not to die, kinde curteous Knight. As hee turned to sée who called thus to him, he beheld a great doore to open, which guided his way into a goodly Hall, where he found ye great Serpent, wher∣in the Princesse Leonarda was sometime enchaūted. This Serpents statue had an opening in his side, where he might behold a Knight that held a liuing Serpent by the taile, and spake vnto him in this manner. Knight, if thou repent not thy comming into a place of such daunger, lende mee thy hand, for by no meanes else can I gette foorth of this huge Serpent, then wilt thou and I try our valour together. Primaleon dreadlesse of any danger whatsoeuer, with∣out any further pausing, gaue him his armed hand, and pul∣ling
with all the strength he could vse, at last the Knight is∣sued foorth vppon him, & then the opening in the great Ser∣pents side closed againe. CHAP. LXIX. Of the dangerous fight, which Primaleon had with the Knight of the Serpent, and how he accomplished the whole aduenture afterward. THe Knight which came foorth of the Serpent, and therefore was called the Knight of ye Serpent, walking on his feete along the great Hall, managed the liuing Serpent which hee helde in his hand, with such extraordinary fa∣cilitie & nimblenesse, as nothing can be imagined more quick and agill. Nowe albeit hee gaue our Champion many cruel strokes therewith, yet this was no∣thing, in regarde of the Serpents sharpe teeth and clawes, which often-times fastened on the bucklings of his Armor, and made it hang very loosely vpon him, so that he seeking to shunne these assaults of the Serpent, the Knight flung it fast about his Helmet, whence writing it selfe down along his breast, he found his body to be quite disarmed, and his Helmet to fall beside his head. This perrill did put newe life into all his spirits, and lif∣ting his Axe vp with both his handes, hee gaue a mighty stroake ouerthwart the Serpent, whereby it fell downe dead out of the Knights handes: and hee (hauing no other weapon for his owne defence) the doore opening againe in the brazen Serpents side, he ran presently in thereat with no meane hast, and there stoode vpright, as quite bereft of all his sences.
Primaleon taking vp his Armour & Helmet, went foorth of the Pallace, where Florian holpe to arme him againe, earnestly intreating to returne in with him: but the youth∣full gallant, to haue the honour alone of so great an enter∣prise, desired that he would not be so much his hinderance, the rather, in regard the aduenture was destenied for him onely, and by no man else could be concluded. So Prima∣leon departing from the Prince, came againe to the Hall where he had left the Serpent, and finding there no further resistance, hee went through a doore into another goodlie roome, where stoode the armed statues of many Pagane Princes, and huge great chestes, wherein the inestimable treasure was contained, whereof we haue briefely spoken in the second part of this Historie, but more at large to be discoursed on, both whose they were, and for whom reser∣ued, either in the end of this booke, or some tractate thereon depending. Finding there likewise no deniall of his passage, as hee profferd to enter a little doore directly before him, looking in thereat, he beheld two angry Lyons, each standing rea∣red vp on his hinder feete, and placing theyr formost on the young Lady Victorias shoulders: whereupon, such was his feare least the Lady should be endangered, that (neuer re∣membring his Axe) he stept boldly in at the doore, and draw∣ing forth his sword, went to one of the Lyons, which stoode still and stird not, as if it had béene an Image of stone, but onely stoode as admiring the Ladies beautie, and expres∣sing a kinde of feare, least shee should by the Knight be ta∣ken from him, the other Lyon dooing the like in all re∣spects. But that which made him most of all to meruaile, was the faire Victoria, standing as if shee were immooueable, v∣sing no word at all, or any signe of knowledge of him: this sight afflicted him more then all the rest, and made him euen ready to sinke downe dead with gréefe, till going somwhat neerer, and offering his hand to leade her thence, both the Lyons suddainly leapt vpon him, and catching him vp be∣twéen
their pawes, caried him forth of the chamber, where with their teeth and clawes they cruelly graspt him, batte∣ring and brusing all his Armour, yet he could not fasten one blow vpon them, but fought as if it had beene with the ayre, till he wexed so wearie, that he could very hardly fetch his breath. Notwithstanding the very vttermost of this ex∣treame agonie, his minde held out couragiously, and labou∣red on the likeliest courses to be taken, for spéediest gayning the glory of this enterprise, and fréedome of the faire young Lady his Mistris: in which meditation, he remembred his Axe, which hee sawe leaning against the chamber doore, whereas him selfe before had left it, & catching it vp quick∣lie, smote one of the Lyons there-with vppon the shoulder, cleauing him down to the very entrailes, which the Knight reioyced not a little to behold, hoping now of good successe in the rest of his labour. And turning to the other Lyon, desi∣rous to spéed as well with him, because he grew the fiercer vpon him, as hauing (by vertue of the enchauntment) his owne strength redoubled, and the force of his wounded fel∣lowes likewise infused: hee found his hope mightily disap∣pointed, for the Lyon catching holde with his teeth on the Axe, wroong it out of his hands, so that now he was glad to make vse of his sword againe, where-with he could defend him selfe but very slenderly, because all his blowes were still spent in vaine. Hauing thus fought a long while together, yet all his la∣bour fruitlesse and to no purpose, his owne life alwayes in greatest hazard, and no likelyhoode of preuailing in the end: hée sawe the beast rise vp on his hinder legges, when sud∣dainly he ranne and caught him in his armes, but thereby he endured the extreamest paine and turmoile, as in all his life time he neuer felt the like, for the Lyons strength was still doubled against him: neuerthelesse, Primaleon helde out so currantly, making vse of cunning sleights and witty preuentions, that the beast got little aduauntage of him. The woorst that befell Primaleon in this dangerous fight, was the beasts continuall gripes vppon his armes, which
hindered him from getting his dagger foorth, albeit he had made many faire offers at it: but at length, the Lyon wex∣ing almost as wearie as he, and starke mad with rage, be∣cause hee could not ouerthrowe the Knight, letting goe his hold, drew back to watch some better aduantage. Now had Primaleon liberty to recouer his dagger, wher∣with (as the Lyon came fiercely againe vpon him) he stabd it into the beasts right shoulder, that it past quite thorowe on the other side, and there he left the dagger still sticking. This wound made the beast so fell & outragious, that gras∣ping Primaleon once more betwéene his pawes, he threw him violently against the ground, and went ouer him twise or thrise, as séeking the readiest way to kill him. But as Primaleon lay vpon his backe, turning aside his head to a∣uoide the beasts foote, hee had a suddaine sight of the young Lady Victoria, who (in his eye) séemed dead, albeit she stood vpright on her féet: whereat he was so affrighted, that star∣ting quickly vp, he gaue another thrust at the Lyon, which made the beast to tumble along, and beating him selfe a while against the ground, at last he was quite depriued of life. Then went Primaleon into the chamber where the La∣die was, and going reuerently neere her, tooke her by the hand, which he felt to be so cold, as if it had beene a hand of marble, in all which time she moued not a iote, but stoode so still as if she were dead. Such was his greefe to see her in this sort, as he grew into a great impatience, and profferd to carry her out of that chamber, to try if any where else he could be better comforted: but as hee laide holde on her to beare her thence, there suddainly started vp from vnder a great stone, two wild Saluage men, with clubs of yron in theyr hands, and at each clubbe hung foure great chaines, with bigge yron balls fastned to them: very furiously smote they at Primaleon, and beate him so about the head with the balls of yron, that he fell downe on the floore, when the Saluage men taking him vp betweene them, intended to ary him vnder the stone, from whence themselues appea∣red
first to him: but although theyr blowes had shrewdly astonned him, yet when he felt himselfe thus carried along, he gaue one of the Saluages such a blow with his gauntlet vppon the heade, that the bloode trickled downe about his shoulders, and giuing the other a spurne with his foote full on the mouth, hee made foure of his teeth to fall out of his head▪ in rage and anger whereof they let him fall, but such was his good hap, that he stood vpright vpon his feete. The Saluages to reuenge this iniurie receiued, turned againe to him with their clubs so furiously, that Primaleo, (not hauing forgotten the weight of theyr strokes, and willing to auoyde them so much as hee might) by his often sleights and slippes aside from them, made indifferent meanes to kéepe them off him, and with his sword he had cut in sunder thrée chaines from one of the clubbes, and two from the o∣ther, whereby hee was not so beaten with the alls as be∣fore, nor they so bolde as at first they were, but receiuing sundry hurts by his weapon, shrunke seuerall wayes aside as desirous of breathing: but hee maintayning so good an aduantage, followed them the more closely, leauing one club quite without chaines and balls, & the other but with one onely, so that the Saluages found their strength verie much impayred. During this fierce and dangerous combate, the conclu∣sion whereof as yet séemed doubtfull, by chance as hee tur∣ned his heade aside toward the doore, he beheld two men farre spent in yeeres, carrying the faire Victoria between them, and laying her as dead in a goodly Tombe, closed a∣gaine the couerture vppon it. This spectakle was so offen∣siue both to his eyes and hart, that hee became like a man frantique or desperate, and at two strokes recouered the clubbes from the Saluages, who hauing lost all strength of the enchauntment, which they had by meanes of ye clubs onely, ranne againe vnder the stone from whence they issu∣ed forth, and Primaleon going toward the Tombe, heard a voyce speake in manner following. Lay hold on this rash & ouer-bold Knight, and enclose him in this Tombe with his
enamoured Lady, so let him enioy her in eternall darknesse, since he is so desperate as to die for her sake. Primaleon expressed no care at all of these threatning words, but going on forward, ye two old men came against him, to with-hold him from opening of the Tombe, and be∣cause their age made him the lesse heedfull of thē, they sud∣denly seazed on him, & held him so strongly betwéene theyr hands, that albeit he stroue so much as hee could, yet was he forcibly taken vp by them, and brought close vnto the Tombes side, which presently opened of it selfe, and as they put his féete first into it, one of the old men thus spake. Take heere thy pleasure so long as thou thinkest good, since thou wilt needs haue thy Victoria. Primaleon, perceiuing he had no dallying worke in hand, strugled with them so stoutly, that he caught one of thē by the long dangling haire, which being the meanes of depriuing ye olde mans strength, made him forsake his hold, whereby Primaleon the easier fastned his hand on the vpper-part of the Tombe, when the other old man (being vnable to hold him of himselfe) let him goe likewise, where-uppon immediatly hee leapt foorth of the Tombe, which quickly closed againe, and then both the old men vanished out of sight. When Primaleon saw himselfe thus left there alone, vn∣likely to be informed by any one, howe or by what meanes he might open the Tombe, he stoode a while as one discon∣tented: but afterward he walked round about it, and héed∣fully noated euery place, if there were any way whereby to open it, & making many assaies to lift vp the couerture, all the strength hee could vse would neuer stirre it, and as thus he stroue with it, but to no purpose, about ye brim edge of the Tombe, he read these engrauen lines. The Lady thou desir'est is dead, Heere haue the wormes vpon her fed. And entring heere, thy selfe must die: Despight all Arte and Chiualrie.
This inscription made Primaleon some-what suspitious of his owne abilitie, which stretched his patience beyonde the limits of sufferance, so that tugging at one end of the Tombe with incredible strength, it séemed to him as if it shooke, and then he heard a voice within it, speaking vnto him after this manner. Alas Sir Knight, what meane you thus to disquiet my rest? Depart hence I beseech you, be∣cause all your labour will prooue but in vaine. These words made such a wide breach in the former hopes of Primaleon, as if he had not set downe his sword for spéedie stay to him, he had suncke downe and falne on the ground: but as hee stoode thus right sad and pensiue, hee saw the wise Aliarte enter the Chamber, who comming to him, said. Bee not dismaied faire Knight, for the young Lady Victoria is not dead, nor yet enclosed within this Tombe, yet must this Tombe (of necessitie) be opened, because you can neuer re∣couer her frō this enchauntment, while her statue of Mar∣ble remaines héere enclosed, but all the strength in the world auailes not to open the Tombe, without mine Arte, after some vse whereof performed by mee, then must your vertue conclude the rest. So he entring into a little studie, (wherein Prince Flo∣rian neuer came, at such time as he deliuered the Princesse Leonarda,) there he found a little booke of strange written Carracters, which some-time belonged to Quéene Melia, and onely serued to finish the enchauntment. Not long had he read vppon the booke, but all the roome began to trem∣ble, and the ayre became so wondrous darke, as they (not séeing one another) heard diuers horrid voyces, which gaue a signe of very serious imployment. And as it thus conti∣nued the space of halfe an houre, from the roofe of the cham∣ber fell downe a great stone, which lighting vppon the co∣uering of the Tombe, brake it through the midst, when pre∣sently the day wexing cleere againe, they might see in the Tombe the faire young Lady Victorias statue, whereupon Primaleon immediatly coniectured, that the enchauntment now was fully accomplished. But suddenly arose from vn∣derneath
the Tombe, a Centaure all armed, holding in ei∣ther hand a greate Mace, where-with hee florished about him so swiftly and nimbly, as it dazzeld the eyes of them to looke on him. My Lord (quoth Aliarte) haue what care you can to this Centaures Maces, for hee must and will smite you with them, and if you meane to kill him, it must be with your hand without any weapon: which wordes were no sooner spoken, but Aliarte vanished againe. Primaleon séeing him∣selfe in the very procinct of recouering his Lady, thought now (if he were naked) yet he was able to accomplish a far more difficult enterprise, & casting by his Gauntlets, went toward the Centaure with his sword prepared, onely to beare off the blowes of his Maces, whereof at first hee fai∣led, and was shrewdly smitten with them both at once: but he stepping back for a more ample opportunitie, smote with such fiercenes at both the Maces, that one of them present∣ly fell to the ground, and so did the other in short while af∣ter. Now began the Centaure to be more violent, and lea∣ping vppon Primaleon, had almost prest him to the earth with his heauie weight, but hee catching him fast by the legge, threw him mainly against the ground, and then set∣ting his foote vpon him, quickly ntied his arming girdle, purposing to binde fast his hands there-with, but the Cen∣taure was so quicke and readie with them, that hee coulde lay no hold vpon them, til at last he gaue him thrée or foure good buffets on the face, which tamed him in such sort, as first he bound the one arme, and afterward ye other, though with much adoe before hee could compasse it: and as hee stroue to raise the Centaure vpon his feete, he suddenly died, and as suddenly did the whole Pallace vanish, with what∣soeuer hee had beheld in it: except the Images of the Pa∣gane Princes, the huge mettall Serpent, and the faire La∣dy Victoria, who stood as amazed at so strange an accident. Then came Florian and the wise Aliarte to Primaleon, who was nowe with Victoria, to comfort her in her wandering
oppinions, and Aliarte spake  him in this maner. Braue Knight, well maist thou be called the darling of Fortune, in receiuing from her such inexpressable fauours: but least we be further troubled by Velonna before our departure, let mee aduise you, to prepare presently for Constantinople. So leaue we them to their intended iourney, and nowe let vs speake of a dangerous combate, which happened betweene Leonato and Tarnaes, as they and the rest returned from this Iland. CHAP. LXX. How Leonato and Tarnaes came to combate toge∣ther, for the loue of faire Candida, and vppon what condition they were parted by Palmerin of England. HEeretofore hath béene tolde you, how Leonato and Tarnaes were both enamoured of faire Candi∣da, ye daughter to noble Belyfart, yet neither of them knowing the others affection: and being both among others entred a Barque together, Leonato, dreadlesse of any danger whatsoeuer, decla∣red to Tarnaes, that hee woulde nowe saile home to Constantinople, onely to compasse his loue to faire Candida. Tarnaes looking sternly vpon him, saide: Thou canst not goe thether for that occasion, so long as this weapon will hold in my hand. Leonato was as ready with his sword, and presently they would there haue falne to the combate: but Oliuanto and Floraman (being in companie) stept betweene them with these spéeches. This is no place (Gentlemen) for quarrell & contention, forbeare then (wée pray you) till wee come to Land, where either of you may maintaine his argument of loue and valour. These reasonable spéeches pacified the Knights, but for no longer time then they should be landed: so the Barque
sayling on as wind and weather pleased, at last it brought them into Macedonia, where Oliuanto and Floraman ear∣nestly laboured to appease them, but all was to no end: for they had coniurd them to graunt them one request, & they (not remembring their sterne resolution) consented vnto it whatsoeuer it were. The boone (quoth Tarnaes) which we vrge yée to grant, is, that (now wee are héere landed) you would folow your best intended courses, and leaue vs to try the effect of our contention. Greatly it displeased Oliuanto and Floraman, that they had so rashly passed such a promise, but because honour tyed them strictly to their word, they left them, and parted toward Constantinople, Oliuanto to see his Auriana, and Floraman to expect the wished arriuall of Vic∣toria. Leonato and Tarnaes thus left by themselues, with their swords ready drawne, and couered with theyr Shieldes, they fought together with such arte & skilfulnes, as aboue two houres were spent, and yet they had not wounded one another: but when their Shields were sliced in péeces, that they were faine to receiue the strokes vppon their armes, and wheresoeuer els they lighted on their bodies, then was true manhood indeed to be plainly discerned, for after ma∣ny breathings and reenforcements of the fight, they stoode still so boldly against each other, as either of them was re∣solued to die or be a conquerour. This equalitie in courage so long continued, that wound for wound was readily deliuered, their bodies and Armour pittifully mangled, but yet the hurts not déeply entring, by reason their dexteritie and skill much holpe them, which is a matter of great consequence in a combate triall, where both parts are of equall valour, and knowledge. Til about mid-day thus lasted the difference, their bloode (in manie places) altering the cullour of their Armour, when at last Tarnaes thus spake to Leonato. You see (Sir) in what estate we are both brought, yet neither of vs certaine who shall haue the victory, therefore (so please you) wéele pause a∣while, and putting off our Armour, wee shall soone make
proofe of the worthier person, and let him be renowned ac∣cording to his merrit. Leonato, who neuer was capable of any feare or dismay, quickly replied that he was well con∣tented with this motion: so either of them stepping aside to his Squire, in very short while they were both disarmed. Then, after they had walked and breathed a space, they came againe together, but in a contrary maner from their first kinde of fight: for each opposing the right side of his bo∣die to his aduersary, made defence of his left side, breaking many desperate blowes & thrusts, according as they were diuers times dangerously offered. When the Squires beheld their Lordes in so apparant perrill of their liues, they intended to make out vnto the roade wayes, in hope to find some Knight that might come to pacifie them: and pursuing their purpose, they were no sooner entred vpon the high-way, but they sawe a Knight come riding toward them, seeming answerable in courage to either of theyr Maisters, to him thus spake one of the Squires. Neuer was a Knight met in a more needfull time, vouchsafe Sir to goe with vs, & helpe to saue the liues of two honourable Knights, then whom there liues none better in the worlde. The Knight (who was Palmerin of England) imagining that they belonged to the Court of Constantinople, went hastily with them, and beeing come to the Combattants, lifting vp the euer of his Helmet, hee stept betwéene them, saying. What fury (faire Knights) hath made you so cruell and vnkinde to one another, let me intreate ye to hold awhile and answere me. Leonato, knowing it was his Father that spake, reti∣red backe, and so did Tarnaes, where-vpon, Palmerin thus began againe. Tell me Leonato the cause of your quarrell, which I am much afrayde is grounded vpon loue: if so, or howsoeuer else it be, so please you to referre it to my iudge∣ment, I doubt not but to satis-fie you both right nobly. Le∣onato declared to his Father, that their strife was for the loue they both bare to faire Candida, and Tarnaes likewise confirmed the same, whereto Palmerin thus presently re∣plied.
Why my friends, you knowe it is a matter meerelie impossible, that the Lady should be wife to you both: let me then so farre preuaile in your patience, that I may nomi∣nate wiues for you both, such as I dare warrant to eyther of your contentment. Palmerin was of such honour & estéeme, among all such Knights as had knowledge of him, as these young gallants could not well gain-say his noble offer, but referring them∣selues to his discretion, he thus procéeded. My Lord Tar∣naes, if your thoughts were as agréeable as mine, there is a Lady that I could wish to be your wife, namely my daugh∣ter called Fior-nouela, who although she be ouer-young as yet for marriage, yet goes she beyond Miragarda in beau∣tie: the reason why I vse these spéeches, is, that I wish you a wife of greater degrée, then shee i whom my soee▪ Leo∣nato affects, therefore because she is lesse worthy then your selfe, let him enioy Candida of mean qualitie, repayring that want onely by your kinde brother-hoode. Tarnaes perceiuing the honourable minde of Palmerin, though it much displeased him to alter his affection, yet cō∣sidering hee impaired not, but rather augmented his repu∣tation, especially in regard of Fior-nouellas beautie, beside great hopes of further aduauncement, accepted Palmerins gentle offer, and so did Leonato, who loued Candida with such intire zeale, as her pouertie coulde▪ not be any hinde∣rance thereof, her birth and faire vertues onely made his election of her. Vpon this agreement, Palmerin and they mounted presently on horsebacke, and he conducted them to a neere adioyning village, where their hurts ere well regarded, and so soone as they were thorowly recouered, they iournied all thrée to Constantinople.
CHAP. LXXI. How Primaleon and Arguto fought together neere to Constantinople, and how no man could part them but the Emperour Primaleon. AFter that the learned Aliarte had prepared all things in readines, hee called Primaleon aside, and spake thus to him. Thou truly valiant, and worthily renowned Knight of Fortune, right well I wote, that your heart nowe tra∣uailes with no other thoughts, but onely how to espouse the faire Victoria, whom you haue with such honour and déere paines deserued: Yet fauour me to tell you, that in respect you are Nephewe to my Lord the Emperour, it is necessary that he should bestow so great a gift on you, for neither dare her Father nor I deale in the matrimoniall contract, before his highnes pleasure be first vnderstood. Neuerthelesse, assure your selfe, that no Knight (but you onely) shall enioy her, albeit she will cost you dea∣rer then as yet she hath done, in a matter which you can by no meanes escape: wherefore let me perswade ye, that ha∣uing taken leaue of her and her father, you trauaile alone to Constantinople, where it shall not be long before we will méete you, & there performe your long desired nuptiall. Primaleon, though but young, yet being wise & discreete, allowed the wizzards counsaile to be sound and good, and therefore without dwelling vpon any other doubts, he went to the Prince Florian, (who was reasoning with his daugh∣ter, concerning Primaleons valour and vertues, to tempt and try her disposition toward him, because already he had determined in his owne minde, frankly to bestow her vpon him in marriage,) Primaleon being come to him, spake in
this manner. My Lord Florian, I am desirous to followe some priuate intent of mine owne, which (happily) may guide me I know not whether, but gladly would I encoun∣ter some aduenture of woorth, before I would be seene in the Emperours presence, for hee in his youth ranne through many rare fortunes, enough for me to admire at, without any vaine opinion of equalling: therefore I craue your fa∣uour for my departure, and commend all my highest hopes, to the gracious regard of this beautifull Princesse. When the Lady Victoria heard his kinde spéeches, a crimson blush leapt vp into her chéekes, and so well as shee could, (her affliction of mind held excused for his so suddaine departure) she formed a pretty kind of wandring discourse, intermedled with broken sighes and faint smiles, the raine in her eyes being readier then her tongue: yet forgot shee not to thanke him for deliuering her from that hellish en∣chauntment, promising to be as mindfull therof, as so great a benefit did iustly deserue. So Primaleon leauing them, went aboorde a little Py∣nace, which (by Aliartes appointment) set saile for Con∣stantinople, and in fewe dayes he came within foure miles of the Citty, when (because it was night) he tooke vp his lod∣ging in the neighbouring village. Arguto making cer∣taine account, that Primaleon would come with Florian and Victoria, vsed often to stray abroad from Constantinople, hauing still a care what Shippes tooke landing, because he longed to encounter Primaleon, for the vtmost proofe of his ability in Armes. So it happened, that as Primaleon came from his Inne in the morning, Arguto met him, and know∣ing him, by reason he wore not his helmet, he spake as fol∣loweth. Sir Knight, put on your helmet, and that speedily, for I am to try the combate with you. Primaleon mused a little to himselfe, returning no aun∣swere, because he knew not the man that challenged him, for Arguto had couered his Shéelde of the Sunne, because hee would by no meanes be knowne: but at last, without speaking any word at all, hauing laced on his helmet, hee
turned his horse for the course, so did Arguto, with a minde full of furious desire to wound his contrary, the other being nothing so much mooued, because he knew not with whom hee should encounter, which made Arguto to receaue the greater aduantage in the shock, in being not stird a iote by his aduersaries Launce, but Primaleon lost one of his stir∣ropes. This séemed somewhat strange to him, and made him forgetfull of his former patience, his imagination pre∣sently apprehending, that doubtlesse his enemie was Ar∣guto, whose enuious nature (toward him) excéeded all man∣lie compasse, wherefore now he purposed verily his death, to be rid of such a riuall both in his loue and honour, and ta∣king another Launce, prepared to the second encounter, whereof Arguto made no refusall, but met him with such a furious disdaine, that he was cast out of his saddle on the crooper of his Horse, very hardly escaping the fall, and Pri∣maleon was set vpon his Horse buttocks, but not in perrill of any fall: so, both recouering their seates againe, they charged a fresh for the third triall. Now met they together with such maine violence, that the girtes of Argutoes saddle breaking, hee tumbled back∣ward to the ground, being shrewdly brused with the fall: but Primaleons Horse (by ouer-great mishap) brake his two fore legges, and falling to the earth, chaunced to stampe one of his hinde féete vppon his Maisters foote, so that both were faine to lie a while and rest them selues. But hauing recouered footing, they came together with their swordes drawne, Primaleon féeling his foote somewhat stonned, with the tread which his Horse had giuen him vpon it, yet did he carrie him selfe with such sprightly agilitie, that his ene∣mie discerned not any impediment at all. Now flew their weapons so nimbly about them, that in their carelesse re∣gard of defence, they were both wounded, Arguto in the right side, and Primaleon vppon the left legge: neuerthe∣lesse the battaile endured in such sort, as if they had but in∣stantly begun the same, and they that came to be beholders thereof, iudged Arguto to be the fiercer, because Primaleon
séemed to limpe a little, onely by the paine he felt of his foot. So long lasted this combate, that their armour beeing he∣wen in peeces from about them, and their bodies wounded in many places, a multitude of people flocking thether to sée the ouent, and admiring the stearne resolution in ey∣ther: coniectured (as well they might) that if they were not the sooner sundered, the liues of them both perforce must miscarie, where-vpon diuers ranne and galloped to Con∣stantinople, carrying such newes héereof to the Pallace, that Palmerin, Florendos, Floraman, Leonato, Tarnaes, (who were all there the day before arriued) presently armed them selues, and departed thence with all possible speede, to saue the liues of two such hardy Knights. No sooner were they come thether, but they vnderstoode immediatly, that one of them was Primaleon, the sonne of Florendos, and to know the other, Palmerin called vnto Ar∣gutoes Squire, and prayed him (for safety of his Maisters life) to let him vnderstand of whence he was. The Squire beeing honest and wise, knowing hee would haue intelli∣gence of his Lord, though not by him, tolde him, that his Maisters name was Arguto. Greatly did it gréeue both him and the rest, to sée Lords (of one Court) in such furie thus hand to hand, so that they stept betwéene and labou∣red to appease them: but they (without any respect to the o∣thers friendly endeuour) by no meanes would be pacified, but striking at them, to get foorth from amongst them, sée∣med tenne times more violent against each other then be∣fore, and all the others honest labour prooued but in vaine. When they perceaued that they might not preuaile with them, and their lauish expence of blood, deliuered appa∣rant daunger of their liues: they concluded, that Leonato should poast to the Emperour, to entreate him (for safety of Arguto and his Nephewe Primaleons life) he would come thether with all hast possible. When the Emperour heard these tidings, immediatly he descended the steps of the Pallace, and mounting vpon an easie Ambler, in lesse then halfe an houre he came to the
Combattants: whose extremitie of fury was indifferently qualified, because both wearinesse and losse of blood had so weakened them, as their blowes nowe did but very little harme. The Emperour riding in betwéene them, spake in this manner. I halfe perswaded my selfe, that you young Knights, woulde maintaine the royall reputation of my Court: but nowe I see, that you rather endeuour to ouer∣throw it, in séeking so cruelly to violence one another. Let me vnderstand the cause of your contention, and I will so order and accomodate the case, as neither of your honours shall thereby be impaired. Primaleon hearing his Grandfather speake, reuerently gaue backe, saying. Trust me my Lord, I know not the least particle of any cause, wherefore this Knight should thus combate with me, for I am vtterly ignorant what he is: onely it pleased him to take knowledge of me, and pro∣uoke me to the fight with chalenging tearmes, neuer yeel∣ding me any reason of his discontentment, or how, or wher∣in I haue offended him. Then the Emperour turned to Arguto, to knowe whence the cause of this presumptuous quarrell grew: when he (more in reuerence to so great a commaund, then otherwise) declared all at large, howe in respect of the loue he bare to the faire Lady Victoria, he had borne a long enuious spléen to Primaleon: but more especi∣ally, how duly he had awaited this opportunity, to try which of them two was the ablest man at Armes. The Empe∣rour, (loth to hold them there in such euident perill,) promi∣sed to carrie such an euen hand in this cause of their diffe∣rence, as each of them should be wel satisfied therewith, both in enioying wiues to eithers good liking, & also in this scru∣pulous case of their valour, wherein, neither was reputed inferiour to the other, by their late ouer-bold and hazardous triall. But (quoth he) I am lately informed of an intended war, leueyed by Corcuto the sonne of Albayzar, & now en∣stalled Souldane of Babilon, prepared only against Christi∣ans: there wil be a better triall of manhood vpon Gods ene∣mie and ours, then thus one friend to misentreate another.
Vppon these spéeches the Knights were pacified, and presently two sumptuous Litters were brought from the Court, where-into (after by the Emperours commaund, the Knights had embraced each other, and solemnly prote∣sted a league of friendship) they were softly laide, and be∣ing brought to Constantinople, were lodged in one goodlie chamber, wherein two beds were purposely placed. Now ranne a certaine muttering among the other Lords, which of these two Knights might bee reckoned as the hardiest warriour, in regard they were both sore wounded, and ey∣thers estate was censured vpon, Primaleons greatest harme being thought the bruse of his foote, but Arguto had recea∣ued most hurts, and his armour was battered farre woorse then Primaleons. The Emperour and the other Princes, came daily to visite these wounded Knights, of whose liues the Chirurgi∣ons as yet stoode in doubt, especially of Arguto, because hee had a daungerous hurt in his throate: to them likewise re∣sorted all the Princesses in the Court, of whom, the most impatient in gréefe, was the Empresse Gridonia and the Princesse Miragarda, in their iust compassion of Primaleons perill. Notwithstanding, they failed not in kinde affabili∣tie to Arguto likewise, who lay for diuers dayes together, by no meanes able to mooue him selfe, to the great discon∣tent of all the Lordes and Ladies, beeing very doubtfull of his recouery: but leaue we them in hope of better health, and returne we now to the wizzard Aliarte.
CHAP. LXXII. Howe the wise Aliarte and Prince Florian, with the faire young Lady Victoria, set forward in theyr iourney to Constantinople, and of a daunger which happened to Aliarte, from which he was rescued by the valour of Prince Florian: Also, howe Floraman desperately slew him selfe. YOu remember, that when Pri∣maleon set away for Constanti∣nople, we left Aliarte, Florian, and Victoria stil at the Iland, where the wizzard discoursing with the Prince, about giuing his daugh∣ter Victoria in marriage to the Knight, who (ending the en∣chauntment) had so highly deser∣ued her: and he found him there∣to right willingly addicted, prouided, that the Emperour misliked not thereof. So taking with him the booke before remembred, which sometime belonged to Quéene Melia, they entred into a vessell of larger fruite, then the other which he had sent away before, as being iealous of some disaster, which Drusa Velonna might worke against them. Sayling with prosperous winde and weather the first day and night, Aliarte (somewhat ouer-wearied with watch∣ing) fell into a sound sléepe, as in like manner did the Lady Victoria: but Florians thoughts were seriously busied, what his wife Targiana might conceaue of his so long absence, as thereby no sléepe could fasten on him, albeit he was as glad on the contrary part, as this amourous affliction made him sad in minde, that hee had so happily recouered his daugh∣ter. As thus he sate transported with varietie of passions, he sawe a darke cloud suddainly to engirt the Shippe, and out
of it dropt a mighty Serpent, with a long taile fashioned like a Gable rope, which wrapping it selfe about the slee∣ping wizzard, the Serpent had presently caried him away: but that Florian quickly snatching foorth his sword, ranne speedily to the Monster, and smiting a maine stroke close to his rumpe, cut the taile quite off, so that Aliarte falling, a∣waked there-with, and beholding the Serpent, knew im∣mediatly this was doone by Drusa Velonna, and looking more aduisedly thereon, perceaued that it was Velonna her selfe: wherefore, because she should not easily escape him, he drew foorth Queene Meliaes booke, & wrought so by rea∣ding thereon, that the Serpent could neither mount vp to the ayre, nor diue into the water, but houering a little a∣boue it, changed into her owne naturall shape: for all her skill failed in the presence of this booke, so that Aliarte step∣ping to her, caught her fast by the arme, and drew her per∣force into the Shippe, where so soone as shee was entred, he bound her very strongly, and clapt her close vnder the hatches, because shee should compasse no more trecherie a∣gainst them, and highly glad were they, that so wise, poli∣tique, and deadly an enemie to Christendome, was in this manner become their prisoner. Without any more encombrances they sailed on merily, and in short while arriued at Constantinople, euen when Pri∣maleon and Arguto were (by reason of their hurts) in grea∣test daunger, which made the whole Court right sad and pensiue. But when they heard that Aliarte was come, eue∣rie one reioyced, hoping the wounded Knights would now be quickly cured, and much more encreased this ioy, when they knew he had brought faire Victoria, and Drusa Ve∣onna as his prisoner: as for the Prince Don Florian, hee would not as yet haue him seene there, because he was to vndergoe a tedious trauaile, for deliuery of the Princesse Argentina daughter to Berolde King of Spayne, who (as he vnderstoode by Drusa Velonna) was detayned in the Castell of amant in Persia. Heere-vpon, desirous also to see his wife Trgiana, he made the more hast in this iourney, lea∣uing
absolute order with the learned Aliarte, concerning the marriage of his daughter to Primaleon, committing all to the good liking of my Lord the Emperour. The Wizzard Aliarte, hauing brought faire Victoria a shoare, espied first the Princesse Polinarda, and with her was Floraman come to sée the young Lady, so mounting on horsebacke, they rode into the Citty, and being alighted at the Pallace, all the Princesses and Ladies descended the steppes, to entertaine the beautifull Victoria, where past such kisses and kinde embraces, as truly reported the affec∣tion they bare her. Aliarte hauing kissed the Emperours hand, was loth to slack time ouer-long for helpe of ye woun∣ded Knights, wherefore, being desirous to sée them, Floren∣dos and Palmerin taking him by each hand, they brought him to the Chamber where they languished in paine, onely through the small hope they had of amendment, but when they beheld the wizzard Aliarte, their former doubts were remooued, and nowe (by his meanes) they were halfe per∣swaded of immediate recouery. He going seuerally to the bed of either Knight, whispered thus in their eares: I am come to helpe your greatest extreamitie, & to procure your harts long wished contentment. This promise so cheered their former drooping mindes, that he applying his precious oyles and vnguents to theyr woundes, made them expresse the next morning, manifest signes of a much better condition, and within eyght dayes they were so well amended, that they were able to goe kisse the Emperours hand, who welcommed them with a chéer∣full countenaunce, not vnmindfull of the honourable pro∣mise he had made them. After some priuate conference had with Aliarte, his Maiestie sent for Florendos, Palmerin, Flo∣raman and the rest, whom he acquainted with his determi∣nation, and found each man thereto agréeable, except vn∣fortunate Floraman: who perceiuing that his own tongue must confirme her marriage to another, whom hee beyond all women in ye world most déerely affected, when his turne came to speake, hee stoode awhile silent, as inwardly con∣founded
with extremity of passion. Neuerthelesse, after some better suruay of his cogitations, to witnes yt hee more estéemed his fidelitie to the Emperour, then any care or re∣spect of his owne life, he answered, that a more honourable match in marriage could not be made, then that those two Knights should enioy Victoria and Concordia, and so it past on in generall oppinion, which his Maiestie fully ratified and appointed, to be sollemnized so soone as ye Knights were thorowly cured. Floraman, hearing the dismall sentence against his ioyes for euer, stepping forth before them in the midst of the hall, thus began. Most mighty Emperour, I haue found by true experience, that to be a louer, hath béen the onely infelicity awayting on my life. First I loued Altea, and by her death my loue proued fruitlesse, after which, long time I liued dis∣consolate, till vainly dreaming, that better happe might be∣tide me, I became enamoured of Clariana, who reiected me with a scornfull disdaine, as iustly my breach of faith de∣serued, vowed to the ghost of my deceased Altea. But then a worse affliction befell me, and a third amourous humour enthralled my sences, namely, to the faire Lady Victoria, whose mariage now being likewise agréed vpon, giues me yet this benefit, that I may liue heereafter among poore de∣spised Louers, performing some rare and memorable acte, that may register the fame of her beautie to all posterities. No sooner had he thus spoken, but setting the pommell of his sword against the ground, hee fell suddenly vppon the poynt thereof, which past quite thorow his body, before any Knight could lay hand vpon him, albeit they ranne to stay him as spéedily as they could. This desperate mishappe of Floraman was generally lamented, and the Emperor him selfe tooke it very grieuously, because Floraman had béene a Knight of good estéeme, and euer-more faithfull to the Em∣perour: notwithstanding, seeing sadnesse and sorrow could not nowe redresse it, they concluded to honour him with a royall buriall.
CHAP. LXXIII. How as they were consulting in the Court, about the marriages of Primaleon and Arguto, with the faire young Ladies Victoria & Concordia: the two Knights were summoned thence to a very strange aduenture. SOone after the sadde funerall of loue-forsaken Floraman, the Em∣perour, beeing very respectiue of his passed promise, sending for the Empresse and Miragarda, impar∣ted to them his priuate thoughts, about the marriages before con∣cluded on, and found them there∣to very tractable: sauing yt Mira∣garda expressed some vnwillingnesse, to haue Concordia wedded so young, she hauing as yet scarce attained to four∣teene yéeres of age, neuerthelesse, she yéelded to the order a∣gréed vpon, and then they determined, that the next day they should acquaint the young Ladies there-with, to the end, that vpon the feast day of Pentecost, which was with∣in lesse then a moneth ensuing, the marriages might be publiquely sollemnized. So departed the Empresse and Miragarda to their cham∣bers, where the day following, they conferred with the two young Ladies, telling them how the Emperour had inten∣ded, and their Fathers likewise thereto consented. Victo∣ria, expecting daily to heare these tydings, could not dissem∣ble the matter so cunningly, but that the quicke-conceited Empresse plainly perceiued, shee no way misliked so graci∣ous an offer: but as for Concordia, she rather desired sport∣full societie, with such young Damosels as were her play∣mates and equalls, then as yet to be burdened with the cares of marriage, whereof her gréene yéeres were yet so vncapable, as she knew not how to shape an aunswere.
But when her Mother at large declared, the honourable worth & valour of Arguto, as also what a perpetuall league of amitie, by this meanes would be lincked betwéene him and her brother, she was the easier won to consent. Thus were the mariages fully concluded on, and the day of Pen∣tecost absolutely appointed, for the publique solemnization of them both: wherof the two Knights hauing likewise in∣telligence, how ioyfully they tooke it I refer to your iudge∣ment. Vpon the Sonday following, as the Knights sate plea∣santly disposed in the Hall after dinner, entercoursing such deuises as themselues thought meetest, they heard a great noyse in the ayre ouer the Pallace, and starting vp to be further resolued thereof, they sawe an armed Knight enter at one of ye windowes, with a huge crooked bill in his hand, which (clapping to the ground before the Emperour and them all) he thus began. Inuinsible Monarche, I am the most vnfortunate Knight, which liues at this day in the world: but not to make sad this mirthfull Court with my mishaps, I wil conceale my disgraces, & acquaint ye onely with the cause of my cōming hether. Briefely then (dread Lord) to finde some ease for my insupportable miserie, I néede the ayde of some valiant Knight héere in your Court: hauing thus spoken, he stoode silent, as expecting an aun∣swere. The Emperour, although hee desired that his Court might be famous, yet in regarde so many gallant bloods were there present, he stoode in doubt whom he should elect for this enterprise, without giuing offence to all the rest: and (indéede) a great murmuring arose in the Hall, because euery man exprest himselfe ready, and it was doubtful least some discord would arise among them, which nothing but the Emperours presence did hinder, for Florendos and his sonne Primaleon fell to thwarting spéeches, either scorning to giue the other place in matter of honour. While the Court continued in this spléenefull humour, the Knight well perceiuing it, and fearing if any disorder
ensued, he might depart thence without any assistance, re∣questing to be heard, he thus procéeded. Great Emperour, let me intreate this gracious fauour, that I may my selfe make choise of the Knight, whom I shal imagine as méetest for my purpose. With all my hart, replied the Emperour: as iudging this the likeliest way to auoyde all partialitie, and qualifie the discord among his Knights. First, (quoth the Knight) I desire to knowe the Emperours Nephew, named Primaleon, and because not farre from the place of my torments, there liues in the like misery a noble Ladie, the onely woman that euer made proofe of her loyaltie: I would likewise haue another Knight, called Arguto, who I am assured will as honourably end this aduenture, as he effected that of the enchaunted Sepulcher. These two young gallants, who had almost renewed their auncient enmitie, as couetous of this honourable im∣ployment, when they saw this election made of thē twaine, before all the other great spirits of the Court, they were highly pleased: and because the Knight was vppon his de∣parture, they craued licence of the Emperour and all the o∣ther Princes, then knéeling before their affianced Ladies, they desired to kisse their hands, and bare the title of theyr Knights. Victoria, knowing how long time Primaleon had loued her, most kindly embraced him, saying: Seeing it pleaseth my Lord the Emperor, and my noble Father, that hereafter I must be yours in marriage, I accept you, not so much for my Knight, as for my Lorde and chiefe Com∣maunder. But Concordia, béeing slenderly skild in loues affaires, knew not what to answere, but that she was con∣tented, and if her worth might make him glorious, she told him plainly he should one day haue it. Now because these young and amourous bloods, thought time neuer long enough in these kind of purposes, ye Knight with whom they were to depart, clapping each of them vp∣pon the shoulder, said. Young Lords, so important is the bu∣sines which I must bring you to, that it will put yée past the remembrance of these faire Ladies. The Knights thus a∣waked
from their louely traunce, presently arose, and ta∣king their leaue, went to put on their Armour, returning in short while right gallantly appointed. Then did ye Knight cause a Ship of Christall to floate about the Hall, wherein∣to he conducted seuerally the Knights, & presently it moun∣ted vp into the ayre, fléeting away with such wonderfull swiftnes, as all of them had quickly left the sight of it: to the great admiration of the Emperour, and extreame griefe of poore Victoria, who rather could haue wished with al her hart, that her Knight had staied to effect her marriage. The Ship in two houres space was gone so farre, that the Knights thought they were brought to the furthest part of the worlde, when suddenly the Ship falling downe on a great stone, séemed as if it was shiuerd all in peeces, and they thought themselues likewise to be broken in the same manner, whereat the strange Knight laughed hartilie, be∣cause he knew it was but a vaine apparition. So mightie was the fall of the Ship on the stone, as if it had béen made of the hardest yron, it had béen sufficient to haue broken it, but the enchauntment beeing of greater power, made it stand whole and sound vpright on the stone: when they is∣suing foorth, followed the Knight, and he being theyr guide some small distance thence, went downe into a Caue that séemed very darke, beckning to Primaleon that he should follow him, and Arguto to stay till he returned. It was not long before he came backe againe, and then went toward a huge thicke Wood, whereinto hee wafted him with his hand to enter, and so Arguto very resolutely did.
CHAP. LXXIIII. Of a strange aduenture which hapned to Primale∣on in the Caue vnder ground, whereinto the strange Knight had conducted him. PRimaleon being thus within the Caue, went downward aboue a mile by estimation, not discer∣ning any light all the way hee had gone, till at last hee came to certaine high windowes, where∣by some small glimmering en∣tred into the Caue. Still past he on along, till at length hee espied a Wall, which was built with the bones of dead men and beasts, and therein was a gate made all with the heads of men, serpents, horses and Grif∣fons, in a cunning diuersitie mingled together, whereby he gathered, that it had béen the handy-worke of men. Boldly stept Primaleon in at this gate, but afterward he was sorry he had aduentured so farre, for hee saw it was a spacious square plot, being round about enclosed with that wall, at the further side whereof hee sawe a higher gate, where there stoode a beast greater then any Elephant, put∣ting his head directly toward him, and feeding on diuers mangled bodies, which were sliced into so many péeces, that he could not gesse whether they were men or beastes. No sooner had hee stept a little forward, but this hideous beast, as if he were extremely hunger-starued, came main∣ly against him, when Primaleon (as loth to be deuoured by so rauenous a Monster) hauing his sworde ready drawne, gaue him a mightie blow vppon the head, but the sword re∣bounded back againe vnto him, as if he had smitten vppon a hard stone. Then lifted ye beast vp suddenly one of his fore∣feete, before Primaleon had sufficiently retired, and fastning hold vpon his pouldron, rent it quite away, & mist verie lit∣tle, of wresting the sword from forth of his hand.
This graspe of the Monster, gaue him plainly to vnder∣stand, that hee must not receiue such another gripe from him, except hee meant to part with life and all, wherefore, keeping him off with his weapon so well as he could, he gaue the Monster diuers wounds in the midst of his body, and albeit the hurts were soundly giuen indeede, yet was the beast of such a wonderful grossenes, as they pierced not into any of the vitall parts. While the battaile thus conti∣nued, he noated a matter most admirable to be reported, for of the blood which issued foorth of the Monsters woundes, arose vp sundry strange mishapen beasts, beeing some of them which he had before deuoured, and they went aside into an angle of the roome, menacing Primaleon with their lookes and howlings, as if they intended some mischiefe to∣ward him. By this time was our Champion so ouer-toyled, that be∣ing almost out of breath, he was glad to shift from place to place, yet with a héedfull eye to the Monster, inuoking in∣wardly the helpe of heauen, to strengthen him in so great an extreamitie: in which meditation of minde, hee beheld the Knight which had cōducted him thether, enter in at the gate with the hooked Bill on his back, and opposed himselfe against the Monster, which presently left Primaleon, & (as bearing deadly hatred to the Knight) turned furiously vpon him. So dexteriously did the Knight handle his bill, that he wounded the Monster in many places therwith, and stil as blood streamed from him, arose sundry kindes of strange beasts, all which (at one loude groane giuen by ye Monster) ran furiously vpon the Knight, & rent him in innumerable péeces, which were al afterward suddenly swalowed by the monster himselfe, the bil only left lying on the groūd. This sudden death & deuouring of the Knight, droue Primaleon to some little amazement, and perceiuing the monster, now to make a fresh toward him, bethought him of the bill, where∣with the Knight had fought so nimbly, and giuen diuers shrewd hurts to the beast, that some vertue (touching the enchauntment) might remaine in it.
Quickly he caught it vp in his hand, and although he had no great skill in the vse of such a weapon, because it no∣thing appertained to Knighthoode, yet hee made it to serue his turne in such sort, as at euery blow he drew blood from the beast: and happening at last to wounde him in the bel∣lie, he perceaued the hurt to open so wide, that the Knight leapt foorth vpon his féete aliue and well, and hee wresting again forcibly the Bill from Primaleon, gaue a fresh charge vppon the Monster, whose belly immediatly was become whole and sound. The other beasts, which still rose vp out of the Monsters blood, as they had done before, tore him a∣gaine in péeces, and the Monster quickly swallowed him vp, when Primaleon recouering the Bill once more, defen∣ded him selfe there-with against the huge beast, who now (by reason of his many woundes and losse of much blood) went somewhat faintly vp and downe. Primaleon taking good notice thereof, conceaued in his minde, that if he could dispatch the other lesser beasts, the Knight should no more be torne in péeces: where-vpon he fiercely made against them, cutting a many of them off by the legges, whereby they being abandoned of the enchaunt∣ment, could rise no more, their legges in this manner be∣ing parted from their bodies. Hée made such a slaughter of these beasts, that but very fewe of them remained aliue, all which ranne spéedily behinde the great Monster, where in a moment they had bound vp his woundes, as hee séemed now as able as euer. When Primaleon saw the Monster so strangely recoue∣red, hee had good cause to doubt the issue of his enterprise, notwithstanding, he gaue the beast sharper wounds then he had doone before, with a setled resolution to die or con∣quer: and casting his head aside, he behelde the Knight to stand hard by him, who taking the Bill againe from Pri∣maleon, with very great courage assayled the Monster. Right quickly did the beast catch him by the arme, & fling∣ing him aloft, cast him quite ouer beyond the wall, so that Primaleon knew not what was become of him, and hauing
now no other defence then his sword only, he much mistru∣sted what might happen to him: but turning aside, he espied the Bill throwne back againe ouer the wall, which (with no little ioy) he tooke vp, and lad there-with chéerefully at the Monsters legges, so that in short time he had cut off two of them, the far legge behinde, & the néerest before, when his vnweldy body falling on ye earth, made the ground to trem∣ble and quake in such manner, as the wall of dead mens bones was altogether ruined, and then the Knight came a∣gaine to him, saying. Neuer wast time (Sir) in killing of this Monster, but goe you onward, and you shall behold me in such mercilesse torments, as are to continue many hun∣dreds of yeares, except by your vertue onely I may be deli∣uered. No sooner had he thus spoken, but Primaleon sawe him diue into a deepe water, whereon he had not looked very long, but suddainly there arose vp a goodly Tower, engirt round about with the water that ran very swiftly, & two sa∣uage Beares he sawe running about the Tower, pursuing the Knight who fled before them, & euer as they caught hold of him, they bit him most cruelly, so ran they with him into the Tower, where (out of a window) he heaued vp his hands to Primaleon, desiring him to take pitty & come to help him, which mooued his minde to such compassion, as hee would gladly haue past through a thousand waters to yéelde him succour. After he had walked on the bancks a while about the water, to see if he could finde any place for passage, he be∣held from a window a great Basket let downe, which the two Beares droue toward him from the Rock, as desirous to haue him leape into it, & they would thereby conuay him to the Tower: but the Knight cried to him out at another window, that by no meanes he should accept their subtill of∣fer, but stay, and awaite a better meanes of bringing him to the Rock, where-vpon, the Beares more and more labou∣red toward him with the Basket, making signes, as if hee could haue no other passage. Primaleon still thrust away the Basket from him, & perceauing no liuely way to helpe him to the Tower, in the selfe same place where he saw the
Knight diue, there did he likewise boldly cast in him selfe, and arose at the Tower againe, as the Knight before did: but as he offered to mount ye steps to enter, the Beares flew vpon him with such maine violence, that one of them griped him so strongly by the head, as he had almost falne downe in a swoune. But his dauntlesse spirit scorning all seruile feare, quickly shook off this passion, & hauing the Bill in his hand, which he would not willingly part withall, he gaue one of the Beares such a blow therewith on the head, that a great part of it fell on the ground: in this while, the other Beare so gript him about the body with his pawes, as hee was no way able to stir him selfe, & the wounded Beare got so strong hold of his leg, (being furiously mad with his neere approching death) that brusing in péeces his armed greaues or gamashes, made him to féele intollerable paine. But now did Primaleon most manifestly declare, that his equall (for chiualry and valour) liued not in the world, for he cat∣ching the Beare fast by the throate, to make him loose his horrible gripes, tweakt his weazand with such strength, that he well-néere strangled him, when séeing him selfe at liberty, he still held his holde with one hand, and drawing forth his dagger with the other, gaue so many stabs vpon the beasts throat, that he fell downe dead, and both the Beares bodies immediatly vanished, to the no little admiration of Primaleon. Then ascended he the steppes, thinking he had alreadie concluded the aduenture, but the Knight, for whose deliue∣rance he had thus dangerously aduentured, snatcht the Bill out of his hand, as before hee had doone, in the perilous fight betweene him and the Monster, whereof Primaleon making no reckoning, nor mistrusting any ill intent in him, thought hee might with more safety mount vp the staires. But the Knight opposed the Bill to his breast, as if hee meant to kill him there-with, which vngentle act in him, greeued Primaleon more then all his paines had doone, in that hee rather expected assistaunce at his hand, then thus to threaten his life, as still hee did: where-vpon, his
pacience conuerting to angry choller, he made an offer to smite at the Knight with his sword, but then was hee sud∣dainly metamorphozed to a Leopard, and assayled Prima∣leon so cruelly with his téeth and nailes, as hee was diuers times in very desperate hazards. Nowe would he either be a conquerour, or else Deaths captiue, and perceauing the beast to stande vpright on his hinder féete, he threw by his sword, and closed with him as if they would wrastle: but Primaleons armes excéeding the beasts legges in length, gaue him such a graspe vpon an ad∣uantage, that the beast was almost thratled, and fearing least he should die in that manner, he called thus to him in his manly voyce. Alas Sir Knight, the continuall torment I haue suffered so many yeares already, me thinkes your selfe might account sufficient, and not paine me more be∣twéene your strong armes. But notwithstanding these speeches, and diuers other entreates deliuered like a man, Primaleon would not let him at liberty, but held him stifly still, (by what meanes I knowe not) from the forme of a Leopard, he changed again to the selfe same shape, as when he first conducted him into the Caue, when expressing ioy∣full lookes, hee thus spake to Primaleon. Well maist thou vaunt thy selfe to be the best Knight in the world, in being able to accomplish so dreadfull an aduenture. When Primaleon heard him speake so humanely, he let goe his holde, and suddainly appeared to them an auncient Knight, who was Lord of the Tower, and an expert Ni∣gromancer, being father to the Lady, which was to be en∣franchised from her thraldome by Arguto, with very sad looks he began in this maner. It greeues me (Sir Knight) that it is your fortune to set at liberty, this wretched man and disloyall Louer, from the enchauntment wherein I had confinde him, as purposing to haue his sinne sufficiently punished: and much more it offendes mee, that the other Knight which came with you, shall likewise ende the en∣chauntment of the indiscréet Girle my daughter, the whole state whereof I wil more at large acquaint you with, when
she is at liberty, if such be her good hap. So descending the staires together, they came to a gate of the Tower, where ws a Bridge for them to passe ouer on, and being come in∣to the open field, they saw the Wood whereto Arguto went, suddaine burst foorth on a flaming fire, which greatly grée∣ued Primaleon, as fearing least his deare friend should so cruelly perish, of whom his Sister had giuen him such espe∣ciall charge, before their setting forth from Constantinople, that he should by no meanes forsake his company, where∣fore he would haue gone to helpe him. But the graue Ma∣gitian, commanded him in no wise to stirre thence, because his vtmost power was not sufficient, to end the labour alot∣ted to Arguto: so diuers discourses passing betwéene them, they stayed to expect the issue of the aduenture. CHAP. LXXV. How Arguto (with great perill of his life) brought to end the aduenture of the enchaunted Lady, and receaued freedome of his suspition, that Fortune was not fauourable vnto him. ARguto, after he was entred into the Wood, saw the boughes knit fast together behinde him all the way he went, in such an intri∣cate and indissoluable manner, as all his labour was in vaine in offering to returne backe, there∣fore of necessity hee must goe on∣ward still, resolued for what so euer might happen vnto him. Hee had not gone aboue the space of halfe a mile, but hee came to a Knightly Tent, where-into as he would haue en∣tred, he beheld a cruell villaine, who with his knife had cut the throate of a beautifull Lady, & so left her on the ground to bléede to death.
Arguto was so moued with this inhumaine act, especial∣lie to see how pittifully she lay panting, that boldly he rusht into the Tent to kill the villaine, if he gaue him not the bet∣ter reason for what he had done: but the villaine scorning to aunswer him, and expressing no base feare or cowardise, coming stoutly to the Knight, holding his long knife closely hid in his hand, stabd Arguto through the Armour very ea∣silie, wounding him a little vpon the breast, and doubtlesse had slaine him with the blow, but that he drew back when he felt the hurt. Héereby he gathered, that except he were more héedefull of this villaines hand, he might soone there be murdered, a matter more hatefull to a generous nature, to perish by the trecherie of such a villaine, then the cruellest death he could receaue from the weapon of a Knight, where-vpon, draw∣ing forth his sword, which all this while he refused to doo, because the villaine had no other weapon then a knife, hee spake to him thus. I will be more respectiue, as becomes a Knight toward any such as thou art, for séeing thou hast so villainously wounded me, without any weapon in my hand to withstand thée, defend thy selfe so well as thou canst a∣gainst mee, for I shall right my wrong as I can or may. I will vse thee worse (said the villaine) if I come but néere thée, therefore it were wisedome for thée to get thée gone, that I may execute what this Ladies father hath comman∣ded me. Well may he be tearmed a cruell father (quoth Arguto) that giues direction for so bloody vsage of his owne childe, therefore although it cost me my life, I will doo my best to frée her from thée. Hauing thus spoken, he deliuered a very fierce stroke at the villaine, which cunningly hee receaued vpon his long knife, and helde out against Arguto with such dauntlesse courage, that albeit he was vnarmed, he was so ready eue∣rie way with his knife, as, doo what the Knight could, a∣gainst euery stroke it was still his defence, and no where could they light but only on the knife. Aboue an houre and more the fight thus continued, in which time, Arguto con∣ceited
with him selfe, in what part of him the force of the enchauntment lay, whereby the villaine was able to stand so long against him, and yet all his paines no more to enda∣mage him. At last, by wary obseruation he perceaued, that he defended himselfe onely with his right hand, managing his knife there-with as him selfe pleased, and helde his left hand directly behinde him, neuer offering it forward, either to breake, awarde, or put by any blow: héere-vpon he ap∣prehended this imagination, that if hee could compasse to hurt him in the left hand, hee might the sooner preuaile a∣gainst him. Now began he to make all his ayme that way, and the villaine well perceauing it, was the more diligent to pre∣uent him with his knife, and defended his left hand with meruailous carefulnes, so that neuer a thrust or blow could once come néere it. Neuerthelesse, among the multitude of mighty maine strokes, one (by good hap) mist the villaines knife, and lighting betwéene his arme and body, did quite cut off his left hand: but the villaine catching it vp quickly with the other hand, ranne away from him so spéedily, that he could scarce discerne which way he tooke, and the Lady likewise, lying all this while as quite bereft of life, starting suddainly vp on her feete, fled away from him he knew not how. To see them both gone in this straunge order, made him wonder thereat not a little in his minde, and entring the Tent to rest him selfe a while, he was scarsly set down, but a Satire all couered with long shaggie haire, holding a young trée in his hand as his weapon, came in vpon him, saying with a loude and hollow voyce. Mischaunce (and not good fortune) brought thee into this Wood, where who soeuer enters, must die the death. As he had spoken these words, he gaue him such a cruell blow with his bat, that brusing his helmet very shrewdly, made him so astonned, that as he thought to rise, he staggerd to and fro: where-vpon, the Satire seeing him in such an a∣mazement, caught him vp in his armes, and ranne away with him toward a Fountaine, meaning to make him drink
more then he stood in néede of. He had not gone aboue halfe a bowe-shoote, but Arguto recouering his former spirits, puld the Satire so strongly by the long haire, that the Mon∣ster (growing angry to be haled in such rude sort) threwe Arguto with such violence against a huge flint, as he made him lie still enough from stirring in hast, and but that the Satire had not his trée there with him, our Knight had ne∣uer gone thence to sée his Concordia. While the Monster ranne backe to the Tent to fetch his trée, Arguto (being of an high and heroyick spirit) was gotten vp on his féete, pur∣posing to defend him selfe from any more such blowes, and the Satire being returned to him, layd such thicke and furi∣ous strokes at him, that he could not retort one back againe at the Satire, but onely had worke enough to doo, to defend and beare off his angry blowes: for in regard of the Mon∣sters nakednes, one blowe or thrust of the Knights, (in his owne conceite) might easily haue sped him. The battaile continuing in this manner, he saw the Lady come running toward him, with a naked Rapier in her throate, and pitti∣fully desiring helpe at his hand. Arguto, who albeit he desired the death of this Satire, hauing twise offended him in such dangerous sort, yet immi∣nent & extraordinary perill of ye Lady, made him forsake the Satire, and follow her, who guided him to a goodly plaine, where stoode ready armed thirty valiant Knights, all which engirt him presently in a ring, and euery man had a maine stroke at him: but he (by good hap) striking at one of them, his sword lighted on the crest of his helmet, where-vpon the Knight immediatly drew backe, as if he could endure the fight no longer. Heereby he halfe perswaded him selfe, that the enchant∣ment consisted in the crests of their helmets, and therefore she shaped his ayme accordingly, whereby he quickly made many of them retire, when stepping foorth from amongst them, he set his backe against a broad leaued Béech, where he both stoutly defended, and wel breathed him selfe. As he stoode thus opprest by the multitude of their blowes, fréely
deliuered on euery side, he espied the Satire come running thether, who laying hande on the Rapier in the Ladies throate, hurld her vppon his shoulder, and away he ranne againe with no meane hast. Arguto was greatly grieued, to sée her thus violentlie hurried thence, wherefore, in hope of recouering her, hee ventured to make his way through the Knights, and hand∣led his weapon with such successe among them, that by the blowes he gaue them on the Helmets, thrée onely of them remained to confront him, which thrée, either because they durst not contende any longer, or whether the enchaunt∣ment would not permit them, they likewise right gladlie retired. This successe was no little comfort to Arguto, and added a chéerefull perswasion of finishing the aduenture, so that neuer minding how weary he was, he went to pursue the Satire which had carried away the Lady, and the sub∣till Monster, making a mock at Argutos great labour, ran in and out leaping, skipping, and dauncing, neuer stray∣ing farre, but keeping still néere him, the Lady continual∣ly crying to the Knight for helpe. Arguto melted with meere compassion, & was extream∣ly tired with following the Satire, for the swiftest Harior in the world could not haue out-stript him, much lesse a man armed, and ouer-wearied with so long combatting. All which notwithstanding, he would not as yet giue ouer his pursute, but noated still the Satires friskes and gambal∣dings, often looking backe with mocks and gires at the Knight, till hee was ouer-reached in his owne folly, for dauncing carelesly, and looking backe at the very same in∣stant, he chaunced to stumble at the roote of a trée, and fal∣ling downe, the Lady escaped from him, running with o∣pen armes vnto Arguto, and embraced him in such forcible manner, as he could not deuise which way to stay himselfe, which the Satire perceiuing, came backe againe toward him. Arguto, béeing helde in this sort by the Lady, and her leggs likewise fast twined about his, he gathered héereby,
that albeit it was to his mightie encombrance, yet shee did it as loth the Satire should seaze on her againe, nor coulde he shunne a dangerous blow which the Monster gaue him with his tree, so that now hee was in two mightie extremi∣ties, one, right fearefull of the Ladies iniurie, the other, that he had no meanes howe to helpe himselfe, but doubt∣lesse his life must there needes miscarie. But sée how it for∣tuned, the Satires tree smiting Arguto on the Helmet, de∣scended vpon the Ladies shoulder, and such was the vehe∣mence of the blow, that shee (loosing her holde) tumbled downe backward. When Arguto sawe himselfe fréed from his former op∣pression, he stept boldly to the Satire, & giuing a full blow at the hand wherein he held the trée, cut it quite off, so that the Monster roaring with sence of his paine, fledde away from him so fast as he could runne. The Lady lying all this while in a dead traunce, starting vp on her féete, said. Sir Knight, if thy hart serue thée so well, as that thou darest vndertake an attempt which I shall shewe thée, my hopes will then assuredly perswade me, that not onely my selfe shall be freed frō this enchauntment, but diuers other beau∣tifull Ladies beside. Guide mee whether thou wilt, quoth Arguto, for a Knight ought not to question after any case of perrill, but boldly aduenture on any enterprise of honour, whatsoeuer. So following the Lady, shee led him along a very nar∣row crooked causey, till at length hee behelde a Tower, which seemed as if it were made of Siluer, and being come neere it, they saw an high engine of warre like a Ramme, made with a deuise to let vp and downe, such as were vsed in elder times, before they had any knowledge of Ordi∣nance, to hurle great stones, or any other annoyance ther∣with into a Towne or Castell. By this engine, quoth the Lady, must you gaine your entrance, and suffer your selfe to be throwne aloft vppon the Tower, because there is no other passage admitted. Arguto tooke it very strangelie, that he should oppose his life to such manifest perrill, but
his great courage, treading all feare vnder-foote, he boldly entred into the cradle fixed on the maine beame, being the receptacle for whatsoeuer should passe into the Tower. No sooner stoode he vpright in this conueyance, but he heard most delicate Musique sound within the Tower, as it séemed for ioy of libertie and fréedome, which the people there imprisoned hoped for by this Knight, who durst so ad∣uenturously put himselfe into the carriage, which no man (till now) was so hardie as to offer it. The engine sudden∣ly mounting it selfe vp, in a moment hee was lifted aloft vpon the Tower, without any other harme or perrill at all, where-vpon the Musique presently ceassed, & a great noyse of Armour-clattering was heard, whereby hee expected some rough encounter. Then beheld he a wilde Beast so strangely mishapen, as he could not comprehend his true naturall forme: for he had the head of a Beare, the téeth and tushes of a Boare, the necke and breast of a Lyon, the tallants of a Griffon, and his taile deuided in two parts, hauing at each end a hooke of stéele, with the poynts there∣of so sharpe and piercing, as they were able to enter the ve∣ry soundest proofe. Arguto beeing well skild in such matters of enchaunt∣ment, perswaded himselfe, that with this Beast was the latest trouble he should finde there, and therefore resolued to shew his vttermost vallour. The Monster was not slow in assayling him with such fury, as would haue dismaied a∣ny hart to behold it, hauing neuer seene so eugly a Monster, but Arguto, purposing to kéepe off from his tallants and teeth, made many faire proffers to cut his leggs in sunder, which the Monster still right cunningly auoyding, smote one of his long tushes into his Shield, and rent it from a∣bout his necke so forcibly, that he made him fall downe flat vppon his face, where he might haue béene prest to death with the Monsters huge weight, but that right quickly he recouered footing againe, but he could not shunne a sudden gripe with his tallants, which piercing through the closing of his Armour, wounded him a little in the left flanck.
This hurt so much displeased Arguto, that striking cou∣ragiously at the Monster, he gaue him a great wound full in the breast, for which he receiued an immediate castise∣ment, by being smitten into the sight of his Caske with the Monsters tushe, which tearing downe the whole Beuer, gript his head with such extreame anguish, that hee was constrained to cut the laces of his Helmet, and let it in that sort be taken from him. Being thus without both Shielde and Helmet, his life stood on shrewd termes of hazard, and doubtlesse had miscaried, if he had not laboured to end the battaile in this manner. Feigning as if he could hold out no longer, he fell downe flat againe vppon his face, and the beast intending to teare him in peeces, stoode stradling ouer him, when stabbing his sword vp into the Monsters belly, he made so large an in∣cition, that his bowels dropt out vpon the ground, and then Arguto crept from vnder him, least with his huge weight he should haue queld him. Now heard hee the Musique a∣gaine, but with farre louder and swéeter straines then be∣fore, as séeming that the aduenture was almost concluded, and nowe came the Lady againe vnto him, with tenne o∣ther faire beauties attending on her, all of them together ioyfully saying: Welcome the brauest Knight that euer bare Armes. So taking him by the hand, they guided him thence, and brought him downe into a faire square Court, where no doore could be discerned for passage out of ye Towre, which made him awhile to stand as abashed, doubting least the Ladies intended some trecherie toward him, but one of them spake to him in this manner. Sir Knight, doe but lift vp this stone, and presently the Towre will vanish, and the enchauntment cease. Arguto, thinking nothing impossible for him to per∣forme, went to the stone, and putting his hand into a great yron ring, which was fastened directly in the midst of the stone, he lifted vp the huge stone, and threw it a pretty way from him, albeit it was so great and weightie, that tenne
ordinary men could hardly mooue it. Out of the place which the stone had couered, started vp the least Dwarffe that e∣uer was séene, who skipping about very pleasantly, tooke vp certaine glasses out of the vaulte, and breaking them in péeces one against another, vanished out of sight suddenly, and with him the Tower and the Wood likewise, so that Arguto and the eleuen Ladies, found themselues at liber∣tie in a large spacious Fielde. There found he the aged Ni∣gromancer, and Primaleon, calling vnto him with a loude voyce, and the Lady knowing her old angry Father, durst not approche néere him, fearing least he would againe en∣close her in the enchauntment, as hauing already tasted his cruell seueritie. But Arguto securing her, went chéerefully to méet them, when being come together, the aged Father could not for∣beare but very louingly embraced his Daughter, the like did Primaleon and Arguto. So going along with the olde man to his abyding, it drew to Supper time, where sitting downe at a Table right sumptuously prepared, all the sup∣per while, the olde mans Daughter did nothing else, but earnestly looke vppon the deliuered Knight, and breathed forth many broken sighes, whereby Primaleon and Arguto coniectured, that the young Lady was enamoured of the Knight, so past they the supper time in mirthfull talke, and pleasant discoursings.
CHAP. LXXVI. How the aged Magitian shewed the cause, wher∣fore hee had enchaunted the Knight and his daugh∣ter, confining them to so long a date of punish∣ment. QVickly after the Tables were with-drawne, the old man com∣maunded the Squires to walke aside, and then turning towarde the Knights, he thus began. Ho∣nourable and vertuous Lords, I am vndoubtedly perswaded, that you repute mee as a cruell & vn∣kinde Father, beeing blessed but with one Daughter onely, I should be so transported with furie and passion, to censure her with so seuere a punishment: but if I tell you the stran∣gest case that euer you heard, I doubt not but your oppinion will bee so altered, as you will wonder I should be so hu∣mane and gentle, in inflicting no heauier a iudgement on her: albeit in the end, each fault should merritoriously haue béene doubled on this disloyall Knight, well woorthy to en∣dure vnconfined torments, so long as this spacious rounde hath continuance. Know then (faire Lords) that this enfranchased Knight named Brunoro, redéemed by your manly paines and tra∣uaile, was Lorde of a Castell some sixe leagues distance hence, who being enriched with countlesse treasure, would make no spare of large and liberall summes, to haue at his pleasure, the fairest maidens dwelling in these parts. Hée hearing that my Daughter was ranckt & reckoned among those of choisest beautie, attempted not by coyne or rich promises to win her to his purpose, because he well knew,
such courses were sillie and very vnsauourie, to preuaile with a Ladie of high blood & resolution: wherfore he prac∣tised by more facill and tractable meanes, and which much more easilier preuaileth with light-headed Damosels, to wit, patheticall spéeches, quick and queintly couched, sea∣led with sad sighes, vowes, & dissembled attestations, that he was truly and sincerely deuoted to her in affection. The young virgine, altogether vnacquainted with loues idle dalliances, casting a rash inconsiderate eye vpon him, apprehended (ouer-hastilie) that hee was a man of comlie personage, debonaire, well qualitied, rich, and so worthie in loue to be respected, that she gaue him so franck a posses∣sion of her hart, as there wanted nothing but apt meanes to consort herselfe with him. He perceiuing this too suddaine inclination of the Damosell, purposed onely to serue his lustful appetite with her, & then afterward to cast her off, as he had in like manner dealt by diuers other: and procuring to haue secrete conference with her, he compast it so close∣ly, as no eye in my house could be guiltie of it. At which in∣stant, it was my mishap, to be farre off from my Country, in seruice of the young Soldane of Babylon, who gathered together his martiall forces, to reuenge the death of Albay∣zer his Father: by meanes whereof he had the apter oppor∣tunitie, to obtaine of my vnhappy childe Rosella, euen what his loose desires best pleased him to vrge. But yet her dis∣cretion gouernd her thus farre, that before her maiden con∣tinence should forsake her, an honourable promise of mar∣riage past betweene them, to be performed in a Woode ve∣rie neere adioyning, where hee would loially combine the matrimoniall knot, neuer to be dissolued but by death one∣lie. And his alleaged reason, why it should be there thus closely consumated, was, because his Parents & Friendes should be no hinderance, to his quiet enioying her in that sacred estate: for (in nobilitie and wealth) he somewhat ex∣céeded her, and therefore, (as he said) he was the more vn∣willing, to be iniured in this sollemne determination.
The sillie Damosell, too full of credulitie, stretched her well-meaning thoughts no further then his promises, and therefore iumpt with Brunoro, both for place and appoint∣ment, without conceiting, that an honourable mind, which she (till this mishap) continually carried, would euer giue entertainement to such degenerate basenes, as his hollow hart right cunningly cloaked. The next night following, without coyne, iewels, or ought else of estéeme, she secretly got foorth at the Garden-gate, where Brunoro diligently a∣waited her comming, and this was done with such warie héed and circumspection, that not any in my Castell did so much as suspect it: there did she louingly embrace her Bru∣noro, and he (the better to couller his vntruth) expressed as kinde a welcome to her. Away they went to the afore-said Wood, where with kisses, coyings, and such like flatteries, but no act at all performed of marriage, he cropt ye fairest flower that beau∣tified her bosome. Then causing a Tent to be brought the∣ther, with all necessaries fit for his noble state and conditi∣on, fifteene dayes they spent there in wanton iouissaunce, and so pleasing séemed this to the poore beguiled Damosell, that (in her minde) shée was more then halfe an Empresse, perswading her selfe, that hee as truly loued her, as (in her very soule) shee intirely loued him. But, as the daintiest delights in time grow yrkesome, so, Brunoro wexing wea∣rie of my Daughters company, concluding the niht ensu∣ing to leaue her, caused Wine (mingled with sléepie drugs) to be closely brought thether, and gaue her to drinke there∣of, she neuer dreaming on any such vile treason. About two houres after supper, the wine began to worke his effect, and shée sitting leaning against a table, slept so soundly, that the loudest thunder coulde not awake her. The deceitfull wretch, to leaue no wicked acte vndoone, that might bring the greater shame & contempt to her, who (by ouer-much loue) fell thus into his power, caused her to be stript starke naked, and then layd in a bedde, where him selfe companying with her, like a monster and no man,
glutted his libidinous and insatiate desire, as (almost) it ex∣céedeth modesty to report it. Which being done, he caused the bed and Tent to be caried away, with whatsoeuer else he had brought thether, not leauing her owne wearing gar∣ments behinde him, no, not her very néerest, to couer na∣kednes, but (vnmanlike) thus left there lying on the bare ground: all which he did to this end, that when in the mor∣ning shee should finde her selfe naked, shee might die or de∣stroy her selfe there in the Wood, rather then for shame to let any one sée her, I cannot tell yée the inward conceite of gréefe, which (poore despised soule) surprized her at her wa∣king, séeing all thinges so altered from her last beholding them, for they were but instances of her further woe and extremitie. The next morning after this heauy accident, it was my hap to come home againe, where I found a strange and vncouth confusion, because my Rosella was no where to be heard of. Héere-vpon, I betooke my selfe presently to mine Arte, thereby to be resolued what was become of her, but my ill hap chaunced to be such, that a certaine wizzard among you Christians, had gone beyond me in mine owne experience, and taken the matter out of my hand, so that this way I could learne nothing of her. Then shaped I my course by another progression, & taking two Knights with me, moun∣ted forth-with on horse-backe, purposing by diligent search to finde her againe, riding directly toward Brunoroes Ca∣stell, because that very day I vnderstoode, how he had béen often séene passing to and fro from my dwelling, and by di∣uers meanes had saluted my daughter, declaring euident signes of loue to her: at which report, my hopes wexing more chéerefull, I was halfe perswaded to finde her linckt with him in mariage. As we rode along through that vnhappy Wood, (the close betrayer both of my daughters ioyes and mine) by what chaunce I know not, we mistooke our way, and happened into the very thickest of all the Wood, where gazing vp and downe for a more easie passage: my daughter, shunning all
places where she might likeliest be séene, had hid her selfe behind a thick leafie brake, yet not with such skill, but that her snow-white skinne shot a lightsome radiaunce through the twisted braunches. Now, albeit I little thought what this bright appearance might be, yet the minde (euermore the Augure and presager of harmes) strooke this harsh diui∣nation on the vntunde strings of my soule, that this shado∣wed Alablaster brightnes was my daughter. And making toward the place, when she perceaued that shee could no longer conceale her selfe, she came vnto me, veyled before with an apron of thick-wrought leaues, which the sight of her owne shame had instructed her to make, and falling sub∣missiuely vpon her knées, spake in this manner. Beholde (deere Father) thy vnfortunate daughter, and kill me not, though (in iustice) I haue deserued no lesse. I (inly toucht with the true sence both of shame & gréefe) was so furiously transported, that neither pitty or patience preuailing against rage, I tooke her by the long tresses of her haire, & lifting her thereby violently from the ground, would with my dagger haue stabd her to the heart: but the Knights in my company, forcibly restrained me, and coun∣sailed me like friends, to take her home with me to my Ca∣stell, where (vpon more deliberate consideration of the case) I might further determine of her as I found occasion. Ve∣rie thankfully I tooke their kinde aduise, because I iudged it an ouer-light punishment, to let her escape with so speedy a dispatch of life, rather (me thought) the case might appre∣hend such merit, that tenne thousand seuere castigations would séeme insufficient: wherefore, cloathing her in the garment of my Page, because that was the neerest and rea∣diest helpe, I brought her to my Castell, where imprisoning her in a remote chamber of my house, for two dayes toge∣ther I gaue her nothing to féede on. The two Knights my friendly companions, knowing for certainty, that the death of her would be mine owne di∣spatch also, right kindly comming to me, tolde me in graue and sensible sort, how highly it would redound to mine own
shame, when her death should be reported to happen, by my meanes, & the nature of her offence neuer heard or known. They hauing certaine precious confectious about them, and wine of rich and soueraigne power, by my consent went to her chamber, where first cherishing her faintnes with those necessary helpes, and addition of apparant likelihoode, that my grace and fauour might againe be recouered: they won from her the sum of all, both by what meanes she came into the Wood, and how (in that sort) she was left there naked, which they perceauing, to happen onely through fond loues simplicity, returned againe to me, and tolde me the whole storie of my daughters mis-fortune. Then grew I incensed against this trothlesse man, cal∣ming my kindled rage (somewhat) toward my daughter, considering, that a young Ladies first offence, should not be so seuerely chastised, especially when earnestly one was the cause of her trespasse: where-vpon I faithfully promised the Knights, that I would not procéede in any further ri∣gour against her. But sitting all alone by my selfe, I be∣gan to practise, how I might be sufficiently reuenged on the Knight, by whose villanie I was so hainously iniuried, and making many plat-formes in my braine, thus I concluded: that Rosella (by writing) should certifie Brunoro, howe I lay sicke at the point of death, so that if he would then come to her, he should enioy my money and goods, and likewise be possessour of all my bookes, whereof (a long while) he had béene very desirous, and offered large summes of money to haue them: as for his leauing her so vnkindly naked, in the depth of her loue she had buried that blame, & by no meanes tooke it as any fact of his, but rather of some slauish vnciuill seruant, who vpon a malicious inclination toward her, had (contrary to his knowledge) so mis-entreated her, and hee (no doubt) in great heauines for lack of her company. My purpose heerein was, that (vppon his comming) I might be possest of him, and afterward to vse him as I saw occasion: so, with a Letter or transcript drawne to this ef∣fect, I entred into my daughters chamber, where giuing
her good lookes, and taking her by the hand, thus I began. Although the iniurie I haue receaued by thée, hath made a large passage thorow my hart: yet am I willing to forgiue and forget it, so thou wilt pleasure me but in one only mat∣ter, which shall yeelde contentment both to thée and mee. I will doe (quoth she) whatsoeuer it shall please you to com∣maund, in recompence of the great grace I receaue from you so vnworthily. My will is, quoth I, that thou write this Letter vnto Brunoro: and there-vpon I gaue it her to reade. The sha∣low witted Girle, whose doating affection would not let her looke into the vnrepairable wrong shee had receaued by Brunoro, suddainly thus replied. Oh God forbid (déere fa∣ther) that I should prooue such a traytresse to him, whom (more then mine owne soule) I loue and estéeme: and no sooner had she thus saide, but suddainly would haue cast her selfe out at the casement of her window, because she would not be guilty of writing such a Letter. I, who knew too well her firme resolution, immediatly became so furiously discontented, as had not the Knights stept in suddainly vpon me, questionlesse she had there peri∣shed by my hand: but beeing by them with-helde from my purpose, I tolde them the wilfull folly of the wench, and how foolish loue quite blinded her iudgement, and made her still doat on him that had so vilely abused her. The Knights spent some little while, in perswading me to more mode∣ration, because shee had confidently aunswered, that shee woulde endure all tormentes whatsoeuer, rather then bee wone to betray Brunoro: and they well noting her setled purpose, held it necessary, that shee should haue her minde, I to pardon her, cloathe her againe in her owne habite, and let her goe at liberty, but with a farre stricter eye of care of her, then before had béene vsed. All which I yéelded to, and she (as impiercible as the diamond) could be drawne to no other beléefe, but that Brunoro right déerely affected her, whereon she compast the meanes, to acquaint him with my determination, writing vnto him what I had entended:
and (which was most to my preiudice,) that my Art failed me, and could at this instant doo me no seruice. Brunoro, being (at that time) the very arrogantest Knight in all this Countrey, grew proude and disdainfull against me, and hearing that I practised his death, did not deter∣mine the like by me, but how to bring me into a most wret∣ched condition of life: and perceauing it was publiquely bruted abroad, what wrong he had done to me & my daugh∣ter, he deuised with him selfe, to lay a fresh affliction on me, and (by trayning her once againe from my house) to abuse her more villainously then hee had done before: neuer re∣membring, that so rare loue and fidelity in a woman, deser∣ued to be matcht with the greatest Prince in the worlde. Vpon this vile determination both against her and me, hee wrote to Rosella, that the third night following hee would come and confer with her in the garden, and at the appoin∣ted houre, the vnfortunate Damosell perceauing him there, went simply to him, where taking her vp againe behinde him on his Horse, vnséene of any one, he caried her away. They had not ridden aboue two leagues, but (like a cun∣ning traytour) faigning that hee would make amendes for his passed discourtesie, he caused her to dismount: then gi∣uing her counterfaited kinde kisses and embraces, and glut∣ting his lust againe with her dishonour, his brutish heate was no sooner alayed, but then he manifested his damnable purpose, and dragging her along by the haire of the head, sayd, that he purposed there to kill her. Shée (silly soule) ruing too late her fond credulity, entrea∣ted him (for Gods sake) to spare her life, whereto he yéelded on this condition, that she would procure his entraunce in∣to my Castell, and make him Lord of all that was mine. The miserable Lady, not knowing how otherwise to ran∣some her life, made him promise to performe it, and retur∣ning with him back to my Castell, with thirty attendants all well prouided: through the Garden she conducted them into my great Hall, where making their passage forward with engines of yron, the noyse quickly awaking me, I pre∣sently
conceited who they were, and stepping immediatly into my study, I found, that a Christian wizzard, called the Sage Aliarte of the obscure valley, had all this while béene the hinderer of my Magick spelles, but hauing done what him pleased, I was now againe at liberty. Héere-vpon, out of my chamber window I threw a cer∣taine powder, which smote Brunoro blinde, & all that were with him, so that except I pleased to release them, they could neuer haue the benefit of sight any more. Then step∣ping downe my selfe among them, in a dissembled voyce I tolde them how easily they might come by my treasure, and opening a doore fit for my purpose, I sayde: Followe mee Gentlemen, and I will make you all rich for euer, they en∣tring where I bad them, were all by me lockt vp in a close prison, but my daughter I conuayed to her former place of restraint. Early the next morning, I sent for my friends, the two fore-remembred Knights, shewing them howe well I had hunted, and what a booty I had caught, yet neuer issued forth of my Castell: whereat a while they stood somewhat ama∣zed, but most of all, at the mad and inconsiderate loue, which my daughter still bare to so false a tretcher. I vrged their aduise, whether thus blinde they should die there in pri∣son, or haue their heads smitten off for so manifest villanie. The Knights studying how to saue Rosellaes life, in regard of her wonderfull error in loue, after some little conference had together, one of them thus spake. In our opinion Sir, you should not put them to death thus blinde in prison, for wanting the sight of their owne misery, they shall also giue no example, of so monstrous an ingratitude toward a true louing Lady: beside, they should not escape with losse of their heads onely, because a fault of such great quality, iust∣lie deserues an aunswerable punishment. Wee rather déeme it more conuenient, that (discharging all the rest) you enchaunt Brunoro and your daughter in two seuerall pla∣ces, with such varietie of chastisements inflicted vpon them, as should neuer cease or they be frée from, till two of the
best Knights in the worlde wrought theyr deliueraunce. This sentence pleased me excéedingly, so that setting all the rest at liberty, I caused Brunoro to be brought bound before me, where restoring his sight againe, and reproouing his base ingratitude to so loyall a Lady, I adiudged him to re∣maine within the Tower, vntill such a Knight should come to redéeme him, and there should he continually be hunted by two shée Beares, and my selfe (to féede mine eyes suffi∣ciently with his affliction) enchaunted my owne abiding in the same Tower, where you my Lord Primaleon hap∣pened to finde me. My daughters doome was within the Wood, where shee lost the bright beauty of her virgine honour, there should a murderous villaine daily cut her throate, and afterward she was to liue in the vncouered Tower, feeding onely vp∣pon the bounty of the ayre, aunswerable to her miserie in the Wood, where she was rauished and left so inhumanely naked. At these words he began to looke about him, and percea∣uing it wexed late, hee would not trouble them with anie further discourse: so the Knights prepared to take their rest, with intent to pacifie this discontentment, and procu∣ring the olde man to be more friendly to the Knight Bru∣noro.
CHAP. LXXVII. How Primaleon and Arguto, caused the mariage to be sollemnized betweene Brunoro and Rosella, and af∣terward iourneyed toward Babylon. NExt morning ensuing, Primale∣on and Arguto hauing cōcluded, to quallifie this heauie case of dis∣cord, came downe into the Hall, where they founde the auncient Magitian holding his daughter by the hand, and chyding Bruno∣ro for his rigorous crueltie: So the Knights giuing them all the mornings salutation, tooke Bru∣noro aside with them, and plainly told him, that he had ve∣rie highly wronged the young Lady, knowing her loue so truly addicted to him, & therefore if he would make amends for his passed transgressions, hee must accept her in mar∣riage, for her vertues did merrit one of greater woorth then hee. Brunoro, who (by this long time of chastisement) had alayed his proud stomack, sayde. That it was in vaine for him to offer any such attonement, when her discontented Father would no way be wonne thereto. Then the two Knights tooke the olde man betwéene them, shewing him, how hee might (in one instant) make firme his daughters lost honour and his owne, by graunting to a conuenable marriage betwéene her and Brunoro, who had now enter∣tained a more milde and obedient spirit, and by the feeling sence of his passed miseries, had hūbled his proud thoughts to a more gentle temper. The aged Magitian, confidently crediting what they said, and that they would not report it, except it were so in∣deede, was contented to giue his daughter in marriage to
Brunoro: but first he desired to see some proofe of him, for the better clearing of all doubtes to come, where-with the Knights could finde no mislike, wherefore they called him before the olde man, and thus Primaleon spake in the pre∣sence of Rosella. Brunoro, this auncient Lord is very well pleased, that this faithfull Lady his daughter shall be your wife: proui∣ded you doo vndertake some glorious enterprise, which may wipe out the scandale of your passed offences. I will per∣forme (quoth Brunoro) what soeuer it shall please him or you to commaund me, although I were assured to loose my life, which truely (in iustice) I haue woorthily deserued. This aunswere was of such powerfull efficacie, that the a∣ged Magitian (as one sufficiently perswaded already) would haue him to aduenture on no further perill, but Brunoro, to let the Knights sée his forwardnes and valour, would néeds performe what he had intended. When he was armed and mounted on horse-backe, Pri∣maleon, loth to make any longer aboade there, caused him to be called, when, to the good liking of the aged man, but much more of Rosella, they ascended the staires, and Prima∣leon, holding the Lady by one hand, and Brunoro by the o∣ther, crauing fauour of the Magitian, began as followeth. Your present behauiour Sir Brunoro, with no doubt of your after progression in all honour, hath made Rosellaes father to forget all former dislikes, & giues you his dearest daugh∣ter as your wife, with absolute promise, that after his death, his wealth and possessions remaine wholy yours, as a dow∣rie in mariage with his beloued child. Then causing a re∣ligious Priest to bee called, which liued secretly among some fewe Christians in that Countrey, he prayed the olde man, that Rosella and Brunoro might be baptized as Chri∣stians, according as he promised him, when he brought him forth of the Tower. The Nigromancer beeing somewhat obstinate in his owne errour, would gladly haue denied it, but not daring to contradict Primaleon in any thing, expressed an outward
willingnes: so being baptized, they were then espoused to∣gether, and sollemne feasting was there performed, such as the time and place could affoord. When our Knights had remained there two whole daies, they called the old Magitian aside, and demaunded of him a plaine information, concerning the procéedings of Albayzars sonne, that they might the better prouide for any harme to ensue. Of him they vnderstood, how this Prince had stird vp the Soldane of Persia, sonne to him that dyed before Constantinople, with the Kings of Tartaria and Ar∣menia, the Emperour of Trebisonde, and other Princes, with them also was a younger Brother of Ristoranoes. The rea∣son why hee gathered such a puissant strength together, was, to be possessed of so many of the best Christian Knights as he could come by, not to put them to death, but as hoping to draw them to his blind sect and error, or at least so to hin∣der them, that they might not beare any armes against him: for the young Soldane was of such a generous spirit, as hee would not reuenge his Fathers death on any man, that by deceipt should fall into his power, but openly & ho∣nourably in a pitcht field of battaile. The Knights being thus farre acquainted with the case, tooke their leaue of the old Wizzard, Brunoro and Rosella, as if they went for Constantinople, not reuealing their close purpose to visite Babylon, yet did the Magitian plainly per∣ceiue it, that their determination was absolutely thether, wherefore when they were gone, hee went to his studie, doubting me mishap that might befall them, therefore he would ha daily eye to their proceedings.
CHAP. LXXVIII. Howe Primaleon and Arguto were taken by Cor∣cuto the Soldane of Babylon, and set at libertie againe by the aged Magitian, Father to Rosella, returning af∣terward to Constantinople. PRimaleon and Arguto, desirous to sée what preparation Corcuto had leueyed, made such dispatch of their daily iourneyes, without any hinderance or contradiction, that they came at last to great Babylon, and hauing very readily the language of the Country, as Knights errant (in those times) were quick and readie in the se∣uerall tongues, they abode there certaine daies, without being knowne to any one whence and what they were: for Knights had frée accesse to all parts of the world, and theyr profession allowed them to go alwaies armed, which made them ye more boldly presume to such publique places, where tryumphs and tourneyes were customably held. Now because Primaleon coueted not to be knowne, hée came to the lists very badly horsed, séeming but as a looker on & no otherwise, which made very many to scorne & deride him, saying: Belike this is some doubtie man at armes, and méeter to bestride an asse then a horse: But especiallie one cock-braind knight of Babylon, being a man of more out∣ward shew and appearance, then any inward vertue or dis∣cretion, would needes play with Primaleon in iesting man∣ner, daring him to triall of the Ioust, and hoping very rea∣dily to vnhorse him. Primaleon not willing to be discoue∣red, feigned him-selfe simple and silly in his aunswers, which prouoked the Knight against him in much more de∣rision, and without anie longer stay, catching fast hold on his arme, hée drew him (as it were) perforce into the midst
of the Listes, and betaking himselfe to his owne quarter, gaue him the signe that he must needes meete him. Primaleon, finding his greatest insufficiencie to consist in his Horse, and the worst that could happen to him, would be but a dismounting, when hee saw he must needes Ioust whether hee would or no, hee setled himselfe in his saddle, and went to his place with so rough a semblance, that they which had mockt and scorned him before, began with much better regard to respect him. The Knight encountred Primaleon in the midst of his Shielde, and brake his Launce vppon it, as if it had beene against a wall: but Primaleon (forgetting his former pur∣posed secrecie) met his aduersary so strongly, as lifting him aboue sixe handfulls from his saddle, he had such a vio∣lent fall against the ground, that he lay a good while as if he had beene dead, and comming to his sences againe, hee grew excéedingly grieued, that he had so vnmannerly pro∣uoked the stranger to the Ioust, buying his folly with so deere repentance. And as hee was going to excuse his offence, another Knight, one of them that was a challenger in this tourna∣ment, (held there at this instant on some especiall occasion) to the end the Stranger should not part thence with such honour, he would reuenge the others ill fortune, and en∣countring with Primaleon, he was so lightly layd along on the ground, as if he had neuer béene toucht at all, and so we re others after him, the last of them being carried by the hea and heeles forth of the Lists, as if he had beene quite depriued of his life. The Princes there present, beholding these strange ac∣cidents, grewe all to a priuate murmuring among them∣selues, of whence and what this Stranger might be, and Corcuto the Soldane, halfe suspecting that this was some Knight of Constantinople Court, went and put on his Ar∣mour, meaning to approoue his owne valour against him, returning againe very sumptuously accoustred, but yet vn∣knowne to any what he was.
Primaleon (by the muttering & priuie whispering which he perceiued to be among the people,) iudged verily, that this was some valiant Pagane, and séeing his owne sillie Iade, by reason of his running so many courses, to be very weake and almost vtterly tyred, sent this message to Cor∣cuto: that if he would haue the honour of vnhorsing him, he should not presume on so apparant an aduantage, but commaund him a better horse, more apt for the encounter, to the end (he being a Stranger there) if he had the fal, yet he might not lay the blame on his horse. Corcuto, hearing a demaund so reasonable, presently sent him a gallant Courser, right richly caparisond, whereon Primaleon lusti∣lie mounting, trotted him brauely to his place, and mana∣ged him so loftilie at the sounde of the Trumpets, that the Babylonians at the sight thereof, beganne to mistrust theyr owne partaker. The encounter betwéene them was with terrible fury, expressing dreadlesse spirits in both the Champions, Cor∣cuto loosing one of his stirrops, but recouering it very quick∣ly againe, and Primaleon glentring a little aside, but sate vpright immediatly on it. At the second course, Corcuto was cast on the crupper of his horse, but presently leapt in∣to his seate againe, Primaleon onely missing one stirrop, and both growing angry at these disgraces, beganne to make choyse of farre stronger Launces: in which encoun∣ter, Primaleon (to scape the fall) caught hold on his horses maine, but Corcuto fell in a swoune on the earth, and was presently carried away by his Squires, because no man should haue knowledge of him. Primaleon, least as a tryumpher he should be conducted to the Pallace, shruncke suddenly away among the croude, and went to his lodging, where being vnarmed, his friend and he fell to pleasant conference. Corcuto being perfectly recouered, and feigning to haue béen absent about some vr∣gent busines, came downe into ye great Hall, where he foūd his Barons and diuers strange Kings, who hauing séene the sport to end, with the fall of the Pagane Knight that
was vnknowne, returned backe to the Pallace, and sitting with Corcuto, told him the whole successe of the Ioust, see∣ming very desirous to know the stranger Knight, whose faire fortune had graced him with the victorie. Corcuto, béeing as couetous thereof as they, caused a Proclamation to be made, that whosoeuer could manifest, what and who the strange Knight was, which had so high∣ly deserued in the tournament, should haue a very large and royall reward. The fame of this bounteous offer, com∣ming to the Hostes eare where Primaleon and Arguto lay, and he beeing assured that this was the Iouster which his King enquired for: to enrich himselfe with the promised reward, hee went and declared to the Soldane, that the Knight after whom his highnesse sought, lodged as a guest within his house. Corcuto, not a little iocond at this good happe, gaue the Host what was promised by Proclamation, and consulting of this matter among his Barons, the conclusion was this, that certaine Spies should be sent thether, and finding him to be a Christian, immediatly to surprize him, thereby to weaken the glory of the Christian Court, but beeing a Sa∣racen, then highly to honour him, and giue him the rich prizes ordained for the tournament. Election was made of such men to be sent thether, as had béene diuers time at Constantinople, and other places of great concourse in Chri∣stendome, among whom was a wealthy Merchant, that had often sold Iewels to the Empresse Grydonia, and like∣wise to the Princesse Miragarda, by meanes whereof, he had diuers times séene both Primaleon and Arguto: and re∣membring them very perfectly, hee quickly returned to the Soldane and tolde him: that these were two of the most e∣steemed Knights among the Christians, and making sea∣zure on them, he might the easier reuenge his iniuries su∣stained. Corcuto calling the Kinges and Barons to coun∣cell, shewed them what a good beginning had happened to theyr proceedings, whereby they might the more assuredly perswade themselues of victorie: and among the diuersitie
of oppinions, it was thus determined, that they should be peaceably taken, to returne in exchange for some of them, if any should happen to be taken as prisoners, because there were many other worthy Knights in the Christian band, at whose hands they expected scarce kinde entertainment. This being resolued on, Corcuto gaue ye Hoste in charge, to serue them at Supper with a commixed Wine, purposelie prepared to cause heauinesse of sleepe, so to be possessed of them without any furder danger: which beeing according∣ly put in execution, in the night time they were taken and strongly bound, without any further knowledge in the Cit∣tie. On the next morrow, when they sawe themselues thus taken prisoners, they made vndoubted account to loose their liues: but when they were brought before Corcuto, who (with a chéerfull countenaunce) embraced Primaleon, their hopes were some-what better reuiued, and Corcuto, being of a very honorable respectiue nature, spake to them in this manner. Albeit I haue iust reason to hate you, as the ene∣mies to my blood and fayth, yet am I not any way cruellie enclined toward yée: wherefore let me tell yée, that you must remaine with mee, so long as I thinke it conuenient, and you shall be serued as in your owne Christian King∣domes, wanting nothing else, but libertie of departing hence at your owne pleasure. Our Knights, who lookt for far worse entertainement, right humbly thanked him for this royall kindnes: where∣vppon they were discharged of their bands, and permitted to walke about the Cittie and Pallace, but alwayes with a good guarde attending on them, whereby theyr hopes grew desperate of euer parting thence. Now come we to the aged Nigromancer againe, who (as hath béene already declared) had a daily respect to what they did, as fearing least some disaster might befall them, when he found by his Arte that they were imprisoned: hée presently purposed to set them at libertie, in respect of the honourable benefit, which he had receiued onely by them,
but yet hee intended to doe it so secretly, that the Soldane should not at any time impute it to him, so, without impar∣ting his purpose to his Daughter, nor yet to his Sonne in Law, hauing prepared two excellent Armours, and two gallant Coursers, he departed toward Babylon. There hee arriued at the instant time, when Albayzars sonne the Sol∣dane of Babylon, had secretly determined the death of our Knights, in reuenge of his Fathers death among the Chri∣stians, beeing thereto prouoked by the importunitie of his Barons, which greatly repined at the fauour hee shewed them, and therefore, though they had wone him to it, yet they meant to performe it when he least dreampt of it. The Magitian perceiuing their imminent perrill, that very night entred into the Cittie, and going to the Cham∣ber where they were safely guarded, hee awaked them out of a very sound sléepe, & making himselfe knowne to them, told all the treason intended against them: then gaue hee them a certaine roote, where-with rubbing theyr faces, they should be altered in so strange a maner, as no man pos∣sibly could haue knowledge of them. Then did he appoynt a place for their meeting, where he would prouide them of horse and Armour, and afterward guide them til they were in sound assurance: they thankfull for so great a courtesie, and loth to be murdered there so inhumanely, made vse of this good hap in such an vrgent necessitie. The Magitian beeing gone very early in the morning, Primaleon and Arguto feigning an accustomed sléeping, much longer then before they had beene wont to doe, séeing the Guard and seruaunts with-drawne to theyr breakefast, put on nothing but theyr shirts, and cullouring theyr faces with the roote, they became all black as any Negro, which changing them strangely from their former appearance, they wondred at one another, and assured themselues that no man could know thē: So passed they out of their cham∣ber, and by the Guard, being taken by them verily for In∣dians, whereof there vsed many to the house, that attended on the strange Kings then there being.
In this sort passed they by the Pallace gate, and walked vnsuspected forth at the Citty port, reputed still to be Indian noble men, and such as were alied to those black Princes. Being come to the place assigned by the Nigromancer, he was right ioyfull of their so safe escape, and washing them with a water which hee had brought for the purpose, their countenances receaued their true complexion. When they were armed, and had thanked the Magitian for his faith∣full kindnes, with promise neuer to forget so great a bene∣fit: they rode on a while together, and when they were far enough from the Citty, he tooke his farewell of them, and they rode away as best them selues pleased: leauing no lit∣tle noise and disquiet in the Citty, when it was known that the two Christian Knights were escaped, and no man could imagine how or in what manner, or whom to holde guilty of their close departure. CHAP. LXXIX. How the mariages of Candida with Leonato, and of Tarnaes with Fior-nouella, being further conferred on in the Court of Constantinople, there happened a suddaine and vnexpectrd alteration. VIctoria and the young Concor∣dia, expressed by sad lookes their hearts discontentment, for the suddaine departure of their estée∣med fauourites, neuerthelesse, hope gaue them comfort, that promises would one day be per∣formed: the like was else-where expected, concerning Palmerins passed worde, for his sonne Leo∣nato, and Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, to enioy the seuerall La∣dies where-with he had agréed them. But Palmerin began to repent his promise, because him selfe doated extreamely
in affection, and intirely loued the faire Lady Candida, yet to keepe his honour from noted touch thereof, hee couerd it very cunningly, and seeing that his sonne must néedes en∣ioy her in mariage, to crosse the match, and compasse his owne hopes in after time, hee practised how to hinder their proceeding. The Emperour Primaleon in like manner, without any regard of his age and imbecilities, hee was also ouercome with such amorous passions, and so enflamed with loue to Candida, that it was hell to him to heare talke of her mari∣age: but Leonato and Tarnaes, relying wholy on Palmerins promise, were the bolder to breake their minds to the Em∣perour, finding him accompanied with Florendos and the wizzard Aliarte, who likewise made loue to the same Can∣dida. By the Emperours aunsweres it plainly appeared, that he was not willing she should be so maried, but said, he had purposed in his priuate thoughts, to bestow her on Oli∣uanto young Primaleons brother, which he vrged the rather, because Oliuanto was not at that present in the Court, so the more surely to deferre off the mariage: but Leonatoes resolution continued in such sort, as the Emperour (not knowing easily howe to get him out of Constantinople) was enforced to say, that it was not meete time to marry so wor∣thie a Lady, without performance of some higher attempts for her sake, then (as yet) he or any else had vnder-taken. When Leonato saw his hopes frustrated with such peremp∣torie speeches, he stept boldly before the Emperour, saying. Since I see your highnesse is my onely hinderer, in the long expected felicity of my desires, which (but for you) I might now freely enioy: were you as other men are, I would then tell yée, that age will not let you performe the office of a Knight, and I will maintaine, against him whosoeuer dare combate in your cause, that you doo me most vnkingly in∣iurie. Palmerin hearing these proud spéeches of his sonne, stept forth, and checkt him with a sharpe reprehension, for being so carelesse of his duty: but Leonato, scorning to be baffuld
by any man in his loue, or that the greatest Monarch on the earth should intercept his desseignes, drewe foorth his sword, saying. Whosoeuer dare denie, that beautious Can∣dida shall not be my wife, let him come forth of Constanti∣nople, there (like a Knight) will I expect him, and there let him try, whether I be worthy of her or no. Palmerin called presently for his armour, to defend (as he saide) the honour of the Emperour, but indeede hee rather sought to disappoint his sonne, and compasse the meanes of his owne fond desires. The Emperour, who was not wont to beare such an iniurie, caused his Armes to be brought, with intent to aduenture the combate with his Nephew: but Aliarte, as forwarde in affection to Candida as any of them, albeit he gouernd it with greater modesty, falling on his knée before the Emperour, tolde him, that he ought by no meanes, to hazard his person in fight against Leonato, because to whatsoeuer issue the combate sorted, he could not but repent it: beside, he would neuer presume so rashly on such an enterprise, but that in generall opinion it would passe for currant, that he was growne amorous of the faire young Lady, which would be a great disgrace to his reue∣rend yeeres. When the Emperour found his gréefe toucht, where it pained him indeede, he stayed his hastines, yet to shew that he was mooude with the zeale of his owne honour, he inten∣ded to banish Leonato frō Constantinople, holding it as great grace, in that hee proceeded with no other seueritie against him: yet he determined within a while to repeale his ba∣nishment, vpon some earnest entreatie of his father Palme∣rin, who verily entended nothing lesse, or declared himselfe offended a iote at his sonnes exile, but rather was highly contented there-with, hoping by meanes of his absence, the easier to proceede in his amourous purpose. When Leonato heard that the Emperour had banished him, he closely went to the lodging of the Princesse Poly∣narda, where he thought him selfe safe, albeit the Emperour should vnderstand of his being there: and such speeches past
betwéene him and his mother, (who already was iealous e∣nough of her husband,) that shee hauing sent for Candida into her chamber, fell into questioning with her concerning Leonato, onely to heare how she stoode affected toward him, he standing close hid all the while behind the Arras. The young Lady being in his mothers presence, whom in her soule she most intirely loued, stood not on nice termes or coying ceremonies, but plainly declared, that none but Leonato was Lord of her desires, him had she elected as her harts best choise, albeit her hopes stoode nowe on desperate hazards, deliuering no likelyhoode that she should euer en∣ioy him, because the Emperour had pronounced his banish∣ment, euen at the instant when their mariage should haue béene confirmed. Polynarda seeing the Lady so firmely min∣ded, and that in such discréete modest manner, she had im∣parted her true affection toward her sonne Leonato, she said. Swéete Lady, if I worke the meanes that Leonato shall be your husband, and him selfe as ready as you to accom∣plish it, tell me (faire soule) what will ye say then? When Candida heard the Princesse vse these spéeches, a flood of ioying teares streamed downe her faire chéekes, and reue∣rently taking the Princesse by the hand, spake in this man∣ner. I know that your highnesse, beeing so néere allyed to my Lord the Emperour, will not determine any thing, that shall returne to my blame or disparagement: therefore (if it please you) I will assure my selfe in your presence to my Lord Leonato your sonne, and confesse my selfe to be his troth-plighted wife, committing all my forunes afterward to your gracious direction. Polynarda making a signe to Leonato, he came foorth to her, where after some duty done to his mother, falling on his knée at Candidaes foote, he caught her hand in his, and sweetly kissing it, was so strangely transported with an a∣mourous passion, as he knéeled there silently a pretty while together: but she remembring at last his ouer-fond errour, raysing him in her armes, said. My noble Lord, doo not so much wrong your worth and reputation, that I being your
humble and obedient spouse, you should thus humiliate your selfe to me: rise therefore I beseech you, and doo as your princely mother shall aduise yée. Polynarda seeing matters in so good a forwardnes, sayde. Since you hold both one solemne purpose, and that I haue no doubt of my sonne, but his behauiour shall be as become a loyall Knight: by your hands plight your harts in a reli∣gious contract, and afterward we will take order for other kinde of proceeding. So ioyned they hand and harts mutu∣ally together, nothing wanting but the ceremonie of the Church to confirme them. Such was Leonatoes ioy for this high good hap, that speaking somewhat louder then nee∣ded, he was ouer-heard by one of his fathers followers, who presently aduertised his Lord therof: which Polynarda per∣ceauing, shifted Leonato away, into the lodging of Lucilla her wayting Gentlewoman, and kept him there so closely, that Palmerin supposed he was gone on his banishment. But matters falling out beyonde expectation, and that Leonato might no longer (with safety) abide in Constanti∣nople: he so ordered the case with his Lady Candida, as she should goe thence with him into England, whereto he found her very tractable. And preparing all thinges for their de∣parture, without acquainting his mother Polynarda there∣with, one night, when Candida should haue betaken her selfe to rest, commaunding her wayting Damosels to bed, she attired her selfe like a comly young Gentleman, and in the company of an English Squire, who was most loyall and firme to Leonato: they closely escaped vnseene out of the Emperours Pallace, going to the place where her hus∣band attended her, and with like safety they past forth of the Citty, shaping their course directly for England, where on their iourney we will leaue them, till time serue more ne∣cessarily to report, what mishappes they endured vpon the way.
CHAP. LXXX. Howe Florian trauailing to the faire Argentina, came to the Citty of Tubante, where with exceeding loue he was entertained by his wife Targiana, and lea∣uing order how she should be defended against her sonne Corcuto, he iourneyed thence to the Adamant Castell. FLorian, who (as you haue heard already) came with Victoria to Constantinople, not suffering him selfe to be seene by the Emperour or any other: returned towarde Turkie, resolued to trauaile to the Adamant Castell, and hauing sailed very prosperously, within few dayes he arriued at Tubante, where Targiana welcomde him with such sincere loue, as he could not but make most choise account of her. Hauing aboade some fewe dayes with her, tidings came thether, that Corcuto intended his first expedition against her, as gréeuing that his mother had so forsaken him, and maried the man that slew his father: so that to make proui∣sion for this purposed inuasion, a proclamation was gene∣rally sent abroade, that all those Turkes, who were wont to giue attendance on the great Turkes person, for vniuer∣sall maintenance of the state, should make their repaire to Tubante, where they should receaue directions for their fur∣ther seruice. Aboue forty thousand horse-men with spéede came thether, and an honourable Turke was sent to Con∣stantinople, to entreate the Emperour, that he would send a generall commaunder for the Armie, because they expected warre from the Souldane of Babilon: and among the rest,
Letters were directed to Blandidon Souldane of Niquea, to be readily prepared, for the assistaunce of Targiana when neede required. All thinges thus setled in very good sort, Florian tooke a kinde farewell of his wife, and trauailed toward the Ada∣mant Castell, where he had arriued in lesse then ten dayes: but that Drusa Velonna, who (by ouer-much kindnes and humanity, daily vsed toward her by the Emperour, in hope to reclaime her stubborne nature) suddainly got away from Constantinople, and thwarted Florian in his purpose. For she appearing to him in the likenes of a Light-horse-man, and beeing demaunded by Florian for the way, which soonest would conduct him to the Adamant Castell: shée told him, that hee should followe the path vpon his left hand, which within two dayes would bring him thether, so bidding him adiew, shee tooke the right hand way, and rode away from him. Florian giuing credite to the horse-mans words, did as he was directed, and hauing ridden till about mid-noone, hee happened vpon a Fountaine of very black water, and about it were tyed in chaines two Beares and foure Lyons, sée∣ming to be as guardians thereof, that no man should pre∣sume to tast of the water. In the midst of the water stoode a Collomne of red stone, and vppon it a figure of meruai∣lous blacke Marble, hauing a breefe on it, containing these words. He that takes a tast of me, Looseth his life, what ere he be. Florian hauing read this threatning inscription, smiling thereat, procéeded onward, and his passage being through the midst of ye Lyons, they all foure rose vp furiously against him, and because the chaines where-with they were tyed, gaue thē ouerlarge scope, they were all vpon him at once: yet did Florian wound the two first that came before him, and the rest stoode so stoutly to him, as being all vp reared on their hinder feete, they gript him terribly about the hel∣met,
and graspt him so strongly in diuers parts of his body, as he could by no meanes get loose from them. Then they which had felt the kéene edge of his weapon, assayled him againe, but somewhat more fearfully, and hauing got him selfe frée from the other, hee set the stoutlier against the wounded beasts, which gladly drew back to their seuerall places, where-vpon, opposing his valour to the other resi∣sters, his blowes flew so thick euery way about them, that the beasts (albeit they were most wilde and furious) helde despairingly off, and durst not come néere him, by meanes wherof he came the closer to ye fountaine. But the Beares, whose office (as it séemed) was the guardance of the water, when Florian had attained so néere within their reach, that they might worke their malice against him: they stoode vp∣right so fiercely against him, as Florian began to be some∣what abashed thereat, but checking his thoughts presently for so weake an humour, he made couragiously many stout strokes at them, and had they not béene by Art enchaunted, they could not haue endured against his least blow. Hee wexing weary with so much labour spent in vaine, and almost driuen quite out of breath, the Beares hauing likewise in diuers places disarmde him, so as he might wel thinke he had no easie taske in hand, when his minde had halfe perswaded him, that there might be some other means then by this sworde, to compasse the height of this daunge∣rous enterprise: he suddenly layd hold on the chayne wher∣with they were tyed, and puld at it with such strength, that the knot of the chaine (beeing fastened onely by a ryding wier, which would slip vp and downe, according to ye force applyed against it) ranne close to the Beares throates, and they béeing well neere strangled thereby, made many light bounds and mountings aloft, onely to be rid of so mightie an oppression. But the Knight, resoluing either on death or victorie, maintayned his pulling with the greater violence, till they were able to breathe no longer, and then the chayne brea∣king, they ranne away spéedily into a Wood neere adioy∣ning,
and the kingly Lyons, seeing the Beares skud away in such sort, began to expresse apparant signes of gladnesse, as if they had beene possest of humaine intellection. So that now he might safely goe neerer the water, and taking off his Helmet to drinke therein, he perceiued the water to be wondrous blacke, which made him a little to deliberate thereon: but to shew himselfe not fearefull thereof, lifting his Helmet vp to drinke of the water, hee suddenly heard a voyce, crying aloude to him in this manner. Drinke not Sir Knight, for if thou doost, thou diest. At this voyce, Florian turned himselfe about, as séeming to haue some knowledge thereof, & perceiued it was Do∣rina, who came running toward him very swiftly, & staying his purpose till shee was come to him, hee then thus spake. You haue doone well (faire Ladie Dorina) in fore-warning me of so great a perrill, although such gentlenes hath béene by mee but vnkindly requited: but blame ye enchauntment of the Ring, which tooke from mee the freedome of iudge∣ment, when (for my loue) you receiued that wound, which appeares as yet not perfectly healed. Forbeare such talke at this time, quoth Dorina, and pro∣uide for your present going to the Adamant Castell, which Drusa Velonna caused her deuils to make in the night, cut∣ting it out of an Adamant Mountaine in such strange man∣ner, that the side toward the East, drawes all kind of yron to it, but then the West side parts againe with it: So that either you must purpose to abide there for euer, or else goe thether without your Armour, and what can any Knight performe without his Armour, especially where Armes must be his best defence? But I haue found out a helpe for this hinderance, you shall couer your Armour with a boyld Harts skinne, and so the vertue of the Adamant, shall not be able to attract or pierce it, for the rest I referre it to your manly valour. Florian thus aduised, tooke his leaue of Dorina, and rode away with no meane hast, fearing least some other should
chaunce thether before him, and set frée the young Ladie: then returning the way againe, which Drusa Velonna had falsely directed, hee rode according to Dorinaes appoint∣ment, and hauing ridden a whole day, about sunne-setting he came to a part of that Countrey, where he vnderstoode, how ye Adamant Castel was within lesse then fiue leagues. There made he his couerture of the Harts skinne, sprea∣ding it ouer his Armour as Dorina had instructed him, and beeing furnished with whatsoeuer else he had néede of, the next day, hee set toward the Castell, arriuing there some∣what after noone: and because it was then no fit time to be∣gin such an enterprise, hee sate him downe vnder a fewe neighbouring trées, & tooke his rest there for all that night. CHAP. LXXXI. How Florian (with some difficultie) concluded the aduenture of the Adamant Castell, and set faire Argentina at libertie. THe chéerefull morning, hauing chaced away sadde melanchollie night, and ye veyled eyes of mor∣talls, enricht with the golden Sunnes vp-rising, Florian bée∣ing all Hart both without and within, went toward the Ada∣mant Tower, and cōming with∣in lesse then a stones cast of it, he met an aged Knight, and two Squires with him, one of them carrying a sword in his hand, and the other a great Bason, when they came neerer together, the aged man thus spake to Florian. Dismount as quickly as thou canst, thou Knight vnwoorthy of any wel∣come hether, to the end I may present thy head, to the pow∣erfull Lady Enchauntresse of this Castell: otherwise, in
sted of thine, I must deliuer her the head of the faire young Lady Argentina, and thou shalt likewise die at ye selfe same instant. Florian smiling at his foolish spéeches, said. Returne (good father) to thy Lady, and tell her I haue but one poore head, which I cannot part withall vpon so easie an iniunc∣tion: bid her rather haue care of her owne head and thine, for I come hether to maister her enchauntment, and to set the iniuried Lady at libertie. The old Knight, without re∣turning him any aunswere, went backe againe to the Ca∣stell, and Florian staying to sée what would ensue héereon, beheld a large table thrust out at a window, vpon ye which was brought forth the young Lady Argentina, by the two Squires and the auncient Knight, where they causing her to fall downe vppon her knees, the olde man, with a loude voyce, spake as followeth. Knight, lay violent hands vppon thine owne life, or pre∣sently sée this Lady perrish. Florian, séeing his comming thether should cause the death of Argentina, whereas his in∣tent was to set her at libertie: became so troubled in his thoughts, as he rather chose to die himselfe, then to be the occasion of her murdering, and therefore hee called to the old man, saying. I pray thée good Father, put not to death an innocent Lady, but rather come worke thy will on mée, since I am come hether to procure her perrill. And doubt∣lesse it had sorted to that issue, for Florian at the old Knights comming, would more willingly haue sent his head to the Sorceresse, then there to haue beheld ye death of Argentina. But Dorina, who had followed him thether inuisible, as being greatly afraide of Drusa Velonna, caused a Knight to steale vppon him, and smiting him trecherously with a Launce, fledde backe againe to the wood: and Florian of∣fended at such a discourtesie, pursued him very angerly, till béeing farre enough from the Castell, the Knight shewed himselfe to be Dorina, and spake vnto him in this manner. Vnderstand (thou worthy-bearer of Armes,) that whatso∣euer thou beholdest at the Castel, are nothing els but méere
illusions, purposely doone to feare and dismay thée. Shee whom thou sawest ready to loose her head, is not Argentina, but a counterfeit Image in her shape, therefore returne a∣gaine before the Castell, and shewe thy selfe so inly toucht with griefe, at beholding a spectacle so sad and moouing, as if very conceit thereof were ready to kill thee. Then when the old man comes to haue thy head, dissemble cunningly, as if thou couldest not readily vndooe the laces of thy Hel∣met, that he may drawe neere to lend thee his helpe: then quickly catch him fast by the long beard, because therin re∣maines the strength of the enchauntment. Nowe knowe withall, that the olde Knight is Drusa Velonna so meta∣morphosed, of whom be sure to haue an especiall care, for feare she get againe at libertie: because I (hauing told the way to surprise her) shall be most cruelly handled by her, if euer she get loose and escape from thee. Florian right ioyfull of this good aduise, returned spéedi∣lie to the Castell, where the old Knight seeing him come a∣gaine, continued his former menacing of the Lady, where∣at Florian expressed such extraordinarie passions, as he see∣med ready to sinck into the ground with griefe, offering if he had tenne thousand liues, to loose them all ere Argentina should miscarie. The old Knight, not a little proude here∣of, came foorth of the Castell, (as before he had doone) with the two Squires, and comming to Florian, found his lookes so sad and pensiuely deiected, with a willing preparation to his death, that the inward ioy of the Knight for this good fortune, made him the lesse héedfull to that which followed. Florian kept a fumbling about his Helmet, as not able to vntie the laces thereof, where-vppon the olde Knight io∣condly offered his assistaunce, when he presently fastening hold on his heard, sawe him immediatly altered to Drusa Velonna, whom (by reason he had seene before else-where) he very well knewe, and spake to her thus. Thou wicked woman, I haue thée now at some aduan∣tage, quickly conduct me into the Castell, that I may sette the young Lady Argentina at libertie. Velonna fearefullie
trembling, by teares and intreates laboured to haue him kisse her, promising then to performe whatsoeuer hee com∣maunded: but Dorina comming at the instant, cryed out vnto him. Kisse her not Knight, for then she kills thee, ney∣ther trust any of the damned Witches promises, beware (beside) thou goe not into the Castell, for then thou canst neuer returne backe againe: but commaund her that Ar∣gentina, and some other Ladies enclosed with her, may be brought foorth hether, then take the chayne-girdle from a∣bout her, and binde her hands strongly therewith, that she be not able to get away from thée. Florian commaunded her, to haue Argentina and the o∣ther Ladies brought foorth, which Velonna in very hum∣ble manner performed: then issued faire Argentina out of the Castell, and diuers other Ladies in company with her, on whom she had wrought her damnable trecherie, & they beeing come before the Prince, Dorina put her hand into Velonnas bosome, and tooke out a booke, which was the ve∣ry deerest iewell for maintenaunce of her Arte, wherat she was euen readie to die with sorrow. And because this dan∣gerous Castell might be guiltie of no more harme, Florian entreated Dorina, by helpe of the Booke she had taken from Velonna, to confound it in such sort, as no other Nigroman∣cer euer after should be possessed thereof. Which beeing doone accordingly, hee desired Dorina, that shee would goe and aduertise Targiana of his fortunate successe, in gayning the libertie of faire Argentina, and to certifie her withall, that he was gone in companie of the young Lady to Con∣stantinople: so taking his leaue of her, he went to a neere ad∣ioyning port of the Sea, where finding a Shippe ready for his purpose, both he, Argentina, and Velonna went present∣lie aboord.
CHAP. LXXXII. VVhat the Emperour, Palmerin, and the other Knights did, when they founde that Candida was gone away with Leonato. ON the next morrowe, when Can∣dida was not séene in the Court, on whom the Emperor & Palme∣rin hetherto had helde a strict eye, now doubting some deceit, and she being last séene in Leonatoes com∣panie, as also now generally noi∣sed abroade, how déerely she affec∣ted Leonato, they must needes ga∣ther, that shee was gone away with him. Hereat ye Emperour shewed himselfe to be high∣ly offended, and culloured this discontentment, to be in re∣gard of the true zeale he euer bare her Father and Mother, and his passions grew to such extremitie, as (in all hast) he called for his Armour, and he would follow to recouer her againe. But Palmerin, no lesse fired with rage, though more cun∣ning in kéeping it from publique note, being come into the Emperours presence, said. It is not méet (dread Lord) that you in person should pursue such an enterprise, least giddie-headed censurers thereby coniecture, that rather wanton follie induced you thereto, then the awfull respect which ought to be in an Emperour. This hee spake, because him∣selfe intended to follow them, and recouer the young Ladie from Leonato: neuer remembring, that a Father (in such a case) should be more mindfull both of his owne honor and his sonnes, but it is no rare noueltie, when the very wisest men are thus transported with amourous passions. Tarnaes, perceiuing Palmerin made no hast in giuing him his daughter Fior-nouella, thought with himselfe that his
best meanes for soonest obtayning her, was to hinder Leo∣nato from passing into England: whether likewise if Palme∣rin and his daughter should post after, then his loues hope might be vtterly frustrate, wherefore very secretely he ar∣med himselfe, & tooke the way that directed to England. Pal∣merin also purposing to ride after his sonne, went and put on his Armour: but beeing prettily quipt and taunted by his wife, for so manifest appearance of vnmanly behauiour, not knowing with what modestie well to excuse it, he was not ouer-hastie in arming himselfe. Aliarte, who likewise was enamoured of faire Candida, but made no outward publication thereof, beeing alone in the Emperours presence, priuately told him: that the Em∣presse Grydonia full well perceiued, his fond loue to Can∣dida in these decrepite yéeres, when a shéete for the graue were more néedfull to be thought on, then such ill-séeming young desires in so olde a body, yet had shee borne it with more patience, then a womans heated blood is commonlie capable of, so that except shee were the sooner visited & com∣forted, ye danger of her life stood desperately vpon it. These spéeches made the Emperor in a very strange taking, whē he heard the weake estate of his Empresse, and contrari∣wise, his loue did mightilie torment him: but because Ali∣arte should not repute him as a man quite reasonlesse, hee went presently to her chamber, and finding her in a verie contagious agonie, hee spake to her meruailous kindly, when she (opening her eyes, and looking right sadly vppon him) said. Goe, goe, (my Lord) to the young beautie that hath bewitched your age, and leaue mee poore old Woman here drownde in mine owne teares: yet you might remem∣ber some of your knightly deedes done for my sake, when you made me (fond credulous foole) to beléeue, that neuer could any other Lady haue power of your thoughts. These words made such a deepe impression in his mind, as he presently resolued to shake off this vnbeséeming hu∣mour, and embraced the Empresse with such signes of true affection, that her former dispayring thoughts were confi∣dently
reuocated, with absolute perswasion, that henceforth all such folly in him would be quite abandoned. Nor did hee hold any longer spleene against Leonato, but the very next day repealed his banishment, vnder this promise, that hee had doone no act of villanie to Candida. When Aliart sawe the Emperours doating loue so well reclaimed, he imme∣diatly prouided, that Palmerin should no further pursue Le∣onato, and caused a Post to bring a Letter, as if it had been written by Leonato himselfe, the summe whereof in briefe thus followeth. The Letter brought by the supposed Poast to Constantinople, as written from Leonato, to his Father Palmerin. ¶The superscription. To his most noble Lord and Father, Palmerin, the right royall Prince of England, at Constantinople, or wheresoeuer. GRacious Lord and Father, your wonted kind and honora∣ble fauour, standing betweene me and my loue-fault com∣mitted, in the true duty of a sonne, I humbly salute you. Gi∣uing you to vnderstand, that (in a mutuall simpathy of our soules desires) I haue espoused the beautiful Lady Candida, whose loue before I leaue, or can endure any riuall in, I haue rated it at the deerest droppe of my blood. I humbly craue pardon of my Lord the Emperour, in my so bold neglect of his sacred worth: and please his Highnesse but to remember, that it was loues rash presumption, and no vnciuill rudenes in Leonato, his wrong will the easier be re∣payred, and my trespasse pardoned. I am now bound for England, to visite my royall Grand-father King Edward, and in his Court to celebrate my marriage: So with my loue and dutie generally to all, I end. Your louing Sonne, Leonato.
Aliarte managed this busines so cunningly, that the Let∣ter was deliuered, the Princesse Polynarda being by, who hearing this Letter to come from her sonne, was the more desirous to reade it, and hauing thorowly perused it, she said. My Lord and husband, I pray yee, much rather for faire Candidaes sake, then for our noble sonnes, that you would forbeare to follow him, to the end no greater disaster may betide the silly Lady: but if you will needes be so forward, then I pray yée take me along with yée, that I may be re∣spectiue of the Ladies honour, whatsoeuer happen to our sonne Leonato. When Palmerin saw he could by no means recouer Candida, without manifest note of being enamou∣red of her, he would giue his Lady no aunswere, but a mes∣senger comming for him, he went presently to the Empe∣rour: and Polynarda, not knowing her fathers change from his former affection, went after her husband, onely to be the hinderance of his iourney. Being come into his presence, the graue olde Emperour with a smiling countenance spake as followeth, Lord Palmerin, if both you and I had not committed some errour in our loue, I would haue appointed, a very seuere prosecution against Leonato: but when I call to minde, how many seuerall dangers I opposed my selfe against, to gaine the loue of my Empresse Grydonia, I can but count it iustice, hauing (my selfe) wrongd the péerelesse vertue of her loue, to pardon the light transgression of an amourous young man. Therefore I will that our sentence of banish∣ment stand no longer vpon Leonato, or any of our Court to follow in pursute of him: only let it be thus, if he demeane not him selfe like an honourable Knight to the Lady, a pu∣nishment accordingly shal be inflicted on him, forbeare then to vndertake such needelesse trauaile, and let vs sende for Tarnaes, to bestow on him (according to our passed promise) the beautifull Fior-nouella in mariage. These words did wound Palmerin to the very hart, especially being spoken in the presence of his wife, who marked well his alteration of countenance, and there-with gaue Leonatoes Letter to the
Emperour, which when he had reade, and perceaued that Leonato had espoused the Lady, he wexed very ioyfull, sée∣ing his idle desseigne in loue so well disappointed, and his thoughts quite discharged of their former tormentes, for should his vaine opinion still haue continued, hee sawe no meanes left of euer attaining it. When Aliarte behelde all thinges in so good an order for Leonato, he purposed to let his owne fond loue neuer be dis∣couered, & brake off all fruitlesse expectation that way, since two so great Princes had brideled their affections. And for the more certainty, that no mishap might befall faire Can∣dida, he wrought in such manner by his Arte, that a Squire ouer-tooke Tarnaes in his trauaile, and riding a while with him, told him, that Leonato was returned to Constantinople, where by the honourable meanes of Polynarda his mother, he had espoused Candida: beside (quoth he) I heard the Em∣perour make earnest enquirie, for a Nephewe of his, who was sonne to king Platir of Lacedemonia, on whom he meant to bestowe in mariage, the daughter of noble Palmerin of England, but the Knights name I doo not well remember. Tarnaes highly ioyed with these so pleasing and happy newes, began to conceaue, that if he returnd not the sooner to Constantinople, some suspect might be gathered, that hee was not willing to accept the Lady as his wife: wherefore parting from the Squire, pretending to him a very farre iourney, he repaired speedily to Constantinople, and no sooner was he entred the Pallace, but he met with the Princesse Polynarda, who taking him very kindly by the hand, sayde. My Lord Tarnaes, your presence hath greatly beene desired in this Court, that a royall promise made you might be ac∣complished. Madame, quoth Tarnaes, I am héere ready at your highnes seruice: and some other speeches of courtesie passing betweene them, Tarnaes priuatly went to his cham∣ber, right glad of the newes he heard by the Princesse Po∣lynarda.
CHAP. LXXXIII. Howe Prince Florian arriued at Constantinople, with the faire Lady Argentina, and the subtill En∣chauntresse Drusa Velonna: Heere likewise is decla∣red, how Leonato lost his beloued Candida, and after∣ward by what meanes he recouered her againe. PAlmerin hauing intelligence that Tarnaes was returned to Court againe, hee obtayned a solemne conference with the Emperour Primaleon and his wife Polynar∣da, about the bestowing of Fior-nouella on him in mariage, and the espousall beeing fully agréed vppon, the learned Aliarte came into the Emperors presence, say∣ing. Great Maiestie, and you the rest héere graciously as∣sembled, in performing your passed promises, concerning Tarnaes and the faire Fior-nouella, it is a case both iust and honourable: yet let me tell yée, there ought to be no such ce∣remonious rites performed, till first those weightier espou∣salls be finished, of Primaleon with Victoria, and Arguto with the swéete young Lady Concordia, which once accom∣plished, there are other inamoratoes of this Court, that look to haue like grace extended them. These spéeches were very pleasing to the Emperour, and all the rest in presence, and as they further discoursed there∣on, tidings entred the Hall, that Florian was arriued in the Port, with faire Argentina, and Drusa Velonna as his pri∣soner, which newes were gracde with a generall welcom, for all the Lords & Ladies gaue a present testimony therof, by being at an instant mounted on their Palfrayes, & riding in comly equipage down to the Port, where they found Ar∣gentina newly come forth of the Ship, whom after they had seuerally kist and embraced, she was seated likewise on a
gallant proude Iennet, and Drusa Velonna (bound to her good behauiour) vpon an other. Thus with Prince Florian rode they along in great state to the Court, where being a∣lighted and ascended the great Hall, the Emperour gaue them most royall entertainment: but when he vnderstood, how Velonna had behaued her selfe toward Prince Florian, with a frowning countenance he saide vnto her. Thou ill naturde woman, could not thy secret escape suffice thée, in contempt of all our gracious fauours toward thée, but still thou must aime thy malice at vs and our Court? a more warie respect héereafter shall attend thée: and because his words should be sealed with déedes, he presently commaun∣ded, that she should be enclosed in ye same yron Cage, which Palmerin d'Oliua kept his witching enemie in. Which be∣ing done, they sate pleasantly conferring in other matters, the Emperour holding Florian by one hand, and Argentina by an other, highly extolling the Prince for his magnani∣mous spirit, and the woorthy aduentures by him perfor∣med. But leaue we them in Court thus gladly disposed, and come againe to Leonato, who hauing trauailed ten dayes together, came at last into an euen champaigne soyle, very much heated and scorched by the Sunnes power: there met he neither with man or woman, nor could happen on any water to coole his thirst. Thus rode he on till halfe the day was spent, till at length he came among certaine straunge shapen trées, with such little leaues as he had neuer seene the like, vnder them he purposed to rest a while, feeding on such thinges as his Squire had brought with him, which hardly aunswered his present extremity. And much more were his thoughts afflicted, in regard of his deare estéemed Candida, neuer vsed to tast of such disasters, and therefore the more vnapt for her tender nature: but to rid themselues from so vast and a desert place, they tooke horse againe, and rode till euening, yet could not out-strip this desolate Coun∣trey. Looking (with a gréeued minde) round about him, to sée if comfort might any where be expected, vpon his left
hand he discerned a little light, and thether he went, hoping to gaine there (by force or faire meanes) some such necessa∣ries as they stoode in néede of. Beeing come to the place where he espied the light, hee found it to be a narrow house of thatch, but built somewhat high, where a man and woman of a Giant-like stature, came to vnderstand the cause of his comming thether: but being vnacquainted with such salutations as Leonato gaue them, they had him in their language, and witnessed the same by outward signes, that he should enter into their cot∣tage. Which when he had done, he saw a sonne of theirs, turning on a spit a whole Boare at the fire, and beeing by becks and nods bidden to sit downe, the woman Giant kin∣dled certaine sticks of wood, which burnt as light as anie candles: then couerd shee a great table, and set the whole Boare vppon it, as wee doo vsually any dish for seruice. By this time had Leonato stept forth, and (vpon this cour∣teous entertainment) brought thether his faire Lady Can∣dida, and although he nor she vnderstoode these Giants lan∣guage, yet by such signes as they made to them, they sate downe with them at the table, and fed very hungerly vpon the meate, by reason their appetite very well serude them, and their drink was cleare fountaine water, whereof they had plenty néere to that cottage. The Giant well noting the beauty of Candida, became surprized there-with in such vehement manner, as diuers times he would gladly haue embraced her: but that he behelde, how Leonato fed with his armour on, & his sword hanging still by his side, where∣fore he determined, to dispossesse him of the Lady while he should sléepe. So, without any euident appearance of loue to her, sup∣per being ended, he shewed them a pallet of leaues, where∣on they should rest so well as they could: now by reason the night before, and all the whole day had béene very molestu∣ous to them, they slept so soundly, that the Giant might the more easily carrie thence Candida, as indéede he did, with∣out any knowledge of the Lady her selfe. Into a néere ad∣ioyning
thicket he caried her, which him selfe had planted with his owne hands, where hee found the Ladies beauty so piercing to him, as he durst not awake her: by which happy meanes, Candida was preserued from dishonour, for otherwise this shamelesse man, making no account of hu∣mane behauiour, if he could not by faire meanes haue com∣passed his desire, in brutish manner he would haue rauisht her. Leonato sléeping still profoundly, dreamed that a great Serpent would haue deuourde him aliue, hauing gotten his foote already in his mouth, at which very instant, the Giantesse (full of iealous fury) hauing noated the vnman∣lie acte of her husband, came and wakened Leonato, say∣ing. Arise Sir Knight, or else thy Lady will be dishonou∣red. Leonato started vp like one halfe franticke, & missing his Candida, perceaued by signes which the Giantesse made, that her husband had caried her into a Cops hard by: and lacing his helmet suddainly on, hee went according as the Giantesse directed him, and hauing gone about halfe a mile in the thicket, hee heard the voyce of his Candida, saying: Help me O heauen, that I be not dishonoured by this beast∣lie man. These words added such wings to his hast, that he came quickly to them, and found the Giant on his knees before Candida, vsing infinite perswasions to obtaine his purpose. Leonato stept vppon him in such fury, without giuing any warning for the defence of him selfe, (as the duty of Knight∣hoode partly commaundeth) he lifted vp his sword to smite off his head: and doubtlesse had done it, but that the Gian∣tesse (repenting she had guided thether the Knight) cried out. Oh holde your hand Sir, and doo not depriue my husband of his life, albeit in iustice his merit is no lesse. Now although he vnderstoode not what she saide, yet he perceaued, that shee was loath to haue her husband slaine, wherefore he helde his hand, and spared the Giant: who rising vp in an extreame rage, and purposing to be reuen∣ged
on the Knight, ranne presently to his Cottage, where he buckled on a great Shéelde, and a mighty long sworde, and lacing on his helmet, which after the auncient fashion was without any beauer, he returned to Leonato, who held faire Candida by the hand, right kindly appeasing her for∣mer gréefe and feare. Fond Knight (quoth the Giant) Ile teach thée the price of hindering my pleasure, and drawing his sworde, smote first at the Lady, who fearefully fell backward, which fall so outragiously madded Leonato, that deliuering a maine full stroke at the Giant, he cleft his Shéelde quite through the middest, the one halfe falling downe on the ground, and the blow sliding downe with no meane force, pierced quite through the armour vnder his side, and gaue the Giant two little hurts. But he returned a shrewde requitall with his heauie long sworde, which lighting rudely on his helmet, smote him downe in a traunce, and the Giant making vse of that aduantage, caught him vp on his necke, intending to drowne him in the neere adioyning Fountaine: yet as he went along, hee looked on bright Candida, who (fearing now to be rauished indeede) seeing her Knight in such a de∣sperate case, fled a pace from the Giant, hoping in short while to get out of his sight. Hée purposing at one instant to ridde him selfe of the Knight, and haue the Lady in his owne possession, threwe Leonato against the ground so cruelly, as the very fall had béene sufficient to haue slaine him: but by great good for∣tune, the Giantesse hauing layd together, boughs, leaues, and little shrubbes in diuers parts of the Wood, to serue them for fewell in the Winter season: it was his chaunce to light on one of those heapes, so that he had no great harme by the fall, albeit the Giant hoped the contrary, who pur∣suing Candida, had soone ouer-taken her, but that the hurts in his side were some hinderance to him. The Lady posting on the wings of her strong feare, gay∣ned a good distaunce of ground, in which space, Leonato be∣ing of a very great spirit, recouered againe, yet ouercome
with extreamity of gréefe, least Candida (whom he could no where behold) was become a pray to the Giants base lust. As he gazed round about him onely to espie her, he saw her come running mainly toward him, and the Giant follow∣ing, but somewhat further off: with exceeding ioy he ranne to meete her, and taking her by the hand, opposed him selfe to defend her against the Giant, who came with an abso∣lute intent to haue slaine him: but hee hauing felt the Gi∣ants stearne force, auoyded his strokes cunningly, and sca∣ping one blow made so mainly at him, as the point of the Giants sword stabd farre into the earth, he followed this opportunity, and smote the helmet quite off from his head, though it cost him a wound in the flanke for his labour, so soone as the Giant had fréed his sworde againe, and after∣ward another vpon his left shoulder, from both which hurts the blood issued forth very liberally. Leonato tooke this somewhat straungely, and began to consider with him selfe, that all this was too little for his Ladies safety: yet if in this conflict he should loose his life, and shee afterward be by him brutishly abused, his soule could endure no greater a torment. Where-vpon, trauer∣sing light about from place to place, and temporizing his owne trauaile, to kéepe him selfe still in some state of abili∣ty, that the Giant (by the liberall expence of his blood, which drild downe his armour a pace from his woundes) might haue the lesse meanes to hold out against him, he found this his likeliest course of preuailing: but the Giant feeling his strength to weaken more and more, leapt vpon Leonatoes backe, and catching him fast about the neck, strugled very hard to ouer-throw him, but then he grasping the Giant a∣bout the body, wroong him strongly by very meere force, that they both fell together vpon the ground, yet Leonatoes good hap was to be vppermost. Now was he in greater pe∣rill then before, for the Giantesse, seeing her husband ready to be slaine, caught vp a great braunch of a tree lying by her, & running to Leonato triumphing ouer the Giant, thought to beate out his braines there-with, that he might not stab
her husband with his dagger, which hee held ready for the purpose in his hand. When Candida saw the desperate ha∣zard of her Louer, she cryed out aloude, that he should take héede of that bloodie minded Woman, and Leonato percei∣uing his imminent perrill, spurning her backward with his foote, ordered the matter in such sort with the Giant, that he stabd his weapon quite thorow his hart: and tur∣ning afterward to the Giantesse, had giuen her such correc∣tion as her trecherie deserued, but that she ran behind Can∣dida, and falling on her knées to her, entreated her to begge pardon for her of her Knight. The pittifull-minded Lady, perceiuing how Leonato intended to kill her, desired him to remit her trespasse, cō∣mitted but in the defence of her husbands life: which proo∣ued to be the safety of the Giantesse, for Leonato hearing himselfe intreated by her, who might cōmaund him to ven∣ture through any danger whatsoeuer, said, hee would wil∣lingly saue her life, but shee should goe along with him to England. So, binding her hands, they went with her to the Cottage, where finding her young sonne, he bound him by the féete also, least he should scape from him, then made hée signes to the Giantesse, that she should prepare some-what for them to eate: she stepping presently to a safe, wherein she vsed to kéepe her prouision, brought forth a yoūg Fawne and two little Boares, which the young Giant & his Mo∣ther drest in such manner, as they were quickly prouided of a dinner. Hauing fed thereon so long as they pleased, they rested themselues there for all that day, and at the entreaty of the Giantesse and her sonne, they gaue buriall to her hus∣bands dead body, finding them likewise ready and willing to depart thence with them and goe for England. At night they supt againe with such prouision as they had, and early in the morning set onward on their way, the Giantesse and her sonne still going before them, loden with fresh water and other necessaries for trauaile: so comming at last by easie iourneyes to Cales, they there tooke shipping, and sayled toward England.
CHAP. LXXXIIII. Howe Leonato (with his faire Candida) arriued in England, where their marriage was sollemnized with very great royaltie. Also how the young trauayling Knights, with them of greater yeeres & experience, returned (the most part of them) to the Emperours Court at Constantinople. LEonato had such prosperous wind and weather, that in fewe dayes hee landed on the Coast of England, where beeing knowne for grand-child to the King their Soueraigne: through all places as he past, hee was entertained with excéeding great honor, and (for his sake) his beauteous Can∣dida, to whō he shewed the bra∣uerie of his Country. When these newes were brought to the King Don Edward, hee acquainted faire Flerida his Quéene there-with, and appointed that most part of the English Nobilitie, should ride to meete them tenne miles from the Citty of London: himselfe accompanied with his greatest Lords & Barons, rode out of the Cittie aboue two miles, where méeting with his graund-sonne, and bright Candida riding hand in hand, hee wondred to behold two such goodly creatures, but especially, faire Candidaes beau∣tie amazed him, so that he began (almost) to be sicke of the Emperour Primaleons doating disease. But his minde bée∣ing enriched with extraordinary vertues, hee checkt such lawlesse lasciuious desires, and hauing doone royall saluta∣tions to either, would by no meanes suffer thē to dismount, but turning his horse, with Leonato on his right hand, and Candida on the left, so rode hee backe to the Cittie of Lon∣don: where, at theyr entrance into ye gate, they met Quéene
Flerida and her traine of Ladies, she hauing long desired to sée Leonato, because it was often told her, that he much re∣sembled her Father, Palmerin d' Oliua, his perfect Image appearing so liuely in this young Prince, as if himselfe had at that instant béene liuing. So rode they thorow the Cittie (with much ioy and de∣light) toward the Pallace, the people expressing all sub∣iect-like loue and reioycing: for since the returne of King Edward into England, after his recouery by ye precous oynt∣ment, there was no other talke but of mirth & iouissaunce. Many gallant shewes and deuises were performed in the stréetes, so that it was long before they came to ye Pallace, where King Edward (taking Candida by the hand) conduc∣ted her vp into the Presence, spending the rest of this day in courtly reuelling and pleasure. The King perceiuing Leonatoes earnest desire, to haue the marriage sollemnized betwéene him and Candida, cal∣led his Lords to councell, to vnderstand their oppinions in the case: where it was concluded, that the next Sonday en∣suing, it should be performed, with the greatest sollemnitie that could be deuised. As it was appointed, so was it accō∣plished, for I purpose not to tell yee perticulerly the whole royaltie of the marriage: because the other young Knights errant, being likewise enamoured of beautifull Ladies, for whose sakes they haue past through many perrillous ad∣uentures, calls me to discourse of them awhile. Oliuanto who left Constantinople, when his Father Flo∣rendos and he seuerally intended, to trauaile in the recoue∣rie of the faire Argentina, trauailed through diuers strange Countries, without stay or contradiction in any part, til at length he happened to the place where the Adamant Castle some-time stoode, and because that Field was vnfurnished of trées, the Sunne at mid-day shone so hotely on him, as it scalded him through his Armour. Heereupon hee alighted from his horse, and shadowing himselfe among the stones of the ruined Castell, hee found himselfe drawne and knit thereto with such violence, as hee could by no meanes get
from thence: whereat he meruailing not a little, stroue to créepe from the stones by his vtmost strength, but he found himselfe bound thereto the faster. Béeing vexed in minde at this strange accident, and studying how he should accomplish the rest of his intended trauaile, a Swaine of the country passing that way, when he sawe the Knight fastened to the stones in such sort, with his Mattocke on his necke hee came to him, saying: Sir Knight, you can neuer part hence, except yee put off your Armour, for this is the Adamant stone, which drawes all kinde of yron to it. Now was his griefe far greater then before, when hée heard that he must needes leaue his Armour behind him, which was to sted him in all perrils, whatsoeuer: and loo∣king better on the place, he perceiued that the same tower or Castell had stoode there, wherein desiring the Peazant further to resolue him, he told him: Howe Drusa Velonna by magicall arte, had built a Castell there on a Rocke of Adamant, and kept therein a Lady of the Grecian Court, whom a Knight of the same Court had deliuered and borne thence. Héereby Oliuanto conceiued, that doubtlesse the Ladie was Argentina, for he knew of the fréedom of the other two before, but he could not imagine who the Knight should be: and séeing he must néedes part with the losse of his armour, he asked the Country-man, if there were no way to gette loose without losse of his Armes. At that very instant, one of the Ladies, who had beene prisoner in the Castell with Ar∣gentina, riding by the place, and séeing the Knight so faste∣ned by his Armour, trotted her Palfrey thether, saying. The curtesie of Prince Florian, in fréeing me and other La∣dies out of this ruined Tower, where wee were enchaun∣ted with faire Argentina, bindes mee to lend yee such assi∣stance, as you shall follow your knightly affaires, and yet not leaue your Armour héere. So, alighting frō her horse, shee tooke a Crimosine Mantle which was wrapt about her, and spreading it ouer Oliuanto and his Squire, the
Adamant immediatly yéelded and lost his vertue, whereby they were at their former libertie. As they rode thence in company of the Lady, shee told Oliuanto at large, in what manner Florian had ended the aduenture, and because his thoughts were altogether ad∣dicted to sée his déere affected Auriana, (who gladly would haue stayed him from pursuing this aduenture, but that hée presently told her, how a Knight should shunne no occasion whatsoeuer, whereby to rancke him-selfe among those of greatest merrit) séeing the Lady ready to ride from him at a crosse-parting way, right curteously he tooke his farewel of her, with hartie thanks for stedding him in so vrgent an necessitie. And béeing come to the Sea-side, he was soone prouided of shipping, sayling in short while to Constantinople, where he was honourably welcommed: especially by his Ladie Auriana, as one right ioyfull of his high good fortunes, and hoping of spéedie attainement of their long desired ioyes. In this time of generall contentation, the Emperor had sent tidings through most parts of the world, to aduertise his Knights, that the thrée Ladies (stolne from the Courte by Drusa Velonna,) were againe recouered: and therefore they should repayre to his Court, because hee would haue none absent at such a meete time of ioying, wherby it hap∣pened, that many were come in againe in very short while. The first was Berolde, King of Spayne, who hearing of his Daughters deliuerance, poasted with spéede toward Con∣stantinople, meeting by the way with Caro and Armindo, who had lost much labour in search of the Princesse, & hea∣ring now such gladsome tydings, returned with Berolde, without staying any where till they came at Constantinople, Berolde reioycing not a little at the sight of his Daughter. Soone after came newes, how in one Ship were come to∣gether, Don Rosuell, Francian, Fortenbracio, and Orino: but because Don Rosuell was of especiall estéeme in the Court, many Lords & Knights rode to welcome him, bring∣ing him to the Pallace very honorably.
As they were entring the gate, they beheld a Knight who had come by Land, and staying to be further resolued who he was, when he came neerer them, his Caske being open, they knew him to be Forcino, the sonne of Dragonal∣te, who by his owne guiltie destenie, was the amourous seruaunt to faire Spina of Fraunce: but shee beeing proude and curious, would neuer acknowledge any of his knightly seruices, wherefore he liued in very desperate estate for her loue. These youthful gallants being thus come to ye Court, the Emperours ioyes excéedingly encreased, to sée them in this noble manner about him, whom they loued as if hee had beene their Father. While the Court was in this ouer-flow of pleasure, one day as they sate in the Hall together, there entred a Da∣mosell, attended on by two comely Squires, who hauing doone dutious reuerence to the Emperour, deliuered him a Letter, which beeing read by Palmerin, appeared to come from Don Edward the King of England, & importing a fur∣ther message to be deliuered by the Damosell, the Empe∣rour commaunded her to speake her minde, where-vppon she began in this manner. High and mightie Lord, King Edward of England in loue salutes yée, with all this gallant and knightly assembly: entreating your Maiestie, to pardon the offence of his graund-sonne Leonato, in presuming to beare hence the beautifull Candida, toward whom he hath demeaned him∣selfe like a vertuous Knight, & married her in the presence of King Edward and his Quéene. The Emperour, who since the comming of Aliarts Letter, had heard no other ty∣dings of this matter, but doubted least some mishap might betide Candida, though not by Leonato, (of whose honour and good cariage he neuer doubted) yet by some other sini∣ster meanes: when he heard of their happy beeing in Eng∣land, and that King Edward spake in theyr behalfe, whom he could not (with honour) any way contradict, he thus re∣plied. Say to our louing Lord & friend, that Leonato may returne to Constantinople safely at his good pleasure, since
his behauiour hath béen so noble and knightly, assuring him we are no way displeased with him: wherefore we commit you Lady to your good rest, allowing your returne to Eng∣land when it shall please your selfe. I desire no rest at all (quoth the Damosell) till I haue deliuered in your presence Lord Leonato, and his vertuous wife the Princesse Candida: so descending the steppes, and passing forth of the Citty, in lesse then two houres shee re∣turned againe, accompanied with Leonato and his Ladie, who entring hand in hand into the Hall, each one with chéerefull countenaunce entertained them: onely his Fa∣ther Palmerin excepted, who had not yet forgot the iniuri∣ous spéeches, which his sonne had so rashly giuen the Em∣peror. But Leonato, feigning as if he discerned it not, stept before the Emperour, who taking both him and Candida vp from off their knees, kissed both their fore-heads: marie he bestowed two kisses on Candida, in remembrance of the loue he some-time bare her, whereat there grew a generall smiling, in regard that his minde still serued him to be en∣amoured, though all the powers else of his bodie denied it. The elder Knights betooke themselues to rest, but the younger delicate bloods, whose soules did liue in the fayre eyes of theyr Mistresses, they stroue by all possible meanes to purchase theyr fauours, hoping one day, (with the Em∣perours gracious consent) to enioy them in mariage. But leaue we this iocond Court in the height of felicitie, and let vs speake now of Franardo and ye other Giants, that went to conquer the Ile of the bottomlesse Lake, tearmed in the former parts of this Historie, the Profound Ile.
CHAP. LXXXV. Howe Dramusiande, Franardo, Almaroll, and For∣zato, trauailed to conquer the Iland of the bottom∣lesse Lake, and what happened to them in the at∣tempt. DRamusiande, beeing first accom∣panied with his sonne, and after∣ward happening on Almaroll & Forzato, according as hath béene alreadie declared, when they had acquainted him with theyr intention, of going to conquere the fore-named Iland, hee said: That theyr hap was very good to meete with him, because if they would goe to the Ile of the bottomlesse Lake, hee could en∣forme them of a place there, which was onely manifested to him by his Aunt Eutropa. For there was a water, which might not be passed with any boate or vessell made of wood, but it must be hewen out of a stone which is lighter then wood, and was made onely by his Aunt herselfe, and kept with great circumspection in his Castell: and (the reason hereof was) because they were to passe a certaine water, which (cōtrary to the nature of all other waters) sent forth continuall flames of fire, and presently consumed any boate of wood. Hee tolde them beside, that this Iland was possest by a progenie of sterne bloody Giants, who had forcibly taken it from his father Frenaque: but that which most of all im∣ported their paynes, was the horrid and strange enchaunt∣ments in the Ile, which his Aunte Eutropa had not the po∣wer to finish, but had left certaine aduertisements with him in writing, which being coupled with theyr valour, would
giue them the greater hope of victory, and the booke of these aduertisements he kept in his owne Castell. These outward appearances of so great difficulty, kin∣dled such forward desires in the Giants, that they could not be quiet till they came thether: wherefore they earnestly entreated Dramusiande, not to slowe time in hastening to the Ile, least some other might rob them of the honour of this aduenture. Franardo would gladly haue stolne thether alone, to dispossesse the rest of so much honour, as in such an high enterprise might well be expected: but hearing that the glory deuided among foure, in conquering so many Gi∣ants and dangerous perrills, was as great as if one man should end an enchauntment, he yéelded the more willing∣lie to trauaile altogether. So in lesse then foure dayes they came to Dramusiandes Castell, where resting them selues one day, the boate was made ready for their passage on the fierie water, and conuayed to such a place, as without any contradiction they might set thence: and hauing put vp the booke in his bosome, they furnished them selues with the best armour which was to be had, because they should stand in great néed thereof. The boat being brought to the mouth of the Lake, they as yet rode all along by the waters side, because them selues being weighty, would not endanger it against the craggie rockes, which rising somewhat high in the Riuer, might the sooner breake it. Hauing ridden so farre as they thought conuenient, they left their Horses with their Squires, and went aboord with∣out any Mariners: for the boate only mooued by the words (which Dramusiande reade in the booke) and flew with such swiftnes, as if it had béene an arrowe through the ayre. When it came to the flaming Lake, the very stoutest a∣mong them began to be astonned, for the flames did folde a∣bout them in such strange manner, as if they felt their ar∣mour on fire about them, and the boate it selfe was so ex∣treamely hot, that they could abide by no means to touch it. So that they had béene in most miserable estate, if the boat had not made such extraordinarie expedition, and floating
along still through the fierie flames, at last it came to a very coole water, which was no meane comfort in quallifying their long heate: there did they discerne the Iland not farre off, and Dramusiande reading in other places of the booke, caused the boate to stay a while, as meaning not to passe to the Iland till the next morning, because being ignorant of the créekes and reaches, the Giants might worke some treacherie to them in the night time. Abiding there vpon this determination, they spent the time in conferring with Dramusiande, how they should sort them selues together for the combates, because they knew not how many Giants they were to fight withall: wherein Dramusiande resolude them so farre as he could, saying (as he had learned by his Aunt) that they vsed not to weare a∣nie strong Armour, so rested they for this night, without any treacherie or inconuenience. In the morning they a∣waked very early, and went towarde the Iland, Dramu∣siande reading such words of Arte, as made the boate goe merily thether, and there they entended to be the sooner, because the Giants might not lay their traynes abroade, to endanger their lyues before their landing, but rather that they might steale vpon them vnséene. At Sunne rising, the bate shot into a little bay of the Ile, and our foure Giants, armed at all points for their purpose, with their Shéeldes strongly fastened on, and very ponderous Axes in theyr hands, went foorth vppon the shoare, and espying a great Tower in the midst of the Iland, thether they shaped their course directly. Not farre had they gone, but they were e∣spied by two young Giants, who were thus early going on hunting, and imagining they would offer them no resi∣staunce, they perceaued presentlie they came to assayle them. Franardo desirous to cope with them first, stept formost to méete them, and receaued two arrowes vpon his Armour, which being of sound proofe, withstoode their entrance, al∣beit they made an inward denting, as if they had beene the pushes of two Launces: héereby he perceaued the strength
of those people, and how industrious they were in the feate of shooting. Boldly he stept to them, and lifting his Axe a∣gainst the formost, who had nockt another arrowe ready in his bowe, by reason he was vnarmed, he cleft him from the left shoulder downe to the flancke, so that immediatly hee tumbled downe dead: and the other (hauing neuer séene such a stroke before) was abashed when he beheld his com∣panion dead, and because he desired not the like salutation, he began to spéede away, but Franardo, (least he should giue warning to the rest in the Iland) followed, and gaue him such a cut in the head, as he was not able to runne any fur∣ther. By this time, Dramusiande and the rest were come to him, all now going together toward the Tower, and there had they arriued without any hinderance: but that a Gian∣tesse (mother to the two young Giants slaine, standing in the doore of an olde ruinous house, made of twigges and raf∣ters knit together,) espied this their mishap, and therefore cried out aloude: Oh helpe, helpe, helpe, for our enemies are entred into the Iland. At this lamentable crie, the Gi∣ants awaked, and making certaine openings in their hou∣ses, which serued them as windowes, they no sooner beheld these foure armed Giants, but they presently coniectured (as indéede it was) that these were some friends of Dramu∣siandes, of whom they liued in hourely feare, because they tooke this Iland from his Father, where-vpon they tooke vp their swords and shéeldes, and eight of them went foorth to make resistaunce, while the rest had leasure to arme them selues. When our Giants sawe these come against them, that so wondrously excéeded thē in stature, they dismayed not a iote, but albeit they were somewhat weary, with running after the yong Giant, that would haue sau'd his own life by flight, yet did they couragiously set vpon them, & with their kéene Axes sliced the others shéelds in péeces: receauing frō them again such puissant stroks, as they were hardly able to stand vnder thē, for such was their strength, as easily they might
haue dasht them in péeces, if they had béene possest of skill and agility in Armes, or could haue borne them selues with prouidence against their enemies. But being almost spent with rage and fury, thrée of them was slaine, and the rest so sore wounded, as they were not able to resist any longer, and then came forth the fiercer Giants, armed onely with a Gant-plate and their helmets, but no defence at all vpon their backs, because they had neuer seene any such armour. When these beheld the large expence of blood, of their neere alliance and respected friends, they were so outragiously in∣censed, that they coulde not expect their enemies as they should haue done, which they likewise well noting, left the other fiue, and preparing to entertaine these fierie fellowes, the greatest Giant set vpon Franardo, another smote Alma∣roll so stoutly on the helmet, that he fell downe backward in a swound. Dramusiande séeing the stearne power of the Giants, could hardly guesse what their attempt would sort vnto, and stepping before Almaroll, to sheelde him from beeing thus slaine on the ground, he gaue such a siding stroke with his Axe, as cut off one of the Giants legges, in which while Almaroll recouered, and being somwhat ashamed of his fall, began to lay about him in such sort with his Axe, that hee wounded one of them very shrewdly on the arme, albeit he was so mighty of stature, that Almaroll seemed but like a Dwarffe to him. Forzato laboured earnestly against one of them, and Franardo was twise in very great danger, but that his skill and dexterity very much holpe him, whereby he escaped many a pezant stroke, which falling on ye ground, seemed as they had lighted on a mountaine. Dramusiande seeing Franardo in great perill of his life, smote mainly at his aduersaries head, who to shun the blow of the Axe, receaude it on his Sheelde, but then Franardo giuing a thrust at his enemies belly, made so large a pas∣sage through the Cuirasse, as his bowels were ready to fall out, and he glad to stay him selfe on his sword from falling. Nowe would Dramusiande needes rid him altogether, in
succour of his sonne, who was extreamely wearied, where∣fore stepping to him, he saide: Get thee away on thy iour∣ney, since thou art so forward, for thou art but an hinde∣rance to my sonne, who is a coward if he send not another soone after thee. These words so stird vp the spirit of Franardo, that laying on loade with dauntlesse resolution, he quickly dispatcht an other after his fellow, and Dramusiande added a third to the number: so that the fight being now growne equall, foure to foure, our Giants being the better armed, and of more cunning in mannaging their weapons, had the greater ad∣uantage against the other, and brought it to such effect, as quickly had this battaile béen concluded: but that ten other Giants of lesser stature, came freshly vpon them, being lit∣tle inferiour to the other in valour, and they with theyr Boare-speares and hunting Iauelings, so sharpely beset them on euery side, as now they iudged them selues to be in great danger. Franardo hauing slaine his Giant of the foure, was round beset by foure more of these other, so that now if he not be∣stird him selfe nimbly indeede, there was no remedy but he must needes perish. Almaroll being likewise rid of his Gi∣ant, though he was wounded in the arme, yet two of these fresh commers in assaulted him, who questionlesse had slain him, if they had béene armed. Forzato hauing left his Gi∣ant but with one legge, buckled the readier with another of these ten, who had growne too strong for him, but that Al∣maroll cleauing one of his customers downe the head, and making the other almost in as able a case, succourd him a while, and then ranne to Dramusiande, who had but three at once vpon him, broaching and goaring him with theyr Launces: but he which most molested him, was soone made quiet enough, and the hastines of the other indifferently calmed, by meanes whereof he went to assist Forzato at a very narrow strait, for his helmet was so batterd and bru∣sed, that it pincht his head in so many seuerall places, as hee was constrained to take it quite off. One of those that
fought with Franardo, séeing a fellow of his somewhat op∣pressed by two of our Giants, ranne spéedily to helpe him, and then flew vpon Forzato, whom he sawe without a hel∣met. The fight continuing a long while in this manner, those thrée that opposed themselues against Franardo, séeing him (through ouer-much labour) to be very weary, not shif∣ting from place to place as before he had doone: they ringd them selues about him, and lifting him from the ground by theyr strength, meant to cary him away with them. But Dramusiande, who all the fight time had an eye to his sonne, when hee sawe him in such a desperate estate: gaue one of his enemies such a furious stroke, as cutting quite through his Sheelde, entred into his belly, and his entrayles falling foorth, him selfe tumbled deade after. To another, whose left arme he had pittifully mangled, he gaue such a suddaine fierce blowe, as cutting his Iaueling in the midst, wounded him likewise aboue the eye, whence the blood streaming forth aboundantly, he could not discerne which way he went. Being thus fréed of them, he ranne to stay those Giants that caried his Sonne away, who séeing him comming, threw Franardo against the ground, and turning vpon Dra∣musiande, he gaue them such a gentle welcome, that he cut off the formost mans left arme, and afterward ranne his sword quite through his breast. The other two affrighted at this accident, setting both their Boare-speares rudely a∣gainst his breast, cast him along on his back, and assuredly had there slaine him, but that Almaroll and Forzato (ha∣uing each slaine one of their opposed enemies, and left the rest in so weake disposition, as they were able to endure no longer against them,) came spéedily to his helpe, endange∣ring greatly their owne liues thereby, in regarde of their former wounds, fainting and wearines, whereof the other Giants not a little triumphed. But Dramusiande and Franardo recouering at one in∣stant, though both were sore brused by their falls, yet did they assaile them with such courage, as (after some fewe
blowes) they fell dead at their féete: and hauing there now no more to withstand them, they entred a house neere ad∣ioyning, appearing to be more honourable then the other, there to binde vp their wounds, and rest them selues. CHAP. LXXXVI. How two young Ladies being Giantesses, decla∣red to our wounded Knights, by what meanes they should enter into the Profound Tower, and finish the enchauntment. IN the house which our wounded Giants had entred, were many young Giantesses, two whereof séemed to be of farre greater re∣spect then the rest, who percea∣uing our Knights to be gentle, discréetly gouernd and ciuilly at∣tired, though the large effusion of their blood much altered their countenances, yet had they great compassion of them. Almaroll well noting this, and loo∣king aduisedly on them, because their lookes likewise were modest and womanlie: went vnto them, and with gentle language entreated them that they would helpe to binde vp their wounds, which appeared to be very daungerous. The young Ladies, desirous to doo them any honourable pleasure, secretly sayde: that they were very ready to cure their hurtes, prouided (for safety of their owne innocent lyues,) they would but say, that they had enforced them to this fauour. Almaroll turning backe to Dramusiande, who as yet stayed without, and entred not the house, tolde him what the Ladies had sayde vnto him, and hee entring the roome where the Ladies were, with a stearne countenaunce saide vnto them: Come quickly and helpe to dresse our wounds, for no iniurie shall be offered to your honours.
The Ladies dissembling before the rest, as if they stoode greatly in feare of them, came presently to them, and they (beeing disarmed) had very soueraigne oyles and emplai∣sters applied to their hurts, beeing handled very tenderly and with choise regarde, with promise of spéedy recouerie, because their wounds were not mortall. Dramusiande afterward sitting downe by them, demaun∣ded if there were any other Giants in the Iland, and why so many women liued together in that one house. The el∣dest of the two Ladies, showring downe teares from her eyes in great aboundance, began in this manner. Faire Sir, we two are Nieces to the Lord of this Iland, who is gone to a Castell called the Profound Tower, intending to bring hether two sonnes of his, to whom (against our wils) he will giue vs in mariage, they being the most brutish and vnciuill men, liuing at this day in any part of the worlde: and his reason héerein is, to depriue vs this way of our inhe∣ritance, and make his sonnes absolute possessours thereof. This vniust act in him, is the cause why we would other∣wayes else dispose of our selues, rather then to liue with such as are loathsome to vs: wherefore if there bee any Knights among you, that are single and vnmaried, as we are, wee will yeelde our persons and honours into their po∣wer, and kindly accept them as our husbands. When Dramusiande had heard the Ladies iust cause of gréefe, and the liberall offer they tendered withall, he tur∣ned to Franardo, saying: You sonne shall take one of these Ladies to wife, & on Almaroll I meane to bestow the other. Forzato beeing the youngest, was in hope some remem∣brance would haue beene had of him: but Franardo, who lo∣ued Grandoya, Farzatoes Sister, as hath already been be∣fore declared, stoode very silent, to the no little meruaile of his Father, and inward greefe of the young Lady, whom Franardo being loath to hold in any further suspence, sayde. My Lord and Father, I humbly entreate your pardon and the Ladies, that I haue béene so slacke in returning mine aunswere: for my thoughts being long since obliged to an
other Ladie, whose loue I can no way iustly refuse, hath béene the reason of my so long silence: but because this La∣die shall not be wrongd in her desires, I will exchange one kindnesse with Forzato, for receipt of another. I loue his faire and vertuous Sister, and that he may with the better will bestow her on mee in marriage, I am content to re∣signe my right héere to him, in enioying one of these woor∣thy Ladies. Forzato being greatly enamoured of the eldest Ladie, falling suddenly on his knee before Dramusiande, said. My Lord, I may with iust reason account my selfe fortunate, that your sonne Franardo so long hath accepted mee as his kinde companion, on whom I fréely bestow my Sister for mariage, without expectation of so gracious a requitall, which makes me to glory the more, that it was my good hap to promise him my Sister. Hauing thus spoken, he rose vp, and very louingly embraced his Brother: which Dra∣musiande perceiuing, and noating withall what speeches had béene past, appointed that Amaroll and Forzato should espouse the two Ladies, who béeing likewise pleased to their owne harts contentment, returned backe to theyr Chamber, to certefie vnto the rest of the Giantesses, that they had no other conference, but of curing the Knights wounds. Soone after, our Knights sent for them againe, to gather some enstructions from them, how they should beare them∣selues against the Lord of the Iland, and compasse the en∣ding of the enchauntment: but still the case was cunning∣ly couered, & Dramusiande sent twise imperiously for them, whereby the rest coniectured, that they were forcibly con∣strained to come to them, which the Ladies as queintly fit∣ting by their behauiour, gaue them to vnderstand. That a Giant, sometime a seruant to their Father, but now atten∣ding on the Lord of the Iland, as being his Nephew, was newly there arriued, and told them, that his vnckle would not returne backe till tenne dayes were expired: But be∣cause the slaughter of the Giants was reuealed to him, that
night he would carrie newes thereof to his vnckle. Wher∣fore the Ladies aduised them to lay hold on him, that hee might not be the messenger of such tidings to his Lord, so should they haue the more time for curing their hurts: and hee returning without intelligence of his losse, could make the lesse prouision for his mishap, because any aduantage a∣gainst him was held for good, in regard hee was of such in∣comparable valour, that tenne other of his greatest Giants could not stand against him, and his sonnes likewise were very valiant, beside diuers other in his company of singuler prowesse. Concerning the enchauntment, they must preserue the Vnckles life, who onely knewe the meanes howe to con∣found it, albeit his taking would be somewhat troublesome to them, and hardly should they make him confesse, how the enchauntment was to be concluded. Then calling Franar∣do, forth at the window they shewed him the house, where the late-come Giant had hidden himselfe, and kissing theyr espoused Lordes, tooke their leaue againe to auoyde suspiti∣on. Our Knights, after they had dined, with theyr swordes and Shieldes they went forth of the roome, demaunding of all the women they met, if there were any more Giants in the Iland, and they made aunswere still that there were none. Dramusiande, feigning as if hee beléeued them not, went straite to the house which ye Ladies had shewed him, where suddainly entring, he found the Giant, who (being wearie with his iourney) slept very soundly: without making any noise they bound him hands and feete, that when hee awa∣ked, they might menace him with death if hee kept not si∣lence. So laid they him aside in another Chamber, where none of the women should come to him, & at night brought him into their owne lodging, where they attended the hea∣ling of their hurts, being daily visited by the Ladies diuers times, giuing them further instructions from time to time, how with honour they might reach ye height of their desires.
CHAP. LXXXVII. How the Lord of the Iland came thether, and of the victory which our Knights obtained against him and his. OVr high resolued Knights, had their hurts no sooner healed, but a Barque put into the port, hauing in it the sonnes of the Lordly Gi∣ant, who came to delight them∣selues with the Ladies, that the more contentedly they might ac∣cept them in marriage. But For∣zato, who alwayes stoode as Cen∣tinell for the speedier arming of themselues vppon the Giants arriuall, hauing espyed the Barque a farre off, gaue the rest of his friendes warning to prepare themselues: then going all closely downe ye Port, they stoode behind a ruined Cottage, onely to haue them come on land, least by sight of them they should turne back againe, and thereby haue falne into such manifest danger, as (with life) they could neuer haue departed thence. The two young Giants being landed, with tenne other in their company, hauing no other defence then their Shieldes, and huge long swords, they tooke toward the house where the Ladies were, which our Knights percei∣uing, boldly stept forth before them, saying. Friends, whe∣ther goe ye? We goe (quoth one of them) to our owne aby∣ding: but bolde theeues, what make you heere in our coun∣trey? That ye shall soone know, replied Dramusiande, and all (with their weapons drawne) went presently against them. When the Giants sawe themselues so fiercely assailed, they stoode vppon their owne guarde, and deliuered such stroakes, that our Knights hauing had good experience of
them before, right cunningly auoided them, and wounded them at their owne pleasure, they hauing no skill in the vse of their weapons. But yet our Knights were sorry, for not bringing theyr Axes with them, which they had left aboue at their lodging, and might cause the Ladies thereby to be suspected, if any one should escape and get thether: but the reason why they brought them not along with them, was, that the other women in the house, imagining they went a∣broad but to walk, should not looke forth to espy ye Barque, and by their out-cryes haue hindered these other Giants from landing. Neuerthelesse, so well they handled the mat∣ter with their swords, that they wounded sixe of these new come Giants, and they would haue fled, but that the two young Lordes cheerely encouraged them, with vndoubted hope of vanquishing their enemies. The battaile thus continuing, one of the bretheren, bée∣ing runne by Franardo quite through the face, fell downe dead, and brake Franardos sword hard at the handle, as hée fell mainly vppon his weapon: whereat the other Brother growing mad & desperate, caught Franardo in his armes, and by reason hee excéeded him in strength, hee gotte him downe vnder him, and striuing to open his Helmet, purpo∣sed to kill him. Franardo beholding his owne extreame pe∣rill, gript his enemie so strongly by the bottome of his bel∣lie, as he (féeling his breath to faile him) let goe his holde, whereby Franardo tumbled him on his backe, and getting aloft vppon him, meant presently to dispatch him: but now hee was in greater hazzard then before, for two other Gi∣ants, who had dealt with Dramusiande very shrewdly, came running in resew of their Lorde, and Franardo per∣ceiuing they purposed to help him, slew him out right with his dagger, being scarcely vpon his féete when the two Gi∣ants set mainly on him, the one before, the other behinde him, forcing him to fall along on the ground, where they had forth-with slaine him, but ye Dramusiande came quick∣ly to assist him, who stepping betwéene them and his sonne, receiued their furious blowes vppon himselfe, till hee was
got vp againe, and beeing more offended with shame of his disgrace, then any paine he felt by their strokes, beganne to buckle the closer to his enemies. And nowe the fight be∣wraied an other kind of course, for Franardo smiting downe one of them dead at a blowe, left his Father hand to hand with the other, running to ayde Forzato, who contended with two, and was almost driuen quite out of breath: but he entring among them, gaue one of them such a salutation on the Helmet, as cleauing it thorow, the weapon entred a pretty way into his head, albeit himselfe was soone cha∣stised for it, for the Giant (being of greatest courage among them all) feeling that he must needes fall downe to ye earth, in his sincking, caught Franardo by one legge, and lyfted him vp so powerfully, that hee had dasht out his braines a∣gainst a great Béech-tree: but more by great good hap then otherwise, Franardo catcht holde with his handes on the boughes of the tree, and smote the Giant with his foote so mainely on the breast, as made him to stagger back aboue sixe paces, in which while, he leapt downe light on his féet, nothing frighted or amazed, with this terible swindge. His aduersary meruailing hereat not a little, & reckoning him∣selfe past hope of life, beckned with his hand to Franardo, as desirous to speake with him: so ceassed the battaile, for thrée other of the Giants remaining aliue, hauing likewise noa∣ted this admirable act, stept backe and held theyr handes, they being kinsmen to the Lord of the Ile. Dramusiande going to the Giant that requested parley, spake thus vnto him. Know that I am Dramusiande, sonne to the deceassed great Lord Frenaque, from whom you tooke this Iland trayterously, and nowe I am come to claime it as my right, beeing constrained to recouer it by force of armes, whē gentle perswasions would not serue to obtaine it. Fosco, for so was the Giant named, considering that of tenne there nowe remained but foure aliue, and they also could expect nothing else but death, replyed: that hee was ready in assisting him to recouer his owne, but Tirso (bee∣ing Lord of the Ile) was so proude and valiant, as by no
meanes he would yéeld to anothers possession. It shal suffise me (quoth Dramusiande) yt you binde your selues to me by faith and knighthood, to stand no further on his part against me. We will not meddle any more against you, replied the Giant, and made him sollemne promise to keepe theyr word. Why then (quoth Dramusiande) will I in such sort commend you to the great Emperour of Constantinople, as hee shall enrich you with larger possessions, then euer Tirso could bestowe on yée. The Giant protested, that as they woulde not pertake against Tirso, so they woulde not im∣peache any course he could take, where by to compasse his owne determination. Dramusiande and his friendes were well pleased with this contract, to declare that they stoode in neede of no other helpe, so leauing theyr weapons with them, the Giants went to a place of theyr owne abiding, so farre remote from the lodging of our Knights, as they could not discerne when the young Ladies came to visite theyr Lords. After this accord, they likewise returned to rest themselues, hauing vnderstoode by these Giants, that it would be tenne daies before the arriuall of Tirso, whereof they were very highly contented: not in regard of any dangerous hurts receiued, but because they were much trauailed & wearie, for which quiet rest was the onely remedie. The Ladies still prouided them of all necessaries, often accompanying them to theyr contentment, whereby the other Giantesses suspitiously gathered, that they bore some fauouring inclination to these strangers, expressing no sor∣row or griefe at all, for the slaughter of theyr friendes and kindred, but rather seemed enamoured of our Knights, which closely they concealed to themselues, expecting daily the comming of theyr Lord. Our Knights hauing recouered their former alacritie of spirit, kept hourely watch on the Port, that when Tirso came, he might not get to the Tower: because the Ladies had enformed them, howe there was no possibilitie of euer surprising, or finishing the enchauntment, if hee in person
came to the defence of it. Almaroll being the first that shooke off his distemper, the night ensuing was watch-man of the Port, and on the mor∣rowe by three a clocke, he espied a spread sayle making to∣ward the Iland, whereof giuing his associates immediate warning, they comforted themselues with precious confec∣tions and other good meates, that they might with better ablenes hold out the fight, arming themselues nowe for all aduantages, not forgetting theyr kéene Axes, and other yron engines which they founde in the Giants Armorie, where-with they went downe to the Port, standing closely ambushed as they did before, that the Giant might not de∣scry them before his landing. No sooner was Tirso (and seauen Giants more with him) come on shoare, but our resolued Knights stept foorth against him, and without vsing any words at all, opposed theyr weapons boldly to withstand him. Tirso, who neuer was bard of his passage till this instant, angerly drew his weapon vpon our Knights, and lighting first vpon Forzato, made him tumble backward ouer and ouer. Dramusiande would next haue dealt with Triso, but his sonne Franardo, doubting least his Father (being weakened with the imbe∣cilitie of age) could not stand against this lustie, strong, and sterne Giant, vndertooke his place, beeing roughly wel∣commed for his presumption with so rude a stroake, as al∣most had smitten him quite out of breath, whereby hée soone perceiued, that if hee became the buckler but to fewe such blowes, his life must be the conclusion of the bargaine. Héere-vppon, he smote at him stoutly with his Axe, and his Armour being but a weake defence against the blowe, hee gaue him a déepe wound, and made him stand off from approching so neere him, albeit whensoeuer Tirso aunswe∣red any stroake againe, he found it layd on with no meane proofe. Dramusiande had thrée of the other Giants confron∣ting him, and resisted them but with slender sufficiencie: Almaroll and Forzato vndertooke the other foure, and well found that they had no loytering labour in hand.
The Ladies looking foorth, & séeing our Knights so hard∣ly matched, began to growe iealous of theyr owne safetie, if Tirso in the end should gaine the victory, wherefore they ranne to the thrée other Giants, which had yéelded before to our Champions, who beholding the manifest perill they were in, knew not how to conceiue of their owne security, but held it for most certaine, that Tirso woulde be most ri∣gorous to them, because they had not yet stept foorth in his assistance. This terror in the Ladies much more augmen∣ted, by alleaging the passed cruelties of Tirso, and how ty∣rannously he maintayned his gouernment ouer thē: which the sooner incited them to ayde our Knights, to whom they came at a very narrowe straite, for Dramusiande was in such extreamitie, that hardly he could support himselfe from falling, which Fosco perceiuing, cryed out aloude to him: Feare not my Lord Dramusiande, for I will be better then my promise which I made to ye. Thus came the battaile to an equalitie againe, no doubt to the great vexation of Tirso, séeing his owne subiects to pertake against him: but now was no time for threates or stearne speeches, which made him therefore to fight ye more furiously, bringing Franardo to so many hazzards, as hee was very often in danger of miscarrying, yet this impaci∣ence of his prooued his owne hurt, for spending his vigour in furie and madnes, without any intermission or respite for breathing, his blowes began to fall the more faintly, which Franardo making very good vse of, and cherrishing his own strength by the others weakening, pursued him still vppon so many aduantages, as the Giant beganne to despaire of victory. By this time had Dramusiande so wounded his enemie in the brest, that it was too late to call for a Chirurgion, and Fosco likewise hauing slaine his encoūtrer, they came both to Tirso sighting with Franardo, to whom Dramusiande spake in the Gréek tongue, that hee should not at any hand kill the Giant, but practise howe to surprise him aliue, o∣therwise, they should neuer gaine the rule of the Iland.
So, they thrée cirkling him round about, seuerally laide hand on him, and binding him fast with two long chaines, which the Ladies had sent them, made him past ability of any further resistance. When the two Giants that fought with Forzato and Almaroll, saw the surprizing of their Lord, they fell to a very desperate course of fight, because they stoode hopelesse of any mercy, but Fosco spake in this man∣ner to them. Forbeare my brethren this angry violence, and entertaine the kindnesse of these Knights, which you shall finde euery way to your owne contentment. The Giants being sore wounded and weary, vpon con∣dition of pardon, threw by their weapons and yéelded them selues: being receiued by our knights as reconciled friends, after which they led Tirso to the Ladies lodging, where their wounds were respected with all helpfull meanes pos∣sible, & Dramusiande had the charge of looking to Tirso. CHAP. LXXXVIII. Howe our Knights went to the aduenture of the Tower, & of the seuerall occasions that befell them, vntill they found the Serpent of the Sunne. BEfore tenne dayes were fully ex∣pired, since the dangerous com∣bate of our Knights with the Gi∣ants, they were very well and soundly recouered, when Dra∣musiande, causing Tirso to bee brought before him, thus spake vnto him. If thou be dreadlesse of death, which I am determined thou shalt endure, mittigate the sharpnes thereof by thine owne meanes, and tell me truly, how the enchauntment of the Tower may soonest be con∣cluded. Tirso, who well knew, that while the enchaunt∣ment lasted, he could not be depriued of the dominion of the
Iland, aunswered: that hee was vtterly ignorant thereof, and maintained his spéeches very constantly. Dramusiande presently called for a fire, and commaun∣ding certaine Tanackles or Pincers for torment to be put therein, threatned him with death in that manner, except he reuealed the enchauntment to him. The Giant, albeit he was of wondrous courage, yet when he saw such sharpe torments prepared, he began to grow fearefull, and sayde. Now doo I well perceaue, that I must iustly restore what I haue wrongfully with-held: knowe then, there are two seuerall enchauntments belonging to the Tower, and they must be vnder-taken by two of you, wherein you will finde so hard a labour, as will cost yée much sweat before yée end it: yet when yée haue gone through all manifest perils, they are to no purpose, except ye can passe thorow the mouth of a Serpent, and issuing foorth at his vent againe, goe into a Garden of frightfull terrour, where obtayning the con∣quest of that place, both the enchauntments are fully con∣cluded. When Dramusiande perceaued, that Tirso knew no fur∣ther of the incantation, he tooke the booke out of his bosome, which his Aunt Eutropa the Enchauntresse had left him, and calling Franardo along with him, they went together toward the Tower. Being come thether, they behelde di∣uers Monsters looking through the battlements, and out at the gate issued a east of so many strange formes, where into still he changed with such swiftnes, as they could not perceaue him to holde any certaine shape. After this beast came forth a Knight with two heads, turning readily to one another euery way, so that without any vse or winding of his body, they guided him whether so euer he pleased: foure armes had he beside, and in each hand a very long sworde. 2Franardo aduaunced him selfe against the Monster, which one while smote him with his horne, and then againe so readily with his pawes, as he could not deuise how to auoide the blowes: and his sword serued him but to small purpose, for hee smote as if it had béene on a flint wall, without any
appearance of the beasts féeling the strokes. Dramusiande buckled with the Knight, beeing still smitten with two swords at once, and as he sought to shunne the other two, the Monster gaue him such a blowe on the backe with his foote, as made him reele staggeringly betwéene the Knights armes, and he being but of common stature, caught him vp from the ground, running so lightly with him into the To∣wer, as if his cariage had béene of an Infant. Franardo sée∣ing his Father thus caried away, pursued him presently, and notwithstanding the Monsters resistaunces, followed the Knight into the Tower, which closed againe in such straunge manner, as there appeared no gate at all for pas∣sage. When Franardo sawe him selfe thus enclosed, he smote at one of the Knights swords, where-with hee laboured to wound his Father, and immediatly it fell out of his hand, whereby he perceaued, that the power of the Knight con∣sisted in his swordes, because by beeing dispossessed of this one, hee was not so furious as before, and beside, Dramu∣siande was againe at liberty, fighting couragiouslie with the beast, yet séeing no likely meanes howe to ouercome him. Wherefore hee turned vppon the Knight, and in little while depriued him of two more of his swordes, whereby his vigour was much enféebled, and beeing soone after robd of his last weapon, the Monster wexed in like sort disabled, because they helde a simpathie of courage, and as the one weakened, so the other in like manner followed, both run∣ning away into an obscure place, where our Knightes would not pursue them, least therein consisted some secret trecherie. Standing still to see what would ensue héere∣on, they sawe a great Barrell come tumbling downe a payre of staires, séeming by the sounde to be full of armed men, and so soone as it was on the grounde, it presentlie opened, where-out there issued tenne Hunts-men, with as manie Houndes in seuerall leashes, and rounding our two Giants as in a ring, they let slip their dogs all at once,
then drew foorth short swords hanging by their sides, and smote so fiercely at Dramusiande, as hee was in very great hazard of his life: for beside the hard vsage of these Hunters, two of the doggs had got him fast by the arme, and another had bit in sunder the laces of his helmet, so that his helmet totterd loosely vppon his head. But hauing recourse to his wonted valour, he behaued him selfe in such maner, as sha∣king his arme, hee threw off the two dogges against the wall, and the other standing vpright against his breast, he caught him fast by the throate, and had quickly strangled him, if two of the Hunters and the other doggs had not hin∣dered him, for they comming fiercely againe vpon him, set him very hardly, and both the men and dogges were so rea∣die about him, as he could not fasten one stroke vpon them. Franardo hauing all the rest on him, had hardly escapt them, but giuing a thrust by chaunce at one of the doggs mouthes, he perceaued him to giue backe and meddle no more with him, where-vpon, ayming his strokes in like manner at the other doggs, they still fell off from him, as expressing where their cheefest power consisted. But now the Hunters did him the greatest iniurie, and as yet he had not found the meanes to endamage them, nor how the enchauntment serued to defend them: yet at last, smiting one of their Hattes beside his head, hee sawe him stagger backward, and declared no willingnes to assayle him againe. These so fortunate accidents, did highly ad∣uantage both the father and the sonne, so that by wounding the dogges in the mouthes, and vnhatting the fierce Hun∣ters one after another, they were in the end depriued of any further resisting, and swallowed vp in a wide opening of the ground: out of which gulffe there presently came foorth, a beast hauing two Serpents bodies vnited together, from the very lowest parts vp to the heads. This Monster leapt betwéene the two Giants, & moun∣ting vp toward their faces, breathed foorth such an horrible smell, as they by no meanes could endure it: and although they laid on the beast lustily with their swords, yet all their
labour was spent but in vaine, and so they might haue con∣tinued God knowes how long, without any better successe of their paines: had not Dramusiande suddainly puld the booke out of his bosome, where he saw the same Monster fi∣gured with two Giants, who hauing the two heads in their hands, séemed easily to wrest them euery way, where-vpon he stept to his sonne Franardo, and shewing him the figure, they gaue ouer further contention, awayting opportunity to get néere the Monster, which when they had compassed, each of them caught a head in his hand, and writhed it as the picture had directed them. Vpon this good hap, they felt an earthquake so suddaine and terrible, as they diuers times imagined the Tower would haue falne flat vpon them, for all which terrour they would not let loose the Monster, but held fast to try the end of this meruaile. Then sawe they the earth to open where they stoode, and after thrée or foure mighty blasts of winde, a huge Dragon came vp out of the ground, which closing quickly againe vnder it, the Dragon caried them into a déepe darknes, where they felt them selues in a ready bea∣ten way, whereof the booke had before giuen them some en∣structions, & that it would guide them to a Pallace, where they should perfectly conclude the aduenture. Going on still in this comfortlesse darknes, they often smote their heads & shoulders against a stonie wall, which made them to hold their hands before them, for feare of bru∣sing or hurting their faces, and hauing béen aboue an houre in this obscurity, at last they beheld a glimmering of light, but could not discerne from whence it procéeded, albeit still the further they went on, the light encreased & grew grea∣ter. At last they came to an open dore, wherein they beheld a very splendant light, which séemed to them as if it were the Sunne: but a wondrous great Serpent obscurde the beames thereof with his wings, which extended forth in a meruailous breadth, and by their often moouing vp and downe, they caused the twinckling light which at first they beheld.
This Dragon was of such wonderfull highnes, as tenne great Giants might easily stand vpright in his belly: his mouth he held continually gaping, and thence issued foorth likewise a shining brightnes, and in faire large letters was engrauen on his head these words, THE SERPENT OF THE SVNNE. CHAP. LXXXIX. Howe Dramusiande and Franardo went into the Serpent, and afterward finished the whole aduen∣ture. DRamusiande séeing the Serpents mouth to gape so wide, hee re∣membred the former spéeches of of Tirso, and sayde to Franardo, In sooth it is a very strange case, for vs to aduenture through this horrible passage, being counsaild thereto by my deadly enemie, perhappes to remaine héere em∣bowelled for euer. Then looking behinde him, hee sawe the way which they had come to bee quite dammed vp, so that there was no turning backe againe, then onwarde they must there was no remedie: wherefore without any more a-doo, he stept into the mouth of the great Serpent, and his Sonne Franardo boldly fol∣lowed. Not long had they stayed within the Serpent, but at his vent they issued foorth againe, without any danger or hurt at all, more then of the darknesse through which they had past. Then found they them selues before a Garden gate, where-into when they entred, they behelde the strangest grafts and plants that euer were seene: for the trées were
great Giants, some planted with their heads downwarde, some vpon one foote, others vpon an arme, and some grafted one vpon another, the very least grafts or plants of all, be∣ing men of middle or common stature, and the hearbs were swords, daggers, and other bloodie weapons. When Dra∣musiande had well noted the manner of this Garden, hee reade these lines written ouer the gate. Into my Garden who dares to enter, Shall heere be planted for his bolde venter. These bug-beare threates did nothing at all discourage our Knights, who without any regarde héereof walked a∣long by these strange appearances, which moouing still to∣ward them, made an horrid noyse with their hitting one a∣gainst another, and still séemed to menace them, but did no action at all against them. Then came they to the straun∣gest Fountaine which euer was séene, for the water was of réeking blood, running swiftlie in a round compasse, and the banckes about it was the flesh of men, diuers Woolues, Beares, and other beasts came running to this Fountaine, where slaking their thirst with drinking the blood, they went and fed on humaine bodies, which were round plan∣ted about the place. As Dramusiande and his Sonne stoode beholding this ad∣mirable spectacle, they sawe the earth suddainly open, and out of it came the Serpent which had two bodies, accom∣panied with an armed Lyon, which immediatly without anie staying, flewe vpon Franardo, who as yet had not vn∣sheathed his weapon, when séeing him selfe in such perill, snatcht out his dagger, where-with he gaue manie stabbes at the beast, but yet not one of them could wound him: and very much had he béene endangered, but that by a grype he gaue the Lyon, the beast was enforced to flie off frō him, by meanes whereof he had the liberty to draw forth his sword, wherwith he both defended himselfe, & offended his enemie, but the Lyon very nimbly auoyded his blowes, and gaue
such spurnes with his feete to Franardo, as diuers times he reeled against the strange trées, which he suddenly heard to speake, saying: Repent thy selfe at leysure, for heere must thou bide and keepe vs companie. The Serpent had so roughly dealt with Dramusiande, as hee was scant able to hold out any longer, for twise hee had beene smitten downe to the ground, and so trampled on, that séeing no other likely way howe to beare off this tur∣moyle, he drew foorth his booke againe, and finding there the platforme of this Garden, he saw that he must strangle the Serpent with his handes, and then binde the Lyon: which was the Enchaunter himselfe, and if he were slaine, there was no possible meanes for conclusion of ye enchaunt∣ment, for the Serpent was the Magitians sonne, whom he had metamorphosed into that shape, for a great offence which he had committed. Dramusiande gaue his sonne aduertisement hereof, and casting by theyr weapons, they ran on the Lyon and Ser∣pent with such courage, as they beganne to be greatly af∣frighted, in séeing them take the onely way to ende the en∣chauntment by the Serpents death. Franardo held the Ly∣on hard tacke, catching him in his armes to ouerthrowe him, for else he should neuer compasse the meanes to binde him, and grasping him very hard by the throate, hee thrat∣led him in such sort, as the Lyon beeing vnable to breathe, began to shrincke backward. Franardo pursuing this good aduantage, tripping with his foote the Lyons hinder féete, he fell flat on his backe, and Franardo vppon him, and get∣ting loose his arming girdle, the Lyon beeing much aston∣ned with the fall, he bound one of his legges, which ere hée had fully doone, the Lyon getting loose his other pawe, and madly raging to be bound in that sort, hee rent the Armour off from his side: whereupon, Franardo seeing in what per∣rill he was, set his knée suddenly on the Lyons breast, and getting holde on the other legge, with much adoe bound it fast too, so did hee his other legges afterward, that he was not able to stirre any way.
In this while, Dramusiande had strangled one of the Serpents neckes, but with such difficultie, as hee was greatly annoyed by the other, and scantly could stirre with extreame wearines: wherefore Franardo being as valiant a Giant as any then liuing, caught the Serpent by the o∣ther neck, and held him so strongly, that presentlie he died. Then was such a terrible thunder and earthquake, and the ayre so wondrously darke on a sudden, as they were not a∣ble to discerne one another, but when the darkenesse was vanished away, they sawe the Lyon changed to a man of fourescore yéeres old, but bounde both by the armes & legs, humbly entreating the Giant to vnbinde him, promising him to finish the enchauntment: but Dramusiande willing to be altogether directed by his booke, found, that hee must not vnbinde the old man, vntill the strange Garden were first quite ruined, wherefore stepping angerly to the olde man, he tooke him by the bosome, threatning to stab him with his dagger, whereat the Wizzard wexing somewhat fearefull, sayde. Saue my life (Sir Knight) and doe not kill mee, and I will willingly fulfill whatsoeuer you com∣maund me. Then praying him to let loose one of his hands, he drewe a little booke out of his pocket, whereon hauing read a while to himselfe, he sawe the men and Giants planted in Garden, run and cast themselues headlong into the Foun∣taine of blood, so that there remained not one body, but all were swallowed vp in the blood, which immediatly was couered with fresh earth, with a piller or Collomne of red stone aduaunced vppon it, and an Idoll standing vppon the piller, which helde a little briefe of letters in his hand, so shadowed ouer with a veile, as easily they could not be read, then said the Nigromancer: Nowe you must vnderstand that the enchauntment is concluded, especially so much thereof as to you appertaineth, now may you safely enioy your owne Iland: But the Idoll which holdeth the scedule in his hande, the reading whereof you cannot attaine to, must stand heere still, vntill a Knight as yet vnborne, and
sonne to the most valiant Prince this day liuing, do chaunce to come hether, to end the highest & most perrillous aduen∣ture that euer was heard of. Hauing thus spoken, they founde themselues presently to be in the Tower, out of which they went at theyr owne pleasure: but the old man vanished from them, of whom ye shall heare more in the following history. CHAP. XC. How Dramusiande made his sonne Franardo Lord of the Iland, assigning the Castells belonging to the Ladies, to theyr Husbands, Almaroll and Forzato, Franardo purposing his departure thence, to take Grandonya Forzatoes Sister to wife, and howe after∣ward they arriued at Constantinople with they La∣dies. ALmaroll and Forzato, who all this while doubted some disaster, which might happen, to Dramu∣siande and his Sonne Franardo, though they had bound Tirso and the two other Giants that yeel∣ded themselues: when they saw them returne frō the Tower in so good disposition, they ran cheer∣fully to meete them, and kindly embraced each other. Then did Dramusiande vnbind Tir∣so▪ and the other, promising (on their good behauiour) to vse them honourablie, so they would be loyall and faithfull to him. On the next morning, hee caused a banquet to be prepa∣red, for espousing the young Giantesse Ladies to theyr Lo∣uers, that they might the sooner set for Constantinople: whe∣ther all the chiefe Knights of that Court now repaired, to
determine a resistance of the purposed warre, which they daily expected frō Corcuto the Soldane of Babylon. When the Giants and ye rest of the Iland were there thus assem∣bled, Dramusiande said, that he would giue the Ile to Fra∣nardo, as his lawfull inheritance, and then calling the La∣dies, they were there publiquely affianced to Almaroll and Forzato, and two Castels belonging to the Ladies as theyr dowries, were appointed to theyr troth-plighted husbands, the eldest Lady béeing named Ferea, and the other Albana. Franardo likewise taking his oath, for their quiet enioying of these their seuerall Castells, with all the rights and pri∣uiledged to them appertaining. This beeing doone, hee appointed that Fosco should goe with his Ring and a Letter to the Castel of the Vale, there to commaund a Nephew of his named Oralio, to bring his Souldiours with theyr wiues & children, and possesse theyr dwelling in that Iland, assigning them the goods and lands of the deceassed Giants. Afterward, he wrote to King Ed∣ward of England, and acquainted him with the whole course of this victory, entreating him withall, to hold his Sonne Franardo as his obedient subiect, and to affoord him all ho∣nourable assistance, for the better performance of his loyall vassailage in right of the Iland. These orders thus established, hee caused the Ladies to prepare themselues in readines, because they should goe a∣long with him to Constantinople, whereof they were not a little ioyfull, in regard of theyr desire to sée ye Court, where the Ladies & Princesses were so renowned for their beau∣ties, as the fame thereof was noised thorow the world. In fewe daies after, Orao came thether, and thinges beeing confirmed in all méete order, they set away thence, taking all the Giants along with them, because no newe stirres should arise by theyr meanes. Thence went they first to Forzatoes Castell, without a∣ny accident in theyr iourney worth the rehearsall, sauing it was their hap to sée vpon the way, the goodly Tombe or Sepulcher, the aduenture whereof was ended by Arguto,
the Knight of the Sunne. Comming to the Tombe, they found it open, and in it lay the shape of an Emperour, but couered with such an arteficiall veyle, as they could not perfectly discerne his face. But Dramusiande well noating the forme of his body, imagined it to be the Emperour Pri∣maleon, as indeede it was: for the skilful Magitian, when he saw the aduenture was accomplished, to shun his owne shame, conuayed thence the Image of Alexander ye great, and placed this other in stedde thereof, but couered in this manner, as lothe to haue it easily knowne. Dramusiande and the rest, grew very pensiue, that the death of the Em∣perour was so neere, as by a manifest signe they perceiued, namely the vncouering of the Tombe, being hourely rea∣die to receiue him. In this griefe they parted thence, and within foure daies arriued at Forzatoes Castell, wherof he hauing before sent his Sister warning, found her most rich and gallantly ac∣coustred, entertayning them with the greatest honour that could be deuised: and taking Franardo by the hand, right friendly kissed & embraced him, but with such a reuerend modest bashfulnesse, as added an admirable luster to her beautie, whereupon Forzato saide vnto her. Neuer blush (swéete Sister) at welcomming of your Louer, who comes now to make you his Wife in marriage. Ascending the staires, they found the Tables ready furnished, and hauing dined, Dramusiande perceiuing his sonnes earnest desire, as also the disposition of the Lady herselfe, sent for a Priest (of most sacred life) neere adioyning, who in presence of all the Giants and the rest, performed the rites of mariage be∣twéene them, to such high liking of both the parties, as the beholders might apparantly perceaue it, Forzato renoun∣cing his right to the Castell, and giuing it as his Sisters dowrie. The next day following, Dramusiande thinking each houre a yéere till he were at Constantinople, would needs set onward, Franardo taking Grandonya along in his compa∣nie, which shee earnestly laboured, as willing to goe with
him through any perrils whatsoeuer, and very glad also of the other Giantesses company, because shee should haue o∣thers of her stature, to associate her in the Grecian Court. No sooner was dinner doone, but they mounted on horse∣back, and pleasantly rode toward Constantinople, beguiling the time with much delightfull conference, and ouertaking Fortenbracio by the way, they iournied together the more merily. Now it fortuned, that the Giants of the Iland, whom Franardo led as prisoners to Constantinople, had secrete talke together, & intended to murder our Knights in their sléepe, which when they should haue cōpassed, they meant to put on theyr Armour, because themselues had none, and after∣ward to doe what other mischiefe they might. And this vile intent had taken effect, but that Dorina happened among them, shee trauailing likewise to Constantinople, to be at the marriage of young Primaleon. Shée riding awhile along with them, and stedfastly looking vpon those Giants, found by her Arte the trechery of theyr thoughts, and feigning as if shee would talke with Dramusiande concerning Prima∣leon, bad him haue an especiall care of the Giants his pri∣soners, because they purposed treason against him and his cōpany. Then Dorina caused two angry Lyons to appeare before them, against which beastes as those Giants stroue to defend themselues, they were presently torne in péeces, without any preiudice or offence at all to any of the other, and thus was the damnable drift of the Giants vtterly dis∣appointed, the Lyons spéedily vanishing no man wist whe∣ther. No sooner was this storme thus past, but onward they gallopped, vntill they came some-what néerer to Constanti∣nople, where a far off they were descried by theyr huge sta∣ture, especially Franardo, who excéeded his father in height aboue thrée foote: wherupon, diuers ran hastily to the Pal∣lace, saying, that a squadron of Giants were comming a∣gainst them, which made euery man presently to arme him selfe, and make out for resistance of these Giants. Arguto
béeing first in readines, because hee was newly returned from hunting, was the formost man that left the Citty, and meeting with Franardo, who wore an embroidered gar∣ment ouer his Armour, which his wife had giuen him as a loue-token, & made him the more vnknowne to the Knight of the Sunne: But Franardo, albeit he knew him well e∣nough, was disposed to breake a Launce with him, the ra∣ther to make some proofe of himselfe, with what abilitie he could endure the shocke of this braue gallant, who was rec∣koned among the very choisest Knights of the Grecian court. When hee behold Arguto to giue signall of the Ioust, hee gaue forth to méete him, and the encounter was so violent∣ly performed, as both of them lost their stirrops, Franardo catching hold by the maine of his horse, to sheeld him from falling, and Arguto some-what disorderly shouldred aside: but, which most displeased him, beeing vnable to rule his horse, he ranne with him till he came to Dramusiande, who perfectly knowing him, receiued him in his open armes, saying: My Lorde Arguto, you come against your louers and friends. Arguto knewe Dramusiande and Almaroll as they em∣braced him, at which instant came thether Palmerin and Florian, who turning to the other with Franardo, after some ceremonious complement, Franardo sayde. I am taught (my Lord Arguto) how to ioust with any man that I haue no knowledge of. Nay, quoth Arguto, I may much rather say so my selfe, as knowing the sufficiencie of your high merrit. Salutations and curtesies beeing ended betweene the Knights, they then affoorded like kindnes to the young Giantesses, whose beauties were aunswerable to theyr greatnesse in stature, and riding on to the Citty, the Empe∣rour had tidings of theyr arriuall, who albeit he was much crazed in body, yet would hee needes be carried along in a Horse-litter, and meeting with the Giants, very sollemne respects of affabilitie passed betwéene them, especiallie to Dramusiande, whose faith and loue to the race of Palmerin, had beene truly approoued.
Afterward, he embraced his sonne Franardo, beeing at large acquainted with his worth and valour, whereof had been so late a tryall, in his hardie meeting with the Knight of the Sunne. The Emperour next gaue welcome to the Ladies, and like one that had wished well to such beauties in his daies, kissed theyr fore-heads, causing them to ride on each side his Litter, taking them seuerally by the fayre hand, and vsing spéeches of much gentlenes to them: but to Grandonya (exceeding the rest in comely features) he ex∣pressed very princely kindnes, all the Ladies highly extol∣ling their fortunes, to be so graciously entertained by the Emperour, of whom they stoode before in great awe and terrour. In this sollemne ioy they entred Constantinople, and bee∣ing come to the Pallace, they were roially welcommed by the Empresse and the other Princesses, all shewing great ioy for the health of Dramusiande, but Arlencea taking her husband and Franardo by the hand, went into the midst of the Hall, where kissing them seuerally very often toge∣ther, all the rest laughed hartily at them, the like did Car∣digea to Almaroll and his Lady. Within few dayes after, the Emperour helde a sollemne festiuall, the espoused La∣dies sitting at the Table with theyr deere affected Lordes, and the other young inamoratoes, praying for the like suc∣cesse in their loues: all eyes beeing bent on the delicate de∣meanour, of Primaleon toward his Victoria, Arguto to Concordia, Tarnaes to Fior-nouella, Oliuanto to Auriana, and the rest of the sweete consorted couples, whereof wee will speake more in the ensuing story. Dinner beeing ended, a dauncing was cōmaunded, one∣ly for the newe married and enamoured, wherein all the Court tooke very great contentment: the Giantesses de∣claring as much ciuilitie, as if they had beene there trained vp all theyr life time, and the Emperour sent for very cost∣ly Iewels he had, which he bestowed on the Ladies of the Profound Ile, because they were not acquainted with such courtly deckings.
Now did his Maiestie thinke it very necessary, to make a publique sollemnitie for all these mariages together, that his Court might be the more renowned therby: but Aliart, to whose iudgement these occasions were most of all refer∣red, told his Highnesse, that they must stay the comming of the Princesse Targiana, as also of King Edward of England, who were in good forwardnesse on their iourney thether: which newes were not a little pleasing to ye whole Court, but especially to Prince Florian, who stoode in doubt least Corcuto had commenced his warre, and thereby endange∣red his beloued Ladie. According as Aliarte had before pro∣mised, so within foure daies after, newes came from the Hauen to the Pallace, that Ships of sundry Nations were put into the Port: and a second messenger openly deliue∣red, the landing of the Princesse Targiana and King Ed∣ward of England, both of them riding in royall manner to∣ward the Citty. The young Prince Primaleon, because the Emperour was weake and aged, caused all the Lordes and Ladies of the Court to mount themselues, that so great states might haue some entertainement aunswerable to their high mer∣rit, and so they rode in royall equipage to meet them, where Florian encountring his faire wife Targiana, gaue her most gracious and louing welcome, as all the Lords and Prin∣cesses in like manner did, reioycing greatly in her noble presence. Then went they to King Edward of England, and did him such dutie as his woorth deserued, in regard of the great esteeme he bare among them, and especiall fauours heeretofore from him receiued: hee not a little glad at the sight of his sonnes, and they as iocond to behold their king∣lie Father. Béeing alighted at the Pallace, the olde Emperour, for ioy of his youths-partner in Armes, swounded twise or thrise downe right, and much a-doe had they to kéepe life in him: so that betweene these two extreames, gladnesse for the view of so long absent friendes, and sadnesse for feare of loosing the Emperour, they could scarce containe any indif∣ferent
measure, till the heate of either was more moderate∣lie appeased, and the violence of such passions in better sort calmed. Within few dayes after, a Councell was called, to deliberate on matters concerning Targiana, who hauing seene into the practises of her Sonne, was come thether to prouide for future dangers of warre, not doubting but to finde her husband in the Court of Constantinople. The Barons and Lords of the Kingdome being assem∣bled together, Targiana declared before them, that all hea∣thenesse drew to the faction of Corcuto, because he had sub∣borned many princes of Turkie, to beleeue his right claime to that gouernment: which since hee could not with quiet∣nesse compasse, hee meant to ouer-runne it with warlike troupes, not doubting but his owne people woulde cleaue vnto him, and iustly beare Armes against his Mother, for marrying the murderer of her husband, and receiuing bap∣tisme among the Christians, then which (in his mind) shée could not haue doone a déede of more indignitie, whereof he would be reuenged euen to the vttermost. She told them beside, that hee was backt by a mightie troupe of Giants, deriued from the progenie of Darmaco, who was slaine by the valiant Palmerin d' Oliua, and they were very bloodily minded, hating all the issue and friends to the said Palmerin. Héereupon he had prepared the grea∣test Fleete that euer was seene at Sea, with resolute de∣termination, that if any man amongst them shoulde but talke of turning backe, till they had vtterly rooted out the name of Christians, hee should suffer the extreamest death that could possibly be deuised: and what Prince soeuer, be∣ing entred with him into this confederacie, that offered to shrinke from the course intended, all the rest were to holde him as a hatefull enemy, and immediatly to turne theyr weapons vpon him, punishing him all one as if hee were a Christian. When Targiana had at large deliuered her minde, with no little admiration of the Emperour and all els present: euerie man was entreated to speake his oppinion, and to
helpe this dangerous case with the best aduise hee could. Florendos perswaded them by many good reasons, to leuey an Armie spéedilie, and assaile the enemy at home in his owne prouinces: all the young Knights iumpt with his op∣pinion, but Palmerin, Florian and Aliarte held the contrary, alleaging, that an Armie of such sufficiencie would not be easily gathered, as might serue to beate the Pagans with∣in their owne dominions. Then Aliarte turning to his Fa∣ther King Edward, desired him to speake what hee thought most expedient, because his long practise in war, and graue experience, could not but yéeld them the pregnantest course héerein to be taken. King Edward replyed, that the counsell of Florendos was so good, as it no way deserued checke or reprehension, and that of Palmerin was very expedient, from both which grounds, there might be an absolute course determined on. But first of all hee aduised, to prouide for Florians best secu∣ritie of the state, who with his people of Thrace, and ye ayde of Blandidon, Soldane of Niquea, might well maintaine that part of Turkie. And, quoth hee, this Court (God be thanked) affoordes young gallants enowe, to vnder-goe a farre heauier burthen then this, Oliuanto and Fortenbracio, they may haue the managing of these affaires. Héere are beside of our déere louers and friends, the Giants so latelie come from the Ile of the bottomlesse Lake, let them foure be imployed in some other méete place, with promise of ho∣nourable recompence for theyr paines, giuing each of them a Citty in the Kingdome of Paraz, falne now to the Em∣pire, by the reuolt and death of Dyrdan, alwayes prouided, that no iniury be any way offered to Blandidon, but vppon his good successe in this glorious enterprise, to haue the rest of that Kingdome vnder his commaund. When things are thus established abroade, then may ye leuey an Armie, according as your prouision by Sea shall require, and though not consisting of multitudes, yet fur∣nished with so many generous & dauntlesse spirits, as may cope with an Armie of farre greater show: and thereof let
Lord Florendos be Generall, choosing to him such graue consorts, as himselfe shall thinke best of, and may fittest be spared from my Lord the Emperour. And such an Armie, when the enemies of Greece shall weene to come hether, will force them (despight their harts) to be more carefull of home, least loosing Citties and Fortresses there, they be not ouer-hastily recouered againe. Then may a fresh sup∣ply be sent after, according as intelligences shall be deliue∣red, that if a generall battaile be proffered, slight skirmi∣shes, sallyes or combats of man to man, such good order may be taken in the election, as it shall euery wa still re∣dound to our benefit. And Palmerin my sonne gaue good di∣rection, in aduising, that as occasion shall néede, so the Cit∣tie heere be still stored with able men at Armes, to be euer in a readines, least the worst shoulde happen. But by no meanes may we spare young Primaleon from this seruice, being so highly fauoured by Fortune as he is, and let him still be stored with the water of the Mountaine Arteferia, whose vertue strengthens Armour in such sort, as the kee∣nest edgd weapon can hardly enter it, the rest I refer to his owne discretion. This counsell of King Edward was generally allowed of, so that with the Emperours consent, and all the Prin∣ces, it was fully ratified and agreed vpon. No sooner were they risen from these weightie businesses, but Aliarte bee∣ing disposed to set all the Court on a iocond meriment, euen as they issued foorth of ye Counsell-chamber, caused strange varieties of Musique to be heard, and the young Ladies ta∣king theyr Louers by the handes, as also the grauer sort theyr honoured Princesses, they daunced gallantly thorow the Hall, the olde Emperour first with the Empresse Gry∣donia, King Edward and his fayre Quéene Flerida, Mira∣garda with Florendos, Palmerin with Polinarda, and so the rest in order followed, Aliarte being highly commended by thē all, for fitting the time with so generall a contentment. After the daunce was ended, a more martiall noise was heard, of Drommes, Fifes, Clarions, & Trompets, when
Aliarte commaunding a way for passage, the resemblance of Corcuto the young Soldane of Babilon, with his confe∣derated Kings and Princes attending on him, all beeing bare-headed, carried couered banquetting dishes, and vp∣pon each mans dish stoode his owne Crowne: thus passed they into the Emperours Gallerie, where a faire Table béeing ready couered, with great reuerence they placed their dishes thereon, which béeing doone, they vanished a∣gaine, and the Emperour with his Lords and Princesses, sate downe to the banquet, gathering héereby, that the war against Corcuto, would prooue successeful: at which banquet we must leaue them, as hauing yet no instructions what further befell them. FINIS.
❧ The Conclusion. HEere Gentlemen, fully ends the History of Palmerin of England, and Don Florian his Brother, without expectation of any o∣ther part concerning them, al∣beit this third Booke breake of imperfectly, and referres the vvarre and other matters to an after discourse. Such a following History indeed my Authour speakes of, but tearmes it, The Knightly deedes of Prince Pagmalion, whereof as yet I can com∣passe no intelligence, neither in the Spanish, Italian, or French: but it is very likely, that if any such Hi∣story were written & imprinted, it will in time hap∣pen to my hands, and then your kindnes to this will commaund it the sooner. In meane while let me intreate your fauour, be∣cause some fewe faults haue escaped in this Booke, both by reason of the crabbed Coppie, not euerie where very leageable, and by wordes mistaken, that quite alter the sence, which such as knowe mee, I doubt not but wil sufficiently excuse me of, as being subiect (I thanke God) to no such sillinesse, nor willinglie (I dare presume) committed by the Prin∣ter.
As for my last part of Primaleon of Greece, and the third and last part of Palmerin d' Oliua, both them I confesse to haue in mine owne custodie, and as I per∣ceiue your willingnesse to entertaine, so shall I bee ready to hasten them for you: but if my paines in this last part of Palmerin purchase your dislike, Ile keepe the rest to my selfe, and offend yee no furder. Yours euer, A. Mundy.
A Table, for the readier finding of e∣uery Chapter contained in this booke, guiding the Reader according to number of the Chapters and Pages. HOw the bodies aliue and dead, of the Princes, Dramu∣siande, and others (supposed slaine) were conuaied vn∣to the Perillous Ile. Chap. 1. Folio. 1. What Targiana did, after the Campe was dissolued, and the Soldane Albayzar her husband dead. Cap. 2. fol. 3. What they did in Constantinople, after the departure of the sage Aliarte. Cap. 3. fol. 5. How the Princes that were in the Perillous Ile, were nowe recouered past any danger: And what happened to Madame Leonarda in child trauaile. Howe the other Princesses in like manner were deliuered of children, and how Prince Florian of the Forrest departed thence. Cap. 4, fol. 6. What happened for the buriall of the dead Princes bodies. Cap. 5. fol. 8. Howe the seuerall Tombes were made manifest, with the Epitaphes belonging to each of them. cap, 6. fol, 9. How Pandritia hauing hid herselfe in the Chamber among the Tombes, was found dead by her husband Bellagris. cap. 7. folio. 11. How the other Princes were buried the day following. cap. 8. folio. eodem How the Knight of the Sauage man following aduentures, there happened to his hand a Letter & a Ring. cap, 9. fol. 14. What Florian did after his departure from Dorina. cap. 10. fol. 15. How Ristorano returning to Tubante, prouided good guar∣dance for Targiana, deliuering the Armenian Princesse to Su∣cusano, and what Florian did for Targiana. cap. 11. fol. 16. What Sucusano did, when he heard that the Armenian Prin∣cesse was forcibly rescued from them, which had charge of conducting her to him: And further concerning the Prince Florian. cap. 12. fol. 18.
Howe the Princes in the Perillous Ile, beeing recouered to their former health, would haue returned thence to theyr se∣uerall estates, but they were staied there for a while: And of a new accident that suddenly happened. cap. 13, fol. 21 How Sucusano became enamoured of Targiana, and know∣ing Florian to be Nephewe to the Emperor Primaleon, layde hold on him, suspecting likewise euill betweene him & Tar∣giana. cap. 14, fol, 24 How Dorina, with the foure Knights and Dramusiande, ar∣riued at the Cittie of Tubante, and deliuered Targiana, with whom they entred the Forrest. cap, 15, fol. 27. Howe the Emperour Primaleon returned to Constantinople with Don Rosuell, and what happened to the rest. Likewise, how the wise Aliarte aduertised Palmerin, Florendos, & other more, of Prince Florians case, who needes would depart to giue him succour. cap. 16, fol. 30 What happened in Turkie, when the prisoner dissembled in the sted of Florian was led to death. cap, 17. fol. 32 How Sucusano raised his Campe to be gone, and being fol∣lowed by the Christian Knights with their power, yeelded Florian. cap. 18. fol. 35 How Dorina left off her loue to the Prince Florian, with in∣tent to aduaunce the honour of Primaleon the second, sonne to Florendos: not because she bare any immodest affection to him, but onely to make him famous through the world. cap. 19. fol. 38 Howe the young Princes arriued at Constantinople, where they receiued the order of Knight-hood, and how preparati∣on was made for a Tournament. cap. 20. fol. 41. How they proceeded to the Tournament, wherein Arguto would haue slaine an vnknowne Knight, because hee could not endure his company. cap. 21. fol. 45. Howe the Knights of Tubante combatted against the Pa∣gane Kings, and how the Citty was neere-hand loosing, by a trecherous deuise that Ristorano wrought. cap. 22. fol. 49 What followed vpon the war at Tubante, & how the Mon∣ster was ouer-come. cap. 23. fol. 57
How Dorina presented her Monster in the Listes at Con∣stantinople, and how Tamerco caried away the faire Polynarda. cap. 24, fol. 61 How Dorina caried away with her the Knight of Fortune, and howe Polynarda was recouered againe by the valour of Arguto. cap. 25. fol. 64 How Arguto was assailed by three Giants, which tooke the faire Princesse Polynarda from him. How she was afterward recouered by the Knight of Fortune, and giuen by him to Leonato, that hee might goe onward to the Ile of Fortune. cap. 26, fol. 67 Of the fight that chaunced at Sea, betweene these guides to the Princesse, and an vnknowne Knight. cap. 27, fol. 71 Howe Franardo found Belcar, Fortenbracio, and Forcino, hand to hand with three Giants, that dwelt at the foote of the mountaine Arteferia in Macedonia, and hauing slaine two of them, they went toward the Iland of Carderia. cap. 28, fo. 75 How Arguto arriued at the Ile of Carderia, and combatted with Franardo, and how they were seazed on by an enchaun∣ted Knight. cap. 29. fol. 77 How the Knight of the Sword vanquished a sauage Mon∣ster, and afterward found Caro and Estrellant combatting to∣gether: likewise what happened to them, and diuers other Knights. cap. 30, fol. 79 How the Knight of the Sword vndertooke the aduenture of the vault. cap. 31, fol. 82 How Tarnaes comming to trie his fortune in the aduenture of the wheele, combatted with Leonato, and howe by Orino they were friendly pacified. cap. 32, fol. 87 How the Armie of the Christians met with Tamerco and his power, where he was taken, and his men ioyned with the Christian forces. cap. 33, fol. 88 How the Knight of Fortune chaunced on a strange aduen∣ture, and what ensued to him thereon. cap. 34, fol. 90 How the Ship went to the shoare, and how the Knight of Fortune, accompanied with the Lady and the Lyons, depar∣ted thence to the aduenture of the Castell, and what chaun∣ced
vnto them by the way. cap. 35, fol. 93 How the Christian Armie, before they could take landing in Turkie, were constrained to deliuer Oliuanto to a Dwarffe, that came and demaunded him at their hands. cap. 36, fol. 96 Of whence and what this King was, and what passed be∣tweene Oliuanto and the Lady, likewise how he accomplished the aduenture. cap, 37. fol. 100 How Leonato caused the wheele to be caried to Constanti∣nople, and afterward went to the Ile of Carderia, where he re∣mained enchaunted for defence of the place. cap. 38, fol. 104 How the Knight of Fortune entred the Castell, where by aduise of the Lady, he accomplished the aduenture. cap. 39, folio, 108 How as the Christian Knights at Tubante, were setting for∣ward to the conquest of Niquea, Florendos despairing, be∣cause he could haue no cure for his lamenesse, departed away with a Damosell, and what he vnderstoode by her. cap. 40, fol. 109 How Florendos met with a strange enchauntment, and af∣terward ouercame Saboco, with great perill of his owne life. cap. 41. fol. 114 Howe the Knight of Fortune went to combate Garnides, and being taken of him, was by one of his daughters set at li∣berty againe. cap. 42, fol. 118 Howe Primaleon caused Laurea to be maried to Trasino, making him King of the Morning Ilands, and gaue Filenia likewise to Garnides. cap. 43, fol. 122 Of that which Florendos did with Saboco and Isota, and how after he had subdued a Serpent, he returned to Tubante, euen as the Christian Armie was preparing to depart. cap. 44, fol. 126 How the Christian Armie departed from Tubante, & what happened to them by the way, in theyr going toward the Kingdome of Niquea. cap. 45. fol. 130
How Palmerin and Florian would needs goe combate with them of the Tent, and howe the enchauntment was con∣cluded: Also of a straunge accident that suddainly happe∣ned. cap. 46. fol. 134 How Oltrando and his men of India, came and ioyned with the Christian forces: and how Niquea was besieged, & Tir∣rena taken. cap. 47, fol. 138 How Primaleon went the aduenture of Fortune, and what happened in the first dayes attempt. cap. 48, fol. 142 Howe Primaleons Squire arriued at Constantinople with his Horse, and there witnessed, that a Lyon had deuoured his Lord in his presence: and of an other sad newes there happe∣ning also. cap. 49. fol. 146 How the Monster released him selfe and Ristorano in Tu∣bante, after that Tirrena was sent to Constantinople. cap. 50. fol. 148 Howe Trineus arriued (by chaunce) with his Shippe on a strange Iland, where he found labour enough to doo: And how his Armie sayled on to Niquea. cap. 51, fol. 152 How Trineus found his Armie in the Port of Niquea: and how they gaue battaile to the Citty. cap. 52. fol. 159 How Tarnaes combatted with Leonato, and remained there prisoner, and how many other Knights were taken: and of a disgrace which happened to the wise Aliarte. cap. 53. fol. 165 How Florian, Florendos, and Berolde sundered them selues, for better recouerie of the Ladies: And howe (thinking he had found the Pallace of Queene Melia) Berolde arriued at the Ile of Carderia: And how Florian finished a strange ad∣uenture. cap. 54, fol. 168 What, and who the Monster, the dogge, the wounded Knight & Lady were: And how the enchauntment was ful∣ly concluded. cap. 55, fol. 173 How Florendos combatting with Leonato, was caried cap∣tiue into the Ile of Carderia. cap. 56, fol. 176 How Primaleon, otherwise called the Knight of Fortune, accomplished in two dayes the aduenture of the Tower. cap. 57. fol. 181 How Primaleon vnderstoode, that the faire Lady Victoria was kept in an enchauntment. And how (vpon the arriuall of Trineus) Primaleon preuailed so much with him by perswa∣sion,
that hee graunted to turne backe to Constantinople, for the conuay of his Mother, and the precious vnguent. cap. 58, fol. 187 How Primaleon slew the sauage wilde Beare, and finishing the aduenture, set all the famous Knights at libertie. cap. 59. fol. 191 The reason why the enchauntment was first framed. And how Primaleon (going to set the wizzard Aliarte at libertie) entred the combate with Palmerin of England, and how they were parted by Dramusiande. cap. 60. fol. 195 Howe Florendos with Oliuanto returned to Constantinople, where he found remedy for his lamenes. And how the other Knights betooke them selues to seuerall parts, finishing diuers straunge and memorable aduentures: among which is ex∣pressed, what happened to Arguto in his trauaile. cap. 61, fol. 199 Howe Palmerin (so soone as his hurts were healed) went straight to Constantinople: And howe Primaleon went to the Perillous Ile, and what happened afterward, for deliuerie of the wizzard Aliarte. cap. 62, fol, 204 Heere followeth the deliuerance of the wise Aliarte, and what Drusa Ʋelonna did in hinderance thereof. cap. 63, fol. 208 How Floraman seeing him selfe but slenderly regarded by Clariana, became enamoured of the faire Princesse Victoria, concluding to goe and deliuer her out of the enchaunted Pal∣lace. cap, 64, fol, 210 How Arguto arriued by strange occasion, at the Pallace be∣longing to the faire Queene Melia, and howe he remained there enchaunted. cap. 65, fol. 212 Howe Florian still pursuing in quest of his daughter, was (vnwittingly) brought to the Pallace of Queene Melia. cap. 66, fol. 213 How, and what the wizzard Aliarte wrought, against the enchauntment of Drusa Velonna, and what ensued to Prima∣leon. cap, 67, fol. 215 How Primaleon entred into the Pallace, and accomplished a
great part of the aduenture. cap. 68, fol. 217 Of the daungerous fight, which Primaleon had with the Knight of the Serpent, and how he accomplished the whole aduenture afterward. cap. 69, fol. 219 How Leonato and Tarnaes came to combate together, for the loue of faire Candida, & vpon what conditions they were parted by Palmerin of England. cap, 70, fol. 223 How Primaleon and Arguto fought together neere to Con∣stantinople, and how no man could part them but the Empe∣rour Primaleon. cap. 71. fol, 225 How the wise Aliarte and Prince Florian, with the fayre young Lady Ʋictoria, set forward on theyr iourney to Con∣stantinople, and of a danger which happened to Aliarte, from which he was rescued by the valour of Prince Florian: Also, how Floraman desperatly slew him selfe. cap. 72, fol. 228 How as they were consulting in the Court, about the ma∣riages of Primaleon and Arguto, with the faire young Ladies Ʋictoria and Concordia, the two young Knights were sum∣moned thence to a strange aduenture. cap, 73, fol, 230 Of a strange aduenture which happened to Primaleon in the Caue vnder ground, where-into the strange Knight had conducted him. cap. 74, fol, 235 Howe Arguto (with great perill of his life) brought to end the aduenture of the enchaunted Lady, and receaued free∣dome of his suspition, that Fortune was not fauourable vnto him. cap. 75, fol. 235 How the aged Magitian shewed the cause, wherefore hee had enchaunted the Knight & his daughter, confining them to so long a date of punishment. cap. 76, fol. 239 Howe Primaleon and Arguto caused the mariage to be so∣lemnized betweene Brunoro and Rosella, and afterward iour∣neyed toward Babylon. cap. 77, fol. 244 Howe Primaleon and Arguto were taken by Corcuto the Souldane of Babylon, & set at liberty againe by the aged Ma∣gitian, Father to Rosella, returning afterward to Constantino∣ple. cap. 78, fol. 246 How the mariages of Candida with Leonato, and of Tarnaes
with Fior-nouella, being further conferred on in the Court of Constantinople, there happened a suddaine and vnexpected al∣teration, cap. 79, fol, 249 How Florian trauailing to the faire Argentina, came to the Citty of Tubante, where with exceeding loue he was entertai∣ned by his wife Targiana, and leauing order how she should be defended against her sonne Corcuto, he iourneyed thence to the Adamant Castell. cap, 80, fol, 251 How Florian (with some difficulty) concluded the aduen∣ture of the Adamant Castell, and set faire Argentina at liberty. cap. 81, fol. 253 What the Emperour, Palmerin, and the other Knights did, when they found that Candida was gone away with Leo∣nato. cap, 82, fol, 255 How Prince Florian arriued at Constantinople, with the faire Lady Argentina, and the subtill Enchauntresse Drusa Ʋe∣lonna: Heere likewise is declared, how Leonato lost his belo∣ued Candida, and aftervvard by vvhat meanes hee recouered her againe. cap. 83, fol. 158 Howe Leonato (with his faire Candida) arriued in England, where their mariage was solemnized vvith great royaltie. Al∣so hovv the young trauailing Knights, vvith them of greater yeares and experience, returned (the most part of them) to the Emperours Court at Constantinople. cap, 84. fol, 261 Hovv Dramusiande, Franardo, Almaroll, and Forzato, tra∣uailed to conquer the Iland of the bottomlesse Lake, & what happened to them in the attempt. cap, 85. fol. 264 How two young Ladies being Giantesses, declared to our wounded Knights, by what meanes they should enter into the Profound Tower, and finish the enchauntment. cap. 86, fol. 268 How the Lord of the Iland came thether, and of the victo∣rie which our Knights obtayned against him and his. cap. 87, fol. 270 Howe our Knights went to the aduenture of the Tower, & of the seuerall occasions that befell them, vntill they found the Serpent of the Sunne. cap. 88. fol. 273
Howe Dramusiande and Franardo went into the Serpent, and afterward finished the vvhole aduenture. cap. 89, fol. 275 Howe Dramusiande made his sonne Franardo Lord of the Iland, assigning the Castels belonging to the Ladies, to theyr Husbands, Almaroll and Forzato, Franardo purposing his departure thence, to take Grandonia Forzatoes Sister to vvife, and hovv aftervvard they arriued at Constantinople vvith their Ladies. cap. 90. fol. 277 FINIS.
