19931 99849890 15062
The burnynge of Paules church in Lon∣don in the yeare of oure Lord 1561. and the iiii. day of Iune by lyghtnynge, at three of the clocke, at after noone, which continued terrible and helplesse vnto nyght. VVERE THESE GREATER SIN∣ners, than the rest? No; I saye vnto you ex∣cept ye repent, ye shall all lyke∣wyse peryshe. Luc. 13. ¶ Imprinted at London by Willyam Seres, dwellynge at the west ende of Powles, at the Sygne of the Hedge∣hog.
AN ADDICION VVITH AN AP∣pologie to the causes of brinnynge of Paules Church, the which causes were vttred at Paules Crosse by the reuerend Bys∣shop of Duresme the. viii. of une. 1561. ALthough almighty God be pacy∣ente, mercifull, and longe suffe∣ringe, wyllinge all sinners to re∣pent their wickednes, to rise from sinne, and come to his mercye: yet if sinners wil not amend after mo∣nition and warninge hadde, at the last God strikes sodainly and sore, as appeares in the Scripture by Sodom and Gomorra vpon the whyche Cytyes God rayned fire and bremstone wherewith the fyue Cities were destroyed mise∣rably. Also Pharao and the Egiptians that wold not be moued by the wordes of Moises and Aaron nor wyth the tenne plages, at last were sodainlye drowned in the Sea. Also Chore Dathan and Abiron, with a greate number of people, that woulde not obey the mini∣stration of Aaron and the Priestes appoynted by God, but went from them, seking a newe waye to serue God: part of them were sodenlye swallowed vp of the earth, and part brent sodainlye with fire from heauen in the tabernacle. After when the peo¦ple of Hierusalem would not heare the true Pro∣phets of god, but would beleue false liyng Prophe∣tes, & so declined from the steps of Dauid, Ezechi∣as, and Iosias, which walked in the feare of god▪ bicause they forsoke their fathers steps, and fell to Idolatrye, the Temple was brent, the Citie de∣stroyed, and the people taken Captiues to Babi∣lon. Also our sauiour Christ for the tender▪ loue he had to mankind came into this world, by his do∣trine
he gathered. xij. Apostles Disciples, & a great multitude of people in one vnity of faith, & sanctifi∣ed them, his church by his precious bloud sheding. committing the rule and gouernment of his Chur∣che to the Byshops: after his Ascencion he sende the holye Ghost in Hierusalem, in lykenes of firie tongues amonge the Apostles, and streight waye they preached as the holy Ghost taught them: and there, in Hierusalem Saint Peter conuerted a great multitude to the faith, which faith at Hieru∣salem was first taught & declared vpon by a coun∣sel of the Apostles and Seniors, there Saint Ia∣mes being Bishop: and after∣warde the same faith was taught in all landes as2 the Prophet Dauid sayes. In omnem terram ex∣iut sonus eorum. The faith of Christes Church hath bene from time to time establyshed by gene∣rall councels: the whiche faith what Countrye so euer hath forsaken it, hath bene miserably scourged and plaged: as about fourtie yeares after the As∣sention of our Sauiour Christ, bicause the Iues would not abide in that religion, that was decreed by the Apostles, and walke in their steps, misera∣bly Hierusalem was plaged with fire, pestilence, famine, battell, and murther. Also in all other Countries, as wel with the Grekes as other par∣tes of the world, when the people haue declyned from the feare of God, forsakinge the steppes of blessed fathers, miserably they haue bene plaged. And in Englande where the faith of Christe and true religion was planted about the yeare of oure3 Lord. Cixxxij. by Elutherius Pope, sending Le∣gates to Lucius then Kinge of Englande, whiche conuerted this Realme to the fayth, and establys∣shed true religion in Englande, whiche conti∣nued. CC. yeares: but when the people dyd de∣clyne from the feare of God and the steps of God and blessed fathers, they came to greate calamitye and misery by the scourge of God. Cadwaliader last kinge of the Britans did confesse by the hand
of God with pestilence and famine they were dry∣uen out of this lande. After that againe this land beinge inhabyted wyth Saxons beynge pamius Saint Gregorye Pope of Rome aboute the yeare4 of our Lorde God. D. xcv. sent Saint Augustine and other Monkes wyth hym into Englande, Ethelbert being king: and then Saint Augustine and his company by their doctrine and vertuous liuinge planted the faith and so establyshed a true religion in England: the which faith and religion euer when the people haue declyned from it, they haue felde great calamities as wel by the hande of God, as by the conquest of the Danes, and after by the Normans, and sith the conquest from time to time, God hath plaged this Realme for Synne and infidelitye. And nowe whether the people of this Realme be declyned from the steps of Saint Augustine and other blessed fathers and Saintes which had Masse and seuen Sacramentes in the Church: and God was honoured night and daye5 in the Church with deuine seruyce: I thinke there is no man so simple but he may easely perceiue ex∣cept malice haue blynded his heart. As in Saint Paules Church in London by the decrees of blessed fathers, euery night at midnight they had Mattines, all the fore noone Masses in the Church, with other deuine seruice and conty∣nuall prayer: and in the steple Antimes and pray∣ers: were hadde certayne tymes: but consider howe farre nowe contrarye the Churche hais bene vsed, and it is no maruaile yf God haue sende downe fire to brinne parte of the Churche as a signe of his wrath. And where a reuerende Byshop at Paules crosse did exhort the people to to take the brinninge of Paules to be a warninge of a greater plage to folowe to the Citye of Lon∣don if amendment of life be not had in all estates, it was well said: but we muste adde Accidentem ad deum opportet credere, the Scripture sais, he that will come to God muste first beleue. Saint
Paule sais: without faith it is impossible to please. xi. e. vi. God: and the Prophet Hieremi saith by the sprite of God speakinge. State super vias & interroga∣te de semitis antiquis que sit bona & ambulate in ea, & inuenietis refrigerium animabus vestris, that is stand vppon the wayes of blessed fathers, and consider and aske of the olde pathes and highe wayes which is the good way and walke therin, and ye shal finde refreshing to youre soules. First searche whether the faith and religion nowe vsed, was taught with the blessed fathers in Chrystes Church in times past: ye shal proue by no recorde of authoritie or Chronicle that this maner of ser∣uice now vsed in the Churche was euer hard tell of afore Luthers time, which is not. xl. yeares old. Therefore it is to be reiected and put awaye as a newe fangled doctrine and scismaticall: therefore come backe againe into the old fathers steppes as well in faith and religion, as godlye conuersation and liuinge or a greater plage is at hande. Also where the said Preacher did recite certain abuses of the said Church as talking, biyng and sellinge, feightinge and brawlinge (although these be verye7 euill and worthie much rebuke) yet there be worse abuses, as blaspheming God in lyinge Sermons, polluting the Temple with Schismaticall seruice, destroying and pullyng downe holye aulters, that were set vp by good blessed men, & there the sacry∣fice of the blessed Masse ministred according to the order of Christes catholycke Church. Yea where the alter stode of the holy Ghost, the new Bishops haue made a place to set their tales vpon, and there sit in the iudgement of such as be Catholycke and liue in the feare of God. Some they depriue from their liuinges, some they commit to prison, excepte they will forsake the Catholicke faith, and embrase a faith and religion that hais no foundacion layde by generall Counseil, nor blessed fathers in times past but inuented by Heretikes that do not agree
one with another nor them selfes. Thus the Bys∣shops that now be, haue abused the Churche, and polluted it as the Prophete Hiere. sais: they haue put offendicles in the house of God and polluted it. Also the said Preacher in his Sermon at Paules Crosse didde declare the vertue of obedience to be muche decayed in these oure dayes: but he lea∣ues out who they be that cause disobedience. For there is none more disobedient then the new Bis∣shopsMath. and Preachers now a dayes, which disobey the vniuersall Church of Christ: the which Chur∣che whosoeuer will not obey, our Sauiour in the Gospel commaundes vs to take them as infidels. As where the vniuersall Churche of Christ com∣maundes Masse and seuen Sacramentes as ne∣cessary for our saluation, they call it abhomination wyth their blasphemous mouthes: where the Church commaundes to fast, they commaunde to eate: where the Churche commaundes continuall prayer of the Clergie, they call it supersticion and blind ignoraunce: where the Church commaundes the Clergie to liue in chastity, they commaund and exhort the Clergie to mariage: where the Chur∣che and all lawes ciuill and canon, yea the lawes of this Realme do prohibit mariage of Priestes, they alow mariage of priestes obeying no law but folow their owne carnal lust. Yea where the Quene hais geuen streyght commaundement to abstayne from flesh in Lent and other dayes commaunded by the Church, these new Preachers and Protestantes haue eaten flesh openly to the great sclaunder of o∣ther: so they obey neither the Quene nor the chur∣che: so that almighty God complaines by his Pro∣phete Esai, tota die blasphematur nomen meumEsa. 62. with these menne God is continually blasphemed. wo be to you sais Esai that call good euill, and e∣uill good, putting darkenes light, and light darke∣nes,Esai. 5. Ezech. 3. as by Ezechiell sais almighty God: the Prie∣stes haue contemned my law and haue polluted my
Sanctuarie. Also O see the Prophete does saye: the bread that they doe offer is full of mourning▪ and all that cat ther of shalbe defiled. We maye see how they contemne all that blessed fathers, holye Martirs and Saintes haue decreed: they disobey all that haue bene vertuous and good in Christes catholick church. As now of late they haue inuen∣ted a new way to make Byshops & Priestes, and a mannor of seruice and ministracion, that Saint Augustine neuer knew. Saint Edmund, Lan∣franc, Saint Anselme, nor neuer one Byshop of Canturburie, sauinge onelye Crammer, who for∣soke his profession as Apostata: so that they muste nedes condemne al the Byshops in Canturbury, but Crammer, and he that now is, al the Bishops in yorke sauinge Holgate and he that nowe is: al∣though9 Saint wild, Saint willyam haue bene taken for saintes and were bishops in yorke. In Countree and Lichfelde. Saint Chad was Bis∣shop and many blessed Bishoppes. And he that is Bishop now, can find not any one that was made as he is, nor of his religion. Therefore he muste proue, al Byshoppes of Lichfelde were deceyued, walked in biyndnes and ignoraunce: or els he that now is, must needs be deceiued and be in blindnes. In Duresine haue bene manye good fathers, but he that is now Bishop, can not find any one Pre∣decessor in that see that was of hys religyon, and made Byshop after such fort as he was: so that he that now is must take in hand to condemne all the Byshops afore him, that they were in ignoraunce and blindnes, or els they will come to his condem∣nation at the daye of iudgement. And this in all Bishoprickes in England, some can find one, and some none, that euer was of their religion. What arrogancy maye be thought in those men that will take in hand to contemne so many blessed fathers, all to be in blindnesse? But nowe they saye, they haue founde a lyght and reforme religyon accor∣ding
to the primitiue Church. Then seing they re∣forme religion so well (as they saye) it were meete as they forsake all the religion that their prede∣cessors vsed, as Masse, Mattins, ministracion of10 sacraments: that they should also forsake houses, arkes, landes, and reuenues that their predeces∣sors had, and go from place to place for Gods sake and preach, and thn were some liklyhode of refor∣mation: or els it may be called rather a deformati∣on, then a reformation. In Christes Church hais euer bene a succession of Bishops from the Apostles time to this day, in euery see. And Tertullian saies: if in any see there be a Byshop that walkes not in his fathers steps, he is to be counted a bastard, and no true inheritor in Chrystes Churche. Saint Cypryan does11 say: they that be made Byshops out of the order of the Church, and not by tradition and ordinance of the Apostles, coming by succession from time to time, are not Byshops by the will of god: ut the∣ues and murtherers comming to kill the flocke of Christ with heresie and lies. And where the saide Preacher does affirme greater matters, then the brinning of Paules to haue chaunced in time of su∣persticion and ignoraunce (as the Church of Pau∣les was rent in the first yeare of Steuen, and the Steple of Paules set on fire by lyghtninge in the12 tyme of kinge Henrie the vi.) they that count that to be the time of supersticion and ignoraunce, when God was serued deuoutly night and day, the peo∣ple liued in the feare of god euery one in his vocati∣on, without reasoning & contencion of matters of religion, but referred all suche thinges to learned men in generall counsailes and vniuersities, there to be disputed: then was the commaundementes of God, and vertue, expressed in liuinge, now all is in talke and nothinge in liuinge: then was prayer, now is prating: then was vertue, and now is vice: then was buildinge vp of Churches, houses of re∣ligion,
and hospitals (where prayer was had night and day, hospitalitye kept and the poore relieued) now is pulling downe and destroying such houses, where God should be serued, hospitalitie kept, and the poore releiued: by meanes wherof Gods glory is destroyed, and the commen welth impouerished: then was plenty of all thinges, now is scarcenesse of all thinges: therfore Operibus credite, the frute will shew whether then was supersticion and ig∣noraunceOsee or nowe in these dayes. Forther: where the true word of god is taught, the holy ghost does so worke there with, that vertue does encrease: but as the Prophet sais, sicut populus ita & Sa∣cerdos, as the people be, so God sendes them Prie∣stes.Hier. 8. Hier. 1. Apprehenderunt mendacium & noluerūt re∣uerti, the people haue apprehended a lye and will not come backe, but trust in liyng Sermons whi∣che wil not profet them, as almighty God says byEsai. 2. his Prophet Hiere. thinkinge they haue done wel because they haue done these abhominations saysEsai. 6 God by his Prophet Hieremi: so as the Priestes be, so be the people: blynded in herisie, as God sais by his Prophet Esai: that their hartes do not vn∣derstande, their eyes do not see, their eares be stop∣ped for hearinge the trueth: so that this maye well be called the time of supersticion and ignoraunce, calling darknes light, and light darknes, that whi∣che is euill good, and good euill. And for the brin∣ning of Paules Church which he speakes of was in time of ciuil warre, and not destroyed by than∣des of God as it was at this time. Whosoeuer rea∣des the Chronicles shal perceyue that and this be not lyke: Therfore beware of false Prophetes and Preachers which come with faire wordes in their mouthes of the Gospel, but marke the frutes that comes of their preachinge: howe they haue set the people in such case that no prayer is vsed, no fasting litle almes dedes, all liberty vsed. What disobe∣dience children be in against their parentes, howe
vntrusty seruauntes be, what swearinge and blas∣pheming of God is vsed of all people? what theft, whoredome, crafte, subtiltye and deceipt: these be frutes that come of this newe fanglet doctrine. Therefore retourne backe againe to the steppes of good fathers afore vs: be not caried away as S. Paule sais with a straunge and diuerse doctrine, embrace the religion and faith taught in Christes Churche from time to time continually, and frame your liuing accordingly, or els Gods14 vengeance hanges ouer your heades, readye sodenly to fall vpon you: so sais the Scripture and let this token of brinninge of Paules be an example and token of a grea∣ter plage to folow excepte ye a∣mende.
A CONFVTACION OF AN AD∣dicion, vvyth an Appologye vvritten and east in the stretes of VVest Chester, agaynst the causes of burnyug Paules Church in London: vvhych causes, the reuerend Byshop of Du∣resme declared at Pau∣les Crosse . Iu∣nij. 1561. OUr Sauiour Christ whan the Deuill spake the truth plainly, did not con∣fute or gayne saye it: but whan he did it frowardly, Christ rebuked hym sharpelye. As whan the deuill said: Iesus of Nazareth, whatLuc. 4 haue we to do with thee, art thou comen to destroy vs? I knowe that thou art the holy one of god. He did not refuse nor de∣nye that truth which he spake: but whan the deuill tempted him, to throw himself down from the Pinacle of the Temple, be rebuked him quickly, bicause he alled∣ged ye true scripture maliciously. So it isMath. 4 Trueth must be truly vt∣tred. not sufficient to do a good dede barely, or speake the trueth only, except it be done rightly, & with such circumstances, as be necessarily required to make it good: as that it be from the hart, and for Goddes cause willingly. &c. In like maner where
this scauenger sweping the stretes with his bookes (as a fittē brome and officer therto) hais spoken the truth, not trulye (bicause it is for an euil purpose, and fro∣wardly) I shal passe ouer it with silence: but where he followes his maister, the father of lies, in falsifiyng the trueth, or racking the Scripture subtilly, I shal by gods grace let the world see his iugling, and by truth trulye vttered, disclose his shameles lyinge. The firste examples that he bringes, declaring how god does iustlye plague the obstinate sinners, that will not repent after manye warninges giuen, are true all: but being alledged to bring vs backe to Poperye, and for ano∣ther purpose then God oure Lorde hais taught them, they be craftelye misused, and ye see whose fotesteppes be folowed. And as he vses theym to perswade vs to supersticion: so they maye, and ought to be vsed specially, for maintainynge true religion. The Rhetoricians teach, that suche kinde of beginninges as maye be applied to two contrary partes, are fau∣ty. Therefore seinge I maye vse the selfe same reasons and woordes, that he has from the beginning hitherto, to train vs to loue and embrase oure godlye refour∣med religion, he can not muche crake of his wyselye placed examples or rea∣sons. But I wyll not stycke wyth hym in suche small poyntes as these,
although they be fautes: but I wil ioine with him in matters of weight and those thefe pointes of religion whiche he hais touched, and we differ from him and hys sort in them. Committinge the rule and gouernement of1 hys Church to the Byshops. &c. THe first is concerning thau∣tority and gouernment ge∣uen to Bishops ouer Gods Church: wherin his wordes are not so vntrue, as they conteyne a false doctryne and meaning in them. Yf ye thinke that I to boldly enter to iudge his meaning, confer these wordes with such as folowe in his owne writing (wherin vntruly he claimes those priuileges to his Bishops whiche neyther he nor they are able to iustifie) and there at large ye shall easlye perceiue what he meanes by these fewe woordes here. But I will followe him where awaye he leades me, and because he does here but briefly touche it I shall likewise shortly passe ouer it, and more throughly search it, where he does more at large presse it. In the beginninge of their late reuyued tyrannye, and afore they had obtained their long desired au∣toritie to ragne ouer Kinges and Prin∣ces,
it was my chaunce to talke with one of their stoutest Champions and of those that he calles the godly Bishops in pri∣son. Among sundry thinges that were to be redressed in talke as he thoughte, he toke this selfe same matter first and said it was not fitte for any temporal officer to sit as iudge on any Priest or spiritualVVhat au∣toritye Byshops haue o∣uer the Church. manne, specially in any spirituall mat∣ter. For the same cause began Tho. Be∣ket to rebell against his Prince: not suf∣feringe his Priestes to be punyshed for their murthers & roberyes and now like good childer they followe his steppes. I asked whye? for the lawes were then as they be nowe: and both verye well that Iustyces in their Sessyons and Assises might and shoulde enquire who than of∣fended the ciuill lawes and the order of religion establyshed, whether he were Priest or other: he aunswered that in the xx. of the Actes of Thappostles it was plaine that God had set the Bishops to gouerne the Churche. I saide that was another kind of gouernment that Saint Paule there grauntes to Byshops, and differs from that which kinges or Prin∣ces claime and ought to haue. No sais he marke the woordes, and it is ad regen∣dum Ecclesiam & regere regum est, there∣fore Byshops haue autoritie to rule as kynges. No said I, if ye wil be iudged
by the worde, the Greke worde must be iudge in this case: For in Greke it was first written and spoken, & there wil ap∣peare an other kind of gouernement, far diuers from that whyche belonges to Princes, the Greke worde in that place is . Which signifies, to fede, as the sheperde fedes his sheepe, and yet not without all gouernment or autority, but only such a simple kinde of rule and au∣toritye as shepeherdes haue ouer their flocke. If ye wil conferre one place of the scripture with another where this word is red or found (which is the best kinde of interpretinge the Scripture rightlye, as S. Austin teaches) and see what kind of gouernment it signifies there, than this place shall more easely be vnderstand. Fede the flocke that is among you, saisi. Pet. 5. Saint Peter. Fede my shepe sais our sa∣uiour Christ to Peter. Where, & in otherIoan. 21 like places also, the same Greke worde that is commenly translated in the Actes regere to rule, is put and signifies as ye s to feede. The same word is aplied also toMath. 2. our sauiour Christ in the Gospel, where is declared plainly, what kind of autori∣ty it signifies. Thou Bethleem in the land of Iuda, thou art not the lest of the Prynces of Iuda: for oute of thee, shalIoan. 10 there come to mee a Prynce, that shall rule or feede my people Israel. Also I am
the good shepeherd sais Chryste: where likewise is the same Greke word placed. Than if Christ our Lorde had any tem∣porall iurisdiction, or these other places, vsing the same Greke worde conteine a∣ny such thing: they might haue some ap∣pearaunce to clame their vsurped auto∣rity: elles it is not probable to giue the same word in that place alone that mea∣ning contrarye to so manye other places hauing the selfe same word. Nay further to say: did not our Lord and Maister Ie∣sus Christ refuse this wordlye autoritye himselfe when it was offered vnto him, and the one brother desired hym to de∣uide the enheritaunce betwixt hym and his other brother: he would not but said:Luk. xii. who apointed me a deuider betwixt you: as though he shoulde saye. It is not my callinge nor belonges to me, his kyng∣dome was not of this worlde: but he came to teache his fathers will, likewise he taught his Appostles not to chalenge this superiority, sayinge: the Princes ofLuk xii the people haue rule ouer theym, but it shall not be so amonge you: but he that woulde be the greatest, shalbe the least, that they might folow his steppes truly. But the manyfest place where the pro∣per signification of this word appeares,Ephe. 4. is in Paule: Where he reckens what officers God hais set in his Church, and
sais: Firste he sette some Apostles, other Prophetes, some Euangelystes, other shepeherdes and teachers. These shepe∣herdes (whiche are noted there, by the same word that they clayme their auto∣rity by) are placed by S. Paul, almost the lowest officers in Goddes Church: than much more they can not haue the highest rowme in the common welth and Chur∣che both. I knowe the Greke Poetes at∣tribute this word to kynges, but I trust they build not on heathen mennes wri∣tinges, and yet that name there is geuen theym, for their fatherlye loue towarde their Subiectes: rather then their royall autority. But compare them with shepe∣herdes that keepe oure sheepe in dede, of whom they haue their name, and easely their nature, property, office, and autori∣ty shalbe spied, Gods people are cald oft in the Scripture, sheepe (as we thy peo∣plePsa. 79. & the shepe of thy pasture will praise thee) and their teachers are called shepe∣herdes: because the one should in liuyng followe the simplicitye and obedience of shepe, and the other, the carefull paines and diligence of shepeherdes in fedynge, healynge, releuinge, guydynge, correc∣tynge. &c. Looke than what temporall autoritye the sheepeherde hais ouer his sheepe: and the same spirituall power haue the Byshoppes ouer the Churche.
The good shepeherde will not lette hys shepe feede in hurtful and roating pastu∣res, but wil remoue them to good feding groūdes: No more wil Gods good shepe∣herbes let Gods people and his brethren be poisoned wyth false doctrines, but by his autority roote out and confute them. The true shepeherd if he see the wolfe or foxe come to deuoure the flocke, he will watche and defende the folde: so shoulde the good Bishop by his office. The good shepeherde will saue the scabbed sheepe, bring home the stray, and fede the weaks and hungry: so wil the good Byshop ac∣cording to his duty. The good shepe∣herde if his shepe be vnrulye, wil set his dogge to pul him downe and tame him: yf any can not be healed, he will cutte it of, and kil it, for infecting the rest: so wil Gods good Byshop with the threatnin∣ges of Gods vengeaunce, pul downe the vnbridled stomaches of the people, make them to tremble and quake at Gods iud∣gementes, and if anye can not be reclay∣med, he wil cut him of by excomunicati∣on, seperate hym from the felowshyp of gods people, not suffer him to communi∣cate the Lordes Supper, whyche is the bande of brotherly loue, and forbidde all good folke his company, y• through suche shame he may be brought to knowledge his faut & amend, that he may ioifully be
receaued as a brother in the companye and felowship of Gods people agayne, and communicate with them in prayer, doctrine, discipline, and sacramentes as afore. In these pointes the autoritye of Byshops is so great, that it extendes to Prince, pope, & prelate, & none is exempt, but as they be subiect to Gods word, sa∣craments and doctrine, so must they obey Gods true minister and discipline. As for example, the good Byshop Ambrose dyd sharplye correct and excommunicate the Emperour Theodosius for a rashe mur∣ther done by his commaundement, and whether he is more praise worthye that would or durst rebuke and excommuni∣cate so mightye a Prince: or the good Emperor that willingly submitted him self, and obeyed his correction, it may be doubted, the power and autority than of Bishoppes is spirituall, belonginge to mans soule as their office and ministery is, and it standes cheiflye in these twoo pointes: in doctrine and disciplyne. As the temporall officer in the comen welth hais not the swearde committed to hym in vaine, but to defend the good, and pu∣nishe the euill: to smite the ennemy, and saue the subiect, to prison the frowarde, and loose the giltles: so hais gods mini∣ster in his Church full power and auto¦rity to teache sound doctrine and confut
the false, to beate downe hawty mindes, and raise the weake, to bind & loose the conscience by vertue of Gods worde, to throw into hell the obstinate, or lift into heauen the penitent, to cast out of Gods Church, and receiue agayne suche as he rightlye iudges by the Scriptures mete for mercy or iustice. And as Saint Peter calles Christ our lord the shepeherd and Bishop of oure soules: so those Bishops that folow Christ will chalenge no more autoritye to theym, than their Maister Christ had. I am sure thys pleases hym well to heare, speciallye of my mouthe, that such spirituall autoritye is geuen to spiritual ministers to execute on all sortes of peo∣ple: for as they belie vs in other thinges, saying: we teach false doctrine, and moue the people to sinne, so they saye that in deniyng them their vsurped autority, we take from theym, that whyche is due to them. Yet in graunting thus much vnto them, I meane as they teach (that Prie∣stes and Byshoppes haue this power of theym selues, or whan they be greased wyth the Popes oyle, that they may ex∣ecute it whan and on whome it pleases theym) but that God workes it by them, as his wisdom thinkes good, whan they vse them as he appointed them. For as the iudge or pursauant that bringes the
kinges pardon to saue a thiefe on the ga∣lowes, is but the Princes seruaunt, and not the chiefe Sauiour and delyuerer of the condemned, so in this absoluing and raysing vp the sinful clogged conscience, the chyefe praise and worke is gods, and the Bishop or minister is but Gods ser∣uaunt, goinge his message by his worde and commaundement to saue and loose them whom it pleases God to offer this grace vnto. But mee thinke I heare him saye: If Byshops in temporall causes haue not thys autority, why sit they so oft by com∣mission now vnder ye gospel in temporal maters. In dede forsomuch as they sit by commission, it proues that it belonges not to their offyce, as appointed by god, but in y• they serue the Prince as they be bounden. Who wils and commaundes thē by Comission to serue in such place and tyme. The Byshops offyce is chiefly taught in the scripture by the holy ghost: and from him he receiues his Commissi∣on, and is not inuented by Pope or man. Yf ye compare together Saint Paules Byshop described in Timothe and Ti∣us, with such toyes as the Popes Pre∣lates are ordeyned to play and feede the people withal: they are as lyke as blacke and white. Saint Paules Byshoppe is in the firste place licensed to marye, the
Popes are forbidden wiues, and alowed hoores for money. Saint Paules Bishop must preache: the Popes thinke it shame to stand in the Pulpit. Saint Paul wils his Bishop to haue his children obedient with al reuerence: the Popyshe Priestes Children sit by other mennes fires, and brought vp most wantonly. The Pope hais commaūded his Bishops to christen belles and shippes, to halow Miters and staues, ringes, Churche yardes, Altars, Superaltares, albes, vestimentes, Cha∣lices, corporas, Palmes, ashes, candels, water, fire, bread, oyle, creame, flowers, strippes, swordes, crownes, fingers. &c. This is their holle lyfe, and yet not one suche worde appointed theym by God in Scripture. What is this, but to forsake Gods ordinaunce, and folow their owne deuyses, to prefer man and his doinges, to the wisdom of the holye ghost. Whan he hais done all these thinges, he maye say, he hais serued bis maister the Pope, and done his commaundement, but not one thing that God biddes him. Yet remaynes one doubt vnanswered in these few wordes whan he sayes, that the gouernemente of the Churche was commytted to Byshoppes, as thoughe they bad receyued a larger & higher com∣mission from god, of doctrine & discipline thā other lawer priests or ministers haue
and thereby might chalenge a greater prerogatiue. But this is to be vnder∣stand that the Priuileges and superiori∣tes which Byshoppes haue aboue other ministers, are rather graunted by manne for maintaining of better order and qui∣etnesse in commen wealthes, then com∣maunded by God in his word. Ministers haue better knowledge and vtteraunce some than other, but their ministerye is of equal dignitye. Gods commission and commaundement is like, and indifferent to all, Priest, Byshop, Archbyshop, Pre∣late, by what name so euer he be called: goe and teach baptisinge in the name ofMar. xvi. Ioan xx. the father, the Son, and the holye ghost. And againe whose sinnes so euer ye for∣geue, they are forgeuen, and what soe∣euer ye loose in earth, it is loosed inAct. xx. heauen. &c. Likewise the Lordes supper by whom soeuer being lawfully called, it be ministred: it is of lyke strength, power and holines, Saint Paule calles the Elders of Ephesus together, and sais, the holy ghost made them Byshops to rule the Church of god, he writes also to the Byshops of Philippos, meaninge the Ministers: for neyther Ephesus nor Philippos were so great townes, but one lytle. Byshopricke is a greater compasse of ground, than they needed not manye Byshops, therefore this diuersitye of ab∣soluing
sinnes, inuented by idle braines, that a simple Priest maye absolue some small ones, other greater belonge to the Byshop, Tharchbyshop clames an other higher sort, the rest and fowlest sort, per∣tein to Popes and Cardinals, as the fa∣thers & maintainers of them: these I say are so foolish & childish to beleue, that I think it not nedeful to speake of thē, theyMynyster autoritye of like power, all are not grounded on Gods word, & ther∣fore must nedes be vntrue, and not to be credited because our faith hangs only on the holy scripture, greadye couetousnes to enriche thēselues, hais inuented these as also the rest of their supersticion whi∣che they tearme religion. Saint Ierom in his commentarye on the. i. Chapter ad Tit sais: that a Byshoppe and a Priest is all one, and in hys Epystle ad Euagri∣um, he sayes: that the Byshop wher so e∣uer he be, he is of the same power and Priesthoode. Rome makes him not bet∣ter, nor Englande makes him worse. A Byshop is a name of office, labour, and paynes, rather then of dignytye, ease, welth, or ydlenes. The word Episcopus is Greke, and signifies a Scoutwatche, an ouerloker or Spie: because he shoulde e∣uer be watching and warning, that the deuill our enemye do not enter to spoyle or destroy. And as in warre, the watche∣men, Scoutes, or Spies, yf they fall on
slepe or be negligent, they betraye their felowes, and deserue death? so in Gods Church, if the Byshops watch not dili∣gentlye, and saue their sheepe, God hais pronoūced sentens of death against them by his Prophet. I made thee a watche man to the house of Israel sais the Lord: thou shall heare the word of my mouth, and declare it them from me. If I say to the wicked, thou wicked, thou shalt die, and thou wilte not warne hym to takeEzech. 33 hede to his way, he shall die in his wic∣kednes, but his bloude I will require of thee. But I thinke the holy Byshops he crakes so much of, haue their callynge of the Dutche name, that signifies byts shepe: rather than of the Greke, that tea∣ches to saue sheepe by his painefull dili∣gence. If they were not to muche blin∣ded in their owne folyshnes, they might see in the last subsidye graunted in the tyme of their owne raygne, that they graunt those to be their betters, & aboue theym, from whence they receyue their autority. The Parliament geues theym and their Collectours, power to suspend depryue, and interdite anye Priest that paies not the subsidy: In that doing they graūt the Parliament to be aboue them, & from it to receiue their power. Yea fur∣ther to let them se how they be contrary to thēselfes, they giue a lay man (as most
part of their Collecters were) power, to interdite, suspende and absolue a Priest: whiche both be contrarye to their owne doctrine. I had not thought to haue said so muche on these his fewe woordes, and yet muche more hanges on this their opinion of claming their vsurped power aboue Princes and other ministers. For if thys their opinyon were true, that god gaue them such autority ouer his Chur∣che as they clame, it might be sayde on theym, as the Poete sais, Ouem lupo co∣misisti: that God had appointed wolues to kepe his shepe. There Saint Iames beynge Byshoppe, and there sayd Masse. ALas poore Masse that hais no better a ground work to be bylte on than false lies, and so vnlerned a Proctour to speake for it. I pray you who helpt Saint Iames at Masse, who halowed hys Corporas, Superaltare, Chalice, vestimentes, &c. Who was dea∣con and Subdeacon to reade the Epistle and Gospel, who rang to the sacring and serued the pax: for I am as sure it was a solempne feast, and that these thinges were done, as he is that S. Iames saide
masse. He that tolde you the one, could haue told you the other as well as this, if he had lust, and ye saye your Masse can not be saide without these trinkettes. I praye you what Masse was it? began it with a great R. of Requiem, or Scala coeli, or resurrexi: For the plague, or murrion of beastes? part of a trentall, or for all chri∣sten soules? if ye wil haue vs to beleue it ye must tell vs some more. I praye you also which Saint Iames was it, for we reade of diuers of that name, both in the Scripture, and other histories liuyng at that time. It is not inoughe to saye, so it is: but ye must proue it, yf ye will be be∣leued. I pray you whose masse as they terme it vsed he, and of whose makynge was it? Chrisostomes or Basils, Grego∣ries or Ambrose, or that whiche beares hys owne name of Saynt Iames? what language spake he? Hebrewe, Greke, or Latin? these thynges must be proued a∣fore your Latin popish patched Masse, by so many Popes in so manye yeares, or it was broughte to his perfection, canne be proued. Doe they thynke that beccaus my Lord Bishop, Maister Docter, or such Scauingers, and corner crepers, as thi Champion is, say it is so, and deceiue th people with lies priuely in corners, tha none dare saye against it openly, but al their sayinges must be beleued: I do no
take them to be of that autoritye or cre∣dit. But I will not stand with him in al these narrow pointes, although I could kepe him much play in so doing. I agree that Iames brother of oure Lorde, was Bisshop there at Ierusalem as the aun∣cient writers testifye: but that he said or did anye thing lyke the Popyshe louted Latin masse, that I vtterly deny. For that the church, alter, Superaltare, ves∣stiments, Chalyce. &c. should be halowed afore they could haue masse said in thē, on theym, or with theym, it is playne written in their owne law, de consecra di∣stincto .i when they haue proued that S. Iames had these halowed, howe and by whome they were halowed, than I will beleue he said their folish masse, and not afore: for their masse canne not be done without them. Also if they will be bele∣ued, they muste declare what order of masse he vsed, was it Chrisostomes, Ba∣sils, Iustines, ertulians, Austins, Di∣onisius, Isidorus, Gregories, Rabanus, the Romaines, or whose els? Surely all these were vnborne manye yeares after Saint Iames died, that it coulde not be theirs, whi (I am sure) some will say is there so many diuers sortes of so manye holy fathers to minister the Lordes sup∣per, and our holye Bishops of late haue burned so many innocentes that would
not vse their only one disordert order of massing, as though all other were here∣ticall and schismatical (as they terme it) but that onely one which they haue de∣uised, disguised and misused: yea surelye these diuersityes al be printed and to be had wyth manye moe godlye ones, and therefore they can not deny it: and bicause they be prynted, I will not stande to re∣hearse them holly, for it were infinite. There is yet an other liturgie in Print, (which worde they cal and vnlearnedly translate euer a Masse) bearing the name of Saint Iames, but euen in their late raging time of madnes, whan they had gotten certayne copies of these Greeke liturgies, or ministring the Lordes sup∣per, thinking to haue printed them, and that it woulde haue stablyshed their do∣inges: whan in triall and translatynge them they see it fall oute otherwais and to make against them, they let it alone, and suppressed it: like as the same holye father and Cardinall fyrste prynted hys booke that he wrote against king Henry the eyght, to please the Pope wythall, and to sturre Themperoure to warre a∣gainst England, for falling from Pope∣ry, and after his conscience accusing him to haue done amysse, he burned all the bookes he coulde come by, and yet nowe they be commonly solde to his shame as
these Liturgies be to theirs. Al these or∣ders of ministring the Communion dif∣fer from their Pope holye relique, their Latin masse in the chiefest poyntes: that is that the Priest prayes not alone, nor in a straunge language, eates not, nor drinkes vp all alone, nor receyues it for other: sels it not for money, nor swepes the Popes scalding house, his purgatory with it: but the people pray with him in theyr mother tounge, receyue wyth him for the coumforte of their owne soules, and not for pockye pigges, scalled horse, nor scabbed shepe, neyther making tren∣tals or marchandise of it, but in remem∣braunce of Chrystes death, who dyed for theim. But that Sainct Iames neuer sayde the Popysh masse (as they would father it on him) the Pope himselfe grauntes. Pope Gregorie the first (called the great for his greate holynes and learninge, inEpistula lib. 7. C▪ 63. comparison of the rest) sais that the Apo∣stles consecrated the host onlye, with the Lordes prayer whan they minystred. Than Saint Iames if he ministred ane thing at al there euen by the Popes con∣fession neuer sayd their latin Masse, nor any thing like it. For that consecration in latin of theirs, hais many longe other prayers, crossinges and blessinges, and supersticious Ceremonies as all manne
see beside the Lordes prayer. And in that same selfe Chapter of Gregorye, ye shal see other diuersites of Ceromonies and prayers there rehearsed, wherein the la∣tin masse differs from the Greke and o∣ther. Wherefore it was not thoughte of old time to so many holy fathers, a wic∣ked thing to haue diuers orders in mini∣string the communion, though our blou∣dye butchers will not swarue an inche from their father of lyes: but burne all that gainsay them. Howe manye toyes, crossinges, blessinges, blowinges, knoc∣kinges, knelinges. bowinges, liftinges, sighinges, houstinges, tournynges and halfe turninges, mockinges, mowings, slepynges, and apyshe playinges, softe whisperyngs, and loud speakinges haue we to consecrate our owne deuises with all, or it can be getten done? Morcouer if Saint Iames should haue vsed our la∣tin canon and priuitye of the Masse (as they terme it) in hys consecration or any such like, he shoulde haue prayed to hym selfe, and worshipped himselfe beynge a∣lyue, whyche were a greate absurdite to graunt. For the latin canon and preuitySaint Ia∣mes ne∣uer sayde Masse. of the Masse is full of praying to Sain∣tes, and names them particularly: amōg whom Saint Iames is one himselfe. Than Sainct Iames vsynge the Lati Masse as they say he did, he shoulde hau
prayed to himselfe: and worshipped him selfe beinge aliue: which I thinke whan they aduise themselues better, they will not graunt to be true, nor meete to be done: and wyth suche wicked foolyshnes I trust they wyll not burden Saint Ia∣mes withal. Furthermore it skils much what language Saint Iames vsed: for our holy Byshops think it not mete that their holy relyques shoulde be vttered in our Englyshe tunge. Saint Paule sais, be had rather speake fiue wordes that hei. Cor. 14. vnderstandes, and to teache other, than tenne thousande in a straunge tongue, oure Prelates saye, nay. None will pre∣pare himselfe to warre, ecept he vnder∣stand what the trumpet blowes: no more can any learne his duty to God, if he vn∣derstand not the thinge that is taught, and the language. Oure Prelates sayes that blinde ignoraunce is the mother of deuocion: but Christ sayes: ye erre be∣cause ye know not the Scripture, Than ignoraunce is the cause of errour. By like God eyther vnderstandes not Eng∣lyshe, or els he is partiall, and loues not oure Englyshe tounge so well as the la∣tin: and yet to speake or vnderstande dy∣uers languages is the gifte of the bolye ghost. Surelye if the holye ghost, geue the grace to speake and vnderstande dy∣uers languages, God can not bate them
that vse anye of theim, nor disalowe the giftes of the holy ghost in any man. We rede (for they be tourned into latin and printed) that other Countries haue vsed of olde tinie, and yet do at this day their owne language in ministring the lordes supper. Why than may not England do the same? What faute haue we made more than other? Chrisostomes order of the Communion Basils, and that which beares the name of Saint Iames, were written in the Greke, whiche the people vnderstoode, and aunswered in the same language. The Sirians, Athiopians, Armenians, Moscouites, and the domi∣nion of Prestor Ioan doe at this day and euer did vse their owne language whan they ministred, and out of them are tur∣ned latin that easily it may be sene how we differ. The good Christian Emperor Iustinian commaundes plainelye in hys ciuill lawes. Nouell constitut 124. and. 126. that all thynges shoulde bee done in the Churches in those languages whyche were knowen in the Countries, and also that the wordes of baptisme and the lor∣des supper shoulde bee spoken in a loude voyce, that thereby the deuotion of the hearers might be stirred vp: which al (al∣thoughe they were written a thousande yeares sins) our holy Papistes deny and saye it was neuer done, nor ought to be
done, nor that Princes haue anye suche autoritye to commaunde or medell in. Pope Pius the seconde beares witnesseaeneas syl∣uius Pisto Boeica. Ca. 13. that the Sclauons whan they made sute to minister in their owne tunge, and the Pope made curtsie to graunt it, a voyce was hearde from heauen, that euery spi∣rite and language shoulde prayse God, and so it was graunted them to vse their owne language. The Popyshe kinde of mariage althoughe the rest was latin, yet the best part was English. I N. take thee N. to my wedded wife. &c. I N. take thee N. to my wedded husbād. &c. If this was well, why not the rest also. Yf in making promises we vse that language whiche we vnderstand, why shoulde we not do it to vnderstand what God com∣maundes vs? Is a promise to man more to be considered than that which is made to God? Yf these thinges shoulde be de∣nied, they be in Print, that euerye man may reade, and therefore I wil not stand longe in rehearsinge of theym: Are these tongues more holye than oures, that the holye misteryes maye bee vsed in theym and not in oures: I leaue oute the Boemians and Waldenses, which haue sed to communicate in their owne lan∣guage many (though not al) these. C C C yeres. The Germans, the Italians, and the French I passe ouer because it is not
olde. But these Countries they wil say, are in the East parte of the worlde, and partes of the Greke Churche, whiche neuer was subiecte to their holye father the Pope, and in these thinges they doe erre, but the west Church (worshippinge the Pope) would neuer suffer anye suche thing. In thus sayinge they proue the Pope to be worse than the Turke, Pres∣ster Ioan, the Sophi, or anye Heathen Prince that will not suffer Gods people to worship their God in their owne lan∣guage as they doe. It is great maruaile to me why oure holye Prelates will not haue the people to praye in Englishe seing the common rude sort and altoge∣ther vnlearned in all the farre Northe partes of the Realme, euen the borders: haue euer vsed the lordes prayer, the ar∣ticles of our faith, and tenne commaun∣dementes, and yet do in Englysh meter differing nothing from the true sense of the scripture. They neuer learned them in latin, and can not nor wil not learne that they vnderstand not. Surelye Gods wisedome in their rude simplicitye, does confound these proude Prelates wicked Poperye. Yet is there remaining one of ye foulest lyes that is commenlye red or writen in the Popes testament, the decrees wher∣on they bylde their faith: whiche if thys
proctour and all his partakers can proue to be true, I will saye with theym: It is writen de consecra distincto. i. ca. Iacobus that Saint Iames y• brother of our lord, Bys∣shop of Ierusalem, and Eusebius Bys∣shop of Cesaria made their masse. If this haue any likenes of a truth in it, let the world iudge. Saint Iames was Bys∣shop of Ierusalem and there liued conti∣nually, not wandringe into other coun∣tryes, as other Apostles didde, but there suffered martirdome: beynge throwne downe from the pynacle of the Temple, where a Fuller smote oute his braines, with a clubbe. In Ierusalem then their naturall speache was Hebrewe, and the prayers that they vsed in the Temple were onelye the Scriptures, and in the Hebrew tounge, as the Iewes do to this day, in their Synagoges: (wherein they proue themselues better than y• Papists, which in their Churches haue few prai∣ers of the Scripture, but manye foolishe ones deuised of their own braine, and in a language that the people vnderstande not.) Therefore whan they haue proued that the Latin toung was vsed in Ieru∣salem, or that Sainct Iames prayed in Latin (although I doubt not but he had the gift of tounges as well as other A∣postles had) I shall than beleue theim.
The order of the Communion whiche is abrode in the name of saint Iames is in Greeke: but that he wrote or spake latin in Hierusalem, there is no probability in it. And if he made oure latin masse than, that should be vsed now through out the world, why woulde he make another in Greke so far vnlike to it? both can not be true that he made one in Greke, and an∣other in latin, so farre vnlyke one to the other. Afterward the gloose vpon this text of the Popes decree, afore rehearsed de consecra distincto. i. sayes: that Sainct Iames made the Canon of the masse, and Eusebius added other peces to it af∣terwarde: but beside that inconueni∣ence whiche I spake of afore (that Saint Iames than shoulde praye to himselfe, yf that were true) a greater vntrueth wold folowe, that is to pray to Saints, that were vnborne, some C. some CC. some. CCC. yeare after and more: as to Cipriane, Cornelius, Laurence, Chriso∣gonus, Damianus, which and such like women as Luce, Agnes, Cecili. &c. are put in their Canon, or priuitye of their latin masse. Is this lyke that Saint Ia∣mes a saint himselfe woulde praye to a saint (if they were saintes) that was yet vnborne so many yeares after his death. But it may be thought that they knewe these thinges to be so foolish that if they
were openly redde and vnderstand, they would be laughed at & despised, & there∣fore they inioyne their haplaynes to speake softly whan they ay these things that none should heare theim what they say. If it were good, it were no daunger in letting it be heard, for it would make them good that heard it (for faith comes by hearinge) thoughe their opinyon is that it would be despysed. But surelye hearynge is the waye to make menne good. Yet folowes a greater inconuenience if this Popes decree were true. For as the glose there sais, that Saint Iames made their Canon, so it sais that Euse∣bius whiche liued (as he sais) vnder the Emperour Iulianus Apostata, shoulde make the rest. How can their great re∣lique the masse than be. M. D. yeare old, as they crake it to be. This counsell of of the Apostles where Saint Iames said masse (as this Proctour sais) was aboute l. yeare after Christ our lord was borne, and not full. xx. yeares after he was cru∣cified (as manye histories doe testifie) but Eusebius lyued vnder Iulian Thempe∣rour CCCix. yeare after the birth of our sauiour Christ: & now sins Christs birth, it is. M. D. lxii. Thā take CCClx. out of M. D. lxii. and so remaines but. M. CCii
So by their owne accoumpte they lie CCClx. yeare in the auncientye of their masse. But yet a greeter lie, Eusebius was a Grecian and neuer wrote in Latin, that any history makes mention of: how than wrote he their latin masse? Yea where Gregory Bishop of Ro. in the Epistle a∣fore alledged sais: that one Scholasticus made the prayers of their Canon, howe can this be true that Saint Iames madeLib. Epi∣stula. 7, Ca. 63. it? darre they deny that whyche the ho∣lyest of the Popes their fathers, sais is so. But bicause they charge vs with con∣trarietes and diuersites of opinions, and are most in that faute themselues. I wil yet let them see more where in they dyf∣fer among themselfes: Isidorus lib. i. de ori∣gine officiorum Ca v. as Faber alleges him,Ioan Fa∣ber de missa ver ger. sais that Saint Peter ordeyned first the order of the Masse or prayers, with whi∣che the consecration is made, and that the holle world folowed the same order, and this was done by Peter at Antioche as the same Ioan Faber sais Than how is that true that saint Iames and Euse∣bius made it at Ierusalem? nay how can any of these sayings agree with Platina one of y• Popes sworne men which affir∣mes, that Pope Sixtus appoynted the Sanctus to be songe. Gregory the Kirie∣eleeson:
Telesphorus, Gloria in excelsis: Ierom the Epistle and Gospell. Leo the censing: Innocentius. i. the pax. Sergius the Agnus. &c whiche all lyued a greate sort of yeares a sunder, and from the first to the last, afore it could be patched toge∣ther, it was six hundreth yere. For Gre∣gory was Pope six hundreth yeare after Christ was borne. Other sortes of recke∣ning there be, which Pope added whiche parte to the Masse, and they agree not on the names, but in the number of yeares there is no great difference: For it was seuen hundreth yeare after Christ afore they had perfectly patched it toge∣ther, and brought it in estimacion as ap∣peares by these reckninges. Where is now their. M. D. yeare they crake so mu∣che on? whan they haue lerned to speake the truth, and agree among themselues: they maye better blame other that dooe not. I wil not lay all their lyes and disa∣greeinges to their charge, for it were to longe, but whan they haue aunswered these, then they shall haue moe. In the meane tyme these are sufficient to lette them see that haue eyes, and be not wil∣fully blinde, how vaine their bragginge lies be whan they crake that their super∣sticion whiche they terme their religion, is so old: & that the contrary was neuer heards of vnto nowe a few yeares past.
There is another sutteller sort of Pa∣pistes, and whan they see these thynges to be so foolyshe, that they haue no good grounde worke, nor able to be defended, they say, that Christ himself said the first masse: and yet that is as vntrue as the rest. For the reasons that I made a∣gainst the canon of S. Iames (as they cal it) ye same may more iustly be applied for our Sauiour Christ. I am sure they will not say that he eate all alone, nor prayed to any saintes, nor what kind of masse it was, they are not able to shewe, and proue it so to be. I graunte, and most true it is: that our Sauiour Christ insti∣tuted the holy communion, or the lordes supper (as sainct Paule calles it) but for anye thinge done by him to proue their masse I vtterly deny. In hys lasse supper be sacryficed not for the quicke and the dead as they doe in their masse: but that sacrifice was offred bi himself in his own body & bloudshed on the crosse, on good Fridaye, the next day after that he insti∣tuted his holye supper, the night afore, and bad theym do that in remembraunce of him vnto his cominge againe. This is that whiche we desire all to folowe: this is that, whyche condemnes their masse: this is that, which we would haue all to eate and drinke of that bread and cuppe with the mynister, as he dydde wyth hys
Apostles, and as Saint Paule willes the Corinthians to doe: and not one Priest to stande liftinge it ouer his heade to be worshipped, & the people to stand gasing at it, and be content with loking at it: & whan they receiue to take both the bread and the cuppe, and not to rob Gods peo∣ple of the one halfe of his supper, ye bloud of our Sauiour Christ, which he shed for the laye people, as well as for Priestes: and badde theym drinke it, as well as the Priestes: for he loued theym, and dyed for theym as well as for the Prie∣stes. And Priestes can no more saue them selues, than they can, but haue the same sauiour that they haue, and must goe to heauen the same waye that they doe. And because they crake so proudly of the auncientye of their masse, let me see in what auncient writer they reade of it or finde the worde writen. I know they woulde faine haue the woorde to be He∣brewe: but if it be so, it rather makes a∣gainst them, than with them. For if itMasse. be a sacrifice of the Iewes, than it is ta∣ken awaye by oure Sauyour Christ, and fulfilled by hym, as all other sacryfices of Moyses be▪ or els they be Iewes vsing those sacrifices, whych god forbad to vse at these dayes after the coming of christ▪
Thappostle to the Ebrewes sais, that if the Priesthode be taken away and trans∣late to another sort, than the law is ta∣kenHebre. 7. away to: but the Priesthoode of Aa∣ron is taken awaye and all his sacrifices (or elles Christe is comen in vaine) why than the lawe of sacrificing must be ta∣ken away to, as Thapostle there sais. If they consider the nature of the He∣brewe worde, they woulde not stryue so much about it. They glory muche that the name of their masse is Missah in E∣brew, and shoulde be written deutero 16 & thereof should Missa come in latin, or els the Ebrew name to remaine still. The word Missah signifies a free will gift that a man offers willinglye vnto the lorde: and not only that which the Priestes of∣fer of themselues, but also which any o∣ther manne frelye bringes to be offered, Therfore if this word or place make for them, it proues that all maner of menne may say Masse: For euery manne maye willinglye bringe what he lust to offer: and than Priestes haue spunne a faire threde in alledginge this against theym selfes, and prouing that euery man may say their masse. But the word signifies also a lyftyng vp, as some do take it, and therfore they proue their eleuation by it. Thus they be driuen to hard shifts, that they can not well tell what to make of
it. They are well content with eyther signification or both, if they might kepe it, for the one biddes menne bringe, and they would gladly take: the other to lyft vp as a sacryfice, and that maynetaynes their state. Reade the place, and than iudge the meaning. Thou shalt kepe the holye daye of wekes, sais Moises (that is Witsonday. vii. wekes after Easter) andDeut. 1. thou shalt bring a gift of thine own fre wil, according to thy power as the lorde hais blessed thee with much or little. This free gifte is called Missah, and the people must geue it: than if it make any thinge for masse, it makes also that the people should say masse: for they bring e∣ery one this gift as they be able. The Priestes say not masse frelye but for mo∣ney, and therefore it can not be called a rewil gift on their part. But because they are delited with giftes, and wil not saye masse freelye, they rather grounde them selues hereon, that they maye not onely sel, but raise the price of them, and ift it high ouer their heades, They may speake well of the Gospel if they would r had any good natures in them. For their Masse was neuer so honoured, nor t so great a price as the gospellers haue made it, at a hūdreth marks, where they will sell it for a grote, and God forbyd that euer it be better chepe. Surely if it
be so good (as they report it to be) it is to good cheape yet, and they with sellynge so good cheape, haue brought it oute of estimation. A good thynge can not be to deare: and surely he that wil lie broi∣lynge in purgatorye for sparinge. i. d. a grote, or x. s. for a trentall, he hais few frendes: & if he be able, to pay it and wil not, I wil neuer be sory for him, though he ly there stil. There is an other Ebrew word called Mas, that signifies a tribute, which may wel be applyed to it (because they be delited with auncient names, I shal helpe them) for it is the greatest taxe that euer was laid on y• world. Al princes heathen & christened laid together, neuer tooke such a tribute of the people, as the Pope and his collectours do by masse. For masse Princes haue geuen wholle countries, noble men their land, and the people their goods, they haue disherited their children, and impoueryshed theym selues to fede the Popes chaplains & bye masses. Alas deare penny worthes, forse vile a thing. The Ducthe word Messe helpes theym well to, whiche signifies a fre marte, or fare for al people to resorte to with all wares to bie and sell, and wyth suche lybertye, that those euyll menne whiche darre not, nor maye not come neare at other tymes wythoute daunger, than may frelye goe and come
wythout harm, after that the market be be ronge, as they vse. So is their masse. What ware so euer is brought for it, it is welcome, they refuse none, wolle, ba∣con, chese, Freers neuer refused, and be he neuer so wicked, it is not denied him, It is a salue for all sores, and heales all wickednes and sorowes that fall eyther on manne or beast. They would faine haue it auncyent, and therefore they seke the olde Autours where the worde Missa may be founde. They allege Igna∣tius, Clemens, Dionisius, Sozomenus. &c. where they woulde make menne be∣leue it were red. In dede in translating these oute of Greeke, they vse the same worde, but he that hais redde his Greks grammer can sone vnderstand that there is no such worde in Greke. Therefore as Thinterpretour does foolyshlye vse the worde: so foolyshlye they folowe and beleue him: The woorde is latin, and is vsed in no latin wryter commenlye a∣fore Gregorye the firste, who liued sixe hundreth yeare after Christe, saue twise or thryse onelye in Ambrose in hys E∣pystle, and yet he lyued. CCCC. yeareLib. 5 Epi∣stula. 33. after Christe. Than they haue not so greate cause to crake of auncientye of the thinge, nor of the woorde, seynge neyther Ebrewe, Greeke, nor Latin,
can be proued to haue such a word in su∣che a signification, the space of four hun∣dreth yere after Christ, no nor than ney∣ther, for thoughe Ambrose vse the worde yet it signifies farre otherwaies, as Am∣brose order of communion wel declares. I wil not stand to rehearse the manifold interpretacion of the latin woorde, and what the meaning of it is, least ye wold laughe, herafter if occasion be geuen by them, I shal more fully entreat of it. One thinge I woulde demaunde o maister Proctour, and if his aunswere b not ready, I am content he aske counsel, so that he aunswere substancially, that i may abide triall. Good fridaye masse, why does it differ from all the yeare be∣side? one of these iii. must nedes folowe▪ eyther that one masse only is good, & th rest noughte, or the reste good, and tha nought, or els (as I am sure he will saye oth are good. If bothe be good, tha there may be diuers sortes of theym: IGood Fri∣dayes Masse. there may be two diuers sortes, and bot good, why may there not be a thirde or fourth as good? Why than maye not th order now apointed in English be goo to? On good friday there is neyther E∣pistle, nor Gospel, Gloria in exelsis, n Crede, Sanctus, nor Agnus, Canon n priuity, crossing, toying, nor blowynge nor their woordes of consecration, pa
or Ite missa est, not so much as Dominus v∣bis cuna: but streight after confiteor, he leapes post haist ouer all, to the Pater noster. Surely if this be good one daye it maye be vsed oftner: and this agrees best with that that Gregory sais: Tha∣pstles consecrated onelye wyth the Lordes prayer: and therefore it seemes that if anye of their masses shoulde be good, that thys goes nexte to the best and simpliest sort, without all curiosi∣tie. If they may doe all perfectlye this daye, without their canon, than their canon & priuitie is not of so great force as they make it to be For sure if this be well on this day, it maye be well on other dayes to, for God is no chaunge∣lynge, nor he commaundes not one sort of communicatinge his supper to daye and another to morow, but alwaies su∣che a one which agrees with his word. Their commen aunswere & solution is knowen, but it wil not serue: they must prouide better stucte, or els theyr doings be foolysh. But to make an ende of this great controuersye for thauncientye of their masse, ye shall heare it determined by a miracle from heauen. Whan there were diuers sortes of masses, as they be called, vsed in latin in diuers places, as at Millane and euery where almost ge∣nerally there was vsed, Saint Ambrose
order of Communion which there con∣tinues to this daye, and Gregories or∣der was vsed also in other places: the Pope to determine the matter, woulde trie whether should be alowed through his Dominion (For Gregories was not vsed at all in Fraunce) and it was thought shame that Ambroses order be∣ing but a Bishop should be preferred to the Popes. Therfore he tooke eyther of their masse bookes as they terme them, in an Euening aid them on the Altar, locked the Churche dodres, and desired god to declare by some miracle whether boke should be vsed generally of all sor∣tes. In the morninge Gregories booke leaues were found scattred al y• Church ouer: and Ambroses lay stil: the doores benge fast locked all night (as he sais:) but wise men may doubt. This miracle maister Pope like a wise expounder of dreames sais, that as the leaues were forne and blowen abrode all the Chur∣che ouer: so should Gregories booke b vsed through out the world. For this was done by God, as well their greate God Bell, did eate vppe all the meat that was set afore him al night as Da∣niell writes. But that a man may no be wiser than Mounser Pope, I woul intrprete this greate miracle thus: That God was angry with Gregories
boke, and therefore rent it in pieces, and scattered it abrode: & the other as good, lay sound vntouched, and at the least so to be preferred. This was done by pope Adrian the first more than vii. C. lxxvii. yeares after Christ, and thus long their holy masse was in controuersy afore it was determined. Than it lackes much of M. D. as they vntruly and proudlye crake. These thinges are not writen by any new menne or heretikes as it plea∣ses theym to terme theym, but by their own catholicke fathers: Durandus and Nauclerus. Yea Polychronic. lib. vii. ca x. writes that the white obseruāt mun∣kes vse by their profession Sainct Am∣brose order, and not Gregories euen at these dayes: wherefore their masse is not generall. I woulde they did make n en of liynge, that we myght ake an ende of reprounge theym: and oth ioyne together in worshipping the uing God only, and beleuing his holy ord afore al other. Saint Austin in  lyke controuersye of religion betwixt m & y• Maniches praies thus. O great nd almighty god & god of al goodnes, hom we ought to thinke & beleue that ou art inuiolable, incorrptible, andRetract. i. cap. xv. mutable: O triple vnity which al the urch does worshippe, I hauing expe∣ence of thy mercye to warde me, praye ee humblye, that thou wte not suf∣fer
theym to dyffer from mee in thy religion, and worshippe of thee, with whom syns I was a childe I haue had a most speciall agrement in felowship of menne. Amen. God graunte vs all this to pray and diligentlye endeuoure our selues to seke this vnity of religion in worshipping the liuinge God onelye as he hais taught vs in his holy word, and no other waies, for his sonnes sake, our lord and christ, So be it. In Englande where the faith of Chryste and true religion was planted aboute the3 yeare of our lorde. C. lxxxii. Elutherius Pope, sendinge Legates to Lucius than kinge of Englande, which conuerted this Realme to the faith, and establyshed true religion in Englande whiche continued▪ CC yeares. As the rest of al their doctrine is foun∣ded on the Pope so is this. This is their subtility to make men belcue that Eng∣land hais euer receyued y• christian fait & religion frō Rome: & therfore we mu fetch it from thence still: which are bot most vntrue. If nothing els would, this one saying proues him to be vnlearned that thus sais: Gildas our country man in his history sayes, that Britane recei∣ued the Gospel in the tyme of Tiberius the Emperour vnder whom Christ suf∣fred. Does not Tertulian who lyued  the same time of this Pope write in h
booke against the Iewes thus: Thapo∣stlesEnglande receiued no the fayth first from Ro. bun Thapostles tyme. are declared in Dauids Psal. to be the Preachers of Christ. Their sounde he sais went oute in all the earth, and their woordes vnto the roastes of the earth. In whom els haue all people be∣leued but in christ which is now comen. Whom haue other people beleued: the Parthians, the Medes, the Persians, they that dwell in Mesopotania, Iurie, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrigia, Pamphilia, Egipt, and the parts of Li∣bia about Cyrene, the straungers of R▪ y• Iewes, Proselites, men of Crete & A∣rabia: and other people, as now the di∣uerse sortes of the Getes, and manye coastes of the Murrians, al the boūders of Spaine, diuerse nations of Fraunce, and the places of the Britanes, whiche the Romaines coulde neuer attaine to, nowe are subiect to Christ, and the pla∣ces of Sarmatia, of the Danes, the Germanes, the Sithians, and of many other hid people and prouinces, & ma∣nye Iles vnknowen to vs▪ and whiche now we can not recken. In all which places reanes the name of Christ which is now comen: Thus ferre Tertullian. Marke in how many countries, he sais the name of Christe reaned, it was so commenly and well beleued: and howe amonge theym, he reckens the wildest
places of the Britaines to be of the nū∣ber: and these were chrystened in hys time, who liued in the same Pope Elu∣therius time. Than it was not Pope Elutherius that first sende the christian faith hither, but they had receyued the Gospell afore he was borne? does not some Chronicles tell that Ioseph of A∣rimathia, came hither & preached here? no doubt eyther he or some Apostle, or scholer of theirs hadde preached Christ here, and he was receyued and beleued afore this Pope was borne. Beda wri∣tes that in his time & almost a thousand yeare after Christ, here in Britaine Ester was kept in the full moone what daye in the weeke so euer it fell on, and not on the sonday after as we do now Wherfore it appeares that these Prea¦chersPolychronic. lib. 5. ca. 17. came from the Easte parte of the world where it was so vsed, rather than from Ro. whiche condemned that vse Parauenture Elutherius helpt to en¦crease it, and sende some Preachers hy¦ther, but that he was the firste, can not be proued: yet woulde to God the  woulde folowe that Gospell, religion Lawes, and Counsell that Elutherius gaue kynge Lucius. But letts it  graunted theym, that Elutherius esta∣blyshed relygion in Englande: will  make any thinge for their purpose: red
the Popes Epystle to the Kynge, and than iudge. There is greate contro∣uersye what time thys kynge lyued (as appeares in Fabians table) and there∣fore a frowarde manne myght doubt, whether anye suche thinge were or not: but I will not deale so preciselye wyth him. In the yeare from Christes passion. Clxix. the Lorde Elutherius Pope wrote thus to Kynge Lucius Kinge ofElutherius Epistle to kyng Lu∣cius. Britaine, for the correction of the kinge and his nobles of the Realme of Bri∣taine. Ye requyred of vs the Romane lawes and the Emperours, to be sent ouer to you, the whiche ye woulde practyse and put in vre within your Realme. The Romane lawes and the Emperoures, we maye euer reproue, but the lawe of God, we maye not. Ye haue recey∣ued of late throughe Goddes mercye in the Realme of Brytaine, the lawe, and sayth of Chryste: ye haue wyth you in the Realme, bothe the partes of the Scryptures: oute of theym by Goddes grace, wyth the Counsell of youre Realme, take ye a lawe, and by that lawe (throughe Goddes sufferance rule youre Kyngedome of Brytaine. For ye ee Goddes Uycarre in youre
kingdome, accordinge to the sayinge of the Psalme. &c. O God geue thy iudge∣ment to the king, and thy righteousnes to the kinges sonne. He saide not the iudgement and righteousnes of Them∣perour, but thy iudgement and iustice, that is to saye of God. The kynges sonnes be the christian people, and folke of the Reame, which be vnder your go∣uernement, and liue and contine we in peace within your kingdom as the gos∣pell sais: Like as the henne gathers her chickins vnder her winges, so does the kyng his people. The people and folke of the Realme of Britaine be youres, whome if they be deuyded, ye ought to gather to concord and peace, to cal them to the fayth, and lawe of christe, and to the holye churche, to cherish and main∣taine them, to rule and gouerne them, and to defend them alwais from theym that wold doe them wrong, from mali∣cious men and enemies. &c. A king hais his name of ruling, and not of hauinge a Realme. Thou shalt be a kyng whileRex a re∣gendo, non a regno. thou rulest well: but if thou do not, the name of a king shall not remaine with thee, and thou shalt loose it, which god forbid. Thalmighty God graunt you so to rule the Reame of Britaine, that ye may raigne with him for euer, whose
vicar ye be in the Realme, thus far the Epistle. Marke I praye you what thys good Pope grauntes, and whether he be of this peuishe Proctours opinion or of his holye Byshops that he crakes so much on. First he wils him not to take the Romaines lawes to rule his realme by, for they maye euer be reproued, but to make lawes accordinge to the scrip∣ture, which neuer can iustlye be gaine, said, and by them to rule. Further he cals the kinge Gods vicar twise in this letter: thirdlye he sais the kinge ought to call the people to the faith of christ. How can Papistes than be disobedient to kings, whan they see the Pope graūt so much to kinges? the Pope calles the king gods vicar: and our Papistes deny it, and say the Pope is Gods vicar. The Pope biddes rule by the Scripture, and refuses his owne lawes: but oure holye Byshoppes saye Scriptures make her∣retikes, and will be subiect to no lawes but the Romaines. Lastly he charges kinges to bring the people to the faith: but oure spiritualitye saye, kinges haue nothing adoe in Ecclesiastical matters, nor religion. They sticke much on aun∣cientie, and the Popes autority: and yet those godly thinges which godly aunci∣ent Popes haue sayde and decreed, they can not abyde, because it takes a waye
their autority and pride. Platina and Polychronicon wryte that this Pope decreed that no manne shoulde refuse anye meate that manne eates: yf thys Pope say true, why haue we than com∣maunded vppon paine of deadlye sinne by Papists, so many supersticious kinds of fastinges & forbearing meates at cer∣tayn times. If they be not supersticious (because they wolde bind the conscience with them and make it sinne to breake theim) let theym proue it by the Scrip∣ture to be godly. If they be catholickes that beleue and folowe the Pope, why are we called heretikes in beleuing and teachynge that whyche the Pope hais written? yf they wil be called the Popes darlynges, why doe they denye the Po∣pes writynges: If true religion was stablyshed here by this Pope, why than does this scauinger sweepe the stretes wyth contrarye doctrine to this Pope, and with false lyes. If they would haue vs beleue and honoure the Pope, they must first beginne theyw selfes. Who will thinke that he geues good counsell & would haue men to folow him, which will be ye first y• wil do & teach contrary to his own sayings: these holy Byshops of oures, honoure their Pope in suffe∣ringe for him, that neuer will thanke theym, and saye, they woulde haue all
to doe the same: yet they themselfes are the firste that teache and dooe contrary to this Pope, and many other of the el∣dest forte, in all suche thinges as please them: and so they wyll correct hym ra∣ther than folowe the auncienst and best of theym. After that againe this lande beynge in∣habited wyth Saxons beynge panims. Saint Gregorye Pope of Rome aboute the yeare of oure Lorde God. Dxcv. sent4 Saint Austin and his company, who by their doctryne and vertuous liuing, plan∣ted the fayth, and so established a true re∣ligion in Englande: the whych sayth and religion euer whan the people haue decli∣ned from it, they haue felt great calami∣ties as well by the hand of God as by the conquest of the Danes, and after by the Normannes: and sythe the conquest from time to time. As I noted afore, they deryue al their religion from Ro. to make men beleue that place (whiche is a sinke of all sinne and esteamed of none, but theym that knowes it not) to be the fountaine of all godlynesse. But as I declared afore, that they forsake all the auncient good∣nes in Rome, so shall I by thys Popes doinges to, lette the worlde see if they will, that in mainetaynynge the Pope in wordes, by outward apperance they
vtterly denye him in their dedes: & they onely pike out of the filthiest of theym, that which may maintaine their super∣sticion, pride and tyrannye. That the Saxons inuaded and obteyned thys Realme for the sinnes of the countrye, it is to plain, but whether Austin plan∣ted true religion the Doctors may dout, and his dedes will proue. It were to longe to write all that Galfridus Bri∣tanicus in his historie wrote about the yeare of our lord. M. C. L. in the latter ende of his viii. booke. ca. iiii. Howe the holye learned Byshops withstoode the teachinge of Austin at his coming into the Realme, and the Popes autoritye that send him: but these few woordes of his are sufficient to declare their mind. In the meane while was Austin sende of Gregorye, he sais, into Britayne to preache the word of God, to Thenglysh menne, which almost had driuen out all christian religion of that part of the I le where they dwelt in Kent: but amonge some of the Britains, the faith of christ did yet florish, and there were. vii. Bys∣shoppes, and an Archbyshop, and many holy Prelates and Abbayes remaining whiche taught their flocke the right or∣der. At Bangor in one churche were MM. C. munkes, whiche gets their ly∣ninge wyth their handes: their Abbot
was called Dineth. Whan Austin re∣quired of the Byshops subiection, Di∣noth proued by diuers argumentes that they ought him none. Than Edelbert King of Kent perceiuing that the Brit∣tans disdained to submit them selues to Austin he sturred vp the other Saxons kings to fight against Dinoth and hys clarkes. They gathered a great armye, and came to Westchester where Bre∣mael was Maior. The munkes and He∣remites met him there to praye for the safegarde of their people. EldefridusThe best witstoode Austin the Popes le∣gate. king of Northumberlande, faught with Bremael, and slewe. M. CC. Munkes, and had manye of his owne men slaine. Than the Dukes of Britaine hearing of his cruelty: Blederic Duke of Corn∣wal, Margadu Duke of Southwales. Caduane Duke of Northwales came and fought with him, and slewe tenne thousande of his men, and about. lrvi. mo: and Blederic that was the graund captaine was slaine there. Thus farre sais he. First marke here that the chris∣stened Britains wold not submit them selues to Austin the Popes Legate, as they that had fallen from religion did: Secondly that so many Munkes lyued not idle, but wrought for their lyuinge: Thirdly note the olde practyse of Papi∣stes, to shede bloud cruelly if their supe∣riority
be denied theim. Polychronicon lib. v. cap. ix. and Fabian ca. Cxix. write all this same in effect, and also further that Austin called a counsell for stabli∣shing his religion, and whan the Bys∣shoppes asked Dinoth whether they should go to it or no: he said, they should go and obey him, if he behaued himselfe lowly like a disciple of Christ. His low∣lines they should trie, if he woulde rise and reuerence them whan they come in to the counsell. But whan Austin gaue no reuerence to them at their cominge, they were angrye, and wente their wayes. Amonge other thinges marke also the pride of the Ro. Legates, that would not as much as make any kynde of curtesy to so many byshops cominge to the counsel. Gildas which writing lamentes this miserable destruction of Britaine by bringinge in the Sarons, and complaines as muche of the decay and neglectinge of religion as of wic∣ked liuinge, in al sortes of menne from the highest to the lowest, to be the cause of this plage of God, and ouerthrow of the Realme. He sharplye rebukes the Kinges, but Priestes and Byshoppes rather more, than anye other sorte of menne: so that it seames to be a double plage, both in bringinge straungers to
rule, and straunge religion to blinde vs wythall. And because they crake so much of y• religion that Austin brought in, ye shall see what he vsed. There be . xi. questions written in the latter ende of Gregories woorkes in latin whyche Austin beinge in England desired Gre∣gory Pope of Rome, to wryte hym his minde and opinion in them. The. iii. question is this, whiche Polichronicon also touches. Lib. v. Ca. ix. Why seyng there is but one faith, there be diuerse customs of Masses in the Churches: and one custome is in Fraunce, and another in Rome. To this Gregory aunsweres that Austin shoulde pike out of the Ro∣myshe Church or the French Church or any other, the best, & vse them in Eng∣lande. Marke here I pray you the be∣ginninge and auncienty of their masse here in Englande, and the patinge it together, and beggerly piking it out of al countries, & also that the pope did not condemne those diuers kindes of masses as our butchers haue, and burned them that gain said it: and than aske my mai∣sters that so shamefullye lie and proud∣ye crake their masse to be M. D. yeare olde, whither these sainges be truely al∣ledged or no. But beleeue neyther mee nor theym, looke youre booke
of Gregory, and iudge youre selfe whoAustyn christening lies. Fabian also writes cap. C. xix. and Cxxx that this Austin christned the peo∣ple in the riuer called Swale, in Swal∣dale not far from yorke: and that Pau∣linus, in steede of fontes, at the same time (who was one of those whom Gre∣gorye sente from Ro. hither to preache here) baptised manye also both in the same riuer and in another cald Gweni: in Gwensedale in yorke shire to, was it lawfull than to christen without halo∣winge of fontes, yea withoute fontes, wythout crossinge, blowinge, censinge, saltinge, spittinge, oyle and chreame. & and nowe is not, who hais made it vn∣lawfull sins? Are we heretikes in doing it withoute coniured water, as Austin did, whom they so much commend. Nay we doe it not, nor wishe it to be done in the Riuer as they did, but in the Chur∣che. Are they worthy to be called Papi∣stes, and glorie so much in it, which will not folow the Popes legate, nor alow his doinges, and dispraise them that d as he did. I speake not this because  woulde be called a Papist, or make the Pope my schole maister, but that w would not vntrulye be called forsaker of true religion and auncient custome of the churche, whan we haue the old Popes and auncient Romishe Church
to teache and alow that which we do. And because this scauinger crakes so muche of his holye Byshoppes that suf∣fer so great paines for disobeyinge their Prince, and cleauinge to their holy fa∣ther the Pope, they that be not wilfully blinde, shall see here that there is none more enemye to that vsurped power of the Pope, claimynge to be aboue other Byshops and Princes, nor to that blas∣phemous name to be called the vniuer∣sall Byshop of the whole Church, than this Gregory was as fully appeares in sundrye places of his workes. In hys time beganne this ambitious desire to crepe into the minde of Ioan Archebis∣shop of Constantinople, to be called the head byshop of the world, because Mau∣rice then Emperoure, and heade aboue many Prynces, lay than at Constanti∣nople, and not at Rome, as his aunce∣toures did for the most parte: while the Emperour lay at Rome, the Byshoppe there was more reuerenced, than other Byshoppes were as it is in all commen welthes where so euer the Prince lies: therfore he thought that like as whan hēperour lay at Rome y• Bishop was preferred aboue other (because comenly Princes will haue the learneder sorte here him) so he thought that the Empe∣roureNeyther Pope no other ought  be called he vniuersal or head bis∣hop of all. nowe lyinge at Constantinople,
that that Byshoppe should likewise be estemed, and therfore he caused Them∣perour to write to Gregorye Byshop of Ro. in this behalfe and that he shoulde submit himselfe to the Byshop of Con∣stantinople. Gregory aunsweres diuers of Themperours letrers sharplye, god∣lily, wisely, and learnedly, sayinge that neyther he at Ro. nor the other at Con∣stantinople, nor no other in anye place shuld chalenge to him that proud name nor autority aboue other. None of my predecessors sais Gregory wold vse this cursed name (to be called the vniversall Byshoppe of all) for if one PatriarcheLib. 4. epi∣sto. . shoulde bee called vniuersall, than the name of Patriarches shoulde be taken from other: but God kepe this far from a Christian mind, that any man should chalenge that to himselfe, whereby he might anye thinge at all diminishe the honour of his brether. Note that he sais none of his predecessours vsed this cur∣sed name: Than in hys tyme it began to be desired: than also they lie, sayin that Christ gaue this autority of being aboue other, to Peter and his successor from time to time, he calles it also  wicked and cursed name, wherein the glory, and so muche desire, wicked and cursed therfore is he that hais it or de∣sires it, be sais further, they doe thei
brether wronge in takyng that honour from them that is due to them, whiche is to bee of like power and autoritye with theym: If any manne now a days shuld write thus, he wold be cald a rai∣ler a foole, a prater, &c. But seing this good Pope, sais so to thē, let them take it among them, and beleue their PopeLib. 7. E 30. C▪ 19▪ for it is true. Againe he saies: I saye boldlye that whosoeuer calles himselfe or desires to be called the vniuersall Priest, in his pride he runnes afore An∣tichrist: bycause in being proud he pre∣ferres himselfe aboue other. This is their partes than that they playe, to be Antichristes forerunners, or rather to be Antichrist himself. Much good doe it them with their Popes that so rewards their folowers: and seinge their maister geues theym that name, they maye bee glad of it, and neyther refuse it, nor be angry with them that so call theym. It were an easy thinge to take many such like sayinges oute of other Doctoures, but because be cries oute so ofte of this holys fathers religion. I kepe me with in his comepasse, and alledge his wri∣tingesLib. 4. E∣stola. 76. onelye Gregorye in his Epistle to Maurice Themperour amonge ma∣nye other wordes sais thus. Who is this that against the ordinaunce of the Gospell, and agaynste the decrees of
the canons presumes to take this newe name: lette this blasphemous name be farre from christen mennes hartes to be called the vniuersal Byshoppe, by whi∣che the honoure of all Priestes is taken away, whan it is folishly clamed of one manne. This name was offered in the Synode of Chalcedome to the Ro∣myshe Byshoppe, but none of them did take this name of singularitye, nor dyd agree to vse it: least while anye priuate thinge shoulde be geuen to one manne, all Priestes shoulde bee robbed of their due honour. He is to be bridled which does wronge to the vniuersall Church, which by this priuate name settes him selfe aboue the honour of your Empire &c. thus much Gregory. I maruail that the later Popes scraped not these say∣inges out of Gregories woorkes, or els condemned not his bookes for heresye, seing he does so plainly condemne their proude Prelacy. But surelye as God hais preserued the true texte of the Bi∣ble by the Iewes that are his enemies to the comforte of his people. So for the glorye of his name, he hais saued the writinges of good Popes, to condemne the foolishnes of the late presumptuous tyrannye of Popes after their times. Remember that he calles it a blasphe∣mous name, and that it is againste the
gospell and Canons, that it was neuer vsed, and is a wronge to all the rest. Thus many yeares it was vi. Cv. afore the pope hadde anye supremacy graun∣ted him? but streight after his death, whan Phocas hadde murdered Them∣perour Maurice his maister, and made himself Emperour, Pope Boniface the iii. & iiii. obteined at his hand that Ro. & the byshop there should be the head of other churches and Byshoppes. A mete manne to set vp a Byshop like himself: the one murdered his maister, and tho∣ther kills soules. Whan they haue aunswered this Pope that denies anye of his predecessours to haue hadde this name and autority than thei may crake that they haue had it. M. D. sins Saint Peters time. And where he sais in the latter ende that whan the people fele from this relygion that Gregory send, and Austin brought in, they felt greate calamites by the conquest of the Danes and the Normans: if he had aduised him selfe well he would not haue said thus. But as Caiphas prophecied truly, say∣ing: that it was necessary that one man Christ should die for the people, and not all perishe, not vnderstanding what he saide: so this vnlearned Proctour hais spoken more truely than he wotes of. For God in deede plaged this Realme
for fallinge from true religion taught in his holy word, rather than by Austin & submittinge them selfes to the Pope, who as ye heard, refused that name and autoritye. The conquest of the Danes was not longe nor greate, but than fo∣lowed the Normans. D. yeare sins saue fiue. And if ye marke euen about that tyme was Hildebrande, commenly cald Gregorye the. vii. Pope, who with his felowes brought more wicked super sticion into the church of God than euer was afore. Afore his time there was no swarme of idle munkes and Freers in Englande, nor in the worlde, but they wroughte for their liuynge, no suche gaddinge of Pilgrimages, sellynge of Masses. &c. And therefore God iustlye plaged the world for falling from him, and defilynge theym selues so filthilye with the dregges of Poperye. I speake not this bicause I thinke all was well afore, or that all the doinges of Grego∣rye and Austin were perfecte, but to lette you see that oure Papystes leaue the beste, and pyke oute the worst to folowe, as metest for their purpose. Now whether the people of thys Reame be declyned from the steppes of Sainct5
Austin and other blessed fathers and Sauntes, whych hadde Masse and vii. Sacramentes in the Churche, and God was honoured night and daye in the Churche wyth deuyne seruyce, I thynke there is no man so simple, but he maye easelye perceyue, except ma∣lyce haue blynded hys hearte As in Saint Paules Churche in London, by the decrees of blessed Fathers eue∣rye nyght at Mydnyght, they hadde Mattys, all the fore none Masses in the Churche, wyth other deuyne ser∣uyce and contiuuall prayer, and in the Steple antimes and prayers were ha certayne tymes. That the people of this Realme be swarued from the steppes of Austin I wyll not greatlye stycke wyth hym to graunte: but how? not in fallynge from anye goodnesse that he vsed (for that they eyther keepe styll or the better in stede of it) but in refusynge suche abu∣ses as he fyrste beganne, and synce hys tyme the Churche of Goode hays bene ouer loden by the Popes oppressi∣on withall. And because he says that we swarue from Austin and other bles∣sed Fathers and Saintes which hadde masse, and vii. sacramentes, who those Fathers and Saintes be, I woulde he adde named theym, that it myghte
be sene how truly he sais. I thinke he durst not, nor yet can, least he be taken with a lowd lie. I thinke he meanes that Austin which is called thapostle of Englande, and not that other Austin, which is taken for one of the iiii. Doc∣tors of the Churche. There is great dif∣ference betwixt them two, both in aun∣cientye of time, in learninge and god∣lynesse. Thenglysh Austin lyued here vi. C. yeare after Christe, the other in Aphric. CCCC. and that the elder Au∣stin and blessed fathers afore him agree better with our reformed religion than with their Popery. I boldlye affirme and if hee or his partakers haue or can saye anye thinge to the contrarye, they shoulde proue it better, than they haue done hitherto, or elles the worlde maye iudge that they more proudlye brag (as Golias did Gods people) than can tru∣lyi. kyng. 17 proue it. But as Dauid wyth his slinge and stone ouercome that mighty Giaunt, so I doubt not, but they shall finde many, that with the simplicitye of Gods trueth shall be able to confounde their wicked subtilitye. I am sure he meanes chefelye the doctrine of the sa∣crament of Christes bodye and bloude▪ but in that he is already ouer matched. I remember in the time of that blessed kinge Edwarde the. vi. D. Kidlay late
Bishop of London came in visitacion to Camebridge, and because that doctrine of the Sacrament semed straunge than to manye, he propounded this proposi∣cion to the hole vniuersitye to dispute on. That it could not be proued by any auncient writer, Greke or latin, which liued a thousande yeare sins, or within D. yeare after Christ that the substance of the bread was chaunged in the sacra∣ment to the substaunce of Christes bo∣dye. There was the eldest and stoutest champions of the bole vuiuersitye, and the pertest lustye yonge princockes also that coulde be pyked out, to saye what they coulde. ii. or iii. dayes together: and one while they hadde liberty to speake what they could in defence of it, and an other whyle to speak against them that wtstode it with what reasons or autori∣ties they could deuise. But the pithy so∣lutions of that godlye learned Byshop were so strōg than, that vnto the world chaunged, his enemies praised him, and wondert at his learnyng, and liked the doctrine so well that their lusty yonker would haue turned Bishop Crammers boke into latin, yea & maried to (as was nedefull) if the good Kinge had liued a while longer. If this be true in the che∣fest point of their religion (as it is most true in deede) that they haue not one
auncient writer without wraistinge to seme to make for them, it is much more true in the rest. There is another confe∣rence of late betwix the reuerēd Bishop of Sarum, and D. Coole wherein that learned father laies to their charge that for the rest of their trashe (whiche they reuerence as bolye reliques) they haue neyther Scripture, auncient writer, Doctor, nor generall counsell, to defend their doinges. The writinges of good Crammer, and these learned Byshops are in print, and yet vnconfuted, and in strength, althoughe one attemted with small praise of late to defende D. Coles parte, but if they coulde haue gainstand it, no manne doubtes of their good wil. They neede not to feare their recogni∣sans, fire nor fagot, nor anye punnyshe∣ment accordinge as they deserue, theyr bloudy lawes are laid on slepe, though their hartes be bloudy still. And because he but onely names par∣ticularly masse and. vii. Sacramentes, and proues it not to bee so, I will not vse many wayes in desprouing it, for he is not a man of that autority, learning nor credite, that because he sais it is so, therefore streight it must be so & be be∣leued: For I maye saye it is not so wyth as good reason as he, yf sayinge wythoute proofe were sufficient. For
their masse I saide inoughe afore, and proued of what auncienty it was. I de∣clared afore how Gregories masse boke was allowed vii. C. lxxvii. yeares after Christ: and also how Austin by Grego∣ries commaundement oute of suche dy∣uerse orders of massinge as ye see in o∣ther Countries patched their order of masse together, that they vsed here in Englande. Seing than by their owne Doctours confession it is manifest to be so many yeares after Christ afore their masse tooke place here or els where. I may boldlye saye that neuer one holye father afore Gregory knew nor alowed anye suche kinde of massinge: for than was no suche thinge made nor vsed. These vnto they be aunswered are suf∣ficient. For their vii. sacramentes I wil not saye muche at thys tyme, because he standes not anye thynge in the proofe of theym The question is meter for the learned sorte than the people to try out such narow points. The controuersy is more about the woorde and name than the thynge it selfe, and vse of it. Wee vse vi. of theym that he calles Sacramentes as well as they, thoughe not without great reason, we forbeare to call theym all Sacramentes, and differ muche in the doctrine, the order
and vsinge of theym, with other cere∣monies and language than they do. Baptisme, the lordes supper, confirma∣tion of Children, mariage, orderinge of ministers, we vse thē al as wel as they, thoughe not in the same sort that they, and teache the people to haue theym in reuerence better than they. Confession is left free to all that fele theym selues burdened in conscience, and wante ey∣ther counsell or comfort, and the weake and ignoraunt, are moued to resorte to a learned minister to receyue the com∣fortable promises of absolution and for∣geuenes of sinne by the liuely worde of God applied to so troubled a minde as a souerain salue for al such grefes. The only controuersye in number than be∣twix vs is for extreme vnction whether that be so necessary to be obserued con∣tinually in the churche. The cheife rea∣son whereon they ground it, is the sai∣ynge of Saint Iames. If any be sickeIam, v. let him call the elders of the congrega∣cion and let them pray for him, annoin∣tinge him with oyle in the name of the lord. &c. The other place of saint MarkeMar. vi. where the Apostles vsed oile in healing the sicke, thoughe they allege it, it pro∣ues not their purpose, euen as their owne Doctours teache. Than was a time of miracles, and God gaue that
power of healynge diseases to confirmeVVhether extreme vnction be a sacrament or no. his gospell withall: now it is not law∣full to looke for suche miracles. If they wey the wordes of Saint Iames well, they wil not so much glory in that their sacrament. Saint Iames biddes theym annoint hym wyth oyle. I aske them with what oyle? I meane not whether with oile Oliue, or lampe oile, or other kinde of oile (althoughe that question can not be aunswered out of the text of the scripture, & yet according to the ge∣neral rule) I graunt that where oile a∣lone is named, there is ment oile oliue) but whither it be halowed & consecrate oile, or commen and vnhalowed? I trust they will not saye vnhalowed: for than their holy sacrament should stand on an vnhalowed thinge, which is a great in∣conuenience, than if it muste be conse∣crated. I aske with what wordes, and after what sort must it be done? there is no wordes of consecration for the oile in Saint Iames, nor in anye place of the Scripture. If there be, let them shew them: but their owne Doctours say that there is none. Than it must be halowed with woordes of their owne deuisinge: why than folowes it consequently, that man is better than God which is blas∣phemy to graunt. It is a greater might and power to make a holy thinge than
to make the vnholy and bare thinge it selfe, as the baker makes the bread, but Christes holy ordinaunce sanctifies the breade in his holye supper, but in thys their sacrament, God shoulde make the oile, and the Byshoppe shoulde make it holye. And because they stycke so stif∣lye that all consecrations stand in spea∣kinge certayne woordes. I aske what those wordes be, where they be taught in the Scriptures, and whether manne haue power of hys owne head, to make a thinge holyer than God haies done, and to deuise the woordes himselfe, al∣so wherewith it shalbe consecrated and made so holye? the Scripture hays no suche wordes, and that manne shoulde deuyse those holye wordes, is great ab∣surditie. Whan these are aunswered▪ more maye be replyed against them. A∣gaine I demaund what Scripture they haue to proue that Byshoppes onelye must halow this oile: for those that be sacramentes in dede, as Baptisme and the L. supper euerye Priest hais autori∣tye to vse, minister, and consecrate them accordynge to their holye institutyon, and dooe all that belonges thereto as well as the Byshoppe. Is this they Sacramente of an oylinge more holy than the other, because Byshoppes a more holye menne are put to the doing
and consecratynge of the oile? Yet one doubte more. They haue. ii. sortes of Oile to annoint withall, differinge in holynesse, consecration, and vse of them, and yet both halowed by the bis∣shoppe. One is of Oyle and Balsam blend together, whiche is called com∣menlye oile and Chreame wherewyth Byshoppes and Priestes in their conse∣cratinge, and Children are anointed in Christenynge: and that is more holy, than thys for sycke persons is, for this is Oyle alone withoute other thinges blend thereto, as their maister teaches.Ma. sen∣tentiar. li. 4 disti. 23. What scripture is there for these toies, and the consecratinge of them. Saynct Paule sais that our meate is sanctified by the word and prayer: but I trust they will graunt a better consecration than this, and more holines in that oile than in our daily meate. But howe wil they proue it? Further euery sacrament hais a promise anexed of god working some spiritual grace by thē, in the receyuer: bere is none such, but S. Iam. sais the faithful prayer shal heale the sicke man. The promyse here named is corporall, bodily health, and is attributed to prai∣er, and not to their sacrament. Than as the promise is corporall, so was this Oyle a corporall medicyne and Salue
for diseased bodies: althoughe I doubte not but than by such godly prayers and exhortacions god wrought a spirituall grace inwardly. Nothinge was more commenly vsed for weake and wearye bodies than oile in all those countries, and nothinge does more ease the paines of the sicke bodye than these supplinge oiles: therefore partlye for the custome of the Countrye, partly for the holsome strength and medicinable nature of oile and partly for an outwarde signe of an inward grace wrought by God (while that gift of healinge diseases did conti∣nue in Christes Churche) Saint Iames biddes them call the elders, anoint him with oile in the name of the lorde, and the faithful prayer shall heale the sycke person, but what does that belonge or howe is it to bee applied to oure dayes where no suche gift is: I woulde faine make an ende of their foolishnesse if it had any ende. Their owne Doctors teache further that this annointing ta∣kes not away mortall sinne, but venial onelye, and that it must not be vsed as longe as there is hope of life in the sickeIoan d Sco us. 4 sen∣ten. di∣stic. 23. person, than by their own doctrine it is not so holye a Sacrament nor a Sacra∣ment at all: Their opinion holdes that Sacramentes doe both gene grace and forgeue sin, and should be geuen onelye
to theym that haue vse of reason to re∣pent for their sinnes, and call on God for his mercye, beynge not children, but comen to full age, this does not so, nor is so vsed by their owne doctrine, and therefore no sacramente. The Popes holy water is as good, or better, as this their sacrament by this doctrine: for he sais that his coniured water canne forgeue veniall sinne, and driue away deuils to. Than after their owne teachinge this their sacrament is not so good as the Popes holye water, for it can driue away deuils, beside for∣geuinge veniall sinne, whiche this oy∣linge can not. But thus to teache is to blaspheme God in makinge Goddes Sacramentes woorse than the Popes dregges. To conclude thautority and auncienty of this their sacrament from whence it comes, and what it is, Poly∣chroni. teaches lib. v. Ca. v. that Pope Felir. iiii. Graundsir to Pope Gregori∣es father (marke whether he was mari∣ed or no) ordeined the sycke to be anoin∣ted with oile. If ye loke for greater au∣tours Uolaterram teaches the same: but I had rather proue it by their own doc∣tours, because they call other, newe fe∣lowes: thā christ taught it not. Forther where he charges vs with declynynge from the steppes of blessed fathers whi∣he
ordeyned in Paules, mattins to be had at midnight, all forenoone Masses and in the steple antems: these thinges we do not onely not deny, for we do not count suche supersticious Idolaters to be oure fathers in religion, but we re∣ioise and praise God for our deliuerance from such supersticion. They crake mu∣che of blessed fathers, and yet name not who they be, but much it shall not skill for their dedes wil proue their holines: what great holynes was thys, to haue mattins at midnight, when folke were on slepe in their beds. Is not commen praier to be had at such houres whā the people might resort commenly vnto itMidnyghte Mattins. cōueniently: if midnyght be such a time most conuenient, let the world indge. I graunt in the primatiue church gods people hadde their prayers earlye afore day, because at other tymes, they were not suffred, but in those assembles were not onelye munkes or Priestes, but all sortes and degrees of men were gathe∣red to pray, here Sermons, and receiue the Sacramentes: for at other times of the day, they durst not for the great∣nes of persecution. In Paules and Ab∣bayes at their midnight prayers were none commenlye, but a fewe ballynge Priestes, yonge queristers and nouyces whyche vnderstode not what they said,
the elder sort kept their beddes, or were woorse occupyed. A prayer not vnder∣stande in the hart, but spoken with the lippes, is rather to be counted praiting and ballyng, than prayinge wyth good deuotiō. The elder sort both in Cathe∣drall Churches and Abbaies almost ne∣uer came at their midnyghte prayer: it was thought inough to knolle the bel∣les, and make menne beleue that they rose to praye: therefore they haue not so much to crake of this their doinge. The Papistes haue a rule of their owne ma∣kynge, to say their mattins in, which I thinke was a great cause of these early mattins, and also of saying theym ouer night, Ante tempus meritum, in tempore debitum, post tempus peccatum. To saye Mattins, afore the tyme due is a merit, to saye them in due time it is duty: but after the appoincted time is sinne. But as all their religion is of their own de∣uysynge, so is their rewarde: God hais made them no suche promise, and ther∣fore they can clayme nothynge at hys handes. For their continuall massynge afore noone, we prayse Godde that hais de∣lyuered vs from it, as a thynge con∣trarye to hys holye wyll and ordy∣nance: Saint Paule sayes, that whan
they came together to eate the Lordes supper, they shoulde tarye one for ano∣ther, but these shorne shaueling shame∣les priestes: woulde neyther receyue to∣gether one of theym with another, nor yet let the people haue anye part withoore none masses. them. Enery one wold crepe into a cor∣ner to an aultar alone, there lifte vppe on highe, eate and drinke vp all alone, sell good penyworthes, and blesse them with the emptye Chalice. Than all was well as they thought, and Godde well serued, but to breake Gods Com∣maundemente of receiuinge together, they passed not of it, so that thei might folowe their owne deuyse. I know their shift in writhyng this text to their pur∣pose, and sayinge that Saint Paule spake this of that feast whych they vsed than to haue: whan they receiued the communyon: but that wrasting wil not serue for both for that feast and al other kind of eating, to fil theyr belly, s. Paul gaue that Commaundemente that fo∣lowes: If any man be an hungred, lette him eate at home: haue ye not housesi. corint ii. to eat and drinke in? or do ye despise the congregacion of God: seynge that Paul speakes there but of twoo sortes of ea∣tynge, the one for hunger to fille their belies, the other fedynge the soule with the spirituall foode of Chrystes bodye
and bloude: for nouryshinge and feding our weake bodyes, he byddes vs eat at home: but for the liuelye foode of oure soules, in the sacrament of his body and bloud, he biddes vs tary one for another for it is the seale and band of brotherlye loue as well as the sacrament of Chri∣stes bodye and bloud. Euery piller in the Churche commenlye had his altar, euerye altar his priest, and his God, to whome the Altars were dedicate: thus like menne, not regarding Gods com∣maundement, they folowed their owne deuises, and yet hauing the truth reue∣led, they harden their heartes, and stop their cares, that they will not learne. For climbing vp to the top of the ste∣pleAntems in the steple. to sing their antimes. I demaund of them, to shew a reason if there be any, why it is done there, rather than on the ground? and why on such saint dais ra∣ther than on other? & why that tyme of the yere rather then other? Whan Ba∣als priests were assēbled against y• Pro∣phet Elias to trie whether of them ser∣ued the liuyng God, and Baals priestes3. kin 18. beganne to praye, and cal on their god, but he woulde not heare theym, Elias said crie louder, perauenture your God is busy, he is chasing his enemies, from home, or on slepe: so vnto ye finde a bet∣ter aunswere I am contente freelye to
lende you this, wythout payinge anye peny for it, that ye maye francklye saye ye goe vp to the top of the steple, to call on your god that he may the more ease∣lye heare you: standing so highe rather than on the grounde so farre of, and at night whan other suters take their rest: for al the day long perauenture he hais bene otherwaies occupied, and nowe waringe olde his hearinge decayes so muche that if ye stande not nere hande and crye loude, he can not helpe you. These and such other are mete for them that serue straunge Gods: but he that calles on the liuinge Lord knowes him to be present in all places, and there∣fore makes no suche difference of them. Againe if according to their owne doc∣trine, a praier made in a halowed place be better than that which is made in an vnhalowed: than better it is to stand on the grounde than to climbe on height, for the top of the steple was neuer ha∣lowed as the church was beneth. Whā suche folishnes is wisely proued we shal streight waies beleue it. First searche whether the faith and re∣ligion nowe vsed was taught wyth6 the blessed fathers in Christes Chur∣che in tymes paste, ye shall proue by no recorde of autoritye or Chronicle tha
this manner of seruyce nowe vsed in the Churche was euer harde tell of a∣fore Luthers time, whyche is not xl. peare agoe: therefore it is to be reiec∣ted, and putte awaye as a newe fan∣gled doctryne and schismaticall, there∣fore come backe agayne into the olde blessed fathers stepes. In that he denies this faith and reli∣gion euer to be heard tel of vnto within these xl. yeares and bids trie the recor∣des, whither it be true that he sais, and semes to charge vs with forsakinge the olde faith and fathers, alledginge the Epistle to the Ebrewes, that be thatII. Ebrew. comes to Godde muste beleue: and that without faith it is not possible to please God: and Iere. that we shoulde searcheIere. 6. out the olde way and walke in it, I am well content to stand with him in these pointes, and proue that this fayth and religion was taught in Christs church, continuallye from the beginning, and that this seruice nowe vsed goes nearer the order appoynted in the Scripture, than any that euer they haue receyued from the Pope. If we had not this faith spoken of to the Ebrewes, we durst not so boldlye come to the throne of grace, wythoute makynge anye moe medya∣toures than one onelye Iesus Chryst: Where as they in makynge so
manye meanes and intercessoures for thē (as though God were a cruel iudge, and not a mercifull father) declare them selues to want this faith, in that they dare not so boldly come to the throne of grace, without suche spokes men as we vse none, for faith onely makes vs bolde to come into Gods presence, and begge of his grace. But accordinge to their desire, let vs searche oute the olde waye whiche is good that we maye walke in it. The faith of a Christian manne is generallye conteined in the Crede, and particularly declared in the scripture at large, and whether we kepe that better then they, let wise men iudge. We do esteame these articles of the Christian faith, so much with the Lordes prayer, and the tenne commaundements of al∣mightye God, that by commen order it is appoynted, and good ministers prac∣tise it, that Children shall learne theim not in a tonge that they vnderstand not as the Pope would haue theim, but in their mother tong, we such a short decla¦ratiō on it by a Catechisme, that now a yong child of a ten year old can tel more of his duty towarde God and manne, than an olde manne of their bringinge vp can doe of. lx. or. lxxx. yeare olde, all the canonycall Scryptures we do so re∣nerently receiue, and faithfully beleue,
that we stande in contention with the Papistes, that nothing is to be beleued as necessary to saluation, but onely the old testament and the new: where their faith is neuer certayne, but whan it pleases the Pope or his Councell to make theym a newe artycle of their faith, or condemne or chaunge any that they haue, they receiue it willingly, be∣leue it faithfully, and folow it earnest∣lye with fire and fagor. It is not longe sins that by commen autoritye (where oure Creede hais but xii. articles) they added. vi. mo articles and with no lesse daunger of wythstandynge theym, than of life. This six stringed whippe did vere Gods people sore, vnto God of his vndeserued mercy, prouided a reme∣dye. And where they thincke no faith norCouncels. religion to be good, alowed or receiued, but that whiche is confirmed by gene∣rall counsels or written by the doctors: for that, I say, their religious supersti∣cion cannot be proued by general coun∣sell, nor Doctour, as the reuerend Bys∣shop of Sarum, laies against D. Coole, But so farre as eyther generall counsel or the Doctoures writinges doe agree with the body of the holy scriptures, we do not onelye reuerentlye and willing∣ly receiue them, but diligently so farre
furth as we maye practise theym: They crake much of the autoritye of a gene∣rall counsel, and bleare the peoples eies with so glorious a name and also with the reuerende name of the fathers, Doctoures, and auncientye, where in deede they make more for vs than theym. If they considert what Gerson and Panormitanus write, which were aun∣cient fathers, and not new protestants, and were at the counsel of Basil, where it was disputed what autoritye a coun∣sell hais, they woulde not so stifly sticke to so weake a staffe, we must rather be∣leue one symple lay manne saye they, alledginge the scripture, than the hole counsell to the contrarye. De Elect. Ca. significasti This thinge was well proued true in the greate Nicene coun∣cell, where manye would haue forbid∣den Priestes mariage, and onelye Pa∣phnutius beinge vnmaried, and alled∣ginge the Scriptures which alow ma∣riage in all menne, did stoppe it, Gre∣gory Nazainzene sais that he neuer see good ende of a counsell. They alledge muche generall Coun∣selles, whan in dede very fewe of them be generall: If it be but a prouinciall
Counsell they themselues graunt that it maye erre. Nowe than looke bow manye maye be called, or are called ge∣nerall in their owne bookes, and ye shall fynde verye fewe. Take heede therefore of these Fores (ye that will not bee deceyued) whan they alledge a Counsell, and trye euen by their owne booke of counselles, whither it bee generall or no? Ye shall fynde that euerye tenth that they alledge, is not generall: than beynge a par∣ticuler and prouinciall, they geue vs leaue to deny it, and so they condemne their owne doinge whan they alledge nothinge but prouinciall Counselles. There is no Crede made at anye gene∣rall counselles, nor Athanasius Crede, but we willingly embrase it, receyue it, and beleue it. Seinge than we open∣ly professe and teache all thynges con∣teined in the holye Scriptures: and all the artycles of anye Crede determined in generall Counsell, or written by A∣thanasius, or anye Catholycke father, howe can it bee that we be oute of the fayth, and howe canne it be, but thys sclaunderous Proctour of the Pope hays blasphemed Godde, belyed hys Minysters, Gods people▪ and his truth.
Thus much I haue spoken particular∣lye to purge vs from his liynge lyppes, where he speakes generallye naminge▪ nothinge, but meaninge all, that we should forsake both faith and religion, and deuyse a newe one of oure owne, where they themselues are gilty in this as more plainly shall appeare. This shalbe sufficient I trust to them that will be satisfied to declare that we be not oute of the faith, seinge we pro∣fesse our faith: now to trie whether we be fallen from the olde wayes of holye fathers, and whether auncient recordes do testifie this maner of Church seruice to be godly, and haue bene heard tell of afore Luthers time, and whether it be elder than theirs, I am content to wine with him in triall thereof. I trust they will be content to call Moyses, Dauid, and the Prophetes, auncient fathers: whye than looke what order of prayer, was in the Tabernacle of god, and Sa∣lomons temple in their time, and see whether it go nerer our seruice, or theur Church ruice agre∣s wyth the uncient Church. Popes Portuis? Rede Dauids Psalme, and marke howe manye of theym haue their title directed to the Chauntor, or chefe singer and plaier on thinstrumen∣tes to Asaph, Hemā Dithum. &c. to be songe in the Temple, and ye shall finde a great sorte suche. Rede the xxv. chap.
of the first booke of the Chronicles, and there it appeares whom Dauid appoin∣tes to be singers of the Psalmes in the Temple with their posteritye. Rede the xiii. Chap. of the art. of Thapostles, and there it appeares that the lawe and the Prophetes were redde in the temple e∣uerye Sabboth daye, for their seruyce, with a Sermon. After the reading (sais Saint Luke) of the lawe and the Pro∣phetes, the rulers of the Synagoge sent to Paule and Barnabas saiyng: ye men and brether, if ye haue any exhortacion to the people, speake. Againe in the. xv. Chap. he sais: Moyses hais of old time them that preache him in euery citye in the Sinagoges, where he is red euery Sabboth daye. Marke what prayers or kinde of seruice as we terme it, Saint Luke sais here, was than vsed in the temple of Salomon: the lawe and the Prophetes he sais were redde. In the Ebrewe bible appeares the diuision in the bookes of Moyses howe farre was redde wekely and monethly. So that as they had than the law and the Pro∣phetes redde in their Temple for their commen prayer and seruice: so haue we nowe the Psalter of Dauid, monethly red ouer▪ and one Chapter of the olde testament and another of the newe red dailye, in oure Churches, in oure owne
tonge, as they had than in theirs. The new testament was not than written, so that it coulde not be redde: but as the newe Testament nowe does more plainlye sette oute to vs the office and mediation of oure Sauioure Christe, so did than the Prophetes more plainlye speake of the cominge of Chryste, than the lawe of Moyses didde signifie him. And therefore was orderlye redde with Moyses, the lawe as a fuller declarer thereof: so that in effect our Church ser∣uice disagrees not from theirs, in this readinge together of the olde testament and the new in our commen prayer, as they redde the lawe and the Prophets together: this order is three thousande yeare old, whan they haue proued their popishe Portuis to be much aboue. iii. C. yeare olde, than they maye begin to trie auncientye. Their Mattins and Euensnge are appointed theym out of their Portuis: and whan any old record of autority teaches them that so manye false miracles, fained lies and tales as be there written, with seruynge suche saintes, as no scripture does alow, nor good Historye makes Mentyon of (but onely the Popes kalender and his scho∣lers) were vsed in the Churche for com∣men prayer, and Goddes seruice, than let theym crake of the blessed Fathers
steppes, that they followe. Lette theym trye their: aunciente Portuis of Sarum, Yorkes vse, Bangor, or the greate diuersytye of Freers, Munkes, Channons Nunnes, whiche for euerye order of theym, hadde their diuers sor∣tes of Mattins, and Euensonge, and if they be proued. iii. hundred yeare olde, they haue muche to reioyse in, and yet farre short of iii. thousand. But of al o∣ther Blasphemies the Psalter of Bri∣git where euery worde and prayer thatThe Poruds antiquity. Dauid names God in, is turned to oure Ladye, is moste horryble to peruert the scripture to mans fantasy. Pope Paule the. iii. but. xx. yeare agoe, was so asha∣med of his Portuis, that he printed a newe one putting out many of the blas∣phemous lies that were in the olde, yet this Popish pricker thinkes all in it to be so good, that it can not nor shuld not be amended. The English Priests Por∣tuis, and order of seruyce that he cra∣kes so muche of, for auncyentye, is full of memoryes daylye, and seruyce of Thomas Becket twyse in the yeare: aud yet it is not longe sins he was bis∣shoppe of Canterburye, he lyued vnder Kynge Henrye the seconde, foure hun∣dreth yeare sins. The feast of Corpus Christi, and the Seruyce of that daye,
was inuented by Pope Urbane the. iiii scarce CCC. yere sins. The feast of the visitacion of our ladye commenly called, the newe founde Lady day, and the ser∣uice for that daye is not. CC. yeare olde and decreed by Pope Urbane the syxt. What auncientye than is theyr Portu∣is and masse booke of, whiche receyued these solemne feastes, and their seruyce of so late yeres▪ and yet he would ake menne beleue that it hais bene from the begining, and that olde recordes make mention of them. Many such other may be found in their Popish seruice, wher∣by it may easely be sene how falslye he bragges of their auncienty. The aunci∣enst beginning of their Portuis of Sa∣rum was vnder Willyam Conquerour not v. C. yeare sins, by Osmundus the second Byshop of Sarum as Polychro. writes, lib. vii. ca. iii. but it hais bene encreased sins, with many a lowde lye, as though they shuld striue who should tell the greatest for the best game, oure seruice hais nothing in it but it is wri∣ten in Goddes booke the holye Byble (where no lie can be founde) sauing Te▪ deum and a fewe Collettes or prayers, which although they be not conteined in the scripture, yet differing in wordes they agree in sense and meaning, with
the articles of the faith and the hole bo∣dye of the scripture. Their Portuis and missall hais manye vntrue fables, and fained miracles for their lessons, writ∣ten neyther in the scripture, olde hio∣rye, nor auncient recorde of autoritye, manye inuocations of suche as bee no Saints, and wickedly callyng on sain∣tes of their owne makynge, in stede of the liuinge God, as Thomas Becket and many Popes, some charmes, as S. Agathes letters for burning of houses, some witchcraftes, as holye waer for castinge out deuils, holy breade in stede of the Communion, ringinge the halo∣wed belle in greate tempestes or light∣ninges, and all in an vnknowen tonge (contrary to Goddes commaundement) yet craftely deuised to deceyue the peo∣ple, least in hearynge theym in their owne tonge, and prouynge them false, they woulde laughe theym to scorne. Dusegisus. lib. i. ca. rix. and lvi. wry∣tes that Charles the great Emperoure decreed that nothinge shoulde be redde in the Churches, but onely the Scrip∣tures, nor anye thinge taught, but out of the Scriptures, but none is so igno∣raunt, but he sees the Popishe seruice and doctrine to agre litle with ye scrip∣tures, and oures to conteine nothinge els but the scriptures. Nowe compare
these together, and iudge whither that be the elder and more to be alowed that hais nothing in it but y• scripture it self and that whiche is drawen onte of it, or that which is deuised of mannes branes alone, beside and contrarye to Goddes word. Is that new fangled and schis∣maticall that conteines nothynge but the doctrine of the Prophetes and Apo∣stles, and is that auncient, that can not be proued good at all? This text of re. that biddes theym search out the olde waye, and walke in it, does not meane all olde wayes, but he sais search of the olde wayes whiche of theym is good, and walke in it, as thoughe he shoulde saye all olde wayes are not good. If all olde wayes were good, he would not bid trie which were good: therefore it is not inough to haue it old but to haue it good also, and than to cleaue to it. If bare wordes would serue, there is manifest saiynges for the contrarye. Ezech. sais xx. Ca. walke not in the commaundementes of youre fa∣thers, nor kepe not their iudgementes. I might as well beat in this text as he the other and of like strength, therefore it is not sufficient to saye it is old, or to folow fathers: but to try that it be good and that godly fathers vsed it, and than be bolde to folowe it. Euill hais bene
To the lorde and his frende waeram by the grace of Godde, the worshyppefull Byshoppe of Nicemburge. Anselme the seruant of Cantorb. Church greting. &c. YOur worship complaynes of the sacramentes of the Church, that they are not ministred euery where af∣ter one sort, but are hand∣led in dyuerse places after diuers sortes. Truly if they were mi∣nistred after one sorte, and agreinglye through the whole church it were good and laudable: notwithstanding because there be manye diuersities which differ not in the summe of the sacrament, nor in the strength of it, or in the faith: nor all can be gathered into one custome I thinke that they are rather to be borne with agrement in peace than to be con∣demned with offence. For we haue this from the holy fathers that if the vnytye of charity be kept in the catholike faith, the diuerse custome hurtes nothing. If it be demaunded wherof these diuersiti∣es of customes do springe I perceiue no∣thinge elles than the diuersities of wit∣tes, which althoughe they dyffer not in the strength, and truth of the thing, yet they agree not in the fitnesse and come∣lines of the mynistring. For that which one iudges to e meter oftentimes o∣ther think it lesse mete. And not to agre
in suche diuersities I think it not mete to swarue from the truth of the thinge. Also where the said Preacher does recite certain abuses of the said Church as tal∣kinge, biynge and sellinge, feightinge and brawlinge (although these be verye euill and worthie muche rebuke) yet there be7 worse abuses, as blaspheming God in ly∣inge Sermons, pollutinge the Temple with Schismaticall seruice, destroyinge and pulynge downe holye aulters, that were set vp by good blessed men, & there the sacryfice of the blessed masse ministred according to the order of Christes catho∣lycke Churche. yea where the alter of the holye Ghost stoode, the newe Bis∣shoppes haue sette their tales vppon, and theyr sit in iudgement of suche as be Ca∣tholycke and liue in the feare of God. Some they depriue from their liuinges, some they commit to prison, excepte they wil forsake the Catholicke faith, and em∣brase a fayth and religion that hais no foundacion layd by generall Counseil, nor blessed fathers in times past but inuented by Heretikes that do not agre one with another, nor them selues. We both doe agree the Churche of Paules to be abused and therfore iustly plaged. God graunt that hencefoorth it may be amended, that worse doe not fo∣lowe. Whan Iosue had conquered Ie∣rico so maruaouslye with cariynge the. 6 arcke of God about it, the priestes blo∣wing their trumpettes, and the people showing, by the might of God rather
house: Goddes house must be a house of prayer, and not the proud towre of Ba∣bilon, nor the Popes market place, nor a stewes for bawdes and Ruffians, nor a horse faire for brokers, no nor yet a burse for marchauntes, nor a metingePaules. place for walkinge and talkynge. If a conuenient place to mete for honest as∣sembles can not be founde nor had con∣uenientlye other where: a particion might be had to close vppe and shit the praters from prayers, the walkers and ianglers, from well disposed persones, that they should not trouble the deuout hearers of Gods worde, so that the one should not heare nor see the other. God hais once againe wyth the trumpet of his worde, and the gladde receiuinge of the people, throwen downe the walles of Iericho, and the Popes bulwarke there by his owne might, without the power of manne, if man woulde so con∣sider it, and feare the Lorde. No place hais bene more abused than Pauls hais bene, nor more against the receyuing of Christes Gospell: Wherfore it is more maruaile that God spared it so longe, rather than that hee ouerthrewe it nowe. From the toppe of the steple downe within the grounde no place hais bene
free from the toppe of the spire at C∣ronations, or other solemne triumphes, some for vin glory vsed to throw them¦selues downe by a rope, and so killed themselues vainly to please other mens eyes. At the Battlementes of the ste∣ple sundrye times were vsed their Po∣pishe antms to call vpon their Goddes with torch & taper in the Euenings. In the top of one of the pinacles, is lollers towre, where manye an innocent soule hais bene by theym cruellye tormented and murthered. In the middest alley was their longe Censer reachinge from y• roe to the ground, as though the ho∣ly Ghost came in their cening down in liknes of a Doue. On y• arches though cōmenly men complaine of wrong and decayed iudgemente in Ecclesiasticall causes, yet because I wyll not iudge by here saye I passe ouer it, sauinge onely for such as haue bene condemned there by Annas & Caiphas for christes cause, as innocently as any Christians coulde be. For their images hanged on euery walle, piller, and doore with their pil∣grimages and worshippinge of them, I will not stand to rehearse them, because they can not be vnknowen to all men that haue seene Lonon, or hearde of them. Their massing and many altars wyth the rest of their Popyshe seruyce
which he so much ertolles, I passe ouer because I aunswered them afore. The south alley for vsurye and Poperye, the north for Simony, and the Horse faire in the middest for all kind of bargains, metinges, brawlinges, murthers, con∣spiracies, and the font for ordinary pai∣mentes of money, are so well knowen to all menne as the begger knowes his dishe. The Popishe clergy began and mayntained these, and Godles world∣linges defende theym: where the poore protestant lamentes and would amend them. Iudas chappell vnder the ground with Thapostles masse so early in the morninge, was counted by report as fit a place to worke a feat in as the stewes or tauerne. So that without and with∣in, aboue the grounde and vnder, ouer the roofe and beneath, on the toppe of the steple and spire downe to the lowe flore, not one spot was free from wyc∣kednes, as the said Byshop did than in his Sermon declare, so that we should praise God for his mercy in sparinge it so longe, and nowe tremble at his fear∣ful iudgement in iustly reuenging such filthines, god for his mercy sake graunt it may now be amended. Secondlye, where it pleases hym to tearme this Churche seruice nowe vsed schismaticall, it is as true, as afore whā
he saide that no auncient recorde made  the  fatrs nd the apists be . mention of anye suche afre. xl. yea∣res past. Why doocye call it a schis∣maticall? Because it differs from the Popes pertus? That it differs we deny not, but reioyce and prayse God for it: but if it agree with the holye Scriptu∣res, and the auncient fathers as I haue proued afore, than be ye schismatickes in swaruinge from them, and not we. In one Morning and Eueninge prayer rayer. . we agree with the olde prayers of Sa∣lomons temple as I proued afore: In Baptisme we folowe Christ Iesus hys▪ Appstles, Austin and Paulme whome Pope Gregory sente into England, in the chiefe pointes, whiche al christened▪  oniured water without salt, spit∣, oyle and chrisme. &c. In the Lordes supper we receiue to∣gether as S. Paule commaunded: and pe Gelasius teaches either to receiue the partes, or to refraine from both: for▪ it is sacrilegs to euide theym. De cons. distinc. ii. We geue the people the uppe of Christes bloude as well as  the Priestes, as Ciprian teaches, sai∣yng: how do we teach or prouoke them to shee their bloude in confessinge his name, if we deny them that shalbe chri∣stes. soudiers, the bloud of christ? or how doe we make them mete to the cuppe of
In burials we do not assemble a num∣ber of Priestes to swepe purgatorye, or bye forgiuenes of synnes, of them whi∣che haue no autoritye to sell, but accor∣dinge to Saint Ieroms example we fo∣lowe. At the death of Fabiola sais he:Epitaph Fabiola. the people of Ro. were gathered to the solemnite of the buriall. Psalmes were songe, and Alleluia soundinge oute on height, did shake the gildet celinges of the Temple. Here was one company of yonge menne, and there another whichBurials. did singe the prayses and worthy dedes of the woman. And no meruaile if men reioyce of her saluation, of whose con∣uersion Thangelles in heauen be glad, thus Ierom vsed burialls likewise Gre∣gory Nazanzene hais his funerall Ser∣mons and Orations in the commenda∣cion of the party departed: so hais Am∣brose for Theodosius and Ualentinian the Emperours: for his brother Satirus &c. Their Dirige grotes, masses, and trentalles, tapers, and ringinges, haue no foundation on the Scripture, nor good auncientye to maintaine theym. Ierom sais that Alleluia was songe so loude that it made the Churche roofe to shake: and our Papes wil not sing Al∣leluia at all, neither at buriall, in lent, nor Aduent, and saye they folowe aun∣cientye. Alleluia is as much in Eng∣lyshe
as praise ye the lorde: as thoughe they shoulde saye, praise the lorde that hais called his seruaunt out of this mi∣serie to himselfe in heauen: But the des∣perat Papes saye wepe, reioyse not for the dead, but mistrust of their saluation thinke that they bee gone from one so∣rowe to another, and therfore bie mas∣ses apase, the Popes proctoures for mo∣ney inoughe, will sel that whiche God can not, or will not geue freely as they thinke. God is wearye as they saye of wel doing, and turned ouer the matter to these the Popes Proctours. But Sa∣lomonEccle. 11. teaches, that in death the bodie tournes to earth from whence it came, and the soule to him that gaue it. Loke how both bodye and soule is bestowed, whatsoeuer gredy gaping Cormoraun∣tes, do say to get money withall. Bles∣sed be the dead that die in the lorde sais Saint Ihon. For they rest from their labours, the Papes saye the dead be ac∣cursed and goe into purgatory from so∣rowes here to greater there, chose whe∣ther ye beleue. In mariage as in other thinges beside, we are but to much like vnto them, that is our fault generally: that we differ not more from them in al our ministery. We haue all in Eng∣lysh where they haue but I N. take thee M. &c. And here I would aske MaisterMariage.
schismaticks commenlye, and not Pro∣testantes. Fascic. tempor. a booke made by one Munke of their owne sect, reher∣ses. xxiii. schismes betwyr Popes, and their partakers: whan they fynde the thirde part of to manye amonge the Protestantes, than they may haue some face of apparens to cal vs schismatikes. At the counseil of Constance were. iii. Popes in. iii. diuerse Countryes, Italy Fraunce, and Spayne, all claymynge to be chiefe, and some Countryes folo∣wed one, some another, but all were deposed, and a iiii. chosen litle more th a C. l. yeare sins. It were to longe to rehearse al the schismes spoken of, who so lust, there maye reade. This schisme that I named last, and the other whan there was one Pope at Rome, and ano∣ther at Auinion in Fraunce. rl. yeares together are the notablest, and troubled the worlde most, in striuing who should haue the most folowers and partakers, the other I passe ouer for shortnes sake, vnto these be considered better of them how they maye defend them selues that they be not proued schismatikes, if that be schismaticall seruice whan one dif∣fers from another, than be all orders of Freers, Munkes, Chanons, Nunnes, yorks vse, Sarum, Bangor. &c. schisma∣tical: for they differ euery one frō other.
Now for pullinge downe Altars, and ministring the Communion on tables, a fewe woordes to trie whether we doe this without reason or example. FirstThe Com∣munion table. our sauiour Christ ministred it sittinge at a table: Than it is not wicked but but best to folow his doinges, for he did all thinges well. Saint Luk. sais that the hand of the traitour was with himLuke. 22. at the table. Saint Paul for the vse of it in his time sais: ye can not be parta∣kers1. Cor. 10. of the Lordes table, and the table of Deuils: where it appeares plain that both Idolaters at their Sacrifices, and the Christyans also in their holye my∣steries vsed tables. Theodor. writes that after Ambrose had excommunica∣ted Themperour Theodosius, and re∣ceyued him againe to the Churche, theLib. 5. Ca. 18. Emperour ynge flat on the grounde, wepinge and tearinge the heare of hys head for sorowe and shame of his offen∣ses he rose vppe and offred (at such time sais he as the giftes were offered at the holy table. Sozo writes lib. viii. ca. vii. howe Eutropius fled to the Churche as a Sanctuary for succour, because he had offended Themperoure: and whan Ihon Byshoppe of Constantinople see him lye afore the holye Communion table, he preached vnto him, and rebu∣ked him of his pryde, whan he was in
autoritye. The Canon of the great Ni∣cene counsel sais thus. In the godly ta∣ble wee muste not lowlye cleaue to the bread and cuppe set afore vs, but lifting vppe oure minde on height by faith, we must consider the lambe of God to be set afore vs in that holy table. Wherein I note that they all call it a table and not an altar, where they ministred the com∣munion. This was. iiii. C. yeare after Christ, aboue a thousaunde yeare sins: why than Alters were not contynued from the beginninge as they saye, and we are not the first that vsed tables, but we would gladly restore these olde cus∣stomes againe. If Ambrose lawfullye and well vsed tables at the Communi∣on at Millan and the Byshop at Con∣stantinople in Grece and elles where. I see no reason why wee shoulde be rebu∣ked for folowinge them, except they can proue that they did it against the Scrip∣ture. I knowe that the Scripture and olde writers also, make mention of al∣tares: but that is because Moises in the lawe commaunded theym to offer their sacryfices vppon Aultars, because the sacrifices than commenlye vsed were heauye, as Oxen, calues, sheepe. &c. and tables were not able to stand and beare suche weyghtes contynuallye. These sacrifices were a figure and shadowe of
that onlye pure sacrifice whiche Christe shoulde offer on the crosse for vs all: for as those innocent beasts were killed for other mennes fautes: so Christ without sinne shoulde die for the sinnes of the worlde: For this cause the crosse wher∣on Christ our lorde died, is called an al∣tar also: because the sacrifice for the sins of the whole worlde was thereon offred as those were on an altar. Where so e∣uer therfore the newe testament or olde writers vse this word altar, they allude to that Sacrifice of christ, fygured byAltars. Moyses, and vse the word stil that Mos∣ses vsed to signyfye the same sacrifice withall, and rather it is a figuratiu, than a proper kinde of speache in all su∣che places. And because altars were euer vsed for sacrifices, to signifie that sacrifice whiche was to come, seing our sauioure christ is comen alreadye, hais fulfilled and finyshed all sacrifices, we thinke it best to take away all occasions of that Popyshe sacrificinge masse (for maintaynnige whereof they haue cru∣elly sacrificed manie innocent soules) to minister on tables, accordinge to these examples. It greeues him that the Bishops set their tales (as it pleases hym to speake) whan they sytte in iudgemente, where the Altars were, but if they were hand∣led
as did Baals Priestes and his4 king. 10. Altars, God did them no wrong. It is a commen true sayinge: he that wil do no yl, must do nothinge that longes there til, so surely if we wil warely audid the wickednes of Popery, we must fe from suche thinges as maintaine their doin∣ges. There is nothinge more profita∣ble vnto them than massinge sacrifices: therefore because Altars importe and maintaine their gainefull sacrificynge, it is necessary they be remoued. For their sacrifice of the Masse, that he so muche lamentes to be defaced, and all good conscyences reioyse, that God of hys vndeserued goodnesse hays ouerthrowen it: I referre all menne to the fyft and laste booke that the blessed soules now lyuinge with god, Bishop∣pes Crammer aud Ridley wrote of the Sacramente, whose bodyes they cruel∣lye tormented therfore. There who so euer lust, maye reade, and with indiffe∣rencye wey the reasons of both parties and iudge wyth the trueth Stout Ste∣uen woulde gladlye haue ouerthrowen that booke: but God confounded hym, and their names lyue for euer. So longe as that booke standes vnconfu∣ted, they maye barke agaynste the trueth, as the Dogge does agaynst the
mone, and not preuaile. And if ye will call but a litle to your remembrance howe many diuers sortes of masses there were vsed in diuers coū∣tries as appeares in the words afore re∣hersed ye shal se how lowd he lies in sai∣inge is not Catholycke. here that their masse was according to the order of christes catholike church. That is catholicke as the Greke word signifies, which is vniuersall and gene∣ral both in time, person and place: ther∣fore he must proue if he will be beleued that this Popish latin patched masking masse hais bene vsed at al times, of all menne and in all Countryes. But I haue declared afore both many sundrye sortes of ministringe the lordes supper in seuerall countries and also howe of late yeares this his order hais bene vi∣olently and blinde ignoraunce brought in: therfore it can not be catholicke. None that be counted learned can be ignoraunt of the general pointes wher∣in the Greke East churche differs fromhe diffe∣rence be∣yx the reke Ghur∣he and the atin. the west latin Romish churche. The Grecians neuer receyued the Pope for their head nor the doctrine of purgatory their Priestes were euer free to mary, they ministred the Lords supper alwais in their owne language with leauened bread in bothe kindes to the lay people both the bred and the cup seuerally, the
Priestes neuer receiued alone withoute other to receyue wyth him, they neuer made trentals of it, nor knew transsub∣stantiation, they neuer vsed pardons y∣mages with manye other moe thinges lyke as auricular shriuinge to a Priest. &c, which all the latin Romish Church defendes, and does contrary, and their these religion standes in theym: there∣fore none of these opinions can be cald catholicke, because the Greke Churche which is the greater part of the worlde neuer receiued, beleued, nor vsed them. Thus many lyes than this maister D. hais made in one word callynge it ca∣tholicke, as there be thynges wherein their Romishe masse dyffers frome the the Greke liturgies and orders of mini∣stringe the Lordes supper: as I haue declared moste of theym. If I shoulde particulrly and throughly handell all his folysh saiynges, it would growe to to great a woorke: therefore brefelye I touche the chefest. He charges vs with a faith and reli∣gion that hais no foundacion layde by generall counsels, which sayinge whan he better considers, I truste he will be content to be reckned in the same num∣ber with vs. Was not the first general counsel, vnder Constantine the Empe∣ror at Nice, aboue. iiii. c. xxx. yeres after
Christ was borne? Shall I say than, orOur reli∣gion is elder than Counsels. is he so shameles to thinke that there was no religion nor faith in the world so manye yeares together after Christ. because there was not of so many yea∣res a generall counsell to bilde vppon. No and because we say and proue oure faithe and relygion to bee the best and auncienst, we bylde not on counsels as they doe, but on Goddds worde, which is aboue the counsel, and rules al being not ruled of any, hais bene from the be∣ginning, and shall continue to the end: and we say with Paule that we be byl∣dedEphe. 2. on the foundacion of the Apostles and Prophetes, Christ himselfe beynge the head corner stone. The Prophetes whereon we buyld lyued many of them a thousaunde yeare afore anye generall counsell was heard of, and the Apostles liued. iiii. C. yere afore them. Wherfore our foundacion and religion is much el∣der than theirs. Councels are lyke to Parliamentes, that that pleases one Pope in his Counsell, pleases not ano∣ther, as the bokes do easely declare: and that whiche one thinkes good, & makes a law one yere, an other condēnes & dis∣anulles. What a vayn thing is it than to bild on so vncertain a groundworke? Heauen and earth shall passe, chaunge, and decaye, but the worde of the Lorde
our God, from whence comes our reli∣gion, remaines for euer, as the ProphetIsai. 40. sais. Therfore the wise builder wil fo∣lowe that which will not fade. Lastlye where he charges vs that we agree not one wyth another, nor wyth oure selues, I maye say to him with theLuk. 6. Gospell Thou Hypocryte first plucke the mote out of thine own eye, and than thou shalte better see to take the beame oute of thy brothers eye. There is no sorte of people more giltye in this be∣halfe than the Papystes be. The hea∣then Philosophers hadde not so manye sundrye sectes and oppinions amonge them selues in their scholes, as the Pa∣pistes haue in their doynges. D. Po∣net late Byshoppe of Winton in his answere to the booke that beares Mar∣tins name for mariage of Priestes, pro∣ues wel that Poperye is a monster pat∣ched of al kynds of heresy, & worse than they al. Where such thinges are fullye taught & proued. I had rather refer you to ye reding of them there, than to write one thynge oft. I declared to you afore also where ye shal find. xxiii. schismes a∣mong the popes themselues. These holy Bishops y• he craks so much on for their imprisonment, and other that in losing their liuings, liue more welthily and at ease than euer they didde afore, or the Protestantes doe in their liberty nowe.
Marke howe like them selues they be, and agreing with themselues. As long as kinge Henry liued, and all the time of blessed kinge Edwarde, they taught, they preached, they subscribed, they sware and beleued all thys, that they now deny. As oft as they had anye li∣uingeThe Papi∣stes tourne with the world, and dyffer one from ano∣ther. in anye College of the vniuersi∣ties, as oft as they tooke degree in the scholes, as oft as they tooke any bene∣fice, and whan they were made Priests or Byshoppes, so ofte they sweare and forsweare all that nowe they denye. Periurye in other menne is punished with bearinge papers, losse of their eares, and other worldlye shame: but these menne abusinge the gentilnes of the Prince, beyng thus oft forsworne are counted holye in the worlde. The Papistes in their religyous monsters haue o kind of munkes, Freers, Cha∣nons, Nunnes, differing in their coates than anye people haue, some be white, some blacke, some graye: differinge in their shoes, some hauinge whole, some halfe, some nothinge but sooles vnder the foote: differinge in shauinge their heades, some more, some lesse: differing in meates, some eatinge fish only, some flesh and fishe at their dayes and times appointed, differinge in places for some neuer go abroade, but are kept stil with
in the compasse of the house, some walk abroode at their pleasure, and some loc∣ked vp in stone walles: diffring in their seruice, for euery order had his diuerse order of masse and Mattins, in manye pointes: differinge in their Saintes, or rather their Goddes whose names they beare, whom they worshippe, and stry∣uinge which of them shoulde be the ho∣liest. Some holde of Francis, some of Benet, some of Dominic, some of Bri∣gitte, and others of other as they lust to deuise. In their schole menne is founde more diuersity of opinions, than among any sort of Philosophers. Some hold of Thomas, some of Dominus, some of Albertus, some of other as they like, for there be so manye that almost they can not be reckened. Which thinges being all considered, and knowen of all men to be true, except they be wilfully blind howe can they saye that they agree in one vnitye of the trueth. Pilate and Herode agreed to crucifie christ, so these in mischeues agree to set vp superstici∣on, but in their priuate opinions none are more contrary and diuers. In their pilgrimages, pardons, reliques, fastin∣ges, what diuersities and striuing whi∣che shoulde be the greatest. Amonge so manye Ladies and Roodes, what stri∣uinge in euery countrye which shoulde
be the holiest, and worke most miracles. Amonge pardons, Boston beare the name, and yet other would compare a∣mong reliques, the bloud of Hales pas∣sed other, vnto their iugling was kno∣wen. Fastinges were mo than I know. Some vsed Saint Rinians, some oure ladies, some the golden Fridayes, some euerye Wednesdaye, some halfe Lent, some whole: some with fishe only, other as they luste. What reason is it that they whyche fasted oure Ladyes faste, some fastinge to bread & water ended it in. iii. yeares space, other in eatynge fishe had. vii. and why shoulde they fo∣lowe the Ladye daye in lent more than other Ladie dayes? and why yearelye doe they chaunge theyr daye. &c. Whan these and such other their doinges are proued to agree in one, and good reason shewed for their doynges, they maye better charge other menne wyth disa∣greinge: but they maye thynke it shame to burthen other wyth that wherein they be most gilty themselues. There is none more disobedient then the newe Byshops and Preachers now a dayes, whyche disoveye the vniuersall church of Christ, the whych Church who. 1. so euer wyll not obey, oure sauyour in the
Gospell commaundes vs to take theym as infydelles. As where the vniuersall Churche of Chryst commaundes Masse and senen Sacramentes as necessary for  our saluacion, they call it abhomination, with their blasphemous mouthes: Where the▪ Churche commaundes to faste, they commaund to eat Where the Church cō∣maunds coutynual prayer of the Clergy, they cal it superslicyon & blynd ignorance: where the Church commaundes the cler∣gie to liue in chastitye, they commaunde and exhort the Clergy to mariage: where the Churche and all lawes ciuyll and ca∣non, yea the lawes of the Realme do pro∣hibit maryage of Pryestes, they alowe maryage of Pryestes, beyinge no lawe, but folowe their owne carnall lustes. Yea where the Queene hays geuen strayte commaundement to abstayne from fleshe in Lent, and other dayes, commaunded by the Church, the newe Preachers and Protestants haue eaten flesh openly to the great sclaunder of other O God howe manye lyes, in so fewe lynes. The vnyuersall Churche of Chryste agrees in the necessarye Arty∣cles of oure Saluation, but in certayne outwarde orders and Ceremonies, eue∣rye Countrie differs from other, wyth∣out anye dyshonoure to Godde.
I declared afore how we agree with the vniuersall churche and confesse the ne∣cessarye Christian articles of our fayth, religion, & saluation better than they, & also I touched some diuersities of out warde orders in the Churche, whereof many or all were tollerable: and nowe by occasion of these matters mynistred by him, I shall touche some moe. He layes to our charge, that we disobey the vniuersall churche, if he meane in those thinges which afterwarde folow, I am content to trie with him. Where vnder y• name of masse, he vnderstands the Ro¦mish latin masse, it appeares afore how many sundry good sortes of ministring the Lordes supper be in other countries at this day, and haue bene of olde time: Therefore he makes a loude lie in say∣ingeMasse. or thinking, that who so euer disa∣grees from their Popish masse disobeies the vniuersal Church: for the most part of Christendome, neyther does at this daye, nor at any time hais vsed it. In the substaunce and doctrine of the holye Communion, we agree with the scrip∣ture and the catholicke Church, though we differ in some peice of the outwarde order of it from other countries: but we prosesse an open disagreeinge from the Romish sinagoge both in the order and substaunce thereof. The Churche of
God, accordinge to the scriptures, does professe and beleue that all faythfull Christians worthely coming to the lor∣des table, receiue by faith in those holy misteries, the body and bloude of Christ whiche was giuen, broken and shed for the sinnes of the whole world: this we teache, beleue and folow, aud exhort all men often to prepare them selues wor∣thelie thus to receiue. The Popish Sy∣nagoge contrary to Saint Paule teach practise, beleue (and persecute with fire and fagot all gainsayers) that in the sa∣crifice of their bread and wine, the crea∣tures be chāged from their natural sub∣staunce, and are made a God to be wor∣shipt, whan they lifte it ouer their hea∣des, hange it in a corde ouer the Altar, or carye it aboute the fieldes, and if the people will bie trentals or masses of it, at their handes, they can swepe purga∣tory cleane, and make soules flie to hea∣uen as thicke as duste. These haue no ground woorke on Goddes worde, and therfore we can not beleue theym: For we read that Christ tooke the substance of his fleshe of the virgin Mary, but ne∣uer of breade. Onelye the Romishe pre∣lates haue made this marchaundise put in that article taught this doctrine, and beleue this contrarie to the whole chur∣che of Christ beside theymselues. Than
it is they that disobey the Churche, and not wee. I spake sufficientlye for theyr masse and Sacramentes afore, yet for their sacramentes nowe a litle more. He sais here that there be. vii. Sacra∣mentes necessarye to saluation, and yet wythin fewe wordes folowinge, he de∣nyes maryage to Priestes, and that is as much to saye as eyther that mariage is no Sacrament, or that Priestes shall not be saued. There is but one waye of saluation for al men, than Priests must eyther be saued that way or els condem∣ned. But it is to foolyshe to saye that anye manne shall be condemned, except he be maried. Shall none be saued but maried folkes? whan he lookes at him selfe beinge vnmaried, and yet not so chaste, he will saye naye. Than. vii. sa∣cramentes are not necessarye for salua∣tion to euerye man: for many haue bene saued without manye of theym: as ma∣riage, extreme vnction, order of Priest∣hode, shriuinge, Byshoppinge, and the Lordes supper. Who is so ignoraunt but he knowes that many children ne∣uer, yea, and olde folke to, neuer recei∣ued all those his Sacramentes: whiche God forbidde should all be condemned. No learninge can beare this saiynge to be true, that there be. vii. sacramentes
necessarye to saluation: therfore by this iudge the rest of his sayinges. And least he shoulde thinke the generall order of the Churche to be thus, thoughe manye particulars neuer receiue theym, yet in searching, he shal find that tobe vntrue to. Socrat. lib. v. cap. xix. & Sozo lib. vii. ca. xvi. in their Ecclesiasticall histories wryte & teach that shriuing to a Priest was not cōmaunded by god, but inuen∣tedConfession. by man: and therfore whan they see it abused they toke it awaye, and vsed it not any more. In ye time of Theodosius Themperor iiii. c. yere after Christ, and Nectarius being Byshop of Constanti∣nople as they write there, a Diacone of the churche, get a Gentel woman wyth chylde in the Churche, that came to be shreuen, while she was there doing the appointed penaunce by her ghostlye fa∣ther. The hole churche was so offended at it that not onlye there, but manye o∣ther Bishoppes beside in their churches left of afterwarde that order of shriuing and lefte euerye manne free to the exa∣mination of his owne conscience for his sinnes. There hays bene nothynge more profytable to the Pope than thys care shriuinge hais, besyde manye su∣che lyke fylthynesse done by it, as thys Diacon didde, for no time was fitter to woe or worke their feate in, wythoute
suspicion than shriuing time. No prince coulde enterprise or purpose anye great thing, but his confessour wold by some meanes learne it vnder confession, and declare it to the Pope or his chaplains. Eliseus by the spirit of God neuer told more secret thinges what the kinge of Siria did in his priuy chamber, than the Pope coulde learne by these his confes∣sours, the secret pourposes of all Prin∣ces. Than if confession might be taken4. kin. 6. away as here appeares it was, it is not so necessary to saluacion: nor the vni∣uersall Churche hais vsed it euer as he sais: nor we disobey not the Churche in leauinge it of, seing so many holy men haue done it afore vs. Ioan Dominus writing on the. iiii. booke of the senten∣ces distinc. xvii. and serching out where this their sacrament shoulde be bilded, writes thus. If we saye it is groun∣ded on the saying of Saint Iames, con∣fesse you one to an other, manye incon∣ueniences wil folow, for so euerye man might heare an others confession howe should Saint Iames Byshop of Ieru∣salem commaund Peter the highest and the Romyshe Church. If it be grounded on Saint Ihons sayinge, whose sinnes ye doe forgeue, they are forgeuen: yet there is no mention to do it in his eare. If that will not serue than, saye that it
comes from Thapostles: yf that serue not, because y• Grecians vse it not, than saye it comes from Ro. as does the Cō∣munion in vnleuend bread, thus ye see what harde shiftes they are driuen to, in triynge out the autoritye and aunci∣entye of this their sacrament and howe small it is whan it comes to profe. But if ye wil iudiffrently iudge whether the newe Bishops or the olde, obeye their Prince and Goddes Church better, read the othe of them both and than iudge. The Pope firste deuised an othe for hys Byshoppes to sweare at their creation and whan that was not thought straite inoughe, he deuysed this afterwarde. I N. Byshoppe of N. from this houre for∣warde,The Pre∣lates othe to the Pope shalbe true to Saint Peter, and the holye Romishe Churche, and to my Lorde Pope N. and to his successours, entrynge canonicallye: I shall not be in counsell, consent, nor at dede, that he may loose his life, or that anye member maye be taken from him by deceyte, or violent handes layde on him or wrong done to him, by anye meanes. That counsell that shall be declared to me by him selfe, letters, or messengers. I shall not disclose to anye manne wittingly to his harme. I shall helpe to defende the Popedome of the Romishe churche, and the rules of holy fathers, and the rialtes
of Saint Peter againste all menne sa∣uinge my order. I shall not be at anye councell or dede where anye euil is de∣uised against the honour and power of them, but to my power I shal stoppe it, and so shortly as I can signify it to our lorde Pope or some other that will tell it his holiner, Hereticks, schismatickes and rebelles to oure lorde Pope, to my power I shal pursue. &c. Loke how well our holy prelates kepe their othe to the Pope, & deny it to their lawful Prince. The othe of the newe Byshoppes is in print in Englyshe, and so knowen of al (that lust to learn) that I nede not to write it, and although the Popishe pre∣lates refuse to take that othe, because it makes the Prince, the chyefe gouer∣nonr ouer them (whiche they can not a∣bide) herafter in his proper place where he falles into that question, I shal en∣treat of it. Secondly where he charges vs, that where the Churche commaundes to faste, we commaunde to eate, and haue eaten fleshe in Lente, and other forbid∣den dayes, we speake plaine Englyshe, and saye he lies. Under the name of the Churche, he euer vnderstandes Rome, yea and not whan it continued in anye pure religion, but euen in these latter dayes whan it is euer whelmed wyth
infinite supersticious. Fasting dayes beFastynge. appointed commenlye by euerye parti∣cular churche and countrye, rather than by the uniuersall Churche, but yf anye kynde of fasting be generall, I say theyAmbrose. breake that order rather than we. Am∣bro. writes on the. xvii. cha. of Luc. that for the space of. l. dayes betwixt Easter and whitsondaye, the Churche knowes no fastinge daye. Marke what the chur∣che vsed in his time, and what it is gro∣wen to since. Howe many fasting dayes in that space haue Popes broughte in synce? from whence came all the gang dayes to bee fasted in the crosse weke? was it from the church or no? if the chur¦che didde it, than the latter churche and Popes were contrarye to the old church in Ambro. time, or els the church is free in all ages to disanull that whiche was done afore them. If it be free: why than may not the churche nowe disanull that whiche was done afore oure tyme, as well as they brake the custome of the chuch in Ambrose time afore them, hais not the Churche lyke power in all ages to decree or dysanulle what they luste? Are we more bounde that wee shall not breake olde customes than they were? What is the reason that wee shoulde bee so, or where is it so wryt∣ten.
If the Churche bee ruled by ge∣nerall counselles where is that coun∣sell that decreed so many fasting dayes to be betwix Easter and Whitsunday: & Ambrose says none was afore hys time. Is counsell so contrarye to counsell, or does one counsell deface that whiche an other determined? Than is that true, where I saide afore that their counsels were like oure Parliamentes, and they are no longer to be obserued than other coūsels folowing shal think mete. Whi¦che being true & graunted who wilbe so mad to bild his faith vpon coūcels, whi∣che haue so often chaunged, and one sort beleue contrarye to another? And althoughe Ambrose saye that the chur∣che knewe no fastinge day betwix Ester and whitsonday, yet beside these manye fastes in the Rogation weke, oure wise Popes of late yeares, haue deuysed a monstrous fast on Saint Markes daye. All other fastinge daies, are on the holy day even, only Saint Marke must haue his day fasted. Tell vs a reason why so that wil not be laughen at. We knowe wel ynough your reasō of Tho. Beket, and thinke you are ashamed of it: tell vs where it was decreed, by the churche or generall counsell. Tell vs also if ye can, why the one side of the strete in
Cheapeside fastes that daye beinge in London diocesse, and the other side be∣inge of Canturbury diocesse fastes not? and so in other townes moe? Could not Beckets holynes reache ouer the strete, or woulde he not. If he coulde not, he is not so mighty a saint as ye make hym: if he would not, he was malicious that woulde not doe so muche for the Citye wherin he was borne. This is his great auncient holy churche that he crakes so much. Becket was liuinge sins the con∣quest vnder king Henry the second, not iii. C. yeares sins: and yet all as they thynke that wyll not beleue their trumpry to be M. D. yere old, and ought not to be broken, is an hereticke, diso∣beyes the vniuersall Churche, and not mete to liue. Monica Saint Austins mo∣ther seing them fast at Rome on the sa∣turday, and coming to Millan see themAugust P. p 06. not fast there, mauailed at it, and as∣ked Austin her sonne, the cause of suche diuersity of fastinge, thinking that both didde not well. Austin beinge yet but a yonge scholer in Christes schole, asked Ambro. the cause. Ambro. said: Fastinge was free, and therfore whan he came to Rome he fasted, and dyd as they done: Whan he was at Millan, be fasted not but did as they did. Afterwarde Austin beinge better learned, gaue this lesson
in the same Epistle, and sayde: that he found written in the newe testament, that we ought to fast: but he neuer foūd it there writen, what dayes we should faste. Therfore the time is free to all christians by the scripture to eat or not eat: but they must eat so soberly euerye day, as though they fasted, and see that they surfet not. Montanus an hereticke was the first that made lawes for fa∣sting, and they like good children make it heresy to breake their dayes, or fast o∣therwayes than they appoint. There be. ii. sortes of fasting, from meat, whi∣che we be bound vnto. The one volun∣tary whan we fele our selues by to mu∣che eatinge giuen to anye kinde of sin, than the fleshe must be bridled by absti∣nence, that it rebell not against the spi∣rit, but the minde may more frely serue the lorde: The other is by commaunde∣ment on suche dayes as be appointed by commen order of the countrye, wherein we must beware that we be not brea∣kers of polities. These kindes of fasting stande in outwarde disciplyne, and are to be obserued with fredom of consciens so farre as the helthe of the bodye maye beare, and supersticion be not maintay∣ned.58. There is a. iii. sort whiche Esai speakes of, that standes not in forbea∣rynge meates onely, but in exercisinge
the workes of mercy. Is this the fast that I choose sais the Lorde that a man shoulde punishe him selfe, pynche hys belye, and pull downe himselfe, so that for hunger and paine he crie out, or fall into sickenes, that he wrythe and lappe hys heade in huddes and Kercheffes. No says the Lorde: but thys is the fast that I haue chosen: bring the poore and straungers to thy house, feede the hun∣grye, clothe the naked. &c. God is not delyted with a hungrye belly for meat, but wyth the soule that hungers for his righteousnesse. Furthermore this ge∣nerall kinde of fastinge whiche standes in forbearynge fleshe, and eatynge but one meale a daye, to many it is no grefe nor a bridelinge to the lust of the flesh. Some loue fyshe so well that they had rather feede of that than of other meat, and some haue so weake stomackes or lyue so ydle lyues, that they can scarce dygest one meale a daye. Agayne other some haue so costlye and greate dinners that they eat more at that one dynner, than the poore man can get at three scamlinges on a day. Therefore I can not say that he punishes his bodye by abstinence that eates fyshe whyche he loues, nor that for weakenes of sto∣macke, can not eat more althoughe his
appetite desire it, nor he that gorges himselfe so ful at one meale that he can not be hungry of a whole daye after. Hard it is therfore to appoint to euerye particuler manne, what, whan, or how seldome he shal eate when he fastes: but bicause generally euery man loues flesh better than fishe, and eates twise a daye at the least, generallye it was well ap∣pointed in fasting to forbeare flesh, and eate but ones a daye, thoughe it faile in many particulers. Therfore whan anye is to be charged with breaking his fast the person is to be considerd whither he may doe it with the health of his body: the kinde of fastynge, whether it be su∣persticious, to bye forgeuenes of sinnes and righteousnesse, the time that it be not wyth Iewyshe obseruatyon of daies, and the meate it selfe, that it be not thought vnclean by nature, and vn∣lawfull: and the cause that it be for ta∣minge the fleshe, and not to compound with God or bargaine that for so many dayes fastinge, God shall rewarde hym with suche worldly blessinges as please him to appoint. In Flaunders euerye saturdaye betwixt Christmas and Can∣delmas they eate flesh for ioy, and haue pardon for it bicause our Ladye laye so longe in child bedde saye they: we here may not eat so: the Pope is not so good
to vs, yet surely it were as good reason that we should eat fleshe with them all that while that our lady lay in child bed as that we shuld beare our candel at her churchinge at Candelmas with theym as they doe. It is seldome sene that men offer candels at womens churchinges, sauinge at oure ladies: but reason it is, that she haue some preferrement, if the Pope woulde be so good maister to vs as let vs fleshe with theym. Euery one euen by the Popes lawe is not bounde to faste as children, olde folkes, women with child, pilgrimes, poore prisoners, labouringe or iorneynge menne: and by the consent of the Phisicion and gostlye father euen in the midst of blynd Pope∣rye all sicke persons might eat fleshe at all times: And those that be bounde to fast maye bee dispensed with for a litle money. That is good holinesse that is bought for so litle money. Our sauioure christ seing the Pharases offended with eating meat, said to them. That which enters in at the mouthe, defiles not the manne, and whan they woulde not be so satisfied he saide: let them alone theyMath, 15. be blinde, and guides of the blind. So surely to such obstinate blinde Papistes as will not learne the fredome of con∣science taught in the Scriptures, and serue the lorde in singlenes of hart, but
put their hole deuocion in outward ob∣seruation of mans traditions, it maye well be saide, lette theym alone they be blinde and guides of the blynde. It is the weake conscience that is to be born with, as Saint Paul teaches, sayinge, I had rather neuer eat flesh, than offend my brother, and not the obstinate wil∣full blindnesse of the supersticious that maye learne and will not. Whan he hais proued that the protestantes vpon their wilfull lustes and not for such ne∣cessary considerations (as is here reher∣sed) haue contemptuouslye broken the fasting dayes appointed by commen or∣der, he may well rebuke them: but there be to manye witnes whiche haue heard manye of them sundry times oute of the solemst places and pulpites in ye realme teache the contrarye: therefore none can beleue these hys liynge woordes to be true. Breakinge thy faste standes not so muche in eatynge anye kinde of meat, as in the quantitye of it, or doynge it with contempt of the higher powers, and commen order appoynted, or elles in offending the weake conscience whi∣che hais not learned his libertye geuen by god in his holy worde. Where he castes in our teeth the brea∣kinge of lent, as though that were com∣maunded by Goddes owne mouth, and
shoulde be obserued without all excuse, they that lust shall see how great diuer∣sities of fastinge Lent haue bene in olde time before, and than iudge whither this their one kinde of fastinge Lent be so necssarye. Socrat. lib. v. ca. xxii. of hisLent. ecclesiastical history writes of the diuer∣sites of sundry thinges in the church as kepinge of Easter, baptising, mariage, and the Communion. &c. Amonge whi∣che he touches the diuersity of lent fast, and sais: that the Romanes fasted. iii. whole Wekes afore Easter, excepte Satturdaye and Sondaye, some Greci∣ans fast. vi. Wekes, some begynne. vii. Wekes afore, and fast but. xv. dayes in that space, and those not all together. They differed also in meates, for some woulde eate nothing that had life: some woulde eate no liuelye thinge but fish: some woulde eat both fishe and fowle, other forbeare Beryes and Egges, o∣ther forbeare all thyngs saue dry bread, and other wold not eat that, some wold not eate afore the. ix. houre, but than woulde fede of diuers meates. Some at one houre of the daye, some at ano∣ther. &c. If all these christian men ser∣ued God, and yet hadde such dyuersites of fastynge their Lente, why shoulde they be counted euill menne that do no worse than they dydde, or swarue but a littel from thys theyr vsed Lent fast.
Is this so well, that nothinge is well but this? And bicause they sticke so mu∣che to the Ro. Church, note that he sais the Romanes fasted but. iii. wekes why should we than fast sir? or how hais Ro∣chaunged this olde custome? or maye it be chaunged? If it maye not why haue they done it, and if it maye, why blame they them that do it? Polychronic. lib. v a. ir. writes that Pope Gregory the. i. ordeined fastinge of all Lent, who liued vi. C. yeare after Christ, than it lackes much of their autoritye and auncientye that they crake so muche of. We reade that our Sauiour Christ eate fleshe at his last supper on maūdy thursday (whi∣che day of all in lent is one of the holy∣est) if Christ than fasted Lent. I speake not this because I woulde haue menne to breake the commen appointed order of fastinge without lawefull cause: but that I woulde euery man should know the libertye of consciens, that Christe hais geuen and taught vs in his word. Let euerye manne obey the ordinaunce of the rulers, whiche commaunde not anye thinge contrarye to God, and let them knowe also the fredom of consci∣ence, that they be not boundmen to the creatures which God of loue hais made to serue, and not to rule vs. Surelye these people were christened, and holye
members of the church of christ: and yet so shamelesly he crakes so muche of the whole church to maintein their doings. Spiridion Byshoppe of a towne in Cy∣prusSozo lib. . ca. . whan his fryende came to him on the fasting daye after dinner, bade his daughter Irene dresse a piece of bacon, because he hadde no other meate in the house, naye sais the manne I am a chri∣sten man I eat no fleshe on the fastinge daye, why sais Spiridion because thou art a christen manne thou shoulde eate. O worthy lesson teaching both the ma∣riage of Byshops, and also libertye of meates. Thirdlye where he belies vs, saiynge that we call praier, supersticion, reade the bookes of prayers, whiche the pro∣testauntes haue made, the order that they teach to pray in, marke their prai∣ers openly in their sermons, with what seruent zeale it is done, and iudge than how falsly he misreportes them. But if he meane the praiers of munks, Freers Bunnes. &c. we will not greatlye stickePrayer. to graunte them to be so in dede: and good reasons we haue out of their owne otours, why to say so. Saint Thō in his scdā scde quest. xcii. writes that it is supersticion whan a manne is to holye. As whan he is so Pope holy that he be∣leues thinges not to be beleued, feares
thinges not to be feared, worships thin∣ges not to be worshipped, or does thin∣ges as holy: which be not holy in dede. Conferre these sayinges with munkish prayers, and suche like, and see whether we saye true. Thinges necessary to be beleued are writen onelye in the scrip∣tures: so be thinges to be worshipt, to be feared as godly, or counted holy, areSupersti∣cion. taught there onlye. Than he that bele∣ues more than the holy Byble teaches, or worshyppes, feares other Gods than the onely liuing God, or does any thing for the seruice of God, or countes holye that which is not taught there general∣lye, he is supersticious and the vse of the thynge it selfe is supersticion. The Englyshe worde is the harder because we vse the Latin worde supersticion, and makes it Englishe: But the Greke woorde makes the nature of it, and the things afore rehersed playner by much. There be. ii. Greke wordes signifyinge this supersticion. Ethelothresceia and dei∣sidaemonia,Ethelo∣thresceia the further word signifies as the interpretacion of it declares, all su∣che relygyous woorshyppinge of God, as manne dcuises on hys owne heade, and is not taught in the holye Scryp∣ture. So sais the glosse Colloss. ii. whan mannes tradicion is taken for re∣ligion than it is supersticion. As ey∣ther
to worshyppe anye other God than the onelye true liuinge God, or to wor∣shyppe the onelye Godde other wayes than he hais appointed vs in his word: as with Ladye Psaltars: trentals, pil∣grimages. &c. And because the chefe partSupersti∣cions. of godly worshippe standes in prayinge to God, and callynge on him in our ne∣cessities with a stedstast beliefe of hys holye worde and promise: He that cals on anye creature but Godde alone for helpe, or beleues other doctrine necessa∣ry to saluation than Gods boke alone,Deisid: moni. he is well called supersticious. The latter word signifies that godly feare in their opinion whiche is due to Godde a∣lone: whiche who so euer gyues to anye other creature besyde the true God, he is supersticious also. As they that to knowe thynges to come wyll counsell wyth spirits, or in their sicknes or trou∣ble seke helpe at their hands, hang vpon the sterres for lucky or unlucky dates, or feare any creature more then the lord & creator. Al the popes creatures therfore be supersticious puttinge their holines and religion in their owles, cloisters, order inuēted of men, and fearing more to breake the rule of Austin Dominie, Benet, than of anye Appostle, Euan∣gelyste, or Chryste hymselfe. They also be superstycious that put holinesse
in meates, dayes, times, places, beades, holy water, palme, crosse, pardons. S. Agathes letters for burninge houses, thorne bushes for lightnings. &c. Lerne therfore to put difference betwix religi∣on and supersticion, and than ye shall easely knowe how we disalow no pray∣er but the supersticious. The Scribes and Pharises prayed at euery corner of the stretes, and fasted oft: yet our Saui∣oure Christ rebuked them, not condem∣ninge prayer, but their misusinge of it. So we will euery manne to praye in e∣ueryPrayer. time and place: yet supersticion we abhorre in all sortes of menne, prayer, time and place. What wicked blinde∣nes is this than, to thinke that bearing prayers written in rolles aboute wyth theym, as S. Iohns Gospell, the length of our lord, the measure of our Lady, or other like, thei shal die no sodain death, ot he hanged, or yf he be hanged, he shall not die. There is to manye suche, though ye laugh, and beleue it not, and not hard to shewe them with a wet fin∣ger. Prayer than is of. ii. sorts, either in begging that that we want, or geuing thankes for that which we haue recey∣ued: and it is the earnest liftinge vp of a mans minde to God or a familiar and reuerent talke and complainte to oure heauenly father of oure miseries with a
rauinge of his mercies, and trusting t obtayne of his mercye that whiche shall be necessarye: or els an humble thankes geuinge for hys liberall benefytes so plenteouslye bestowed on vs vndeser∣ued. These stande in depe sighes and groninges, wyth a ful consideration of our miserable state, and Goddes maie∣stye: in the heart, and not in ynke or pa∣per: not in hangyng written scrolles a∣bout the necke, but lamentinge vnfey∣nedlye oure sinnes from the hart, accu∣singe aud condemninge our selues, and beggynge pardon for them: not in spea∣kynge a number of woordes wyth the lippes vnconsideratlye, be they neuer so holy, but with bitter teares weiyng frō the heart euery syllable that he thinkes or speakes. Thus prayed Anna to haue a son. i. kin. i. so sorowfullye pouringe out her grefes afore God in her mynde, that the Priest seinge her lyppes moue and hearynge not her wordes, thought she had bene dronken. Thus earnestlye called Moyses on Godde, in his sorow∣full meditacion. That the Lorde sayde to him, why cries thou so to me? and yet we reade not that he spake anye worde at all. The other is lyplabour in spea∣kynge much, or saying a great number of their owne deuised prayers (or elles a charminge) thinkinge that in certayne
wordes speaking they could make thin∣ges come to passe as they lust. These with suche other as popery is ful (of we say be supersticious.) Lastlye be burdens vs with breaking al lawes, of the church, ciuil, canon, andMaryage of priestes, the Realme, in that we say, mariage of Priestes is lawfull. This is that which may not be borne: this is thought so ha∣nus that Christen men should not suf∣fer it. If he were learned he could ne∣uer haue heaped so many lyes together. Al writers confesse that the greke chur∣che in the east part of the worlde (which is the greater part of christendome) ne∣uer forbade their Priestes mariage, nor doe at this daye. For the west and La∣tin Churche nowe will I trie a little, whether anye suche haue bene borne by lawe or no. Hildebrand commenlye cal∣led Gregorye. vii. (who for his deedes might be turned and cald a hell brand) was the first that euer brought aboute (but with muche a doe,) that PriestesPolid. lib 5. ca. 4. de inuen∣or. should not marye, and the maried shuld lose eyther their wiues or liuinges: but the Priestes of Spane withstode him by their Byshop. Some afore attemted it, but neuer one coulde compasse it. This Pope lyued aboute the conquest. v. C. yeare sins: and syns the begynnynge of the worlde vnto hys tyme, it was not
brought to passe. There is a great diffe∣rence in continuaunce of time, than that mariage was alowed, and a small that they were forbidden. In Moyses law it was not forbidden, two thousand yeare afore Christ: Peter Thapostle and Phi∣lip Theuangelist were maried, and hadAct. 21. Roiff. lib. 2. Ca. 9 daughters. Gregory Bishop of Naan∣um was Byshoppe there as hys father was afore him. Polychrates Byshop of Ephesus says that vii. of his cosins and auncetours had bene Byshoppes afore him. Whan Phileas Bishop of ChinnEuseb. lib 5. ca. 26 was ledde to martirdome, the greatest reason they had to perswade him to re∣cant, was that he woulde haue pitye on his wife. Eustathius and his scholers are blamed bicause they despised maried priestes. These amonge the GreciansSozo lib. 3 Ca. 14. I trust proue that the Church hais had maried Priestes of olde time. The. l. Canon of The Appostles says: If anye Byshoppe, Priest, Diacon, or any of the Clergye forbeare mariage, fleshe and wyne, not for that his mynde might be fytter to godlynes, but for abhominati∣on, forgettynge that all that God hais made is good, and that he made both male and female: lette him be correct or deposed The thirde Councell of Car∣tage sayes thus: Let not Pryestes chil∣dren make anye playes and gammes.
If any says the Popes canon law, shuld teache that a Pryest for religyon sake, should despise his wife accursed be he. Distinct. xxviii. Againe the next cha. fo∣lowinge: If any make a difference of a maried Priest, as though he should not minister by occasiō of his mariage, and therfore forbeare from his ministration accursed be he. Whan this foolysh vn∣learned Papiste hais scraped these and such like sayinges out of the Popes te∣stament (commonly called his decrees) than he may say the Popes lawe, hais vtterly condemned mariage of Priestes in the Latin Church. But what nedes. Paule. these proofes whan Saint Paule saies playne a Byshop must be the husbande of one wife: and Ambrose writinge onAmbrose. the same place, sais that he is not for∣bidden to haue a seconde. Pope PiusPlatina. ii. wrytes that there were great causes why Priests were forbidden wiues, but there were greater causes why they shoulde be restored. Ierom grauntes that in his time manye Priestes wereIerom. maried. cōtr. Ioui. And on the vi. cha. of the Epistle. He writes thus. Let Bys∣shoppes and Priestes reade these, which teache their children worldly learning, and make them to reade Comedes, and singe bawdy songes of ministrelles. &c. Nauclerus part. vii. generat. xxxvii. wri
tes thus Gregorye. vii. decreed in theGregor∣. ii. yeare. M. lxxiii. that from thencefoorth Priestes shoulde not haue wyues: and they that had shoulde leaue them or be deposed. He wrote to the Byshops of France, and Germany, that they should procure it so to be with them. The hole clergy cried out against this decree, cal∣lingeMath. 19. 1. Co. 7. him hereticke: who hadde forgot∣ten the worde of the Lord (who said) al receiue not this sayinge: and he that can not refrayne let him mary: and it is better to marye, than to burne. Howe violent a thinge is this to compell that menne shoulde liue like Aungelles: and whan he denyes the accustomed course of nature, he shoulde giue lybertye to horedome: If he continued to confirme this decree, they had rather leaue their Priesthode than mariage. Gregory notGregorie. withstandinge was instaunt and rebu∣kes the Byshops of slouthfulnesse, that these thynges were not done amonge theim. Tharchbyshop of Mentz percey∣ninge howe harde a thynge it was, to breake so longe a rooted custome, and to reforme the worlde in his olde age, ap∣pointed his Priestes. vi. monethes to do that in which they must necessarily doe: they purposed than to laye violent han∣des on the Byshoppe, except he chaun∣ged his purpose. The yeare folowinge
Gregorye attempted that diuorcinge of them by his legate which he coulde not bringe to passe by the Byshoppe. The Priestes were so moued against the le∣gate, that they had almost torne him in peces except he had gone away, and left the matter vndone. A horrible plage he sais further did folow this contenti∣on of the west Churche, in so much that lay men didde christen and minister sa∣cramentes because the Priestes had ra∣ther forsake their Priesthode than their wines, and would not minister. &c. thus far the history. Marke whan thys was done, the trouble in doynge it, the plague that folowed, and that mariage as he says was longe used afore him. To the Lorde and father Nycholas, theNote also this nota∣table Epi∣stle con∣cernynge the same matter. dyligent prouyder for the holye Romysh church: Huldrich Bishop of Angsburgh in name only, wyshes loue as a sun, and scare as a seruaunt. WHere I founde (O father and lord) your decrees for the cōtinentie of clerks, which ye send me of late, to be without discretion, a certaine feare and hea∣uines
both troubled me, fear because the iudgement of the shepeherd whither it be right or wrong, is to be feared: for I was afraid lest the weake hearers of the scripture whiche wil scarce obey a righ∣teous iudgement, not regarding this of yours as wrongful, should boldly break this so heauy a cōmandement of the she∣perd that it may not be borne. Sorow or rather pity troubled me, whā I douted by what meanes the members myght escape, wher their head was so sore sick. What can be more greuous, or more to be pitied of the hole church, thā that you y• bishop of the chefest see, shuld swarue but a litle from a holy discretion? Thou swarued muche from thys, whan thou would that clerkes (whom thou shoulde warne for the continentie of mariage) shoulde be compelled to it by a certaine imperious violence. Is not this worthi∣ly to be coūted a violence, by the cōmen iudgment of al wise men, whā any man is cōpelled to execute priuat decrees, cō∣trarye to the doctrine of the gospel, and decree of the holy gost? Therfore where there be many examples of the old testa∣ment & new, teachinge discretion, as ye know: I besech your fatherhode be con∣tent y• some few amōg many may be put in this writing. Our lord apoynted ma∣riage to priestes in the old law, which is
not redde to be forbydden theym after∣warde. But he sais in the Gospel: there be Euunches whiche haue geldet them∣selues for the kyngdome of heauen: but all men receiue not this worde, he that can take it, let him take it. Therefore Thappostle sais: for Uirgins I haue no Commaundement of the Lorde, but I geue counsell. Ye see that al men can not take this counsell accordinge to the sayinge of the Lord. And ye see also ma∣nye flatterers of the same counsell, wil∣ling to please menne and not god, with this false shewe of continentie, to doe more haynous thinges: as to prouoke their fathers wiues, not abhore to lye by beastes, and menne. But least the state of the whole churche should be de∣cayed by the great mischeues of this fil∣thines, he said: For fornication let eue∣rye man haue his owne wife. Yet these hipocrites falsy saye, that this same be∣longes speciallye to laye menne: whiche hipocrites, althoughe they be in a moste holy order: yet they doubt not to misuse other mens wyues. These men vnder∣stode not the scripture rightlye, and be∣cause they wrunge the pappe to soore, they souked bloude in stede of milke. For that saynge of Thapostle: Let eue∣ly manne haue his owne wife, exceptes no man in dede, but him that professes
conrotinentye, or him that determines to continue his virginitye in the Lord. &c. And that ye may know that they which haue not made this vowe, ought not to be compelled: Here Thappostle to Ti∣mothe, saying: It becomes a Byshoppe to be blameles, the husband of one wife: and least anye manne should turne this sayinge to the Churche onely, he addes: he that canne not rule his owne house, howe can he rule the Churche of God? Likewise he sais Diacons muste be the husbande of one wife, whiche can well rule their children and houses. I know that ye haue taught by the decrees of holye Syluester Pope, that this wife must be blessed of the Priest. The wri∣ter of the rule of clerkes liues, agreing wyth these, and suche sentences of the scripture sais: A clerke must be chast, or els bounde with the bande of one mari∣age. Of all whiche sayinges he gethers trulye that a Bishoppe and Diacon, are to be blamed, if they be deuyded into manye women: but if eyther Bishoppe, or Diacon, forsake one woman for reli∣gion sake, the canonicall sentence here condemnes theym without respecte of their degrees, sayinge. A Byshop vn∣der pretense of religion must not put a∣waye his owne wife: if he put her away let him be excommunicat: but if he con∣tinue,
let him be deposed, & postea. There be some which take S. Gregory for a help of this opinion: whose folysh∣nes I laughe at, and am sorye for their ignoraunce: they know not that the pe∣rillous decree of this heresy made by S. Gregory, was purged afterward of him by worthy fruite of repentance. For on a time when he sende to his pounde for fyshe and see mo than six thousand chil∣drens heades brought, he sight, moued with inwarde sorowe, and confessinge that decree whiche he made for forbea∣ringe of mariage to haue bene the cause of so greate a slaughter, did purge it with worthy frute of repentaunce, and condemninge his owne decree, praysed that counseel of the Apostle: It is better to mary than to burne, addinge for hys part this: It is better to marye, than giue occasion of murther. Thus muche among many other reasons concerning this matter, this Byshop wrote a. vii. c. yeare sins. Frere Mantuan says that Hilary the learned writer & Byshop of Poiters in Fraunce was maried. The counsell Gangrēse about a iii. C. yeare after Christ says. If anye man thinke that it is not lawful for a maried priest to vse his ministery, or abhorre him for that cause, cursed be he. The Priestes of Spane did earnestlye defend their ma∣riage
againste Pope Syricius, beynge angrye wyth them. Thus ferre ye see of howe late yeares, and howe trouble∣some a beginninge this forbiddinge of priests mariage had in other countries, now let vs see a little howe and whan it began here in Englande, that this proude prycker and vnlearned papist, may see his owne folyshnes. If I should begin at Wales, the reliques of the old Britans whiche haue at all times suf∣fred their Priestes to marye in al pope∣rye, parauenture some would call them concubines for a shifte rather then wi∣ues, as they be in dede, but surely if pa∣pistes will suffer fathers so to bestowe their daughters, and their chaplains to keepe vnlawfull women, rather than their lawfull wiues, (as Pigius their great patrone sais it is better for a priest to keepe a whore than haue a wife) they declare whose children they be. Mariage is of God, whoredome is of the Deuill, therfore I come to more certayn things. In the time of Kinge Henrye the first, Paschall beinge Pope and Ansel. Bis∣shoppe of Cantorb. about. iiii. C. yeares sins, this diuorcynge of Priestes began chefely here with vs. The Pope willed Ansel. to do it, he attemted to do it, and the kinge withstode it, as appeares by sūdry Epistles of Ansel concerning the same matter. Epi. lxxvii. &. iii. c. lxxvi
Ansel. to his brether & sunnes, the lord Prior Ernulph & other seruing god vn∣derErnulph. him in Christes church in Cantorb. gretinge and his blessinge. As concerning Priestes of whom the kinge gaue commaundement that they shoulde haue both their Churches, and their wyues, as they had in the tyme of his father, and of Lanfranc late arche∣bishop: yet both because the kinge hais reuested and reseased me of the whole archbishopricke, and also because so cur∣sed a mariage was forbidden in a coun∣sell in the time of his father, and the same Archbishop, boldly by that autori∣tye which I haue by tharchbishopricke, I commaunde not onlye within tharch∣bishopricke: but also through oute Eng∣land, that all Priestes which kepe their wiues, shalbe depriued of their churches and ecclestasticall benefice. Marke the thinges conteined in these few wordes: the kinges commaundement for Prie∣stes to kepe their benefices and wyues both, contrarye to Pope Gregories de∣cree afore, and yet not contrarye to the custome in his fathers tyme and Bys∣shop Lanfranc. And where Ansel. de∣maundedAnsel. the Popes aduise what was best to doe, seinge it was so harde to di∣uorse theim, note the Popes aunswere. Epist. iii. C. xxxi. Paschal Byshop, ser∣uauntPaschall.
of Gods seruauntes, to his reue∣rende brother Anselme Byshop of Can∣torb. gretyng and Apostolicall blessing. We beleue youre brotherhode is not ignorāt, what is decreed in the Romish churche concerninge Priestes chyldren: but because ther is so great a multitude of such within the Realm of England, that almost the greater and better part of the clarkes are reckened to be on this side: we commit the order here into your charge: For we graunt those to be pro∣moted to holye offices (by reason of the nede at this time, and for the profet of the church) whom learning and life shal commende amonge you: and yet not∣withstandinge the preiudice of the Ec∣clesiastical decree be taken hede to here∣after. Here I note the Popes confessi∣on that almost the greater and better part of the Clergye here in Englande were maried than, and that he suffers theym to be promoted to benefices, and afterwarde as time would suffer to exe∣cute the Popes deuorcing decre. Whan the Bishops coulde not wel bring those diuorces to passe, the Pope sende Ioan his Cardinall to doe it: and he as Poly∣chro.Polychro. writes lib. vii. ca. xvi. was taken the same night in bedde with a doore in the time of Henrye the first. O holy sin∣gle life that the Pope went about: The
same Polychro. sais also lib. vii. ca. xxxi. that Fuico a Frenche Prieste came to kinge Richard the. i. and bad him mary his. iii. daughters, the kinge said he had none, yes says he: Pride, couetous, & le∣cherye, than the king said: pryde I giue to Templers, couetous to white mun∣kes, and lecherye to Prelates, this ma∣riage was so knytte than that it coulde not be broken sins, and this was the kinges opinion of them. But not onely this hardnesse was in beginning of this diuorce, but after that they were sepera∣ted dyuerse came together again, as ap∣peares in the Epistle that Ansel. wrote to Willyam his Archdiacon in this be∣halfe. Ansel. Archebyshoppe to the reuerende Gundulph Bish. and to Er∣nulph Prior, and to Willyam Archdi∣acon of Cantorb. and to all in his dio∣cesse gretinge. Epi. iii. C. lxxiii. Wil∣lyam our Archdiacon hais writen to me that some Priestes whiche be vnder his custodye, takinge againe their Wyues that were forbidden theym, haue fallen into vncleanesse from whiche they were drawen by holsome Counsell and com∣maundement, whan Tharchdiacon woulde amende thys thynge, they vt∣terlye despised his warninge, and wor∣thye Commaundement with a wycked pryde. Than he callyng together many
religious menne and obedient Priests, excommunicated worthelye the proude and dysobedient, which beastlie despised his curse, and defyled the holy ministery as much as in them lay. &c. Here appea∣res how harde it was to diuorse the ma∣ried Priestes, and howe some wolde not obey though they were excomunicate. I marke also how the Bishop calles these mariages vncleanesse, and sais: they de∣file the ministerye: but to an indifferent iudge the Priestes haue better reasons out of the Scriptures for theym selues, than the Byshop had. Let al them ther∣fore that haue the feare of Godde afore theym, consyder the great plages that God layd on thys Realme at that time. The Realme was conquered by straun∣gers. Willyam Conquerour and his fe∣lowes: the Popes Chaplains. Lanfranc Bis. of Cantorb. vnder kinge Willyam the. ii. brought in transubstantiation, & Ansel. vnder Henry ye. i. next kinge folo∣winge, brought in vnmaried priestes, & diuorced the maried, the doctrine of trā∣substātiacion is so holy y• a maried priest may not handel it, the one can not stand without the other, & the one necessarily bringes in ye other. The late popes were better then they, for in the time of pope Paule the. iii. kepynge hys Counsell at Trident a. xvii. yeare synce, came forth that woorthye booke Interim,
wherein is entreated the mariages of Priestes and concludet that those which be maried, shoulde not be deuorced, but whither any mo shoulde mary, it should be referred and differred to a generall counsell. These men were more reaso∣nable, modest, and wise than oure late brutish Papistes: for in the late daies of their raging madnes contrarye to this decree of the Pope made not. xvi. yere a fore, they deuorsed here wt vs al Priests that afore were maried. But whā these olde Popes see howe harde it was to driue Priestes from their wiues, that Helbrande Gregorye. vii. decreed that none shoulde heare his masse that was maried: and by this politie, he brought more to passe than by excommunication or anye other waye. Suche practises the Popes prelates are ful of: for whan the Priestes perceiued their ministerye was despised, it made them some thing to re∣lent, and at length altogether to quale. At the same tyme, and streight after the conqueste were swarmes of munkes, brought almost into all the Cathedrall churches of the Realme. As at Duresme in the yere. M. lxxxiii. the Priests (which than were maried) were brought from Duresme, and had the prebendes of Au∣cland,Duresme. Darnton and Norton: and mun∣kes were placed in their stedes, at Dur∣ram
in the xviii. yeare of Willyam the conquerour: and these prebendes were than first founded & appointed for these secular maried priestes. O gētil Papists of old time that wold not displace mari∣ed priests, but prouide liuings for them, where our Edomites persecute theym wythout mercye. Mariage Gods holye ordinaunce in Paradise, & blessed is pu∣nished of poperye in the world, suche is their wickednesse. In other places as Winchester, Worceter and els where, this bringinge in of Munkes, and dry∣uinge out maried Priestes, beganne a litle afore the conquest vnder kyng Ed∣garus but no great differens in the yea∣res. Dunstan and Oswalde Byshops of Worcetor first and after of Cantorb∣and Yorke, were greate helpers in thys matter. Oswald thrast all the clarkes out of worceter Church whych woulde not be made munkes. Ethelwoldus Byshop of Wynchester thrast oute hys maried priestes likewise, if they woulde not forsake their Wyues, and become Munkes, and placed Munkes in their stede, but they so hated the Munkish life that they were cōtent to leaue al rather than become munks, euery one of them saue iii. But after y• death of Edgarus, Aelfer kinge of Mercia (whiche was the middle aud chefe part of England) and
many other nobles of the realme, droue out the munkes and brought in the ma∣ried Priestes againe. These and suche like are written in the recordes of these churches, and were done many of them about the yeare of our lorde. ix. C. lxiii. and after. Polychroni. also in his. vi. booke touches manye of these thinges: These things I haue spoken more large lye because he charges vs with disobey∣ing all lawes, as though these were ne∣uer done in Englande afore, and good men shoulde not suffer theym: and also that the worlde maye see howe lewde, vnlearned a Proctour hays taken theyr case in hande, If he were not to farre paste shame, he woulde not denye the lawes of the Realme to suffer Priestes mariage, seynge the. xxix. Iniunction whiche the Queenes hignesse set forth, entreates of their mariage onelye. But thys is their obedyence, that they shewe to their Prynces, in deniynge their lawes: and it is their olde opinion that Iuiunctions be not lawes, nor Princes haue that autoritye ouer them to make suche lawes. God gyue theym better myndes, or graunte the Prynce better subiectes. It were to long to write all that may
be said in this behalfe, and it is not my meaninge: onelye I woulde let theym see whiche woulde learne how wrong∣fullye Priestes mariage is accused. For the frowarde obstinate, that wyll not learne, but contemne and condemne all that gayne saye it, afore they heare theym speake, I saye wyth oure Saui∣oure Chryste in a lyke case: lette theym alone, they be blynde, and guydes ofMath. 15. the blynde: They are not to be passed on, doe as trueth, Goddes worde, and a good conscience teaches, you nothyng regardinge their ralynge blasphemies. Austin in his booke de bono coniug ali. Ca. xxi. comparyng the chastitie of ma∣riage and slngle life together sais thus. The vertue of continentie muste be al∣wayes in the power of the mynde, but in dede if must be shewed as things and tymes chaunge. For as there was not a dyuerse meryte of sufferynge Martyr∣dome in Peter that suffered cruell death, and in Ioan that suffered not: So there is not a dyuerse meryte of Chastytye in Ioan whych was not ma∣ryed, and in Abraham whyche gate chyldren. For bothe hys syngle lyfe and thys mannes maryage, serued Chryste as the tyme chaunged, but Ioan hadde Chastytye bothe in
power and dede, Abraham onely in po∣wer. Again. ca. xxii. euill menne saye to him that is chaste: Art thou better than Abraham? but whan he heares it lette him not be afraide, but saye, I am not better, but the chastitie of single men is better than the chastitie of mariage. A∣gain ca. xxiii. If we compare the things them selues together, it is sure that the chastitie of continentie, is better than the chastitie of mariage, and yet bothe good: but whan we compare the men to gether, he is the better that hais a grea∣ter goodnes and vertue in him than the other hais. Thus ferre Austin. Marke the difference that he puttes betwix the goodnes of thinges themselues, and the goodnes of the menne that haue theim. I am sure many wil iudge that I speak this to please my wyfe: but we reade that Paphuntius vnmaried (whan some in the counsell would haue determinedSozo. lib. 1 Ca. 23. that Priests shoulde leaue their wiues) perswaded the contrarye. Spiridion being maried as he writes also, and ha∣uinge children was neuer the worse, ori. Ca. 11. hindred to minister the sacramentes. Chriso. in his homily on the mariage in Cana Galilea writes th{us}. Thou repro∣s mariage that they be a let to godly∣nes: but wilt thou know that it hurtes not to haue wyfe and children. Had not
Moyses wife and children? was not He∣lias a virgin? Moses brought Manna from heauen, and Helias fire: god spake to Moyses, and was conuersaunt with Helias. Did not Moyses make Duales to come: and Helias shut vppe heauen from raine with a word? Did not Moy∣ses deuide the sea, and brought through the people? Was not Helias taken into heauen in a firie charet. Did virginitye hurte the one, or was wife and children a hindraunce to the other? hais thou marked Helias in his charet in the aer, and Moyses goynge on foote in the sea? Marke Peter also a piller of the church that he had a wife: for it is writ∣ten that Iesus wente into Peters mo∣therMath. 8. in lawe, beinge sicke, touched her and the feuer left her. Where there is a mother in lawe, there must nedes be a wife, and daughter in lawe. Sees thou not than that Peter had a wife? blame not mariage than. &c. thus ferre Chriso∣stome. I coulde shew you like examples of maried ministers at these daies, whi∣che are not hindered in their duty doing therby, nor in any part of godlynes: but rather forthered in that houshold cares be taken from them therby: and in sike∣nes, they better cherished These be i∣nough for them that wil be perswaded, or more will not serue. It is not hard
to bringe diuerse moe autorities out ot the Popes distinc. xxviii. and xxxi. to proue this withall: but he that is father of all filthines is not worthye to beare witnes in so honest a matter. In Moises law where euery one should marie with in his owne tribe, the priestes had thys priuilege that they might marye wyth the kinges stocke: but oure menne ab∣hore Priestes mariage, lest they should get gentilwomen, and so possibly might enherite their landes. God was not so wise to foresee these thinges as we be, and that which Gods wisdome thought good and commendable, we with oure polities thinke hurtfull and vnprofita∣ble. God make vs wise in him. For the foolyshe writhinge and rackynge of the scriptures folowinge, because they be so vnaptlye applied that a blind manne maye sce them, I will not stande to set out his folye: for they conteyne no mat∣ter of weight against vs. They haue inuented a newe waye to make Bishoppes and Priestes, and a maner of seruice and ministracion that Saint Austin neuer knewe, Saint Edmond, Lanfranc. S. Anselme, no neuer one Bishop of Cantorb. sauing only Crammer, who for soke his pro∣fessyon as Apostata, so that they must nes condemne all the Bishoppes in Cantor. but Crāmer and he that now9 is: all the Byshoppes of yorke sauy Holgate, and he that nowe is: al∣thoughe
Saint Wilfride, S. Willyam haue bene taken for Saintes, and were Byshoppes in yorke. In Couentre and Lichfyelde S. Chad was Byshop and many blessed Byshops, and he that now to Bishop, can fynde not anye one that euer was made as he is, nor of his reli∣gion. Therefore he must proue all Bi∣shops  Lichfloe were deceyued, wal∣ked in blindnes, and ignoraunce, or els he that nowe is must nedes be deceyued and be in blyndnes: In Duresiue haut bene many good fathers: but he that now is Bishop can not fynde any one prede∣cessour in that see that was of his rely∣gion and made bishop after such fort as he was: so that he that no we is, muste take in bande to condemne all the Bis∣shops afore him that they were in igno∣rance and blindnes, or they wil come to hys condemnation at the daye of indge∣ment. And this in all Bishoprickes in Englād, some can find one, & some none that euer was of their religion. What arrogancy may be thought in those men that will take in hande to condemne so many blessed fathers al to be in blindnes Here this proud Papist triumphes as thoughe nothinge coulde be said to the contrary. For our churche seruice I said inough afore, now marke what weight his raginge railynge wordes haue. He sais Saint Edmonde Lanfranc, Ansel. neuer knewe such an orderyng of Prie∣stes, and Bishopes, how proues he that? I thinke they dyd: for they liued in that
age whan religion beganne to decaye, blyndnes and supersticion to crepe into the worlde, and therefore coulde not be ignoraunt of suche good order as hadde bene afore them, althoughe they theym selues than beganne to chaunge & bring in the contrary, wherof I declared part afore as mariage of priestes, church ser∣uyce. &c. To graunt that so manye Bis∣shops of Cantorb. yorke, Lichfield, and Duresme were in blindnes, he thinkes it such an inconuenience, as no manne will doe it: and therfore these that now be Byshops must nedes be deceyued. I am not of that oppinion to thynke it a shame to graunt that Byshoppes be de∣ceyued eyther in that age or other: for there hais bene no man so holye (except Christ Iesus) but he hais bene deceiued and ignoraunt in manye thinges, euen in religion. Did not Paule rebuke Pe∣ter for dissemblynge in meates with the Iewes? Only Christ hais the ful truth. That is the proude principle of Popery to, think that they can not be deceyued: yet in that sayinge they are most fowly deceyued. The Scribes and Pharases vsed the same reasons agaynst Christe oure Lorde, and the false Prophetes a∣gainst the true, sayinge that they kepte the olde true learninge, and the other brought in a new, & deceiued the people.
But in grauntinge these olde Byshops to be made after another sort than these be nowe, what harme maye followe? What auncienty be they of? al sins the conquest, and not past v. C. yeare sins. Than it is but newe in comparison of of M. D. l. And if oure order agree wyth Christes doinges and his Apostles wri∣tings better thā theirs, are we to blame in forsakyng them, & folowing Christ & his Apostles: or are we to be counted deuisers of a new way, when we folow that which is M. ycre elder than theirs. Naye surely their deuyses be new, and we restore the old religion again, prac∣tised and taught by Christ and his Ap∣postles: which they haue defaced wyth their newe deuysed supersticyon and Popery. Whither is it more to contēne or correct these Byshoppes of Cantorb. York, Lichfielde, and Duresme that he names, rather than Christ oure Lorde, Peter, Paul, Timothe, Tit{us}. &c. Whe∣ther is to bee iudged elder, wyser, and godlyer, these Byshoppes that he names which are not v. C. yeare old, or Christe and his Appostles whiche be M. D. yeare old and more? In the Actes of Thappostles where Matthias was chosen in stede of Iudas the traitour. Where the. vii. Deacons were chosen, and whan Paule and Barnabas were
sēt forth to preach, how few ceremonies were vsed in comparison of that multi∣tude which the Papistes vse nowe? andThe orde∣ng of my∣ysters. howe much does it agree with our kind of orderinge ministers better than with theirs: Whan Paule taught Timothe and Titus to appointe mynisters and Byshops in euery towne how ferre dif∣fers it from the Popes oiled shauelin∣ges? Act. i. Peter calles the disciples to∣gether, preaches vnto them: they fall to prayer, and those Matthias in stede of Iudas. In the vi. of the act. the Apostles assemble ye people declare to them how they themselfes shuld folow preaching, & willes them therfore to pike out men of honestye and godlinesse to serue the poore, they praye together, laye their handes on them, and made theim Dia∣cons to prouide for the pore. In sending forth Paule and Barnabas whan theyAct. 13. were assembled to their ministery, they fasted, prayed, laid their hands on them and send them forth. In the. viiii. Paule and Barnabas ordeyned in euery chur∣che ministers, requirynge the consent of the people (by holdynge vppe their han∣des, as the Greke word there signifies) In ye. i. Epistle to Timoth. ca. v. he bid∣des him that he lay not his hands rash∣lye on anye manne, where afore he had taught him sufficientlye what manner
of menne, and with what qualities be shoulde call and thinke theym mee for the ministery. But because he findes not so great faute with the menne that be calde nowe a dayes (althoughe other doe grudge at theym, as with the order and maner of their callynge. I wil one∣lye answere to that point which he tou∣ches. In these places of the scripture afore rehearsed there be these thinges to be noted, in sending forth ministers. First an assemblye of the Clergye, and people to beare testimonie of their ho∣nestie and aptnes that be calde: for it must not be done in corners, least suche be admitted as be vnworthye, and with whom some could or would haue found faut, if it hadde bene knowen and done openly. The ministery is so godly a vo∣cation that none ought to be admitted to it hauing anye notable faut in them, or if they maye not abide the triall and judgemet of the multitude, yea, though they be heathens. For Saint Paul sais they must haue good testimonie of their honesty, euen of them that be out of the churche. Secondly I note they vsed ex∣hortacions, wyth fastinge, prayer, and layinge on of handes. These Cere∣monies we be sure are good and godly, because Thappostles vsed them so oft: & these except some great cause to the con∣trary are to be vsed of al in calling of y• ministers.
Al these thinges the order now appoin∣ted obserues and no more: all the popish ceremonies be cut of as vain & superflu∣ous. The time of geuing orders now is the holy day, whan the people be assem∣bled that they may see who be cald: and if they knowe anie notable faute in any of theym that are there to be appointed ministers, or Byshoppes, they maye de∣clare it, that they may be reiected as vn∣worthy. The Popishe Prelates giue their orders on the Saturdaye, whan the people is not present, and commenly at home in their chappelles where fewe resort to see. The Byshops nowe vse in giuyng their orders, an exhortacion, commen prayer, the Communion, and laying on of handes, which Thapostles vsed. The Pope and his Prelates haue deuised of them selues, clippinges, sha∣uinge their crownes, an vnlawful com∣pelled vowe to lyue vnmaried, oile for an intinge their fingers, and power to sacrifice for quicke and dead, their dou∣ble latin matins, and Euensonge daily with suche a kinde of apparell that they be more like to Aaron and Moyses prie∣stes of the olde law, than a simple prea∣cher of Christes Gospell, or minister of his sacraments of the new Testament. Whan we do that which Christ & hys Apostles did & vsed, we may be sure it is
good lawfull and necessarye, whan we adde any thing of our owne, it may be doubted on, and if it be commaunded as necessarye, or as the true worshippe of Godde it ought to he refused, chaunged, yea condemned. For Christe sais. They worship me in vain teaching doctrines, the commaundementes of men. There∣foreMath. 15. as he reasons here, that it should be to great an inconuenience to saye that these Byshops whiche he names were blynde and ignoraunt in their doings, and that they would come at the iudge∣ment to the condemnation of these new Bishops which folow not their wayes. I had rather tourne hys argument a∣gainst him selfe on his owne heade, and saye: that it is a greater inconuenience yea blasphemy, to say that Peter, Paul Timothe, Titus. &c. were in blindnesse and had not the right order of appoin∣tinge their ministers, but that these lat∣ter Popishe Prelates haue inuented of late yeres a perfecter way to do it than they knew or vsed. Let them proue that eyther Thapostles themselues, or anye of their scholers vsed clippinge, shauing their crownes, the vowe of single life, sacrificinge for the deade, oilinge their fingers or crown, their Iewysh apparel their halowinges, crossings, blessinges, or suche trashe as their order is full of,
and than blame this new order: but be∣cause they can not (the Scrypture tea∣chinge no suche thynge) I saye they be Hypocrites, layinge heauye loodes on mens backes and consciences, yea grea∣ter than anye maye beare, not tou∣chinge theym with their finger, to ease them, but rather to presse theym downe lower in preferringe mans dreames be∣fore the symple truthe of the Gospell, Christ and his Apostles with their scho∣lers shall come in iudgemente to their condemnatiō: For that they haue main∣tained their owne deuises afore the in∣fallyble truth of the Scripture, the per∣fect rule and onelye example of all oure doinges and religion. Than if our Bis∣shops nowe vse all such order as Thap∣postles theymselues vsed (as in compa∣ringe them together it will easelye ap∣peare) why shoulde anye proude Papist be so bolde to correct magnificat, to re∣proue theym, and saye that the Pope hays deuysed a better way than Thap∣postles vsed? or why shoulde any weake conscience hanginge on manne rather than on Godde be offended to see suche vaine superfluous and wicked toies left of and not vsed. If they left out anye thing that Thapostles vsed they might wel be blamed: but seing thei had rather folow them as their schole masters, and
not the Pope, they were to be praysed. Are Papes wiser than Thappostles or shall Papists for folowinge their father of lies be preferred to Protestauntes, whiche haue Gods worde and his truth with the doings of Thapostles for their defence to alledge for them. God forbid. But I thinke this good Proctour of the Pope is offended, because the new Bis∣shops runne not to Ro. theymselues, or by their deputye to doe their homage to their holye father, and sweare an vn∣lawful and traitorous oth against their lawfull and naturall Prince, and bring home yt holy relique their Palle, which many haue bought so deare, that in ga∣thering money for it, they beggerd their bole diocesse. Yet that the blind may see that these ragged Popishe cloutes whi∣che they thinke so holye relyques and necessarye are not of suche worthinesse nor to be regarded so highly, it is easye to see euen in this realme, & others that both they haue bene not regarded of old time & also that they had another facion of making priests and bishops, than our papistes of these daies haue, and more a∣greing with the order that the new bis∣shops vse. Fabian writes. part iii. ca. ix.Palle. that the Byshoppe of Saint Dauyds hadde no Palle from Rome at all, from the time that Samson was Byshoppe
there vnto the time of kynge Henrye. i. in whiche space were there. xxi. Bis∣shops. Polychro. writes lib. v. cap. xii. that Northumberlande was withoute Bishop. xxx. yere: without Palle. C. xxv yeare: nor had anye altar at all vnto the vi. C. xxiii. yeare of our Lord, than these thynges are neyther so auncient nor so necessary as Papistes would make men beleue, seinge they had no altars, than they hadde no Popishe masses: for they may not be said but on a halowed altar or superaltare. The Pope decreed that all Abbotes and Bishops beinge chosen to their dignities shoulde come to Ro. to be confirmed and blessed: by whiche meanes, he and the Cardinalles, made them to paye suche summes of money to be spedelye dispatched (as our vnder of∣ficers do nowe for expedicion) that they impouerished many Realmes by it, and enriched themselues, by reason whereof kinge Edwarde. i. perceiuynge the Bis∣shoppe of Elye, and Thabbot of S. Ed∣mons berye, being than chosen to their dignities to haue spent so much money, was ashamed of it, and forbade any mo to go thither afterwarde theym selues. For they beggerde their Churches, or they coulde paye their dettes, as Matth Parisien writes all this at large & more speaking against this decree of y• popes.
The Byshops of Colen and Mentʒ pay either to the Pope for their palle. 24000 Ducats. The same man sais also that Thurstan archbyshoppe of yorke going to a counsell holden at Remis by Pope Calixtus was forbydden of the king to be consecrate of the Pope, and sworns also: but he notwithstandinge as a wic∣ked manne obteyned of the wicked Ro∣manes by rewardes, to be consecrate there of the Pope: Which thinge whan the kinge hearde tell of, he forbade him all places of his dominion. Thomas Hatfeld Byshop of Duresme chosen an. M. iii. C. xlv. and the. xix. yeare of Ed∣warde the. iii. payed to Pope Clement. the. vi. ix. thousande florence of golde, for his commen seruice, besyde fyue ac∣customed seruices, which were. xliii. flo∣rence yearelye: whiche appeares by the Popes acquittance made to him. The Bishop of Lions declared in the counsel of Basil that the Pope had. ix. Millions of Crownes yearlye out of Fraunce of the Bishops. A million conteynes ten hundreth thousand. If these be not hys griefes perauenture because they haue not the cruche and miter as the old bis∣shops had, displeases him: Surely suche horned beasts be fitter for the pope than the Gospell: For as the Latin prouerb. sayes of vnruly beastes that they were
wont to be knowen by hanginge haye on their hornes. Fenum habet in cornu: So these vnruly popishe cattel, haue their marke that they might be knowen by, their horned miters: or els because they were of the generatyon of the horned beast, that Daniell in the vii. cha. and S. Iohn writes of in his reuelation. xiii. and xvii. Reade the latter ende of Gildas our country manne, in his chro∣nicle and chidinge exhortacion to the Priestes, and ye shall finde, that in hys time which is a M. yere sins, there were diuers other parts of the scriptures ap∣pointed to be red out of the Actes of the apostles, and Peters Epistle whan they were appointed ministers, and made Priestes, which the Popish prelates vse not in orderinge their chaplens nowe. Whereby it maye be gathered that the ceremonies differd also. But the bar∣barousnes of the time hais bene suche sins, that scars anye perfect memoriall of their doinges remaine. The rude Sarons ouer ranne this Realme, and destroied al learning and religion, with helpe of the Pope and his creatures, the Munkes and Freers: so that vnto nowe of late yeares verye lytle good learning ais bene heard of. Dionisiu Aripa∣gita as he is commenly cald, and whom
they saye was Paules scholer, and of whom Saint Luk. writes. Act. xvii. sais in his booke (if it be his booke) as they saye it is, that in makyng their priestes and Byshoppes in his time, they vsed no moe ceremonies, than to bringe himEcclesiast. Hierach. that was to be calde a Byshop, to knele afore the altar, to laye the Byble on his head, and the Byshop his handes also, with certaine prayers and salutations. Thys symple facyon was vsed of olde time, without anye further adoe. The priests & Diacons had not all these cere∣monies in their creatinge: and yet ours Byshops which folowe this aunciente simplicitye, are blamed that they haue deuised new facions of their own, whi∣che neuer were hearde of afore. But by these fewe thinges that I haue resited, it maye well be sene howe malice hais blynded their Popishe hartes, falsly to accuse the Protestantes of those things which are not true. And to put aways all doubtes, that maye be moued for the auncientie and autoritye of their order and facion of makynge Priestes and Byshops, Polychro. writes lib. v. ca. xii. that Pope Honorius sent to Honorius bishop of Cantor. the Palle & the order how to make bishops, this was about y• yere of our Lord. M. C. xxvii. Loke how auncient it is, and they cris M. D. years
olde, where it is not past. iiii. C. And as Dyonise in this orderinge of Priestes declares, howe farre they dif∣fered in his time from all these Popishe toyes that this beast woulde burthen the Churche and simple soules withall: so shal ye finde in him also, how muche they differed in his age, in ministring ye Communion, in duriynge the dead, and other such seruyce and ceremonies from the Popes synagoge in our dayes. In so muche that it may be truly saide of this our religion that Freer mantuan said: Hec nouitas non est nouitas sed vera vetustas. The Popes supersticion maye well be called newe as I haue proued by many particulars afore: but this of oures is bothe olde and true, as it maye be more fullye proued than I haue yet spoken. Therfore let them set better clarkes to speake for theim, and proue it by the scriptures, or elles for shame holde their peace. But a scalled horse is good inoughe for a scabbed esquier: and for so false a doctrine, so foolyshe vnlearned a dronken dotel is a mete scholemai∣ster. They knowe well ynoughe that they be not able to stande in defence of it, and therefore they set vp such a dolt, that whan he takes a foyle no man wil meruaile: and yet they shall thinke that
the stoute champions are behind, which can binde beares and confute all men. But surely this rude asse is the mouthe of them all to vtter what they thinke, and they haue no better ware, than he hais vttered, let them put their helping hands to, and bring better stuffe if they haue it, but if they run to the later con∣stitutions of Gregory and Clemens or such like we know what auncienty and autority they be of, and our answere is readye: for they them selues kepe them not. What religion the old Bishops haue bene of from the beginning in these sees whiche he names, or howe they were made I thinke no good record declares. The rudenesse of the times haue bene such, and such destruction of old monu∣mentes, both by inward and outwarde warre, that none or fewe remaynes. I will note onlye therefore suche thinges as were done in oure dayes that euerye man knowes, or els such as be in print. In Duresme I graunt the Byshop that nowe is and his predecessour were not of one religion in dyuers pointes, nor made Byshops after one facion. Thys hais neither cruche nor miter, neuer sweare against his Prince, his allegi∣ans to the Pope: this hais neyther po∣wer to christen belles, nor halowe cha∣lices
and superaltares. &c. as the other had, and with gladnesse, prayses God that kepes him from suche filthinesse: his predecessour wrote, preached, and sware against the Pope, was iustly de∣priued afterward for disobedience to his prince: and yet being restored, submitted himselfe to the Pope again. Stout Ste∣uen and bloudye Bonner with other champions yet liuing, be in the like case: God defende al good people from such religion, and bishops. For these other holye Byshops that be reckens and calles saintes, if I shuld speake all that I know, & they deserue, it were to longe a booke, and to wise menne it wold be thought a scorne, ra∣ther than a praise. There is no good auncient history that makes mention of them, for they them selues are not aunci¦ent, nor long it is sins they liued here. There is no better history than y• popes Portuis and Legenda Sanctorum, with such like that speakes of them, & to read those Miracles would make a horse to laugh: yet some thing will I saye. In the time of that famous Prince Henry the. viii. Whan Goddes ennemye, and the ouer∣thrower of all Princes, the Pope, was bannyshed thys Realme, it was decreed wel, that all Doctoures, Deanes, and other heads menne of the Clergye,
should declare to the people in their ser∣mons, the vsurped power of the Pope, diuers times in the yeare. Amonge o∣ther, one D. Str. preachynge at Yorke, and inueying against thabuses of Pope∣rye (although in many thinges a Papist himselfe) and namelye against his cano∣nizinge and making of saintes: amonge other he fel in talke of Saint Willyam of yorke, & said, that Saint Willyams horse was more woorthye to be made a Saint, than saint Willyam himselfe. The reason was this: Saint Wil∣lyam on a time whā he was made new Bishop, riding in his rialty ouer OwesS. VVyllya of Yorke. bridge, within Yorke (as he was wont to do oft, very gloriously, and as stout∣lye as Thomas Becket, in whose time he liued also) the bridge brake, and ma∣nye that folowed were drowned. Saint Willyams horse, as full of courage as hys maister, wyth wrastlynge and spar∣ringe vppe, saued himselfe and his ma∣ster from drowninge. The horse dyd the notable deede, and deserued the prayse: but the Maister wanne the re∣warde, and was made a Saint by the pope. This and such other, is inough wyth the Pope, to make his seruauntes Sayntes: but thys Byshoppes lyfe and doinges, other wayes afore Godde and godly menne, are in wickednes as euil as Tho. Beckets. He was so vn∣happy
a manne that whan he was first chosen Byshop of yorke, the pope Eu∣genius woulde not confirme him, but made Henrye Murdah Byshoppe there in his stede. Whan both that Pope and Bishop were dead, than he was chosen againe, and made Byshop of yorke, and cominge so gloriously into the citye, as I spake of, the brydge brake for the weight of menne that folowed as Legen∣da noa sanctorum sais in his life. S. Ed∣mond was so holy, as the same worthy history says, that whan diuers women came to his chamber to him, he wouldEdmond. not touch thē. If ye beleue him, he euer set great store by women, for honour of our lady, the same writer sais also, and whan one of his friendes rebuked hym bicause he talked so oft with a certaine wife, he saide? sees thou not howe faire she is, and oft sate by me and yet I was neuer temted with her. Polychronicon also tels the same tale lib. vii. Further whan one of his clerkes, sitting at din∣ner, did eate nothinge bycause that day was ordinarye to haue his fit of a quar∣tan, he asked why he did not eat: bicause I looke for my fitte sais he. I wil make a crosse on this lamprey in my dish sais Edmond, and put in thy mouthe in the name of the Trinitye, and thou shalte
be holle. But that such holy men may doe what they lust, and haue it for wel, yet if poore soules should haue done it, it would haue bene laughed at, & coun∣ted a charminge, for lampery is very e∣uill for a quartaine. Lanfranc brougtLanfranc. Ansel. in the heresy of transubstantiation. An∣selme diuorsed maried priestes, and sais also further that Lucus was the firste Byshop of Rome writinge in the latter ende of his commentaries on the. ii. E∣pistle to Timoth. Let the Papistes loke their bokes, and see whether I say true, and than iudge howe trulye they crake that Peter was the first Pope at Rome and that all the rest haue their autority from him. If this foole had looked, he should finde some Byshops of Cantor. euen Papistes as Austin and Ansel, to haue bene of oure religion in some opi∣nion of the greatest matters, moe than Crammer: whose writinges and doin∣ges because they be in print, and so fresh memory, like a berking cur in the night at the mone shine, he maye declare hys owne malyce rather than deface the godly memory of that holy martir, and therfore I will not speake of him. But that the worlde maye see how ewdlye he lies whan he says that no Byshops haue bene of oure religion, the same
Legenda sanctorum telles: that Anselme Byshoppe of Cantorb. came to Kynge Henrye the. i. to desire licens to goe to Ro. to Pope Urban to fetche his palle. The kinge said, he knewe him not for Pope, nor it was not lawfull for anye to name any Pope without his licence. The Prelates and noble menne were called together, and Ansel. accused, and all the Byshops there, said it was not lawefull for hym to take Urbane for Pope in his Realme, and kepe his oth that he made to the kinge: and so al the Bishoppes (except Rochester) forsaked him, and woulde not obey him as their archbyshoppe. Iudge now whether any Bishoppes in this Realme, haue refu∣sed the Pope afore these our dayes. And bicause I haue entered to entreate of these holy fathers that he crakes so mu∣che on, I will shewe you what is writ∣ten in the life and historye of Tho. Bec∣ket byshoppe of Cantorb. their stinking martir, & traitour to his Prince. Whan the Bishop was fled out of the Realme the Kinge sent Embassadours by theTho. Bec∣ket. consent of the nobles and Prelates to Rome after him, to declare the matter, and accuse him of disobeying the kinge, troublinge the Realme and the Cler∣gye, and of periurye, in not kepinge the lawes whiche he sware to first. The
Embassadours ware, Roger Archebys∣shoppe of Yorke, Gilbert Byshoppe of London, Roger Byshoppe of Worce∣ter, Hilary Byshop of Chichester, Ba∣tholmewe Byshoppe of Eretor, the erle of Arundel, with many other noble men and clerkes. Their orations wherein they accuse this holye traitour be there in print seuerallye, and somewhat long to recite: but iudge indifferentlie whan so many Byshops and the Erle accuse Thom. Becket afore the Pope so ear∣nestly, whither we be to blame to accuse him nowe. Theffect of the Byshop of Londons oration to the Pope and Car∣dinals was this: and the other byshops rations are like. Fathers, the care of the Churche belonges to you, that they whiche be wise, might be cherished by you, and they that be vnwise, might be corrected that they might be wise: but he is not thoughte wise to youre wise∣domes that trustes in hys owne wyse∣dome, and goes about to trouble the peace of his brether, & the king. Of late there fell a debate in England betwit the Kynge and the Clergye, for a light cause, whyche myght haue bene ease∣lye buryed, yf a gentyll medicyne had bene ministred: but the Byshoppe of
Eantorb. vsynge hys owne will, and not oures, was to earnest not consyde∣ringe what harme might come by suche headines. And bicause he could not get our consent, he wente aboute to cast the faute of his rashnes on oure Lorde the Kynge, and the Realme: and that he might deface oure brotherlye loue, he flees awaye no man compellinge him, as it is writen in the Psal. The wicked flees whē no man persecutes him. The other Byshoppe and Erle folowe with like or more vehement wordes. Whan kinge Egfride had maried Etheldrede, and shee had rather liue a virgin, than do the dutie of a wyfe, the kinge desyred Saint Wilfride to counsell his wife to do her duty: the Byshoppe woulde not but rather encoraged her, diuorced her,VVilfride. made her a Nunne, and the kinge ma∣ried another, whiche counsell of Wil∣fride was plaine contrarye to S. Paule sayinge. The woman hais not power of her owne bodye, but the manne, foregenda no∣a Sancto∣rm in hys fe. she can not depart from her husbande, without licens, and but for a time. God kepe vs from suche holy Byshops. Po∣lychro. lib. v. ca. xxii. declares a knot of these his holye fathers. Aldelme firste Priest, than abbot, and lastly a Byshop whan he▪ was tempted in the flesh, toke
a faire wenche into bed with him while he might saye the Psalter: and yet wold not mary, lib. vii. ca. ii. Walter Byshop of Ertford was slain by a woman whi∣che goored him in the coddes, with her sheares, because he woulde haue rauy∣shed her. Ca. xi. Walter Byshoppe of Durram made women to serue him, & the munks at the table, with their hear hanginge downe, where fewe scaped their handes, ca. xii. Giraldus Byshop of Yorke, was sais he a lecherous man and a witche. O holye fathers. I trust who so euer considers these things wel, wil iudge the holynes of these good bis∣shoppes on whom he glories so muche. The rest of the Byshoppes whyche he names be such like, and bicause he spea∣kes not muche of them I will let theim passe, for they be no better: and oute of the same worshipful history ye shal read of them, because no learned manne hais thought mete to loose his time in com∣mendinge suche. They lyued all sins the conquest, not. v. C. yeare sins: all made Saintes, and promoted by the Pope, and he by theym: therefore they must neede maintaine his doinges, and he theirs. I woulde not haue blotted so muche paper with so muche wicked∣nes, nor filled your eares and eyes with
such filthines, but that he prouoked me to it, and cals that good, which is euil, and light, darknes: The rest be no bet∣ter. In euery Bishopricke ye shal finde some byshoppes that were ennemies to the Pope and his doinges in that blind age. In Lincolne, Robert grosshead ap∣pealed from the Pope to Iesus Christ, and wrote diuers good bookes against manye his doinges. Ranolde Pecocke of Chichester was condemned in the xxvi. yeare of Henrye. vi. for this newe learninge, and specially for saying that a generall counsell and the church may erre in religion. In the late dayes of poperye were burned fiue byshops, and fiue bannished: let them shewe so many byshops that sufferd within this thou∣sand yeare for their God the Pope, and they might haue some shewe of honesty for thē. It is a rare thing to see a byshop die for religion, and specially a Papist. Seynge they reforme religion so swell as they saye, it were mete▪ as they forsake the religion that their predecessours vsed, as10 masse, matins, ministracion of sacraments, tht they shuld also forsake houses, parks, lands, and reuenewes, that their predeces∣sours hadde, and go from place to place for gods sake and preach. If nothinge els, this one sayinge will
proue him a dissembinge liynge Hipo∣crite. All the worlde knowes, that the greatest faute and readiest that they haue to lay against the Gospel time, is: that Churche landes and liuinges are taken from spirituall menne, and besto∣wed on other: and of this thing he com∣plaines hymselfe in manifest woordes hereafter. Therfore it is manifest, that he woulde not haue the byshops to giue away their landes, seing he complaines of the takynge it awaye: but he woulde so faine finde a faute in the newe bys∣shoppes, that rather than he find none, he wil shew him self a foole in blaming them wherein they deserue it not, and which be thinkes to be no faut in dede. Why they forsake their masse and mat∣tins, is sufficiently declared afore. For their houses, parkes and landes, why some few that haue any such do not for∣sake them that be left, there is good rea∣son: but why other some haue them not (that they might forsake theym if they shoulde) I feare their popishe predeces∣sours haue prouided to wel for them a∣gainst reason. They keepe house, and such lands as they can get, because they be not Anabaptistes, nor heretyckes, thinkynge it not to be lawfull for them so to doe (for Goddes good creatures are ordeined to serue Gods good ministers)
and also because they bee not so super∣sticious as the obseruants freers, which thought themselues so holye that they might not handle money. They remem¦ber also that Godde commaundes them to kepe hospitalitie to their power: & bi∣cause by this meanes it may the better be done, they do not refuse it althoughe gredilye they doe not desire it. TheSpirituall mens lan∣des. Prince also and commen welth desires a seruice of them whiche they can not so wel performe without these: but chefely for the maintenance of learning which is so decayed almost remedilesse, and so litle hope to recouer it, if these helpes be cleane taken away, that extreme blind ignoraunce is like to folow this age. Looke into the Uniuersities, and spie what auncient learned menne ye finde there, either Papist or Protestant. I am ashamed to tel, and it is to be lamented to see that there is so few, and it is ear∣nestlye to bee begged at Goddes hande that it maye be amended: but I feare it is rather to be wished than hoped for. This plage is ouer our heads not regar¦ded, and cannot be auoided how so euer the world go. These few that now liue both Papist and protestant must nedes die. Where is there than any learned nūber to supplye their rowmes? There be fewe schooles abroade to bringe vppe
youthe: but so manye benefices so small that no man wil take them, and so the parishes be vnserued, & the people waxe without feare of God. The Uniuersites haue many goodly fresh wittes in them but so yonge, and wythout a sufficyent number of aunciente guydes to teache and rule them, that manye mens dayes shalbe spent afore any number come to ripenes, although for their yong yeares many can do wel. But fathers and mo∣thers must answere this questiō (& they) if they be asked why, they kepe not their children at schole, wil say there is more profet to be had in makyng hys sonne a lawer, a Phisicion, or anye thynge ex∣cept a minister: for whan they haue be∣stowed all they can get on one childe in the Uniuersitye, he shall not be able to liue hym selfe, nor helpe any fryende he hais, where the lawer will become a Gentylman, a purchaser, wythin fewe yeares. They will doe anye thing wyth him, rather than make him a Priest. S. Paule biddes: he that is taught, let himGala. 6. giue part of all hys goodes to him that teaches him: and the next wordes folo∣wing be. God is not mocked, as though be should say: If ye deale not lyberallye with your teachers, and thynk nothing so precious, but they shoulde haue their part of it in theyr nede, ye but mocke
God in so mockinge his ministers, but he that dwelles in heauen will mocke you againe sais Dauid. Let them weyPsal. 2. these woordes well whiche in paiynge their tythes yf they fynde one sheafe, lambe, or flese, worse than another cast it out in scorne, & say it is good ynough for a priest or with worse words as they be ful of such. If they sow spiritual thin1. Cor. 9: ges, is it much if they reape your carnal thinges? No sure: ye haue nothing good inough to recompense their labour with all. In the primitiue churche it was not vnlawfull to haue landes, though ma∣nye solde their landes for to releue the poore Christians withall. It is no more vnlawfull to kepe landes, than to kepe the money for whiche he sould the lan∣des:Act. 5. and Peter saide to Ananias that solde his land: Didde it not remaine to thee, and whan thou had sold it, was it not in thine owne power to do with it what thou woulde. So Peter grauntes that it was lawful for him both to kepe the landes, & to kepe the money to, that he receyued whan he had solde it: & yet I doubt not but the newe Byshops if case so shoulde require, could be content to forgoe all and liue as God woulde, as their dedes of late well declared, so that they might serue God or his peo∣ple the better, and rather than they de∣file
themselues with popery. We reade that diuers of the holy fathers and bys∣shoppes had lands with their churches∣but it is folye to aunswere so curious a foole in a matter of no doubt, but inuen ted of an idle scoffinge brane. If ye de∣maunde why some byshoppes haue so litle landes, few houses and parkes, the reasons also be sundrye: but sure lie few or none haue so muche as to kepe theim out of dette, or to maintaine that hospi∣tality which is loked for at their hands. Some of their lands and parkes against their willes bee exchaunged by order of lawe: but the most parte, the malicious Popishe prelates that were their prede∣cessours seinge their kyngedome decay, and that professours of Goddes gospell shoulde followe in their places, woulde rather giue it women, children, horske∣pers (I say no worse) by lease, patentes, anuites, than any that loues god shuld enioye it. This is the greatest reason why they haue not lands, and that can not be auoyded, more is the pitye. How many byshoprickes in the Realme haue they impoueryshed by these meanes: so that they whyche nowe succede are not able to releue them selues nor the poore as they would & should. The multitude ry out on the protestātes that they kepe
not howses like the Papists, nor such a number of idle seruauntes., they consi∣der not how barelye they came to their liuinges: what pensions they paye, and aites whyche their predecessours graunted, howe all commodites be lea∣sed awaye from them. What charges they beare for first frutes, subsides and tenthes, howe they lacke all housholde stuffe and furniture at their entring: so that for. iii. yeres space they be not able to liue out of dette, and get them neces∣saries. The popishe prelates afore they were Byshoppes had diuers fat benefi∣ces and prebendes, which they kept still for a commendum: they were stoored of all necessaries of householde afore they entred, they paid no first frutes, so that they may do on the first daye more than the other can doe in vii. yeare. If ye were of the worlde sais our Lorde, the worlde woulde loue you, but because yeIoan. 15. be not of the worlde, therfore the world hates you. The world loues the papists therfore they be worldlinges and not of god, the poore protestant because he wil not lie, not flatter, is despised of the worlde. The worlde geues to the papist honour, castels, towres, and all that it hais: to the protestaunt if he geue anye thinge it is thought to muche, and of those thinges that it geues, it giues the
worste that can be piked oute, and yet thinkes it to good. Therefore surelye the one hais his rewarde in this world: the other must loke for it at gods hand. For the proude papist there is nothinge good inoughe: for the poore protestant euery thinge is to good. What can the professours of Gods truth therfore loke to haue here, but to folow thexample of Thapostles whose doctrine they teach, to suffer wrongs, sclaunders, contempt, to be counted as out casts, and shepe ap∣pointed to the slaughter. UUhan the Popes butchers are alofte, they broile and brenne, they prison, hange and tor∣ment the selye gospeller at their plea∣sure: UUhan the Protestaunt is at the best, and the worlde semes to laughe on him, he is scars able to liue, runnes in contempt and sclaunder of the worlde, and the lurking papist lookinge for his daye whan he maye runne loose again, gapes to satisfy his bloudy hart & hāds, which neuer wilbe satisfied with bloud. Diuers of these holy prelats that he cra∣kes so muche of, had so leased oute their houses, landes and parkes, that some of the new Bishops had scars a corner of a house to lie in, and diuers not so mu∣che ground as to grese a goose or shepe. So that some were compelled to tether their horse in their Orcharde: and yet
haue these holy fathers prouided that if they be restored (as they loke for) as ma∣nye thinke, that they shall haue al their commodities againe. O notable chari∣tye, and mete for the children of suche a father. The Lorde God for his mercy a∣mend this at his good wil and pleasure. The people are so blinde that they ra∣ther beleue him that fils their bely, than him that teaches theym Christe: so rude that they care more for y• bodye than for the soule. Euen as christ whan he filled v. M. with fiue loues they woulde haue made him a king: but within few dayes after they would haue stoned him. Paul. thessa. 3 wrought for his owne liuynge, and would not be a burthen to any congre∣gacion: yet he sais that it was lawfull for him to take all hys necessaries of them whom he taught. Chrisost. in the lxxxvi. Homil. on Matth. writynge en∣treates the like question and tels cau∣ses why he and others had landes be∣longing to their Churches. He sais: the vnthankfulnes of the people was such, that if they had not such prouision they shoulde goe a begginge. So surelye I thinke nowe, if the Byshops and mi∣nisters hadde not that prouisyon, they might sterue for hunger. Loue and du∣tye to Godde, his worde, and ministers, is so decayed that to gette awaye from
them is thought godlynes, pastime and profet. Surely God will not haue his seruauntes so mocked: God turne from vs for Christes sake that whiche we de∣serue and prouoke him to, in these oure doinges. Iulianus apostata Thempe∣rour that forsaked hys fayth, hearinge that the Gospell taught the Christians to liue in pouertye, and suffer persecu∣tion, toke their goods from theym, and punyshed them sayinge, he would helpe theym to heauen, bycause their Gospell taught theym to lyue poore and suffer: so oure papistes hearing the Protestan∣tes preach pouerty, and condemne their proude prelatie, haue leased, graunted, and giuen awaye their lyuynges, that now the pore gospeller hais scars wher∣on to lyue through their malice. In Chrystes Church hays euer bene a suc∣cession of Byshops from the Apostles time to this daye, in euerye see. Tertullian sayes: yf in any see there be a Byshop that1 walkes not in hys fathers steppes, he is to be counted a bastard. and no true inheritour in Christes Church. Saint Ciprian does saye: they that be made Byshops out of the order of the Churche, and not by tradicion and ordinaunce of the Apostles, coming by succession from time to time, are not bishops by the will of god but theues and murthe∣rers. A succession of Byshops or ministers
e graunt hais bene in the worlde, ra∣ther than in any one see or countre sins christ: which succession we say we haue and folow better than they, but not af∣ter such sort as he sais and meanes. God is neuer withoute hys Churche in the worlde, although some countries falle, and his churche, neuer wantes his Mi∣nisters and true teachers at the lest pri∣elye, althoughe in some ages it hais theym more plenteouslye than in other some, and some times the outward face of the Churche wantes not his errours and blottes. But where he sais, there hais bene Byshoppes in euerye see sins Thapostles time, it must nedes be false: For here with vs vnto the time of king Lucius almost ii. C. yeare after Christ, there were no Byshops in this Realme at al but Flamines as Fabian & Poly∣chronic.Polychro. lib. 5. saye, and heathen Priestes: and sundrye times sins dyuers sees in thys Realme manye yeares together had no Byshops at all, whan the vnchristened Saxons were here, and diuers Bishop∣prickes, here are not halfe so olde as Thapostles time. Yet in all these ages were some that both knew, taught pri∣uatlye and folowed the truth, thoughe they were not horned and mitred bishop pes, nor oyled and sworne shauelinges to the Pope. Such popishe Bishoppes
I am sure no manne is able to proue to haue bene in euerye see of this Realme continuallye sins the Apostles time, nor els where: whan he hais proued it I wil say as he does. Does the see make the bishop and his doctrine good or badde? Does the place make him good or bad? If his sayinge bee true that they haue such a succession, the manne must nedes be good bicause he is Bishop of suche a place or suche (for he meanes to haue a continuall succession of good byshoppes euery where without interruption:) but whether they succede in agreement of one true doctrine as they doe of one se or place he cares not. If succedinge in place be sufficient to proue theym good byshoppes, than the Iewes and Turks haue their good bishops and religiō stil at Ierusalem, Constantinople, and els where, for there they dwel where Tha∣postles did, and haue their sinagoges, leuites, Priestes and bishops after their sort. UUe do esteme and reuerence the continuall succession of good byshops in anye place if they can be founde: if they can not we runne not from Godde, but rather sticke fast to his worde. I thinke ther is no place where euil bishops haue not bene. If Corinth, Galatia, Ephe∣sus, Philippos, Colossa, Thessalonica, Macedonia, where Paule preached, & to
whome he wrote his seuerall Epistles, might fall, and haue turkysh prelates: why maye not Rome fall to? the same maye bee saie of Ierusalem where S. a. was, and of Aphricke where Cipri∣an and Austin were, and of other places where Thapostles preached, & now be fallen awaye. Succession of good Bys∣shoppes is a great blessinge of God: but bicause God and his trueth henges not on manne nor place, we rather heng on the vndeceiuable trueth of Gods worde in all doubtes, than on any Byshoppes place, or manne: For all men are liers, and may be deceyued: onely god and his word is true, and neyther deceyues, nor is deceyued. In the. x. tribes of Israel where Iereboam made him Priestes a∣gainst Gods lawe, and the greater part of their religion was defaced with ido∣latry, yet were there euer some good Prophetes amonge, that taughte Gods people their duetye, thoughe not of the higher sort of Priestes and in autoritye as there be some fewe among the Tur∣kes at this daye also. Elias complaines that he was left alone: Of all the true folowers of Gods lawe he knewe none that feared God beside hym selfe: butSuccession god said he had reserued. vii. M. that ne∣uer bend their knee to Baal. So surely though the great number of priests and
bishops hauing autority haue bene these many yeres the Popes deriyngs, rather seruing Baall than God, yet our good God, pitinge his people hais in al ages reserued some few that taught the truth and feared him. God hais not promised that euerye Byshoprycke, no nor anye one Bishopricke shoulde haue alwayes good Bishoppes one after an other, no more than one good father should haue alwaies good children borne of him, nor a good king shoulde haue good Princes to reign after him. After wise Salomon reigned foolyshe Roboam: after godlye Ezechias reigned wicked Manasses: and after Iesus the son of Iosede folowed not long after Annas and Caiphas, and many wicked ones afore them. Contra∣ry wise of sinful auncetors came the in∣nocent Lambe of God Christ Iesus, and after the traitour Iudas folowed y• good Apostle Matthias. So that both in king doms and Priesthode, the good hais fo∣lowed the bad, & the bad the good. The Gospell sais, that in Moyses cheare theMath. 23. Scribes & Pharises sit: if after Moyses followed the wicked scribes and Phari∣ses, what priuilege haue our bishops or Popes more than Moises that their suc∣cessoures shoulde continue in purenesse of religyon, and not fall awaye as the Pharises didde? Are they better than Moyses? r where is thys
their promise writen in Goddes booke▪ the gloriynge of this succession is lyke the proude bragges of the Iewes for their genealogies and pety gres, saiyng we haue Abraham for oure father, but our Sauiour Christ saide: ye are of the deuill your father and his workes willIoan. 8. ye do. So it maye be said to these which crake that they haue Thappostles for their fathers, that they haue the Pope their father: for his works and doctrine they folowe and not Thapostles. As Christ our lord, therfore proued the Ie∣wes to be of y• deuil, because they filled his desires: and therfore not the children of Abraham: so it is easye to see whose children these be whan they folowe the Pope and not Thappostles. Succession in doctrine makes theym the sonnes of the Prophetes and Apostles, and not sittinge in the same seate, nor beynge byshop of the same place. There is one of his holy byshoppes that he crakes so much of, a litle wiser and subtiller than he in wordes althoughe in sense they a∣gres. He sais that in euerye see there hais bene a succession, but for example he takes Cantor. & sais in a litle scrolle that he wrote for the autorytye of the churche, and sent it priuely to his fren∣des to comfort and confirme them with that they shoulde sticke fast, thus. UUe
can recken al the byshops there sins S. Austin that was the first, and from him goe to Gregorye byshop of Rome who sent Austin hither, and from Gregorye vppe to Peter, and so proue that all our religion came from Rome by succession and therefore we must heng on Ro. stil. He sais ye like may be done in euery see: and whan it is proued I will beleue it. But I am content to stand with him in triall of this If Austin was the first, as he sais, than Cantorb. hais not hadde a continuall succession sins Thappostles time. It is since Austin liued a vii. C lx. yere, but since Thapostles it is M. D. lx Howe is there than a continuall succes∣sion in Cantorb. sins Thapostles time, if they wanted bishops the space of viii. C. yeare. The same reason is against other byshoprickes to: and there can not bee proued a succession of their byshops in anye one place of thys Realme since Thapostles. And for a succession of a∣grement in one doctryne, relygion, and other their doinges: they can not find it in Rome neyther afore Gregory nor af∣ter: Clemens in the booke that goes inClemens. his name: sais that wyues ought to bee comen, whych God forbiddes: And here of I thinke the Papists are so bold with other mennes wyues, and wyll none of
their owne. Alexander made holy wa∣terAlexander as they saye, to driue awaye diuels and heale diseases, as thoughe it were more holye than Christ himself: for the deuill temted him, and yet runnes a∣way from their coniured water as they wold make fooles to beleue. But what papist was euer so mad to forsake the Phisicions helpe in his sicknes, and say he was healed by the Popes holye wa∣ter. If that were true, phisicions mightPius. put vppe their pipes. Pope Pius bade kepe Ester in the full mone what daye in the weke so euer it light on: and not alwaies to kepe it on the sonday, as weMarcelli∣nus, Libe∣rius, Felix, Anastasius do nowe. Marcellinus in persecution sacrificed idols. Liberius, Felix, and Anastasius Popes, were Arrians and great heretickes deniynge Chryst to be God equall with his father. Pope Leo cut of his hande, because a woman kis∣sedLeo. it, and he felt himselfe some thinge tempted. Ioan. i. was send to Thempe∣rourIoan. as Embassadour from the king of Gthes, to counsell him to restore the Churches to Tharrians heretickes.Sergius. Sergius Pope set forthe yearely a piece of a crosse (whiche he said was Christs)Gregory. 3 to be worshipt and kissed. Gregorye. iii. graunted licence to marye hys uncles wyfe, plaine against the scripture. Za∣char.Zachary. i. Pope absolued the Frenche men
from obeyinge their king, deposed him, and confirmed Pipine for their kinge, and so did Pope Steuen to. Leo. iii. a∣lowedSteuen. Leo. 3. Ioan. 8. the bloude of Christ at Mantua, suche a one as was the swete bloude of Halis here. Ioan viii. a harlot wearing mannes apparell, was made Pope, and gote with childe, and delyuered as she went in procession solemly. Nicholas. i.Nicholas was so proude that he said it was not lawful to reproue the Popes iudgemen∣tes. Syluester. ii. and Benet. ix. gaue themselues to the deuill, and offered sa∣crificeSyluester. 2 Benet. 9. to hym, that he woulde make theym Popes, and promised after their death wholy to be his, they entised wo∣men to naughtines with them by witch craft. Innocent. iii. dispensed with theInnocent 3. Emperor Otho to mary his Nese plain contrary to Gods worde. Ioan. xxiii.Ioan. 23. denied the soules to lyue after this lyfe, the Cardinalles finding no faute with him: but the Frenche kinge compelled hym to recante. Thys is the goodlye succession that he woulde haue vs to fo∣lowe, of doctrine in Romyshe Popes written by Platina, and suche like no Protestauntes: these be the successours and fathers whom he woulde haue vs to be lyke vnto. God defende all good folke from all suche doinges, saiynges, beleuynge, liuyng, louing or folowing.
Except god dwel and be tied in cheares seates, and places he can not dwell in suche wycked men as these Popes be. God dwelles not in houses made wyth mans handes, nor in the mighty Prela∣tes of the worlde: but he dwelles in the pure mindes and consciences of his elect people of what Estate or degree so euer they be. Compare the doings, preachin∣ges, and troublesom life of Peter Tha∣postle from time to time, with the wic∣ked blasphemyes of these Romyshe pre∣lates, and with their lordly idlenes, and mark in what thing he is lyke to them, or they to him. They are no more like than an apple and Oister: than canne not he bee their Predecessour, nor they his successours. If they clame to be Iu∣das successoures I will not sticke with theym. In temporall enheritaunce an euyll man maye succede as ryght heire to a good: but in matters of pure religi∣on an heretycke or he that dyffers from the trueth, can not be a lawful folower in Goddes Church, and defender of the same relygion, and trueth, from which he is fallen, and becomen an enemy. Therfore as the succession of good kin∣ges standes not onely in enioyinge the landes, goodes, possessions, and pleasu∣res of the Realme, but in the painefull ministrynge of iustyce, defendinge hys
subiects from straungers, maintaining the good, and punishinge the euill, by holsome and godly lawes: so standes the succession of the Church not in miters, palaces, landes, or lordships, but in tea∣chinge true doctrine, and roting out the contrarye: by sharpe discipline to correct thoffendours, and godly exhortacion to stirre vp the slouthfull, and encourage the good, to raise them that be fallen by comfortable promises, to strengthen them that stande, and bring home them that runne astraye. He that does these is the true successour of the Prophetes and Apostles, though he liue in wilder∣nes as Elias did. Or be tied in cheanes as Peter and Paule: He that does not, is not their successour in dede, but in name onlye, though he haue the Popes blessinge, cruche and miter, landes, and palaces, halowinges and blessinges, or all that the Pope hais deuised for hys Prelates. To be a Byshop is to be an officer, a ruler, a guide, a teacher of Gods flocke in Gods Church: and to be a true successour in a Bishopricke, is to succede in like paines, care, and diligent regarde of Gods people. Is he an offi∣cer that does not his office? nay surelye but onelye in name, for he is a thefe in his office, and an vsurrer, that takes the profet and not the paine. An office stan∣des
properlye in doynge the duty of it, and not in talkinge of it, settinge in deputies, bearinge a shewe, bragge and face of a Byshop. Whan they can bring Thapostles doctrine or life for example to be like their life and teachinge, they maye say they folowe Thapostles: but because they seeke to be Lordes ouer the flocke, contrary to Peters doctrine, and be enemies to the Gospell, and murthe∣rers of the professours of it, they be trai∣tours to their lorde God. What does Tertul. make for his pourpose? If he walk not in his fathers steppes sais he, he is a bastard. Content, who be the fa∣thers? surely Thapostles, for in his time the Pope had no such autority, nor ther were any such horned cattell of the Po∣pes made Bishoppes. Proue than that the Pope walkes in Thapostles steps, and we will reuerence him. Surelye he is like no Apostle, except Iudas: & these Popish Prelates, so as the father is, su∣che is the sonne. Iudas solde and be∣trayed his maister for. xxx. pieces of syl∣ur: and our Papistes sel their purgato∣ry for. xxx. grotes, the price of a trental. Or ls for their pleasure, I will graunt theym some thing. The Pope maye be like to Peter in suche case as christ our lord said to him: go after me Satan, for thou vnderstandes not the thynges of
god. Peter was ambitious, and therfore our Lorde cald him deuill, and bade him go backe: so the Pope desiringe to be a∣boue all, folowes the deuill his father, and therefore we maye iustlye saye to them with Christ▪, come after me thou deuill. But I put case a manne shouldeMath. 16. graunt that the fathers which Tertul. speakes of, be the popes in dede of Ro. what thā? what makes it for this mans purpose? Tertul. liued within C. lxxvii yeres after christs death: why thā, proue that any of these popes and their trashe whiche he esteames so highlye to be of that autoritie and auncientye, that he woulde, and than lette him beginne to crake some thing. He is not able to do it. XXX. of the first popes which liued al∣most iii. C. yeres after Christ, were per∣secuted, sufferd death for their religion, liued in caues, and had none of the rial∣tie of the worlde, but were subiectes to princes accordinge to their dutye: than these latter proude popes that woulde rule bothe God and the world, by Ter∣tullians saying, be bastardes, and folow not their auncient fathers, the first po∣pes. And thus he hais brought a good reason agaynst hym selfe. Does Cy∣prian make anye more for his purpose? Marke his woordes, and iudge. They that be made Byshoppes (sayes he) oute
the order of the Churche, and not by tradicion of Thappostles by suc∣cession, are not Bishops but theues. &c. I am content to be iudged by these wor¦des. I proued afore by Paule and Ti∣mothe, by Dyonise. &c. that the order by whiche oure Byshops and Priestes are made nowe, is more agreeing to the or∣der of the churche in Ciprians time and tradition of Thapostles than that mis∣order wherby the Popish prelates order their clergy. Let thē proue by good wri∣ters that their oiling, shauing, vowing, sacrificinge, apparel. &c. was vsed in the Churche in Cyprians time, and I sub∣mitte my selfe. Ciprian was liuinge more than. ii. C. l. yeare after Christ, in whiche time was no suche proud Pope nor Popishe order vsed in the Churche as he requires of vs, but onelye suche a simplicitye as I spake of afore. Thus like a tolyshe boye he hais gotten a rod to beat him selfe withall: God send him more wit. Where the sayde Preacher does affyrme greater matters than the burnyng of Pau∣les to haue chaunced in the time of supersti∣cion and ignoraunce, as the church of Pau∣les was brent in the first yeare of Steuen.12 and the steple of Paules sette on fyre by lighthing in the tyme of kynge Henrye the
vi. they that count that to be the time of su∣perstycyon and ignoraunce, whan god was, serued deuoutly nyght & day, the people ly∣ued in the feare of god euery one in his own vocation wythout reasonynge and conten∣tion of matters of relygion, but referred all suche thynges to learned menne in generall counsels, and vnyuersyties there to be dis∣puted: than was the commaundementes of god and vertue expressed in lyuyng, now all is in talke, and nothyng in liuing: than was prayer, now is praytyng, than was vertue now is vice: than was bildyng vp of Chur∣ches, houses of religion & Hospitals: where prayer was had night and daye hospitalitye kept, and the poore releued, now is pullyng downe, and destroyinge such houses where god shoulde be serued, hospitality kept, and the poore releued. By meanes wherof gods glory is destroyed, and the commen wealth impoueryshed, than was plenty of all thin∣ges, nowe is scarcenes. Therefore Operi∣bus credite. If I shoulde fall into a comparison of the plagues in the time of popecye and the Gospell, although both were great: yet in supersticious times were the grea¦ter. Many did not beleue that these o∣ther brennynges of Paules were true, which the Byshoppe declared whan he spake it openlye there, but it was ey∣ther for ignoraunce or malice, or both, for all these were true, as appeares in recordes, & many mo. In the yere of our lorde. M. lxxxvii. and the vii. day of Iuly
the Church of Paules and all that was in it, with a great part of the City were burned. Maurice than beinge byshop of London, and the. xxi. yeare of Willyam Conquerour. In the yeare M. C. xxxii. the moste parte of the Citye of London was burned by the fire of Gilbert Be∣ket, and in the xxxii. yeare of king Hen∣rye the first. Of this kinred came that goodlye impe Tho. Beket. In the yeare M. C. xxxvii. and the first yeare of kynge Steuen, began a fire at London bridge, and burned all the Citye and Churche of Paules vnto ye come out at Temple barre to Saint Clementes church, whi∣che was than called the Danes chur∣che. In the yeare. M. iii. lxxxii. and theMoe and greater plagues in popery than the Gospel. xxi. daye of Maye: with a greate earth quake through the Realme, the crosse in Paules Church yard was ouerthrowen in the. vi. yere of Richard the. ii. To the bylding of that crosse againe, Willyam than Byshoppe of Cantorb. gathered greate summes of money, and enriched him selfe. And because menne should be more willinge and liberal to giue, he & the rest of such holy Byshops, graunted manye dayes of pardon to theym that would frely geue money, to the bilding of that crosse again. Cantor. graūted. xl days. London, Ely, Bathe, Chichester, Carleil, Lādaff. Bangor, euery one. xl.
dayes: the summe in all iii. C. rr. dayes of pardon, but not one dodkin of money came out of their purse. All which thin∣ges and more, the Deane of Paules de∣clared wel at the crosse out of the recor∣des of their church and Citye. iii. yeare afore Lanfranc was made Byshoppe of Cantorb. as Legenda sanctorum writes, the hole city of Cantor. almost, and Christs church there was burned vp with fire in the beginninge of Willyam conque∣rours days. Polychr. tels. lib. vii. ca. iiii that a great piece of London, and Pau∣les Churche with the principall Cities of Englande were burned. Ca. vii. he sais a whirle winde threw downe a. C. houses in London, and many churches also lib. viii. ca. i. Basil a great Citie with many towres fel with earthquake in Edward the. iii. days, and in Naples xl. thousande were killed. Ca. xviii. on Candelmas euen in mid winter Pau∣les steple was burned wyth lyghtninge in the tyme of Henrye. vi. Ca. xxii. the church of Durrā likewise about. xl. yere sins, wt many other like. But why shuld I stand to proue that which euerye man knowes to be true, if he be of any lerning & knowledge as thoughe it were a doubt or straunge thing? What great town or church can ye recken within the realme or wtout almost, that hais not sufferd the lyke? why shuld we thā meruail of this?
cal to remembrans ye late dais of popery here we vs (not vii. yere sins) & see what horrible stormes, thunders, and light∣ninges, was here by Notingam, where houses, Churches, belles, woodes, and loden cartes were ouerthrowen and ca∣ried awaye. But he sais these chaunced some in time of Ciuill warre, and not all with fire from heauen. What than? what helpes that his case? all were in the time of poperye, and many mo like. And thoughe all these were not wyth fire from heauen, yet it is as great a to∣ken of Goddes anger as well as the o∣ther, or more. Sais not Dauid? Fire, haile, snowe, yse, and windy stormes doPsal. 148. his cōmaundement. If they do his com∣maundement than the one is his doing aswell as the other. Does not god rule the earth as well as the heauen? These fires from heauen, chaunce more seldom than the other, and therefore more fear∣full, whan they come: yet these on earth obey his word as well as the other, and are not done withoute him. And not without a cause, it maye be a token of gods greater anger to punish vs rather with those thinges that be daily among vs, and were ordeyned to serue vs for our helth, than to corect vs with those that fall so seldome, and are made to feare vs, and declare Gods great feare∣full maiestie.
But this greues him to call that the time of supersticion & ignoraunce whan God was serued night and daye, so de∣uoutly as he thinkes, and euery one li∣ued quietly without reasoning of ye scrip¦ture, and beleued what so euer the pope sent them, & serued god after their owne diuise, & not as god himselfe taught the: & so that the belly were ful, al was wel, thoughe they maintained ideli lubbers which was no more almes afore god thā their praitinge was praying. For their munkishe night prayer, how vain lippe labour it was, and mumbled vp of an vnlearned sort, I said inough afore, and declared how farre it differed from true prayer, but this is that maye not be borne, whan the people haue the scrip∣ture in their owne tonge, for than they are able to tell the Priestes their dutye and correcte their supersticious Idola∣try. It skilles not muche thoughe the Papistes would haue the people to liue in blyndnesse still: for in that the Pope and the Turke agrees well, that their people shalbe vnlerned, and vnderstandThe people shoulde learne the scriptures. nothing but what so euer it pleases the Priestes to teach them, which is neither much nor good: but God in his word & the auncient fathers in their writinges do teache christian people otherwaies.Psal. 73. Dauid sais: the father shoulde declare his truth to their children. Moyses sais:
Aske thy father and he will tel thee, de∣maunde of the elders, and they will de∣clare vnto thee. Paul sais: wiues if theyDeut. 32. woulde know any thing, let them aske their husbandes at home. If fathers must teache their children, and children learne of their fathers, and wyues of their husbandes: howe shoulde eyther party be ignoraunt? Ierom. sais, men are wont, women are wont, and Mun∣kes are wont to striue amonge themsel∣uesPsal. 133. who should learne most scriptures, and thinks them best that learnes most, but he learned most, that does most. Chriso. in his xxxi. Homily on S. Ioan, rebukes the people that were so vnwil∣linge to learne the scriptures, seing the woman of Samaria, of whom there he writes, was so desirous: & that at home in their houses, they hadde Tables and Chesses, rather than bookes: and if they had anye bookes, they were not occupi∣ed. &c. In his ii. Homilie on Matth. In declaringe howe the scriptures refresh the minde, as a holesome aer does the bodye, he moues them to the readinge of it, and rebukes theym that saye it be∣longes to munkes and Priestes to read it, and studie it, and not to the people. Thus in corners these ennemyes of god
and hys woorde woulde drawe the peo∣ple from their saluation, and woulde make them beleue that it were not their duty to learne. What blindnes is this, to thinke ignoraunce better than lear∣ninge? and blindnes than sight? SaintRo. 1. Paul sais, the Gospel of God, is the po∣wer of god, to saue them that beleue. Saint Ia. sais, the worde of god is ableIa. 1. to saue oure soules. Than surelye those theues that woulde robbe Gods people of Gods worde, woulde robbe theym of their saluation by christ and sell theym such filthye salues, as the Pope woulde heale his scabbed shepe withall, whiche stinkes in Gods sight. Christ oure lorde sais: if the blinde leade the blinde, bothe fall into the ditch: than it is not inoughMath. 15. to saye, Sir Iohn our Priest taught me thus. For surely if he be as bold asblind baierd, to leade the wrong, and thou be so madde to folowe hym, thou shalt bee condemned as well as he. If he a∣lone might fall in the ditch, thou might more boldlye folowe him: but now thou art warned, learn and take hede, for ig∣noraunce will not excuse thee. The Hospitalitye and almes of Ab∣bayes, is not altogether to be ey∣ther allowed or dyspraysed.
The most of that which they did bestowHospita∣litye. was on the riche, and not the poore in dede, as halt, lame, blinde, sicke, or im∣potent, but lither lubbers that might worke and would not. In so much that it came into a commen prouerbe to call him an abbay lubber, that was idle, wel fed, a long lewd lither loiterer that might worke, and would not. On these and the richer sorte was the most part of their liberalitie bestowed that I nede not to speake of any worse: the smallest portion was on theim that neded most, not according to their foundation. Poly chro. sais. lib. v. ca. xxxii. that Abbaies wasted their goodes in glotony and out rage lib. vii. ca. vi. that munks vsed hau∣kinge, būtinge, disinge, drinkinge, and therfore vnder kinge Richard. i. munks were put from Couentrye, and clerkes brought in. lib. vii. ca. xxv. & Baldwin a munke, and Byshoppe of Cantorb. did the like with his munkes the same time ca. xxviii. But whether y• new munkes with their short coates, & almost wyth∣oute all religion, kepinge a shepeherde and a dog, where all thys good cheare was afore be worse than the munkyshe Idolatrous Popish creatures which de∣uised a religion of their owne, shewing their holynesse in their longe coates, I leaue it to the disputacion of the lear∣ned.
Looke into London, and see what hospitals be there founded in the Gos∣pell time, and the poore in dede releued, youth godly brought vppe, and the idls set to worke. Poperye would some time fede the hungry, but seldome correct the vnprofitable drones that sucked the ho∣nye from the labouring bees, nor bring vp children in the feare of God, but to fill the bellye, and not to teache vertue is to encrease vice. Wel worth Bride∣well therfore, for it is a good schole. The rest of his railyng is not worthy aunsweringe for there is as muche and more vertue and kepinge Goddes com∣maundementes vsed nowe as was than and more? though both sortes be bad y∣nough, and the best may be amended. Aske an olde Papist of the commen sort howe many commaundementes of god, and what they be, and he can not tell. Aske a Protestauntes childe of vii. yere olde that hais learned his Catechisme, and he can tell his duety to God & man, how to liue and die, what to loue, and what to flee, better then all their popish Priestes Is it like that he kepes gods commaundementes which knowes not what they be? how manye of the people were taught than woulde learne, or were moued to learne their commaun∣dementes? no: fewe suche at these dayes
are willinge to heare theym, or learne them: how much lesse to practise them? What a wicked opiniō is this, to think that ignorance is better than learning? or that a manne shall better serue God without knowledge of god, his duetye and his word, rather than by knowing, feling, and vnderstandinge gods good∣nes, and mannes frailnes, gods mercy, and mans misery, oure wretched world∣lye state, and Gods euerlasting blessed felicitye, God giue vs grace to thinke and thanke. The last reason that he lais for main∣tayning his supersticion, declares what religion and opinion he is of. Than was plenty he sais, and nowe is scarse∣nes of all thinges: whiche howe true it is, let the worlde iudge. Looke at the late dayes of poperye, and see what dearth, death, and scarsenes was than, and compare it with these dayes, and the plentye of gods vndeserued blessing powred on so vnthankefull a people. Then akecornes were good to makeDearth. bread of, and vnder Henry i. they made breade offerne rootes, as Polychro sais lib. viii. ca. xxi. now commenly the porer sort almost haue disdained with brown bread. Then scholers of the vniuersitys brake by their houses, went and liued a∣broade with their frendes, being not a∣ble
to continue at their study: than was such dearth and scarsity as the like hais not oft bene red of: than a Bishoppe of Mentz was so pursued with rattes in a time of derth, that he was compelled to flee to his towre standinge in the mids of the riuer Rhene, a myle from anye land, yet the rats folowed him & deuou∣red him there, for his vnmercifulnes, & therfore is called the rats towre to thys daye, this Byshop was no protestaunt. UUhether the like be nowe, the blinde maye see. UUho feles it? God giues his blessing plentifully, if man coulde con∣sider it thankfully, and vse it liberally. Who hais cause to complaine, or where is it sene? I think England had not the like plenteous time so commenlye these many yeres, although this yeare corne be deare, and somwhat ars. But I put the case that there were scarsenes and dearth of all things, plagues & war. &c. UUere thys a suffycyent cause to con∣demne our religion? No sure: no world∣lye thinge good or euill, wil moue gods people to iudge gods truth, by any other thinge than by gods holye booke. Should we condemne Saint Austin, because the city where he was Byshop, was besieged and wun by gods enemi∣es, Austin himself beinge within it, and died a littell before the wynnynge of it▪
Shoulde Elias and Eliseus haue for∣saken Gods lawe because there was so great dearth and scarsenes in their ty∣mes? Shoulde Daniel for the Lions denne, or Paul for his chaines haue for∣saken their God? In the dayes of Elias it rained not the space of. iii. yeare and a half: vnder Eliseus in the sege of Sa∣maria, women eate their Children, and Doues dung was good meate. Onely the worldlynges iudge by their bellye, their religyon. The Godles people said to Ier. We will not heare the word ofIere. 44. God of thee: for while we worshipt the mone and sterres, we had plentye of all thinges: but sins we harde the worde of Godde of thee we haue hadde scarsenes of all thinges. This is the reason that led the Iewes, and by the same is this Iewishe Papist moued to iudge of gods trueth. Therefore I can not iudge him to be of another religion than those, whose belye is their God. Let vs praise God for our health, welth, and libertye that he bestowes on vs vndeserued so plenteouslye, lest in not thankfullye re∣cetuing his word, & murmuring against his blessinges, we prouoke him to plage vs worse than afore. If wealth maye moue, consider what great thinges the Lord hais wrought by the Quenes ma∣iestie, & than iudge. Whan the Realme
was in daunger to be giuen into straun¦gers handes, and none coulde tell howe to deliuer them selfes, god of his vnde∣serued goodnes set vp the Queene ours maistres, who quietlye contrarye to all mennes expectacion auoyded theym all. UUhat daunger was Scotlande in: yet so god blessed the Quenes maiestye that she not onelye delyuered vs, but theym from their enemies handes, what relese in France, the poore oppressed haue had at her highnes handes, the blynde sce, all her louinge subiectes reioise, though the enuious Papist murmure & grudge. God graunt her hyghnesse grace to be thankefull to gods maiestye, who does so past all mannes expectacion prosper her doinges: that he onelye maye haue the praise. UUhat cause we haue to prayse god for restoring religiō through the Quenes trauaile, all menne of god do see & praise him for it, thoughe blind papists be sory therfore. UUhat ost her highnes hais susteined in restoringe vs a fine coine from so base, wise men re∣ioise though this malicious foole say we be in great pouerty. Looke howe fewe taxes she hais taken to doe this withal, and howe manye and howe great were leuied afore. Howe was this Realme pesterd with straunge rulers, straunge
Goddes, straunge languages, straunge religion, straunge coines, and howe is it nowe peaceablye ridde of theym all, to the greate glorye of God that hais wroughte so manye wonderful, straunge, greate thinges in so shorte a time in a weake vessell, which he neuer did by anye her noble progenitors whi∣che haue bene so manye and so worthy. Coulde anye be so blinde, but that ma∣lyce hays bewytched, to not see, or not praise Godde for these worthye dedes▪ I woulde haue wanted the suspicyon of flatterye in rehearsinge these thinges, but that I would the vnthankful world shoulde see the disdainefull blinde ma∣lice of popery which can not say well by Gods good blessinges. The foolishe lynking and clouting of y• scriptures together which folowes de∣clares what wit he hais. They may be applied all against himselfe, and such as he is, rather than against the professors of Gods trueth: what blasphemye is it to lay all kinde of wickednes on Gods worde? what euil so euer raignes in the world it is to be imputed to man, & not to God, to mans frailnes, & not to gods trueth and goodnes. God and his ho∣lye worde punish and condemne al false doctrine and filthines: therfore God wil confounde all suche filthye mouthes as
blaspheme hym or his holye woorde, to be the cause of anye kynde of naughti∣nesse. All liberty is now vsed he sais, where in dede iustyce was not better ministred these manye yeares, euen as the wiser and indifferenter sorte of Papistes doe graunte. Call to remembraunce howeIustice. sharplye buggerye, coniuringe, witch∣craftes, sorcery. &c. were punished wyth death by lawe, in the Gospell tyme of blessed king Edw. Whan were these lawes repealed, but in the late dayes of Popery, than iudge whether there was greater liberty to sinne vnder the chri∣stian kinge, or vnder supersticious pope∣rye. But the sodomiticall papistes, thinke these to be no sinnes, and there∣fore beastly doe misuse them selues, de∣filinge theym selues bothe with spiri∣tual and Sodomitical vncleanes, whe∣ther is there more libertye gyuen to sin whan such sinnes be made deathe by or∣der of lawe, or whan the lawes apoint no punishment for theym? Surelye the∣gospel is vniustly blamed in geuing car∣nal liberty, & popery rightfully condem∣ned in taking away the pain, & opening a doore to al mischefe. Who liues more licentiously than the pope himself wtout al feare of god, good order, & gods law, doing what he wil? so be al his scholers
folowing their owne fathers steps. In these my sayinges I go not about to proue vs Aungels, yet surely not suche deuilles as he woulde make vs, but in comparison of them we be saintes: ther∣fore let vs both amend, that God maye be mercifull to bothe, and glorified in both. And as thexamples in his begin∣ninge were good, if they had bene well applied, so is his conclusion. I wil con∣clude with him therefore in the ryght sense and meaninge of it, saiynge with him. Returne to the steppes of the good fathers the Prophets and Apostles, fra∣minge your selues to folowe their doc∣trine: be not caried away with straunge and diuerse doctrine of Popes, contrary to Gods holy worde, and inuented of late by men. Imbrace the religion and faith taught from the beginninge, in christes Church, from time to time con∣tinually: Flee this new fangled Popish supersticion, whiche hais crept into the Church of late yeares, and beleue that onelye whiche Christ hais taught, and his Appostles and Martirs haue confir∣med, and frame your liues accordingly, or elles Goddes vengeaunce hanges o∣uer your heades, ready sodenlye to fall vppon you: and let this token of bren∣ninge of Paules, be an example and token of a greater plague to folowe, ex∣cept
ye amend, whiche god graunt vs al to doe. Amen. A Prayer. MOste ryghteouse and wise iudge, eternall god and merciful father, which of thy secret iudge∣ment, haste suffered false Prophetes in al ages, to rise for the tri∣al of thine elect, that the worlde might knowe who woulde stedfastly sticke vn∣to thy vndoubted and infallible trueth, and who woulde be caried awaye with euerye vayne doctrine, and yet by the might of thy holye spirite hais confoun∣ded theym all, to thy great glorye, and comfort of thy people: haue mercy vpon vs we besech thee, and strengthen oure weakenes against all assaultes of our e∣nemies: confounde all Popery, as thou did the doctrine of the Pharises, streng∣then y• louers of thy truth, to the confu∣sion of all supersticiō and hipocrisy: giue vs due loue and reuerence of thy holye worde, defende vs from mannes tradi∣cions: encrease oure fayth, graunte vs grace neuer to fall from thee, but vp∣rightlye to walke accordynge as thou
hais taught vs swaruing neyther to the right hand, nor the life, neyther adding nor taking any thinge awaye from thy writen worde, but submitting oure sel∣ues hollye to thy good wil and pleasure may so passe this transitorye life, that through thy goodnes we may lyue euerlastinglye wyth thee in thy glory, through Christ our lord who with thee and the ho∣lye Ghoste, lyues and reignes one god and our Sauiour for euer and euer. Haue not I hated theym O Lorde that hate thee, and euen ined awaye because of thine enne∣mies. Psal. Cxxxix. I will giue you a mouth and wisdome, whi∣che all your enemies can not gainsaye and wyth∣stande. Luke. xxi. FINIS.
¶ Here folowe also certaine questions propounded by him, whiche are fullye althoughe shortly aunswe∣red. whiche is the catholycke Church? SAint Augustine and S. HieroAugust ca Epist. fūd. Hiero. con Lucifer. do saye: The Church is a visible companye of people gathered of christ our lord and the Apostles, and continued vnto this day by a perpetual succession liuing in one faith Apostolicall vnder Christe the heade, and his vicar in earth, being the pastor and high Byshop. Out of this catholicke and a∣postolicall church is no trust of saluation. Saint Augustine sais, who so euer shalbe outAugust. E∣pist. 1512. of this church, althoughe his lyfe be esteamed to be very good and laudable by this only faut, that he is disioyned and seperated from the vnitye of Christ and his Church, he can haue no lyfe, but the wrath of God hanges ouer him. Saint Ciprian sayes: he seperates him∣selfeCiprian simpliei. from Christ that does against the consent of the Byshop and clergy. Saint Hiero. does saye: we muste remayneHiero. co Lucifer. in that Churche whiche is founded of the Apo∣stles, and does endure vnto thys daye, by a
succession of Byshoppes to whom the holye Ghoste hais appointed the rule and gouernement of this Churche sanctified by Christes bloud she∣dinge. Nor let heretickes take anye comforte to theym selues, if they can frame out of the Chap∣ters of the scripture for their pourpose that whi∣che they saye, seynge the deuill hais alledged some thinges of scripture: for the scriptures consist not in readinge but true vnderstandinge. If we will be members of Christes Churche, we must con∣tinue firmely in that faith and religyon, that was sent from the Apostolicall see of Ro. by S. Gre∣gory into England: which faith and religion was planted and stablyshed by Saint Angustine in thys Realme. Saint Augustine stablyshed masse and vii. sacramentes to be vsed in the latin tonge, as Gdas does witnes, and such maner of deuine seruice as is nowe vsed. The aunswere to the. i. question. SAint Austin in the first place al∣ledged hais no suche definition, althoughe the most parte of the wordes which he puttes there are true: and woulde to God he considered howe muche he speakes against him selfe here in. This is that which we defende: that the Churche is gathered by Christ and Thappostles first, and continues not in the Papisticall but in the Apostolicall faith vnder Christ our head, who rules his churche stil by his holye spirite and worde, and hais not put it into the an∣des of any one only general vicar in the earth, as he vntruelye sayes: whereas
their church is bylded not on christ, but on the Popes decrees, whiche Thappo∣stles neuer knewe, and were vnwritten manye yeares after the death of Thap∣postles, and are alwayes vncertayne, chaunginge euer as it pleases the Pope for his time to determine: And their Church hais had at one time iii. or. iiii. Popes for their heades, like a monster with manye heades, some Countrie fo∣lowinge one Pope, some another, as their heade? We saye also that the Papistes haue deuided theim selues from this Churche of Christe, makinge them selues sinagoges and chappelles,Iudg. 17. gods, and religion, of their owne deuy∣synge as Micha did contrarye to Gods worde: and therefore the wrath of God hanges ouer them except they returne, howe holye so euer they pretende to be. Ciprians wordes are not all together so plaine as he settes theym: but if they were, he meanes an other sort of Prie∣stes and Clergye than the Popes: for neyther they did take than to them nor he knew no such autoritye in them, as they now vsurpe vnto theim selues, for he writes as sharplye and homelye vn∣to Cornelius than byshop of Rome, as he does to any other his felow bishops. Surelye who so euer deuydes him selfe from Christes ministers and people re∣fusinge
their doctrine and discipline, se∣perates him selfe from Christ: euen as he that flees from the filthy dregges of Poperye, and his Chaplaines is cut of from the Pope the father of suche wic∣kednes. In Ieroms wordes we most re∣ioyse, teachinge vs to continue in that Churche, which is founded by Thapo∣stles, and not Popes, & endures to thys daye: The wordes of succession. &c. folo∣winge, are his owne, and not Ieroms. By thys doctrine of Ierom we flee to Thapostolicall, and flee from the Pa∣pisticall Churche, whiche was neuer knowen of manye yeares after Thapo∣stles. And we graunt that the deuil, pa∣pistes and heretickes, can alledge some wordes of the scriptures: and therefore we saye that the Papistes be deuilyshe Heretickes because they racke & writhe the scriptures to a contrarye meaninge to their owne damnation as the deuill did. For succession and gouernement of Byshops: for Austins religion massinge and vii. sacramentes, I said inoughe a∣fore: but where he alleges Gildas as fa∣ther of his lies, he does him much wrōg for he hais neuer suche a word in all his writinges. If he haue lette him shew it. This is euer the facion of liynge Papistes to haue the names of doctours and auncient writers in their mouthes,
as though they were of the same opiniō that they be, where in dede they be no∣thynge lesse: and if they get a word or. if that seemes to make for them, they will adde a hole tale of their owne makinge as thoughe it were a piece of the same auncient mannes sayinge, and by thys meanes they deceyue the simple whiche haue no learninge to iudge, or haue not the bookes to trye their saiynges by: as this miser goes about in these places afore. Who is an hereticke? HE that teaches, defendes or maintaines anye erronyous oppinion agaynst the de∣crees,2 iudgemente, or determynatyon of Christes Catholicke Church, is an he∣reticke. Who is a schismaticke? HE that is deuided or separat from the v∣nitye3 of the catholycke Church in mini∣stration or receyuynge the sacramentes or diuine seruice, is a schismaticke and in state of perdicion. The aunswere to the. ii. and. iii. questions. HE wold gladly appeare to be wel sene in logi, if he had any. If all be hereticks that defend an erro∣nius opinion: than many disputacions shall be condemned.
In disputing it is oft sene that of igno∣raunce or for his learning sake, manye defend an vntruth: yet God forbid that they shoulde all be heretickes. Austin says well: I maye erre, but I will not be an hereticke. Then he is an hereticke properlye that defendes an errour obsti∣natelye, and will not be corrected. So teaches Saint Paule. Flee from an he∣retickeTit. 3. after one or. ii. warnynges: he sais not for ones teachinge or defending of it. Also he is not a schismaticke that differs in small pointes or circumstaun∣ces of ministringe the sacraments from other: for than shoulde all the Greke church be in a schisme, because they dif∣fer in some ceremonies from the Latin Churche, and also one from another, as I declared afore in the ministration of Basil, Chrisost, Saint Iames. &c. the same may be said of the latin church to, as for Ambrose order, Gregores. &c. And because euer vnder the Catholicke chur∣che he signifies Rome, we saye that no countrie whiche vses other ceremonies than they doe, is in this case a schisma∣ticke: for that their Romishe orders and ceremonies be of their owne deuisinge for the most part, and not commaunded by god, nor neuer were vsed generally in the vniuersall Catholicke churche as I proued afore, and therfore they be free
to vse or not vse as shalbe thought mete to differ in the substaunce and doctrine of sacramentes maye make a schisme or heresye: but such ceremonies are free to all countries whiche maye edifie as ap∣peared in Ansel. Epistle afore. These fewe wordes are sufficient to lette him see his owne foolyshnes, more might be said but I will not be so curious nor te∣diousi. Cor. 1. 11. to note all. Saint Paule cals the Corinth. schismatickes in henginge on mennes sleues for opinions in religion, and for misusinge the communion: and not for euery diuersitye of triflinge ce∣remonies, as he defines it here. Whether be Priests in schisme that haue4 subscribed to the religion nowe vsed in Englande. IN subcribinge to this religion now vsed in Englande, they haue both refused the po∣wer & autority which was geuen to them by the Byshoppe, when they were made Priestes (that is to saye power and autoritye to consecrate and offer, and to celebrate Masse for the quicke and the deade) and also they haue re∣fused their canonicall obedience solemplye promi∣sed to the Byshoppes with a kysse. And where the Byshopprs of this Realme with the Cler∣gye assembled at time of parliament would agree to no part of this religion (in wytnesse whereof the Byshoppes be in prison, and put from al their liuinges, and a great number of the Clergie haue lost all their liuynges) some be in prison, some ba∣nished
from their friendes: both the Bishops & al the clergy that hais lost their lyuynges, are al readye to suffer death afore they will consent to anye part of this religion. But all they whiche haue subscribed, haue forsaken the Byshoppes their true Pastors and Capitaynes, obeying and followinge wolues and Apostates: in wytnesse whereof they haue subscribed their names so se∣paratinge them selues from the Byshoppes and clergye, they must nedes be in schisme. The. iiii. aunswere. UUHere he lays to the priestes charge that in subscribynge to thys religion, they haue refused hoth the power that was giuen to them to offer sacrifice and celebrate masse for the quicke and dead, & also their canoni∣call obedience promised to the Byshops by a Iudas kisse, bycause the olde Bis∣shoppes in parliament did not agree to it: he does the Priests more honour than he knowes of, or thinkes wel bestowed. If he would cal to remembrance thaun∣swere that the piller of their Church, stout Steuen makes in his booke de ve∣ra obedientia, to the like reason where he was charged with fallynge from the Pope, and breaking that othe and vow of subiection which he made vnto him, when he was first made Byshoppe, he might better defende the priestes of oure time than accuse them. In oure baptis. we all make a solemne vow to God our
Lord that him onely we will serue, and beleue his worde: all vowes folowinge which are contrarye to that, not onelye maye and ought to be broken, but it is wicked to kepe theim: for we must serue god onelye as he hais taught vs in his holye word. But the scripture condem∣nes all suche sacrificing now for sinne, saue onelye that sacrifice whiche Iesus Christ offered ones for the sinnes of the hole world, and biddes vs also obey our kinge as chiefe and highest gouernour: therefore the Priestes forsakinge these later wicked vowes and powers which are contrarye to Gods worde, and their solemne profession made in baptis. (as Steuen did wel than though he flatterd afterward, and turned to his old vomit) are more worthyto be praised thā these obstinate prelates which now misusing the gentilnes of the Prince, deny with mouth that which they know in consci∣ens to be true, & yet charge the Priestes with it although they subscribed to the same things themselfes vnder that good king Edw. because both they knew it to be true, & see the rod than more sharplie shaken than it is now. And thoughe he crake in their name that thei wil rather die than agre to any part of this religi∣on, which they them selues vsed, mini∣stred, taught, & receyued afore: I doubt not but yf they were apposed as they
opposed other, they would as sone eate the fagot, as fele it burne them. Thapo∣stle sais: by one offeringe he hais made perfecte all theym that be sanctified. IfHebr. 10. one offeringe ones made, haue made all perfect: than cursed be they that wil cor∣rect or amend Christes death, as though it were not perfect to saue all without their often sacrificinge. We must obeyAct. 5. God rather than man, as S. Luke tea∣ches: therfore that vnlawfull obedience promised to the Pope and his Prelates contrary to their due allegians to their Prince, commaunded in the Scripture not only may, but ought with safe con∣science to be broken. At the preaching of christ oure Lorde and hys Apostles, manye forsaked the tradycyons of the elders and Pharises, receiuyng and be∣leuinge the Gospell of christ Iesus, and forsakyng the Iewishe ceremonies, and were not counted forsakers of God and his worde: no more are they surely to be reckened Apostates that forsake the po∣pes draffe, the clogge of all good consci∣ences, and cleaue to the simplicitye of Gods trueth, taught in the scripture. And where he crakes muche that they haue lost their lyuinges, and be in pry∣son, or bannyshed, let the worlde iudge whether they euer liued more merilye, quietlye, fared better, laye easelier, had
had more plenty of al thinges then they haue nowe. They are farre short from such handlyng as they delt wyth other. Some they hongerd to death, some they beat in prison, some they cast on dung∣hils being so murthered at their hands, some they burned, after they had bene long bursed: but euery one was so mise∣rablye handled that christian eares and hartes abhorre to thinke, or heare of it, and yet like shameles beasts they blush not, nor repente, but wishe and looke to be murthering again. They are as pale in prison as a butchers bolle: they are as leane as a fat hogge, they lye at ease vnto their bones ach with rising early, they fare of ye best, they take no thought but looke for a day, and thinke long vn∣to they maye embrue their handes in bloude againe, and make all officers to be their hangmen, and the stoutest to be afraide of a priestes cappe as they did a∣fore. They prouided so well for theym∣selues in their somer that they nede not to sterue in this gentill winter: the world is so much their frende, that they can lacke nothinge: they woulde fayne be counted to suffer for religion if anye manne would beleue it. The poore pro∣testaunt which hais his libertye, lyues in more miserye, nede, det, reproche and contempt, than these the Popes priso∣ners,
who he sais haue lost al. It is bet∣ter in the world to be the Popes pryso∣ner than Christs Preacher, God amend all. Whether be Priestes in schisme that mi∣nister the Communion and other sacra∣mentes accordinge to the booke of com∣men prayer now set forth? THis maner of ministration of sacraments5 set forth in the booke of commen prayers was neuer allowed nor agreed vppon by the vniuersall churche of Christe in anye generall counsell or sacrate synod: no riot by the clergye of Englande at the laste Perliament: butAct. 6. Act. 15. onelye it was agreed vppon by the laitie whiche haue nothynge adoe wyth spirituall matters or causes of religion, but ought to stande to the de∣crees, iudgement and determinacion of the cler∣gye in causes of fayth and religion. For so it was vsed in Thapostles time as appeares in the actes of the Apostles: As when the Apostles toke then order to make vii. deacons, & whē they put away the ceremonies of the old lawe. Such decrees as the Apostles and clergye made at Ierusal. with∣out anye counsell of the laitie. Saint Paule and other of the Apostles taught all Countries and Nations to obey and obserue: and sith the Apo∣stles time the clergye hais euer decreed matters of religion and fayth. Nor it can not be proued that euer the laite in anye countrie or Nation a∣fore the last parliament did presume to set forth a religion, against the whole consent of the clergye. Therefore this manner of ministration of sacra∣mentes, nowe vsed beinge against the consent and determinacyon of Christes Church which ought
to be ruled and gouerned by Byshops, it must ne∣desAct. 20. be schismaticall, and they that vse this maner of ministration muste nedes be in schisme. The blessed martir Saint Ciprian does declare what daunger they doe stand in that do vse this maner of ministration against the order of christes chur∣che, sayinge these wordes. They be ennemies of the altar, and rebelles against the sacrifice of christ contemninge the Bishoppes and forsakinge the Priestes of God: they are bolde to sette vp an o∣ther Alter with vnlawfull voyces, to make an o∣ther maner of prayer, to prophane with false sacri∣fices the veritie of the blessed sacrament of the Al∣ter: nor they wyll not knowe theym that fare a∣bout to doe againste the ordinance of God. For their bold rashnes by the punishment of god they shalbe punyshed as he punished Chore Dathan and Abiron which woulde offer vp Sacrifice a∣gainste the consente of Moyses and Aaron: some were swalowed vp of the earth, and the rest brent with fire to the terrible example of all others. Hi∣therto be Saint Cyprians wordes. Also almightye God by his holye PropheteMala. 1. Malachi, does crye oute vpon suche Priestes as minister against the ordinaunce of Christes chur∣che sayinge, they dispise his name in offeringe vp poluted bread. The Prophet Osee does call the sacrifyce ofOsee. 9. Ezech. 22. suche Priestes breade of mourninge, and all that eate thereof shalbe defiled sayes the Prophet. Almightye God does complaine by his Prophet Ezechiel sayinge: the Priestes haue condemned my lawe, and haue polluted my Sanctua∣rye: woe bee vnto you, that goo from the
truth sayes our lorde by Esai. Our lord sayes byac. 2. his Prophete except suche Priestes will amende quicklye and geue glorye to his name, they shall be brought into great necessitye and pouerty and he wyll curse their blessinges: and bicause they haue made voyde the pact of Leui, they shall be in contempt in all people. The. v. aunswere. UUhat if this order of ministringe and commen prayer was not a∣greed on by the vniuersall chur∣che in generall councell? Is it not good therefore? Than is neyther their latin Portuis, nor Missall and masse booke, good, for the generall churche neuer a∣lowed them, as I declared afore. It is free for all countries to differ in out∣warde order of prayer and ceremonies, so that they agree in substaunce of doc∣trine with the scripture. But the laite he sais hais nothinge ado with spiritu∣all matters and religion, and alledges Thactes of Apostles, how wil he proue that none of the elders there were of theAct. 1. laite, nor none of the multitude in the choisinge of the Deacons vnto it be wel proued, it maye well be doubted on. As in other things so in this he shewes him self how learned he is whan the lawe of God was neglect in the dayes of Saul, Dauid commyng to be king, and moued
with loue of religion, cals all the nobi∣lity and worshippe of the Realme toge∣ther thirty thousande, and also the leui∣tes1. Chro . 2▪ king. . and Priestes to knowe their mindes whither they woulde bringe home the arke of God, and restore the religion de∣caied or no? and they aunswered al, yea, what a great parliament was this, and full of the laite to determine for recey∣uynge of religion. Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Iosias, good kinges sent their visi∣ters2. Chroni 30. 34. 17. abroade throughe the Realme ioy∣ninge in commission from the king, no∣ble menne of the laite to go in visitaci∣on with the Leuites. Legenda sanctorū telles howe king Dswi cald a synode atin VV∣frido. Whithy, for takinge awaye that diuer∣sitye of kepinge Easter which was here in the Realme, whan some kepte it in the ful mone, what daye of the weke so euer it fell on, other onely on the sonday folowinge: Wherein appeares thauto∣ritye that the king iustly clames to him selfe in religion euen in that blinde age whan he cals the learned men together to dispute on it, heares what they can saye, and concludes so the matter him∣selfe that all other didde folowe his sen∣tence. Ioan Gerson and Panormitanus as I alleged afore, no new protestantes but auncient catholicks, and both being present in the last counsels at Constance
and Basil, said they woulde rather be∣leue a pore simple learned lay man that bringes and alleges the holy scripture, than all the whole counsell hauinge no scripture for theym. Gods trueth is not bound to miters, Byshops and Priestes alone, but lay menne may haue, and oft haue better the true vnderstandinge of it, than those that looke highest in the clergye: and therfore they are to be bele∣ued and hearde aswell as the Priestes. Did not king Dauid no Priest set in or∣der,hro. 23. the leuites howe they shoulde resort in course to serue in ye tabernacle, made the Psalmes: appointed theym, howe, where and whan they shoulde be songe? Ezechias and Iosias pulled downe the brasen serpent and other Images. Did not Prescilia and Aquila teache ApolloAct. 18. the misteries of the scripture? By these I trust it appeares that lay menne may doe some thing in religion. If these may not serue, looke the statutes of Queene Marie how she takes away one religion and bringes in an other: and there is no more done now: howe blynde be they in their owne causes, and partiall to them selfes. But it was neuer hard of he sais that the laite in any countrie presumed to set forth a religion agaynste the hole consent of the clergye afore the last par∣liament.
O proude bragge, was all the clergy of the realme conteyned in a few horned popyshe Byshoppes. Was there no Clergye in the vniuersitie nor other partes of the Realme beside those fewe Byshops, did not manye in the vniuer∣sitye and abrode in the Realme vse thys seruyce openlye and commenly in their churches afore it was receyued or enac∣ted by parliament? Bicause the rulers, the Scribes and all the Priestes. Act. iiii▪ forbade Thappostles in their Parlia∣ment and counsel that they shoulde not preache Christ anye more, were not the Apostles therfore of the clergye, or was not their doctrine good, because it was condēned in that wicked counsell. Was there not a disputacion for religion ap∣pointed by the Quenes maiestie where∣in youre Clergye was afraide to vtter their foolyshnes in defendinge their su∣persticion, least they hadde taken more shame in aunsweringe than they did in holdinge their peace, whiche well they coulde not. I thinke the vniuersities with so manye places of the Realme re∣cayuing religion, and these other dispu∣tinge for it, maye be counted to be some part of the Clergy of the Realme, and so it was not receyued wythout consent of the Clergye. But these were not of the Parlyamente: What than? Is re∣ligion
to be determined no where but in parliament? he is wonte to saye, and did afore. In vniuersities and coun∣sels. To make a religion as he termes it, no manne hais autoritye (for that be∣longes to God alone) but to restore pure religion which hais bene defaced by su∣persticion, Princes in their Countries ought to doe, thoughe their prelates be against it. Did not king Ioas cōmaund the Priestes to restore the Temple, and first ordeyned the poores mans chist in the Churche? Did not Nabuchodo. and Darius make proclamation through al their countries without and against the consent of their priestes that all people shoulde worship Daniels God? though there was not a perfect order than sette forth by theym to doe it in, yet it was much for heathen Princes to do so, and it teaches christen Princes, howe to doe in the like case. But as Ioas, Iosaphat Ezechias, and Iosias, dyd not make a newe religion, but restore that whiche afore was defaced, and hadde long lien buried: so oure Parliament did not set forth a newe religion, but restore that which was godly, begonne vnder good kinge Edw. confirmed by the Parlya∣ment and the clergy than, but sodenlye by violens troden vnder fete, by bloudy papistes a littell after, yet all this satis∣fies
not them, for nothinge can be con∣cluded as a lawe by Parliament saye they without consent of the clergy there present, but this hauinge not their con∣sent, can not be counted a lawe as they thinke▪ I had rather leaue this to be an∣swered by the lawers than otherwise, bicause it is a mere temporall case to dispute on, and concernes theyr professi∣on, yet that the worlde maye see that some thing may be said in it, we graunt him not this to be true that no lawe at all can be made without consent of the byshops. Loke your olde statutes of par∣liment whan byshoppes were highest, afore Edward. iii. and ye shall read that they passed by the consent of the Lordes temporall and commens without anye mention of the Lordes spirituall: which statutes many of them stand in strength at this day. Than it may wel be gathe∣red, that the consent of the clergy was not alwayes so necessary as they thinke it. If it be so strong a reason as he thin∣kes it to be, to haue consent of the Bys∣shoppes, I will proue by the same rea∣son that it is as necessarye to haue Ab∣bots of the Parliament: For they were present of olde time, and their consent was required as well as the Bishops, and but of late yeares they were put of the parliament, and it is not longe sins
the conuocation house was seperat from the parliament to. The lawers, Iudges and Iustices put in practise, and execute these lawes: therfore their doinges may be a sufficient reason to lead the vnlear∣ned what opinion they haue of these sta¦tutes for religion except Iustice Rascal first executing them, and after running awaye, may condemne the rest, whiche I trust he may not. I thinke they wold not execute theym, except they had the strength and nature of lawes: If they doe contrarye to their knowledge and opinion, they canne not be able to aun∣swere their doinges. But I thinke no wyse menne are of this oppinion: onely these corner crepers that dare not shew their face, and woulde deceyue the peo∣ple, go about thus to deface al good and godly order that displeases them. In the dayes of blessed kinge Edw. they hadde the like fond opinion: that a king could not make lawes in his minoritie vnto he come to full age: But this and that was onely to hynder relygion, and to make the people disobeye their Prince: Yet God hais and I trust wil confound all such wicked deuises. Ciprians wor∣des are not trulye alledged, and if they were, what doe they make against vs? Howe could Ciprian write against our order whiche he neuer knewe, beinge
founde of so late yeres as they say? And he does not meane them that differed in outward order of prayer, but that swar∣ued from the substance & veritye taught in the scriptures. In ceremonies he him selfe differd from other countries, and euery countrye almost from others, as I declared afore: and the Byshops whi∣che he speakes of, are as like our popish Prelates as Will Fletcher, and the swete rode. The Prophetes words may all be tourned against him and his, so wiselye he applyes them. whether be they in schisme that minister no sacrameut but onely in stede of diuine seruyce read chapters and Psalmes. &c. afore the people? TO read afore the people in stede of diuine6 seruyce, Psalmes and Chapters or other such like beinge not appointed by the vni∣uersall consent of the Church of God, but against the decrees of the churche must nedes be schismaticall and they in schisme that doe it. ForLeui. 10. as the. ii. sonnes of Aaron were striken with so∣daine death, because they offered vppe straunge fire which was not appointed to theym by Moi∣ses and Aaron: euen so doe they offende that will in stede of Mattins and Euensong and other di∣uyne seruice appointed by the Church, read psal∣mes and Chapters and such like, not apointed by the Catholycke Byshops, lawfully consecrated. For our sauiour sayes in the Gospell: he that willMath. 19. not heare and obey the church, that is to saye the
Byshoppes take him as an infidel. And Saint Clement does saye in an Epistle that he writes to S. Iames: by the iudgement of God, they shal suffer euerlasting torment in the fire of hil, that neglect the decrees of the Chur∣che. Therefore the holye Martir Saint Cipri∣an does saye: he that hais not den̄ied his handes wyth these wycked sacramentes, & hais polluted his conscience otherwise, let him not comfort him selfe that he nedes to do no penaunce: for he hais broken hys professyon and canonicall obedience that he made to the Byshops when he was made Priest. Also this decree was made in the canons of the Apostles. Si quis cercus aut laicus syna∣gogam Iudoum au conuenticulum heetico∣rum ingressus fuerit vt preces cum illis coungat deponatur, that is: If anye of the clergy or laite shall enter into the synagoge of the Iewes, or the companye of the heretickes to saye prayers with him let him be deposed. The. vi. aunswere. THe cuckoe hais but one song, and that is vnpleasant: no more hais this cokewolde maker, but one foolyshe false principle to grounde his sayinges on: that is the Romishe Chur∣che. I sayd afore (and no man is able to improue it) that the vniuersall Churche neuer made any one order of seruice to be vsed through the hole worlde, but e∣uery country hais and may haue diuers without affending, so they agree in one
substaunce of true doctrine. He knowes no church but Ro. and yet o. neuer de∣creed anye one generall order for the hole worlde: nor the hole worlde neuer obeyed nor receyued anye. The Popes Portuis & Missall hais bene oft chaun∣ged, as I proued afore: and euery coun∣trie hais their diuers order of seruice. Aarons sonnes did plainly against gods expresse commaundement, and therefore were iustly plaged: Ours do not so, and therfore they be not in like case, but vn∣deseruedly blamed. Clementes wordes and Ciprians whan they are proued to be truly alledged, touch not vs, but su∣che as he is, for they knew no such prie∣stes nor church as he meanes, nor anye such were many yeares after. The pa∣pistes differ verye litle from Iewes, for both of them set their hole religiō in ce∣remonies and olde customes: We sticke stifly to the word of God only, and bilde not on such vain foundations. Therfore he bringes that canon against himselfe, and his sort, beinge as supersticious as the Iewes, and blynded obstinatlye in errours as heretickes. Whether is it lawefull for Priestes that saye the Communyon also to celebrate masse?
THe holye Martir Saint Ciprian sayes: It is not leafull by and by afore penanceCiprianus de lap. done, to consecrate or touch with his wic∣ked handes the body of oure Lorde, and with his polluted mouth to receyue the bloud of oure orde, but first let him doe penaunce. Does thou thinke says Saint Cyprian that our Lorde wilbe so sodenly mitigated whom thou hais refu∣sed, & hais more esteamed thy worldly liuing then him? Saint Cyprian says, the blynd loue of their patrimonye and wordly goods hais deceyued ma∣ny, and bound them as it were in stockes and fet∣ters, that they can not folow christ. A great num∣ber for feare of woordes of suche as be not good, haue refused their faith, not cast downe by any vi∣olence of persecutiō, but by a voluntary lapse haue cast downe their selues, although they haue per∣ceyued the Byshops and a greate number of the clergie not to be afrayed to lose all their lyuinges, not fearing losse of goods, or imprisonment, or ba∣nyshment from their fryendes: yea all readye to suffer death in this case. Our Sauiour in the gos∣pell sais: No manne can serue ii. maisters: that is to say the Communion decreed and appointed by the laite parliement against the consent of the cler∣gye in christes Churche, and also celebrate masse decreed and apointed by the clergye in sacrate sy∣nodes, representinge the whole estate of christes churche. S. Paule sais: ye can not be partakers both of the table of our lorde, and the table of the deuilles. S. Ciprian sayes: It is an horrible ab∣homidation to fare about to serue both Ball and christ: it is contimely and not religion, it is iniu∣ryeiprianus cecundum and not deuotion, if thou communicate of the cup of christ with the deuils, hitherto be S. Cy∣prians wordes. S. Paule sais, we haue an altar whereof they may not eate that serue the Taber∣nacie. By these examples it is euident that the
Priestes may not minister the communion to one sort, and Masse to an other sorte. In tripartita Historia it appeares the catholyckes and the Ar∣rians did not communicate one with another. Whether it be lawfull for Priestes to say Masse whiche saye no communion, but only read Psalmes and chapters to the people in seade of seruyce? SAint Ciprian sais: the verity is not to beCiprianus de lap. dissembled: it is nought to halte vppon both the partes. If God be the Lorde, folow him: If Ball, folowe him. Euen so, it mattens and Euensonge be the ordinaunces of christes church vse theym: if the Psalmes and chapters, vse them. It is no lesse offence to alowe a schisme with assent, than to offer to idolles. S. Austin sais such as be in schisme: that is to say inAugust ci∣uitate dei  21. ca. 25. sacraments or diuine seruice seperated from the v∣nity of christs mistical body, & not in oining toge∣ther of christian mēbers, not in the band of peace, which is expressed in the sacrament of the altar, they may consecrate & receiue this sacrament, but it is not profitable to thē, but very hurtful, wher∣by they shalbe iudged more greuously of almighty god. S. Paul says: Not only they that do euil be worthye death, but also they that consent to the doers. The holy ghost does cry by his Prophete Esay saying: get you hence, go forth, beware that you touch no vncleane thing. The scripture sais: thou shalte loue the lorde god with all thy heart, with all thy strength. &c. god loues no halfe ser∣uice. As for example it is writen in the booke of kings, that kinge Dauid sent his seruauntes to comfort Anon for the death of his father, all be it Kynge Anon tooke theym as espies, and cau∣sed the haulfe of their beardes to bee shauen,
and cut their clothes by their buttockes, and so sent them backe agayne to Kynge Dauid. But whan Kynge Dauid heard of thys, he would not suffer them to come in his sight at Ierusalem, but commaunded them to tarie at Hierico vntil their beardes were growen out againe: euen so suche Priestes as hais gone out of Christes Church, and entangled them selues with any part of this religion against the decrees of the Churche, are not worthye in ministracion of sacramentes, to come in the presence of the faithfull that continue still in Christes Churche vntil they be reconcy∣led, and haue done penaunce for their lapse into schisine. Whether is thys to bee called a wicked, time that suche heresye and schisme does reigne. 9 NO rather it is a blessed tyme for now godCiprian de lap. tryes his family as Saint Cyprian sais: for the longe rest and peace whiche hayes bene in Christes churche afore time, cau∣sed the clergye to be almost on sleape: by reason wherof, deuout religion was not in a great num∣ber of Priestes, in workes was small mercye, no discipline in manners. Saint Paule sais: It is mete that there be herefye, that the good maye be tried: so that suche as haue grace to stande this troublous tyme, and be not spotted with schisme shalbe kyndred more feruent in the loue and feare of God: and such as be fallen in lapse, if they will seke to come backe againe to oure mother holye Churche with penaunce, that is with prayer, sa∣tisfaction, and teares, she shittes her bosome from none that will so come, for God is nere at hande to all that call on him in vertue, and will reioyse more in theym, then in other. But some are not
be gathered out of schisme says Cyprian: so that suche as be whole and stedfast be thereby woun∣ded, nor he is not a profitable and wise pastor that gathereth the shepe that be diseased, scabbed, or sicke into the whole flocke, afore they be whole, least they infect al the flocke. Nor the Byshoppe muste not haue a respect to the greatnesse of the number, for better it is to haue one good Priest that feareth God, than a thousande that be euill, this sayes S. Ciprian. Answere to the vii. viii. and ix. UUhat a foole is he that goes a∣bout to proue by so manye balde reasons, (cloutinge such patched pieces together) that whiche is alreadye graunted him: we confesse that no man ought to say masse at al, much lesse they that say the communion should become masse mungers, his autorities are fond∣lye brought to proue his pourpose, and maye be turned against himselfe all, for there is no sort of men that vse double dissemblynge so much as the Popes do: other thinges that I proued afore I wil not repeat againe nowe, but I wishe or god that as Dauid would not suffer his men that were shauen so to come in his sig ht, so al christiā princes wold banysh the Popes shauelinges: for so the reason holdes in like of both. The time for tri∣al of gods people we do not greatly mis∣like:
onely this greues vs that so manye wythstande the manifest trueth, whiche their conscience acknowledges to bee true, and yet for feare of a chaunge or flattery of the worlde, they be colde and will not or bare not openlye professe it: and also that another sort of turnetipet∣es, for lacke of disciplyne occupie the place of pastours, seruinge rather to fill their bely, than for loue, conscience, or dutie, where good order would that ey∣ther such should be displaced, or elles do great and worthye open penaunce so∣lemnely afore they ministred, the alled∣ginge of these sundrye autorityes are vntrue and foolyshe. Whether it is lawfull for the laite to re∣ceyue the communion as is now vsed? 10 IN receyuinge the Communion as now v∣led, you break your profession made in bap∣tisme, and fall into schisme seperating youre selues from god and hys Church, refusinge the Byshoppes youre true pastours, so entringe into the malignaunt church of Sathan. S. Paul dyes commaunde vs to obey the Byshoppes, for they watche as to geue an accompt for oure sou∣lde. The Byshoppes be in prison readye to suffer death afore they willeyther minister or reseyue the communion like true pastours: they put them selues walled and a sure defence for the people. The catholicke church which we professed at our baptisme to beleue & obey, teacheth vs to receiue Christes bodye consecrato at inasse with prayers
inuocations, and benediction, with the signe of the holy crosse and not bare bread and wine without consecration and benediction, as is vsed in thys Communion, beinge against the decrees and or∣dinaunce of Christes catholycke church. Almigh∣tyeNum. 16. God does commaunde vs to seperate our sel∣ues from such as take in hand a ministration of sa craments against the ordinance of Christs chur∣che, & that ye touch nothing pertaining to them, lest ye be lapped in their sin. The Prophete O seeCiprian Epist. boes say, that al that receiue that bread of mour∣ninge ouer the whiche, wordes of blasphemye be spoken at the table shalbe defiled. Therfore S. Ciprian says foramuch as we can exhort you by our letters that you come not to the cursed Com∣munion with Priestes that be maculat: for they be not worthye death that doe euill, but all that consent to the doinge of ouill. Nor let not the peo∣ple perswade with theym selues that they can be free wythout spot of sinne, communicating wyth a Priest in sinne. No man can be well excused by ignoraunce: be he neue so grosse of witte he maye perceyue it is not that whiche we haue professed to beleue, but against it: and if it were for a world lye gaine, euery one woulde learne a longe mat∣ter and kepe it in memory. The. x. aunswere. IN receyuyng the communion now vsed the laite kepe their profession made in bapt. where they promised like good shepe to beleue the Catholick Church which heares the voyce of their shepeherd only & flees from straungers:
the Popishe churche and prelates haue deuised a facion of the Communion con trarye to Christes and his Apostles do∣inges: and therefore they be worthelye abhorred. Ye lie in sayinge that the ca∣tholicke Church teaches to receiue chri∣stes bodye consecrate at masse with the signe of the holy crosse, or that we geue nothing but bare bread and wine now. Proue where the Churche teaches so: I proued afore howe many diuerse sortes of ministringe there was of olde tyme, and all good: therefore this youre one onelye popishe waye, is not decreed by the vniuersall Churche, nor neuer was generally receyued throughout all the worlde. With what face can they saye, we haue no consecration, and geue no∣thinge but bare bread and wine) If they haue any in their masse, if the Euange∣listes haue anye consecration or paul, or if Thappostles, we haue it also. For if consecration stande in wordes, we haue all the words that their masse, the Gos∣pell, Saint Paul or Thapostles hadde. Read Matth. Mark. Luk. and the. xi. to the Corinth, what is written of the lor∣des supper, and see whether oure Com∣munion wante anye one worde that is in anye of them. Than if we haue al (as we haue in dede) why is there no con∣secration with vs. Gregory sayes Tha∣postles
consecrated only with the lordesLib. 7. Ep▪ 63. Lib. 4. s tent distin 8 prayer: and that we vse as wel as they: Ioan Duns sayes, the wordes of conse∣cratinge the bread, be these. This is my bodye: and those wordes we haue to. Further he sais: Neyther Christ nor the Church hais defined which be the wor∣des of consecrating the cuppe: and ther∣fore he will not determine them. What are we now worse than their owne doc∣tours, and why do ye lie in sayinge the Church hais defined it? Duns knewe it not in his time, nor the Church, where is one so madde except Priestes, to saye that consecration standes in crossinge, or that Benedicete is to make a crosse? proue it if ye can, or els hold youre tong for shame. Deceiue not the people. Al ye workes of the lorde, prayse ye the lord, sais the psal. Is blessing there to make a crosse, or in anye other place ye canne finde? I haue sene and heard many foo∣lysh vnlearned papistes, but a more asse than this, I haue not, he sais the people which communicate with a Priest that is in sin, cannot be free from sin. If the Priest be a drunkarde, art thou a dron∣kard to in communicatynge with him? if he be a hore hunter, art thou one to? I trust ye can iudge how false and foolish this is. Saint Paule says: he that eates and drinkes vnworthely, eates & drin∣kes
his own damnation, he sais not thy damnation, or anye other mans but his owne. Chrysost notes wel that he says: sibijpsi non tibi. He eates it and drinkes it damnation to himselfe, and not to thee. God forbid ye euilnes of the priest should defile theym that receiue with him: for what Priest is so cleane that he hais no sinne in him? If the sinne of the Priest shoulde defile the receiuer, who woulde euer receyue at any priestes handes, se∣ynge all be sinners? it is a generall rule and true in their owne bookes. The vnworthines of the Priest hurtes not the goodnes of the sacrament. God for∣bid that the euilnes of manne shoulde hurt or defile Gods holy ordinaunce, or that the wickednes of the Priests shuld be imputed to them that receiue the sa∣crament at their hand. The father shal not beare the sinne of the sonne, nor the sonne of the father, but the soule that sinnes shall die it selfe as the Prophet sais. Muche lesse shall the sinne of the Priest condemne the people, but euerye one shall aunswere for himselfe. Whether the people compelled wyth fearII for losse of worldlye goods or temporall punishement, maye receyue the Com∣munion
as breade and wine, not consen∣tinge to it in the hart? SAint Paule sais, it is requisite to oureRoma. 1▪ Math. 1▪ saluation, with oure mouthes to confesse the trueth: also our Sauiour Christ sais▪ he that denies hym afore men, he will de∣nye him afore his father in heauen. And to kneie downe to receyue that cursed and polluted bread, ye commit Idolatrye: nor it is not lawfull to dis∣semble herein as we haue example. Eleazarus whiche rather than he woulde dissemble to eate swynes fleshe forbidden by the law, he was con∣tent to suffer a verye cruell death. Also it is read in tripartita historia of a good woman one Olim∣pyas that rather then she would receiue the com∣munion was content to haue her pappes writhen of, or anie other punishment sayinge: lay vpon me more punishment, for it is not lawefull for me to do that which the good Priestes refuse to do. E∣uen so at this time the Byshops and good priests refuse to medle wyth the Communion: therfore it is euident, it is not lawfull for anye of the laite to receyue it for any cause. Also when Constantius the Emperour persecuted the church of god, such as woulde not receyue the communion wyth the Aarians, the byshoppe Macidonius put theim in prison, and caused the communion to be brought vnto theym in prison, and opened their mouthes wyth stickes and hote yrons. Yet for no punish∣ment the good catholick people would in any wise receyue with y• Arrians: much lesse ought we to receiue y• comunion now vsed for any punishment
For if we receyue it against our conscience, we be traitours to god: & dissemblers with the Queene, as Ustazadis did saye to the kinge of Persis, la∣menting that he did liue, for he confessed (after the Archbishoppe Symeon had rebuked him) that he was worthy to haue a double death, for he was a traytour to God in forsaking his profession in re∣ligion, & a dissembler with the kinge, for to please the kinge, and to auoide punishment he had done against his consciens, but vtterlye he did protest that he woulde neuer dissemble againe, offeringe his whole bodye to make a mendes: and in con∣clusion had his heade stricken of. woulde to GodMath. 10. all that by dissimulation be traitours aud dissem∣blers with the Queene against their conscience, woulde folowe the example of Ustazadis in ear∣nest repentaunce. Oure sauiour commaundes vs not to feare theym that can but onelye kill the bo∣dye, but feare him that can kill the body, and after cast the soule into the fire of hell. How shoulde the people do, that can not haue the sacrament ministred to theym12 accordinge to the ordinaunce of Chrystes Church? IN no wise they ought to receiue the Com∣munion, but to commend their mindes and good willes to God, with deuout prayer, firmely continuinge in that faith that they were christened in: whych syth the Apostles time hais euer bene taught by blessed fathers in Chri∣stes catholick churche. And so being in will to re∣ceiue ye blessed sacrament if he were in place where it is ministred according to the ordinance of chri∣stes church, God wil accept your will, & good in∣tent
as if you did receiue it corporally: And by that wil and intent ye be partakers of the sacramentes & prayers of the vniuersall church of Christ, in all christian countries and nations as well as if you were present bodilye. But if you receyue this Communion, ye seperate and deuide your selues, from the sacramentes and prayers of all the vni∣uersall church of christ, and so wander in the way of perdicion. The aunswere to the .xi. and xii. To receyue the Communion dis∣semblingly we graunt to be dam¦nable as well as he: and therfore we exhorte all men with an ear∣nest faith, and pure loue, sorowfull re∣pentance, and ful purpose of a new life, to resort vnto the lordes table deuoutly without all hipocritall dissimulation. God will confounde such blasphemers as open their filthy mouthes to rail a∣gainst his holy sacraments, as this wic∣ked Morian does here callynge it cursed breade. Eleazarus did well in obeyinge Goddes lawe: and Papistes be Goddes enemies in their doinges contrarye to Goddes lawe. The Arrians were here∣tickes and ennemies to the trueth, deni∣ynge Christ our lorde to be God equall wyth his father, and saying he was but a weake simple ruanne as we be. So the Papistes be, sayinge christes death
is not a sufficient sacrifice for the whole worlde, except their sacrifice be ioyned to. They do both erre in the chefe arti∣cle of our faith and saluation: and sure∣lye to communicate with such is to de∣ny our faith and saluation, therfore O∣lympias and other well abhorred them. He that hais not a right faith of Iesus Christe that instituted the Sacrament, he can not haue the true vse of the Sa∣cramentes, whiche Christ ordeyned. It is well that he wyshes all dyssem∣blynge Papistes whiche haue tourned with euerye worlde, to repent as Usta∣zadis did, & God graunt that they may: If they will not, if their rewarde were like his, they had no wronge. And thus as all dissemblinge Papistes receiuinge the communion against their conscien∣ces are worthely condemned: so surelye are al dissemblinge protesrauntes resor∣tinge to masse, sor feare of worldlye los∣ses. God graunt vs all vprightlye to walke, not feaning a conscience to oure selues of mannes deuise, but folowinge the rule of scripture without haltinge, what so euer the worlde saye of vs. If this Counsell that he geues for not re∣ceiuing the communion now vsed were turned and applied against their masse, it were wel and truly applied. We were neuer christened in anye faythe of the
masse, but in the name of the father and the sonne, and the holye ghoste, who in the holy scriptures condemne al sacrifi∣cing massers, and surely to communicat with massemungers is to forsake gods institution, and folowe the Pope, to for∣sake Christ the head of his churche, and ioyne himselfe to papistes, and become a member of his synagoge, robbinge Christ of his glorye, and prefarringe mannes dreames and doctrine deuised of late yeares by Popes (as was pro∣ued afore) afore the infallyble trueth of the Gospell which Iesus Christ him∣selfe brought from heauen, preached it, and commaunded vs all diligentlye to folowe it. To be partaker of prayers made in other Countryes is true that we maye, and to be wished of God that it were diligentlye vsed: but vnto he haue proued that we bee partakers of sacramentes, wise men will not beleue it. No man is christned one for another, nor receyues the Communion one for another. This doctrine comes from the Pope, and fedde his chaplains fat whan they taught, that it was sufficient to come and see the Pristes lift vp their sa∣crament, offer it for the deade and quicke, and eate all vp whan they haue done.
whether is not euery one aswel the prie∣stes3. as laite bounde to obey the Queene and her lawes? BOth Priestes and the laite be bounden to obey the Queene and her lawes, as farre as Goddes lawe will permit: but no manne ought to obey the Queene and her lawes against God and his lawes. For landes, goodes, and bodye, euerye one is bounde to obey the Queene and her lawes, and no man ought to disobey or resist her or her lawes: for God in the scripture commaundes. But for matters of faith and relygion pertaynyng to oure soule health, she hath nothinge adoe to medle: for Christe himselfe hath dearly bought our soules with his precious bloude shedinge, and committed them to the rule and gouernement of the Byshoppes, which wat∣che as to gyue an accompt for our soules. There∣fore the Scripture commaundes vs to obey the Byshoppes in matters of faith and religion per∣tayninge to our soules health, and the Queene in temporall causes concernynge landes and goods, and body. The. xiii. answere. FOr obeyinge the Queenes maie∣stie and her lawes or for disobey∣ing we do not greatly differ from him: but where he sais she hais nothing a doe with matters of faith and relygi∣on we vtterly denye it. For that is as much to say, as that she were not a chri∣stian Prince, no nor a Prince at all, for Princes are charged by God to main∣taine
true religion, and suppresse super∣sticion and Idolatry. This is the marke that they shote at: to be exempt from all correction of Princes, that they might do what they lust, bring in supersticion in stede of religion, and nourish the peo∣ple in bloude deuotion: rule all other, and be ruled of none, no not of God him selfe. So muche obedience the Turkes subiectes owe him, and yet denie him not autority in their religion. But this mater was more fully handled in the. v. aunswere. King Richard the. ii. proues wel in his Epistle to pope Boniface the ix. that temporall rulers haue oftē from the beginnige bridled and ruled the spi∣ritualtye, euen the Popes. Salomon sayes, he putte downe the Priest Abia∣ther, and set vp Sadoc. Otho Thempe∣rour deposed Pope Ioan. xii. Henry the Emperour put downe Gratianus. O∣tho deposed pope Benet the. i. The con∣trouersy betwix Symmachus and Lau∣rens who should be Pope was ended a∣fore Theodoricus kinge of Italy. Hen∣ry Themperor deposed. ii. striuing who shoulde be Pope, and set vp a. iii. called Clement the. ii. Frederick Themperor corrected. iiii. Popes. By these and ma∣nye suche like, he proues that Princes haue corrected and brought in order so
many Popes: therfore they haue lawful power so to do. And shal not our Quene haue power to see whether the clergye here within her Realme, do their duty, in teachinge true doctrine, pure mini∣stringe of the sacramentes, and an vp∣right godlye life? In dede this was the beginninge of the controuersye betwix Tho. Becket and kinge Henrye. ii. and these lyke good scholers of the same schole folowe the same waye. Certaine priestes were complayned on, for their leud liuing, whom the king would haue punished: But Becket withstode him, sayinge it belonged not to the kinge to handell such holy anointed spirituall men. Austin in his boke contr. liter. pe∣tiliaī. ii. in vi. and other sundry chapters proues that it belonges to Kynges, to haue care and charge for religion, bothe in maintaininge the good, and pullinge downe the euill. He alleages this of the ii. psal. Serue the lord in feare. &c. How shoulde kinges sais he, serue the lord in feare, but in forbiddinge and punishing those thinges that are done against the Lordes commaundement? he serues in one sort in asmuch as he is a man, and in another, in so muche as he is a king, he serues him as a manne in liuing tru∣lye, but as a kinge in makinge lawes, whiche commaund iust thinges and for∣bid
the contrary. So serued kinge Eze∣chias in descriyng the groues and tem∣ples of idolles: so serued Iosias, so the kinge of Niniue in compellynge the whole citie to pacifie the lord. Thus ser¦ued Nabucho. in forbiddinge by a fear∣full law that they should not blaspheme god. Kings serue the Lord in this point whan they doe those thynges to serue him which none can doe but kinges. &c. Thus far Austin. Constantine also the good Emperour commaunds the dona∣tistes to come to Ro. to heare the Bys∣shops iudgement: but afterward whan he had hard the matter debated, he iud∣ged the cause himselfe, and made a law against them as Austin writes Epist. ix viii. Thus Princes than callyng their clergye together, bicause fewe of theym haue sufficient learninge of themselues and hearing the matters of religion de∣bated, and the trueth tried, maye and ought by their law and roial power de∣fende that trueth, and punyshe the diso∣bedient who so euer they be. The Pro∣pheteIsai. 49. sayes that God made kinges and Queenes to be nurces to hys Churche. The Nurces duetye is to feede, guyde, and chearyshe the chylde: yea to correct, instruct, and reforme him wha he do∣es a faut. She must not be a drie nurce, but wyth the. ii. Pappes of the newe
Testament and olde feede her children: she must teache him to goe, whan he is fallen, take him vp agayne, and geue him suche holesome meat, that she maye and dare taste and trie it herselfe. God graunt Princes thus to be nurces, and not stepmothers, that Goddes children may serue their lord Godde maister and father quietlye vnder their winges. The conclusion. OUr Sauioure Christe whan they called him Samaritan a friende of Publycans and sinners a drun¦kard. &c. held his tunge, and made no aunswere: but whan they sayde he had a deuill, he saide: I haue no deuil. It is written also in vitis prū of Agathō whom certaine woulde trie whether he could pacientlie beare sclaunders, and cal∣led him proude aduoterer, a these and bereticke. Al other he let passe and said: I am a sinner but I am not an heretick They asked him why he aunswered to that rather than to the other, he said: he learned of Christe his maister to suffer lies, but not his doctrine to be touched: for heresy separates a manne from god. So amonge all sclaunderous tounges that goe about to deface gods truth by
raning on the ministers of it, many are borne of manye with gryefe of minde: but to be charged wyth false doctrine, no honest minde can beare, nor good man shoulde suffer. For as he teaches the good and holesome doctryns, so he should confounde the contrarye to hys power: and this was amonge other, a great cause why I (though not hurt by this his folish railing) tooke in hand to aunswere this blynde Papist, and by∣cause those learned fathers whome he woulde seme to touche, thought it vn∣worthy any aunswere. Whan I see this copye cast abroade by a malicious member of Antichryst, to wythdrawe Gods people from his truth, my spirie was stirred to the aunswerynge of the same: but manye whan they see howe foolyshe it was, laughed at it, and thought it to bee passed awaye wyth sylence, for that foolyshnesse of it selfe would confound it selfe to theym that hadde witte or learnynge. Yet that the simple ones for whose cause chief∣lye thys labour is taken, should not be deceyued and ouercomen wyth founde phantasyes of ydle braynes, and least Goddes ennemyes shoulde crake that none coulde or durste aunswere it: I thought good, bycause other that can doe better, woulde not, thus shortlye
to aunswere the chyefe pointes of Po∣perye, touched in thys hys vnlearned apologye. Thys is the politye of Pa∣pystes to sette oute a broker to vtter their ware, and catche the vnlearned, but the sutteller sort hold their toung, stande alofe to see howe thys forerun∣ner wil take place, and are thought by their sylence to be able to saye muche more, whan as they feare in dede least in beinge aunswered, they should take the foile, to the cleane ouerthrowinge of their cause. Thys proude Golyas hais craked and prouoked all Goddes people, as thoughe none durst medell wyth hym: but I truste poore Dauid hais wyped hys nose, and gyuen hym a falle wyth hys poore slyng and few stones. But I feare I lose my laboure: for as y• Prophet says. Can the blackeere. 1. man of Iude chaunge hys colour? No more can thys Morian learne to saye well. If the miserable state of the peo∣ple had not moued me, I woulde haue holden my tounge, and laughe at it as wyse menne doe, but that wyth the poore symple ones whom they deceyue in corners wyth such lyes as these, su∣che commen balde reasons as he hais broughte, shoulde not preuayle, I thought good for pity sake to say thus
much, to staye theym▪ whose eyes God shall open to see. My reasons and a∣torityes of pourpose are commenlye taken out of their owne Doctours and writers, and suche bookes, as are not counted protestauntes, nor made by a∣nye of this newe learninge. For the nonest I forbare to alledge the lear∣neder sort, least the vnlearned shoulde saye, they coulde no skyll on such boo∣kes, nor knewe not whether they were truelye broughte in: and seynge their owne Doctours and schole may∣sters haue geuen vs thys vauntage a∣gainst them, I feare not to trye wyth theym in writers of greater autoritye and auncientye. Thus muche I haue spoken for my parte: let the rest whom Godde hays geuen greater knowlege and vtteraunce vnto helpe, thus to stoppe the mouthes of Goddes enne∣myes, and I trust by the power of hys holye spiryte. Antichryst wyth hys members shall dayly decay, and God∣des gloryous trueth shall shyne to the coumfort of all hys elect, though their eyes bee not yet fullye opened to see, nor their heartes lyghtned to vnder∣stande it. Godde the father graunts for hys Sonne sake Iesus Chryste cru∣cifyed,
that we all maye be partakers of his spyryte of trueth, and hys wil∣full obstinate ennemies confoun∣ded, his poore lambes deliuered from the wolfes, and streng∣thened against thassaul∣tes of Satan, that at the length we may be glorified with hym for euer and euer. Amen. ¶ Beholde sayes the Lord of Hostes to thee: I wyll laye thy skyrtes on thy face, and open thy fylthynesse to the people, and thy shame to kyngedoines: and I wyll cast thy abhomyna∣tions vppon thee, and I wyll reuile thee, and make thee lyke dunge: and it shall come to passe that euerye one that sees thee, shall fall from thee. Naū. iii. ¶ Haue mercye on vs O Lorde, haue mer∣cye on vs, for we are vtterlye despysed. Oure soule is fylled wyth the mockynge of the ry∣che, and despyte of the proude. Psal. C. xxiii.
¶ Commen places en∣treated. The autoritie of Byshops. A. 8. S. Ia. Masse and others. B. 7. Englande receyued not the fayth from Ro. D. 3. None is vniuersall Byshop ouer al. E. i. Extreme vnction is no Sacrament. E. 7. Our Churche seruice. F. 7 Communion. Burials. Communion table. G. 6. Altars. H. 1. Confession. H. 8. Fasting. I. 2. Lent. I. 7. Mariage of Priestes. K. i. Orderinge of Mynisters. L. 5. Succession. N. 4. The people learne the Scriptures. O. 5. The Princes autoritie in religyon. Q. 2. R. 7
¶ Faultes in pryntynge. B 3 leafe, line 24. I meane not C 1 leafe, page. 2. line. 19. turned in∣to latin. D 1 leafe, page. 2. line. 26. as wel as their. D 3 leafe, pag. 6. line. 25. it cannot be E 1 leafe, line. 31. nere theym G 1 leafe, line. 23 Ausegisus G 3 leafe, line. 1. put out, mete page. 2. line. 17. put out, not H 2 leafe, line. 1. as Iehu page. 2. line. 20. by blind H  leafe, line. 16. some of Duns. H 8 leafe, line. 17. for Ioan Dominus alwayes read Ioan Duns. 25. Confession and bow. I 5 page, line. 12. so muche of page. 9. line. 11. let vs eate fleshe with them. K 2 leafe, line. 17. Epistle to the E∣phesians. K 7 leafe, page. 2. line. 1. that History placed 16. leaues after M 5 leafe, line. 9. that Linus was O 3 leafe, line. 17. 1382.
¶ Imprynted at London by Wyl∣lyam Seres dwellinge at the West end of Pau∣les, at the sygne of the Hedge∣bogge. ¶ The tenth of March. Anno. 1563.
