21695 99851645 16931
The supper of our Lord SET FOORTH ACCOR∣ding to the truth of the Gospell and Catholike faith. By Nicolas Saunder, Doctor of Diuinitie. with a confutation of such false doctrine as the Apologie of the Churche of England, M. Nowels chalenge, or M. Iuels Replie haue vttered, touching the reall presence of Christe in the Sacrament. MANHV? What is this? The figure. Exod. 16. This is the bread which our Lord hath geuen you to eate. The prophecie. Prouerb. 9. Come eate my bread, & drink yt wine which Ihaue mixed for you. The promise. Ioan. 6. The bread which I wil geue, is my flesh for the life of the world. The performance. Matt. 26. Luc. 22. He gaue, sayīg: take, eate, this is my body which is geuē for you. The doctrine of the Apostles. 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is ye cōmunicatīg of our Lords body. The belefe of the Church. Hilar. lib. 8. de Trinit. Both our Lord hath professed, & we beleue it to be flesh in dede. The custome of Heretiks. Tertul. de Resur. car. The contrarie part reiseth vp trouble by presence of figures. LOVANII. Anno domini 1566.
CVm Regiae Maiestatis priuilegio sub 20. msis Augusti anni 1565. permissum esset Nicolao Saundero Anglo sacrae Theo∣logiae Doctori, vt  in scriptum, The supper of our Lord set forth according to the truth of the Gospel &c. imprimere posset: posteaquàm prodiisset liber quidā a duersus Catholicā fidē (qum D. Nicolaus defendisset) anglicè conscriptus, quem etiam confu∣tandum sumpsit renouato Priuilegio concessum est eidem Nico∣lao, vt ei vnâ cum confutatione contrariae doctrinae, suum librum typis mandare ac impunè distrahere liceat. Datum Bruxellis 22. Decembris. Anno Christi 1565. S. de la Torre. Approbatio sex priorum librorum. AVthor ipse huius voluminis Nicolaus Saūder sacrae Theologiae Professor eius est apud nos fidei, vt sine aliquo metu tutò posset euulgari: estque praeterà à multis Anglici idiomatis & sacrae Theologiae peri∣tissimis perlectum, qui illud meritò plurimum cō∣mendarunt. Cunerus Petri, Pastor Sancti Petri Louan. 7. August. Anno. 1565.
TO THE BODY AND BLOOD OF ou Sauiour Iesus Christ vnder the foormes of bread and wyne all honour praisc and thanks be geuen for uer. IF he that mainteneth a right good cause, yet partly for feare of the deceits and suttiltie of his aduersaries, partly for mistrust of his own knowledge and memoric, dare not ap∣pere in iudgement without his aduocate or protour with : seing y• sending foorth of a booke into y• light of y• world is y• dan∣gering to haue it sūmoned to so manie courts, as it shalbe brought into howses, & y• appering before so manie iudges, as be readers thereof: what aduocat and proctour, yea rather what Doctor and Patrone am I constrayned to seek, who do not only set foorth mie book to be readen of whatsoeuer English man, but also write of suche a matter, as being of most weight, is most diligently examined in these our dayes? and wherein I am sure to find as wel the Lutherans as the Zuinglians, (though vtterly dissa∣greing betwene themselues) yet against me not only agreing to be seuere iudges in the reading, but also to be cruel aduersaries in their iudgement. Which seing it is so, let noman wonder, that I, not mistrusting anie whit the vniuersal cause of the Ca∣tholiks, but misdoubting mine own wit, and the shamelesse shifts of our aduersaries, haue chosen to dedicate this work to y• mysteri of thy glorious body and blood (Lord Iesu Christ,) to , those that now take vpon them to misiudge y• manifest & effectu∣all words of thy blessing and thanksgeuing, pronounced by tho in thy last supper, making a figuratiue speache of a proper: and, whereas thy true body and blood itself worthie of all honour, is
through thy godhead made really present, teaching not with∣standing for their parte, the substance of bread and wine still to re∣main, and therefore an idol to be falsely et vp and worshipped by the Catholiks: to th'intet, I saie, those false teachers maie either through thy grace be conuerted from thr misbelefe, (whereof I most humbly beseche the) or els if they wil stubbnly persist in their detestable opinion, maie euen presently be confounded with the maiestie of thy name whose glorie they oppgne. For what can be more dishonorable to thy goodnes, then if it maie be truly reported, that the wisedome of god did institute his chief Sacrament in such words, ye which either being true and not beleued, should brden our consciences with infidelitie, or being earnestly beleued, and yet not conceaed in proper speache, should bring vs into manifest danger of idolatrie? sith no faithfull man beleuing this to be thy body (as thou hast said it is) can abteineMat. 26. Psal. 98. from the singular worshipping of that singular fotestole of God. Now soeuer it be with other men, I adore thee my God and lord really present vnder the formes of bread and wine after couse∣cration dewly made. Beseeching thee of pardō for my synnes by the same propitiatorie sacrifice of thy body and blood, which be∣ing made once with bloodsheding vpon the crosse, causeth theHeb. 10. Malac. 1. fruits therof to be daily applied in that cleane and vnbloody sa∣crifice of the masse. To this great mysterie of thy real presence I dedicate these my paines, as to the most vndoubted fountain, cause, and supporter of them. In this faith I was baptized and made a member of thy mystical body, in the hope to mainteine this  mi parents and frinds did set me to schole, in the vehement loue and affection thereof I haue written this rude and simple work. And to whom should I refer the praise and thanks for it, but vnto the alone? Or of whom shuld I craue the
protection thereof, but of thee? seing thou only art a meet patrone for the defence of any booke, which only art alwaies present, wheresoeuer and whensoeuer it shalbe examined. To the honour therefore of thy body and blood I offer this poore mite of my sim∣ple vnderstanding (thy mercifull gift, whatsoeuer it be) trusting thou wilt not suffer, neither the truthe of thy gospel to be long vnrestored in the desolate Ile of pitifull England, nor me thy poore seruant through  or naughty liuing to perish euerlastinglie. AMEN.
The Contentes of the first Booke. 1. The preface to the Reader. 2. Notes concerning the translation of holy scri∣pture in this argument. 3. The state of the question. 4. What the supper of our lords is according to the belefe of the Catholiks. 5. What it is according to the doctrine of our aduersaries. 6. A speciall errour of Caluin, concerning the vvords of Christes supper, is confuted.
The preface to the Christian Reader. WHo so will auoyd the danger of pride, of schisme and of hearesie, he hath no greater helpe therevnto in thisProu. 3. world, then to mystrust his owne iudgement, and to followe the authoritie of greater wisdome. Whiche thing heAugust. de Bap∣tis. cōa Dona∣st lib 2. Cap. . 1. . 3. muste doe, not only by preferring the holie scriptures before the wrytinges of whatsoeuer men, but also by expoding the same, according to the greatest authoritie that may be founde in that kinde. The greatest authoritie among mē must nedes be in the whole Catholike Churche of Christe, the piller and establishment of truthe, whose consent in the interpretation of Gods worde, be∣cause wee can not knowe by the handwryting of euerie parti∣cular1. Cor. 8. member (for knowledge is not in all persons) we therefore muste not so muche seke after the bookes, as after the workes, and practise of all faythfull nations, to knowe by what meanes they expounded Christes Gospell. For as the holie Ghoste in∣structedHebr. 10. alwayes theyr hartes, wryting his lawes in them: so by theyr conformable deedes we lerne, what he inspired to theyr hartes. As therefore it is most necessarie to conferre one part of holy scripture with an other, for the right vnderstanding of both places: euen so it behoueth to ioyne with that conference, theAugust. adanua. Epist 118 Matt. 28. vse and custome of the people of God. To make this matter the playner by an example, the Apostles are wille to teache all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Now shallThe Ana∣baptistes. this precept be vnderstanded? For some thinke that teaching before baptisme is so necessarie, that no creature ought to be baptised, whiche is not first taught. Others thinke both ne∣cessarie,The Ca∣tholikes.
but yet teaching to belong firste to suche as are able to be taught, and baptizing firste to suche, as are able to be bap∣tized, and not yet readie to be taught. And because infautes may be baptized before they can be taught, they thynke that Christe meant, to haue teaching goe before baptisme in men of discretion, and baptisme before teaching in children, whose pa∣rentsThe pra∣ctise of the whole Churche  a good interpreta tion of scripture aske baptisme for them. Whiche later vnderstanding is proued to be more agreable to the meaning of Christe, not by the order of his wordes, but by the vse and consent of all nations, whiche are the spouse of Christe. For in euerie age and countrie of Christendome, children are brought to be baptized by theyr frindes: and the Bishops or Priestes of those countries haue al∣wayes baptized them. So that we haue two great and necessarie poyntes expoun∣ded, in the precept of baptisme, by the custome of the Churche. The one is, that children maie be christened before they are taught theyr beleefe: the other, that suche children oulie maie be Christened, whose parents or frindes aske baptisme for them. But if any Iew or Gentil doe liue among vs, who wil not haue his child Christened, the Apostles by that fame  of Christ, haue no authoritie to baptize suche a childe. Whiche thinge is proued, because the Church of God hath no suche custome.. Cor. 11 The same strength whiche the practise of Christian men is nowe sene to haue in baptisme, is also founde to be no lesse in other Sacraments. For likewise al faithful countries haue asked the Sacrament of consirmation for their baptized children, and all Bishops haue geuen it, oynting and confirming them in the name of the  with , thereby declaring, how the holy Ghoste is geuen to the late baptized by the impositionAct. 8. of handes of the Apostles.  all faithfull
adored the body and blood of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wine after consecration. They haue desyred that holy sacrifice to be made and offered for them, & all Priestes, Bishops, and Primates haue said masse, and allowed that deuotion of the layemen. Wherby it is proued that those wordes of Christ: This ys mie bodye, and: This ys my bloode, are to be taken properly,Matt. 26. and not figuratiuely, in so muche as the holy Ghost, by the vse of all the people of God, hath expounded the whole meanyge of Christe. Therfore whosoeuer teacheth a figuratiue vnderstanding of those words, he goethe syrst from the autoritie of the gospell, where yt ys  sayed: This is my body. Next he  from the  of the whole Churche, whiche so earnestly be∣leued these wordes, and theffecte of them, that she adored the bo∣dy of Christe present, vnder the forme of breade, and acknow∣ledged yt to be offered to God vnbloodely, for the obteyuinge of the sruites of Christes death. Thirdlie he must nedes  con∣cluded singular and prowd, who had rather leane to his owneThe  of a  must not be trusted. iudgement, or to the iudgement of a fewe lyke him self, then to trust either God, or his whole Churche. And wheras certayne men are wont to saye, that the holy Fa∣thers and faythfull people of the first six hundred yeres after Christ, did vnderstande the wordes of his supper otherwise: It is (Good Reader) to to palpable, and to muche assected a blindnesse not to ponder and wigh, howe vnsensibly that is spoken. All men of neuer so meane witte iudge thinges vncertayne by be  by . those that are most certayne, not contrariwise leauinge that whi∣che they euidently knowe, and measuringe yt by a rule cleane obscure or throwghly withowt the cōpasse of their reache. Christ in that dreadfull night wherin he was betrayed,  nowe1. Cor. 11  the mysterie of owr redemption, after breade taken and
blessing, , and gaue, and sayd, This ys my body. Hereof1. Scriptu∣. Matt. 26. Marci. 14 l. . 22. 1. Cor. 11. S. Mathew, S. Marke, S. Luke, and S.  beare wytnesse. Neither may auie man dowt therof, who loketh for saluation by . Agayne whosoeuer is of lawfull age, and hath but the vse o his eyes and eares, can tell that in the Catholike Churche all men2. The  of god.  the real body of Christ vnder the  of that bread, which was blessed by the Prieste. These two principals no man aliue may deny.  no man is able to deny that  three hundred and fiftie  paste it was decreed by 4. 70. Bishops in the great Councell of  kept at , that the body, and blood of Christ are trulie contayned vnder the3. Generall Councels  of bread and wine, the substance of bread and wine being changed into the body and blood of Christ by the power of God. The same thing is in effect tawght in the Councells kept after∣ward at , at Constance, at , at Trent. Fowrthly before those Councells,  was condemned by three4.  re∣. other Councells, and by the preachers and lerned men of that age, wherein he , and therfore he  the same , which now  mayntayned in England. No poynte of these , nor may be  denied. Wee haue then the wordes of the gospell plaine, the worship∣ping and adoration of the Christians plaine, the authoritie of di∣uers generall Councells exceding plaine. These all be thinges so knowen and certayne, that our aduersaries cannot say, they are not so, Albeyt they say, they should not be so. Well, they yet graunt we haue the wordes of the gospell, the vse of the Church these nyne hundred yeares, and the authoritie of generall Coun∣cels, of whom I  on the other side, what gospell, what Church, what Councels they haue.1. . First they can bring no gospell where yt is written. This is
figure of my bodie. Secundarily thei can bring no Church,2. No vse of  Church of God. where the bodie of Christ was not confessed, worshipped and . Thirdly they haue no generall , where it was euer said, that the wordes of Christ are , and worke not his bodie present. Thereunto they will straight take exception, affir∣ming3. No gene∣rall Coun . that all y• first six hūdred yeres cooke the wordes of Christes supper to be figuratiue, and nedes they must say so muche, for  they should saie nothyng at all. But what  we to that saying of theirs? Uerily we , that it is a mayn lye, an impudent assertion, a fond imagination, as the which hath no ground at all in theThe first 600. ye∣res  not for the . first six hundred yeres. Which thing although yt may be proued many wayes, yet in  it is most inuincibly declared by three . The former is, in so muche as diuers holy Fathers  vs most instantly to beleue the wordes wherin1. Christ said: This ys my body, and: This ys my bloode, although they seme to be agaynst naturall reason and sense. and yet no wise man wil requier vs to beleue figuratiue wordes. The second is,2. because the same Fathers teach expresly the adoration of that  and blood of Christe, which is in the holy mysteries, which  on the altar and table, which is taken into the handes mouthes, and bodies of Christian men. The third reason is,3. because the holie Fathers teach, that we are made naturally and corporally one flesh with the flesh of Christ, in the worthy recen∣uing of the blessed Sacrament of his supper. All these thinges shalbe declared, God willing, in their places. We haue there∣fore iust cause, not to graunt our aduersaries the first six hun∣dred yeres. And although we had not so iust cause to shewe the first six houdred to stand so playnlie for vs, yet how ys yt possible, that they or any man aliue can be sure of the opinion of that age?
The scriptures that should teache them, what thei owght to ∣ue, sounde an other waie▪ The practise of the Churche, which hath deriued to vs their custome and vse, doth informe vs of a contrary meaning. By what meanes then come oure aduersa∣ries to assure them selues of the first six hundred yeres? It is cle∣ely impossible that any man should haue any sufficient ground, whereby to know, that the first six hundred yeres were of the  or Sacramentarie iudgement. For the wrytinges of the Fathers (whiche only they pretend) cannot informe them of any suche their minde, for so muche as none of them all writeth so fauorably for them, that he hathe gone aboute once to proue, that the bodie of Christ is not vnder that which the Priest bles∣seth, or hath warned the people to beware of idolatrie, or ha∣th vsed suche words in that behalfe, as the Sacramentaries of oure tyme do vse. And yet suerlie a lyke fayth wolde hau browght foorthe a lyke doctrine. Now where they call the Sacrament a figure and holie si∣gne: that doth not withstand the reall presence any whit, but ra∣ther proueth it, to him, who considereth the signe, we speake of, not to be a signe made by men, whose tokens do signifie thThe sig∣nes of Christes  the signified . truth absent, but institued by Christ, who maketh reall truth in euerie Sacrament, vnder a holy signe therof. To be shorte, there is nothinge to be sene or readen in the auncient Fathers con∣cerninge the matter of the Sacrament, but the same hath bene alwayes acknowleged of the Catholikes for good and sound doctrine, euen continually all thies nine hundred yeres, when, if they had thought otherwise, they might withowt reprouffe of any man, before Berēgarius, or after his tyme, haue condemned what booke they lysted. But no Papist, were he neuer so muche addicted to the real presence of Christes body in the Sacrament, did find fault with any Catholike Father of the first six hundred
: Undowtedlie, because he neuer sawe worde in them aga∣inst his owne opinion. Or tell me, doth S. Thomas, doth So∣tus, doth Nicolaus de Lira, doth Dionysius Larthusianus ac∣cuse anie Father of the first six hundred yeres, as not thynkinge well of the Sacrament? No suerlie. And that is because they neue founde in them but the same docteine, which them selues beleued and tawght. And yet as sone as Berengarius began his newe doctrine, euerie lerned man founde fault with yt. Likewise with , with uinglins, and with Iohn Caluin. It is therfore euident, seinge no Catholike nother hathe bene before Luters time, nor is nowe offended with the olde Fathers doctrine concerninge the reall presence of Christes body, and yet euerie of them is offended with the Sacramentaries doctrine: that the Sacramentaries teache not, as the olde Fathers did, and agayne that the Sacramentaries cannot be suer, that their doc∣trine is found in the olde Fathers. For if yt were there to he found, why should not Catholikes find yt there as well as they: Or what one word can be brought sorthe of them so plainly de∣nyinge the reall presence of Christes body, vnder the forme of bread, as we are able to bringe forth certayne hundred places, wherin the said reall presence is earnestly affirmed? Admitte the Fathers doctrine were vncertayne, were dowtfull & obscure, yet cowld oure aduersaries neuer be sure therby, that the fyrst six hundred yeres were with them. Admitte some of them semed rather to fauoure theire side then owrs (whiche is vtterly false) yet the plaine word of God, the plaine generall Councelles, the faith of all nations by the space of nine hundred yeres owghtThe  mentaries are fam t  y• Fa∣thers of y• first 600▪ yeres  ye. to preuaile, before the probable and apparant sayenges of a fewe men. But nowe seinge the Fathers of the first six hundred yeres are so clerelie for vs, that oure aduersaries are forced to excuse the
expresse witnesses of S. , S. Chrysostome, S.  alleged for the reall presence of Christes bodie, as spoken by plaine hyperbole which (in them that professe to teach the Catho∣like faith) is no lesse to say, then yt these Fathers make rhetoricall lyes in wryting of the blessed ucharist, seing they are con∣strayned to deuie certaine workes of the verie most auncient, as of Dionysius Areopagita, of S. Ignatius, of S. Polycarpus, of Abdias, of S. Clement, of Anacletus, of  of , yea of S. Ambrose, and of suche like (because their sayings are to  agaynst them) seing all, that dispute now a dayes with the , presse them with nothing more customably then with the autoritie of the auncient Fathers. Now to saie they leae to the first six hundred yeres, when the holie scriptures, and auncient Fathers, generall Counceils, and  tradition maketh agaynst them, he that listeth to con∣syder how , how vilely, how impudently it is pretended, may in all other assertions mistrust them, as men for great syn∣nes geuen ouer vnto their owne lewd phantasie, withowt theyRoma. 1. repent and call agayne to the holie Ghost for more grace and better vnderstanding. M. Nowel in the preface prefixed before the reprouf of M.Nowell in his pre∣. Dormans prouf, semeth to haue small confidence in the first six hundred yeres, and therfore findeth fault with M. Iuell, because he gaue vs that most large scope of all Doctors of the Church, who haue wryten for the space of six hundred yeres after our Sa∣uior Christes being here in earth, and of al Councells kept in the said continuance of tyme: Whereas M. Nowel wolde haue had him tye vs streightly to the triall of the scriptures, the certaine and only iudges (sayeth M. Nowell) in controuersies of religion. Wherin he affirmeth, we can saye nothing at all. The holy scriptures, M. Nowell, are so certayne and vpryght
udges, that if they cowld speake, thei wold remoue out of theirThe Scri ptures wold ne∣uer abyd him that shld say: This is not my body. cortes all suche  tonges as saie, This ys not Chri∣stes bodie. This, I say, whiche is made at y• holy table of Christes supper. This▪ which after blessing and the wordes of consecra∣tion spoken, is broken and deliuered. This, which at the handes of the Priest is taken and eaten. If scriptures might be heard, should he leue one hower, that seing a thing so exaly taken and pointed vnto, and hearing the same with so manie circum∣stances (all tendinge to the makinge a new mysterie of the new testament) affirmed to be the body of Christ, whiche is geuenLuce. 22. for vs, yet wold neither care sor the word nor the dede, but stowtly, , that this whiche is sene and taken, is not by the wordes of Christe made his owne reall bodye? And yet haue we nothing at all to say in the holie scriptures? Some others graunt we haue somwhat to say in this que∣stion of the reall presence, but not in any other. Whome I beseche to suspend their iudgement, vntill they know what they saie. For not if they vnderstand not how scriptures belong to vs in other questiōs, we doe therfore lack scriptures. From the highestThe Ca∣tholiks lack no Scriptu∣res. question of the sacrifice of the masse, to the most abiect (in our aduersaries reputation) of indulgences and pardons, the Catho∣like Churche neuer lacked, nor shall at any tyme lack plentie of holy scriptures, as yt shall appere when particular occasion ser∣ueth. In the meane tyme because I am not able to bring foorth at once, what may be sayed owt of holy scriptures, for all the con∣ of our age, I haue begne first with the cheif of all, which is concerning the reall presence of Christes body and blood vnder the  of bread and wine. Beseching God I may haue grace and tyme, to bring in other questions other like1. scriptures. I haue examined y• wordes of Christes supper, I haue2.
noted the cicumstances of thinges done and sayd there: I ha. conferred the holy scriptures of one place, with them that in the same matter are written in other places, as well of the old as of the new testament: I haue ioyned the Fathers of the first six hun∣dred4. yeres, to shewe, they thought as the Catholikes nowe doe, whom they call Papistes. But what circumstāce, what confere∣ce of holie scripture can helpe owre aduersaries?Te  cānot confer scri ptures in this mat∣ter. Before they can ioyne one place of scripture with an other, they must haue some one clere and playne, by whiche the other, that is more darke and obsre, maye be interpreted and expoun∣ded. But what playne place can that be in the supper of Christe? For if the wordes and dedes, that make the supper, be obscure, if thy that sulfill the prophecies and promyses goinge before, be darke and figuratiue: where ys it possible to finde a prophecie, aIf the wordes of the supper be figura∣tiue, none other can be plaine. figure, a psalme, a promesse more eident, then the perfomance therof was? Doth not the death of Christ as fulfill, so make play∣ne and open all the lawe and prophetes? Euen so whatsoeuer is browght apperteininge to the purpose of Christes supper, muste nedes be more vncertayne and lesse euident, then the supper it self, which is the end and perfourmance, and therfore the openinge and interpretation of all the rest. Who so therfore maketh the wordes of Christes supper figuratiue or vncertaine, muche more he maketh al other places, that belonge to that argumēt, obscure and harde to be vnderstanded. What certentie then can theire belefe haue, who neither haue an euident faithe comminge from theire ancestoures to them, nor any manifest place of scripture, by which they maye iudge and trie other suche scriptures, as they bringe for theire figuratiue doctrine? As they imagine withowt any prouf at all, that they haue the faith of the first six hundred yeres: so I thynke they imagine a
gospell, where it is wtten, This is not my body: or, This is the figure of my bodie. But as with thine eyes thow maiest reade it distinctly wrytten in fower places of the th , This ys my body: so if thow be of any good yeres, thow  em∣ber the tyme, when noman professed the belese that they now doe prosesse. And farther, if god graunt the to leue but twentie yeres moe, thow shalt see manie a thowsand of their owne felowshippe beleue the cotrarie of that, whiche in many articles is now pro∣fessed by the  them selues. For heresie can not staye, vntill1. Tim. 3. yt come at the length to infidelitie. But, as I sayed, thow art sure of the gospell, where it is sayed: This ys my body, and sure of the Churche, where t both was, and is beleued, to be Christes body after cōsecration: so can they neuer be sure, where yt is wrytten, this is the figure of my body, nor yet can they be sure that euer yt was beleued in the first six hundred yers, to haue ene a figure, without the reall truth of Christes sbstance vnder the forme of bread. Tell me masters, I beseche yow, sith before youre ies the wordes of Christe lie sownding against your opinion, and in your knowledge and experiēce yow haue sene al Christian people profsse a  faith vnto yours, by what euidence, by what inuincible authoritie can yow proue, that the first six hundred ye∣res agreed with yow? Is yt wrytten in the gospell? It sayth1. the contrarie in these wordes, This ys my body. Is it come to2. your hands by tradition? All tradition maketh agaynst you, whereby we are tawght the body of Christ to be made by Christes wordes vnder the forme of bread. Did all nations and faithsull3. pople beare wytnes to your opinion? It is cleane contrarie. For yow can name no people where your opinion was professed befo∣re these fiftie yeres, albeit a fewe haue in corners now and then  yt, as now some or other alwayes  the blessed
Trinitie. Did generall Coucels teache yow, to thynke as yo4. dor? They are cleane on the other , as which professe an vn∣bloodyCon. Ni. Cō. Lat. sacrisice, and a  of Christ vpon the altar, and ? Doe the auucieut Fathers tell you, that them5.  beleued so? They tell you cleane contrary, as who forbyd you to  of Christes wordes, and bid vs adore his flesh in the mysteries. Where is then this faith of six hundred yeres proued: Admit you had a worde or two, that semed to fauoure your parte. Is that enough to buyld your consciences vpon, agaynst the playne scripture, vniuersall tradition, consent of nations, de∣ of generall Councels, and so vndouted witnesses, as are inEphes. 4. the acient Fathers? are you so slenderly buylt vpon Christ, that euerie blast of , inglius, or Caluins mouth is able to remoue you from the scriptures, tradition, Councels, Fathers, and  belefe of all Christendome? I speake not this (God is my witnesse) to vpbrayd you of your , but to warne you of the miserable state, that your  seses haue caried you to. I now requier not anie other thing of you, then that yow depelie ponder, and all par∣ set a side (calling for the grace of God) earnestly examine, what was the sirst motion that made you doute of ChristesTe rea∣ss that  our faith.  and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine. Was it not your senses? Did not your sensuall man saie, how can this white round cake be ye body of Christ? How can this bald shoren Priest make God? How can Christe sitting at the ryght hand of his Father, he also present in a thousand places at once? Tell not me, but tell your ghostly fathers, whether theis reasons chefely moed you not, to discredit this high mysterie? If those or suche like where the beginning of your departing from the Catho∣like aith, remember that God is almightie, that Christ is God, that he said: This is my body, doe and make this thing: and allLuce. 22.
those thoughtes of infidelitie are straight driuen away. But if now ye replie that there was in dede the beginning, but afterward you found more strong argumentes, I tell you, the argumentes also be daily the stronger, because your faith is day∣lie the weaker. But for so muche as I am not with euerie of you, face to face, where I maye shew the weakenes of your argu∣mentes, I haue answered in this booke such as I found in the Apologie of the Churche of England, beseching you most hartely to take my paynes in good worth. If any where I seme to charge my aduersaries with malice or any like faulte, take not that spoken to you, but to hym that is giltie of it. If my laboure lyke you in this argument, it shalbe redie to serue in anie other to my best habilitie. Fare well and pray for me, as I beseche God of his grace that I may pray especially for all them, that reade my booke. To th'entent it may offend none, but the desperate, helpe some that be not incurable, comfort others that desier comfort of God, to whom be all honour and glorie. Amen.
¶ Certeyne notes about the vse and translation of holy scripture to be remembred of hym that shall reade this booke. IN alleging the holy scriptures although I haue had al∣waies dew regard vnto the tonges, wherein they were first writen, yet I haue specially kept that texte, which hath bene a∣boue these thousand yeres generally receaued throughowt all the weast Churche, and therefore is expounded best, and best knowen to the Latyns. Concerninge the number of the Psal∣mes, I haue followed the seuentie interpretours, whom vniuer∣sally the whole Churche hath followed from the Apostles tyme, namely in the distinction of the Psalmes. Concerning the englyshe bible, I haue almost neuer vsed the wordes thereof, partely because I am not bounde therevnto, but specially because it almost neuer translateth any text well, where∣of any controuersie is in these our daies. And to omit for this present other falsified places to the number of a great many hun∣dreds, these that followe, are found not to be well translated in the onely matter of the Sacrament of Christes body and blood. Christ saieth: . Opera∣miniIoan. 6. cibum permanentem. The true Englishe were: worke the meate which tarieth. The translation appointed to be read in the Churches turneth (Operamini) labour for. Whereby theCertin places not weltrans∣lated. sense of the place is corrupted. We labour for that, which we seeke, and haue not, we worke that stuffe, which is present with vs, and must nedes be present, before we can worke it. I suppose there is a difference, whether a carpenter worke a piece of tymber, or labour for a piece of tymber. He that woorketh it, hath it pre∣sent, he that laboureth for it, seeketh it absent. Christ bad the Iewes not labour for a meate, which should be absent, when they came to work, but he bad them work the meate, which taryeth
to life euerlastinge, which the sonne of man will geue them. The sonne of man (which is Christ) will make the meate present, and the Iewes are willed to worke the sayed meate being first made present, and geuen to them. It is not therfore the commaundement of Christ, that they should labourfor it, as if it were to be sought out by their diligēce (for they should labour in vain, as neuer being able to find of them selues so preciouse a thing) But Christ meaneth that they shuld work, by faith and mouth, by soule and body, by soule in be∣leuing, by body in eating, that meate, which the sonne of man doth promise to geue them. That is the trew meaning of the word, Operamini, work ye: as the wordes that follow to the end of the Chapiter do plainly declare. But because the Sacramentaries do not beleue the meate thatWhy th Sacrain taries ha∣ue corru∣pted th text. tarieth (which is afterward shewed to be the flesh of Christ eaten in dede, whereby he tarieth in vs and we in him for euer) to be made really present, so that we maye work it by faith and body: therfore they haue changed working into labouring for, as thow∣gh in the supper of Christ we laboured for his body, and did dot rather work his body. Againe, Christ saith: 2. Ioan. 6. Qui manducat me & ipse viuet propter me. The trew English is, He that eateth me, he also shall liue for me, The Englishe Bible teadeth, He that eateth me, shall liue by the meanes of me. There is a similitude made in that place, that as Christ being sent of the Father liueth for the Father: so he that eateth Christ liueth for Christ. The Greek word is  in both places. It is construed with an accusatiue case in both places, it is latined by propter in both places. yet in the former place it is englished in the common Bible, for the Father: in the later, not (for me) as it owght, but by the meanes of me: Whereas Christ wold proue, that as him self
doth liue for his Father (with whom he is one nature and God∣head by eterna! generation) so we doe liue for him, with whom we are one flesh and manhod by eating him worthely. As therfor the Godhead of the Father is really present in the whole substance thereof with Christ: so is Chist really present with vs in his whole substance, when we eate him in the Sacrament, of which kind of eating he speaketh in that place by the waie of promise, as I haue proued vpon S. Ihon. What honsty can be here preten∣ded in one sentence to turne one word diersly, euen when Christ seth the self same word to shew therby the similitude of y• matter? Is propter Patrem, for the Father? and yet is propter me, not, for me, but, by the meanes of me? A man maie liue by his meanes that is abst, whom also he neuer saw. But he can not liue for him, who is not with him, yea so with him, that his whole life is mainteined through him. For here Christ meaneth, by liuing for me, such a kind of life as men haue by liuing for, and because of the meate which they . As therfore noman is able to liue through that meate which is absent, and as when the meat causeth vs to liue, it is truly and really in vs: euen so when Christ saith, He that eateth me, shall liue for me, he meaneth him self, to be really eaten of him who liueth through that he eateth Christ. This helpe toward the Catholike faith the Sacramentaries thought to make nothing, by saifying the holy scripture. Thirdly Christ saith: .. Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. The true English were. He that eateth this bread, shall liue for euer. The Bible doth English it, He that eateth of this bread. It is true to saie, he that earcth of this bread shall liue for euer, and it was saied before of Christ. But though it be true in his place, yet it is not the true sense of this place. For here Christ speaketh (by the waie of promise) of sacramental eating, and he is so eaten in the
Sacrament, that we both eate him, and of him. We eate him, be∣cause he is bodiy prsent vnder the foorm of bread. We eate of him, because we take vertue and increase of lie of him, & he yet tarieth whole. Of him we maie eate also, without the Sacrament, by be∣leuing in him, and keping his commaundments. But himself we properly eate only vnder the foorm of bread, of which eating Christ now spake. But because the Sacramentaries wold haue no difference be∣twen eating Christ, & eating of Christ, (as who beleue Christ re∣ally neuer to be eaten vnder the form of bread) therfore they haue corruped the text, putting, of this bread, where they shuld haue left out, of, and haue said: He y• eateth this bread. this bread, I say, which before Christ called his own lesh and his own self. He that eateth this bread shall liue for euer. Other smal faults in transla∣ting S. John I will not now stand about. Lett vs passe vnto the supper of Christ. S. athew writeth: . Cūaccepisset Iesus panē, et gratias egisset, fregit, et dedit discipulis, et ait. The true english is Iesus hauing taken bread, & geuē thanks (or blessed) brae, & gaue to the disciples and said. The common Bible readeth: Iesus tok bread, and when e had geuen thanks he brake it, & gaue it to the discples. The holy scripture saith not that Jeus brake (it) neither that he gaue (it) but that he brake and gaue. For Iesus toke in dede wheaten bread. but hauing  ad guen thanks, and saied the words of consecration, This is my body, he made fom of the  of bread the subsance of his body, because he said, This is my body, nd he is not wont to saie . Thi , which when Jess toke, was bread, is, after the words pronoced, the body of Christ, and consequently that which was taken is made his body, whis it is changed by the power of God in to his body
and therfore the substance of bread is no more present. For which cause the scripture saied not, fregit eum, & dedit eum, as the En∣glish Bible hath, he brake it, and gaue it, but he brake, and gaue, withowt, it, for he brake the forme of bread which remained, and he gaue his body which by his word he made. The words of S. Mathew do not all stand in order, as it shal∣be shewed hereafter: in so much as Christ said the words of conse∣cration, as it is more like, before he brake the Sacrament or gaue to his Disciples. But the Sacramentaries who wold the word of Christ (when he said: This is my body) to be voide, to be figuratiue, to be a word of promising and not of performing, do saie falsely that it is not in dede the body of Christ, but bread stil as it was before, & to main∣tein that heresie they corrupt the text, sayng: Jesus toke breadMatt. 26. Marc. 14 Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 and brake (it) and gaue (it) Again, in S. Mark (say they) he brake (it) and in S. Luke, he brake (it) last of all in S. Paule, he brake (it)  tymes putting the particle (it) which is neither in the Breke nor in the Latin ble. S. Luke and S. Paule after the consecration of the body ofLuc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 Christ, witnesse that Christ sayd: . Hoc facite. The trewest Englishe were, Make this thing▪ The sullest, do and make this thing. The common Bible readeth in S. Luke, This do.  S. Paule, This do ye. And that which is most abominable of all, in the second tome of yowr holies, in the homilie of the Sacra∣mentFol. 213. of Christes body, it is translated, Do ye thus. So that in two wordes thre faults be committed: the one, tha facere is here Englished, to doe, whereas it standeth not for that only, but also to make, which is y• cheefer meaning of y• twaine as I proue hereafter. And therfore either both significatiōs of doing and making, or the more principal which is, of making, owght to aue bē expressed. Moreouer, hoc, this thing, is turned (this) only
without adding therunto the name of thing, and that to thnd noman should think y• a substātial thing were wi to be made, but only that a qualitie were dd. For they wold haue the words of Christ, to meane: Doe as ,  so, do this. Wher∣as he meaneth, Make this thing, wh I haue m: This thing, I saye, wherof you heard me saye: This ys my body: as though he , make this my body. But the Sacramentaries, without all , haue corrupted y• gespell, because noman should think of  any thing, least by asking what thing it were, he should  that the body of Christ is commanded to be made. In so much that in those homi∣liesTom. 2. Fol. 213. where they pretend to teache the word of d, they report the command of Christ, saying: Do ye thus. a what  do ye thus.  bread and  it, and  it, and make no more a doe, but doe ye thus. O trusty go , O blasphemouse tongs. Did Christ say,  ye thue? He say: Doe and make this thing: Hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis datur, hoc sacite. This is my ody, which is geuen or you, do and make this thing. tt vs go forward. It  in S. Luke, and in S. Paule, .Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 In meam comme morationem. The true English were, for the remembrance of me, or to th'end I may be remembred. The common Bible turneth In the remembrance of me. A thing may be done best in the remembrance of a man, when the man is first remembred, and afterward the thing is done in the remembrance of him. But Christ meaneth not so, he meaneth to haue this thing (to witt) his body made to this effect, that his death may be re∣membred, and so his words do sound: Doe and me this thing for the remembrance of me, to bring men into the remembrance of me. For when my body is made by the Priest, and listed vp to be adored, and all the peple taught to bow doune to the body of
Christ, and to come with pure consciences to receaue it, then Christ is remembred by reason of his body made, and so the scrip∣ture is fulfilled which saith: Doe and make this thing for the re∣membrance of me. But the Sacramentaries wold haue nothing made in Chri∣stes supper. But they wold haue bread eaten, and wine druncken, which is not able to make Christ to be remembred so effectually, and with such contrition, confession and satisfaction, as he requi∣reth to be remēbred withall. For he seeketh not (as the Zuingliās imagine) a remembrance in words alone, but much more in dedes. The remembrance of him is the following of his Crosse and death by penance, by humility, by confessing our synnes to his ministers, and taking absolution of them: and all this kind of remembrance ariseth by the making of Christes body, whiles men are persuaded, they may not come to so preciouse a thing, without confoorming of them selues to the death of Christ. In translating S. Paule there are other faults not of so greate1. Cor. 10 weight, as these others, but yet which should haue bene more dili∣gently translated: as where the Greek readeth, . Cōmunicatio sanguinis Chri∣sti, cōmunicatio corporis. There the common Bible turneth: The partaking of y• blood of Christ, the partaking of y• body. Whereas it shuld be translated, the cōmunicating of the blood of Christ, and the communicating of the body. Communicating is more then partaking, albeit the old Latin text in the later place doth reade, participatio, partaking. But that excuseth not the Sacramenta∣ries, who pretend to correct it allwaies by the Greek. and now whereas the Greek readeth twise, , and the Latin once communicatio, the English agreing throughly with neither o both, turneth twise, partaking. The communicating of Christes body and blood is, when it
self and all thing that is in it, is made common. Partaking is, when part therof is taken. But because after his resurrection Christ can be no more diuided, the partaking of his blood is the communicating of it, not by the force of the meane, but by the de∣pendence of the thing. For as he that hath anie part of God, must nedes haue all God, because God is a nature whole euery where without any parts therof: so he that hath any peece of Christes body and blood, hath the whole body and blood, because it is un∣mortal and can no more die. Yet if it might be diuided, it might also bye, so that although partaking must in this argument  stand for communicating, yet the Sacramētaries haue shew∣ed their spite against S. Paule, in translating it after the worst maner they could. after S. Paul sath: we being many are one bread, be∣cause we all partake, , it should be Englished, of the one bread. For such strength hath y•  article, . & so∣time the common Bible turneth the Greek article into, that. But here it was not for the purpose of the Sacramentaries, that it should be meaned so. S. Paul meaneth one certain bread of lie wherof we partake, & to shew that, he said, , of the oneIoan. 6. bread (to witte) of the bread which hath no fellowes, of that bread who said: I am the bread of life, and the bread which I wil geue, is me flesh. If so manie faults be found without curiouse serching (which I haue not vsed) in so sinal rome, iudge (good Reader) in what case their soules be, who take the word of God at these mens handes, iudge whose Gospell they haue deliuered to the simple people in English. Uerily their own, and not the Gospell of Jesus Christ.
¶ The state of the question betwen the Lutherans, Zuinglians, , and Catholikes, concer∣ning the Sacrment of the altar. TO th'inthent thou maiest good Reader the better vnder∣stand, to what point and mark the whole disputation shalbe : I will briefly declare how diuersly the do∣ctrine of the blessed Sacrament of the altar hath be set forth in our dayes. From the beginning of y• Christian Churche vntill y• yere of our Lord 1517. all y• on the earth professed openly Christes CatholikeAll the Church  y•  pre∣sence of Christes body. faith, did beleue, as well in the Breke as in the Latin Church, the reall presence of Chrises body & blood vnder the formes of bread and wine, after consecration dewly made. This faith of theirs was preserued by the delyuery from hand to hand of that do∣crine euen sithens the beginning of Christes Church, and was mainteined by the preaching and writing of the lerned Fathers, and protested by the godly honour, which all Christen people gaue to the said Sacrament at the time of masse or otherwise. Well it might be that sme one in his harte thought amisse of that hely myst, and that some  in corners also conspiredNoman denied o∣penly the  pre∣sence of Christes body. against the truthe thereof, as  and some other like: as now ull many maie be suspected to think that Christ is not the saui∣our of mankind.  as o Christian this daie teacheth openly and in expresse , that  is not y•  of the world: so did no man in open , with the autoritie or toleration of any , preache, write or professe, that the body of Christ was not present in the Sacrament of the altar, if the Priest had once  the solemne benediction, which our lord JesusLuc. 22. commanded. On the other syde, if in the first six hundred yeres, the Christians had beleued, as the Lutherans or Zuinglians now doe, he that
had first begunne to haue taught y• real presence of Christes bodyThe opi∣ of ye reall pre∣sence  ye first six hundred yeres. and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine, must haue ben at yt tyme noted & reputed for an , he must haue ben conuin∣ced by som generall or proninciall Councell kept either in the  Church, or in the west, the Preachers and Doctours of that age should haue writen against him. It is not possible, that all the whole Church, which to that day had beleued the mysteries, that be consecrated vpon the altar, to be more but holy bread and wine, to be only tokens of Christes body absent in substance, to be neither a sacrifice , nor the reall body and blood of Christ: should  through all nations change the Catholike and vniuersall belefe wit∣hout  that had  six hundred yeres, could not  sodnly changed, without great tu∣multe. any trouble or tumult at all, without any contradiction, or disputation, yea without any man at all knowen or euer heard of, that should first commend vnto them this new opinion of nine hundred yeres old. Is it credible, that so many thousand millions of Christen men, as were in the Church at the end of the first six hundred yeres, be∣leuing the one yere those halowed things vpon the altar to be still bread and wine, should the next yere after, alltogether in all countres and languages fall  prostrate or , or at the least bow to the very same things, as to the true body of their maker and sauiour, which before they had ben taught to haue ben vnreasonable and vnsensible creatures And did they al this thing without any guide or preacher, who might will them so to doe? Or did all the Preachers in  at on moment changeNo histo∣ry maketh  of any chāge of y• faith after y• first six hūdred . their mind, &  the  so? Or did som few go through the sower parts of the world, and without resistance of any man preache that new ? Were all the pennes of all the writers of histories so tyed, that  of them all was able once to write any one mans name, who after the six hundred yeres  taught
first, second or third, or at any tyme that change of belefe through out Christendom? Was that heretike alone so almighty, that no∣man durst write his name, neither whiles he liued, nor when he was departed out of this life? If the man were vnknowen, at theNo  can be pa∣, be∣cause none . least why hath the sect no speciall name? Was there not one lerned man in the whole Church of God either willing or able, to resist that fury of new doctrin in the matter of Christes supper? If none were lerned enough to conquer it by preaching, or dis∣puting, or writing, at the least wise wold none do bis best to sett  a bare historie of that tragedie? Or who euer hath writen that the whole Church chāged her saith in this matter? So many Councells haue ben kept in all ages and countries, so many he∣ names and opiniōs, who were but in priuie corners, haueEuthi∣mius, In panoplia Libro. 2. Bernar∣dus. Concil. Viēnen. ben of late  left writen to vs, as Bogomili, VValdenses, Pe∣trobusiani, Pseudoapostoli, Begardi, Beguinae, with such like, and could this main heresie of Christes reall preseuce ouerrunne the whole Church so far, that fifty yeres past and vpwards no small chapell can be named in the wide world, where Christes supper was made without adoration of his body and blood as present vnder formes of bread and wine, and yet  noman vpon the earth be found, in the space of eight hundred and fiftie yeres, to leaue in monumēts of histories, when that heresy began, or by whom it was promulgated, or what name was geuen to it? Did Satan in those eight hundred yeres so strongly oppresseMarc. 1. Matt. 16. Ioan. 16. Christ, that his gospell was cleane darkned and his kingdom lost? Did hel gates auaile against the whole Churche? Did the rock it self ? Did y• holy Ghost  to teache y• people of God all ? I think it wilbe sayed, that the Bishops of Rome did preache, commend, set foorth and mainteine that . But they must shew which Bishop first began, and who writeth it of him, and by what meanes he was so  obeyed, that no resi∣stance
in the world is read to haue ben any where made against him. And yet surely he neuer lacked eemies in the cast Church. The truth is, that all the Bishops of Rome, yea all the Catho∣like Bishops of the whole world, lerned of Christ, this to be his reall body, and this to be his blood. And this faith dured from the last supper of Christ in all faithfull men without any denying or direct  therof, vntill Berengarius began to teache otherwise. It was in dede  indirectly by Marcion Va∣lentinus, Manichaeus, and all those, that thought Christ to haue had no true body of his own. Again by Arrius and Nestorius, who taught the body of Christ to be the body of a man. Arrius, because Christ was not equal in substance with his father but a creature only: Nestorius, because he had two persons, one of God, anCyrillus in Ana∣thematis mo. 11. other, man, therfore seing this was his humane body, Nestorius wold it not to be the body of y• sonne of God. But directly y• reall presence of Christ in this blessed Sacrament was not impugned, vntill Berengarius, about fiue hundred yeres past, began to sow in the field of the Churche the corrupt sede of false doctrine, concer∣ning that question. But his owne , and the three Coun∣cels gathered straight against him at Uercelles, Tours, and Ro∣me,Thre coū cells kept against Berenga rius  his life tyme. do rather shew what, and how constant the Catholike  was of old time in that behalfe, then any thing help and  the opinion of those men, who now adayes endeuour to establish a new inuention of their owne. The Church therefore, as I said, beleuing most , that Christ gaue his owne reall flesh and blood in the mysteries of his last supper, taught consequently, the meane of making presentThe mea∣  Chri  presence. that blessed body, to be (not the comming downe of Christ from heauen) but the changing of the substance of bread and wine into the substance of his  and blood, by the almighty power of  word spoken by a Priest, with such minde and ,
as that solemne  required. This hange, wherein the whle subsance of brad and wine should by the  of Christ be so mightely conuerted into that  which  for vs, and into that holy bloud whichLuc. 22. was shed for vs on the rosse, must of  be a dreadfull and propitiatorie sacrifice, as well by reason of the body of Christ sacri∣fied once to death (which is now made ) as for the cause and finall end, why it is made present. For Christ sayd at his , This is my Lody, which is geuen for you, doe and makeLuc. 22. this thing for the remembraunce of me. If it be at the tyme ofThe  of y• . consecration geuen for vs  by the commadement of Christ, who can deny but it is a sacrifice, and that we take greate profit and aduantage by that gift? Upon this ground, the Christen people were taught to esteme this holy sacriice, abou all other externall inds of worshipping God in this life. Thence came so goodly biding of so many Churches, so riche decking of altars, so great foundations of hanteries, in , so much estimation of Masse, that some came to the holy order of Priesthod not for , but for welth. AndThe faul∣tes of the . some other went into monasteries rather for case, then for  to serue God. All which became, though ouer much ease, & lacke of the feare of God, negligent in their office, dissolute in their be∣hauiour, ignorant in good lerning, and (which in that vocation is most filthy of all) , , coutouse. And the moe that in such sorte vnworthly presumed to those holy prosessions, the greater anger of God the synfull doing prouoked against them selues. The people on th'other side seing the vnhonest lie of certaineThe  of the . religiouse persons and Priestes, and how vnreerently they handled the diuine seruice, sell in hatred not so much with their faultes, as with the office it selfe, imputing the vices of euill men
to a most holy vocation and ministerie, against the commaunde∣mentMatt. 23. of Christ. They withdrew vniustly their tithes and obla∣tions, they enuied the riches of the clergy, and in euery alehouse dcouered the  of their spirituall fathers. When these great enormities were comme to the highest, so that the cockle began to ouergrow and hide the good corne, and now tyme required that iudgement should beginne at the house of God, and those that in dede were good and faithfull should be1. Pet. 4. disseuered from the euill, Martin Luther a Frier of S. Augu∣stines order in Saxonic, was permitted like a proud ing of Ba∣bylon to comme out of the north, and to make spirituall bataile toIerem. 1. the holy Citie of Hierusalem, because her Citezens did not wor∣ship Christ in such puritie of good life, as they ought to haue done. Whereby it came to light, who were ye chae, which is with euery  of windecaried vp and doune, & who were the true wheat, which lieth  against all tentations, and perseuereth in the Church of God. For those that were light and euill disposed,Who were mee to re ceaue  do∣ctrine. when they vnderstode they might kepe their liuinges, though they did not dischardge the office belonging therevnto, seing they came to the office only to haue the liuing, those, I say, embraced with all their endeuour the new religion of Martin Luther. And that, whether they were Monkes and religious men, or secular Priestes only. Make them sure of good , & they will assure the Prince to geue vp their Abbeys and monasteries. And good reason why. For they neuer loued neither the cote nor the vow, but only the ase and filling of their bellies. Then God made it euident vnto the world, which were those who had standered in dede the holy order of Priesthod. Who they were that hauing  kept wemen, sayd afterward they were their wiues, and who they were that  their  more them their vowes made to God. I shall nede name no
man. But I thinke there are few men aboue forty yeres old in all England, but they can of their owne knowledge reckon vp di∣uers  and , who before the preaching of Lu∣ther, shamed with their vnhouest behauiour the clergy of the realme. And the same men shewed themselues, when broching tyme came, not to haue ben of the Church, but of that religion whatsoeuer should be set foor most carual. This good then Luther hath doe, that whereas the euill wereThe pro∣fit which y• Church taketh of . in profession mingled among the good, now it should be no more so. For two bodies are made, ou of Catholikes, an other of the Protestantes. And the Churche of God remaineth  purged from that wicked generation of men. Not that Cathokes lack their great , or can be iustified in the sighe of God as no synners. But it skilleth much whether a man doe syn with fear of  and with desyre of repentance, or els whether he desend his syn, & make a doctrine of his euildoing. The  and Priest sayeth, he doth not synne in ma∣rying, though he , not to marie. Yea to amend the matter, he sayeth, no man ought to vowe chastitie, condemning in that doctrine, besyde an infinite number of holy professed virgins, the blessed mother of God, who wōdered how she might haue a childeLuce. 1.  she knew not any man. Whereunto her own reason migt  haue replied, that hereafter she might know a man, except she had vowed her selfe not to know at all any man. Now Luther was permitted to discouer such synners, as were most desperate and of least purpose to repent. This Luther hath shaken the walles of moe Chapels, Chur∣ches, Monasteries, then euer any king of Syria did shake , Castels or houses in the land of the twelue tribes of Israel and uda. He began with lesse matters, but as the Prince of the  throwing  and conquering such small fortes as
lay in his way, alwayes made hast to besiege Hierusalem itselse the chiefe Citie of the land of Iury: so Luther hauing his eye vpon the highest mysterie of all our faith, (as him selse ) In epist. ad argen to raten∣ses. to ouerthrow the great reuerence which all good men gaue to the blessed Sacrament of the altar. He went about to be persuaded, In Sacramento praeter panem & vinum esse nihil, that nothing was in the Sacrament besides bread and wine. For these are his owne wordes. But sinding the scriptures to plaine (as himself also ) and the saith and consent of  do∣ctours and people to strong, he  gaue ouer tha , and contented himselfe with  the sacred ower of . He taught, that bread and wine were not in. The  of  ther. their substance changed into the body of Christ,  with∣all the  presence of our Sauiours flesh and blood. Whose  oce being spred in Germanie, a great multitude of  Rutters voluntarily folowed his . But when the Catholikes had euidently shewed, that two di∣uers natures already extat in the world (as Christ and  bread or wine) could neuer without a maruelouse vnion be made one, and be incorporated together: the which vnion, betwen Christ and materiall bread and wine, neither is exprey acknow∣ledged by the holy Gospell, neither gathered thence by generall Councels or lerned Fathers (or who euer heard, De Christo im∣panato, of Christ imbreaded) moreouer when the Catholikes de∣clared their belefe of  to be conformable to the Scriptures, and expresly alowed by the holy spirit of God in ge∣nerall Councels, and in the bookes of auncient Doctours: In the great Con̄ sl of . etc.  his Capitain Luther neither to be able to withstand the reasons brought against him, neither yet willing to geue ouer the opinion which him selfe had chosen, he much misli∣ked with Luther, and within foure yeres after began to publish
at zurich in zcherland, that the reall substance of Christes flesh2. The opi∣on o zum∣. Decolam∣. and blood was not in the Sacrament of the altar, as Luther had said, but only was named and signified to be there. To whom Decolams a renegate out of S. Brigittes Cloister ioyned him selfe, stoutly defending that figuratine doctrine, both against the Catholikes and against Martin Luther. The Catholikes out of hand shewed how much against the wordes and workes of Christ that opinion is, how absurd, vnse∣mely and vncredible it were, that Christ, who is the truth it selfe,Ioan. 1. Luc. 24. and by whom truth is made, and who came to fulfill all figures, should leaue in his owne supper, contrary to the meaning of his owne sayinges, nothing but figures and shadowes. Satan therefore vnderstanding this doctrine of zuinglius to be much better impugned by the Catholikes, then by Decolam∣dins defended, fearing y• onerthrow of the whole armie, spe∣dily3. The opi∣ of Caluin. sent in a fresh band vnder y• conduct and gouernance of John Caluin. who restoring y• fight, protested y• he neither thought nor taught a bare figure to be geuē at y• supper of Christ, as zuinglius did seme to teach. In dede (quod he) a figure it is, but a strōg stout effectual figure, ioyned with words of promise, stirring vp the hart of him, that heareth the promise and worthely raueth the pledge therof, to mounte into heauen, and there by faith to fede in spirite vpon Christes owne body and blood, as he in earth corpo∣rally feedeth vpon bread and wine. For Caluin teacheth bread and wine to be the figures and signes of Christes body, and those wordes, This is my body, to be wordes of preaching, or of pro∣mising Christes body, to them that doe beleue. O pitifull tossing and tearing of Gods holy mysteries. Are those words, which make and shew the body of Christ present, words of promise? But hereof, I will speak more hereafter. Now concerning that he willeth vs to goe into heauen by faith, know
ye not that, because our nature was not able to  y to the seat of God in heauen, therefore y•  o God came  from heauen to earth, to leade and list vs vp to the ition o his Fa∣ther? Know ye not, that because our body more quickly wethSapiē. 9. our soule dounward, then our spirit is able to draw our body vp∣ward, therefore Christ  not only y• soule, but also the body of man, geuing vs in his last supper that body of his, to th'inthent our bodies taking hold in the Sacrament of the altar of his bo∣dy, might be caried into heauen to haue the sight of God? And be∣cause faith without th'incarnation of Christ cannot lift vp our bo∣dies, therefore Christ fulfilled aith with truth, and hauing taken of the virgin oure nature, gaue his body in dede to our bodiesThe flesh of Christ was sent down to lift  vp. and soules, y• we again might in body & soule be lifted vp with it. As a man that is cast into a depe pit, calleth by the meane of his tonge for help, but when a cord is let doune to him for the aide and  of him, it is not then sufficient to vse his tong still, and to let his handes alone: euen so our faith called for Christ to come from heauen to help vs, to let doune the corde of his hu∣manitie, & of his flesh and blood. And shall we now when it is let doune to be fastened in our bodies, and in the bottom of our har∣tes, by eating it really, shall wee now refuse it, and saie, wee will goe into heauen by faith ourselues, and there take holde of Christ, whereby wee maie be saued and deliuered out of the depe vale of misery? As though the corde should haue neded to haue ben let doune, if wee could haue fastened our bodies to any thing in hea∣uen, and yet our bodyes are they which weigh doune our soulesSapiē. 9. chely. But what meane I to reason in this place of that point, where∣of in all the booke folowing, by Gods grace, I will fully intreat? For as it happeneth, they are the scholars of Calnin, with whom specially wee must haue to do at this time. Of whose lerning and
prncie▪ I most cruey craue this fauour, that none of them allThe Au∣thor inten deth not to speak a∣gainst the person of the Sacra mētaries. thin me to speak against their persons, but only against their opinions, and so to speak against them, as I am instructed by the holy Scriptures, not graunting, that either they loue more intier∣ly, or study more carefully, or reuerence more hartily the word of God, then my Fathers, brethren, and I my selfe doe in the Catho∣like Church of Jesus Christ. Only about the meaning of it, I ra∣ther would trust the common iudgeent of auncient Doctours, and practise of the whole Church, theu mine owne priuate election and phantasie, or the deuise of a newly planted congregation. A Catholike man must kepe the most auncient path, and mostIerem. 6. Matt. 24. commonly troden high waie. Priuie bypathes carie mn a side to the  dennes of . My purpose is to proue out of theThe intēt of the w ter. word of God, specially against zuinglius and Caluin, that Christ geueth in his last supper the true substance of his flesh and blood, not only to our soules by words of promise, but also to our bo∣dies vnder the formes of bread and wine. And for as much as the present Church of England, in the Apologie thereof, hath set forth to the world an other doctrine contrarie to that wce reued of our fore Fathers: I will first disproue and confute the wordes and reasons o the Apologie: and afterward will by the grace of God proue the Catholike faith, out of the holy Scriptures and auncient Fathers. But first of all I must declare what we Catholiks, and what the Protestants and Sacramentaries beleue the supper of Christ to be. That seing I make the Title of my booke, Of the supper of our Lord, it maie straight appere whose  is more worthy to be instituted of Christ, that which we through his word be∣leue, or that which they assigne him, against y•  truthe of his own words.
¶ what the supper of Christ is, according to the bele of the Catholikes. BEcause my purpose is to intreat of the blessed supper of our Lord, I thought it best to declare before hand, what we take that supper to be, shewing withal how the Sacramentaries, vnder the pretense of refoorming the abuses thereof, haue taken away the whole supper of Christ, and geuen vs a bare drinking of their own . And whence maie that be more truly and soundly proued, then chifly out of the word of God, & next out of the monuments of the a acient Fathers? The word of God is a most faithfull witnesse o the institution of Christ, the monuments and writings of auncient Fathers doe shew the right vnderstanding of the word of God. which thing I speake not, as though the Catholike Doctours of this later tyire had not the self same holy Ghost which the first had, but seing our aduersaries refuse Albereus magnus, Thomas of Aquine, Bona∣uenture, Alexander of ales, Dionyns the Carthusian, Nico∣laus de Lyra, Gabriel Biel, and such other men of excellēt vertue, wit, and lerning, (who not withstanding by a rule that S. Augu∣stineAugusti∣nus in si∣ne libr. 2. cōtra Iu∣lianū Pe∣lagianū. geueth, ought to be of credit, in so much as all they liued be∣fore this question rose bewene the Sacramentaries and vs, and therfore can not beare nor shew more affection to the one syde then to the other) but seing our aduersaries refuse them for , and yet follow men of later , as Luther, zuinglius, : we are content to put all the matter into the hands of the old Doctours. And to beginne (as we promised) with the word of God, thus writeth S. Paul in his first  to the Corinthians: Conue∣nientibus vobis in vnum, iam non est dominicam coenam man∣ducare,1. Cor. 11. vnusquis{que} enim suam coenam praesumit ad manducandū. when yow come together, now there is no eating of our Lords
supper. For euery man taketh  his owne supper to eate. By the name of supper, in the old tyme, that one meale was meant,Oecume nius in. 1. Cor. 11 wich ordinarily was made after noon, and it serued for diner and supper. The Corinthians coming together to y• holy communion, taried not one for the other, but euery man as he was most riche so he made hast to take his owne meale, neglecting to call other poore men to it. S. Paule mislyking this custome in them, shew∣eth, that Christ did other wise, who communicated his supper to all his Apostles equally. For as S. Cyprian saith: Aequa omni∣busCypria∣nus de caena Do mini. Hiero. li. 2. aduer∣sus Ioui∣nian. Theodo ritus in 1. Cor. 11 Matt 26. Marc. 14 . 22. 1. Cor. 11 portio datur. An equal porcion is geuen to all men. And S. Hieroine sayeth: Christi corpus aequaliter accipimus. We take the body of Christ equally. And Theodorite sayeth: All men are indif∣ferently partakers of our Lords supper. At this time we chiefly consider that Christ hath a supper of his own, as y• Corinthians had one of theirs. And it is our question, what Christes supper was. If we shall beleue ye holy scriptures:  toke bread & wine, & when he had geuen thankes, he said: This is my body, which is geuen for you, and this chalice is the new te∣stament in my blood. By which words we are informed, ye supper of Christ to be his owne body & blood, geuen vnder y• signes of y• bread & wine, whre vpō he gaue thākes, turning by his almighty power the substance of bread and wine, into the substance of his body and blood. The Sacramentaries take the wordes of Christ to be spoken figuratiuely, and therefore they put bread and wine to remaine in their olde substance, sayng, we are  by faith with the body and blood of Christ. Leauing other argumentes for other places, we now only de∣, whether the name and nature of a supper be more agrea∣ble to our belefe, or to their meaning? Whether is more like, that Christ made his  supper to his Apostles of the substance of common bread and wine, or of his owne reall body and blood?
When a man departeth from his frends taking his leaue with a banket, it is lyke that his banket shalbe, according to his habi∣litie, full of deinty dishes and costly cates, specially if it be pu∣blished before and long tyme loked for, as Christes banket was. The which Melchisedech had prefigured more then two thousandGen. 14. Sapiē. 16. Psal. 22. Prou. 9. yeares before.  had foreshewed it shuld contein al that might be delectable to the taste. Dauid had called it a table proui∣ded by God. Salomon a table set forth by the wisedome of God, whereunto poore men in spirit and the fooles of the world were3. Reg. 17 called. Elias lying hidden at the Torrent of Laryth was sed by crowes that brought him bread and flesh euery euening. Christ in a parable describing the great supper made at theMatt. 2. Luce. 14. mariage of the kinges sonne which him self was, telleth of oxen and other satlings kylled and made readie for that purpose. And now shal we suppose, that the sonne of the king of heauen makingGalat. 2. a parting supper unto his best beloued and the pillours of all his Church, doth geue them ouwardly at his farewel none other deuties besides common bread and wine sanctified in vse only, and not  in substance? A  before, he had  with the same Apostles the paschall lambe, and rising from that table (as being the table of MoysesIoan. 13. Matt. 26. rather then of Christ) he  his Apostles feere to make them meete or a greater mysterie. And sitting doune againe he toke bread and wine, not as the dishes of his banket, but as matter and stuff wherof he wold make his owne supper. For it is to be well weighed, that this banket is called our Lords supper, that1. Cor. 11. is to say, made, and ministred, and ornished by Christ himselfe. He now did not send S. Iohn & S. Peter to prepare his supperLuce. 22. (as he sent them to make ready the Paschall lambe) Christ in his owne supper is the prouider and maker of it. He taketh bread and wie into his holy handes, intēding lyke a most conning worke∣man,
of simple and litle stuff to make the greatest and finest feast that euer was hard of. It is a great glorie in the profession of cookery, to be able to make of one kinde of stuff (as for example of egs alone) sixtene or twenty diuerse dishes. But to doe that feate, much labour, many spices and sauces, great compositions and mixtures are required. Christ in stede of all those shyfts vsed blessing, & working wordsMarc 14. of thankes geuing, which were so sure to worke their intent, that some men haue doubted, whether he gaue thanks first, because he forsaw the whole purpose out of hand should be obtained as him selfe wished, or else (which is more probable) whether the veryWhat the blessing of Christ was. working of the feate were not the selfe thankes geuing for the worke. For his blessing and thankes geuing was the sayng ouer the bread, This is my body: and ouer the wine, This is my blood. By the vertue of which wordes his body and blood being made of the creatures of bread and wine, as well were a thankfull sa∣criice them selues to God euen vnder ye forme of bread and wine, as Christ also in his visible foorm hauing wrought this worke, did praise and thanke his Father for such an excellent effect. The which body and blood his Aposles eating & drinking were made partakers of ye greatest bāket, that euer was made in earth. For the better vnderstanding wherof it maye please the reader to repete in his minde, how God in the beginning adorned this world, first with angels and heauenly spirits. Secondly with theGene. 1. heauens them selues. Thirdly with the elements of fyer, ayer, water and arth. And as the angels occupie the highest place, so doe the heauens with the lights and starres in them occupie the second place, & the foure elements are beneth them. When  were come after this sorte from the highest order of  to the earth, which is the lowest element of all, then it pleased the wyedome of God to make as it were a reuolt of all things, and
to returne his creatures from the bottom of the earth vpwardFrom the owest grow vp∣ward a∣gain. againe towards him selfe. He therefore made the arth to bring sorth grene grasse with all such kind of things as haue animam vegetatiuam, that is to saye, as liue and are quick by the strength which they haue in them selues to grow and encreace, of which kinde all herbes, springs and trees be. Aboue those in a higher de∣gre were byrdes, fishes & beasts, which haue a life sensitiue, being able (those that be perfit) to moue from place to place. Last of all God made man, who hath not only the vegetatiueMan is y• brif and somme of all creatu∣res. power and sensitiue in his soule, but also reason and vnderstan∣ding. In whose body are the vertues of the foure elements, with the  of the heauns, in whose soule is free will and power to gouern, agreable to the nature of angels and of heauenly spi∣rits. For which cause this creature hath bene worthely called, euen of the Christn Philosophers, , a lytle world, for that he alone hath in him all the degrees of creatures both liuing and without life, both sensible and reasonable, and therefore he isMarc. 16. Exod. 8. called in holy scripture, Omnis creatura, ll creatures. Now when the sonne of God taking pitie, that this litle world the worke of his great power was by the deuyll seduced, came doune and toke flesh of the virgyn Mary, being true God andLuce. 1. true man in one person. At that tyme were all things briefly brought again to God, whence they first were created & brought forth. Christ aboue is all in one. In his Godhed, he is all that isChrist alone is all. Ierem. 23 Psal. 98. aboue the heauens, and that fylleth the world. In his manhod which is the  of God, he is all that is in, or vnder the heauens. In this manhod are all creatures most perfectly com∣piled, without all blemmysh of nature, of mynd or of body. So that seing this body of Christ, (wherein also the fullnes of God∣hedColoss. 2. dwelleth) is geuen and eaten at a banket, there is no doubt but the same is such a banket, as can not be made with all the
creatures of heauen and earth gathered together. In this one dysh is a composition most delicate of angels, heauens, ele∣ments, of herbes, fysshes, byrds, beasts, of reasonable men, and of God hym selfe. No kind of salit, meate, sauce, sruyts, confe∣ction, no kynde of wyne, aqua vite, aqua composita, liquors, sy∣rops can be found in nature, made by arte, deuysed by wyt, but it is all set vppon this table, and that in a small rome, where it cloyeth not with the abundance, ue annoyeth with the vncleane handling, it sylleth without lothsomues, it prouoketh the appe∣tite without daunger of surfcating. To be shorte, were it not a banket prouided by the sonne of God, no man wold think it pos∣sible, to haue any such feast made in the desert of this wycked world. Thus, good reader, doe the Latholyks teache of the supper of our Lord, and beleue it agreable to his word, and worthy his worship. This banket fedeth the whole man, there is a rea∣sonable soule to fede our reason, a naturall substance of flesh to fede and nourysh our flesh, there is the spirite of God which quyckeneth both soule and flesh to lyfe euerlasting. This is theSap. 16. true Manna, which conteyneth the taste of all swetenes, and hath in it selfe all maner of pleasant refection. This is the fode of lyfe,Ioan. 6. the which who so eateth worthely he shall lyue for euer. This is the feast whereof Salomō speaketh: Hoc ita{que} visum est mihi bonūEccle. 3. 5. &. 7. vt comedat quis & bibat, & fruatur laetitia ex labore suo. This therefore semeth good to me, that a man should eate and drinke and enioye myrth of his traualic. Which words. S. Augustine al∣legeth and expoundeth after this sorte. Vbi ait: Non est bonū ho∣miniAugusti∣nus. De ciuit. Libr. 17. Capi. 20. nisi quod manducabit & bibet, quid credibilius dicere intel∣ligitur, quàm quod ad participationem mensae huius pertinet, quam Sacerdos ipse, mediator testamentinoui, perhibet secundum ordi∣nem
Melchisedech de corpore & sanguine sue? when Salomon sayeth, There is no good thing to a man, but that which he shall eate and drinke: what is he more credibly thought to meane, then the thing which belongeth to the partaking of this table, y• which table y• Priest him selfe, who is mediatour of the new testament, doth furnish according to y• order of Melchisedech with his owne body and blood? If then the Prophet haue affirmed the greatest good that man hath in this life, to be eating and drinking, and that eating and drinking belong to the supper of Christ: we maye perceaue right well, that the matter and substance of Christes supper consisteth not in bread and wine (for then we might be better occupied then in eating and drinking it) but in the reall flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, wherein all goodnes spirituall and corporall is collected into one heape, and geuen to vs vnder the forme of bread and wine. For so God hath appoīted, Instaurare omnia in Christo quaeEphes. 1. in caelis, & quae in terra sunt, in ipso. Briefly to renew all things in Christ, which are in heauen, and which are in earth in him. The Breek word, , importeth such a brief gathering to one certain head and somme, that not only heauen and earth, but all things that are in them are brought into Christ, and in him as it were begun again & renewed. The which cometh to passe by the taking of his flesh, and geuing it to death vpon the crosse sor man, in whom all things were both briefly collected, and pitiously corrupted. Now when Christ gaue to vs in his banket that flesh which he toke of his mother, and that blood which he did shed on the crosse, bidding vs make and eate that thing for theLuc. 22. remembrance of him, then was the head, the floure, the cheif com∣position of all meats, drinks, and iunkets in the world geuen vs in his last fupper. S. Cyprian consydering the great deinties of this feast, sayth:De caena Domin.
Vident haec. Sacramenta pauperes spiritu, & hoc vno contenti fer∣culo, omnes mundi huius delicias aspernantur, & possidentes Chri stum, aliquam huius mundi possidere supellectilem dedignantur. The poore in spirit see these Sacraments, and contenting them selues with this one dishe, they despise all the delicates of this world, and possessing Christ, they disdaine to possesse any stuff of this world. Contrariwise the wise men of this world, abhorring (as the same Cyprian saith) the commandement of this religion, euen to this day go backward (he alludeth to the Capharnaits, who through the doctrine this Sacrament forsoke Christ) & à secretis diuinis, omnium intra se mysteriorum continentibus sum∣mam, diffugiunt & recedunt. And they flee and depart from the diuine secrets, which conteine within them the brief or somme of all mysteries. A great deale more is found in S. Cyprian after the same sense, in so much he calleth the supper of our Lord, Omni consummationis sinem, the end of all perfection. All which praises only rise vpon this ground, because these mysteries truly & really contein within them the body and blood of Christ. when S. Cy∣prianDe coe∣na Domi ni. sayth within them (intra se) he meaneth within the compasse or soormes of bread and wine. For those only are the things that we can point vnto within or without. Other meate or drink we see not. S. Chrysostom hath so much in the praise of this feast, that it wold make a great volume to bring all he saith therof. I will con tent myself at this tyme with one place. Quando corpus ChristiIn 1. cor. Hom. 24 tibi propositum fuerit, dic tecum: Propter hoc corpus, & so foorth. When the body of Christ is set before thee, sai with thyselfe: For this bodies sake, I am nomore earth and ashes. For this, I hope to receaue heauen and the good things which are in heauen, im∣mortall life, the seat of Angels, the cumpanie of Christ. The verie
table is the strength of our soule, the bond of trust, the foundation, our hope, saluation, life. If we goe hence pure with this sacrifice, with most great confidence we shall ascend to the holy porche, or entry, as it were compassed round about with golden garments. But what reherse I things to come? Dum in hac vita sumus, vt nobis terra caelum sit, facit hoc mysterium. Whiles we are in this life, this mysterie causeth, that the earth is heauen to vs. By the iudgement of Chrysostom, the fame body of Christ which is our saluation and life, is set besore vs vpon the verie table, to th'intent whiles we liue, the earth should be heauen to vs, and when we departed heuce, carying that body with vs, we should be safe conueied vnto heauen it self. When he saith the earth is heauen to vs through this mysterie, he meaneth nolesse to be set vpon the table it self or altar, then is at the right hand of God the Father. And this is the supper of our Lord, which the Catholiks beleue, and not an emptie dish of faith, which although it be much worth when truthe is absent, yet as in heauen where clere vision is, no faith abydeth: euen so when earth is through1. Cor. 13 this mysterie made heauen to vs, we receaue and eate the body of Christ, not only by faith from heauen, but also in truthe from the verie altar and table. For as there is a truthe lesse of our bo∣dies, then of our soules, and as the soules of the faithfull neuer lacked God whom they might feede on by faith & spirit: so Christ therefore toke flesh, that our bodies also might haue a banket ma∣de to them, and so the whole man might be norished to life euer∣lasting. Oportuit enim certe (sayth Cyrillus) vt non solum animaIn Ioan. Libro. 4. c. 14. per spiritum sanctum in beatam vitam alcenderet, verum etiam vt rude atque terrestre hoc corpus cognato sibi gustu, tactu & cibo, ad immortalitatem reduceretur. For it behoued truly, that not only y• soule should ascend by the holy Ghost into the blessed life, but also that this rude and earthly body should be brought to
immortality by tasting, touching & eating the meate which were of alliance or kynred with it, that is to say, of the same nature and substance whereof our bodies are. Thus in the Ctholik banket of Christes supper not only the soule but euen the body eateth, tasteth, and toucheth such meat as is of the same blood and kynred with it. That is to say: our flesh eateth Christes flesh, our body his body. It was flesh that made vs all borne in originall synne, it is flesh that maketh vs all rege∣erate in Christ. Our soule was sptted, by the entrance into that flesh which was spotted. Thereiore our soule is made cleane by the wasshing of that our flesh, which was bor in syn. The flesh,Tertulli. De resur rectione . sayth Trtullian, is washed that the soule maie be cleansed. The flesh is oynted, that the soule maie be consecrated. The esh is si∣gued, that the soule maie be defenced. The flesh is shadowed with imposition of hand, that the soule also may be defenced. The flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ, that the soule may also be made sat of God. Non possunt ergo separari in mercede quas opera coniung it. They cannot therefore be parted in reward, whom work ioyeth. Hitherto hath Tertullian commended to vs the great priuileges which God geueth to our flesh. The grea∣test of all which, is the eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ. As therefore we Catholiks beleue most vndoutedly, not only that our soules be  and redemed of Christ, but euen that our flesh is the creature of God, made with his own hands, redemed by Christ, and shall  again at the later daie really, andGene. 1. 1. Cor. 15 liue for euer with the soule of the iuste man: euen so we beleue and professe, that not only our soules, but euen y• same flesh receaueth to it the benefits of Chris paon, the Sacraments which he left to vs, eating & draiing really vnder the formes of bread and wine the true substance of Christes body and blood. This is the last supper of Christ, which we Catholiks beleue and prosesse.
¶ wht the supper of Christ is according to the doctrine of the Protestants and Sacramentaries, with a confu∣tation thereof. NOw let vs consyder on the other syde, what kinde of banket our new brethern teache. They saye: Christ ge∣ueth to the body bread and wyne, but to the soule he ge∣eth hym selfe by faith, spirit and vnderstanding. This opinion shall by Gods grace be straight waies proued faulye and er∣roneous. In dede before that Christ was made man, such a banket asGen. 14. they speake of had bene much worth, and was kept of Melchise∣dech and Abraham, of the children of Israell eating Manna, ofExo. 16. the priests eating the bread and cakes, which was offered accor∣dingLeuit. . to the lawe. For then with an earthly banket of bread, of flesh, and of wyne, the ioyning of a spirituall eating by fayth and vnderstanding was the highest banket that could be made. For as the spirit and fayth was vertuously occupied in lifting vp it self to God: So was the body occupied in making a figure and signe of the true banket of Christ, which was to come. But when Christ had taken flesh of the virgyn Marye, tunc Ioan. 1. Christum facta est, then the truth was made by Christ. Truth perfoormed outwardly in fulfilling the corporall figures, doth adde much vnto fayth and spirit. In the fayth of good men and in the spirit of God Christ wasChrist  by faith ly. euer man, but not euer man in truth of nature. Whils Christ was only a spirit and only God, so long ye feast or banket, whichChrist ea∣tē ty faith oly. was geuen for hym, had no better thing in it then the fayth and spirit of the eaters and drinckers, for that was the highest gyft tht God as yet had geuen to man. But all those eatings and drinkings which were in nature and in ye law of Moyses though they had corporall meate with faith and spirit, are so farre behind
the supper of Christ (after his manhod really asspted) as theChrist re∣ally man. fayth of Christes incarnation is behind the incarnation it felf. Mark the point (good reader) and thou shalt not be deceaued by false doctrine. As Christ by his incarnation did geue a reall truth to the fayth of the old fathers, and not a new spirite: so in his last supper, he geueth the same spirituall gyft to vs that he gaue to Abel, Noe, Abraham, Moyses, Dauid, Daniell, and such others: but he geueth vs an other kind of truth then euer heChrist re∣ally eaten  his own supper. gaue them. The truthe made by Christ is the true flesh and blood which he tooke of his mother, and the geuing of that truth to be eaten, is the geing of that flesh and blood vnder the formes of bread and wyne. Therefore they that now say: Christ geueth bread and wyne with spirituall gyfts, wherein our soule eateth and drinketh Christes flesh and blood, they graunt a good thing one way, but an other way they take away the greatest goodnes that euer was geuen to man. Their spirituall eating is not euill, but it lacketh some truthe.A true ea tīg is to ea te  thīg boh with body and soule. How so? because the whole man is not fed. For faith feedeth bue the soule, and yet the name of feeding is proper to the body, and thence is transferred to the soule. that feeding therefore is not ful∣ly true, which eateth not that in the mouth, which it eateth in the harte, whereas the true supper of Christ, is meat in dede, and drink in dede, and must be the eating of that in our body, whichIoan. 6. our mynde and soule doth eate. So sayd Leo the great of Christes supper: Hoc enim ore sumitur, quod fide creditur. For that isSer. 6. de ieiunio. 7. men. taken in the mouth, which is beleued in fayth. The reall flesh of Christ is beleued in faith, therefore the same real flesh must be ea∣ten with mouth. And what other cause can be deuysed, why all∣ways from the beginning of the world to this day, eating by mouth hath bee ioyned to the highest sacrifices and chefe kind of worshipping of God that euer was vsed: what meaneth the
ating of the Paschall labe, of Man, of shew bread, wheateExo. 12. Exo. 16. Leuit. 2. & 24. meale, and all such offerings as were in the law? Could not God haue inueuted an other waye to haue occupied his people in ser∣uing him, but only by eating and drinking? Surely the meaning of all those diners, and suppers, and feasts, were to shew, that in tyme to come the same Messias, that they loked for,  in whom they beleued, should so truly come for our sakes into the earth, that he should come also into our bodies to dwell (by his flesh caten) in vs, that we might dwell in him. Nei∣therIoan. 6. let this seme a laughing matter to thee (good Reader) For sith Christ was born to vs, and geuen to vs (as Esaie saith) heEsai. 9. sought not his owne commoditie but ours, and perceauing that in paradyse the whole nature of man was ouercome of the deuill, specially by cating with mouth of the fruit, which was forbiddē1. The deuil Eua. him: As against the deuill persuading Eua to disobaye God, he sent the arhangell Babriell to persuade the blessed virgin Marie2. Gabriel. Maria. to consent to his will: as against that appletree, he planted the crosse of our redemption: as for y• disobedience of Adam, him selfe3. The ap∣. The cros∣se. came to be obedient euen to death: right so for the apple of the for∣biddē tree  eaten, he gaue him selfe the fruit and apple of the crosse, which is the tree of grace, lawfully and medefully to4. Ada. Christ. be eaten, and his blood to be drunken. Bibimus (sayth S. Cyprian)5. The ap∣ple eaten. The flsh of Christ eaten. Cypria∣nus de Coena Domini. de sanguine Christi, ipso iub ēte, vitae aeternae cum ipso & per ipsum participes, animalis vitae peccata quasi sanguinem impurum hor∣rentes, & fatentes nos per peccati gustum â beatitudine priuatos & damnatos, nisi nos Christi clementia ad societatem vitae aeternae suo sanguine reduxisset. We drink of the blood of Christ, him self commanding, being partakers of euerlasting life with him, and by him, abhorring ye sinnes of bare natural life as vnpure blood, and graunting ourselues to haue ben depriued from blisse, and
damned through the taste of sinne, except the clemencie of Christ had brought vs again to the fellowship of euerlasting life by his blood. S. Cyprian setteth the drinking of Christes blood against the taste of syn, which man fell into, by tasting vnlawfully the apple which was forbidden to be tasted of. The like phrase also Prosper Aquitanicus hath vsed. who firs declareth our fall by eating and drinking, and afterward our ari∣sing again by eating the body, and drinking the blood of Christ. Concerning our fall thus he writeth: Liberum ergo arbitrium, id est, rei sibi placitae spontaneus appetitus vbi vsum bonorum quaeProsper Aquitan. contra Collato. acceperat fastidiuit, & vilescentibus sibi felicitatis suae praesidijs in∣sanam cupiditatem ad experientiam praeuaricationis intendit, bi∣bit omnium vitiorum venenum, & totam naturam hominis intem∣perantiae suae ebrietate madefecit. Free will therefore, that is to saie y• volūtarie appetite of the thing which pleased it, being ones 10thsome of ye good things which it had takē, and without regardwe were poysoned in Adam. or care had to the aydes of his own blessednes, hauing bent his impotēt gredines to the triall and experience of disobedience and preuarication, drank in the poyson of all vices, and drowned the whole nature of man with the drunkēnes of his intemperance. Thus was poison drunk in. Let vs now cōsider whence helth maie be recouered. Inde, priusquam edendo carnem filij hominis, & bibendo sanguiuem eius, lethalem digerat cruditatem, labitur memoria, errat iuditio, nutat incessu, neque vllo modo idoneus est ad illud bonum eligendum▪ & concupiscendum quo se sponte pri∣uauit. Thence it commeth, that man faileth in memorie, erreth in iudgement, wauereth in his going, neither is he by any meanes mete to choose and desier that good thing, whereof he depriued himself of his own accorde, before that by eating the flesh of thewe digest our surfet  Christ. sonne of man & by drinking his blood, he digest the deadly suret which he toke.
As therefore ye apple that Adam did really eate against the com∣mandement of God, doth make vs all, y• were in his body at that tyme, gilty of disobedience, and the children of wrath: so the reall eating of Christes flesh, according to the worthy eating thereof, which Christ commanded, doth make vs all free from the pain of euerlasting death, and the children of grace and glorie. But as euery man did not eate the prohibited apple in his own person and by his own act, but by the act of our father and mo∣ther, and as being in them, and of them: so it is not nedefull that euery man in his own person eate the flesh of Christ, which isIt is not  eueri child eate really y• flesh of Christ. geuen vs in the Sacrament to be eaten, but it is absolutely nede∣full that some or other eate it as really, as euer the apple was eaten, that all the rest, who by baptisme enter into the same body, maie be one perfitly with Christ, whiles they are one mystically with them, who really eate the substance of Christes flesh, being the substance of our true sacrifice, truly rosted vpon the crosse, and truly rising from death, to th'intent it might be truly eaten of vs without any corruption or perishing therof. Thus we find, that the supper of Christ can not in any wise consist of eating the flesh of Christ, by faith and spirit alone. But we (that is to saie) some of the mystical body that are of lawfull age, must eate it to saluation, as ye apple was eaten to damnatiō. And because before Christ was incarnat, we had no apple to damnatiō, he toke flesh, and went of his own accord to death, that thence weThe flesh of Christ is y• wood of life. might plucke ye apple of life and the fruit of the wood of life which preserueth vs to euerlasting ioyes. For as Gregorius Bishop of Nyssa brother to S. Basil doth teache, the medicine must be accor∣ding to the poyson which we are infected withall. His discourse is to long to write it all in this place, so muche as apperteineth to my purpose, I will translate into English. Quemadmodum qui per insidias venenum hauserunt, & caetera.
As those that by  haue drunk in poyson, doe by an other Orat. . medicine put out the strength thereof, and like as the poyson so the medicine must goe into the bowels, that by meane of them help maie be spread throughout the whole body: euen so is it to be don of vs. That seing we haue tasted poyson wher with ourPoyson tasted. nature is dissolued, we maie receaue a medicine whereby that na∣ture of ours is gathered together, that the infection of the poy∣son maie be expelled by the contrarie and holsome strength of the medicine. What medicine is this? None other beside that body,The  of Christ is the me∣dicine. which is declared to be aboue death, and the cause of our saluatiō. For as a litle leauen (saith the Apostle) maketh the whole lump of dow like to it self: so that body, which is made immortal of God, entring into our body doth transferre and change the whole into it self. For as if a pestilent thing be mixed with a holsom thing it maketh it hurtfull: so the immortall body maketh all that, whereinThe body of Christ entreth into oure body. The me∣decyne must ne∣des enter into our bodyes. it is receaued, of the like nature & immortal. But it can not enter into the body, except it be mingled with the bowels by meate and drink: Itaque necessarium est, vt natura nostra, quoad eius fieri po∣test, vim salutarem intra corpus admittat. Therefore it is necessa∣rie, that our nature (as much as lieth in it) do receaue yt healthfull strength within the body. And seing none other thing, beside that diuine body (of Christ) hath receaued such grace (to heale our sicknes) and seing it hath ben shewed, it can not be, our bodies should attein to immortality, vnlesse they be ioyned with the im∣mortall body, and so obtein incorruption, it is to be consydered how it maie be brought to passe, whereas that one body conti∣nually through the whole world is geuen to so many thousands of faithfull men, the whole maie become euery mans for his part, and  tarie whole in it felf. Consequently Gregorius goeth forward to shew, how that  be: and he sheweth it to be brought to passe whiles bread and
wine (wherwith Christ was nourished in this mortal life, and theHow Christes▪ body to ge uen really to many and yet re mayneth whole. Transub∣st āttation. which by the power of altering and  were daily tur∣ned into his flesh and blood) be now also in his holy Sacraments turned by the consecration of his blessing and by his words, into his own body and blood. For by that meanes he proueth it possi∣ble, that Christes whole body should both be geuen to euery man a part, and yet remain whole in it self. But hereof we shall speak an other tyme. All that apperteined to my present purpose, was to declareGrego∣rius an. D. 370. out of S. Bregorie of Nyssa, who liued about twelue hundred yeres past, that syth Christ hath made his body and blood, in the blessed Sacrament of the altar, a medicine against that poy∣son, which Adā first, and in him all we tooke by tasting the apple against the commandement of God: it is not only profitable but , that as the poysoned apple entred in at Adams mouth, and was not only receaued by faith, spirit, and vnderstanding, but by hand, tong, iawes, and was digested into his bowells, and so poysoned all his flesh & blood, whereby the flesh that we tooke of Adam, was also  and poysoned, and our soules vnitedDriginall syn. to that infected flesh were also infected: euen so y• medicine (which is the body and blood of Christ made of bread and wine) must not only be receaued by faith, spirit and vnderstanding, neither only the figure of it must be receaued in at our mouthes and so be  into our bowels, but the body of Christ it self must come to our bodyes, and it must be receaued as really into them by our mouthes, as euer the apple came into the mouth of Adam. Who euer heard that when a mans body was really poysoned,The  re of a me  hea leth not. it should be sufficient to think vpon a certain true medicine, and to receaue withal the figure or signe therof into his body, not at all touching and receauing really ye medicine it self? And yet sure∣ly they that teache the body of Christ, to be  into our
bodies only by bread and wine the figures therof, and into our soules by faith and spirit, do manifestly tell him that is bodily poysoned, that it is enough for him to think in his mind vpon mithridaicum or some other medicine, and to receaue the token thereof into his body. Such is the physike and y• diuinitie of the Caluinists. Before that Adam had tasted of the apple, he was gtie of death in the sight of God concerning his own person and soule, in so much as in his hart he consented to taste thereof at his wyfesGen. 3. request. For he did not taste it so hastely, but that he first intended so to doe: yea S. Augustine saith it is not to be thought, y• deuyllAugust. de Gen. ad lit. li. 11. cap. 5. should haue throwen doune Adam, except a certain pride had ben first in his mynde. But when he tooke the apple into his mouth (to the eating whereof his hart had allready yelded) then had he brought the inward disobedience into the outward acte, so that he was inexcusable not only before God, but in the sight of an∣gels, of his wife, and of all creatures, his hands, his eyes, his mouth, his throte and stomack was now wytnes against hym. Thence came the dredfull necessitie of death to all the children of Adam, it was the tasting of his flesh which made all our flesh so farre gilty. That polluted body could not beget innocent chil∣drenIod. 14. with vncleane sede. Well. Christ is the second Adam which taketh away this obli∣gation1. Cor. 15 and bond of death that lay on our neckes. and he taketh it away, nt by force but by istice, changing and recompensingRo▪ 5▪ all that was before done amysse. For the corrupt generatiō which we haue by the sede of Adam, he geueth vs a new byrth in the Sa crament of water and renuing of ye holy Ghost, in which baptismTit. 3. our soule only is not cleansed, but our body also is washed. For the fruyt of death which Adam did ate as well in mouth as hart, he hath geuen the apple of lyfe, as well to be eaten in our mou∣thes
as in ou hates, so that as the olde Adam caryed a wytnes of damnation for hym and his posteritie in all his membres, so doth the new Adam with his children cary the witnes of lyfe in all their membres. They haue God and man not in hart alone,1. Cor. 10 but also in a Sacrament, yea in their ands, in their mouthes, in their bodyes, and become one with the flesh of Christ which they eate, as the apple, which Adam did eate, became one with his flesh. This was the supper that Christ came to make: not to gue bread and wyne, not to make figures and shadowes, not to geue vs a drinking in stede of a solemne feast. In comparyson of this banket all fayth is impet. For we eate the ende of our belefe.Spirit gifts are not here reproued, but Chr∣l is ∣fered be∣fore them all. Ephes. 4 All vnderstanding fayleth, in so much as more is in our mouth then we are able to comprehend in our wyt or mynde. All spiri∣tuall gyfts are inerlour, because the flesh is present which trium∣pheth ouer death, and ascending into heauen sytteth at the right hand of God, thence distributing gyfts vnto men. We haue the cause of all  present, and letting it go, shall we chiefly com∣mend the feast for ertayn spirituall effectes? In respect of Christes reall substance, thy supper O Caluyn is but a mere sauour of swete meates. Geue me the flesh of Christ, and take thou the sauour of it. But alas the sauour hath alredy2. Cor. 2. Caluin setteth foorth the kingom of y• deui, & abaseth y• kingd gifts of God. klled thee▪ so much the lesse I wonder, if thou art wery of the flesh it selfe. In setting forth our damnation in old Adam thou lackest neither diligence nor eloquence, thou hast therin set foorth the lumpe of perdition, the seuere doctrine of induration, the im∣potent weakenes of the wounded man, to helpe forward his owne destruction. But when thou commest to Christ the new Adam, he hath a sly pore vnknowen and vnsene cumpanie, fewe children, a cold supper, small offering of sufficient grace, his bap∣tisme is (with thee) lyke a marke set vpon shepe that sheweth
somewhat and worketh nothing, his Church hath no externa sacrifice, no priesthod, no one chief shepherd in earth, no autho∣ritie to make lawes, no communion of Sats (by the way of praying to them or for y• soules departed) no reall ioyning & vi∣ting with Christes flesh and blood in the holy mysteries. What is this but to preferr euill before good, the deuill before God, sha∣dowes before truth, vice before vertue, and the power of darknes before the kingdom of light? It is no eating now (as S. Paule1. Cor. 11 sayeth) of our Lords supper, for euery heretyke taketh a supper of his owne before hand, making Christes supper to geue place to hym. And that I maye speake nothing of so great change of commu∣nionsLuthers supper. as hath bene in England, Luther saith: that Christes words be proper, and that his supper is bread and flesh, wyne and blood, as though the immortall flesh of Christ must be eaten with materiall bread. How do mortal things agree with immor∣tal in one banket? Carolstadius supposeth that Christes words be proper, butCorolsta∣dius sup∣per. that he touching hym selfe on the brest, sayd: Take bread and wine, this is my body, which I touche as though it were a sup∣per mete for Christes making, if he only shewed his body to his Apostles which euer was in their sight, not suffering them to eate thereof. Zuinglius said, the bread and wine were only figures of Chri∣stesZuingli∣us sup∣per. body and blood, geuē to our bodies to represent to our harts te death of Christ. And that the words of Christes supper were figuratine only, by which reason the supper of the Paschall lam∣be was better then the supper of Christ, because the dead flesh of an vnspotted lambe was more apt then bread and wine, to shew the death of Christes innocent flesh, wich is the lambe of God,Ioan. 1. that taketh away the sinnes of the world.
Calin added to Zuinglius bare figures, an efficacie of feedingCaluins supper. by faith, and taught the words of Christ, not so much to be figura∣tiue, as words of promise, which being heard with faith, cause that the minde by faith eateth of Christ sitting in heauen. a mete supper for such a deuiser, who setting the men that should be fed vppon earth, kepeth the meate, wherof they should be filled, in heauen, promising them, who consist also of bodies mortal and corruptible, that they shall fede vpon immortall meat in their soules. such an eating were good for Angels, I denie not. but it is not the supper that Christ made to corporall men for his fare∣well, when he said: Take and eate, this is my body, and, DrinkeMatt. 26. ye all of this, for this is my blood. Taking with our bodies is more then beleuing in our soules, eating y• body of Christ is more then signifying the eating of his body. The meate is the body of Christ, the drinke is the blood of Christ. Beleue and thou hast it in harte, before thou commest to the table. But come to the blessed Sacrament of the altar, and thou hast it in thy mouth and body.Matth. 3. Bothe is better then one, Christ hath  and fullfilled all maner of iustice, he made both body and soule, redemeth both, fe∣deth both, rayseth both, crowneth both. He doth not now diuide the hand from the harte, the mouth from the minde, the figure from the thing, the token from the truth. That he sayth, he doth, that thou beleuest in heauen, thou receyuest at his table in earth. yea earth is heauen to thee (saith Chrysostom) through this my∣sterie,Chryso∣stom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. make his gift no lesse then he nameth it, leste for vnthank∣fullnes thou be giltie of iudgement. He that beleueth his plaine wordes is on the surer syde. The Corinthians fault concerning the supper of our Lord wasThe first fault of y• Corin∣thians. partely for that they came to it after they had eaten their own supper, and vndoutebly so doe heretyks. They first deuise with them seues what supper they will allow to Christ, and then they
come to his supper entending to conforme it to their forme deuise. Partely the  were reproued of S. Paule forThe'r se∣eōd fault. eating and drinking alone, without making their meate common to the poore. Euen so the heretiks eate and drinke alone, teaching that euery man eateth Christ only by ye measure of his own faith, which hath diuerse degrees in euery man, and therefore it makethRom 12. Ephes. 4 euery man eate Christ after his own faith only. Whereas the sup∣per of Christ is equall and common to all, as S. Cyprian, S. Hie∣rome, and Theodorite witnessed before. wherein he geueth oe , one blood, one person to all that come, without any respecteHieroni mus li. 2. aduer∣sus Ioui∣nianum. concerning the meate and substance of the supper, although not without discerning the diuerse merites of the geastes. It is the honour of him that maketh the feast, to haue the meate most boū∣tifull and most reall, howsoeuer the weak stomaks of euill men are able to beare it. Wilt thou yet see more plainly, how liberall Christ is in his sup∣per? All that he hath he geueth, for he geueth his own selfe indiffe∣rently to euery man that sitteth at his table, be the nian riche or poore, good or bad. The  of this feast at his table is the ma∣ker of the feast him selfe. Who sayeth so? Uerily he that cānot lye. Who after that he said: My flesh is meate in dede, douted not toIoan. 6. add moreouer, He that eateth me, shall liue for me, doing  to vnderstand, that by eating his flesh we eate himself. The same thing teacheth S. Hierom, a man worthy to be credi ted as well for his own great learning, as for yt tyme wherein he liued, and the faith wherof in his writing he witnesseth. S. Hie∣rome, I saie, expounding these wordes of  the Prophet,Hiero. in Ozeam. Capit. 11. Declinaui ad eum vt vesceretur, I bowed downe or turned in to him that he might eate, writeth thus, in Christes person: Declina∣ui ad eos deserens regna coelorum, vt cum eis vescerer assumpta forma hominis: siue, dedi eis esum corporis mei, ipse & cibus &
. Forsaking the kingdome of heauen I bowed downe or turned in to them, that the shape of mā being taken, I might eate with them: or else, I gaue them the meate of my body, I my selfeHieron. ad He∣dib. 2. being both the meate and the banketer or feaster. And yet he spe∣keth in an other place more plainly: Nec Moyses, &c. Neither Moyses hath geuen vs the true bread, but our lord Iesus him self the feaster and the feast, himself the eater and he that is eaten. Behold Christes supper. it may worthely be called his , for neuer any man made any such before him, he biddeth geasts and fedeth them with his owne flesh. He is at the table, as he was at the altar of his crosse. For these two things are in most points agreable. For this table is the  and reall remembrance of that crosse. As therefore vpon the crosse ChristAugusti∣nus. De Trinit. Libro. 4. Cap. 14. Esaie. 63 was the preist, who made the sacrifice, Christ the hoste that was killed, Christ the God to whom it was offred, Christ the head of that body of his Church for whom it was offered, & Christ alone played all partes, & non fuit de gentibus vir cum illo, and of all nations no man was with him: so likewise in the last supper, Christ  the geastes, telling them  yere before of his ban  at Capharnaum, and the hower being come, Christ geuethIoan. 13. Cypria∣nus De  Domini. water not only to their hands, but euen to their feete, Christ is the panter, Christ is the butler, as S. Cyprian also hath writen: Christ is the meate, Christ is the drinke, and what creature should haue parte with him in his supper? Are bread and wine mete ban ketting dishes for his table? They are in dede mete by their owt∣ward shew to signifie the supper of Christ, but not mete to be a substancial part therof. He that is Lord of heauen and earth, will he borow the substance of his creatures to make vp his feast? As though he lacked bread of his owne, or as though his flesh which is the true  conteining al swetnesse in it, lacked the swet∣nesse of wheaten bread or of materiall wine, as though Christ had
not better bread and meate of his , and better drinke of his owne then the grape maketh? and who shall haue them if he be without them? A great shame it is that either any thing should chalenge part in Christes supper besydes Christe himselfe, or that he should  the table with bare odours of spirituall grace, hauiug atColos. 2. commandement the substance of flesh and blood, wherein the full∣nes of Godhed dwelleth corporally. Think of Christes supper ac∣cording to the worship of him that made it, leaue bread and wine for Lutrish tables, beleue thou that Christ gaue no lesse to his geasts then he had to geue. for verily all that he toke, he toke it to geue for vs and to vs: for vs, vppon the crosse, and to vs, in his. 22. last supper. Both which he expressed manifestly, when he  saing: Take, eate, this is my body, which is geuen for you. that bo∣dy was geuen bloodily for vs in the forme of man, because he died for man. the same is vnbloodily geuen to vs in the form of bread, because man liueth by bread. But earthly bread is to maintein life to earthly men. Heauēly men eate the bread which came doun from heauen, which is the sonne of God assumpting the flesh of man. For the bread which Christ promised to geue, is his flesh forIoan. 6. the life of the world. His flesh is meate in dede, and his blood is brink in dede. Therefore who so teacheth the body & blood of Christ to be now receaued by faith & spirit only, he denieth the supper of our Lord, where the body was geuen by the hands of Christ, receaued withMatt. 26. the hands of the Apostles, eaten with their corporal mouthes, and the blood drunken out of the chalice of blessing, the which Christ1. Cor. 10 deliuered by their hands to their mouths and harts, by that mea∣nes feeding the whole man with his whole substance.
¶ A speciall  of Caluin is coned, who taught this is my body, which is geuen for you, to be words of promise in the way of preaching at Christes supper, whereas they are words of per∣foormance in the way of working. THe special authoritie that Caluin hath gotten through his scholars in England, moueth me specially to coufute, I can not tell whether I shall name it, his more false or more foolish opinion. Who perceauing the Catholiks wholy to stick to the most proper and most effectual words of Christes supper,Matt. 26 and therevpon to build the belefe of the real presence of his body and blood: thought best to inuegle the strength of those words, as much as might , & to bring them from doing to saying, from making to speaking, from perfoorming to promising. and there∣fore among manie other words of the same argument, thus he writeth. Atqui non panem alloquitur Christus, vt corpus suum fiat, sed discipulos iubet manducare, at{que} illis corporis & sangui∣nis sui communicationem pollicetur, & caet. But Christ speakethThe words of  in his insti∣tutions De coe∣na Do. not to the bread, that it might be made his body, but he comman∣deth his disciples to eate, and he promiseth them the communica∣ting of his body and . And afterward: Let vs vnderstand those words to be a liuely preaching, which may edifie the hea∣rers, etc. which in the fulfilling of that it promiseth, may bring foorth his efficacie. Hytherto Caluin. whose worthy scholars haue consecrated that vnsensible deuise of his in the booke of theirThe wor∣des of the  the leafe 213. pag.  English homilies. Where after an exhortation made that men should come them selues to communion, it is sayd: To this Christes commandement forceth vs, saying, do ye thus. to this, his promise enticeth vs, this is my body which is geuen for you, this is my blood which is shed for you. This fault I find with my countriemen. There can not be a
foolish saying in al Germanie or uicherland which they mustThe  of the En∣glish new preachers. not allow, follow, preache to their audience, and set foorth in print. And therefore if euery man might haue his will, so many schismatical Churches as they had see beyond the seas, so many orders of communion they wold haue embraced. Men that neuer brought foorth of them selues any thing worthy name, and yet neuer saw in other places so apish a toye, which they did not wonder at, and gredeily practise. Wherein they are both most like their master Caluin, for so much as they specially follow his peuish inuentions: and most vnlike him, because he followed none other man in his doctrine, but himself inuented a new reli∣gion of his own making. What say we then? This is my body which is geuen for you, are they words of promise, or no? I answere. Words of promiseWords of promise are of two sorts. Gala. 4. may be taken for suche as make a promise, or els for suche as haue a promise made cōcerning them. Those who beleue in God (as Isaac did) are named in holy scripture the children of pro∣mise, not of that promise which themselues make to God, but because through the grace of God which he promised before to Abraham in his blessed sede (Iesus Christ) they are made his chilGen. 18. 20. 22. Galat. 3. dren. And in that sense This is my body which is geuen for you, may be called words of promise, in so much as they fulfil at Chri∣stes supper the promise made before at Capharnaū, When Christ sayd: work the meate which the sonne of man will geue you, andIoan. 6. the bread which I wil geue is my flesh. Again these words which is geuen for you, at the tyme of Chri stes supper might stand to signifie, which shalbe geuen for you, and so the old Fathers did reade them, and the Latin copies of S. Paule haue so at this daye. But the the promise was to be. Cor. 11 consydered concerning the death of Christ, which was to come, and not concerning his supper which was present.
Caluin speaking of Christes supper as it is a supper, saithHow Cal uin taketh the name of promise De Coe∣na Dom. (this is my body which is geuen for you) be words of promise, and that, not because they are iustified concerning a former pro∣mise made at Capharnaum, neither concerning the death which is now past: but because they make a promise of Christes body to be spiritually eaten at his supper. For he saith, those words were not spoken to the bread & wine, but vnto the disciples, to whom Christ (pollicetur) promiseth the communicating of his body and blood. Also he saith, the promises are offered to the faithfull toge∣ther with bread and wine. Moreouer, let vs vnderstand (saith he) these words to be a liuely preaching, which maie shew his effica∣cie in the accomplishement of that it promiseth. First these words be a breif collation or sermon. Secondly they promise the cōmunicating of Christes ody. Thirdly they being receaued of the faithfull, bring forth in them that effectual eating of Christ which they promise. Last of al he saith, Take, eate, is the commandement like vnto Inuoca me, call vpon me. This is my body, is the promise like vnto Exaudiam te, I will heare the. I am the longer in shewing his mind, because I feared it might be thought of wise men a great slaunder to faine so folish an opi∣nion vpon a man taken for wise and lerned. For it semeth an ex∣treme madnesse, to affirm that those words, which shew a thing really present, and bid vs take the same, are notwithstandingMatt. 17. words of promise. At the transfiguration of Christ, it was said, this is my derebeloued sonne, in whom I haue delighted, heare him. But who was euer so mad as to think, that Christ was promised in those words, and not rather shewed present? Like∣wiseMatth. 9. when Christ said to him that had the palsey, take a good hart sonne, thy sinnes are forgeuen thee, we beleue his sinnes were presently forgeuen him, and not only a promise made that hereafter they should be forgeuen.The diffe rence be∣twene a promise & a perfoor∣mance. A promise lacketh many conditions, which the performance hath. A promise beginneth the bargain, the perfoormance endeth at the least some part of it. A promise consisteth in bare words,
the perfoormance besyde words hath dedes also ioyned. A pr mise belongeth to the time to come, the performance to the tyme present. A promise maie be differred to a certain daie, or suspended with conditions, the perfoormance must edes be altogether without delay. And how can, these words, Take, eate, this is my body, which is geuen for you, be words of promise, which neither speake of the time to come, but of the present: neither begyn, but end the couenant: nor consist in bare talk, but also in reall dedes, nor haue any condition or delay annexed, but haue all things pre∣sently said, signified, made and deliuered? If, this is my body, make to y• hearers a promise of a spirituall communicating, then seing those words were spoken to IudasMatt. 26. Luc. 22. one of the twelue, and are daily spoken to euil men without any condition or exception: it maie seme that a spirituall communica∣ting is promised to them, which possibly can not be so. For how can light and darknesse agree? But if Caluin saie these words promise the body of Christ only to the faithfull, I aske whether those words be writen in the supper of Christ, or no? If they be not writen, how dareth Caluin supply them? It is not said, this is my body to you only that be faithfull (as Caluin vseth falselyIoan. 6. 1. Cor. 11 Matt. 26. to interprete those words) But it is absolutely said, This is my body, whosoeuer take it, and eate it, whether he take it by faith, to his comfort and to euerlasting life, or in deadely sinne, to his iudgement and death. For as God the Father said, This is myMatth. 3. derebeloued sonne, and as thereof it foloweth, that the person then shewed and pointed vnto by y• voice, was y• sonne of God in dede, whether euill men had to doe with him (to whom he was y•2. Cor. 2. sauour of death) or good men (to whom he was ye sauour of life) right so, this is my body was said of one certain thing then bles∣sed, be ye man y• cometh to eate it, good or bad. And as this is my derebeloued ne are no words of promise but of a diuine witnes
oward Christ: euen so this is my body, promise not, but witnesse and make presently the thing shewed to be in dede Christes body. If this is my body, doe promise the body of Christ, & yet (this) must nedes shew where the thing is whereunto it pointeth: theThis, ∣inteth to  thing. body of Christ which is promised, is also pointed vnto. and the sense is, I will geue you this thing to eate, which is my body: and by that meanes the eating is promised, and the body is poin∣ted to, but the pointing can be directed to none other sensible thing, but vnto that which semeth bread. therfore that is affirmed to be Christes body, and is promised to be geuen vs as meat. bu bread is not naturally the body of Christ, therfore it is made his body. And consequently Caluin who will haue these words to promise the ing of Christes body by faith, must nedes confesse that they make the same body in dede, to th'nd the promise of ea∣ting yt body, which is so directly pointed vnto, maie be fulfilled. Howbeit Christ said not, I will geue you my body, but presently geuing, said, take, eate, this is my body. But seing Caluin teacheth, this, that is pointed vnto, still to remain bread, I see not how those words which (as he saith) point vnto bread, can withall promise the body of Christ. For the proposition is simple, and affirmeth but one thing, and that thing doth concerne the substāce, as we beleue, of Christes body, as he saith, of bread, so that none other thing can  inferred vpon those words, then what thing this is (as we saie) or what thing this bread doth signifie, as the Sacramentaries teache. Admit now it were expresly said, this bread is the signe of Christes body, (which sense is salsely ascribed to those words by the Zuinglians) yet it wold not follow therevpon, that the body of Christ is promised to our soules, but only that by this bread we are brought to remember Christ. Now as for eating it is commanded, and not promised,
Caluin had the cheif property of an heretike, which was to be singular. And therein he delighted so much, that albeit he was determined not to tarie in the faith wherein he was Christened,Caluin wold ∣des set vp a new re∣ligion. yet he wold neither goe to Luther (who first withdrew himself from vs) nor to Zuinglius (whose sect he fauored rather) but he wold make a religion of his own. And therfore he deuised a new sense of Christes words. Affirming This is my body, not to be spoken to the bread (as both Catholiks, Lutherans and Zuingli∣ans after diuers meanings doe confesse) but to be words of prea∣ching, made vnto the people that stand about the Priest, and that these words promise the body of Christ to al that beleue his death and resurrection, as verily as that bread is really eaten into their bodies, and yet neither be the words conceied in the manner of promising, neither do they speake of faith, or death, or of the resur∣rection of Christ, or of eating bread. Is not this a strang sense, to pick out of these words: This is my body? as if it were said: Ma∣sters, beleue that Christ is dead and risen again, and then, as this bread is eaten of your bodies, so certainly shal you fede of his bo∣dy in faith & spirit. Did uer any man heare of such a ? Hoc, This, doth signifie and shew to Caluin the bread which must be eaten at the supper of Christ, and pointeth also to a spirituall food which is promised. Est, Is, doth stand both properly for the present time, in y• it is a signe of Christes body at ye tyme of spea∣king, and also vnproperly for the tyme to come, in that it is a pro∣mise of his body to be eaten spiritually. Corpus meum, My body doth signifie to him, the signe of my body taken by mouth, and the strēgth or vertue therof that shalbe taken by faith and spirit. Put together: This bread which you bodily eate, is the signe, & this thing which I promise that your soules shall eate, shallbe the strēgth or efficacie of my body (and yet he addeth farther of his owne) to them that beleue Christes death and resurrection.
This is the sermon which Caluin saith was made at Christes supper. Wherein euery word must signifie at once two or three things. and one verb in one tense must signifie two tymes. and the same word body, must signifie two proprieties, and yet nei∣ther of them both properly. For whether body stand for signe of body (as he wold haue it taken in respect of bread) it standeth vn∣properly, or whether i stand for efficacie of body (as he wold haue it taken in respect of the communicants) it standeth vnpro∣perly: whereas the proper signification thereof is to signifie the substance of Christes body. If we presse him out of S. Paul and1. Cor. 11 out of the Fathers, that euil men eate the body of Christ, then he will answere they eate the signe of his body, without promise or efficacie. If we saie, that good men eate the body of Christ, he ex∣poundeth it in such sense, that they first haue it promised them, & ate both a certain pledge bodily, and in their soules a spirituall efficacie thereof. O crafty deuiser. If thou canst thus deceaue a sort of miserable, and either vn∣lerned or vngraciouse men, thinkest thou to deceaue God or to escape his terrible iudgement? Agree at the last, how euery word shalbe so taken, that thy interpretation maie be like it self. Let not the same word be now a signe, now a pledge, now a promise, now an efficacie, & now again no efficacie, no promise, no pledge but only a signe. We beleue that euery word standeth properly. And that both euill and good receaue one and the same substanceThe Ca∣tholike interpreta tion o Christes words. of Christes body. But as one medicine receaued of two diuerse complexions worketh not one effect: so the good men haue a good effect by eating worthely the body of Christ, the euill haue condemnation by eating it vnworthely. Thus we take the word body, for the reall substance of the body. the verb, est is, we take properly, because it is in dede Christes body, when the words are spoken. This, we saie, doth finally point to the substance of
Christes body as then prently made vnder the foorm of bread. In our interpretation there is no inconstancy, no impropriety, no changing of significations in the same words, no bare promising of a thing to come, bt a present perfoormance. If any man aske by what scriptures I conuince Caluin, I wold first now by what scriptures he proueth his lewed interpretation. Shall he speake a thing without scripture beside all truthe and reason, and shall not we be credited, vnlesse we conuince him by scripture? Howbeit let vs forgeue that iniurie, and confute his fond piniō by the word of God. Caluin saith, This ys my body, be words of promise, against which saing thus I reason. S. Paule intending to shew that God was not bound to the carnall Iewes, because they were the chil∣dern of Abraham by flesh, but that rather he wold reward them who were the children of Abraham by faith and spirit, declareth Isaac to haue ben the child of promise, because the Angell said to Abraham, Secundum hoc tempus veniam, & erit Sarae filius: I will come according to this tyme, and a sonne shalbe vnto Sara. out of which words S. Paule proueth a promise. How so? Pro∣missionisRom. 9. enim hoc verbum est. For this word or saing, is a word of promise. which word is that? Veniam, I will com, & filius rit, a sonne shalbe, as if S. Paule said, wil, &, shall, be words of pro∣mise. For when a speache is conceiued for the tyme to come with  circumstance that it maie appere the speaker meant to war∣rant the thing spoken, it maketh a promise. If, I will come, and  sonne shalbe, are words of promise: I am come and a sonne is, be words of perfoormance. and that is also conirmed out os the word of God. Where it is writn, the Lord visited Sara, as he had. 21. promised, and fulfilled the things which he spake. and she concei∣ued, and brought foorth a sonne at y• tyme wherein god had fore∣old , that which was before in S. Paul named a promise is
ow called also a foretelling or prediction. For albeit euery pre∣dictionA promi is a predi∣ction. be not a promise, yet euery promise is a prediction and a telling before hand. so that we haue in the word of God, that a promise telleth a thing before hand, yea that a promise is concei∣ued for the time to come. For it could not be told before hand, if it were not to come in respect of him to whom it is told. But these words, This is my bdy, do not tell a thing before hand. they doe not belong to the time to come, but vnto the time present. therefore they be not words of promise. they do not saie this shal∣be my body, but this is my body. Who knoweth not yt there are three differences of tyme, one pa, an other present, & the third to come? out of question a promise i self is of a thīg to come. therfore ye words of promising must nedes be words that may belōg to ye time to come. For the nature of the time is applied to ye nature of the thig. except they be suche words as being inuented principally to signifie y• present bond of yt thing to come, do contein at once eche strength in them. as when we say polliceor, spondeo, {pro}mitto: I promise. & then it is all one to say▪ I promise to gee, or, I will geue. which thig is proued by y• custom of all nations which speak so, and by the autoritie of the auncient ciuilians who when they bound men most strightly to words and termes, yet they gaue them leaue to say, any of these follo∣wing, as being all of equall power: Spondes? spondeo. Promit∣tis?In , de verb. oblig. promitto. Fideiubes? . Dabis? dabo. Facies? faciam. Where these words are put for words of like meaning ad sense, doest thou promise, or wilt thou geue, or wilt thou doe? al which induce and make both a promise and an obligation of words. Whereby we lern y• words of promise either must be vttered by expressing the name of promise, as if Christ should saie: I pomise him the eating of my body, who  eateth with saith this bread: or ls must be  in the fure tense, as if it were said: Take,
cate, this shalbe my body to you: but seing neither of both is don, it is a vain folly to saie that words of present affirmation, words o working & consecrating, be words of promise or of preaching. Yea but God speaketh not to the bread (saith Caluin) that it should be made his body. But he commandeth his Disciples to eate, and he promiseth them the communicating of his body and blood. In dede God saith to his Disciples, take, and eate. But that is a commandement, and no promise. He saith farther, this is my body. and that is the making of the meate which must be eaten, and the shewing of it, but no promise. For Christ maketh his sup∣per ready by dede alone, or by his word & dede together. by dede alone in taking bread: by his word and dede together in blessing and saying, this is my body. which words turn the substance of bread into his body. so that these words doe not promise any thing, but they perfoorm an old promise made before at Caphar∣naum. What saie we then to  words, who affirmeth, that Christ spake not to the bread, that it should be made his body, but that he spake to his Disciples? I answere, he spake y• words, eate and take, to his Disciples, but he spake these words (this is my body) to the bread, or (as the Catholiks rather vse to speake) ouer the dread, and vpon the bread. But yet we might saie very well and truly, that Christ spake to the bread, euen as he is rea∣ to haue commanded the windes, and they cessed, and to haueMatth. 8 Matt 21. Matt. 17. spoken to the figtree, when he said let sruite neuer spring more of the. And as he said, the Apostles hauing faith should speake to any certain hil, Transi hine illuc, & transibit, passe from this place to that, and it shall passe from hence. The speaking of God or of his ministers to any creature, whether it be a reasonable a sensi∣ble or a diuine creature, is the signisying that his wil is don al∣wayes
vpon euery creature, according as it pleaseth him. neither oth it skyll in what foorm of words he speaketh, seing that som∣time he is readen to saie, Volo, I will, Mundare, e thou cleanied.Matt. 8. Somtime he saith: Sicut credidisti iat tibi, be it don to the as thou  beleued. Somtime he cureth by touching alone withoutMatt. 9. words. Somtime he saith in the present tense: Remittātur tibi pec  tua, thy sinnes are forgeuē thee. And thereūto these words of his supper are like. For when he toke bread and hauing bled,Matt. 26. said: This is my body: His word at that instant made his body of that bread which was taken, euen as these words, thy synnes are forgeuen thee, made a iust man of a synner. The speaking therefore of God vnto creatures is the shewingIob 38. of his will to be don vpon them. In so much that in Iob God confesseth himself only to dispose, order, and command all crea∣tures. he sedeth lightings and they goe, and returning they saie to him, adsumus, here we are. which thing they could not say, ex∣cept they heard his voice. Therefore it is not wel said of Caluin, to make it an absurd thing for bread to heare the words of Christ, seing they doe not only heare, but also answer in so much that an. . other Prophet saith, the starres were called, and they said: Adsu∣mus, we are at haud. To be short, S. Paul saith, that God callethRom. 4. things that be not, as things that be. Meaning, that it is no lesse easy to God by his calling or naming to make a thing to be which was not at all, or els to be that which before it was not, then it is to call a thing by his old name. It is all one to God to saie toIoan. 2. vs, this is water which before was water, and to saie of water, thi is wine. for at his word it is made wine as who cannot possibly . and seing experience teacheth vs, that all crea∣ture will go against their own particular nature, rather then the order which God hath appointed in y• whole world, shall in any oint faile, seing when a quill is put into any liquour, & the ayer
thereof drawen vp with his breath that sucketh it, y• heauy  of water will rather against his nature goe vpward, then any voide or emptie place should be. shall we yet wonder that Gods will is don euery where euen at y• speaking of his word shall not his visible  make faith of his inuisible & mysticall doings,Roma. 1. so tht all which will not beleue, shalbe inexcusabe? Caluin saith, Christ spake not to the bread. I tell him, he spake to the bread, not as to a thing that should tarie bread, but as to that which should be chāged into his body: for he called the bread his body. will Caluin graunt me that, or no? If he will not, I bring foorth Tertullian, one that is nere had fourtene hundredTertull. aduersus Marcio∣nem. Libr. 4. yeres old, who saith that Christ called the bread his body. Panem corpus suum appellat. He calleth the bread his body. But we can not call a thing, except we speake vnto it. Therefore when Christ called the bread his body, he spake vnto the bread, as if he had said to the bread, be thou my body. For as it is all one in Christ to saie, let thy synnes be forgeuen, and thy synnes are forgeuen: so it isMatth. 9. one to saye concerning a certain bread which was taken: Let this be my body, or this is my body. with whatsoeuer words the mind of Christ be vttered, out of question it is allwaies fullfilled. But among all kind of vtterāce, none is more plain to vs, then when a thing is clerely armed to be this or that: for then it is made plain to vs, not only that God wold haue it so, or wisheth it to be so, but that really and in dede it is so. Christ calleth bread his bo∣dy: Therfore Caluin saith fals, when he affirmeth that Christ speaketh not to the bread to th'end it might be made his body. You will say, calling is not making. yeas for fout, in God, in Christ, in those whom Christ willeth to call one thing, and make thereof an other thing, in all them calling is making. Men call a thing by the name of the former nature, but God in calling anyThe cal∣ of Go. thig, or in willing it to be called by a new name changeth the
former nature, and maketh it to be as he called it. And there∣fore when the Prophet  wold signifie that the gentils and panims should be turned to the faith, how doth he vtterOzee. 2. that matter? Saith he not in the person of God: Dicam non populo meo, populus meus es tu? I will saye to that which is not my people, thou art my people? Dicam. I will saye it. And trow ye, his saying is not don? Yes it solloweth immediatly. Et ipse dicet: Deus meus es tu. And the people it self shall say, thou art my God. which thing the people could not saye, ex∣cept in dede it were conuerted and made the people of God from the people of infidelity. And therfore S. Paul him self expoundeth this place of Osoe, by the word of calling, andRoma. 9.  Vocabo non plebem meam, plebem meam. I will call that, which is not my people, my people: & erit in loco vbi dictumOzee. 1. Roma. 9. est eis, non plebs mea vos, ibi vocabuntur filij Dei. And it shall come to passe in the plate, where it hath ben said to them, ye are not my people, there they shalbe called the sonnes God. After which sort when Christ hauing taken bread and blessed, said: This is my body: That saying was the calling of that which was before, Non corpus Christi, not the body of Christ. Corpus Christi, the body of Christ. In this sense S. Ambroise saith: Ante benedictionem ver∣borumDe ijs qui init. myster. Capit. 9. coelesm alia species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus significatur. Ipse dicit sanguinem suum ante consecratio∣nem aliud dicitur, post consecrationem sanguis nuncupatur. Et tu dicis, Amen, hoc est, verum est. quod os loquitur, mens interna fateatur. Quod sermo sonat, affectus sentiat. Before the blessing of the heauenly words it is named an other kind, after consecra∣tion the body is signified. himself saith (or nameth) his blood. Before consecration it is named (or sayd) an other thing.
ater consecration it is called blood. and thou , Amen,  is to saie, it is true. That which the mouth speaketh, let the in∣ward mind cousesse, that which the speache soundeth, let the har think. Here we lern by S. Ambrose, that the naming, signisying, or calling bread and wine the body and blood of Christ, is both  uident signe, that Christ spake to bread and wine (otherwis then Caluin said) and also the making of them to be in dede so s they are called and signified. also he sheweth y• custome of y• pri∣matiue Church to haue ben, that immediatly before communio when y• Priest said, the body of Christ, the people vsed, to answer: Amen, it is true: it is in dede his body. And as the word body soundeth, and as our confirmation thereof soundeth: so he requi∣reth vs to beleue confesse and think. certainly there is none othe thing sounding to our eares besyde the name of body. Likewise Tertullian hauing witnessed that Christ called the bread his bo∣dy,Tertull. aduers. Marcio∣ lib. 4. witnesseth also that he made the bread which was taken and distributed to the Disciples, his body. Fecit panem corpus suum. He made the bread his body, in saying, This is my body, that is to saye, the figure of my body. But neither calling nor naming, no saying, nor the being of a figure, stoppeth any thing y• reall truth of Christes body. the Sacrament is the figure of Christes body, because it sheweth his death vntill he come, as S. Paul saith. But as Christ is the figure, or print and form of his Fathers sub∣stance,1. Cor. 11 and yet also his substance in dede: euen so the SacramentHebr. 1. is a figure of Christ, and Christ in dede. Christ, as an other person beside his Father, so is he the figure of his substance. But other∣wise in truthe he is throughly the same substance. euen so, as the Sacrament is another maner of Christes presence, so it is a fi∣gure either of his visible body, or of his death. But concerning the truth of substance, all is one. Thus without all controuersy
the  of  ords standeth vpright. And his naming, signifying, figuring, calling, is the making of a thing to be that which it is named bi him, signified, figured, or called. He hath saidPsal. 14 & the things are made. Ther can be none more grosse, more vile, more blasphemous opiniō, then to think y• Christ is a bare man▪ that his word is like our word, or his figures and Sacraments like our figures, or like the figures of the old law. Looke what oddes is betwen God and man, so much beleue thou to be also betwen his naming, or his figures of the new Testament, and all other figures. His figures contein the self same substance which they expresse in figure, signe, or name, whereof God wylling I will intreat more hereafter. It is at this tyme to be cōsydered, y• seing the Sacramēt of ChriLucae. 2. 1. Cor.  stes supper, is ye remēbrance of yt great sacriice made by his death vpō y• crosse: It self also must nedes partake that nature, whereof it is the remembrance, & consequētly it must be certeinly beleued to be a true sacrifice, as that of ye crosse was. In euery publike sa∣ ther is a thing offered & vowed vnto God, & the act which offereth & voweth it, apperteiueth as wel to the thing  (by the meane of doing sumwhat about it) as vnto God, to whom the oblation is theifly dedicated. As therefore when a lamb is sa∣crificed,Leuiti▪ 1. Math. 21. hands are layed vpon the lambs head, the lamb is killed, burnt or eaten, and all that while God in the lamb is honoured, prayed vnto, blessed, thanked and praised: euen so when the bread is taken, the words (which are the instrument to make our sa∣crifice) are spoken to the bread i the way of vowing and dedica∣ting it vnto Christ, into whose flesh it is turned by his almighty word in such sort, that God is withal the last end of the whole of∣fering, to whom this thnkful sacrifice is made. For S. IreneusIreneus. Libro. 5. aduersus haereses. hath witnessed, that when the mixed chalice and the bread broken percipit verbum Dei, taketh the word of God, the Eucharist of
the blood and body of Christ is made. Ireneus saith, the  taketh the word of God. Caluin affirmeth that Christ speaketh not vnto the bread. As though the bread could take that word, which is not directed vnto it. Bread is the matter of the Eucha∣rist, to witt, of the most thankful sacrifice of Christes supper. Words are the instrument which the word of God vseth in wor∣king and consecrating the bread. When the words come vnto the bread, or (as S. Ireneus speaketh) when the bread taketh, and re ceaueth, or heareth y• word of God, y• Eucharist of Christes body and blood is made. Is a thing made of bread by words, and yet doth not Christ speake those words vnto y• bread? How cā words work or make any thing, but by speaking? In an other place likewise S. Ireneus saith: panis percipiensIreneus auersus haeres. li. 3 Cap. 34. vocationem Dei, bread receauing the calling of God is not now common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, one earthly, an other heauenly. The earthly thing is y• old soorm o bread, y• heauenly is y• body of Christ newly made vnder yt ▪ And yet doth not Christ speak vnto bread, to  it should be made his body? Iustinus Martyr intreating of the self same sacrifice, writethIustinus Martyr▪ In apo∣log. 2. thus: Cibum qui per verbum precationis, quod ab eo accepimus, consecratus est, Iesu Christi carnem & sanguinem esse accepimus. We haue learned yt sood which is consecrated by y• word of prayer (which we toke of him) to be y• flesh and blood of Iesus Christ. Thre is a kind of meate or food cōsecrated. by what meanes? by the word of prayer, which we toke of Christ. What word can yt be I pray you, but only, This is my body? Caluin thought they had bene words of preaching, but Iustinus scholar vnto y• Apo∣stles, calleth them words of prayer, because he that speaketh them mindeth by yt speaking, to make a sacrifice vnto God, which is y• highest kind of prayer & of worshipping God y•  be. Of which
kind Christ said: my howse shalbe called yt howse of prayer. Prea∣chingMath. 21. is principally directed vnto ye people, prayer only to God. But among all prayers, yt which is most peculiar to publike sacri fice, is most proper vnto God. For he that offereth sacrifice to any other thing besyde to God alone, is most properly an idolatour. Now seing Caluin is content yt y• word of prayer and sacrifice, which we receaued of Christ, shalbe so principally directed to the people, y• it shall not in ye like degree appertein to ye bread (whichCaluin is shewed to be an ido∣latour. is yt matter of our sacrifice,) I say he is content, yt▪ sacrifice by na∣ture dew to God alone, be offered vnto mortal men. & because in stede of God (to whom these words are chiefly directed) he hath placed y• ticklish eares of y• rude multitude, he hath cōmitted mayn idolatry. As chosing to speake these words (This is my body) altogether to the men standing about him, whereas they are dew finally to God aloue, and by ye way of sacrificing, appertein to ye bread, which is chāged into Christes body. As therefore if a manActo. 14. should kil an ox or a Calf, referrig ye last end thereof vnto yt people which standeth by, he should vndoubtedly be an idolatour: euen so when he affirmeth y• those words (which by y• appointment of Christ, make y• Eucharist & sacriice of thanksgeuing vnto God) ought to be spoken to ye people, as for ye cheif vse where vnto they were created, he not only committeth, but also defendeth mayn idolatry. Which is  most grosse fault yt euer was don by so spiri∣tual a worshipper of Christ, as Caluin wil seme to be. Ad Pres by terorū preces (saith S. Hierom) Christi corpus sanguis{que} consici∣tur:Hierony mus ad  to. 2. The body and blood of Christ is made at the prayers of the Priests. Doutlesse at none other prayers, then wherein they say  y• mind of sacrificing,  bread, This is my body, & ouer wine this is my blood.  speaking of these words y• body & bloodAugusti∣nus in Psal. 39. of Christ be ,  these words promise nothing. For as S. Augustine .  abstulit verba promittētia,
The  or the perfienesse of the thigs promised, ha taken away the promising words. And again. Tam diu quis{que} promissor est donec det, cum dederit, mutat verba, non dicit ad∣huc dabo, quod se daturum dicebat, sed dicit, dedi, mutauit ver∣bum. So long euery man is one that proiseth, vntil he geue. When he hath geuen, he changeth the words. He saith not stil: I wil geue, of y• which he said he wold geue: but he saith, I hau geuen. He hath chaged the word. S. Augustine putteth a diffe∣rence betwene a ger and a promiser. Betwene words, & dedes, betwene sayings and doings. He accompteth dabo, I wil geu for a word of promise, but dedi, I haue geuen for a word of per∣ance. Seing therefore Christ in his supper did not say he wold geue his body to the faithful, but said expresly take, eate, thi is my body, and seing the Euangelist saith of that fact, dedit Di∣scipulis, he hath geuen to his Disciples, out of question y• words which are ioyned with a reall gift, be not verba promissiua, sed completiua: as S. Augustine nameth them, they are not words which promise, but which accomplish and fulfil the former pro∣mise. And now to return to the forer talke of sacrifce, they are such words as fulfil the act of the sacrifice, and therefore they are called of Iustinus Martyr, . Orationis aut voti verbū.Iustinus in apol. 2 Augusti∣us. pist 59 . Tim. 2. the word of prayer or of vow. or (as S. Augustine hath well no∣ted in expounding the words of S.  to Timothe,) ea pro∣prie intelligenda est oratio, quam facimus ad votum. That is pro∣perly vnderstanded to be prayer which is made at vowing, that is to saye, which we make with a special owing and rering vnto God of our selues, or of some  thing where by we pro  our faith. So that the word of prayer in the Eucharist, is the word which voweth and dedicateth vnto God the substance of y• bread
and wyne, which is taken to be consecrated. Vouentur autemThe obla tion of the  to . omnia que offeruntur Deo, maximè sancti altaris oblatio. Truly all things are vowed (saith S. Augustine) which are offered vnto God, specially the oblation of the holy altar. We bring bread and wyne to the altar to offer them. That offering is a vowing of them to God. When are they vowed? When the word of vowing or of prayer is spoken. When is that prayer made? S. Augustine sheweth in the same place: Orationes accipimus dictas, cum illudEpist. 59 (quod est in Domini mensa) benedicitur & sanctificatur, & ad di∣stribuendum comminuitur. We take prayers to be sayd, when that which is on the table of our Lord, is blessed and sanctified, and broken to be distributed. Mark whether S. Augustine speake like Caluin or no. thatS. Augu  reth  words, this is y body to  vpon y• ta∣ble, & not vnto the audience. which is on the table is blessed, that is sanctified, that is broken, that is distributed, that blessing & sanctifying is made by prayer, that prayer is the vowing to God, of that which is brought to the table, which was bread and wine. The word of vowing is to saye ouer it, This is my body. For the sense of these words is, that Christ so estly offereth, so throughly voweth the substance of bread and wine to the honour of God, that he maketh them by his almighty power the same flesh and blood of Christ, which is vnited to the sonne of God in one person. This only is the offe∣ring and vowing of an outward thing, which came to that per∣fectionGen. 14. Psal. 109. whereunto in the  of  it was destenied. Because the Priest (who offered it according to the order of ) is God as well as man. The instrument of this great sacrifice, the word of this prayer, ye execution of this vow, are theMarci. 14 words of Christ, who said in the waie of blessing, of thāksgeuing, o praying, and of vowing or of offering to God, This is my bo∣dy, which is geuen for you, doe and make this thing for the re∣membranceLucae. 22. of me.
Caluin wold neither haue prayer nor vow, nor any sacrifice made vnto God in these words, but hath with swete poysoned talk, made of them a promise & apreaching to the people, geuing to man the  of sacrifice dew  God only. But S. IreneusLib. 4. cap. 32. witnesseth, that Christ hauing taken bread, and geuen thanks, said, This is my body, and confe the chalice to be his blood. Et noui testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, and he taught a new oblation of the new testament. Which also he proueth out oMalac. 1. Malachie the Prophet. Caluin wold the words to be spoken without working any thing vpon the brend: as who should say, the bread could be offe∣red according to the state of any law or testament, and yet no change of substance be made therein. Caluin wold the working to be only in the minds of y• hearers, whereas y• gospell teache that Christ hauing taken bread, said: This is my body. But Cal∣uin imagineth, that he spake not to the bread, but sayd to the peo∣ple, this bread is a witnesse that you shall cae my body, whereas the bread it self was by those words made Christes body, and so made, that it was his body, as sone as the word was spoken. So saith Bregorius Nyssenus, who writeth that the bread is chāgedIn Orat. . into the body of Christ, statim vt dictum est  verbo: Hoc est cor∣pus meum, straight as sone as it is sayd of the word (of God) thi is my body. S. Chrysostom sheweth the words to be spoken byChryso. hom. de prodio ne Iud. to. 3. Ambros. de Sacra. lib. 4 c. 5 the Priests mouth: who saith, This is my body. Hoc verbo prop sita consecrantur. With this word the things set foorth are con∣secrated. S. Ambrose saith: Vbi verba Christi operata fuerint, san∣guis efficitur, qui plebem redit. When y• words of Chist haus wrought, the blood is made which hath  the people. Is it nt a great madnesse to resist thee witnesses? Or can the thngs set foorth, which are  and wine be consecrate, be chand, e made the body &  of Christ, & not be
I might bring against Caluin whatsoeuer the Catholikes teache or saie of the reall presence of Christes body and blood, of , and of the sacrifice. For  word destroyeth this foolish inuention of promising and preaching. It shalbe now sufficient to shew, that the whole East and West Church by diuerse meanes yet conformably destroye that erroneouse opiniō of Caluin. In the East Church the words of consecration, This is my bo∣dyThe cu∣stom of y• East Churche at conse∣cration. which is geuen for you: and likewise of the blood, are spoken with so lowd avoice, that the whole Church maie here the Priest pronouncing them. And immediatly after eche of the words the quere and people cried out Amen. Which doth signific, as S. Am∣broseDe iis qui init. cap. 9. hath expounded it, Verum est, it is true. Wherby all those Churches did signifie, that the body and blood of Christ was pre∣sently made, when the people affirmed it to be true, and yet no∣man had at that tyme receaued the communion. Therefore thse words, This is my body, which is geuen for you, and, this is my blood, which is shed for you, Which Caluin calleth words of promise made to the receauers, are witnessed by y• whole Churh to be true presently, and so to be perfoormed, lg before any man receaue cither kind. On the other side in the West Churche the same words are spo∣kenThe cn∣stom of the west hurch in conse∣crating. secretly oer the bread and the wine, and immediatly after the pronouncing of eche words, the body and blood of Christ is adored of all the people, because it is really conteined nder the foormes of bread and wine. Which auncient custome of secretly pronouncing these words, This is my body, shew they are neither words of promise nor of preaching. If they were words of pro∣mise or of preaching, they should be spoken to the people out of the chaire, or pulpit, or some like place. But now they are spokn at the alar of God, and not at all directed to the people, as the
which  to yt office of  Priesthod, whereunto y• peo∣ple is not called. For as the high Bishop among the Jewes wentHebr. 9. alone, and that but one day in the whole yere into ye Holy of Ho∣lies in the temple of Salomon: right so when the Priest goeth to consecrate the Holy of all Holies (which is the body and blood of Christ) it is most conneniently ordeined, that he alone enter . And this custom is in that West Church which S. Pe∣ter and S. Paule planted with their preaching, and watered with their blood. This is the Church which S. Ambrose honou∣red so , that albeit himself in manie points followed in his seruice the  rite and manner, yet he openly praised the good and laudable custom of the Romane Churche, saying: In omni∣busDe Sa∣cra. lib. 3. cap. 1. cupio sequi Ecclesiam Romanam. In all points I couet to follow the Romane Churche. But now let vs bring a practise of ye whole primatiue Churche, as well in the East as in the West, which so euidently doth con∣fute the  opinion of Caluin, that he is sain to condēne the Apostles them  to auoide that argument. For so had he rather doe, yea to deny all the whole Bible, then once to re∣moue the breadth of a  from his derebeloued phatasy. such is the stubburnesse of heretiks. The holy Bishop and Martyr S.  doth witnesse (as  allegeth him) that the Bishops of Rome before theuseb. li. 5. c. 24 tyme of Pope Uictor, to wit, Soter, Anicetus, Pius, Higinius, Telesphorus, Xistus, did all kepe Easterday alwayes vpon the sunday, and yet withal kept peace with ohter Churches, which did otherwise. For a demonstration of that peace,  alle∣gethThe Eu∣charist was sent  in the pri∣ Churche. generally, that all the Priests which were before Uictor, (which were in number, from S. Peters time, twelue at the least) vsed solemnely to send Eucharistiam, the Eucharist (which is the Sacrament of Christes supper) to suche Priests who came out of
those quarters, where Easter was kept otherwise, then it was at Rome. By that sending of the Sacramēt from the Pope to other Priests ad Bishops, Jreneus concludeth all those to haue com∣municated together. To our purpose, I note, that there is a certain thing so ∣crated in Christes supper, that it hath in it the whole vertue of y• spper. And it is a torporall and real thing which may be ∣ued, caried, sent vp and down, and so at the last receaued. Mark wel the Historie. Al the Bisshops of Rome vsed to send to strāge Bishops comming to Rome the holy Eucharist, in token that they were al of one communion, of one Church, and one religion. This Eucharist was the Sacrament of Christes supper, this Sa crament was first made, and then kept for strāgers, and sent vnto them when they came. Which they receaued as the bond of peace & loue. The consecration of that Eucharist could consist in none other thing so essentially, as in the pronouncing ouer bread, these words, This is my body. Now remember, I beseche you, what Caluin iudgeth of our Lords supper. He teacheth those words to be words of promise, and of preaching, Which being heard of the faithfull stirr vp their harts to receaue Christ by faith. But the custom of the primatiue Churche, euen of the first hundred yeres after Christes death, ma∣nifestly reproueth his opinion. For the Eucharist was made thenThe cu∣stom of y•  Church is against y• doctrie of Caluin. and sent afterward to those who were not present at the making thereof. Who neither heard any preaching, nor toke hold of any promise, but came like strangers to Rome, and so had the blessed body of Christ deliuered them. wherefore his body was not only cōsecrated in the harts of men, but also in a corporall thing which might be sene, touched, caried, deliuered and rceaued. The con∣secration was fulfilled in that external thing, which was called the Eucharist. And so it is proued without any escape, that when
bread was taken and blessed, these words, This is my body, were said to the bread and ouer it, and changed it into the substance of Christes body. And by that meanes the body of Christ was con∣teined vnder the foorm of bread, and so caried vnto the faithfull Prelats which came to Rome: The Eucharist it self was caried. The body of Christ was sent from one Bisshop to an other. The words which Caluin dreameth to be words of promise, were not suche: but in dede were word working the reall presen∣ce of Christes body. And truly when Christ gaue his Apostles au∣thoriieLuc. 22. to make his last supper: He ad them not make a promise of any thing. But he said: Hoc facite, Doe and make this thing. A certayn external thing was made and don by Christ, which he wilChrist ad not his Apo∣stles ma∣ke a pro∣mise of a thing but make the thing it self. led his Apostles to doe & make. He said not to them, preache ths, nor say thus, nor doe thus (albeit the homilies corrupt the gos∣pel after that sort) but he said: doe this thing, make this thing, to wit, make my body with the same words of blessing, which you heard me vse when I toke bread, and hauing guen thanks sayd thereof: This is my body, make this thing. Which thing the Apostles and their successours haue alwayes made, not in pulpits, (as Caluin, who wold haue them words of promise, and of preaching, must nedes allow best) But they haue made the body and blood of Christ vpon the blessed altars & holy tables, where they oered vnblody sacrifice, and sanctified the holy mysteries with yt mind o celebrating, of daing and making, but not with the mind of promising or preaching. Neither only was this the custom of Rome, to send the Eucharist already con∣secrated vnto other Bisshops, but wise and learned men think ye like vse to haue bene in euery other Churche. And certeinly Iustius Martyr, of sufficient antiquity to them that care for Apostolical doctri or traditio, doth witnesse that the Eucharist was made in the assembles of the , and af∣terward
sent by the Deacons to those that were absent: by Dea∣cons,The  charist was cari∣ed by  to y•  per∣ with∣out wor∣des of pr mising. Hieron. Euagri. to. 2. Iustinu Marty in apo∣log. 2. I say, who could in no wise them selues either consecrate or iterate again the words of consecration already spokē. For as S. Hierom writeth, Priests differ from Deacons, because at the prayer of Priests the body and blood of Christ is made. Which thing the Deacons can not doe. They on'y can minister vnto the people the body and bod already consecrated and made by the Priests. And therefore Iustinus Martyr writeth thus of them, and of the whole making of the mysteries. Panis vinum{que} & aqua affe∣runtur, tum{que} is qui primum locum tenet eodem modo preces gra tiarum{que} actionem pro virili mittit, populus{que} acclamat dicens, Amen. Et ijs, quae cum gratiarum actione consecrata sunt, vnus∣quis{que} participat. Eadem{que} ad eos qui absunt, Diaconis dantur perferenda. Bread, wine, and water are brought. And then he which is chief prayeth and geueth thanks to the vttermost of his pwer, after the same maner (which was described before) and yt people reioysingly crieth, Amen And euery man partaketh those things which are consecrated with thanksgeuing. And the same things are geuen to the Deacons to be caried to these which are absent. What can be more plainly spoken? Bread, wine, and water are consecrated by the words of prayer which we toke of Christ. those words are, This is my body, and, this is my blood. After which consecration the people cried, Amen. And the consecrated things, to wit, the body and blood which are made by the consecration of bread, wine, and water, the body and blood, I say, are deliue∣red by the  to them first which are present. And when they haue communicated, to others also which are absent. Therefore the holynes rested in y• things that were consecrated and was not made by  in the eares and  of y• people
but the consecrated mysteries were geuen and caryed: geuen to y• present, caryed to the absent. geuen by hands, not by words, ge∣uen to their hands or mouthes, and not to their eares. they were caried to the absent, as hauing real vertue made in them by the words of Christ. what saith Caluin to these practises of the pri∣matiue Churche? what spirit will he in this point shew to vs? whether will he shew the spirit of humility in wondering at, and in following those Fathers which lerned all their seruice and or∣ders of the Apostles them selues? If Caluin had that spirit, he were farr from hearesy. But now see what spirit Caluin hath. Thus he writeth in this matter. Immediatly after the words which I rehersed in ye  of this chapiter, thus he writeth. His rationibus constat, repositionem Sacramenti, &c. It isThe words of Caluin. De Coen. Domini. euident (saith Caluin) by those reasons, the reseruation of the Sa∣crament (which some men presse, to th end it maie be distributed extraordinarily to the sick,) to be vnprofitable. For either the sick shall receaue it without rehersall of the institution of Christ, or the minister together with the signe will ioyne the true expli∣cation of the mysterie. If the institution of Christ be not spoken of, it is an abuse, and a fault. If the promises be rehersed and the mysterie be declared, so that they who shall receaue, maie receaue with fruit, we nde not dowt, this to be ye true consecration. To what purpose then is the other, whose strength reacheth not so farr as to come to the sick? But you will saye, they that doe so (to wit, that reserue the Sacrament) haue the example of the old Churche. Fateor. I graunt but in so weighty a matter, & wherein errour is not committed without great danger, nothing is more safe then to follow the truthe it self. Hytherto Caluin hath reasoned, who putteth the whole strēgth of the Sacrament of Christes supper in promising and preaching. therefore if any where preaching and promising be not vsed in the geuing of the Sacrament, he calleth it an abuse and fault. And seing the primatiue Church, euen whiles ye Apostles were liue, did by the witnesse of  reserue the Sacramēt so long
after consecration, as to send it to such Bishops, which might come to strange dioceses out of an other prouince: and seing the deacous vsed to carie it in the tyme of Iustinus Martyr (who liued within a hundred yeres of Christes death) to those which were absent: Caluin, I saie, perceauing the vse of all ApostolicallCaluin re proueth ye  Church. Churchs to stand against him, will seme to conute them all with this fond reason. Either the sick and absent persons (for all is one concerning this matter) shall receaue that which was con∣secrated in the Church without a new rehersall of these words, This is my body, And then, it is an abuse, saith Caluin, & a fault: (& he calleth it an abuse, which the scholars of the Apostles vsed) or ls (saith he) the words shalbe ioyned with the signe, and it is a true consecration. And then, saith he, the first consecration made at the Church was in vain concerning the sick and absent men. But the second is good, which is made by preaching and rehear∣sing the words of promise to the sick persons. I haue most faithfully behersed the opinion of Caluin. But let vs now examine, why it is an abuse and fault to deliuer to the sick or to the absent persons the holy hoste which was consecra∣ted in the Churches, without a new rehersall of Christes words. why is that an abuse? who told Caluin it was an abuse or a fault.Caluin bringeth no reason for his  re∣ of the Apo∣ ∣lers. For south his own mind gaue him so, his wisedom thought so, his grauitie said so, his blasphemonse penue wrote so. But other cause, reason, or scripture he bringeth none for it. e first  that the consecration of Christes supper consisteth in saying to the people, This is my body which is geuen for you: And proneth it not at all. but graunt him once his dream, & consequently he in∣ferreth that if such an hoste whereupon the words of consecration were once dewly pronoūced, be afterward geuē to him that head not those words of promise, because he was sick or absent, if the ost, I say, he geuen without a new rehersall of the words, it fo∣loweth
that it is an abuse. Yea but some Papist will saye, the old Churche did so. For now he calleth the primatie Churche the old Churche. I graunt, saith Caluin. But it is better yet to follow the truthe it self. Why  doest thow only know, what the truth it self is? we allege the old Church, to proe, that the truthe  Christes gospell doth stand for vs: and to proue that consecra∣tion is not made by preaching and by the hearing of the people, but by the vertue of Gods word, which spoken ouer the elements of bread and wine, saith by the one: This is my body, making it so. And by the other: This is my blood, making it so. We saye these words make the body of Christ vnder the form of bread, and his blood vnder the form of wine. For our saying we bring the gospell, where t is writen, this is, and, this is. When other  the gospell, we shew that the Apostles andMatt. 26. their successours practised this which we beleue. For they all vn∣derstode, by these words directed to brcad and wine, that the bo∣dy and blood of Christ was really made, vnder the formes of them. How proue we that? Because if once the words had ben spoken by a Priest vpon those elements, the things consecrated were afterward kept and caried as a most holy sacrifice to men abent. as the which things cōteined really within them the body & blood of Christ. Why els should they be caried to others that were absent? A  maye say, that when they came to the absent persons, the words were again rehersed. First that appe∣reth not in Iustinus, or in Ireneus, of whom the one sayth, the  was sent to stragers: the other saith, that the things consecrated, which were receaued of the present Christians, the same were caried to the absent. How is the Eucharist sent, if it beNothing knowē to be cōsecra ted maye be  teo again. no Eucharist vntill it come to the stranger, and then be made a new? Or is it  to iterate the consecration of any Sacra∣ment? Hath Caluin lerned so farr? Did the first consecration lack
ertue, so that an other must be made, or the first be repeted? Last of al the Deacons caried the Eucharist, who possibly could not reherse the words of consecration, This is my body, and, this is my blood. And yet if they were words of promise & preaching, the Deacon, who may  and in preaching may  y• spiritual seeding of our soules, might also reherse those words. But from the Apostles tyme to this day it was neuer heard, that  Deacon might consecrate the body and blood of Christ. For no∣manHebr. 5. A Deacō cannot cō secrate the holy my∣. is able to doe any more, then wherevnto he is lawfully cal∣led. But no Deacon hath the power to cōsecrate geuen him. And that his name sheweth, which is to say, a , or a waiter on. For he waiteth vpon the Priest at Masse, and is not as yet pro∣moted to the office of . Seing then the Deacons caried the Eucharist, and they could not say the words of consecration, doublesse they that receaued it of their hands, receaued neither words of promise, nor of prea∣ching, but they receaued that blessed body and blood of Christ which was cōsecrated before, vnder the foormes of bread & wine. This faith wil stand sound when Caluin and all his scholars be out of memorie. This practise did the Apostles leaue to their suc∣cessours and scholars, as Iustinus the Martyr, Ireneus and Eu∣sebis witnesse. Now consyder what an intolerable spirit of arrogancy wasThe into∣lerable pride of . in Caluin, who dareth oppose him self against the first hundred yeres after Christ. He dareth affirm, that all the Priests and Bis∣shops of Rome before  committed an abuse, in sending the Eucharist to strangers. That all Asia and Brece committed an abuse, in sending the Eucharist by Deacons to men that were ab∣sent, who heard not the words of promise. If thou looke to be saued (good Reader) beware of that arro∣gant spirit. Learning thou shalt not find in Caluin, and much
lesse honesty. Only he hath a sort of smothe words, which are poy soned with pride and ignorance. If any of his scholars wil take vpon him to defend his errour, I wil by Gods grace discouer more ignorance of that arrogant Master of theirs. In the meane tyme I wil content my self with these reasons, which I haue presently brought against him out of the word of God, and out of the sayings and doings of the whole primatiue Churche.
¶ The preface of the second Booke. FOr so muche as contraric things, one being set against the other, are both made the more clere and plaine: it semed best I should not only confirme the Catholike faith, but also con fute the contrarie doctrine, which is allowed for good and lauda∣ble in the Apologie of the Church of England, to th intent the Reader might iudge, whether the Catholikes or Protestauts doe more oftallege, more syncerely interprete, and more through∣ly beleue the word of God. I feare me he shal find nothing, beside the name of the gospell, to be among the Protestāts. But the true meaning and vse thereof only to remain in yt Catholike Church of Christ. Let the thing it self speake: I aske but an vpright and indifferent iudge. Neither let any man be now shamed to heare that his new chosen opinion, is a great deale worse then his old faith was. For if he blushed not to forsake the faith of the Catholike Church vowed at the fonte of Baptism, and to embrace a truthe lately es∣pied (as he thought) in the gospell: Muche lesse ought he to ac∣compt it any reproche, to reade further in the same gospell, and there to lern, his old profession, made at the tyme of his Christen∣dom, to haue bene not only the receaued belefe of all Christians, but also to haue bene grounded in the true word of God, and practised of the Apostles and their Successours from the beginning.
The Chapiters of the second Booke. 1. The Catholiks require their cause to be vprightly tried by the holy scriptures, which they haue alwayes studied aud reuerenced. 2. It is proued by the word of God, that euill men receaue the body of Christ in his supper. 3. The auncient Fathers teache, that euill men re∣ceaue truly the body of Christ. 4. What is the true deliuerance of Christes body and blood. 5. What it is which nourisheth vs in ye supp of Christ. 6. The reall presence is proued by ye vnion which is consessed to be made in the supper of Christ. 7. That the Apologie speaking of the Lords supper, goeth cleane from the word of God. 8. That S. Ambrose and S. Augustine taught more then two Sacraments. 9. That the supper of our Lord is the chief Sacra∣ment of all, but not acknouledged of the Apo∣logie according to the word of God. 10. That the supper of our Lord is both the signe of Christes body, and also his true body, euen as it is a Sacrament. 11. What signe must cheifly be respected in ye Sacra∣mēt of Christes supper, & what a Sacrament is.
12. Which argument is more agreable to the word of God: It is a token of the body made by Christ, and therefore not the body: or els, therefore the true body of Christ. 13. The words of Christes supper are not figuratiue, nor his token a common kind of token. 14. That the supper of our Lord is no Sacrament at all, if these words of Christ, This is my body, and this is my blood, be figuratiue. 15. There all presence of Christes body is that, which setteth his death and life before vs. 16. Our thanksgeuing and remembrance of Christes death, is altogether by the reall presence of his body. 17. The true resurrection of our bodyes cometh by eating that body of Christ, which is bothe true, and truly in vs. 18. Nothing is wrought in the supper of Christ, ac∣cording to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries. 19. The reall presence of Christes flesh is proued by the expresse naming of flesh, blood, and body, which are names of his humane nature. 20. It is a cold supper which the Sacramentaries as∣signe to Christ in comparison of his true supper. 21. By eating we touche the body of Christ, as it
maye be touched vnder the form of bread. 22. The Sacramentaries haue neither vnderstan∣ding, nor faith, nor spirit, nor deuotion to re∣ceaue Christ withall. 23. The reall presence of Christes body is proued by the confession of the Apologie. 24. The contrariety of the apologie is shewed, and that the lifting vp of our harts to heauen, is no good cause, why we should lift the body of Christ from the altar. 25. What be grosse imaginations concerning the supper of Christ. 26. What the first Councell of Nice hath taught concerning Christes supper. 27. That the Catholiks haue the table of Egles; and the Sacramentaries the table of Iayes. 28. The bread which is ye meate of the mind, and not of the belly, can be no wheaten bread, but only the bread of life, which is the body of Christ. 29. Sacramentall eating differeth from eating by faith alone, whereof only S. Augustine speaketh in the place alleged by the Apologie.
¶ The Catholikes require their cause to be vprightlye tried by the holy Scriptures, which they haue alwayes studied and reuerenced. THe Apologie of the Church of England boasting it self,The first Chapiter. partly of the word of God, partly of the primatiue Church, requireth that we call the new gospellers no more by the name of heretykes, neither accompt our selues hereafter Catho∣likes, except we coince them out of the holy Scriptures, as the old Catholike Fathers did vse to conuince the old stubburne he∣retikes. If we be heretikes (saith the Apologie) & they (as they wouldThe wor des of the Apologie. Fol. 14. b vi. pag 1. gladly be called) be Catholikes, why do they not, as they see the Fathers, which were Catholike men, haue done alwayes? Why do they not conuince and maister vs by the die Scriptures? Why do they not call vs againe to be tried by them? Why do they not lay before vs, how we haue gone away from Christ? From the Prophets? From the Apostles? and from the holy Fathers? Why sticke they to do it? Why are they afrayed of it? It is Gods cause, why doubt they to commit it to the triall of Gods word? To this proude bragge of the Apologie, thus I answere. ToThe an∣swere. the holy scriptures, and to the holy Fathers ye haue appealed: By the holy Scriptures and Fathers your doctrine shalbe tried▪ The Catholikes neuer feared to be tried by the holy Scriptures, but they alwayes feared to abuse them. For we y• know in dede what holy Scripture is, are so carefull how to behaue ourselues reuerently and semely about the same, that we lightly vse not to allege any part thereof to proue any rare and harde matter, vnlesse we shew some auncient Fathers or Councell to haue ex∣pounded that peece of Scripture before vs, in suche sorte & sense, as we, by the witnes thereof, desyre to persuade and confirme. But otherwise, the Catholikes neuer refused the triall of the oly Scriptures, as y• which they alwayes both studied & loued.
Do not the writings of S. Beruard in manner wholy consist ofS. Ber∣nard. Petrus Lombar∣bus. Tho. de Aquino. Lyranus Diony∣sius. Bur gensis. Caieta∣nus. continuall testimonies taken out of holy Scripture? Did not Pe∣t ombardus lernedly comment the Psalmes, the Episs of S. Paule, and other parcels of Gods word▪ Did not S. Tho∣mas of Aquin write so vpō Iob, Esaias, Ieremias, S. Mathew, S. Iohn, S. Paule, the Canonicall epistles, and the Apocalips, that he vseth to expound one hard place by an other, as nighe as th thing will suffer? Did not Nicolaus de Lyra, Dionysius the Carthusian, Paulus Burgensis, Caietanus the Cardinall, with diuerse other expound the whole Bible, or make notes vpon it? wold they haue don so, except they had ben specially delighted with the word of God? More ouer when heresies arose in our dayes, Did not Contarenus, Sadoletus, Polus, osius, , Gropper, Tapper, Eckius, Pighius, Petrus and Domi∣nicus of Soto, Miranda, Uillegagnon, Ioannes a Louanio, with diuerse other coince those heresies by the holy Scriptu∣res and Fathers? And yet as though we brought nothing at all for defence of the Catholike faith out of the word of God or pri∣mitiue Churche, so dothe the penner of this Apologie, more to his discredite then to ours, falsely and vnhonestly reporte. But now to shew the better his falsehood and dishonestie, I thought good for my part to set soorth such holy Scriptures, and suche witnes∣ses of the primitiue Churche, as plainly confirme the Catholike belefe concerning the chefe matter, which at this day is in con∣trouere betwixt vs and them. The chefe question is about the blessed Sacrament of the al∣tar.The  question of our age. Our belefe is, that after consecration duely made, the body & blood of Christ is really present vnder the formes of bread and wine. The Apologie teacheth other wise, as now it shall appeare. But whereas there are many questions in this behalfe, as of the reall presence, of transubstantiation, of the sacrifice of the masse, of
communion vnder one kind, of receauing alone, of rtion of the Sacrament, and of suche other: I will beginne  with the matter of reall presence, which i the grounde of all the rest, not despayring to haue (at other tymes) more leasure to handle also the other questions. So much therefore as in the Apologie belongeth to the reall presence of Christes body and blood in the Sacrament of the al∣tar, I will faithfully set foorth, and trie the truth of that doctrine by Gods word, and by the holy Fathers. Neither let any man be offended, yf I seme to kepe no good order, in so much as I make no new methode of myne owne, but follow the order of the Apo∣logie, which sodenly and abruptly thus intreth in to y• question. ¶ It is proued by the word of God, that euill men receaueThe secōd Chapiter. the body of Christ in his supper. WE do expresly pronounce, that in the supper (vntoThe Apo logie. Fol. 24. c. 8. pa. 1. The an∣swere. suche as beleue) there is truly geuen the body and blood of the Lord. This doctrine being called to y• word of God, & to y• iudgement of holy Fathers for his triall, will appere false & for∣ged. Because the holy scripture teacheth the body and blood ofEuill men  y• body of Christ. Tit. 1. Ioan. 6. Leo. de passione Domini Sermo. 1 The body of Christ was deli∣uered to Iudas. Christ to be truly delyuered not only to such as do beleue, but euen to wicked men, who in their workes haue deuied their faith howsoeuer they kepe it, or geue it ouer in hart. Iudas one whole yere before the last supper, was called a dell, for so much as Christ knew that he wold betray and sell him vnto y• Iewes. Which it is not to be thought yt Iudas wold haue don, if he had bene of the true belefe, that Christ was the Sonne of God, & God him self. And yet the body and blood of Christ was truly deliue∣red vnto him. Who although he had beleued the diuine power of Christ, yet he had not beleued as we now take beleuing, for
the fulfilling and perfoorming of all that which belongeth to theBelief is takē ∣tune for ye hole sta∣te of the gospell. Ioan. 3. Galat. 5. state and lawe of the new Testament. According as it is written, Vt omnis qui credit in eum non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam. That euery man which beleueth in him, may not perish but haue euerlasting life. Such a belefe workig by charitie, Iudas had not. And yet he receaued the body and blood of Christ. For albeit some auncient Fathers thought, that Iudas went out before the supper of Christ, yet farre the greater part teache otherwise. AndHilarius in Matt. it is much more agreable to the word of God. How proue I that? S. Mark writeth that Christ came with the twelue. S. Ma∣thewMatt. 26. Marc. 14 sayeth, Christ sate down with the twelue, and whiles they were eating he gaue his body and blood. S. Luke agreeth vpon the very same number, and vpon the same gift. Among ye twelueMatt. 10. Marc. 3. Luc. 6. Ioan. 6. Matt. 26. Iudas is rekoned in S. Mathew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Iohn. And whiles they were at supper (which they besyde the twelue?) Iesus tooke bread and blessed (and gaue thanks) and brake and gaue to them. To which them I pray you, but vnto the twelue that came with him, and sate with him? to y• twelue there∣fore he gaue and said: Take, eate, this is my body. And taking the chalice, he gaue thanks, and gaue them saying: Drinke ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament, Which is (or shalbe) shed, or the remission of synnes. Et biberunt ex illo om∣nes.Marc. 14 And all drank of it. Which all, if not the twelue? Iudas therefore being one of the twelue, had the body & bloodIudas drank y• which the other A∣postles did. Matt. 26. of Christ deliuered to him. For Christ said: Take, eate, and drinke ye all of this. And as they dranke all, so is there no doubt, but they all did take and eate: therefore Iudas tooke that, which Christ deliuered. But Christ witnessed himselfe to deliuer his owne body, saying, Take, and eate, this is my body: And drink ye all of this, for this is my blood: Therefore the body and blood of
Christ was deliuered vnto Iudas. And sith Iudas did not be∣leue:Iudas did not be leue well. the body and blood of Christ was truely delyuered to some such, as did not beleue. We nowe call these defenders to be tried by the holy Scrip∣tures. We make it appere y• they haue seuered them selues from Christ, from the Prophetes, from the Apostles, we stagger not, we flee not, it is Gods cause, we doubt not to commit it to Gods word. And that no man maie suspect we take the words of the Apologie to short, that we expound them to hardly, that we seeke aduantage vpon small occasion: I will bring foorth their owne words, which they haue more fully writen in an other place of the same Apologie concerning this matter. We do affirme with the most auncient Fathers, that the bodyThe  logie. Fol. 90. m. ij. pa∣gin. 2. of Christ is eaten of none other, but of godly and of faithfull men, and such as are endued with the spirite of Christ. These felowes do teach, that the very body of Christ maie in very dede, and as they terme it really, and substantially, be eaten not only of wicked and vnfaithfull men, but also (it is horrible to speake it) of mise and dogges. Whether mise and dogges maie in some sense eate the body of an∣swre. Victor persecu∣tionis vand. li. 1. cap. 3. Optatus lib. 6. de schisma. Donat. Christ or no, it is not worth while to discusse, for so much as the Catholikes kepe the body of Christ so warely, that neither mouse nor dogge maie come nigh to it. But as y• Arrians threw downe the body and blood of Christ, and trod thereon with their filthie feete, and as the Donatists brake the chalices, which as Optatus saith, caried the blood of Christ: so the Sacramentaries of Eng∣land haue taken out of the holy pixes, and troden vnder their prophane fecte the blessed body of Christ, they haue sold, broken and abused to filthy ministeries the chalices which haue holden Christes blood. If the wicked men be able to pollute, to tread on, and to defile, (as much as lieth in them) the body of Christ, men are worse thē dogs,Heb. 10. The Fa∣thers teach that Iudas did eate ye body of Christ. 1. Cypri. de coena Domini. 2. Hiero. Li. 2. ad uers. Io. 3. Theo∣dorit. in 3. Cor. 11 4. Chry∣sost. Ho. deprodit 5. Augu∣stinus in Ioà. tra∣ctat. 50. 6. Leo in Ser. 1. de passione. 7. Sedul. in Carm. Paschali. 8. Beda in Ioà. 6. 9. Theo∣phil. in Matt. 26. 10. Euthi mius. 64 in Matt. A thinke that to be worse, then if mise and dogges did eate it.
Not that the immortall body of Christ can take any harme at all. But yet a terrible damnation is reserued to them, who being able to do it no hurte, shewe not withstanding their vnsatiable malice against the highest mysterie of our redemption, tredding vnder foote the sonne of God, & counting the blood of the new testament prophane and vnholy. Leauing therefore this question, we returne to the principall matter, cōfessing our selues to teache, yt ye wked men ate in dede & really ye body of Christ in our Lords supper. Thus we teach, not only because the greater part of the Fathers haue deliuered so vnto vs, but also because thus we learned of Christ. Who after bread taken hauing blessed, gaue to Iudas one of the twelue bid∣ding him take & eate, saying, This is my body. A worse man then Iudas, I think, is not lightly heard of. Which amōg other things causeth vs to beleue, that be the man neuer so euill, yet if he take and eate after consecration and benediction, he taketh and eateth really and in dede the body of Christ. Which vnworthy recea∣uing of so precious a thing, although it mislike Christ (as all synne doth) yet as he permitteth synne for the goodnes which he worketh by the occasion thereof: so he thought it lesse euill that euil men should eate his body, then that his Sacraments by any our infidelity should be made void, or that the gift of his grace should be vncertaine. For Christ in the institution of his Sacramēts dependeth not vpon our faith or vertue, but vpon his owne mercy and truth. Wherefore when so euer by a lawfull Priest intending to execute the ministerie commaunded by Christ, it is dely sayd ouer bread and wine, This is my body, and, This is my blood, Christ would it so to be as the wordes declare, and who so euer receaueth that kind of food, receaueth the body of Christ. whether well or uill, that dependeth vpon his worthy or vnworthy eating.
If any man eate vnworthely, then will Christ complaine of him, as he cōplained of Iudas. For straight after the deliuery of the blood, he sayd (as S. Luke doth witnesse, and S. AugustineLucae. 22. S. Augu∣stin. de verb. do. serm. 22. so expoun∣deth it. hath noted the same to pertaine to the Sacrament) Veruntamen ecce manus tradentis me, mecum est in mensa. But yet see, y• hand of him y• betrayeth me, is with me on the table. As if he had sayd: You see what loue I shewe to you by geuing mine owne body to be eaten, mine owne blood to be drunken in this my last supper, this only greueth me, that a very deuill doth eate & drinke these preciouse giftes together with me and you. Except our new bre∣thren will say Iudas to haue bene a good faithfull man, I see not but they must cōfesse, that euill men may haue the body and blood of Christ deliuered to them. Which thing S. Paul most euidently confirmeth of all euill1. Cor. 1 Christians, saying: Therefore who so euer shall eate this bread, or drinke the chalice of our Lord vnworthely, he shallbe gilty of the body and blood of our Lord. Doth not he that speaketh of vnUnwor∣thy eating presuppo∣seth  ea∣ting. worthy eating, cōfesse a true eating? True, I say, in nature of the thing eaten, but vnworthy cōcerning ye effect of grace ensewing. And yet doe not euill men, who receaue the body of Christ vn∣worthely, eate really the same body? It is written in the booke of the Machabees, that King An∣tiochusMachab. li. 2. ca. 5. hauing slaine foure score thousand, within three dayes, entred also into ye holy Temple. Et scelestis manibus sumens san∣cta vasa, contrectabat indigne & contaminabat. And taking in hisandling  the  handling. wicked hands the holy vessels, he handled or touched them vn∣worthely and defiled them. I aske whether it doth not folow: Antiochus touched vnworthely the holy vessels, therefore he tou ched the holy vessels? If that argument be good, it is like to say; an euil man doth eate the body of Christ vnworthely, therefore he doth eate y• body of Christ. Or did not Adam and  eate of the
uit of the tree, because they did eate the same against the com∣maundementGene. 3. of God? For these defenders seme to make an vn∣worthy eating no eating. Whereas if it were no eating, it wereAn vn∣worthy ea ng is an . not an vnworthy eating. Perhaps they wil say, S. Paul writeth not yt synners & wicked men eate ye body of Christ vnworthely, but yt they eate this bread vnworthely. Uerily S. Paul speaketh not of bakers bread in y• place. But hauing shewed yt Christ taking bread after thanks ge∣uen,1. Cor. 11 sayd: This is my body, straight he inferreth that, as often as this bread is eaten, the death of Christ is shewed, & therefore who so eateth this bread vnworthely, he shalbe gilty of the body of our Lord. This bread is one certayn kinde of meate or foode (for soBread is tak in holy scrip∣ture for all y• which is eaten. bread in the holy scripture doth signifie) which food before was declared to be the body of Christ. And S. Paul doth so warely describe this kind of bread, that he putteth both an article and a pronoune to it, saying. . As if it were said in English, who so eateth vnworthelyThe grek article & y• pronoun make plam the words of S. Paule Matt. 26. this certayn kinde of bread: For so the article  betokeneth  certayn bread spoken of before. But then foloweth besides  which most vehemently restraineth that certayn bread to this kind of bread & food which Christ gaue at his last supper, saying, take and eate, this is my body. So that S. Paul by (bread) mea∣neth a thing eaten: By (the bread) a certayn knowen thing ea∣ten: By (this bread) one certayn kind of thing eaten, which alitle before was declared to be the body of Christ. Who so euer eatet this kind of bread vnworthely, he is gilty of the body of Christ. Why so? Because he eateth the body of Christ vnworthely. oth∣wise by eating he can not be gilty of that body, which he doth not eate. But hereof we shall saye more vpon S. Paule. Thus now I reason out of the holy gospel. That thing where
of Christ sayd to the twelue; take and eate, and drinke, was takenThis, can not be spo∣ken of two things. & eatē & drunken of all y• twelue, yt was one thing only cōceruing y• eating, & one thing only concerning y• drinking, yt is to say, the body of Christ, & y• blood of Christ. For he sayd, This is my body. (This) truly is but one thing, which Peter, Iohn, Iames, & like∣wiseAugust. in loan. tracta. 50 Peter and Iudas to ke of one bread. Lucae. 22. Iudas did eate. If Iudas did not eate this, he did eate no∣thing of Christes supper. But Christ cōplaineth at his owne last supper, that his betrayer had his hand on the table with him. He did therefore eate somewhat: And consequētly this one thing, which was only at Christes supper geuen to be eaten. But this (one thing) is my body (sayeth Christ) therefore Iudas did eate Christes body.This, can meane but one thing, which all the po∣stles did take a ke If that argument be not plaine ynough, take an other. Iudas and Iohn did eate one thing. Eche of them that foode, whereof Christ sayd, This is my body, But S. Iohn, by the confession of the Apologie did truly eate Christes body, because, I suppose, the Apologie doth take S. Iohn for a faithfull man: Therefore Iu∣das did truly eate the same body. As truly, as really, did Iudas eate the body of Christ, as S. Iohn, but not so worthely. Or made Christ in his supper two giftes? Did he deliuer one thingChrist made but one gift of his ody. to S. Iohn, an other to Iudas? What gospell teacheth that? sayd not Christ, This? Is not This the singular nomber? Is it not one certayn thing? (This) was deliuered to all twelue, and to euery of them. (This) was eaten of all twelue, and of euery of them. Therefore seing (this) was to S. Iohn the body of Christ, (as the Apologie confesseth it was, as also to all others yt do beleue) likewise (this) was to Iudas y• body of Christ, and to all others that receaue at Christes table.If Iu∣das did not eate ye body, nei∣ther any o ther cold eate it. What Iuglers be these, yt of one certayn thing whereof Christ sayd, This is my body, doo make the true body to Iohn, and not the true body to Iudas? If they say, that (this) doth nor point to
the body of Christ, but to Bakers bread: then how doth S. Iohn by eating this, eate the body of Christ? S. Iohn eateth that same thing which Christ deliuereth to Iudas. But you say Christ deli∣uereth Bakers bread, and none other thing to Iudas: Therefore S. Iohn though he beleue neuer so well, yet by eating (this) he doth not eate any thing besyde Bakers bread, and so he doth not eate the body of Christ. More then Christ deliuereth him, he can not eate at the supper of our Lord. But Christ geuing (this) deliuereth bread to Iu∣das, and not his body, as you say. Then how can S. Ihon by ea∣ting (this) eate the body of Christ? You will say: S. Ihon may eate it by faith. Yea Syr, but that is not the eating (this) where∣of Christ spake. Here againe I presse you with y• word of God. The eating whereof Christ spake in his supper, was an eatingThe ea∣ting in Christes supper was bodi∣ly. by body. It was such an eating as agreed with the geuing of Christ, and with the taking of y• Disciples. But Christ gaue with his hands, they toke with their hands, and they did eate by the meane of their tonges, teeth, and mouthes. Therefore the eating and drinking whereof Christ sayd: take and eate & drinke, was an eating and drinking by body, albeit y• end of that banket was to feed also y• soule by that bodily food. The end, I say, intended on Christes part. But you can not out of that outward precept of eating and drinking, deduce an eating and drinking of y• body and blood an other way, that is to wit, by faith and spirit only. If you can, it must nedes folow, that Iudas did eate and drinke the body and blood of Christ by faith and spirit also. For as it is sayd: Bibite ex hoc omnes, drinke ye all of this: soMat. 26▪ Mar. 14. it is sayd, Biberut ex illo omnes, they all dranke of that. If the precept be fulfilled: such as the precept is, such the fulfilling is. If Christ by saying, drink, did will them to drinke wine in their mouthes, and his blood in spirit only: Then they whom y• gospell
heweth to haue drunken, did also drinke wine in their mouthes and his blood in spirit. Or will you take in the historie of y• samedrink  all of this and they all drank muste ne∣des be said of one thing. supper Bibite otherwise, then biberunt? Is not drinke ye, sayd of the same thing, whereof it is sayd, They dranke? Now then either Ihon dranke not truly (according to the precept geuen in the supper) the blood of Christ, or Iudas dranke also the blood of Christ. For (this) whereof Christ sayd: drinke ye all of this, came as wel to Iudas, as to S. Ihon. Christ sayd to all: drinke ye of this, and they all dranke of that. Lo, that which S. Ihon dranke, also Iudas dranke, concer∣ning, I say, the drinking of the supper. And the drinking of that thing, which is the substance of the Sacrament of the altar, Ihon truly dranke, as ye confesse: Iudas truly dranke, as the Gospell teacheth. Wherefore Iudas drank the same blood, that S. IhonIudas dranke y• samethig, but not to the same merite. 1. Cor. 10 did. Had Iudas then as greate merite by drinking, as S. Ihon? God forbid. But Iudas dranke the same thing, as all ye children of Israel did eate one, and the same Manna, but not to one and the same merite, as S. Paul hath declared. The merite riseth not of drinking, but of worthy drinking. As Manna tasted better toSap. 16. the good Israelites, then to the bad: so S. Ihon dranke worthe∣ly, Iudas vnworthely. S. Ihon had by drinking life euerlasting,Augusti. tractat. 50. in Io. Peter to∣ke to life, Iudas to death. Iudas had by drinking damnation. S. Ihon dranke by body & by faith working by charitie. Iudas dranke by body alone, with a maliciouse intent to betraye Christ. The good faith of S. Ihon was not the thing, whereby he dranke the blood according to the outward precept of Christ in his last supper, but it was the thing whereby and wherewith heFaith was nessa ry not to y• drinking but to the worthy drinking. worthely dranke the blood. Did not then Christ will and com∣mand his Disciples to come worthely to his supper? Yeas for∣soth, he not only willed them to come worthely, but for his part he offered them grace to come worthely. He not only for his part
was redy to euse their soules, but in token thereof washed alsoIoan. 13. their bodies: Saying, they were all cleane except one, which was Iuda. The preparing to haue a good faith, to haue a good charitie, to1. Cor. 11 examine him selfe, goeth before the supper: eating by faith andEating bi fayth is a  to worthy  of y• sacramt̄. spirit is a thing required to come worthely to the supper. But when we once come thither, we all eate one thing, one meate, one foode, one body, whether we come worthely or vnworthely, euen as all that are sprinkled with water in the name of the Trinitie, are baptized in one, and the same Sacrament of baptim, whetherIt is one bape to good & euill. they be good men as Cornelius was, or uill men as Simon Magus was. For Simon Magus was baptized of Philip y• deacon. But as it may appere by yt is tolde in the scriptures, and gathered by theActo. 2. Simon Magus was bapti ed as wel as Corne∣lius, but not so me∣ritoriously Ephes. 4. Breke and Latine Fathers, he came not worthely to that Sacra∣ment, but faynedly, as one that hoped to make gain of his faith. And yet he had that baptisme, which (as S. Paul sayeth) is but one. But he had not the vertue of that one baptisme, which is the remission of synnes. I trust by this tyme the defenders nede not boast of their do∣ctrine, neither vpbraid vs of ours, because they teach, that onlyTit. 3. Acto. 2▪ good men haue y• body of Christ deliuered to them. And we teach that euill men also eate really the true body of Christ. We haue, I suppose, declared the word of God to stand in our side. and seing their doctrine must be tried by the word of God, I tell them it is tried and sound to be false and forged, except they can proue Iu∣das to haue bene an honest man. For surely that he receaued the body of Christ, it is the mind of S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, S. Chrysoom, S. Augustin, S. Leo, S. Bede, Theodoritus, Se∣dulius, , Euthymius. yea it is so farre the common opinion of all men, that vpon that example this▪ conclusion is
grounded, that we can not remoue  euill man from the commuC. Si Sa∣cerd. de off. Iudi. ordinar. Chryso. hom. 83. in Mat. nion, excepthy order of law we may cōuince him, Quia nec Chri∣stus Iudam a communione remouit: Because Christ did not re∣moue Iudas from communion. Howbeit we stand not in this doctrine vpon the person of Iu∣das only, but also vpon the generall doctrine of S. Paule, who teacheth euery euill man to be gilty of the body of Christ, for ea∣ting that bread vnworthely. ¶ The auncient Fathers teach, that euill men receaueThe third chapiter. truly the body of Christ. YEa but (say they) we do affirme with the most auncientThe Apo logie. Fathers, that the body of Christ is eaten of none other, but of Godly and faithfull men. Seing the holy scriptures are proued to stand on ourThe an∣se. side, it were great marueile if the auncient Fathers did make for you. They are not wonte to be contrarie to the word of God. But what a miserie is this, what a seducing of the people? The word of God is pretended, the auncient Fathers be named, and not one syllable brought forth out of either both, concerning this question. But as before we brought holy scriptures, so let vs now allege the auncient Fathers. Origen sayeth: Those who come to the Eucharist without exa∣miningOrigi∣nes in Psal. 37. Hom. 2. & cleansing them selues, are lyke to men sicke of an ague, who presuming to eate sanorum cibos the meates of whole men, doe hurte them selues. Whereby we may perceaue, he iudgeth the meate of Christes supper, which is proded only for whole men, yet to be truly, but not profitaby, eaten of them, who are burde∣ned with great synnes. Basile asketh, what a man shall say of him, qui otiose et inutili∣terBasil. de Bapt. ▪  ca. vlt. edere audet corpus, et bibere sanguinem Domini nostri Iesu Christi? Who dareth in vayne and vnprofitably eate the body and
drinke the blood of our Lord Iesus Christ? If a man eate in vaine and to his disprofit, yet he eateth in dede, and as S. Basile sayeth, he eateth the body of Christ.Chrysost. in Ioan. Ho. 45. Chrysostom writeth thus: If those which spotte the Kinges purple be no lesse punished, then those that cutte it, what wonder is it, if those who take the body of Christ with an vncleane con∣science, haue the same punishment which they haue, who pearced him with nailes? Behold as it is one purple still, whether it be spotted or cutt, so is it the same body still, whether it be pearced with nailes (as the Iewes haudled it) or taken with an vnclean conscience, as euill Christians order it. S. Cyprian in manner of purpose answereth those obiectionsCypria∣nus de Coena Domini. which might moue any man to doubt, how euill men may & doo receaue so good a thing, as Christes owne body is. The Sacra∣mentes (sayeth he) for their part can not be without their proper vertue. Neither doth Gods maiestie by any meanes absent it self from the mysteries. But albeit the Sacramentes permitte themEuill mē receaue y• Sacra∣mēts but not the holines of them. selues to be taken or touched of vnworthy men, yet those men can not be partakers of the spirit, whose infidelitie or vnworthy∣nes withstandeth such holines. If, by the mynd of S. Ciprian, the Sacramentes can not lacke their owne proper vertue, come good men or euill to them, one substance is alwayes geuen. but the euill can not receaue ye spirit or grace thereof, because they are vnworthie of such a benefite. S. Hierome: Opponis mihi Gomor Mannae vnam mensuram: Et nos Christi corpus aequaliter accipimus. Thou laiest vnto me the one measure of Manna called Gomor, and we take the body of Christ equally. One as well taketh it as an other, but as it there foloweth: Pro accipientiū meritis diuersum fit, quod vnum est. According to the merites of them that receaue, that which is one, is made diuerse. The Sacrament is one in it selfe, yet to one
it is made y• cause of goodnes when he taketh it worthely, to an other the cause of euill, when he taketh it vnworthely. There also S. Hierome sayeth, that Iudas dranke of the same cuppe, where∣of the other Apostles dranke, but yet that he was not of the same merit. S. Augustine sayeth: Tolerat ipse Dominus Iudam, Diabolū,in Epist. 162. furem, & venditorem suum sinit accipere inter innocentes Disci∣pulos, quod norunt fideles, precium nostrum. Our Lord him selfe beareth with Iudas, he suth a deuill, a theefe, and the seller of him selfe to receaue among the innocent Disciples, our price,Iudas did eate our price, which is y• reall body of Christ. which the faithfull knowe. If any thing, besydes yt body of Christ, may be our price, then S. Augustine might meane that euill men receaue an other thing. But if our price be vndoubtedly that body of Christ which by death redemed vs, Iudas receauing our price receaued the very true body and substance of Christ. In an other place he writeth: Eundem cibū sanctū alios mandu∣careContra Crescor. li. . ca. 25 digne, alios indigne. Some eate worthely, some vnworthely the same holy meate. Beholde the meate is the same, Whether the euill receaue it or the good. And because the Apologie (though it name no Father at all) yet it maie haue some pretense of certain wordes which are in S Augustine, it is to be weighed diligētly,Christ hath both a natural, and a my∣stical bo∣dy. that Christ hath as well a mystical body, as a true naturall body. The mysticall body of Christ, are his members which are incor∣porated by grace, & ioyned to him being their head. This incor∣poration is wrought by the grace of baptisme in one degr, and finised by the Sacrament of the altar in a higher degree, whereof we shall speake hereafter more at large. The naturall body of Christis that, which he tooke of the virgine and gaue to death for vs. Now Christ in his last supper gaue y• substāce of his natural body to be aten of his disciples, to th' intent they should be made one mysticall body, euen by eating his flesh & blood.
Seing then the naturall body of Christ is geuen to thend we maie be nerer knitte in the mysticall body, (according as S. Paul sayeth, The bread which we breake is the communicating of our1. Cor, 10 Lords body, because we being many, are one bread, one body, all that partake of one bread: Seing I say, we communicate the na∣tural body, to be made a mystical body in a greater vnitie then we had in baptisme, any man of discretion may perceaue, that in somEuil men receaue not ye vniō which is in ye mysti∣cal body. August.  Ioan. tra ctat. 26. sense euill men receaue not the thing or the effect of the body of Christ, vnderstanding by the effect of body, the vnitie of the mysti call body, the obteining whereof is the end of the eating. Which vnitie S. Augustine somtime calleth Rem ipsam: The thing it selfe, that is to say, the last effect and benefite which ariseth to vs by worthy eating of the Sacrament of the altar. After which sort S. Augustin saieth, euill men are not to be saidAugust. de ciuita te Dei. li. 21. c. 25 to eate the body of Christ, adding therevnto this reason, Quoniā nec in membris computandi sunt Christi: Because they are not to be rekoned among the membres of Christ. So that euil men eate the substance of the naturall body, but not the thing for which yt substance was geuen, which is the vnite of the body mysticall, because they eate not worthely. Whereas worthy eating only maketh them to obteyne the vnitie of the mysticall body, which is to abide in Christ, and to haue Christ abiding in them. ThereforeIoan. 6. S. Augustine him selfe sayeth, Non quocun{que} modo quisquàmDe verb. Domini. Serm. 22. manducauerit carnem Christi, & biberit sanguinem Christi, ma∣net in Christo, & in illo Christus, sed certo quodam modo. Not how so euer a man eateth the flesh of Christ, and drinketh ye blood of Christ, he abideth in Christ, and Christ in him, but by a certain kind of way. As though S. Augustine sayd: Euery waye ye flesh and blood of Christ is receaued in the supper of our Lord, But not euery way it is so receaued, that we maye dwell in Christ, and Christ in vs.
S. Bregorse saith by euell men: Salutis fructū non percipiuntGrego. in prim. reg. li. 2. Cap. 1. in comestione salutaris hostiae. They receaue not y• fruit of salua∣tion in y• eating of y• healthful sacrifice. They eate y• healthfull sa∣crifice, which surely is nothing els but ye naturall body of Christ, but the fruit they receaue not, as many men take an healthfull medicine, but because their bodies be euil affected, it proueth not healthfull to them.Beda in Lucae. ca. 22. S. Bede, cōpareth him to Iudas, who with his sinfull mem∣bers presumeth to violate, Illud inestimabile & inuiolabile Do∣mini corpus, That inestimable and inuiolable body of our Lord. And how could he violate it with his members, if with no partArno∣bius. 1. Cor. 11 of his body he touched it? I omit Arnobius vpon yt Psalm. 74. S. Ambrose, Theodorite, Decumenius, Haimo, Theophilact, Anselme vpon S. Paule, who agree with the rest of the FathersEuery Sacra∣mēt hath a substāce and an f∣fect. Euil men receaue ye substance of Christs body, but;  not y• ef∣fect. What com parisons y• Fathers vse in shewing, y• good & euil  re ceaue one  in ye Sacra∣ments. that there is in euery mysterie the substance of the Sacramēt and the effect thereof. As well the euill as the good receaue the sub∣stance, which (in our Lords supper) is the body and blood of Christ. But only ye good receaue th'effect, Which is ye grace of spi∣rituall nourishment to life euerlasting, and ye vnion with Christ. Now as we haue shewed by the holy Scriptures, euen so haue we proued out of ye holy Fathers, that euell men recaue the body and blood of Christ as really, as the purple is one still whether it be spotted or cutt: as really, as one meate is eaten of some to their hurte, of others to their helth: as really, as good and euill Iewes had all one measure of Manna, but not all one swetenes in ye ast thereof: as really as Iudas did kisse trayterously the same body of Christ which him self (as all euill men) trayterously receaued at Christes supper. If nowe the Apologie hath neither Scriptures nor Fathers, it maie leaue those boasting vpbraidinges, as though the Catholikes fled ye tria of bth Scriptures and Fathers. It is Gods cause, we haue committed it to Gods word. The Fathers
when they agree in anie one article, are knowen to haue y• spirite of Christ, and they beare witnesse that we haue rightly expoūded the holy scriptures. He that listeth to see more of the same argu∣ment,  read that which I haue writen vpon yt saying of S. Paule: He that eateth this bread vnworthely, shalbe gilty of the body and blood of our Lord. ¶ What is the true deliuerance of Christes bodyThe fourth Chapiter. and blood. IN the supper there is truly deliuered ye body and blood of theThe Apo logie. Fol. 24. Lord, the flesh of the sōne of God quickening our soules, The food of immortalitie, grace, truth, life. In these words no euil doctrine is conteined, but all soundThe an∣swere. and Catholike. In so much a man wold wōder, to what purpose these things are now brought, being extreme contrary to y• which the Caluinists defend, saing, they wold seme to speake as the ho∣ly scriptures and primitiue Churche hath spoken. Seing there∣fore these words conteine true doctrine, I wil reason briefly out of them, against their opinion that wrote them. You say, The bo∣dy and blood of the Lord is truly deliuered in the super. If it be so, it is truly present. And seing none other thing can be war∣rautedThe Apo logie by his own confession defendeth the reall presence. to haue bene deliuered in the supper, besyde that which Christ gaue with his own hands, which semed bread, whereof he sayd: This is my body, and besyde that which semed wine, where of he sayd: This is my blood, by the doctrine of the Apologie it will folow, that Chrises body was deliuered truly vnder that, which semed bread, and his blood was deliuered truly vnder that which semed wine. Or tell me: Can  any man proue out of the word of God, that any other thing was deliuered in the supper of Christ, besyde two kinds, the one being bread, vntill Christ had sayd:
This is my body, The other being the cup of wine, vntill Christ had sayd: This is my blood? Is there mention made of any other thing truly exhibited, offered, or deliuered to the Apostles? Or doth the supper of Christ consist of fower kinds? of bread & body, of wine and blood? In what gospell reade we of bread and wine deliuered? Bread and wine were takē, but body and blood wereMatt. 26. only deliuered. For Christ sayd: Take, this is my body. Drinke, this is my blood. This, can be but one thing. Therefore Christ de∣liuering that, whereof he sayd: This and this, deliuered at eche tyme but one thing, in all but two things. He deliuered his body & blood as him self sayd, and you cōfese he truly deliuered them, wherevpon I conclude, that he deliuered neither bread nor wine, and consequently that the bread taken was changed in to ye body of Christ, and the wine was changed into his blood. For seing Christ toke both bread and wine, and deliuered truly his body and blood, & yet deliuered but one thing at eche tyme, and that also keping the forme of bread and wine, it must nedes be graunted, that the substance of bread and wine which was tru∣ly taken, and not truly deliuered (because an other thing was truly deliuered) was in the meane tyme truly changed into that body and blood, which was truly deliuered. O masters, truth is strong, and by the aduersaries own weapon getteth the victorie. Again, remember that the name of body and the name of bloodA work belonging  ye  of Christ must haue a truth ac cording to the man∣hod. The  heresic. are names belonging to the manhod of Christ, to which manhod when you adioyne any act or work which may truly be verisied thereof, it must be meant according to that truth, which properly belongeth to the nature of the manhod. When we say, Christ was truly scurged, nailed to the Crosse, bound, and buried, it is not here to be vnderstanded, that these things were don in figure, in spirit, in faith: But that his body suffered, according to the fesh, all these things. And he that saith the contrarie is an
which heresie wold the manhod of Christ to be changed into his diuine nature. If then the body and blood of Christ be truly dred, you must not vuderstand a figure only to be dred, neither a spi∣ritual d only. For if the body of Christ be deliuered tru∣ly, and yet by spirit only: then the truth of his body is by these men brought vnto the truth of a spirit, and the flesh of Christ hath losi his true nature and prop. Mark wel the reason: when the body of Christ is truly deli∣uered, it is deliuered according to the truth of his own nature. The nature of a body is to be dd after some bodily maner, verily by hands, or by some other corporail action. And they toThe deli∣ of a corporall ting must haue some t of the body. whom it is delred, likewise receaue it by some part or sense of their body. For so requireth the true nature of flesh and blood, not immediatly to be geuen to the spirit and soule, but to come to it by meane of the body. Whereof it is inferred, that the body and blood of Christ, which are truly deliuered in the supper, are bodi∣ly deliuered and bodily receaued. But from the body of Christ who made the dance vnto the bodies of the Apoes, who receaued the things deliuered, none other thing can syde that which semed bread and wine: therefore vnder that foormes the body and blood of Christ were truly contined, and by y• meanes truly deliuered, and truly receaued. Thirdly when you say, the sh of God quickeneth our soules, you should haue sayd also, that it quickeneth our bodies, as in other places I haue proued out of the sixth of S. , an out of S. Jreneus, tullian, Cyrillus, and other auncient Fa∣thers. ¶ what it is which nourisheth vs in the supper ofThe fifth Chapiter. Christ▪
ANd that the same supper is the coion of the bodyThe . Fol. 24. and blood of Christ, by the partaking whereof we are qned, we are  and sed . That which  and th can not be  fromThe ∣swere. them whom it nourisheth, and when it is cut of their reache, they can not haue it before it be geuen. If then we haue in  y• body is by  ry pre∣. and blood of Christ, we receaued it by his gift at his supper. And surely it was the thing whereof he sayd: Eate, and whereof he sayd, Drinke. Other food was not deliuered in Christes supper, be his body and blood: Nor possiblie can we haue the food of his supper at any other mans table, then at his. Wel. If we be nourished by the meate which Christ gaue vsChrist gaue with  hs y• which nour∣sheth. when he sayd: Eate, and yet we be nourished by his body and blood: vndoubtedly he sayd: Eate, of that which he gaue with his hands, and which the Apostles toke into their mouthes, and that was bread to see vnto, therefore vnder that orme of bread we take the nourishment whereby we are sed to immortalitie. Otherwise, what warrant haue we to come by this food, which is cleane out of our reache, vntil God geue it saying, Eate, this is my body: Drinke, this is my blood? By those words o ate & one liquour only is geuen, which also deth vs to immortali∣tie, as y• Apologie coh. But none other food that man may receaue bodily, can feed vs to immortalitie, besyde the reall sub∣stance of Christ. therefore that substance is receaued, & nourisheth vs when Christ sayd: Eate, this is my body: Drinke, this is my blood. ¶ The vnion, which is made by eating ChristesThe sixth . reall flesh, must ns be a naturall vnion, ore it be a mysticall.
ANd by the which we are coupled, we are vnited, and graf∣tedThe Apo . into the body of Christ, that we might well in hin, and he in vs. Christes sh is deliuered to the end we should be nourished therewith. And the end of nourishing is to make one thing of y•The aun∣. which is eaten, and of him that eateth it. The flesh deliuered to nourishe vs, is not any mysticall flesh, but only the natural flesh of Christ, neither can it be any other food. For none other thing that coth in at the mouth of man, is able to seed him to im∣mortalitie, besyde the substance of Christes flesh and blood. If then it be the naturall flesh which feedeth, and the vnion doe come by seeding: the vnion must of necesty be made with the naturall flesh of Christ. And because that is such a flesh, asIoan. 1. being vnited to God, hath power to geue life and mortality: out of the naturall vnion which is made with it by eating, an other spiritual and mystical vnion floweth, which maketh all the members of Christ to be one mysticall body. So that we haue now fie degrees. First, the slesh of Christ isThe de∣s o re ing Christ in  supper. deliuered to vs in his supper. Next, we eate the same flesh. Thirdly, we are fed by it, if we eate it worthely. Fourthly, of y• feeding conuneth a reall and naturall vnion and ioyning with Christes flesh, as S. Hilarie teacheth, and other auncient Fa∣thers. Of that naturall vnion procedeth a spirituall vnion withHilarius de trinit. li. 8. the whole body of the Church. Because being made one with Christes flesh, we are vnited thereby to his spirit and Godhead, liuing for him, as he th for his Father: whereof I will speakeIoan. 6 more hereafter. The Apologie acknowledgeth a ioyning with Christ by eating. But it surely meaneth the last spirituall ioyning, which ariseth of the other naturall vnion. Whereas that spiritual ioyning doth
ude the other natural, as euery effect presupposeth the neces∣sarie cause thereof. We are coupled to Christ by eating that flesh of his, which he deliuereth to vs. But Christ deliuereth it not on∣ly spiritually, but also with his hands, saying: Take, eate, this isMath 26 my body. As therefore y• deliuery is real and not only spirituall, so is the eating reall, and the coupling reall. I haue proued this thing in other places folowing. Here it is  to say this much against the bare words of the Apologie. ¶ That the Apologie speaking of the Lords supper,The seuē th chapter goeth cleane from the word of God. VVE do acknowledge the Eucharist or the Lordes sup∣perThe Apo log. to be a Sacrament, y• is to say, an  of the body and blood of Christ. Besides the former vat of the word of God already broughtThe aun∣swere. foorth to the reproche of the Catholikes, also the Apologie atle before these words witnessed, that y• auctours & abtours thereof gaue thanks to God for the light of the Gospel raysed to them,The or des of the Aplogie. which they might allwayes haue before theyr eyes, as a moste certayne rule, to which all doctrine of y• Church ought to be called for his triall. And within lesse than  lines after, the same Apologie cometh to denie our Lords supper, calling it a Sacra∣ment, that is to say, an  token of the body and blood of Christ.The scrip  call not y• sup∣per of  a . Ioan. 6. The na∣ of What mers? Hau you in the holy Scriptures, that the supper of our Lord is a Sacrament or a signe of y• body and blood of Christ? From the beginning of  to the later ende of tho ocalips, you finde t our Lordes supper so called. Christ in S.  calleth it y• me which  not, but  into le . He saieth, y• bread which he will ,  which he will  or y• se of y• world. He  it the  and
the blood of the sonne of man, meate in dede, and drinke in dede, his flesh and his blood, the eating of him, the bread which who so eateth shall liue for euer. In S. Mathew, and in S. Marke,Matt 26. Marc. 14 Lucae. 22. 1. Cor, 10 his body and his blood of the new testament. In S. Luke, his body whiche is geuen for vs, and the chalice which is the newe testament in his blood, which is shed for vs. In S. Paul, ye bread which we breake is the communicating of our Lords body, the chalice of blessing which we blesse, which is the cōmunicating (or partaking) of Christes blood; the one bread, y• table of our Lord, and the chalice of our Lord, the body which is broken for vs, the chalice which is the new Testament of his blood, the eating of1. Cor. 11 this bread, and drinking of this chalice. So many names are geuen in so many places of holy scripture to this blessed Sacrament, and it being no where called a signe or token, yet the Apologie which thanketh God for y• holy scrip∣tures, ad will trie all doctrine by them, in the chief question ofThe Apo logie go∣eth quite from the scriptures our age, goeth quite from all holy scriptures and sayeth, the Eu∣charist or the Lordes supper is an euident token of the body and blood of Christ. What is the matter that in wordes you make so much of holy scripture, and in dede so litle? What Apostle, what Euangelist, what Prophete, or Patriarke taught our Lordes supper to be a signe or token? S. Paul threateneth damnation to him, who vnworthely ea∣teth1. Cor. 11. it, and he calleth vnworthy eating, not only the contempte thereof or lacke of faith, but euen the omitting to proue or exa∣mineWhat vn∣worthy ea ting to in S. Paule him selfe, before he eate our Lords body. And that because he maketh no difference betwixt it and common meates. And come you with a new doctrine, affirming yt we receaue not our Lords body into our bodies, but an euident signe and token thereof?
you  no authoritie, no rule, no triall of matters belonging to faith, but only the holy Scriptures. and immediatly ye breakeThe Apo logie brea∣kth  own rule. your owne rule, in so much as the holy scriptures call the supper of our Lord, his body and blood, and you teach it to be an euident token of his body and blood. If you kepe not your owne rule, whom can you binde to kepe the aine? Ye will aske me perhaps, whether the Lordes supper be not a Sacrament? if a Sacrament, then also a signe and token. I aun∣swere, ye that prescribe rules of beleuing to the world, ye that wil haue all thinges iudged and proued by yt touchestone of Gods worde, ye that for pretense of folowing the gospell, haue stirred vp so greate strife through all Christendome, must not talke with vs with if, with and, with conditions and peraduentures. But ye must bring forth the word of God for that ye say. Although the supper of our Lord were neuer so much a Sacra∣ment,The sp∣per of our Lorde to ∣res is no acramet. surely to you it were none, because ye cannot proue out of the word of God, where it is so named. To vs it is both a Sacrament and a sacrifice. A Sacrament, be∣cause we are so taught by tradiction from the Apostles: A sacrifice because Malachie the prophet in ye person of God expressely saieth In omni loco sacrificatur & offertur nomini meo oblatio munda▪Malac. 1. quia magnum est nomen meum in gētibus. In euery place a cleane oblation is sacrificed and offered to mie name, because my name isThe sup∣per of Christ is a acrifice. greate amonge the gentils. There is absolutely no pure and cleane oblation besides the sacrifice of Christes body and blood, whiche was offered to death not in euery place, but without the gate of Hierusalem alone, and the same is at this daie vnbloodily offeredHeb. 13. in the masse in euerie place, where so euer among the gentils the name of God is  called vpon. Thus both we and you maie proue the upper of our Lord to be a sacrifice, but that it is a ▪ we can proue, because
our forefathers delyuered such a doctrine to vs: You can notIt is a tradition vnwriten that our Lords super is a Sacra∣ment. The Apo logie. Fol. 24. a. 8. pa. 1 proue the same, seing you will not be bound to folow vnwritten traditions. If you flee to the Church for naming it a Sacramēt, the church hathe seuen Sacramentes. But ye in this present Apologie ac∣knowledge only two, properly to be rekoned vnder y• name. for so many (saie you) do we find deliuered and sanctified by Christ, and allowed of the olde fathers Ambrose and Augustine. Concer∣ning the deliuery of Sacraments by Christ, ye might haue found in the word of God Confirmatiō. Actor. 8. Penance, Ioā. 20. Ex∣treme vnction, Iacob. 5. Priesthod. Luk. 22. Matrimonie, Eph. 5. And not only Baptim and the Eucharist. But what kind of talk is this, to say, that S. Ambrose and S. Augustine allow yt workes of Christ? was not the deliuery and consecration of Christ of suf∣ficent autoritie, except Ambrose and Augustine had approued it? I thoght Ambrose and Augustine should haue bene allowed by the scripture, and not the scripture by them. I stand with you vpon the autoritie of the word of God. proueNor bap∣tim nor y• supper is called a sacrament in y• scrip∣tures. me thence, that these two are Sacramentes alone, yea proue, that thei are so named at all. what gospell calleth baptisme a Sa∣crament? What holy write nameth the supper of our Lord a Sa∣crament? dare you geue these things a name, which is not in the word of God? What warrāt haue you for that dede? you will say, Ambrose and Augustine calle them so. I replie, Peter and Paul doe not call them so. At other times and with other men, I will stay vpon the authoritie of Ambrose and Augustine', whom as I ought to do, I reuerence for men of excellent vertue and lear∣ning. But yet they were men (as you are wont to saie) they might erre, they might be deceaued. At this time we haue appealed chiefly to y• holy scriptures, and out of them we must ground all our talke, and next vnto them,
we will heare what the Fathers saye. I saie, that neither the old testament, nor the new calleth the supper of our lord, a Sacrament. Therefore the Apologie that so calleth it, goeth from the assurance of the word of God, to the good and audable inuentions and traditions of mē, which them seiues , when they lilte. And yet the said Apologie so calleth it a Sacrament, that vponThe wor de Sa∣cramēt is y• ground o  y• ro testars o  in our Lor∣des sup∣per. that only word the auctors thereof grounde all their doctrine. Thence it hath to be a signe, to be a token, to be a badge, a seale, a paterne, a counterpae. Thence all the figuratiue doctrine ry∣seth. Thence it commeth, that the reall body and blood of Christ is denied to be vnder the formes of bread and wine. Shall now so much as Christ hath plainely spoken of his bo∣dy and blood, so much as his Apostles and disciples haue prea∣ched and writen in that behalfe, shall now all this be ouerthrow∣enThe Apo logie fle∣eth from y• writen wor to ye . by an vnwritten veritie? Are these the men o God who fee from S. Mathew, S. Marke, S. Luke, S. Iohn, S. Paul, to Augustine and Ambrose? Will the Apologie allowe that dede? If it will not, why hath it done so it selfe? If none but prophetes and Apostles had written, where had they found two Sacramentes? where had they readen, that the supper of our Lord is a signe and token? They make much a doe about the word of God, till they haue gotten credit among the ignorant, and then they quite lead thē from all the word of God. To you I speake, good Christen readers, yt haue the true loue of the word of God  in your hartes, to you I speake. geue not ouer S. Mahew, S. Iohn, S. Paul, for Ambroe and Augu∣sine.  not ouer Christ, who is God and man, to haue the o∣pinion of what s euer ottor and Father in causes of belefe. Some men in comparison of others be of greate authoritie. But in comparison o God, all men be nothing at all.
God saieth, this is my body. Now what so euer man or angellNo man is to be heard who saieth: This is not the body of Christ. Gal. 5. Ephe 5. from heauen tell you, this is not the body of Christ but only a fi∣gure of it, beleue him not, but let him be cursed to you. Shal we not be well occupied, if we leaue y• plain worde of God and come to see whether Ambrose and Augustine teach two Sa∣cramentes, or mo then twaine? S. Paul teacheth Matrimonie to be a Sacrament. And yet shall we goe from him to Ambrose and Augustine, to see whether it be one or no? Was euer such a vile practise heard of, as to brag of scriptures, to boast of holy write, to crie vpon vs for comyng to the worde of God, and nowe that we are come thither, to call vs from all Prophetes and Apostles, yea frō Christ him selfe, to Ambrose andThe Apo logi brin gth v from y• ho∣ly Scrip∣ture to the Fathers. Augustine? Is this the waie to the holy scriptures? Can this fault be excused? Can this hypocrisie be tolerated? To winne to you the itching eares of the inconstant multitude, to get you ye applause of licencious libertines in y• pulpit, you call to y• word of God, and when you haue gotten them within your nettes, you teach them out of Ambrose and Augustine. Yea, would God ye did so at the least. And although it be alitle out of mie way, (if to detect falshod can euer be out of a mans way) yet what if now we proue that ye deceaue them also, by fathering that vpon Ambrose and Augustine, which they neuer wrote  thought? ¶ That S. Ambrose and S. Augustine taught moeThe eigth chapiter. then two Sacraments. DOe they teache but two Sacramentes only? What if they taught two especially, yet if they do not deny the other, your proof is none. But let vs see. Doe they ap∣proue no more then twaine? What if besydes these twaine which you haue named, I bring within the compasse of one chapiter.
two moe out of S. Augustin as plainly named of him, as possibly can be? Where then will this Apologie ret? Bonum igitur nuptiarum per omnes gentes at{que} omnes homi∣nesAug. d bono cō iugal. ca. 24. in causa generandi est, & in fide castitatis. quòd autem ad po∣pulum Dei pertinet, etiam in sancti tate Sacramenti, & caet. The good (sayeth S. Augustine) which riseth of mariage through all nations, and all men, consisteth in y• cause of begetting (children) and in the faith of chastitie. And in so much as appertaineth to y•Mariage among Christiās is a Sa∣crament. people of God, it consisteth also in the holynes of the Sacramēt, through which it is vnlawfull (yea though diuorse come betwen) to marie an other, whiles her husband liueth, not so much as for the very cause of bringing foorth of children, which though alone it be the cause why mariages are made, yet the band of mariage is not loosed (vnlesse the husband die) albeit y• thing folow not, for which the mariage is made. Much like, as if to bring the peo∣plePriesth is a Sa∣crament. together, some of the clergie should be ordered (or consecra∣ted with holy orders) for although the meeting of the people do not insewe, yet Sacramentum ordinationis, the Sacrament of ge∣uing orders abideth, in them that be ordered. And if for any faultThe sub∣stance of y• Sacra∣ment tari∣eth in an eill priest remoued from his office. any man be remoued from the office, he shall not lacke the Sacra∣ment of our Lord, which is once put vpon him, although it re∣maine to his damnation. In these words S. Augustine hath shewed, that amōg Christi∣an men there are two other Sacramentes, of Priesthod & of Ma∣trimonie, besides baptisme and the Eucharist. And eche of them so greate and so strong, that they can not be loosed and taken awaie but only by death of the partie, although the chief cause asse why the Sacrament was geuen. I could bring if nede were an other notable place out of S.Augu. eō tra Don. li. 5. c. 20 Ambros. lib. 1. de Paenit. cap. 7. Augustine, where he nameth together, the water of baptim, oile, the Eucharist, and the imposition of hands.
S. Ambrose like wise confesseth moe Sacraments then Bap∣tim and the Eucharist: Cur baptizatis, si per hominem peccata di∣mitti non licet? In baptismo vti{que} remissio peccatorum omniū est. Quid interest vtrum per paenitentiam, an per lauacrum hoc ius sibi datum sacerdotes vendicent? Vnum in vtro{que} mysterium est. Sed dices, quia in lauacro operatur mysteriorum gratia. Quid in paeni∣tentia? Nonne Dei nomen operatur? Why art thou baptized if it be not lawfull synnes to be forgeuen by man? Truly in Baptim there is forgeuenesse of all synnes. What skilleth it whether Priests challenge this right (of forgeuing synnes) to be geuen them by penance, or by baptim? The mysterie or Sacrament is one in both. But thou wilt say: that in Baptim the grace o y• my∣steries worketh. What in Penance? doth not the name of God work? Here is the same vertue and name of a mysterie or Sacra ment geuen to Penance, which is geuē to Baptim. Whereby S. Ambrose taught as wel that there was a Sacramēt of Penance, as the Apologie graunteth one of Baptim. But to stand about the proof of all the seuen Sacraments itSeuē Sa cramts were pro∣  y• Greeks & Latins in y• Coūcell of Forēce nedeth not, sith in that most notable generall Councell gathered both of Grekes and Latines at Florence, all the seuen Sacra∣mentes were according to the word of God confessed, proued, de∣clared and expounded, as in the ende thereof it may appere. But neither S. Ambrose, nor S. Augustine had the charge commit∣ted to them, to rekon vp how many Sacraments there are. I brought these few places out of S. Augustine, and S. Am∣brose to shewe as it were to the eyes of all them that will not wilfully blind them selues, how these defenders crie out vpon the word of God, vntill they haue with swete words wonne a∣nourHeretikes eeme nei ther scrip∣tures nor Fathes. amōg the miserable nomber f those vnstable me, that all∣wayes harken for newes. But when they haue them fast, then is the word of God cleane forgotten, and in siede of it, Ambrose and
Augustie are captiously and falsely alleged. For the truth is, they that set nought by the word of God, can not long esme Ambrose and Augustine, who with all their hartes embraced the word of God, and expounded the same according to the auncient tradition of holy Church. To what end then doth this Apologie runne? Truly to setteThe Apo logie pre∣tendeth scriptures til it may set vp an idol of his own. vp an Idoll of their owne making, in place of the word of God. To set vp, I say, a fantasticall religion of their owne deuising. But if they should crie to the people: Come, come, bowe down to the Idoll that we haue deuised for you: the people would not come, as being feared with y• infamouse name of an Idoll. There∣fore they say, come to the word of God, come to the holy Scrip∣tures, come to the true gospell of Iesus Christ. well Syr, you say herein exceding well, we are come. Teach vs the word of God, the Scriptures, the gospell. Say on a Gods name. ¶ That the supper of our Lord is the chief Sacra∣mentThe nyn∣the cha∣piter. of all, but not acknowledged of the Apologie, according to the word of God. WE saye, that Eucharistia, the supper of the Lord, is aThe Apo logie. Sacrament, that is to wit, an euident token of ye body and blood of Christ. It is most true, that the supper of our Lord is a Sacrament,The aun∣swere. The sup∣per of our Lord is a sacrament Dion. de Ec. Hier. cap. 3. Maxim. in schol. Graecis. yea it is the chief Sacrament of all Sacraments. . Est enim, se∣cundū clarissimi praeceptoris nostri sententiam, Sacramentorū Sa∣cramentum. The most holy Eucharist (which Dyonisius named so a litle before) according to the mind of our renowmed maister, is the Sacrament of Sacramentes. Although Dionysius had S. Paul to his master, yet he mea∣neth at this tyme (as vpon him Maximus hath noted, & by other
places of his worke it may well appere to be true) Hierotheus an holy Father and Disciple of Christ, who in his talke whiche he was wonte to haue with Dyonisius, did vse to call the holy E∣charist of all the Sacramentes the chief Sacrament. Surely i there had bene but two Sacramentes, both Hierotheus & Dyo∣nisius∣sius ac∣knowled∣geth moe Sacra∣mēts then twaine. had abused their words. For where two things only are of one degree, there one may be worthier then the other, but nei∣ther of the twaiue may iustly be called the chief of the others. If in all there be only two Sacramentes, baptisme & the Eu∣charist, how is the Eucharist the Sacrament of Sacramentes? sith when one is taken away, there doth remaine but one moe, to which relation may be made. The opinion therefore of this Apo∣logie standing, the Eucharist may be y• more chief Sacrament of te twaine, but not the Sacrament of moe Sacramentes. But what nede we stand herevpon, seing Dionysius hath atCa. 4. 5. 6. de Ec∣clesiast. Hierar∣hia. large prosecuted moe Sacramentes then baptisme and the Eu∣charist, as it is easye to see in his workes? Seing then the supper of our Lord is a Sacrament, and yet not found so to be named in holy Scripture, the Apologie is con∣strained to beleue it selfe, and to teach others somewhat which isThe Apo logie is cō strained to beleue many veri ties vn∣writen. not readen in holy Scripture. Againe that euery Sacrament is a signe and token, it is also true, but not readen in holy Scripture. Thirdly the Sacrament of ye altar is an euident token of y• body and blood of Christ. But so much is not expressed in holy Scrip∣ture. Last of all, the supper of our Lord is the reall body & blood ofIoan. 6. Matt. 26. Mark. 14 Luk. 22. 1. Cor. 10. &. 11. Christ him selfe. And that truth is very plainly, very ofte, very earnestly sayd, taught, repeted in holy Scripture. Foure thinges are now verified of the supper of our Lord. It is a Sacrament, it is consequently a holy signe. It is an euident
token of the body and blood of Christ. It is the truth and sub∣stance of the body and blood of Christ. Of the foure truthes, the last only is expressed in holy scriptures because it is the ground of all the other. The three first are taught by the Church not cōtrary to the scripture, but ouer and besides it. Now mark well whe∣ther these defenders lead vs to the word of God or no. In describing the supper of our Lord, they put the three first verities, of which neuer a one is named in the scripture. And the last veritie which is expresly named in all the foure Euange∣listes and in S. Paul (as before I haue declared) that they vtter∣lyThe apo∣logie skip∣peth the writen ve∣.  ad leaue out: As if they shuld saie, we make much a∣ to pretend y• holy scriptures, but we will be sure to bring any thig soner then the holy scriptures. Marke this Apologie who shal, he neuer lightly saw any book writen in so many matters of diuinitie, wherein so litle scriptureThe Apo logie is full o glo∣ses but not of scriptu∣res. hath bene alleged. It is full of gloses, but the texte it hath very seldome. And why? They loue not in dede the scriptures, they know not the scriptures according to the mind of the holy Ghost, but only make a shew of them to entangle the sunple in their snares. The supper of our Lord is a sacrament, a holy signe, an euident token of the body and blood of Christ. hitherto they teache with∣outMath. 26 Heretikes loue not the gospel. scriptures. It is the body and blood it selfe of Iesus Christ. Hereof speake they at this time neuer a word, because it is in the Gospell which they loue not. If this last truth can not stand with the first, what doubt is there, but the worde of God must ouercome, and the doctrine of men gue place? If therefore the supper of our Lord mae both be the signe of the body, and the body it selfe, it is well, we are throughly agreed, for all sciptures call it the body, and some doc∣tours call it a signe, But if these thinges can not both be true to∣gether,
awase with signes, awaie with tokens, let the worde ofMatt. 26. God be heard, which saieth: This is m body, This is my blood. Is it reason we obeie men, or God? If both stand in one degree,Actor. 5. men keping them selues vnder God, let both be obeyed. But if men draw from God, he is more worth alone, then all the men of the world. What  we now? Will the sige of the body and the body it sele stand together or no? If not, let the signe of the body (which is not in scripture) geue place, let the body it selfe which is often times found there, tarie still. If the signe and the truth can not stand together, the Sacra∣mentaries must nedes be condemned, who denie the truth which is in the scripture, and preferre the signe before it, which is not in the scripture. If the signe & truth doe both stand together, y• SacramentariesEuery way the Sacramē  be . (onlesse they repent) be condemned, because they denie the one part of y• twaine. For they denie the true presence of Christs body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine. In what case stand these defenders, which still be in state of damnation, whatsoeuer be concluded true. We verely teach and beleue the figure and the truth to stand together: the supper of our Lord to be the signe of Christes body, and to be his owne body. The weaker part is the signe, the grea∣terThe fi∣gre and y• truth . is the truth. But both doe not only stand together in one Sa∣crament, but farther more, the true nature of euerie Sacrament of Christ is to haue both: that is aie, to haue oue certaine truth, & one certaine signe of the same truth. The truth is hidden vnder the signe, the signe is witnes of the truth. Which thing once being declared, you shall see the vaine doctrine of this Apologie, & with what kind of worthy School∣ the English Church is nowe gouerned, to the greate
and destruction of Christian soules. Pardon me, good rea∣der, if I stand somewhat long vpon the name of a Sacrament, for in that word lieth hidden all the poyson of the Sacramentarie doctrine. ¶ That the supper of our Lord is both the signe ofThe. x. Chapiter. Christes body, and also his true body, euen as it is a Sacrament. GEue diligent care (good Reader) to the doctrine folow∣ing. Because as it is most true and profitable, so is it somewhat hard. I will shew that suche a signe as belon∣geth to Christes institution, must nedes haue the same truth pre∣sent, whereof it is the Sacrament, or holy signe.Ioan. 1. Christ hath two natures in one persō. Galat. 3. 1. Tim. 2. The naturall sonne of God tooke naturall flesh of the virgin Marie, to th'intent he being oe persone and there in hauing his humane nature common with men, and his diuine common with God, might by that meanes reconcile man to God againe. His diuine personne staied in it the nature of man, his manhod part∣ly couered the diuine nature, from the eyes of mortall men: part∣ly by maruelous signes and workes shewed the same to the faith1. Ioā. 5. &. 10. of  men. Liewise man consisteth of two parts, of a soule inuisible, andMan con∣sisteth of two parts of a visible body. The soule ruleth and gouerneth the body. And the body sheweth to others by outward tokens, what the soule thinketh and inwardly worketh. Christ therefore intending to leaue certayn holy mysteries vn∣to his Church, thereby to  to her the fruite of his passion and death: as well for regard of his owne selfe, in whose per∣sonneThe Sa∣craments consist of  parts. two natures were vnited, as for regard of vs who cōsiste of body and soule, made the sayd holy Sacramentes to be of a dubble sort and nature, so that the one part thereof might appere
to the senses, the other should lye priuie and only be seene by faith. But as the outward workes and doctrine of Christ were vn∣doubted testimonies of the inward Godhed really present, so ye outward signe, which is in the Sacraments, is a most euident witnesse of the inward grace which they worke really present in them. Ater this sort Christ instituted ye Sacrament of Baptisme,Ioan. 3. that we might be newly borne and regenerated of water and of the holy Ghost, as him selfe sayd to . For ye outward wasshing of the body in the nae of the Trinitie, is an euidentMat. 28. signe that the holy Ghost at the same instant by the meane of the word and water, inwardly wassheth y• soule from synne. There∣fore S. Paul sayeth: God hath saued vs by the wasshing of water,Tit. 3. and of the renewing of the holy Ghost. The which holy scrip∣tures S. Augustine embracing, sayeth: Aqua exhibens forinsecusIn ep. 23. ad Boni∣facium. Sacramentum gratiae, & spiritus operans intrinsecus beneficium gratiae regenerat hominem in vno Christo, ex vno Adam genera∣tum. Water geuing outwardly the Sacrament (or holy signe) of grace, and the holy Ghost working inwardly the benefite of grace, begetteth man againe in one Christ, which was begotten of one Adam. Water is the outward signe. Grace is y• inward benefite. The outward water which wassheth the body, is the signe of the in∣ward grace which is wrought vpon the soue. Here thou seest, good Reader, the signe of a thing, and the thing it selfe to agree soThe signe and thing signified stand toge ther. well, that the one is alwayes depending of the other. Much lesse doth one of them hinder the other. Except any man will say, that Christ was not God in dede, because his works were tokens & signes of his Godhead, which were a detestable saying. Likewise the supper of Christ is both a signe of his body, & also his true body, A signe outwardly & ye true body inwardly. A signe
by y• sound of words when it is first made, & a truth by ye inward working of ye holy Ghost, by ye meanes of ye words of ye censecra∣tion. For as when ye Priest spinkleth or dippeth ye child in water,Mat. 28. saying:  wass he the, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: At ye same moment ye holy Ghost wassheth the soule of the person baptized: Right so, when Christ, or any lawfull Priest in his name, taking bread, & blesing duely sayeth:Mat. 26▪ Marc 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 This is my body, making in those words an euident token of his body eally present, at the same instant the holy Ghost worketh inwardly the true substance of Jesus Christ really present vnder the forme of bread. The outward pronouncing of the words o∣uer bread and wine, is the Sacrament or holy signe that maketh and sheweth Christes body, and the inward  ning of the sub∣stance of bread into Christes reall body, is the grace which is at the same tyme inuisbly wrought. Thus in holy Scripture the signe of body, and the true body stand so wel together, that both are true, because one is true. The which doctrine S. Chrisostom confessing, writeth: Sacerdo∣tisHomil. de Iudae proditio ne. oreverba proferuntur: Et Dei virtute proposita consecrantur & gratia. Hoc est (ait) corpus meum, hoc verbo proposita conse∣crantur. The words are pronounced by the Priests mouth. And the things set foorth are consecrated by the vertue and grace of God. This (sayeth he) is my body. With this word the things which are set foorth are consecrated. Who seeth not here the visible Sacrament, and the thing or in∣isible grace of the Sacrament? The Sacrament is the due pro∣nouncing of the words ouer bread o wine. As for example, ta∣king bread, I say, in Christes person, This is my body. The words naturally haue their knowen signification as other wor∣des of other things haue. Which who so heaeth spoken or per∣ceaueth to be spoken, can tell what they meane and signifie.
Neither can it be denied but they betoken the being or substance of Christes body. That natural betokening of theirs alone with∣out the matter of bread and wine present, should not be a Sacra∣ment, that is to say, an euident signe and token of a holy thing. But when those words are spoken ouer bread by a Priest (as Christ appointed them to be spoken) then by his institution they are a Sacrament, to wit, an euident token of a holy thing. Now as God and Christ can not lye, so they do not instituteChrist c not insti∣ a false signe. a false signe and token. If the token be true, and it be the token of Christes body present, that thing which it betokeneth by the in∣stitution of Christ, must nedes be not only true, but also present, if it be so betokened. ¶ What signe must chiefly be respected in the Sa∣cramentThe. xi. chapiter. of Christes supper. And what a Sacrament is. IAm not ignorant that in the Sacrament of the altar, diuerseDiuerse signs are in y• Eu∣. kindes of signes & tokens are founde.1. some be tokens of the making and consecrating the Eucharist:2. others of it being now consecrated and made, vntill the outward signes be consu∣med:3. a signification also of the Church of Christ is gathered out  it now made and consecrated.4. Yea the very eating is again a signe of a maruelous banket in the life to come. 1. The first signe of all is ye signe of consecrating our Lords sup per, and it is the words duely spoken by a Priest ouer bread andThe Words of ∣tion ar y• first signe. , which both betoken the making of Christes body & blood, and make it in dede. 2. The signe of the Eucharist now made, is the forme of bread and wine. But this later signe presupposeth the first signe and token. For except it had bene sayd ouer the bread and wine: This is my body, and this is my blood, the formes of bread and wine
could not betoken the reall body and blood of Christ vnder them. For not wheresoeuer we see such formes, we doe there beleue the body and blood to be, except we thinke the words of consecration to haue bene spoken ouer them. We now speake of that first signe and token, which both signi∣fieth and maketh the Sacrament. Wherein Christ would that to be wrought inuisibly, whiche the words do signifie to our cares, and whic, the doing sheweth to our eyes. A man is able to institute a token of the truth, but not always able to make present the truth of the token: As when he leaueth a ring in token of him himsele, not being able to leaue his owne sub∣stance in the same ring, or vnder the forme of it. But Christ as he is both God and man, so he leaneth both anChristes toke hath in it, the truth . outward token according to his huane nature, and worketh an inward truth of the same token, according to his diuine allnugh∣tynes. The outward token is called the Sacrament, the truth thereof is called the thing of the Sacrament. Christ intending to shewe to the people that his Father all∣ways heareth him, sayeth: Father I thanke the because thou hastIoan. 11. heard me. These words betoken a thanksull hart. Wheresore if in ede the hart be thankfull, they are a Sacrament or holy signe because they betoken a most holy sacrifice of thankigeuing. But if in dede the hart geue no thanks, they are a false token, & there∣fore1. Ioā. 5. please not God, who is truth and loueth nothing but truth. Upon this ground of holy scriptures and of lerned Fathers,What a Sara∣ment is. the definition of a Sacrament is agred pon by all diuins, ta∣ken specially ont of S. Augustine, as  doth , in these words. Sacramentum est  gratiae, visiilis forma.De cōse∣cratione . 2. cap▪ Sa∣. A Sacrament is the visible forme of  grace. whereby  may perceaue a Sacrament to  o two parts. the one is ap prehended by faith, whiles the other is outwardly shewed to the
senses. If we see one baptized in the name of the Trinitie, we say, a Christen man was made to day. How proue we that? be∣cause y• Sacrament, which we saw, telleth vs what was wrought inwardly. Therefore seing Christ hath willd vs to say at his holy tableLuc. 22. ouer bread and  (This is my body and this is my blood) there is no doubt but the very naming of body and blood solēnly com∣maunded, is the commaudement to make a holy signe, which is asmuch to say, as to make a Sacrament. Whereof it foloweth, that the same thing is inuisibly wrought, which is outwardly si∣gnified. Otherwise a Sacrament may be false, it may be of one part alone, it may lacke the operation of the holy Ghost. And to be short, it may be made voide and of none . The token and signe sayeth, when bread is present: Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. The prone Hoc (This) and the verb (est, is) beto∣ken a thing present. The thing spoken of, is the body of Christ.If the bo dy be not made the wordes make a fal se token. Psal. 58. If this (whereof I speake it) be not made my body here present∣ly, I signifie and betoken a false thing. No false signification can be a Sacrament, because rather it is an execration or cursing, wherein au vntruth is betokened, from which God abhorreth. The Apologie confeeth the supper of our Lord to be a Sa∣crament, and whereas euery Sacramēt  of words and things, of which twaine the words are the more plaine token of the holy thing which is made: seing the words of Christes sup∣per are, This is my body, & This is my blood, of necessitie there must be a truth of that thing which these words doe signifie. And for asmuche as they signifie the presence of Christes body, his bo∣dy must nedes be present, where they doe signifie it to be present. I will exemplifie it in an other Sacrament also. Christ at hisFacere is to doe and make. last supper hauing sayd, This is my body which is geuen for you, sayd to his Apostles, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem.
Doe, and make this thing for the remembrance of me. In these words Christ betokened somewhat, surely that they shold make and doe the thing he spake of. I aske now, whether he gaue in deed power to the Apostles to make and doe that thing for the remembrance of him, or no? If in deed he gaue them no power, the signification of his words was false, and the tokē which they make to our eares, vntrue. On th' otherside if in deed by that precept Priests haue power to make that thing, whereof Christ spake, then the token was true, and the outward signification of the words agreeth with the in∣ward effect and working of them. For which cause we say, thatWhen the order of Priestho was geuè to the Apostles. Christ in those words instituted a Sacrament of holy orders. For he gaue vnto his Apostles at that tyme by those words the order of Priesthod. The holy signe of this Sacrament is, the pronoun∣cing of these words. Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Make and doe this thing for the remembrance of me. The inuisi∣ble grace wrought therein, is the power which the Apostles toke to make the body of Christ. Euen so: As sone as these words This is my body, and this is my blood are duely spoken, straight the body and blood is made present. If indeed it be not present, here is no Sacrament at all. Note well what I say, here is no true signe at all, but an hipo∣criticall and fonde Imagination of a thing, the truth whereof is not so as the word soundeth, and therefore the sige is false. Neither will it helpe any thing at all, if one say that Christ spake figuratiuely. For a figuratiue speache can not be an euidēt token of any thing, except it be such a figure, as through the cu∣stome of speache hath now obteined some easy and knowen  among all men that vse the same language as when by the name of a cuppe, we meane the drinke in it, or by the keyes ofLucae. 22. Matt. 16. the Kingdome of heauen we meane authoritie to bring men to
Christ and God, or by opening the mouth we meane speaking, which kind of speache though it be called figuratiue for some re∣spect, yet in dede it is all one with proper speach, because vse and custome maketh euery speach propre. Otherwise a very figura∣tiueA figura∣tiue speach doth not signifie till it be vn∣derstāded. speach signifieth no certain thing, vntill it be plainly vnder∣standed. And consequently no figuratiue speach can be a Sacra∣ment or a holy signe of an other thing. For a signe is euer plaine euident and able to instruct, as being according to the iudgemēt of S. Augustine the thing which besides the shew it maketh toAugust. de doctr. Christ. li. 2. ca. 1. our senses, causeth an other thing to come to our knowledge. But a figure not made common by vse, is obscure, darke, vncer∣taine, as all ridles be vntill they are opened. So that if Christ saying, This is my body, had meant (this doth signifie my body, and in dede is not so,) truly no Sacra∣ment had bene made (as I will shew hereafter) because no eui∣dent token had bene geuen of any thing. It can not be called an euident token, when I may more truly veryfie the contradictorie then that which is spoken. For if the Sacramentaries teach wel, it is a truer token to say, This is not my body: then to say, This is my body. But this is my body, cā neuer signifie to me by any figure of hetorike, this is not my body. For doubtlesse as long as I am not driuen to thinke this is not my body, or to thinke of an other thing as of trees, stones, water, bread, wine, or any like thing which is cleane diuerse in nature from Christes body (which to do after the name of body once heard out of ChristesThis is my body either doth signi fie nothing or it signi∣fieth the body of Christ. mouth is allmost impossible) so long it may still be a signe to me that it is Christes body. And seing it can neuer come to passe that I hearing Christ say, This is my body, can exclude the thought of his body from my vnderstanding, will I or nill I, (This) will be to me either a fals∣hod, or it will be the Sacrament or signe of his body. If it be so,
then seing the Sacrament and holy signe must nedes be true, the body must likewise be truly present, for so the token doth report. If when I heare Christ say This is my body, I must stand mu∣sing and diuising, how (is) may be taken vnproperly, and signi∣fie a certayn betokening without a true being, surely because all ignorant men, (studie they neuer so long) are able to conclude noSimple men can not vnder stand how the sige may e called y y• name o the thin. such thing, for that no such example cometh to their minde, and they are not exercised in scriptures as diuines be, thereby it will folow, that Christes words shall signifie one thing, to one man, and an other to an other. To some learned men after some conference they may signifie by the waye of coniecture the betokening of his body. To others who coniecture that Christ pointed to his own person when he sayd so, they will sound otherwise. But to the simple and igno∣rant who can not so put matters together, they will signifie all∣waysThe Apo stles were simple men. the reall presence of his body. Uerily the twelue Aptles were very simple, ignorant and (as the scriptures call them)  without lerning, neither was their mind opened to vn∣derstand the scriptures at y• tyme. And yet I dare say they knewActor. 4. what they did receaue: wherefore they toke the words of Christ literally as they sounded to them. Now seing these words (This is my body) signified the body of Christ, it will insewe, that seing Christ maketh allways a true signe, to them it was the truth of Christes body. Marye to Ihon Caluine who is more deeply lerned, and who studieth ful sore toIf Chri∣stes words haue not their first meaning they must sound to diuere mē diuersly. make and proue Christ a lyer, it may well be they will sounde otherwise. O Lord to what case are these signes and Sacra∣mentes brought, if according to some menne they shall sound one way, and to others an other way. And yet the truth of them stan∣deth chiefly & wholy dependeth vpon the signe which they make. As though all other men being able to make their last willes
with wordes plaine enough, thou Lord alone haddest neither vt∣terance, nor witte, nor mind, nor remembrance to make a token of thy inuisible work. And yet the Apologie sayth that the Eucharist is an euidēt to∣ken of the body and blood. If the token be euident all men doThe Apo logie is cō futed by his own saying. quicklie vnderstand it, why then striue we vpon an euident mat∣ter? Call wemen & children to ask of them what token y• words of Christ make: I warrant you, they will not say, that (is) doth stand to betoken, nor (body) for figure of body. That kind of to∣kens is not very euident to them. But in deed the token of Chri∣stes body is euident by his own words, and therefore the truth which he doth betoken to be present, is really present, for as his token is most euident, so is it most true. Christ after his resurrection gaue power to his Apostles to forgeue and retaine synnes. This thing was the institution of the Sacrament of Peuance. Let vs there see the Sacrament or holy signe of this git. whose synnes ye forgeue (sayeth he) theyIoan. 20. are foregeuen them. And whose ye retaine, they are reteyned.  in those words a signe of remission of synnes be instituted, suely when that signe is made by a Priest duly absoluing the penitēt, his synnes are in deed remitted. For loke how much the wordswords must be taken as they com∣monly sound. doe signifie to men of common vnderstanding, so much is geuen by them. How proue I that▪ because so much is signified to be geuen. And seing the gift of God which might haue bene secret, is now so made that the signe and token of it goeth together with the truth thereof, it could geue from it selfe no other token then it hath nature of his owne. The token of Christ sheweth power of forgeuing and reteyning synnes to be geuen to the Apostles. Therefore that power is in deed geuen. I am not ignorant that the Apologie (as it denieth this Sa∣crament
of Penance) so it falsefieth the words of Christ, sayingThe Apo logie falsi∣fieth the words of Christ. that the words whose synnes ye forgeue they are forgeuen, are meant, whose synnes ye declare to be forgeuen, but thereof we may by Gods grace, dispute an other tyme. Now it is enough to shew that the word (forgeuing) doth not importe euidently and at the first sight a declaration of forgeuenesse, but an actual for∣geuenesse in deed, and a signe thereof. Euen as these words This is my body, doe importe both a signe, and work a true being of the body, and not a signe without a truth. Briefly, it is one thing to consyder, what words any other where may signifie, and an other thing, to consyder what they may signifie in a Sacrament. For many words may signifie vn∣properlyThe chief words of a Sacra∣mēt must not be vn∣proper. in other places, but the principall words of a Sacramēt can not be vnproper. For the nature of y• thing doth lyitte the interpretation of the words. When Christ maketh a Sacrament, he maketh a thing of a dubble nature, to wit, a holy thing, and the signe of a holy thing. But the whole is to vs knowen by the signe. For the thing we see not, neither in Baptisine nor in confirmation, nor in the Eu∣charist, nor in Penaunce, nor in extreme vnction, nor in Priest∣hod, nor in Matrimonie. The thing, the truth, the grace, the in∣ward operation is hid from our eyes, from our eares, & feeling. The signe thereof is sensible and apperteineth to the eyes and ea∣res. Now to say that a plaine signe is not made outwardly, it is as much to say, as a plaine grace or truth is not made inwardly. Againe, if it be not a plaine signe, it is dark and obscure, it is doubtfull and in controuersie. Wherefore it will be inferred thatAn obscu∣re saying is no sen∣sible signe it rather confoundeth our vnderstanding, then teacheth it. Which being so, it is no visible signe of inuisible grace. For surely, be the inward grace what so euer it pleaseth God it shal be, yet one cer∣tayn being, nature, substance, condition and state it hath, whereof
no man is certainly warned, if y• words y• warne vs of it, be not plaine. And therefore we haue found a Sacrament according to y•It is a∣gainst the nature of an holy signe or sa∣crament not to sig∣nific plain y. Sacramentaries opiniō, without a holy signe, a truth without a figure, a certayn grace without a certayn foorme, a great mysterie without belefe or knowlege thereof. A notable institutiō of a sup∣per i mē knew, or might know what it were, a thing to be made daily, to be frequented oft, to be eaten and dronken, but what it is, no man is able to proue it plainely. To this point our new es would bring vs. That they couet to bring you into this blindnes cleane cōtra∣ry to the word of God, I wonder not, they do their ministerie, they worke their masters inspiration, they practise the deils de∣uises. Antichrist must denie all the mysteries & veryties of Christ,Antichrist could not take away the whole faith, if some part  not called in oubt be∣ore. how could that come to passe if no mā went before to bring them in doubt? Sodenly to preuale that belongeth only to God, by peece meale, and by litle and litle, to creepe in, that is the worke of Satan. They are faithfull seruantes to their Lord. And as lōg as they serue him, I blame them not, but I exhort them to leaue his seruice, for he is but an euill paimaster in th▪end. Mary that other so diligently follow them, that they so carefully striue to maintaine the same doctrine, that they by so long experience do not vnderstand whence it commeth, and whereto it hasteneth that is the greater grief. ¶ which argument is more agreable to the word of God, it is a token of the body, made by Christ, andThe. xij. Chapiter. therefore not the body, or els, therefore it is the true body of Christ. THe common argument of all the Sacramentaries against the blessed Sacrament of the altar, is thus formed. The supper of our Lord is the Sacrament, the signe, the figure,The rgu ment of he es. the pledge, the token, the remembrance of Christes body, there∣fore
it is not his body in dede. This argument is so good, or rather so bad, that if I should dispute for my life on the contrary side, I would bring the same, to proue the contrary truth. I wold say, the supper of our Lord isThe sup∣per of our Lord is his body▪ because it is a signe thereof in∣stituted by him self. the Sacrament of Christes body, the signe, the figure, y• pledge, the token, the remembrance thereof, instituted by Christ, there∣fore it is in dede the body of Christ. Now let vs goe to the word of God, to trie whiche argument is better. First it is to be noted, that although before the incarnation of Christ, signes were in part emptie and voide of the truth which they sinified, yet now the signes of the new Testament whichIoan. 1. August. Psal. 73. Christ himself hath instituted, conteyn the truth which they signi fie, because truthe is made by Jesus Christ. And S. Augustiue sayth, the Sacraments of the new Testament gene saluation. Again not with standing y• Christ left to his Church only seuen Sacramentes, which it should vse according as the nature of eueryone, or the profite of men doth require, yet Christ him selfe made a greate number moe, not leauing ordinarie atoritie to vs to do the same, but those which him self made in his own dispensa tiō of esh, & which he left to his Church to be made, be all of one nature. His incarnation, fasting, baptis, miracles, transfigu∣ration, passion, resurrection, ascension, were marue louse greate1. Tim. 3. Sacraments. For besides the truth which was wrought in them, they also be tokened an other thing either fulfilled in the olde i∣gures and Prophecies, or to be followed of his members, which1. Pet. 2. should conform them selues to the dedes of Christ their heade. But because we now speake of such Sacraments as are made chiely by words (of which kind those are, which y• Church prac∣tiseth.) I will shew only a fewe such places which doe witnes a hing to haue bene done, whiles a word signifying so much, was spoken. And all my examples shall proue, that looke what is out
wardly sayd, the same is inuisibly wrought at the same . So that the word is an vndoubted token of the thing don and made thereby.The true conception  is  with the signe thereof. Lucae. 1. For my part I say, the Angell Gabriel made the sige & token that Christ should be conceaued of the virgin Marye. Saying: Concipies in vtero. Thou shalt conceaue in thy wombe. And the holy virgin signified her consent therevnto saying, Fiat mihi se∣cundum verbum tuum. Be it done to me according to thy word. Therefore Christ in deed was conceaued, and tooke flesh of theMatth. 8. Cleansing  in deed  the word is . virgin Marie at the very same tyme. Christ ayd to the Leprouse man, Be thou made cleane, which words gaue a signe and token of cleansing, therefore in deed he was made cleane. Christ gaue a signe and token that synnes were forgeuen to him that had the palsey, by these words. Remittuntur tibi pecca∣taMatth. 9.  be forgeuē  when so  sd  Christ. Math. 11. Those mi racies were don in deed which were be∣. Marci. 7. The ea∣res were opened  deed when it was sayd, be y• opened. tua. Thie synnes are forgeuen the, therefore in deed they were forgeuen. Likewise Christ bad him take vp his bed, & goe home, for a token that the sonne of man had power in earth to forgeue synnes, therefore Christ in deed had power in earth to forgeue synnes: Because his token and signe is neuer false. When Iohn Baptiste had sent two of his disciples to know whether he were the man that shuld come, or an other, were to be looked for: Christ gaue a token to the eyes and eares of the messengers, that the blind sawe, y• lame walked, y• leepers were cleansed: Therefore in deed it was so. And he bad them tell S. Ihon what they had heard and seen. Christ sayd to the deafe and domme man, Adaperire. Be thou opened, and as it foloweth in the Gospell, straight ways his eares were opened, and the bond of his tonge loosed. Thus might I goe through euery example of the whole Gospell, and allways
when at the doing of any thing an outward signe of an inward grace is rehersed, that which the signe soundeth the grace wor∣keth. Marke well good Reader, that this rule be not wreasted to yt mere doctrine of Christ, which he spake doing or making no∣thing.Math. 13. Parables w vsed in teachig but not in doing. For then I confesse many parables, many obscure sayings were vttered to prouoke his audience to be humble, to think of their owne ignorance, to depend wholy of Christ, & to aske him the vnderstanding of the darke sayings. But now I speake not of sole doctrine. I speake of a worke that Christ maketh and of words ioyd with his worke. In this case I say, what so euer signe is outwardly made, the same is inwardly wrought.Ioan. 20. Christ sayeth to his Disciples. Take ye the holy Ghost, and withal he  vpon them. Beholde the word and the doing. The outward word is a holy signe or Sacrament, so is the out∣ward doing, which is breathing. The inward worke is the per∣foorming of th  signe which the worde and breath did betoken. Seing then Christ at his last supper did somewhat, seing heChrist ra∣ther did, thē taught in his supper. tooke bread, seing he blessed, seing he brake, seing he gaue, seing at the ty of this outward doing and working, he sayd some∣what, which saying was a signe, a Sacrament, a figure, a token, a pledge, a  of his body: we are assured by the word of God (which neuer shall perish) that Christ gaue at the same1. Pet. 1. tyme his true body vnder the forme of that bread, which he tooke and which by blessing he turned into his body. Hath not now the Apologie depely reasoned? Hath it not put a goodly foundation of the Sacramentarie doctrine? to saye the supper of our Lord is the euident token of the body and blood of Christ, thereby meaning th his body is not in dede really pre∣sent? wherein although it speake otherwise then ye holy scripture
oth in the same case: et mangre the will of the makers there∣of, it proueth the Catholike faith, because the signe that euery Sa crament of Christ maketh euidently to our senses, is inwardly wrought in that creature, whereof the signifying words are spo∣ken. By this true declaration of the nature of a Sacrament, it is proued, that so many Fathers, as call the supper of Christ a signe or figure, geue witnesse that it is also the truth it self. And if the Apologie will disproue the reall presence of Christ vnder y• foorm of bread, it must shew that his supper is not so much as a signe of his body and blood. But as long as they graunt vs the sige, the word of God will conuince the truthe to be present, which is signified. ¶ The words of Christes supper are not figuratiue,The. xiii. Chapiter. nor his token a common kind of tokens. WHen I graunt the supper of Christ to be a signe, a to∣ken, a figure, yet I do not graunt the words where∣withThe wor∣des of the Sacra∣ment be not figu∣ratiue. it is made, to be figuratiue. If I geue you a ring and say, were this token for the remembrance of me, I both geue a token of me, and name a signe or token, and yet my words are not figuratiue. It is therefore to be noted, that how many Fathers so euer call the Sacrament a figure, yet none of them all teacheth these words: (This is my body, and, this is my blood) to be words fi∣guratiue.The Fa∣thers cal∣ling y• sup∣per of Christ a figure, meane not a figure of Rheto∣. For when they call it a figure, they meane not a figure of Rhetorike, but a mysticall figure, and calling it a signe they meane not a naturall signe or token, but a mysticall signe, that is to say, a secret and miraculous kind of token, such as the state of the new Testament requireth, the nature whereof is to doe that which it sayeth▪ because Christ the speaker  all that by his diuine power and substance, which his word spoken by ye
mouth of his manhod, in holy Sacraments doth vtter and signi∣fie. Now he that wold the Sacrament of Christ so to be a signe, that he should not make that thing to be his body in deed where∣of in word he sayeth, This is my body, he most wickedly denieth the Godhead of Christ. Ebion was an heretike, who denying the diuine nature ofEpipha∣nius. li. 1. To. 2. Her. 30. Christ, sayd him to be Nudū hominem, a bare man. Epiphanius will proue against Ebion, that he is God. How so? Because he was geuen to the world for a signe. As the holy Ghost had pro∣phecied before of him, when he sayd to Achaz, Pete tibi signum,Esaiae. 7. The sig∣nes of Christ are miracu∣louse. ask to the a signe. And for as much as he wold not ask, then sayd the Prophete, Ipse Dominus dabit vobis signum, our Lord him self will geue you a signe. Behold a virgin shall conceaue: Now sayth Epiphanius: Non potest is qui per omnia homo genitus est signi gratia mundo dari: He y• is alltogether begotten as a man, can not be geuen to the world for a signe. For that which is cu∣stomably don, what signe of the Godhead could be therein? Epiphanius therefore doth signifie that sith Christes birth was geuen to the world for a signe, it could not be such a byrth, as o∣ther men haue, but it must be miraculous, and the miracle stode in this point, because he was truly born of a true virgin. Muche more we may say, sith the blessed Sacrament of the al∣tar hath bene left vnto vs as a signe of the body and blood of Christ: It could not be so if it were bare bread and wine, and notThe Sa∣craments of Christ are secret tokens. in deed his body and blood. what signe, what secret token, what miracle were in the eating and drinking of bare bread and wine, if none other thing were made thereof? As the ordinarie birth of man is no mere signe for Christ, who is true God, so the ordinarie eating of bread & drinking of wine, is no mete signe for the remembrance of Christes death. As the birth of Christ was a true birth but most miraculous
withall: so is the Sacrament of the altar a true signe, and there∣fore his true body and blood, by the great miracle of turning the substance of bread & wine in to them. This is y• signe that Christ made in his last supper. This is such a signe as is withall a secret miracle. For it is a miracle not shewed to  but only to the faithfull. For asThe  of Chri∣stes Chur che be ge∣ to the , & therore are ∣ble. the birth of Christ is a  to the faithfull only, who beleue Christ being God and man, truly to haue bene borne of a virgin, withou sede of man by the almighty power of the holy host: Right so the supp of Christ is a sige of his body  blood to the faithfull only, who beleue the  of bread and wine to be urned into his body and blood without  or corrup∣tion, by y• only  of the  o Chris. Who sayd after bread taken, and , This is my body, and this is my blood.Luc. 22. Doe and make this thing for the remembrance of me. Behold: the making of Christes body nd blood or y• remem∣brance of his death, that is the signe we speake of. This was the memorie or the remembrance whereof Dauid sayd: MemoriamPsal. 110. fecit mirabilium suorum misericors & miserator Dominus, esean dedit timentibus se. Our mercifull & graciouse Lord hath made a remembrance of his maruelous works, he hath geuen meate to them that feare him. And think we that a remembrance of mar∣uelous things is made of God without a miracle?Ciprian. de coena Domini. August. in ma∣nuali. cap. 11. Chrysos. de sacer∣dot. lib. 3. Damasc. de or∣thod. fid. li. 4. c. 14. S. Cyprian saith the bread to be made slesh Omnipotentia ver∣bi. By the allmighty power of the word. S. Augustine calleth it Mirabile sacrificium, A maruelous sa∣crifice. S. Chrysostom crieth out, o miracle, o the goodnesse of God he that sitteth aboue with the Father, in the self same moment of tyme is touched with the hands of all men. If thou ask how it is made (saith Damascene) it is enough
for the to heare, that it is made by the holy Ghost, euen as our Lord made for him self, and in him self a body out of the virgin, Mother of God. And we know no more but that the word of God is true, strenghtfull, allmighty.Euseb. li. 5. demō. cap. 3. Beda in hom. vi∣dit Iesus &c. Basilius in Litur. Gregor. Nyssen. in orat. de pas∣chate. Hieron. in Leui. Nicepho rus lib. 1. cap. 28. Eusebius calleth it Admirabilem exitum oraculi, a maruelous euent of the oracle. S. Bede nameth it a sanctification of the holy Ghost that can not be vttered by speache. The like words haue S. Baile, S. Gregorins Nyssenus, S. ieront, Nicephorus. This much I thought good briefly to say concerning y• man∣ner how the blessed Sacrament of the altar is a signe, token, fi∣gure, mysterie, remembrance: Euery word whereof expounded according to the Gospell and to the state of the new Testament, doth proue the reall presence of Christes body and blood vnder y• foormes of bread and wine. It is a Sacrament which outwardly signi that which is inwardly wrought. It is a figure cōtey∣ning the truth figured. It is a signe mete for the institution of Christ, whose signes are miraculous, it is a secret token knowen only to them that beleue. It is a remembrance of Christes death, by the presence of the body which died. What shall I say more? It is the body and blood of Christ couered from our eyes, reueled to our faith, feeding presently our bodies and soules to life euer∣lasting. ¶ That the supper of our Lord is no Sacrament atThe. xiiij. Chapiter. all, if these words of Christ, (This is my body, and This is my blood) be figuratiue.The ∣rence bet∣wen ∣res of  & . THere is a great difference betwen a figure of Rhetorike, and a Sacramentall figure made by Christ. The Rhetori∣call figures consist in words or sentences: the mysticall fi∣gures of Christ consist in deeds, & secret workings. Those some∣tymes
sound one way, and meane an other way. These meane and sound always one thing, but they shew it one way, and doe it an other way. Those chiefly serue the eares of mortall men: These chiefly serue the harts of faithfull men. Those were found by men, these were instituted of God. Christ sometime vsed figures of Rhetorike, because in taking the nature of man he addicted him selfe to vse the kind of speakīg which men obserued. But now Christians vse y• mystical signes of Christ, because he that toke their nature left vnto them the ver∣tue of his almightie Godhead. Let noman therore think when y• supper of our Lorde is called sometime a figure, that a RhetoriThe fi∣gures of Christ are mysticall. cal figure is meant, it is not so. A mystical figure, a secrete kno∣wlege, a priie watch word is vnderstanded by the name of a fi∣gure, as if Christ should say to his Apostles & folowers. Let this be a token betwen you and me, & betwene one of you toward y• other that when a faithfull man is washed with water and in theMatt. 28. meane tyme it is said ouer him, I Baptize the in the name of the Father, and of the sonne, and of the holy gost, straight all synnes are forgeuen him. And he is of my flock and receaued into my fold. Lett it be again an other couenant or signe betwene vs. When my Apostles or those which are made Priests by them, say ouer bread this is my body, and ouer wine this is my blood, hauingMatt. 26. the intent to blesse and geue thanks and to make a remembrance of my death, that my body and blood are really present vnder the formes of bread and wine accordingly as my words doe sound. These are mystical signes, priuie tokens, and secret figures to be kept only among the faithfull, and not to be published to infi∣dels. For as men by vse of speaking haue agreed to transferr cer∣tain words from their most proper signification to an other figu∣ratiue custom: euen so Christ hath transferred certain natural
things to an other mystical vse, which is now called in some Fa∣thers by yt name of holy signes, or figures, or tokens, or which is most common of all, by the name of sacraments or mysteries. See good reader to what myserie we are growen. He that commeth late from his grammar, where he lerned certain figures of construction, or he y• beginneth his Rhetorik where he moreoyes iudge the figures of God to be figures of grammer. depely entreth into the treatise of tropes and shemes, when he readeth in a two pēny booke the place alleged, where it is said (in Tertullian) this is my body, that is to saie the figure of my body he iudgeth owt of hand that Tertullian meaneth a figure of Rhe∣torik, and Decolampadius, Caluin, or Peter Martir is a meteHeretikes name what fi∣gure of grammer it is. Scholemaster for him to expound what kind of Rhetorical figure it is, verely saithei, metonymia, or synecdoche. Again, whe thei heare S. Augustine affirm that Christ gaue a'signe of his body, thei think he meaneth such a signe as is set vp at an ale howse, or wine tauern. yt Doctors meane a peculiar signe and token, miraculously instituted by Christ, which conteyneth & geueth to the faithfull the truthe which it betokeneth. This kind of signes and figures concerning the substance of things. them, consist of two parts as I sayd before. Of things and of words: the things are diuers, as for example, water, bread, wine,Mysticall words. oile and suche other. The mystical words coming to suche things as Christ hath appointed, make vp the whole Sacrament. So that the things are like stone, tymber, iron, wher withall a man will build or make somewhat, the words are like the order, and foorm which the Carpenter will set the stuff in. The things are confuse vntill the words determine them particularly to this or that vse. Therefore S. Paule saith, that Christ sanctifieth his Church Mudans eam lauacro aquae in verbo vitae. Cleansing it with theEphes. 5. wasng of water, in the word of life. What is that word of ?
erily whereof Christ sayd, goe teache all nations BaptizingMath. 28. them in the nanse of the Father and of the Sonne, and of the ho∣ly Ghost: This is the word which geueth life to him that is due∣ly wasshed. Of this word Christ sayd: Iam vos mundi estis prop∣terIoan. 15. sermonem quem locutus sum vobis. Now ye are clean for the words sake which I haue spoken to you. S. Augustine demandeth, why Christ sayd not, ye are cleaneIn Ioan. tract. 80. for ye Baptim wherewith ye are wasshed, but rather ye are cleane for the word which I haue spoken to you, sauing that euen in wa ter it is the word that cleanseth? Detrahe verbū, & quid est aqua nisi aqua? Accedit verbum ad elementum & fit Sacramentum. Take away the word and what is water but water? The word cometh to the matter, and the Sacrament is made. S. Angustine calleth the thing or stuff whereof the SacramtElemen∣tum. is made, Elementum: Which is to say a materiall thing that ser∣ueth for a beginning whereof a farther mysterie may be made, when the word appointed by Christ cometh to it. The Grecians vse to call those things, especially in the supper of Christ.   The things put or set before the Priest who must consecrate them with the word of God. The element therefore whether it be water, oile, bread, wine, or any other thing that Christ appointeth, is the weaker and infer riour part. The word is the more chief and principal. Vnde ista tanta virtus aquae (saith S. Augustine) vt corpus tangat & corAugust. in oan. tract. 80. abluat, nisi faciente verbo? Non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur, Nam & in ipso verbo aliud est sonus transiens, aliud virtus ma∣nens. Whence hath water this great vertue, that it should touche the body, and wasshe the hart, but that the word causeth it, not (only) because it is spoken, but because it is beleued, For in the er e word the soud which passeth awaie is one thing, and the vertue which remaineth is an other thing.
Now haue we thre things consydered by S. Augustine in an. things in a Sa∣crament. Sacrament, the lowest is the element which in baptun is water, the higher, is the word which again is cōsydered in two respects, in one as it is spoken, and so being ioyned with the element it maketh the substance of the Sacrament, and passeth awaie: in the other as it is beleued of him that receaueth the Sacrament, and so it worketh in him a grace, vertue, and effect of the Sacra∣ment. If now the word be it that both chefely maketh and effectuallie establisheth the Sacrament, it can not be douted, but that Christ gaue the greatest diligence of all, in assigning the solemn words of his blessed Sacraments. For the words appointed by Christ to the making of his Sa∣craments are so stronge, that althoughe the minister be neuer soAugust. cōt. Do∣nat. li. 5. cap. 19. &. 20. éuil a man, yet as S. Augustine saith, God sanctifieth his Sacra∣ments, Ad verba quae procedunt ex ore homicidae. At the words which come foorth of the mouth of a mankiller. And again he saith, Deus adest Sacramentis & verbis suis, per qualeslibet admi∣nistrentur. God is present to his Sacraments and words by whatsoeuer maner of men they be ministred. In so much that ifAugust. cōt. Ep. Parmen. li. 2. c. 12. at the tyme of celebrating, both the geuer and receauer haue don vulafully (saith S. Augustine) Non tamen pro non dato habebi∣tur. Yet the Sacrament shall not be accompted as not geuen. For seing the word was once spoken and ioyned with the ele∣ment, the substance of the Sacrament was made though it lacked his effect. Whereof it foloweth, that the Sacramētal words bring foorth a secret strength for their own part, albeit neither the mini∣sterChry∣sost. in Epist. ad Roma. Hom. 16 nor the receauer be of such worthinesse as they owght to be of. In ipso aquarum lauacro (saith S. Chrysostom) verba Dei sunt quae nos generant. In the verie washing of the waters they be the words of God which begett vs.
Which thing sith it is so, the words of Christes Sacraments doe not depend vpon the vnderstanding either of the minister, or of him that receaueth the Sacrament, but they haue a sufficient vertue in them selues, whereby they may worke. It is enowgh that the minister doe as the Church vseth to doe in such cases. This intention being kept, the words will bring the rest to passe. Or if a maliciouse Priest baptize a child with the mind to make him a Lutheran or an Anabaptist, shall yt child by yt intention be made an heretke? No verily: For so much as the words of Christ wherewith he is baptized, make him a member of his mysticall body, not incorporating him to any other felowship. Qui fuerit superbus minister, cum diabolo computatur, sed non contamina∣turAugust. in Ioan. tracta. 5. donū Christi. The proude minister (saith S. Augustin) is ac∣compted with the deuill, but the gift of Christ is not defiled. To come somewhat nere our purpose, S. Ambrose doth by name witnes, what strength Christes words haue in making hisAmbros. de Sacra. li. 4. c. 4. &. 5. supper. Sermo Christi hoc conficit Sacramentum, The words of Christ make this Sacrament. Antequàm consecretur, panis est, vbi verba Christi accesserint, corpus est Christi. Before it be consecra∣ted, it is bread, when the words of Christ are come to it, it is the body of Christ. Hoc (ait Sacerdos) est corpus meum. Hoc verbo proposita con∣secratnr.Chryso. hom. de prodii. Iudae. S. Chrysostom writeth, that when the Priest saith: This is my body, the things set foorth are consecrated with this word or saying. If now it be clere, that among many causes which concurre to make a Sacrament, one of the chefe is the words pronounced at the same tyme: and in the Sacrament of the Altar, seing they are: This is my body, and, This is my blood, Which are spoken ouer bred and wine, I say these words maie be in no wise figuratiue.
For by that meanes they shall not only not consecrate the body and blood of Christ, but (which is more) they shall not  so much as a signe of Christes body and blood. For yf words make any thing, they make it by signifiyng, as the which are not only signes of things, but by S. AugustinesAugust, de dct. Christi. li. 2 ca. 3. August. de Ma∣gistro. iudgement, they are the chefe among all signes. And as the same Doctour saith in an other place, Signum nisi aliquid significet, nō potest esse signum: A signe except it signifie sumwhat, can not be a signe. Now yt which doth not signifie a thing at all, can not by signifiyng make and work that thing, which it doth not signifie. Take these fower words, This is my body: Neuer a one of them doth signifie washing. Therefore if a mā washing an other with the mind to make him a member of Christes body should saie, This is my body, out of doute that man washed with those words, should not be baptized. What is the cause? Washing was vsed, ye minister was present with intent to baptize, some words also lacked not. but yet because those words lacked, which might signifie washing in the name of ye Trinitie, he was not baptized. If then the words of Sacraments must signifie that which shalbe made, these words, This is my body, spoken by any Priest, shall neuer make the signe of Christes body. Because they doeThe wor∣des of Christes supper doe not sig nifie a fi∣gure of his body. not signifie any figure or signe thereof. Ou the other syde, If they be in dede figuratiue, (as the Zuinglians affirm them to be) they shall not make the body of Christ, because (they say) Christ meant not so, but only meant a figure to be made in bread and wine. Behold to what case we are now brought. We haue striued so long about the words of Christ, whether they be proper or figu∣ratiue,If Chri∣stes wor∣des be si∣guratiue, they make nothing at all. that now they are proued to make nothing at all, if they be figuratiue. For they make not the body of Christ, because (if they be figuratiue) they meane not to make it. They make no figure of the body, because they name and signifie no figure. And that
which they do not signifie, they by signifying can not make. Fo their whole institution, vse, nature, and commoditie is to signifie, to shew foorth, to betoken & make plain the mind of the speaker. That which words doe not signifie they do not work. ThatWords doe all  they doe by signi∣fying. which they work not is neuer don by them. But these words, This is my body, and this is my blood signifie no figure no signe, no token (for so muche as they signifie an other thing) therefore they work no figure, they make no signe, they leaue no token. And then haue we no Sacrament at all made, because none is made without suche words as may signifie that which is made and wrought. If any man saye Christ may meane a figure and signe, and by his meaning, these words, This is my body, may work a figure o his body, I answer, if Christ wil work by his meaning, who can forbed him, seing he is almighty? And if he will work without any words, who cā gainsaye him? But then his words work not. And why then are they deliuered to vs, as the chief instrument to work withall? Why sayd he, Hoc facite, Doe, and make thisLucae. 22. thing? why are they rehersed in euery Masse and communion? Why doe the auncient Fathers teache the bread and wine to be consecrated by them? Why may not Baptism be made by other words then by those which Christ instituted? Surely to say, that these words, This is my body, make a fi∣gureMath. 28 of his body because Christ wil haue it so, is to say that Christ will not hane words necessarie to the making of his Sacramēts. Or it is to saie, that he will haue a thing wrought by words, to work the which they be vumete instruments: as if a man wold take a saw to plane timber withall, & a beetil to cutt down a tree.The word of God hath geuen ho∣ur to words. Christ being ye word of God hath geuen that honour to words of men (but yet to such as are appointed by him self) that they should principally among instrumentall causes work and make
his Sacraments. Next vnto words he chose maruelous conue∣nient things, wherewith they should concur. The things to be most agreable to th▪effect which they are sett to work, all men agree. It is conuenient for water to washe, for bread and wine to concur to the Sacrament of the Altar as meetest to nourish, for oile to serue in ointing at the vse of other Sacraments. And now hath Christ erred in chosing his words? hath he  (body) to signifie the figure of his body? To whom doth it signi∣fie after that sort? Surely not to all men, as it is eident. not to all Christians, as it maie appere, in that we hearing it said, that Christ had a mans body, or walked in a mans body, or that ourBody doth sigi sie y• sub∣stance but not the si∣gure of a body. bodies shall rise at the later daie, in all these phrases, we take not the name of body, for a signe and figure of a body: but we take it to meane the true substance of flesh and blood. How then? shall the word body be taken only in the supper of our Lord for the signe and figure of body? Wher is that rul readen? Wher is that secret reueled▪? For dowtlesse if it were true, it were of it self a mysterie, and an vnwont acception appointed by Christ, and it had neded to haue ben registred in the Scriptu∣res or in the holy Fathers, or at the least to haue ben deliuered to vs by tradition. But who teacheth, that body standeth to signifie the figure of body? many Fathers saie the words of Christ are plain, manifest, true, and effectuall, but no man telleth vs of such a strange taking of the words (body and blood,) noman witnesseth them to be ta∣ken for the figures of body and blood, and no maruail. For no man knew that iuterpretation. They knew that the true body of Christ geuen after such a sortHow Christes body is a figure. vnder the foormes of bread and wine, was a figure of the self same body, either walking visibly vpon the earth, or suffering death vpon the crosse, or sitting now at the right hand of his
Father, or intending to come to iudgement. They could tell, that a thing present in a secrete maner, is a token, a signe, and a watch word to all the faithfull, of an open maner, either past or to come in the same thing. By this meanes they confessed the Sacrament to be the figure of Christes body and blood, but they knew no such figure as the Sacramētaries haue deuised. they neuer could tell of Synecdoche, or of Meronymia. they knew Sacramentall, and not Rhetoricall figures, Mysticall, and not Poeticall, holy and not prophane. Let him therfore that will haue any thing at all made by Christes words, acknowlege them to be proper, to signifie sumwhat, and to make that they signifie, which is the true body and blood of Christ. ¶ The reall presence of Christes body is that, whichThe. xv. Chapiter. setteth his death and life before vs. WE doe acknowlege the Eucharist to be a Sacrament,The Apo logie. wherein is sette after a manner before our eyes the death of Christ, and his resurrection, and what soeuer he did here in his humane body. The eating of common bread and drinking of common wineThe aun∣swere. is but an homely maner of setting the death and resurrection and life of Christ before our eyes. Here is the Sacramentaries argu∣ment: I eate bread and drinke wine in token of Christes death & resurrection, therefore he is dead and risen. I pray you Syr, how doth this argument hold? What affinitie hath bread and wine with the death and with the resurrection of Christ? But if bread and wine be turned into the same body & blood ofIt is the body of Christ which set∣teth his death be∣fore vs, & not bread and wine. Christ, which died and rose againe, which wrought all the mira∣cles done in this world: Then is the death and resurrection and conuersation of Christ in dede it selfe set before the eyes of our faith. Because (as Chrisostom teacheth) Hoc idem corpus cruen∣tatum, & caet. This very same body bloudied, perced with y• speare
gaue as it were out of a spring, fountaynes of blood, healthfull to the whole world. And the selfe body God aanced vnto the high∣est seate, the which body also he gaue to vs, both to th'intent we should haue it, and to the intent we should eae it. But what speake I of S. Chrisostom? This (sayeth Christ) isLucae. 22. 1. Cor. 11 my body, which is geuen for you. And againe, the bread which I will geue is my flesh, which I will geue for the life of the world.Ioan. 6. How ofte so euer (sayeth S. Paul) ye shall eate this bread and1. Cor. 11 drinke the chalice of our Lord, ye shall shew his death vntill he comme. So that the hauing of the death, and resurrection, and all y• mi∣racles of Christ before our eyes at Masse tyme, riseth chiefly of y• thing which is the body of Christ. And secondarily of the things which are done about that his body. The consecrating, the offe∣ring, the eating of the selfe same body, which wrought these mi∣racles, which died and rose againe, those facts I say in that thing, shew his death and resurrection. All other wayes of setting the death and resurrection and conuersation of Christ before our eyes without the reall presence of Christ, is painting and shadowing in comparison of this liuely representation. O how many (sayeth S. Chrisostom) say now adayes, I woldHom. 83. in Mah. see the soorm & shape of Christ, I would see his very garmentes, and shoowes. Ipsum igitur vides, ipsum tāgis, ipsum comedis. Lo, thou seest him selfe, thou touchest him selfe, thou eatest him selfe. Non quòd corpus illud (sayeth Damascen) è coelo descendat, sedDamas∣cenus de orthod. side. li. 4. cap. 14. quia panis & vinum in Christi corpus & sanguinem transmutatur Not as though the body of Christ came downe from heauen, but because the bread and wine is changed into the body and blood of Christ. See now good Reader, whether the Apologie say more truly,
that, the signe or token of Christes body and blood (the body it selfe not being made present vnder the sones of bread and wine as it teacheth) doe more effectuously set before our eyes yt death and resurrection and all the miracles of Christ, or els whether ye incarnation, life, death, and resurrection of him be not better and more according to the word of God set soorth by the Catholikes who teach that the substance of bread and wine is changed into yt body and blood of Christ to th'end the death and resurrection of the same body might be effectually remembred. So teacheth S. Cyrillus in these words. Prebet Christus nobisCyrillus in Ioan. lib. 12. cap. 28. carnem suam tangendam, &c. Christ geueth vs his flesh to be tou ched, that we might beleue assuredly that he hath in deed reised his temple. For that the communion of mystical blessing is a cer∣tayn confession of the resurrection of Christ, it is proued by his own words. For he distributed the bread after it was broken, saying, This is my body, which shalbe geuen for you, for the re∣mission of synnes. Make and doe this thing for the remembrance of me. Therefore the participation of yt mysterie is a certain true confession and remembrance that for our sakes and for vs our Lord both hath died and is reuiued, and through that filleth vs with diuine blessing. Let vs therefore flee infidelity after the tou∣ching of Christ, and let vs be found strong and stedfast being far from all doubtfulnesse. Thus far S. Cyrillus. Who alludeth in that place to S. Tho∣mas the Apostle. And as S. Thomas touching the syde of Christ cried out My Lord and my God, euen so S. Cyrillus teacheth yt we touche the body of Christ when we come to the holy commu∣nion.Ioan. 20. For as vnder the visible flesh of Christ, his Godhead lay priuie but yet was truly present, and had assumpted his flesh into one person, euen so vnder the visible foorm of bread the flesh of Christ is really present in the holy mysteries, and therefore we
touch that flesh, when we touche the foorm of bread, as S. Tho∣mas did touche the Godhead when he touched the flesh of Christ. For in eche place we touche not either the Godhead or the flesh visibly, but by the meane of that thing, wherein it is truly pre∣sent. That thing I say receaued of vs, doth make his death and resurrection to be remembred. Hath not he all that euer Christ did, presently before his eyes, who hath Christ him selfe present? But take Christ awaye, and afterward it is a foolish dreame to talke, how his deeds be set be∣fore our eyes by bread and wine. The apparence of bread is the token, that Christes body is here to be eaten. And the similitude of wine doth shew, that his blood is here to be drunken. But the true shewing of his death, life, and resurrection, ariseth of that truth which is vnder those foormes. When I eate the body that died, I shew the death of it, because1. Cor. 11 no sacrificed flesh was euer eaten before the host was offered. But we eate really the body of Christ, therefore our fact crieth, that Christ is dead. We eate his body aliue hauing the blood and soule in it, therefore our fact crieth, he is risen again. Thus the Ca tholiks reason. Let him that hath cōmon sense iudge, who goeth nere the truth of the Gospell, the Sacramentarie, or the Ca∣tholike. ¶ Our thanksgeuing and remembrance of Christes death is altogether by the reall presence of his body.The. xvi. Chapiter. TO th'intent we should geue thanks for his death and ourThe Apo logie. deliuerance, and that by often resorting to the Sacramen∣tes, we should continually renew the remembrance there∣of. These men presuppose we haue a signe or token left vnto vsThe aun∣swere. in bread and wine, to geue thanks withall. We haue in deed a to∣ken, but this token though it were made of bread and wine, is
not bread and wine. For Christ in his last supper, tooke bread,Lucae. 22. and when he had geuen thanks, he sayd, This is my body, which is geuen for you, doe and make this thing for the remembrance of me. Behold the token, wherein Christ both him selfe gaue thanks, and would vs to geue thanks in the same. The making of his body for vs, is the thanksgeuing for his death, and for our deli∣uerance. Ipso genere sacrificij (sayeth S. Chrysostom) ad iugem nos proChry∣sost. in Hom. 26 in Math. beneficijs suis inuitans gratiarum actionem: Stirring vs to geue thanks perpetually for his benefites, by the very kind of the sa∣crifice. And shewing farther in an other place what kind of sacri∣fice it is, God (sayth Chrysostom) did yerely by certain holydays set the remembrances of his benefites before the Iewes. Tibi ve∣roChry∣sostom. Hom. 51. in Math. quotidiè ipse, ne obliuiscaris, proponitur. But he is set before thee daily him selfe, lest thou shouldest bee vnmindfull. See now by what meanes the death of Christ is renewed. Not by tokens wherein he is doubtfully called to minde, him selfe being absent, (for that were a feble token) but by these tokens, wherein him selfe is made present, lest we should forgett his death. The body of Christ must be made, to th'intent we maye re∣memberLucae. 22. his death. If you take from vs the making of his body which causeth the vehement remembrance of the death, it is af∣terward a vaine thing to talke of the remembraunce of his death by eating bread and drinking wine. For the necessarie meane of necessarie remembrance of his death, consisteth in the reall pre∣sence of him that died. For who can forget his death, whose body is daily made, worshipped and eaten, to the end the death may be remembred. But I may right well eate bread and drinke wine, not yet remembring thereby, that Christ is dead for me.
¶ The true resurrection of our bodies commeth byThe. xvii. Chapiter. eating that body of Christ, which is both true and is true in vs. TO th'intent we being fed with the body and blood ofThe Apo logie. Christ, may be brought into the hope of the resurrection, and of euerlasting life, and may most assuredly beleue that the body and blood of Christ doth in like manner feed our soules, as bread and wine doth feed our bodies. I omit to say any thing vpon that ouersight, wherein the En∣glishThe aun∣swere. translation of a body hath left out the word Vero, the true body, which the Latine edition hath. But here the Apologie pre∣supposeth that Christes supper consisteth as wel of bread & wine, as of body and blood. The first two they will haue geuen to the bodies: The later twaine to the soules. The bread & wine they will haue present on the table, whence they be deliuered: The bo∣dy and blood they will haue to be receaued from heauen, by faith and vnderstanding. Against this dreame thus I reason out of ye word of God. Christ made his whole supper vpon a visible table, according∣ly as it was prophecied by king Dauid, Parasti in conspectu meoPsal. 22. mensam. Thou hast prepared a table in my sight. And by Salo∣mon,Prou. 9. Sapientia proposuit mensam suā & insipientibus locuta est: venite, comedite panem meum, & bibite vinum quod miscui vo∣bis. Wisedome hath set foorth her table, and hath spoken to sim∣ple men: come ye, eate my bread, and drinke ye wine which I haue mixed for you. S. Paul sayth, Non potestis mensae Domini parti∣cipes1. Cor. 10 esse, & mensae Daemoniorum. Ye can not be partakers of our Lords table, and of the table of deuils. Put these three together, and the sense will be, the supper and table of our Lord was prepared and set foorth in the sight of the faithfull, that they might thence cate and drinke such as the wise∣dome of God gaue them at his supper. Therefore no meate, no
foode, no banket is to be looked for at his supper, but such as is prepared by Christ & set foorth vpon his table. Otherwise ChristPsal. 22. had prepared no supper, in the sight of yt faithfull (as Dauid fore∣told) nor had not set foorth his table (as Salomon prophecied)Prou. 9. nor we had not bene partakers of our Lords table (as S. Paul1. Cor. 10 writeth. For bread and wine is not prepared of Christ: But was beforeBread & wine was not y• ta∣ble that Christ pre pared. hand made ready by the baker and vintner, or by the seruants y• brought them foorth. The preparing which Christ made, was by blessing and conseng, to make of earthly bread, the bread of life euerlasting. And hauing made it, he deliuered the same to the Apostles, and bad them both make and doe that thing. If he deliuered not his owne body with his owne handes,Lucae. 22. doubtles they did not eate his body. For he, sayd in respect only of that which he deliuered, take and eate. Wherevpon S. Chry∣sostomHom. 82 in Math. sayeth to him that cometh to our Lords table: Cogita quid manu capias, & caet. Bethink thy selfe what thou takest in thy hand, and kepe it free from all couetousnes and violent robbery. Consider againe, that thou takest it not only in thy hande, but al∣soThe hand & tō ge re∣ceaue he same body y• the hart doth. puttest it to the mouth (and) after thy hand and tonge, the harte receaueth that dreadfull mysterie. Thus much S. Chryso∣stom. Let any reasonable man iudge, whether he sayeth not, that the hart receaueth the same which the hande doth, and the hande the same, which the hart doth. For if the hart receaue it after yt hand, the hand receaued it before the hart. It is not therefore, as the Sacramentaries falsely teach, bread only in hand, and body only in harte: But body as well in hand, as in harte. And none other true body in the harte, then was first in the hand, and mouth. For this cause euer sith we receaued the faith, we called this
blessed supper, The Sacrament of the altar. As if we sayd, the Sa∣cramētWhy the supper of Christ is called the Sacra∣mēt of the altar. Malach. 1 which is made vpon the altar or vpon the table of Christ. for the table of Christ is an altar, as in Malachie it may appere, and in an other place, by the fauour of God, I will declare. This name of the Sacramēt of the altar was deliuered to vs with our Christianitie, and it is found very ofte in the olde wri∣ters, namely in S. Augustine. By which we are enformed thatDe ciuit. Dei. li. 10 cap. 6. the consecration and oblation thereof is made, not in the hartes of men by words of promising and preaching, but vpon the visi∣ble altar, in the sight of Christian people, by y• visible Priest who as a publike minister ordeined by God, consecrateth the body of Christ by the same power, which Christ gaue when he sayd: HocLucae. 22. facite, doe and make this thing. This is  table prepared in the sight of Dauid, set foorth byPsal. 22. Prou. 9. 1. Cor. 10 August. li. 9. con∣fes. ca. 13. the wisedome of God, whereof we are partakers, when we re∣ceaue the blessed Sacrament of the altar. At this altar S. Augu∣stines mother desired a memorie of her to be made, vnde sci∣ret dispensari victimam sanctam, qua deletum est chirographum quod erat contrarium nobis. From which altar my mother knew (sayeth S. Augustine) the holy sacrifice to be distributed, where∣by the handwriting that was contrarie to vs, is put out. Behold the sacrificed body of Christ was dispēsed and geuen from the al∣tar, as both S. Augustine, and his mother, and all the faithfull then beleued. Thus thou seest the dreame of the Apologie by the word of God to be blowen away like chaf & dust dispersed with the wind. The Apologie sayeth, our bodies are fed at Christes supperMath. 26 with bread and wine. that is not in the word of God, where it is sayd: Eate, This is my body. The Apologie semeth to say, that our bodies be not norished with the body and blood of Christ, for it assigneth body and blood
to our soules as our bodies are fed with bread and wine. But Christ gaue his body to norish our bodies also. And thereforeIoan. 6. sayd: Except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man and drinke his blood, ye shall not haue life in you. That is (as Cyrillus expoun∣dethCyrillus li. 10. c. 13 in Ioan. it) In corpore vestro, in your body. And therefore on the o∣ther syde Christ sayd, he that eateth my flesh & drinketh my blood, hath life euerlasting, and I will reyse him again in the last day. Ego (sayeth Cyrillus) Id est, corpus meum quod comedetur. I will reyse him, that is to say, my body which shalbe eaten. Rey∣sing belongeth to the body which falleth into putrefaction by death. As therefore the body is reysed by Christes body: so the body li∣ueth in the state of grace, by Christes body. and such life is by spi∣ritual nutriment, which is receaued of the flesh of Christ really present in vs. For which cause Tertullian confessed that not only our soule,Tertul. in lib. de resurrec. carnis. Ireneus aduersus haereses. li. 4. c. 34. but also our body seedeth vpon the body and blood of Christ, to th'intent our soule may be made fat of God. Likewise Ireneus writeth that our flesh is nourishd of the body and blood of our Lord. We may now see what errour they fall into, who assigne the body and blood of Christ to our soules, and bread & wine to our bodies, whereas there is no substance left of bread or wine, but euen our bodies feede vpon Christes body, as Ireneus, Cyrillus and Tertullian haue sayd. ¶ Nothing is wrought in the supper of Christ accor∣dingThe . to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries. AFter the Apologie had spoken of communion vnder both kinds, and of transubstautiation, of which points as yet I speake not, it returneth again in a confuse manner to the matter of the reall presence, and thus it sayeth.
And in speaking thus, we meane not to abase the Lords sup∣per,The Apo logie. or to teache that it is but a cold ceremonie only, and nothing to be wrought therein, as many falsely slaunder vs, we teache. If they that pluck down altars, and other ornaments of Chri∣stesThe aun∣swere. supper, if they that call the blessed Sacrament of the altar by so vile names as you and your scholars haue done, be not of yourBy what meanes y• Lords sup per is aba sed now in Englā number, if they be not your derelings, if they lerned not that cō∣tempt of holy things, and the denyall of the vnbloody sacrifice of you, if they first persuaded not the licenciouse youth and faithlesse companie of men and wmen in Englād rather by blasphemous names, geuen to the Eucharist, then by any word of God (which you stil pretend and neuer allege) then let it be thought, that you meane not to abase the Lords supper. But if you did set all the players and minstrels in the realme a work with such scoffes, as your brotherhead inuented against the blessed body and blood of Christ, I feare me you be not slaun∣dered, when you are sayd to teach it to be but a cold ceremonie,The Apo logie na∣meth y• ho nouring of Christes body, the worship∣ping of bread. sith you doubt not to call, euen in this Apologie, y• honour done to it the worshipping of bread, whereas it is in deed the worship∣ping of the true body and blood of Christ. Wel, you teach not, that nothing is wrought or made in the sup∣per. Then by like you teach, that somewhat is wrought there. I wold fain see what it is which you teach to be wrought in the sup per. For where you say, that Christ geueth him self in his supper that we may eate him by faith: You teach a work of Christ, in ge∣uing him self, & a work of ours in eating him, but not any thing wrought or made in the supper it self. For the supper is that meate which is prouided to be eaten at the table of Christ. There you confesse bread and wine to be ta∣ken. But seing you teache the same things (notwithstanding he speaketh otherwise of them) yet to tarie bread and wine stil, I can
not perceaue, what substanciall thing you teach to be wroughtNo sub∣stanciall thing is wrought in Chri∣stes sup∣per by the Sacra∣mentaries doctrine. in the supper concerning the matter of the supper, which is bread and wine. Now concerning the body and blood of Christ, which you graunt to be geuen by faith, I trow you teache not any thing to be wrought a new and made therein, sithens they be impassi∣ble, and therefore can not haue any thing made in them. what is it then, which you teache to be made in the supper? Either bread and wine is the supper, or the body and blood of Christ, or both together. For nothing els is there mentioned. Bread and wine, you say, remayne still as they were before con∣cerning their substāce. Then I say, nothing is wrought in them. The body and blood of Christ can haue nothing wrought in their substance, because that wherein somewhat shalbe made, must suf∣fer of that which worketh it. therefore glose the matter how ye will, you teache not any substanciall thing to be wrought in the supper of Christ, except you call the geastes them selues the sup∣per. And then I wee they must be eaten vp of some body, in so much as euery supper is prouided to be eaten. We teache the substance of bread and wine to be made the sub∣stanceWhat the Catholi∣kes beleue to be wrought. of Christes body and blood. And that is y• true work made in the supper of Christ, where the mutable creatures are turned into the immutable substance of Christ. which work sith you de∣ny, bable what you wil, you teache nothing to be wrought in the supper of Christ. ¶ The reall presence of Christes flesh is proued by theThe. xix. Chapiter. expresse naming of flesh, blood, and body, which are names of his humane nature. FOr we affirme that Christ doth truly and presently geue hisThe Apo logie. owne self in his Sacraments. in Baptisme, that we may put him on, and in his supper, that we may eate him by faith and spirite, and may haue euerlasting life by his crsse and blood.
Heare ye not how they affirme that Christ presently geueth hisThe . own self? wold not a mā thinke they meant honestly and truly? But sith they can make the words of Christ figuratiue when they lyst, wonder not if they require their own words to be taken fi∣guratiuely. They meane not that Christ doth geue him self presently to our bodies and soules, as is requisite to the presence of the fleshThe Apo logie pea∣keth  & meaner euill. and blood of man. why then vse they such words? Uerily because they see the Scriptures so playne, the Fathers and Councells so manifest, the aith and practise of the Church so euident for y• reall presence of Christ, that in no wyse they may confesse any other thing then they doe. And yet on the other side being fully deter∣mined to sticke to their desperate opinion, that we really neither eate nor drinke vnder forme of bread and wine the flesh & blood of Christ, they haue inuented such kind of speaking, as may both seme to agree with the Scriptures, and yet withall mayntein their false doctrine. The which thing that thou mayest the better vnderstand, this is to be consydered. The Catholike faith is, that Christ in one person hath two na∣tures:Two na∣tures in one peron of Christ. The nature of God, and the nature of man. which two natures are ioyned and vnited together into one person, after such sorte, that what so euer is said of the one nature, may be sayd of the other, if we speake by that worde which signifieth the per∣son. For example, we may say that man was in heauen before theIoan. 3. ascension of Christ, and that God died, not because the nature of God could be borne of a woman or dye, or ye nature of man could be in heauen before the ascension of Christ, but because that which was borne and dyed, was also God, and that which was in hea∣uen was also man. albeit his byrth and death was by the nature of man, and his being in heauen by the nature of God. The na∣tures then tary distinct, but y• prson of God & man is but one.
Now shall you see the meane, whereby these new prechers go about to deceaue you. They say Christ geueth him selfe in his Sacramēts. The wordChrist, & him self be names of his person (Christ) doth signifie his person, wherein he is both God & man: Likewise the word (him self) is a word belonging to his person, wherein both natures of God & man are conteyned. Now when they say Christ geueth him self, they meane that he being God & man geueth by some spiritual way the vertue of his flesh & blood, which they call him self, for that he, as God, being euery where, may dwell in vs more excellently by charitie, as the Father and the holy Ghost doe. But they meane not by geuing of him selfe, ye reall gifte of his person and of both natures which are ioyned therein, after such sort that our whole nature might receaue his nature. For then they should teache that, which we doe. But howsoeuer they ba∣ble of our soules, they will graunt our bodies no touching nor tasting of him, no not so much as vnder y• oormes of bread and wine. You haue heard what they say: Now heare what Christ sayeth. Christ speaketh of him self in diuerse places diuersely. Due where he sayeth: I will not leaue you Orphans, I will come vntoIoan. 14. you. There he speaketh of his person, and concerning the nature of Godhead, as it appereth afterward where it is written: If any man loue me, he will kepe my word, and my Father will loue him and we will come vnto him, and make a mansion or dwelling with him, or at his howse. Here he speaketh first in such sort of his own coming, that his Father (as it appered afterward) might come after the same sort. Then was it the coming of God, and not of man. At his departure when he ascended from the world into hea∣uen, he sayd: Behold I am with you all dayes euen vntill the con∣summation
of the world. These words may be meant as well byMath. 28 the nature of manhod, which we haue with his Godhead in theS. Ger∣manus in rer. Ecc. Theoria. Sacrament of the altar (and so some holy Doctors haue taken them) as also by the only nature of the Godhead, which is euery where by maiestie, and in good men by grace. In an other place he sayd: Poore men ye shall haue allwayesMath. 26 with you, me ye shall not haue allwayes. Where, by the word, me, he meaneth not his Godhead, which is allways euery where, but the nature of his manhod, and that not as it is in the Sacrament, but as it was when he spake, in a visible forme of a poore man, who had not any howse of his own, where he might reste his head. Last of all let vs marke, after what sorte he sayd that he woldMath. 8. be in his blessed supper. Dyd he say: I will geue my self to be ea∣ten and to be drnken? If he had sayd so, yet seing he had men∣tioned eating and drinking, which according to the letter, rather belongeth to his manhod then to his Godhead, we should ra∣ther haue thought, that the words must haue bene taken proper∣ly, then improperly. To eate the substance of a man may be sayd properly, for in deed it may be eaten with mouth and teeth, but toCyrillus in. 11. Anathe∣matismū eate the substance of God it is sayd vnproperly: For it can not be eaten with teethe and mouth (as also S. Cyrillus hath noted) but only with vnderstanding and faith. If then Christ had sayd before supper, I will geue my self to be eaten, and had sayd at his supper: I do geue my self to be eaten: These words with a circumstance of a supper, had made so strōg∣ly for the bodily geuing of him selfe, that their part had bene more probable, who had vnderstanded it of his manhod. With whom if the tradition of the Apostles had stood, there were no doubt but he should haue bene a wicked heretik, who, when Christ had sayd I geue my self to be eaten, wold haue denyed that we had eaten
the humane nature of Christ. But now attend what words Christ vsed: He forcseing this hearesie made  agaynst it, and therefore he sayd not, I will geue or do geue my self to be eaten, as heretiks now delightChrist v∣sed the names of his hu∣mane na∣ture in his supper. to speake, but I geue my flesh, my body, my blood. These are not wordes of personage, which may be applyed two wayes, but they are the words of nature, and only of mans nature. For God by y• nature of his Godhead hath neither flesh ne blood, ne soule, ne body, ne bone. Christ as man hath all these things. Now do the heretiks and false preachers of our age maruclous∣ly deceaue the people of God, who alwayes say that they dimi∣nish not Christes benefite, nor do not abuse the Lords supper,  (say they) we teache that Christ geueth his owne self, and they re∣pete agayne and agayn his owne self, his owne self. And thereby they meane no more then the comming of his grace and charitie into our soules, by fayth, spirit, and vnderstanding: Wholy rob∣bing vs of that flesh which dyed for vs, and of that blood whiche was shed for vs. For although God was able to haue saued man otherwyse, yet he swetely disposed our saluaciō, by sending his dere sōne to takeIt is real flesh and blood which sa∣ueth vs. of the virgyn our flesh and blood. This flesh and this blood wor∣keth our saluacion: Which he y• taketh away from the Sacrament of the altar, depriueth vs of the meane whereby to come to life euerlasting. For as by this flesh and blood we are redemed: So that redemption is applyed to all that be of lawful age by wor∣thyIoan. 6. eating and drinking thereof. Now when these preachers cry vnto you, of God, of fayth, of spirit, of vnderstanding, of vertue, they seme perhaps to say goodly things, but they craftily put you from that only meane of fleshe and blood, whereby God hath or∣deyned our saluacion. Abraham was the sather of al beleuers,Rom. 4. because neuer any mans belefe was so throughly tryed, as hys.
He lacked not grace, vertue and vnderstanding, but he lacked the flesh and blood of Christ: Which flesh when it came really into the world, when it was crucified and gusshed out streames of blood, then the soule of Christ deliuered the soule of Abraham and all the other Fathers out of prison. Wel, to end this matter, Christ to shew that he wold be in his supper by y• nature of his manhed, for that cause he named not his person, but his flesh, his body, his blood. And S. Paule namedEphe. 5. his bones, as you shall see hereafter. Wherefore y• talke of his pre∣sence by fayth is vnfaythfull, y• talke of his presence by spirite asLucae. 24. thereby excluding his body & soule from our bodies and soules, is spritish and diuelish. A spirit hath no flesh and bones: Christ is with vs in the substance of his owne flesh, & of his owne bones. And yet that we might vnderstand that Christ naming flesh & blood, meaneth not that either his flesh is vnder y• forme of bread without blood, or his blood vnder the forme of wine without flesh, but that vnder eche kinde both flesh and blood and soule and Godhead is: he saith, he that eateth my flesh and drinketh myIoan. 6. blood, taryethin me, & I in hym. That is to say, when I promise flesh and blood, I name them only to declare plainly, that my be∣ing in the Sacrament is a being according to y• truthe of my hu∣mane nature, and not as though I were not there in mine owne person. for he that eateth my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwell∣eth in me and I in him. But it I had sayd, that I geue my self & no more:  false preachers had expoūded my selfe by my God∣head and by fayth vppon me, my simple faythfull people might haue bene deceaued. I name flesh, body, and blood, to shew according to what nature I am . But I am not diuided as though my flesh were vn∣der one kynde, and mie blood vnder the other. And therefore I say last of all: He that catcth me, he also, shall lyue for me, so that
I am altogether in mine owne person vnder eche kynde, after cō∣secration. Marke this agayne and agayne, and let not the doc∣trineWe ought to beleue as y• word of God speaketh. of Christ him self pretēded in suttil words, deceaue thee any longer. Beleue thou the presence of body, of blood, of flesh, and of bones, as the word of God speaketh. ¶ It is a cold supper which the Sacramentaries as∣signeThe. xx. Chapiter. to Christ, in comparison of his true supper. ANd we say not this is done sleightly and coldly, but effec∣tuallyThe Apo logie. and truly. The eating of Christ by faith and spirit is no sleight orThe aun∣swere. cold thing. But to say that no more is done in his supper, that is sleightly & coldly sayd. Partly because so much may be done with∣outWhy  Sacra∣mentaries make the  of Christ a cold sup∣per. Ioan. 6. the supper, namely when so euer a man with good faith and charitie doth meditate vpon his gloriouse victorie ouer death & synne: Partly because, it is a cold thing to  men, who consist of bodies, to a supper of Christes making, and to geue their bo∣dies none other meate then corruptible bread and wine, as you teache, whereas Christ did forbid vs to work the perishing meate at his banket. How can y• be worthely called y• supper of Christ, which a man may make at home, without coming to the table of Christ? As though it were not for his honour to haue a singular kind of sup∣ of his owne. Euery man may eate bread and drinke wine at his owne howse with his wife and children, and remember that Christ died for them, neither wil Christ leaue his good deuotion vnrewarded, wherein the supper, that you assigne to Christ, con∣sisteth and is fulfilled. And is not that, which may be done at pri∣uate mens tables, coldly and sleightly done in comparison of that great sacrifice of the true Melchisedech, who by his blessed word turneth the substance of the bread and wine into that body of his1. Cor. 10 Hebr. 5. which died, and into that blood which was shed for vs?
¶ By eating we touche the body of Christ, as it mayThe. xxi. Chapiter be touched vnder the foorm of bread. FOr although we do not touche the body of Christ with teethThe Apo logie. and mouth, yet we hold him fast and eate him by faith, by vnderstanding, and by the spirit. These men haue lost their wits through malice. As who canThe aun∣swere. deuise an eating of meate in a supper, which eating shalbe with∣out touching the meate that is eaten with teeth and mouth. For in the supper of Christ it is a detestable heresie and an in∣tolerableMath. 26 ignorance to say, that Christ saying: Take and eate, did not meane taking by hands or mouthes, and eating by teeth and mouth. Taking and eating is not without touching: Christ sayd Take and eate, this is my body, therefore he sayd in effect, touche my body with your teeth and with your mouth. Neither doth it skil that his body is immortal and impassible. for though it be not perished by the eating, yet the eating and tou ching is not therefore false, but so much the truer, by how much the meate receaued is the more profitable cuē to our bodies. And as we are sayd truly to kisse the Kings knee, when we kisse his hose vnder which the knee is conteined: euen so in touching the accidents of bread and wine, we touche the body and blood of Christ which is cōteined vnder them. For which cause S. Chry∣sostomChry∣sost. in 1. Cor. 10 Hom. 24 & in Math. 83 sayd,  we doe not only see, we doe not only touch, but we eate, and fasten our teeth in y• slesh of Christ, thereby noting and teaching the vndoubted presence thereof vnder the foorm of bread. Which foorm we see, we touche, we eate, we chaw, and by that meanes we doe these things to the body of Christ vnder that foorm, not perishing the body one whit. For the same cause S. Cyrillus speaking of the blessed Eucharist, sayeth of Christ: Prae∣betCyrillus in loan. li. 12. c.  nobis carnem suam tangendā, vt firmiter credamus, quia tem∣plum verè suum suscitauit. He geueth vs his flesh to be touched,
that we might beleue assuredly, that he hath truly reised his tem∣ple, that is to say, his own body. Christ geueth vs his flesh to be touched, and yet doe we not touche it? But how do we touche it? Uerily as S. Thomas touched the Godhead of Christ. For as inIoan. 20. touching his flesh he confessed him to be God, because the God∣head lay hid in that flesh: right so, when we touche with teeth & mouth the forme of bread in the holy mysteries, we confesse that we touche thereby the flesh which lieth hid vnder that forme, and yet the Apologie denieth vs to touche the body of Christ with teeth and mouth. And whereas it sayeth we hold him fast by faith, that is true also, but it is not the whole truthe. for as S. Thomas the Apostle did beleue vpon the Godhead of Christ, and withall touche the flesh wherein it dwelt corporally: euen so we beleue the presence of his body, and touch it vnder the foorm of bread, not hinderingColos. 2. our touching by our belefe, but rather furthering our belefe by our touching, for so much as we touche that visibly, wherein we beleue the flesh of Christ to be inuisibly. The Apologie supposeth holding by faith, to be contrarie to touching with teeth. But we think them bothe to agree right well, and both to be true in their proper kind. S. Ireneus writing against those heretiks who denied the re∣surrectionIreneus aduersus . li. 5. of our flesh, sayeth: that S. Paule naming spirituall men, doth call them so, because they partake of the spirit, Sed non secundum defraudationem & interceptionem carnis, but not as defrauding them, or as taking their flesh from them. Euen so it is true that we hold Christ by faith, spirit, and vnderstanding in the holy mysteries, but we thereby ought not to take away the truthe of his flesh which is in the same mysteries. It is an old custome of heretiks by ye assertiō of one truth to imbarr & stop an other truth, whereas y• Catholiks beleue as wel y• one as y• other.
¶ The acramentaries haue neither vnderstanding,The. . Chapiter. nor faith, nor spirit, nor deuotion to receaue Chrit withall. ANd this is no vaine faith which doth comprehend Christ,The  logie. and that is not receaued with cold deuotion, which is re∣ceaued with vnderstanding, with faith, and with spirit. The faih of receauing Christ in spirit (which you speake of)The aun∣swere. is not vaine, when it denieth not some veritie of the Gospell. But seing you denie this to be the body of Christ which Christ visibly deliuered, now it is a vaine faith to beleue, that who so deniethMath. 26 parcell of his faith, doth notwithstanding comprehend and re∣ceaue Christ by faith or spirit. What vnderstanding haue you, that say: This is my body, doth not meane, This is my body? What faith haue you, that beleue not the working and effectual words of Christ which were spoken with blessing? What spirit haue you, when you know not y• words of ChristMarc. 14. to be spirit & life, as y• which make all that which they sound in ytIoan. 6. consecration of his holy mysteries? It is a warme deuotion that hearing the body of Christ by him self affirmed to be present, can eate without adoring, and denye Godly honour to it. God kepePsal. 21. me and all others from such faith, such vnderstanding, such spi∣rit, and such deotion. ¶ The reall presence of Christes body is proued byThe. xxiii. Chapiter. the confession of the Apologie. FOr Christ him self altogether is so offered and geuen vs inThe Apo logie. these mysteries, that we may certeinly know, we be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and that Christ continueth in vs, and we in him. If Christ be geuen vs in these mysteries, he is present in thm.The aun∣swere. For a gift is not made of a thing absent. But he is not any where
to be shewed present, but only vnder the forms of bread and wineA gift is of a thing present. & yet Christ shewed his body & blood saying: This is my body & this is my blood. This and this be words that shew things which are spoken of. therefore the presence of Christ, which you confesse, and which him self sheweth, must nedes be meant of his presence vnder the formes of bread and wine. Again if we may certainly know, we are flesh of Christes flesh, and bone of his bones, if we may know it (as your words import) by his presence in these mysteries: Seing our knowlegeThat is not know  hich  not true must nedes rise of a certaine truth, (otherwise it were an errour and not a knowlege) it is certainly true, that in theis mysterics we are by the presence of Christ in them, flesh of his flesh, & bone of his bones. But y• can not be, except y• flesh & bones of Christ be really present, yea so really present as Christes mother was really present to hym, & he to her when he toke flesh of her flesh. For a coniunctiō betwixt y• flesh of Christ & y• flesh of men cā not de made by faith, spirit, & vnderstanding: For y• is a coniunctiō o mind, but not of flesh & bones. Flesh and bones haue no faith or with flesh can not be made by  only. spirit, whereby the cōiunction betwene them and Christ may be receaued. they haue a natural substance as wel in Christ as in vs. And as the man and wife can not be one flesh by the consent of mariage, except in dede they come bodily together: Euen so cā not the flesh of Christ be made one with our flesh, except both his flesh he present in the Sacrament for vs, and we come to the selfe Sacrament to be ioyned to it. And this example of mariage is so good and true, that S. Paul him self vseth it in talking of this verie coniunction of flesh and bones betwixt vs and Christ. which now the Apologie semeth to allude vnto. But the flesh of Christ cometh not from his Fathers right hand corporally to be ioyned with our flesh: Therefore it remaineth that the bread is by consecration turned into Christes , to thintent it may
e receaued and made one with our flesh. Other meanes how either Christ may be present in flesh, or his flesh ioyned to our flesh, the Gospel neuer taught, the Fathers neuer lerned, y• Catholike Church neuer knew. But by this mea∣nes, S. Irenens, S. Hilarie, S. Cyril, S. Chrysostome, and other Fathers cōsesse our natural ioyning with Christes flesh, as it shall appere in diuerse places of this booke. ¶ The contrarietie of the Apologie is shewed, andThe. . Chapiter. that the lifting vp of our harrs to heauen is no good cause, why we should lift the body of Christ from the altar. ANd therefore in celebrating these mysteries the people areThe Apo logie. to good purpose exhorted, before they come to receaue the holy communon, to lift vp their harts, and to direct their minds to heauenward, because he is there, by whom we must be full fed and liue. Who euer had to doe with so forgetfull men? A eueller name IThe aun∣swere. wil not vse. For Gods sake, good reader, suffer not thy self to be lead of them, as if thou haddest nor wit nor sense. Be a child in1. Cor. 14 anoiding malice, but in vnderstanding shew thy self a man. I assure thee he is not worthy to be called a man, who percea∣uing their extreme foly (as now he may) yet wil addict him self to folow their doctrine. See I besech you how this geare han∣geth together. Christ (said the Apologie in the last sentence) geueth him self present in these mysteries, & we know we are flesh of his flesh & bone of his bones, and therfore we are byd lift vp our harts to heauen, becaue he is there by whom we must be ful fed and liue. Mark how this (therefore) cometh in. it agreeth together as if it were sayd in shorter words: Christ geueth him self present inThe con∣trtie of the Apo logie. these mysteries, and therefore he is not here but in heauē, seeding vs from thence.
You deceaued deceauers, how feare you not to dally thus with the dreadfull mysteries of God? Doth Christ offer and geue him self present in the mysteries, or no? You graunt he doth. be these mysteries in heauen, or in earth? I suppose they be in earth. Then (say I) your words import, tht Christ geueth him self present in the earth. How then doe you straight way inferre (by a therefore) that we are bid lift vp our harts to hnward, because he is there, by whom we must be  fed? If you meane he is both there and here, you say very wel, bu th you graunt his body to be at once in diuers places, at the least by y• way of Sacramētall being. Except you will say his body is not in these mysteries, and then he geueth not him self present. For his body is the chefe thing whereof this Sacrament is named. Neither we are flesh of his flesh in those mysteries, where his flesh is not present to be ioyned with ours. You say, that Christ geueth him self present, yea so farr present, that we know certain∣ly we are flesh of his flesh, and yet you bid vs goe to heauen, be∣cause he is there of whom we must be ful fed. As though his my∣steries were not in earth, in which you graunt he geueth him sel present. If any spark of grace remaine in you, consyder that God hathRom. 1. geuen you ouer into a lewd vnderstanding, into a blind hart, in to palpable darknesse. Ye wold set God and the deuill together, ye wold reconcile your fond hearesie with the healthfull Gospell of Christ, you wold seme to confe with Christ, y• he geueth him self present in these mysteries, with S. Paul, that we are flesh oIoan. 6. Christes flesh, and yet withall you will ioyne your own repug∣nantEphes. 5. assertion, that the body of Christ is only in heauen, and con∣sequently not in these mysteries which are in earth. The longer you stand in this repugnance, the more you shame your selues. I haue not spoken this for any other cause but to stirr vp your
minds by words of sharp warning (which S. Paul biddeth vsTit. 3. vse to heretiks) thereby to prouoke some such, as haue regard to their soules, to repent in tyme, and to persuade them selues that they are not able to geue a new exposition of Christes supper, which may stand with the old Gospell of Christes Church. The body of Christ is the meat of his supper. For thereof he sayd: TakeMath. 26 eate, this is my body. If then Christ geue him self present in these mysteries, he geneth his body present. If his body be present, how say ye, we must lift vp our harts to heauen, there to be ful fed? Is not Christ him self being present, able to feed vs full? How is it then, that we must goe vp to heauen to be ful fed? But let vs far∣ther consyder your discrete discurse. It is said in the preface of the Masse: Lift vp your harts. which words you interprete as though it were sayd, your meat is in heauen, and not vpon the holy table. This argument I maruail if any man be able to answere: The people are warned before cō∣secration, to lit vp their myndes to heauen: Therefore the body of Christ is not really present on the alter aftar consecration. As much to say, as: Before the incarnation of Christ the Prophetes and Patriarchs called and cried to God them selues, and also ex∣horted the people to praie for ye coming of Christ, therefore when he was come, he was not true God and true man in earth. We crie: Lift vp your harts, before the body of Christ is made, as beseching God we may haue his body made for vs. & when it is made, we lift the body it self vp, to be adored, and worshipped of the faithfull people as hauing then obteined our desier, and yt because it is the true body of true God. And yet euen after consecration and after the body is reallyChry so. de Dei natura Hom. 4. present, it might wel be sayd, lift vp your harts to heauen. where by lyfting vp, we should meane nothing ells, but that the faithful men should not geue them selues to wordly thoughts of ye earth,
of mony, of flesh, but list vp their minds to thinke of euerlasting ioyes. Againe by naming heauen, we meane not to denye y• real pre∣sence either of God in the whole earth, or of Christ on the altar, but only to shew that we should looke for another worlde and y• life thereof. This argument might haue become a tinkar better then a di∣uine, and least of all it could become a superintendent, who ought to haue knowen, that y• Church is y• kingdome of heauen, and therefore the kingdome of God is within vs: & that to con∣syder,Lucae. 17. what Christ worketh in his Church and for her sake, is also after one sort to lift vp our hartes to heauen: & last of all he ought to consyder that S. Chrysostom writeth. Diddest thou not promise y• Preist, when he cryed: lift vp yourChryso. Hom. de Eucha∣ristia. minds and hartes, and saidest thou not: we lift them vp vnto our Lord? Will you see a wonderfull matter? The table is furnished with the mysteries, the Lamb of God is offred for thee, the Priest is hofull for thee, a spirituall fyre floweth from the table. See what lifting vp of harts was to the old Fathers. It was, to acknowlege the mysteries vpon the table, to beleue the sacri∣fice of the Masse, and not to deny the real presence of Christ. That is in deed a homely lifting vp of harts, to lift the body and blood of Christ, cleane from the altar and holy table. Such lifting away becometh theues. Hitherto these men brought neither any euident authoritie of Scripture, thereby to fortifie their opinion, nor any sentence of auncient Father, cōcerning the question of the reall presence. And now I pray you see what worshipful geare they bring. We say in the Masse, lift vp your harts, before y• body is sanctified and made present: therefore it is not made present at all. We say grace before the meate is set vpon the table: therefore none at all is set there.
This is the stuff of them that boast so much of the Gospell. This is my body is forgotten: which is fower tymes repeted twise of two Apostles, and twise of two Euangelists. Yet is that forgotten, and, lifting vp of harts, which came of the good inuen∣tion of Godly Fathers, but yet from men it came, that is called in for a witnesse, against the truth of the Gospell. And yet euery man thinkeththey bring nothing but the pure word of God for their false doctrine. ¶What be grosse imaginations concerning the sup∣perThe. xxv. Chapiter. of Christ. ANd Cyrillus sayth, that in the receauing of the mysteries,The Apo logie. all grosse imaginations must be put away. Here is the second authoritie alleged against the reall presenceThe aun∣swere. of Christes body, and that, I warrant you, full strong. Grosse imaginations must be put awaye in receauing the my∣steries:The argu ment of y• Apologie. therefore Christ spake not properly nor truly, when he sayd, This is my body. Are we not now happy to haue such fine preachers, who can shew the beleuing of that, which Christ sayth and teacheth, to be a grosse imagination? O grosse imagination of these pitifull preachers. May there be a more grosse imagina∣tion, then to imagine that Christ lyed? Cyrillus biddeth vs putCyrillu in Epist. ad Calo∣syr. away grosse imaginations, and Cyrillus saith of y• reall presence, Ne dubites an hoc verum sit, eo manifestè dicente, hoc est corpus meum: Sed potius suscipe verba Saluatoris in fide. Cum enim sit veritas, non mentitur. Doubt thou not whether this be true, sith him self plainly saith: This is my body. But rather imbrace the words of our Sauiour in faith. For seing he is the truth, he lieth not. Who so consydereth well these words, may vnderstand, that
Cyrillus thought nothing more grosse, then to doubt whether yt body of Christ be present or no. What grosse imaginations then did Cyrillus bid vs put away?1. For sooth aboue all, yt we should not imagin, Christ to lye.2. Secondly that we should not imagin his words, concerning this Sacrament, to be dark or obscure, seing Christ (as he sayth) spake manifestly.3. Again, that no man should thinke, any other body to be geuen, besydes the true body of Christ, who in one person is God and man. In the tyme of Cyrillus, a great heretike named Nestorius,Nesto∣rius his hearesie. scholar to one Diodorus, falsely taught that Christ had two per∣sons, one of God, an other of man. Therefore they imagined, the the body of Christ (which all the world, euen the heretikes them selues, beleued to be present vpon the altar after consecration) to be the body of man, but not the proper body of God the word. This was a very grosse imagination, and therefore ought to be put away from the mind of faithfull men, in receauing the mysteries. Hereof Cyrillus literally said, Num hominis comesti∣onemIn. 11. Anathe∣matismo nostrum hoc Sucramentum pronuncias, & irreligiosè ad crassas cogitationes vrges eorum mentem qui crediderunt? Doest thou pronounce this our Sacrament, to be the eating of a man? And doest thou irreuerently inforce the mind of the faithfull, to grosse cogitations? Behold, the grosse cogitation was to thinke, that we doe eate yt body of a mā, whereas in dede through ye vnitie of person it is y• ody of God him self. And therefore Cyrillus sayth afterwar: Proprium est corpus eius verbi, quod omnia viuificat. It is the body proper to that word, which quickeneth all thinges. Of this oule and grosse eoure, two epistles are extant of Cyrillus, asAd Suc∣cessum Episcop. Isauriae. also in all his workes he full oft confuteth it. One thing I wil further note. this fine penner of the Apologie citeth not, where Cyrillus speaketh of these grosse imaginations,
because the place is maruelous euident against him. And what foul play is this, to belie Cyrillus, as though he had spoken of that imagination, wherein we beleue yt reall presence of Christes body vnder the form of bread, whereas he spake, of that wherein Nestorius vnderstanded, that we did eate the flesh of Christ, with out the diuine nature vnited vnto it in one person. Cyrillus sayth, because the word which is of God the Father,Cyrillus▪ in Ana∣them. 11. ad Eno∣ptium. is life by nature it hath declared his flesh to be the geuer of life, & hac ratione, facta est nobis benedictio viuificatrix and by this meanes, the blessing is made to vs, geuer of life. Cyrillus calleth y• Sacrement of the altar, benedictio, blessing, because it is made by blessing. Now in naming blessing, he mustThe Eu∣charist is called bles sing. nedes meane, that which is blessed, which is on the altar before vs, and not any thing coceaued in faith or spirit. Therefore Cyrillus meaneth out of all cōtrouersie, that thing which is made by blessing, which we take in our hands, whichCyrillus natura di uinitatis minime comedi∣tur. we put in our mouths, to be able to geue life euerlasting, which none other eatable thing can doe besydes the reall flesh of Christ. For the nature of Godhead (as Cyrillus there confesseth) is not eaten, by itself, or a part from the flesh. If we put this together, I require no more, but that he be an honest man, who shall construe the place of Cyrillus. He shalbe forced to confesse such an eating in the Sacrament of the altar as is not proper to the Godhead: And yet eating by faith is proper to vs in respect of the Godhead, therefore Cyrillus speaketh of eating, that which quickeneth vs to life euerlasting with our bo∣dy also, and not with faith alone. An other grosse imagination was to thinke that we eating the* 4 The. ∣grosse  gination. body of Christ, should eat it dead, or mortall, and passible, as we vse to eate other meates: Whereas it is quicke, yea of power to quicken vs (as Cyrillus teacheth)
Quoniam Saluatoris caro, verbo Dei quod naturaliter vita est∣coniuncta, viuifica effecta est, quando eam comedimus, tun vitam habemus in nobis, illi coniuncti, quae vita effecta est. Because the flesh of our Sauiour, ioyned to the word of God which is life na turally, is made able to geue life: When we eate it, then we haue life in vs, being ioyned to that flesh which is made life. 5. The fifth grosse imagination is, to thinke that we should so eate Christes flesh, as if it were rawe and not by any meanes, made meate for mannes cating. Of this grosse imagination, the Capharnaits were. Ad immanes ferarum mores, vocari se a ChriCyrillus in Ioan. li. 4. c. 22. sto arbitrabantur, incitari{que}, vt vellent crudas hominis carnes manducare, & sanguinem bibere: quae vel auditu horribilia sunt. They thought them selues to be inuited of Christ, to the cruel cu∣stom of wild beastes, and to be prouoked, to eate the raw flesh, & drinke the blood of man: which thinges are horrible to heare. It was yet no lesse a grosse imaginatiō to suppose, they should 6. cate the body of Christ peece meale, one taking the shoulder, an other the legg, the third the brest, and so foorth. Against which imagination S. Augustine hath writen. Their imagination also, is very grosse, who think yt substance,August. in Psal. 98. of bread to remaine, after consecration, as though they wold eate that immortall and gloriouse flesh of Christ, with bakers bread.* 7. Which is the cursed banket, of the Lutherās, whereas Christ said, The bread which I will geue, is my flesh. geuing vs to vnderstand,Ioan. 6. y• he wold not haue in his heauenly supper, an earthly substance, of materiall bread. And yet it is, a more grosse imagination, to confesse yt reallpre∣sence* 8. of Christes body, and to denye adoration to it, sithens it is the body of God. 9. But how grosse is it to denye it to be a propitiatorie sacrifice, sith it is his body, who is the propitiation for the whole world.. Ioan. 2.
10▪ I omit at this tyme his grosse imagination who teacheth the words which are spoken of a gift presently made and deliuered, to be words of promise and of preaching. * But the grossest imagination that euer was heard of, is of them, who affirm no body of Christ at all, to be made really pre∣sent, vnder the form of bread when it is sayd ouer the bread, of Christ him self: This is my body. This grosse imagination, ma∣keth Christ a lyer, as Cyrillus hath witnessed. And now came our Apologists, and bring those wordes aga∣inst the Catholikes, as though they had a grosse imagination, who thinke and teach, the wordes of Christ, to be true & to worke that they speake, when soeuer they belong to any Sacrament. And therefore the substance of bread and wine, to be turned into yt substance of the body and blood of Christ, the formes of the same bread and wine remaining, as veyles and cortaines to couer theWhy the formes of bread and wine re∣main. sayd flesh, as well because our faith should haue merit, as because our eyes be not able to see that gloriouse & mysticall kind of pre∣sence. The which consecrating of Christes body, is an vnblody sacrifice wherein God is put in mind, of the death, which redemed the world. Euery part of yt Sacrament hath in it whole Christ, eue∣ry kind alone is sufficiēt to norish him to saluatiō, who worthely eateth it. And yet both kinds together must be cōsecrated, to shew the death of Christ. This belefe hath no grosse imagination in it, as shall appeare in all the worke folowing. ¶What the first Councel of Nice hath taught concer∣ningThe. xxvi. Chapiter. Christes supper. ANd the Councell of Nice, as it is cited in Greek of some,The Apo logie. doth expresly forbid vs, that we should not basely occupy our minds about the bread and wine set before vs.
The words of the Nicen Councell, whereof the Apologie speaThe aun∣swere. keth, are these. Iterum etiam hic in diuina mensa, & caet. Again here also in the holy table, let vs not basely attend the bread and cupThe wor∣des of the first Ni∣cene Con cell. set before vs, but lifting vp our mind, let vs vnderstand by faith, That Lamb of God, which taketh away the synnes of the world, , sitū esse, to be put, and laid on that holy table, incruente a sacerdotibus immolatum, to be vnbloodely sacrificed of the Priests, and that we , Verè, Truly and in deed, taking his own precious body and blood, doe beleue, these to be the mysti∣call tokens, of our redemption. For this cause we take not much but litle, that we might know we take not, to fill vs, but for holy∣nesse. In these words many things are affirmed, of the blessed Sa∣crament of the altar, euery of the which doth proue, or helpe to proue, the real presence of Christes body, vnder the forme of bread and wine. 1 First the Councell sayeth the bread and the cup to be set be∣fore vs, vpon the holy table, bidding vs not basely attend or con∣syder them. What other thing, can these words meane, then to warne vs▪ that we should not looke to the natural appearing or shew, of theSome vertue ly∣eth priuie vnder the formes of bread and wine. bread and of the cup, but to a greater vertue, which lieth priuie vnder their formes? Therefore begin we to collect, that the bread and the wine, which stand vpon y• holy table, kepe not any more their old nature & substance, but contein vnder their old formes, the new substance of Christ. For if they remained (as before con∣secration they were) materiall bread and wine: then we nede no warning to put away base considerations of them, sith by that opinion, we are bound to beleue, earthly bread and wine, to be still bread and wine, and to be nothing bettered in substance. 2 Then as concerning the vse of them, so long as y• blessed word
of God, which is the form of the Secrament, is ioyned with anyHow long a Sacra∣ment may be so cal∣led. element, (which remaineth still in his old nature), so long y• word and the element, make a mysterie: But when the word or form is ended, the Sacrament is ended, as the which only worketh, and hath grace annexed to it, whiles it is in the vse, whereunto Christ hath appointed it. So long as the Priest, whiles he washeth, is saying, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, so long y• baptim is a doing and working: when the wordes be ended, the Sacrament is ended. For seing y• promesse of forgeuenesse of synnes, is geuen to the washing in y•Ioan. 3. Marc. 16. name of the Trinite, when that is done, the promesse is sinished for that course. The councell of Nice, speaketh of the bread and of the cup af∣ter consecration, after that it was sayd ouer thē, This is my body and this is my blood, which wordes are the form of that Sacra∣ment. For the councell speaketh of the being, and standing, and of cōsyderig these things vpon the holy table, not only whiles y• wordes are spoken, but still afterward vntill they be receaued. If then, both the wordes of the Sacrament be past, and yet y• councell say, we must not basely attend, the bread and the cup that are vpon the holy table. It geueth vs to vnderstand, that the wordes did not only come to the elements of bread and wine, to make them a Sacrament, after the commen sort of making, whichThe wor∣des of the supper di work so permanē thing. is in baptim, in confirmation, in holy orders, and in penance, but also, that the wordes did worke some reall thing, vnder y• formes of bread & wine, which remaineth still as long as y• sayd formes & signes remain. For this cause the councell sayd, we ought not basely consyder the bread and cup, for that, more was vnder the shew and colour of them, then our eyes could tell vs. What must we then doe? We must resort to a higher master, then our eyes are: we must
lift vp our mind, we must vnderstand, not by loking & seing, but by faith. Whether must we lift our mind? To heauen? That is not euill, but the councell sayth, an other thing: We lifting vpWhat lif∣eing vp of the mind is. our mindes must vnderstand by faith. Then the lifting vp of our mind, is the renouncing of our senses, & the cleauing to our faith. We must beleue that which we can not see. 4. What must we beliue? That the Lamb of God is vpon the holy table. Which Lamb? He that taketh away the sinnes of theIoan. 1. world. On which table? On the holy table, whereon that standeth, which semeth bread and wine. 5. How is y• Lamb there? He is put layed & situate there as a thing may be situate which is vnder the formes of an other thing. For of such a situation the councell speaketh & so we must beleue of it. Now put this geare together, and thus the councell sayth. Consyder not basely that bread and cup which standeth beforeThe mea∣ning of the Nicen Councell. you. For although it seme that which nature made, yet we must lift vp our mind, and vnderstand by faith, that thing or substance, which is standing on the holy table, how so euer it appere bread and wine, to be the Lamb of God, that taketh away the synnes of the world. Now we see, what is base, and what is high. Bread and wine is base: Body and blood is highe. That must not be consydered, because the substance thereof now hath ceased to be: This must be beleued, because it is made present in substance. And it is so truly made, and the Lamb so truly prosen, that he* 6. The sa∣crifice of y• Masse. is offered not in hart alone, but euen outwardly of the Priests, not by shedding of blood (as vpon the crosse) but vnblodely as it becommeth the cleane oblation of the new Testament, where∣of Malachie did prophecie. That sacrifice which Priests offer can not be but present, forMalach. 1 cp. they offer with their hands, mothes, and other externall mem∣bers
of their body. 7. After that the sacrifice is made, the faithfull people, who stand by, doe partake with the altar, which could not be, except a perma net substance were made by consecration. The Lamb is vpon the table. He is offered there by y• Priests. It foloweth in the Councell. 8. We take truly the precious body and blood: We take it and truly take it. That is to say, in deed really and bodily. For theTrue bo∣dy. truth of Christes body and blood, is not an imaginarie or fained truth, it is not a thing conceaued only (as a man might conceaue in his mind, men flying in the aier), it is not only beleued or ho∣ped, but he in naturall existence, and among external things, hath as true a body and blood, as any creature hath a substance of his owne. The true taking of the which precious body and blood, is theTrne ta∣king. taking of it in suche a truth of subsce as it self hath. And because it is true in y• thing it selfe, the taking of it, is in the thing it self. 9. The taking of that which sandeth before vs on the table, is by instrument of our bodyes, therefore it is deliuered according to the same external truth, by the corporall ministerie of y• Priests So that all is truly and externally done, by the iudgement of this auncient councell. 10. Wel, we truly taking them, beleue them to be the tokens of ourThe to∣kens of our re∣demption. redemption or as some bookes read, of our resurrection. For as our redemption was by the ame body and the same blood really wrought vpon the crosse: so hauing them selues present vpon y• holy table, and truly taking them, we take the sure witnesses and euident tokens of our redemption.Bread & wine be not  of our re∣demption. But if the things which stand vpon the holy table were in sub∣stance bread and wine, how could they be the tokens of our re∣demption? Did bread and wine redeme vs? Or did they rise from
death for vs? It is the body and blood of Christ which redemed vs and which arose from death, and the self same body and blood are now made present to vs, & offered vnbloodely for vs, to shew in fact and dede, our redemption already wrought by them, and to distribute the fruits of y• Crosse, by none other thing so much, as by the same body and blood that redemed vs. For least we should assigne any part of our saluation, to anyWhy Chri stes body is the tokē of our re∣demption. other creature besydes to the only body and blood of Christ, he made the selfsame body, both the price wherewith he redemed vs, and the token and dispensour of the redemption. It was proued before, that if these things be the tokens of our redemption, instituted by the expresse words of Christ, then they are the things them selues, which they betoken, because they are mysticall tokens of the new Testament. But they are here not as redeming vs new, and therefore as tokens of y• old redemption, that no man should thinke Christ to die again, or should doubt (as S. Chrysostom hath noted) of his death already past, or ofChrysos. Hom. 83, in Math. any maner prices of our redemptiō to be payed then one, or that it hath any other token left thereof in the holy mysteries besydes it selfe. For it was so worthy a truth and rasom payed for vs vpon the Crosse, which was able to be painted worthely or set foorth, to the remembrances of the faithfull by none other image, then such, wherein y• truth might be set foorth after an other sort more mystical, concerning the manner: But no lesse true then the thing which died was, concerning the substance. Who so is faithfull and humble, is now able to vnderstād, howThe some of all that was sayd. the shew of bread and wine, standeth with the truth, of body and blood present on the holy table: How the vnbloody sacrifice, is made of the Priests, whiles by pronouncing the words of God they turne the substance of bread and wine in to the substance of
Christes body and blood: how we both truly take the precious body and blood of Christ, cōcerning the substance of them, vnder the formes of bread and wine: And yet beleue them to be tokens instituted of Christ, of our redemptiō, betokening the price paid, by making present the body and blood which payed it. Was not this a worthy place, for the Apologie to allege? ButHow much of this testi∣monie the Apolog left out. I warrant you, it alleged the weakest part therof, leauing out the situatiō of the Lamb of God, on the holy table: The vnbloody sacrifice made of Priests, the true taking and receauing of the pre cious body and blood. Only bread and wine, (which are named to shew the formes within the which the body and blood are) them they name, as a great matter, to further this new broched heresie. But he is a faithfull trier and examiner of auncient Fathers, who faithfully citeth the whole place, neither adding nor dimi∣nishing, which honest dealing we may not looke, for, at these de∣fenders hands. ¶ That the Catholiks haue the table of Egles, andThe.  Chapiter. the Sacramentaries haue the table of Iaies. ANd as Chrisostome writeth wel, we say, that the body ofThe Apo logie. Christ is the carcas, and we must be the Egles, that we may know, that we ought, to flye highe, if we will come to the body of Christ. For this is the table of Egles, not of Iayes. It is a weake stake that these mē wold not take hold of, beingThe aun∣swere. now plunging for life, vnder the water. S. Chrysostome so plainly expoundeth his owne meaning, immediatly where he speaketh, of the carcas and of the Egles, that I can not sufficiently wonder, at the impudēcie of him, who allegeth this place. For the alleger, wold haue the wordes taken, as though the body of Christ, were not vpon the altar: But we
only shold by faith ascend into heauen, whereas S. Chrysostome speaketh, of going in to heauen, by good life also, and not by faith only. His words are these. The body of our Lord is through death become the, Chryso. in. . cor. Hom. 24 carcase. for vnlesse he had fallen, we had not risen. Christ vseth the name of Egles to declare, that it behoueth him, who shall approchevn∣to his body, to seeke for high things, and not to medle with the earth, nor to be drawē down, or crepe vnto earthly matters, which are a low, but to flee allways vp to higher matters: And to behold the sonne of righteousnes, and to haue the eye and the mind quick of sight, for this is the table of Egles and not of Iaies. Hetherto S. Chrysostome. 1 The car∣case. Who first sheweth why the body of Christ is called the carcase. Not because it is without life, but because it once hath died for vs 2 Like Egles. Secondly we must be like Egles in life and faith. In life by forsaking earthly affectiōs: In faith by quicknesse of mind, whiles we beleue, that not withstanding bread and wine appeare to vs, yet it is in deed an other .The pro∣pries of the Egle. The Egle hath many proprietes, as to flee highe, to looke ed∣fastly vpon the sun, to see most clerely a farr of, and to take his pray most swiftly: To the flying high, our good life must answer: to y• quicknesse of sight, our faith: Not in suche sort to flee a highe as though the matter we seeke were not present, but to spie the body and blood of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wine.This is ye table o Egles. For as S. Chrysostome saith: This is the table of Egles. He speaketh not now of heauen, which is a boe the sun, he speaketh of the table which standeth in the Church before vs, wherupon ye sonne of righteousnes is situated, from which we take the foode of life, the ioye of heauen, y• earcase y• hath died for vs. The table is it whereof he speaketh. What impudencie is this, so to abuse the wordes of that blessed man, as if he spake of going into heauen by faith, whereas in dede
he speaketh of them that liue like the saints of heauen, and of thē that haue a quick sight, to witt, a faithfull vnderstanding, y• they be able as it were to loke through the formes of bread and wine. there to see vnder those formes the reall body and blood of Christ.The quic ight of Egles is . For straight vpon the naming of a quick sight, he inferreth y• this is the table of Egles not of Iaies. As who shold say here is a meate that none can see but those who haue a most pure eye of faith. Aquila (sayth S. Augustine) sublimiter volās, de tanto intervalloAugust. in lib. de diumat. Daemonū sub fluctibus natantem piscem dicitur {per}idere, & grauiter aquis illisa extertis pedibus at{que} vnguibus rapere. The Egle flying a high, is sayd most perfitly to see a great way of, a fishe swīming vnder the waues, and vehemētly beating her self against the wa∣ter, by stretching out her feet and clawes, to snatch vp the fishe. Behold an Egle seeth one thing vnder an other: And so mustAn Egle seeth one thing vn∣der an o∣ther. we repute y• table of Christ to haue in it one thing vnder an other. To haue vpon it the body of Christ vnder the form of bread. And therefore noe but Egles can espie the said body. As for the Sacramentaries & Zuinglians they are like Iaies,The here∣ts are Iayes. euer pratling of the body of Christ, but neuer espying it, or seing where it lieth, they flee low as ye Iaies doe, as thinking that good works bring smal aide to ife euerlasting. They see weakely, and cōtent them selues with a base banket of bread and wine, requirīg to theyr bodies none other food of life. And whereas the sonne of reghteousnesse hath couered him self as it were with the cloudes of bread and wine, to thintnt our eye might be able to beare more easily the brightesse of his shyning,The  sight of ∣tiks. yet they are of so dull and of so dimme eye sight, that thy say ther is nothing but  vpon the table. So that our table is the table of Eles, where faithfull Egles may epie the sonne of  present vpon the altar and table, and theyr table is
the table of Iaies, where nothing is  besydes that, which iufidell Iaies may find out by naturall eye sight, & bare naming without true being. It foloweth in S. Chrysostm. If noman wil rashly handle anChryso. Hom. 24 in. 1. cor. other mans garment, how dare we, to our great shame and re∣proche, receaue this pure and immaculate body▪ which is Lord of al, which is partaker of the diuine nature, through which we haue our being and liuing, by which y• gates of hel are broken downe: and the gates of heauen set wide open? Thus S. Chrysostome sheweth, vs to receaue this body of Christ, from y• holy table or altar, as truly, cōcerning the substance thereof, as we may truly touche, an other mans garment. Heauen is vsed both in holy Scriptures and in the Fathers forHeauen. Lucae. 10. &. 12. &c the heauenly life. And so we must flee in to heauen, not, to receaue this body (so it is not said) but, when we approche vnto this body. The body is in earth with vs, cōcerning the nature and substāce thereof, vnder the formes of bread: But as it is a body gloriied, and thereby made heauenly, euen so we must clense and purge our selues from synne, when we come to it, and so be made hea∣uenly,Lucae. 10. 1. Tim. 3. or flee in to the state of them who liue in heauen: And that state we professe who are called the kingdome of heauē, & y• howse of God. ¶ The bread, that is the meate of the mind and not of theThe. 28. Chapiter. belly, can be no wheaten bread, but only the bread of lyfe which is the body of Christ. ANd Ciprian, this bread (sayith hee) is meate of the mynd,The Apo logie. not meate of the belly. The truth is so strong, that y• more is brought agaynst it, theThe aun∣swere. better it is seene. The sayng of S. Ciprian maketh so clearly
for the contrarie of that wich the Apologi teacheth, as it is pos∣sible to deuise. If this bread be meate of the mind not meate of the belly, outThat the substance of bread r mameth not in Christes supper. of questiō, it is not material bread, it is not the substāce of cōmon bread. for though such materiall bread, be neuer so much hallo∣wed, by prayer and thanksgeuing, yet it still remayneth, in sub∣stance, bread of the belly. But seing y• substance of y• common bread, is changed into y• flesh of Christ, (as we catholikes beleue and teach) now, it can by no meanes be meate of the bellye. for albeit wee receiue it really, vnder the formes of bread, into our bodyes, and that also to feedTwo kinds of feeding. them, as wel as our sowles, yet there ar two kinds of feedyng, one, wich is to liue in this world (and in that case meate is for the belly, and the belly for meate, and God shall destroye both1. Cor. 6. the one & the other). But an other feeding is to life euerlasting, &Ioan. 6. yt is called by Christ, cibus permanens, meate which abideth & which perisheth not. Such a meate, is the blessed body of Christ. It is a meat ī deed.The body of Christ is not the meate of y• belly. A meate wiche is truly eaten, but is not digested into our cor∣ruptible flesh, and voided as common meates are, but a litle and a litle, it feedeth and nourisheth vs to life euerlasting. These defenders thought, if it were aten in deed, that it couldThe er∣rour of y• Apologie. not be, but meate of the belly. As well they might blasphemously say, that because Christ was man in deed, he was born in synne. And in that opinion, they are like the Capharnaits, who couldIoan. 6. imagine none other kinde of meate, besides that which is diuided into peeces, and consumed by eating. The true Christians haue learned, by the mercy of God, withCyrillus lib. 4. in Ioā. c. 14. holy Cyrillus, how the flesh of Christ (because it is y• flesh of God) may be eaten, and yet quicken the eaters, and make them liue to God, and notbe wasted by eating, but rather how it may profite
our soules being worthely receaued into our bodies. For so Tertullian sayeth. The flesh is fedde with the body andTertull. de resur. carnis. blood of Christ, to th'ende that the soule may be made fatte in God. Perhaps the Apologists will say, that S. Cyprian doth call it bread: I answere he calleth it bread because it is meate for heThe kind of bread whereof S. Cy∣prian spea keth. sayeth, This bread is meate. But what kinde of meate? Panis iste quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non effigie sed natura mu tatus omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. This bread which ou Lord gae to the Disciples, being changed not in shape, but inCypria. de coena Domini. nature, is made flesh by the almighty power of the word. Behold the kind of bread, it is cōmon bread in sha pe, but made the flesh of Christ in substance. In the olde tyme sayth S. Ciprian, the shew loues being coldCypria. de coena Domini. and hard, were changed euery Sabothe daie, and hote loaues of the same nomber were wonte to be sette vpon ye table. I am nulla itpanis panis mutatio, vnus est panis caloris continui. Now there is no change of bread made, there is one loase os cōtal heate, which neuer is cold. By this we vnderstand that somtyme S. Ciprian speaketh of common bread which Christ tooke into his handes, and that is changed, and is at euery tyme a new loafe. At other tymes he speaketh of ye bread whereunto ye change is made. And y• bread is ye flesh of Christ which is neuer changed. The first bread if it tared in substance, it should sill the belly. But because the substance thereof is changed, the flesh of Christ which is made by consecration is the meate of the mind, and not of the belly. For it feedeth vs to that state of immortalitie where the belly shall no more be filled with coruptible meates. So that it feedeth vs in such sorte that we leaue to cherishe or bellies so much the lesse, by how much the more we eate it .
¶ Sacramētall eating differreth from eating by faithThe. . . alone whereof only S. Augustine speaketh in y• place alaged by the Apologie. ANd Augustine. how (sayth he) shall I hold him that is ab∣sent?The Apo logie. How shall I reache forth my hand into hauen that I might hold him there sitting? Reach out (sayth he) faith: & thou hast caught him. To make vp and to conlnde all these wrested places, which haueThe ∣sivere. bene alleaged heretofore out of ye Fathers, a plaine text is brought forth out of S. Augustine, which speaketh neuer a wht of y• pre∣sentAugust. tract. 50. in Ioan. controuersie, nor can not be at all applied to it. The question betwixt vs is, whether Christes body bee present in ye Sacrament of the altar or o? The Apologie reasoneth thus A Iewe that yet beleued not, niay beginne to beleue, and so mayThe arg ment of ye Apologie. streche forth his hand to heauen, and hold Christ fast by faith, al∣though he be bodily absent, therefore Christes body after conse∣cration dewly made, is not present vnder forme of bread. Is not this a mighty argument, and worthy to be kept for the last place? A Iewe may hold Christ by faith if he wil beleue vponAugust. tract. 50. in Ioan. him, therefore he is not to be eaten really of faithful Christians in the Sacrament? Nos indicemus modo Iudaeis, vbi sit Christus. Let vs now shew to the Iewes (sayeth S. Augustine) where Christ is. Occisus est a parentibus eorum, he is aine of their Pa rents. Venturus est iudex, he shall come a idge. Audiant & te∣neant, let them heare and hold. Respondet, quem tenebo? The Iwe maketh answere, whom shall I hold? Absentem? Shall I hold him that is absent? Quomodo in coelum manum mittam vt ibi sedentem teneam? How shall I stretch my hand vnto heauen that I may hold him sitting there? Fidem mitte, & tenuisti, strech out faith, and thou hast caught him. Parentes tui tenuerunt car∣, tu tene corde. Thy Parents haue holden (him) in flesh, hold hold (him) in harte. Quoniam Christus absens etiam presens est,
because Christ being absent is also present. And againe, corpus suum intulit coelo, maiestatem n on abstulit mundo. Christ hath caried his body into heauen, he hath not taken away his maiestie from the world. This dialogue S. Augustine made betwen him selfe & a Iew, not intending any whit, to spcake in that place of the Sacrament of the altar, wherof Iewes ought to know nothing. And yet commeth y• Apologie, and will proue that we touch not the body of Christ with our teeth, and iawes, but by faith, mind, and spirite, bycause, beside all the former argumentes (which be not woreth a strawe) S. Augustine telleth a Iewe, yt he may beleue vpon Christ absent in body, but present in maiestie of his Godhead. You will say perhaps, If Christ be absent in body, that his bo∣dy is not present vnder the form of bread, after consecration. Syr, S. Augustine speaketh not of Christs body, as it is in y• Sacramēt to be eaten, but as it is visible in heauen.Infidels were kept from Masse. And to assure you therof, it was y• custome of y• primitiue Church, to let no infidel see, or be present, at y• tyme of Masse of y• Christiās. Therefore S. Augustine might not lawfully talke to a Iewe, of y• misticall presens of Christ in the Saament, neither surely any word of his in that alleaged place, is to be referred to the Sacra∣mentall eating. They are two distinct things, to receaue Christ by faith alone, and to receaue by faith and Sacramēt together: that may be doneReceauīg by faith. Act. 10. Sacramē tall recea∣ning. Iustinus in Apol. 2. before baptisme (as it appeareth by Cornelius in the Actes of the Apostles) But a Sacramentall receauing in the supper of Christ, is graunted only to Christians after baptisme (as S. Justinus y• martyr and the experience it selfe doth witnesse) For as he, that is not borne, can not eate, so he, y• is not regene∣rated in Christ, may not be suffered to eate his body & drinke his blood in the Sacrament. And truly, except a man hath so addicted
him selfe to Christ, that he wil be contented to belee what so euerWhy infi∣ might not come to Masse. he shal say vnto him, he would neuer be persuaded, that vnder the forme of so small a peece of bread the reall body of Christ were conteyned. But when he hath learned in the articles of his faith, yt Christ is God, and therefore almighty, after that belefe, he both can be∣leue his word to be true, when he sayd ouer bread which was ta∣ken: This is my body, and also may eate the same body of ChristMath. 26 to his profit, and to the encrease of life euerlasting. But what ignorance was this, to applie the eating of an infidell Iew to the mysticall eating, which only the faithfull make in Christes supper?
¶ The preface of the third Booke. THe mysterie of Christes supper was so great, that not onlyGen. 14. Leuiti. 2. diuerse figures in the lawe of nature and of Moyses were by the Patriarches & Priests outwardly celebrated there∣of, and not only diuerse predictiōs were made by the ProphetesProu. 9. Psal. 22. concerning the same: but also, when Christ him selfe was come into the world, he did both make an introduction to the promise of his supper by a miraculouse blessing and breaking of fiue andMath. 14 Marci. 7. seuē loaues to the Iewes, and more ouer in expresse words fore∣told, that he wold geue his flesh to be eaten, euen the same flesh,Ioan. 6. which he wold geue for the life of the world. But for so muche as some men thinke, that Christ in the sixth Chapiter of S. Ihon speaketh not properly at all (no not so muche as by the way of promise) of his last supper: I must asTwo things are to be pro∣ued in this booke. well proue against them, who thinke so, that Christ spake in that place of the gift which he afterward made in his parting banket: As also, that the reall presence of his flesh and blood, is euidently proued by such words of promise, as he there vttered. For it can not be doubted, but the truthe it self performed all that in deed it self, whiche his words had before promised for the tyme to come. Neither ought it to be a grief to any man, if in handling these matters I seeme to intreat of hard questions, which are aboue ye capacitie of the vulgar people. For the nature of all holy myste∣riesAugust. de vtil. creden. ad Hon. cap. 2. is such, that (as S. Augustine sayeth) it may soner be im∣pugned popularly and plausibly, then be so defended. Which notwithstanding, I haue done what I can to vtter all things plainly. And yet who is there, that now can iustly find fault with me, for handling deepe and obscure matters? Is not euery man sufficiently instructed by this tyme to iudge of all points in diui∣nitie.
Is not that man, who in parlement scared not to sit iudge of this high mysterie, and without the consent of any one Pre∣late in that howse, to condemne the vnbloody sacrifice of the bles∣sed Masse, is not that man able to vnderstand suche writings, as are set foorth in that behalf? He that must, if a parlement be called, prescribe a faith vnto me (what, say I, vnto me?) he that will take vpon him to prescribe it to all the realme, to generall Councels, yea to the whole Churche, he that will accuse his Fa∣thers and graundfathers euen to the tenth generation of igno∣rance, of superstition, and of idolatry, he that accompteth him self1. Cor. 2. spirituall, and therefore sufficient to discerne doctrines & spirits, will he say that a poore scholar of Oxforde doth write to high for his vnderstanding? If it be so, let him vnderstand, that the sayd scholar is a very base member in Christes Church, and a very ignorant man, in re pect of those notable Bisshops & other diuines, whom he heardOf the  Councell. and sawe at the Councell of Trent with suche admiration, that  deed he was neither able nor worthy to speake among them. Let him vnderstand that those Fathers did so exactly serche out the truth of the present controuersies, as well by conferring to∣gether the holy Scriptures, as by vewing the bookes of the aun cient Doctors ánd Councels, that they spent in some one matter fower moneths cōtinual. To be short, let him vnderstand y• seing the tenth part of the learned men  Christendome came not to y• Councell, and yet there were in it aboue two hundred persons of suche excellencie, for wit, learning, & vertue, that it passed much more the wisedom of any one realme, then the graue Senate of aThe wise dome of the whole Churche. whole realm doth excede yt particular Councell of neuer so meane a Litie: Let him, I say, vnderstand, what wisedom, what know∣lege, what iudgement is, and hath bene in the whole Church of God, by the space of fiftene hundred yeres together. The prea∣ching
practise, and gouernement of which long tyme a few such feared not of late by their open voices to cōdemne, as to whom if a mā should at their own howse propose a very meane problemeThe iud∣ges of reli giō in our tyme.▪ or doubt in diuinitie, they wold not only refuse to answer there∣vnto, but they wold also confesse plainly, that they neuer studied the science of Diuinitie. They wold swere if nede were, that they neuer attended principally to any other thing, then to serue God and their Prince, and to hauke or hunt. Whereof I put them in mind, to the end they should depely cōsyder with what temeritie they attempted, to determine the high and secret points of Chri∣stian faith, and that knowing their fault they should bewaile & amend the same. I beseche God to geue vs al grace to know our selues, and t beware that, whiles we couet to be as Gods in vnderstanding the Scriptures, we tast not of the tree which is named the knowlege of good and euill, and afterward be cast out of Paradise, because we contented not our selues with the orderGenes. 3. and condition, which our Lord had appointed for vs. I trust, although the matters, which I intreat of, be very hard, to make them yet plain by such help as the aunciēt Fathers haue left vnto vs in their most learned works and commentaries. According to whose wisedome I wil expound those places of S. Ihon, which specially appertein to my pur∣pose.
The Chapiters of the third booke. 1. The Argument of the sixt chapiter of S. Iohn is declared. 2. It is proued by circumstances, and by the confe∣rēce of holy Scriptures, that Christ speaketh in S. Iohn of his last supper. 3. The same is proued out of the Fathers and Coun∣cels. 4. Answer is made to them that teache the cōtrary out of the Fathers. 5. Item to them, that teache the contrary out of the Scriptues. 6. The gift of the euerlasting meate is shewed to be the gift of Christes flesh at his supper. 7. The equalitie of substance alleged betwene Christ and his Father, proueth one substance to be geuē both of God the Father to Christ, and of Christ to vs. 8. Christ is not the bread of life to vs by the gift of his flesh, except we eate really his own flesh. 9. Whereas three giftes are named in S. Iohn, Christes gift partaketh of both the other, & therefore conteineth his reall flesh vnder a figure.
10. The midle state of the new Testament betwene the law and glory requireth the same truth, which is in heauen, to be geuē vnder a figure. 11. The bread that Christ will geue, which is his flesh, must nedes be meant of the substance of his flesh. 12. Christ himself sheweth, that the eating of him by faith or in a figure only differeth far from the real eating of his flesh in his last supper. 13. Christes flesh to be as really present in his supper, as water is at baptism: In so much that chil∣dern were somtyme communicated. 14. That S. Augustin did not teache these wordes, except ye eate the flesh & caet. to betoken only eating by faith and spirit, or by figure alone. 15. Christes flesh, being meate in dede, must needes be really present to be eaten. 16. By the maner of Christes tarying in vs, it is {pro}ued that we eate his reall flesh. 17. VVe are one with Christ by eating his flesh in the naturall substāce thereof, as he is one nature with his Father by eternall generation. 18. The reall presence of Christes hody vvas so true, that it vvas taught with the losse of many disciples.
19. How the flesh profiteth nothing vvithout the spirit. 20. The wordes of Christ, being spirit and life, make and witnesse his flesh to be present miraculo∣usly and aboue the course of nature.
¶ The argument of the sixth Chapiter of S. Ihon isThe first Chapiter. declared. WHereas Christ may be receaued either by faith & spirit only, without the Sacrament of the altar, or els in theChrist may be re∣ceaued thre ways Sacrament of the altar only, without liuely faith and grace, or in both together, which is the most fruitfull kinde of communicating: some haue thought, that in the sixth cha∣piter of S. Iohn there is no talke of the second and third kinde of receauing (which is referred to the Sacrament of the altar) but only of the first, which is by faith and charitie. Merily those men are not to be blamed for saying y• Christ spea∣kethChrist speaketh not in S. Ihon of vnworthy eating. not there, of y• second kinde of eating which is by Sacramēt alone, without spirituall eating and drinking (for thereof in deed he speaketh not) but they are to be reprehended, if they denie y• he speaketh of such Sacramētall eating, as is vsed in our Lords supper, when it is (as it always ought to be) worthely receaued. My purpose is at this tyme, to shew that albeit Christ in the former part of that Chapiter speaketh for the most part of spiritu∣allWorthy Sacra∣mētal ea∣ting is spo ken of to ward the end of y• Chapiter. eating and drinking only, yet afterward he speaketh also of yt eating which is by receauing worthely the Sacrament of yt altar at y• Priests hands. for to that ende chiefly goeth all the talke of it, not as though spirituall receauing alone were not better then on∣ly Sacramentall receauing, but because both together are better then one alone. Christ presseth his Disciples to such a receauing of him selfe as is most perfit of all. For proofe of which thing, I am constrained brifly to touche the tyme and order of Christes talke. A litle more then one whole yere before his passion, Christ about the greate feast of Easter, went beyond the sea of Galilee, and wrought that notable miracle, wherein he fedde about fiue thou∣sandIoan. 6. men with fiue loaes and two fishes. Wherby y• people were
induced y• rather to seeke him yt next day at . WhomThe mi∣racle of multiply∣ing bread, was a pre paratorie to the talk of Chry∣stes sup∣per. he no  sawe, but he did put them in mind of yesterdays mi∣racle, telling them that they followed him, not for the signessake which they had sene, but because they had eaten their bellies full of bread. as though he had sayd: my intent was yt you should ra∣ther haue noted ye miracle, then haue respected your bellies▪ which  sith you haue not done of your selues, I warne you thereof willing you to worke, not the meate which perisheth (as yester∣days bread & fish did) but that which tarieth vnto life euerlasting, which the Sonne of man will geue you. In these words Christ doth manifestly declare (as also S. Chry∣ostomChryso. in ca. 6. Ioan. Ho mi. 45. Math. 14. hath noted) that the miracle of fiue loaues appertained in some part vnto his last supper, whereof he intended at that tyme to speake, taking an occasin of that bread which by blessing and thanksgeuing he had multiplied. For which cause he sayd, worke  other kind of meae then ye did yesterday, for y• meate is now perished, and ye are a hungred againe. Worke a meate that may tary longer with you, y• may tary vnto euerlasting life. Hitherto the words of Christ may be meant▪ by spirituall eating and drin∣king only, Bt the words that follow, do meane also a further kinde of ea∣tingThe gift of Christ which is to come is meant of his supper and drinking. For when he sayth: which the sonne of man wil geue you, he plainely meaneth yt gift of his last supper, as Theo∣phylact doth witnesse, but yet vttereth his meaning after a secret sort, as S. Cyrillus doth write vpon the same place. And in dede yt Christ doth ex∣pound the spirituall eating be∣fore the Sacra∣metall a∣ting. is the gift which is namely reserued in this Chapiter to the sonne of man, as it shall appere afterward. But because they could not come to y• worthy working of Chr∣stes own gift, vntill y• worke of faith were by y•  wrought in them, he straight declareth by an occasion taken of the olde fi∣gure manna, how they must haue faith from God, to beleue vpon
him. for that he was the bread of life, who came downe from hea∣uen to geue life eurlasting both in body and soule to all such as his Father brought vnto him. for who so euer should eate of that bread which him selfe was, should liue for euer. After which preparation made, he retourneth to expound his owne gifte which he named the gifte of ye Sonne of man shewing most expressely that which he will geue in his last supper: And theIoan. 6. bread which I will geue is my flesh for the life of the world. TheSpiritual ating was pre∣sent. gift of spirituall eating by faith & charitie was not to come when Christ spake vnto his Disciples. For it was then present, & there∣fore he sayd presently, I am the bread of life, meaning that he was presently so, cōcerning spiritual feeding, in so much as, if any man would haue beleued in him, euen at that instāt, he might through grace haue eaten of Christ. But Christ sayth his own peculiar gift was to come: and thereSacra∣mental ea∣ting was to come. fore he continueth expounding his gift in many sentences, vntill at the last he sayth, he that eateth this bread (which him self had be∣fore promised to geue to be eaten) shall liue for euer. I will by Gods grace make ye proofe hereof so plaine hereafter, as any reasonable man shall desire. Only first protesting that I folowe not myne own braine herein, but yt iudgemēt of all y• ∣cient Fathers, who with one accorde haue taken this Chapiter to speake (by way of promise), of the Sacrament of the altar, which was iustituted by Christ in his last supper. ¶ It is proued by circumstances & by ye cōference of holyThe secōd Chapiter. Scriptures y• Christ speaketh in S. Ihon of his last sup∣per.1. The tyme of Easter. HE y• doth well consider ye only time when this talke was had, he that weygheth how Christ hauing made yt greate1. The mi∣racle made n bread. miracle in blessing fiue loaues, doth the next daie about the time of Easter, one whole yere before the celebrating
of his last supper, as it wer make both a prophecie and a promise3. The Pro pheticall promise. what he would do y• Easter twelue moneth after, he that confer∣reth as well what was done and sayd abonte the sea of Tiberias4▪ The con∣ference of things done and sayd. and at Capharnaū as what was done and said in the last supper which was kept the night wherein he was betrayed, he that no∣teth the fathers gift to be accompted present, and that to be the working of belefe in yt hartes of the faithful (which is a spiritual5. The pre∣sent eating of Gods gift. eating of Christ) but y• sōnes gift to be rekoned as a thing to come hereafter, and to be called eating his flesh and drinking his blood (Wich if it shall differ any thing at all from the fathers gift, must nedes be more then a spirituall eating of Christes flesh) he shall6. The ea∣ting of Christes gift to come. Ioan. 6. Math. 26 Marc. 14. perceane  this chapiter both a spirituall eating presently offred, and a sacramentall eating promised hereafter  the naturall sub∣stāce of flesh and blood. which in this place thus breefly touched shall at large be handled in the treatise folowing. At this tyme he that conferreth what was done and sayd both at the last supper of Christ and the yere before about the sea of1. Bread ta∣ken. Tyberias: shall see concerning the doyngs, bread taken in bothe places, blessing and thanksgeuing in bothe, eating in bothe. And as concerning words, let him deeply ponder, and consider2. Blessing. that as in S. Iohn he began his talke of cōmon bread saying to ye3. Thanks∣geuing. Iewes: ye folow me because yehaue eaten of the loaues of bread,4. Eating. but at the length he ended his talke with the eating of his fleshe, and drynking his blood: So in his last supper he tooke into his5. From bread to flesh. Math 26 handes cōmon bread, but at the length he ended his banket in the eating his body and drinking his blood. As in S. Iohn he speaketh distinctly of a meate which the sōne6. The sōne of man is the geuer. of man will geue: So at his supper, ye soon of man did administer the whole gift of his heauenly meate in his owne person. As in S. Iohn he saieth: the bread which I will geue, that is to7. Meare is geuen▪ Mar. 4. Mat. 26. say, ye meate of my last supper: so in his last supper he takg bread
after blessing & breakyng, dth geue a blessed food saying, sumite, take.8. That is  which Christ toke first. . 6. As in S. Iohn he sayd, the bread whiche I will geue, and not the bread whiche I will take: so in his supper he tooke one kind of bread, and gaue an other. For as in S. Iohn he saieth, the bread which I will geue is my flesh: so at his last supper after he had taken cōmon bread, and blessed, he sayed: Take, this is my body.9. Flesh and body is geuen. Ioan. 6. As in S. Ihon the bread to be geuen and the flesh of Christ is all oe: so in his supper he geueth none other bread besides his owne body. For the substance of the cōmon bread was chaunged by blessing and speaking the wordes.10. No com∣mon bread is geuen. Ioan. 6. As his bread and flesh was sayd to be in S. Iohn for the lyfe of yt world: so in his supper he sayd: This is my body which is geuen for you.11. The flesh that died is geuen. As in S. Iohn he saieth, my flessh is meate in deed: so in his supper he saieth: take, eate, this is my body. That whiche is eaten in deed, is meate in deed.12. The gift is eaten in deed. Ioan. 6. As in S. Ihon there is mention o drinking the blood of Christ: so in his supper he sayth: drink ye al of this, for this is my blood. As in S. Ihon there is no mention of wine to be geuen or drū∣ken:13. The blood is drunkē. Ioan. 6. so Christ in his supper neither spake of wine at the tyme of drīking, nor gaue any wine at all to be drūken, because it was by his words changed into his blood.14. No wine was run ken. Ioan. 6. As at Capharuaum certaine of his Disciples went away from him: so at his last supper he did reiect and separate them from his table. And as his twelue Apostles most faithfully taried with him at Capharnaum: so they alone were in the night of his betraying admitted to his holy table.15. The. xij. only taried  both places. As at Capharnaum when Christ had asked the twelue, whe∣ther16. The. xij. protested in bothe places not to orsake Christ. Ioan. 6. they also wold goe away, S. Peter answered for them (Lord to whom shall we goe?) meaning they were not offended, nor
wold nōt got from him: euen so after his last supper S. Peter & likewise all the rest sayd they wold not deie him, though all the world forsoke him, or toke offence against him. As at Capharnaum Christ sayd, that one of the twelue was a deuill: so at his last supper y• Bospel doth tell that Satan entred17. Iudas was re∣proued in both pla∣ces. Ioan. 13. into Iudas one of the twelue. If the tyme, wordes, dedes, & persons throughly agree, it is vnsemely to make them diuerse kindes of eating and drinking, whereof one man at one tyme of the yere speaketh and practiseth to the same Disciples so conformable a doctrine and doing. ¶ It is proued out of the holy Fathers and generallThe third Chapiter. Councels, that Christ in S. Ihon spake of his last supper. THat I may here omit S. Ignatius, who defineth ye breadIgnatius  epist. ad Roman. of God, of heauen, and of life (which is named in the sixth of S. Ihon) to be the flesh of Christ and his cup or blood: That I may let passe Clemens Alexandrinus, who speaking ofClemens Alexād. De Paeda gogo. li. 1. ca. 6. Ioan. 6. Origen. Hom. 7. sup num. Ioan. 6. the nourishment which we, that are baptized in Christ, haue by him, calleth it not only Christ, the word, milk, bread and drink, but also the flesh and blood, and body of Christ, and the mysterie of bread, alleging diuerse places out of S. Ihon for that pur∣pose: Last of all, that I may not stand vpon Origen, who com∣paring the fulnes of Baptism to the red sea which was but a shadow, and likewise the Sacramēt of Christes supper to Mau∣na, declareth out of S. Ihon that now the flesh of Christ is meate in deed, by that meanes witnessing, that he toke the words of the sixth of S. Ihon to belong to the mysterie o Christes last ban∣ket: Surely S. Cyprian doth not only by occasion of other talk,Cypria. in oratio nem Do mini. but euen of set purpose teache, that who so euer for some great fault is any long tyme kept from the body of Christ in the Sa∣crament,
he is in danger of euerlasting life. And y• because Christ sayd: except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drink his blood, ye shal not haue life in you. And yet he should wholy faile of his proofe, if that place which he bringeth out of S. Ihon, did not proue the necessitie of communicating Sacramentally. S. Athanasius setting foorth a brief and compendiouse reher∣salAthana∣sius in Synopsi. no. testa. lib. 4. Ioan. 6. of the whole diuine Scripture, witnesseth that Christ at his coming to Capharnaum, reasoneth with the multitude concer∣ning the mysteries. Which saying of his can not be iustified accor∣ding to the historicall sense which he professeth in that worke, if Christ in S. Ihon spake principally of yt spirituall eating which is besyde his holy mysteries. S. Hilarie disputing of the naturall veritie of Christ which isHilarius libr. 8. de Trinit. Ioan. 6. in vs by the Sacramēt of receauing his flesh, doth not only bring for that intent, these words, My flesh is meate in deed: But also concludeth that as well by the profession of our Lord, as by our own faith Christes flesh is truly in vs. And certainly he meaneth it so to be in vs as we receaue it in his last supper. But if ye place by him alleged proue not so muche, his reason lacketh a sufficient ground, for so much as he citeth none other authoritie for that ar∣gument of his against the Arrians, but only the words which are in S. Ihon. By those words he affirmeth Christ to be in vs after such sort, that he is in vs naturally, and we naturally in him. S. Basile intituling his booke of Baptism, and wholy bent toBasilius de bapt. li. 1. ca. 3. declare the Sacraments of Christes Church, sheweth that after our second birth nourishment is necessarie to vs, & straight way bringeth foorth Christes words in S. Ihon: ioyning them with the words of his last supper, which S. Basile sayeth to be writenIoan. 6. in the end of the Gospels, thereby geuing vs to vnderstand that as the performance was made in the end, so the promise went be∣fore. Is it not maruaile now that any thing should be pretended
out of this blessed man for the contrarie opinion? But how iustly it is pretended, wee shall see afterward. Gregorius of Nyssa brother to S. Basile teacheth the flesh ofGrego∣rius Nys senus in vita Moy sis. Ioan. 6. Christ to be a bodily thing because it is made meate for mans bo∣dy. That it is meate he proueth out of S. Ihon. For there only are found the chief words by him alleged, which are, Panis enim qui de coelo descendit qui verus cibus est, non incorporea quaedam res est. For the bread which came down from heauen which is the true meate is not a thing without a body. Quo enim pacto (sayth he) res incorporea corpori cibus fiet? For by what meanes will a thing which lacketh a body be made meate vnto the body? Doubtlesse Christ is made meate vnto our bodies no where els but only in the Sacramēt of his supper. And therefore this great clerck thought him self to reason wel, in bringing such words as are in S. Ihon for that effect which belongeth to the holy cōmu∣nion. Because he iudged both places of holy Scripture to be of one argument. Cyrillus of Hierusalem intreating of the Sacrament of the al∣tar,Cyrillus Catech. mysta∣gogi. 4. so euidently citeth these words of S. Ihon, Excepte ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, & caet. that noman may doubt of his meaning. And because this part of my work wold be ouer long if I should staye so long vpon euery of the aunciēt Fathers, I besech the studiouse Reader to be content that hereafter I may in fewer words declare euery mans iudgemēt, shewing him the place of the author, where if it please him, he may at more leisure examine all the circumstances.Ambros. de Sacra men. li. 6 cap. 1. Euseb. Emissen. Hom. 5.  Pacha. S. Ambrose disputing of the truth of Christes flesh in the Eu∣charist, although it selfe be not sene, bringeth out of S. Ihon: My flesh is meate in dede, and except ye eate the flesh, &c. Eusebius Emissenus hauing spoken of the bread and wine of Melchisedech, sheweth Christ to haue spoken of eating his own
esh, & of drinking his own blood in S. Ihon, as of two kindes whereby he is receaued, which is done no where but in Christes supper. S. Chrysostom is so plaine herein, that of those wordes, theChryso. Hom. 44 in Ioan. bread which I will geue is my flesh, he maketh none other literal meaning, but such as apperteineth to the Sacrament of Christes body. And yet he expoundeth the former partes of the Chapiter indifferently of spirituall eating and drinking. S. Augustine albeit he may seme vpon S. Ihon to presse mostAugust. in Ioan. cap. 6. tract. 26. earnestly vpon the witie, which we haue with Christ by eating his esh and drinking his blood, and by tarying in him, & hauing him tarying in vs: yet he meaneth not to exclude out of those wordes al Sacramentall receauing, but only the vnworthy Sa∣cramentall receauing. For he sayth expresly, he that tarieth not in Christ eaeth not spiritually his flesh▪ albei carnally and visibly he presse with his teath the Sacramēt of  body and blood of Christ.There is a dubble spiritual eating of Christ. So that by S. Augustine there is a dubble spirituall eating of Christes flesh, one without the Sacrament, and an other with the Sacrament. Christ so spake of both, that he spake specially of the most perit, which is obteined by worthy receauing of ye Sa∣crament.August▪ in Ioan. cap. 6. As the greatest signe there of, so the highest  is in this Sa crament. August. de uit. Dei li. 27 cap. 5. Ioan. 6. Out of this worthy receauing riseth that greate societie & vnitie with Christ & his mysticall body, whereof S. Augustine so much speaketh: This is the Sacramēt of Godlines, the signe of vnitie, the bonde of chaitie. Without eating of this, one way or other, no life euerlastīg is to be loked for: & by eating y• same wor thely in y• best kinde of way (which is in the Sacrament of the al∣tar) the highest degree of vnitie with Christ our head is obeined. As the best signe of vnitie is in the forin of this Sacrament, so the best effect springeth ot of the worthy receauing of ye substāce which is vnder that form. Therefore in other places S. Augustīe  words out o S. Ihon (This bread wcih I wll
geue is my flesh for the life of the world) to shew the Priesthod of Melchisedech, which Priesthod him selfe declareth to be in theAugust. Epist. 95 Sacrament of the altar saying: Melchicedech prolato Sacramen∣to mensae dominicae, nouit aeternum eius Sacerdotium figurare. Melchisedech by bringing forth the Sacrament of our Lords ta∣ble,August. de conse. Euange. li. 3. ca. 1. de ciuit. li. 17. c 5. de verb. Apostol. Serm. 2. de pecca▪ mer. li. 1. ca. 20. & 24. in Psal. 33. &. 98. cō tra Cre∣scō. Grā. li. 1. c. 25. de verb. Do. Ser. 11. &. 46. q. ī Leui. ca. 57. Hieron. in. 1. ca. Epist. ad Ephes. Ioan. 6. Cyrillus Alexan∣drinus. li. 4. c. 14. &. 16. did know to shew the igure of his euerlasting Priesthod. Furthermore S. Augustine expounding these words of S. Ihon of the last supper in very many places of his works most expresly sayth, that S. Ihon spake nothing of the body and blood of our Lord in the thirtenth Chapiter (where he mentioned the last supper,) sed plane alibi multo vberius hinc Dominum locutū esse testatur. But verily in an other place S. Ihon witnesseth our Lord to haue spoken much more copiously thereof. Except S. Augustine thought y• sixth Chapiter of S. Ihon to appertein literally to the Sacrament of the altar, he wold neuer haue sayd that S. Ihon spake not of the supper in the due place, because he spake of it in an other place more copiously. But of S. Augustie I will speake again hereafter. S. Hierome sayth, the flesh and blood of Christ is vnderstanded two ways or in two maners: Either that spirituall and diuine, whereof he sayd. My flesh is meate in dede and my blood is drinke in dede, &c▪ or els y• flesh which was crucified for vs, and y• blood which was shed with the speare of the Souldiour. And that one substance is in eche maner of flesh and blood (only the maner of geuing it being diuerse) it appereth also by the sentēce folowing, where he sayeth: one flesh of the Saires may see the saluatiō of God, an other flesh can not possesse heauen. Not that the substāce of natural flesh, but the worthines of the men is diuerse. S. Cyrillus of Alexandria writing vpon S. Ihon of purpose and shewing the most literall sense thereof that he could deuise, or learn, interpreateth the whole sixth chapiter of S. Ihon of the
Sacramēt of the altar, naming very many tymes the partaking of the holy mysteries and the mysticall blessing, and the commu∣nicating of the holy chalice. Also vpon those words, I will reyseCyrillus in . li. 4. ca. 15. him vp again, he maketh this exposition: Ego, id est, corpus meū quod comedetur, resuscitabo eum. I will reise him, that is to say, my body that shalbe eaten, shall reise him. As if he sayd, I will reise him, because my body which shalbe eaten of him, shall reise him. Sedulius proueth the chalice of blessing to be the communica∣tigSedulius in 1. Cor. 10. Leo in serm. 6. de Ieiun. mens. 7. Theodo ritus in Dalo▪ 1. of Christes blood according as Christ said: He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, &c. Leo the great sayth, we ought so to communicate with our Lords table, that we doubt nothing of the veritie of his body and blood, seing he sayd: Except ye eat the flesh, &c. Theodoritus speaking of the holy mysteries, ioyneth with the words of the supper these also: The bread which I wil geue is my flesh, which I will geue for the life of the world. Isychius shewing that the penitent person may eate the breadIsychius in Leuit. li. 6. c. 22. whereof Christ sayd: The bread which I will geue is my flesh, ioy∣neth there with all the words of S. Paul: Let a man proue him self and so eate: Declaring both sayings to belong to one mysterie. Theophilact vpon these words: The bread which I will geue, witnesseth that Christ manifestly telleth vs in this place of the mysticall communion of his body.Damasce nus de Orthod. l. 4. c. 14. Damascenus declaring that Christ sayd: This is my body, and not the figure of my body, bringeth for the same purpose: Except ye eate the flesh, &c. Prosper Aquitanicus ioyneth these words, Except ye eate theProsper de vocat. gent. lib. 1. cap. 18. flesh, &c. with these, except a man be born again of water, to shew that the Sacraments of Christ doe geue vs grace, and not or own works which goe before baptism. As therefore S. Cyprian
and S. Augustin applie those two sayings to two seuerall Sa∣craments of baptism, and of the Eucharist: so must we think thatProcop. in com∣mēt. in cap. 12. Prosper doth who most diligently folowed S. Augustine. Proco pius Gazeus writeth, y• these words: except ye eate my flesh, &c. Typum mysteriorum quae sub ipso latent, continent, conteine the foorm of the mysteries which lie priuie vnder it. Eucherius teaching that Christ feedeth vs with the nourish∣mētsEucher. in 2. Reg. cap. 4. of the healthiull mysterie, saith that he distributeth to euery man a ake of that bread, which came down rom heauen and ge∣ueth life to the world. Cassiodorus saying that Christ did cosecrate his body & bloodCassiod. in psalm. 109. Ioan. 6. Primat. in 1. Cor. cap. 10. in geuing of bread and wine, proueth it because him self sayd: Ex∣cept ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man, &c. Primatius shewing how the chalice of blessing is the commu∣nicating of the blood of Christ, bringeth our Sauiour his words in S. Ihon saying, he that eateth my flesh & drinketh my blood, tarieth in me and I in him. S. Bede folowed in all points S. Augustin, whose words he reciteth both vpon S. Ihon, & vponIoan. 6. Beda in Ioan. 6. 1. Cor. 10 & 11. Angelo∣mus in 1. Reg. c. 2. Hao in 1. Cor. cap. 11. Bernar∣dusin . 90. vers. tertio. S. Paule. And therefore we nede not doubt but he is wholy of y• same mind. Angelomus vpon the first booke of the kings reciteth S. Ihon in the same sense. Haimo vpon S. Paule intreating of the Sacrament confer∣reth S. Paules words with the sixth of S. Ihon. S. Brnard although he say the eating of the flesh of Christ to be the folowing of his painful conuersation in suffering voluntarie  for his sake, yet well knowing that Christ spake literally also of an other kinde of eating, he saieth, that Christ did speake of penance in a figure, that is to saie, couertly as rather inclu∣ding penance vnder the wordes which he named, then expresse∣ly naming it. Vnde & hoe designat illibatum illud altaris sacra∣mentum,
vbi dominicum corpus accipimus. wherefore that pure Sacrament of the altar where we take our Lords body betoke∣neth so much. Behold the true and literall meaning of Christes wordes is to haue his flesh eaten in the sacrament of the altar. But that ea∣ting importeth a folowing of Christ in his painful conuersati∣on. For as that forme of bread (saieth S. Bernard) is seene to enter into vs: so let vs knowe that Christ thorough that con∣uersation which he had in earth, eutreth into vs, to dwell by faith in our hartes. Whereby we maie perceaue that S. Bernard vnderstandeth the sixth chapter of S. Iohn so literally of the sacrament of the altar, that thereupon he buildeth a couert and a figuratiue prea∣ching of penance. Euthymius noteth that Christ did not say: I do geue myEuthy∣mius in 6. Ioan. Ioan. 6. Nicolaus Methon. In tract. flesh, but I wil geue, because he minded to geue it in his last sup∣per. Nicolaus Methonensis hauing first rehersed the wordes of the Gospell, this is my body, straight expoundeth all the chap∣ter of S. Iohn thereof, shewing the profit which we take by this Sacrament. Samonas after the wordes of the supper declared, as not be∣tokeningSamonas in tract. a figure or image, affirmeth Christ to haue said in other places the same thing, and straight reciteth the sixth chapiter of S. Iohn. I omitt here Petrus Cluniacensis, Guimundus, Al∣gerus, Lanfrancus, S. Thomas de Aquino, Albertus Magnus, Dionysius the Carthusian, Nicolaus de Lyra, & a great number of late writers, which all agreed vpon the same vnderstanding ofGonciliū Triden∣tinum. sessione. 13. ca. 2. the sixth of S. Iohu. But what speake I of these Fathers one by one? not only the Councel of Trident hath taken witnesse for the Sacrament of the altar out of S. Iohn, but also the seuenth kept at Nice, and the
first kept at Ephesus doth allege against Nestorius the here∣tikeConcili∣um Nice num 2. Concili∣um Ephe sinum in epist. ad Nestori∣um. for the presence of Christes person in the Sacramēt, the wor∣des of S. Iohn his gospell. Yea the whole west church readeth the same gospell of S. Iohn, when it celebrateth the feast of corpus Christi daie. And surely whē the Church kepeth any feast, whereof there is mention in the gospell according to the letter, it alwaies chooseth to reade that part, where the feast is literally mentioned. It wold there∣foreThe prac tise of the churche. be very absurd, sith S. Mathew, S. Marke, and S. Luke, haue written so distinctly the historie of Christes supper, to leaue them all, and to reade the wordes of Christ in S. Iohn, if the same wordes had any other sense more literall then that, which belongeth to the supper of Christ. So that I trust there is no possible cause of doubting to a sober man, but that the wordes of Christ in this chapiter maie literally and according to the first and chief meaning of them, be brought to declare, what we ought to thinke of his bodily presence in the Sacrament of his last supper. But if any man be not fully satis∣fied therein, let him reade the processe folowing, and he shal haue lesse cause to doubt any more in this matter. ¶ Answer is made to their obiections, who teache outThe iii. Chapit. of the holy fathers, that the sixth chapiter of S. Iohn ought to be expounded only of spiritual eating. FOr their opinion, who think the sixth chapiter of S. Iohn to speake only of the spiritual and not of the worthy sacra∣mental eating of Christes body, the authoritie of certaine fa∣thersThe argu ments for the contra rie part. is alleged, who are thought somtimes to expound the wordes of this chapiter, partly of belefe in Christ, partly of the vnitie which riseth by the sacramentes of baptisme and of penance.
But it maie seme a sufficient answere to that obiection, if weThe aun∣swere. saie first, that so many fathers do not expound the wordes of1. Christ in the sixth chapter of S. Iohn of any other one argu∣ment, as doe conformably expound it of the supper of our lord. And when we speake of the authoritie of the fathers, their con∣sentThe con∣sent of Fa thers is mot to be followed. Math. 18. and agreement in one point is the chiefe waie to know (ac∣cording to the promise of Christ) in what case they are specially to be followed. Secondly those fathers which are named some where to haue2. expounded these wordes otherwise then of the supper of Christ, haue them selues in other places expounded the same wordes of the verie supper: As we maie perceaue by the places of S. Cy∣prian, of S. Hierome, of S. Augustine, and of S. Bernard, be∣fore alleged. Whereby their authoritie is as great for that which I say, as it is against it. Thirdly no one of the auncient writers is brought forth, who3. denieth these words in S. Iohn to appertaine to the supper.Li. Con∣fess. 12. cap 28. 29. 20. And what skilleth it, if many senses of one place be found out, so long as they all stand together? Is it not S. Augustines rule that all such senses may be well kept and all admitted? Fourthly many of those places which are brought for the con trary opinion, do manifestly, and as it semeth to me, inuincibly4. proue the wordes in S. Iohn to be literally meant of the sup∣per of Christ. S. Cyprian (who is first alleged for the other side) puttethCypria. ad Quiri num. li. 3. cap. 25. &. 26. Ioan. 3. Ioan 6. forth this truth, that a man without baptisme can not come t the kingdome of heauen: because except a man be borne againe of water, and of the holy ghost, he can not enter into the kingdo∣me of God. Likewise, except ye eate the flessh of the sonne of man and drinke his blood, ye shall not haue life in you. Now they suppose that S. Ciprian bringeth these two sayin∣ges
for baptisme alone. Wherefore (say they) it was not sayd of the supper, except ye eate the flesh &c. But herein they seme to be deceaued, because the custome of the primitiue church i many places was, to geue the sacramēt of y• al∣tarBaptism & the Eu∣ ere in some pla∣ces geuen together. Dionys. de Eccle. Hierar. c. 1. i fine. Ambros. de ijs qui init. ca. 9. Cypria. de lapsis. Cypria. ad Quir. cap. 26. together with the sacrament of baptisme, not so much for ne∣cessitie, as for sureties sake. Hereof we haue mention i Dionysius Areopagita, and in S. Am brose. In so much that ye very infantes were in ye primitiue church in some countries made partakers of the sacrament of ye altar. Seing then ye sacament of ye altar was vsed to be geuen straight after y• sacrament of baptism, therefore S. Cyprian ioyned toge∣ther those two witnesses whiche did belong to those two Sacra∣mentes, & that is vndoubtedly proued by his owne wordes, for after he had cited those wordes in S. Iohn, it followeth mediatly Parum esse baptizari et eucharistiam accipere, nisi quis factis et opere perficiat. It is litle worth to be baptized and to receaue the eucharist, except a man by deedes and workes make all perfit. Behold as he alleged two sayings of Christ, so he nameth the two sacramēts whereof they were spoken. Thus I think it most clere that S. Ciprian did not expound the eating of the flessh of Christ as spoken by baptism only. And ye lyke may be said of Innocentius, Augustinus, EusebiusTob. 2. August. Epist. 93. &. 106. Euseb. Hom. 5. in Pascha Iustinus Martyr in Apo∣logia. 2. Ioan. 6. Emissenus, and of suche others, whiche bring these woords of Christ, except ye eate the fleshe of the sonne of man &c. against the Pelagians, to proue that infantes cannot haue lyfe in them selues, vnles they be first baptized. For seing they knew, that no man could come to the eucharist, except he were first baptized (as also Iustinus Martyr hath witnessed) & seing y• Eucharist was namely called the bread of life, whiche who so did eate, he should liue for euer: and who by any fault of his own did not eate it, he should not haue life in himself: moreouer, seing the person bapti∣zed,
had not only Christ in him spiritually through baptism, but had right vnto the very Sacrament of Christes supper, and also being of lawfull discretion customably receaued it straight after baptism: these things being so, it is most true, that who so is not at all baptized, he is not only excluded from y• kingdom of heauē (as y• Pelagians graunted) but likewise (whiche thing they de∣nyed)Ioan. 3. from euerlasting life, because he is by all meanes excluded from the food of life, whiche except we eate by some meanes or other, we cannot haue life in vs. & we cannot eate it by any mea∣nes at all, that is to say, not so muche as spiritually, except we be first baptized, either in deed or in perfit desire. And being once baptized we doo eate it in some effect at the very font, and really may, and commonly must eate it afterward in the Sacrament to a farther effect. So that the reasons of those Fathers do not import, as though Christ meant in S. Ihon of spirituall eating only, but that he meant of that kind of eating at the least: and meant a farther kindIoan. 3. of eating also in that case, when farther occasion should be mini∣stred. For as when Christ saide: except a man be born againe of water and of the holye Ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of heauen, he so meant in those wordes to include his saluation, that would be born & vowed him self to be born again (although by preuention of death he were not really so borne) that yet not withstanding, he meant muche more to haue most men really so born of water and of the holy ghost: Right so, when Christ sayd:The pre∣ceptof bap tism, and of eating Christes flesh are like. except ye eate the lesh of the sonne af man & drinke his blood, ye shall not haue life in you, he so meant to binde vs to eate his fleash, that he should haue life which was at the least spiritually fead there with in baptisme, and yet also that most men should be bound to feed really thereon, and that he should haue most perfit
life, who was d sacramentally with his fleshe and blood in the Sacrament of the Altar. As therefore not withstandinge that the will of being baptised seth to some, others must be sacramentally baptised by thatIoan. . very precept of Christ in S. Ihon: euen so though it be sufficient for tes to eate Christ in baptisme spiritually, yet other are boūd by y• same very precept to eate his flesh Sacramētally. Now to airme the one sense whiche was lesse meant, denying there∣withall the chief sense which was principally meant, it is no smal iuiurie to Gods worde. Certeinly S. Innocentins, Gusebius, & S. Augu in saying that infants can not haue life except they t the least wise eate Christ in baptisme, did not meane to say that these wordes except ye eate the flesh, & cae. were only spoken of baptisme, or els more principally of baptisme, then of Christes supper, but rather they meant cleane contrarie, as it may appere by S. Augustines owne wordes. who disputing against the Pe∣lagiās in this very question which we now speak of, saith expres∣ly,Augu. de pec. mer. li. 1. c. 20. Dominum audiamus non quidem hoode. Sacramento lauacri dicentem, sed de sacramento sanctae mensae suae (quo nemo ritè nisi baptizatus accedit) nisi manducaueritis carnem meam, & caet. Let vs heare our Lorde, verily not saying this of the Sacramente of baptisme, but saying it of the Sacramēt of his holy table, (whither no man cometh well, vnlesse he be baptised) except ye eate my flesh, and soforth. S. Augustine here declareth the precept of eatinge Christes flesh which is in the sixt of S. Ihon, so to appertein to the Sacra∣mēt of his holy supper, that it apperteineth not in suche sorte vn∣to baptisme. And yet if by eating his flesh he meant only beleuing in him, and the receauing of grace or the vnitie of Christes mysti∣call body, then truely those wordes, except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man, should belong first to baptisme where we are vni∣ted
first, and incorporated vnto Christ  But S. Augustine ∣meth a difference betwene baptisme and the Eucharist by these wordes, in so uche as he saith God spake of the one & not of the other. But yf he spake of spirituall vniting vs to Christ withou the Sacrament of his owne supper, then he rather spake of bap∣tisme then of his supper, whiche S. Augustine him selfe denieth. Therefore S. Augustine meant, that Christ in S. Ihon literallyLib: 1. ca. . promysed the gift of his supper, but yet to them only that were baptised. And for y• cause he geueth a reason why this gift whiche is proper to Christes supper, is applied to the infants which areAugu. in Epi. 106. 10. 2. baptised, his reason is, quo nmo ritè nisi baptizatus accedit, to the Sacrament of which holy table no man cometh duely, with∣out he be baptised. y• which reason also he brinketh another where for the same purpose. If the Sacrament of his holy table be taken for the thing and general effect of that Sacramēt (as some expound S. Augustine) then the reason alleged is false. for some man, yea all men that are worthely baptised, in the very baptisme come to the thing, to the grace, and to the geuerall effect of Christes holy table, because they come by baptisme to the vnitie of his mysticall body, whiche is a generall effect wrought in the Sacrament as wel of baptism as of Christes table, as S. Paule saith: we are one bread, one bo∣dy,. Cor. 10 all that receaue of the one bread. But if we take the thing or effect of Christes table for the spe∣ciall effect rysing thence (whiche is the nourishing and maintey∣ of life ing) that effect being spoken of in S. Ihon doth inf of , that the ordinarie case of the same effect is also spoken of▪ which is the blessed Eucharist. For euery effect presuppose necessary cause. But the cause without whiche we can not ordinarily maintein or spirituall life, is the Sacra∣ment of Christes supper. He therefore sayinge except ye eate my
flesh, ye shal not haue life in y; meaneth exceptye co he∣lye to the Sacrament of my supper, ye shall not kepe and preserue lyfe in you. For, that the verbe,  habere, doth in holy scripture signifieHabere. not onlye the firste obteining of a thing, but also the keping andHieron. adu. Iou. lib. 1. 1. Cor. 7. vse thereof. S. Hierom hath well noted against Iouinian, vppon those words of S. Paul: Vnusquisque habeat vxorē suam, let eue∣ry mahaue and hold his wife. I make o doubt but al men of iudgement will confesse, thatThe main tenance of life depen∣deth vpo the Eucha rist alone. when a Sacrament is instituted of Christ for a speciall purpose, that purpose dependeth ordinarily vpon that Sacrament alone. and although Christ be able otherwyse to saue en , yet we can not warrant that he will saue him, who being of lawfull age doth abstein voluntarily from the Sacrament of his holy table. Thus muche I haue said concerning S. Augustines mynde,  whose workes I neuer saw one syllable, why to think that he would the literall sense of the sixth of S. Ihon to long only to spirituall eating. But I haue sene very muche and haue alleged, and shal hereafter allege many places out of him, wherein it ap∣ most clerely, that he meant otherwyse.Basilius in ep. 141 S. Basil is also brought foorth, who saith that Christ in those wordes: except ye eate my flesh, &c. calleth his whole mysticall coming fleshe and blood. But what of that? is not therefore that saying verisied also of the Sacrament of his last supper? whicheThe Eu∣charist is y• somme of al y• Christ dyd in his fleshe. who so receaueth worthely, he is partaker of all the mysteries of Christ, of his , of his preaching, of his passiō, ∣tion, ascension, and of al the rest his doings and saings. so that it is a very good sense to say: except ye beleue that the soe of mā ath done and taught in fleshe, & except your selu by his grace  and kepe all his commaundements, ye shall not haue lyse in , but S Bastil knewe right wel that the chief Sacrament left
by Christ was the institution of his last supper, and therfore that Sacramēt is a singular peece of that which Christ in these words commaundeth vs to beleue and to performe, and for that cause in the place where S. Basil purposely disputeth of the holy Sacra∣ments,Basilius debaptis. li. 11. c. 3. he declareth all the later parte of the sixth of S. Ihon to appertein specially to Christes supper. Their reasons are aunswered who denye Christ to speake properly of his last supper in S. Ihon. THe first reason which is brought, to shew that Christ in S.1. Ihon promysed not properly the Sacramente of his holy table, is grounded vpon this negatiue proposition, because there is no mention made of bread and wine, which are the matter and elements wherof his supper is made. As though heThe aun∣swer. might not promise the thing which shold be made in his banket vnlesse he named that whereof it should be made. A man may be inuited to a pastie or tart or some lyke confection, although it be not tolde him of what stuf it shalbe made▪ it skilled nothing for y• multitude of men to know the order of king his banket, which thing was committed to the Apostles alone. But it skilled much for them all to know what kynd of food they should receaue. Againe the matter of any sacramēt is not more necessary, then the forme of wor which is vsed therein. But when Christ sayd: except a man b orne againe of water and of the holy Ghost, heIoan. 3. can not enter into the kingdome of heauen, He shewed not by what wordes the water whiche washeth, should be made a sacra∣ment to our vse & profite. Therefore (if this kind of reasoning be good) he spake not at all of baptisme to Nicodeus, whiche is a false conclusion. In ede it foloweth wel, Christ in S. Ihon spea∣keth neither of bread, nor of wine, therfore he meaneth not to bind
vs by his wordes in that Chapiter to receaue vder both kinds▪ but onely bindeth vs to receaue that thing which is his flesh and blood, vnder whatsoeuer kind we receaue it. But to say that he speaketh notat all of his fleshe in respect of the sacrant of the altar, that is not true▪ as I haue proued before. An other argumente of theirs, is, that Christe speaketh of2. eatinge him by faith, and therefore saith: this is the worke of God, that ye should beleue in him whom he hath sent. He that beleueth in  shall not hunger, but there be some of you whiche beleue not, so that the eating is the beleuing, and the not beleuing is the not eating. Christ in dede speaketh of belefe which is veryThe aun∣swere. Cyr. li. 4 a. 17. in Ioan. necessarie and euen the foundation (as S. Cyrillus noteth) of his last supper, but he speaketh also of a farther act, whiche is to build vpon the foundation of faith the working of the euerlasting meat that he wil geue▪ and to work not onely by faith, but lykewise by eating and drinking, and therefore as he chalengeth belefe to his godhead, so doth he say that we muste eate his fleshe and drinke his blood according as he is the sonne of man. Thus may we consyder in Christes wordes, a dubble kind of eating, the one is called māducare ex hoc pane, to eate of his breadThe diffe rence be∣twene e∣tinge of Christ, & eatinge Christ. the which bread Christ is, the other is manducare hunc panem, to eate this bread. by faith we eate of Christ, by his last supper we eate Christ. By eating of him we partake some effect of grace frō him: By eating him we receaue his whole flesh, blood, soule and godhead into our bodies. As therfore Christ willeth vs not ouly to eate of him, but also to eate him self: so besyds the eating which is by faith, he geueth vs to vnderstand there is another eatinge proper to his last supper described in S. Ihon. The third argument of theirs is, that Christ was the bread of. life presently, when he spake to the Iewes. For he sayd I am the bread of life, or the liuely bread which am come downe from hea∣uen
& my father doth geu you y• tru bread from heauen. There∣fore Christ was presently the bread of life, yea rather he was so when he was incarnate firste of the virgin. for euen then he came down from heauē. but how can this stand together, if his words be applied to his last supper, which was not yet instituted?The aun∣swere. Christ through his Godhead was the bread of life to vs all for euer, and straight vpon his incarnation he was the bread of life through his manhod, and so continued stil at the tyme when he spake to the Iewes, and after that visible and corporall sort he was to be eaten by faith & not corporally. But he sad also: worke the meate which the Sonne of man wil geue you, and the bread which I wil geue, is my flesh. This gift which Christ sayth he wil make, differeth in tyme and maner from the gift which his Father doth presently make, so that as he is the bread of life by faith, so he wilbe the bread of life by corporal participation. which second gift is fulfilled in his last supper which he him self now promiseth. For no reason can be shewed why Christ should say his gift was to come, except it had bene some other gift thē to eate him by faith alone. The which eating by faith sith it was lawful euen at the same instant wherein he spake, he wold not say: I wil goue, of any spiritual eating. therefore he spake of the Sacramental geuing which he intended to make at his last supper. Against this last saying of mine, Caietane or some other of hisThe iii. argut. opiniō wil pretend, that Christes gift whereof he speaketh in S. Ihon was in dede to come, but yet not meant of his last supper, because it was the gift of him self to death vpon the Crosse whichThis obie ction hath many things to be wei∣ghed in it. he meant. And therefore he sayd, the bread which I wil geue is my  for the life of the world, signifying that the gift which he wil make shalbe such as shal redeme the world. Which gift was only performed vpon the Crosse, & was partaken always of the old Fathers, and may be dayly & howerly partaken of vs. Which
points doe not agree with the gift of ye holy Eucharist in Christes upper. This argument although it were wittily deuised, yet it is in∣sufficient,The ∣sw. and for many causes. First becaus Christ spake of a meate which he wold geue euen vnto our bodies, and not only vnto our soules. And that may ppeare to be so, as wel for that he ordeined the miracle of multi∣plying fiue loaues to be an introduction to this talke (the which loaues were corporally eaten) as also for that he shewed him self to be the true bread, which would fulfill and excede anna the fi∣guratiueCyril. in Ioan. lib. 4. ca. 16. breade of the Iewes. and therefore S. Cyrill saith, that Christ saying, my fleshe is meat in dede, maketh a distinction be∣twene the mysticall benediction and manna▪ for manna dyd not geue life euerlasting, but by the blessing of the mysterie (saith S. Cyrill) we take the verie sonne of God. Nowe seing manna was eaten of the Iewes, both spiritually of the iust men, and also cor∣porllye of all the Israelites, Christ who sayd his father to geue presently the true bread, and promysed that him selfe would geueChrist pro miseth his flesh as he gaue 5. loa ues and manna to y• Iewes. hereafter his flesh to be eaten, which is ate in dede, dyd shewe, the spirituall eating of manna to be presently fulfilled by his fa∣thers gifte, whereby he toke fleshe, and that the corporall eating shuld likewise be hereafter fulfilled in his last supper. Whiche being wel consydered, it is plain that Christ when he speaketh of a gift which he will make, doth speake of suche a kind of gifte as the miracle of fyue loaues, as the figure of manna, as the name of bread and nature of eating requireth. But his death vpon the crosse is not the fulfilling of manna, in that respect as manna was eaten either corporally or spiritually. It is in dede the cause of all our feeding both in spirit and body, the fontain of all our sacraments, the welspring of al grace. Bt we seek a simi∣litude of things which are spoken together, an agreement of one
matter with an other. Manna was a sacramēt onely and not properly a sacrifice, andManna wa  Sa crte ely. therefore it being eatē betokened the gift of Christ which he wold make in his supper, wherein the true manna shulde be sacramen∣tally eaten. For which cause after Christ had said, the bread which I will geue is my flesh, he both commanded his flesh to be eaten & shewed the profit of eating it, and concluded in this wise, not as your fathers haue eaten māna & be dead, he that eateth this bread,Ioan. 6. shall line for euer. If now we must eate that which he wil geue, & we must eate it after the rate as manna was eaten (albeit y• thing eaten is far better) surely the gift promised must be of a thing thatDe cōse. di. 2. c. de hac. Marke this place of S. Hie∣ro. in cap. 1. ad Ephes. shalbe geuen to vs in a supper, and not y• shalbe made for vs vpō the Crosse. for noman (as it is alleged out of Origines) eateth properly the flesh of Christ as it was crucified. In so much that S. Hierom distincteth expresly the flesh of Christ, whereof Christ speaketh in S. Ihon, from the respect whiche the same flesh hath being crucified. For although it be one substāce, yet it is crufied as a sacrisice onely, but it is eaten as a sacrament wherin the sa∣crifice is partaken. Secondarily the Greeke text maketh mention of two gifts: The one of that which Christ will make to vs, which also is y• same substance y• he wil geue for vs. The bread (sayth he) which I wil geue is my flesh, the which I wil geue for the life of the world.Chrt ma keth two diuerser o mises of geuing. It is not in vaine sayd twise I wil geue. For he wil geue one and the same flesh both as a Sacramētal food, & as a bloody sacrific: the one gift he wil make in his supper, the other vpon the Crosse, Neither doth it skill that the latin copies report but once I wil geue, for as they say that which is true, so the same truth is made the plainer by the greke text. God forbid we should so vnderstād the one, as to make y• other false or superons, seing both may stand right well together.
Thirdly it ought diligently to be marked y• Christ sayd before, worke the euerlasting meate which the Sonne of man wil geue you. He there said he would geue meate vnto them, but he determined not what kind of meate it was, but now expounding the kind of meate be sayth, and the bread (or meate) which I wil geue is my flesh. As then the meate which y• Sonne of man sayd he would geueChrist pr miseth to geue his flesh to vs was promised to be geuen to vs (for he sayd dabit vobis, he wil geue to you) euen so the kind of meate, to wit, the esh of Christ which he wil geue, must be vnderstāded of that gift which he wil make, nobis to vs, and not only pro nobis, for vs. But his death is geuen more properly for vs, then to vs. His death, I say, was paied to God the Father, to whom we were detters, and it wasChristes death was for vs ra∣ther then to vs. paied for vs and in our behalf, but his death was not properly geuen to vs. For then a sacrifice should be made of Christ to vs, and consequently God the Father is robbed of his glory, and that glory is geuen to men. From which thought all good men doe abhorre. All is one to say, the sonne of man will geue, and I will geue, to say, euerlasting meate, and the bread which is Christes flesh. But it was expresly sayd in the first proposition, Dabit vobis he will geue it to you, therefore in the second it is to be supplied, the bread which I will geue to you, is my flesh for the life of y• world, that is to say, it is the same flesh which I will offer to my Father to the end the iust men of the world may liue for euer. And so a reason is geuen by Christ why his flesh is that euerlasting meate vnto vs which he sayd before tarieth into life euerlasting. For y• which is offered meritoriously to God for the life of the whole world, must nedes euen by that sacrifice haue strength in it selfe to quicken all that eate it worthely, and to reconcile the parta∣kers thereof to God.
Farthermore, when Christ sayd: The bread which I will geue is my flesh, he sayd in effect, The eatable thing which I wil geue is my flesh, as if it were in other termes sayd, I wil geue you my flesh to be eaten. For bread vnto the Hebrewes doth shew all y•,What bread is in this place. which is apt to be eaten of man. Christ ad the Iewes work the euerlasting meate which he wold geue. They straight sayd, their Fathers had eaten Manna, thinking that Christ was not able to geue them a better kind of bread. Then Christ shewing that his Father had geuen them him self by his incarnation the true bread of God, last of all cometh to shew what bread he him self wold geue them. And the bread, sayth he, which I will geue, that is to wit, the Manna, the foode, the meate which I wil geue is my flesh, so that by the promise of bread he sheweth him self to speake properly of a banket which is to come. The Iewes who knew the Hebrew phrase, albeit they did a∣misse in that they taried not to see how y• promise should be per∣foormed, yet they vnderstode right well that Christ sayd: I will geue you my flesh to eate. And therefore they in other words re∣porting the same sense, ask, how this man is able to geue themTo geue bread which is flesh, is to geu. flesh to  aten his flesh to be eaten? As who should say, we vnderstand that he promiseth vs the eating of his flesh, but we see not that he is able to perfoorm it, in such sort as Manna was geuen to our forea∣thers. Neither is any man able to deny, but the Iewes toke the words of Christ after this sense, s knowing him to promise his flesh to be really eaten. The which sense surely is against their o∣pinion who suppose that Christ meant only of the gift of his flesh vpon the Crosse. Yea Christ alloweth the sense of the Iewes cōcerning the na∣turall sound of his words, and (as S. Basile hath noted) with aBasil. de baptis. li. 1. cap. 3. vehement repetition signifieth, he wil so truly geue his flesh to be eaten, that except they do eate is, they shall not haue life in them
selues. Neither is it to be doubted but if they had so obediently submitted them selues to Christ cōcerning the maner of perfoor∣ming his gift, as they vnderstode what he promised, they had not offended at all. For they lacked rather belefe, then wit or vnder∣standing. What shall I say more? The circumstance of the whole talk, the Greektext, the like words going before, the propriety of the Hebrew tong, the vnderstanding of the Iewes, the othe and cō∣firmation of Christ geue a witnesse aboue al exception, that when he sayd, The bread which I will geue is my flesh, he meant, I thatThe mea∣ning of Christes promise. am the true bread, which by incarnation came down from heauē, I that am presently sent and geuen to you to be beleued on of my Father, I will hereafter geue mine own flesh, euen the same flesh which is offered for the life of the world, to be meate vnto you y• wil tarie with me, which haue the words of eternall life. Which sense being thus proued, their sense who wold haue the gift of Christes death only to be meant, is not sufficient or full enough for the right interpretation of this place, but it must be also meant of the last supper, as all the Fathers both Greek and Latin haue bene shewed before to hae taken it, and as all these reasons doe euidently conuince. Now whereas they (who dissent from me in this matter) say, that Christ speaketh here of that gift which was common to the whole world, euen to the Patriarchs and Prophets, and there∣fore that it is a spirituall gift (for els Dauid and Abraham couldThe aun∣swere. not haue partaken it) I answere, that Christ doth not promise in these words any one meate vnto the whole world, but he promi∣seth his flesh to be eaten, the which flesh is geuen for the whole world. For as at his last supper he sayd: This is my body which is or shalbe geuen for you (thereby geuing vs in his supper a farLucae. 22. 1. Cor. 11. better meale, then he gaue to Moyses or Elias) euen so in this
place, when he promiseth to geue vs the bread which is his flesh for y• world, he meaneth not that we shall haue no more then Ia∣cob had, but that our meate is such as also is the propitiation for1. Ioan. 2. the synnes of the whole world. By which words it is shewed y• our meat is also an externall sacrifice, and not that it is only a spirituall food receaued by faith and charitie. Concerning that daily we may eate y• bread which Christ pro∣miseth, it is not against the Sacrament of his supper, which is left to be our daily and supersubstantial bread: Either because weMath. 6. may come daily to it, or els because being receaued at certaine tymes, it always tarieth with vs, by some spirituall effect, which the Sacramentall receauing worketh in vs. And as the absolutiō which we receaue of the Priest at certain tymes, causeth a conti∣nual Penance in vs through all our life: so a Sacramental recea∣uing of Christes body causeth a cōtinuall eating of him by spirit. Now Christ so meant to haue his flesh eaten spiritually, that the ordinarie cause of that feeding should consist in the Sacrament of his last supper. for that Sacrament mainteineth our spiritual life as S. Paule teacheth. The last reason of the contrarie part1. Co. 10. is thus foormed. Christ in S. Iohn speaketh of that eating, which maketh vs tary in him, and him to tary in vs. But that is not alwayes the effecte of the Sacramentall eating. for as S. Paul sayeth, a man1. Co. 11. maye eate Christes body in the Sacrament of the altar vnwor∣thely, and to his damnation. Therefore, say they, Christ speaketh not in S. Ihon of sacramentall eating, but only of that eating by faith and charitie whereby we maye liue for euer. For answere to this argument thus I saye: SacramentallThe ann∣swer. Sacramē tal eating is conside∣red two wais. eating must be considered two waies, as all the other workes of God towardes men maye be considered. one waye is to consider it in that nature, vertue, and effect which God for his part put∣teth
in the Sacrament. An other is in that abuse, and imperfe∣ction which man wickedly committeth about the holy workes of God. Who can doubt but that Christ came into the world to saueIoan. 3. men, vt saluetur mundus per ipsum, that the world maye be sayd by him? as for condemnation it was not brought in by Christ,Rom. 5. but by Adam and Eue our first parents, and by our owne wilful synnes ad misdoinges. And yet the holy scriptures witnes that2. Cor. 2. Christ is the sauour of death to many, and the stone whereat they stomble, not through any fault of his, but because they vse their1. Pet. 2. freewil to the worse part with whom he hath to do. Euen so cometh it to passe in the blessed Sacrament of the altar. Christ geueth it only to this end, that we by eating there∣of maye tarie in him and he in vs. For as Isychius hath wellIsychius in Leuit. c. 22. l. 6. noted, Sanctificationis causa, non autem contaminationis propo∣suit suum mysterium. Christ hath set foorth his mysterie to san∣ctifie, and not to spott vs. As he geueth faith to th'end it shouldGal. 5. Iacob. 2. worke by charitie, and not to th'end it should lye dead and vn∣fruitfull. And in dede so should all men tary for euer in Christ, if they did eate this Sacrament as they ought to do. If nowe they will pro∣fanely come vnto it without contrition, and confession of theirIoan. 20. synnes, and absolution of the priest, that is not the sault of the Sacrament, which is geuen to make vs dwel for euer in Christ, but it is their fault, who abuse the gift of God to their owne hurte and losse. This thing wel weighed I answere, that alwaies the effect ofThe Sa∣cramental eating, on Christes behalfe is euer profi table. Sacramentall eating on Christes behalfe is the tarying of vs in Christ, and of Christ in vs. And S. Paul saying, that some re∣ceyue it vnworthely and to their damnation, speaketh not of any effect rising of the Sacrament it self, but only of a negligence and
impietie which standeth on their part, who come to the rea1. Co. 11. flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as if it were common bread and wine, only halowed by the deuout praiers of man, whereas in dede it is changed in substance by the mightie power of the word of God. Let it therefore stand for a truth (as it is a most vndoubted truth) that Christ in the sixth chapiter of S. Ihon doth prophecie of his last supper, promising to geue in it his own flesh to be ea∣ten, as the which is meate in dede, and for his part he promiseth that it shall haue a perfit effect, albeit we sometymes through ma lice withstand his goodnes. This meaning is not only true in it self, but it is confirmed also by S. Augustine, who declaring thatAugusti. contra Crscon gramm. li. 1. c. 25. Rom. 3. a thing good in it self may be vnproitable to him y• vseth it euill, after he had shewed that to be so in light which hurteth sick eyes and delighteth the whole eyes, and in the law, in which although the Iewes were, yet they abused the same: at the length he co∣meth to our very purpose saying, Quid de ipso corpore & san∣guine Domini vnico sacrificio pro salute nostra, quamuis ipse Do∣minus dicat: nisi manducaueritis, & caet. What say we concerning the very body and blood of our Lord the only sacrifice for our sal∣uation? Not withstanding that our Lord him self sayth, ExceptIoan. 6. a man eate my flesh and drink my blood, he shall not haue life in him self, doth not yet the same Apostle teache euen this thing to be made hurtfull to them y• vse it euill? For he sayth: Whosoeuer eat eth the bread and drinketh the chalice of our Lord vnworthe∣ly, he shalbe gilty of the body and blood of our Lord. What cā be1. Co. 11. plainer then these words of S. Augustine? Who thought that ar∣gument, which I haue answered, to be nothing worth at all, af∣firming the Apostle S. Paule, and Christ in S. Ihon to speake of one and the same body or flesh of Christ, as it is geuen in the Sa∣crament of his last supper.
And truly they doe no small iniury to S. Augustine, who by any meanes wold father vpon him this opinion, as though heS. Aug stine all∣wais ex∣poundeth the sixth of Ihon as being the promise of Christes supper. taught Christ in S. Ihon to speake only of a spirituall eating by faith and charitie, whereas he neuer gaue any sufficient token of that meaning, but expresly teacheth the contrarie as all the other Fathers doe. The reason which moued some men to think, that S. Augustine meant so, was for that he speaketh much of spiri∣tual eating and of the vnitie of Christes Church. But that eating is also made, and best of all made in the mysteries of Christes sup∣per when they are worthely receaued, as Christ wold allways haue them to be receaued. If any other argument remain, by this which is already said it may be easily sene, what answere ought to be made therevnto. Thus I haue proued by the proprietie of y• words in S. Ihon,By how manye wais it is proued, y• Christ i S. Ihon speaketh of his sup∣per. by the circumstance of the tyme and place, by the cōference of holy Scriptures, by the vniform consent of the auncient Fathers, by the authoritie of generall Councels, by the yerely practise of the west Church, by the confutation of the reasons which are made to the contrarie, that Christ in his disputation at Capharnaum spake in some part of y• sixth Chapiter (by the way of promise) of y• Sacrament of his last supper. All which things if they proue notIoan. 6. my intent, I desier the learned Reader to shew me, wherein they faile from the truth. But vntill that be shewed, I must say all the authoritie, that is an y• earth, semeth to concurre to that my posi∣tion. And therefore God willing, I intend to build vpon this so sure a ground the rest of my disputation against the heretiks of our tyme, who teach false doctrine in the matter of Christes sup∣per,The entrā ce to the e cond part of this booke. affirming that Christ promiseth in S. Ihon to geue his flesh in spirit only and not vnder the forme of bread. Against whom I wil from hence foorth dispute, if yet I first shew somwhat more particularly, that the euerlasting meate (which Christ promiseth
in S. Ihon) doth appertein to that part of Christes talk whic is before proued to appertein to his last supper. ¶ The meate tarying to euerlasting life, which ChristThe . Chap. promiseth to geue, is meant of his reall flesh and blood to be geuen at his last supper. CHrist going about to drawe the people from filling of their bellies to a more spiritual feeding, said: worke not the meate which perisheth, but that which tarieth to lifeIoan. 6. euerlasting, which the sonne of man wil geue you. This proposition is diligently to be consydered, as being the chief keye of the whole dispation folowing. And therefore I wil declare how euery part of it doth agree with the processe ofThe con∣ference of Scriptu∣res. the talke, which towardes the end of the chapter is made concer∣ning Christes owne gift. First where he saith: the sonne of man will geue meate, he afterwarde vttereth the kinde of meate or foode more plainly saying: The Bread which I wil geue, is my flesh.Ioan. 6. And whereas he ad them worke the sayd meate, he afterward sheweth that by working, he meaneth first beleuing in him with a true and working faith, and afterward also eating and drin∣kingWhat it is to worke the meate which Christwil gue. worthely his owne flesh and blood. And therfore sayth: this is the worke of God, that you beleue in him whom he hath sent, and again: Except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man and drinke his blood, ye shal not haue life in you. he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath life euerlasting. And yet farther expounding his former wordes he sayth, for my flesh  meate in dede. the word (verè in dede) declareth what kinde ofverè. worke belongeth to this meate, not only a metaphoricall worke, but a true worke of the body and soule, of the soule in beleuing, of the body in eating.
So that if we marke well, the meate that must be wroght, the bread that he wil geue, and his owe flesh which must be eaten, is al one thing. The working of this meate reqreth the helpe as well of the minde as of the body, accordingly as Ter∣tullianTertul. de resur. carnis. sayth: Caro corpore & sanguine Christi vescitur, vt & ani∣ma de Deo saginetur. non possunt ergo separari in mercede quas opera coniungit. The flesh eateth the body and blood of Christ, to thintent the soule also me be made fat of God. They can not therefore be seperated in reward whom the worke ioyneth. The body worketh with the soule in eating y• flesh of Christ, yeThe boy worketh in eating Christes fleshe. work ioyneth them, because they both work and eate one thing, and therefore they must be rewarded both together in the daye of Iugdement. But if we did eate the body of Christ by faith only (as the Sacramentaries teache) our bodies should not worke the meate which perisheth not, but only should eate bread and drinke wine, which must nedes erish. But Christ goeth forward to shewe his owne flesh to be meat in dede, & to be that true meate, which he sayd before should not3. Ioan. 6. perish, but tary and abide still, saying: for he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, tarieth in me and I in him; which thinghy Christes flesh beng eaten a∣rieth vncō sued. cometh so t passe, because Christes flesh being eaten is not di∣gested into our earthly flesh, and so consumed of vs as other meates are, bt rather as being incomparably stronger then or stomaks, it consumeth all our carnall and fleshly humours. If then it cause vs not to perish, how much more is it selfe a meate not perishing, but tarying for euer? And to shew, that the sayd worker of the meate and flesh which Christ will geue, taieth in Christ ot only for a time, but to life euerlasting, (as the not perishing meate was before sayd to doe) againe it foloweth, He that eateth this brad shall liue for euer. By which  of Christes words it is euident
when he sayeth: worke not the meate whiche perisheth, but which tarieth to life euerlasting, which the sonne of man wil geue you, that then he meaneth they shuld eate his flesh & drinke his blood, in such orte as the sonne of man wil geue it. I  thee, good Reader, once againe to conferre these say∣inges. Is it not all one to say, the sonne of man will geue, and1. I wil geue. Likewyse the sonne of man wil geue you meate, and2. the bread which I will geue is my flesh. only this difference there is that in the later wordes he nameth the kinde of meate, which in the former he did not name. The sonne of man will geue the meate which perisheth not. and what is that  say, but that he3. will geue his flesh as meate, which flesh he will geue for the life of the world. And how can that fleshe be thought able to perish, which maketh all other men that beleue in it to liue for euer? The meate which the sonne of man wil geue must be wrought: and the bread which Christ sayeth to be his flesh which he wil geue, must also be eaten. for except ye ate the flesh of the sonne of 4. and drinke his blood, ye shal not haue life in you. The meate of the sonne of man tarieth, and he that eateth the flesh of Christ and5. drinketh his blood, tarieth in Christ, and Christ in him. The meate of the sonne of man dureth to life euerlasting. And he that6. eateth the flesh of Christ hath life euerlasting. If these things answere throughly, if Christ be the sonne of man, if the bread he wil geue (which is his flesh for the life of the world) be the meat which perisheth not, if the working of this meate be both beleuing and eating, if the meat make the eater arie for euer: then ith so many thinges agree, let these wordes be cōfessed no lesse to perteine to the promise of Christes supper, then those doe towardes thende of the chapter when he sayth, theTheoph.  cap. Ioan. 6. bread which I wil gee is my flesh. So doth Theophilact expod this place; Cibum manentem
mysticam dicit sumptionem carnis domini, quam nobis ipse dat filius hominis factus. He calleth the meate which tarieth, the my∣call receauing of our Lords esh, which him selfe being made the Sonne of man geueth vs. What name I Theophilact? All the Fathers, yea all ChristiansAugust. in Psal.  agree that Christe in his supper is the meate whereof it is sayd, it perisheth not. Now Christ perisheth not whether he be geuen to vs by faith as his Father is sayd to geue him, or in the Sacra∣ment of his supper, as y• Sonne of man is afterward sayd to be of the will to geue his flesh which is meate in dede. As therefore we can not denie Christ when he is geuen by faithChrist in his supp is the not perishinge meate. to be the not perishing meate: so it were woderfull impiety to say the substance of Christes flesh geuen at his supper, not to be the same not perishing meate. or seing it is also a not perishing meate at his supper, why should not these words be vnderstāded of the same supper? And seing Christ would it to be wrought not only as his Fa∣ther geueth it presently, but also as the Sonne of man wil geue it hereafter, to wit, vnder ye form of bread at his last supper: it must nedes be grated y• Christ speaking of working the gift of ye Sōne of man, meant no lesse of working his own gift which he nameth afterward eating, then the working of his Fathers gift which is straghtways called beleuing. How beit concerning equalitie of substance in Godhead, all is common betwixt them. In fine, the not perishing meate which the Sonne of man wil geue to y• Iewes, is his flesh, which he wil geue to be eatē. Which flesh  not perish, as well because it is wholly  in by the na ture & substance of almightie God, as also because it is not chāgedCollos. 2 into our flesh when it is aten, as other meats are, but spiritually changeth vs into it. Now that fleshe not perishing but tarying in our soules & bo∣dies
maketh them also kepe and preserue  life, whereby weThe eat whereof  spe keth elon  to our bo∣dies. Cyril. in Ioan. li. 3 cap. 28. come to the ioys of heauen. For, that Christ meant of suche a not perishīg meat, as might be receaued not only into our soules but into our bodies. Also, S. Cyrillus hath witnessed vpō this place. Operemur igitur (vt saluator ait) non eum ibum, & caet. Let vs work therefore (s our sauiour saith) not that meat which iding into the belly and geuing vs a short pleasure, at the leugth goth forth in excrements and perisheth, but let vs work the spiritall meat, which strengtheneth the hartes, & leadeth to life uerlasting, the which meate he promiseth that he wil geue saying: the Sonne of man will geue you this meate. Thus he hath ioyned the thingsHumana o man to the things of God, and touched the whole mysterie of the incarnation. For he sheweth sum what priuily the spirituallOccult. meate whereby we liue in Christe, being sanctified both in soule and body. But he wil say this thing more openly anon, where∣foreApertius we also wil write there more at large, an interpretation that shall agree to this place. dured the words of S. Cyrillus, who as he was a most excellent man of wit and lerning, so hath he most exactly de∣clared the meaning of these wordes which I now expound. Christ meāt to persuade the Iewes his diuine nature, and thatChristes . he was himself according to his flesh the true maa which came down from heauen, and that he would geue the self same flesh as truely to be aten into the bodies of the faithfull for a spirituall nourishement of them, as euer the Iewes dyd corporally feede vpon manna. To persuade this he wrought a miracle in bread, he traied them to talk of bread, and of manna, withal exhorting thē to sede vpon the corruptible meate which he would geue. This meate was his owne fleshe. but he as yet would not vtter so muche, vntill their myndes were somwhat prepared therunto by true faith. For this cause S. Cyrillus wryteth, that Christ as yet
describeth the spirituall meate occultius somwhat secrtly. Bu that afterward h will shew it apertius more openly. Agame S. Cyrillus saith: Christ hath ioyned humana diuinis, the things of man to the things of God. The things of man are yt, flesh assumpted by Christ, and the sanctifying of our bodies by re∣ceauing his fleshe into them through the gift of Christ, whiche he gaue as man. The thinges of God are, the feeding of our soules by right belefe vpon God. Thirdly by the iudgement of S. Cyrillus, this place appertei∣neth to that which foloweth concerning the sanctification as wel of our bodies as of our soules. but that whiche foloweth is most properly meant of the sanctification, which our bodies receaue by the food of Christes supper, of which supper S. Cyrillus exponn∣deth those words: except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man. &c. What nede more words? this place is like to ye othr following in the end of the same chapiter: The bread which I wil geue is my flesh, whiche wordes al the auncient fathers without any contra∣diction, teache to belong to the supper. Therefore doubtlesse they are of the same mynd concerning this place also, but because this place is not so plaine as the other, no man nede to maruaile why they rather allege the other, then this. And yet euen to this place of S. Iohn, the holy martyr Igna∣tius alluded, when he sayd in that epistle, which both Eusebius &Hier. in Catalo. Ignatius ad Rom nos. S. Hierom acknowledged to be his: Non mihi placet cibus corru∣ptionis, nequè voluptates vitae huius. panem Dei volo, panem coe∣lestem, panem vitae, quod est caro Christi filij Dei, & poculum vo∣lo, sanguinē eius, quod est charitas incorruptibilis & perennis vita. The perishing meae and pleasures of this life plase me not. I long for Gods bread, the heanēly bread, the bread of li, whiche thing is the flesh of Christ the sonne of God, and for the cup, his blood, which thing is haritie not perishing and life euerlasting.
Thus as wel the cōference of holy scriptures, as the witnesses of S. Ignatius, of S. Cyrillus, of Theophilact, of S. Augustine, and of Tertullian do shew this place to belong to the Sacramēt of the Altar. therefore therein we muste eate, not bread and wine which perishe, but only the permanent fleshe of Christ, and so we must eate it by mouth, as we beleue on it in hart. For eating and beleuing is referred in this Chapiter to the selfe same fleshe of Christe. therefore as really it must be eaten by mouth, as it is be∣leued in hart to be most rall in it selfe. ¶The equalitie of substance with his father (which Christ allegeth for his gift) proueth the reall presence of his bo∣dyThe vii. Chatt. and blood in the Sacramēt of the altar, euen as God the Father gaue hun reall fleshe and blood at his incar∣nation. CHrist for the meate whiche he promysed to gene in his last supper, alleaged his diuinity, as who shoulde plainly say: wonder not that I promise you suche a thing of so greate difficulty and miracle, for I am God. His wordes are these: worke (saith he to the multitude of the Iewes) not the meate which doth perish, but that which tarieth to life euerlasting, which the sonne of man wil geue you, for him God hath signed, that is, God the father hath printed his diuine substance vppon him by1. The fa∣ther and y• sonne be equall. Psal. 44. eternal generation, or hath oynted him with the oile of gladnes aboue al others, because his humane nature is vnited to the god∣hed, whereby he is able to do as much as his father. It is not to be thought, that Christ would haue alleged his equall auctoritie with his Father, for a gift which were not of2. Their gifts be equall. equall truth and of equall power with that, which his Father is sayd to gene. But his Father gaue him not only the vertue and  of flesh, but reall and natural flesh and blood at his in∣carnation,
thereore God the Snn  to geue vs the same  ral fsh in his last supper. For which cause he doth im∣mediatly declare both God his Fathers gift, and his own. Ioan. 6. his Fathers gift he say  My Father geueth you the true bread3. The Fa∣thers gift. from heauen, for it is the bread of God, whiche cometh downe from heauen, and geueth life to the worlde. But what breade is this? I (saith Christ) am the bread of life, I am the liuely bread which came downe from heauen. ow we haue lerned, that God the Father gaue Christ his Sonne from heauen; when he sent him to take the flesh of man: which flesh assumpted o the word is also by vnion to the word made the bread of life. Christ therefore hauing shewed his Fathers gift, and that him4. Thesōn gift. self is the bread of lie, cometh to shew his own bread, which he wil geue saying: And the bread which I wil geue, is my flesh for the life of the world. The brief discourse of y• whole doctrine is this: work the meate which tarieth for euer, which the Sonne of man wil geue you. for5. the whole discours. this Sone of man is equall with God his Father, whose na∣turall image he hath printed in him. God the Father hath geuen his Sonne to the world and made him true man, the true bread of life. Therefore God y• Sonne being equall with his Father, wil geue vs the same true flesh of the Sonne of man as meate y• shall tarie with vs to life euerlasting. But his Father gaue him o the world not only in faith & spirite, but in real and substancial flesh. Therefore God the Sonne by the drift of all his talk doth signi∣fie, that he wil geue in his supper (whereof he speaketh) not in spi rite and faith only, but in truth of nature and substance, the  same real and substanciall flesh. First he sayth, he wil geue that meate, which shal tarye to life1. euerlasting. Secondly that he is able to doe so, as one signed of2. God his Father. Thirdly he sheweth what bread and meate his.
Father hath geuen him, that is to say, the true flesh, wherein e4. spake to that presēt multitude of men. Fourthly, he sayth y• breade5. that he wil geue is his fleshe. Last of all who so cateth it, hath life euerlasting.1. Christ toke real flesh. Doth not all this goe to proue, that as he bad them work the meate which tarieth for euer, and shewed him sefe (concerning2. He is able to geue vs the same. his ) to be made that meate, sent from God his Father: so he is able to geue them that meate which his Father gaue him, and sayth he wil geue it them, to the end they eating it, may liue3. He saith he wil ge∣ue it. for euer, he tarying in them, and they in him? And yet is not that his reall and substanciall flesh, which he promiseth? Or did he not perform in his supper, that, which he pro4. Healwais perfor∣meth his promise. mised? If he can not be false of his word, we haue in our Lords supper (where he perfomed this promise) the reall and substancial body of Iesus Christ, as truly as euer his Father gaue him reall5. In his supper he gaue it. and substancial flesh in this world. And consequently we haue it not only by faith and spirite, but in truth and substance. This plainly is the discorse of Christ him selfe, who by his6. He gaue it really & not by faith alone Hilarius lib. 8. de Trinit. Godhead assureth vs of the gift of that incorruptible meat, which is his flesh. Whereupon S. Hilarie sayth, that no man douteth of y• veritie of Christes flesh in vs, except he deny Christ to be true God. ¶ Seing Christ is the bread of life to vs by the gift of his flesh, the eating of that flesh by our faith & spiritThe ▪ . only suffiseth not, but it self also must be really ea∣ten. GOd sent his Sonne, who is by nature the bread of life (as. 6. hym self hath witnessed) to take flesh for vs, that in his flesh he might geue vs the same diine nature, which is ye  bread of life. Therefore when Christ had sayd: The Sonne of
man will geue you the meate, which tarieth to life euerlasting, straightways he sheweth in one word three causes of y• his pro∣mise. For God the Father (sayeth he) hath signed this Sōne of mā, that is to say, he hath geuen him hys owne substance concerning the diuine nature of Christ, and concerning his humane nature he hath shewed his will by hym, as by a seale of his owne hand. Farthermore he hath assigned hym to bring vs this meate, whichSignare. tarieth to life euerlasting. The verb Signauit, he hath signed, may1. Cyillus Libr. 3. cap. 29. signifye the printing of the same forme and ymage, which the ori∣ginall seale hath, as S. Cyrillus hath noted in this place. also it may stand to shew or confirme a thing by witnes of seale, as2. Theophi lact. ī ca. 6. Ioan. Theophilact expoundeth it. Orels to assigne or appoint a thing to some certain effect and purpose, as S. Chrysostome, and E∣thymius take it.3. God the Father signed Christ after the first sort by geuing him1. his own nature: And after y• secōd sort by shewing him (through2. miracles wrought in his flesh) to be his own Sonne. And last of3. all in appointing to haue his will done most perfitly and execu∣tedIoan. 4. by him, as Christ him self said: It is my meate to doe the wil of him that sent me. According to this last sense, it was the wil of God, that Christ should geue vs the euerlasting eate, which naturally is his Godhead, and by the mysterie of the incarnation, it is his flesh. And to signifie so much, Christ sayd: I will geue you the euerla∣sting meate, because my Father hath signed me to this purpose. The whiche sense S. Chrysostome followeth in the first place ofChryso. ibidem. his interpretation writing thus: Signauit, hoc est misit, qui hunc vobis cibum ferret. God the Father hath signed, that is to say, hath sent the Sonne of man, to bring you this meate. And E∣thymius agreeth with S. Chrysostome therein. Christ therefore being sent of his Father to geue vs the euer∣lasting
meate of life, first fayeth: I am the bread of life. And then sheweth how he will geue the same bread, saying: And the bread which I will geue, is my flesh. S. Cyrillus vppon those words:Cyrillus in Ian. li. 3. c. 36. I am the bread of life, writeth thus: His verbis subostendit san∣ctissimi sui corporis vitam, & gratiam, qua in nobis vnigeniti pro∣prietas, id est, vita & ingreditur, & permanet. In these words he sheweth priuily the life and grace of his most holy body, where∣by the proprietie, that is to say, the life of the only begotten both entreth into vs and tarieth. Likewise S. Hilarie hath these words: Si verè verbū caro fa∣ctumHilarins lib. 8 de rinit. est, & nos verè verbum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter manere in nobis existimandus est? If the word be truly made flesh, and in our Lords meate we truly re ceaue the word (made) flesh, how can it be, but he must be iud∣ged to dwell naturally in vs? Christ being for euer God in the fulnesse of tyme toke flesh, and when the hower of death was at hād, he gaue vs that flesh to be eaten, by the which eating we re∣eaue the word it self, that is to say the naturall Sonne of God into our bodies, and so Christ dwelleth in vs not only by faith, spirit, or vnderstanding, but naturally. Wherefore S. Hilarie sayth, we take and receaue the word truly. Verè verbū sumimus. We receaue truly and in dede the word which was with God in the beginning, and which was God. But how can we receaueIoan. 1. Ioan. 4. God truly or naturally? God is a spirit, and our nature, consi∣sting of a body, can not fede truly and naturally vpon a spirit, but only by faith and charitie. How hen receaue we God truly? For south because  toke flesh truly, and we receaue truly the word made flesh. Noman doubted but we can truly receaue flesh, seing then the word is made flesh, we thereby can receaue the word it self, not only by vnderstanding, but also whiles his own pro∣prietie, that is to say, whiles ye life & Godhead, which corporally
dwelleth in Christes flesh, entreth into vs with his flesh & tarith in vs, if we receaue worthely his most holy body. Thus it appea∣reth that Christ in his flesh geueth vs the bread of life which he was sent to geue, and he geueth it because that flesh is vnited to the word of God, which is life by his own nature. But if this flesh of his be geuen to vs by faith alone, and vn∣derstanding, or spirit alone, and not in very dede: We haue not y• bread of life in dede geuen to vs, but only geuen to vs by faith & spirite or vnderstanding. And so it was geuen to vs before y• in∣carnatiō of Christ. For God was euer beleued on of the iust menHebr. 11. Ioan. 14. oth to be, and to be the rewarder of them who seeke him, as S. Paule sayth. And faith by nature is due to God, as Christ sayth:  beleue in God, beleue also in me. Therefore although Christ hath taken flesh, yet if his flesh he geuen to vs only by aith and spirit, the bread of life and nature of God, which dwelleth cor∣porallyColos. 2. in that flesh, is not geuen vs after the coming of Christ by any other meanes then by faith. And so by the incarnation of Christ we haue not the bread of life geuē to vs by any other way then we had it before. Which is expresly against the word of God, where the euerlasting meat, and the bread of life is now first pro∣mised by the gift of Christ, as who came into the world to bring vs this euerlasting meate. And the bread which he will geue is his flesh. Therefore to saue the truth of y• Gospell (which neuer cā faile) we must beleue, that by the incarnation of Christ and by his gif at the last supper we haue his reall flesh, and in it the bread of life geuen to vs, more then by faith, or vnderstanding, or spirit. & that more, is the gift of the true substance of flesh and of blood, where∣in the Godhead corporally dwelleth. And by it the Godhead is receaued of vs, not only by an effecte of grace, & by a certain ver∣ue,Colos. 2▪ but in such truth of nature, as it is corporally dwelling in
the person of Christ, who is one in substance with his Father.Ierem 23 Iustinus Martyr in libr. de Trinitat. For although God be euery where by nature, and fill both hea∣uen and earth, yet as Iustinus Martyr witnesseth, he is in the Sonne of man by so excellent a meane of vg man to God, yt he is no where els after that sort. And by that singular meane he was promised vnto vs, as who is only the euerlasting meate, which alone satisfieth the hunger of man: whose harte as S.August. li. cōfess. 1. cap. 1. Augustine confesseth, is without rest, vntil it rest in God, because it was made to come to God: And nothing is at quiet, vntill it hue obteyned the end wherevnto it was first made. Seing then God is by nature y• only euerlasting meate which perisheth not, and seing he must be geuen to vs in his own na∣ture, and we are not able to receaue him as he is a spirit, he hath done for vs as good mothers and Nourses doe for their babes. The mother eateth bread, & by her eating, turneth it into milk, and that milk she geueth to the infante, and by that meanes theAugust. in cōc. 1. in Psal. 33 Ioan. 1. infante eateth bread made milk. This similitude S. Augustine bringeth for the same purpose whereof I now speake. In the beginning was the worde and the worde was wt God, and the word was God. Ecce cibus sempiternus: Behold, sayeth S. Augustine, the euerlasting meate, Sed manducant Angeli: But the Angels eate it. Quis homo posset ad illum cibum? What man were able (to attayne) to yt meate? Oportebat ergo vt illa mensa lactesceret, & ad paruulos perueniret. It behoued therefore that foode should be turned into milk, and so come to litle ones. Vn∣de cibus in lac conuertitur, nisi per carnem traijciatur? By what meanes is meate turned into milk, except it be conueyed through flesh? Quomodo ergo de ipso pane pauit nos sapientia Dei? How then hath the wisedome of God fed vs with y• bread it selfe? Quia verbum caro factum est, & habitauit in nobis. Because the worde is made flesh and hath dwelte in vs. And so S. Augustine cōclu∣deth
y• man hath eatē Angels food, and that, as he sheweth there, in the new sacrifice of Christes supper. For of that sacrifice & Sa∣crament he intreateth. Thus we see that God him self must be eaten of vs, not only by faith (for then he neded not to haue bene made man) but he must be eaten also, as infants eate milk, by mouth and body. And because that could not be, vnlesse God were made man, he vni∣ted to his diuine person the nature of man, thereby making the bread of life and the food of Angels apt to be eaten of men. And at his supper he gaue that flesh, wherein the Godhead corporally dwelt, by which only meanes y• word of God is fulfilled, where he sayeth: Worke the euerlasting meate which the Sonne of man wil geue you. For God the Father hath signed hym to this intent, that he should bring and geue you this meate. The way of brin∣ging was for the word to become man: The way of geuing was for the Sonne of man to geue the flesh of his, which is vnited to the Godhead, to be eaten. It is geuen at Christes supper vnder the forme of bread. No other meane of geuinge will serue. for eating by faitheNo gift cā recōpense the gift of Christes reall flesh. alone, be it neuer so liuely a faith, lacketh the Godhead, in suche sorte and truth, as it hath assumpted the fleshe of man to fede vs therewithall. No spirit, no vnderstanding, no faith, no grace, no other gifte in heauen or in earth (besyde the naturall substance of Christ) can supplie the gifte of Gods nature dwelling corporally in Christ. What thing can be equall to the gift of y• euerlasting meate, and to the gifte of y• bread of life? There is but one meanes in all the world for vs to obtein y• substance, which meanes is the fleshe of Christ, where it only dwelleth for vs. and God assum∣pted that flesh to geue it vnto vs. And now what crueltie is it, to spoile vs of yt flesh, & thereby to spoyle vs of God, of life, and of the spirite? That spirite is it
which we muste eate. The flesh profiteth nothing, it is the spi∣ritIoan. 6. that quickneth, it is the Godhead that feedeth, God is a spi∣rite: And because man consisting of a body could not eateIoan. 4. God, therefore the spirit assumpted flesh, and quickned that flesh singularli for our sakes. That flesh is geuen vs, and is profita∣ble, not in respect as it is flesh, but because the spirite of the God∣head and the life it self dwelleth in it, and that not by faith or vn∣derstanding alone, but corporallie. That Godhead the Sacra∣entaries depriue vs of, that spirite they plucke from vs, and it is no where els to be so eaten of man. Heauen and earth, Angels and archangels, yea all yt creatures can not geue vs God corporallie dwelling in them▪ and so to be eaten in anie kynde of meate besydès the flesh of Christ. But in that flesh we eate the substance it self of God him self. So teachethAmbros. de Sacra mentis li. 6. c. 1. blessed S. Ambrose, saying: Tu qui accepisti eius carnem, diuinae eius substantiae in illo participaris alimento. Thou that hast taken his flesh, art made partaker of his diuine substance in that fode. It is not possible to vnderstand this saying of anie spirituall vertue, or of anie other thing, then of the real flesh of Christ. Therein only is the substance of God made mete to be eaten of man. No signe suffiseth to conuey to vs that heauenlie brad. It is an haynous impietie and an horrible blasphemie to say that a peece of bread can make vs partakers of the substance of God, as it hath assumpted flesh in one persone: Or to say that my faith is able to deriue the substance of God as meate into myphes. 2. sowle and body. faith is a great gifte of God, but yet a creature only wherein the fulnes of Godhead dwelleth not. and there∣fore it is not able to aiue to the vnion of Gods nature, and much lesse able to geue it me. But Christ although he be true man, yet is he God also in one persone, equal with his Father, and yt fulnesse of Godhead dwel∣leth
in his flesh. that flesh he geueth & in it the fulnes of the God∣head. So may we eat the meat which perisheth not: So we re∣ceaue the bread of life. But other way in the whole world none can be deuised, how we may eate God, or carie hym in our bo∣dies properly and corporally. ¶ By the three diuerse geuings which are named, in S.The. ix. Chapiter. Ihon, it is shewed that Christ geueth his reall flesh vnder the figure of an other thing. IN that wonderfull disputation which our sauiour had at Ca∣pharnaum, and which is described by S. Iohn, dyuers perso∣ues at three seuerall tymes are shewed to haue had somwhat to do about the geuing of bread or food: God by the mynisterie of Moyses, God the Father him self, and Iesus Christ God and man. God by Moyses, is sayd to haue geuen in tyme past: He hath1. Ioan. 6. geuen them bread from heauen to eate. God the Father him self2. is sayd presently to geue: my Father geueth you from heauen the3. true bread. Iesus Christ sayth that hereafter he wil geue: Work the euerlasting meate which the sonne of man wil geue you: the bread whiche I wil geue is my flesh. God by Moyses gaue breadThe breadgeu by v∣ses was figurue which was figuratiue, coming from the vppermost part of the ayer, not able to geue life of it self, and therefore not the true bread. The bread of God the Father was from heauen it self, able toThe bd of God is true. geue life of it self, and therefore the true bread. Christes bread is such according to the forme thereof, as both God by Moyses had figured (which was māna) and such in sub∣stanceThebread of Christ  true vnder a figure. as God the Father gaue, which is the flesh of his sonne incarnate, and therfore it is called the bread, which is the flesh of Christ.
Christes bread, concerning the substance thereof, is the same flesh which geueth life euerlasting, which is made the proper flesh of the worde, and it is vnder the sorme of bread, in tokenThe gift of Christ sheweth both his Godhead & manhod that he fulfilleth the figure of manna. For Christ being true God with his Father, and true man with Moyses, doth both geue vs by his Godhead the same true fleh, which his Father gaue to him, and also he geueth it by his manhood, vnder such a figure and forme of bread, as in the ministerie of the law was vsed, and eaten with the paschal lambe a litell before the making of his ow supper. He geueth not the substance of common bread, as Moyses did, (for then the outward substance of his gyste had bene no better,The form of bread. then God by Moyses gaue) neither geueth he the shape of flesh. as his Father gaue (for then he had kept no agreement with theKepeth y• agreemēt with the law of Moyses. figuratiue law of Moyses) but he geueth as true flesh, as his Father gaue him, because he is one with his Father: and coue∣reth y• same flesh wt y• forme of bread, because he is not only God with his Father, but man also with Moyses, and with all vs. By whiche manhood he is lesse then his Father. and therefore as vnder the forme of man he couereth his true Godhead, (wherein he is equal with his Father) so vnder y• forme of bread, he couereth the gifte of his flesh, wherein he geueth as much as his Father gaue him. Only this difference there is, that it was expedient for vs the flesh assumpted of Christe to tary flesh still. & in dede seing GodWhy the substāce of bread takē is chāged, and y• sub∣stance of flesh takē, . Math. 26 is by all meanes immutable, neither could the word be changed into flesh, neither flesh into the word. but sith the substance of common bread doth not helpe vs to life enerlasting, and may be chaunged into the flesh of Christ, it is by the power of Christ chaunged into his flesh, when he taking bread and blessing saith, this is my body.
Hereby we may see how the name of brad and the figure of Manna is ioyned with the flesh of Christ, as the processe of this chapiter teacheth. Hereby we may vnderstand how the blessedGen. 14. seed of Abraham, which is the body of Christ, is ioyned with the apparent shewe, that Melchisedech made of bread and wine:Exo. 12. how the vnleauened bread eaten with the old lambe is the couer of the trew paschall lambe Iesus Christ, and to be short how the substance of the old figure, is gone into the substance of Christes flesh, and how the outwarde forme of the figure remayneth vntill we come to heauen, where we shall see face to face without1. Co. . any vayle or shadow put betwene vs and the gloriouse flesh of Christ. Hence it cometh that (as S. Ireneus doth witnes) the Eucha∣ristIreneus l. 4. c. 34. consisteth of two things, of one earthly which is the forme of bread and of wine: of the other heauenly, which is the substance of Christes body and blood. But if Christes gift consisted of the substance of bread beingThe ab∣surdities which rise of the Sa cramenta∣ries opi∣nion. only sanctified in quality and made a signe of Christes body (as y• Sacramentaries teache) it should neither be that true bread, which his Father gaue him, nor be in substance better then man∣na, but rather worse (for that Manna was miraculously wrought by angels, whereas at Christes supper common bread is taken) nor it should not be disncted from the gift made in the law: forPsal. 77. as much as there also while Manna was eaten, the iust men had grace frome God geuen them, because it was a Sacrament of the law. It is not therefore grace and commō bread which Christ geueth, but the substance of his flesh made vnder the forme of common bread by his almighty word.
¶ By the shadow of the law past, and by the  truthe to come in heauē, it is perceaued, that y• midleThe x. Chapiter. state of the new Testament requireth the reall pre∣sence of Christes body vnder the forme of brea. THe occasion of the thre tymes, the past, the present, and the future, and of the gifts made in them which are named in S. Iohn, doth prouoke me to ētre into a farther discourse, whereby it may appeare to those that delight in conferring the holy scriptures, what wonderfull witnesse euery part of them doth beare to that truthe, which our forefathers beleued, and we that are not bastarde children doe kepe and mayntaine. The law (saieth S. Paule) hath the shadow of good things toHeb. 10. Shadow. Image of things. Things them . a. Cor. 5. come, not the very image of things. whereby he meaneth, that as the lawe had but a shadow: so the ghospell hath the thing it self. but yet not clere and playne. for (as the same Apostle sayeth) we in this world walke by fayth, and not by vision and clere sight. If Christ gaue not vnto vs his reall and substanciall flesh vnder the forme of bread, how gaue he vs the thing it self? HowChrist is the thing it self. were he by that gyfte proued greater then Moyses, and equall with his Father? If on the other side he gaue vs his flesh naked, how were our state an image of the things them selues? Christ is our mediatoure. A mediatour is in the myddle toGalat. 3. 1. Tim. 2. ioyne two partes that otherwise do not agree. then if he will make man agree with God, he must haue oth the nature of God and of man ioyned in one person. likewise if he wil make the state of the ghospell present, agree with the law past, and with the state of glorye to come, he must take the similitude of the law and the nature of the glorye of heauen, and ioyne these two into one mystery, and so he hath done. For as he is in one person very God, and very man: so he hath perfectly expressed the old state of the lawe and the state of heauen in o Sacrament.
The nature of the law of Moyses was to shew Christ, and toThe state of the law. Galat. 3. be a guyde vnto the schole of Christ, which thing it did by diuerse figures. The nature of glory is to see face to face, to haue all truth with1. Co. 13. The state of glory. The mid∣dle state.  any figure. Now the state of the new Testament, being the middle state betwixt the law and the glory of heauē, must haue the very truth that is in heauen (which is the true flesh of Christ whereon An∣gelles desyer to looke) and the true Godhead, which is the full blessednes of all sainctes, and this thing it must haue vnder a fi∣gure. Therefore the thee Sacrament thát Christ left vnto his Church (which also he called the new Testament in hisLuc. 22. blood) must by the same reason haue y• true flesh of Christ, where∣inColos. 2. the Godhead dwelleth corporally, and y• vnder a very figure, which is the forme of bread. Ad truly this forme of bread and of wyne is only a true fi∣gure, because there is in it none other substance but the bare fi∣gure. Other figures of the olde lawe were set to signify, being them selues  other substance in nature, as the arke, the taber∣nacle,The form of bread is only a true figure. the vayle, the hewebread and all the sacrifices. but the bare figure of bread without the substance of bread set to signifie the bread of life really present vnder it, that is the only true figure as the whiche hathe none other truthe in his own substance, but only the truth of a figure, because the substance thereof is turnedHebr. 5. Psa. 109. into that flesh of Christ, who vnder the figure of y• ordre of Mel∣chisedech (whereof he is priest) fullfilleth all figures, that euer haue bene of him, in his real and substanciall flesh. which real flesh yf we had not in our Sacramēt of the altar, Christ gaue no more in his outward mysteries then was geuen by Moyses, he were not equal with his Father by his gyfte, he were not y• corner stone ioyning the state of Moyses law whichEphes. .
was only  ad the veritie of glory together. But if these are great rrours, let vs stedfastly beleue that Christ left vs his very crue rcall flesh in the blessed Sactament of the altar, vnder the forme of bread and wyne.Math. 5. For as in other precepts we may vnderstand the old law notGalat. 5. to be taken away concering the spirit which laie hid in it, but only to be fulfilled and made more perfect: so notwithstanding the old figures be dead and changed, yet the state of fulfilling them is suche, that the new Testament is not it self without all figures, but rather conteineth the truth couered with a conue∣nient figure. Uerily Christ sayd so much in effect, when he taught that he came not to putt away the law, but to fulfill it▪ for the ful∣fillingMath. 5. of the law without the putting away thereof, is no lesse to say, then to putt the fulnesse of new grace vnder a shadow, which shadow may seme to kepe a resemblance with the old law: so that of two distincte states there must now be made one new middle state of the which the outward parte resembleth the law, and the inward is one with the state of grace. Let vs put an example in the precepts of nature to make this thing more plaine. The law saith: Non occides: Thou shalt notExo. 20. kyl. This precept was not put away by Christe, but the true ground of it (which is, not to be angry) was ioyned therevnto as it appeareth by y• sermn of Christe in S. Mathew: It was saidMath. 5. to them of the oldelaw, Thou shalt not kyl, but I say vnto yow that euery one that is angry with his brother shalbe gylty in iudgement. Here we see two things, the one of kylliug, the other of being angrie. That of kylling is outward: That of angre, is in∣warde.Anger is the groūd of not kil∣ng. they both make but one precept of the new Testament. the not kylling dependeth vppon the not being angrie, and then is kylling throughly taken away, when anger is throughly cu∣red,
and as it fareth with this precept: so staudeth it with the the blessed Sacrament, whereof we reason. For it keepeth y• forme of bread and wyne which vnder y• law was emptie, and ye truth which was be tokened by the olde man∣na, is put by the almyghtic power of God vnder the formes of bread and wyne. and so remayneth the law not altogether put away (for a kynd of figure taryeth stil, and it was euer a sigura∣tiue law) but fulfilled, because the body of Christ, which is the fulfilling of the law, is made present vnder a figure. The signe of circuncision (saith S. Leo) the sanctification ofLeo de passione Domini serm. 13. gifts, the consecracion of priests, the purity of sacrisice, the veritie of washing, the honour of the tēple is with vs. there is no legal instruction, no prophetical figure, quod non totum in Christi sa∣cramēta transierit. which is not wholy transferred into the Sa∣cramentsLeo de passione Domini serm. 8. of Christ: and again, one oblation of thy body and blood fulfilleth the diuersity of the old sacrifices. Hitherto S. Leo the great. To y• same effect serue y• words of blessed Dionysius a Coun∣seller of the Senate of Athens scholar to S. Paule, who hauingIn lib. de coele. Hi erarchia. declared the holy kinde of gouernāce, which is in heauen among the ordres of Angelles, and hauing shewed, that by them the in∣feriour degrees of men are brought vnto God according to their capacitie, he first sheweth that God gaue vnto the world the go∣ueruement of the law, which he gaue as to children in signes and tokens, and as to weak eyes in figures, clowdes, or sha∣dowes. But afterward came our holy gouernaunce, which is the end and fulfilling of the former law. Now saith this holyDionys. Areopa∣gita  ec∣cles. Hie rar. ca. 5. writer. Nostra hierarchia & coelestis est & legalis, quae communiter me∣dietate extremorum comprehenditur, cum illa communes ha∣bens spiritales contemplationes, cum hac autem signa quo sensum
mouent, quorum varietate distinguitur & per ea piè ad deum ad∣ducitur. Our holy gouernance (saieth Dionysius) is both hea∣uenly and legal, that is to say, hauing somewhat like to the law conteyned in cōmon betwene those two extremyties, partaking with that of heauen spirituall contemplations, and with this of the law sensible signes, whereby it is diuersly distincted, and by them it is brought after an holy mauer vnto God. We haue heard how the scholar of S. Paule ioyneth in ourOur state is mingled of law and glory. state the heauenly contemplaciōs of Angelles (who looke vpon God him selfe) with the outward signes of the law. For by hea∣uenly contemplacions S. Dionysius meaneth that truth, which face to face is sene in heauen. But let vs returne again to the words of S. Paule, who did yet expresse this matter more plain∣ly, keping the same diuision, but geuing euery thing his playne name. The law had the bare shadow of things to come: The truth,Heb. 10. is the body of Christ it self, which he calleth also Rem ipsam, the thing it self, wherein also dwelleth the nature of God. Now theColos. 2. ioyning of a figure with the truthe is called Ipsa imago rerū, the very shape or image of the things. Vmbram enim habens lex fu∣turorumHeb. 10. bonorum non ipsam imaginem rerum: For y• law (sayth S. Paule) hath the shadow of good things to come, not the very image of the things. The good things to come are the vision ofThe good things. Christ in glory, and y• clere sight of God, who corporally dwel∣leth in the body of Christ. The shadow hereof was y• law, where∣ofThe sha∣dow. The ima∣ge of the things. Moyses being steward, obtayned bread from the ayer for the children of Israel: But the image it self of the things, that is to say, wherein the body of Christ is conteyned and in that body God dwelleth, y• image is the substance of God & man couered vnder the formes of our blessed Sacrament of the altar.The pecu liar gift of Christ. And therefore that Sacrament is properly the gift of Christ cō
teyning both it whiche we shall see in heauen, and suche a figure as we haue sene vnder the lawe, couering presently the truth to come, with the shadow past, to come I say without a shadowe, &Maxim. in scho∣lijs in Di ony Pachim. Oecume nius in 10. ad Hebr. The di∣stinctiō of the gifts is not in vaine. past I say, without y• real truthe, but now hauing the truthe vn∣der a shadow. Maximus and Pachimera do vpon S. Dionysius allege S. Paule for the profe of that which Dionysius said. Oecu menius likewise expoundeth the things them selues, to be the life to come, the shadow to be the old testamēt, the image of things to be the state of the Gospel. This I take to be the true meaning of the holy Ghost, who doth not in vaine cause the gifte of God by Moyses to be named diuersly from the gift of God the father, and the gift of Christ to differ from them both. Moyses is sayd to haue geuen, God the fa ther presently to geue, Christ promiseth that he will geue. God by Moyses hath geuen bread, God the father at the tyme of spea∣king, gaue his sonne in visible fleshe, Christ promyseth to geue y• bread which is the flesh of the sonne of man, which flesh vnder the forme of bread bringeth together in the Sacrament of the al∣tar the good things of heauen, & such figures as were in the law.The Sa∣cramen∣taries make voyde these di∣uerse gifts All which distinctions of geuing, and truth of gifts, the Sacra mentaries by their figuratiue doctrine make voyd, as they doe the reste of the holy Scriptures. For they will that Christes out∣warde gift should in it conteyne no inuisible truth of fleshe and blood, but euen the bare substance of common bread and wyne, feeding vs with needy and impotent creatures, as though weGal. 4. remayned yet babes, as though Christ in fulfylling all figures had destroyed them, and not left them full and perfect. That which the water and the cloude did signifie, is now real∣ly1. Co. 10. performed in baptisme, where we are saued by the washing of regeneration and of the renewing of the holy ghoste. LikewyseTit. 3. that which Manna dyd then shadow hauing the swetenesse of all
deyntie and pleasant tastes, as now really geuen, because y• fleshSap. 16. of Christ is meate in dede. We differ not in substance of our manna from the Angels ofWe are nere to the Angels then to y• Iewes. heauen, but only they are out of all feare, we lyuc in good hope, they see and eate we eate, & see not, but beue. They are in theyr and oure countrey, we are in the way to them. Whyles we are goyng, the truth of heauen is couered to vs, but sith Christ came downe to be our guyde, he hath left the kingdome of heauen in the blood of the newe testament among vs, as really as him self really for that purpose tooke fleshe, and dyed in the same flesh, toIoan. 12. thintent he being exalted vpon the crosse, should draw al things vnto him selfe. ¶ The bread that Christ promiseth to geue which is his flesh, must nedes be meant of the substance ofThe. xi. Chapiter. his flesh. HAuing already touched the three seuerall tymes of geuing▪ which are spoken of in S. Ihon, order wold y• I should shew the three seuerall kinds of working those three gifts. But for as much as the last gift of the three is the gift of Christ, whereof we doe principally intreat, I thought good to say some∣what of it alone. Christ hauing sayd before: work the euerlasting meat which the Sonne of man will geue you, cometh now to namè what kind of meat it is, and the bread (sayth he) which I will geue is my flesh. I haue proued already that these two sentences belong to one maner of gift, which also is promised to be geuen to vs, and not only to be geuen for vs, as some doe a. To be geuen to vs I say, in the Sacrament of Christes supper, and not only for vs vpon y• Crosse, the which thing because I haue by diuerse reasōs
proued in two places of this present booke. it shalbe now suIn he ▪ Chap. in y• aunswere to the iiij. obiectiō, & in the vi. Chapiter. Cyp de orat. Do min. Chrys. hon. i. 46 in Ioan. Cyril. li. 11. in Ioā. cap. 22. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 17 c. 5. de pec. mer. & remis. li 1 c 24. &c. Theodo. dial. 1. to warn the reader that S. Cypr writing vpō our Lords pray∣ier, hath alleged these words: The bread which I will geue is my esh, as spoken of the Eucharist. The like hath S. Chrysostom done in his comments vpon the same place, affirming that Christ spake of the mysteries: beside that which he speaketh hereof vpon the sixt of S. Ihon, doth also allege it again for the Sacrament of Christes supper, naming benedictionem mystica, the mysti∣call blessing. S. Augustine often tymes allegeth this text for the gift made in Christes supper, as I haue declared before also. Theodoritus was of the same mind: and as for Theophilact and Euthymius be so clere in this matter, that they neuer doubted thereof. Which sith it is so: let it stād for a truth most vniuersally recea∣ued, y• Christ saying, The bread which I wil geue is my flesh, meant, the bread which I wil geue you at my last supper is my flesh. Moreouer, the word bread must be noted, which standeth not presently for wheaten breade, but only for food and meat. For as Christ sayd before, work the meat which the sonne of man wil geue you: so now he sayth, and the bread which I wil geue is my flesh, declaring y• bread in this place is all one with meat. The whichCyril. in Ioan. lib. 11. ca. 22. truthe is also expressed of S. Cyrillus where he sayth: Saluator cū ad Iudaeos multa de carne sua dissereret, ac viuisicum verè panem am appellaret, panis enim, inquit, quem ego dabo, caro mea est. When our Sauiour disputed manie things among the Iewes, of his flesh, and caed it the bread truly geuing life, he sayd: for the bread which I will geue is my flesh. Thus it is clere, that Christ in effect sayth, I will geue you a kind of meat or food in my last supper, y• which is my flesh, euen the same flesh which I wil geue for the life of the world. This promise Christ made at Caph to al the tude,
but  submitted thē selues to receaue that doctrine beside the twelue Apostles, among whom Iudas being one, had this pro∣mise made to him also. For although Christ knew him to be a de∣uil and traitour, as him self sayd euen at Caphum: yet seingIoan. 6. he taried with the twelue euen at the last supper, and other men knewe not so muche of his maliciouse intent, Christ dissembled it, and as he promysed his fleshe to all, so he gaue it to the twelue in the night wherein he was betrayd. The whiche thing I speake to thend the reader might perceane, what Christ pro∣mised presently. Suche a gift it was the whiche was performed o lesse to Iudas, then to the other Apostles. It was not therefore a spiritual gift only which was promised (for such a one Iudas neither did nor could take) but it was a reall ▪and externall gift, which was deliuered with the hands of Christ, and receaued into the mouthes of the Apostles. After which sort Iudas tooke it. Which could not be so, except the fleshe of Christ were vnder the forme of bread, which Christ gaue. Again Christ spake not now of geuing his flesh by faith only, for that gift his Father presently gaue, as he sayd: Pater meus dat vobis panem de coelo verum, my Father doth geue you the true bread from heauen. That gift Christ him self was being geuen in flesh, to thend we should beleue in him, and  vpon him by spi∣rituall deuotion. But Christes gift both hath an other person, & an other tyme. The person is Christ, the tyme is to come. Where∣vponChrys. homi. 46 in Ioan. S. Chrysostom here noteth: Se, non patrem dare dicit: He saith him self to geue, and not his Father. It is therefore a reall gift to be made externally whereof Christ speaketh. Wherupō it foloweth, that Christes flesh was promised vnder the form of bread which suin his pper was taken, blessed, and deliuered. Under that form Christes flesh is promised not in faith only, but in truth of nature, and in the same substance which was
geuen  the life of the world. The Sacramentaries must nowe say, that flesh here standethThe ∣ction. for the signe and figure of Christes flesh, and so by that meanes (they will say) both Iudas had the figure of Christes flesh geuen▪ and the other Apostles had the flesh it self by faith and spirit. It hath be wed before, that the bread, whereof Christ nowThe ∣swere. speaketh, and which he affirmeth to be his flesh, is Christ him self, as he is true God and man. Therefore to say, the bread which Christ will geue, is the signe of his flesh, is to say that Christ him self through his own gift is the signe of his own flesh, for of any other bread Christ spake not in this place, then of such bread as him self is. And of that he spake, not in that only respecte as he is God, but as he is man. And so either the manhood of Christ is y•Either no signe is ge uen by Christ, or his flesh is the signe y• is geuē. signe of his flesh, or nothing els is here called the signe thereof. If the māhood be the signe, surely the māhood is now promised and is deliuered euen to Iudas at his last supper: which being so, I graunt it to be a most true se, y• Iudas did eate such a signe of Christes flesh, as his owne substance is. But if the Sacramen∣taries will needes haue materiall bread meant by these words (The bread which I will geue) besydes that they take that word otherwyse, then it is taken in all the talke which apperteineth to y• true bread which came down rom heauen, I wil confute that grosse error an other way also. Christ ioyneth together two diuerse tenses, the future, and the present, Dabo, I will geue, and est, it is, aing that the geuig of his bread is to come, but the substance or being o the same bread which he wil geue, is presnt. for he sayd not, y• bread whichFlesh here can not meane the igure of flesh. I will geue shalbe my flesh, but is my flesh. And yet if the word bread did stand for materiall bread, and the word flesh for y• signe and figure of fleshe (as some doubt not falsely to teache) or it the  (is) od stand or the verbe (signiicat) which maneth to be∣token
or to signifie, thē Christ euen by our aduersaryes interpre∣tation should haue sayd, the bread which I will geue shalbe my flesh, and not (as he now said) is my flesh. For seing that Christ spake these words one whole yere before his supper (as by the ghospell it maie appere) if the bread whiche he said he would geue, should only betoken his flesh, and not be his fleshe in dede, then were it falsely spoken that the same bread now presently is his flesh. for if the bread it self he not yet made, yea perhappes not so much as the corne thereof in the grounde, and certainly not yet blessed of Christ, how is it possible that the bread which now is not, can be now a signe or token of Christes flesh? That which is not it self, can much lesse be a oken of an other thing. but that which Christ sayd he wold geue, was extāt in substance at that tyme when he spake, and at that present in∣stant when he spake. For he sayd the bread which I will geue, is my flesh as I say, is now, is at this moment, wherein I speake. But the materiall bread that I will take into my hands, & turne into my flsh, is not as yet extant any where. Or if it be, it is not a token vntill I blesse. But the bread that I will geue is euen now my flesh: As much as if Christ sayd, that which I will geu at my last supper, howe so euer it seme cōmon breade, and ap∣peare in the forme of bread, which forme and figure is to come: (and therefore I say that I will geue it hereafter) yet the sub∣stance that shalbe conteyned within that forme of bread, that sub stance which is the being and essence of my gift, whereof now I speake, that substance is now present in your eyes. What substāce is that? Forsoth the substance of my flesh. For as the forme of brad is to come, and the substance of my flesh is here present in me: so by the forme of bread I say, I wil geue it. but concerning the substance thereof, I say it is my flesh. I say not it shalbe, lest you should thinke I meante to make such a git of my flesh, the
substance whereof were to come rather then present. But I say, it is my flesh. For within the forme of that bread none other sub stance shalbe, then that which you see here, which is my flesh. so that these words (the bread which I wil geue is my flesh) are as much to say, as I will geue you the substance of my flesh to eat: And that the word flesh doth here signifie the substance of Chri∣stes flesh, Tertullian hath witnessed almoste fourtene hundredTertull. de carne Christi. yeres past. Who disputing against those heretiks, that confoun∣ded the flesh and the soule of Christ, taketh vpon him to declare that they are two distincted natures. Of y• soule of Christ it was sayd: Anxia est anima mea vs{que} ad mortem, my soule is sorowfull to death. of his flesh, Panis, quem ego dedero pro salute mundi, caro mea est. The bread which I shall geue for the life of y• world is my flesh. Quod si vna caro, & vna anima, illa tristis vs{que} ad mor∣tem: & illa panis pro mundi salute saluus est numerus duarū sub∣stantiarum  genere distantium, excludens carneae animae vnicam speciem. If the flesh be one and the soule an other, y• soule sorowui to death, & the flesh bread for the saluation of the world, the number of two substances differring in their kinde is safe, excluding the one kind of a fleshly soule. If in this disputatin we might expound flesh for the signe of flesh, and being for the signe of being, Tertullian by this place had not proued a reall substance of flesh, sith a signe of flesh, is not the substance of flesh. but now, as in this saying, my soule sorowfull, the word, soule standeth for the substance of the soule: so in this, the bread which I will gene is my flesh, the word flesh standeth for the true sub∣stance of Christes flesh. Seing then Christ promiseth to geue the substance of his flesh, & it must nedes be that he fulfilled his pro∣myse, vndonbtedly he hath geuen vs in dede the true substance of his flesh in his last supper, when he sayd: Take and eate, this is my body, that is to say, as now I haue prosd, the substance of
my body. Thus it is pro: first, that these words belong to the Sacrament of Christes supper: Next that the word bread  eth Christ him self the bread of life: Thirdly that if it were ex∣ for common bread, yet euery way the sense should serue to proue of  the true gift of Christes substance in his last supper. ¶ A farther declaration of the reall presence of Christes boThe . Chapiter. dy & blood taken out of the discourse of his wn words concerning the different eating of him by fith, and the reauing of his fleshe and bl in the Samente of the ltar. MAruaile not, good Reader, that I stand long about a lit∣tle. The strength of the word of God is so greate, that a fewe syllables of his can not be sufficiētly expounded by a great many bookes of any mortall mās making. for God spakePsal. 61. but one, and yet Dauid heard two things, to wit, the power and mercy of God. Whereby are vnderstanded the two hole bookes of the old and newe Testament. Now I wil goe forward to shew you the plaine differerence, that Christ him selfe hath set forth in this Chapiter betwene ea∣ting of him by faith, and eating of his flesh and blood in the Sa∣crament of the altar. For these two are not one, as our new prea∣chers goe about (against the worde of God) to make you beleue: neither doe they differ onely, because in the supper a bodily signe of that thing is eaten, where vpon we feed by faith: but because that thing is receaued into our bodies, where vppon we feed by faith. In so much that of purpose Christ impugneth & destroyeth the Sacramētary doctrine by these his wordes in this Chapiter. wherein as I haue heretofore noed diuerse kindes and tymes ofThre . geng, because God by Moyses gaue naked figures in the tyme
past, the father him self geueth presently the true naturall flesh of his naturall sonne to our eyes and hartes. and Christ will geue hereafter the same true fleshe vnder the forme of breade to our mouthes and mindes: so now must I note diuerse workings of the sayd gifts. One worke aunswered to Gods gift by Moyses, another toThree workings. the fathers gist, and the third to Christes gift. By Moyses his minister God gaue Manna. This bread was1. Manna was wrought corporally only corporall, and the people wrought the substāce thereof only with their teeth & bellies: other thing was there not in it whiche myght be wrought. for although it were ordeined to be a figure o a greater thing to come in Christ, yet that was no parte of the Manna it self, but consisted and had his whole ground in the ap∣pointemēt of God, and in the vnderstanding of y• people of God. to whom (if they were well instructed and so toke it) Māna was a figure: and whether they toke it so or no, it was ordeined to be a figure, but not to them profitable who toke it onely for bodily food. Again those which vnderstode wel what Manna signified, had not any good by the meat it self, but looked for it of the truth which Manna shadowed. for whiche cause Christ saith, your fa∣thers haue eaten Manna in the desert and are dead: as who should say, Manna by his owne vertue could saue none of them all, but that true breade Iesus Christ only saueth, whiche Manna dyd signifie. The second gift is the present gift of the Father, whereof Christ2. Ioan 6. Christ wrought on by faith Augu. in Ioan. c. 6 sayeth: My  doth geue you the true bread frō heauen. This gift of the father muste be wrought not by teeth and bellies (as Manna was) but by fayth and spirite. And therefore S. Augu∣sine saith vpon this place: Vt quid paras dentem & ventrem? Cre de & máducasti. What doest thou prouide tooth and belly? beleue, and thou .
The third gift is that where Christ promiseth to geue his flesh:Christ re∣ceaued cor porally. and the working of it, is to eate worthely the same fleshe vnder ye forme of bread. God the father is sayd to gene the true bread, whiche is ChristChrist geuen. him selfe in such sorte as he is God and man in one person: and the same one God doth worke faith in all that heare his voyce, byFaith geuen. the which faith they may worke vpon Christ and eate of him by spirit. Of this worke it is sayde: This is the worke of God that yeIoan. 6. beleue vpon him whom he hath sent. of this kind of working it is sayd: He that commeth to me shall not hunger, and he that bele∣uethThe re∣ward of faith. in me, shall not thirst for euer. To be short, of this worke doth Christ speake specially, and in maner wholy from that place where he sayd, that the Father geueth the true bread, for twenty sentences together, vntyll he conclude that kind of working by these words: If any man eate of this bread, he shall lyue for euer▪ Take the payne to reade ouer once or twise the Chapitre of S. Jhon from that place, where it is sayd, operamini, worke, not ytThe diui∣sion of the Chapiter. meat which perisheth, and so forth to the end, and conferte there∣with that which I now write, and you shal see as clevely as can be, that Christ distincteth as thre giftes, so thre workings of thē. As God by Moyses gaue the delicate bread called Manna, so they wrought vppon it by eating the same bread with their teth. As God the father geueth y• true bread Iesus Christ, so the faith∣full must worke it by beleuing, and their reward shalbe life euer∣lasting. But as thou doest tender thy soule health, so goe forward with me to the third git, and the third working or eating: which in dede yf it be done profitably conteineth both a bodily and a spi rituall working, a bodily with manna, a spirituall with the gifteThe third gift is catē with bo∣dy  soule. of God the father. a bodily to  the manhod of Christ, a spiri∣tuall to eate it fruitfully. the eating is spirituall because it requi∣reth faith in Christ, and loue towards God and our neighbours,
the same eating is bodily, becaue it in dede eateth vnder yt forms of bread and wine that fleshe of Christ, whiche it beleueth in saith and harte. First Christ sheweth his gift, saying: And the bread which I wil geue is my flesh for the life of the world. That this gifte doth dif∣ferChristes gift isse∣reth from manna. from the gifte of Moyses (who gaue bare breade) it is easily sene. For the sonnes gift tarieth for euer, but Māna perished and they that dyd eate it, concerning any vertue that Manna had in his own substāce to saue them from death. The working of this gift is also named eating and drinking, but yet after another sort then the eating of Manna was vnder Moyses. for here the truth is eaten that was figured in Manna. But how it differeth from the fathers gifte, and the worke whiche belongeth to the fathers gifte, there standeth a great part of this question. Here I must warne the Reader, that he cōfound not him self. for in ofte repeating what the Father, and what the sonne, why the Father, and why the sonne geueth this, or that: it is to be sea∣red least the mynd goret the chief distinction, and so take one part in stead of the other. The Father, and the sonne, yea the holy ghost also be all one God, and giue al one thing. But the holy scripture, for the in∣structionThe who le trinitie worketh. of vs, and by reason of Christes flesh assumpted, doth attribute sometyme one thing to the Father, an other to y• son∣ne, an other to the holy ghoste: meaninge most commonly by the name of the Father, God, and the whole Trinitie, according to the whiche appropriation of workes and giftes, we now in∣tend to speake. The Father is sayd to geue many waies in this chapiter, he geueth faith into our hartes, he geueth Christ to the world inHow ma∣nie ways y• Father geueth. flesh, he geueth Christ to vs, and geueth vs to Christ. Therefore the gift of the Father may be respected speciallie two wayes.
either in Christ him self, or in vs toward Christ. The Fathers gift in Christ him elf is reall and externall, because he sendeth and geueth his only begotten Sonne in the true flesh of man to be seen, heard, and felt. The Fathers gift, in respect of y• we re∣ceaue of him, is reall, but internal, spiritual, and without wor∣king outwardly yt same sensible gift which is wrought inward∣ly. For after the Father had once geuen flesh to his Sonne, all sensible and externall working was worthely committed to that heauenly instrument of Christes flesh. So that sometyme we say the Fathers gift is reall and externall, but then we meane the visible flesh of Christ in his owne person: Somtyme we say the Fathers gift is only spiritual, and then we vnderstand the faith, charitie, and grace, which the Father worketh in vs, whom he bringeth to Christ by faith and spirit. This distinction well re∣membred, I trust to make the matter playne enough. The state of our nature is suche, that sith we consist of body and soule, our soule being the chief part of vs, and our body the inseriour parte, God the Father in his gift intendeth to feed ourThe Fa∣ther fee∣deth the soule. Sap. 9. soules: which being fed, our body shalbe fed, by reason it depen∣deth vppon the soule. But Christ considering that our heauy bo∣dies most commonly weigh down our soules to the pit of hell, wold also inuent a way, that our very bodies might not only not hindre, but rather helpe our soules, and not only through our soules, but also through a meate that them selues should re∣ceaue, be made lyght and meet to rise vpward, and to obey the spirit gladly. So that the meate, which God the Father geueth to the soule,Christ  y• spirituall food euen to the bo∣dy. Christ bringeth to the body. And because the body hath no faith to apprehend the flesh of Christ withall, neither vnderstanding, nor spirite, whereby to folowe the flesh of Christ into heauen: it hath pleased his infinite mercy to leaue his flesh in so mar∣uelouse
a manner vnder the forme of bread, that it might be ge∣uen into our handes, mouthes, and breastes, by which meanes we are able to receaue it corporally and naturally. The SonneThe Fa∣ and  geu one thing not one way. therefore and the Father geue one thing on Christes behalfe, but not one way on our behalfe. For the Father geueth Christ vnto the world in dede, but to vs in faith and spirit. The sonne geueth him self to vs in faith and spirit with the Father, and moreouer he is here sayd to geue him self in truth of body and blood to oursoules and bodies. Because therefore the thing it self is one which the Father and the Soune geue, one effect doth folowe in vs of both gifts. For as it is sayd of the Fathers gifte, He that beleueth in me, hath euerlasting life: So it is sayd of the Sounes gifte, He thatThere∣ward is one of both gifts The di∣uerse wayes of geuing. The irst difference. eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath euerlasting life. But for so much as the Father and the Sonne geue not theire gifts after one sorte: Therefore their two giftes are in this cha∣piter of S Ihon diuersly described. First as I sayd before, of the Fathers gift it is sayd, He doth geue the true bread, in the present tense: Of yt Sonne, I wil geue, in the future tense. The Father geueth Christ in the forme of man, and thereforeThe  difference. it is sayd: This is the will of my Father which sent me, that euery one, who seeth the Sonne and beleueth on him, may haue euerla∣sting life, and again, ye haue sene me and haue not beleued. Be∣hold, by the manner of the Fathers gift, the faithful may see that Sonne of man, vppon whom they beleue. But of the Sonnes gifte it is only sayd. The bread which I will geue, is my flesh. where it is not sayd that his flesh shalbe seen, but rather insinua∣ted yt it shalbe vnder a couering of an other kinde of food, which the naming of bread signifieth. And in the supper (where this prophecie was fulfilled) it is most clere.
The Fathers gift is called Verus panis de coelo, the true breadThe . difference. or meate from heauen: The Sonnes gift is called not only true bread, but also truly bread, and meate in dede, Caro mea verè est cibus, my flesh is truly meate. some true meate may chaunce not to be truly meate, because it is not eaten: but nothing is meat in dede, and truly meate, except it be in dede eaten. There is diffe∣rence betwene being the true vyne, and a vyne truly. Christ sayd him self was the true vyne, but he sayd not, that he was truly any certeyn vyne. The Iewes and Disciples went not away from Christ forThe iiij. difference. any thing that was spoken about the Fathers gyfte. For al∣beit they beleued not Christ to be y• sonne of God, yet they well perceaued, that suche a gifte of eating by faith myght stand with the custome of Gods people. but when the sonnes gifte came to be declared, they could abyde no longer. Seing then it is playne that they lacked faith, but yet lacked not vnderstanding, we may be sure they sawe more apparāt absurditie in the sonnes gifte (as they toke it) then in the Fathers. because it semeth straunger for mans flesh to be eaten, as the sonne semed to saye, then God to be made man, which is the Fathers gift, who sent his sonne to take our flesh. The gifte of the Father is called by suche names only, as be∣longThe v. difference. to the persone of Christ, or to his dyuine nature, to say: the bread of life, the liuely bread, the true bread, (for God only is absolutely the true bread of life) or by the pronown ego, which is to say, I. but y• gifte of Christ, is called also by y• names of his humane nature, to wit, the flesh and blood o the sonne of man. An other difference may be, to cōsider, that Christ endeth hisThe vi. difference. talke of eche gifte with repeating the old figure Manna, betoke∣ning y• as wel by the giste of the Father as of the sonne the sha∣dow of manna was fulfilled. But (as it shall hereafter appeare)
Manna was more perfectly fulfilled in outward doyngesManna was fulfil led in both gifts. by the sonnes gift. As therefore when he had longe reasoned of the belefe which they ought to haue in him, whom God the Fa∣ther had sent, he last of al concludeth: I am the bread of lyfe.To eate o this bread Your Fathers did eate manna in the desert and be dead, yf any man eate of this bread he shall lyue for euer: ryght so, hauing atTo eate this bread large reasoned of eating his owne flesh, and of y• effect which ry∣seth thereof, he at the last endeth: This is the bread which came downe from heauen: not as your Fathers haue eaten manna, and be dead, he that eateth this bread shall lyue for euer. The like peroration vsed in both places with wordes somwhat vnlike, doth declare that one substance is gyuen of the Father to be eatē of vs by faith, and of the sonne to be really eaten. so that the ma∣ner differeth, because we eate only ex Christo, that is to say of Christ by faith, but we eate and receaue Christum Christ him self, in the Sacrament of the altar. For it pleased the whole Trinitie, y• the fulnesse of our salua∣tion should be in the manhood of Christ, whose food it is, to endIoan. 4. his Fathers worke. The Fathers gift is to beleue in Christ: the sōnes gifte is, to eate and drink in very dede his flesh and blood. In working the Fathers gifte, a working faith is sufficient. in working the sonnes gifte, aith is required with taking and eating that, wherein we beleue. The Fathers gifte is to worke Christ in vs, as Christ is God and man: but more as he is God, then as he is man. for oure aith and belefe is due to the Godhead first of all, ad vnto the manhood because it is ioyned vnto the Godhead: and thereforeIoan. 14. Christ sayd, ye beleue in God, beleue also in me. But drinking and eating is first apperteyning to the manhood, and afterward reacheth vnto the Godhead, because y• Godhead is in that meae and drinke, which we take, therefore Christ sayd: he that
my flesh, dwelleth in me, and I in him.4. The Fathers gift is belonging first to our spirite, and then to oure flesh, because it is the flesh of such a spirit, which beleueth in God, and loueth him. the sonnes gifte is first in our body and flesh, concernyng the Sacramentall receauing of him, and then in our spirite, because it is a spirite belonging to such a flesh, which receaueth the flesh of God thorough Christ. In the Fathers gift we are not sayd to receaue y• true bread it5. self, which the Father gaue into the world, but to receaue, as it were an effect wrought by y• strēgth thereof. for after Christ had at large described his Fathers gifte, he said: this is the bread com∣mingWe eate of Christ by the Fa∣thers gift. downe from heauen, to the entent that if any man shal eate, ex ipso, of it, he may not dye. he saith not ipsum, if any man eate it, but of it. Again: Ego sum panis qui de coelo descēdi, si quis man∣ducauerit ex hoc páne, viuet in aeternum. I am the bread which came downe from heauen, if any man eate of this bread he shall liue for euer. to eat of this bread, is, to receaue some grace and ef∣fect comming from it. And this much cōcerning y• Fathers gift. But concerning the sonnes gifte, Christ saith: except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of mā. He saith not of the flesh, but y• wholè flesh it self. Again, My flesh is truely mea he that eateth my fleshWe eate Christ by y• Sonnes gift. tarieth in me. and afterward, he that eateth me he saith not now of me, but me. Last of all: qui māducat hunc panem, viuet in aeter∣num, he that eateth this bread shal liue for euer. he saith not now, he that eateth (of this bread) as he sayd before speaking of spirituall eating, but he that eateth this bread. And yet to make the matter more playne such an eating is as∣signed6. We eate Christ in his supper as Mana was eatē. to the gifte of Christ (which is made in his supper) as be∣fore was named of Māna. for it was sayd thereof: Our Fathers did eate Manna. they sayd not of Manna, but Manna in his owne substance. which words are three tymes conformably re∣hearsed,
and euery where they did eate Manna, not only of Man na (as though they had only taken a certeyn vertue out of it) but they did eate Manna, as we eate common bread. Seing then we may eate of a thing, or els the thing it self, the eating of it is a spiritual eating by faith and vnderstanding. But the eating it is a reall eating, in the nature and substance of the thing it self. When I say, that by the Fathers gifte we eate of Christ, and by the Sonnes gifte we eate Christ, I meane not to deny but that also by the Sonnes gifte we eate of Christ. For as he that hath syxe, hath fower: so he yt eateth worthely Christes flesh, ea∣tethHe that eateth Christ, may eate also of Christ. both Christ, and of Christ, but not only of Christ, for he ea∣teth Christ in his humane nature, wherein the diuine nature dwelleth, and is geuen thereby to be eaten of. He eateth of Christ, I say, concerning that effect & grace, which by Sacramentall eating the Godhead worketh in his body and soule. For the Godhead it self is the bread whereof we must par∣take. But the meane to partake it most abundantly is to receaue worthely y• manhood, wherein the Godhead corporally dwelleth. Therefore Christ geuing all the spirituall gifts that his FatherColos. 2. doth, as meane to make vs partakers of y• Godhead, geueth also besydes all them, the truth of his flesh and blood in the Sacra∣ment of the altar, as y• meane far y• highest to ioyne vs most nigh to y• spirit of God. And although his Father geue vs by his ap∣pointment the same flesh and blood which Christ doth geue, yet Christ calleth it for a great reason his own gift, because the sub∣stance of it procedeth from his own person, where vnto he assum∣pted flesh and blood. For in this Chapiter (as in many other places) by the Fathers gift, the gift of God and of the whole Trinitie is meant. And by y• Sonnes gift that chiefly is meant, which peculiarly procedeth by meane of y• incarnatiō & strength
of Christes flesh ioyned always with y• dyuine nature, the which flesh we receaue in the Sacrament of Christes own institution,Mat. 26. wherein he sayd in his own person: Take and eate, this is my bo∣dy, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood. Who seeth not nowe the difference betwene the gift that God geueth vs by charitie (which he spreadeth in our hartes) and the gif wherein he gaue his owne Sonne, whē he toke flesh and be∣came man with vs, and the gift which the Sonne being made man geueth in his supper. No gifte of God could saue vs (theTheword made . prophecies standing as they did) but only the geuing of his sōne into the world, when he tooke reall flesh for vs. And yet was notChrist mae our sacrifice. that enough, except the Sonne again had geuen him self to death for vs. Then the flesh of Christ is the meane for vs to be saued, that is, a ladder let down from heauen, whereon we may steppe and so clyme vp. God him self we could not eate, thereby to beChrist made our food. chaūged into him, and made membres of him. But God became man, that we eating mā might receaue God, as he dwelt in that flesh which we reaued. The conclusion is, that if the Fathers gifte, which is the in∣arnation of Christ and his manhood, be to be taken in spirite and faith, concerning the feeding of our soules (as you haue seen it plainly proued) the sonnes gifte (which is an other different maner of geuing, and hath an other kynde of working, appoin ted to it) must be receaued not in faith, spirit, and vertue only, but also in the substance of flesh and blood. Our new preachers expound the whole matter, as thoughThe Sa∣cramen∣taries ex∣. Christ gaue his flesh in his last supper noe otherwise (excepting materiall bread and wine) then his Father geueth it vnto vs by faith. And therefore they teache, that we receaue in the supper of our Lord with common bread and wine, Christ him self by faith and spirit. But by that meanes Christ geueth a great deale lesse,
then his father gaue. For bread and wine is lesse then the gift of faith, & when Christ geueth faith, he doth it as God, therein being one with his father. Is then his owne gift only bread and wine? Came he into the world to geue a lesse tokē, then God had geuen before vnder Moyses? For who can doubt, but manna dyd in his owne substāce farre passe bakers bread and wine of the grape? Is this the end of this long disputation, of so many differences put betwene Moyses, God the Father, and Christ, betwene manna, Christes incarnatiō, & his supper? betwene eating by body alone, by faith alone, by bodie & faith together? Is this al, to haue by y• gift of Christ, only a token of him selfe in bread and wine? how is then the bread, which is eaten, able to make vs liue for euer? if the eating it by faith only at Christes supper, make vs lyue for euer, and yet we had it by faith before of the fathers geuing: then Christe geneth him selfe by none other meane (sauing bread and wine) then his father had done. and doth he in vain (trow ye) di∣stinct his own gift from his fathers so many waies? is it then all one to eate of Christ alone, and to eate Christ and of Christ? Ue∣rily if concerning our taking of it, the thing were throughly one (sauing bread and wine) he wold not make so many differences. But if Christes gift (concerning our partaking) differ front his fathers gift in tyme, in maner, in degree, why should it be so, but that Christ geueth for a greater ioyning of vs to him▪ y• same in truth of nature, whiche his father in faith and spirite gaue be∣fore, as the necessarie preparation to the sonnes gifte? His father is only spirite and truth, and therefore geueth Christe really to the worlde to be fed of, spiritually by vs. But the sonne is flesheIoan. 1. (for the worde is made flesh) and so geueth really to vs the gifte of that flesh whiche he toke, not for his own sake, but for ours to thende we might really eate the spirite of God which is in it. Neither let it be strange to you, y• Christ semeth to geue more
to vs then his father. for he geueth more both for vs vppon the Cros, and to vs in his supper, then his father doth outwardly ge. but yet all his gifts come srom his father, because his father gaue his only begotten sonne to vs in the truth of our fleshe, to thend he should geue the same flshe in his owne person both for vs & to vs: that by such an excellen meane we might  the nerer ioyned to God him self. Although the conference of the words of the Ghospel do proue sufficiently that which I haue sayd, yet I wil shew also that S. Chrisostom toke this chapiter in the same sense that I haue done. First he noteth the diuersitie of persons, in that Christ sayd: se,In Ioan. hom. 45. non patem dare: him selfe to geue, and not his Father. Secondly, the distinct places of the chapiter where Christ spea∣keth, in the one, of eating his Godhead by faith: in the other, ofIn Ioan. hom. 44. eating his body. Primum de diuinitate &c. de corpore circa finē inquit. Panis quem ego dabo &c. Christ speaketh firt o his God∣head: & of his body he sayth toward the end: the bread, which I will geue, is my flesh. Thirdly S. Chrysostom noteth, that the word panis bread, sig∣nifieth either the doctrine of Christ, and saluatiō, and faith in him:In Ioan. hm. 45. or els his body. By which words who seeth not, y• he distincteth eating by faith alone, from eating y• body it self? The body there∣fore is it self eaten otherwyse then by fa th. Fourthly he sayth (vpon these words, my flesh is verily meat) that Christ sayd so, to thend they should not thinke him to speakeIn Ioan hom. 47. In Ioan. hom. 45. in parables. And yet by flesh to meaue the signe of his flesh, or by eating to meane beuing, is to speake in parables. Last of all he sayth, it is brought to passe by the meat which he hath geuen vs, that we should not only by loue, but also in dedeIn Math. hom. 83. it selfe be turned into y• flesh of his. And again: Christ mingleth him sele with vs not by faith only, but he maketh vs his booy in
it self. But if we  Christ by faith only & loue, surely we should be reformed to him by none other meane thē by faith & loue. But now we are turned from our corruptible nature, and are made able to liue for euer, not only by the gift of faith and charitie, but euen by that we receaue Christes flesh in dede it sele in his owne substance, truthe and nature. All these things did S. Chrysostom gather out of Christes words. I nede not to shew in many lines that Theophilact and Eu∣thymius folow yt same order in expounding S. Ihon, which S. Chrysostom before had vsed. For I think no man, who knoweth their trade of wryting, doubteth of it. The former saith vpō theseTheophi lact. in 6. Ioan. words: The bread whiche I wil geue is my flesh, that Christ ma∣nifestly in that place speaketh of the Sacramentall communion of his body, and that y• bread which is eaten of vs in y• mysteries is not only a certein resembling of our Lords flesh, sed ipsa caro Domini, but the flesh of our Lod it selfe. Euthymius likewyse agreeth, that Christ is bread two ways,Euth. in c. 6. oā. according to his diuine and humane nature. Non autem dixit, quem do, sed quem dabo. He sayd not, which I doe geue, but which I will geue. For he minded to geue it in his last supper. Now as Christ is bread two ways: so is he eaten two ways. As God, he is eaten by faith alone: as man geuing his flesh to vs at hi last supper, he is eaten not only by faith but in very dede. The later way of eating the Sacramentaries take away. ¶ The like precept made to men olawful age forThe xiij. . caring Chrises flesh, as was made generally for , sheweth his  to be as really present i his , as  is in .
WHen Christ had promised to geue his flesh to be eaten, and the Iewes had asked how he was able to doe it, Christ answered: Except y eate the flesh of the SonneIoan. 6. of man and drinke his blood, ye shall not haue life in you: he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath life euerlasting, and I will reise him in the last day. These words first were spoken to men of lawfull age as it ap∣pereth by the circumstance, who are bound to receaue the blessed Sacrament of Christes supper, if no lawfull impediment stop them, to thend they may nourish and maitein the life which they toke in baptism, and increase it to a higher degree of vnitie with Christ him selfe. But baptism, by our aduersaries confession, may and ought to be geuen to infants, and yet it could not doe them any good, if it conteined not in it self ye strength to regenerate them in Christ, seing they are not able for their parts to beleue actually. Mary if baptism really make them a new creature, & saue them (as S. Paule speaketh): the nourishment which we receaue in y• Sacra∣mēt2. Cor. 5. Tit 3. Greg. in orat. ca∣theche ca, apud Euthy. in Pano∣plia. li 2. Hor. 21. of  altar (being now of perfect vnderstāding) must nedes be also reall. For as regorius of Nyssa reasoneth, our nature is not at any certain state, but continueth in his substance by per∣petuall motion, drawing to it that which it lacketh, and expelling superfluose things. As therefore our baptim is made by real washing with water, & real renewing of y• holy Ghost: so nowe in the supper of Christ it behoueth we be really fed with the fruit of the  of life, which is one other thing besyde the flesh of Christ. That flesh thn  be really eaten of vs, and not only eaten by spirit, ( is conuenient for Angels, but satisfieth not the necessi∣tie  nature) but eaten by mouth and body. For of ,  Christ at this tyme, neither is it worth
while to say, that the body shall eate bread while the soul feedeth vpon the flesh of Christ. For the bread and wine haue no promise made in this place of them. For albeit bread and wine be necessa∣rie to the consecrating of the Sacrament, yet the substance of thē is not necessarie at y• tyme of receauing the Sacrament. it is only the flesh which died for vs, that Christ promiseth to geue to be ea∣ten, it is the flesh of the sonne of man, which if we eate not, we shall not haue life in vs. It is Christes flesh, which if we eate, he will reise vs vp at the last day. That flesh of his must be eaten & his only blood must be drunken. This threatning which is made, if we receaue not worthely the flesh of Christ, must be vnderstanded in his kind, like the other threatning precept made before, concerninge baptism: where it was sayd, except a man be borne again of water and of the holy ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of heauen. bothe are Sacraments, both necessarie to faithful men and both profitable to life euerlasting. that whiche water doth in wasshing vs, the fleshe of Christ must do in feeding vs. for this cause the ancient Fathers haue alwais both ioyned these two Sacraments toge∣ther,Cyp. ad Quiri. li. 3. cap. 26. & 26. Basil. de baptis. li. 1. c. 2. & 3. Ambr de sacramē. & de  qui initiā Aug de . mer. & remis. cap 20. and haue alleged these two places for them: the one out of the third, the other out of the sixth of S. Iohn. and they haue na∣med the one baptism, of wasshing: and the other is called Chri∣stes body and blood, of that substance whiche is geuen in it. What should I name here S. Cyprian, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, & all the rest, who reckon euery where the same truth of flesh to be in the , which is concerning water in bap∣tisme. Therefore as the water which washeth vs, is present really: so must the fleshe of Christ which feedeth vs, be made really present. As baptisme can not be truely kept without naturall water, so
can not the supper of Christ be truely kept without his naturall flesh. As if an euil mā come to baptism, he is truly washed though not profitably to him self: so if an euill man come to the supper of Christ, he truly (though not worthely) receaueth his flesh. As it is not enough for the Sracrament of baptism to haue water pre∣sent in faith only and in spirite or vnderstanding: so the presence of Christes flesh by faith, spirite, or vnderstanding only suffiseth not, to make the Sacrament of his supper. I pray you what vnderstanding had children, wherewith they might receaue the body and blood of Christe? and yet seing it is. in ser. de la∣psis. Innocēt. epist. 92. to. 2. a∣pud Aug. & Aug. epi. 106.  by the witnesse of S. Cyprian, of S. unocentius, and of S. Augustin, that children (although without euident ) receaued the  in many places of christendō, euen while the Churche was yet in his cheife floure, it can not be denied but in that age all those Bishops, Doctors, and preachers which vsed to do so, dyd well vnderstand, that the receauing of the Eu∣charist consisted not in receauing Christ by actuall faith, and me∣ditation of his death and resurrection, but in the vertue of those visible giftes, which were sanctified by the Priestes vpon the ho∣ly altar of God, and thence distributed to the faithfull people. Tat custome of so auncient time vsed more for a securitie thēThe com∣  of in∣fants doth  the  taries. for necessitie, yet was approued of God thus farre, that we there∣by might haue an  witnesse of the learned farthers auc∣thority, against them, who doubt not to affirme all the writers and preachers of the first six hundred yeres after Christ, to haue beleued of our Lords supper, as the new preachers do now pro∣ in England. But the new preachers make the substance of Christes supper to  in faith, in spirite, and in vnderstanding. And that not in  saith, whiche another man  for me (as it is dne for . antes at the ) bt teache te upper o conist in
faith, as euery man for him self bringeth and . So that if a man thinke not of Christes death, and lifting vp his hart doe not swetely feede vppon Christ sitting at the right hand of his Fa ther, they say he doth not receaue our Lords body. And they teach that he eateth nothing but breade and wine, and toucheth nor the body and blood of Christ at all. Of whō I aske, what S. , what all the other BishopsCypr. in . de . of Arica thought. If they had thought so as these men doe, they would not haue geuē the Eucharist to children and infants, who could not uminate Christes passion, nor thinke vpon him sitting in heauen. They doutlesse beleued farre otherwise of the Sacrament, then so. They beleued the body and blood of Christ to be really contei∣ned vnder the formes of bread and wine, and therefore that chil∣dren might haue profite by receauing it into their verie bodies & soules, albeit they could not lift vp their mindes actually to hea∣uen. The matter in those daes dyd not stand vppon the faith of men, but vpon the word of God, who said: this is my body. This, I say, which I bid you take, this, whiche I geue, this, whiche I bid you eate. What a toy is it nowe for our Sacramentaries to imagin an eating aboue the sky, whereas the body is geuen to the Apostles hands & mouthes by Christ himself, and to the hāds or mouthes of other faithfull men by his ministers in earth?The xiii. Chapter▪ ¶That S. Augustine did not teach these words, except ye eate the flesh &c. to betoken the eating o Christ ony by faith and spirit, nor yet the eating o materiall bread with  remembrance of him, but the eating of his flesh, to thed we may be the better wyned to the spirit of God.
IF any speache (sayth S. Augustin) seme to command a disho∣norableAug. de doctrina Christ. li. 3. c. 16. acte or vncharitable deed, or to forbyd a profitable or benesiciall thing, that speache conteineth some figure. Fxcept ye eate (sayth our Lord) the slesh of the sonne of man and drinke his blood, ye shall not haue life in you. He semeth to command a dishonorable act, or an euyll deed. It is therefore a figure cōman∣ding that we should communicate with the passion of our Lord, and y• we should swetely and profitably remember, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for vs. This place of S. Augustine may be alleged against me, first byThe obie∣ctiō of the utherās the Lutherans, who wold proue thereby that Christ in S. Thou spake figuratiuely, whe he named the eating of his flesh and the drinking of his blood. For there (wil they say) he toke eating and drinking for perfect beleuing and remembring Christes death, which is no sacramentall eating. To whom I answere, that S. Augustin by calling this speachThe aun∣swere. a figure, meaneth not to deny that it apperteineth to the last sup∣per, but only that it is a figure of speache in respect of the maner of eating his flesh and of drinking his blood: because it semeth to commaund the visible and external eating of a mans flesh, which is a heynouse thing. but in dede Christ meant, that they should cae his fleshe and drinke his blood swetely and profitably in a Sacrament, in a mysterie, in a remembraunce of his death who purchased our life: which was done at Christes last supper, when taking bread he said after blessing, this is my body which is geuēLuc. 22. for you, take & eate. which body who so eateth worthely, he must nedes communicate with the passion of Christ, in so much as he eateth that body, which suffered so bitter a passion for him. Now by the fact of eating to communicate also with the spirite & god∣head of Christ, that is the figure whereof S. Augustin speaketh: but otherwise it is out all question, that S. Augustine meant not
by the swete remembraunce of Christes death to exclude the ne∣cessitie of receauing that Sacrament, the which if we cae not when we shold cate it, we shal not haue life, and the whiche is. Co. 11. commanded to be made for Christes remembrance. Or is any man able to make a more swete remembrance of his own deuo∣tion, then Christ hath iustituted for vs at his last supper? there∣fore S. Augustin oth meane that whiles we eate the Sacra∣mēt, we should communicate with Christes passion, by doing y• in soule, which our body doth. Farthermore S. Augustin expoundeth these present wordes of Christes last supper in diuers other places of his workes. inAug. de pec. me. li. 1. c. 20. so much that he disputing against the Pelagians expresly affir∣meth them to be sayd, De sanctae mensae Sacramento, of the Sa∣crament of the holy table. and vppon the booke of Leuiticus, he asketh why the Iewes were forbidden to drink blood, sith Christ& in Le∣uit. 9. q. 57. & in ep. 106. &c. & in Ps. 68. con∣tra Cre∣scon li. 1. cap. 25. exhorteth all men that wil haue life, to receaue the blood of his sacrifice, in alimentum, to nourish them. which thing is knowē to be done in the Sacrament of the altar, and the exhortation therevnto is made in S. Iohn. This much is sufficiēt to answer the Lutherans concerning that they leane to S. Augustins au∣thoritie, in whom he that listeth to see more, may reade the pla∣ces noted in the marget. Secondarilie the Zwinglians graunting this place to be vn∣derstanded of Christes last supper, and building vntruly there∣vpponThe obie∣ of the . the necessitie of both kindes, make an argument, that in his last supper we haue not the body of Christ present vnder the forme of bread after consecration, but only that by eating ma∣teriall bread the figure thereof, we must remember it absent, and swetely repete in our minde what paines Christ suffered or vs, and with how great loue he redemed vs. and this their saying they wold father vppon this present place of S. Augu∣stine,
because he calleth Christes speache figuratiue. For the better vnderstanding of this present controuersie, itThe ann∣swer. is to be noted, that S. Augustine, writing rules or precepts of christian doctrine, taketh and defineth a figuratiue speache after a certain peculiar maner, which he him self describeth in this sort:Aug. de doctrina Christ. l. 3. cap. 10. Quicquid in sermone diuino nequè ad morum honestatem, ne{que} ad fidei veritatom propriè referri potest, figuratum esse cognoscas. Whatsoeuer in the word of God can not be properly referred neither to the honestie of maners, nor to the truthe of faith, be thou sure it is figuratiue. Whereby we may perceaue, that he measureth a figuratiueWhat a fi guratiue speache is to S. Au∣gustine. speache, by true faith and good maners. to either of which all that cannot be properly attributed, he doubteth not to call figura tiue, in such sort as he now vseth that word for a thing that mea∣neth a farther truthe, then the word naturally soundeth. The figure, that S. Augustine findeth in Christes words, is because if we rest in their natural sense, they can not be referred to the ho∣nesty of maners. for it semeth a dishonorable dede and against charitie to eate a mans flesh. for it is both against that charitie which a man oweth to him self (and therefore is called flagitium,agitiū. dishonour) and also against y• which we owe to our neighbour, and therefore is named facinus an vncharitable or hurtsull act.facinus. For as S. Augustine him self sheweth how he taketh a figura∣tiue speathe, so doth he tell how he taketh flagitium and facinus.L. 3. c. 10. It is surely a wilfull abusing of good lerning, if a man know∣ing how a master and teacher taketh his termes, will notwith∣standing dispute with him, vsing them in other seuse. which thing sith it is not landable, we knowing what S. Augustine calleth figuratiue, and what he calleth dishonour and vnchari∣table, must so talk of those things, as he hath done. Why then is it a figuratiue speache, when Christ ad the Iewes
ate his flesh? S. Augustine him self geueth the cause, saying: Facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere. he semeth to command a thing dis honorable and hurtfull. dishonorable to y• cater, hurt∣full to him, whose flesh is eaten. for it is a thing muche against the honestie of nature to fede vpon our brothers flesh, and it can not be naturally and properly done, without the losse of his life whose flesh we eate. for these two causes, or els for any one of them, we ought to think this precept to be a figure, that is to say, that it must be more profitablie vnderstanded, then y• words doe properly sound. what sound they properly? See, good reader, whether I deale syncerely with thee, or no. It is a weighty matter to hādle diuine mysteries, and therefore I endeuour to vse therin such warinesse, as becometh me. I will bring none other mans words, but S. Augustines own, to shew, what the precept of eating Christes flesh at Capharnaum did seme to sound properly. S. Augustine speaketh in this wiseAugust. tract. 26. in oan. of the Iewes: Carnē sic intellexerunt quomodo in cadauere dila∣niatur, & caet. The Iewes vnderstode flesh after such sort, as it is torne in peeces in a carcase, or as it is sold in the shambles, and not as it is quickened with the spirit. And in an other place S. Augustine writeth also of the very same matter: Durum illisAug. in Psal. 98. visum est quod ait, nisi quis manducauerit &c. it semed a hard saying to the Iewes: except a man eate my flesh, he shal not haue life euerlasting. They toke it foolishly, thei thought of it carnally and supposed, that our lord minded to cut of certain smal peeces of his body, and to geue it them. This is a hard talk sayd they. they were hard, and not the talk. for if they were not hard, but gentle, they wold say to them selues: He speaketh not this thing rashly, but because there lieth priuie some Sacrament. eing gen tle & not hard, they wold arie with him, and should learn of him that thing which, after their departure, those lerned who ta∣ried.
for when y• twelue had taried with him (the other being de∣parted) they (as who were sorie of y• others departing,) warned Christ, that they were offended with his word & so were depar∣ted. but Christ instructed them and sayd: It is the spirit which quickeneth, the flesh profiteth not, the words which I haue spo∣ken to you are spirit and life. vnderstand that, which I haue spo∣ken, spiritually. Ye shall not eate this body which ye see, ne shall not drink that blood which they shal shed who wil  me. I haue commended to you a certain Sacrament, which, being spi∣ritually vnderstanded, shal make you liue. and although that Sacrament mustenedes be visibly celebrated, yet it must be in∣uisibly vnderstanded. thus much S. Augustine. First I note in these words against the Lutherans, that S.1. Augustine vnderstandeth the precept of eating Christes flesh of the Sacrament of his last supper. for there only a Sacrament of his death is visibly folemnized, and inuisibly vnderstanded. Secondly I note against the Zuinglas, that the figuratiue2. speache which S. Augustine acknowlegeth in Christes words, is to be measured and meant according to the natural and custo∣mable speaking and vnderstanding of carnall men, who yet be not fully faithfull. for they thought they should haue eaten Chri∣stes flesh torne into peeces, & to fl their bellies there withal. for in dede ye eating of flesh naturally imploieth cutting or tearing, before it come to our month, and afterward chawing with the teeth, and so the filling of the bellye. but in respect of all suche meanings, the words of Christ be figuratiue. For seing it is against the honestie of maners to order mans flesh after such a cruel fashion, the Iewes should haue deui∣sed how to make an honest meaning of his words, whomIoan. 6. they confessed to be a great Prophete, or at the least they should haue asked of Christ the true meaning of his own words. For
seing Christ had multiplied siue loaues miraculously to feed them, and did so many other miracles and so much good in al the countrie, that all men who were voide of malice confessed himIoan. 9. to be of God, reason geueth, they should harken obediently to his words, as the which they might perceaue to be spoken by no meane or common man, and that therefore they should not measure them by their own phantasie & experience. Now then to say, that except ye eate my flesh, is a siguratiue speache, is no more to say, but you must not take the eating of Christes flesh so as at the first sight it cometh to your mind, neither concerning the vsuall maner, nor concerning the customable end of y• eating, for that is vnhonest. Tarie therefore vntill you find a better sense. Whiche sense is found when it is knowen that Christ vn∣der the forme of bread geueth the substance of his flesh whole,Colos. 2. sound, and quick, with the Godhead corporally dwelling in it, to the end we should liue spiritually for euer, by worthy recea∣uing it into our bodies and soules. Thirdly I note much the kind of speaking, which S. Augu∣stine vseth. For he calleth that thing a Sacrament vpon y• words of the Psalm now alleged, which in his bookes of ChristianPsal. 98. doctrine, he called a figure: Shewing him self to take the name of a figure for all that, when a farther and higher thing is to belib. 3. ca. 10. vnderstanded then was outwardly expressed, in which case the thing expressed is a Sacrament, to wit, a figure or a holy signe of that higher truth which is to be vnderstanded. but he meant not by the name of a figure either to exclude the truth of eating Christes flesh, or the truthe of drinking his blood, but only the grosse maner of eating and drinking it to a carnal end, which the Iewes thought vpon. for as the killing and eating of the Pas∣chall lamb was not only natural, but also gaue y• faithful to vn∣derstand that Christ ould be both killed on the crosse, and eaten
in a Sacrament: and as the figure which was in that Lamb did not diminish the real killing and eating thereof, but only did refer it to a higher truthe: so the figure, which is in eating Christes flesh, doth not diminish the true eating there∣of, but only declareth that eating to be a figure, because it is referred again to a higher truthe, both in Christ, whose flesh that once died is now eaten, and in vs, who eate it not so much for to eate it corporally, as to fede spiritually of God him self, who maketh that flesh profitable. and that S. Augustine thought so, it is euident by his own words vpon S. Iohn: ye know not what is yt maner of eating this flesh, but except ye eate it &c. Lo the maner of eating was secret, but the thing that should be eaten was naturall flesh.August. in Ioan. tractat. 26. &. 27 Again: Carnem sic intellexerunt, quomodo in cadauere dila∣niatur, aut in macello venditur, non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. They so vnderstode flesh, as it is torne in a carcase, or solde in the shambles: And not as it is quickened with the spirit or God∣head. Here it is reported, wherein the Iewes did erre. They toke the word, flesh, amisse, not concerning the substance of it, (which must be really eaten) but concerning the maner of ea∣tingModus. it. Is not modus Latin for the maner? Is not quomodo as much to say, as by what maner? The Iewes vnderstode y• name of flesh, Quomodo dilaniatur, non quomodo vegetatur: After such maner as it is torn into pecces, and not after such maner as it is quickened with the spirit of God. Do not these words import, that the Iewes erred in the manner of eating Christes flesh? Doth not he that findeth fault only with the maner of ea∣ting flesh, sufficiently allow the eating of the flesh it self, if it be done after a good maner? Yea farther, doth not he that sheweth the maner how it may be well eaten, approue that kind of eating it? As we must not
ate Christes flesh after such a grosse maner, as is vsed in eating such flesh which is commonly cut into peeces: Right so we must eate Christes flesh after such maner, as it is quickened with the Godhead. So doe S. Angustines words import. I beseche thee, good Reader, see the oddes betwene the argu∣ment of a Catholike and of a Sacramētarie. He reasoneth thus:The Sa∣cramen∣tarie. we must not eate Christes flesh carnally and butcharly, there∣fore we must not eate really y• substance thereof. We reason thus: We must eate Christes flesh as it is quickened with the God∣head,The Ca∣tholike. Why the Sacra∣mentaries argument faileth. therefore we must eate really the substance thereof. The ar∣gument of the Sacramentarie is naught, because a certain vse or maner of a thing forbidden doth not infer, that the substance of the thing it self is forbidden. Yea contrariewise, the forbidding of one maner semeth to li∣cence the same thing in an other maner. As if the law say, let no∣man were a sword in the city, it semeth to graunt that men may were a sword in the highe way. And yet because S. Augustine sayth, we ought to take Christes words figuratiuely in respect of such a foule maner of eating his flesh, as the Iewes imagined, the Sacramentarie will conclude, that Christes flesh it self must not be eaten really and substancially at all. See on the other syde, why the Catholikes argument is goodWhy the Catho∣liks argu ment is good. and laudable. Euery maner and qualitie which is graunted, cō∣cerning the vse of any substance, doth infer of necessitie the ha∣uing of that substance. But we may externally in a Sacrament by our fact and dede, as wel as by faith, eate Christes flesh, Quo∣modo spiritu vegetatur, after such maner as it is quickened with the spirit, therefore we must haue it substancially and really pre∣sent, to the end we may so eate it in the sayd Sacrament. The not eating it after a grosse maner, doth not take away the eating of it in substance. but the eating of it in a Sacrament, whereof we
now speake, as it is dwt in of the  (which is a mo pure maner of eating it) doth include the eating of it in substāce, where dwelleth the Godhead but in the substance of Christes flesh? Or how can I eate it as the spirit doth quicken it, if I eat not the substance of it, which only is quickened and vnited to the Godhead? which thing sith it is so, S. Augustine meaneth no, by calling Christes words figuratiue, to exclude the eating  his flesh substancially, but to exclude the eating of it by peece meale, or els for the filling of the belly. And therefore vppon.  thus he writeth: Quomodo illi intellexerunt carnem, nontract. 27. sic ego do ad manducandum carnem meam. After such maner as they vnderstode flesh, I do not so geue my flesh to eate. What is this to say, but I gue my flesh to be eaten after an other sort, but not in an other substance then the Iewes thought of? The Iewes erred in the maner of eating, as thinking they should eate it in that visible quantitie wherein Christ spake: and so they erred in the maner, but not in the substance of Christes flesh. But the Sacramentaries erre in the substance it . The Iewes thought Christes slesh should haue bene eaten properly and na∣turally, as other meates are eaten which are diuided and pe∣rished in the eating. The Sacramentaries think, that Christes flesh must not be eaten substancially or in truth of his own na∣ture, but  and by faith alone. The truth receaued in the whole Catholike Church is, that Christes flesh is eaten both substancially and figuratiu, in such sort, that the  eating is referred to an eating by faith. we eate Christes flesh substancially, because his true sub∣stanceGen. 14. Exo. . & 16. Pro. 9. was both shadowed in the law of nature and of Moyses to be eaten: and prophecied of before as meate and drink: and promised by Christ vnder those names: And deliuered by his own hands with these words, This is my body, and this is my
blood, take and eate. and beleued in the whole church, and adoredHila. li. 8 de Trin. Augu. in Psal. 98. vnder the formes of bread and wine through all Christendome: we beleue yt same substance of Christes flesh to be also eaten figu∣ratiuely, because it is not remoued thereby from his place in hea∣uen: but is made present by wordes, which signifie & worke the presence of his flesh and blood. It is not sene in his own shape, not felt nor tasted in his own proprieties, not cut into peeces al∣though diuerse take it together: it is not perished by eating, it ∣deth not the belly, or y• sensible, but the reasonable & spiritual life, it is not eaten only to be eatē, but to make vs remēbre effectual∣ly, and to conforme our selues to the death and life of him, whose flesh it is. And thereby to make vs to loue him, & to beleue him to be the bread of life to all the faithsull, and no lesse to gather di∣uerse men into one mysticall body of his church, then diuerse bo∣dies of wheat and of grapes are made into one artificiall body of bread and wine. the which mysticall body he will no lesse change from mortalitie, then he hath changed the substance of bread and wine into the substance of his flesh and blood. Seing the flesh of Christ may signifie so many things vnto vs through the maner of the presence, it were more then madnesse to say it is not a figure, or is not eaten figuratiuely. But because it signifieth so many things, therefore to deny it to be present, is to take away no lesse the figures whiche come by the presence of it, then the thing it felfe. Christ is the figure of his fathers substance, the image of GodHebr. 1. Coloss. 1. Phil. 2. who can not be sene, he is  in shape as a man. But what? is he not therefore the same substance with his father,  God with him, and true man in dede: who reason thus but ; whoTert. cō. Mar. l. 5. . ep. 46. but Arriās, but Marcionits, but ? did S.  gustine euer meane suche a figure of Christes , whiche was voide of the truth sigured? taught he not that we must adore
the body and blood of  we  it▪ but of Aug. in Psal. 98.  I  to .  not ,  a  may  a  of it  doth not the  a  or twain ,  that bread is there to be  lose is both bread,  a  of ,  bread in , and a  in  of : so is the  of Chri. a  and  that  vs. It is the flesh it self and the  , but it is  in  owne substance without any  or lacke, and the  in  of death whiche the same , hauing  once,  not now suffer, but would by his own  make it  to vs in suche sort, that we should  the death of , and partake the fruites of the death as oft as we came to receaue that  worthely. what nede more wordes? To geue a brief resolution of S.  mynd, it is to be noted, that both by his iudgemēt, and by the  of the Sa cramentaries, these words, except ye eate the flesh &c. belong to the mysterie of Christes supper: therefore, if they be figuratiue, they must shewe some figure in one parte or other of the supper. The supper cōsisteth of bread & wine as of material parts, ∣of it must be made, and of pronouncing vpō or ouer them (as S.Iustin. in Apol. 2. Iustinus the martyr speaketh) the wordes instituted by Christ, this is my body and this is my blood, the which words whē they come to the elements of bread and wine, the Sacramēt is made: what is that Sacramente? we say, it is the making present (in a miraculouse sorte) the true body and blood of Christ. Our ad∣uersaries say, it is the appointing of bread and wine to be a fi∣gure of Christes body and blood through the remembrance of his death. For our belefe, I bring S. Augustines authoritie, who saith, except ye eate my flesh, are words figuratiue, and out of it, thus I reason.
The ating of Christes fleshe, and the  of his blood, being reall  which must be performed in Christes supper, & yet being called  good  siguratiue , must nedes  the sigures of somwhat, & the  dedes & words being re∣ferred to the supper os Christ,  nedes betoken somewhat as they are there . But the eating of flesh in Christes sup∣per can betoken nothing at all,  his flesh be there eaten, the eating whereof may be the  of this betokening. Therefore these wordes import of , that in Christes supper the  of Christ is really eaten, and his blood is really drunken. It is not sayd of Christ: except ye eate bread & drinke wine. OfBread &  are not ∣ned at Ca  those elemēts he in the promyse of his supper made at Caphar∣, speakethnot one syllable. for which cause we must not aske at this time what they figure & signisy in Christes supper, because nowe there is no mentiō of thē, except any man be so frontike as to say, that y• flesh of Christ is here made y• figure of bakers bread, & his blood y• figure of wine. whereupon it would folow that y•  & blood, as being  of these dead , were worse and baser then the elements thē selues. for euery figure is some way or other behind the truth, which it figureth. If then we must leaue of the consyderation of bread and wine, if likewise no respect must now be had of the words of consecra∣tion, which are not yet spoken os: what other thing can these  ratiue words, except ye eate my flesh, signifie in Christes supper, but this: except ye eate my flesh in that mysticall and wonderfull maner, which I will geue it in, and to that  end, for the which I (being true God) wil geue it you? that is to say, except ye do both take it in the Sacrament, and spiritually remember my death  me thanks for it, and conforming your selues to it, ye shall not haue  in you. By whiche interpretation Christes  are figuratiue, in so much as they meane neither that ma∣ner
of ating pces of fleshe, whiche the Iewes vnderstode, no that end of eating it, which they thought vpon, mynding altogeCyr. li. 3. ca. 35. in Ioan. Chrys in Ioan. ho. 44. ther (as S. Cyrillus and S. Chrysostom note) the feding of their bellies. But if Christes flesh be not present at all, whereof is it a figure when it is eaten? can that, which is not, signifie or figure anie thing? cā the flesh which is only figured at the tyme of our eating bread (as the Sacramentaries teache) be made a signe and figure by eating it? if the eating of Christes fleshe be not the figure, the wordes: Except ye eate my flesh, be not figuratiue. For if eating e throughly taken for beleuing and for no eating at all, thē these wordes do not apperteine to the Sacramētall eating of Christes supper. But seing the Sacramentaries teache them to speake of the supper (as in truth they doe) the eating must so be figuratiue one way, that yet it be true another way. For if there be no true eating, there lacketh a groūd which may be the figure of another eating, that is to say, of spirituall communicating with Christes passion. If some reall eating must be had to warn vs of that spirituall eating, surely that real eating can not in S. Iohn be meante of bread and wine, sith Christ neuer named them. therefore it is im∣ployed that Christ meaneth, except ye eate my flesh so, as it is a figure both of my death, and may be a cause of your spiritual life, ye shal not liue euerlastīgly. Thus doubtelesse did Christ meane, thus dyd S. Augustine expound his wordes. The Sacramentaries doc erre in making Christes words to be figurati only passiuely, whereas they are also figuratiueWherein y• Sacramē taries re in  ding the wores. actiuely. That is to say, the Sacramentaries so take this matter as if it were only said, the fleshe and blood of Christ be figured & signied in his supper as to be spiriually fed on. But it is not so said only, but also the actuall eating of Christes flesh is taught
to be a figure it selfe of another spirituall eating. Therefore we eate really flesh one way, to signifie another way the ating andAmbr. in 1. cor. ca. 11. beleuing in flesh spiritually. And that is proued out S. Ambrose most maniestly, where he saith: In edendo & potando , & sanguinem, (for there is the point, albeit the Sacramentaries go about to corrupt his wordes by euil distincting of them) quae pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus. In eating and drinking the  and blood, we signifie those things, whiche were offered or vs. Behold, the ating  doth signiie and make a figure of the self same flesh, as it was offered for vs. And so doth both Christ & S. Augustine ane at this tyme. our Lord cōmaunding vs to eat his flesh, doth command vs to cōmunicate with his passion (saithLi. 3.  1 de doct. Christ. S. Augustine) and profitably to remember his death, that is to wit, he commadeth both to eate the body which died, & to eate it worthely, to eate it in hart as wel as in mouth: to eate it in re∣membraunce of his loue toward vs, as wel as in the Sacramēt: to eate it as the Godhead doth quicken it, and as it figureth the entring and tarying in his mysticall body the Church. This eating of Christes eshe is swete, is profitable, is not hard, not carnall, not without a figure, or mysterie. For to eate without any mystical meaning is only to fill the belly, whereof Christ spake not. he commanded a figuratiue eating of his fleshe, that figu∣reth ano∣ther thing must be . the which figuratiue ating should not take away the real eating of his flesh. for that eating whiche is not reall, can not be actiuely figuratiue, sith euerie figure is made vpon a true ground of one thing done really, & of another thing meant mystically. But the figuratie eating importeth a farther thing, then to rest in the eating it selfe. It is therefore insensibly said of the Sacramētaries, that those wordes which naming a certain actuall and real dede (as the ea∣ting of mans flesh is) be iguratiue, because the flesh is not really
ten. But they be in dede figuratiue because the fleshe of that  is  also and vnderstanded to be more then ally ea∣ten: for it  spiritlly eaten also. The Sacrametaries comted an oter foule error in these secōd  y• . wordes.  whiles they wil draw this place of S. Iohn to their purpose, they are constrained to expound the wordes of Christ i this :  ye eate te  of the sonne of man, that is to say, the sigure of his flesh. That is the  speach which they find n the text, and yet that might be wel born withal, if thei rested there. For in dede it is meant in some sense of Christ, ex∣cept is a  of it self. ye eate the figure of my flsh, to wit, except ye eate that inui∣sible sstance of my fleshe, which is a figure of my visible & pas∣sible , ye shall not haue life in you. But now they can not so ke it. For they will not graunt that Christ meat of his owne substance to be really eaten. For which cause they must goe for∣ward and expod again the figure of Christes flesh saying: x∣cept ye eate the gure of my flsh, the which igure bread & wineBreade   are not the  which S. . Aug. de doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 16. shall make, ye shall not haue life in you. Did S. Augustin referre the gure he  of, to bread and wine? Did he once touche or mention those materiall elements, in declaring the figuratiue speach tht Chrst by his iudgement vsed? where named S.  bread and wine? He sayth our Lord commanded vs to communicat with his passiō, to remember swetely the flesh which was crucified for vs. In that communicating and remembrance he putteth the figuratiue speache. So that, if we marke wel, the reall eating of Christes flsh is not , but left stil as the  the gure must be built. The figure must be in the end of the worke, and not in the beginning therof.  gure looketh higher to a truth aboue it, and not lower to  elements which re  it. rily neither Christ, nor S. Augustine did speake or meane
of bread and , and  bread and  the  the  which . Christ sayth: except ye eate my . hey sy,  ye , which shall  the   and blood.  a  s this, to  and blood to  bread and wine, and there  to make  & wine to  and blood? What ignorance, what abusing of Gods word, what a blasphemy is this, to make y• higher  first to sinifie the lower, that the lower may afterward  y• higher? It is as muh to say, as Chr  a doore, & then a doore is sōdarily the token of Christ. Where is honesty? where is shamenes? where is cōmon ? I aske of them whether these words, except ye eate, belong to y• supper. They say, they doe belong to the supper so truly, that they build vppon them falsely the  of both . Then say I, ating is meant not only of eating by hart and faith, but also by mouth, as S. Basil, S. Chrysoome, S. Cyrillus, S. Augustine, with all the rest of the fathers besore alleged, doe cofesse, and the Sacramentaries graunt the same most willingly. Then we are agreed that eating standeth in some part properly, concerning that some one thing eaten shall enter into our mouth. I aske thē, wherein the figure cheefely standeth? They say in y• word flesh principally, & secondarily in eating, y• is, in remēbring (by that thing which is eaten) an other thing, and I cone it also. What is now meant by that word, flesh? They say, the figure of flesh. and that doe I graunt, although it were more properly sayd, that flesh meaneth, and is the figure of the passion. But let flesh stand for the figure of flesh. Here beginneth the issue.
What meane you by the figure of flesh? Bread, say they. That,Flesh can not signi∣fie bread. say I, is starke false, and vnpossible. For how commeth flesh to be latine for breade? By what grammaticall, by what Rhethori∣call, by what Mosaical or mysticall figure is that interpretation brought about? All the world seeth, that in proper speach he that wil haue bread, vseth not to cal for flesh. Or if he doe so, I think the butcher wil soner serue him, then the baker. Moreouer no fi∣gure wil serue to make one thing meane another, except there be some affinitie or dependance betwene them. but fleshe and bread are cleane seuerall kindes of natures. Thirdly, Christ neuer in any couenant or truse instituted flesh to signifie material bread. we haue no such Sacramēt neither in the old, nor in the new Testament. and surely sith flesh is neither a naturall nor a diuine token of breade, nor so vsed in common speache, it can not by any ordinarie meane betoken bread. In so muche that the lawiers, who of all men best know the proprietie of wordes, and are most prone to expound them fauorably in the testamentes of men departed, yet haue cōcluded, that if any man erre in naming the kinde of thing, as if intending to bequeath his garmentes doe say: I bequeath my siluer, or contrarie wise: the legacie can not hold. For saith Ulpian: Rerum vocabula immuVlpia. de leg. 3. l. 4. tabilia sunt, hominum mutabilia. Proper names geuen by men may be changed, and therefore an errour in them is tolerable. but the appellatiue names of things can not be changed. and yet our new brethern can fynd the meanes how fleshe may stand for bakers bread, & blood for wine of the grape. The cōtrarie might stand right wel, because bread and wine were instituded by God in the law of nature and of Moyses (as the fact of MelchisedechGen. 14. Leu. 2. 1. Cor 10 Ioan. 6. & the figures of the lawe do shewe) to figure & shadow Christes flesh & blood. So was the rock instituted to signifie Christ, manna to be a signe of his last supper. But that flesh, yea ye flesh of Christ
(who is the end of the law) that it should serue to signifie whea∣tenRom. 10. bread, that diuinitie was born and sprang first in our dayes, being vnknowen to S. Augustine, and to all other Fathers and Councels. yet it is so good diuinitie iu England, that a mā may soner haue a bishopprick for it, then for saying God is one in thre persons. I haue stode sumwhat long vpon this place, because it is one of them, where vpon the Sacramentaries vse fondly to boast & bragg, as thowgh they had gained sumwhat by ye name of a figuratiue speache, which S. Augustine saith is in Christes words. but y• figure serueth to shew a higher & a more profitable mysterie, thē ye word nameth, but not as they vulearnedly wold haue it, to shew ye base creature of wheaten bread & wyne. It is ye passion of Christ, & ye spirituall maner of eating, in respect where of Christes speache is called of S. Augustine figuratiue. for if Christes flesh were eatē only to fill ye bellie, without farther ac∣compt of spiritual grace and life, then were the eating of that flesh natural, sensible, accustomable and without all figure, and should be eaten by cutting, tearing, and wasting it: but in that case flesh profiteth nothing. the flesh we speake of, must beHow fles must be eaten in a figure. be eaten as a figure, as a mysterie, as a Sacrameut, as a holy signe of a higher truthe wrought in the soule, then that bodilie eating doth work. So likewise in baptism we are washed in a fi gure, because the washing hath a farther and higher end, then only to cleanse the body. That speache therefore wherein Christ commādeth his flesh to be eatē, is figuratiue, not that we should denye the true eating of his flesh, but because that eating is re∣ferred to a greater purpose, then to the feeding of the body. for Christes flesh is meate in dede, that is to say, is eaten in dede as I shal proue vpon that place. but it is not eaten only yt it should be corporaly receaued, but to thend we should partake of the spirit and godhead which is in it, and so by the merit of that
flesh really present in vs, obteyn life euerlasting with it. now from what a worthy meaning wold these figuratiue Gospellers bring the words of our sauiour? whose hard harts I beseche God to mollify, that when they heare the truthe, their stomake do not kendle to maynteine their old fashon, beore they haue well loked about them. rather choosing to confesse a fault and to amend it, then to make a new synne by myssexcusing the for∣mer fault. ¶ Christes slesh being meate in dede, must nedes be really receaued into our bodyes. HE that wil know exactly why the flesh of Christ is called meate in dede, must put before his eies three thinges. The first is, that the Iewes hearing Christ say he wold geue1. them his flesh, asked, how he could geue it, to be eaten? The se∣cond is, that although Christ answered not directly to their cap∣tious,2. how and vnsaythful question, yet he sayd, the eating of his flesh to be necessary for them (as without the whiche they could not haue life) and profitable (as whereby they shold haue euerlasting life, & that not in their soules only, but also in their bodies, for so much as he wold reise them vp in the last day. after whiche two things well pondered, the third is to marke, that3. Christ confirmeth all these former sayings of his, by suche wor∣des,These words cō firm the former talk. as geue a reason of them. for my flesh (saith he) is meate in dede, and my blood is drinke in dede. as if he had sayd, wonder not y• my flesh geueth you life euerlasting, & reiseth vp your bo∣dies, for it is meate in dede. that is to say, it hath truly & in dede those proprieties, which any man wold wish for in true meate. Two thinges may be considered in meate: the one, that it is trulie receaued into the body of that liuing creature for whoseTwo pro∣prieties in . vse it is appointed: the other, that it is receaued as a medicine
whiche may preserue vs against death. for meate is neither pro∣perly attributed vnto the feeding of the sowle (but only by a metaphor and an vnproper speache) neither is it worthy to be called true meat, if it gene not a true remedie against death. there fore when Christ saith: My flesh is meate in dede, he meaneth thus, my flesh bothe shalbe receaued into the verie bodies of my people, and shall geue life euerlasting as well to their bodis, as to their soules▪ the whiche interpretation S. Chrysostom ma∣keth writing thus: Quid significat &c. what meane these words,Chryso. in Ioan. Hom. 46 my flesh is meate in deede, and my blood is truly drinke? either it meaneth that flesh to be ye true meate whiche saueth the soule, or els, he speaketh it to confirm them in the former wordes, N obscurè locutum in parabolis arbitrarentur, sed scirent omnino necessariū esse vt corpus comederent: that they should not thinke him to haue spokē in parables darkely, but that they should knowNote that Christ pake not now in parables. it to be by all meanes necessary to eate his body. thus far S. Chrysostom. By whiche interpretation Christ geueth a reason both of his first wordes, wherein he sayd, the bread which I wil geue, is my flesh, and of the second, when he sayd, he that eateth my flesh hath life euerlasting. for my flesh is meate in deede, both in that re∣spect that it shal be geuen to you as true meate is wont to be de∣liuered to them, who truly take and truly eate it, and also in that respect that it nourisheth truly, as true and eerlasting meate ought to nourishe. he that denieth any one sense of the twaine, deuieth one veritie of ye ghospell. he that graunteth both senses, must needes graunt, that the true eating of the flesh stan∣dethIt were a parable if flesh stode for bread and  for . not for eating truly the signe of flesh, because he spake not obscurely nor in parables as S. Chrysostom affirmeth. and yet it is an obsnre saying to put flesh for materiall bread, or eating for beleuing. it is a parabolicall speache, if when flesh, blood,
eating, and drinking is named, yet we shal derstand that ba∣kers bread must be eaten and wyne drunken, and Christ must be loued & beleued vppon? these parables neither Christ thought of, nor the Fathers knew. If Adam had not synned, the opinion of ancient doctors is, that notwithstanding his body consisted of contrarie elements, by whose continual fight and battail it should naturally haue drawen to corruption and dissolution, yet through the marue∣louse grace of God (saith S. Augustine) his body sholo haueAug. de iuit. dei lib. 13. c. 20. Gen. 2. bene far from disseases, from old age, from death, & from all cor∣ruption, by tasting of the wood of life whiche was in y• middest of paradise. Tanquam caetera essent alimento, illud Sacramento. vt sic fuisse accipiatur lignum vitae in paradyso corporali, sicut in spiritali, hoc est, intelligibili paradyso sapientia Dei, de qua scri∣ptum est: Lignum vitae est omnibus amplectentibus eam. So thatProu. 3. other meates (in paradise) were to nourish Adam corporally, the word of life was also in stede of a mysterie or Sacrament, to th'end the word of life should be vnderstanded to be after such sort in the corporal paradise, as the wisedom of God is in the spiritual paradise, which is atteined to by only vnderstanding. the which wisedom of God, as it is writen thereof, is the wood of life to all that embrace it. As now the wood of life which should haue preserued man frōCorporall asting is ecessarie to make y• eat true eate. incorruption, was to be bodily tasted of, and yet to wore a Sa∣cramentall and spirituall effect in preseruing mans body aboue al course of a corrutible nature: so is it meant that Christes flesh, which is in dede the wood of life, should be a Sacramēt vnto vs by the corporall eating and spiritual working thereof, & for bothe these canses together it is called meate in dede. Take a way y• corporall tasting of Christes body: and charitie, aith, hope, or any like vertue is proportionably & in his degree
meat in dede, or drinke in dede, as the Sacramēt of Christes sup∣perIacob. 1. is. For all those vertues coming from God feed vs in dede to life euerlasting, & therefore haue yt second proprietie of trut meat, which is to nourish for euer. But they haue not y• first proprietie, which is to be receaued after an external maner into our bodies. To this externall maner Christ had also respect, when he ayd: My flesh is meat in dede, or verily meat. For he sayd not only myverè▪ Truly. flesh is true meat, but it is truly meat. It hath not only y• true na∣ture of meat, but also y• true maner of it. for as verus cibus is true meat: so is verè cibus truly meat. As true meat is sayd in respect of the essentiall proprietie and effect of meat, which is to nourish: so is the flesh of Christ truly meat in respect of the maner of it, because it is receaued in at the mouth, & goeth into the body, af∣ter such sort as other meates doc, although it nourish spiritually. I haue sayd often tymes, that Christ in this chapiter speaketh both of spirituall eating alone, and besydes that of Sacramental eating together with spirituall. He speaketh of spirtuall alone about the middest of the chapiter raight after those words: workThe theme of y• . of S. Ihon. the euerlasting meat which the sonne of man will geue you. Which words are the generall theme to the whole Sermon folowing. But of Sacramental eating, as being the scond part of his Ser∣mon, Christ speaketh specially and expresly, from these words forward, and the bread which I will geue, is my flesh. Whiles Christ was yet about the first part of his Sermon, which belōgeth to spiritual eating alone, he sayd: Patermeus da vobis panem de coelo verum. My Father geueth you the trueVerus panis. bread from heauen. Qui credit in me, non sitiet vnquam. He that beleueth in me shall not thirt at any tyme. As Christ is only be∣leued on and only receaued by faith, so he is panis verus, the true bread, or meate. But when he was come to the second part of his Sermon,
where he spake of Sacramentall eating as well as of spirituall, there he sayd, for Pater meus dat, ego dabo: For verus, verè. InHow the Sonnes gift is dif∣ferēt from the Fa∣thers gift. stede of, my Father, he sayth, I: in stede of, doth geue, he sayth, I will geue. In stede of, him self to be true food, he sayth, His flesh is truly food. There is in the second parte none other sub∣stance then was in the first, to th'end we should vnderstand that Christ geueth in his Sacrament the same reall flesh, which his Father gaue him when he came down from heauen by taking flesh. But there is an other tyme of Christes gift at his last sup∣per, and an other sorte or maner of his geuing. For that which God the Father gaue vnto the soules of the faithfull, God the Sonne geueth to their bodies also. And by that meanes he is not only true meate, but also truly meate. And that without all dark speaches or parables. S. Hilarie well vnderstanding the strength of the same word Verè, truly or verily, or in dede presseth the old Arrians and new Sacramentaries therewith in this maner. De naturali in nobis Christi veritate quae dicimus nisi ab eo di∣scimus,Hilarius lib. 8. de Trinitat. stultè atque impiè dicimus. ipse enim ait, caro mea vere est esca, & caet. Thus they are in English. That we say concerning the naturall truth of Christ being in vs, except we learue it of him, we say it foolishly and vngodly. For him self sayth, My flesh is meate in dede, and my blood is drink in dede: he that ea∣teth my flesh and drinketh my blood, tarieth in me and I in him. There is no place of doubting left concerning the truth of flesh and blood. for now both by the profession of our Lord, and by our own faith it is truly flesh, and truly blood. And these things taken and swallowed are the cause, that we tary in Christ and Christ in vs. Is not this thing the truth? It may well chaunce not to be true to them, who denye Iesus Christ not to be true God.
S. Hilarie disputing in those words against the Arrians, who wolde Christ to be one with his Father in will only, doth proue that we also are one with Christ naturally by some anes, that is to say, by naturall partaking of Christes flesh in his last sup∣per. And to proue that thinge, albeit he might hauc brought ma∣ny places out of the Ghospell, or out of S. Paule, yet  to bring this place out of S. Ihon, as the which he thought no lesse plaine, then any other was. And twise he repeteth that the flesh of Christ is truly meate: Dce as being spoken of God, an other tyme as being also beleued of vs. and farther he affirmeth vppon this place, that the flesh and blood of Christ being takenAccepta. and swallowed, bringe to passe that we are in Christ, and Christ in vs. The taking of Christ by faith doth not proue S. Hilaries purpose. for he must shew that we take Christ in body and na∣ture, euen as he defendeth Christ to be one nature and substance with his Father. The being of Christes flesh in our bodies, and the reall ioyning of the one to the other is that, which S. Hilarie forceth vppon. And therefore he sayth afterward, that Christ na∣turaliter in nobis permanet, tarieth naturally in vs. By that word naturally S. Hilarie expoundeth how he takethNatural∣ly. Truly. the word Verè, truly. For he taketh it, as if it were writen, my flesh is to be naturally receaued of my Disciples, as meate. The which thing he had twise expressed before, saying: nos verè, ver∣bumLib. 8. de Trinitat. carnem, cibo Dominico sumimus. We take y• word (made) flesh truly in our Lords meate. And again: Verè sub mysterio arnem corporis sui sumimus. We take the flesh of his body truly vnder a mysterie. Lo, by thies meanes the naturall veritie of Christ is in vs, according as we learned of him, saying: My flesh is meate in dede. All men knowe what we receaue into oure mouthes and bodies in Christes supper. That very thing is af∣firmed
of Christ to be his flesh. And by that receauing of ours, his flesh is truly meate. S. Gregorie of Nyssa, brother to S. Basile the greate, war∣nethGregor. Nyssen. in vita Moysit. vs, puro defaecatoque animo coelestem cibū sumere: To take the heauenly meat▪ with a pure▪ and cleane mind. The which meat (sayth he) no sowing brought forth vnto vs by the arte of tilling the ground. But it is bread prouided for vs without seed, without sowing, without any other worke of man. It flowing from aboue is found in the earth. for the bread which came downe from hea∣uen, which is the true meate, which is obscurely meant by this historie of Manna, is nor a thing without a body. For by what meanes cā a thing without a body be made meate vnto the body? The thing which is not without a body, is by all meanes a body. This blessed man alludeth euidently to the wordes of Christ in S. Iohn, where he saith: my flesh is meate in dede. for ye bread whiche came downe from heauen whiche is the trew meate, is none other thing then the flesh of Christ. this kind of thing is not a spiritual thing that lacketh a body, but it is a trew body. how doth S. Gregorie proue it to be a trew body? because it isNyssenus proueth ye truth of Christes body by ye truth of the eating it. made meate vnto the body. for how (saith he) can a 'thing whiche lacketh a body, be made meat vnto the body? as who should say, there is no doubt but the flesh of Christ is made meate vnto one body, because Christ sayd: my flesh is meate in dede. and meate is ordinarilie promised to nourish the body, although it, being the meate of God, helpeth the soule also. If the bread that came downe from heauen whiche is the flesh of Christ, be true meate, it is a bodily thing. for els how could a thinge that hath no body, be made meate for the body? if that can not be so, truly the flesh geuen at the supper of Christ, whiche is meate in dede and drinke in dede, can not be only receaued in
spirit, but it must be so reall, that it may fede our bodies also, to thintēt they may be reised in the later day. therefore that whiche our body receaueth when Christ saith: take and eate, is the same flesh of Christ which is meate in dede. and seing it is proued to be a body, because it is made meate vnto ye body, it must be meate in dede vnto vs, and must be really taken into our bodies by our mouthes, or els Nyssenus ayleth in his whole discourse. for he proueth it a body, because it is meate vnto the body. then cer∣tainlie it is not meate only to the soule, nor it is not only recea∣ued by faith, but trulie and in dede. And seing al wise men reasonThe faith of the pri∣matiue churche. vpon a sure ground, we may not doubt but all the Catholike Church twelue hundred yeres past and so vpward toke it for an euident truthe, that Christes body was meate vnto our bodies. ¶ By the maner of our tarying in Christ it is proued,The xvi. chapit. that we receaue his reall flesh into our bodies. WHereas hitherto the necessitie, the profite and the truth of eating Chrisies flesh hath bene shewed and confirmed: Now the proper effect of that banket isThe effect of Chri∣stes sup∣per. also declared, because he that eateth Christes flesh, and drinketh his blood, tarieth in Christ and Christ in him. In respect whereof the same thing was before named, Cibus permanens, the meate which tarieth. Whereby we may perceaue, that in the Sacramēt of Christes supper we doe not beginue to liue (as in baptism) but we maintein, kepe, nourish, & increase the sede of life, which we toke in our spirituall birth. Neither only doe we preserue life during the tyme of our fee∣ding, but also when the banket is ended, some effect remaineth in vs, through the which we are sayd to tary in Christ, and he in vs. Let vs then trye out what effect that is. for by the maner & kind of the effect, we may gather somewhat of the cause.
What meaueth it, that Christ tarieth in vs and we in him? S. Chryostom answereth: In me manet, dicit, vt cum ipso se admi∣sceri ostendat. Christ sayth: He tarieth in me, to shew that himChryso. hom 46. in Math. self is mingled with him. S. Chrysostom meaneth, that whiles we receaue worthely the substance of Christes flesh into our bodies, we are so intierly ioyned to him, that we may be sayd to be min∣gled with him. And how that is done, S. Cyrillus declareth byCyril. in Ioan lib. 4. ca. 16. this similitude. As if a man poure wax vppon melted wax, he wholy must nedes mingle the one with ye other, so it must nedes be, if any man receaue the flesh and blood of our Lord, that he be so ioyned with him, that Christ may be found in him, and he in Christ. And again: Sicut parum fermenti, & caet. As a litle leauen tempereth the whole lump of dow: so a litle benedictiō (where∣by he meaneth a peece of the consecrated host, be it neuer so smal) draweth the whole man vnto it, and filleth him with his grace, and by this meanes Christ tarieth in vs, and we in him. S. Cyrillus calleth the things which are consecrated at Chri∣stesCyril. li. 4. in Ioā. cap. 17. supper, Benedictio, a blessing, because they are consecrated by the words of blessing, the which Christ left vnto vs. Now a litle of that blessed food being receaued worthely of vs, is not so properly sayd to tary in vs, as we to tary in it, for that, though it be small in forme, yet in vertue it is great. And therefore it draweth vs vnto it, as leauen turneth the dow to his nature. It can not be auoided by these interpretations, but that the heauenly food which we receaue into our mouthes, is the reall substance of Christes flesh. For it is here called Benedictio, theBenedi∣ctio. blessing. & that word is not meant of an inward vertue coming srom heauen, but of that which semeth bread, and is visibly re∣ceaued at our Lords table. For euen in the same Chapiter S. Cyrillus exhorteth men ad recipiendam benedictionem, to re∣ceaue the Sacrament of Christes supper. The which Sacramēt
if it were wheaten bread, how could it be true, that a litle there∣of should draw the whole man vnto it? Doth wheaten bread make vs like it? are we then made vnreasonable, vnsensible, and a corruptible creature, as wheatē bread is? Christ sayth, his meat tarieth to life euerlasting, so doth not wheatē bread. Christ sayth by eating his flesh we tary in him. But we tary in him, whiles the gift, which at his supper he deliuereth, is mingled with vs, and conuerteth vs vnto it, as S. Chrysostom and S. yrillus teache: And yet we be not conuerted or drawen to the nature of materiall bread or wine. therefore it appeareth the gift which Christ deliuered, not to haue bene bread and wine, but his own body and blood vnder those formes. S. Hilarie bringeth the very same word of tarying to proue,Hilar. 8. de trinit. that as Christ is in his Father by the nature of Godhead, & we in him by his corporall birth: so he is in vs by the mysterie of the Sacraments, and tarieth in vs naturally. The like witnesse Theophilact geueth, saying: Contempera∣tioTheophi lact. in Ioan. 6. fit noua & super rationem, ita vt sit Deus in nobis & nos in ipso. There is made (by eating Christes flesh) a new mingling toge∣ther, so that God is in vs and we in him. Briefly thus Christ meaneth: He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood recea∣ueth me, as meate into his body and soule. But because I come not to nourish carnall life but spiritual in him, he doth not digest and turn my body into his, (as it happeneth in other meates) but he is turned to be like me. For the real ioyning and knitting of my flesh to his maketh a maruelouse mixture, as if melted wax were poured to other wax, so that a great grace and vertue is left of me in him, whereby he may tary still in me and increase ye fountain of life, which is in him. This kind of our tarying in Christ, and of his with vs, could not be true, if we ed spiritually only vpō Christ absent in body.
For how can the body, which is only in heauen, be so tēpered t our bodies & soules in earth, as one melted wax being powred to an other wax doth make one thing of twain, which is the simili∣tude made here by S. Tyrillus? What like ioyning to that other similitude of the leauen can be, if no leauē, that is to say, no bene∣diction or no flesh of Christ be receaued into vs, which may draw vs to it? What mingling together is made of things that be so far distant as heauen and earth? If you say, faith and spirit doth ioyne, mingle, & knitte Christ to vs, and vs to Christ, and make vs to tarie in him, and him to tarie in vs, either you geue a cause of y• ioyning which may stand with the cause alleged by Christ, or els you correct his cause and put a better. If the faith & spirit, whereof you speake, shal stand with Chri∣stes cause, it must be such faith as doth concurre with the eating of his flesh. For he now sayd not, he that beleueth in me tarieth in me, but he y• eateth my flesh tarieth in me. Therefore though tary ng in Christ is assigned to eating and not only to  ye beleue neuer so wel, yet your present tarying in Christ is not assigned to faith, but vnto eating. Faith is necessarie to worthy eating, and cōsequently to our tarying in Christ. But not euery ground, which is necessarie to a thing, is by and by y• cause thre∣of. Or though it be one cause, it is not the only cause. In the for∣mer part of this chapiter saith had his due commendation. But now Christ speaketh of eating his flesh, and saith it maketh vs tary, that is to say, to be ioyned to him wholy, and to be mingled with him as well in body, as in soule, which thing can not be otherwise then through that we eate his flesh substantially. He that leauing that eating of Christes flesh, staieth vpon feeding by faith alone, correcteth the cause assigned by Christ, and also de∣priueth vs of that naturall tarying in him, whereof he now in∣treateth.
¶ We are made one with Christ by natural participa∣tionThe xvi. Chapiter. of his flesh, as he, being one nature with his Father, hath assumpted our nature into his own person. HE that eateth Christes flesh tarieth in Christ, and recea∣ueth life of him, not by the meanes of faith & spirit only, but also by natural participation of his flesh. which thing Christ declareth by this example: As the liuing Father hath sent me, and I liue for the Father: also he that eateth me, shal him selfChrist ∣ueth not for his Fa ther in faith. liue for me. But Christ liueth not for his Father by faith at all, (because he seeth his glorie face to face) nor yet by the meane of spirit alone, as we take spirit for deuotion, or els for spiritual gifts and qualities. but he liueth for his Father, hauing his Fa∣thers whole substance really present in him self: therefore we yt eating Christ liue in like maner for him, must haue his whole substance really present in vs, and so must we receaue life, not by faith or spirit alone, but by taking the flesh of life it self into our bodies and soules. Thus veriic Christ doth meane. That we may reache to the true ground of this comparison, it behoueth we lerne first, how Christ liueth for his Father: and then we may vnderstand, how we receauing his flesh worthelie, shall liue also for him. Christ hauing two natures in one person may be sayd to liue for his Father, according to either of bothe natures. As God: he liueth for his Father, for that he is eternally begotten of him, to whom the Father geeth his whole nature, substance, life, glorie, so thatHow Christ li∣ueth for his Fa∣ther as God. uo diference is betwene the Father and the sonne, but that the sonne is begotten of the Father and the Father is altogether vnbegotten and without any relation to a farther beginning. This order wherein the sonne (otherwise equall God  his Fa∣ther)
doth yet alwaies refer his generation and life to an euerla∣stingHilar. li. 8 de tri∣nitate. beginning, is the cause why Christ as God, liueth for his Father. the which interpretation S. Hilarie, S. Basile, S. Chry sostom, and S. Augustine doe confesse may well agree to this place. Christ as man lieth for his Father, because his Father sentHow he liueth as man▪ him to take flesh, whose flesh (being of it self neither able to geue life euerlasting, nor to haue it in his own nature) yet for the word wherevnto it is vnited in one person, both hath life and geueth life. now the word is naturally one God and one life with the Father. this second sense doth better please S. Basile, S. Augu∣stine, and S. Cyril, although they allow the former also: but this second sense doth more agree with those words sicut misit me pater, as my Father sent me. For the sending of Christ was the taking of flesh at his incarnation. bothe senses agree herein,Wherein both sen∣ses agree. that both life is really and corporally dwelling in Christes flesh through the Godhead, and the Godhead is naturally with Christ, through that he is the sonne of God the Father. Two things are to be noted in this comparison. the one is the real presence of life: the other is the hauing of it by gift, and by relation to a farther cause or beginning. For as Christes flesh li∣ueth for the word of God, to whom it is really vnited, and the word of God liueth for the Father, whose whole substāce it hathWherein be simili∣tude stan∣deth. really receaued by generation without beginning of tyme: so he that eateth Christ, liueth for Christ, hauing the substance of his flesh really present with him, and thereby partaketh life euer∣lasting. This verie sense Christes words haue, both by the conference of the text it self, and also by the interpretation of S. Hilarie.Arrians. who by this scripture confuteth the Arrians that sayd, Christ to be inferiour to his Father, & not to be equall God with him. To
mainteine the which heresie, they brought foorth a similitude ofIoan. 17. vnitie which is made in holy scripture betwene God the Father, Christ, and vs: affirming Christ to be one with his Father as we are one with him, but (sayd they) we are one with Christ only by will and consent, therefore Christ is one with his Father only after the same sort. to which argument S. Hilarie answe∣ring,Hilar. li. 8. de Tri nitate. turneth it vpon their own heads in this wise: Viuit ergo per patrem, & quomodo per patrem viuit, eodem modo nos per carnem eius viuemus. omnis enim comparatio, &c. Christ then liueth by his Father. and as he liueth by his Father, after the same maner we shal liue by his flesh. for euery comparison is presumed to be made according to the forme and concept of our vnderstanding, to thintent the matter whereof we intreat may be so perceaued, as the example geueth, which is proponed. This truly is the cause of our life, in so much as we haue ChristChrist in vs by flesh. abyding by flesh in vs, who consist of flesh: and he shall liue through him by such condition, as he liueth through his Fa∣ther. Yf we then liue through him naturally according to flesh, that is to wit, hauing obteined the nature of his flesh, how can he but haue naturally the Father in him self according to the spi∣rit (or Godhead) sith he liueth through the Father? S. Hilarie sheweth first in these words, y• there is a similitude of liuing betwene vs and Christ, and betwene God the Father and Christ. we liue for Christ, by eating his flesh, as he liueth for his Father who sent him: but we (saith S. Hilarie) liue for Christ by eating his flesh in such sort, that we haue the nature of his flesh in vs. Therefore Christ liuing for his Father, hath his Fathers nature in him self. Thus haue the Arrians gained no∣thing, by saying that the Father was one with Christ, as Christ is one with vs. For Christ is found to be one wt vs naturally. and thereunto it suffiseth not that Christ toke our naturall flesh
in his mothers womb. for Christ spake not of that vnitie: other∣wiseThe  nation ma keth not Christ to be in vs naturally. the gentils, Iewes, heretiks, and heinouse synners should be naturally one with Christ, which thing is not so. for, to be one with Christ, it behoueth that as he toke our nature into his own person, we take his nature into our bodies & soules. Two reasonable parties, which haue both free will & consist of bodies, be not properly made one in nature, if they bothe do not as well consent thereunto in mind, as also approche in bodies. Lett vs put an example betwene Dina and Sichem. for al∣thoughGen. 34. One in bo dy wit∣hout mine Sichem had by force oppressed Dina corporally: yet she not consenting in hart thereunto, was not throughly and in her whole nature made one with him, for that the cheif part of her dissented. Again, lett vs put the cae, that two other persons be together in hart wisshing to be man and wise: but yet that they can not come together, because bothe, or one of them is in∣closedOne in mind with out body. in prison. these also are not one naturally, as long as their bodies be asonder. euen so albeit Christ haue the same na∣ture which all men haue (excepting synne) yet he is not natural∣lie, that is to say, in the whole truth of nature one with vs there∣by, except we both in hart and body approche vnto him. If we come to him in body alone, we come vnworthely: if in hart alone, it is a spiritual coniunction, which will serue if either necessitie or infamie kepe vs from natural coniunction. but if we come to lawful age & haue opportunitie, we must approche both in bodyOne in bo dy and mind. and soule to the Sacrament of Christes supper, to be made one with him naturally, that is to say, to take his body really into ours, to th'end the spirit and Godhead which dwelleth corporal∣ly in that body of his, may fede our spirit and soule (which be∣leueth in him) to life euerlasting. Of this kind of liuing Christ spake when he sayd: he that eateth me, lineth for me, as I liue for my Father.
And it is to be consydered, that Christe brought the similitude of his own liuing for his father, to shew thereby how we doe line for him, when we eate him. But S. Hilarie was so sure of this later part of the similitude, to wit, that we liue for Christ by na∣turall coniunction of his body and spirite to our bodies and soules, when we eate him: that thereby he proued Christ to be one with his father in nature and substance. And now come our new Sacramentaries teaching the argu∣ment1. The Sa∣cramenta ries be agast S. Hilarie. of S. Hilarie to be nothing worth, because they presuppose Christes fleshe not to be eaten of vs, and consequently not to be in vs in his own nature and substance. whereby they also affirm that the father is not proued to be in Christe naturally by these wordes of our sauiour. as the liuing father sent me, and I liue for the father, also he that eateth me, shall liue him selfe for me. For if here the comparison be only in this point, that as Christ refer∣reth his life to another beginning, which is his father: so we liue by Christ who is the cause of all the grace we haue: if I say no∣thing els be respected in both partes, but that a thing whiche is2. Against  Godhead of Christ. lesse receaueth a benefite by the greater: these words rather seme to proue against the Godhead of Christ then for it. Yea the mā∣hood is not by thē shewed to be really vnited to the worde. And so that which the Catholike fathers bring for the truth, which is beleued in Christ, the Sacramentaries make altogether voyd. Let vs adde to the former consyderations, yt we, eating Christ, liue for Christ. we then so liue for him, as we eate him. For seing the eating is the cause of the life, such is the life as the eating is. But the Sacramentaries auouche that we eate bodily nothing els at Christes supper beside bread and wine, therefore by theyr3. Against  life of our bodies. iudgement we shall liue bodily none other way, then to that end whereunto bread & wine cā fede vs. They can not feed vs to life euerlasting, therefore it foloweth of the Sacramentarie docrine
that our bodies haue no meate whereby they may liue for euer. What say ye masters? Haue we not bodies as wel as soules▪ Doe not our bodies eate in theyr kind, as wel as our soules? Do4. Against yt food our bread. not our bodies line by theyr proper meat, as our soules doe liue by the meat which is conuenient for them? If Christ be meat vnto vs, is he not meat to vs as well in re∣spectIoan. 7. Our bo∣dies bo fed to liue for euer. of our bodies, as of our soules? Doth he not heale the whole man, regenerate the whole, feed the whole, and saue the whole▪ Then by like he feedeth our bodies to life euerlasting. What food it that? Where is it geuen? how cometh it vnto vs? The Catholiks answere: It is the flesh of Christ which is ge∣uen to vs vnder the form of bread. But ye Zuinglians (who deny that real presence of Christ) shew what meat our bodies receaue, which is able to make them liue for euer. Either say, they shal not liue, or shew the meane of life. You say our bodies eate sanctified bread at Christes supper. Be it so. But is that sanctified bread stil bread, or is it made the flesh of Christ which is the bread of life? If it be made Christes fleshe, ye agree with me. our bodies haueBread is no food of life. the true food of life. But if it tarie bread stil, it can not geue our flesh life euerlasting. Ye will say, Christ is able to vse wheaten bread tarying breadThe obiec tion. for his instrument or tokē, to geue vs by that maane euerlastiug life: As common water tarying water, is in baptism y• instrumēt & meane, as wel to our bodies, as to our soules of life euerlastig. In which reason ye vaunt your selues ouer much, and think ye haue found a goodly defence. But beware least ye triūph before yeThe aun∣swere. victorie. As hitherto I haue resorted to the word of God to confute your vain doctrine: so now I wil repair to the same vndouted fountain of true wisdome. It is most certain that God were able to saue vs by what mea
nes he would. But his will is now committed to writing, that heretiks might not fame vpō him what should please them, but should be controlled by his word. For as vniuersal tradition suf∣fisethScrip∣tures wer prouided against he retikes. to Catholiks who beleue it, so the heretik, who estemeth no tradition, must haue his ouerthrow by the holy Scriptures. In them we read, that who so beleueth and is baptized, shalbe saued: Whereby is most clere, that baptism hath his promse of sal∣uationMarc. 16 annexed to it. But when we come to our Lords supper, no promise at al is made to him, that eateth material bread, or dri∣keth wine. Therefore no man may be so bold to say, that by eatigNo pro∣mise is made to bread.. bakers bread we shalbe saued. Eating verily hath his promyse of saluatiō annexed thereunto. but it is the flesh of Christ whiche must be eaten, it is the blood of the sonne of man, which must be drunken, it is the food of life Christ him felf, whiche must be Sa∣cramentallie receaued. In all S. Iohn there is promyse of life made to none otherIoan. 6. thing. At the last supper it is said: this is my body, take eate: and this is my blood, drinke ye all of this. Where no mention of ea∣tingMatt. 26. bread, or of drinkg wine is made, much lesse anie promise of life is thereunto annexed. S. Paul speaketh of none other breade1. Cor. 10 & 11. then of that, which is the communicating of his flesh, and which being one, is receaued and partaken of al faithful: and yet neither in him, nor in the actes of the Apostles, nor in anieplace place els is any promise made by Christ, that who so eateth material bread in his remembrance (though he eate it neuer so deuoutly) shall by that eating liue foreuer. Nowe whereas Caluin pretendeth y• words of Christes sup∣perIn the. 1. booke. to be words of promise, it is already confuted. and albeit they were words of promise, yet they neither promise bread to be eatē, nor life to them that deuoutly eate bread. In cōsideration where∣of we may conclude, that water is the instrument to giue life, be∣cause
baptism is expresly named, andd hath the promyse of salua∣tion in Gods word. But seing bread hath not suche promise, they speake beside all scriptures, who think it sufficient for our bodies to eate bread, and to drinke wine at Christes supper. And lest any man should think, that I may be deceaued in the word of God, and that some promise there made to bread & wine may escape me: I answer, that euen here Christ sheweth vs not only to liue for him, but also to line for him by eating him: so that we haue the word of God, that Christ him self is our food not on∣ly by faith, but by eating. We haue then two aduātages, one that no promise of life is made to bread and wine: The other, that ex∣presse promise of life is made to him, who eateth Christ. whereup∣on thus I reason: Either this promise of life, which is made to him that eateth Christ, suiseth in the kind of eating or no. If this suffise not, the word of God is reproued, which sayth: He that eateth me, shall liue for me. And by eating Christ he vn∣derstandethIt suffi∣seth ocate Christ. (as I haue often tymes declared) beleuing vpō him, doing his wil, and besydes al that the receauing of him corporal∣ly in the Sacrament of his supper. If now his promise of life be alone sufficient, what place is left for the Sacramentaries, to chalenge life to their bodies by the ea∣ting of wheaten bread and by drinking wine. Their bodies veri∣ly can not liue without the food of life, for as Christ said before, except ye eate my flesh, ye shall not haue life in you. and I am sure he spake to men that had bodies. But material bread is not Chri∣stes fleshe, neither hath it any promise to geue life to our bodies, therefore either our bodies die for euer, or els they liue through y•Our bo∣dies re∣ceaue Christ. Cyril. in Ioan. lib. 10. ca. 13. that they receaue Christ into them corporally, the which saying of myne is confirmed by this place of S. Cyrillus. Non poterat aliter corruptibilis haec natura corporis ad incor∣ruptibilitatem & vitam traduci, nisi naturalis vitae corpus ei con∣iungeretur.
This corruptible  of the body could not other∣wise be brought to incorruption and life,  the body of the naturall life were ioyned vnto it, which, if it be true,  not they, who take the body of Christe (who is the naturall life) from  corruptible bodies, depriue vs of all hope of life in our bodies: How thē do we lyue for Christ & through him, as he liued for his father? Doth not he liue for his father as well in body as in soule, because his manhood is vnited to ye word which word is ye sonne of y• father? Therefore as we liue for him by eating him, & as he li∣ueth for his father who sent him: so must we be naturally ioyned to his flesh in the Sacramēt of his supper, & by receauing y• same worthely into our bodies, liue in body and soule for euer. ¶ The eating of Christes flesh was so true, that itThe . Chapiter. was taught with the losse of many disciples. IT is not to be thought that Christ, who forbiddeth all occa∣siōsMatt. 18. Christ gaue no offence. of geuing offence to other men, wold him self cast a stum∣bling block in his disciples way, by pressing them to eate his fleshe and to drinke his blood, if in dede they were not really to be eaten and drunken. But if Christ spake that, which was true in dede, and spake it as it was true, then was it their fault (who had sene him the day before working so great a miracle) not toIoan. 6. beleue such a Prophet, as their own experiēce and expresse words witnessed him to be. If then they were bound to beleue him, and y• they could do noThe disci ples shuld haue bele∣ued. otherwise, then if they beleued that he would geue them his flesh to eate in dede, their fault was in that they did not beleue that he was both able, and in dede would by a conunient meane geue them his true flesh in the way o meate, and his true blood in the way of drinke. If that were their fault, then is it their ault like∣wise, who in our daies thinke & teach, that Christ hath not geuen vs in his last supper his  flesh to be really eaten, & true blood
to be really drunken.  the maner of eating flesh and drinking blood  should in time conuenient haue learned that also. Al men do know, that when a thing is to be done, the first que∣stion is to demand, whether it may be done or no. wherein it isThe natu rall order of que∣stions. also conteined, how easily a thing may be done. The second is, whether it be worthy y• taking in hand. The third, how it may be brought to passe. As lōg as the thig is thought either vnpossible, or very hard or vnproitable: so long it is in vaine to talke of the maner of the doing it. Christ did talke with the Iewes of the two first points, shew∣ing that he was able to do it: Quia hnc pater signauit Deus, because God the father hath signed him, whereby he declared him self to be almyghty God. He said also that it was profytable, because he that dyd eate his flesh and drinke his blood, should be raised againe to life euerlasting. If they had beleued him in theseThe Ie∣wes bele∣uing not the . first points ler ned not y• third. Matt. 26. pointes, they might haue asked, yea without asking they had knowen (at, or not long after his last supper) the maner how it should haue bene cōueniently done, as those Apostles did know, who continued in their belefe. And the way of knowledge was at his last supper, where taking breade with speaking of these wordes (this is my body) he changed the substance of the breade into his body: and wylled his disciples to take and eate his body. This much those could not fre, because thei would not beleue. but to say that Christ hyndred their belefe by words more hard then neded, that is more cruelly sayd, thê it neded. Oportebat, &c. they ought (saith S. Cyril) first of al to cast the rootes of faith in their mind, and then to aske the thinges that were to be asked, but theCyril. li. 4. c. 14. in. Ioan. Iewes asked importunely before they beleued. for this cause our Lord shewed them not, how it might be brought to passe. & ater∣ward S. Cyrill declareth, how Christ in his last supper shewed y•
maner also to thē, who dyd beleue, although they asked not for it. ¶ The right vnderstanding of those words: It is the spi∣riteThe xix. Chapiter. that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing. I May be the shorter in this point, because none of those who are meanely conuersant in the bookes of auncient writers (though otherwyse they beleue not well) haue applied these words against the reall presence of Christes body in his last sup∣per. for how can it be, that Christes fleshe, which is geuen for the1. de bap. li. 1. ca. 2. 2. in Ioā. hom. 46. 3. in Ioā. tract. 27. life of the world, should profite nothing? Therefore S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustin do expound the name of flesh (after one sort) for the fleshly and carnall vnderstanding of the Iewes, who thought they should haue eaten Christ, as men eat mutton and beefe, whereas Christ meant to geue his flesh in a secret ma∣ner, as the faithful know. which notwithstāding, the Luciferian spirit of Caluin reproueth this first vnderstanding in his com∣mentsThe pride of Caluin. vppon this place. But it is sufficient, to say, that he dif∣sented from those three notable pillers of Gods Church before named. The second vnderstanding is on Christes behalf, whose flesh should not profit any thing, if the spirit, yt is to say, the Godhead did not make it able to geue vs euerlasting life. The which sense is chiefly followed by S. Augustin also, and by S. Cyrillus.Aug. in Psal. 98. & in Ioā. Cyril. in Ioan. li. 4 c. 23. & 24 Now seing the flesh of Christ is geuen so to vs vnder the foorm of bread, that the Godhead is present with it, we are sure to haue much profit by it. What nede moe words? If this saying appertem not to the last supper, it maketh no∣thing against our belefe: If it doe appertein to it, the words are Propheticall, because they speake before hand of a thing, which most certeinly shall come to passe in the last supper, and then the fulfilling of them will make them plaine. For as Procopius
saith: A prophecie at the first sight is not clere, but when it is comeProcop. in praefa∣tionem genesim. to the euent, which was forespoken, and is cōferred with the thing it self, then draweth it to a perfit clerenes. If now the sayd words were fulsilled at the supper, and take a clere vnderstāding there∣of,How̄e Christes flesh was geuen spi∣ritually. what meaning can they haue but that when Christ gaue his body, he gaue it after a spiritual sort & not after a fleshely maner? He gaue not a shoulder to one Apostle, and a legg to an other, a brest to the third, and a ribbe to the fourth, but the whole body to euery : not visible in the forme of flesh, but inuisible in the forme of bread: so making plaine, why he had so often called him selfe bread, and said that the bread which he would geue, is his flesh. He gaue not his body without his soule and Godhead, nei∣ther his blood without his bones and flesh: but the spirite quic∣kened al things, eche kinde had whole Christ. He lost not his vi∣sible body by geuing of it, but by his words, which are spirit and life, turned bread and wine into his body and blood, shewing y• as he was at the table in his whole body, notwithstanding they did eate the same body, so he might be in heauen although the sub stance of his true body and blood were geuen in his Sacrament in earth. What shall I say more? If the vnderstanding of these words depend vpon the last supper, they must not geue vs a rule how to vnderstand the last supper, but they must take their vn∣derstanding of it. Who dare say that bread was crucified for vs, because Ieremie sayd: Mittamus lignum in panem eius, let vs putHie. c. 11. wood into his bread? Do we not rather say, that because we are sure that the true flesh of Christ was crucified, therefore in Iere∣mie bread is taken for flesh? Who dare say that Christ had hornes in his hands, because Habacuk said: Cornua in manibus eius? DoHabac. 3. we not rather say that by hornes he meante the corners of the crosse, because we are sure that Christ had vpon the crosse no ma∣teriall hornes in his hands? If then these words, the spirit quic∣keneth,
be referred to the supper, and there we finde bread & wine taken, and after blessing, body and blood geuen, we may be well assured that one truth doth not take away the other. Spirit doth not take away flesh, but spirit must be taken for the Godhead, which maketh the flesh both to be present and profitable, to all such as receaue it worthely. ¶ The words of Christ being spirit and life shew, thatThe xx. Chapiter. his reall flesh is made present in his last supper a∣boue all course of nature and reason. VErba quae ego locutus sum vobis, spiritus & vita sunt. The words which I haue spoken, or (as the greke text readeth) which I doe speake to you, are spirit and life. The Capharnaits hearing Christ say, he wold geue his flesh to be eaten, partly thought it not possible for him to geue, partly not semely for them selues to take. They imagined a diuisiō of y• fleshThe er∣rour of the Caphar∣naits. which should be deliuered, and consequently the person, whose flesh were cut in such peeces, must die. but how could a dead man geue his own flesh to be eaten? Again though he could doe it, what a cruel thing were it for them to eate mans flesh? Christ knowing this theyr grosse concept, sayth, that the sonne of man wil ascend into heauen where he was before. Thereby de∣claring first his almighty power and Godhead: Next, that the gift of his flesh doth not import the lacke of life either in y• geuer, or in ye thing geuē. For thē in dede the gift should be litle worth, because it is the spirit & life which quickeneth, dead flesh profiteth nothing to euerlasting life. My words (sayth Christ) be spirit and life, that is to say, they beThe spi∣rit of Christ is his God∣head. words of him that is by nature euerlasting life, who meaneth to geue his flesh aliue, and that not only so aliue as our flesh liueth whiles the soule is in it, but so liuing as that flesh liueth, which is  and ioyned in one person to the Godhed.
Think no more (you grosse Capharnaits) of dead flesh geuē by peece meale, which is not auayable to brg you to heauē, but think of such a flesh as God hath assūpted, to geue life by it to ye world, of such a flesh as will ascend by his own vertue into heauen, of such a flesh as being conceaued not by the sede of man, but by the holy ghost, hath power to become spirituall without losse of his true nature and substance. My words be spirit and life. Spiritus est Deus, God is a spirit. In ipso vita erat, life was inIoan. 4. Ioan. 1. the word, & verbum caro factum est, and y• word was made flesh. Of that flesh Christ words must be vnderstanded. That is ye flesh which he will geue, & which we must eate. that flesh liueth wt God and in God, and geueth them life who receaue it worthely. This doutlesse is the literall meaning of Christes words, and therefore S. Cyrillus douted not to write: Spiritum hic &c.Cyril in Ioan. lib. 4. ca. 24. Christ hath called here the very flesh, pirit, not because it hath lost the nature of flesh, and is changed into the spirit, but because the flesh, being very nigh ioyned with the spirit or Godhead, hath receaued the whole power of quikning, or of making thīgs to liue. The words then, which I haue spoken to you, are spirit, that is toSpiritus. say, spirituall. Et de spiritu & vita, id est, de viuisica & naturali vita sunt. And they are of the spirit and life. That is to say, of the natu∣rall life, and of that which maketh other things to liue.De spiri∣tu. This phrase: Verba mea de spiritu sunt, my words are of the spirit, doth meane, that the words of Christ haue in them some of his spirit and of his diuine power. Which meaning sith it is most true, these words of Christ doeNote. not shew, that the naming of flesh and blood which went before was figuratiue, and that now Christ declareth only a spirituall vnderstanding of them (as the Sacramentaries teach) but all is cleane, cōtrary. For Christ now geueth a reason, why his former
words be possible, easy, true, and proper. The reason is, for that he is God that spake them, and he spake them of that flesh, which is vnited to the sonne of God. Spiritus viuificans est caro Domini &c. The flesh of our LordDamasc. de Orth. sid. li. 4. cap. 14. Ioan. 3. (sayth Damascen) is a spirit which quickeneth, because it was cō∣ceiued of a quickeng spirit. sor that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. Which thing I say not, taking away the nature of the bo∣dy, but intending to shew the Godhead thereof, and the power which it hath to make things liue. As therefore the flesh of Christ was not thereby no flesh, be∣cause it was ioyned to his diuine substance, but rather had by that vnion the power to make vs liue for euer: euen so y• words which before did shew the flesh of Christ to be meate in dede, and his blood to be drink in dede, are not now declared to be figura∣tiue or vnproper words, but rather they are declared to be most proper and true, because they are witnessed to be spirit and life. For as the Godhead is in his own nature most infinite, almigh∣ty, simple, and vncompounded, and the truth it self: So thoseHow the words be spirital. words, which partake of the Godhead, are declared to be of most strength to work that they sound, to be most simple, and to haue least figures & parables in them, as the which conteine the ver∣tue to make that truth which they signifi. So that the name of spirit doth not stand to deprie vs of Chri∣stes reall flesh, but only to make it profitable to vs, and to shew that Christ by his word is able to geue vs his flesh, wherein the Godhead corporally dwelleth. Corpus Dei (sayeth S. Ambrose)Ambros. de ijs qui init. my∣ster. c. 9. Corpus est spiritale: corpus Christi, corpus est diuini spiritus, quia Spiritus est Christus. The body of God is a spirituall body, the body of Christ is the body of the diuine spirit, because Christ is the spirit, that is to say, God. Non ergo corporalis esca, sed spiri∣talis est. It is therefore no bodily, but a spirituall food.
The food is spirituall as the body of Christ, which he toke ofSpiritual food. the virgin, is spiritual. But the body is not spiritual, as though it lacked the substance of true flesh, but because it was wrought and made by the holy Ghost in the virgens womb. Therefore the heauenly bread, which we receaue from the altar, is a spiri∣tuall food, no that it lacketh the true substance of Christes flesh, but because it is wrought and made present vnder the foorm of bread by the spirit of God and by the holy Ghost aboue all course of nature. It is clere (saith S. Ambrose) that the virgen did beare (Christ)Ambros. ibidem. otherwise, then the course of nature was. and this body which we make, is of the virgen. What sekest thou here the course of nature in the body of Christ, seing our Lord Iesus him self is brought foorth of the virgen besyde the course of nature? As who should say, the reall flesh of Christ is made present vnder the foorm of bread by the holy Ghost, euen as Christ was incarnate in the vir∣gens womb by the holy Ghost. It is the Godhead, the spirit, the life that worketh all things in y• holy mysteries. The flesh with∣out y• Godhead profiteth nothing. From y• Godhead the words came which Christ spake. That Godhead is it which maketh Christes flesh profitable. Per carnem spiritus (sayth S. Augu∣stine)August. in Ioan. tract. 27. aliquid prosalute nostra egit: caro vas fuit. quod habebat, at∣tende, non quod erat. By the flesh the spirit (or Godhead) did somewhat for our saluation. The flesh was the vessel (or instru∣ment) mark what the flesh had or held, and not what it was by his own nature. And again: The charitie of God is spread in ourRoma. 5. harts by the holy Ghost which is geuen to vs. Ergo, it is the holy Ghost which quickeneth. The words which I haue spoken to you are spirit and life. What is it to say, they are spirit and life? They are to be vnderstanded spiritually. If thou hast vnderstanded them
spiritually, they are spirit and life, if thou hast vnderstanded them carnally, they are spirit and life, but not to thee. Thus farre S. Augustine. The word spirit may stand to signifie God, Angels, the soulewhat spi∣rit may si∣gnifie. of man, the life, the gift of God made to any reasonable crea∣ture, & the wind, or breath, or ayer, or briefly any thing that mo∣ueth. But among all significations the chief is to signifie God, who is by nature the only spirit which quickeneth and moueth all other spirits: In whom we liue, are moued, and haue ourActo. 17. being. Therefore the words, which are called spirit and life, are called in effect diuine and almighty. Spirit sometyme standeth to signific the words of God, as when S. Paule sayth, the letter killeth the spirit quickeneth, the letter in that place doth signiie the law, and the spirit doth signi∣fieBasil. de baptis. l.  cap. 2. the words of our Lord, as S. Basile doth expound it. For Christ our Lord geueth grace to his words, that they should not only signifie things (as the words of the law did) but also make and work the things which they signified. The words that be spirit must be vnderstanded spiritually,Spiri∣tually. that is to say, diuinely, and as it becometh the words of him who is God him self, whose words haue power in them selues to worke that which they betoken. To vnderstand the words of Christ spiritually, it behoueth we beleue them first as they sound to humble & reasonable men.Esaiae. 7. for if we beleue not, we shal not vnderstand: but if we do beleue, then we may be assured (as S. Chrysotom vppon this placeChryso. hom. 47. in loan. hath writen) that they conteine no naturall course, but are free from al earthly necessity and from the lawes of this life. Which being so, when Christ taking bread, and blessing saith, this is my body, we may not say with our selues, how can this be so? what other body can here be, then a peece of bread which
mine eye seeth, and my tong tasteth. If we speake after this sort,The Sa∣cramen∣taries make Christes words no spirit. we call the words of Christ from the spirit of God to the course of nature and of reason. and we do not beleue them to be spiri∣tuall, that is to say, diuine, and aboue the course of nature. but we vnderstād thē carnally, loking for no miracle to be wrought by them. and yet they are spirit and life, able to quicken what soeuer they list. they can make bread to be Christes body, & wine to be his blood. they haue power to change natures, and to worke inuisibly.The wor∣des of pa∣rables. In a parable it is not nedefull that all things be in dede, as the words doe sound. but when Christes words are sayd to be spirit and life, then it is declared to vs, that they partake the na∣ture of his Godhead, that they worke a thing aboue our capa∣citie, and make all that, which they say.A spiri∣tual body. Yea but (say you) shew me the body which they haue wrought. I answer, they are spirit and haue wrought a spiritual body, not such as lacketh the truthe of flesh, but such as through the vnion which it hath with the Godhead, hath disposed the substance of flesh vnder the form of bread in such sorte, as our soules are dis∣posed within our bodies, which are vndoubtedlie there, but they can not be touched or felt by any sense. euen so we beleue the real presence of Christes flesh vnder the form of bread and wine, be∣cause the words of Christ are spirit & life, albeit no scuse or rea∣son can attein to that highe mysterie. Seing then these words of promise (the bread which I wil geue is my flesh) be spirit and life, these words of performance, which after bread taken, say presently: this is my body, must nedes be much more spirit and life, y• is to say, of diuine power to worke that which they sound. Let now al heretikes ceasse to mock vs of so many miracles, as we teache to be in the sacramēt of the altar, for so much as Christ
hath witnessed it should be a miraculouse sacramēt, and aboue alThis Sa crament is miracu∣louse. course of nature, as being made by words which are spirit and life. Let them likewise no more abuse the name of spirit, to make men beleue that Christ spake not properly, sith Christ calleth his words, spirit, because they be so proper, that they come nere to y• nature of the Godhead (as being his words who is naturally God) then the words of men are able to doe. and as the Godhead is most immurable, and not at al subiect to any change: euen so those words, which partake most of the Godhead, are most vn∣changeable, and least figuratiue. for al figuratiue speaches areTropi. changed and abused, hauing the name of tropes among the Gre∣cians, , ab eo quod vocabula mutantur a propria significatione in alienam. figuratiue speaches are called in greake tropes, that is to say, chāges, because y• words are changedMalach. from their proper significatiō to an vnproper meaning. but God is not changed, nor those words be not changed frō their proper signification, which God hath called spirit & life. but as they par∣take y• Godhead, so doc they partake the proprietie of not being changed from their most accustomed meaning, & proper nature. It is a world to see what difference there is betwene y• words of Christes Ghospell, & the interpretation of the false Ghospel∣lers:The er∣rour of y• Sacramē taires. betwene the old Fathers, and the new brethern: betwene Catholikes & Protestants. Mark I pray thee, good Reader, the differences diligently. Christ by his incarnation was made to vs the bread of life, to the end we might eate his Godhead otherwise then the Fathers had done before. the new brethern after the incarnation and sup∣per of Christ, wherein we should haue the Godhead geuen vs, bid vs beleue vpon Christ in heauen, and so to fede vpon him by faith alone, as No & Abraham did. Their councl is not  in bidding vs sede by saith, but where is y• Godhead  by this
meanes? is that also receaued by faith? why, so it might haue bene receaued and so it was receaued before Christ was man? Where is the food of Angels made the food of man? where is thePsal. 77. word of God so geuen to me after his incarnation, as it could not be geuen before? Where is any euerlasting meate for my body? Where is the supper, which may fede the whole man? faith fedeth my vnderstāding, but my wil & affectiō hath as much nede to be fed. my flesh is rebelliouse to my spirit, & it hath nede to be fed. my body was the meane to poyson my soule, therefore my soule must haue a medicine, which shalbe receaued into my body, and so be communicated vnto my soule. S. Ireneus reproued those heretiks, who because men wereIreneus. aduersus Her. li. 5. called in scripture spirituall, denied the true resurrection of their flesh, as though their spirit only should tary for euer. and yet our new brethern, where so euer mention is made of spirit or of a spirituall body and flesh, so wrast it, as though the reall sub∣stance of flesh in the Sacrament were by that word denied or di∣minisshed: whereas it is rather increased, for so much as that flesh which is spirituall is not thereby the lesse true flesh, but it parta∣keth the more of the spirit. And because a spirit once created is by the natural gift of God immortal, a spiritual flesh is likewise like to the spirit in that case. S. Augustine writeth, that after re∣surrectionAugust. lib. 1. re∣tractat. cap. 13. & de ci∣uit. Dei. lib. 13. cap. 22. the body shall no more haue nede of corporal nourish∣ments, because the only spirit shall suffise to nourish it. qua causa etiam spiritale erit, for which cause also the body shalbe spiritual. now as after resurrection the spiritual being, which our bodies shal haue, doth not diminish the truthe of their nature, but decla∣reth a wonderful abettering of them, in yt they be made in maner equal to spiritual substances: euen so the body of Christ in his supper is spiritual, not for any lack of his true substance vnder y• formes of bread and wine, but because it is wholy possessed and
replenished with the Godhead, and is present after the maner of a spirit, as being neither sene, nor felt, nor tasted, but only bele∣ued. And therefore this blessed Sacrament is worthely called of the Churche at the consecration of the blood, yea (as I think) it is12. The my∣sterie of faith. 1. Tim. 3. called of S. Paule also, mysterium fidei. the myserie of faith, because it secretly cōteineth vnder the formes of bread ond wine, the flesh, the blood, the soule and the spirit, or Godhead of Iesus Christ. The which mysterie of faith the Deacons vsed to deliuer to the faithful after consecration, as Iustinus the martyr doth witnesse, and therefore S. Paule willed the Deacons to vse that mysterie of faith with a pure and cleane conscience. To be short: The Sacramentaries abuse y• word of God mi∣serablie, when they talk of the spirit and of the flesh of Christ in such sort as they do. For Christ sayd, the flesh profiteth nothing, meaning only the corruptible flesh of a bare man, who is no God. The Sacramentaries expound it, as if it were sayd, it is no∣thing worth to eate Christes own flesh really, but only it is pro∣fitable to fede on it by faith. Christ sayd, it is the spirit that quickeneth, meaning the God∣head, to make his flesh profitable vnto vs. They take it so, as though the spirit alone did qicken vs at his last supper, with∣out eating his fleshe really. Christ by naming the spirit reuoketh ot the real gift of his flesh, the eating whereof he auouched to be necessarie for vs. They vse it contrarily to proue his flesh to be geuen vs really in his last supper, as though he had corre∣cted his former words: Christ meant to adde more dignitie and worthinesse to the eating of his flesh, then is in other mens flesh, because the spirit made it alone quick, aliue, and profitable. They endeuour by the precense of the word spirit, to say, he wold not geue his flesh to be eaten in dede, and so abuse yt name
to the diminishing of his inestimable gift. Christ sayd: my words are spirit, that is to say of diuine power, & proceding from God. They imagin he sayd: my words be vnproper and cropicall or parabolicall, as being only true by an allegory. Christ meant his words to procede from his own spirit and maiesty, and thereore to be true aboue the course of nature. They expond thē as if he had sayd, you must care my flesh in your spirit only, & not in very dede. Thus they wreast that to the spirit of mā, which Christ said of the spirit of God, and vnder this ambiguitie of words they co∣uer theyr poisoued doctrine. Christ would vs to vnderstand spiritually the reall ating of his reall flesh, because he would geue it vs without losse of his own body, without lothsomnes of our stomacks, and without remouing from his own place in heauen. They apply the spiri∣tuall vnderstanding of eating his flesh, to take away the real a∣ting of it, as though he that vnderstandeth a thing spiritually, should not therefore eate that really, which he vnderstandeth to be mysticall. The substance of Christes flesh eaten is the ground of that mystery, figure, Sacrament, or spiritual vnderstanding, which Christ spake of. Because he would them to eate his flesh, not to fil theyr bellies, but to signifie and partake y• merits other∣wise done in that flesh. They taking away the ground of the figure (which is Christes fleshe) adde of theyr own iention, bread & wine to be the groūd of this figure and of the spirituall vnderstanding. They making Christes spiritual words tropicall and grama∣tically iguratiue, abase thē beneth y• condition of cōmon words. For a proper word i of more dignitie then an improper, and mē for the most part speake properly. Christ sayd, my words are life, meaning thē to be so proper, that they performe whatsoeuer they promise or speake, as hauing the propriety of the Godhead which
is most far from all figures, shadowes, and changes. They make them dead words. For seing the mind of the spea∣ker vttered in plain words is y• life of the words, the same words vttering the speakers mind obscurely are as dead and without life, vntil they be expoūded. What shal I say more? they take these words to be figuratiue in such sort, that they make thē inferiour to the common words of mortall men, who neuer ligthtly vse y• words flesh and blood for the signes of flesh and blood, but for the substances of them, and muche lesse doe they vse, flesh and blood so to signifie bread and wine, that the same bread and wine must again signifie Christes fleshe and blood, as I haue noted before that the Sacramentaries are constrained to say, if they will defend theyr false and  doctrine, the which I praie God they may haue grace to see and to amend.
The preface of the fourth booke. VUe haue shewed what proufes may be brought out of Christes promise at Capharnaum, for his reall and corpo∣ral presence in the Eucharist: it remaineth we nowe de∣clare the same truth, by that whiche he performed in his last sup∣per. And because the chefe controuersie is, whether the words of Christ do meane as they sound, or els must be taken otherwise: I wil first make it plaine, that they ought to be taken properly & as they sound to men of common vnderstanding, vntill an euident reason be brought why they must be meant vnproperly. & there∣withal I shew, that no reason is now to be heard for the vnpro∣per interpretation of them, because the tyme of all such allegatiōs is expired more then fiften hundred yeres past, for so much as the whole Church is in possession of the proper meaning. Afterward I wil proue the proper & literall meaning of those words by the circumstances of the supper: by the conference of holy scriptures taken out of the old and newe testament, and last of all by the commandement whiche was geuen the Apostles to continue the Sacrament of Christes supper vntill he come to iudge the worlde. If in conferring the promise with the perfor∣mance, or by any other occasion I chance to say somwhat, whiche was before touched: I must aske pardon thereof, as who ende∣uore partly to make al things playne, partly to confirme the pre∣sent matter, whereof I speake by such conuenient allegations as for the tyme come to my remembrance. Once I am sure, it is not a thing affected of me to say the same thing oft: albeit either the affinitie of the argument, or the desyre to haue the thing wel remembred, or my forgetfulnes may cause me to fall in to that default.
The Chapiters of the fourth Booke. 1. That no reasō ought to be heard, why the words of Christes supper should now be expoūded vnproperly or figuratiuely. & that the Sa∣cramentaries can neuer be sure thereof. 2. That as al other, so the words of Christes supper ought to be taken properly, vntill the cōtra∣rie doth euidently appere. 3. The proper fignification of these words (this is my body) and (this is my blood) is, that the substance of Christes body & blood is con∣teined vnder the visible formes of bread & wine. 4. That the pronoune (this) in Christes vvords cā point neither to bread nor to vvine. 5. That the pronoune (this) can not pointe to any certein acte, vvhiche is a doing about the bread and vvine. 6. That the sayd pronoune pointeth finally to the body and blood of Christ, and in the meane tyme it signifieth particularly one certaine kind of food. 7. The naming of the chalice proueth not the rest of the vvords to be figuratiue, but helpeth much the reall presence.
8. That the vvordes of Christes supper be proper, though many other (vnlike to them) be figu∣ratiue. 9. The reall presence is declared by xxvij. circun∣stances vvhich belong to Christes supper. 10. The same is proued by conference of holy scrip∣tures in the nevv Testament. 11. Why the Sacrament is called bread after con∣secration. 12. The real presence is proued by cnference of ho∣ly scriptures of the old Testament. 13. Item by the vvords (hoc facite) vvhich do signi∣fie, make this thing. 14. Item by the vvords: for the remembrance of me. 15. The grosse error, & impudent chalenge of M. Novvell is corrected, and fully satisfied con∣cerning the cōference betwene these vvords: this is my body, and, I am the true vine.
¶ That no reason ought to be heard, why ye words ofThe first Chapter. Christes supper should now be expoundd vnpro∣perly or figuratuely. and that the Sacramentaries can neuer be sure thereof. CHrist in his last supper was bth like a testatour, who disposeth before his death what shalbe com of his goods afterward, and like a maker of lawes, who prescribeth anThe gift or legacy of Christ. order to be kept in his commō weale. The legacie bequeath ed, or rather the gift made by his life tyme in consyderation of death cereinly approching, was ye deliuery of those inestimable twels, which he called his own body and blood, willing his heyrs and fruids to take & to care hs bod, which should be geuen for thē: and to drink his blood of the new Testament, which should be shed for the remission of synns. The law which he made, was, that the Apostles and their suc∣cessonesThe law of Christ. (in the like degree of Priesthood) should make that Sa∣crament, which he had then instituted, for the remembrance of his death, vntill he came again to iudge the world. His Testament and the gift made therein was confirmed by yt famouse death, which he siffered the next day vpon the Crosse. His law was receaued and practised from the coming doune of the holy Ghost euen to this day through al the catholike Church. A few yeres after Christes death his Testamēt and law whichThe wri∣ting of both. he made by mouth, was by witnesses of sufficient credit, put in writing, published, and acknowleged of al faithful men. If there∣fore any question arise cōcerning such words, as were either in y• last wil or in ye law, or the narration of them who wrote the Gos∣pell: We ought to weigh, whether that question be moued of a thing not already determined, or els vpō that which many yeres before was accustomed and receaued. For as reason would a newNee doubts▪ doubt to be newly dissolued: so no reason, no law, no conscience
can suffer, that a matter once fully decided and perfitly ended, should be again called into iudgement. The question is, whether the words of Christ be figuratiue, or proper. I say, that question was decided aboue fiftene hundred yeres past. For when yt wil & law of Christ was first published,The que∣stion deci∣ded of old. al men toke those words, This is my body, and this is my blood, to be proper: And so we receaued of our forefathers from hand to hand, in so much yt the Church neuer heard before these daies any other doctrine preached by publike auctoritie. it neuer saw other practise, then to adore with Godly honoure those things ouer which the Priest, as Christes mynister, had sayd the words before rehearsed. The vniuersal preaching and vsage of Christes Church is a sufficient witnesse, that it hath always taken those words to be proper & not figuratiue. Whiche thing sith it is so, minimè suntPaulus ff. de leg. mutanda (sayth the lawier) quae interpretationem certam semper habuerunt. Those things are least of all to be changed, whiche haue always had a knowen vnderstanding. And yet if we should come to geue accompt of these vniuersall customs, how reasona∣bly might it be applied to our purpose, which y• same lawier saith. Si de interpretatione legis quaeratur, inprimis inspiciendum est, quo iure ciuitas retro in huiusmodi casibus vsa fuisset. Optima e∣nim est legū interpres . If a question be moued cōcer∣ning the interpretation of a law, it is principally to be attended, what order and law the common weale hath vsed before in thoseCustom. cases, for custome is the best interpreter of lawes. We are sure that before the birth of uther, yea also of Beren∣garius,The vse of Gods church. al the Church vsed to worship the body & blood of Christ vnder the forms ofbread and wine: and yet it could not haue done so, if it had taken the word, body, for material bread only signi∣fying ye body, & yt name of, blood, for wine which was appointed
only to signifie Christes blood. For the Church of God wold ne∣uer haue worshipped with Godly honour bakers bread & wine of the grape, though they were tokens of neuer so goodly things. But if the Sacramentaries answer, that once the Church did other wise, and yt the auncient fathers neither adored the body & blood of Christ vnder yt formes of bread and wine, nor preached the words of Christes supper to be proper, besyde that such an∣swer of theyrs is stark false, as by yt plain words of S. Ambrose,The ado∣ration of Christes body. of S. , of S. Augustine and of Theodoretus it shal here∣after euidērly appere: yet surely though so much could not be pre∣sently declared, yet it were a great folly vpon the allegation of a thing so far beyond memorie of mā (as the primitiue Church is) to leaue the manifest vse and custom of the present Church, the which Christ no lesse redemed, no lesse gouerneth and loueth, thē he did the faithfull of the first six hundred yeres. Furthermore if all that is presently beleued shalbe vndone, as oft as it is pretendd that the primatiue Church thought other∣wise, what quietnes can there be in the Church after this order? what end shall we haue of controuersies? When shall we hope to see that agreement of minds, that consent of wils, that vnifor∣mitie of life and belefe, which our grandfathers and great grand∣fathers had? The Trinitaries of Polonia vnder their Capitain A new heresie in Poolelād. (who is a false preacher in  yt chief citie of y• Kingdom) said that the name of the blessed Trinitie is a monsterouse thing, not because they openly deny the father, y• sonne, & y• holy ghost, or the equality of them, nor because they defend any more then one God: But they affirm, y• albeit there are three vnius naturae, of one nature & of one Godhead, yet there are not three, say they, y• are vna natura, vel Deitas, one nature or Godhead. And for proufe hereof they appeale to the new Testament and old, and to the
Churche which they call priuatiue, which was of ye first two hun∣dred yeres, or thereabout, bidding vs, looke whether we find, Trinum & vnum deū, or Trinitatem in vnitate, or vnum deum in tribus personis, in any scripture, or in any Father of that age. As for S. Athanasius, S. Hilarie, S. Basil, S. Augustin & so forth, they esteme no more, then our new brethren esteme S. Bede, or S. Thomas of Aquine. The booke intituled of the Tri∣nitie, which is in S. Iustinus works, they affirm not to be his, vsing presently the same shamles shifts against the blessed name and nature of yt Trinitie, which the Sacramentaries vse against the nature & name of the Masse. Not long after these Trinitaries, an other cumpany began toCircum∣ of them sels think circumcision so necessarie, that in Lituania many  them selues, who to defend that heresy must nedes deny S. Pan les epistles, as Luther hath denied S. Iames his epistle, for that it is against his iustification of only faith. And what forbiddeth an other sect to doe the like in an otherTertull. de prae scriptiō. aduersus haeretic. matter? Thus alwaies are we seeking (as Tertullian sayth) but we neuer find any thing, if once we goe from that which we all beleued. If then a stay be to be made at any tyme in questions of belefe, if we may be sure of any article of all our faith, it behoueth we vndoe not that, which our forfathers haue so long before conclu∣ded to be true. No reason of inducīg a new faith can be so weigh∣ty, as the peace and preseruation of vnitie in Christes Churche ought to be singularly weighed of euery man. There was but one vniuersall chang to be loked for in religiōOne chāge on∣ly could be in religiō. from the beginning of Christes Church to the last end thereof. And that was at ye coming of Christ into the world. The which chang that it might not be sodein, it was prophecied of before in all ages both by y• dedes and words of Patriarchs, of Prophets,
and of Priests. And when the fulnesse of tyme was come, it was proued to become by miracles of so great vertue and name, that the very stones, that is to say, the infidels were turned by them: so great a matter it was with God, to haue the order of his reli∣giō altered. And now shal we after Christes faith preached & be∣leued fiften hūdred yeres together, shall we now take a new faith of Luther, of Zumglius, and of Caluin? If they be Christ, I grāt we must admit theyr doctrine: but if they be not so, it is not possible they should come of God, though they came with neuer so many miracles, but they must be the forerunners of . To come again nere  own matter, if we shall geue any eare to them who affirm the words of Christes supper to be figura∣tiue,Iacob. 1. that must be with some dout of our former faith. and in dou∣ting thereof we are become men that lacke faith. which if it be not sure, it is not good, for so much as it hath not the foundation ofHeb. 11. the things, which the Apostle sayd were to be hoped for. Or tell me, he that first gaue eare to Berēgarius or Zuinglius against the bessed Sacrament of y• altar, may the same man geue care now to another that should wickedly say, the Apostles hadA teacher of new do∣ctrine is not to be heard. no authoritie geuen them to write holy scriptures? If he may, thē he may dout of the sayd utoritie. and yet surely it were very hard to proue to a wrangler, that such autoritie of writing Gos∣pels or epistles could be iustified out of the expresse words of the holy Bible. But if it be vnlawfull to heare any such seditiouse man, how could it be lawful when eare was first geuen to Berengarius orBerenga rius prea∣ched a new do∣ctrine. Zuinglius? for then it was no lesse generally receaued through all Christendom, and much more expresly to be proued by the ho∣ly scripture, that the things set foorth and consecrated vpon the holy table and altar were the reall body and blood of Christ, then it is sayd, that whatsoeuer the Apostles did write, should be con∣firmed
and established, as the words of the holy goo. Where yet I will enter farther into the  of the cause▪ And before we heare what reasōs he can bring, who wil reproue the faith of the church in the blessed Eucharist, I say, he is notThe Sa∣cramen∣taries can haue no ground of their do∣ctrine. to be heard, because it is not possible that his reason can haue any sufficient ground, why we should geue ouer our old faith: and that whether we respect the writen word of God, or y• faith of all Christians, or the glorie of God, or the loue of Christ toward vs, or the profite of his churche. For either can he shew, where it is writen, or when it was1. 2. 3. 4. 5. beleued, This is not my body: nor can proue that it is more ho∣norable to God, or more agreable to Christes coming, or more profitable to vs, that we should lack his body present vnder the forme of bread, rather then haue it. For if the death of Christ did procede from excessiue charitie of him toward vs, and of God and our profite, that his Sonne should take flesh and dye for vs: I can not deuise how the most honorable remembrance of theThe ho∣nour of God. same death should not be most according to th'intent of Christ, and to our soules health. And doubtles it is a more honorable and a more louing remembrāce, where the true substāce of Christ is made really present for the keping of his death in memorie, & we take more benefite by such a commemoration of his bloodyThe pro∣fite of the faithfull. sacrifice: then if in stede of Christes reall body, a peece of bread and wine be left vnto vs with neuer so great a feding by faith. For imagine ye the faith to be neuer so great, I am sure it will not be the lesse because Christ is taken into our hands, mouthes, and brests. The touching of his garment neuer hindred anyLucae. 6. good hart, much lesse can the taking of his whole body hurt our faith or deuotion. And yet if corporal touching did not also help, the faithfull womā troubled so long with a bloody fluxe, had notLucae 8. bene so miraculously cured by touching the hemme of Christes
garment. Her faith touched his Godhead, and her soule was healed. Her body also touched his manhod, and her body was likewise cured. Seing then it is writen: This is my body, and all men beleued it once as well as the other articles of our faith: Seing that be∣eif is so honorable vnto God, so mete for Christes coming and loue toward vs, and so profitable vnto vs, that the contrarie as∣sertion shall lack the like holy Scriptures, and the like belefe of the Church, the like honour of God, the like loue of Christ, and the like profite of our soules: There can be no reason alleged hereafter, why we should oce geue audiēce to him, that preten∣deth to proue the body of Christ not to be really present vnder the formes of bread and wine. For what thing possibly can ex∣cede these causes before alleged? Moreouer, all igures were inuented partly for lack of properTwo cau ses of spea king figu∣ratily. words, partly for the pleasantnes of speaking. Christ surely lac∣ked not words to shew, yt he gaue bread for a signe of his body, if in dede he had done so. For sith Zuinglius and Caluin had words to signifie their opinion in this matter, it could not be but that Christ was able to haue spoken that which they speake. If then he spake not figuratiuely for necessity, our new brethern must proue, that he spake figuratiuely for his only pleasure. but how can they know that?Aug. de doctrina Christ. l. 3. cap, 10. S. Augustine biddeth vs nolesse beware, that we take not a propre speache for a figuratiue, then that we take not a figura∣tiue speache for a proper. The rule to know ye one from the other is this: Vt quicquid in sermone diuino &c. that what soeuer in the woord of God can be properly referred neither to the ho∣nestie of manners, nor to y• truthe of faith, thou maist know to be figuratiue. Yf nowe these wordes of Christ, this is my body and this is my blood, may be referred to the truthe of faith (in
so muche as all men haue beleued the body of Christ to be geuenThe pro∣per sense of  is no∣ther aga∣ the , nor good ma∣ners. in the Sacrament of the altar, not diminishing thereby their faith in any other article) by S. Augustins iugdement these wordes be not siguratiue. For certeinlie they be not only nothing against the honestie of maners (as good men vnderstand Christes pre∣sence vnder the form of bread) but rather the strong belefe of them maketh al men more honest in life, whiles they come with great feare to so dreadfull mysteries. therefore it followeth y• they be not of necessitie figuratiue: of necessitie, I say, because there is no repugnance in saith or good maners, why they may not be proper. whiche notwithstanding a man for his pleasure might vse his wordes in a figuratiue sorte, when he neded not▪ but who so affirmeth so muche, beside that he breaketh S. Augustins rule, he casteth himselfe in greate daunger of prouing y• whiche hangeth of an other mans pleasure. What argument haue our new brethern to proue, that it plea∣sedWe can neuer be sure that Christ spake figu ratiuely. Christ at this tyme to speake vnproperlie? what ground in the word of God can their opinion haue? how can they be sure, that they erre not in their indgement? when we reade that God is angry or sory, or that Iohn Baptist is Elias, or that the rocke is Christ, we say they are siguratiue speaches, because they can not be proper. Anger falleth not in God, nor sorrow. the rocke for that reason is not Christ in person and nature, because it is a rocke. for by nature they are seueral thinges, and suche as do not stand together. the like might haue bene thought in this Sacrament, if Christ had sayd: this bread is my body, and this wine is my blood. but he foresaw greate cause, why he wold not say so. For he wold by his worde so make his body and blood of bread and wine, that when the substance of his body and blood should be present, the substances of bread and wine should not remain, of this we are sure, because besyde the faith
of the whole Churche, the proper signification of the words in∣forceth so much, as now it shalbe declared. ¶ That as all other, so the words of Christes supperThe ii. Chapiter. ought to be taken properly, vutill the contrarie doth euidently appeare. WHat meaning words ought to haue, we iudge most directly by the proper signification and common vse of them. For if the contrary do not appeare, al wordsWordes are to be taken as they do properly signifie. must be taken in yt meaning ad sense, which the vsual custom of speaking and writing hath geuen them. Otherwise all things are confounded, and the profite, which cometh of words, is lost. Neither any man shall know what an other meaneth, neither how to make his own bargaine, or last will and Testament. Certè peruersissimum est (sayth Tertullian) vt carnem nomi∣nantes,Tertull. de carne Christi. animam intelligamus, & animam significantes, carnem in∣terpretemur. Omnia periclitabuntur aliter accipi quàmsunt, & amittere quod sunt, dum aliter accipiuntur, si aliter quàm sunt, cognoninantur. Fides nominum, salus est proprietatum. Truly it is a most ouerthwart thing, that naming the esh we should vnderstand the soule, and signifying the soule, we shouldThings must be beleued a they are named. expound it the flesh. all things shall be in danger to be otherwise taken then they are, and whiles they are otherwise takē, to loose that they are, if they be named otherwise then they are. The faithfull naming of things preserueth their proprieties. By these words of this auncient Doctour we may iudge, how foule a thing it is, that hearing the body of Christ named, we should without any reasonable cause expound it the figure of his body: And hearing the blood of Christ named, we should ex∣pound it the signe of his blood. As well when he is named the
Sonne of God, we may expound it, the image of the Sonne of God. And so we open a gate to all heresie, we take away all cer∣teintie of speache, and make the holy Scriptures subiect to euery mans filthy lust & pleasure. We must therefore kepe euery word in his own nature and in his knowen signification, except it be manifest vnto vs that the speaker meante otherwise. Doth not naturall reason teach vs so much? Sayth not Marcellus the same, being taught only by cōmonLi. 67. de leg. 3. wisedom and iudgement? Non aliter a significatione verborum recedi oportet, quàm cum manifestū est aliud sensisse testatorem. We must not otherwise depart from ye significatiō of the words, but when it is manifest y• the testatour thought an other thing. In which rule if we rest, all the world well knoweth that whenThe names v∣sed at Christes supper are to be kept. Christ said (This is my body) and (This is my blood) the words both by theire propre signisication, and by the present vse of all speakers and writers, do importe the reall presence of Christes true body and blood. For neither the pronoun (This) pointeth to a thing absent,This is body. neither the verb (is) can be said of that, which presently hath no true being, neither the noun (body) vseth to be verisied of a sha∣dow, figure or token of a body, neither when Christ sayeth: This is my body, any faithfull man doubteth, but that both Christ hadmy. a true naturall body which he might geue, and is able to make his word true, & vseth to vtter no falshood. And whereas Christ sayd after bread taken, This is my body, it is geuen vs to vnder∣stand, that by his word he maketh that particular substaunce of bread, which was taken into his hands, to be his own body. what cause can now be brought why we should forsake these knowen significations, and seeke out other more strange? The law of nature wold vs to rest in the names which we find. Ira∣dition also maketh for the same interpretation. And surely these
are yt chief rules to know yt meanig which any words may haue. Epiphanius in this matter hath a notable rule, saying: Om∣niaEpiphā. lib. 2. to. 1. haer. 61. diuina verba non habent opus allegoria, sed prout se habent, accipienda sunt. Speculatione autem indigent & sensu, ad cogno∣scendam vniuscuiusque argumēti vim & facultatem. Oportet au∣tem & traditione vti, non enim omnia a diuina Scriptura accipi possunt. All the words of God nede not an allegorie (or a figu∣ratiueTraditiō is to be re spected in exposiding holy scri∣ptures. meaning) but they are to be taken as they be. They re∣quire in dede a diligent obseruation and vnderstanding, that the strength and power of euery matter proponed may be knowen. (wherein it behooueth to vse tradition.) For all things cā not be gathered out of the diuine writing. Here is the first place ge∣uen by Epiphanius to the naturall takīg of words, for al things be not figuratiue, though many be. To know which is figuratiue, and which is not, diligent con∣syderation, and auncient tradition helpeth much. Well, of other helpes hereafter. Now let this be graunted, that the first rule of all maketh for the Catholikes. Which is, that euery word and speache, as long as the contrary is not manifestly proued, is to be taken, as it commonly doth signifie. According to the which rule these words of Christ (This is my body) and (This is my blood) affirme the reall presence of Christes body and blood, as now it shalbe shewed. ¶ The proper signification of these words This is my body, and This is my blood, is, that the substanceThe ii. Chapiter. of Christes body and blood is couteyned vnder the visible formes of bread and wine. WHen the Paschall Lamb was eaten, and the DisciplesIoan. 13. feete washed, Christ by taking bread into his hands declared him self to be disposed, to vse it for some one purpose or other: by blessing, and thanksgeuing ouer it, we are
informed he wold make some diuine mysterie of that bread. And when he began to make the mysterie, saying (this is) and ended it, adding thereto (my body) we lern by the two first words (thisThis, can be said but of one sub∣stance. is) that his mysterie consisteth not of bread and of his body, but of one substance only, which was declared to be so really inten∣ded as well in his mind, as at his tongs end, that hauing once named what it was, to wit (my body) no mā aliue might doubt, but either he both in word and dede made a false signification, (which is with all true Catholikes a thing without al possibili∣tie) or els that it was in dede so, as his words of blessing, and of saying, This is my body, witnessed. And for asmuch as his word affirmed this to be his body, and his dede of taking bread, and of blessing shewed his words to beChristes words di∣rected to the bread. directed vnto y• which was in his hand, or lay before him (which was bread before) it must nedes be, that the pronoun (this) so shewed to his Apostles ye thing already subiect vnto their eyes, that much more it serued to teache their vnderstanding verily, this, which appeared to them bread, to be in substance, at the en∣ding of the words, his own body. Therefore we teache the pronoun (this) to serue both to theThe strēgth of the pro∣noun this. eyes and to the vnderstanding of the Apostles. to their eyes, in pointing to the foorm of bread which they saw: to their vnder∣standing, in teaching that substance which was present vnder that they saw, to be his own body streight when it was so na∣med. And in so much as the same forme of bread tarieth after cō∣secration which was there before, the pronoun (this) doth all∣wayes direct their eyes to one and the same forme of wheaten bread, which was there when Christ tooke it first. and also it in∣sinuateth to their vnderstanding, that they must looke (by the nonn that foloweth the verb) to know what proprietie or sub∣stance that visible thing hath. And seing the noun which cometh
after, is not the name of a qalitie or proprietie, but the name of a substance, and of such a substance as before was not present: Without all question, these words (This is my body) haue accor∣dingThe pr∣per sense of Chri∣stes wor∣des. to the proper custom of speache, this meaning: The sub∣stance which is conteyned vnder this forme of bread, and vnder the accidents the which I shew you, is the substance of my body. Whereof it foloweth, that the same thing is no longer the sub∣stance of bread, and consequently therevnto, that the substance of the bread is, by the word of Christ, changed into the substanceTransub∣stantiatiō. of his body. And likewise when Christ sayd: This is my blood, the sense is: The substance which is conteined vnter the forme of wine (which you sensibly perceaue to be in this cuppe) is my blood, or is the substance of my blood. Which interpretation is so true, that Christ hath forced vs to1. Co. 11. Luc. 22. seeke it out, in causing S. Luke, and S. Paule to write: This chalice is the new Testament in my blood. For of necessitie we must interpret these words, This chalice, that is to say, the thing conteined inthis chalice, is my blood. As therefore (This) in na ming the chalice doth serue to shew the place & compasse, with∣in which I must looke for that substance, which afterward is de∣fined to be the blood of Christ: euen so (this) being spoken of the bread which was taken into Christes hands, doth first point vnto the eye, within what circuit or quantitie the mind shal seke for that substance or proprietie, which afterward the mouth of Christ wil declare. and when the name is once heard, it sheweth it to be yt substance of Christes body. Out of which discourse we may gather two conclusions: The one, that (this) beginneth most naturally with the sense of man: The other, that it with the rest of yt speache informeth ye vnderstanding of more then the eye saw. To ye sense it sheweth y• outward formes, to ye vnderstā∣dīg it sheweth prcipally ye inward substāce vnder those formes.
Now looke by how many degrees the inward substance dothhoc, this,  the noune (body.) passe the outward formes, and the end of the talk doth passe the beginning thereof: by so many the pronoun (this) rather ap∣perteyneth to the substantiue (body) wherein it endeth, then to the formes, within the which it goeth about to shew an invisible substance. Which being so, Hoc, (this) is in Latin of the neuter gender, because the noune substantiue (corpus) body, wherevn∣to it hasteneth) is of the neuter gender. And in the consecration of the blood Hic, (this) of certeintie is the masculine gender, be∣cause sanguis blood, whereto it belongeth, is of the masculine gender. Thus the literall sense of Christes words is declared, which ought to be taken for true, vntill the contrarie be proued. But this propriety of words standing (as it ought to stand) marke that whensoeuer any Catholike sayth, The substance of Christes body and blood to be vnder the formes of bread and wine, he speaketh not any other thing, then the natural and proper signi∣fication of Christes words doth geue. For as he that pointing to that kind of beast (which an other cometh to learne) sayeth: This is an Oelephant, in effect sayth: The substance of an Oele∣phant is contemed vnder this visible forme: So Christ hauing taken bread, and saying, This is my body, sayeth in effect: the substance of my body is conteined vnder the forme of this bread. Only this oddes is betwene Christes naming and ours, thatChristes naming to making. we either must name the thing by his former substance or pro∣prietie, or els we make a lye: But Christ by  one thing ye name of an other, geueth it also the substance thereof whensoe∣uerRom. 4. he speaketh, not in parables, but in the way of doing some good turn. for he being God, as easily calleth things which are not, as those which are. and by his calling he maketh them to be as he nameth them, and not as them selues were.
¶ That the pronoun (this) in Christes wordes canThe . Chapiter. point neither to bread nor to wine. SEing Christ in his last supper assigneth none other substāce to (this, and this) besyde the substance of body and blood, and yet the Sacramentaries will not graunt so muche: I ask them (for as muche as although it were so, that his words did mean an accidentall token of his body and blood, that token must be grounded in some substance or other) I ask them what substance is pointed vnto (as wherein the figure of Christes body and blood may by their iudgement consist) when Christ saith, this is my body and this is my blood? is any substance in∣cluded in those words, or none at all? yf none, (this) may not be sayd to be any particular nature at all. for yf it be any certain thing consisting by it self, it is a substance: if it be in any other thing, it may be an accident and qualitie. but Christ saith not, this is in my body, but this is my body. Admit now that he meant, this doth signifie my body. yet this that doth so signifie, must be sumwhat or other. I aske what thisThe opt∣mō of the prote∣stants. thing is, which you say doth signifie or shadow Christes body? you must nedes say, it is bread and wine, and therefore you must expound it, this bread signifieth my body, & this wine signifieth my blood. This interpretation of yours can not be true. For (this) wil not agree with bread or wine neither in greeke, nor in latin. For hoc in latin and  in greek is of the neuter gender, but panis in latin and  in greeke is of the masculine gender. therefore hoc, (this) doth neither in greeke nor in latin agree with bread. likewise (hic) in latin is of the masculine gen∣der, vinum, wine is of the newter. and contrarie wise in greke  is of the newter gender, and,  wine, is of the mascu∣line gender, therefore (this) nother in greeke nor in latine can be referred to wine.
Now to say, hoc, this thing, (vnderstanding, which is bread) is to correct the words of Christ, as though he had sayd: hoc quod est panis, est corpus meum, this which is bread is my body. & yet if it had bene so sayd, the sense must haue bene thus: the substance of bread doth signifie the body of Christ. for that thing which is bread, is to say, the substance of bread. which if itThe sub∣stance of bread is not pom∣ted vnto. were so, euery substance of bread should be the signe of Christes body, because that which the substance of one loafe is, ye substance of an other loaf is also in the same kind. & consequently when∣soeuer any man eateth any substāce of bread without examining1. Co. 11. himself, he is giltie of the body of Christ. Again when it were sayd, hic est sanguis meus: hic, being of the masculine gender, could not be expounded by, hoc quod est vinū, (this thing which is wine) for it standeth not neutrally to signi∣fie this thing, but only agreeth with the noune blood, which fo∣loweth after, when it is sayd: this is my blood. The pronoun is put in the same case, gender, and number whereof the substance is, wherevnto it pointeth. as when ChristMat. 21. sayd: hic est haeres, this is the heire, hic, this, is of the masculine gender, aswell as the noune substātiue, hres, an heire. hc est ho∣raLuc. 22. vestra, this is your hower. As hower is of the femine gender, so is the pronoun haec, this. hoc est opus Dei, this is the worke ofIoan. 6. God. as opus worke is of the neuter gender, so is the pronoune, hoc, that. But when Christ tooke bread & blessed, he pointed notThis, and bread be not of one gender. to bread by the pronoune (this) as to the substance which should remaine at the end of his whole talke. for bread is of the mascu∣line gender, both in greke and latine. Again let vs consyder, that it is all one to say, hoc est corpusCypriā. de coena Domini not farre from the beginning meum, and haec est caro mea. in so much that S. Cyprian re∣hearseth the words of Christes supper by these words, haec est caro mea, where haec being the feminine gender doth only agree
with caro flesh, and not with, panis bread, which is neither of the neuter gender, that hoc may agree with, nor of the feminine tha haec may be referred to it, but only of y• masculine gender. There∣fore if Christ had pointed finally to bread, he must hane sayd, neither hoc est corpus, nor haec est caro, but hic est corpus meum, vnderstanding to hic, the substantiue (panis) and in Greke itThis, in English is of all genders. should haue bene , and not . In English (this) is of all gēders, and therefore it can not be exemplified in our barbarous tong, which thereby appereth not so mete to haue the word of God handled literally in it, as the lerned tongs are, although it is able enoughe to receaue an interpretation of Gods word. But it is much like as if one pointing to a man, called Lau∣rence, should say, she is Laurence, or her is Laurence, which is as good english among the Brytons, as hoc panis, and hic vinū, is good latine among the Sacramentaries. Thus make they the wisedome of God to speake at this time, who say that the pro noune (this) determineth and pointeth to bread, as to a thing that still remaineth in his old substance, whereas bread is of the masculine gender, and the pronowne hoc, (this) of the newter gender. and God prouided of purpose yt the article (this) should neither agree with bread nor with wine, but only with body and blood, or with the chalice wherein the blood is conteined. ¶ That the pronoun (this) can not point to any certain acte, which is a doing about the bread and wine.The v. Chapiter. LEast any man should thinke that in these wordes (this is(This) doth not stand to signifie many things. my body) the prononu (this) doth stand to signifie neither bread nor body, but only this thing which is a doing, where∣by a certaine taking, and breaking, and eating of bread in the remembrance of Christ should be meante: he must vnderstand that euery thing which is so distinctly shewed, is a particular
thing, and it is but one thing. otherwise it should haue bene sayd in the plurall number, these things are the tokens of my body & of my blood. But now sith it is sayd in the singular number (this) it must nedes be only one singular thing which is spoken of. Therefore if you will haue (hoc) this thing, to appointe to a doing, name which doing it is. For Christ did many thinges in his supper. He took bread, he blessed, he brake, he gaue. To which doth (hoc, this thing) pointe? To all it can not, sor they all be not only thisAll the doings be not poin∣ted vnto. one thing in the singular number, but many thinges. If any one be named, I aske which of them? If breaking (which is one of the most like of all owtward actions to signifie the death of Christ) I aske how you are able to proue, that breaking is poin∣ted vnto? surely S. Paule saith, the bread which we break is the1. Co. 10. communicating of our lords body. which could not be so, if the words of Christ, which make it the signe of his body, had not bene first spoken ouer the bread. For (as Iustinus Martyr, Gregorius Nyssenus, S. Am∣brose,1. in Apo. 2. 2. in Or. cathech. 3. li. 4. de Sacram. 4. depro dit. lud. 5. contr. Faust. li. 20. ca. 13. & epi. 59. Breaking is not poin ted vnto. S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and briefly all the Fathers teache) the bread is consecrated by these words of Christ, This is my body. And surely before it be consecrated there vnto, bread can not signifie Christes body, nor it can not be to vs the com∣municating of Christes body. Therefore seing the bread which we breake is the communicating of our Lords body (as S. Paule sayeth) the words which were spoken ouer y• bread be∣fore the breaking of it, can not presently point to that which is not yet done. And consequently (this) doth not point vnto the acte of breaking, nor vnto the act either of geuing or of eating, which folowed after the breaking. If any man say, that Christ whiles he spake these wordes, dyd breake the bread, or eate it him felf, or make his Apostles eate it:
the vuiuersall custome of the Churche in all ages doth shewe the contrarie. Whiche all, euen from the Apoles tyme haue vsed to consecrate aud to say these wordes: this is my body, aud this is my blood: ouer bread and wine at the holy altar and table, a good tyme before the breaking or eating and drinking of them,Of S. Iames. Of S. . Of S. Chrysost. Of S. Chrysost. as the auncient Liturgies manifestly declare. Besydes, if the act of breaking, whiles it is adding, dyd only betoken to vs his body: when that act were past, the signe of his body were ended. and so we should not eate the signe of Christes body. Moreouer, seing neither the chalice nor the wine is broken, therein should be no signe of Christes blood at all. On the other syde, if eating or drinking only were the signeEating or drinkig is not alone pointed vnto. 1. Cor. 10 pointed vnto, it should be no signe before the eating, and there∣vpon it would follow, that the bread which we breake is not the cōmunicating of Christes body, sith no signe at all is made there∣in, if the whole signe depend vpō the eating alone. For if the signe depended of both together, it could not be said, this, i the sin∣gular number as I sayd before, but it must haue bene sayd: these actes and these doings about these creatures do signifie the bo∣dy of Christ. But seing it is sayd, this is my body, whiche (this) can point but to one thing, and seing that one thing can be neither breade (wherewith it agreeth not in gender) nor any one acte or doing (which alone doth not signify the body of Christ) doubtlesse (this)The body or blood is only poin∣ted vnto. can by no meanes be referred to any other word or deede, then to the true substance of Christes body vnder the forme of bread, and vnto the true substance of his blood vnder the forme of wine. The whiche thing once graunted, after that Christ hath taken bread and blessed, and sayd, this is my body, whatsoeuer is done either in breaking or in eating, or in geuing, and taking, doth si∣guifie the body of Christe, because it is done to that thing and
about it, which is the true substance of his body. the breakingThe brea king. of the forme of bread, vnder whiche the body is, doth signifie the body of Christe once to haue ben broken with scourgingThe ta∣king. and nailing to the Crosse, and now also to be impassible. The ta∣king and touching signifieth the visible and palpable body, which walked vpon the earth preaching visibly to his disciples. The eating signifieth it to be the true bread of life, whiche who so ea∣tethThe ea∣ting. Luc. 22. The ge∣uing. worthely, he shall liue for euer, and shal eate it in heauen af∣ter a new maner. The geuing of it doth signifie, how Christ gaue it or vs to death. To be short whatsoeuer is done about y• which is the body o Christ, doth signify somwhat either past or to come in that same body, & it doth signifie it so muche the more, because the presence of Christes glorious substance is such, that nothing done to it can hurt it, or bring any detriment thereunto. For the breaking, taking, geuing, and eating is done in a figure and my∣sterie, the which figure is grounded in the reall presence of Chri∣stes body. which if it were not vnder the formes of bread & wine, the things sayd & done about the Sacramēt should not be so my∣sticall and miraculouse, as they are. ¶That the pronoune (this) pointeth finally to the bo∣dyThe vi. Chapiter. and blood, and particularly sigfieth in Christes supper one certein kinde of foe. SEing it is declared, that y• pronoun (this) pointeth neither to bread & wine, nor to any act done about them, it remaineth y• it pointeth only to the body and blood of Christ, and so long as the words of Christ are a speaking (which in so few words is not long) the pronoune spendeth his last determination. AndTheop.  Math. 26 when al the words are ended, his pointing is also ended. There∣sore  expounding what hoc, this, doth finally meane, writeth us: Dicens hoc est corpus meum, ostendit quod ipsum
corpus domini est panis qui sanctificatur in altario, & non respon∣dens figura. Christ saying, this is my body, sheweth that the bread which is consecrated on the altar, is the self body of Christ, & not a figure which answereth thereunto. And again in an other place he saith: hoc est corpus meum, hoc inquam, quod sumitur. This isIn Marc. 14. my body, this I say, whiche you take. So that by his  (this) pointeth not finally to that wheaten bread whiche Christe tooke, neither to any doing of his, but to y• body of Christ whiche he made by his words at the holy altar and table, and which the Apostles tooke afterward at the handes of Christ. Howbeit if any man be so hastie, that he wil not tary the spea∣king of fower words, to know what particular & finall substance the pronoun, hoc (this) doth point vnto, but will nedes knowe what it meaneth as sone as it came out of Christes mouth, vntill the last word be pronounced: I answere, that by the circūstances which are about and concerne the dedes and words of Christ, it may be wel sayd, that the pronoun (this) beside his generall sig∣nisicationThis, doth mean particular ly this ea∣table thi (whiche is declared before) doth here also particularly betoken, euen from the beginning of Christes words to the end, this thing which is to be eaten or drunken, and so doth it declare as well the beginning of the words (which belong to wheaten bread whose cheefe vse is to be eaten) as the progresse which ten∣deth to a supper, the substance whereof is eating, & the end, which is the bod of Christ made present to be eatē. So (this) doth tru∣ly always signifie this food or eateable substance, of which parti∣cular pointing and signification I shall haue occasion to speake more at large hereafter, when I come to confer y• holy scriptures together which belong to the supper of Christ. ¶The naming of the chalice proueth not the rest ofThe vii. Chapiter. Christes words to be figuratiue.
HEreof the Sacramentaries make no small boast, that Christ sayd: this chalice is the new Testament in my blood.1. Cor. 11 It can not be denyed (say they) but the name of chalice is figuratiuely put for that, whiche is in the chalice. Why may notThe obie∣cion. therefore other words in the supper be also figuratiuely taken? Masters, it foloweth not, because one word is euidently sigu∣ratiue,The aun∣swere. that therefore another word must be also figuratiue, except one reason be in both words. Which in our case is cleane contra∣ry, and that for diuerse causes. for all men, that is to say, as well Catholiks as Protestants and Sacramentaries confesse the word1. (chalice) to be figuratiue, and thei are compelled so to doe, because if we take the name of (chalice) properly, we must confesse, sith Christ sayth this chalice is the new Testament in my blood, that a material cup of wood, glasse, or siluer is the new Testament, or y• cause of our synnes to be forgeuen, which no reasonable man will so much as dream of. Seing then we are constrained by forceThe Cha lice. of reason to say the (chalice) to stand for that, which is in the cha∣lice, and no like reason presseth vs to think the like of the verbe (est, is) or of the noun (corpus, body) or of ye noun (sanguis, blood) the example which moueth vs to graunt a figure in ye one word, kepeth vs from suspecting any figure in the other words, which are nothing like. Secondly, whereas S. Luke and S. Paul named the chalice,2. The cha∣lice expoū ded in ho∣ly scrip∣ture. S. Mathew and S. Marke speake not of it, geuing vs to vnder∣stand, that the meaning of Christ was only to make and shew the blood of the new Testament, which was in the chalice. As there∣fore the holy Ghost prouided for a sufficient declaration of tha word which was in dede figuratiue: so leauing the verbe (est, is) and the nounes (body and blood) still in they proper significatiō, without mention of signe or figure, it hath sufficiently witnessed that they were to be takē as they did naturally sound to the com∣mon
ares of men. Thirdly although the word (calix) a cup or chalice were at the3. beginning appointed to signifie chefely that vessel, which holdeth liquour mee to be drunk: yet by common vse of speaking (whichThe cha∣lice by vse of speakig signifieth the drinke in it. is farre the chefe gouernour in the vnderstanding of wordes) we being at the table meane by the cup that, which is in the cup. in so much y• if a mā sitting at the table, bid y• cup be geuen to another, no seruāt is lightly so rude, as to geue a stranger the cup without drink in it. now when words are as commonly vsed in theyr si∣guratiue sense as in theyr natural, then eche way the sense is pro∣per enough, in so much as the vse of speaking is equal to the first propriety of the word. Fourthly, seing Christ sitting at the table, & in the sight of his4. Apostles, taking the cup of wine mingled with water, blessed, &This cha lice where in liquor is knowē to be can not make the speach obscure. gaue thāks, saying not only the chalice or a chalice, but this cha∣lice or this cup is the new Testament in my blood, it could not be that any dout could rise to his Apostles through naming that chalice which the Apostles them selues knew to contein a certen liquour, but that notwithstanding maruelouse great dout wold haue risen to them and to al Christians, if he should haue vsed (est for significat) and body & blood, for the signe of body & blood, for so much as they could not coniecture any other meaning of these words, then they did outwardly sound. For it is no common vse of speaking, but only both seldom vsed and not vnderstāded, but by great doctors and interpreters, who know and discern tokēs of things to be called sometyme by the names of the things them selues. Fifthly, when with a figuratiue worde an other is immediat∣ly5. ioyned, which doth expound the figure, the whole speach is ra ther to be accompted proper, then figuratiue: for so much as the weaker part yeldeth always to the stronger, euen as in
when one noune adiectiue serueth two substantiues of diuerse genders, we make it agree with the masculin as with the more worthy gender. When Christ sayd to S. Peter, I will geue theeMatt. 16. the keies, he spake figuratiuely (cōcerning the name of keies) but if we marke that he ioyned thereunto, the keies of the kingdom of heauen, and yet again, what soeuer thou bindest or loosest in earth, and so foorth: by these words the former speache is made plain, as if it were not figuratiue at all: right so when he sayth,The word ioned wt the name of , maketh a pla. this chalice is the new testament in my blood, y• nāing of the blood is so plain a declaration how the name of chalice is taken, that al is one as if it had bene said, this is my blood of y• new testament, which is in the chalice. See then for Gods sake, how farre the figuratiue naming of y•6. chalice is frō any figuratiue naming of the body or blood. As to y• chalice such words were ioyned which did shew the name to b figuratiue: so to the body and blood such were ioyned, as forbid vs to think the like of them, not only because Christe sayd: This is my body & my blood (which surely were enough to proue that I say, because the body and blood of Christe wa not figu∣ratiue but true and naturall) but also because to the naming of Christes body it is ioined in S. Luke: The which is geuē for you,Luc. 22. And to the name of the cup, the which is shed for you. Last of all the naming of the cup or chalice was prouided of7. God for a maruelouse declaration and setting foorth of the reall blood of Christ made within it. For whereas the new preachers bid vs list our mindes to heauen to receaue y• blood of Christ by faith, spirit, and vnderstanding (as though it were not present at Christes own table) the holy Ghost knowing that afterward such false reachers should arise, prouided that the words of Christ should not only be reported (This is my blood of the new testamēt26. as S. Mathew & S. Mark write) but also (as S. Luke & S. Paul14.
haue penned thē) this chalice is the new testament in my blood, this cahlice, that is to say the thing cnteyned in this chalice, to the  is amed. the intent we should be sure, that the said blood was euen within the compasse of this chalice, and not only apprehended by saith and spirit. so that euen the word (chalice) although by exact ac∣compt of grammer it stand figuratiuely, yet by common vse it signifieth the liquour in it, and that liquour is expresly named the blood of Christ, and that blood is declared to be present in the very chalice. ¶ That the words of Christes supper be proper,The . Chapiter. though many other be figuratiue and vnproper. VUhy these wordes of Christ (this is my body and this is my blood) can not be like the other, where Christ is sayd to beIoan. 15. 1. Cor. 10 the dore, the way, the true viue, and Iohn Baptist to be Elias, or the rocke to be Christ, it shalbe more particularly decla∣red in the last chapiter of the booke. Nowe it shall suffise to say, that they were neuer taken to meane as they seme to stand, there∣fore the general consent of al Christians taking them for figura∣tiue, is an euident cause why they must be confessed to be figura∣tiue.Uniuer∣sal consent is a way to knowe figuratiue speaches. And that vninersail consent is of more importance, then the proper signification of the words. But on the other syde y• words of Christ in his last supper haue not only no such vniuersal iudge∣ment and consent against them, but rather they always haue bene taken to be meant of the presence of his own body & blood, accordingly as they doe sound. Again none of all those propositions doth so much as seeme to sound like y• which Christ sayd in his supper: This is my body. For partly they do name two seueral natures, as Th Baptist & Elias, wheras these words (this is my body) name but one: part∣ly they speake not of any certeine thing (as Christes body) or if they doe so, yet they point not to it as to a thing present. A dore
and the doore, is not (this dore) this doth expresse a great deale dore. The dore. Chiore more thē a, or the. A dore is meant generally of any dore, the dore of a certein dore spoken of before, but this dore pointeth presētly to y• dore whereof he speaketh. Christes wordes were directed to one thing only, which is made & shewed together, when y• God∣head maketh y• which by his māhod he pointeth to, saying (this is my body) so that in dede in al scripture there is no like speach to that, which Christ vsed in his last supper, much lesse any like is figuratiue, and least of all that it selfe can be proued figuratiue, while it is compared with other speaches. Let all the Sacramentaries, shew where that proposition is figuratiue, whiche first instituteth and maketh any thing and presently pointeth to the same, saying, this is this, or this is that, as it is sayd: this is my body, and this is my blood. For whereas it is sayd in Ezechiel: this Hierusalem, it is nothing like, becauseEzec. c. 5 it was sayd rather by the occasion of expounding a parable, then at the doing or making of any thing by him that said, this is Hie∣rusalem. But Christ when he made his supper and instituted his chefe Sacrament, said of that whiche was in his hands, this is my body. What ignorance then is it, to say these words be vnpro∣per, because other words (from which they differ) be vnproper? ¶ It is shewed by the circumstāces of Christes supper, that he made his reall flesh and blood present vnder the formes of bread and wine, and consequently that his words are proper. NExt vnto the proper signification and common sense ofThe circū stance of y• speache is to be con∣sidered. Aug. lib. quaest. 83 q. 69. speaking, the circumstances of the talke are to be conside∣red, of which kinde of handling matters belonging to di∣uinitie, S. Augustine geueth vs a lerned rule, writing thus: So∣let circumstantia illuminare sententiā, cum ea quae circa scriptu∣ram
sunt praesentem quaestionem contingētia, diligenti discussio∣ne tractantur. The circumstance of y• scripture is wonte to geue light to the meaning thereof, when those thinges which are about the scripture (to wit, which goe before and folowe after) concerning that which is presentlie in question, are diligentlie examined. by this rule we haue nowe to consyder about the sup∣per of Christ, and about the meaninge of dedes & wordes there in, who spake, or did, when, where, to whome, vppon what oc∣casion, how and in what maner, what were the words, for what cause, & to what effecte or purpose he spake or did, with suche like respectes. For I wil at this tyme so examine the last supper, to proueThe intt of the au∣thor in this chapi ter. thereby the reall prensence of Christes body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine, that I will shew euery part thereof, whether it consiste in dede or in worde, to helpe much rather, then to hinder any thinge, the catholike belefe of the sayd reall pre∣sence, and consequentlie that no reason at all should either suffi∣cientlie or meanly moue any man, to thinke the wordes of Christ to be figuratiue, or vnproper. and truly whether the wordes be proper, the body and blood, which they signifie as present, must nedes be present, or els whether the body and blood be proued present, y• wordes which signifie so much, must nedes be proper. ¶ The first circumstance of Christes last supper is to consyder who made it. THe maker of the supper is almightie, as being the natu∣rallIoan. 1. & 14. God Ioan. 6. Sent  flesh. sonne of God. so that no man may discredit his wor∣des for lacke of power to bring them to passe. The same Sonne of God was sent of his Father to take mans flesh, to th'end he might in that flesh bring vs the euerlasting meate of the diuine substance.
Neither came he in flesh to bring vs the meate of his God∣headTo men that were flesh. in faith and spirit only. for so the Godhed was eaten y Abraham, Moyses, Dauid and other  men ( not so plen∣tifully before the incarnation of Christ) but Christ me not only to make vs beleue the better in God, but also to make our weake bodies and imprisoned sonles partakers of his Godhed by a bet∣ter and higher meane, then by our faith alone. or our faith is re∣ceauedRom. 12. Col. 2. in measure, but the  of Godhed dwellech corpo∣rally in Christes flesh. & so his flesh rally eaten of vs, with due faith & charitie, is a maruelouse instrument to geue vs the euer∣lasting meate, and to ioyne vs most  to the spirit of God. Marke well, that concerninge the eating God by saith and minde, we approue it as a speciall good thinge, but we say far∣ther, that God came in flesh, to be eaten in flesh of them, that con∣sist of flesh. And therefore hauing sayd: my Father geueth you the true bread from heauen, and I am the bread of life (which hitherto is meant to be eaten by faith) he also goeth forwardPromi∣seth flesh. promising an eating to come herafter, that is to say, in his last supper, and thereof saith: the bread which I will geue is my flesh, and he that eateth me tarieth in me. The same Christ commeth in his owne person to performe y•Geueth flesh. former promise, not saying only, beleue ye in God and in me as I teache you, but saying and doing, that is to wit, taking, bles∣sing, geuing, and saying: take, eate, this is my body which is ge∣uen for you. this only pointe were depelie pondered, it semeth to meHe is to be beleued that the almightie speaker so sent, so promising, and so doing ought to be of suche aucthoritie, that nothing should staye vs to beleue that externall thing to be his body, whereof he sayd: this is my body. Let vs now adde hereunto the wisedome, the prouidence, the
truthe, and the goodues of y• speaker, who wold not of purpose blind his owne spouse with siguratiue wordes both of promise and of performance: and yet the one ioyned with the other, and the person (who both speaketh and doth) well considered, make to men of reason suche persuasion of a proper speache, that no sufficient cause is lefte, why to presume those wordes to be figu∣ratiue. Of this first circumstance Eusebius Emissenus writeth:Euseb. homil. 5. in pasch. Ad cognoscendum & percipiendum sacrificium veri corporis, ipsa te roboret potentia consecrantis. Let the very power of him that consecrateth it strengthen thee, to know & to perceaue the sacri∣fice of the true body. Again: recedat omne  ambiguum. qui auctor est muneris, ipse etiam testis est veritatis. Let al dout∣fulnes of insidelity depart, he that is the authour of the gift, is him self also the witnes of the truthe. ¶ The second circumstance may be, to consyder the tyme when the supper was made. THe tyme of speaking was the nyght before Christ depar∣tedMen speake most ware ly toward their death. 1. Co. 11. out of this world, at what tyme men are wonte to speake most plainly. And S. Paule himself noted that circumstance, saying: our lord in the night that he was betrayed toke bread &c. For when the howre of death draweth nere, men vse manifestly to shew their last wil without al figures & tropes, as nighe as the matter will suffer. And how much more wold the wisedom of God vse wordes warily in this case? specially seing S. Augustin witnesseth, that he gaue this Sacrament after sup∣per,Aug. ep. 118. ad Ia nuar. when his passion was at hand, to thintent the highnes of the mysterie might the better sticke in the hartes and memorie of the disciples. whereas otherwise the Churche is taught by the holy ghost, to receaue this Sacrament fasting, for the honour (saith
S. Augustine) of so great a Sacrament. Let vs now a litle weigh with our selues, whether any goodChrist  not bethought lesse dis∣crete in his words then other men wold . and discrete man, knowing his parting hower out of this world to be at hand, will speake of purpose such words of ordeining matters to be done after his death, the which words he foreseeth wil cause his heyres either to synne greuously, if they obserue thē plainly as they should, or els to haue an inward dissensiō, if some affirme them to be plaine, others denying and  them o be figuratiue. for if Christes words be in dedt figura∣tiue, the Catholiks synne, both in teaching the contrarie, and in adoring Christes body and blood vnder the formes of bread and , which thing they are constrained to doe by the force of the words. and then they are giltie of , who possiblie can find no cause, why they should not beleue their master so speakig and doing as he spake and did. and thus lieth the ander vpon Christ himself. but if the words be in dede plain, then Christ is purged, and the only sault is in them, who will not beleue. I think it far the better to beleue the wonderfull discretiō of Christ,  so  him, to mistrust the infidelite of wicked men. ¶ The third circumstance concerning the persons, who were at the last supper. THe hearers were his twelue Apostles, who should in∣structe y• whole world of that, which they lerned of Christ,The A∣postles haue  Christes words to vs with∣out any mentiō of a figure. in this very busines whereof we talke. and so they did, ne∣uer leauing in any peece of all their writinges or preachinges, that Christ leste a figure of his body without the very truthe thereof conteined in the Sacrament of the altar. To the same Apostles it was geuen to know and vnderstand the mysteries of the kingdom of heauen. whereore it is veryMath. 13. iueredible, that the greatest mysterie of the whole Church was
either hidden from them by Christ, or by them hidden from vs.Parable hide the truth in part. Math. 13. Yet it can not be denied but it is in some part hidden, if yt words which report it, be figuratiue and parabolicall. for parables are spoken (as Christ himself witnesseth out of Esaias the Prophet) so, that men hearing doe not vnderstād in hart the things which are spoken. Thyrdly, the Apostles were those who taried with Christ at Capharnaum, where he promised his flesh and blood. therefore ifIoan. 6. Christ had then spoken figuratiuely to the people, yet now at the least he should and wold haue declared the matter more plainly. and so he did in dede, not verilie adding any word, which might shew his former talke to haue beue figuratiue (conceruing the substance of flesh to be eaten, & the substance of wine to be drun∣ken) but only teaching the maner of geuing them his flesh and blood, vnder the formes of bread and wine, to be figuratiue and mystical, because they are not geuen to fill the bellie, but to fede the soule, & not so much for the fleshes sake, which we , as for y• spirit & Godhead which replenisheth that flesh of Christ. ¶ The fourth circumstance concerning the ending of the old passouer, and the making of a new. THe occasion mouing Christ at his last supper, rather then at any other tyme to say ouer bread (This is my body) and ouer wine (This is my blood) was the setting and placingLeo in serm. de pass. do. of the new Paschal Lamb in stede of y• old. For least his Churche should be without a mysticall sacrifice (called according to the law of Moyses a passouer, that is to say, a sacrifice betokeningExo. 12. our passing ouer the sea of synne, and our  to the Land of grace and life which we looke for) as sone as the old Lamb1. Cor. 5. Ioan. 1. was eatē, and the tyme come that shadowes and figures should be fultilled by the death of Christ the true passouer, and the true
Lamb of God: Straight way he began to make this new Sa∣crament in stede of the old Paschall Lamb, that the Churche ofIreneus lib. 4. ca. 32. Leo de pass. do. serm. 7. Christ might haue a new oblation, which should conteine really the true Lamb of God that taketh away the synnes of the world. For as Leo the great sayeth: Vetus Testamentum consummabat, & nouum Pascha condebat, he ended the old Testament, and made a new passouer. As therefore the old Paschall Lamb was really present and really eaten: so much more the true passouer Iesus Christ, in y• banket which him self instituted, is really pre∣sent to be really eatē, except we shal say, y• his ew banket is lesse true and really, then the old was, or that the old being an vn∣doubted figure of the new, did not by the eating thereof declare, that the new Paschall Lamb Iesus Christ should be also eaten, not only by saith (which kind of eating Christ, both Moyses and Phinees had) but euen externally vnder the forme of bread, the which kind of eating Christes flesh, the old Fathers had not,Heb. 7. Ioan. 1. because the law brought nothing to perfection. but we haue it, because the truth is made by Iesus Christ, who deliuered vs his own flesh to be eaten really, and in dede. ¶ The fyfth circumstance concerning the preface which Christ made before his supper. AS the ending of the old ceremonie moued Christ to insti∣tute a new, so the ioye which he tooke of that change wasLucae. 22. so great, y• he could not forbeare, but sayd to his Apostles: Desy derio desyderaui hoc Pascha manducare vobiscum, antéquā patiar, I haue desired with desire to eate this passouer with you, before I suffer. And as S. Chrysostom witnesseth, he did reallyChryso. in Math. ho. 83. receaue the mysteries at his supper, to incourage his Disciples to receaue them without all scruple or feare. Neither doth it skill to my purpose, whether the words be first
referred to the old Paschall Lamb, or to the nw. If they be re∣ferred to the new alone, Christ desireth only to eate his own body with his Apostles. But Christ could not eate it by faith &Christ did not ea his own flesh by faith but in dede. deuotion, sith he had it present in a better maner then so. there∣fore by shewing him self desirouse of eating it, and by his owne eating it, we learn that it is his own reall substance, & not only an effectuall sige thereof. And it is not to be wondered, that he will gladly eate his own flesh (namely in such an vnspeakable mysterie, as him self hath prepared) because thereby (as S. ChryHom. 83. sostom writeth) he encouraged his Apostles, not to be afeard therof. And why should not Christ doe that thing for our great pro∣fite, seing that other men haue often tymes eaten their own flesh euen in a grosse manr either for hunger, or for anger, or phansie, without doing so great good to them selues or to any other, as Christ in this fact hath done to all his Churche? Or is it more straunge to eate his own flesh in so miraculouse a maner (as it is present in) then voluntarily to geue the same flesh to shamful death for our sakes? Marke, that I say, Christ did eate his own flesh, not as butchers and cookes dresse it, but in so pure a sort as Angels feede on it, by hauing it really present with them, and yet in so true a sort, as men receaue meat into their bodies. ForPsal. 77. herein man eateth Angels foode, in that he eateth the same spirit of God in Christes flesh, the which feedeth the Angels really in heauen. Now for Christ to eate his own body in truth of sub∣stance after that Angelicall maner, it is no absurditie at all. But for him to eate it by faith, it were a thing cleane impossible. And to eate it in abare figure without saith, it were to lack the chief point that is requisite to the worthy receauing of the Sacra∣ment. If the words be first referred to the old Paschall Lamb, the
yet is all one, because it is certein he desired not to eate theThe old Lamb was not desired for his own sake. old Lamb, for the Lambs sake, but only for that it was the last eating of the Lamb, as the which was out of hand to be taken away, and to haue the flesh of the true Lamb of God geuen to the faithfull in stede thereof. In either of oth ways, the desire and ioye of Christ was not finally for eating the Paschall Lamb (wherein according to the Prophets words he had no delight)Psal. 49. Malac. 1. but for the eating of his own passouer, which can be none other thing besyde his own flesh. Therefore Tertullian expounding this matter, noteth well, Indignum esse, vt quid alienum concu∣pisceretTertul. l. 4. aduer. Marcio. Deus: How it were vnsemely, that God should desier any thing, which were other then his own. With whom S. Chrysostom agreing, writeth: Non solummodo Pascha, sed hoe,Chryso. in Ps. 37. in quo cum praeterijsset figura, peracta erat veritas. Christ desired not simply a passouer, but this passoner, wherein (the figure being passed ouer) the truth was celebrated. And as he sayeth inChryso. in Math. hom. 82. & 83. an other place, Wherein he wold deliur the mysteries and new things vnto vs. Lo that which Christ desired was the truth it self, to wit, his own substance, because it being vnited to y• God∣head was the only meat wherein God taketh pleasure, and that substance is the meate of Christes supper, and not only the ea∣ting thereof by faith. ¶ The sixth circumstance concerning the loue which moued Christ to institute this Sacrament. WHereas Christ through all his life had loued hisIoan. 13. In fine di lexit eos Church, he both continued that his loue euen to the last end of his life, and spent his own life for the same loue, and most euidently shewed that his loue the night before his passion: first, by wasshing most humbly his Apostles seete, and then by geuing his own body and blood vnto them, in so
much, that the said Sacrament is thereof called, Signum vnitatis, & vinculum charitatis: The signe of vnitie, and the bond of chari∣tie,Chrys. hom. 61. ad Anti. Chrys. 1. Cor. ho∣mi. 24. Whereof S. Chrystom writeth thus: Christ hath mingled him self together with vs, & hath tempered his body into vs, to thend we may be made one rtein thing, as it were a body ioyned to the head: Ardēter enim amantium hoc est. For that is a point of them who loue feruently. the like he saith also vpon S. Paul. Seing now loue was one of the causes which moued Christ to institute this holie Sacrament, let vs coniecture by that circum∣stance, whether it be more like y• he leaft a peece of wheaten bread for a signe of his loue, or els left the best & greatest iewel he had,great loue cauleth y• greatest gifs. to wit, his own substance vnder the form of bread, to witnesse y• same excessiue loue towards vs. I thinke it more then probable, that sithens he was able to geue the substāce of his own body to vs, by turning bread into it, and hauing taking bread, said after thanks geuē: this is my body, I think it more then probable, that his great loue dyd rather geue his reall body vnder that blessed signe of bread, then that he would say he gaue vs his body, & yet in dede gaue vs wheaten bread, whiche were lesse then his body. Howsoeuer shamefast men are wont to speake modestly to them whom they loue best, surely they wil not blush to do most boti∣fully for them: much lesse may we thinke that Christ, louing vs so well, spake more then he dyd performe. ¶ The vij. circumstance of washing the Apostles feete. THe Paschal lambe being eaten, Christ sate down at the ta∣bleIoan. 13. with his disciples, He arose again, laid his garments down, girded himself with a towel, poured water into the basin, and began to washe his Apostles fete, and to wipe them, shewing thereby, both his own humilitie, & also of what a great
mystery they should be made partakers. For the worthy coming whereunto, not only their mind should be tried and purified, but also their bodies, yea euen the the vttermost parts of their affec∣tions should be purged and cleansed. For which cause euer sins the Apostles  (as it may appereDionys. de Eccl. Hierar. cap. 3. by the practise of the Churche, and by S. ionysius the Areopa∣gite) the Catholike Bishops and Priestes haue vsed (before they come to cōsecrate y• dreadfull mysteries) to wash the very toppes of their handes. What to doe I pray you? wether because they should come to handle bread and wine? then might Christe haue washed his disciples hands, as he dyd their fete, before they had eaten the Paschal lambe: for it was not eaten without bread, nei∣ther without a cup of wine also, if we shal beleue S. Hierom, S.Hieron. in Math. 26. Luc. 22. Bede, and Theophilact, who thinke suche a cuppe of wine, as the Iewes dranke of after the Paschall lambe, to be mentioned in S. Luke. And why is not the bread & wine, which was ioyned with the fleshe of the Paschall lambe, it being set also to signifie the same Christ, for which the bread and wine of the new testament is ap∣pointed (as the Protestants teach) why is not, I say, that bread & wine as good as this whiche we haue? one God made both, and both be assigned to show one Christ: both oblations, both Sa∣cramēts, both be  of the same men in the same night and place. And yet so much  is betwene the bread and wine of the old  and that of the new, that it was sufficient for the one to be eaten with  not vncleane, but the other  haue  the bodies purified for the more worthy receauigWhy the bread of Christ is  y• of . thereof.  not because it is bread and wine still, but because it is made the  of life, the food of Aungels, the body and blood of . Hence cometh al this preparation, hence cometh the difference betwene the old & new . For although
they meete inone signification, yet in substance the one was earthly, the other in substance is heauenly: the one published by Moyses, the other of Christes own insutiō: and for that cause y• one a bare shadow of the truth, the other a truth of y• shadow, and also couering the me truth in a mysterie. ¶ The . Circumstance, concerning the place of the last supper. THe place where Christ kept his supper, was chosn & ap∣pointed, not without a miracle, by geuing his disciples aLuc, 22. strange signe howe to go to an vnknowen house, by fo∣lowing him that should cary a pot of water into it. That house Nicephorus and Damascene write to haue bene about the mount Siou, whiche standeth in holy scripture (euē byNiceph. li. 1. . Eccles. cap 28. Damasc. de orth. fi. lib. 4. cap 14. Gal. 4. Hebr. 11. the inrerpretation of S. Paule) to signify the City and Churche o God: all which things doe portend that some great and vnac∣customed matter shalbe done in suche a place so assigned. In the house a faier parler was decked, and adorned, and therem a table at the which Christ sitting downe made thereupon his maundy. Of which table (for the meats sake whiche should be geuen at it) the holy Ghost had before prophecied, by king Dauid, saying: thou hast prepared a table in my sight. And by Salomon, wisedom hath set forth his table. Likewise y• table whereuppon the tweluePsal. 22. Prou. 9. Leuit. 24 loaues of ye shew bread stoode in the tabernacle of the law before the face of God, shadowed this table of Christes supper, whereat the twelue Apostles sate before the face of Christ our Lord, he being the bread of life, and geuing to euery of them a loaf vnder the forme whereof his owne substance was conteyned. Christ then making his supper vppon this table, and thence distributing his meate vnto the Apostles, doth vs to vnderstand, that whatsoeuer he feedeth vs withall either in spirit or in body
at his supper, is reall present vppon the very boord, where∣vpponChristos supper is vpon the table it self. he did eate. For Christ at this tyme is not talking in pa∣rables, not disputing in the synagoge, not preaching in the tēple▪ he is in a house, in a parler, at a boord, shewing thereby where his banket is exhibibed, where it is serued, and whence it is re∣ceaued. We are not now occupied in spirituall praicr alone, but also in corporal eating and drinking. If the euerlasting meate of Chri∣stes supper be only spiritual, and only receaued in mind by faith, let the howse be thought only to be spirituall, the parler to be spiritual, and the boord to be spiritual. Let vs deny that any ofIf y• table be rll, muche more the meate. these things were natural and real. but if all the rest be confessed real, seing al they are prouided for the meates sake which shalbe eaten from the table, what an impudent folly is it to say, the body and blood of Christ (whiche only is the euerlasting meate of this banket) are taken neither in hand, nor in mouth, nor be not at all vppon the material boord, whence Christ visibly deliuered them to his Apostles own handes, bidding them take and eate. ¶ The nyntenth circumstance of the taking bread and wine. OUr sauiour sitting doun at the table toke bread, and the cup of wine. and he tooke it, who neuer touched the thigLuc. 6. which he did not sanctifie, because vertue went forth of him, euen by touching his garments. Moreouer it is to be thought he toke such bread, as the presThe bread  Christ toke was already ha lowed. feast of Caster (which was begūne) might suffer: Unleauened I meane, and such as presently was vpon the table at the eating of y• Paschal Lamb. The which surely was already figuratiue bread, it was already a token of Christ, and already was partakē of the
disciples. Shall we think then that Christ goeth about to do that which was already done? No, no, this  of his goeth to an other end, as we shall perceaue anon. Thirdly, by taking bread and wine into his hands ChristThe  of Chri∣stes sup∣per is made in bread and wine. meaneth vs to looke for the mystery (that shalbe made) within the forms of those cratures, which he toucheth. He now pointeth not to his Apostles, as though he would only consecrate some∣what in theyr breasts (as Caluin dreameth). he taketh bread and wine. there we must seeke the first work of his supper. Last of al, by this kind of taking bread & wine he putteth vs in mind of that great Priest Melchisedech, who brought forth bread and wine, and blessed Abraham. As therefore Melchisedech tokeGen. 14. bread and wine to offer them first vnto God, next to communi∣cate Abrahā with them: so doth our true king of rightuousues in∣tend to offer to God and his Father the present bread and wine which he taketh. And because the thing sacrificed is to be changed (one way or other) euen in substance from the former nature which it had, asLeuit. 1. 2. &c. Al things that be sa∣crificed be changed. being sometymes killed, sometymes burnt, and sometymes ea∣ten, when Christ as the high Priest of God, for so it appeareth in the end, toke bread & wine, he toke them to offer, & cōsequently to thange them in the most perfit maner that euer could be deuised, as who is the most perfit Priest. And into what substance shallMatth. 5. he chāge them, but into the sede of Abraham, his own body, who came to fulfil the law, and gather all things into him selfe, and so to bring them again vnto his Father? For which cause S, CypriāCypr. ad Caecil. li. 2. epi. 3. sheweth, that as Melchisedech first brought foorth bread & wine, that so the blessing might duely be celebrated about Abraham: so Christ fulfilling the truth of the prefigured image offered bread & wine, suum scilicet corpus & sanguinem, that is to say, offered his own body & blood, This great mystery could not be throughly
hādled in a whole booke, much lesse I am able to cōclude it with∣in the cumpasse of a circumstance. it is now sicient to touch the chefe points of so long a matter. ¶ The tenth circumstance of blessing. OUr chefe Bisshop did not only take bread and wine, but he blessed also. Benedictio, blessing, is as it were a blessedBlessing. Psal. 148 saying: and because God sayth, and it is done, in him bles∣sing is doing. and in Christ who is both God man, blessing is most properly of all, a doing by the meane of saying or signi∣fiyng. for not alwayes when he blesseth, he nedeth to speake: butIoan. 6. if he blesse as man, he maketh at the least some outward tokenMarc. 6. Luc. 24. of the good dede, which he is about, either by lifting vp his eyes or hands to heauen, or by making the signe of the crosse, or by speaking certeine words. Howsoeuer it be, it cā not be well ima∣ginedThe bles∣sing of god is a doing that blessing should be in God or in Christe without a do∣ing, otherwise it should not differ from a simple saying, yea it should be the saying of mn, rather then of God. But now it is called the blessing, as if we should say, a beneficiall saying, which in God always importeth a doing. In this place it sheweth also, what intent and purpose ChristThe word blessing sheweth y• intent of Christ. had. For whereas Christ might haue spoken in the way of exhor∣ting, or of prophecying, or of threatening, or of comforting, when it is writē, he blessed and sayd: we may learne, that he speake in ye way of doing, of working, of bestowing some real benefit, and of geuing vertue and strength vnto his word for that effecte. which being so, we can not now with any pretense of honestie imagine. that those words are in the substantial parts of them , at the prononcing whereof the Gospell hath rehearsed the word and vertue of blessing. For as a figuratiue saying is an imperfect
speache, and therefore lesse then a common kind of speaking: so is blessing farre more thē any speaking, and therefore a true doing. What repugnance then were it to say, that Christ blessed at such tyme, as he not only did no great miracle, but also did lesse then the ordinary nature of speaking requireth? For ordinarily men vse proper words. Well, that blessing in this place is to be referred to the words:Amb. de ijs qui init. mys. cap. 9. This is my body and this is my blood, it is the doctrin of the most auncient fathers. For S. Ambrose calleth this mystery benedi∣ctionem verborum coelestium, the blessing of the heauēly words. and S. Cyrillus commonly nameth the blessed Eucharist, bene∣dictionemCyril. li. 4. in Ioā. c. 16. 17. 19. & lib. 11. ca. 22. Chrys. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. Christi, or, mysticam benedictionem, the blessing of Christ, or the mysticall blessing. The like doth S. Chrysostome writing vpon S. Paule. Now for so much as blessing standeth here bewene taking of bread, and saying, this is my body, the which bread and body cā not be truely verified of the same thing at once: the blessing so declareth the working and making pre∣sent of Christes body, that it doth intimate withal, the bread to be changed into his body. For as all blessing doth geue some be∣nefit, so when a creature taketh a benefit, it is chged into a better state. For which cause both, S. Gregorie of Nyssa, andNysse. in orat. ca∣thechet. Amb. de ijs qui init. ca. 9. S. Ambrose atribute the chaunging of the nature of bread and wine into Christes body and blood, to the vertue of his blessing. It would pae y• describing of a circumstāce and become a whole booke, if I should prosecute any of these matters so largely as the thing would beare, which at this tyme I may not doe. ¶ The eleuenth circumstance, of gening thankes. GOd blesseth his creatures in bestowiing some benesiteBlessing. vpon them, and the creatures blesse God by praising and rendring  vnto . Blessing thereore in a diuerse
sse is cōmon to God and man, but thanksgeuing is the properThanks . duety whiche man oweth to God. As Christ by blessing at his supper shewed his intent of changing bread and wine to a better nature, then they before had: so by geuing thanks, he declarerh his change to appertein to the honoure of God, and that after such speciall sort in this Sacrament, that the whole mysterie ta∣kingIustin. in Apol. 2. Euchar. thereof his name, is called, as Iustinus the martyr doth witnesse, Eucharistia, that is to say, the geuing of thanks. Whereas thanks be geuen by words alone, or dedes alone, or in both together: it can not be denied, but those are best thanks,The best kind of thanks. wherein most excellent dedes are ioyned with most true and reall words. And who can dout but it is a more worthy dede, to make present the body of Christ vnder the form of bread, y• God may thence be glorified & thanked, then to make bread, stil taryīg bread, to be an effectuall signe of Chistes body? Who can dout but ye words of thanking are more true, whichTrue words be most thāk full. say, this is my body, and meane the same, then those which name y• body of Christ, & meane the figure of his body? The Chatholiks beleue that Christ gaue thanks to his Father with moste true words, and with most perfit dedes: in so much that we deny any perfiter worke to be any where done vpon any creature in the whole world, then that was, wherein Christ wrought his body present vnder the form of bread, to thend it should be a sacrifice ofren. lib. 4. ca. 34, thanksgeuing to God. And consequently we confesse with S. Ireneus, eum panem, in quo gratiae actae sunt, corpus esse domini. that bread, wherein thanks were geuen, to be the body of our Lord. And therefore he addeth: iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia. it is not now common bread, but the Eucharist, or sacrifice of thanksgeuing. The Sacramentaries on y• other syde make thanks to be geuē of Christ in bare wheaten bread and wine. They make also the
words of thanksgeuing figuratiue, and thereby untrue in theyr proper sense. The lie was done by theyr auncestours before, as S. Ignatius doth witnesse, whose words Theodorus allegethTheod. Dial. 3. thus: Eucharistias & oblationes non admittunt, quòd non confi∣teantur Eucharistiam esse carnem saluatoris nostri. They admit no sacrifices of thanksgeuing nor oblations, because they cōfesse not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Sauiour. But hereof I shall speake again hereafter. ¶ The xii. Circumstance, of breaking. BY the fact of breaking the Protestants thinke them selues to haue one circumstance making for their opinion. for what can be broken (say they) at Christes supper, beside common bread? But if we take the bread to haue bene brokē before the cō∣secration thereof, they haue no more aduātage by the fact of brea∣king common bread, then they had by the fact of taking common bread. For we confesse it to be still common bread, vntill Christ hath said of it, this is my body. After whiche words if we thinke the breaking to haue bene vsed (which is farre the more probable opinion) we must nedes confesse the Euangelists not to haue re∣hearsedThe or∣der of doing and speaking. all things in such order as they were done in, & we must construe the wordes in this wise: Christ tooke bread, blessed or gaue thanks, and sayd, this is my body, and then brake, and gaue1. Cor. 10 to his disciples. the whiche interpretation is confirmed both by S. Paule, as I haue shewed in an other place, & by the dayly pra∣ctise of the vniuersall churche. neither haue the Sacramentaries any iust occasion to triumphe hereof, that we graunt a figure in changing the order of the words. for the figure is not in Christes words (of which only we contend) but in the words of the Euan¦gelistes, who knowing that, before the tyme of their writing, the order of Christes supper was taught & practised in a great num∣ber
of Christian churches, dyd rather attend to write the  of the matter (as in most other things they haue done) then cu∣riously to note the cerimonie and order of the doing & speaking. And therefore he that will, may obserue, that they oyne toge∣therChristes supper di∣uided into  and word. all the dedes of Christes supper, belonging to eche kind, and afterward place the words apperteyning to the same, not because none of the wordes came not betwene some of the dedes, but to make short, and by diuision, made into dedes & words, to set like to his like. That is to wit, to ioyne only dedes with dedes, and only words with words: the dedes were, taking bread, blessing, thanksgening, breaking, deliuering, which stand together. the words are, take, eate, this is my body, doe and make this thing for the remembrance of me. and those be placed altogether. Let it then goe for a truthe (howsoeuer our aduersaries are now plea∣sed withall) that Christ did breake and gene after the words of consecration. yet shal it euen so make more for the reall presence of his body vnder the form of bread, thē against it, because yt very breaking doth shew the substance of flesh (whereof Christ sayd this is my body) to be so really and miraculoush present, that it was conteined whole vnder euery peece and fragment of that which stil appered bread. otherwise euery Apostle could not haue aued one and the same whole substance (without more and lesse) which an other did aue. but the contrarie was figured in manna, of the which some gathered more and some lesse, butManna. Exod. 16 neither he that gathered more had more, nor he that gathered lesse found lesse, when it came to the trial of measure. the which thing S.  sheweth to be verified of yt Sacramēt of Chri∣stesHieron. aduersus Iouinia. lib. 2. supper. and yet it were not so neither externallie nor spiri∣tually, if it were the substance of wheaten bread which the Apo∣stles  after y• breaking. for then one should haue the greater peece of bread, an other the lesse, neither could any balance or
measure day make them througly equal. Again if (it being bread which was broken and taken) Christ be only eaten by faith and spirit, surely seing the faith and deuo∣tion which euery man hath, is in a  measure from that which an other hath (according as Christ or the holy Ghost di∣uidethEphes. 4. Rom. 12. 1. Cor. 12 his  to one after one sort, to an other otherwise, as he listeth to euery man) neither by that meaues one should haue as much as the other. And that especially, because some receaue life euerlasting by eating that, which was broken to them, and other eate their own damnation. And how is it (I pray you) all1. Cor. 11 one measure to them? Or is it one, to be saued & to be damned: S.  hauing spoken of the equall measure of Manna, sayeth: Et nos Christi corpus qualiter accipimus vna est in my∣sterijsHieron. aduersus Iouinia. lib. 2. sanctificatio, Domini & serui, & . Quanquàm pro acci∣pientium meritis diuersum fiat, quod vnum est. And we also take the body of Christ equally. there is one sanctification in the my∣steries as well of the seruant as of the master. Albeit according to yt merits of the , that is made diuerse, which is one. The meaning of which words must of necessitie be, that one sub∣stance of Christes body is receaued in the mysteries, to wit, vn∣der the foorm of bread, as well by the poore as by the riche: al∣though the deuotion be diuerse, wherewith it is receaued. To one it is more meritoriouse in effect, and to an other lesse meri∣toriouse: but in substance it is one sanctification to all men. So that the breaking and the peeces, which are made, certifie vs of suche a mysticall presence, that (as Eusebius  witnesseth) Corpus hoc sacerdote dispensante tantum est in exi∣guo,Homil.  in Pasch. quantum esse constat in toto. And again: De hoc verò pane cum assumitur, nihilo minus habent singuli quam vniuersi: totum vnus, totum duo, totum plures sine diminutione percipiunt. This body (when the Priest ) is as great in the small
peece, as it is great in the whole (loaf). of this bread when it is taken, euery man hath no lesse, then alltogether haue.  hath all, twaine all,  haue all without diminishing. These words I say can be  neither of materiall bread outwardly broken, and deliuered, the peeces whereof are vnequall: nor of inward grace and faith, the measure whereof is diuerse▪ but only of the substance of Christes body, which is con∣ wholy vnder euery fragment of that which is broken, ha∣uing with it none other substance, which may cause any man to haue more or lesse then his fellow. Of this kind of breaking S.Ignatius ad Phila delphien . Ignatius sayeth: Vnus panis omnibus confractus est. One bread is broken to all, one bread of life he meaneth. As for materiall loanes they wer diuerse (euen in the same Church) and not al∣ways one. But the bread of Christes supper, to wit, the subs of his own body is one to all. But the eating by faith is not oneIn Theo . Eccles. to all. It is the body which is one. Therefore  the Archebisshop of Constantinople writeth: Post eleuationem sta∣tim partitio diuini corporis fit. Verum enim vero tametsi in par∣tes diuiditur, indiuiduus & insectus in singulis partibus sectorum totus agnoscitur & inuenitur. Aster the eleuation (which among the Breakes was done immediatly before the communion) by & by a partition of the diuine body is made. But truly although he be diuided into parts, yet he is acknowledged and found vn∣diuided, , and whole in euery part of the things, which are cut. what is this to say, but that the forme of bread is only broken, and the substance of Christes body  whole vnder euery peece of the sayd ? But what speake I of the Fathers? S. Paule sayeth: The1. Cor 10 bread which we breake is it not the communicating of our Lords body? Because we being many, are one bread, one body. For so much as we all partake of the one bread. If the bread be broken,
how partake we all of one bread? That which is broken, is not according to the course of nature one in number. And surely the Corinthians had more then one loaf, which was broken among them. And yet S. Paule hauing shewed that we breake a kind of bread, sayeth: Be we neuer so many we partake all of the oneThe one bread to Christ, who  breaking  whole. bread. How is that? but because the bread which we breake, is no materiall bread, but how many loaues so euer there were be∣fore, after it is once sayd  them, This is my body, euery one of them is turned into that one bread, which is Iesus Christ. And that bread is distributed vnder the formes of commō bread, and so is the scripture instified, which sayeth: The bread which we breake is the communicating of Christes body. And there∣fore that body being one bread it self, maketh all vs one bread, which partake of that one bread. ¶ The xiij. circumstance, of geuing. It is not to be thought that Christ deliuered first the fragmēts of bread vnto his Apostles, and then sayd the words of conse∣cration. for then he had not deliuered them a Sacrament, but only had geuen them the matter and element whereof the Sa∣crament should be made. but seing S. Paule saith, y• bread which1. Cor. 10 we breake is the communicating of Christes body, we must ra∣ther iudge, that he had consecrated his body, before he brake: as who intended by breaking to distribute the Sacrament, which was already made. And consequentlie as the Sacrament was made being yet in Christes own handes, or lying vppon the ta∣ble before him: so it was deliuered with his own hands and byChrist gaue with his hands none other way (that euer I can reade of) vnto his Apostles. but Christ had willed them before, not to work the perishing, but the euerlasting meate, which the sonne of man should geue them, &Ioan. 6. which he shewed afterward to be his flesh, and now fulfil∣ling
his promise, he geueth the same euerlasting meate with his own hands: which could not be so, except the sayd euerlasting meate were vnder the form of bread or in the chalice, which only the Apostles doe see in Christes hands, therefore it is inuincibly proued by the word of God, that Christes body, which is the euerlasting meate, was and is geuen to them, that communicate vnder the formes of bread and wine. What soeuer is sayd of spirituall meate comming down fromThe meat of Chri∣stes sup∣per came from his hands. heauen (as to be a part of Christes supper) it is vtterly voyd and without all ground of Christes institution, wherein, yt Apostles are bound to rest vppon that onlye which Christ doth corporally geue, and when he is readen to geue (the which was done with his hands) for vs at the same tyme to looke beyond him, as if an other way more might be had then at his own hands, it is a hor∣rible blasphemie and a reprouing of his gift, as insufficient. He sayd, I will geue you the euerlasting meate: the Ghospell saith, he gaue at his supper saying, this is my body: the Catholikes beleue, that he thē gaue the same euerlasting meate, which he had promised, to wit, his own flesh and blood: the Sacramentaries say, he gaue it not with his own hands. I say there is none other way of geuing mentioned in the supper, and yet there only was the flesh of Christ to be geuen, as the Sacrament it self declareth, being called the body and blood of Christ. I allege S. Mathew, S. Mark, S. Luke, S. Paule, where26. 14. 22 1. Cor. 11 it is writen, that Christ brake and gaue. I think our  will not deuie, that gift of his to haue bene made with Christes corporal handes▪ therein I beleue his promisse to haue bene ful∣filled,Christes gift in S.  is meant of an exter∣nall gift. therein the spirituall and euerlasting meate to haue bene deliuered. S. Iohn witnesseth, that Christ said: dabo, I wil geue. the which is not meant only of a geuing by faith (for so Christ had alreadie geuen his flesh to diuerse men) but it was meant of
geuing by hands, after which sort he had not yet geuen, now the other fower  before, witnesse that our lord in his supper dedit: gaue. I say, this later word fulfilled the former promise. I aske our Sacramentaries, what other Ghospell they can bring forth, wherein Christ fulfilled at any tyme his promise ofThe Sa∣cramen∣taries can not  when Christ ful filled his promise. geuing the bread which was his flesh, and the meate which ta∣rieth to life euerlasting? pardon me, good reader, if in so weightie a matter zeale force to  out vpō these false preachers of Gods word. You cruell murderers of Christian soules, where is that euerlasting meate geuen (by your false glosing) which Christ pro∣mised, and called it his flesh? is it not geuen at his own supper? where then? is it geuen at Christes table? by which word shew you that gift, if not by the word, dedit, he gaue? if that word shew it, that word signifieth a gift of that which was broken mystical∣ly, & deliuered with Christes hands, appearing still bread: there∣fore vnder the forme of that bread Christes flesh was geuen, which is the meate that tarith to life euerlasting. I speake so earnestly, to th'end I might prouoke you to come to the trial of these effectual points in Gods word. ¶ The xiiii. Circumstance of saying. WOrds be somtyme applied to the decking and gar∣nishing1. The pro∣fite of words. of á matter, the which without thē might doe right wel, albeit it doth the better through their help. But when the thing standeth so, that either nothing at al can be vnderstanded without words, or the cheife part of the businesse wilbe hindered for lack of thē: in that case they are by al meanes2. The ne∣cessitie of words. as most necessarie, so most diligently to be obserued, as for ex∣ample: we could know nothing that belongeth to  matters, if God reueled it not vnto vs by his only sōne, by An∣gels, Apostles, prophets, or other his seruants. For this reason
those words are moste carefully to be weighed, which come from3. The wor∣des of God. God, and belong to causes of religion. And yet in them as euery thing is most obscure: so are words more necessarie for the opening of it. All mysteries by their very name pretend a secret and an obscure knowlege. Among all the4. Myste∣ries. mysteries which were lest vnto the Church by Christ, none hath obteined that name so peculiarly, as the Sacrament of Christes supper. whereupon it foloweth, that words are most necessarie of all for the declaration of that Sacrament. therefore noman5. The my∣sterie of Christes supper. ought to wonder, that with so many dedes of sitting down at y• table, of eating the paschal Lamb, of washing the Apostles fete, of raking bread and wine, of blessing, thanksgeuing, breaking & geuing, words at the length be ioyned, which may shew plainly the meaning, wherevnto all those dedes tend. Let vs not there∣fore follow the Sacramentaries in this behalf, who looke only to this, that Christ toke bread, and will not consyder his pro∣mise6. The Sa∣cramen∣taries trust not Christes words. (going before his present performance in geuing that, which he promised) his blessing, and his words, Wherein he plainly sayth: This is my body. But because bread was taken and still bread is tasted and seen (do and say Christ what him list) they will trust their eyes, and not his word. But S. Mathew, S. Marke, S. Paule , that Christ did these things, & sayd.26. 14. 1. Co. 11. 22. S. Luke writeth he did them, saying. All meane that saying is a principall part of the supper. And that not without a cause. For whereas dedes may haue many and diuerse interpreta∣tions7. Dedes be doubtfull. (as it appeareth by the figures of the law) except words be ioyned withall to make them certein and plaine, we shall not know how to vnderstand the dedes, and therefore we can not tell how to beleue them. For this cause S. Chrysostom sayd,Chryso. in Math. Hom. 83. that whereas Christes words ought in al things to be more cre∣dited then our senses, yet he addeth: Quod praecipue in myste∣rijs
faciamus, the which thing let vs do specially in the myste∣ries. Ponder then, I pray you, whether Christ did expound one pa∣rable8. The  of the supper were para bles. by an other. For the dedes of his last supper  to me vndoubted parables. Who could tell what the taking of bread meant after supper, or to what end the blessing and geuing of thankes wolde goe, except Christes own words had interpreted his mysticall doings? For whereas all Christes doings are our instruction, it can not be denied, but when he toke bread, blessed, gaue thanks, brake and gaue, those dedes were a certein aduer∣tissement or dark lesson to his Disciples. Of the which some vn∣derstode more, some lesse, according as they had grace and wit. Now the words of Christ come to these dedes, as it were a plain9. The words of the supper expound y• parable of the dedes. exposition added to an obscure parable. And yet shall we think, that the words also are para? Shal we say, the thing that is spoken to geue more light, bringeth more darknesse? Or did the comment of Christ nede again an other comment? He did certain things, and to shew what he did, He sayd: this10 Mere  words ex pound no∣thing. is my body. If these words be , it had bene better he had sayd nothing, but only, do this for the remembrance of me. For by that meanes we might haue done as he did, and so haue referred obediētly the meaning of the dede to his wisedom. But he in words expounded the secrete meaning of the dedes, & sayd: This is my body. What reason can now excuse vs, why we should not rest in the authoritie of the speaker, sith he spake as an expo∣sitour or interpreter of his own doings? This reason alone ought to persuade any man. But now I will bring a greater. Not only the interpretatiō of Christes dedes dependeth vpon11. The words of y• supper ge∣ue  to y•  his words, but also the whole substance of them. For he being the word of God hath ordeined, that no Sacrament shalbe made without words. Yea, that words shalbe the chief part of euery
Sacramt. This appereth in baptisme where the washing withIoan 3. Matt. 28. water is the lesse part, and the pronouncing of the words is the chefe part. Hereof I haue spoken before, and haue declared out of S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, & S. Augustine, that y• SacramentsIn y• se∣cōd booke ca. . haue their verie chese being through words. As therefore water, breade, wine and oile, whiche are the inferiour elements, and the baser part of the Sacraments, be most commonly knowen and most easily gotten: so the words (which are the higher part of the same Sacraments) must be such, as be most common & easy.12. It is no sing  che is not knowen. For euery Sacrament is a signe, & euery signe is to geue know∣ledge of a thing whiche otherwise had bene secrete. Now if the token it self be secrete, what knowledge can rise thereof? Seing therefore Chri making a Sacrament, said, this is my body, we must think either no signe at all to haue bene made, or els we must beleue the wordes as they sound outwardly. ¶ The fiftenth circumstance, of taking. SEing Christ willed all the twelue Apostles (among whom Iudas also was (to take that one thing which he gaue: we must vnderstand such a taking, as may agree to  no∣lesse, then to the other Apostles. Againe whatsoeuer taking be vnderstanded, it must appertein to corporal apprehēsion whereof only Christ sayd: take.  thing therefore which was taken either was  bread being a bare figure of Christ, or the body of Christ vnder the form of bread. For in bothe these ways Iu∣das might take that, which all the other toke. As for any effectual signe (whereof Caluin vseth to brag) no man corporally toke, sith it is clere that Iudas toke none such, & yet it was sayd to him no lesse then to the other, take. Nw if the Apostles toke only a bare  of Christes body, Christ gaue no more with his hands but a  signe,  they oke that which he gaue. but Christ was
not sent to geue bare signes (which thing was th  of the old lawe) therefore it being false that he gaue a bare signe, it must nedes be true, that the Apostles toke at his hāds his ownThe . body vnder the form of bread. Neither will it serue here, if a ∣cramentarie say y• Christ gaue spiritually more hē bare signes, and likewise that y• good Apostles toke more spiritually: for ifThe aun∣swer. we speake of spirituall gifts, they wanted ot in y•  of  and of the old law. Abraham beleued God, and it was  to in∣stice. Elizeus receaued the dbble spirit of , &  beseching God to restore him y•  of his , & to strength∣thenIoan. 6. him with his chefe spirit, doth  that both he had once the holy Ghost, and loked again for greater comfort of him. Seig then the good men always receaued pirituall ,  betwene Christ and the old law doth not stand only in ∣all gifts receaued in the soule, but in this, that Christ in his mā∣hod which he toke for that purpose, left vs such coporal meanes and instruments of grace, as might work also vpon our soules. And therefore Christ denyed  to be the true bread, not be∣cause it was not a signe of true bread, neither because who so de∣uoutly receaued it, should not be deliuered frō euerlasting death, of God: but because it selfe had not in it any thing, which being corally taken ight saue a man (otherwise good) from euer∣lasting dath: whereas the true bread which the Apostles toke into theyr hands (through Christes gift) was that very esh, which by the power of the Godhead whereunto it is annexed, kepeth our soules that they dye not by synne, and reth out bodies to liue for euer. S. Augustine sayth: Dominus sinit IudamIn Epi. 162. accipere inter innocentes disipulos, quod fideles nouerunt, preciū nostrum. Our Lord suffereth Iudas to take among the innocent disciples our price, which the faithful know. See what kind of
taking S. Augustine speaketh of. surely of that which was com∣mon to Iudas, and which was made with hands. See what Iudas toke, precium nostrum, our price. Is bread and wine our price? We are then derely bought in dede. But if the reall substāce of Christes body and blood be only our price, when Christ sayth take, he meaneth, take y• real substance of my flesh into your hāds, that thence it may come afterward vnder your hars. ¶ The sixtenth circumstance, of eating. CHrist sayd: eate ye, once only, and he sayd it of that one thing only, which he deliuered to his Apostles corporally, and they so toke it. but Christ meant they should eate it as wel in soule, as in body, as wel by faith, as by mouth. For he had sayd before, worke ye the euerlasting meat which the sonne of mā wil geue you, and he declared the worke of God to be this, that they should beleue in Christ, who is the bread of life, and who said his flesh to be meat in dede▪ therefore when Christ sayd, eate, this is my body, he meant eate bodily that I geue you, and eate it also spiritually, because it is a heauēly kind of bread, and a meate which neuer perisheth. Neither doth the verbe, eate, by this meane stand vnproperly, be∣longeth to the body  soule. because ating belongeth naturally both to the soule and to the body. but yet, concerning the cause of eating, principally to the soule, as the which alone geueth power to the body to eate, and concerning the meane of eating, principally to the body, as the which only hath conuenient instruments to receaue corporall meat. For neither a dead body can eate at al, neither a soule which lacketh a body can eate properly. Now when the soule and body may both not only eate, but also be nourished by the eating, that is the truest eating which can be deuised. Christ then in saying eate, meaneth, eate ye as ye are men, who
consist of soules and of bodies, eate in both, and feede them both together. For this is my body, which hath in it the Godhead corporally dwelling. Eating this, you eate a food both spirituall and corporall. This feedeth the whole man, this is it whichTertul. de resur. carnis. Tertulliā saith, Caro &c. The flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ, that the soule may also be made fat of God. Note the per∣fit eating. the flesh is fed, and y• soule is made fat. The Catho∣liks vpon this ground beleue, the flesh which must be eaten spi∣ritually, to be vnder the form of bread, which is eaten really, and that Christ saying to a reasoable man: eate, this is my body, saith by the reason of that kind of meat which he nameth, eate in body and soule my body, The Sacramētaries teache a dubble substance to be eaten in a dubble maner; of which y• one is present corporally: y• other ab∣sent, they teach bread & wine to be eaten & drunken corporally, as things present, but the flesh of Christ only to be eaten spiritually, as a thing absent in his own substance. they diuide the work of our bodies from the worke of our soules. But the word eate ye, can not be so meant, sith it only pointeth to y• which the disciples had taken into theyr hands. none other literal meaning can be of this word, eate. eating by faith, hath no part in Christes supper, neither is at al commanded, if the thing eaten be not in the hāds of the Apostles. ¶ The . circumstance, of these words, this is my body. I Wil speake of these wordes, not al that may be sayd, but rather no more then the nature of one circumstance (among so many as Christ vsed in his supper) will conueniently beare. who ta∣king bread after blessing and thāks geuing, sayd: this is my body. If y• meaning be, this bread is y• signe of my body, he gaue thāks
for the institution of a bare signe: for so I must needs call it, seing . bread remaining still in his owne nature, can neuer be any more then a bare signe, so long as it is not the body it self, which it doth signifie. For euery figure, image & token whiche differeth in sub∣stance from his originall, is always bare and naked in respect of that truth, which it , & hath not the same in it selfe. So was Christ a bare māto ye Ebionits, because they denied y• substāceEpipha. haer. 30. of God to be in him, howsoeuer they extolled him otherwise. Christ come thē to leaue naked & bare signes to his Church: and is he so glad of that promotion, that he thanketh his father for it? was this the ioy he had of eating the new passouer, where∣in he would geue vs only bread and wine mixed with water, in ede of bread, wine, herbs, and flesh, which were geuen vnder the law of Myses? is not his outward gift at the least desaced by this doctrine? Uerily seing with thanks geuing Christ ioyned, this is my bo∣dy, presenting in effectuall words that, whiche his hart intended before to consecrate vnto God: we must no more say, that he in∣stituted a bare figure of his body in these wordes, then that he presented a bare signe in his hart when he gauc thanks. For who can think that Christ, who had said by God and by his Pro∣phet Duid, Sacrifice and offring thou wouldest not, but thou hastHebr. 10 Christ pre sented no external sacrifice besyde his own flesh Gen. 14. Exod. 16 framed me a body, meanig that none other sacrifice pleased God beside his vnspotted fleshe: who can thinke that he now expresly naming that his body, yet presenteth to his father bread & wine only, as figures & signes of his body and blood, and that he gaue thanks for them▪ Melchisedech ended the mysterie of his bread and wine in the blessing of Abraham him self: and doth Christ after bread & wine taken end his blessing only in a figure of the sede of Abrahā: that, whereof Moyses said, this is the bread which our Lord hath geuē
you to eate, was in dede a more excellēt bread then he could name, and oth Christ name more then is really present? Surely the signe of Christes supper is so bare, if that which he pointeth vn∣to, be not in dede his body, y• in words he geueth greater  to God his Father, then in his dedes. For his word  this (whereunto he pointeth) to be in substance his on body, but his dedes perform only a signe of his own body, as the Sacra∣mentaries teach. May I not now say to the Sacramentaries the like to that, which Malachie the Prophet sayd to those  among the Iewes, who offered in the temple of God ind, lame, and feint, or sicke oxen and shepe? Offer illud , si placue∣retMalac. 1. ei, aut si susceperit faciem tuam. Offer such halting presents to thy Lord or capitain, & tel me whether it wil please him, or whe∣ther thou shalt be welcome to him, or no. If one should come to a greate personage, and with solemne thāks make him a presēt in words of a fat oxe, or of a couragiouse horse, and when the noble man were come forth to accept the present, he should geue him a pece of paper wherein it were writen, this is a fat oxe, or a couragiouse horse, wold the noble man take it well? Now come these new preachers, and whereas they confesse y• Christ gaue thanks to his Father, and sayd in words: This is my body, yet they feare not to teache, that he offered more to him in words, then he performed in dedes. Yea they doubt not to teache, that the words wherewith he maketh his present, are vtterly vnproper and figuratiue, not withstanding that S. Ambrose speaking of the Sacrament of  supper, sayth: In cōsecratione diuina verba ipsa domini Saluatoris operantur. In the diuine consecration the selfe words of our Lord and  doe worke▪ The words doe worke how
thē are thei ? A figuratiue word, is like a paited image,Working words cā not be fi∣guratiue. which may be somewhat, if the thing meant thereby be real and true, but otherwise it is an idole and nothing at all. But as an image of neuer so liuely a truth, absent in substance frō it, can not it selfe worke or doe any thing (because it is dead) no more can words grammatically figuratiue worke of them selues, for that they are dead, as not hauing theyr meaning (which is theyr life) present with them.Chrys. homi. de prodit Iudae. S. Chrysostom likewise writeth: hoc est, ait, corpus meū: hoc verbo proposita consecrantur. This (saith he) is my body: with this word the things set foorth are consecrated. And yet can this word, whiche doth so wonderfull an act, can it be in the meane tme so weake, so feble, so dead, that it hath not in it self so much as the naturall proprietie of common wordes? Commonly wordes do meane as they sound, and those whiche do not so, be, concerning the vse and seruice of words (which is to vtter a mās minde) of baser condition, then other wordes are. But Christes words be so liuely, that they haue power to work and make that which they sound, in so much that he called them in S. Iohn, lifeIoan. 6. and spirit. therefore it is vnreasonably said, that they are figu∣ratiue. Hoc est corpus meum, are but foure words, of which foure they leaue neuer a one in his own significatiō, and some of them they pluck from his gender, other they pluck from their case, which they were put in. hoc, this, is the neuter gender with his nouneHowe the Sacramē taries  Chri stes wor∣des. substantiue, corpus: body. they draw it to the masculine gender, that it may agree with panis, bread. Est, is a verbe substantiue, si∣gnifiyng the substance of that noune substantiue, with whom it is ioyned. They draw it from yt signification to signifie an acci∣dent in bread, which in these words is not named. They put cor∣pus meum (which is by Christes setting the nominatiue case) into
somtime the accusatiue, somtime the genitiue case. for they ay this doth signifie my body. & then is it in y• accusatiue case: or this is the figure of my body, and then it is the genitiue case. what miserable taking is this of so heauēly words? but hereof I think to say more vpon those words, this is my blood, least I now ex∣cede the measure of a circumstance. Yet this one thing I can not but warn y• eader of, althoughChryso. in Ioan. Hom. 35. it may seme to some man of no great weight. But I thinke with S. Chrysostom, no syllable or prick in the word of God to be su∣perfluously placed. S. Paule reciting the words of Christes sup∣per placeth them thus: . hoc mei est corpus, this of me is the body. For where as the other Euangelist had writen the pronoun  in the last place, as we likewise in latin put meū last, the holy Ghost foreseing the heresy y• now should rise, caused S. Paul to ioyne that prooun belonging to Chri∣stesHow S.  placed ▪ words. person, vnto y• other pronoun , hoc, this. For although  be ruled of the noun body, and in sense must nedes follow after it, yet it pleased God to place the same pronoun, with  this: shewing thereby that  must finally be referred vnto the noun corpus, body, as wel as the other pronoun meum mine. as if it were in latin, hoc mei est corpus, this of me is the body. That ioyning I say, of this, and of me together, doth geue such coniecture (as in the order of words may be had) that as of me is the genitiue case coming after y• noun body, so this like∣wise apperteyneth to the noun substantiue body, and only resteth and endeth his signification in that word. Whereas on the other syde if this were only referred vnto bread, no reason could be brought, why S. Paule should ioyne the word , of me vnto it. This bread of me is the signe of body, iudge what a hard speache it were. Let noman wonder if I so narrowly scan euery syllable. For
you shall see before all is done, that God hath caused the word of his last supper by so many circumstances of writing and spea∣king to be opened vnto vs, that when the rest is all heard, it wil seme probable enough, not so much as the setting of  with , to haue bene superfluouse. ¶ The. . circumstance, of these words: Which is geuen for you. ALthough S. Mathew, and S. Mark thought it sufficient to report that Christ sayd: This is my body, as the which words both were plaine enough, & able to make the my∣sterie of Christes supper: yet the holy Ghost stirred vp S. Luke, to adde the other words which Christ had also vsed, to thntene the literall meaning of Christes words might be most ctainly confirmed, and therefore he writeth that Christ sayd: This is myThere is but one noun sub∣stanti in Christes . body which is geuen for you. In all the which words there is none other noune substantiue named, besides the only substance of Christes body. With it agreeth Hoc, This, with it, quod, the which. It cometh after the verb est, is, and goeth before the verb, datur, is geuen. If now we interpret the noun corpus body, by figura corporis the igure of the body: Looke what place corpus did occupy, the same figura corporis must nedes occupy. And therevppon it fo∣loweth, that the pronoun hoc must be ruled by the noun figura,By the Sacra∣ doctre a gure was cru∣ for vs. likewise the relatiue quod: and it must follow the verb est, and goe before the verb datur. And so the sense is, Haec est figura cor∣poris mei quae pro vobis datur. This is the figure of my body, the which (figure) is geuen for you. Thus the Sacramētaries haue brought vs not only o a figuratiue presence of Christes body, but also to a figuratiue death and sacrifice thereof.The ob∣ction. I know they will say, that albeit by the noun corpus body,
they vndcrstand figura corporis, the figure of the body,  they wold not the relatiue quod, which, to be ruled by the noun figu∣ra, but by the genitiue case corpus, body. As if it were sayd, this is the figure of my body, the which my body is geuen for you. This shift will not serue, because after that sort the noun sub∣stantiueThe aun∣swer. corpus, body, is takē two ways, that is to say, first vn∣properly, and then again properly. Unproperly, when it standeth for the figure of Christes body: properly, when it is sayd to be geuen for vs. Now seing that noun substantiue is but once na∣med in all, how so euer it is taken at one tyme, it must be taken likewise at the other tyme, for so much as it is not twise repeted, but once only mentioned. This (sayeth Christ) is my body, which is geuen for you. IOne word can not haue at once a pro per & vn∣proper meaning. ask, how ye take the word (body) which is but once named in the whole sentence? If ye take it to stand for the signe of Christes body, mark well that you take it vnproperly. And remember that you euer continew in taking it vnproperly after the same sort. therefore if it be Christes body vnproperly, it is geuen for vs vnproperly. If it stand for the signe and figure of Christes body, when it is ioyned with the verb est, is, how can it but stand for the same signe and figure, when it is ioyned with the verb datur, it is geuen?The rela tiue must repete hi whole . Can the relatiue, quod, take half of that signification, which was in his noun substantiue, and lay asyde the other half? You say, corpus doth signifie two things, to wit, the figure of Chri∣stes body. beit so. Then the one peece of the signification is in the noun figure, the other in the noun body. To which word, so consisting of two parts, when a relation is made, that relation can not respect the oe half of the word, and neglect the other half. But howsoeuer the word is taken, so must the pronoun re∣latiue, quod, repete him again.
In, this is my body (say you) the body standeth for the signe of Christes body: therefore (say I) in these words, which is geuen for you, it must nedes be vnderstanded, the which signe of my bo∣dyBy the Sacra∣mentarie doctrine bread is sacrificed for vs. is geuen for you. And seing they say y• this pointeth to bread, it followeth that bread is geuen for vs. This later sense is so blasphemous, that the very Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists, and Anabaptists abhorre from it, therefore they ought likewise to abhorre from the former sense, where they take the noun body for a figure of Christes body. For doubtlesse as they take y• word in the one place, they must nedes take it in the other, sith it is one simple proposition, hauing but once in it the word, body. This thing is yet more plainly sene in the Grke text, where S. Luke writeth thus: . Which is to say word for word, as igh as our tonge may attein to the phrase: This is the body of me geuen for you. Or ra∣ther, presently geuen for you. And yet more expresly, this is my body, the same body, I say, which is presently geuē for you. Two of the which Greek words can hardly be expressed in the Latin tong. The one is the participle . Which being of the. present tense, hath no like in Latin answering to it. But we are constrained to put for it, these two words, quod datur, which is geuen. The other is the article , which repeteth again y• noun. , body: Geuing an vndoubted witnes, that the thing geuen for vs is the same body, which is pointed vnto and affirmed to be present. This is my body. This is the same body, I say, which is euenThere is but one verb in the Greek text. presently deliuered to be sacrificed for you. But in Greek all this sense is without any other verb, sauing the verb substantiue, est is. As if it were sayd in Latin, Hoc est corpus meum datum pro vobis, this is my body geuen for you. In which proposition cor∣pus is the noun substantiue to the participle datum. And there∣fore
one and the same body is both pointed vnto vnder y• forme of bread, and presently geuen, that is to say, offered to  sacrifi∣ced on the Crosse, and to be pearced and crucified the next day for vs. I require and humbly beseche him y• thinketh me to be decea∣ued the . in this point, ▪as he loueth God and his neighbour, to shew me wherein I misconstrue these words, or by what meanes the argument, which I now make for the reall presence of Christes body, may be possibly auoided. For it semeth to me that noman of good conscience, who will not wilfully be damned, is able to auoide, but that Christ affirmeth, this (which he pointeth to) really to be the same substance of his body, which was betrayed and offered vpon the crosse for vs. He that sayth, this is a figure of Christes body, sayeth a figure of his body to haue bene geuen for vs. I can deuise no maner of escape besyde wilfull malice. It may be, some ignorant man will say, that the noun corpusThe . body standeth not for the signe of Christes body, but that the verb est is, rather standeth for the verb, significat, doth signifie. and so the sense to be, this doth signifie my body. and so the noun body standeth still properly. who so maketh any such obiection, vnderstandeth not that it is all one to say, this doth signifie myThe aun∣swer. To signi∣fie and to be a signe o all one. body, and this is the signe of my body. therefore either of both being confuted, both are confuted. for the cause why the verb est should be resolued into the verb significat, must nedes come from the word corpus body: sithens, this, doth therefore signifie the body, because it is made the signe of Christes body. But if it be not the signe thereof, surely it doth not signifie it, in so muh thatSignifi∣cat, , this proposition, hoc significat corpus meum being resolued into this hoc est significans corpus meum (as the rules of good reason and of the arte of logik require) the word, which apperteined to the signe shalbe found à parte praedicati, rather then à parte copu∣lae,
that is to say, it shalbe found that the reason of signifieng con sisteth in the noun body, rather then in the verb est is. for which cause Oecolampadis admitted aswell the one as the other, ma∣king no difference whether est is stand for significat, to signifie, or corpus body, for signum corporis, the signe and figure of y• body, so that the reall presence might be taken away. But (as I haue now proued out of the word of God) seing y• body is pointed vnto which died, & the true substance it self died for vs, the true substāce is pointed vnto vnder the form of bread, and so pointed vnto, that none other cōstruction of those words can be made. for if corpus body doth not stand properly, when it is ioyned with the verb est is, it is not possible that it standeth properly, as it is the noun substātiue to the participle , datum, geuen: or as it is antecedent to the relatiue quod, which. In dede if Christ had sayd expresie, this is the figure of my body, it might wel haue folowed, the which body is truly geuen for you. for of the two antecedents the relatiue might haue bene re∣ferred to the next. But now there is but one antecedent in all, and it is taken vnproperlie (as the Sacramentaries say) there∣fore in that vnproper signification it must be antecedent to the relatiue folowing. all the grammarians in Christendom can find none other construction of these words. If the Sacramentaries can excuse the matter, let them bring it to light. ¶ The xix. Circumstance, of the verb facere, to doe, or make, or to offer sacrifice. ALthough the verb facere doth signifie most generally all making and doing, yet because the most excellent dede that can be made, is to offer a true internal and external sacri∣fice vnto God: therefore it is come to passe, that facere in his most principall signification is vsed somtimes to signifie the offering
of a sacrifice, neither doth it skill, whether it stand alone, or be3. Reg. 18 Leuit. 15 ioyned with an other word in the accusatiue, or in the ablatiue case. for it is the circumstance of dedes and words, which princi∣pallie make it so to signifie. That facere in this place doth betoken the offering of a sacri∣fice, it appereth by al the circumstances of the supper. first, in thatExod. 12 Christ hath now in the fourtenth day of the first moue at euening tyde begonthe blessed sacrifice of his passion: next, he hath offered the old aschal Lamb the cheef sacrifice of the law: thirdly, he hath taken bread and wine the materiall parte of the sacrifice of Melchisedech. fourthly, he blesseth, & geueth thāks externally to God in a fact, wherein he consecrateth his own body the onlyGen. 14. sacrifice of mankind. yea farther he so consecrateth it, y• he douted not to say, ouer y• bread: this is my body which is geuen for you. straight vpon which words, he addeth hoc facite, doe ye, or, mak ye this thing. Wht other sense now can this verb haue, but doe that I haue done, who now haue exercised my priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech? So did S. Cyprian take this verb facere, when he said of thisCypria. lib 2. Epist. 3. verie matter: Iesus Christus Dominus et Deus noster, Ipse est sum mus sacerdos Dei patris, & sacrificium Deo patri ipse primus ob∣tulit, & hoc fieri in sui commemorationem praecepit. Iesus Christ our Lord and our God, him self is the highhest preist of God y• Father, and first hath offered sacrifice vnto God the Father, and hath commāded the same to be done for the remembrance of him. If Christ offered sacriice, and commāded the same to be done, heThe  were com  to  sa∣crifice. commanded sacrifice to be offered of his Apostles. and therefore it foloweth in S. Cyprian cocerning a priest of the new Testa∣ment: & sacrificium verum & plenum tunc oert in ecclesia Deo patri, si sic incipiat offerre, secundum quod ipsum Christum vi∣deat
obtulisse. & he then offereth a true and full sacrifice to God the Father in the Church, if he so begin to offer, according as he may see Christ him self to haue offered. If now Christ hath willed his Apostles to offer that which he hath offered, it is most certain yt Christ offered none other thing in the whole earth, besyde his own body, the which he toke toPsal. 39. Heb. 10. offer to God in stede of al other oblations, as Dauid & S. Paule say. therefore that body of his he both offered himself, and willed his Apostles to offer it. but what soeuer he offered in his last sup∣per he had it in his hands or vpon the table before him, and gaueThe body ored was at Christes ble. it vnder the forme of bread and wine to his Apostles: therefore the reall substance of Christes body and blood was vnder the sayd formes, that it might so be offered vnto God, according as Melchisedech had before signified. This argument were able to receae a great deale of matter, but it wold be aboue the cum∣passe of a circumstance. ¶ The xx. Circumstance of the pronoun hoc, this thing. CHrist sayd not only facite, doe ye or make ye, but, hoc facite doe ye & make ye this thing. The which words as they cō∣maund bread to be takē, blessing, breaking, geuing, taking and eating to be vsed, and the words of Christ to be duely pro∣nounced: so beyond all these things they commaund one speciall thing to be made, which is the body of Christ. for none other thing in all the supper can particularly discharge and fulfill those words besyde the body of Christ. As for bread & wine they be not commaunded to be made, ith they were made before the supper began. taking, blessing, brea∣king, & eating partly are not this one thing, but manie things: partly they be not such as may be in all degrees repeted & done
so, as the precept of doing or making this thing requireth. ForThisthīg is more then such an other thing. the taking and breaking of other bread, is y• doing of a like thing to this, whiche Christ hath done, & not the doing or making this thing. But Christ said not, sic facite, doe so as I haue done, but hoc facite, do or make this thing. If we shal kepe the propriety of Christes words, the meaning must nedes be, make this body of mine. For he sayd: this is my body, which is geuen for you, make this thing. which this thing, but that only thing whiche was named? for none other special thing or substance was named besyde the body of Christ. Hoc, is the neuter gender, and either it must be referred to the noune cor pus, body, as to his substantiue which went before (and the senseHaimo in 1 Cor. 11. is, facite corpus meum, make my body) and so doth Haimo con∣strue it: or els it must stand substantiuely, and so it meaneth, this thing, that is to say, the thing which is the body of Christ. I doe not without great cause stand so long about euery litle word. I know the tergiuersation of them that missexpound the word of God, who altough they will soer be confounded, then amended, yet the more particular my reasoning is, the more it ought to moue them earnestly to looke to the worde of God, and not to contente them selues with the bare shewes thereof. For my exposition, beside the very order and conference of Chri∣stesIustin. i Apol. 2. supper, hath for it as auncient a witnesse, as Iusts Mar∣tyr is, a man within the first two hundred, not only within the 600. yeres: whose works Robert Steuēs printed in greke at Pa∣rise, An. Dom. 1551. Thus he writeth: The Apostles in their com mētaries, which are called gospels, haue deliuered, that Iesus gaue them thus in commaundement, who when he had taken bread & geuen thanks, said: do and make this thing for the remembrance of me. , id est, corpus meum. That is to say, my body.
Thus I reade the words, & thus they are vnderstanded, make this thing. That is to say, make my body. They that haue trans∣lated Iustinus, haue turned , Hoc est, whiche words may be Englished, as if the cause had bene, This is. But they also may signify, hoc est, that is to say. For so the compound , is ta∣ken in greke, in the way of interpretation or of exposition, when the wordes that went before are expounded by the wordes that follow. The same phrase is vsed in S. Matthew, where after theMatt. 27. Hebrew wordes were writen, which Christ said vpon the Crosse Fli, Eli, Lamalabachtami, it followeth , &c. That is to say: my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? There∣fore albeit the Latins can not distinct betwene, hoc est, whicheHoc est. signifieth, this is, and hoc est, whiche signifieth, that is to say, yet the grecians write the first , (which thing Iustinus also hath obserned in the wordes belonging to the blood putting in euery letter) The last they write leauing out y• last letter of , by an Apostrophe, in pronountiation making one word of both. And this sense is proued true by the processe of Iustinus, who after that he had said: we are taught, the meat whiche is consecra∣ted by the praier of the word (whiche we toke of Christ) to be his body and blood, He would proue it to be still so, because the Apo∣stles dyd witnesse, Iesum sic sibi mandasse, Christ to haue geuē thē such a precept. Hoc facite, make this thing: what thing? my bo∣dy. Now if this thing, were not meant to be y• body of Christ, Iu∣stinus had proued no commandement thereof, and consequently no fleshe of Christ present, whiche yet he affirmeth most plainly. Therefore straight after he had rehearsed the commaundement: Hoc facite, make this thing, he sheweth what thing it is, aiyng: that is to say, my body. whereunto we must nedes vnderstand (to make vp the full sense) make my body, or make this thing, which is my body. Therefore as well by the force of the letter of
the Gospell, as by the authoritie of S. Iustinus, these words can be verified of no signe or figure, nor by any other way, theu by that we make the selfbody of Christ, which always is, this thing, because it always tarieth one and the same in number & person: whereas the taking of bread and breaking or eating it, is alwais such anotherthing, but neuer this thing. ¶ the xxi. Circumstance, of the words, in meam com∣memorationem, for the remembrance of me. THe finall cause of instituting this new passouer was to1. Cor. 11 make the remembrance of Christes death, which so effec∣tually and profitably for vs could be made in nothing els, as in the same flesh, that died for vs: and being made therein, it forceth vs by al meanes through the presence thereof to remēber him whose flesh it is. If now he that hath a busines to doe will those the beast meanes he can to bring it to passe, if Christ came into the world to redeme vs by his death, and if in beleuing and folowing that death our life consist: seing no meane possibly can be deuised so effectuall to make vs remember and partake his death, as if the thing which died be it self made present with vs, and it self deliuered to vs: a wise man may easibly iudge, whe∣ther Christe hath not rather leaft his own body to vs, for an vn∣doubted token of his death (seing his words doe sound so) theu that he hath leaft a peece of bread and a litle wine, which neither be spoken of in the deliuery of the mysticall tokens, nor be apt enough to worke the matter, for which they are sayd to be least. Therefore S. Chrysostom shewing the difference betweneA thing is the remē∣braunce of it self. other figuraiue remembrances and this truthe, sayth: Tibi quo∣tidie, ipse ne obliuiscaris proponitur. Christ is euery day him self put before thee, least thou shouldest forget him. Note, that Christ him self in this Sacrament is a remembrance of him selfe dying for vs, euen as Manna was kept in the taberle of God to be
a remembrance of it self. Kepe it, sayth God: Vt nouerint filii Is∣raëlExo. 16. panem quo alui vos in solitudine. That the children of Israel may know the bread wherewith I fed ye in y• desert. So likewise the self body of Christ is kept as it were, and preserued in the ta∣bernacle of this blessed Sacrament, that we may know (by that knowlege which is meete for faithfull men) that our Lord hath died for vs. ¶ The xxij circumstance, of these words: Drink ye all of this. AFter the cup was taken and thanks geuen, Christ gaue toMatt. 26. Luc. 22. his disciples and sayd, bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this. In S. Luke it is sayd, take and diuide among you. By these words Christ meaneth literally, that all the twelue should drink of that one cup, and S. Marke witnesseth this pre∣ceptMarc. 14 to haue bene filled, saying, Et biberunt ex illo omnes, and all drank thereof. This interpretation S. Dionysis ye Areopa∣giteDe eccl. Hierar. cap. 3. In Ioan. li. 4. c. 14 confirmeth, saying, that one chalice was diuided among them all. And as S. Lyrillus witnesseth, Circumtulit calicem, dicens, bibite ex hoc omnes. He caried about the chalice, saying, drink ye all of this. By carying about, he meaneth all the twelue to haue receaued the drink out of that one cup in order. Christ then would, that his twelue Apostles should al drink of the same cup. The reason, why he wold haue it so, foloweth. For (sayth he) this is my blood, as if he sayd, I haue conserated thiswhy althe Apostles dranke of one cup. cup only, and none other, therefore drink y all of this. For if two or three of the twelue should haue drunk vp all that was in that cup, either Christ must haue consecrated the cup again, or the rest must haue receaued a drink not consecrated. But it is not the wil of Christ, that one Priest should cōsecrate in one Masse any more then once eche kind of the Sacrament, because Christ died but
once, and then he onght to consecrate both kinds together, be∣cause Christes blood and soule must be signified a part from his flesh and his bdoy. It is not therefore according to the mind of the Gospell, that (as now they doe in England) when one cup is drunken vp, an other should be filled out of a prophaue pot that staudeth by, asTheause  the En∣glish mi∣nisters. though al were one, so that wine be drunken with a remēbrance of Christes death and resurrection. it is not so. All must drink of one chalice, that is to say, of y• one blood of Christ which is con∣secrated at one tyme, though the chalices which hold it were di∣uerse, as sometymes they haue bene, when a great multitude of people did receaue at once. This circumstance doth shew, that it is more then wine which is drunke. This doth shewe that these words, This is my blood, work somewhat in that one chalice, whereof all must drink. And consequently that Christ speaketh to bread and wine at his sup∣per, and not only preacheth to the audience, as Caluin most igno∣rantly aud impudently affirmeth. This is the cup whereof S.Ignat. in epist. ad. Phi. Ignatius writeth: Vnū poculum vniuersis distributum est, one cup is distributed to the whole empanie. and he meaneth not so much one cup in nūber, as that the drink is al one in euery cup, to wit, the blood of Christ. This cup was so throughly communicated to all the twelue,Matt. 10. Iudas drank. that Iudas one of the twelue drank thereof, and that to his own damnation, because he made no difference betwen the blood of Christ and other drinkes. And now the Sacramentaries be in the same case, concerning that they teache the substance in Christes chalice, to bethe substance of common wine, and not the blood of Christe. As our Sacramentaries in England by geuing the faithfull people drink (they care not whence, so it be wine) doe by that
face shew them selues to beleue, that the blood of Christ is not present in the cup of the holy table: so Christ by willing his Apost∣les that all should drink of that one cup, because it was his blood, geueth vs a greate warning to beleuc that cup to haue had really his owne blood in it. For contrary doctrines haue contrary vsages. ¶The xxiii circumstance of these words: This is my blood. I Must nedes touch in this place somewhat spokē of before, but I will doe it for a farther purpose and to an other effect. whereas the Sacramentaries teache, the wine to be made a igure of Christes blood, wine is neither named at the consecra∣tion tyme (as it is euident) nor pointed vnto, because the article hic this (which only pointeth to all that is pointed vnto) can not agree with wine, but diffeeth from it in gender, for so much as in Latine hic this, is of the masculine gender, and vinum wine is of the neuter. Again in Breeke the articicle , is of the neuter gender, and  wine, is of the maculine: so that if the pronoune hic this be not a noune substantiue it self, but do point vnto a certain substance, and yet that substance by the rules oThe grā∣maticall sense of Christes words. grammar can not be wine, and withall it both may be blood, and of Chist is sayd to be his blood: there can be none other literall, proper, and historical sense of these words, but that, This which is shewed by pointing vnto it, is the substance of Christes blood. I chose rather to say this much vpō these words, then vppon y• other, This is my body. Because though in them also, y• pronoune hoc this doth only agree with the noune body, & not with bread, yet I know that the Sacramentaries would striue therein, & say impudently that hoc standeth substantiuely, for this thing, and so would resolue it into this thing which is bread. But in the con∣secration
of Christes blood they can not pretend so much. for it is not sayd, hoc est sanguis meus in the neute gender, but, hic est sanguis meus in y• masculine gender, where the pronoune hic may only agree with sanguis, blood. By the which words we are certified also, that in hoc est corpus meum, the pronoune hoc this, may only agree with the noune corpus body, and neither with bread, nor with any other acte, which at the supper ty is a do∣ing. It can not now be sayd that (est) doth stād for significat, seing there is no nominatiue case at al to go before the verbe significat.Est  not stand for significat. for hic this can not stand neutrally, but is of the same case, gēder, and number, that his substantiue sanguis blood is of. It can not therefore be sayd, Hic significat sanguinem meum, this doth signi∣fie my blood, because in that speache (this) doth lack a noune substantiue, to whome it may be referred, and consequently the verb significat lacketh a noune substantiue to be the nominatiueHeretiks build with out a foun dation. case vnto it. By which meanes the Sacramentaries leaue no congruitie of speach at all. And so (as S. Hierom wel noteth, of their forefathers) they build a roofe without walls or foūdation. For what sense can they make without congrue words? or what congruitie of words, is, in hoc panis and hic vinum? what pro∣position will they haue without a nominatiue case? or what no∣minatie case without a noune substantiue, or without an other thing, which may stand substantiuely? Or how can hic this in the masculine gender stand substantiuely? The words of S. Hirome are: Debemus scripturam sanctamHieron. in Amos proh. c. 4 primûm secundum literam intelligere, facientes in ethica quae∣cun{que} praecepta sunt. Secundô iuxta allegoriam, id est intelligen∣tiam spiritualem. Tertiô secundum futurornm beatitudinem. Vos autem primam, inquit, & secundam contemnentes diem, spi∣ritualia vobis quaedam figmenta componitis, sine fundamento &
parietibus, tectum desuper imponentes. We ought first to vnder∣standThree  of ho∣ scrip∣tue. the holy scripture according to the letter, doing whatsoeuer things are commaunded concerning morall vertues. Secondly according to the allegory, that is to say, according to the spirtual vnderstanding. Thirdly according to y• blessedues of the things to come. But you (sayth God) contemning the first and y• secondThe lite∣rall sense s the fon dtion. day, do frame you certain spirituall imaginations, putting a roof thereuppon, without a foundation and walles. Euen so the Sacramentaries tel a goodly tale of eating and drinking by fayth, and of spirtuall feeding, but they take away the meat and drinke whereupon we should eed, they take away the literall sense of Christes words, which being once gone, all that is buylded vppon the words, is the putting vp of a roofe without walles or foūdation. These three propositiōs are found, hic est sanguis meus, haec est caro mea, hoc est corpus meum. InCypr. de coena do haec est caro mea. all three it is euident, that the pronoune agreeth only with the noune folowing the verbe. The Sacramentaries pull hic from sanguis, blood, & ioyne it to vinum wine. They pul haec from caro flesh, and hoc from corpus body, and ioyne haec and hoc to panis bread. Is not this to play with Gods word, to elude the scrip∣tures, and to destroy the whole writen Gospell? ¶ What the new Testament is, whereof the holy Scripture speaketh. FOr as much as in consecrating of the blood, S. Mathew. S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paule make mention of the new Testament, it is necessarie for the vnderstanding of the circumstances which folow▪ to declare what the new Testamēt is. A Testament is the solemne ordeining of a thing by words,A testa∣ment. which is wont to be confirmed by naturall or violeut death. For
neither the last will of any man is of strength and force, vntil theHebr. 9. Gene. 31 testatour dye: Nor any truse or  is perfit, vntil it be de∣dicated with sacrifice, wherein some liuing creature is wont to be offered vnto God bloodily. Of Testaments, one is old, an other new. For it was of oldGalat. 4. tyme couenanted with the Iewes, that in case they kept the law of Moyses, they should haue a temporall inheritance for keping it. Christ made a new truse, that if we kept his law, we should haue forgeuenes of synnes, and enioye the euerlasting inheritāceIerem. 31 of God. The old truse was dedicated (as S. Paule speaketh)Hebr. 9. by the blood of calues or oxen, which were offered for the con∣firmation thereof. The new truse is dedicated by Christes own blood, which was shed for the confirmation of his new law and promise. The blood of the old truse was put into bass, and soExo. 24. sprinckled with hysope vpon the people. The blood of the new truse is put into a cup or chalice, and thence it is drunk by the people of God. They that kept the old truse enioyed the land of promise: and they that kepe the new truse, enioye the kingdom of heauen. Now because there are many things requisite to a Testamēt,Three things in a solemne Testamēt first a law, couenant, or promise, next a bloodshedding to con∣firm the promise, thirdly an application of the blood that was shed, for to be as a witnesse and a remembrance to all them, who bound them selues to kepe the conditions agreed vpon: it may so be, that either all these things, or some one of them alone may be called the new Testament. When God sayeth by Jeremie: consummabo TestamentumIerem. 31 Hebr. 8. nouum, he meaneth all together. For he will as well publish his true law, as confirm it by blood, and distribute the blood wherewith it is confirmed, to the faithfull, when Christ sayeth:
This is my blood of the new Testament, he meaneth the first part of the new Testament, which is the law and promise it self of forgeuing sys. And therefore it foloweth, the which shalbeMath. 26 shed for many, for the remission o synnes. In which words he sheweth, how this is the blood of the new Testament. Uerily because it is the blood, which shall obtein and merite the for∣geuenesseIerem. 31 of those synnes, which the new law promiseth to take away. e called it (sayth S. Chrysostom) the blood of y• promise ofChryso. in Math. Hom. 83. y• new law. And again: Testamentum nouum hoc ipso confirma∣tur. The new Testament is confirmed with this very blood. Tertullian sayeth of Chr: Testamentum constituens sanguineLi. 4. cōt. Marci. suo obsignatum. He establisheth the Testament, that is to say, the law, sealed with his own blood. But when S. Luke and S. Paule report Christ to haue said: This cup is the new Testament in my blood, they seme to take the word Testament for the substance of the thing, which doth con∣firm the new Testament, or witnesse it to be confirmed, and not properly for the new truse and promise thereof. For this that is in the chalice, is not the promise of remitting synnes, but it is the new Testament in Christes blood, that is to say, it is the thing that confirmeth the new law, or that witnh it to be confir∣med.Sedulius in. 1. Co. 11. So doth Sedulius very well expound the words of S. Paule, saying: Ideo autem calix Testamentum vocatur (for so I think the true reading to be, and not Testamenti) quia testatus est pòst paululum passionem futuram, & nunc testificatur factam. The chalice is therefore called the new Testament, because it didThe cha∣lice bea∣reth wit∣nesse. beare witnesse (at Christes supper) that the passion should be a litle after, and now it doth beare witnesse, that y• passion is made or done. Thus we see, that whereas a Testament hath a law, a confir∣mation,
and a witnesse of the confirmation: the blood of Christ is not the law it self, but it is both the thing which confirmed the law, and the thing which doth witnesse it to be confirmed. The which if it be well remembred, I trust the circumstances of grea∣test importance, whereof I shall speake hereafter, wilbe the bet∣ter vnderstanded. ¶ The. xxiiij. circumstance, of the blood of the new Testament. THis is my blood of the new Testament, sayth Christ, that is to say, the blood, wherewith the new Testament is con firmed and sealed, as S. Chrysostom, Tertullian, Theo∣philact,1.  Math. Hom. 83. 2. l. 4. cō. Marci. 3. in Lucae. 22. and the other auncient Fathers declare. But the blood of Christes new Testament was reall and true: Therefore this which Christ doth point vnto, is the true & reall blood of Christ, and not the substance of wine, which the Sacramentaries ima∣gine to be a figure of this blood: And so cons the words, this is the sigue of my blood of the new Testament. But their interpretation is proued false by conferring the old Testament with the new. For as the old Testament had none other thing to signifie the blood thereof besyde y• self same blood of the calues, which was shed to confirm the old couenant: soThe same blood which con firmeth doth also witnesse y•  much more the new Testament must haue noe other thing to signifie the blood thereof, besyde the self same blood of Christ, which was shed to confirm the new law. For if it be a perfection not only to haue the true and law confirmed by blood, but also to haue the confirmation thereof witnessed by sprinkling y• blood which was shed vpon the people: it is not possible that the old law should in that point passe the new. For as S. ChrysostomChryso. in Ioan. Hom. 13. sayth, the figure neither is cleane different from the truth, & yet if it kepe the condition of a shadow, minor erat veritate, it was
lesse then the truth. And yet the basin of calues blood were more then the truth, if the substance of common wine were set to shew, that the new truse is confirmed. Again S. Paule and S. Luke so euidently expound these ve∣ry words, by reciting them otherwise, that no reasonable man cōing the words together will say, that in these words, blood may stand for a figure of blood. They write thus: Hic calix no∣uum Testamentum est in meo sanguine. This cup is ye new Te∣stament in my blood. but the new Testamēt is not in the figure of Christes blood, but in his true blood. Therefore the name of blood, which Christ vsed in consecrating the liquor in the chalice, is not vsed figuratiuely. For ye same blood, whereof S. Matthew, & S. Mark do speak,The blood is not meant the figure of blood. is also meant of S. Luke. and of S. Paule. but as S. Paule and S. Luke take the noun blood, it can not possibly be taken figu∣ratiuely▪ except any man wilbe so desperate, as to say, that the w promise and Law of Christ is established in a figure of blood, or in the substance of common wine. Which if it were so, we are in worse case then the Patriarhes and Iewes, who at the least had true blood to cōfirm their tem∣porall truses, Testaments, and promises (as it may be see bothGene. 31. Exod. 24 Hebr. 9. in Genesis & Exodus) although it were the blood of beastes. & it must nedes be, that the heaueuly things them selues be clean∣sed with better sacrifices, saith S. Paule. If then the name of blood being put in these words, this cup is the new testament in my blood, be taken for the substance of Christes blood, which is that better sacrifice whereof S. Paule speaketh, without al que∣stion, in these wordes, this is my blood of the new testament, it stondeth likewise for the substance of Christes blood. It is one supper, one Sacrament, one parte of the supper, and one part of the Sacrament, yea one self same thing, whereof all
foure do speake. If new do answere to new, testament to testa∣ment, this to this, is to is: how can it be, that blood should not answer to blood? But, this cup is the new testamēt in my blood, can not be meant in y• figure of my blood (least y• signe of blood, and not the truthe thereof, be that which establisheth the new truse) therefore in these words, this is the blood of the new te∣stament, the noune blood standeth not for a figure and signe of blood, but for the real substance thereof. ¶ The xxv. Circumstance, of these words: this cup or chalice. AS euery Apostle or Euangelist wrote later then other, soLucae. 22. 1. Cor. 11 he made the supper of Christ more plain, geuing vs eui∣dently to vnderstand, that the words of Christes supper are so far of from figuratiue speaches, that rather the propriety of them is by all meanes fortified. I haue shewed before how the name of cup or chalice doth not hinder any whyt, why all y• rest of Christes words may not be proper, and literally true: butWhy the cup is na∣med. now I affirm also, that it increaseth much the reason of their pro prietie. Why so? Because the cup is named to shew the maner of fulfilling of the old figures. In the old Testament the blood of the oxen was put in crate∣ras,Exod. 24 into great cups or basins, and so the people were sprinkled therewithall. Now to bring the Apostles and all vs in mind thereof, Christ nameth the cup or chalice: Declaring thereby, that his own blood is now to vs, as the blood of oxen was to the people of Israel: His in the chalice, as the blood of oxen was in the basis: His presently drunk, as that other was presentlyChryso. Hom. 27 in. 1. Co. sprinkled. Erat autem veteris Testamenti calix, & caet. There was a cup or chalice (sayth S. Chrysostom) of the old Testament and sacrifices, and the blood of brute beasts. For after sacrifice (the blood being taken in a chalice and cup) they made after that sort
libations (or offerings of that which was liquide and renning.) Cū igitur pro sanguine brutorum sanguinem suum induxisset, ne quis his auditis perturbaretur, illius veteris sacrificij meminit. Seing therefore he had brought in his own blood in stede of the blood of brute beasts, least any man hearing of these things should be troubled, he maketh mentiō of the old sacrifice. Decumenius al∣soOecum. in. 1. Co. cap. 11. writeth thus concerning the naming of the chalice or cup: Pro sanguine irrationalium Dominus proprium dat sanguinem. Et bene in poculo, vt ostendat vetus Testamentum anteà hoc deli∣neasse. Our Lord geueth his own blood in stede of the blood of vnreasonable creatures. And he doth well to geue it in a cup, to shew that the old Testament did shadow this thing before. Behold why the cup is mentioned. Uerily to shew Christes blood to be as really in the cup of his own supper, as euer the brue beastes blood was in ye cup of the old testament. yea much more also. For the blood of the oxen was really put into that old cup, to shew that Christes blood should be really present in the cup of his supper. the old blood did not shew, that wine should be in Christes cup (for that had bene lesse then the old testamēt it self, because the blood of oxen is better then wine of the grape) but that blood in ye basin did signifie, that Christes blood shouldChristes blood real ly in the chalice. be in our chalice, not only as in a figure (for so it was in the basin also of the old testament) but euen in very dede vnder the forme of wine. It is not now sufficient to say, we drink Christes blood in hart or by faith: it must be drunken really out of the chalice and cup of Christes supper. thence the hart must take it at Christes supper, thence it must be receaued both in faith and truthe. ¶ The xxvi. Circumstance of the verb est, left out in S. Lukes words.
IT is the custome of writers in the Hebrew tonge, to leaue out many tymes the verb sum, es, fui, which is latin, to be: andThe verb substātiue left out. that, because common sense and vse doth easily teache vs to supply that verb, as being both most necessarie of al other, and most frequent in common speache. S. Luke writeth thus: This cu is the new testament in my blood shed for you. this sentence is imperfit for lack of a verb which may knit the parts thereof together. I ask what verb we shal vnderstand, to make it perfit. The Sacramontaries say, that Christ meaneth, this cup doth signifie the new testament in myThe verb significat can not be vnderstan ded. blood. will ye then vnderstand the verb, significat, doth signifie? if ye do so, I wil shew that as well the noun cup, as  testamentum are both put in the nominatiue case. but if S. Luke had meant to vnderstand the verb significat, he wold haue put one of them in, the accusatiue case. If ye supply the verb est is, to make the sentence perfit, thatThe verb est must nedes be supplied. verb must nedes be takē in the same sense, wherein it is wont to be supplied: but it is cōmonly supplied as a cōmon verb whose nature is to declare the substance and not the figure of the thing, which is spoken of: therefore so it must be taken at this tyme. Otherwise, what a folly were it, whē a verb is at ye first left out, to call it of purpose into the speache, and as sone as it is placed there, to say it stādeth not properly, but to remoue it again, & put an other verb for it? What? was the verb est, being once left out, brought in for this intent only, y• as sone as it was in his place, it should be immediatly cast out, & chāged into ye verb significat? If ye say ye were compelled to cal it in, I agree with you, andThe ne∣cessitie of the verb est in Christes words. say further, ye are to blame to cast it out. For the holy Ghost would not haue compelled you in vaine to call it in. God meant ye should cal it in, and kepe it in. For in yt he left it out, he would shew to your hard harts, how that verbe, which when ye had it
present in other Euangelists ye disdanied, and scortiefully re∣moued, that it was not only well placed, but it was so necessary to the meaning of his words, y• whē it was left out, ye should be forced to cal it in. And wil ye be so forgetful, as not to note these secret inforcements of God? Know ye not that one iota or one title of the law (and much lesse of the Gospel) passeth not away,Math. 5. vntill all things be fulfilled? And yet dare you take away the verbe substātiue it self from Christes own words, the same verb, I say, which he cōpelled you to take in, when it was omitted by S. Luke? See how farre Christ is from your mind. when it is but once left out, he will haue it euen then put in, and when it is expressed in the words of Christes supper seuen tymes, you will euery tyme put it out. It is the custome of the Hebrew tonge to leaue out the verbe substātiue sum, es, fui, when it signifieth properly. But how is it left out, when (if you say true) it was neuer meant to be in? Or how was it meant to be in, when being put in, it is by you remo∣ued as not meant properly by him that spake? And yet it is so necessarily meant to be put in Christes words, that when it is left out, the Sacramentaries can not chose but supply it and put it in. therefore Christ meant to haue it stand in his proper and vsual signification. For, seing the verbe est, is vsed to be left out, because it may easily be supplied, and may be taken as expressed (though it be not expressed in deede) then the vse which maketh it to be leaft out, as a verbe easily supplied, must by the same rea∣son make it signifie that thing, which it vseth commonly to signi∣fie, sith it is supplied by the only force of the vse of speaking. and surely the vse of the verbe est, is to signifie the substance of that noune substantiue which hath a peculiar substance, and conse∣quently in the words of Christes supper it must signifie the sub∣stance of his body and of his blood really present.
¶ The xxvij. Circumstance, of these words: whiche is shed for you. THis cup is the new Testamēt in my blood (saith S. Luke) whiche is or shalbe shed for you. The relatiue, which, inQui ca∣lix, The which cup these words is not ruled (as some perhaps would thinke) of the noune blood, which went last before: but of the noune, cup, or chalice. Which thing is most plain in the Greke text:. . Hoc poculum nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo, quod pro vobis effunditur. This cup is the new Testamēt in my blood, the whiche cup is shed for you. For seing the Greke participle , which signifieth shedding, is in the nominatiue case with the noune cup, and not in the datiue with the noune blood, no escape can be had, but it mut be referred to that word, where∣with in grammer it may agree: otherwise, if we shall neglect the literal sense, which ariseth of the right construction of the words, we build a roofe (as I alleged before out of S. Hierm) withoutIn Amos cap. 4. walles or foundation. What meaning then haue these words, the whiche cup is shed for you, or as the latine copies reade, which shalbe shed? For it was both presently shed in a mystery at the holy table of Christ, & should the next day be naturally shed vpon the crosse. The sub∣stance of blood was one in both places, the maner of shedding only differing. But, as I sayd, how is the cup sayd to be shed for vs? The word for vs importeth a sacrifice made in the shedding: and therefore S. Mathew sheweth it to be shed in redēptionem peccatorum, for the remission of synnes. Marke, good Reader, the maner of speaking the cup is shed▪ that is to say, the thing contemed in the cup. For we all agree herein, that the name of, cup, standeth to meane the liquour in it,
as continens is vsed to be put pro contento. the thing which holdeth a liquour is vsed to be put for the liquour it selfe, which it holdeth. We say, he dranke vp a great bolle, who drank the ale, bere, or wine that was in it: and that is a figuratiue speach by exacte rules of Grammar, but a speach made as proper through vse and custome. Therefore to say, the cup is shed for vs, doth signifie, that the liquour in it is shed for vs, what liquour was that? It is the greatest mareyle in the world, if any man be so im∣pudent as to affirme, that material wine was shed for vs, or that wine obteined vs remission of oúr synnes: and yet it can not be denied, but the liquour conteyned in the cup of Christes supper was shed for vs, as Christ sayth. Therefore I say, the liquour conteyned in the cup of Christes supper could be no wine, but only the blood of Christ. Is this a plaine argument, or no? the liquour in the cup of Christes banket was shed for vs to obteinA demon∣stratiō out of Gods worde. the forgeuenes of synnes: but only the reall blood of Christ was shed for the remission of our synnes: therefore the only real blood of Chist was conteined in the cup of Christes banket. What answer can be framed to this argument, if Hell were let loose? what probable solutiō were it able to bring? The first part is in S. Luke, the second is in S. Paule: who affirmeth it to beHebr. 9. the blood of Christ (who offered him self by the holy spirit vn∣spd vnto God) which cleanseth our cōscience frō dead works to serue the liuing God. After these two partes the conclusion  solow, that Christes real blood is in the cup of Christes sup∣per. in the cup, I say, which Christ shewed & pointed vnto saying: this cup, that is to say, the thing herein conteined is the new Testament in my blood. the which thing coneiued in the cup isEuthy. in c. Luc. 22. shed for you. Euthymius wel peceauing this to be y• meaning of S. Lukes
wordes, writteth thus: Quod verò dicitur, quod pro vobis effunditur, ad poculum referendum est: porrô poculum est saguis eius. Whereas it is sayd, the which is shed for you, it is to be re∣ferred vnto the cup. Now the cup is Christes blood. God graūt our deceaued bretheren may once perceaue this Grammaticll & literall sene of Christes wordes. ¶ The last circumstance, of the Hymne sayd at Christes supper. WHen Christ had ended his banket, he renounced to ate or drinke any more with his Apostles, vntil the kigdom of God came, geuing thē an euident watch∣word therein: that he would presently offer him self to death, and so depart from this world, vntill he should arise the third day. And straight he sang an hymne, and with his Apostles went forth of the parler, where they had supped. Although the hymne or song of praise, whereof S. Mathew speaketh, doe not aloneMatt. 26. proue the real presence of Christs body and blood: yet it helpeth thus far toward it, as to shew and expresse a singular banket toAn hymne said only at Chri∣stes sup∣per. haue bene made: after which so rare and solemne a praise was geuē to God, as again is no where els mentioned. For albeit no man may doubt, but Chist did always geue thanks vnto God after his meate receaued: yet we neuer reade of an hyme sayd or song after any other Feast, besyde this. And yet I doubt no∣thingIoan. 12. atall, but that Christ gaue him self by faith and spirit euen at the supper tyme to some of his Disciples before this night, and namely to the blessed Mary, which at Bethay oynted his feete at supper tyme. but that geuing of him self to Saint Mry or any other to be eaten of by faith was not this dreful git of Christs supper. The hymne which was externally song or said, was ue to this externall worke of God, wherein he wit
own hands gaue his own body and blood to his disciples. To conclude at the length cōcerning all these circumstances of this heauenly supper: I besech the Reader, to accompt & weighe them all together, and not only to consyder them a part albeit many of them alone are not able to be answered. but a circum∣stance is not a perfit thing of it self, but is a part of that whole thing, about the which it hath his being and place. If all these circumstances ioyned together doe proue the real presence of Christes body and blood, vnder y• formes of that bread and wine, which Christ toke, and sayd thereof, this is my body, and this is my blood: I haue my purpose and intent. but he dealeth vnho∣nestly who diuiding them a part, cauilleth at one or two, and wil not looke to al at once. If al these ioyned together proue not my purpose, let him who thinketh so, either shew me so many & so strong for his contrary assertion, or let him yeld to y• Catholi faith. ¶ The real presence of Christes body and blood, and theThe x. Chapiter. proper meaning of his words, is proued by the con∣ference of holy scriptures taken ou of the new Te∣stament, and speaking of our ords supper. EUery place in holy scripture hath not another place like, or in apparance cōtrarie to it, whereby the more light may be taken for the vnderstanding thereof: but when there are any such places, they helpe marueilously toward the vnderstan∣ding of holy scripture. Christ one yere before his last supper said at Capharna: The bread, whiche I will geue, is my flesh: & my flsh is meat in dede.Ioan. 6. Math. 26 At his supper he toke bread, and hauing blessed, said: Take eate, this is my body, and this cup is the new Testament in my blood: S.  speaking of the self same mysterie, wryteth thus: The1. Cor. 10
chalice of blessing, which we blesse, is it not the communicating ofThe pla∣ces which are to be confered. Christes blood? And the bread which we breake, is it not the com municating of the body of our Lord: Let vs now conferre euery word together. That whiche was promised in S. Iohn by these wordes: TheIoan. 6. bread whiche I will geue, is discribed in the supper presently byMath. 26 these words: Take, eate (this) and this cup. not that I make (this) the accusatiue case to the verbe eate, but only to shew, that these three wordes agree with the first words in S. Ihon. And after∣ward in S. Paule it is called, The bread which we breake: so that1. Cor. 10 these foure particles belong in effect to one thing: The bread, whiche I will geue: The bread, whiche we breake, and, take, eate, (this) or drinke ye this cup. By which conference we learne, how the pronoune (this) may be particularly expounded in ChristesThis. supper: for of his generall signification, whiche is to shew vnder a visible form an inuisible substance, I haue spoken before suffici∣ently. (This) then is as much to say, as: this meat, drink or food, which is now broken and geuē, and willed to be taken and eaten or drunken, is my body or blood. It hath bene euidently proued vppon the sixt of S. Ihon, that y• bread which he promised, wasThebred promised is not m teriall bread. not meant of wheatē bread (whereof Christ spake not in y• place) but of the meate and foode of euerlasting life. Therefore, when Christ sayth (this) in his last supper, he meaneth none otherwise, then this eatable thing, or this which is to be drunken, this kind of meate or drinke and food, which I nw geue, is my body or blod: otherwise, i it were not his flesh and blood, but material bread and wine, it were not the euerlasting meate, which Christ at Caphanamn promised to geue, and now at his supper doth geue. So that whereas Christ both brake and gaue, & after blessing said, take, eate (this) therewith beginning to consecrate the
Sacrament of his last supper: we haue it expounded what (this)This is  by y• other places. doth , by three  ways: by the tyme to come, when it is sayd: the brea that I wil geue, hich out of question is vnder∣standed the food  Christ wil geue. For Christ him self called it before the meate which tarieth to life euerlasting. Agayne, the pronoune (this) may be wel expounded by the dede exercysed a∣bout the Sacrament after cousration, when it is sayd of S. Paule: The bread which we breake. for the breaking is vsed af∣ter consecration in the signe and form of bread, to shew the death of Christ, wherein his flesh was in dede broken, and to distribute the mrites thereof by the holy communion. The third way is, by conferring together the very words of the consecrating the two kinds. For as he said of the bread, this alone, so he sayd of the wine this cup. geuing vs to vnderstand, that as this cup must of necessity be resolued into y• thing within the cup: so in the other kind we should resolue the pronoune this into that, which is within this visible form. Thereby declaring that (this) generally meaneth, the substance vnder this: and par∣ticularly meaneth, the food vnder this. All is in effecte to say, The meate that I will geue, the eatable thing that we breake at Masse, that, whereof Christ sayd, take and eate, that which is conteyned vnder the apparant formes: that is it, which in the supper is termed by the pronoun (his) The next word is the verbe (is) which can very hardly be ex∣poundedThe verb . by any other word in any tonge: because it being the verbe substa, is in all tonges set alone, to signifie y• being or substāce that euery thing hath, and no other one word is equal to it, which may expound it. Yet I may boldly say, the holy Ghost hath done so much to expound this verbe, as may suffiseWhat  mean by . to any reasonable creature. For Christ sayd, before any signe of his body was : The bread which I wil geue, is my flesh. Whē
Christ made that promise, there was nothing in y• whole world, whereof the verbe (is) might be verified in the present tense, but only that substance of Christes flesh, which he had in his natural body. The outward gift of the supper was then to come, & yet Christ sayd of the substance of his gift, The bread which I will geue, is my flesh. I say not only that it shalbe my flesh, but I say it is my flesh at this tyme: because the substance that I will geue, is now present with you, although the manner of deliuerance be to come. Let vs therefore so expound the verbè (is) in the supper, that it may agree with the verbe (is) in S. Ihon: where it cannot be taken for a bare significatiue being, because then there was no signe of his body made. Moreouer S. Paule writing after the supper was past, doth interprete the verbe (is) as plainly, as can be deuised: to signifie a substancial, and not an accidentall being. for he sayth: The bread,The com∣municatig which we breake, is the communicating of Christes flesh. it is y• communicating, as though he sayd: it is so truely Christes flesh, that no differēce is betwene it, and the being or substance of Chri∣stes flesh. All thing is common betwene it, and Christes flesh: no diuision, no separation, no distinction cōmeth betwene these two. All this the word communicating doth signifie, and more to. For the bread, which we breake, is so farre Christes body: that it maketh vs also the body of Christ. The bread which  breake, is so  distant from being a bare signe: that it hath Christes body made common to it by consecration, and it maketh Chri∣stes body common to vs by communion: so that for est, is, S. Paule putteth, communicatio est, it is the communicating, or the hauing, or making common Christes body and blood.Chrys. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. S. Chrysostom so vehemently presseth the word cōmunicating & vnion, whereof ye Apostle speaketh: y• he sayth, S. Paule would not leaue so muche as a little difference betwene the men, which
doe communicate, and that, which is communicated: and yet if that, which is communicated, were materiall bread, it would so much differ from Christ our head, and the mysticall body, which we are in Christ, that it should be an other nature and substance cleane diuerse from it, not only not communicating in one and the same mēber of a mystical body, but neither in the whole kind of things, which the Logicians call speciem, or genus proximum. Let vs adde hereunto, that if we take, est, for significat, in these words, hic significat sanguinem meum: the verb shal lac a noune substantiue to be his nominatiue case. And that S. Luke, by lea∣uing est, to be vnderstanded by common reason, doth shew it sig∣nifieth properly, as men commonly are wonte to vse that verbe. Thus much being said for (this) and (is), the worde (body) re∣mayneth,Body. Matt. 6. Ioan. 6. Matt. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 1. Cor. 10 1. Cor. 11 Ioan. 6. Matt. 26 Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 10 1 Cor. 11 Matt. 26. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 to be declared by the conference of holy scripture. In S. Matthew it is called supersubstantiall breade. In S. Iohn it is called my flesh, whiche I will geue for the lite of the world. In S. Matthew and Marke my body. in S. Luke, my body whiche is geuen for you. in S. Paule, my body which is broken for you, or shalbe betraied for you, the body of our Lord this bread, & the one bread. Likewise concerning the blood, it is called the blood of the sonne of man: my blood, the blood of the new Testament, the new testament in my blood. The chalice of blessing whiche we▪ blesse, the blood of Christ, the blood of our Lord, and the chalice of our Lord. Of the body it is said take, eate: of the blood, take & diuide among you, and drinke ye all of this. Of both together it is said, to the Apostles, make, and do ye this thing. Of euill men it is said, that they eate this breade, and drinke the chalice of our Lord vnworthely, not iudging rightly our Lordes body: And last of all, he that eateth me, shall liue for me. If now we will expoūdIoan. 6. body, for the signe of body, it will folow, that the signe of Chri∣stes
body was gn for vs. And when it is sayd, He that eateth me shall liue for me: it must be expounded: He that eateth the signe of me, shal liue for the signe of me. To conclude, as (this) belongeth not to the substance either of bread or of wine, wherewith it can not agree in : as the verb est, is, can not stand for significat to signifie, least it lack his nominatiue case: as the cup shed for vs, can not stande for wine shed in sacrifice, or els for the signe of blood shed, but only for the substance of blood shed on the crosse: so corpus body can not stand for a figure or a signe of the body, because hoc est corpu meum datum pro vobis (accordingly as the Greeke hath) can not be interpreted, this is y• figure of my body which is geuē for you▪ except with Ualentinus, Marcion, Manicheus it shalbe sayd, y• figure of Christes body was geuen to death for vs. Wherefore I may boldly cōclude, that stubburnly to defend, that the words of Christes supper are Grammatically or Rhetorically figu∣ratiue (cōcerning the substantial parts of the chefe propositions) is extreme ignorance in the rules of Grammar and of Logicke, palpable blindnes in the studie of diuinitie, and a malice inexcu∣sable at the day of iudgement, if the party repent not. Now on the other syde, conferre Scriptures, whether Ihon Baptist be Elias: it is euident, that it is not so. There was be∣twene them in tyme aboue fiue hundred yeres: Ihon Baptist was killed, Elias liueth yet. The Angel sayd by Ihon Baptist,Lucae. 1. He shall goe before our Lord in the spirit and vertue of Elias: He sayd not, in truth and person. And Ihon Baptist being as∣ked, whether he were Elias or no, answered plainly: Non sum,Ioan. 1. I am not. It is plaine enough, that Ihon Baptist is not Elias in person: but only in like office and function. Thus you may see (good Reader) what oddes is betwene those places, which our aduersas wold haue like, and wold make you beleue that
these words (This is my body) be no more properly spoken, then these (He is Elias.) The like may be sayd of the rock, which meaneth two diuerseExod. 17 Num. 20 natures, se geuing water: as it is described in the bookes of Moyses, and well knowen to be neither Christ by nature, nei∣ther by cōneon of any rok into Christ. For neither Christ euer sayd of the rock (This is my body) neither did he commaund vs, to say so. What shall I say of that vnsensible obiection, that God dwel∣lethActo. 17. not in Temples made with mans hand? For we now spea∣king of the body of Christ, speake not of the dwelling, which be∣longeth to God: but of that, which belongeth to his humane na∣ture, which it self also is not a Temple made with the hand of man, or begotten by the seede of man, but formed and concea∣ued of the holy Ghost in the wombe of the Uirgin, in the whichCollos. 1. manhod of Christ, the fulnesse of Godhead dwelleth corporally. As for those places where Christ sayth: Poore men shall yeMarc. 14 &. 16. Lucae. 24. Rom. 8. haue with you always, but me ye shall no haue: And, he is rysen, he is not here: And, whiles Christ blessed his Disciples, he went from them, and was caried into heauen, there sitting at the right hand of his Father vntil the end of the world, with such like: they▪ are not to be conferred with these words (This is my body) be∣cause they speake of a naturall being of Christ, and not of such a being, as is peculiar vnto the Sacrament of Christes supper. Neither is it possible, that one of those kinds of  should impugne y• other: sith Christ hath orded both, & the Church did  always both together. Christ ascended into heauen there sitting at the right hand ofActor. 1. &. 2. his Father, and leauing vs the beleefe thereof as a chief article of our faith, Christ made his own supper, saying: This is my bo∣dy, and commaunded his Apostles and their succs to makeL. 22.
the same, saying: Doe and make this thing, for the remembrance of me. Therefore neither the making of Christes body, neither the belefe thereof, can be contrary to the sitting of Christ at the right hand of his father. Agayne, sith nothing is impossible toThe pre∣sence of Christes bdy is not impos∣sible. God (albeit that which imploiet cōtradiction in it self, be there∣fore impossiple, because it repugneth to the truth it self which is in God) it is not possible to God, y• y• body of Christ should both be in heauen after one visible sorte, and in the Sacrament after a mysticall sorte. It were in dede impossible for the body of Christ both to be in heauen, and not to be in heauen. Or, to be in the Sa crament, and not to be there in the same respect: but to be in hea∣uen and in the Sacrament, or to be in many places at once, that maketh no , but onely sheweth an allmighty and in∣finite power in him, who worketh it. Of this minde all the Church of God hath bene hitherto, and therefore it hath beleued as well the sitting of Christ at his Fa∣thers rht hand in heauen: as the reall presence of his flesh and blood in the Sacrament of the altar. Yea it hath beleued the one, because of the other. For in so much as Christ is so almighty, asThe sit∣ting of  in heauen , a hp to his  presence in the Sacra . to sit at the right hand of God: he is able to performe his owne word and gift in the Sacrament of the altar. And therefore in the sixte of S. Ihon when he spake of eating his flesh, and of drin∣king his blood, which he wold geue: he also declared, that he wold goe vp into heauen in his manhood, where he was before in his Godhead. And that thing he spake (as S. Cyrillus hath noted) to declare, that he was God, and therefore able to worke that, which he spake of, in so much as his words were spirit and life. For this cause Chrysostom cryeth out: ô miraculum, ô DeiChryso. de sacer. lib. 3. benignitatem. Qui cum Patre sursum sedet, in illo ipso temporis articulo omnium manibus pertractatur, ac se ipse tradit volenti∣bus ipsum excipere ac complecti. O miracle, O goodnes of God.
He that sitteth aboue with the Father, in the same very momen of tyme is touched with the hands of all men, and deliuereth himself to those, that wil receaue and imbrace him. Num tibi ista contemptu ac despectu digna esse videntur? Seme these things to thee worthy to be despised & neglected? Sacra nostra non modòChristes supper pas seth all wōdering mira esse videbis, sed etiam omnem stuporem excedentia. Thou shalt perceaue, our holy things not only to be wonderfull: but also to excede all wondringe, and astonyng of the mynd. Yf then we vnderstand, that only a great wonder is wrought in our Lords supper, and no contradiction at all to any other partes of our belefe: we may be sure, that none other article of our crede doth driue vs to miscredit the reall presence of Christes body and blood in his owne supper. And therefore where we dispute of his last supper, we must ex∣amine y• meaning of y• words, which were spokē there, according to other places of y• Scriptures, which belong vnto y• last supper. The places apperteyning to Christes last supper, accordingThe pla∣ces belon∣ging to Christes supper. to the interpretation of ancient doctors, are these: the later part of the 6. Chapiter of S. Iohn. the supersubstantiall bread in the 6. of S. Mathew. and the supper it self in the 62. of S. Mathew, in the 14. of S. Marke, the 22. and the 24. of S. Luke. certain sentences in the 10. and 11. chapiter of the first epile of S. Paule to the Corinthians: in the 5. to the Ephesians, in the 2. chapiter of the first epistle to Timotheus. in the 13. to the Hebrewes. in the 2. 13. and 20. chapiter of the Actes of the Apostles. In all which places & other (if there be any like) we finde much to con∣e the reall presence: but nothing to leade vs to a siguratiue meaninge. These wordes, which be in S. Iohn: the flesh profi∣teth nothing, it is the spirite which quickeneth, my wordes be spirit and life, be declared in the former booke, when we disputed of the sixt chapiter of S. Iohn.
¶ Why the Sacrament is called bread after conse∣cration.The . Chapiter. NO man ought to mistrust the real presence of Christ in his Sacrament, for that it semeth in many places to be called bread euen ater consecration, and that aswell in S. Iohn as in S. Paule, and in the Actes of the Apostles: noman (I say) ought vppon this slender argument to change his belefe other∣wise grounded vpō so plaine scriptures, & the faith of y• Church so generally receaued: but rather he ought to lern the cause, why the body of Christ is most iustly called bread in this Sacramēt. The custome of speaking in holy scriptures came chefely from the Hebrew tonge, wherein the old Testament was writen: as also S. Mathewes Ghospel with the epistle of S. Paule to the Hebrewes were. The residue of the Apostles and Euangelistes, albeit they wrote in Greeke, they very osten kept the Hebrew phrase in their wordes. Bread in the Hebrew tonge his called Lehem, and commeth of the verbe Laham, whyche signifieth toAll foode  in He∣brew cal∣led bread. ate: so that al which man may eate, is meant by the Hebrew worde Lehem, as wel bread, as flesh or fruytes, in so much that sometyme it signifieth only flesh, as the Hebrew Doctors haueVide Pa∣gninum in verbo Laham. noted out of the sixte and seuenth chapiter of Iob. Now y• Apo∣stles and Euangelistes writing also in Greeke haue put for the Hebrew word Lehem, the Greeke worde : and they that translated the scriptures into latin, haue turned it into panis, and we in our vulgar tonge name it bread: by which meanes it co∣meth to passe, that the Greeke, Latine, and English worde must be takē in holy scriptures according to y• Hebrew worde Lehem: which betokeneth all what soeuer is to be eaten of man, but espe nally bread, as being the chief fruite of the earth. After which sorte when Christ saith in y• Ghospel: man lyuethDeut. 8. & Cath. 4. not by bread alone, but by euery worde, which procedeth from
the mowth of God, he meaneth by the name of bread, al kinde of natural nourishment, which man taketh by moth. without all whiche he may lie either by naturall bread, as Manna was: or, if it so please God to say the worde, without any meat at all, as Moyses and Elias fasted fortie days. according to which gene∣rallMath. 6. Luc. 11. taking of bread, we aske in our Lordes praier, our daily and supersubstantiall bread: that is to saye, all necessary sustenance for body and sowle. It is further to be noted, that in holy scriptures, when one thinge is conuerted into an other, the later thinge is many times called by the name of the first thing: not because it is still the first, but because it was made from the first. As when it is sayd,Exod. 7. that the rod of Aron deuoured the rods of the Coniurers of Pha rao: where that is called a rodde, which was in dede a serpent, and not then a rod: but it is named a rod, because from a rod it was turned into a . Likewise Adam is called earth, be∣causeGen. 1. 3. he was made of earthe. Thirdly a thing is calld in holy scripture not only as it is, but also as it semeth outwardly to be. so the Angel, which the godly wmen sawe at the sepulcher of Christ, is called a yongeMarc. 16. man, because he appered so, although in dede he were not so. Which things being wel pondred, it is casie to satisie them that saye, the holy communion is bread still, because after conse∣crationThat  be  bad wch  bread  et se∣mth brad. it is called bread: To whome I answere, first that it is called bread, because it was bread, and still semeth bread: but that notwithstanding, it is flesh and was made flesh from of the sub∣stace of bread, being conuerted into flesh by the almightie wor∣des of Christ: who taking bread, sayd in the way of blessinge, & of thanks geuing, this is my body. Secondly I answere, that in dede after consecration it is a kinde of bread and foode (not that whiche it was before) but
ineably bitter and of more price, and more worthy of yt name of true bread, then it was before: that is to say, it is the true flesh of hrist which nourysheth the bodies and soules of the faithfull men to lie euerlasting. And to proue this answere true, it may please the Reades to remember, that Christ called himself the bread of life: and named the gifte of his supper the meate whichIoan. 6. tarieth to life euerlasting, & the liuely bread which came downe from heauen. After which meaning he saith, and the bread which I wil gene is my esh. Behold ye kind of bread. Agayne S. Paule1. Cor. 10 saith: The bread, which we breake is it not the communicating of our Lords body? For we being many are one bread, one body all we that partake of the one bread. all partake of the one bread, and it be the bread which we breake, surely that, which is brokē, can not be any material bread, but is only the body of Christ the bread of life. And least any man should thinke, that in saying the name of bread in Christes supper standeth for meate & for flesh, I speake without sufficient authoritie, besyde the authoritie of y• scriptures already alleged, which can not be otherwise taken: let him also weigh together wt me, how cōformably ye aunciēt Fathers taughtIgnatius in 2. epi. ad Rom. the same doctrine. S. Ignatius sayth: Panem Dei volo, quod est caro Christi. I desier the bread of God, which thing is the flesh of Christ: Which thing in the nenter gender, is none other to say, then which substance.Iustinus in Apol. 2. Iustinus the Martyr affirmeth first that the Deacons geue to euery man the bread, wine, and water which are cōsecrated withFirst. Bread, ,  water. geuing of thankes. Where he calleth them by the ames which they had before consecration: And sraight expounding y• names of bread, wine, and water, which they haue by consecration, he writeth thus: Hic cibus apud nos Eucharistia nominatur, This2. Conse∣cration. foode is called wt vs ye Eucharist, Wherefore for all three names,3. Food.
he putteth this one name of food, wherein they all meete. Nei∣ther so content, he sayth yet againe: For we take not these things as common bread and drink, but we haue learned, the meat which is consecrated by the words of prayer taken of him, to be the flesh and blood of Christ. So that first, he declareth him self by bread,4. Flesh and blood. wine, and water, to meane the matter of the Sacramēt. Second∣ly, he confesseth the consecration, to make them a more heauenly food. Thirdly, he denieth them to be now common bread and drinke. Fourthly, he affirmeth it to be that kind of foode, which is the flesh and blood of Christ. Of the same very Sacrament S. Hilarie sayth: Nos vere ver∣bum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus: We take the word truly esh, in our Lords meate. Where he calleth the thing, which is geuen at Christes supper, cibum Dominicum, the meate which our Lord geueth, meaning it not to be any more common bread, but that kind of bread, which is also called meate or food. S. Cy∣prianLibro. 2. Epist. 3. d Cecil. 2. Ireneus. . 4. ca. 34 sayth, Christ offered bread and wine, suum scilicet corpus & sanguinem: that is to say, his own body and blood. Mark the kind of bread. S. Ireneus sayth: It is not now (to wit after cō∣secration) common bread, but the Eucharist. S. Ambrose asketh, why after cōsecration we say in or LordsAmbro∣sius de Sacram. li. 5. ca. 4. prayer: Geue vs this day our daily bread? And him self aunswe∣reth: He calleth it bread in dede, Sed , hoc est, supersub∣stantialem: That is to say, as S. Hierom expoundeth it, qui su∣per omnes substantias sit, such a bread which is aboue all sub∣stances. And yet farther S. Hierom sayth, Panem illum petimus,Hieron. in Math. cap. 6. qui dicit: Ego sum panis viuus, we aske that bread which sayd: I am the liely bread. But to return againe to S. Ambrose, he con∣cludeth: Non iste panis est, qui vadit in corpus: sed ille panisvitae aeternae, qui animae nostrae substantiam fulcit. It is not that bread, which goeth into the body, but that bread of euerlasting life,
which holdeth vp the substance of our soule, Gregorius of NyaNyssen. in vita Moysis. speaking of the Sacrament of the altar, saith: Panis est absque se∣mine, absque aratione, absque alio humano opere nobis paratus. It is bread prouided for vs without seed, without plowing, andTract. 26 in Ioan. without any other work of man. S. Augustine saith: whē would flesh vnderstand this thing, that he called bread flesh?In Leuit. c. 22. l. 6. In oper Paschal. Isychis nameth the bread, whiche S. Paule saith is eaten vnworthely, nutritorem substantiae nostrae intelligibilis: the nou∣risher of our intelligible or spiriall substance. Sedulius spea∣king of the bread whiche Christ gaue to Iudas, saith: Panem cuiThebr geuen to Iudas was betr ed for vs. tradidit ipse, Qui panis tradendus erat. to whom Christe himselfe gaue bread, the whiche bread was to be betraied. See, the bread that Christ gaue, it was not euery bread, not the substance of cō∣mon bread: but euen that bread in substance, which was betraied for vs to death. For Christ is bread, & geuing himself to Iudas, he gaue the same bread that was betraied, except any other thing was betraied for vs beside Christ. I might surely bring a maruelouse number of suche testimo∣nies, all which declare the name of bread (whiche is attributed to the body of Christ after consecration) not to signifie materiall or wheaten bread (as it was before the blessing and pronouncing of the words) but to describe that meat, that food, that true Manna: which is only the flesh of Iesus Christ eaten vnder the forme o common bread. And that kinde of bread is neuer named without an article or pronoune ioyned with it: Whereby the excellency of the bread is witnessed, & the difference of it from common bread.Math. 6. Ioan. 6. 1. Cor.  It is called in S. Mathew supersubstantiall bread, & in S. Iohn the bread which is flesh, and in S. Paul the bread, which who so eateth vnworthely, he is gilty of the body of Christ: which is as much to say, as that kind of bread is the body of Christ.
¶ The presence of the body and blood of Christ in hisThe xii. Chapiter. last supper is proued by the conference of holy scrip∣tures taken out of the old Testament. FRom Adam to S. Iohn Baptist, all the faithfull people of God was both in continuall expectation of the coming ofEuseb. Emissen. Hom. 2. de Pasch. Iesus Christ: & partly foreshewed in dedes by holy figures and pagents: partly foretolde in words by the spirite of prophe∣cie, what should afterward be done by Christ him self, and be ob∣serued in his kingdom the church. After which sort the brasen ser∣entNum. 21. Ioan. 3. Ionae 2. Math. 12. betokened the death of Christ, and Ionas his resurrection. The figures by the way of doing, commended the same truth to ye eyes, which ye prophecies by the way of speaking dyd set forth to the eares. Which two senses are the chief meanes, whereby we atteine to knowledge in this life. And because both figures and prophecies are obscure, darke, and vnpleasant, vntill they be fulfilled: I thought best, not t speake of them, before I had declared the true meaning of that gift, whiche Christ made at his last supper. Now it remaineth, y• we briefly conferre the one, with the other, shewing that sense of Christes wordes, which the Catholiks defend, to be agreable to suche old shadowes, figures & prophecies, as apperteined to the Sacramēt of the altar. For to the Iewes (as S. Paul affirmeth)1. Co. 10. all things chanced in figures. And Christ saith, all things mustLuc. 24. Gen. 4. nedes be fulfilled which are spoken of him in the law, Psalmes and Prophetes.De mira bil. sacrae scriptur. cap. 3. Hier. in quaest. He br. in ge. ¶ The figure of Abel. ABell the first shepherd, Priest, Martyr, and perpetuall vir∣gin, made a sacrifice of the first begotten of his flocke, and of the fat of them: which God shewed him self to accept by sending down fier from heauen. Abel then hauing first offered
him self vnto God vnder the shape of other thinges, afterward went forth to be offered in his owne person and shape, beingDidym. in epist. Ioan. 1. aiterously put to death by his brother Cain, wt a deadly ripe of a wodden club or stake: whose blood the earth (opening her mouth) receaued into her bowels, and from thence it cryed to God. The prince of shepherdes, the chief Priest, greate martyr and witensbea to al truth, the flower and garland of all virginitieEzech. cap. 24. is Iesus Christ God and man. whose flocke the faithful men are. The first begoē and fatte of them, is the flesh and blood, which Iesus oke of the virgin Marie: which flesh and blood he first offered to God by wil and affection, when he toke into his handsMath. 26 bread and wie, within a certaine parler vpon mounte Sio, where he did eate the Paschal lambe with his Apostles. And God shewed him selo to accept that intent of the sonne of man, by working with the consuming fiex of his Diuinity that maruci∣louse grace: which turned the substance of bread and wine into y• substance of Christes own flesh and blood. And from that placeIoan. 18. Aug. ad quaest. Orosij 4. 9 Pro∣sper de promis∣sis & prae dict. De He. 11. 12 If any good man were able to offer  to God his owne bo∣dy in his owne hāds, he wold do Abel by sleying his Lbs shewed himself to haue de∣sired an other sa∣crifice. Christ went forth ouer the brook of Cedron, to be offered in his owne person and shape, betraied by Iudas, and put to death vp∣on the wood of the crosse by his own brethren the Iewes: whose blood the Church, called forth from among both Iewes and gentils, with al due honour receaueth into her mouth, & bowels: whence it geueth a better crie, then the blood of Abell did from the earth, where it lay. Abel vnder the sige of his Lambes did by will and affection consecrate the same truth of his body and soule to God, which at y• tyme of his death he actually rendred and gaue vp into the handes of his maker. And surely if he had bene able to haue made the substance of his owne body an soule present in his owne handes, when he offered, he would much more  haue offe∣red,
it, then y• dad flesh of lambes, which he vsed for a signe of . For who would content him selfe with a bar signe, if he wee able to offer the truth it selfe? He was not of such power, as to change the lambes into him selfe, thereby working that in his haudes outwardly, which his hart inwardly offered. But yet he shewed his desier to haue a change made, in that he slew y• lābes, taking from them theyr former substance, to thint by consecra∣tion they might obteie a more holy and saced being. God also looked vpon his gifts, as wel accepting the mind of his Priest, as the maner of his doing. But that which lacked in Abel (who was faine to shew outwardly the consecration of his owne hart by a thing of an othere substance) that thing Christ fulfilled, making the same substance of his owne flesh present inMarc. 14 his hands, which he dedicated to God in his hart: For taking bread and blessing he sayd, This is my body. Abel offered his gift, before he went forth into the field, whereGen. 4. he was aine: The Sacramentaries dee Christ to haue offered his giftes in his last supper, before h went forth to his passion. Abel contented not him self with the former substance, which his lambes naturally had: They teach, that Christ contented him self with the former substance of bread & wine. Fier rom heauen in∣amed the external giftes of Abel: They deny y• fier of the word of God to swallow vp the substance of bread and wine which Christ toke. Abel consecrated his own body and blood, as farre as he was able, vnder the outward signe of his lambes: They deny Christ to haue consecrated his owne body and blood vnder the formes of the bread and wine which he toke, although they must nedes confesse, that both Christ was able really to do it, andAug de Trm. l. 3. by y• way of blessing to haue sayd, this is my body: which words all the Fathers haue called the words of consecration. The reall blood of Abel was taken into y• mouth of y• sensible earth: They
deny the Church (which is the earth of God) to take the blood of Christ into her sensible mouth, whereas S. Augustine sayth:Aug. in Psal. 39. Terra quae ore accepit sanguinem, Ecclesia est. The Church is the earth, which hath taken the blood in her mouth. The blood of Abel cried from the bowels of the earth to God: They deny the blood of Christ to cric to God out of our bowels. Abel figured both the supper and passion of Christ: They deny Christ to haue fulfilled the figure concerning his supper. Abel offered him selfe two ways, once vnder a signe, and again in the visible truth of nature: They deny Christ to haue offered him self vnder any signe, but only in y• visible truth of his nature. The deuil had the more power vppon ain, because he came to the high office of sa crificing vnworthely: They graunting that Satan entred into Iudas at the banket of Christ, yet deny Christ to haue made a sarifice there. And so cōfessing that Iudas did eate vnworthely, they will not confesse the worthines of the thing eaten. To be hort, the Sacramentaries (who teach bread and wine, whichThe Sa∣cramenta ries make the supper of Christ like to the doings of ain. are fruites of the earth, to remaine in theyr owne earthly nature, not hauing the body and blood of Christ offered vnder the formes of them and accepted) make the supper of Christ to be like the earthly fruites of Cain: who neither him selfe went about to change them, neither obteined to haue y• earthly grossenes of thē prged with fie from heauē, neither offered his owne body and blood vnder the outward signes of them: but keping backe that, which was of most price, he offered only a few base fruites of the earth, geuing an example for his part, what a base and arthlyCain did beare a si∣gure of y• English cōmunion communion heretikes would set vp directly against the blessed sacrifice of Abel: which in all pointes Christ fulfilled, & the Ca∣tholikes doe kepe and folowe. If I should haue handled euery member of this comparison at large, thou maiest iudge, good Reader, how great a booke it would haue made. In matters of
the old Tstament I had rather be short, then tediouse. which excuse I desire thee to accept throughout euery part of all this whole chapiter. ¶ The figure of Melchisedech. THe Sacramentaries deny, y• Christ exercised any Priestly office after the order of Melchisedech in his last supper: AsGen. 14. though elchisedech did not bring forth bread and wine, and Christ like wise did not take at his last supper bread & wine.Math. 26 Gen. 14. Maro. 14 Gen. 14. Math. 26 Gen. 14. Math. 26 Galat. 3. Gen. 14. Melchisedech did blesse, and Christ blessed. Melchisedech gaue thankes to God, and Christ gaue thankes. The thing blessed by Melchisedech was Abraham: And the thing made by Christes blessing was his owne body the seede of Abraham. Melchisedech gaue thankes to God for the victory of Abraham, by cōsecrating the person him self, who was the conquerour, saying: Blessed be Abraham to the high God. So did Christ make his charist, y• is to say, he gaue his thankes to God for the victory obteined at his death, by consecrating the selfe same body, which died, and wherein he wan the field, saying: This is my body which is geueLuc. 22. for you. And yet did not Christ at his supper sulfill the whole or∣der of Mlchisedech? The weakest and basest thing that Melchisedech had in all his Priesthod, was the bringing forth of bread and wine. At y• whichGen. 14. he staied not, but went forward to blesse Abraham, the end of his sacrifice. And now the Sacramentaries make Christ to staie vpō the substance of bread and wine, without going forward by bles∣sing, to make there of his blessed body, the seede of Abraham, Melchisedech gaue his bread to Abraham, to the ende it, beingClemens Alexād. Strō. l. 4. Christ as seth Mel∣chisedech by turning the bread, which he brought forth, into his owne body. eaten of him, might be made a better substance in his flesh, then it was in it selfe. But Christ geueth not vs the naturall substance of common bread (for cōmon bread profiteth nothing) but Christ
changeth it into a better substanc, verily into the substance of his owne flesh: to the ende we eating his flesh might be made a better and more holy substance, whiles we abide in Christ whom we eate, and to whom we are vnited. The Sacramentaries, who confesse Melchisedech to haue had Abraham really present, as it were, in his handes at the tune of blessing and consecrating him to God, denie Christ to haue had his owne body and blood present in his handes at the time of his blessing and consecrating, which he made in his last supper:Cypria. ad Caecil. li. 2. ep. 3. As though Melchisedech were the figure of Christ, because Christ, who is the truth, should haue lesse, then he had. Melchi∣sedech in the shew of bread and wine, shewed an image of theEuthy. in pano∣plia. supper of Christ. But vnder his image he had not present the reall truthe: because an image of a liuely thing made in a dead kind of stuff or matter, differeth from the chief paterne in sub∣stance. But Christ acknowleging his owne image in the sacri∣fice of Melchisedech, kept the formes of bread and wine (becauseChrist hath set his owne true sub∣stence vn∣der those formes of brend and wine, which Melchise dech vsed. they were images and formes of the priesthod, which he excersi∣ced in his supper) but he changed the inward substance of them: for so much as the substance of bread and wine were not the sub∣stance of his priesthod. And in dede an artificiall image of a liucly thing made by man, neuer can haue the truth it selfe vnder it, whose image it beareth: but when Christ had put the substance of his owne flesh vnder the formes of bread and wine, then was the image and shadow of Melchisedech fulfilled with the truthe, which it signified. And so is the whole Tatholike faith perfitly shadowed, by conferring the figure of Melchisedech with the supper of Christ.
¶ The figure of the  Lambe. THe paschall Lambe was taken vp yt tenth daie of y• firstExod. 12 Gregor. Nazian. in Pasch. orat. 4. Leo de pass. do∣min. se. 7 Theod. in 1. Co. 11. Ioan. 1. Ioan. 12. Luc. 22. moone, & yt fourtenth daie at night it was, after y•  thereof, wholy offered and  with  bread, the blood being sprinkled ouer and vpon both postes of the dore. Christ is the Lambe of God, who in his owne person came to  the tenth daie of y• first moneth, being receiued with great triumph, in somuch yt daie tooke thereof the name of Palme sondaie. The fourtenth daie at night (which was  Thursdaie) he offered him selfe to God by consecrating his owne body and blood, turning the substance of common bread & wine by the fier of his diuine word, into the pure substance of his hea∣uenly flesh, which him selfe tooke of his mother: and he gaue the same selfe body of his to be eaten vnder the forme of vnleauenedGregor. Paschal. Hom. 22 bread, sprinkeling with it as well the post of our mouth, as of our harte, in token that we receiue the same selfe blood into our mouth, which our harte beleueth. In which supper Christ must be vnderstanded to be as truly offered, rosted, eaten, and his blood as really sprinkled (after a mysticall sorte) as all this was visibly done about the Lambe. The mysterie, we speake of, taketh not away any truth from the myste∣rie contei∣neth the truth, but it contei∣neth it after a se∣cret man∣ner. thing: but sheweth the maner of the doing to be spirituall. For the offering is made without slaughter, the rosting without ope∣ration of sensible fier, the eating without cōsuming of the meat, the sprinkling without diuision or losse of the blood. But as the incarnation being wrought without the seede of man, did not cause the  of Christ to be the lesse true: euen so the inuisible changing of the substance of bread and wine into his body and blood, the vnbloody offering, the Sacramental ea∣ting and drinking, doth rather shew to all faithfull people the
worker of so high a mysterie to be true God, then any why hinder the reall presen of his flesh and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine. ¶ The Prophecie and figure of Manna. GOd sayd to Moyses: Behold, I wil raine bread to thee frōExo. 16. Ioan. 6. Exo. 16. Ioan. 6. Exo. 16. Ioan. 6. Matt. 26. Luc. 22. heauen. Christ sayd, worke the meate abyding to life euer∣lasting which the Sonne of man will geue you. This is the bread, which came downe from heauen: And the bread which I will geue is my flesh for the life of the world. The Israelits said, Manhu, What is this? For they knew not, what is was. The Ca∣pharnaits striued, saying, How can this man geue vs his flesh to eate? Moyses pointing to Manna, sayth, This is the bread, whichSee how y• words of Moses and of Christ agree. our Lord hath geuen you to eate. Christ pointing to that true Manna coming down from heauen which him self made, sayeth: Take, and eate, this is my body, which is geuen for you. Moyses sayd, this: and Christ, this. Moyses sayd, is: & Christ, is. Moy∣ses, the bread. Christ, my body. Moyses, which our Lord hath geuen: Christ, our Lord, sayth, which is geuen. Moyses, to you: Christ, for you. Moyses, to eate: Christ sayd, take and eate. TheExo. 16. bread, which Moyses shewed, was not the substance of wheaten bread, but heauenly. Neither the bread, which Christ geueth, is the substance of wheaten bread: but the true bread, which by the mysterie of the incarnation came from heauen. The bread, whichIoan. 6. Psal. 77 Moyses shewed, was made by Angels of such earthly stuffe and vapours, as they found in the ppermost part of the ayer: And the bread of Christ was made by the Angell of great Councel, ofMala. 2. Luc. 22. such earthly stuffe, as he found vppon the table of the Paschall Lambe, which was bread and wine, willing also his Priestes (who are his Angels in earth) to doe and make the same. The
bread, which Moyses shewed, was truly eaten of the IsraelitesExo. 16. Matt. 26. The bread whiche Christ ge ueth is both a signe and a truth. Exo. 16. Luc. 22 Exo. 16. Hieron. aduersus Iouin. l. 2 The whole sub stance of Christ is vnder  ry peece of the forme of bread. The fi∣gure of Māna is not fulfil∣led except the reall fleshe of Christ be geuen vn∣der y• form of bread. 1. Cor. 12 Ephe. 4. All that come to y• sacrament  y• body of Christ equally. Sap. 16. within the cumpasse of that white and cleare dew which they ga∣thered: And how much more is the body of Christ eaten of the Apostles and of other Christians within the cumpasse of y• forme of bread, which they receaue from the altar of God? The bread, whereof Moyses (him self bearing but a figure of the truth) at this tyme spake, was a signe, & not the truth. The bread which Christ (being the truth it self) geueth, is both a signe & the truth. The bread which Moyses shewed was perfect in his own na∣ture, before the Israelites did eate it: Euen so the meate which Christ geueth is perfect in the Sacrament it self vnder the forme of bread, before we do  it. whether more or lesse were ga∣thered of Manna, oue measure was always found in the ende: to signifie that, sith whole Christ is vnder euery part of y• forme of bread, whether you take a greater peece of the forme or a lesse, euer the same substance of Christes body is wholy receaued of euery Communicant. Neither is it sufficient to fulfil this figure if we say, that euery man hath the vertue and grace of Christes body geuen him by faith and spirit. for the measure of that grace is, as S. Paule teacheth, diuers in diuers men, according to the measure that Christ geueth it in. Some haue greater giftes, and some lesse, and no one member is the whole body. But Manna was in one measure to all men. Euen so the substāce of Christes body vnder the forme of bread is geuen to all, that receaue the sayd forme, in one measure and equally concerning the body it self: For euery man receaueth the whole. As wel the good men, as the  did eate Manna: But the euill did eate with , but to the good it gaue the taste of all swetenes. Right so y• body and blood of Christ, which is vnder the forme of bread and wine, is as really taken of the euill, as of the iust: But they take it to their damnation, these to their saluation. He that marketh these
comparisons shall easily perceaue, that the holy Ghost both by the figure and by the truth, condemneth their false doctrine: who teache the reall body of Christ not to be geuen vnder the forme of bread and wine, after consecration is once made. ¶ The figure of the old Testament. MOyses hauing offered oxen to God, powred one halfe ofThe fi∣gure of  old Testa ment. Exo. 24. The  of couenāt Heb. 9. the blood vpon the altar, the other halfe he powred into basins. And after he had readen the booke of  betwene God and the Israelites, and the people had promised to kepe the conditions thereof: he sprinkled them with ye blood saying: This is the blood of the Testament, which our Lord vpon all this talke hath made with you. Christ intending to offer him self vnto his Father, and certaine yeres before publishing to his people the conditions of his new Testament, at the last, in his supper he geueth his own blood, the very same blood which con firmeth the new agreemēt made with vs: And in stede of ∣ling vs with it, he toke the chalice and gaue thanks, and gaue toMatt 26. The blood of the new testament  geuē in the chalice as the  was geuē in . his Disciples saying: Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament: Which shalbe shed for many for the remis∣sion of synnes. The figure and the truth answer maruelously, as they may finde, who will conferre the partes. It is sufficient at this tyme to note, that as the blood of the old Testament was in the  or cup really, whence it was sprinkled: so the blood of Christ, which is the blood of the new Testament, is really in the chalice, whence it is receaued. As the noune blood in the old Testament, which is but a figure of the new, yet was not taken figuratiuely but properly for true naturall blood: so much more the noune blood in Christes words, which appertein to the new Testament it self, may not be taken tropically, but euen as the
word most literally doth sound. As the substance of blood which Moyses spake of, was shewed vnder the accidents of the natu∣rall blood of calues: so the substance of the blood, whereof Christ spake, was shewed vnder the accidents of wine. For (as Iacob had Prophecied) Christ wasshed his garments and cote inGen. 49. wine, because he tooke the orme of wine to couer his owne hu∣mane nature: which was his garment, in respect of his God∣head, as S. Paule sayeth, Habitu inuētus vt homo. Found in hisPhilip. 2. apparell as man. ¶ The prophecit and figure of Iob. THe men of the tabernacle of Iob sayd: Who might geueThe pro∣phecie of Iob ap∣plied to Christ. Iob, 31. Hieron. in hunc locum. Greg. in Iob li. 22 cap. 11. Matt. 26. vs of his flesh, to the intent we may be filled? The taber∣nacle or houshold of Iob (whome some of his seruants ha∣ted, some loued) was the figure of the Church, wherein are good and bad. The bad wish for one that might geue them Christes flesh, to fill their hatred vpon it: as the proude Pharises bought Christ of Iudas, and now a daies the Iewes wil geue any mony for the blessed body of Christ in the forme of breade: that there∣vpon they may shew their malice against Christ, whom the He∣retikes of our age folow in yt point. Therefore these souldiours of darknes, when they can finde Christ visible or inuisible, shewe all the spite they can against him. But on thother side good men that be in the tabernacle of Iob,Chrys. hom. 45. in Ioan. with loue and reuerence wish for his flesh, and desyre to be filled with it, to their inestunable comfort. Christ gaue his visible body to the handes of the Pharisees and Iewes: Wherein hauing their desires satisfied, they nailed it to the crosse. And how much more is Christ to be thought, to haue fulfilled really the desyre of good men, who long for the inuisible substance of his owne bo∣dy?Luc. 22. especially seing his owne desire was so vehement to eate
this passouer of his owne body with his Apostles, at which tymeMatt. 26. he sayd to them: Take and eate this is my body, which is geuen for you If we had not as really y• flesh of Christ geuē to our handes and mouthes, as the Pharisees had the same deliuered to their cruell handes: it might seeme, that the worse parte of the taber∣nacle of Iob had obtined more truth, and more fulfilling of their desire, then the better. which is a thought vnworthy of Chri∣sten men. The iust men of the tabernacle of Iob loued him so well, that they desired to be filled with his flesh, euen for the loue they bare to him: which loue the greater it is, the greater vnion it wishethLoue de∣syreth as great a ioyning & vnion as may be had. and . Christ fulfilled to his people that, which the ser∣nantes of Iob figured in their vehenient affection, which they had to be filled with their maisters flesh. They of the tabernacle of Iob wished not only to see him, or heare him speake, nor they wished not at all to fede vpon him in spirite and vnderstanding (for they knew well he was not God) but they would fill their flesh with his flesh, and their sole with his soule, and so make a perfite vnion: for so much as them selues consisted as well of body, as of soule. This vnion Christ hath truly graunted vs, making vs oneIoan. 6. with his very flesh, saying his flesh to be meate in dede: which who so eateth worthily,  in Christ, and Christ in him for euer. That is the vnion of reall flesh, which was prophecied of in Iob, and which is made betwe Christ and vs, when we re∣ceiueChrys. hom. 83. in Matth. & 45. in Ioānem. worthelie his naturall fleshe vnder forme of bread, into our naturall bodies and soules, and are made one with it re ipsa, in dede it self: as meate is made one substance with him, that ea∣teth and digesteth it well.
¶ The prophecies of Dauid and Salomon. THou hast prepared a table (sayeth Dauid to God) in myPsal. 22. Prophe∣cies takē out of the Psalmes, and pro∣uerbs of Salomō. Prou. 9. What sup∣per wisedō prepared. Cyp. lib. 2. epist. 3. sight, against them, who afflicte me: And my chalice, which maketh me drunke, how excellent is it? Wisedome hath offered his sacrifices, set foorth his table, and sayeth to the inno∣cent and simple: Come, eate my bread and drink my wine, which I haue mingled vnto you. They falsyfie the holy Scriptures, who teache the substance of common bread and wine to be by Christe prepared at his last supper: But his preparing was to conuert the substance of them into his flesh and blood. And those were the sacrifices, which wisedome made. That was his bread & his wine: which if it were only receaued by faith and spirite, how sayeth the Prophet, that the table was prepared in his sight? No man is able to see that, which is only spirituall: But, according to the word of God, the Catholikes beleue that their meate isThe sup∣per of Christ is set vpon the table. prepared, set, and layed vpon the table, before they receaue it: and it is set foorth in their sight in that visible forme of bread, which is consecrated. Againe the table is but one, come good, come bad: They eateChrist hath but one table. Aug. in Ioā. tra∣ctatu 50. the same meate, and surely none other at the supper of Christ, be∣sydes y•, which is vpon his table. Iudas did eate the same meate that Peter and Ihon did, although diuers effectes came of it: because them selues were not like affected. But the Sacramen∣taries make Christ to haue two tables: one, where the good men receaue Christ him self with bread and wine (as they each) anThe Sa∣cramenta∣ries assi∣gne two tables to Christ. 1. Cor. 10 other, where only common bread and wine is geuen to the wic∣ked men. And yet Dauid, Salomon, and S. Paule speake but of one table, and it is prepared and set foorth not by faith and spi∣rite, but in our sight. It is not only drunk of, by mind and vnderstanding▪ but the very chalice of it is of strength, to
make vs drunk, because it conteyneth the blood of life and saluation.Psal. 21. An other prophecie taken  Dauid. Only Christi adore that they eate, because they only eate the flesh of God. Bread not  our Lords ta∣ble. Augu. in psal. 98. Coloss. 2 ¶ An other Prophecie of Dauid. ALl that be fatte vppon earth haue eaten and adored, which thing the Prophete spake, thereby to shew, as it may ap∣peare in the same place, that all the nations of the world were by faith subdued to Christ. And he bringeth a most vndou∣ed token thereof, in so much that they adore that, which they eate, which thing is peculiar to Christians, because none other people doth ate the reall flesh of God, which only may and must be adored. This propertie and token of the true faith they take away, who say, we eate in our Lords supper the substance of cō∣mon bread: forbidding vs to adore the blessed Sacramēt of the altar, the footestole, wherein the  of Godhead corporally dwelleth. ¶Many figures and prophecies ioyned together for breuities sake. WHat shall Isay, that Noë being made drunke with y•Gen. 9. Cypr. li. 3. epist. 3. ad Caeci∣lium. wine of his owne planting, lieth naked & is lawghed to scorne of his own childe, to shew that Christ hauing drunke in his supper of the same blood, which he planted for him selfe in the virgyns womb, hangeth afterward naked vppon the crosse, and is lawghed to scorne, not only of the Iewes for his nakednesse: but also of the Sacramētaries, for so grosse a dede, as they repute it to be, that he drank his own blood vnder the form of wine. What shall I reherse, that Abraham did set cakes made of ine wheaten meale befo the Angels, & they allowed his dede: notGen. 18. for the , which they nded not, but for te excellenty of the
mysticall cake, which was come in Christes supper? That IsaacGen. 27. hauing stablished his sonne Iacob with corne and wine, sayth to Esau demanding his blessing: what more can I doe now to thee? as who should say, al goodnesse is already figured in that, which I haue assigned to thy yonger brother: which betokeneth y• faith∣full people of the Gentils, whose greatest mysteries be made of corne and wine? That Iacob prophecied of the fat bread of Aser∣whichGen. 49. should geue spirituall delicats to the faithfull kings of Christes Church: and yet how cā any bread be fat, except it be the bread of life, which is the flesh of Christ, which is made fat with the presence of his Godhead? Who seeth not, that God promiseth, as the highest reward inExo. 22. earth, for keping his cōmamdements, to blesse the loaues of his people, and to geue abundance of bread and wine? That wheatēLeuit. 2. Iustin. in Triph. Leui. 24. Leui. 21. meale is appointed for fit matter, to make a sacrifice of? that the shew bread must stand continually in the temple before the face of God? That Priests shall offer the loaues of theyr God, & there∣fore shalbe holy? Or what is the loaf of God besyde the flesh of Christ? And who would not wonder to consyder, that euen the chief1. Reg. 2. Mala 2. Aug. de ciu. Dei li. 17. c. 5. Priests of the Iewes (whose lips kept once the law of God) af∣ter the comming of the faithfull Priest Iesus Christ (to whome God hath built a new Church, which shal neuer be vnfaithful to him) are constrained to aske a morsell of mysticall breade at the hāds of those Priests, which God hath appointed ouer the faith∣ful Gentils, if they wil haue any part of the euerlasting heritage in the house of God? so that all the sacrifices of the law must be supplied, fulfilled, and made perfit by the Priests of the new tes∣tament in that cake or peece of the liuely bread, which is the bodyLuc. 22. 1. Reg. 21 secūd. 70 of Iesus Christ geuen for vs. Dauid flying from Saul king of the Iewes, to king Achis a
Gentile, changeth his countenaunce, appearing like a foole or mad man to the vnfaithfull courtiers, driueling on his beard, stumbling, and being caried in his own hands: to shew y• Christ should appere vnder an other form to the conuerted Gentils, thē he had commonly appered in among the Iewes. For now he semeth contemptibly vnder the frme of bread add wine, who appereth daily of great authority to the Iewes in the naturalAug. in Psal. 33. Ioan. 6. forme of his true manhod: but at his last supper he driueled like a child to theyr seming, that be wise in the world: he offended euen his own Disciples at Capharnan with the promise of geuing his flesh to cate: he changed his countenaunce, & caried him self after a sort in his own hands: when holding and geuing to be eaten that which semed bread, he by his almighty Godhead,Luc. 22. dowted not to say, as the thing was, This is my body which is geuen for you. The same kingly Prophet had great ioy in his harte conside∣ring the increase, that came by the fruit of corne & wine: he pray∣sedPsal. 4. Psal. 103. Psal. 22. the bread that strengtheneth, and the wine that maketh mery the faithfull hart of a spirituall man: The goodly chalice that ma∣keth true Christians drunke: The remembrance which God hathPsal 110. made of his maruelous workes, geuing meate to them, that feare him. How can it be thought a smal mysterie, that Elias is fed from the ayr with bread and fleshe? that he walketh forty daies in the3. Reg. 17 3. Reg. 19 inward strēgth of a peece of bread, very weake & feble to see vn∣to? that Esaias saieth: the wheat corn of the Church of God shallEsaiae. 62 Hieron. ibidem. no more be geuen to her ennemies: and that the vine, wherein she hath laboured, shall not be the drinke of strange children? That ieremie calleth the flesh of Christ, the bread, wherein the wood (of the Crosse) is fastened? That Zacharie asked, what good thingIere. 11. Zach. 9. there is besides the corne of the elect, and the wine which engen∣dreth
virgins? That Malachie complaining how the Iewes had polluted Gods ble with vncleane bread, promiseth a pure andMala. 1. cleane oblation made to his name among the Gentils▪ That God him selfe would be called the bread of Aungels? That Christ ha∣uingPsal. 77. taken eshe, would be called through his diuine nature, theIoan. 6. tre bread which came down from heauen? and through his hu∣mane nature, wherein the Godhead dwelleth, meae in dede and drinke in dede? And last of all, that the holy Ghost would cause the preacher to say, and very ofte to repete, none other thing to beEccl. c. 3. 5. 8. good vnder the sonne, besides eating and drinking with gladnes and mirth. Which saying who so vnderstandeth of the eating common bread or meat, and drinking common wine: he doth not wel to think that the holy Ghoost commendeth  liuing. Neither doth the Prophet meane such a kinde of eating & drin∣king,Eccl. c. 7 Aug. de eiuitate Dei li. 17 c. 20.  y• same booke he saith: It is better to goe to the house of moorning, then to the house of feasting: for there a man is war∣ned of the ende, that all liuing thinges shal haue, and in his life time thinketh what thinges are to come. On th'other side, he that so vnderstandeth it onely of spirite, faith, & vertuouse meditatiō, that he leaue no possible meanes to eate and drinke bodily such a kinde of bread and wine, in com∣parisonThe best thing vn∣der y• So may be eaten and drunken. whereof nothing may be iudged good vnder y• sonne: he semeth without iust cause to deny that Sacramentall eating and drinking there to be mea, whereof the prophete may be right wel thought co speake. For as the holy scriptures by the vsuall manner of attributing to God the passions, qualities and natu∣resOrigin. tractatu o in c. Math. 22 partly of other creatures, but especially of man, did thereby geue vs warning, that one time or other God should become trew man himselfe, after that sorte fulfilling those propheticall phrases of speach: euen so the citoine of commending so much
orn, wheat, meale, bread and wine, and of eating and drinking,The cu∣stom of scriptures in cōmen∣ding so much bread and wine she∣weth that the body & blood of Christ should be geuen vn∣der their formes. Eph. 5. Ioan. 17. Now all things are one by the Sacra∣ment of y• altar. doth declare, that such a thing should at the last be eaten and drun ken vnder the formes of bread and wine, as might be called not only good: but euen the best thing absolutely vnder the sonne, except any thing can be better then Christ, or any action more ac∣ceptable to God, then the receiuing of that flesh and blood wor∣thely which both maketh al iust men to be one body among them selues: and to be one with Christ through eating his flesh, who is one with his Father in diuine nature and substance. Whereby three persons in the holy Trinitie and one God, two natures in Christ and one person, many persons in the Church and one nature, al be made one in a marulous mysterie. The Sacrament of which vnitie because our Lords supper is, both in shewing manie graines to be actually molded into one loaf, and in making many persons really to be members of y• one flesh, which euery of them vnder the forme of bread wor∣thely receiueth, and is changed into it: therefore in comparison of this eating and drinking none other thing is good vnder the sunne. And he well saith, vnder the sonne, for aboue the SonneEccles. 3. 5. 8. there is (I will not say more goodnes) yet more fruition of the same goodnes: when the forme and couer of bread & wine being taken away, we shal see face to face, eating and drinking vpon theLuc. 22. table of God in his kingdo. ¶ These words of Christes supper hoc facite, do notThe xi. Chapiter. only signifie doe this: but much rather make this thing, whereof it foloweth, that y• body of Christ is commaunded to be made. FAcere, doth more properly stand to make, then to doe, spe∣ciallyFacere. when it hath an accusatiue case ioyned with it, where∣vppon somewhat is to be wrought: as, facere librum, na∣uem,
domum, is to make a booke, a ship, a howse. But when itHoc fa∣cere. hath a generall word ioyned with it, as hoc, this thing, is, then it may stand either to make, or to doe, according as the matter spoken of doth require. For if I doe a thing first, and afterward say to an other, hoc fac, doe this thing: if my dede were also the making of a thing (as the making of a chayer, or of a sword) then my word importeth, that he must by doing make this thing. But if my dede were only doing, & not making, as if I did only play vppon a harp: in that case, hoc fac, doth not import make this, but only doe as I haue done. Christ in his supper both did, and made. His doing was toThe sup∣per had both doing & making. take bread, to breake, to geue: His making was to say (with the intent of blessing and of thanksgeuing) This is my body: For y• word so spoken made his body. Therefore when he sayeth after∣ward to his Apostles, hoc facite, he meaneth, doe and make this thing: Or by doing the like to that, which I haue done, make this thing, which I haue made. That is to say, by taking bread, and by blessing, and saying: This is my body, make my body. Thus doth facere stand most properly and truly. For making doth first signifie such a work as presupposeth a matter to worke vppon: Which is the difference betwene creareCreare. Facere. and facere, in that creare is to make a thing of nothing: Facere, is to make one thing of an other, according to which sense ChristCont. Marc. l. 4 made bread his body, as Tertullian sayth. And when one thing is made of an other, that, whereof it was made, may either kepe his old substance (as it chaunceth in artificiall things which are made, and it is called facere quippiam ex aliquo, to make oneFacere ex aliquo thing of an other, as a chayer is made of wood) or els the sub∣stance may be changed, and it is more properly called facere ali∣quid de aliquo, to make one thing from an other thing, that is toFacere de aliquo De Sac. li. 4. c. 4. wit, so to make it, that the thing, whence it was made remai∣neth
not in his former nature. And so S. Ambrose sayth, De pa∣ne fit caro Christi, from of bread the flesh of Christ is made. Moreouer facere (which is in Greke ) doth differ as S.Basilius hom. 1. in hexame. specular. Agere. Basile noteth from , speculari, and , agere. Specu∣lari is an action of the mind, exercised by thinking or studying, without any outward working at all: Agere, is to worke with the body, not leauing any work behind, as he that daunceth can not shew what part of his dauncing remayneth, after that it isFacere. past. But facere, doth signifie the doing of a work, which remay∣neth to be seen or vnderstanded after the working of it. As God made heauen and earth, not only to tari for the tyme of wor∣king them, but also to remaine still as a witnesse of his handy work. The Greke word , (whereof S. Basile writeth) is the same, which S. Luke and S. Paule haue vsed to expresse the commaundement geuen in Christes supper by these words , hoc facite. If the body of Christ were not meant to be made by this com∣maundement: what thing is it, that Christ will haue made? Wil he haue bread and wine to be taken, eaten, and drunken, for his remembrance? No surely. For he had sayd before, Take, and eate, and drink ye all of this, which notwithstanding, he sayd hoc faci∣te, clerely certifying vs, that he now cōmaundeth an other thing besyde eating and drinking. And that is verily ye making of his own body and blood from of bread and wine, by blessing & spea∣king the words of consecration. Let vs now consider also the persons, to whome this com∣maundementIreneus li. 4. c. 32. was geuen. They were those twelue Apostles, whome Christ at his last supper taught the new oblation of the new Testament, as S. Ireneus writeth, geuing them authori∣tieThe pricst hod of the new testament. by this precept, to consecrate, to make present, and to offer to God his body and blood. As for bringing of bread and wine to
the table, it is a kind of doing, which may be performed by other as well, as by the Apostles. eating and drinking belongeth not necessarily to them alone, but to all that cōmunicate with them. But when it is sayd namely to them, Make this thing, such a thig is commaunded, which none other man may doe besyde them, and their successors. And that is not only to eate and to drink, but to make the body of Christ. That body is the only thing, which is so precisely appointedA sauing y• body of Christ is rather a like thing then this thing. Ioan. 13. vnto in Christes supper. For whatsoeuer els is done at the sup∣per, which may consist in any action, whether it be taking, bles∣sing, breaking, eating or drinking: it is rather the doing of a like thing to that, which Christ did, then the making of this thing. When Christ had washed his Apostles feete, he sayd not, hoe facite, make this thing: But I haue geuen you an example, that as I haue done, Ita & vos faciatis, euen so you also may doe. In which place the word facere doth signifie to doe, & not to make. And therefore Christ doth not say, doe you that thing, which I haue done: but ita faciatis, doe ye so, as I haue done. But straight after that he had sayd: This is my body, he then sayd not, ita fa∣cite, doe so as I haue done: But hoc facite, make this thing, to wit, my body. Moreouer as it is here sayd, Hoc facite in meam commeratio∣nem:Psal. 110. A memo∣rie is ma∣de. so in an other place Dauid in the spirit of prophecie did say, concerning this very facte of Christ, Memoriam fecit mirabilium suorum misericors & miserator dominns, escam dedit timentibus se. Our mercifull Lord and taker of pity hath made a memory of his marueilouse workes: he hath geuen meate to them, that feare him. Behold, as it is sayd in the Gospell, Make this thing for the remembrance of me: so it is said in y• Psalme, He hath made a me∣mory of his miracles. And euen as he hath made a memory: so
hath he willed this thing to be made for his memory. Making then can not  excluded from these words, hoc facite: which hi∣therto being proued by the proper nature of the word facere, by y• circumstance of the words, this is my body, & make this thing, ioyned together, by the word hoc this thing, which is ioyned with facere, by the conference of a like place in holy scripture, and by the condition of the persons to whom it was spoken: I will now proue the same truth more plainly out of y• old Fathers. S. ames (of whose Masse mention is made in y• sixth Gene∣rall councell) when he was effectually working and fulfilling theCan. 32. commandement of Christ, when he was doin, yea rather ma∣kingacobus in litur∣gia. that, which Christ bad him make, thus he praieth vnto God: Spiritum tuum & caet. Send doune (o Lord) thy most holy spirit now also vppon vs, and vppon these holy giftes put before vs: that he comming thereuppon, with his holy and good and glo∣riouse presence sanctificet & efficiat, may sanctfie and make this bread y• holy body of thy . Behold what is to be made. The bread is made the body of Christ. Can you say, that the holy Ghost doth this bread the body of Christ? No verily, that wereClemens li. . con∣stut A∣pool. no English. The trewe English is, that the holy Ghost doth make this bread the body of Christ. Therefore facere in this place is not taken for to doe, but for to make. The like may be noted in S. lemēt, S. Basile, & S. Thrysostom: who all haue writen Masses and liturgies, wherein the like praier is vsed. Which thing is cofirmed yet more strongly by the auctorityCyrillus in Caa. myst. 5. of S. Cyrillus Archebisshop of Jerusalem, who expounding the order and mysterios of the Breeke Masse, hath these wordes: Deum benignissimum oramus, vt S. Spiritum super proposita emittat, we beseche God, to send his holy Ghost vppon the thin∣ges, which are set before vs, . vt panem quidem saciat corpus Chri
sti, vinum verò sanguinem Christi. that he may make the bread (to be) the body of Christ, & the wine (to be) the blood of Christ. Lo, the holy Ghost is desired of the priest to make bread Christes body, & he is desired so to doe of the priest: who were not other∣wise able to make so high a mysterie, if Christ had not comman∣ded him to make this thing. S. Dionysius reopagita sheweth, that the Priest purgethDionys. de eccle. hierar. cap. 3. and excuseth him self of this great office, saying: Tu dixisti, hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Thou hast sayd, make this thing for the remembraunce of me: after which excuse made, th Priest (sayeth Dionysius) desireth that he may be made worthy of this holy sacrificing, or of making these holy things. For so much the word , doth signifie. It is worth the labor to marke, how S. Dionysius hauing declared, that the Priest ma∣keth his excuse cōcerning the making of that thing which Christ bad him make, consequētly sheweth, what the Priest doth make,The most  things be made. saying: The Priest , and again, . Diuina perficit, diuinissima consecrat, seu sacra operatur. He ma∣keth the diuine things, and worketh holy or cōsecrateth the most diuine things. He saith not, , id est agit: sed perficit, opera tur, consecrat. He saith not, that the Priest, doth holy things: he saith, he maketh them, he worketh them, he consecrateth them. Manifestly witnessing, that facere in these words (hoc facite) is to make, to worke, to consecrate, and not only to doe. Martyr is of the same mind, who rehersing Chri∣stesustin. in Apol. 2. words, make this thing, consequently addeth, that is to say, my body. As if he sayd, make my body.  I spake before.Ireneus aduersus . l. 5 The  is made. S. Ireneus hath these words, Quando mixtus calix & fra∣ctus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia corporis & sangui nis Christi.  the chalice mixed with water, and the bread being broken taketh the word of God, then the Eucharist of thē
body & blood of Christ is made. Thē it is made, saith , it cā not there be Englished, y• Eucharist is done, but only is made. Likewise  saith: Acceptum panem & distributū di∣scipulis,. aduersus Marcio∣nem li. 4. To  bread his body. Amb. de iis qui  myst. c  The body is made. corpus suum illum fecit the bread taken and distributed to his disciples, he made it his own body. fecit panē corpus suū, he made the breade his body. It were  English to say, he dyd bread his body. S. Ambrose hath these words, Sacramentum istud, quod acci∣pis, Christi sermone conficitur. And again, Hoc, quod  corpus, ex virgine est. This Sacrament, whiche thou receauest is made by the worde of Christ, and this body which we make, is of the virgin. The Sacrament  is made, and we make the bo∣dy of Christ. By what other , then by the worde of Christ, who sayd: make this thing▪ For if these words, hoc facite,We make Christes ody be∣cause he said: make this thing. do not conteine facite corpus meum, make my body: S. Ambrose in  saith conficimus corpus Christi: we make the body of Christ. But so wise a man saith not so  vaine, because he well knoweth, that hoc facite, doth signifie thus , make thisHoc. thing, to wit, make the body of Christ. See now what is facere, and see whatis hoc: Facere is to make, hoc is this thing, whiche is the body of Christ. According to the whiche meaning S. Hierom said: Absit, vt de. in Epist. ad Heli. The body of Christ is made  the . . in . . 2. . . lib. . ijs quicquàm sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui succedentes Christi corpus sacro ore consiciunt. God forbid y• I should speake any thing amisse of them, who comming in place of the Apostles degree, make the body of Christ with their holy mouth. If they make it with their mouthes: surely it is because Christ after y• he had made it with his owne mouth, said vnto them: hoc facite, make this thing. S, Chrysostom writeth thus: Sacra ipsa oblatio, siue illā Petrus, sine illam Paulus, siue cuiusuis mriti Sacerdos offerat, , est,
quá deit Christus ipse discipulis, quam{que} Sacerdotes modo quo{que}The priest maketh y• holy obla∣tion. conficiunt. That self holy oblation, it is the same, which Christ him self gaue to his Disciples and which the Priests now also doe make. Again in an ocher place: Operantibus Sacerdotibus, Sa∣cramentaChry. de sacerdo∣tio. li. 3. haec quae dico initiantur perficiūtur{que}▪ when the Priests work, the holy things, which I speake of, are begun & ended or made persit. And shewing that  Priest doth not this in hisChrys. hom. de prodit. Iudae. owne, but in Christes person, he saith: Non homo est, qui corpus Christi facit & sanguinem, sed ille qui crucifixus est pro nobis Christus. Sacerdotis ore verba proferuntur, & Dei virtute pro∣posita consecrantur & gratia. Hoc est enim, ait, corpus meū. Man ma∣keth not Christes body by his own vertue. verbo proposita consecrantur. it is not a man which maketh the body and blood of Christ, but Christ who hath bene crucified for vs. the words are spokē by the Priests mouth, & the things which are set before vs are cōsecarted by the power & grace of God. for this, sayth he, is my body. with this saying the thīgs put before vs, are consecrated. Thus much Chrysostom. S. Angustin affyrmithAug. cō∣tra Faust. Man. lib. 20. ca. 3. Ourbread is made vnto vs mysticall. Theoph. in Math. 26. Damasc. de Orth. fide li. 4. ca. 14. Psal. 113. & 134. Ge. ca. 1. Psal. 32. that our bread and chalice certa cosecratione mysticus fit nobis, non nascitur: is made mysticall vnto vs by a certein cōsecration, & not born: is made, I say. Therfore hoc facite signifieth, make this thing.  sayth, Inefficabili operatione , trāsformatur, etiam si nobis videatur panis. although it seme bread to vs it is made an other thing, or transformed by an vnspeake∣able working. after this sorte. If the word of God be liuely and of efficacy, and all things, what soeuer it wold, it hath made: if it sayd, Let light be made, & it was made, let the firma∣ment be made, and it was made: If the  be establyshed by the word of God, and all the vertue of them by the spirit of his mouth: if heauen and earth, water, fier, aier, and all the decking of thē, and man himself a lyuing creature spred and made com∣mon
euery where, were made perfecte with the word of God: IfGod was made mā. God the word him self of his owne wil was made man, and hath vpholden and staied in his own person flesh without seed of mā, out of the most pure and  blood of the holy virgine: is he not able to make bread his own body, and wine and water hisChrist ma keth bread his  body. Gen. 1. blood? He said in the beginning, let the earth bring forth  spring, & to this day (reyne being made) it bringeth forth springs holpen and strengthned with the commandement of God. God hath sayd: This is my body and this is my blood, and make this thing for the remembrance of me, Et omnipotenti eius praecepto, donec veniat, efficitur, and by his  it is made,  he come.Euthy. in ca 26. Matt. Marke whether Damascene doth not ground all his autho∣rities vppon making, and the authoritie of Christes supper vpon these words, make this thīg.  expoūding these words, Hoc facite, sayth: Hoc, inquit, nouum mysterium, & non illud ve∣tus make this new mysterie (sayth he) and not that old. HaymoMake this my∣sterie. sayth: Hoc facite, id est, hoc corpus sanctificate, sanctifie this bo∣dy: that is to say, make holy and consecrate this body. Archbysshop of Cantorbury, although he shewethAnsel. in epist. 1. Cor. c. 11 first that by this word (Hoc facite) eating and drinking for the remembrance of Christes death is commamded to al Christians: yet declaring also a farther sense of y• same words, he sayth: Aut corde vos, qui Sacerdotes estis, hoc facite quod ego  feci, id est, calicem vini consecrate, vt  sanguismeus, hoc facite in meā commemorationem, vt in hoc facto sitis memores mei & eorumMake y• whiche I haue made quae pro vobis passus sum. Or els, ye that are Priests make that which I haue now made: that is to say, consecrate the chalice of wine, that it may be made my blood, make this thing for the re∣membrance of me, and of those things which I haue suffred for you.  the Archebisshop of Constantinople sayth, that
the holy Ghoste maketh the mysteries by the hande of PriestesGerm. in rerum Eccles. theoria in tract. ad eos qui haesi. and tog. Nicolaus Methonensis sayth, the body and blood of Christ to be those thinges, quae hoc ritu perficiuntur, which are made pefit with this ryte. If sanctificare & efficere panem corpus Christi, panem facere corpus Christi & vinum sanguinem: if consecrare & operari diui∣nissima, fieri eucharistiam, facere panem corpus Christi, conficere corpus Christi, ore conficere, oblationem Christi conficere, panē & calicem mysticum fieri, panem sui ipsius corpus facere, nouum mysterium sacere, corpus effici, corpus hoc sanctificare, cōsecrare calicem vini, vt fiat sanguis Christi: If al these phrases and kindes of speache can not be nglished by doing, but only by making, and yet the aucthority and commandement, that any Priest hath to make the body and blood of Christ commeth only from these words Hoc facite: it must nedes be confessed, that these words doA autho∣rity of ma king Chri stes body ometh frō these wor∣des: make th thing. signifie much more make this thing, then doe this. Otherwise, we should not make the body of Christ at al: whereas S. Iames Dionysius Areopagita, S. Iustinus, S. Ireneus, Tertllian, S. Hierom, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Theophilaet, Eu∣thymius, Haimo, Damascene, Germanus, Methonensis, yea al the whole Church doth say with one accorde: that Priestes doe make, and are commanded to make the body of Christ. Is it now possible, that the body of Christ, which is thus made frō of wheaten bread by y• cōmandement of God him self, should not be for al y• present with vs vnder the form of the same bread? If when the word was made flesh in the virgins wombe, it was present with vs not only by saith and spirit, but dwelt really inIoan. 1. the world, being conuersant among men, and was sene in earth: likewise when the body of Christ is made from of the creature ofBar. 3. bread, by the Priests mouth in the vertue of Christes word, it is present with vs, not only by faith and spirit, but in deede and
trth it self, & it dweleth not only among vs, but euen within vs, as meate dwelleth in him who receaueth it weth a sound sto∣make, and digesteth it well. For seing Christ hauing taken bread and blessed, sayd, this is my body, and ad his Apostles make this thing: bread is in such sorte made his body, y• when y•  of the words is past, the body of Christe remaineth still (according to the distinctionBasil ho. 1. in Hex. of S. Basill, as the work which was wrought by y• sayd words) and it is receaued of the faithfull people vnder the form of bread, to nourish theyr soules and bodies to euerlasting life.The . Chapiter. ¶What these words doe signifie, For the remembrance of me: & that they much help, to proue Christes reall presence vder the formes of bread and wine. IT may be (some man will say) I deale not honestly▪ for ChristAn ob∣tion. sayd not only, make this thing which I haue most pressed vpō, but he added other words thereunto: which declare, that a fi∣gure should be made, and not his true body. For he sayd, do this in the remembrance of me. If it be a remembrance of Christ, how is it Christ him self? The remembrance of a man differeth from the man him self. Thus much if any man say against me, I feare nothing, butThe a∣swere. I shall satisfie him concerning my doing: if now I shewe, that the words of remēbrance (whereof he taketh holde) doth much more help my saying, theu his. Which that I may the better per∣form,The wor∣des of Christ were not wet En∣glished by the Prote . I besech him to remember, that Chist said not, hoc agite in cōmemoratione mei, doe this in my remembrance, or in remē∣brance of me, but hoc facite in meam commemorationem: which signifieth as wel to make, as to do this thing, not only in, but ra∣ther for the remembrāce o me: and yet so haue these words bene commonly Englyshed and  by the , as
though he had said only, hoc agite, doe this, & not  hoc facite, which is, both doe this, and make this thing. Again as though he had said in mea commemoratione, in the ablatiue case, in the remembrance of me: and not , in meam commemorationem, in the accusatiue case, the true English whereof must be, for the remembrance of me. Christ sayd, make this thing for the remembrance of me, thatWhat the remem∣brāce is whereof Christ spae. is, make my body, which is geuen for you: to thend my geuiug of it for you vpon y• crosse may through that your fact and doing be remembred. This is the true meaning of Christes words. For so doth S. Paule expoimd them to the Corinthians: where after he had declared the history of Christes supper, of purpose teachig vs what is meant by the remembrance of him, thus he writeth: As ofte as ye shall eate this bread and drinke the chalice, ye shall1. Cor. 11 shew our Lordes death, vntill he come. Lo, the shewing of our Lordes death is the kind of remembrance, for which Christ wil∣leth his body to be made & eaten, his blood to be made and run∣ken. Wherefore saying, make or doe this for the remembrance of me, he sayth this much: Take bread, blesse saying, this is my body breake, geue, eate, and all to this ende, that my death may be remembred vntill my second coming. Here we learne, that the remembrance, whereof Christ spea∣keth,The remē brance of Christ is the she∣wing of his death by fact. is the shewing of his death, and that not by word only, but by dede and facte, and by making and doing. For the making of Christes body, by chaunging the substance of the bread into the substance of his flesh, is a marilouse shewing of his death. For as his death was the dissolution of the soule from the body: so his soule, which (as S. Ambrose noteth) is vnderstanded by theAmbros. in ca. 11. 1 ad Cor. blood, is shewed vnder the form of wine, & his body is shewed a part from it vnder an other form of bread. I doe not say, that either the body is without soule and blood, or the blood without
flesh and soule: but I say, the shewing of the body vnder form ofChristes body and blood made vn∣der diuerse kinds doth shew and make vs remember his death. bread, and of the blood vnder y• forme of wine (in che of which whole Christ is conteyned) is the shewing of his death, and also of his resurrection. For at the death in dede the soule and body were a sonder, and at the resurrection they came againe together: Euen as now in figure and shew they are a sonder, not withstā∣ding that in truth they are together. But if the bread and wine remayned in their old nature still, taking only the name and signe of Christes body & blood: Then should nothing be made for the remembrance, or to shew ourThe reall body with the signes of breakig is the re∣mēbrance y• Christ spake of. Lords death, whereas he sayd: Make this thing for the remem∣brance of me: That is (sayeth S. Paule) for the shewing of my death, the which death is yet frther shewed, when the same bo∣dy in a signe is broken and geuen to be eaten, & the blood drun∣ken. For then as Christes flesh was in dede broken vppon the Crosse, so it is in shew & signe broken, first in the Priests hands vnder forme of bread, and next in his or their mouths who com∣municate with him, by eating and chewing of it. And likewise y• blood is powred or shedde into his or their mouthes vnder the forme of wine, as it was in dede shed vppon the Crosse, and as in dede Christ there deliuered his ghost into his Fathers hands. But if the breade and wine were not changed into the body & blood of Christ: then that body, which at all were not so much as in signe and shew broken (because it were not present) and that blood, whiche were not so muche as in apparence apart from the fleshe, or shed into the mouthes of the receauers, could not shew our Lords death at all, whereas Christ would his own death to be shewed by the making of his own body and blood, with the signes of breaking, shedding, parting and dissoluing. Thou see now, good Reader, how the kind of remembrance, which Christ required to he had of him, is not only nothing at all against the
reall presence of his body and blood: yea rather it is so singular∣ly set forth thereby, that without the presence of the body & bloo it shalbe somewhat hard to deuise, what memorie at all here can be of Christes death. Most sure it is, that though mans wit may deuyse much, yet can it neuer inuent so perfect a meane, to make the death of Christ be remembred, as if his own self be present to warne vs thereof. If it hath chaunted to any man, whiles by manly fighting he hath delyuered his frind from perill of death, to take some great wound in his owne face: tell me on thy conscience, is there anyThe pre∣sence of y• benefac∣tour is y• best meane to make his good dede  bred. way more effectual for that wounded man, to put his frind in re∣membraunce of that fighting, then if him self come with the skar in his face to his frins presence and sight? Is it not more, then if he sent an hundred letters, an hundred tokens and messengers to warne his frinde thereof? Euen so fareth it with Christ at this tyme, who fighting for vs vppon the Crosse, whiles he delyue∣red mankind from the bonde of death, toke a wound which made him geue vp his ghost. Can therefore a more vehement remembrance be stirred vp in our harts, then if the same Christ offer him self present to vs with he skar vpon his face? Thou wilt, I think, graunt that nothing would moue vs, or make vs more vehemently remembre the death which he tooke for vs. But thou wilt say, that Christ nowThe pre∣sence of a man hyn∣dreth not his . cōmeth not before vs, & that we see him not. Well Sir. First you graunt that the remembrance of Christes death is nothing at all hiudered by the presence of his body: why then sayd you before, if the Sacrament of the altar be a remembrance of Christ, it is not Christ him self? Why sayd you, that the remembrance of a thing must uedes differ from the thing it self? And now you see and confesse, that Christ present with the resemblance of his woundes, should make you best remember his death.
Beware hereafter of this kind of reasoning. Christ made a re∣semblance of his death at his supper, therefore it is not his ownA perfect remēbrāce requireth y• real pre∣sence of y• thing re∣membred. body. That argument is not good, yea rather this is good: Christ made a perfecte remembrance of his death, therefore his own body is geuen, to put vs in mind, that he died for vs. Now let vs returne to that you said, Christ was not seene of vs. If he were seene, your faith should be of small merite, besyde that you could not receaue him into your body after that visible quantitie, wherein he walked vppon the earth. He therefore that died for you, hath now geuen you the substance of his naturall flesh and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine: Where he is as verily present, as if you saw him or touched him. For (IA thing may be pre sēt though it be not seen. trow) you vnderstand that eye sight is not necessary, to make a thing present: Otherwise, blinde men were in euill case, and to them nothing should be present: Which seing it is not so, the bo∣dy of Christ is not therefore the lesse present, because you see it not. But if it may please you to beleue Christ, that sayd: This is my body, and, this is my blood, the remembrance of Christes death shall no lesse worke in your mind by reason of your faith,The faith of Christ his body is as much to vs as the sight of it. thē if you sawe with your bodily eyes y• self same body of Christ, which is vnder the forme of bread. For faith is that to Christiās, which eye sight is to infidels. You must consyder, that Christ ge∣ueth this Sacrament only to them, that being already Christe∣ned, professe to beleue him in all things. He now telleth y• this is his body, and this is his blood: If you beleue him not, you haue denyed your faith, and are become an infidell: But yet ye may repent & recouer your old faith againe. If then you beleue him, now tell me, what his bodily presence doth hurte the remem∣brance of his death: or contrarywise, what hinderance cometh to the memory of his death by the bodily presence? Doth not one
helpe the other, and so helpe, that no lyke helpe can be deuised by all the world? Doth not his blessed body, as it were, crye vnto thy hart: Behold, here it is that suffred al the scorues, scourges, nayles, thornes, speare and death for thee? And yet come our new preachers and crye: O good people,The new preachers: Christ called bread his body by a figuratiue speache: and that ap∣pereth, because he sayd, doe this in my remembrance, In my re∣membrance, I say. It is therefore no body, but a remembrance of his body. Is not this gaye diuinitie? Is not this trew dealing  Gods people? Are not these preachers worthy of Bishopriks, and the contrary teachers worthy of chaynes? Haue they not found a fresh remembrance, to put the fruyt of Christes death out of all remembrance? Whiles the faithfull people beleued, the body of Christ to beWhat kīd of fruitful remēbran ce the be∣lief of Christes bodily pre sence did worke. present: they came with that preparation, with that circumspe∣ction, with that humble and contrite hart vnto this blessed Sa∣crament, that in all their lyfe after, they were the better. They died vnto sinne, and mortyfied them selues, to comme worthely to this high banket: and by those meanes they so wel remembred Christes death, that they practised it in their owne flesh, and printed it in their hartes. And this was a great cause, why Christ himself wold put the nature and substance of his body vnder the forme of bread: to the intent he might so be remembred of vs, that for feare of comming to this dreadfull Sacrament vnwor∣thely, we might conforme our selues to his death by contrition, confession, and satisfaction. For besides the pauges of bodily death, none other thing in the world maketh vs so fruitfully mindefull of Christes death: as the Sacrament of the altar. And this to be one peece of theBasil. de baptis. li. 1. cap. 3. remembrance, which Christ wold haue to be made in our hartes, S. Basile doth witnesse: Oportet igitur accedentem ad corpus &
sanguinem Christi, in commemorationem ipsius &c. He that co∣meth to the body and blood of Christ, must not onely be cleane from all filthy spot of flesh and sowle (that he eate and drinke not to his damnation) but also he must euidently shew the remem∣brance of him (who died for vs and rose again) in mortifying himself to synne, and to the world, and to himself, so that he may liue to God in Christ Iesu our Lord. This great lerned and vertuouse man putteth our mortifica∣tion for a peece of the remembrance, which is made of Christes death and resurrection. And in dede the reall presence of Christ in the Sacrament, & the belefe thereof in vs, causeth vs to mor∣tifieHow Christ is remēbred in eating bread & in drinking wine. our selues, lest we come vnworthely to such high mysteries. But now Christ is so well remembred in bread and wyne: that neither synnes be confessed, neither amendment mynded, neither faith exercised, neither charitie vsed. Is this the remembrance, which Christ wold haue of his death? Men of woorship and honor, when they see death at hand, prouide to haue a goodly tumbe built: Whereby their memories may be preserued, as long as it is possible. And the Egyptians wisely considering how the life is very short, and the tyme of being in the graue exeding long, did bestowe much more costThe tūbs of the E∣gyptians. vppon their tumbs, then vppon their houses: Thinking it best, there to buyld most surely, where they should dwell longest. Christ for his part refused not an honorable burying, and a gloriouse sepulcher: Which to this day standeth at Dierusalem. But yet sith he tooke his body for mens sake only, he chose hisThe body of a faith∣ful man is the tum of Christ. longer memorie and perpetuall sepulcher to be rather in the bo∣dy & hart of man, then in the bowels of the earth. Rising there∣fore the third day from death, he left no more his body in the earthly sepulcher: But the night before he died, he had institu∣ted such a memorie of his death, as became the sonne of God.
For such a one in dede no man were able to make. His memorie is, to haue bread turned into the substāce of his body, and wine turned into the substance of his blood, and theThe mo∣nument of Christ. same to be receaued of vs: To th'intent we might be turned in∣to Christ, dwelling in him for euer. Hereby his death is shewed vntill he come to iudgement at the end of the world. As the noble Actes, which other men haue done, be writē vpō their sepulchers: so in this memorie of Christ, his acts are daily shewed and rehersed. Then his incarnation is betokened mostWhat re∣mēbrance is made of Christ at the masse tyme. mystically, when bread is made flesh: as the worde was before made flesh, and that incarnatiō is represented in outward shew also, by singing of the Angels Hymne, Glory be to God in the highest. Then the going before of Iho Baptist is expressed, by reading of the Epistle. Then Christes preaching is represented, by singing of the Gospell. Then the faith of his Apostles and Disciples is betokened, in pronouncing the Crde or articles of the faith. Then the supper of Christ is made with no lesse autho∣ritie, then himself instituted it. Then his Crosse is shewed, by making the signe thereof vppon the holy mysteries. Then his death is inuisiblie wrought vnder the formes of bread & wine, by turning their substances into him self, and shewing them, as if the body were diuided from the blood. Then the fruit thereof is sowen in the hartes of the faithfull people, by geuing them the grace to feare him, to loue him, to come penitentlie vnto him, and to be made one with him. Then ye resurrection is outward∣lie shewed, because the seuerall formes of bread and wine eche of them conteine whole Christ vnder them. Then the body is ado∣red, which suffred for vs. Then Christ is glorified for the redem∣ption of all mankinde. Then thankes be geuen to God, blessing to the people, and prayer is made for all the world. This is the memorie of Christ, whereby his name is greateMalac. 1. Esaiae 11. Psal. 100
among the Gentils, as Malachias did prophecie: And this is the gloriouse sepulchre, which Esay spake of: this is the memory, whereof Dauid saith, Our Lord hath made a memory of his mar∣uailons doings. Now is it likely, that al this cost is bestowed vppon a peece of bread and wine? Two kindes of sepulchers we reade to haue bene alwaies, &Two  des of se∣pulchers. this day to be in vse: the one is, where the body lieth present, and that is properly the place of buriall: the other, when the body is absent, and only a token of it is erected, and this later kinde isCaenota phium. called Caenotaphium, a voyd monument without hauing the bo∣dy in it. Iudge, good Reader, whether it be more semelie, sith ChristChristes remēbrāce is no void monumēt. wold this Sacrament to be made for his remembrance, that it be a void monument, without hauing the body in it: or els a sepul∣cher truly conteining his body within it, whose name it beareth. specially seing himself sayd of this tumb and sepulcher: This is my body, and this is my blood. The body is named of the Greekes ,The body is y• tumbe of y• soule. that is to say, of y• buriall or sepulcher, as though the soule were buried therein, as the carkase is put in the sepulcher. And yet it is much more apt, to call the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar, the sepulcher of his passion: because in it is buried y• whole vertue of that gloriouse sacrifice, and thence it is applied and di∣spensed to the faithfull. S. Chrysostom also called the body of Christ in the SacramētChrys. in 1. Corin. Hom. 24  a carkase: because it is present after the same rate, as it was dead in the sepulcher. not in dede without soule and life, but yet without sensible mouinge, as Epiphanius also hath noted.Epipha. in Anco∣rato. Psal. 115. The holy Martyrs (whose death was of great price in y• sight of God) haue leaft their bodies behinde them to our comfort: neither haue they yet recead the second robe of their flesh, Deo
pro nobis melius aliquid prouidente, vt non sine nobis consum∣marentur,Heb. 11. God prouiding some etter thinge for vs, to the intent they should not be made throughly perfect without vs. euen asAbdias historiae Apostol. li. 5. the Fathers of y• old Testament (of whome S. Paule speaketh) had not the reward of their faith, vntill some of the new Testa∣ment were ioyned to them. S. John the Eangelist, although his carkase appered not, yet he was not vnremembred, because manna flowed out of his monument abundantly, as Abdias hath witnessed. And now shall Christ leaue a void memorie without his body, or without Manna in it? Are the reliques of the blessed Martyrs profitable vnto vs, and is not the flesh of Christ, who is Lord of all Martyrs, more then necessary for vs? It was mete yt Christ should arise with body and soule, because he is the first fruites of1. Co. 15. all them that arise from death. But he now sitting at the right hand of his Father, had before instituted a memorie, wherein bread and wine should be conuerted into the substance of his bo∣dy and blood: that thereby we might both haue his body, & him selfe not lack it. For so it becommed all iustice to be perfectly ful∣filledMath. 3. in his person. I trust, by this tyme it appeareth, that the remembrance of Christes death is maruelously set foorth by the reall presence ofThe body of Christ is the best mean to re member his death. his body and blood. Seing then the sayd remembrance is y• end, why the Sacrament is made: it is a better kind of reasoning to affirme that so profitable a meane, as the body & blood of Christ is for the remembrance of his death, was not omitted by Christ: then to teache, that because it is a remembrance, therefore it isThe intēt of Christ is furthe∣red by ta∣king the words . not the body of Christ. Specially sith Christ sayd, This is my body. For when the thing, which is intended, is the more furthered by taking the words properly, then figuratinely: as wel the pro∣per
nature of the words, as the scope of the whole matter com∣pellethOrigen. Hom. 13. in Leuit. vs, to take them as they naturally and vsually sounde, without any arther circuition or seking of figures. Si res icias (sayth Origenes) ad illam commemorationem, de qua dicit Do∣minus,A propi∣tiatorie re mēbrance. Hoc facite in meā commemoratio nem: Inuenies, quod ista est commemoratio sola, quae propitium faciat hominibus Deum. If thou looke to that remembrance, whereof our Lord sayd: Doe and make this thing, for the remembrance of me: Thou shalt find, that this is the only remembrance, which may make God mercifull to men. Mark this propitiatorie kind of remembrance.Aug. de fide ad Petrum cap. 19. S. Augustine also declareth by conferring the Sacrament of the altar with the facrifices of the law: how it is the remembrance of Christ, saying: In isto sacrificio gratiarum actio at{que} commemo∣ratio est carnis Christi, quam pro nobis obtulit, In this sacrifice a thanksgeuing and a remembrance is of the flesh of Christ, which he offered for vs, and of the blood which the same God did shedEuiden∣ter osten ditur. for vs. Therefore in those (olde) sacrifices, it was figuratiuely signi fied, what should be geuen vs: But in this sacrifice it is euidently shewed, what hath now bene geuen vs. In those sacrifices it was before hand shewed, that the sonne of God should be afterward kylled for wicked men: But in this he is shewed to haue bene all∣ready kylled for wicked men. By this writer (whether it were S. Augustine, or as others think, Fulgentius) the whole nature of the remembrance, which we kepe of Christes death, is shewed: wherein the death is inMark the difference betwene a figurauue signifying & an eui∣dent she∣wing. dede past and absent, but the body of him, that died, is present. But in the old sacrifices, neither the death neither the body was preent, but only a shadow of both. Therefore those sacrifices are a figuratiue signification, as Fulgentius sayeth: But the Sacra∣ment of the altar is an euident shewing. Marke the wordes of
Fulgentius, and you shall see two words of the old law, answer vnto other two of the new law. By the old sacrifices, he sayeth, siguratè significabatur, it was figuratiuely signified: By the new sacrifice, euidenter ostenditur, it is euidētly shewed. Looke how much difference is betwene shewing & signifiyng, betwene eui∣dence and figures: so much is betwene the old sacrifices, and the new. Yet if vnder forme of bread the body were not, and the blood vnder the forme of wine: surely the olde did better shew Chri∣stes death, then this. for there was flesh to shew flesh, and bloodIf we had not Chri∣stes body present, y• old shado∣wes wold shew , is death bet∣ter, then bread and wine. to shew blood. The blood was both in dede and in shew also shed, and in dede separated from the flesh, and poured vpon the altar: and the flesh in dede eaten by them, that made the offering. Therefore our sacrifice doth not passe that in shewing outward∣ly the maner of Christes death, but in euidēt shewing that which died. In euident shewing, I say, vnder the forme of bread and wine, which shewing is called euident, not for the seing, but for the certeyntie of the place and circiut: within the which we know by Gods word y• flesh and blood of Christ to be vnder the same forme, because Christ him self shewing to vs the foorm of bread, sayd, This is my body. What nede I to bring the Fathers one by one, sith the wholeConcil. Nicenū secūdum second Councell of Nice doubted not to say: Nemo sanctorum Apostolorum, qui tuba sunt Spiritus sancti, aut gloriosorum Pa∣trum nostrorum incruentum nostrum sacrificium in memoriam passionis Christi Domini Dei nostri, & totius suae dispensationis factum, imaginem corporis illius dixerit: None of the holy Apo∣stles (who are the trumpet of the holy Ghost) either of our glo∣riousIn vnblo dy sacrifi∣ce in the remēbrāce of Christ. Fathers, hath sayd our vnbloody sacrifice, which is made in the remembrance of Christ our Lord and God his passion, and of his whole conuersation, to be a ymage of that body.
No Apostle, no Father hath called this remembrance an image of the body so, as it should be denied to be y• body it self. An unage of the death it might haue bene called, but an image of Christes body no Doctor euer called it. because it is y• truth it self. It is the body of Christ made for the remembrance of his death, according∣lyLuc. 22. 1. Cor. 11 as Christ said: This is my body, which is geuen for you, make this for the remēbrance of me, Shewing my death vntyll I come. ¶ Answere is made to the chalenge of M. Nowell concerng the difference betwene, I am the true vine, and, This is my body. MAster Nowell (iu his reproufe of M.  proufe)Fol. 102. hauing occasion ministred to speake of these words, This is my body, (about the whiche M. Dorman had sayd, that Luther and Caluin did not agree) he answereth first: they agree both in this, that the Papists exound them alsely: Next he affirmeth, that M. Dorman, nor all Papists with him, shallM. No∣wels words. neuer be able to shew cause, why these words, Ego sum vitis vera I am the true vine, doe not proue as wel a transubstantiaton, as hoc est corpus meum, this is my body. I am, M. Nowell, one of those Catholiks, whom you cal Pa∣pists,The aun∣swere to M. No∣well. who by Gods grace will shewe sufficient cause, why these words, I am the true vine, doe not proue as well a transubstatia∣tion, as, This is my body, In these words, I am the true vine, I say not only, that there is no transubstantiation: but I affirine also, that in them there can be no transubstantion at all. Whereas in the words, This is my body, a transubstantiation both may be, and is. To make theWhat trā∣substātia∣tion, mea∣neth. proufe where of plaine, it is to be knowen, that by the word, tran∣substantiatiō the change or passing of one substance into an other is meant.
To haue one substance goe and passe into an other, it requireth that two seurall substances be first or last really found: of which real substāces be requi∣site to a transub∣. two, y• one must be extant, before it be changed: the other must at the least be extant when the change is made, though it were not extant before. As for example. The bread, which at his supper Christ toke into his hands, was one certaine substance: the other was his owne body, which he had taken of the virgin Mary. Now when Christ sayd ouer the bread, which he had ta∣ken, This is my body: we beleue, that he changed the bread into his body, and we call the passing of the substance of bread, into y• substance of Christes body, transubstantiation. This  we build vppon the deedes and words of Christ.Two grounds of trāsub∣stantiatiō. Uppon his dedes, that he toke bread, and blessed or gaue thanks: Uppon his words, in that he sayd, This is my body. we beleue his words to be proper, because (beside that he spake them in the way of blessing, of  a Sacrament, and of commanding his Apostles to make this thg) he also expoded them him self, as not being only contented to say, This is my body, but adding thereunto, which is geuen for you. Uppon these vnfallible grounds, we say that the thing poin∣ted vnto, is Christes owne substance really present at y• speaking of the wordes. And seing we know the same to haue bene bread before, and that it can not be at once both materiall bread, and withal Christes body (for that the substance of bread is not vnitedBreade is not ited to Christ. to the person of Christ) we are constrained to beleue, that the bread was changed or  into Christes body. Such a change is not only possible, became bread is a creat able to be changed into Christes owne body: but it is also mostLeu. 1. 2.  bread is  Chri∣sts body. Gen. 14. conueniet, as well to make the external sacrifice of the new tes∣tament (for no externall sacrifice is made without a change) as  to make it according to the order of Melchisedch: whose ob∣lation
began in bread and wine, but was ended in blessing Abra∣ham,Psal. 109. Cyp ep. 3. lib. 2. and in pronouncing him blessed to the high God the which propheticall figure the true Melchisedech Iesus Christ fulfilling, toke bread and wine, to begiune his new sacrifice withall: but by blessing & pronoūcing this is my body, he  his nblody sacrifice, in that blessed sede of Abrahams owu body and blood. Thus we  touching these words, this is my body, both a sufficient cause, why transubstantiation may be in them beleued: and an vndoubted possibility of the same. But concerning the other words, I am the true wine, alleged by M. Nowel: the very first ground of al transubstantiation lacketh in them. For whereas in euery transubstantiation two particular and seueral substances are to be graunted, one which may be chāged, an other into which the change may be made: in these wordes, I am the true vine, here is but one particular substance, which is Christ him selfe. As for the true vine, ither it is Christ him selfe,The true vine is no particular substance. distincted frō Christ (and so it is no seueral substance from him, whereunto he may be changed) or els it is no particular substance at all: but only a ge∣neral ame of a kind of substance, which hath in it self no doter∣mined and proper being. For as, before Christ spake, there was no such vine extant, which might be pointed vnto: so  speaking he made no such true vine any where, he brought foorth no such materiall thing, nay, he ment not of any vine or of any other creature vnder the sonne: but only ment him self to be that in hisHow Christ i the true vine. own person towards vs his members, which the natural vine is towards his branches. And therein him selfe to be so much the uer kind of vine, thē y• natural vine is: because the iuyce, which vniteth his members to him the head of his mysticall body, is more true and more nigh to the spirit of God (which is the truth t self) then any material vine can be nigh to his own braunches. Seing then transubstantiation can not be made otherwise,
then by turning oe materiall substance into an other: where one material substance only was found, there possibly could no tran∣substantiation be made. Christ in dede is one substance, but the vine, he spake of, was no one particular substance at all. It was therefore a great ouersyght to compare these wordes, I am the true vine, to these, This is my body: which words were so spoken, that by the circumstance of the supper they are vnder∣standed to pertein after a sort to two substances, to the one, as takē before the begnining of Christes wordes, which was bread: to the other, as made present at the end of them, which is y• body of Christ. For this which is bread, when Christ taketh it into his hands, afterward when he sayth of it, This is my body (by chā∣ging of the former substance) is made from bread the substance of Christes own body. Here are two paticular substāces, of y• which oe both may be right well changed into the other, & so muche is signified by Christes dede & word: but in these words, I am yt true vine, sithens two particular substāces are not, but only onē: the like change could neither be ment, nor be made by any meanes. Again in euery trāsubstātiatiō as two substāces are presuppo∣sed first or last really extant: so when the change is made, one of y• twayne must ceasse to be: for so much as it is chāged into y• other substance. as, when water was made wine, the water was noIoan. 2. more extant: but the wine only was extant, into whiche the wa∣ter was changed. If in these words, I am y• true vine, any changeIn these words ey∣ther christ is chan∣ged or no∣thing. at all might be, Christ were the thing that should be changed. for he is personally affirmed to be the true vine, in whose person two natures are beleued. Seing therefore in the proposition he occupieth the inferiour place (whiche thing is clrely signified in that he is constrned before the verbe, and (as it were) is made to serue & to be subiect vnto the true vine) either nothing is meant o be changed, or els Christ himself is the thing.
Now it is clerely impossible, y• Christes person should changeCrist cō . Mala. 3. his owne substance, because he is God. Who saith of him self by the Prophete, Ego Dominus, & non mutor. I am the Lorde, and am not changed. Therefore Christe can be changed into no sub∣stance at all, muche lesse he may be changed into the true vine: whiche it selfe is no determined or peculiar substance  from Christes person. But when after bread taken it is said: This is my body, the breade may be right well changed, because it is a mere creatureThe bred is  to change. subiect by nature to mutatiō. So that looke how much ods there is betwene God, who is immutable, and his creatures, whiche are alwaies changed: so much soner may the bread be made Chri∣stes body, then Christ can be made the true vine. Whereupon it insueth that M. Nowell auouched that, which was vtterly false: & he said it maruelouse gnorātly, when he affirmed these words,M. No∣wels  assertion. I am the true vine, to proue a transubstantiation as wel, as, this is my body. What M. Nowel? take you vpon you, to chalenge all the Pa∣pists in so weake a matter: wherein a yong Logician would not only be able to aunswere you, but also to driue you out of the scholes? You bring foorth a proposition, whiche importeth two substances: the one signified by the pronoune, ego, I, the other by the noune vitis, a vine. in whiche proposition eche word doth soEche part of M. N. propositiō is against . violently withstand al maner of substantiall change: that the one can not suffer it through the excellency thereof (which is the sub∣stance of Christ) the other can not beare it, for lack of the existēce thereof, because the true vine, whereof Christ spake, is no pecu∣liar nature at all distincted from Christ: but only sheweth the si∣militude of a truth, whiche truth is found no where els besyde in Christ him selfe. in so much that if Christ should be changed into the true vine, he should be changed into a property of his owne:
howbeit that could be no change from one substance to another, sith it is only one substance in all. But is it like in yt supper of Christ, where he sayth, This is myEche part in this pro position beareth a transubstā tiation. body? Is the bread, ouer which these words were spoken, a sub∣stance, which can not be changed? Is it any more then a creature without reason and sese? On the other side, is not the body of Christ a reall substance, into which a change may be really made? Is it not a substance different from the substance of bread both in number and in the kind of nature? Perhaps M. Nowell wil say, that albeit so great a difference be found betwene I am the tr vine, and, This is my body, cōcer∣ningThe obie∣tion. the two extreme and vttermost parts, which are Christ, and the vine: bread, & Christes body: yet at the least the verbe, which doth couple them together, is like in both propositions. For as in the first person Christe sayth, I am the : so it is sayd in the third, This is my body. Now M. Nowell ment by like, that the verbe est, is, doth signifie no otherwise in this is my body: thē the verb sum I am, doth meane in these words, I am the true vine. As though the matter, & things them selues, which are signifiedThe aun∣swere. by the two vttermost parts of a proposition, were not of more importance: then the verbe alone, which serueth to couple them, and to shew the agrement of y• one toward the other. But what if the verbe also be otherwise put in, this is my body: then it is in, I am the true vine? Then surely, these two propositions, which M. Nowell compareth together as in all points like (touching transubstantiation) shalbe found in euery point diuerse, touching the same . The words, sum, es, fui, doth serue to signifie y• kind of being▪The signi fication of the verbe, Sum, es, fui. which euery thing hath, according to y• matter & case wherein it is vsed. Sometime it signifieth th general, or special, or personal & proper nature of a thing▪ sometyme yt differēce thereof, sometyme
the proper or the common accidents belonging to it. Yea some∣tyme it only meaneth such a being, as is in the mind or vnder∣standing, without any reall existence at all, as when we say, synne is nothing: or, synne is euill: y• verbe, is, doth srue to shewhow snne is said to be. after what maner the reasonable mind conceaneth synne: the which conceyth it as being indede nothing, because it is no creature made by God: but yt the mind speaketh of it and con∣sydereth i, as somewhat. Uexily as the lack of a perfectiō, which should haue bene really, where synne is now said to be. Among al these  of being, the verbe , fur, doth mostGod is most pro∣perly. Exo. 3. proply serue to ignifie God him self: who (as he said to Moy∣ses) is he, that is by nature, & therefore he named him self, Ego sum qui sum, I am who . Next vnto God it signifieth euery sub∣stance most principally, as euery one partaketh of God a most excellent and pfit being. And as among all substances they are most principally suchParticu∣lar ∣ces haue their being next vnto God. which are most rally dermined, and limited by nature, as this man, that bread, this body, and such like peculiar substances, which are  named thē  and chefe substances, and can not be  into ay creatures more particular, then them solues are: euen so they are most specially meant by the verbe sum, es, ui,  they may be so . They nede haue no reason brought sor proufe, that thy are really ment to be that, which they are called, whē they are named together with the ,  if there be not eui∣dent  the proper meaing, naturally they areIoan 1. Ioan 6. Matt. 12.  1. Ma. 16. Matt. 21. included. Thus when it is said: The word was Gd, the word was made flesh, there was much grasse in that place, the onne of man shalbe three days in the hat of the earth, John was in
those particular substances really, to be that which they are na∣med: but if it chaunce otherwise, we aske, why it doth not sig∣nifie▪ as it should chiefly doe. Which being so, we must seeke the reason why these words, I am the true vine, doe not signifie Christ  self to be y• substance of the true vine whiche, thinge the  someth to import. But, as the truthe is, when Christ sayth, I am theWhy, the verbe Sum, th not gnifie Christ to b the sub∣stane of a . true vine, he can not meane, I am the substance of a vine: for if he were so, he were not Christ. Because the substance of Christ, who is God and man, differeth wholy  the substance of a vine. But Christ preth of him self, I am this, or that: ∣fore we are compelled so to expound his words, that his  may stil be saued. He sayth not, I am changed into a vine: or I am made a vine, the which words  a ▪ of being with the losse of the former Being: but  sayth, I am the true , wherein somwhat is rather attributed or geuen to his for∣mer substance▪ then any thing taken from it, and much lesse the former substance it self is wholy taken away. If then it repugne to the nature of Christ wordes, that heIt is a∣gainst rea∣son, to take away Christes sub by words, which si∣gnifie a vertue thereof. should in thē e thought to  spoiled of his , by which words his substance  and : we  nedes find ot some other way of expounding those words, then o ae that▪ Christ is the substance of any materiall vine. Seig then these two substes (for so in word they seme to , although in de they can not so be ment) seing (I say) these two  substances▪ Christ & a vine can not either be wholy one, whiles they be diuer, or be whol , whil  be said to  a wise man auoiding (as nigh as may be) all absurdity, seeketh out such a meaning: that both natures may remayne still  concerning their differēt substances, and that they may co∣municat and agree in some▪ uality, which is common to th.
The which consyderation made al the lerned Fathers in these phrases of speache, I am the dore, I am the way, I am the trueIoan. 10. 14. 15. 1 Co 10. Math. 11. vine, the rock is Christ, on Baptist is Elias, and in such like, to shew what cōdition qualitie or propertie was common betwene these natures, without any surmise at all that any transubstan∣tiation could be meant in those words: in all which propositions the verb sum, es, fui, doth stand to signifie an accidental, and not a substantiall agreement betwene diuerse natures & substances. But it is far otherwise, when Christ hauing taken bread, saithTwo sub stances be neither na med nor meant in This is my body after blessing, This is my body: for in those words two seuerall natures are not ioyned together, and thereby affed still to be the substances they were before. It is not sayd, This bread is my body. No Enangelist, no Apostle, no Disciple reporteth Chri∣stes words in that sorte: such additions comme from Luther, from zwinglius, from Decolampadius, from Caluin: but not from S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke or S. Paule. The true Apostles of God by the ininct of the holy Ghoost were so farThis, can not be re∣ferred to bread or wine. from the minde of saying this bread, or this wine: that they did put the pronoune this, in such a gender: as neither could agree to bread nor to wine, whereof I haue spoken sufficiently before. The proposition then being such, as nameth one substance only, and that moste particular: there is no cause, why the verb, est, is, ought not to stand in his moste proper and vsuall signifi∣cation, verily to signifie this one thing, which was knowen to haue bene bread, by Christes word to be the substance of ChristesThe body of Christ is not com mō bread. owne body. which if it be once graunted, it will necessarily fo∣low: that this, which is the substance of Christes body, is not also common bread, because those natures were not at any time appointed to be together in any one proprietie of person. If it be not common bread, and yet it doth seme so: it will in∣sew, that the substance of y• bread is changed into Christes owne
substance, which is really present vnder the forme of common bread. Thus I haue shewed cause, why the verb est, is, doth si∣gnifie otherwise in, this is my body, then in these words, I am the true vine: by reason of which proper vnderstanding of the verb substantiue, transubstantiation is of necessitie inferred. For as when I heare it reported for certeine, that Peter, who was in the morning at Douer, was seene the same night at Ca∣lis, I doe thereby vnderstand, that Peter passed ouer the sea, not because so much was spoken, but because it foloweth vpon that, which was done: Euen so, when I reade, that Christ in his sup∣perThe con∣sequent whereby substan station is gathered. toke bread, and sayd after blessing: Take, eate, this is my bo∣dy: I vnderstand the bread, which by nature is not Christes body, by blessing and speaking to be made his body, and conse∣quently to be changed from his own substance into the substance of Christes body. None of all which things can be reasonably applied to the other words, I am the true vine. For which reason I conclude, that whereas in euery propo∣sition three parts are either expressed, or imployed: the one which goeth before the verb, the other which foloweth after, and y• verb it self: euery one helpeth to proue transubstantiation in theseEuery ord of y•  ropo tions is against . No∣. words, This is my body: and euery one hindereth the proufe of the same transubstantiation in the other words, I am the true vine. So discrete a chalenge M. Nowel made in comparing these two sayings together. But who can looke for better stuffe at his hands, sith he hath forsaken the notable wisedom of the Church of God, and taketh Caluins dreame to be Gods word? Hitherto, M. Nowell, I haue shewed the true meaning of euery word of the two propositions by you alleged. But now I haue such confidence in the cause of those Catholikes, whom you  Papists: that I will graunt you for farther disputations ake, euery thing to be otherwise, then it is in dede. Let vs ima∣gine,
that Christ were not God, and therefore might be changedThat is grated for argumēts sake, which is not true. in substance: that the true vine were a certeyne particular vine eueral from Christ, into the which a real change might be made: that the verb sum, I am, did stand to signifie a being in substāce, and not in qualitie alone: yet these words, I am the true vine,The more semely trā substantia tion wold be the ∣ter proued wold not proue as well a transubstantiation, as, This is my bo∣dy: for that transubstantiation wold be better proued in all dou∣tes moued therevppon, which were the more semely for Christ to worke. But it is a great deale more semely for him, to turne bread into his body: then to turne him self into a vine. Because it is to be thought, he being the wisedom of God changeth all∣ways for the best. Which were not so, if in stede of him self he should leaue vs a materiall vine: and yet in turning bread into his body, the change is made for the better by infinite degrees. Therefore these words, I am the true vine (though al other thigs were equall) could neuer proue that vnwise change so well: as, This is my body wil proue a most wise & happy change of com∣mon bread into the bread of life. Morcouer, these words, the vine, albeit they were ment of a certeyne vine: yet there is no necessitie, that they should shew itThe, both not shew a thing present. present. Sith those words may be verified of a vine, which being a hundred mile thence, were knowen to Christ alone: as like∣wise, whē S. Paule sayd, The rock was Christ, the rock whereof he spake was not present  him: but in his mind he noted a cer∣teyne1. Co. 10. rock, which yet in truth it self was not very certeyne (tou∣ching any one materiall rock) because two diuerse rocks wereExo. 17. Num. 20 The true vine might be  to the ∣posties. stryken, out of which water flowed at diuerse tymes. But (as I was about to say) the true vine, being only described by those termes, might be vncerteine to the Apostles and to the hearers of Christ, either because they neuer knew it, or because they haue forgotten it. So that these words, I am the true vine, will not as
well proue a transubstantiation, as the other words, This is my body. For both the bread, which was changed, was first present, and the body, wherevnto the change is made, is presently she∣wed, taken, and eaten vnder the forme of the same bread. It is doubtlesse a great help in prouing transubstantiation, to know both the vttermost partes, and to be able to bring that foorth, into the which the other is changed. For the nature of proof among men consisteth in making a thing plaine to reason,Proufe. by the meane of senses: and among faithfull men, it consisteth in making it plain to faith, by the meane of the same senses. If one should aske where the vine is, whereof Christ sayd, I am the true vine, and ye could not bring it foorth: and on the other syde, if I could bring foorth the body of Christ, into which y• bread were changed: although you might as wel beleue the transubstantia∣tion of Christ into the vine through the word of Christ, as I do beleue the transubstantiation of bread into his body: yet you could not so wel proue it, because you could not shew it so well. The vine, is lesse then, this vine, and the proof that (this) ma∣keth,He pro∣ueth best who she∣weth the thing mo∣ste really present. doth far excede the proof that (the) can make. If an inqui∣sition were made, who had done a certeyne murder, and you said the man hath done it, but I could say, this man hath done it: I suppose, all the Iudges in the world wold say, that I proued the murder done better, then you. When it is sayd, the man hath done such a murder, albeit the Iudge beleue the saying: yet his vnderstanding is not quieted, but he asketh farther, which man is that? But when you come so nigh to the point, as to say, this man hath done it: nothing cā be asked more plaine. Which being so, albeit I graunted a transubstantiation in eche saying: yet M. Nowell had not sayd truly in affirming, that these words, I am the true vine, do proue as well a transubstantiation, as, This is my body. By how much (this) in making proof doth passe (the)
by so much the later words wold better proue a transubstantia∣tion, then the first. Besydes this, when two transubstantiations are affirmed, of the which one hath bene in some like sorte practised before, but the other hath not bene likewise practised: those words which affirme such a transubstantiation, the like whereof hath bene be∣fore done, do proue the sayd transubstantiation better: then those that speake of a thing, that neuer was done. Bread was vsually turned into Christes body, whiles he li∣nedBread was tur∣ned into Christes body whi∣les he li∣ued. In orat. Catech. in earth: for his body was nourished with bread, the which bread was turned into his flesh. Quamobrem rectè nunc etiam Dei verbo sanctificatum panem in Dei verbi corpus credimus im mutari. Wherefore now also we beleue well (sayeth Nyssenus brother to S. Basile) the bread, which is sanctified with y• word of God, to be changed into the body of God the word. This argument also Damascene, Theophylact, and Euthy∣miusLi. 4. ca. 14. in Io∣an. 6. in Math. 26 do make. So that it is no newes for bread to become Chri stes body: but for Christ to become a vine, that, as it is through∣ly impossible, because Christ is God and vnable to be changed: so albeit we did graunt it possible, yet it were y• harder to proue it, because it had not ben done before. Last of all, there was neuer any auncient Father, or Generall Councell, nay there was neuer no learned man, were he Catho∣like or otherwise, there was neuer none of the lay people, no woman, no childe, no naturall foole: which tooke or thought any vine or rock in the whole world to be the naturall substanceNoman euer tok any vine or  to be Christ. Transub∣stātiation . of Christ: Notwithstanding that Christ had sayd, I am the true vine, and S. Paule, that the rock was Christ. But if we come to these words, This is my body, and consider them so pronounced, as they were: we shal finde, not only thousand millions of faith∣ful people to haue beleued the bread, ouer which those words are
spoken, to be changed into Christes body: but also whole Gene∣rall Councels, wherein many hundred of Bisshops and of great clerks haue bene gathered together, to haue taught and decreedTransub∣stātiation decreed & taught. directly or by manifest sequele y• doctrine of transubstantiation: as the Councels of Lateran, of Basile, of Constance, of Florēce, of Trent. Which all are knowen to haue agreed in this behalf. Besides many auncient Fathers haue moste constantlie wri∣tenIn Apo. 2 2. li. 4. ca. 34. 3. l. 4. cōt. Marc. 4. de caen. Dom. 5 de ijs qui init. cap. 9. 6. hom. 60. ad P. Antio. the same: as S. Iustinus the Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, with all the rest. The prosecuting of which argumēt were at this present to far distant from my principall intent: but in case I may vnderstand, that these few reasons doe not satisfie M. Nowell, or any other man to whome my labour may doe good, I will proue moste fully the doctrine of transubstātiation both out of the holy scriptures, and out of the holy Fathers. Now for M. Nowell, not withstanding al these suē differen∣ces, to affirme yt no Papist shal euer be able to shew cause, why I am the true vine: doth not proue as well a transubstantiation, as these words, This is my body: it was an ignorance in a prea∣cher not pardonable. For if I should only staye vppon the lastThe faith  doctri ne of the Church is a reason of the thing taught. argument, wherein all Christendom is shewed to haue beleued transubstantiation through these words, This is my body, and that as well before in dede, as by confession of our aduersaries, euer sence the great Councell of Lateran (which was kept aboue three hundred yeres past) seing M. Nowell for his parte could not bring foorth one reasonable creature, that euer surmised any transubstantiation in these words, I am the true vine: were not cause shewed, why these words, I am the true vine: did not as well proue a transubstātiation, as these words, This is my body? S. Paul thought it a sufficient prouf of resurrection, to say: If there be no resurrection, our faith and our preaching is in vaine.
But that can not be so (as S. Paule concludeth) therefore like∣wise1. Co. 15. the faith of all Christendom these three hundred yeres toge∣ther was a cause, why a transubstantiation should be proued by the one words much rather, then by the other. M. Nowell.M. No∣well. ¶Is not this as plainlie spoken and as pithily, I am a true, or a very vine: as, this is my body? IT were small pleasure to me, M. Nowell, to impugne your words, against whose person I haue no quarell: were it not, ytAct. 15. Galat. 1. you are & wold be accōpted a teacher in y• realme of England, which kinde of men as it is moste necessarie, when by lawfull commission it preacheth the Ghospell, which it hath taken of the Apostles and their successors: so is the same moste perniciouse, whē it preacheth a Ghospell of his owne framing, otherwise vn∣derstanded, then they tooke it of their Prelates, vnder whomeIoan. 21. Chryso. ibidem. they liued, before they departed frō y• fold of Christ: who appoin∣ted S. Peter to be y• generall sheperd of his whole flock in earth, in whose chaire the Bishops of Rome sit by lawfull succession. Is it then so plainly and so pithily spoken, M. Nowell, I am a true, or a very vine: as, this is my body? If the words, I am aThese words be more pi∣thy, which instuted a Sacra∣ment. true vine, or a very vine, be as pithy, as those of Christes sup∣per: without controuersie they must as well institute a Sacra∣ment of a true and of a very vine, as Christ at his supper did in∣stitute a Sacrament of his owne body and blood. For words a like pithy, must work an effect of like pith: otherwise, if y• words of the supper do work that, which the words of a true and very vine do not work: you haue spoken falslie, in affirming that it is as pithily sayd, I am the true vine, as, this is my body. Before Christ came in to the world, he made diuerse figures of his last supper: as that of Melchisedech, of the Paschall lāb, ofGen. 14. Exod. 12 & 16. Leuit. 2. & 22.
manna, of shew brd, of wheatē meale, & of such like. was there likewise so many figures made, to prefigure that he wold be a ve∣rie vine? When he was come into the world, he promised at Capharnaū that, the bread which he wold geue was his flesh. Made he the like3. of geuing any vine to vs? or of making himself a very vine?Ioan. 6. When the houre of sacrificing the Passouer was come, he sent4. S. Peter before, to prepare the passoner, which was but the sha∣dow of his supper. Did he likwise make a certeyne banket, or any like matter be prepared for him: which might be the shadow of himself in any such respect, as he is the true ?  did eate the5. passouer with all the twelue, a mysticall number, as it may wellMath. 10 26. Act. 1 Ioán. 13. appere in the holy : one of y• which was departed rom him, before that he sayd: I am the true vine. He protested his desier to eate this passouer, but not so to eate,6. or to be made any vine.Luc. 22. He washed his Apostles feete immediatly▪ before his supper: wherein he said, This is my body: but not immediatly before that7. he said, I am the true vine.Ioan. 13. He sate at the table, when he said, This is my body, which was8. the place, whereupon he wrought his mysterie: but he rose andIoan. 14. went out of the place, before he said, I am the true vine. And soPsal 22. lacked the circumstance of that table, whereof Dauid and Salo∣monProu. 9. had prophecied. To make his supper, he toke bread: but he toke nothing at all, to make thereof a vine. Therefore there is a9. more reall ground of the one, then of the other. He blessed at his supper: he did not so, when he said, I am the10. true vine: and yet surely y• words, wherewith blessing is ioyned, are thereby the playner. He gaue thankes there, but not here: which is a token, that11. the mystrie of his body was the greater.
He brake there, but not here: whereby the very vine lacked a12. notable cerimony concering y• represētation of Christes death. He gaue there, but not here: because in his supper the cheif gift13. was externall, and geuen by Christes hands to theyr bodies and hartes. He sayd there, and also he did those other things, as S. Luke14. rorteth, , saying: wherein he doth vs to vnderstand, thatLuc. 22. Christ at his supper as well did, as sayd: for he toke, he blessed, he brake, he gaue saying, to wit, his saying and doing went to∣gether & one made the other plaine: but whē he said, I am the trueIoan. 15. vine, he did nothing els, whereūto his words could apperteyne, so that the dede might geue light to the word. At his supper he bad his Apostles, take▪ not so in speaking of15. y• true vine, because they had already the gift of being the braun∣ches of him, the true vine. At his supper he bad them eate▪ not so in the other place. for y•16. he prouided no externall meat vnder the forme of auy vine, as he had prepared his owne flesh vnder the form of bread. At his supper he sayd, This is my body, where one substance17. only is named: and yet that by Christes doing and speaking is vnderstāded to be verified within the cumpasse and form of that, which once was knowen to haue bene the substance of bread: but in these words, I am the true vine, two substances are named: of the whiche one is only a proper and peculiar substance, the other is taken vnproperly, and is no reall substance distincted from Christ. There the words passe from the worse to the better, from that18. which was bread to the body of Christ: here they passe from the better to the worse, from Christ to the name of a vine. There is in the former part a demonstration, by pointing to19. this thing really present: here it is only described to be the true
vine, but no such creature is shewed or brought foorth There such words are added, which restraine the name body20. to that true body of Christ, which died for vs: here such words beLuc. 22. added, which declare the true vine, which is spoken of, not to be a natural vine, but a parabolical vine. for it is said afterwad: As aIoan. 15. branche can not beare fruit of it self, vnlesse it tarry in the vine: soThe circū stance of y• wordes in both pla∣s. neither ye, except ye tarry in me. See the ods, M. Nowell, This is my body. Which body? which is deliuered for you. to say, this is mine owne substance, the very same, that is put to death for you. but concerning the true vine he saith, As the braunche can not beare fruit, vnlesse it be in the vine: so can not we beare fruit, except we tary in him. The particles as and so, be words of si∣militude, and not of substance. Behold how he is a vine, by a similitude, and by a metaphor, by an exāple, by hauing a like propriety towards vs: as the vine hath towards his owne braunches. These be other manner of circumstances, for the pithy and plaine setting forth of his reall body vnder the form of bread: thē you can bring any to make so much as an apparence, that Christ should be a vine. And is yet the one with you so plaine & so pithy,21. as the other? To what case would you bring the words, this isIn Apol. 2. my body: if your power were to your will? S. Iustinus the Martyr calleth them words of praier, because22. they were spoken with thankesgeuing.Deprod. Iud. S. Chrysostom, words which consecrate the things set forth: be∣cause23. they make a Sacrament of y• bread and wine. S. AmbroseDe ijs qui init. cap. 9. calleth them words of blessing, and a speache which worketh: be∣cause they are spoken with the intent of working that they soūd.24. S. Augustine nameth them a mystical praier, of consecrating, ofIn epi. 59 & li. 3. de Trin. c. 4 vowing, or offering, because they consecrate, vow and offer vnto God the substance of bread and wine: to thed it being accepted
of him, may be made the body of Christ our only sacrifice, wherein the oblations of the new law must end. You making these words no more pithy, thē, I am the true vine, would haue them worke no more: then metaphorical words do work. which is to say, that they teach only a comfortable doctrine: but worke no essentiall thing in the substance of bread, whiche is set forth to be consecrated. Christ after his body was consecrated, sayd to his Apostles,25. Make this thing for the remembrance of me: but after the wordes of the true vine were spoken, he bad no thing to be do or made for any purpose or effect. The making of Christes body was er accompted a greate26. sacrifice, as the greeke Liturgies and latine bookes delare:S. Iames. but there neuer was hard of auy vine, that was in that opinionS. Basil. among the faithfull.S. Chry. The words, which consecrate Christes blood, shew likewise,27. what is to be thought of, this is my body: but the true vine is not so cond by any other like consecration annexed. The blood is pointed vnto within a cup or chalice, declaring28. the body also to haue bene pointed vnto vnder the form of bread: but the vine was not so limited within a certaine place, where it might appere to any sense of the Apostles. It is called the blood of the new tostament, or the new testa∣ment29. in Christes blood: the like addition is not made to y• true vine. The very cup of Christes supper is said to be shed for vs, be∣cause30. the blood is conteined in it, which was only shed for vs: y• like is not said of any thing, wherein y• vine might be conteined. The wordes of Christes supper be so playne and so pithy, that31. if we take them not as they sound: the pronones hoc and hic shall lacke theyr noune substantiue.
The verbe est, is being once taken for significat, shall haue no32. substantiue at all, to be his nominatiue case. The noune corpus, body, being expounded for the figure of33. Christes body, shall not agree with his participle , da∣tum, geuen: or els the relatiue quod, which, shall not agree with his antecedent corpus, body: except we defend a figure of Christ to haue bene crucified for vs. None of all these things compell vs, to take these wordes, I am the true vine, in suche sorte. There is no pronoune, no Relatiue or Participle, which may so restrain the nature of the wordes: but that we may take Christes kind of being the true vine, for hauing the qualitie of a true vine, and not being any vine in a seuerall substance. Three Euangelists haue writen, This is my body, one after an34. other, confirming the propriety of the words: but only S. Ihon wrote, that Christe said, I am the true vine. Nowe that is not so plainly said, whereof four men write conformably, as that, which one writeth alone. For if an other had writen the parable of the vine, perhaps he would haue added other words to haue made it plainer, although it be plaine enough already. For the honour of these wordes, This is my body, Churches35. and Altars haue bene builded: where that blessed body might be cōsecrated vnder the forme of bread. For any vine I neuer thinke the like to haue bene done. You your selues allow at the least a square table, where this36. is my body, may be solemnly pronounced: but not so for these words, I am the true vine.37. The body whereof Christ spake, hath bene taught to be ado∣red1. de spir. sanct. l. 3. cap. 12. 1. vnder the forme of bread by S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, & all the Fathers. You are the first M. Nowell, whoCor. ho. 24. 3. in Psal. 98. would either a vine to be adored equally with Christes body: or els his body to be no more adored in the Sacrament of the altar
then a parabolicall vine. For to that end your words runne, thatM. No∣ scope as wel Christ should be a vine: as that whereof he spake in his supper, should be his body. to say, that his body is only present in a parable at Christes supper. S. Chrysostom calleth these words, I am the true vine, a para∣ble,38. and theresore saith: Quid vult haec parabola significare, whatIn Ioan. hom. 75. will this parable meane? And againe: Vide, quàm diligenter hanc parabolom exequitur. See, how diligently he prosecuteth this parable. But thought he, trow you, that: This is my body, was likewise a parable? No, no, it neuer was his minde. For writingChrys. in Matth. hom. 83. vpō these words, Take, eate: this is my body, and hauing asked, why the disciples were not troubled hearing that thing, he aun∣swereth: Quia multa iam, & magna de hoc anteà disseruit, because Christ hath disputed of this thing, many and great things before. Where no dout at al can be, but that S. Chrysostom meaneth the the disputation kept at Capharnaum: where Christ promised theIoan. 6. Chrys. in Ioan. bread whiche is his flesh, affirming his fleshe to be not only true meate, but to be meat truely, therein shewing: that it is meat nothom. 46. only concerning the truth of nourishing, but also concerning the manc of caing it. vpon whiche place S. Chrysostome writeth, that Christe called his fleshe truely meate, either because it is the true meate which saueth the soule, or to confirme them in his for∣mer sayings: ne obscurè locutum in parabolis arbitrarentur, sed scrent omnino necessarium esse, vt corpus comederent: least they should thinke him to haue spoken darkly in parables, but should know it to be by all means necessary, tha they should eate hisThere is no parable in the wor des belon∣ging to the gift of Chrstes flesh. body. Behold, in promising his flesh, and in affirming it to be meate in dede Christ spake not in parables: much lesse could he do so in performing his promise, and in saying, Take, eate: this is my bo∣dy. Yet M. Nowell thinketh a parable as plaine, as that speache
which is no parable: Forgetting y• Christ said him self to speakeMatt. 13. in parables to the multitude, so that the hearers did not vnder∣stand him. Yet M. Nowell wil haue, I am the true vine, whiche is a parable, to be as plaine, as, this is my body. S. Augustine saith, Christe is called a vine by a Similitude or39. Metaphore: but he neuer taught the like, of, this is my body. ForTrac. 80 in Ioan. he saith, Noster panis & calix certa consecratione mystious fit no∣bis,Contra Faust. li. 20. ca. 13: nō nascitur: Our bread and chalice is not borne, but is made mysticall to vs by a certain consecration. That, whiche is conse∣crated, is in dede made somwhat, which it was not before, & not only shewed to be a thing by a similitude. A parable or similitude (as I am the true vine is) hath no consecration belonging to it: but our bread hath a certeine consecration, which worketh some mysterie: and what consecration is that, besyde the effectual ope∣ration of these words, this is my body? Christ was the true vine, before he said, I am the true vine: but40. the thing pointed vnto at his supper was not his body, before it was said, This is my body. Therefore these words, which make a new thing, when they are spoken, are more pithy: then those, which only shew a thing already extant. But are metaphors vsed to be really made after acerteine mauer of consecration, Master Nowell? They be named and writē many tymes, but they be ne∣uer cosecrated  made really. S. Cyrillus , that he called himself a vine exempli rati∣one:41. by the way of example. But what? said he likwise, this is myIn Ioan. li. 10. c. 13 The vseof n exāple. body, as it were for examples sake? whē we bring an example, we bring it to proue some other thing, which is more principal, then the example was. Christ intēding to teach in what sort his disci∣ples depended vpon him for their spiritnal life, sheweth it by an example of the vine: but in his supper his own body consecrated, made, and eaten was not an example brought to declare an other
thing: but it was the principall thing it self, which was intended. Therefore, this is my body, was more pithily said: then, I am the true vine. For the principal is always more pithy, then that, which is alleged for to serue an othr purpose: in so muche thatIbidem. S. Cyrill sayth, Longè ab omni ratione remotum est, ad naturae substantiae{que} rationem illud traducere, quod per similitudinem dictum est. It is far distant from all reason, to apply that, whichThe arās reason. was spoken by a similitude, to a comparison of nature and sub∣stance. Which words, S. Cyrill spake of the Arrians, who deny∣ing these words to be ment of Christes humane nature, by the si∣militude went about to proe: that as the vine, and the husband∣man be not of one nature, so God the father, who is, as it were, the husbandman, and Christ, who is the vine, were not of one nature. And as the Arians did amisse, to applie the words spoken by aA simili∣tude must not be ap∣plied to disproue  substāce. similitude, to the denying of Christes own diuine substāce: right so M. Nowell doth applie the same similitude euill, to disproue by the example thereof the substanciall presence of Christes body in the Sacrament. But as S. Cyrillus doth returne the argument of the Arians vppon their heads, by shewing how Christ is the vine, and weI am the true vine, serueth to shew the reall pre∣sence of Christes body. the braunches according to his humanitie: so may we shew to M. Nowell, that these words of Christ, I am the true vine, serue to shew the reall presence of Christes body in the Sacrament of the altar. S. Augustine sayeth, Christ was made man, to th'end the na∣tureAug. in Ioan. of man might be the vine in him: of which humane nature we men might be the braunches. S. Cyrill affirmeth likewise,Tract. 80 Cyr. l. 10 in Ioā. 13. Christ to be the vine euen according to the flesh: and vs to be braunches both spiritually and corporally. He proueth it, for soThempst cal blessig. much as the mysticall blessing maketh Christ to dwell corporal∣ly
also in vs, by the communicating of the flesh of Christ. What meaneth he by dwelling corporally? Himself sheweth saying, Non habitudine solum, quae per charitatem intelligitur: verū etiá & naturali participatione. Not only by habit, by power, by effect, or by the state and condition of charitie alone: but also by natu∣rall participation. o, he placeth naturall participation, as a farther degree beyond that dwelling of Christ in vs, which is by faith or charitie. M. Nowell will say pehaps, that the naturall participationAn obiec∣. of Christes flesh is to beleue, that he is true man and true God: and so to fede vpon him by faith at the tyme of eating bread and of drinking wine. Such cursed interpretations now adaies theyThe an∣swere. bring: as though he, that doth not beleue Christe to be in dede true man and true God, can be ioyned to Christ at all▪ by faith and charitie. But S. Cyrill speaketh of that participation, which is made not only by faith and charitie: but also by naturall par∣taking his body and blood. We must put a certeine iust man to beleue most py, who yet hath not receaued the mysticall blessing or communion of Chri∣stes flesh. That iust man is ioyned to God by faith and charitie, but not yet corporally. He is a branche of the Godhead (which is principally the true vine) and a braunche of the manhod in that he beleueth in Christ, who is true God and man: but he is not yet corporally a braunche of the manhood (which is also the true vine) except he  worthily the mysticall blessing, which is the Sacrament of Christes supper: the which maketh Christ to dwell in vs corporally also. Note the word quoque, also. For Christ dwelt in his Apostles harts before the last supper. by right faith and charitie, and therefore he sayd they were all cleane sauing Iudas: but this mysterie maketh him dwel in themIoan. 13. corporllay also. And S. Cyrill expoundeth farther, how Christ
by the Sacrament dwelleth in vs. For whereas Christ had sayd, except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man and drink his blood,Life. ye shall not haue life in your selues: He interpreteth life, the flesh of life, in your selues, in your body. That is to say: except ye eate my flesh, ye shall not haue the flesh of life in your body. Vita au∣tem iure ipsa vitae caro intelligi potest. The life may well be vnderstanded the self flesh of life. In vobis ipsis dicit, id est, in cor∣pore vestro. Christ sayth, except ye eate y• flesh and drink y• blood of the sonne of man, ye shall not haue life in your selues: that is to say, in your body. Is not this plaine enough? Then heare yet a plainer simili∣tude, which fully doth open his minde. S. Cyrillus expresly af∣firmethA ∣tude made by S. Cy rill. Christ to be in vs, and vs to be in him, by the communica∣ting of his body and blood, euen after that sort: as if a man taking wax (which is melted by the fier) do so mingle it with other mel∣ted wax, that one maner of thing semeth to be made of both. How think you, M. Nowell? Is one wax mingled with an other by faith and spirit alone? or is it mingled by signes and tokens  the one part, without the reall presence of both waxes. What wicked men are ye, who will make vs beleue, y• S. Cy∣rill did not meane the reall substance of Christes fleshe to be re∣allie and corporallie in vs, by communicating his bodie & blood? If you beleue him not, why do ye not deny his aucthoritie? If ye beleue his doctrine, why teache you not the same? These beThe points to be noted in this place o S. Cy∣rill. the points, M. Nowell, which you must aswer vnto. For eue∣ry word, that foloweth, is in S. Cyrill euen in that place, where he disputeth of the true vine: though not in such order, as I now put them. Which thing I doe, to make his whole mind ap∣peare at once. Thus he sayth. * 1. The mysticall blessing, or the communicating of Christes body and blood▪ * 2. maketh. * 3. Christ, or the life, or the flesh
of life. * 4. to be, or to be made, or to be ioyned, or to dwell. * 5. in vs, or with vs, and vs to haue it in our selues, or in our bo∣dies. * 6. according to the flesh, or corporally. * 7. and not on∣ly by habit, or power, or by aith, or charitie, or spiritually. * 8. but also, by naturall partaking. * 9. euen so as one melted wax is mingled to an other melted wax, and in maner made one there∣with. * 10. By this meanes we are both corporally and spiritual∣ly braunches of Christes flesh, which is also the true vine. See now, M. Nowell, how y• parable of the true vine right∣ly expounded, maketh altogether for our purpose. As Christ is the true vine according to his flesh, so are we the braunches ac∣cordingThe vine. to his flesh. He is the vine, by hauing his flesh really present and vnited to himself: therefore we be the braunches byThe bran ches. hauing the same flesh really present in vs, and by being really vnited vnto it, as the braunche is vnited to his roote. As Christ is the true vine two ways, by his Godhead and by his manhod: so a mā may two ways liue by Christ, by partaking of his God∣head and manhod: by habit only, if he haue a good faith: and by partaking his manhod corporally also, if he receaue worthily the Sacrament of the altar. But that Sacrament could no more make vs be braunches according to the flesh of Christ, then our faith and charitie doth make vs to be braunches thereof: except it had his flesh really present. For otherwise our faith it self is a better meane to gra vs into Christ, then bread and wine is: because it is a ioyning of vs to God in a higher degree. But the mystical blessing in S. Cyril is made the meane to ioyne vs to God in a higher degree, then faith or charitie. Therefore S. Cyrill and all the Fathers before him, (whose minde he professeth himself to folow) bele∣ued the reall presence of Christes flesh in the Sacrament of the altar: And that by the way of turning the bread into his flesh.
For the flesh of Christ could not be really present, to dwell cor∣porally with vs and in our bodies, except it were corporally re∣ceaued of vs. And other way, how to receaue it corporally, I see not: except the bread be changed into it. Thus you see, what aduantage, I am the true vine, doth bring to the Catholike faith: but no hinderance in the world can be thence deduced against the reall presence of Christes body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar. M. Nowell. ¶ Nay, if Christ had sayd likewise, this is my true & very body, as he sayd, I am a true or very vine what a rule had we then had? I Marueile, if M. Nowell think more strength to be in theseThe aun∣swer. words, my true or very body: thē in these, My body which is geuen for you. as though y• true & very body were not geuen for vs. But if the true body were geuen for vs, Christ saying, This is my body, which is geuen for you, sayd also: This is my true and very body. And therein M. Nowell shal haue a rule, to know that Christ spake not metaphorically: for the relatiue quod, which, can not agree with any other word, then with the noune substantiue corpus, body. which noune corpus, body, if it stand vnproperlie, the relatiue must nedes repete it so, as it stan∣deth: and then, if this be the sigure of Christes body, which is ge∣uen at his supper, the figure of his body is geuen for vs vpon the crosse. I confesse M. Nowell, I could be content to goe to schole, & to rne of so aunciēt a scholemaster as you are: how a word which is but once named (as y• noune corpus, body, in Christes supper) may be antecedent to the relatiue, quod, which, (as the Latins
reade) or noune substantiue to the participle datum, geuen, (as the Greeks reade) and yet be otherwise ment in his relatiue and participle, then it was being the antecedent or the noune sub∣stantiue. Christ sayd, This is my body geuen for you. wil you diuide the participle geuen, from his noune substantiue body? If you will not, as the body geuen for vs was the substance of Christes body: so this is the self same substāce of Christes body, which the Apostles are commanded to take, to eate, and to make. In that you turne the words vitis vera, not only a true, but also a verie vine, you are much deceaued. The word vera, is not now to be pressed, as if it were set to signifie a naturall vine (where vnto your words run) but to signifie a perfect vine, in respect of an imperfit: for so we say, he is a true man, meaning a truth in his words and dedes, but not in nature. for a lier and falsifier is also a true man in nature. Euen so Christ meaneth himself to be a moste true and perfect vine concerning the swete frute, which a vine ought to bring foorth and to communicate vnto his bran∣ches. For the Iewes being a vine well planted by God, became through synne a oure vine, and brought foorth none other but wilde grapes: but Christ is a true, a perfit, a moste excellent vine, which bringeth foorth swete grapes in his faithfull members of y• Church. Thus doth S. Augustine expound y• word vera, true,Tractat. 80. in Io ann. saying: that when Christ calleth him self a true vine, he maketh a difference betwene him self, and that vine, to which it is sayd:Esai, 5. How art thou turned into the bitternes of a strange vine? Euthymius declareth the Greeke word , to signifieIn cap. Ioan. 15. either an excellent, an incorruptible, a spirituall vine: or els a vine, which for his fruit bringeth foorth veritie and truth. Now such an addition doth rather detract sum what from the naturall and very vine, whereof M. Nowell speaketh: then help it any thing. For which cause he should not haue had such a rule
with vs, as he thinketh, if it were sayd, This is my true body: sith the word true might haue ben taken for the effect or frute proce∣ding from his body, which wold not haue bene so much for our purpose, as when it is sayd, This is my body which is geuen for you. Thus euery way M. Nowell is deceaued in his constru∣ction. And no wonder, sith he buildeth not vpon the rock plan∣ted by Christ in the Catholike Church: but vpon Caluins new inuentions, which are more feble, then the sands them selues. M. Nowell. ¶ Christ saith, Ego sum panis, I am bread: and yet no transubstantiation of his body into bread. Why should these words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, more transubstantiate bread into his body? HOw long will you continew in falsifying the holy Scri∣ptures, M. Nowell? When shall a man find you to deale vprightly? Where is it writen, I am bread? Where sayeth Christ those words? Uerily if he had sayd them, yet you may know, he meant him self to be bread only by a similitude or Me∣taphore: as it was expounded before in the words, I am the true vine. And therefore, I am bread, could import no transubstantia∣tion for seuen causes. * 1. The bread, he speaketh of, is no certayne or limited sub∣stance.The cau∣ses, why Christ cā not be ma teriall bread. * 2. Christ can not be personally changed, for that he is God. * 3. The verb sum, I am, being ioyned with two natures cleane distant doth always signifie a like condition or propertie, and no identitie of substance. * 4. It were a change made for y• worse, such as Christ vseth not to make. * 5. It wold be y• har∣der to be proued, because the thing, whereinto the change should be made, is not pointed vnto, as present. * 6. It had bene a change, the like whereof had not bene vsed before. * 7. It was
ner taght nor beleued in the Church. But in these words, This is my body. * 1. The body is cer∣tayne.This is my body may work  change. * 2. The bread taken is a creature made to be changed. * 3. The verb est, is, doth not stand betwene two diuerse sub∣stances: but betwene the pronoune and his only noune substan∣tiue. * 4. The change is for the better. * 5. It is better to be proed, because it poynteth presently to the thing made. * 6. Bread was before changed into Christes flesh, whiles he eating bread liued thereby. * 7. The Church beleued, the Fathers taught, and the Generall Councels decreed the change of the bread into Christes body. It had not bene had, to haue answered thus: if Christ had sayd, I am bread. But phy vppon that impietie of yours, M.M. No∣well hath falsified y• worde of God. Nowell, who in so few words commit so many faults? You re∣porte, that Christ sayd, I am bread: and therein you falsify the word of God. It is not sayd any where, I am bread. For what call you the saying of Christ? It is writen, Odiui omnem viam iniquitatis: And again, Omnem viam iniquā odio habui. I hauePsal. 118. vers. 104 & 128. hated euery way of iniquitie, I haue hated euery vniust way. Were it now truly reported, that God had sayd: I haue hated euery way? And thereof to conclude, that noman may either walk by the high way, or walk in the path of God: because God hath hated euery way? After the like maner doth M. Nowell reporte the words ofIoan. 6. Christ: who sayd twise, I am the bread of life. And once he sayd, I am the liuing bread. Now cometh M. Nowell and leaueth outThe geni  afe lft out. the genitiue case in the two first sayings, and the participle in the last, and the article in both, and affirmeth that Christ sayd, I am bread. In dede M. Nowell, these words be found, as likewise we find, I haue hated euery way: but it is no small sacrilege, to allege Gods word, leauing out any essentiall part thereof. And
specially when the word left out is so ioyned with the rest: as y• genitiue case is ioyned to the noune, which it foloweth, or as the participle is ioyned to his noune substantiue. It had bene bad enough, to haue sayd in our tong, which hathThe arti∣cle left out articles: I am bread of life. for euen so the article () the, had bene left out: because it is writen, I am the bread of life, or, I am the liuing bread: And not, I am bread. But to leaue out both the article (the) and the genitiue case (of life) or the participle (li∣uing) and to argue vppon that false ground, that Christ is not transubstantiated into bread: it is so dissolutely done, that it may warne you, M. Nowell, of your ow blindnesse of hart, and of y• blindnes of all such other fale preachers as you are. Who through (what other great synnes I can not tel) but cer∣teinlyThe blin∣dnes of Schisma tks. through schisme are so wonderfully forsaken of God: that you see not now, not only what his true meaning, what his worde and Ghospell▪ what the moste sycere faith of his Church is, but you see not that, which naturall Philosophers, which men of common reason, which children in y• Catholike Church see. You see not the dependence betwene the pronoune adiectiue, and his noune substantiue: but referre hoc to panis, and hic toHoc pa∣nis. vinum: you see not, how the nominatiue case agreeth with his verb: but in expounding Hic est sanguis meus, for hic significat sanguinem meum you leaue the verb without a noune substan∣tiueHic signi ficat. to goe before him: which is not so, when we say, Hic est san∣guis meus, this is my blood, taking the verb substantiue est, is, properly. For sing here is in all but one substance named, the pronoun hic, this, is so referred finally to the blood alone, that yet we do not construe the words saying, this blood is my blood:The Ca∣tholiks fal not into the like er rour. but we make the last determination of the pronoune (this) to rest only in the substance folowing. And so as long as the substance is vnnamed, the noune substātine to the pronoune is vnknowē,
as in, Hic est filius meus, haec vidua erat, hoc est verbum fidei: butMath. 3. strayght vpon the naming thereof, the prooune is ruled in case,Luc. 7. 20. 10. gender, and number, of his noune substantiue, which coeth after the verb. But when you haue expounded the words of Christ by hic si∣nificatSignifi∣cat neuer hath a noune to be his no∣minatiue case. sanguinem meum, when al the speache is fully ended: your pronoune of the masculine gender & of the nominatiue case fin∣deth no noune substantine at all, with whom he may rest, but styl is without his due construction. You turne the nounes corpus, and sanguis, from the nomina∣tiueCorpus. case into the accusatiue. You diuide the relatiue quod, which,Quod. from his antecedent corpus, body, in that you make him repete but halfe the signification of his antecedent. You diuide the par∣ticiple , geuen, frō the signification of his noune , body. You supply in S. Luks Greeke words the verbe est, is, by common vse: & when you haue it present, you cast it out again,Est sup∣d. or expound it not according to y• common vse of speaking: which forced you to supply it, but according to an vnproper meaning very sildom vsed, & not vnderstanded of any meane lerned man. You teache by necessarie & ineuitable sequele of your doctrine, figure offered for vs. Wine shed for vs. a figure of Christes body, that is to say, material bread to be sacri ficed for vs. You teache, the wine to be in the cup: and yet Christ saith, the cup, to wit, that which is in the cup, to be shed for vs. You diuide the noune substautine from his genitine case: san∣guis from testamenti, vitae from panis. you cut of the article. you myssēglish many things, as I haue noted before. These be faults, into which a Grammarian should not fal: & yet you are so blind, that you see them not. For so I rather think of you: thē that you of purpose chose to be Heretiks, and to be damned persons. What might a man doe, to bring you home? You wrote not passing twenty lines together of this blessed Sacrament in this
place: and yet s into what grosse  you be fallen. If your whole booke were so particularly skanned, euery leafe is full of such like faults. But because it wold passe all measure of writing, if in a great volume euery line should be thus staid vpon: there∣fore al things euery where be not, nor can not be so particularly examined. but surely all be as fond, as vayne, as false.How Christ is the breade of life. To returne to my chefe purpose, Christ is y• bread of life, accor∣ding to his Godhead and manhod: and is to be eaten of by faith, as it is often times said in S. . But he is also to be eaten i his humane fleshe, and to be drunken in the substance of his na∣turall blood not onlie by faith, but verè, trulie▪ that is to saie: he is to be taken at the mouth, and so cometh to oure hartes and mindes, which is the wa of eating him at his last supper. The which way (by that meane of eating) fulfilleth the figure Māna. In respect whereof Christ calleth him self not dead food, as y• was: but ye liuing bread, not without power to quicken (as that was)  the bread of life: which can geue life to him, thatBread of life. worthily  it. Not a  breade, as Manna was: but the true bread▪ not geuen from the , as Manna, but fromTrue bread. Bread frō heauen. The euer∣lasting in eate. heauen. and the bread sayth Christ, which I wil geue, is my flesh. This bread of life, M. Nowel, is the euerlasting meat, which the sonne of man promised to geue: and at his supper he doth geue it, euen as he is the sonne of man, to wit, by the instrument of his manhod verily by his own handes, and by his corporall deliuery made to the twelue at his last supper.
The preface of the fift Booke. ALmighty God knowing the reall presence of his Sonnes flesh vnder the forme of bread, to be a thing so farre aboue the whole course of nature, that no vnderstanding of man was able to atteine vnto it, did at the least so fortifie the same by his holy wordes put in writing, and by the continuall practise of the Church: that who so listeth to beleue, may haue more then sufficient grnd, to bld his faith vpon. That I may now omitte other proes, how plainly doth S. Paul speake in this matter? whose words are the more earnest∣lyAug. de opere Mona∣chor. c. 2 to be weighed: for so much as S. Augustine, a man much n∣uersant in the Epistles of this chosen , affirmeth him, to di∣spute (according to the Apostolike maner) more plainly. Et magis proprie quam figurate  qui, and rather to speake properly, then figuratiuely. Which thing I wish the Reader to haue always in his minde, depely consydering, that if Chrs body.  not really present, o  hath spo more ely,  S. Paul: be▪ cause he alone hath writen more of the last  it selfe, then any other holy writer. But  he vseth for the most part to speake properly, we must not in this myy alone take his words  .
The Chapiters of the fyfth Booke. 1. The reall presence of Christe is proued by the blessing of the cup of his blood. 2. Item by the name of breaking and communica∣ting. 3. Item by the one bread, which maketh vs all one body. 4. Item by the conference of al those wordes toge∣ther. 5. It is shewed how vve are one body in Christ. 6. The reall presence is proued by the like exam∣ple, vvhiche S. Paule vsed concerning the Ievves and Gentils. 7. Item by the kind of shewing Christes death. 8. Item because euill men eate this bread vnvvor∣thelie. 9. Item because euill men are gilty of Christes bo∣dy and blood, by eating and drinking it. 10. Item because they discerne it not in their doings from other meates. 11. Item because no figure can make a man gilty of Christes body vvithout speciall conempt,
except it be the truth and the figure toge∣ther. 12. Last of al, the real presence is confirmed by the frequent repetition of the body and blood of Christ.
¶The real presence of Christes body and blood is prouedThe first Chapiter. by the blessing and communicating of Christes blood, where of S. Paule speaketh. S. Paule writeth to the Corinthians of the Sacrament of the1. Cor. 10 altar in this manner: The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the communicating of the blood of Christ? as though he sayd: there is no doubt, but that the chalice, which we blesse, maketh vs partake the blood of Christ. This aduantage we haue by conference of those holy scriptures, whiche speake of oneMatt. 26. matter: that one place geueth light to the other. S. Mathewe reherseth, how Christ taking the chalice, said: This is my blood of the new testament. S. Luke sheweth, that he said: This chalice isLuc. 22. 1. Cor. 10 the new testament in my blood. S. Paule addeth thereunto: The chalice of blessing, which we blesse, is the communicating of Chri∣stes blood. A blessing in holy scripture is either a praising of a thing, orWhat bles∣sing is. it is the geuing of a benefite thereunto. It is certaine, that the chalice, as long as it hath nothing but wine in it, can not deserue any praise, because a thig without life is not apt to receaue praise. It remaineth then to , what benefite is bestowed vppon the liquour in the chalice. The Sacramentaries wil say, that it is made holy wine of cō∣monAn obi∣tion. wine, and sanctified bread of common bread, which sancti∣sying is a blessed action: and by that holy signification, where∣vnto it is apointed, a certaine holines is geuen to it, which may be called a blessing. This were very wel said, if it had bene only said generally of y•The aun∣swere. chalice, that it is the chalice of blessing which we blesse: but the blessing, that S. Paule speaketh of, is named specially also the communicating of Christes blood.
A generall blessing geueth a general benefite, as when we say: our Lord blesse you, God send you good speede, the right hand of God blesse this meate, the holy Ghost sanctifie this wine, and make it to be a remembrance of Christes bloodsheading. These & like wordes be blessings, & hallow or sanctifie the thing blessed:1. Timo. cap. 4. as S. Paule saith, the creatures to be sanctified by the word of God and praier. But when a speciall blessing is geuen, a speciall sanctifiyng must folow: As when God blessed the , Bene∣dixitque eis dicens, Crescite & multiplicamini, & replete aquasGen. 1. maris: and God blessed them saying, Increase and multiplie, and fyll the waters of the sea: this special kinde of blessing worketh aA blessing made by words, worketh y•, whiche the words  signify. speciall benefite vnto the creature, which is blessed▪ and it wor∣keth euen that which the word signifieth▪ who doubteth, but by these words of Gods blessing (increase and multiplie) the fisshes toke the vertue of increasing and multiplying, which before these words they had not? for this kind of blessing gaue them this kind of benefite. Seing then Christ blessed the chalice, saying: This is my blood of the new testament out of doubt he gaue it really this vertue, to be the blood of the new testament. Tell me no more, that Christ willed it to signifie his blood: for I tel you out of y• word of God, what soeuer words haue b spoken belonging to any creature by the way of blessing, they haue wrought that, which they did signifie. But Christ said in the way of blessing▪ This chalice is the new testament in my blood: Therefore he made, by that bles∣sing, his blood within the chalice. Bring me no more of those paltry examples: I am a dore, IChriste is not called a dore, vine, or rock by  way of . am a vine, the rock is Christ, Iohn Baptist is Elias, the holy Ghost is a doue, & a  of that sort. I  in one word to al, that none of these were spoken by God in the way of blessing. The  saieth not, that Christ blessed any certaine
vine, saying this is Christ, or: This is my body▪ He sayd many thinges without blessing, and he bled sometymes without speaking. But when blessing & words are oyned, we are certified, that those words are not figuratiue, nor only tokens and bare sigs: but working and making that, which is said. For if they promiseGen. 8. Rom. 9. a thing to come, they worke by the way of causing the promyse in due tyme to be fulfilled: as when a soe was promysed to Abraham by the Aungell of God. If they be spoken, as betoke∣ning a present verbe, they presently worke the thing betokened. Let no  deceaue thee, good Reader. There is a dubble bles∣sing spoken of in S. Paule: there is the chalice of blessing, and the chalice, which we blesse. The chalice of blessing, as S. ChrysostomIn. 1. cor. cap. 10. saieth, is that: which whē we haue before vs, we prayse God with admiration and horrour of the vnspeakeable gift: but it is not the chalice of blessing, vntill we haue blessed it. The blessing, whiche maketh it the chalice of blessing, is that we speake of: and that is the blessing, whiche is made by the wordes of consecration, as I haue said before. Therefore S. Chrysostom wryteth thus vponChrys. 1. Cor. hom. 24. this place of S. Paule: Cùm benedictionem dico, Eucharistiam dico, & dicendo Eucharistiam, omnem benignitatis Dei thesau∣rum aperio, & magna illa munera commemoro. When I say bles∣sing, I say the Eucharist, and in saying the Eucharist, I open all the treasour of the goodnes of God, and I make rehearsall of those great gifts. But least any cauill should be made, as though the wordes ofAmb. d ijs qui init. mys. cap. 9.  were not the words of blessing: heare what S. Am∣brose ath of this Sacrament: Quantis vtimur exemplis, vt probemus, non hoc esse, quod natura formauit? How many  vse we to proue, that it is not y• thing, whiche nature made: but that, which blessing consecrated? Lo, that, which coneth,
is blessing. But what blessing? After y• S. Ambrose had brongh many examples, to shew what strength blessing had: at the last he concludeth: Quòd si tantùm valuit humana benedictio, vt natu∣ram conuerteret: quid dicimus de ipsa consecratione diuina, vbi verba ipsa Domini Saluatoris operantur? If the blessing of man was of that power, that it changed nature: what say we of Gods own consecrating, where the self words of our Lord & SaniouBlessing. Cōsecra∣tng. working. words. do worke? Marke good Read er: blessing, consecrating, and the words of our Sauiour working, is all one matter. And yet againe, to make it playner, S. Ambrose saieth: Nam Sacramentum istud quod ac cipis, Christi sermone conficitur, for this Sacrament which thou receauest, is made with the wordes of Christ: & what the words be, he telleth him self: Vide, omniaDe Sacr. li. 4. c. 5. illa verba Euangelistae sunt, vsque ad: accipite, siue corpus, siue sanguinem: inde verba sunt Christi. Behold al those are the words of the Enngelist, vntill we come to this word, take, either body or blood: from thense they are the wordes of Christ. Yf blessing be that which consecrateth, & both blessing & conse∣cration be made with the words o Christ, & his words he those, which folow the word take, & y• words which folow be these, This is my bodie, and This is my blood: who perceyueth not, y• these only are the words of blessing? Then we blesse the chalice, when we consecrate, when we say: This is my blood of the new testa∣ment: & when we blesse saying the wordes of blessing in Christes mysteries, then we make so much as our words do signifie. For which cause S.  concludeth, that y• chace, which we blesse, is the cōmunicating of the blood of Christ. In saying, which we blesse, he sheweth the cause, why it is Christes blood: In saying, it is the communicating of Christes blood: he sheweth both y• effect wrought by blessing (which is y• presence of the blood of Christ) and the cause finall, why it is made, verily to communicate vnto
vs the merites of Christes death, where the sayd blood was shed for the remission of synnes. If the halice after blessing had no blood in it, how did it com∣municateChrys. in 1. Cor. 10 to vs the blood of Christ? S. Chrysostom geuing the li∣terall sense of these woordes, writeth thus: Eorū autē huiusmodi est sententia. Quod est in calice, id est quod a latere fluxit, et illius sumus participes. of these wordes this is y• meaning. The same which is in the chalice, is that, which flowed from the side, ad thereof we are pàrtakers. He affirmeth S. Paul to say, that both y• blood, which flowed from Christes side, is in the chalice, & also that we are thereof partakers. But y• blood, whereof we are par∣takers, by the confession of y• Sacramentaries is y• naturall blood of Christ, therefore the natural blood of Christ is cōteined within y• chalice. And consequētlie they are deceaued, in teahing that we partake it only by faith: for so much as we drink really y•, which is in the chalice. ¶ The reall presence is proued by the name of brea∣kingThe se∣cond  piter. and communicating. CHrist taking bread and blessing, sayd: This is my body. S. Paule sheweth those words to haue bene spoken, not (as arolostadius sayd) of his body sitting visiblie at the table: not (as aluin sayd) of the body feeding vs by faith from heauen: but of that very body, which was made vnder the forme of bread. And how sheweth S. Paule thus much? By the wordBreaking breaking: for when he sayth: The bread, which we breake, is the communicating of our Lords body: he determineth the presence and the distribution of the body to that, which is broken. As though he sayd, there we must beleue the body of Christ to be, and thence to be distributed, where we see breaking vsed at the Masse tyme.
For not euery bread, that is broken, is the communicating of Christes body: but the bread, which we breake after blessing and thanksgeuing. The two Disciples knew Christ in the breakingLuc. 24. Ex erm. de verb. Euang. apud Be dam. of the bread. Nouerunt fideles (sayeth S. Augustine)  quid dicam: nouerunt Christum in fractione panis. Non enim omnis panis, sed accipiens benedictionē Christi fit corpus Christi. The faithfull haue knowen, they can tell, what I meane: they haue1. Co. 10. knowen our Lord in breaking of the bread. For not euery bread, but the bread, which taketh y• blessing, is made the body of Christ. If the bread, which once was common, be made the body of Christ by blessing, and in breaking of that bread the faithfull do know our Lord: that bread can not be still the substance of com∣mon bread, for then it were not made the body of Christ, as S. Augustin sayth it is. Again if Christ were not vnder the forme of that bread, the faithfull knew not our Lord in the breaking ofThe kno∣wing of our Lord in bread. that bread: for if the substance of Christ be absent, no signe or to∣ken is sufficient, to make vs know our Lord more at the brea∣king of bread in the Church, then at our own howses. If one substance be in both places, and it be broken in both: what oddes is it, whether it be broken here or there? in this place, or in that? But to say, that the bread broken at our common tables is the body of Christ because it may signifie his body: it were to say, that who soeuer eateth common bread in mortal synne should be1. Co. 11. damned for eating it. when S. Paul sayth: The bread, which we breake, is: doe not al men perceaue, that he goeth about to shw, what the bread is, which we breake? If it be common bread, it is a fondnes, to shew what it is: for he hath already named it and who knoweth not, what common bread is? But he meaneth not so. He goeth not about to teache, what bread is: but what that bread is, which we breake: whereof it followeth, that we haue a eculiar kind of bread, which we breake.
What bread is that? He answereth, It is the communicating ofThe com∣munica∣ting. Christes body. Why doth he not say, it is Christes body? For∣soth because the holy  foresaw, that  should rise, who wold say: the verb est, is, to meane significat, it doth signifie, or els the noune corps, body, to meane the signe of Christes bo∣dy. Therefore S. Paule being the instrument and Secretarie of God was made to put in such a word betwene the verb, est, is, and the noune corpus, body: that euery man might know, no fi∣guratiue being of Christes body, but his reall and substantiall being to be meant. For S. Paule speaketh, as though Christ had sayd: this is the communicating of my body. For of that, which Christ brake and sayd thereof: This is my body: of the very same S. Paul sayeth, The bread, which we breake, is it not the com∣municating of our Lords body? Now say I, that which is the communicating of Christes body, can not be a figure of his body still remaining in the former substance of bread. For a communicating, which the  name , is such a geuing? that the whole is made common. Otherwise, as S. Chrysostom sayeth, it should haue bene called , a parti∣cipation:. but now as wel in speaking of the chalice, as of the bo∣dy, S. Paule vsed the Greke word , which is commu∣nicatio in Latin, communicating in English, or hauing and ma∣king common: albit the common Latin translation readeth par∣ticipatio, partaking, in respect that euery man for his owne parte receaueth that bread, which in substance is the body of Christ. But when the one word or the other standeth properly, therein we must be iudged by wise men: among whom S. ChrysostomChryso. is worthy of a special place. who hauing rehersed these words of1. Corin. the Apostle, the bread which we breake, is it not the communi∣catingHom. 24 of our Lords body? asketh: Quare non dixit participatio? Quia amplius quiddam significare voluit, & multā inter haec con∣uenientiam
ostendere Non enim participatione tantm & acce∣ptione, sed vnitate communicamus. Quemadmodum enim cor∣pus illud vnitum est Christo, ita & nos per hunc panem vnione coniungimur. Why sayd not S. Paule: The bread, which we breake, is the partaking of our Lords body? Because he wold signifie a greater thing, and shew the great affinitie which is be∣twene these things: that is to say, betwene them that receaue, and the thing that is receaued. For we communicate not only by participation and partaking, but in vnitie: for as that body is vnited to Christ, so we also are ioyned in vniō with him by this bread. S. Paule then by the iudgement of S. Chrysostom chose that word, which might expresse a most inward communicating and ioyning betwene vs in this Sacrament. But if this Sacramēt were a figure of Christ, without the substance of his body: S.Parta∣king were to goo a wor to ex presse a fi∣gure of Christes body. Paule hath not done wel, to vse the word of communicating. for partaking were to good a word to expresse so slender a gift, as the Sacramētaries talk of. But S. Paul sayd: The bread which we breake, that is to say, the mysticall bread of our Lords sup∣per is not only a partaking, but a communicating. and yet no figure can make vs one with Christ in vnitie of nature. There∣fore this mysterie, which geueth more then a figuratiue vnion, is the very true body of our Sauiour: for it maketh common with vs all, that is in Christ. The bread (I say) which we breake maketh the body of Christ and all things in it common with vs. No bare figure can doe so. Therefore the bread, which we breake, is the true body, and notThere is no lesse partaking then to haue the  only common. only a figure. Tell me, good Reader, he that receaueth a figure of a thing, doth he not rather take a part, then the whole? Yea doth he not take a very slender part? Or can there be any lesse part of a thing, then the image and figure of it? When we will
shew how far a thing is from that, which it is called, doe we not say: Hoc nomine tenus tale est, & nō re ipsa? This is such a thing in name, and not in dede? So that the naming of a thing with∣out being the true thing it self, is the nakedest and barest thing, that can be▪ Our aduersaries wold the bread after consecration to be the body and blood of Christ in name only, & not in truthe: which being so, the chalice of blessing, & bread which is broken, should rather be called partaking (because a sinal part of y• truth is taken) then communicating, where all is made common. But S. Paule sayd, it is a communicating, and S. Chryso∣stom sayeth, he did it to shew that it was more than partaking: therefore it is a false doctrine, to say that y• true body and blood of Christ is not really vnder the forme of bread which is broken, and within the chalice which we blesse. Let vs conferre the scri∣ptures, and seke the word , communicare, in other pla∣ces of the new Testament: we shall find, that it standeth to geue and make common the thing it self, rather then the shadow or name thereof. S. Luke in the Actes of the Apostles sayeth: Multitudinis creActor. 4. dentium erat corvnum & animavna, nec quisquàm eorum, quae possidebat, aliquid suum esse dicebat: sed erant illis omnia com∣munia. Of the multitude of beleuers there was one hart and one soule, neither any man sayd any thing of that he possessed, to be his own: but all things were common to them. In which place we haue it defined what communicating is: truly it is such a ge∣uing, that all is made common, and nothing chalenged as hisWhere a communi∣cating of the body is, the whole bo∣y is com mon. own. If then the chalice of blessing, which we blesse, be the com∣municating of Christes blood, and the bread which we breake the communicating of his body: all the blood and all the body is made common to them, that receae that chalice and that bread. If all be common, then we doe not receaue only a spirituall re∣membrance
of Christes body, or a figure and signe of his blood. For in so doing we had not all, but rather the smallest part. In so doing Christ kept the best back, and chalenged somewhat, yea far the best part to his owne self, and we should not haue it. Likewise when S. Paul sayeth, that the Gentils did commu∣nicateRom. 15. with the spirituall goods of the Iewes (for his word is ) he meaneth not a ioyning in name, in shewe, in fi∣gure, in signes: but in the truth of faith, and in ye grace of God, and in the redemption of Iesus Christ, Last of al S. Paul shew∣ing, Christ to call the faithfull people of God his brethren and children, reasoneth thus: Quia ergo pueri communicauerūt ear∣nieb. 2. & sanguini, & ipse similiter participauit ijsdem. Because there∣fore the children did communicate lesh and blood, him self like∣wise tooke parte with them. In which place, communicating is the naturall knitting and vniting, which men haue to flesh and blood: so that whether communicating be spoken by flesh and blood, or by the goods of the world, the communicating of them is the hauing of them common, or making them common. Euery where communicating importeth a great and liberall geuing or taking, which can not be fulfilled with the only figure and bare name of body and blood: but requireth the things them selues in truth of nature, as holy Ireneus a disciple of the Apo∣stles scholers writeth against those, that taught that our fleshIrenaeus lib. 5. ad∣uerius haeres. could not aryse againe to glory: Vani sunt omnes, &c. They are all vayne, that denyd the saluation of the flesh, and despyse the regeneration of it, saying: that it is not able to receaue the state of incorruptibilitie. So in dede, to wyt, according to those say∣inges, neither our Lorde hath redemed vs wt his blood, neither the chalice of thankes geuing is the cōmunicating of his blood, neither the bread, which we breake, is the communicating of his body. For blood is not but from the vaynes and flesh, and from
the other substāce, which is belonging to man: in the which sub∣stance y• worde of God truly made, redemed vs with his blood. S. Ireneus accomptth it a great absurditie, that the bread, which we breake, should not be the communicating of Christ his true body, & the chalice of the Encharist the communicating of his blood. Of what blood? of the same, which  from vaynes, from flesh, and from the rest of our substance. And S▪ Ireneus bringeth this interpretation, to proue that we, that re∣ceyue the sayd body, and blood, receyue therein a gyft sufficientA figure of Chri∣stes body can not raise out flesh. to raise our flesh at ye later daye. But surely fignes and figures of Christ wil not raise our flesh, for so much as they are perceaued only by vnderstanding: and be not of the same nature and kinde whereof our flesh is. And S. Ireneus neuer dreamed of blood, that should be receaued from heauen: but only of that blood, which is in the chalice and cup of Christes supper. ¶ The presence of Christ in his supper is proued byThe iij. Chapiter. the one bread, which being receaued of vs maketh all vs one body. VNuspanis & vnum corpus multi sumus, omnes qui de vno1. Co. 10. pane participamus. we being many are one bread and one body, all we that partake of the one bread. He that listeth only to mark the order of S. Paules words, may quickly per∣ceaue what his meaning is, concerning the true doctrine of the Sacrament of the altar. First he described our Lordes supper by the name of the chalice of blessing, which we blesse, and of the bread which we breake. Secondly he saith, that eche of them is the communicating, the one of Christ his body, the other of hisBlessing. Breaking Commu∣nicating. niting. blood. Last of all, he feareth not to say, that the partakers of that bread, all are one bread and one body. Who seeth not, that he is come from blessing and breaking to communicating, and from
communicating to vniting & making one? so that, vse we what wordes we please in vttering the matter, call we it partaking, eating, drinking, or communicating: certainly it is so nigh a ioy∣ning, that a very vnion, which is to say, one thing is made ofWhat vnion is. that, which is receaued in this blessed Sacrament, and of those that receaue the same. one thing, I say, is made of both, yea one of al: not only he that receaueth this one bread, is made one with the bread, but he is one also with al them, that any where within the Churche worthely receaue of the same bread. for when two things mee in a thirde, they mete also betwene them selues.Whence this great vnion co∣meth. The reason of this great ioyning is the reall presence of Christes body and blood in the Sacrament: for seing the bread receaued is Christ, he is so strong a bread and foode, that he can be ouer∣comed of no stomack, but ouercometh all their natures that touche him. By that meanes it is brought to passe, that as  approching nigh to any thing urneth all, that is apt to be bur∣ned into it self, making it of his owne condition and qualitie, yeaDeut. 4. rather of his owne nature: so Christ, who is consuming fier, tur∣neth into his mysticall body, all that worthely eate and drinke his naturall body in the Sacrament of the altar. Yf we did eate common bread & drinke common wine, out of all question both the bread and wine wold be ouercomed of our stomack, and by lytle and lytle wold be conuerted into our flesh and blood, toThe vniō can not be made by wheaten bread. norrish them corporally: by which meanes neither we should by eating wheaten bread at any time be made one bread, neither any of vs should become one with an other. For they that dif∣fer by reason of diuers persons, as diuerse men doe: can neuer in any kinde of meate be made one, whiles they eate that, which is digested into their vaynes, and made parte of their persons: but only they are able to be made one, who eate that, which ta∣ryeth styll whole and sound in his owne nature, styll common
to all, & neuer appropriated to any one, but gathereth all them into it self as making one spirituall & mysticall body of all faith∣full men. Yf then we eate a kinde of bread in the holy mysteries, and are one bread because we eate of the one bread, surely it is no common bread, but such a foode and meate, as being eaten is not consumed of vs, but rather consuming our weaknes maketh al vs, that eate it, of the same immortall nature with it: which none other meate doth absolutely, besydes the reall body and blood of Iesus Christ: and it so mightely worketh our spirituall vnion, that Christ wold his owne body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine, to be the Sacrament of that self vnitie, which itIn serm. ad infan∣tes. worketh. Nothing is more common in S. Augustine, then to say, that we take in the Sacrament, the body of Christ, which we are. Vos estis in mensa, vos estis in calice. ye are in the meate, yeEx serm. de sacra∣fidel. ser. 2. paschae. & in 6. ca. Ioan. are in the cup: but we are not in the substance of wheaten bread (albeit we are after consecration signified by that forme of bread, which bread it self was from many graines of corne, made one loaf) but we are not at all signified by the substance of the bread. For so euery bread in the world were the holy signe of y• Church of God, & by that meanes it were much more the body of Christ,Contra Faustūli. 20. ca. 13. which thing S. Augustine denieth, saying: that euery bread and cup is not borne mysticall to vs, but it is made mystical by a cer∣teine consecration. If then the natural substance of bread suffise not to signifie the body of Christ, and the felowship of the elect, and yet they be manifestly signified to be one in the Sacrament of Christes supper: what other ground must concur, to shew them to be in the meate which they receane, & in the cup where∣ofHilar. . 8. de Tri. Cyrill. in Ioan. lib. 10. ca. 13. they drink? The Catholikes haue learned of the auncient Fa∣thers, that it is the reall body and blood of Christ, which only (being vnder the foorm of bread and wine) can make vs to be shewed in the meate & in the chalice. For we are shewed in them,
because our head Iesus Christ is there within the forme of bread and wine: now where the head is, there also the members be sig∣nified to be. specially seing the head is there, to gather his mem∣bersChrys. in Matth. hom. 83. nere vnto him, and (as S. Chrysostome speaketh) to make them, as it were, one lumpe with him. For, as many grains of corne are made into one loaf, and that loaf by consecration is tur∣ned into Christes body, the forme of bread stil remaining: so, ma∣ny persons are in Baptisme made one mysticall body, and that body at Christes supper is againe naturally ioyned to Christes own flesh, and by that corporall vnion is mingled & wholy tem∣pered with him, so that one thing is made of Christe and of his Church. ¶ The reall presence is proued by ioyning together allThe iiij. Chapiter. the former wordes. HAuing particularly declared, how breaking, communica∣ting, & vniting, make for the real presence of Christes body and blood, I thought good now to cōferre al these things together: The bread which we breake, is the communicating of1. Cor. 10 Christes body, because we being many are one bread, and one bo∣dy, for we all partake of the one bread. Here bread is thrise na∣med, and foure things are affirmed of it. 1. We breake breade, 2. bread is the communicating of Christes body, 3. we are one bread. 4. we partake of the one bread. Seing in all these places the name of breade is put to expresse one and thesame mysteri: it must nedes be ment so that all these sayings may be verified, without  of the one to the other: which can be done by no meanes, except we take the sub∣stanceThe bred  S. Paule speketh. of Christes body, vnder y• form of bread, to be called bread. By that meanes the body, in respect of the form of bread, is con∣uenieiuly said to be broken. By that meanes the substance of the
body is the thing cōmunicated vnto vs vnder the form of bread. By the communicating of that substance we are vnited to the one bread, and be made one body, not only by faith and will, as in baptism: but by the corporall cōinnction of Christes flesh, because we partake of that one bread in his own substance: whereof we did partake before in certaine effectes of grace proceding from it.. Comu∣nicating. . Partakig Thus the breaking & distributing of such a bread is the cause of the communicating of Christes body, and such a cōmunicating is the cause of ioyning vs corporally in one body, and such an vnion procedeth of the partaking of that one bread in his owne substance. And consequently all things agree well together. But if we once take the sub stance of common bread, to be the thing, which is broken: neither that substance is the communicating of Christes body (because euery bread in the world should by like reason be the communicating thereof, for so much as that, which is the substance of any thing, is in euery particular propriety of the same kind) nor we are not all one material bread, as it is eui∣dent: nor we all partake not of one wheaten bread, either in bap∣tisme, or after. Again if the wheaten bread, which is said to be the communi∣catingTo be. To signi∣fy. of Christes body, be interpreted to signifie y• cōmunicating betwene vs and Christ: when it is likewise said of the Apostle, we are one bread and one body: for it is one verbe and oue noune in both places, est, there: & sumus here: communicating of one body there: one bread and one body here: If the bread, which is the cō∣municating of Christes body, be the bread, which is the figure of the communicating: we that are said to be one bread, are said to be the figure of one bread. Likewise, seing we partake of the bread, which is broken: if theBreakg. bread broken e materiall, we partake of the material bread, and yet the bread, whereof we partake, is by S. Paule named one
bread. Therefore we partake of one materiall bread, which can not be so. For seing the bread is broken, it is not still one. These and many like absurdities can neuer be escaped, except we say (as the truth is) that the bread broken is the flesh of Christ vnder thePartakig form of bread: for our partaking is named of taking part of that, which is brokē: but we al that are one patake only of Christ him selfe, and be one in him alone, and be not one in any materiall bread. Therefore Christ is the bread broken (by the reason of the form of bread vnder the which he is) and the bread cōmunicated, and the bread which we are: for that he is the cause of our mysti∣call coniunction. For albeit the mysticall bread and body, which we are, be in seuerall persons and ditinct proprieties of men: yet the substancial cause of that bread, which we are, is only found in the person and substāce of Christ: who is the beginner, maintey∣ner, and the end of that our mysticall body. from Christ, as from the cause of our vitie, the same vnity procedeth to vs in an effect wrought by him. But either to make vs one materiall bread, or to make it, being stil bread in substance, to be notwithstanding the communicating of Christes body to vs, or to be the bond, which holdeth vs together by partaking thereof: it is a doctrine which can not hang together. And because the matter is of great impor∣tauce, I will yet intreat farther of this our vnion. ¶ Now we are one mysticall body in Christ.The fyfth Chapiter. THe Church is one body more then one w First, becauseEphes. 4. it is called and holden together with one site of God.Rom. 10. Next, because it is grounded in one faith,  reaching ofGal. 1. Phil. 2. one true Gospel, maīteined with one hope, perfited th one cha∣ritic,1. Tim. 2. watered with one baptisme of spiritual regeneation, rede∣medEphe. . by one Mediatour, ruled by one head,  to one hus∣band,2. Cor. 11 ioyned in mariage to one fesh of Christ, & rewarded withEphes. 5.
one essentiall fruition of one euerlasting God. The first foundation of this one cumpany, which is the house, the tabernacle, y• tēple of God, is the blessed Trinitie: of whome,Rom. 11. by whome, and in whome all things are. In his diuine spirite1. Cor. 12 we mete, and be one not only with the Patriarches & Prophets: but also we therein be one with the Aungels, Thrones and Se∣raphins,Hebr. in so muche that he vseth them for our ministery: who neuer synned or swarued from the way of truth & righteousnes. Next after God, all mankinde putteth his euerlasting confi∣denceEphes. 3. in the flesh of Iesus Christ: who is the only Mediatour of1. Tim. 2. all men, that fell by synne either actuall or els originall, & there is no saluation in any other man. Christ toke really our flesh, toAct. 4. make it an iustrument: whereby we might be brought again to God. Therefore he both offered the same flesh vnto God euen toHeb. 10. death: and gaue the same flesh to be partaken of vs, for the obtei∣ning of euerlasting life. The partaking whereof is called in ho∣ly scripture by the name of eating & drinking, because although it be graunted to vs by diuers meanes: yet the chiefe meane of all is, when we eate his flesh, and drinke his blood. The first and most necessary meane of all is faith, withoutHebr. 11. which it selfe (in men of lawfull age) or without the Sacrament thereof (in children) none other  can serue. But faith aloneIoan. 3. Gal. 5. (though it worke by charitie) doth not always uffise: because it is conueaient for a corporall substance (such as the flesh of Christ is) to be partaken by corporall meanes also. For seing the corru∣ptionSap. 9. of our fleshe was the thing, whiche did most incline vs toHeb. 4. synne: as the sonne of God toke our true flesh without synne, to thend by it he might purge our synnes: so he instituted diuerse Sacraments in certeine corporal things, and in mystical words:Ioā. 3. 6, 20. whereby the grace of his flesh might e applied to our flesh, and by that meane also to come to our soes.
Against the corrupion of our birth he would vs to be washedMatt. 28. & 3. in water, which element his own fleshe had sanctified in the flud Iordan: against the tentation of the deuill, he cōfirmeth vs withAct. 2. & 8. the holy Ghost. In stede of the custome of synning, he geueth vsIoan. 6. heauenly nourishement, as well in body as in soule. By these meanes (I say) we are one body in Christ, of the which, faith and charitic are meanes only spirituall: the Sacraments are both spirituall meanes through the inward grace, & corporal, through1. Cor. 10 the visible formes of them. The meanes only spirituall be neuerHeb. 10. changed, sith our faith is all one with that of the Patriarches: but our Sacraments differ from theirs, as whiche conteine the truth, whereof the old Sacraments were only the shadow. Hitherto it hath bene said, that we can not be of the mysticall body of Christ: vnlesse we partake his flesh, either by faith or byAug ad Simplic. quaest. 2. the Sacraments. For (as S. Augustine writeth) Albeit in some the grace of faith be so great, that they are now assigned to the body of Christ, and to the holy temple of God: yet in some it is such, as doth not suffise, to obteine the kingdom of heauen: as in the Cathecumenis, as in Cornelius, antequàm Sacramentorū parti∣cipatione incorporaretur Ecclesiae, before that he was incorpora∣ted to the Church y paraking of the Sacraments. The Sacramēt,Ioan. 3. wherein we are first incorporated to Christ, is wel knowen to be Baptim: which seing it consisteth of speaking holy words, and ofMatt. 28. washing with the elemēt of water, it is not to be denied, but that God worketh our incorporation by corporall meanes also, and not by faith a lone. And as it is not enough for hauing the nature of a man, to be conceaued only, except he be also borne: so if, when he is borne, he be not fed, he can not long cōtinew a man. Therefore as the Sa∣crament of baptim beginneth the incorporation (specially nowe, when we al are baptized in our infancy) euen so after the we are
come to the yeres of discretion, an other Sacramēt is requisite, to mainteyne vs in the body of Christ: which is called the SacramētIoan. 6. of his body and blood, whereof Christ said: he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, tarieth in me, and I in him. Now, sing the sacrament, which maketh vs tary in the body of Christ, must edes be a corporal thing, as baptism was, and yet it hath none other nature, then that which Christ geueth it, & he nameth it his own body and blood: we ought to confesse, that the Sacrament, which nourisheth the state of life euerlasting in vs, is the body and blood of Christ corporally present: that is to say, that it so feedeth vs, as the water in baptism doth wash vs: and that as water toucheth our body, so it entreth into our body. Which thing is so true, that Christ hauing taken bread & blessed,Matt. 26. stretching forth his hand, said: Take, eate, this is my body, which is geuen for you. Where (not without a great mysterie) Christe gaue his body vnder the forme of bread, not only to feede vs presently through y• grace, which procedeth frō his flesh by touching & eating y• same: but also to shew vs, that this is the same bodie, which before had incorporated vs into it self. For, as of manie graines of wheate, one loaf, & of manie persons one Mysticall body of Christe was made: so when Christ turneh ye substance of bread into his own substāce, and so maketh him self present vnder y• form of bread: he both feedeth many persons, who partake of that one bread, and by the form of bread sheweth, how they being neuer so many, are yet one in him, because they are all incorporated into him. Of this Sacrament S. Paule intreating, sayd: The bread which we breake is the communicating of Christes body: because through it we both partake of the one bread, which is Christ, and1. Cor. 10 are our selues shewed to be one bread and one body. What are we in mystery, but only members of Christ? And for as much as
Christ is him self present vnder the forme of this bread, and is the very substāce, which is receaued there: we are no lesse named one mystical bread of this one bread, then we are named one mysticalOne bread One body body of Christes true body: out of which discourse it is vndouted∣ly proued, that the bread, which we breake, is the body of Christ. How could we otherwise be called thereof one bread. How could one bread and one body be put to signifie one thing, but that in dede bread and body are here in substance the same selfe thing? we are named the mysticall body in respect of y•The my∣stical body Ephe. 4. vnion, which we haue with the natural body of Christ, and amōg our selues. But we are also called one bread in S. Paule. There∣fore out of dout S. Paul meaneth that one bread, which is Christ, in respect whereof we are named to be y• mystical body of Christ. The Church taketh her names frō Christ: that, which Christ isThe pro∣portion of Christ & y• Church. in truth, the Church is in mystery, so that nothing can be verified of the Church, which was not true before in Christ: for the mem∣bers folow the state of theyr head. But the mēbers are called one bread, one body, for mysteries sake: therefore the head is in truth one bodie. & he is the one bread whereof we partake, and we par∣take of that which is broken (by mean of y• forme of bread) there∣fore Christ is really present vnder that forme of bread, whiche at his supper we breake and partake. We are members of this bread, before we take it in the Sacra∣ment of the altar: because this bread is that substance of Christe vnder the form of bread, to whose mystical body we were ioyned in baptise: whereof S. Augustine writeth thus.Aug. in serm. ad infantes apud Bedam. Nulli est aliqutenus ambigend, & cae. No man ought by any meanes to doubt, but that he is then made partaker of the body & blood of our Lord: when he is made a member of Christ in bap∣tim, neither is he alienated from the company of that bread and1. Cor. 10 that cup: although before he eate that bread, and drinke that cup
(being placed in the vnity of Christes body) he depart out of this world. For he is not depriued of the partaking and benefite ofIoan. 6. that Sacrament: for so much as him self hath found that thing, which that Sacrament doth signify. Whereas Christ sayd, Ex∣cept ye eate my flesh and drink my blood, ye shal not haue life in you: a man wold haue thought, that euery person were bound to receaue actually the Sacrament of Christes body and blood: but S. Augustine sheweth, that thing not to be after that sorce necessarie to all men. For he that is made a member of Christ in Baptism, is therein made partaker of y• body & blood of Christ. How so? Because he receaueth that thing, which the Sacrament of Christes body and blood signifieth. What doth it signifie? The mysticall body of Christ. By what meanes? S. Augustine expounded y• meane a litle before, saying: BreadIn serm. ad insan tes. is not made of one grayne, but of many: likewise one liquour is made of many grapes. Thus our Lord Iesus signified vs. he wold vs to apperteine to himself. Mysterium panis & vnitatis nostrae in sua mensa consecrauit. he hath consecrated the mysterie of our peace and vnitie in his table. Note, that our mysterie was not made by the baker, but consecrated by Christ: the consecration was, to turne the substance of the bread into his owne flesh, keping still the olde forme of the same bread. But if the body of Christ were not really vnder the forme of bread: how could he, that is baptized, be partaker of the benefite of this Sacrament? Was he made partaker of bread and wine?The signe of the my∣sticall bo∣dy. No verily, but of the mysticall body. What hath the mystical bo∣dy to doe in this Sacrament? For oth so much, that here is both the thing, which maketh vs all one, which is Christ: and he is so present, that he sheweth him self to haue ioyned all vs to him, as he hath ioyned the graines of wheat vnto his flesh. For as the bread, which we breake, hath none other substance
besyde the substance of Christ, and yet it hath an outward appa∣reuce of an other thing: so the mysticall body of Christ hath none other substance, through which it is one body, besydes y• body of Christ: although it haue an otward apparēce of an other thing. For be we neuer so many in number & persons, we are one body1. Co. 12. in Christ. How so euer we appere mortal men, as we once were.Ephel. 5. yet in truth we are ioyned to the body of Christ, and are mem∣bers of him our only head. Take away that body of Christ from the forme of bread, and here is no signe of vnitie in Christ. A signe of vnitie here is, butThe vni∣tie must be signified in Christ. not in Christ. Euery loaf  vnitie, but none other be∣tokeneth our vnitie in Christ, but yt bread, the substance where∣of is Christ, & y• forme whereof is the forme of common bread. If the naturall substance of Christ be absent from the bread, which we consecrate, and so be signified without the reall pre∣sence thereof: if again the natural substance of bread remaine and signific the mysticall body of Christ, who is absent him self inWhat si∣gne y• sub∣stance of common bread ma∣keth. substance: no signe is by that meane more effectually made, then that Christ and his members are as far a sunder, as heauen is distant from the earth: and that as Christ is signified present being in dede not present: so his members be signified to be ioy∣ned to him, and in truth be not ioyned to him. These are the mystical signes, which do folow necessarily vpon the Sacramentaric doctrine: whereof I haue the gladlier wri∣ten, to thintent S. Augustines doctrine might be opened: who alwaies noteth this Sacrament to be the signe of the vnitie, which is made by Christ in baptism among the faithfull: but he meaneth such a signe, as Christ him elf maketh vnder the forme of bread, when he affirmeth him to consecrate herein y• mystery of vnitie. Is it not an extreme madnes, to affirme, yt wheaten bread keping his own earthly nature, should be the mystery of vnitie?
Christ is that mystery, first, because he is both God, who aloneChriste is the myste∣ry of vui∣tie. made all things to serue him: and man, in whom all things are a new collected, which where before made. Secondly, because Christ maketh vs one with God, reconciling vs to him, by theColos. 1. blood of his crosse. Thirdly, because he maketh vs one among our selues by his one spirit and Baptism. Last of all, because he sheweth and geueth him self really present vnder the forme of bread: wherein he would vs to vnderstand the vnitie, which is really made betwene vs, and him, and God. Of this vnitie S. Hilarie writeth: If Christ assumpted trulyHilar. l. 8 de Tri. the flesh of our body, and we take truly, vnder a mysterie, the flesh of his body, and by this thing we shalbe one, because the Father is in him, and he in vs: quomodo voluntatisvnitas asseri∣tur, cùm naturalis per Sacramentum proprietas perfectae Sacra∣cramentum sit vnitatis? How is y• vnitie of wil affirmed, whereas the naturall proprietie through the Sacrament, is the holy signe of a perfite vnitie? This place, good Reader, openeth al the hard points of the mystery of vnitie. First, Christ toke truly flesh. Next, we take truly the same flesh vnder a mystery. By his taking, God and man were made one, concerning the whole nature of man. By our taking, we and Christ are made one concerning euery particular man, who receaueth worthely his body. And that is not only done so, but withall it is shewed so: for the thing, which we receaue, is the flesh of Christ vnder the forme of bread. The flesh, y• is there being receaued, maketh vs in dede to be one with Christ. The form of bread sheweth not only them to be one, that receaue this food: but those also, who now doe not receaue it (if yet they be, or shalbe baptized) to be one in Christ. And sayeth S. Hilarie so much? Ye doubtlesse, and that he twise repeteth. For when he sayth: Verè sub mysterio carnem corporis sui su∣mimus,
we take truly vnder a mysterie the flesh of his body: thenUnder a mystery. he meaneth, that vnder the forme of bread we take Christes flesh. Under what other mysterie can it be sayd, we take it? Or seing he speaketh of the last supper, doth he not meane the signe of the same supper, which was bread? But yet let vs heare more plaine words. Naturalis per Sacramentum proprietas perfectae Sacramentum est vnitatis. The natural proprietie through the Sacramēt, is theProprie∣tas. Sacramēt of a perfite vnitie. The word proprietas meaneth one particular substance proper to one thing, which in men is com∣monly called a person. S. Augustine witnesseth, that Christ isIn Ioan. . 80 called the true vine, Per similitudinem, non per proprietatem, by likenes, not by proprietie: that is to say, Christ is y• true vine by like condition, and not by the self substance of a true vine. S. Hilarie then sayeth: The naturall proprietie of Christ by a Sacrament, is a Sacrament of perfite vnitie. Here is the word Sa∣crament twise iterated: the proprietie of Christ is a Sacrament, and it is a Sacrament by a Sacrament. A Sacrament is a holy signe. Therefore the proprietie or substance of Christ is a holy signe. But how? Euery substance is the truth. How is it then a sigue? It is not barely and absolutely called a signe, but a signeA signe by a signe. by a signe: that is to say, the true substāce of Christ put vnder the form of bread, by that signe of bread, is se to signifie a most per∣fite vnitie made betwene God and vs. The natural proprietie of Christ by the signe of bread maketh and signifieth a perfite vnitie. It maketh it, whiles we receaue Christ into vs, who is one with his Father in nature: as we na∣turally haue him in our bodies and soules. It signifieth the same vnitie, because the substance of Christ (who is one nature with his Father in Godhead, & one with vs in manhod) being now vnder the signe of bread sheweth him self (as it were) with al his
faithfull members about him, offering them all to God, as if he sayd: Ecce ego & pueri mei mecum. Behold Father, I am here,Heb. 2. and my seruants or children with me.Aug. de ciuitate Dei li. 10 cap. 5. This (sayeth S. Augustine) is the sacrifice of the Christians, we being many are one body in Christ: Quod etiam Sacramento al∣taris fidelibus noto frequentat Ecclesia: vbi ei demonstratur, quod in ea oblatione, quam offert, ipsa offeratur. The which thing alsoThe Sa∣crament of y• altar. the Church celebrateth in the Sacrament of the altar knowen to the faithful. Where it is shewed to the Church, that in that sacri∣fice which she offereth, her self is offered. It is well knowen, that the Priests of y• Church taking bread and wine, according to the institution of Christ, consecrate them saying in Christes name: This is my body, and this is my blood. If by those words the body and blood of Christ be not made pre sent vnder the forme of bread and wine: how is the Church offe∣red in the offering, which she maketh? Who doth make an obla∣tion of her to God? Wil ye say, that Christ sitting in heauen pre∣sentethA goodly mysticall body. to his Father the bread & wine which is in earth, saying: Father, looke vppon my faithfull members? See what a mysti∣call body I haue gotten to me in the earth. Might not God answer? Why sonne, is the substance of your mysticall body, bread and wine? Haue you coupled my seruants your brethren, whome I created reasonable, to those vnsesible creatures? Or is the handy work of the baker your oblation, orThe obla∣tion of the Church. the oblation of your mysticall body? But if Christ be vnder the forme of bread, and thence make an oblation to his Father of all his obedient members, which are there signified by the forme of bread: then is none other substance of those mysticall members presented, besyde the true substance and head of the mysticall bo∣dy: to wit, the flesh of Christ, which worketh & gathereth a body to it self through out the whole world. Thē the Church offereth
none other substance besyde the one oblation, which dyed forHeb. 10. vs. The same reall coniunction of the faithfull to Christes flesh may be declared also by the example of building a howse. For as euery howse is in the fundation moste large, and afterward it is drawen alwaies so muche the nigher together, by how much it approcheth to the top or end thereof: euen so the Church being1. Tim. 3. the howse of God must be one, so that it may in some partes thereof be ioyned together in the top it self, which is the flesh of Christ. For they that are one mysticall howse by faith and charitie alone, they are one in the fundation through the spirit of God: but not yet one in the top. And the vnitie of that fundation wold1. Cor. 6. not cause them to be a perfite howse, if some stones being reised thereon, did not at the length mete really together in the top ofEphes. 4. the building, which is the flesh of Christ: through the connexion of which stones, those also which laie in the lowest place, may be sayd to mete in the top: for that they are necessary and substancial parts of that howse, which is builded from the lowest parte of the ground vp to the very highest top. Faith is the fundation and ground of the things, which areHeb. 11. hoped for. Baptisme goeth nerer the top, because beside the grace of faith, it partaketh some other grace proceding not only fromChrysos. the spirit of Christe, but also from his flesh: in that the water, ac∣cordingHom. 16 ad Rom. to the minde of S. Chrysostom & of Leo, is, as it were, the wombe wherein, and the worde is the sede, wherewith manLeo de natiuit. is regenerated, as wel in body as in soule. Confirmation geueth strength to the new building, wherein the stones are, as it were,Domin. ser. 5. & 4 with strong barres of iron holden together.Acto. 8. But when Christe geueth him selfe to vs vnder the forme of bread, then are we come to the top of the building, and are ioy∣ned
really to him, that is y• end of the law. For which cause this Sacrament of Christes body & blood, is called of the Grecians,Cone.  perfectio, the end or perfitenes of our heauenlyAncyr. can. 6. building. This flesh is also in the fundation, but by spiritual effi∣cacie, not by reall vnion. It is in Baptisme by the vse of corpo∣rall instruments of water and the word: and so by spirituall effi∣cacie, and also by meane of bodily instruments proceding from the flesh by that Sacrament of Baptisme, which he constitutedMath. 3. in his body, and sanctified the element thereof with his body. In the Sacrament of perfection this flesh it self is present, toFaith. Baptism. Christes flesh. make a moste perfite end of the whole spirituall building. Thus are the baptized Christians built vpon y• faith of the Patriarchs and Prophets: and the faithfull, who receaue Christes body in his last supper, are built in a higher degree aboue the faith of the Fathers, and aboue the Baptisme of those, who died before they partaked Sacramentally Christes flesh. And seing all these concurre to make vp one howse, the top whereof may touche Christes naturall body, which he toke to make the reall coninction with vs, who consist of bodies: all the mysticall body of Christ is perfitly one through them, who being one with the rest in faith, spirit and baptisme, be also one with Christes flesh in truth of naturall and corporall vnion to Christes flesh really partaken at his holy table. Let vs once deny the flesh of Christ to be really in the blessed Sacrament of the altar: and here is no perfite building toward the flesh of Christ, and consequently no reason, why we should beEphes. 4 & 5. called his mysticall body, or flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. For as if Eue had not bene taken really out of the natu∣rall body of Adam, she should not haue bene in truth bone of his bones: so we are not flesh of Christes flesh in truth it self, except the flesh of Christ in the naturall substance thereof be the meane
by our natural coction to it: that we are framed & wrought into a spirituall man. These last wordes of S. Paule, where he toucheth how we areEphes. 5. esh of Christes flesh, doe also leade vs to an other notable exam∣ple of our natural vnion which is to be made to yt flesh of Christ. For when S, Paule had said, that the husband is head of the wo∣man, as Christ is head of the Church: he prouoketh the husbands to loue their wiues, as Christ hath loued his Churche. Who haue loued it so intierly: that he hath cleansed it in the washing of water and the word, to thend he might make him self a gloriouse Church without spot or wrinkle. Behold, baptisme is a token of Christes loue, but to what end? That he might haue a cleane spouse. To what purpose? Will he then come nere to his wife: and, as it were, be cloupled with her? Yea verily, not for any fleshly pleasure: but to nourish her by his reall flesh. And therefore S. Paul goeth forward, saying: Husbands ought to loue their wiues, as their own bodies. He that loueth his wife, loueth him self. And surely noman euer hated his own flesh, but he nourisheth and cherisheth it, as Christ doth his Church. What meane you S. Paule? Is then the Church the flesh of Christ? For your words import so much. He answereth, it is so. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause the man shall forsake Father and mother, and shal∣be ioyned to his own wife, and they shalbe two in one flesh. ThisGenes. 2. is a great Sacrament or mysterie, but I meane in Christ and the Church. Hitherto S. Paul hath prouoked the husbands, to loue and to cherish their wiues, as Christ hath loued his Churche in cleansing it through baptisme, and as he cherisheth it, as being members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Note, that as the loue of husbands toward their wiues is cō∣pared
to baptis: so the cherishing of them is compared to the cherishing & nourishing, which Christ vseth toward his Chur▪ whiche is knowe to be done after baptisme. for no man che∣risheth that, which is not yet borne. When we are borne again in Christ, we are made members of Christes body: and therefore those words, Membra sumus cor∣poris eius, we are members of his body, may be ment of baptisme▪ where we are made members of his my stical body, according as S. Paule had said before: Sumus inu icem membra, we are mem∣bersEphes. 4. one of an other. But when he addeth, de carne eius & de ossibus eius, of his flesh, and of his bones: he then speaketh not of any mysticall flesh and blood, but euen of the naturall flesh and bones of Christ: whereof we are made members, not by faith and mystery alone (as in baptisme) but by naturall participation of them in the last supper. So doth S. Ireneus take these words. For S. Paule, spakeIrenens aduers. haeres. l. 5 Luc. 24. not (saith he) of any spirituall or inuisible man (sith a spirit hath neither bones nor flesh) but of that disposition which is agreable to man, the which consisteth of flesh, of sinewes, of bones. the which disposition is nourished of the chalice which is his blood, and is increased of the bread which is his body. So doth S. Chrysostome also take these words, saying: we areHom. 45 in Ioan. members of his flesh and bones. And again, he hath mingled him selfe with vs, and brought him selfe into one with vs. Vt corpus cūEphes. 5. corpore vniretur. That the body might be vnited to the head. Behold, we that by baptisme were the body, must yet be vnited with our head. what? by only vnitie of wl, or faith, and loue? all that we had before, but we must be vnited now in nature, in real coniunction of body and blood.Cyril. in Ioan. li. 11. c. 26 S Cyrl writeth thus: If we all eate one bread, we are all made one body. For Christ suffereth not himselfe to be diuided or sepa∣rated.
Therefore the Church also is made the body of Christ, and uery one of vs, according to S. Paule, y• members of Christ. ForEphe. 5. we being ioyned to Christ alone through his body, because we haue receaued him in vs who can nat be diuided, our members are rather applied to him then to vs. Theodoritus toucheth as well the vnion of baptisme as of the. Cor. 11 Eucharist, saying: As Eue was formed out of Adam, so we out of Christ our Lord. For we are buried together with him in bap∣tism. and we rise together with him, and we eate his body and drink his blood. Thus we are members of Christ either by faith and mysterie (which is done in baptisme) or by is body & blood, which is done in the Eucharist. That is the beginning of our vniting, this is the end: that is the foundation of the house, this is the top: that is in spirit chefely, this in chefely in flesh. But now let vs graunt that when S. Paule saith, we are mē∣bers of his body, of his fleshe and of his bones, that he meant, we in baptisme are members of Christes mysticall body, and we are members as it were, taken out, or proceding from his flesh & bones, that is to say, we are one mystical body, because the flesh & bones of Christ haue geuē vertue to the font of baptism, whēce we are regenerated. Let vs admit S. Paule had meant so (theEphes. 5. contrarie whereof al the auncient fathers teache) yet the wordes which folow in S. Paule, can by no meanes  auoided. For he vseth the example of Adam and Eue, shewing it to be a great mysterie in Chist and the Church. and that mysticall ex∣ample may be applied to the vnity which is betwene Christ and vs, either in baptism, or in the supper of our Lord. For cōcerning baptisme: as Eue was not corporally begotten of Adam, butAug. de ciuit. lib. 22. ca. 17. was taken out of his syde whiles he slept: so our regeneration is made by the water which flowed from Christes side whiles he slept vpon the Crosse, without the personall begetting of Christ
him selfe in his owne substance. But what▪ stayeth S. Paule in this part of the similitude? Goeth he not forward to a grea mysterie? Saith he not, for this cause, the man (which is Christ) shall for∣sake Father and mother, and shall cleaue to his own wife (which is the Church) and they shalbe two in one flesh? Eue was taken outGen. 2. of Adam, and was flesh of his flesh. but as the spirit of God and not Adam wrought that birth: so y• vnion of baptism is wrought rather by the spirit of Christ, then by his flesh, Albeit his  flesh is y• material patern according to which God  flesh in baptism, euen as Adam was y• material patern according to which God formed Eue. But Eue was borne beside the cus∣tomable course of nature, to betoken that the Church should be born of the vertue of Christes flesh, not by company of two sexes, but by the working of God, without the natural seede of man. But when Adam knew his wife carnally, then the flesh takenGen. 4. before out of him by God, was not only ioyned again to his flesh by God, but also by the actuall cooperation of Adam him self▪ thē two were made not only out of one flesh (which was the mira∣culouse work of God in forming Eue out of Adam) but also two diuerse persons already made by God, are by natural cōiunction of both theyr bodies, made really one flesh, euen as man and wife when they beget children, are not now two (as Christ him selfeMatt. 19. testifieth) but one flesh. This is a great mysterie, I meane (sayth S. Paule) that it is great in Christ and the Church. For when the faithfull members, who were incorporated to Christ in baptisme by the vertue of his flesh really absent in sub∣stance,. but presente in efficacy, when those members come againe to Christ in the sacramēt of his last supper, they then find not hisThe sup∣per. flesh absent in substance (as before) but two (that is to say, Christ and his spouse the Church) are in dede one flesh, they are in deede
soyned together in truth of substance on eche part. Christ by his power and vertue prepared our flesh in baptism, and by cleausing it there, he made it a mete spouse to receaue his naturall flesh in his own real substance. But in the supper we areThe vniō of Chri∣stes fleshe is tempo∣rall. not only of him, but we are him selfe. For we two are one flesh for the tyme that the coniunction dureth. for as the man and wife be not always ioyned in the act of begetting children, no more is y• real flesh of Christ always ioyned in his own substāce with ourIoan. 6. flesh, albeit his spirit and the vertue of his flesh tarie stil with vs, and make vs tarie in him. but when we come to the Sacrament whereof he said: take, eate, this is my body, then we really haue y• substance of Christes flesh in our mouthes and bodie. In mariage there are diuerse degrees of coupling, the first is byThree degrees in mariage words of promise for mariage to ensew. The second is by words of present bargayning. the third is when the man & wife deliuer theyr bodies eche to other for begetting of children. Christ was made one with his Church in the way of spousage from the beginning, when he promised that the sede of y• woman should tread downe the serpents head. The which promise the Patriarches beleuing, were euen then ioyned by faith aud loue vnto God. The signe whereof Abraham and his sede caried in theyr flesh, and it was renewed to Dauid, and denoūced by many Prophetes as by the lawfull proctours of God. At the length Christ by taking fleshe came to the house of hisGen. 17. Faith. spouse to see whether she would goe forward in mariage or no.Gen. 17. And although the vnfaithfull Jewes forgetting the couenantsPsal. 131. of spousage, plaied the harlots parte with Christe (whereof heOseae. 2. greuously complaineth in his Prophets) yet Christ keping hisExo. 24. Iosue 24 promise, went forward in mariage with them who wouldIere. 3. receaue him. Who consenting to his conditions by the aunswereBaptism. of a good cōscience in baptisme, were by present words made sur. Pet. 3.
vnto him for euer renouncing all other orain husbands, ater which consent eche part hath right vpon the others body. newe1. Cor. 7. may the party baptized call for the Sacrament of Christes body, if he be of the yeres of discretion. And likewise him  is on theEphes. 5. other syde bond to obey the voice and commandmēt of Christ, and to be subiect to him, as the wife is to her husband. As therefore the parties maried come to the third vnitie of being made both one fleshe, is no lawfull impdiment stay them: so doth Christ present him self in the Sacrament of his body and blood, to make perfite and to cōsate his mariage in the last degree. And as in adultery S. Paul graunteth a place of recon∣ciliation1. Cor. 7. bewene the man and wife: so if any mā, after he is ma∣ried to Christ, folow the world, the fleshe or the deuill, he may be absolued by the Priests, and so come to be ioyned with the bodyIoan. 20. and blood of Christ in vnion of true flesh. If now the naturall and the whole mysticall body of Christe haue so great affinitie with the state of mariage, that in all de∣grees they be described by like termes in the worde of God, seingThe bo∣dies ioy∣ned must be presen the last and chefe coniunction, whiche is in mariage, can not be made without the real presence of the two bodies, which are ioy∣ned: no more can the last vnion of Christ and of his Churche be made in his last supper vnlesse both his and our bodies come really together. If Christ sit only in heauen not hauing his body made present at his holy table, and our bodies be yet still in the earth: what coniunction of bodies is made betwene Christ & vs? If the vnitie, which is betwene two persons in mariage, be a signe of the vnitie, whiche is betwene Christ and the Church, as S. Paul proeth: it is not possible, that the vnity can be lesse realEphs.  in the truth, then it is in the signe. But in mariage (whiche is the signe) the persons maried are one flesh (during the tym of their being together) and they are both present bodily: Thersore Christ
is present in his own substance, to be ioyned in that most chae and vnspotted bed of matrimony with his own spouse: whicheHebr. 13. ioyuing is made in a Sacrament, the which Sacramēt is mini∣stred in those knowē forms of bread & wine. Therfore vnderthose forms, the substance of Christes body and blood is really present. This is that, which S. Hilarie saith: Verè verbum carnē cibo dominico sumimus. We take truly the word (made) flesh, in theila. lib. S. de Tri. meat of our ord▪ we take y• word made flesh, y• is to say, y• whole substance of Christ: & we take it truly, & that in the meate whiche our Lord geueth. It is writen, that he gaue saying: Take, eate: Therefore in that meate we take truly the word made flesh: butMatt. 26. seing that meat semeth bread: vnder that, which semeth bread, we take the whole substance of Christ. Again he saith, Naturam car∣nis suae sub sactamento nobis admiscuit, he hath mixed the nature of his flesh to vs vnder a sacrament. That same word sub vnder, sheweth, what he meaneth: for the form of bread is called a signeSub. or sacrament alone, as the body vnder it is called a sacrament or signe, and also the thing or substance of the Sacrament. S. Chriostom saith: vt non solum per dilectionem, sed reipsa in illam carnem conuertamur, per cibum id efficitur, quem nobis lar∣gitusChrys. in Ioan. hom. 45. est. It is brought to passe by y• meate which Christ hath ge∣uen vs: that we may be cōuerted into that flesh not only by loue, but in the thing it self. If bread and wine be not the thing it selfe, but only Christes owne flesh, and yet we are connerted in very dede into y• lesh of Christ through the meat which he gaue, seing he gaue al that he gaue vnder the form of bread and wine: vnder those formes we receaue in dede and truth that flesh, according to which we are reformed. Which place of many shall I bring out of S. Cyrill? He sayth one where, Cûm mystica benedictio in nobis fiat, nónne corpora∣literCyr. l. 10 ca. 15. quoque facit cōmunicatione carnis Christi? For as much as
the mysticall blessing is made in vs, doth it not make Christe to wel in vs corporally also, through the cōmunicating of Christes flesh? Can the mysticall blessing make Christ dwell corporally in vs, if it self haue not Christes flesh corporally in it? Cur membra fidelium, membra Christi sunt? Nescitis (inquit) quia membra vestra membra sunt Christi? Membra igitur Christi,Cyrill. . 10. cap. 15. meretricis faciam membra? Absit. Why are the mēbers of y• faith∣full the members of Christ? Know ye not (saith S. Paule) that1. Cor. 6. your members are the members of Christ? Shall I then make y• members of Christ, the members of a harlot? God forbid. Here S. Cyril doth manifestly allude to the kind of vnitie, which is betwen man and wife in lawfull mariage: and betwene foruica∣tours in vnlawful coniunction. In ehe place two are made one: but in mariage lawfully, in whoredom vnlawfully. The Sacramēt of Christes supper is like to lawful mariage. And therefore S. Cyrill concludeth, Non ha∣bitudine solum, quae per charitatē intelligitur, Christum in nobis habare: sed participatione naturali. That Christ dwelleth in vs not only by affection, or deuotion, or efficacy which is vnderstan∣dedHabitu∣do. by charitie, but by natural partaking. It is therefore an here∣sy: to defend (as the Sacramentaries do) that we are ioyned toNatara∣lis parti∣cipatio. Christes flesh in his supper, by faith and spirite only: as though Christ being so long maried neuer came bodily to make vp that most chast knot of vnion betwene him and his Church. But if the Sacramentarie doctrine were true, it should haue lesse: for asmuch as it should not be present really with vs, it should not be offered externally vnto God by the Prits of the new lawe, it should not be vppon the table, it should not be in the mouthes of them, who receaue y• same, it should not be made naturally one with our bodies, nor we one with it. S. Paule by the reall vnitie, which is made betwene the meat
of Christ and of his faithfull people, doth proue an vnitie in lesse degree: but yet an vnitie betwene those who did eate together of meates offered to ydoles. But y• meat of Christes supper, where∣by we should be ioyned as well to it, as among our selues, our new brethern take cleane away from the visible table and al∣tar. S. Paule sayeth: Ye can not be partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the deuils table. Our new brethern graunting the deuils a reall table, will not allow any such to Christ. They must conesse a table as well inuisible as corporall of the Iewes and Gentils, for eche of them had their faith and their God, albeit not good and true: but to Christes body and blood, which is the altar and table of the new Testament, they will not allow any externall or visible altar or table. I neede not insult at them for it,  ithens the day will come when Christ will not allow them any table to eate or drink with him in the kingdom of heauen. They that haue brought all his mysteries to naked names, shall enioye his glorie no more real∣ly, then they allow him a reall truth in his blessed Sacraments. ¶ The reall presence is proued by the example, which S. Paule vseth concerning the Iewes and Gen∣tils.The vi. Chapter. SAint Paule intending to dissuade the Corinthians from ea∣ting and drinking with the Gentils at their false and vaine sacrifices, vseth in that behalf, this kind of argument. Whosoeuer doth eate or drink that, which is offered vp in sa∣crifice, he is made one with the oblation it self, and with it, to whome the things eaten and drunken are offered. This propo∣sitionThe Chri steans. he proueth by example of the Christiās, who by partaking of the bread which we breake, and of the chalice which we blesse
(which are the communicating of Christes body and blood) are made one bread, one body: because they partake all of the oneThe Ie∣wes. bread. The like is sene also in the carnall Iewes, among whom they that eate the oblations or things offered, thereby were par∣takers of the altar: to wit, of the sacrifice, and of the worshipping of God, to whom it was offered. Therefore if the CorinthiansThe Ge tils. wold also partake of the meate offered to ydols, it must follow, that they should be partakers of the ydolatrie. For although the dead ydoll be no true God, nor any thing at all, wherewith they may communicate: yet a societie is ioyned thereby with the deuils, who reigne in those ydols. Therefore as ydolatry it self: so the eating of the meates offered to ydols is to be auoided. Out of this discourse it is proued, that the Chri∣stians, Iewes & Gentils, eche of them haue a God, true, or false: eche of them offereth an externall sacrifice to him: eche of them vse to partake of the things offered: and eche of them communi∣cated among them selues.The sacri fice of the Iewes. The meat offered and eaten of the Iewes was the flesh of such cleane beasts, or such other oblations as were allowed by y• lawe of Moyses. The meate offered and eaten of the Gentils, wasOf the Gentils. such, as their superstition had receaued. To one ydol a shepe was offered, to another an oxe. The meate offered and eaten of theOf the Christiās Christians is described of S. Paule, to be the bread which we breake, which is the communicating of Christes body: and the chalice of blessing which we blesse, which is the communicating f Christes blood. The vnitie rising thereof is to be one bread, one body, because all partake of the one bread. Uppon which ground it may be wel built, that the meate par∣taken at Christes supper is the body and blood of Christ: where∣in we passe and ouercome the Iewes & Gentils, who had other earthly oblations, but none of them had this foode, which came
down from heauen. For as S. Paul sayeth: We haue an altar,Heb. 13. whereof they haue no power to eate, who serue the tabernacle. But surely they might eate bread and wine, who serued the ta∣bernacle: therefore the meate of Christes supper is not bread and wine, but the bread of life, and the blood of Christ. And whereas the Iewes had certeyn obseruancies of eating this, and of lea∣uing that meate: or that the Leuits should eate this, and the Priest that, and the laye people an other meate: S. Paule coun∣selleth them to stablish their hart with grace, and not so carefully to obserue the old law, which commaunded so many differences of meate. How beit if it be a good thing to haue some meates reserued for the Priests, which the common people may not eate (as the Iewes think) then sayeth S. Paule: we Christians also haue anOur al∣tar. altar, to wit, a thing offered vnto God, and that so preciouse, that the very Priests and Bisshops, who serue in the tabernacle may not eate thereof. That meate is as Theodorite sayth: Hostia ra∣tionalisIn 13. ad Heb. & diuina. A reasonable and diuine sacrifice: as Sedulius writeth, y• altar whence we partake the body and blood of Christ: as Theophtlact witnesseth, the vnbloody sacrifice of the body, which quickeneth. This then being the meate of our altar, it foloweth, that thisThe a∣gremēt of the holy meates. meate is no lesse present vppon his holy table: then that, which the Iewes or ydolatours did eate, was present at their sacrifi∣ces. But that, which they did partake, was really present, an receaued into their mouthes: therefore likewise  flesh is really present, and is receaued into our mouthes. The meate of the Iewes and of the Gentils was made one natural flesh with the partakers thereof: therefore we likewise are made one natu∣rall flesh with the meate of Christes tabe. But herein is the oddes, that their meat was turned into their
flesh, because it was weaker then their own nature: but our fleshThe diffe rence of y• meates. is turned without losse of his owne substance or proprietie, into the nature of Christes flesh: because it being the flesh, which is dwelt in by the Godhead, is stronger then our nature. Again, as the Iewes and Gentils by eating meates offered vp, are made one body among them selues, by cōformitie of wil and mind alone: (because the meate was not able to tary in his own nature, and to draw them vnto it) so contrariwise we that eate Christes body, are made really one flesh with Christ & amōg our selues: because (as S. Cyrill declareth) Christ suffereth himLi. 11. in Ioan. ca. 26. self to be no more diuided, but kping his owne flesh whole, he gathereth all vs into it. And seing we all, that eate Christ, are made naturally one with Christ: we are also one among our sel∣ues. For they, who are one in any third, are withall one among them selues. Thus the meate of Christes table hath more truth in it, then the meate of the Iewes or Gentils had, according to the Catholike doctrine.The vij. Chapiter. ¶ The reall presence is proued by the kind of shewing Christes death. QVotiescunque manducabitis panē hunc & calicem (hunc)1. Co. 11. bibetis: mortem Domini annunciabitis, donec veniat. How often so euer ye shall eate this bread, and shall drinke this chalice: ye shall shew the death of our Lord vntill he come. Shewing may be either in word alone, or in dede alone, or in both together. S. Paul speaketh in this place, of that shew∣ing,Shewing by dede. which is by dede alone: for eating and drinking is a kind of doing. But not the eating of euery bread, and the drinking of tuery chalice doth shew Christes death: except it be this bread ea∣ten, & that chalice drunken, whereof S. Paule had sayd in Chri∣stes person a litle before: This is my body, which is broken for
you, and, this cup is the new Testament in my blood. The eating and drinking of  sacriiced body and blood doth euidently shew the death thereof: as the which should not be ea∣tenA thing s not eaten whiles it ueth. and drunken, if it were not already consecrated by death vn∣to God. For who doth eate the flsh of any creature, whiles it yet liueth and hath blood in it? Or how can blood be drunken in a cup, if it be yet in the veines of the body? The nature of the fact is such, that it presupposeth the immolation, and sacrifice, and death of that holy thing, which is eaten: for a liuing and sensi∣ble creature is not vsed to be eaten, without it be depriued first of his life. Therefore Theophilact sayth: Quinta vesperi fecit DominusTheoph. in 28. coenam, & caet. Nemo enim quicquàm edit, nisi prius mactatum fuerit. The fift euening (which was on Maundy Thursday night)Math. our Lord made a supper, and ayd to his Disciples: Take and eate, for this is my body. And so, because he was of power to lay down his soule: it is euident, that he then sacrificed him self from that tyme, wherein he deliuered the Disciples his body. For no man eateth any thing, vnlesse it be first killed. Thus we see, that the reall presence of Christes flesh, to th'end it may be eaten, is the consequent, whereby S. Paule proueth the shewing of Christes reall death. Who perceaneth not, that it is a good argument, to say: I eate in a Sacrament Christes reall flesh, thereore he is  dead? Doth it not follow well in the discourse of reason, I drink the true blood of Christ: therefore Christ hath truly shed his blood?The fi∣gure of Christes boy eatē, doth but shew a fi∣guratiue death past Or doth any faithfull man at the table of God eate the flsh and drink the blood of that thing, which is not yet dead and offered in a sacrifice? This argument of S. Paule they make vtterly voyde, who say: that we eate a figure, and not the truth of Chri∣stes substance: for then should Christ be shewed figuratiuely
dead, as he should be figuratiuely eaten. Neither could it folow, that because Christ is eaten by faith in a figure: therefore he is already dead in truth it self, but only that he is dead in a figure or in bare name, without the truth of death as yet presently shewed. When the Paschall Lamb was eaten, the Lamb was truly dead: but as the Lamb was the figure of Christ, and not Christ: did it thereof follow, that it was only shewed in a figure that Christ sometyme should dye, and not that in dede he was dead? But now that he is dead in dede, and so dead, that his death is shewed true by the eating of his own body, and by the drinking of his own blood: vndoubtedly, as truly as uer that same Pa∣schall Lamb was killed, which was eaten, so truly is the same body of Christ dead, which is eaten: and therevpon it wil folow, that by eating the flesh of the man that dyed, that mā is shewed to be dead in ded. Wherefore S. Ambrose sayth, vpon this place: Quia enim morAmbros. in 1. Cor. cap. 11. te Domini liberati sumus: huius rei memores, in edendo & po∣tando carnem & sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata sunt, significa∣mus. Because we are made free through the death of our Lord, being mindful thereof, we in eating and in drinking flesh & blood signifie those things, which were offered for vs. Lo the very fact of eating flesh and of drinking blood shew the things, that were offered to death for vs: That is to say, shew the flesh and blood of Christ as dead. Damascene in that pleasant history of Iosaphat, maketh theDama∣scenus in historia Barlaam & Ioa∣phat. King Auenite to demaunde of certeyne Eremites: why they ca∣ried about them yt bones of dead men, to whome they answered: Ossa ista munda & caet. we cary about with vs ô King, these cleane and holy bones, representing the death of these maruelousemen whose they are: and bringing our selues in minde of their exer∣cise
and of their conuersation beloued of God, and flyring our selues to the like zeale. And afterward, the bones of dead men cause the remembrance of death to them that are a line. Here we see many commodities, which the blessed reliquesThe Com modity of Reliques. of Sayntes do bring to good men. Among other things they cause vs to remember the vertues of them, whose bones we re∣erently kept. And for as much as Christ did shew his charityRom 5. chefely, in dying for his enemies: we haue no greater thing to remember by the presence of his body, thē the same louing deathRasil. de Bapt. li. 1. cap. 3. of that body. But if the bare presence of dead bones make vs remember yt Saynts that be with God, whose bones they were: how muh more doth the eating of Christs body both make vs remember his death, and shew it to our eyes being eaten after such sorte, as this body is eaten. This kinde of reasoning, which S. Paule vseth, is called ofThe rea∣son of S. Paul in this place. the logicians, A consequentibus: when by those things that are put for true and follow, an other thing is proued to haue neces∣sarily gone before. As, for example, we may reason thus: This woman is brought a bed, therefore she hath companyed with a man: in so much that reason declareth that no woman by the course of nature cā haue a childe, except she lye before with a mā. Now, as if the bringing a bed be but in a shadow, thereof no true cumpany with a man may directly be inferred: euen so at this time, if by eating y• body of Christe, we shew Christs death, and yet we do eate the body of Christe only in a shadow: then may it not be inferred hereof, that Christ is shewed to haue dyedSuch as the Conse quent to, such nte  may b proued therby. truly & in dede, but only in a shadow. Such as y• Consequent is, where vpon we reason: such antecedent may be inferred there∣of. If y• Consequēt be reall, true, perfyt: y• Antecedent is shewed to haue bene like. If the Consequent be imperfyt, figuratiue, or sayned: the Antecedent is not thereby shewed to be true.
If two persons are maryed together, it may be well inferred, that they consented together: but if their maryage be ained, to say, made vppon a safold in the way of playing some Comedy or enterlude: then is the cōsent also sayned. If the maryage were true, the consent was true. Christe made his last supper chefelyLuc. 22. to haue it a remembrance of his death, and therefore he sayd: Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, doe and make this thing, for the remembrance of me. S. Paule hauing before declared, how this thing may be made by the preistes of the new Testament, for the remēbrance of Christ, in declaring that Christe toke bread, brake, and sayd: this is my body: he sheweth afterward how the sme body may be eaten by the common people for the remem∣brance of Christes death, saying: As often as ye shall eate this bread, and drinke this chalice, ye shall shew our Lords death, vntill he come. so that y• consecrating of Christes body by priests, and the eating thereof by all Christian men, is the shewing of Christes death. Here I would know, whether Christ instituted this Sacra∣ment,y y• death of Christe shalbe she wed past in dede the body must be eaten in dede. to shew his death as past in dede: or els past in a bare shadow. If to shew it in a bare shadow, thē two absurd sequeles may seme to be employed. One is, y• it may shew Christes death as well to come, as already past. An other is, yt if it be past: it is rather shewed to haue bene a figuratiue death, thē a true death, For as the eating of vnleauened bread vnder the law, were the faith of yt eater neuer so great, did not shew Christes death past, but only to come: so this eating of common bread in our LordsThe fi∣gure cea∣seth to be only a fi∣gure, when the truth of it is come. supper doth not by the eating inferre the death of Christe to be past, but rather as being to come. For euery shadow belon∣geth to a truth, whereof it is the shadow, and is , vntil the truth it self come: but when the truth is ones present, the shadow is no more a bare shadow, but a shadow fylled with
the truth. But by the Zwiglians opinion the Sacrament of Christes supper is common bread without any reall truth made or wrought abowt it: therefore it is a figure, a shadow, and an imperfyt worke, whereas if y• truth of it were come, it should not. Co. 11. be only a shadow: but should haue a truth vnder the shadow. Thus we may perceyue, that the eating of common bread for a figure of Christes death with neuer so greate a faith, doth not so much by the eating shew his death past, as to come hereater. Agayne, were it graunted, that by reason of the faith of the eater, it shewed the death past: yet because it sheweth it in a sim∣ple figure, it may seme, that it is past in a simple figure: whereby this Sacrament, ater the interpretation of our new preachers, is no sufficiēt meane by the dede it selfe: to shew that true death, which Christe suffred for vs vppon the crosse. and yet S. Paule saith, that by eating this bread we shew the death of Christe: that is to say, we shew him to haue died. by eating it, I say. For now we speake not of preaching the Ghospell, not of remembring the articles of our crede, nor of other vndoubted wytnesses: whereby it is proued, that Christe hath died for vs. We speake of S Paules argument, who aith: by eating this bread we shew, Christe to haue dyed for vs. which argument is none, is vayne, is rather agaynst the faith, then with it: if the bread, that we eate, be not the reall flesh, of Christe. But if we once confesse, that we eate the subsāce of Christes natural body, & drinke the substance of his naturall blood, then doth it follow inuincibly, that Christe is dead for vs. It followeth, I say, by the order of Gods words: for no flesh is eaten whiles the beast liueth, whose lesh it is, as it is written: Carnem cum sanguineGen 9. non comedetis, ye shal not eate the flesh with the blood in it, or any member cut from the liue beast: whiles the blood yet remay∣ueth in it.
Agayne the order of religion, as wel vnder the Patriarkes as vnder the law of Moyses sheweth: that no beast was eaten Sa∣cramentally, before it was kylled and offred. From the sacrifice of Ablto to the comming of Christ, certeinly Christ is really dead for vs: and being his true fleshe that we eate, we shew his true death▪ and we shew it past, and not to come. Neither let any man say, that Christ in his last supper gaue hisWhy Christ gaue his flesh be∣fore he died. fleshe before he died: for he dyd not that, before his death was at the very point to be fulfilled. The Iewes began their feastes on the euening tyde, coūting the day from Son set, to the next Son set. according as it is writen: A vespera in vesperam celebrabitisLeuit. 23 Sabbata vestra, from euening to euening ye shall kepe your ho∣ly days. Christe therefore kept his supper the maūdy thursday at night, after Son set, when y• goodfryday (whereon he dyed) was now begon, when he was already solde vnto the Iewes, and all things prepared for his death: so that he came to the geuing of his flesh, as men do come in their death bed to dispose what shal∣be done after their death. willing this mystery to be made for the remembrance of him. And (as it may appere in the actes of the Apostles) after theAct. 2.  of Christ and comming down of the holy Ghost, the Christē mn begāfirst to kepe & cōtinue this: at which time they shwed him both dead & rysen, & sitting at his Fathers right hād in heauen. And surely, as well S. Iames in his liturgie, as Da∣mascenIacobus in Litur∣gia. expounding these wordes of S. Paule, whereof we speke aieth: Mortem filii hominis annunciatis, & resurrectionem eiusDamasc. de Orth. fid. lib. 4. cap. 14. conitemini, onec veniat, ye shew the death of the son of man and cōfsse his resurrection vntil he come. Thus by eating this body we shew Christes true death, & by eating it, being in it self aliue, we shew also y• which folowed his death, which was his resur∣rection and ascension.
Bt by a figuratiue eating we should not shew his true death, and much lesse his true resurrectiō: for as the death is shewed by eating the body which died, so the resurrection of the said body is shewed, by, eating the body, which died & now is a liue: the death is shewed, whiles the body is vnder the forme of bread, and the blood a part vnder the forme of wyne, as though they were styll a sunder. The resurrection is shewed, whiles vnder eche forme whole Christ is conteyned. Therefore we eate Christ more then in a figure, and more then by faith and spirit. we eate him in dede: whereby it followeth, that he is dead for vs in dede. we eate him aliue, without impairing or diminishing any part of him: where∣by it foloweth, he is rysen from death and remaineth immortall. Now let vs heare, how S. Chrisostom alludeth to the same rea∣son: who speaking os Christes last supper, writeth in this maner: Quando id propositū videris, dic tecum: Hoc corpus, & cae. WhenChrys. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. thow seest that body set before thee, say with thy self: This body nailed and beaten, was not ouercommed with death. This bo∣dy the onne seing crucified, turned away his beames: Through it also the vele of the temple was torne, and the rocks, and the whole earth shaken. The self same body made bloody, & woūded with a speare, gusshed out in founteines of blood & water health∣some to the whole world. Seest thou, after what sorte Chrysostom talketh of the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar▪ Seest thou, by what means he there sheweth the death of Christ? This (body saith he) was nai∣led, wounded, perced with a spere. It is then the reall body, that sheweth the reall death of Christe, and that sheweth it not only, when we remember, that Christ dyed, when we thinke of his re∣srrection and ascension: but though no man think of his death, yet the very eating of this very reall body sheweth his death to men, to Aungels, to God. The dede (I say) and fact of eating
sheweth him to be dead, whose fleshe is eaten: euen as the bloodGen. 4. of Abel cried to God from the earth, where it lay: and as the bo∣dy of Christ in heauen by his only presence maketh continual in∣tercession to God the Father for vs, alwaies putting God in minde of his death and of our saluation. ¶ The real presence is proued by the illation, which S.The . Chapiter. Paule maketh concerning the vnworthy eating and drinking of euill men. WHen S. Paule had said, As oft as ye shall eate this bread, and drink the cup of our Lord: ye shall shewe our Lordes death, vntill he come: he goeth forward, saying. Therefore, who so eateth this bread & drinketh the chalice of our Lord vnworthely: he shalbe gilty of our Lordes body and blood. How doth this sentēce hang vpō y• former? how cōmeth it in with  Therefore? but because in the former sentence S. PaulTherfore. said, by eating this bread we shew Christes death. And for as much as we shew it in that self thing, which dyed for vs: therefore he that eateth vnworthely such a meate (wherein by the substance which died, he sheweth Christes death) he is gilty of our Lordes body. none otherwyse, then if he had betraied it as Iudas did. For the same body that Iudas did by a false kisse geue to death we eate vnder the forme of bread, to shew the same death. If then Iudas were gilty of Christes natural body for geuing it vnworthely to death: we are gilty of the same naturall body, when by eating it we shew vnworthely the same death. But if we had not present the same real flesh, which Iudas hetraied: our vnworthy shewing could not be like his vnworthy doing. al the strength of S. Paules reasoning is only grounded vpon the real presence of Christes body: the vnworthy shewing, whereof heUnwor∣thy ating now speaketh, is the vnworthy ating. And for so much as eating
is a corporall action, which is done by the instruments of teeth and mouth: S. Paule doth vs to vnderstand, that euil men might touch and haue in their mouthes y• bread and drink of our Lord. But his bread and his drink is of him elfe affirmed to be his body and blood: therefore S. Paule confesseth, that euill men may haue the body and blood of Christ in theyr mouthes. But that they could not doe, except the body and blood were vnder the formes of bread and wine: therefore he teacheth, the body and blood of Christ to be really present vnder the formes of bread and wine. Saith not S. Paule: whosoeuer eateth this bread, and drin∣keth the cup of our Lord vnworthely? Then this bread and the cup of our Lord may be eaten and drunken vnworthely. But what? Speaketh he of eating by faith, or of drinking by spirit? No verily, for such eating and drinking can not be vnworthely made. You wil say, it is bread and wine whereof he speaketh. If it were so, why doth S. Paule name it, this bread▪ For  theThis . pronoune (this) doth shew a thing present to some sense or other: and seing when S. Paule wrote these wordes, he being absent in body from the Corinthians, could not shew them any thing by any corporal actiō of his: it remaineth, that y• thing whereunto (this) doth point, was named in the epistle of S. Paule, which he worte to those faithfull men: and also, that it went not long before, as the which otherwese might be of vncertaine vnderstā∣ding. What is it then, which went before? Christ toke bread, and after thanks geuen said: Take, eate, this is my body. whosoeuer eateth this bread vnworthely, he is gilty of the body of our Lord. If this bread point vnto that, whereof Christ said, This is my body: S. Paule meaneth to shew his faut, whosoeuer eateth the body of our Lord vnworthely. and thereby he graūteth euil men to eate Christes body: which they can doe by no meanes, except
that be Christes body, which they take into theyr outhes.An ∣tion. The Sacramentaries will obiect againste me, that ChristThe ∣swere. ment the signe of his body: which truly can not be so. For seing S. Paule named no signe, as (this) can not point to that, which was not named: so it must point only to the thing named before. But the thing before named was the body of Christ broken for vs: therefore this bread meaneth that body of Christ, and none other substance. ¶ The reall presence is proued, because vnworthyThe ix. Chapiter. receauers are gilty of Christes body and blood. WHo soeer eateth this bread, or drinketh the cup of our Lord vnwortehly: he shalbe gily of y• body & blood of our Lord. A man may be gilty, either for doing an euilDoing. deede: or for leauing a good deede cleane vndon: or els for doing a good dede in an euil manner. Here S. Paule maketh the vn∣worthy receauer gilty, for eating this bread, and drinking the cup of our Lord vnworthely. which is to say, for doing a good deede after an euil manner. his dede is eating, which thing he so realy doth: that S. Paule affirmeth him to eate and drink dam∣nation to himself. But no man is gilty of doing more, thē he actually doth: there∣fore the vnworthy receauer, who for eating and drinking is gilty of the body and blood of Christ, doth eate and drink in deede the same body and blood of Christ, whereof he is gilty. The Sacramentaries imagine S. Paule to haue said: He thatThe ∣meles in∣terpreta∣tions of Heretik. eating by mouth materiall bread at Christes supper, refuseth to eate by faith the body of Christ sitting in heauen, is gilty of not eating Christes body. Who euer heard of such a toy? what iote of all the scriptures, which appertein to Christes supper, haue they left vnwrested, vntorne, or vndefiled? what sentence, clause, or
word haue they left in his naturall meaning? If S. Paule and the foure Euangelists were not thē selues men of sufficient dis∣cretion, who might consider how nedefull it were to vnderstand wel the mysteries of Christ: yet surely in repeting one matter oft, it would at the least chance vnto them, that they should haue told vs some one syllable: which might haue made for the Sacramen∣tary doctine, if it had bene true. But now whatsoeuer they speake, doth destroie vtterly and ouerthrow theyr fond assertion. And that I may for this tyme go no farther, what cā be answered to this place of S. Paul? he that eateth a very good thing vnworthely, is pronounced gilty: there∣fore his present fault consisteth in the euill manner of his eating. For to eate vnworthely is to eate in deede, but not to eate after a good manner. No man, by eating in an euill manner, can be gil∣ty of that, which he doth not eate in that euill manner: and yet the vnworthy receauer of this bread is pronounced gilty of Christes body, and it is ment of his naturall body. Therefore this bread, which he doth eate vnworthely, is the reall and naturall body of Christ. If a man had done neuer so heinouse a robbery, yet thereby to condemne him of adulterie, it were an euidēt : although the paine due to adultery be lesse then that, which is due to rob∣berie. But now to condemne a man for eating the body of Christ, who did eate only the figure of it: that were much more vniust,Deut. 25 for that his paine increased aboue the measure of his fault. Let it be neuer so great a fault, to eate the holy bread vnworthely: yet if that holy bread be not in dede a man, it shall neuer be the fault of eating mans flesh, to eate that bread vnworthely. S. Paule saith not only, he is gilty, who eateth this bread: but he is gilty of the body of Christe. Howe can that be, except this bread, which he eateth, be the body of Christ▪ If this bread be his
body, seing it stll appereth bread, we must confesse: that the body of Christ is really present vnder the forme of bread. And truly, that is the cause, why S. Paule nameth it this bread:This bread. for y• word sheweth him to meane the bread cōsecrated at y• altar: yt bread, which yt Priest frō thence deliuereth: y• bread, which yt peo∣ple receaueth at the Priests hād. Whosoeuer eateth this bread vn∣worthely, he is gilty of Christes body: because yt substance of this bread is yt substāce of Christes natural body made & geuē vnder yt forme of bread. If it were not so, the eater of this bread could not by his eating be gilty of Christe s body. Otherwise, the talke of S. Paule would no more hang together, then if it were said: he that toucheth vnworthely the kings garment, is gilty of murde∣ring his person. I am loth to heape vp in this place y• manifold witnesses of the auncient Fathers (whose wordes I haue partly touched alsoIn the third chap▪ of the se∣cōd booke. before) concerning that euill men eate Christes bo∣dy. Now it shall suffise to shew, that they make the same sequele of S. Paules wordes, whiche I do: for they shew, the vnworthy receauer to be gilty of Christes body: because he inuadeth the bo∣dy of Christ, and not because he eateth wheaten bread. Theodoritus expoundeth these words, whereuppon we dis∣pute,Theodo. in 1. Cor. cap. 11. after this sort: Illud autem: & cae. These words, he shalbe gilty of the body and blood of our Lord, signifie this much: That, as Iudas betrayd him, and the Iewes thē selfes insulted, and rayled shamfully and sclanderously at him: so these shame & defile him, who take his most holy body with vncleane hands, & put it into a polluted and vnchaste mouth. Lo, the taking, touching, and eating vnworthely Christes bo∣dyHaymo▪ 1, Cor. 11▪ maketh them gilty: as Iudas and the Iewes were gilty of Christes death. Yea Haymo saieth: It were better for him, who cometh with mortall sinnes to this Sacramente, neuer to haue knowen the way of truth, then to goe backward and to do worse
then an infidell: Primasius faith. He despiseth Christ and his bo∣dyPrima∣sius. as the Iewes dyd: who comet to it without trying of his own conscience. Sedulius, besides that common similitude of IudasSedulius and the Iewes, vseth another saying: If no man dare put it into a filthy cloth or vessel, how much more ought he not to put it in∣to an vncleane harte? Note, good Reader, that the self same Sa∣crament is put in the cloth or vessel: which is put in the harte. It is not therefore, as the Sacramentaries blaspheme, breade and wine, that is put into a cloth and vessell after consecration, and body and blood, that (whiles the body eateth breade and wine) is in hart receaued. The same thing is in the harte, which is put in the vessell, wherein the Sacra ment is kept. S. Hierome vsing the same similitude of a cloth or vncleaneHiero. in 1. Cor. 11 vessell, declareth farther, that as Ioseph did folde the body o our Lord in a cleane sheete, so must we receaue him with a cleane cō∣science. Du menius declareth the fault of the euill men to be, in that they touche the body of Christ with vncleane mouth and impure hands, saying that as Iudas betrayed Christ, and the Iewes did violently runne vppon him: euen so they do shame to him, Quòd sanctissimum ipsius corpus manibus impuris susci∣piunt, veluti tunc eum Iudaei tenuerunt, & execrando admouent ori: Who doe take with impure hands his most holy body, none otherwise then the Iewes at that tyme helde him, and doe put it to theyr cursed mouth. Theophylact sayth of the blood of Christ:Theoph. in ca. 11. 1. Cor. Qui indignè hunc hauserit nullū ex eo fructū adeptus, frustra ac temerè Christi sanguinem fudit: He that drinketh the blood vn∣worthely, he hath shed in vayne & rashly the blood of Christ. ta∣king thereof no fruit. And again, The cause why euil men take no fruit (saith Theophylact) is not through the nature of yt mysteries (as the which both haue life in them and geue life) but it chaūceth through the vnworthines of them, that come to them: who take
hurte by them nonc other wise, thē as the sonne is wont to hurte them, who haue sore eyes: Theophylacte meaneth, that as it is oue sonne, which shineth to whole aud to sore eyes, but yet the sore eyes through their owne defecte take hurt thereof, and the whole eyes take good: so the mysteries are one to the good and to the bad concerning their owne nature, being (as he saith) al∣ways of that nature both to conteyne life and to gene life. But the fault why life is not takē, cometh of the vnworthy receauer. We haue now harde, that euill men receaue the same true body of Christ, which the good men do receaue: but not to y• same pro∣fit, because they haue not wel prepared them selues. We must not then thinke, that euer any auncient Father was of this mind: to say, that euill men haue in their mouthes only bread and wine, and the good men eate only the true body of Christ. That heresi is as farre from the opinion of the Fathers, as it is farre from the truth of the Scriptures. S. Chrysostom saith, he will suffer his own blood to be shed:In Math. Hom. 8▪ rather then he will graunt the moste holy blood of our Lord to an vnworthy man. Doth not he meane, that he hath our Lords blood in his own hand at the tyme of celebrating the mysteries: and that he will not deliuer the same to a knowen euill man?In Ioan. li. 9. c. 19 S. Cyrill noteth, that it is not sayd in vaine of Iudas, Exiuit continuò, he went foorth by and by: Timet diabolus benedictio∣nis virtutem, ne sintillam in animo eius accenderit. The deuill feareth the vertue of the consecration or blessing, lest perhaps it might haue kendled a spark (of grace or of repentance) in his minde. S. Augustine hauing spoken of Iudas, who gaue himDe Bap. cont. do∣natist. self to the deuill, Non malum accipiendo, sed male accipiendo, not by taking an euill thing, but by taking it in an euill maner,5. cap. 8. concludeth generally of all euill men: Corpus enim & sanguis domini erat etiam illis, quibus dicebat Apostolus: Qui manducat
indignè, iudicium sibi manducat & bibit. for it was the body and blood of our Lord euen to those, to whom S. Paule sayd▪ he that eateth vnworthely, eateth and drinketh damnation to him self. It were easy after this sorte to allege a very greate number of y• olde Fathers: but our aduersaries well knowing that we our selues beleue, that the euill men, albeit they receaue the substance of Christes body, yet they doe not receaue the grace and vnitie, for which it is geuen: abuse maliciously the words which S. Au∣gustine speaketh of the effect of Christes body, against the reall substance thereof. But what speake I of the iniury done to S. Augustine, sith they haue done so great and manifold iniuries to the word of God it self. ¶ The reall presence is proued, by the kynde of discer∣ningThe x. Chapiter. our Lords body. LEt a man examine him self, and so eate of that bread and drink of the chalice: for he that eateth and nketh vnwor∣thely, eateth and drinketh damnation to him self, not discer∣ning our Lords body: That is to say, not putting a difference be∣twene it and other meates. The not making of this difference may rise vpon mysbelee,Misbelefe as when a man thinketh, that Christ was not able to make the bread his body: or, that his flesh is vnder y• forme of bread apart from his blood. An other sorte of men may so contenme ChristesCōtempt. body, that he will not worship it, although he beleue it to be pre∣sent. But S. Paule speakth not of those desperate men, who through their special malice be gilty of Christes body before theyAug. in . tract. 62. come vnto it:  they are the more gilty for touching it really: He speaketh of them, who oit to examine them selues, in so much that S. Augustine writeth thus of this very mater. De his erat sermo, & caet▪ when the Apostle sayd this thing, the
talk was of them: who did receaue the body of our Lord indis∣cretely and negligētly, as if it were any other meate. And againe,Negl∣gence. If the negligēce of the guest be touched with reprofe: with what punishment is he vexed, who sold the maker of the feast? Here S. Augustine doth witnes, that S. Paul speaking of vnwor∣thy receauers did meane them: who for negligence omitted to proue and examine them selues, comming to the supper of our Lord, as if they came to a prophane supper. S. Chrysostom, and after him Decumenius accompt the faultChrys. i 1. Cor. of the Corinthians to haue beue the dispising of the poore men:Hom. 28 because S. Paul sayd in the same Chapiter, Ye put those to shame who haue not goodes of their own. Theodoretus sayeth besydes,1. Co. 11. that some of them were ambitious: others also did eate the things offered vp to Ydols, one had maried his own mother in law, these1. Co. 11. were the faultes of the Corinthians, and not any speciall con∣tempt of hart, namely against these holy mysteries. According to which sense the Prophet Malachie doth say, thatMala. 10. the offering of polluted bread vppon the altar of God, was the despising of him: and S. Hirome there sayeth, Opera peccato∣rumHieron. in Ma∣lach. despiciunt mensam Dei, the workes of synners despise the table of God. Seing then, S. Paule speaketh of such fault and contempt of the Corinthians, as riseth of their negligence and for the lacke of discretion: this kind of giltines can not come only of the mind it self (whose iudgement is rather vpright) but it cometh, for so much as the fault is committed about that thing, wherein the body and blood of Christ is really conteyned. For whereas an iniury done may either touch our body, orAlpian. de iniur. lib. 1. c. 7. estimation: and when we will persecute the same, reason and law wold we should specially describe the kind of iniury, least we doe wrong to him, whome we burden falsly with a more greuouse
kind of fault, then he hath done: seing S. Paule doth by name burden the vnworthy recauer of this Sacrament with being gilty not only of Christes worship or name, (wherewith in otherRom. 2. places he burdeneth other great synners) but with being gilty1. Co. 11. Heb. 10. of his own body and blood, with which fault he neuer 1. Cor. 2. any other then the vnworthy receauers of this blessed Sacra∣ment, or y• Iewes, who layed  hands vppon Christ at his death: it must nedes be, y• such a cōmunicant receaeth Chri∣stes owne naturall body, & so offendeth Christ not only in his name or in his estimation, but also in his naturall flesh & blood. Moreouer, seing when he warneth him to beware of doing this euil dede, he biddeth him only put a  betwene Chri∣stes body, and all other meates: it is euident, that none other meate is here present besyde the body of Christ. Otherwise, he should haue sayd, Non dijudicans panem & vinum, figuram cor∣poris Domini. Not discerning bread and wine, the signe of Chri∣stes body. But now he only sayeth, not discerning the body of our Lord. And yet it is much more to be noted, that S. Paule nameth not any other meates: but only he nameth the body of our Lord, shewing thereby, y• we must discerne it not only from other meates, but from al other creatures in the world. As if he sayd, he that eateth vnworthely, considereth not whose body he cometh vnto. For as S. Chrysostome sayeth, The receauer nedeth to consi∣derIn 1. Co. Hom. 28 nothing els: but only, qui sit propositus, who is set foorth. Et magnitudinem propositorum, and the greatnes of the things set oorth. If the body were not present, we ought rather to consi∣der, who is in heauen, and where the truth of this image is: then who, and what is set before vs. Which (as the Sacramentaries falsely teache) is bread and wine: but (as the holy Scriptures and Fathers affirme) it is the substance of Christes body.
¶ No igure, which is not in substance ChristesThe xi. Chapiter. body, can make any man, by eating it negligently gilty of Christes naturall body. IN all this question of vnworthy receaing the holy mysteries the chief refuge of the Sacramentaries is to say: that seing theAn ∣ction. bread eaten, and the wine drunken are the figures of Christes body and blood, who so taketh them vnworthely, he is gilty of the body and blood them selues, which those figures doe signi∣fie. This pretensed excuse of theirs, I will now conste God willing. When a man by wilful contempt doth breake or defile y• imageThe aun∣swer. of a great Prince, it is reputed all one, as if he had stryken the Prince himself: not because the dede is one, but for that his will is thought to be no lesse vttered against the Prince by his de∣meanure toward the signe: then if he had  touched the Prince him self. But S. Paule speaketh not of any such matter in this place, as who maketh his argument rather vppon y• reall fact it self: hen vppon the wil or mind of the doer. Neither doth he reason vppon presumption, surmise, or any like far fet inter∣pretation: but absolutely pronounceth him to be gilty of Christes body, who eateth this bread vnworthely. Therefore he ment not, that the image or figure of Christes body was eaten: but the true substance thereof. He spake not now only of wilfull contempt, but of negligent doing. of not examining a mans self▪ and of despising the poore. Secondarily, they that say the signe, image, or figure of Chri∣stes body is abused, must shew wherein that figure doth consist.Figures. Figures and images be either externall or internall. Those be iudged by the eye, these by the vnderstanding. Those are most commonly made by act, these by nature or grace.
No manifest externall signe is made in Christes supper suffi∣cient, to shew or to expresse his body and blood outwardly vnto our eyes: albeit some likenes and similitude be kept outwardly betwene the figures and the things figured. otherwise (as S. Augustine reasoneth) they should not be Sacraments or holyEpist. 23. signes. But (as Epiphanius well noteth of this Sacrament) Videmus, quòd non aequale est, neque simile, non imagini in car∣ne,In Anco rato. non inuisibli deitati, non lineamientis membrorum: hoc enim est rotundae formae, & insensibile quantum ad potentiam. We see, that this thing (he meaneth the Sacrament of Christes supper) is not equall nor like, either to the shape in flesh, or to the inui∣sible Godhead, or to the proportion of his members. for this thing is of a round forme, and vnsensible concerning the power of feling or mouing. Seing then the things consecrated vppon the , be not so like Christes nature, & person, that thereby they may be in dede his image in any parte of their outward shape: it appereth, that the figure made in them, is not so much seene in the outward forme: as it is to be sought for in some inward vertue of them. Internall figures be either naturall, or typicall. The SonneInternall figures. is a naturall image or figure of his Father: and the serpent liftedNum. 21. vp in the desert, was a mysticall image of Christ.Ioan. 3. There is likewise no mere natural image of Christ in his last supper, because there is nothing, which procedeth from him by the way of birth or of generation: and yet a certein proportion is kept in the Sacrament of Christes supper with this kinde of figure also. Typicall signes be dubble, some of the olde lawe, which didTypicall images. signify (as it were in a shadow) y• truth absent in substāce, which was to come in Christ: others of the new Testament, which doe euidently geue vs the truth it self, which they by visible ormes
both signify and conteine. Those of the olde law are called inHeb. 10. Theodo retus in 10. Heb. S. Paule, vmbra futurorum bonorum: the shadow of the good things to come: these of the new lawe are named ipsa imago rerū, the self image of the things. of which matter I haue spoken be∣foreShado∣wes. Self ima∣ges. at large. The supper of Christe belongeth to the new Testament, the chalice whereof is the new Testament in his blood. ThereforeIn the . booke the x. Chap. the figure which is made in Christes supper, is ipsa imago rerū, The self image of the things: as also Baptisme conteyneth really1. Co. 11. Leo de nat. Do. ser. 4. 5. the grace of regeneration, which it geueth to him, that is wor∣thely baptized. There is an image, and a self image. The image may be of a thing, whose substance is absent, as it chaunceth in all artificiall images. The self image is it, which hath the truth ioyned with y•Ipsa ima go. image: or els, which is an image rather through that self substāce which it hath common with the truth, then in his outward re∣semblance.Heb. 1. Colos. 1. Such an image is Christ of his Father, and ChristesArtificiall figures. Naturall figures. supper of him self: Hauing after the rate of artificiall and exter∣nal figures, (by breaking of the bread) a resemblance of the na∣turall flesh broken with nailes and scourges: but much more ha∣uing the proprietie of a naturall image in being that substance, whereof it is the figure. And whereas it hath the properties of the kind of images or figures, yet it is neither of both, but farre passeth both: & therefore is called not only a typicall figure (suchTypicall figures. as those of the old law were) nor only a mystical figure of y• newMysticall figures. Testament (as other Sacraments of Christes Church are) but it is called singularly the Sacrament of Sacraments, the perfe∣ction,Sacrifice and the vnbloody sacrifice: which who so receaueth vn∣worthely, he is worthy to be gilty of no lesse punishment, then the thing is great, which he . He is gilty of the sacri∣iced body of Christ, because he really eateth it.
But if it were the image of a truth absent in substance (as the figures of the old Testament were) the negligent eating thereof could by no meanes make a man gilty of violating Christes bo∣dy: partly because no image of the old law did by eating it make any man gilty of laying  hands vppon Christes body, and yet they were all figures of his body: partly because anyHeb. 10. other Satrament of the new law should likewise make vs gilty of missordering his body. For as bread and wine doe signify the spirituall nourishment, which Christ geueth to our soules: right so Baptisme doth signifie the spirituall birth, which we receaue of Christ in our soules. But seing it is a thing neuer heard of, that either Manna or the shew bread vnworthely eaten, or baptisme vnworthely ta∣ken, made any man gilty of Christes own body and blood: cer∣teinly there is some other heauenly substance vnder the forme of bread and wine, then either Manna or the shew bread had, or baptisme now hath. He that did eate Manna vnworthely mightNum. 21. be gilty of contempt, disdaine, lothsomnes, or negligence, accor∣ding as his fault was, wherewith he did eate it: but the thing eaten made him not gilty of Christes body and blood. Other∣wise the Iewes must haue prepared and examined them selues euery day: least they should haue committed a new synne against the body of our Sauiour: which as it is a thing not readen of, so it had required more perfection in the law, then now is vsed: for so much as we receaue our maker perhaps but once a yere, & surely at the most but once a day, whereas they did fede vpponExod. 16 Manna so oft, as hunger or custome prouoked them by the space of forty yeres. What shal I say more? As the Sacrament of Christes body & blood is really and in dede it self the bread, which (through the substance thereof vnited to God) is able to make the worthy ea∣ters
liue for euer: so it is the body, whiche through the substance thereof (whereunto power of iudging and cōdemning is geuen)Ioan. 5. doth make the vnworthy receauers thereof to be damned, euen for the only negligence vsed in eating it. Death and life comme from the substance of that, which is eaten: and therein it differethCyrill. in Ioā. c. 19. frō Manna, exceding it so far, as the body it selfe is more worth, then the shadow thereof: whereas otherwise one slesh and blood of Christ were signified by both, but not really present in both. ¶ The reall presence of Christes body is confirmed by the oft reprting of the name of flesh, body, blood, eating, drinking and such like wordes. THat, which Ioseph said vnto Pharao concerning that hisGen. 41. dreame seene y• second tyme, was an assured token of Gods will in bringing the matter to passe, I may much more ustly allege at this tyme: sith (touching the real presce of his bo∣dy & blood) Christe was not content to say it the second or third tyme, but he hath by him self or his Apostles, and Euangelists, repeted it aboue twentie tymes: to the intent it might at the least wise sinke at the lengthe into some of his disciples minde. And how much lesse should I either thinke it long, to dilate this ar∣gument, either the Reader be wery thereof? S. Paule sayth, eadēAd Phil. cap. 3. vobis scribere, mihi quidem non pigrū, vobis autem necessarium. To write the same thinges vnto you it is not lothsom vnto me, but truly necessarie vnto you. Euen so Christe for our greate profite always repeted, that heIoan. 6. would geue meate whiche should not perish, a bread which was his flesh. And that we should eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drink his blood, that who so did eate his flesh and drink his blood should haue life euerlasting. for his flesh is meate in deede and his blood is drinke in deede, who so doth eate his flesh and
drinke his blood doth tarie in Christ and Christ in him, and he that doth eate him should liue for him, and that this is the bread which came doune from heauen, an other manner of bread then Māna was. He that doth eate this bread shal liue for euer. Thus about tenne tymes we finde, that in S. Ihon he said one thing, though not in one words: Sometyme calling it flesh, sometyme blood, sometyme him self, sometyme this bread, sometyme meat. Put now here vnto that he toke bread and wine, blessed, gaueMatt. 26. thankes, brake and gaue, and said, take and eate, this is my bo∣dy, and drinke ye al of this, for this is my blood, and make or doe this thing for the remembrance of me. Remember farther that three Euangelists wrote the history of the supper in diuerse yeres1. Cor. 10 & 11. all after one sort, yt S. Paule wrote the same adding more terrour to it, by shewing that some died at Corinth for the vnworthy re∣ceauing the body and blood of Christ, with all the rest which the Apostle sayth in that epistle, and we shall find, that the holy ghost hath confirmed and verified the knowen and litterall vnderstā∣ding of the words, flesh, blood, body, meat, without any figura∣tiue speache or meaning. Albeit God meant not his body and blood to be eaten and drunken after the common & vsual manner of eating rosted flesh, or drinking raw blood, but that we should eate it & drinke it vn∣der ye forms of bread & wine. For which cause he also vsed y• name of a certaine kinde of bread. A bread, I say, which came donne from heauen, because it is vnited vnto y• sonne of God, who was for euer equal with his Father in glory, nature, & honour. This repeting of one thing so many tymes is a great argumēt of spea∣king plainly without all figures or parables. This argument (to begin wth the weaker) the greke authorEuthy. in6. c. Io. Euthymius maketh. who vpon those wordes: my flesh is truly meate, saieth: hoc dixit confirmans quòd non aenigmaticè, neque
parabolic loqueretur. This he hath said, cōfirming that he spake not , either els in the manner of a parable. Which obser∣uation Euthymius borowed of S. Chrysostom, who saith thatS. Chry. in Ioan. hom. 48. Christ affirmed his fleshe to be meate in dede, to confirme his di∣sciples least they should thinke him to haue spoken obscurely in parables. But the ofte repeting is of it selfe the confirming and assuring vs, that he spake not so. Oecumenius also vse th the same reason in a like matter. PerOcum. in Epi. 1. hoc quod frequenter ait, (corporis & sanguinis domini) manife∣stat,ad Cor. cap. 11. quòd non sit nudus homo qui immolatur, sed ipse dominus & factor omnium: vt videlicet per haec iplos exterreat. in that he ma∣ny tymes nameth the body and blood of our Lord, he sheweth, that he which is offered is not a bare man (as the Nestorians did falsely teache) but the Lord him self and maker of all things. to thend he might verily put them in a terrour by these wordes. if the ofte naming of (Lord) did shew it to be the body not of a bare man, but also of God, how much more doth it shew, that it is not the bare substance of bread, but the body it selfe of Christ who is our maker? S. Basile noteth in the Apostle S. Paule cōcerning this veryBasil. de baptis. li. 2. cap. 3. matter: Vehemētius simul{que} horribilius proponit ac declarat con∣demnationem per repetitionem. The Apostle setteth forth and declareth more vehemētly, & to the more terrour of the vnworthy receauers, the condemnation by repeting it. S. Augustine in his booke which he made concerning the working of muncks, per∣ceauing that some thought y• Apostle to speake figuratinely, whē he requireth that all men should labour and worke who would eate: among other arguments, wherewith he disproueth these fi∣gurantiueAug. de  workers, vseth this also. Neque enim aut vno loco, aut breuiter dictū est, vt possit cuius∣uisMona∣chorum cap. 13. astutissimi tergiuersatione in aliam traduci peruertique sen∣tentiam.
t is not said in one place, or in shorte wordes, so that it may be  and peruerted into an other meaning, by y• ouer∣thwarting of neuer so suttle a sophist. Thus reasoneth S. Augus∣tine vpō the ost repeting of worke, of labour, of miniring with handes, prouing thereby that the Apostle meant in dede bodily worke, and not only working with mind, or tonge. But I am assured there is not more in the new testamēt con∣cerning the precept of working with handes, then is of the bodyIoan. 6. Math. 6. and blood of Christ, of his flesh, of the meat which perisheth not,Matt. 26. of such substanciall bread: of taking, eating, drinking, communi∣cating,Marc. 14 & partaking the body and blood of Christ, of making theLuc. 22. same, of geuing, breaking and distributing, of not discerning it,1. Cor. 10 1. Cor. 11 of being gilty for vnworthy eating: of true meate, true drink, oEphes. 5. reising vp him that eateth it, of his abyding in Christ, and liuing for Christ, of the Church and Christ being twain in one flesh, of being one bread, one body all that partake of the one bread: of liuing for euer, if any man worthely eate this bread which is the flesh of Christ, which he wil geue for y• life of yt world. it is not said in one place, neither in short or few words. therefore it ought not be drawen into an other meaning, then the words do sound, y the ouerthwarting of neuer so suttle a sophist. To conclude S.Cyrill. in Ioan. lib. 4. cap. 11. Cyrillus writeth in the same sense: Non obdurescamus toties a Christo veritatem audientes. non est enim ambigendū quin sum∣ma supplicia subituri sunt, qui saepius haec a Chisto iterata non ca∣piunt. Let vs not harden our selues hearing the truth so oft of Christ. for it is not to be doubted, but they shall suffer most reme paines, who receaue not these thinges whiche are so many tymes repeted of Christ.
The preface of the sixth booke. BEcause the adoration of the body and blood of Christe in the Sacrament of the Altar is a matter, whiche moste manifestly conuinceth the reall presence of Christ vnder the forme of bread: I thought it best to handle it a part by it selfe, a also being one of those things, which doth principally declare the saith of the whole Churche in this behalfe. For no man would adore the body of Christ in the Priestes hands or vpon the altar, if it were not really present there.
The Chapiters of the sixth Booke. 1. The adoration of Christes body is proued out of the Prophet Dauid in the Psalm 21. 2. Item of the Psalme 98. 3. It is proued out of the Prophetes, that it can be no idolatry, to worship the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar. 4. The adoration of Christes body is proued out of the new Testament. 5. That the Fathers of the first six hundred yeres after Christ, dyd honour the body & blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar. 6. The adoration of the body & blood of Christ is proued by the custome of the Priestes and people of the first six hundred yeres. 7. The reall presence is proued by the doctrine & consent of the auncient Fathers. 8. Item by the faith of the people. 9. That no man can be cōdemned for beleuing the reall presence of Christes body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine.
¶ The adoration of Christes body is proued out ofThe first Chapiter. the Prophete Dauid. OF this adoration due to the body of Christ the holy ghostAmbros. erm. 3. forewarned vs by the Prophete Dauid in that psalme, which Christ him selfe hanging vpon the Crosse declared to be literally ment of him selfe: and that as well concerning hisMatt. 27. death, whch he suffered for vs, as also concerning the memory of ye same death, which he instituted in the night wherein he was betraied. Christ therefore hauing she wed in that psalme the cru∣eltyPsal. 21. of Iewes in killing him, most humbly asketh of his Father through his manhod: that his soule may be deliuered by resurrec∣tion from the mouth of y• lion, promising or vowing therewithal,The . that he will open the name of God vnto his brethren, and praise him in the middest of the congregation: And when I cried vnto him, he heard me. If God hath fauorably heard Christ, as there can be no doubt but he hath: Christ is boūd by his own promise, to praise his Father in a greate Church, & therefore saith, he will doe so, adding thereunto: I will render (or performe) my vowes inThe per∣formance. the sight of them that feare him. By what meane wil he performe them? It foloweth immediatly, Edent pauperes & caet. The pooreThe meane of performīg the vow. shal eate, & be silled: and they that seeke him, shal praise the Lord: theyr hartes shall liue for euer, all the endes of the earth shall re∣member and be turned to the Lord. All the families of the Gen∣tils shall adore in his sight. Because the kingdome is the Lords, andThe king dom of the Lord. him selfe shall beare rule among the nations. All that be fat on the earth, haue eaten and adored: al they that goe doune into the earthAdoratiō. shall fall doune before him. 1. Christ then or his resurrections sake, 2. made a vow, to praise God, 3. in the great Church of all nations: 4. the performance whereof should be stablished by the meanes of eating, filling,
, , , and worshiping. ose, that after baptism by y• grace of God are preserued frō. ,  the body of Christ in the Sacramēt of y• altar,  be filled,  praise God for euer. Eating is the acte of theEating. , spirituall  is the heauenly effect there∣of, the praising of God is the fruit of the . For we . . to be , & are filled to the end we should praise God for euer. that after  fall into greate , partly they. so fal, that they rise , and then they remember in y• memoryRemini∣. of Christes  ( his last supper is) that Christe died for them, and so the  of  forceth & presseth them by penance1. Cor. 11 to returne: Partly they so fall, that they care not to returne to2. Cor. 5. . God, but lye wallowing still in their synnes: & yet they departe not by  or infidelity out of the Church, but kepe stil the bare belefe of Gods truth, without performing his ∣dementes. Such men eate & worship, but because they wil not remēber & be  to God, but come to the table of Christ vnworthely, they are not filled by their eating. But there are two other kinds of men, who sometime haue bene of Christes church, but now are not of it: of which two the one doth eat and not worship, because it beleuth not the thing eaten to be the flesh of God (such are theSacra∣ . Unfith∣full Zinglians) the other doth neither worship, nor eate, which are the vnfaithfull Iewes: who are not only departed from the Ca∣tholike Church, but also frō y• cōfession of Christ our true Messias, of whom S. Pule saith: we haue an altar whereof they haueIewes. no power to eate, who serue the tabernacle. Christ being absent in the visible forme of his body, & sittingHebr. . therein at the right hand of his father, ruleth his Church & reig∣ethDomini est regnū in it, not as the vnfaithfull Iewes thought he would haue done, by exising violent inisdiction and subduing the bodiesIoan. 8.
of men by force: but he reigneth in y• hartes through faith & cha∣ritie,Luc. 17. which he geueth vs. This inuisible reigning among visible men requireth for conuenient matenance thereof, an inuisibleThe king done of God in his Church. kinde of presence (concerning the person of the king) bt yet visi∣ble concerning the fories of bread and wine, to thed his mem∣bers may know, where to worship him. For as his Church is vi∣sible through the bodies of them, whose soules do inuisibly serue him: so his body is visible through the formes of bread & wine, vnder the which it lieth inuisibly, distributing the frutes of his death and resurrection All this eating, adoring, filling, raigning, and praysing, doth chiely belong (in this place) to the Sacrament of Christes body and blood. Through those mysteries Christe the bread of life isIoan 6. really eaten, wee are filled with grace, God is praised in good works, reigneth in our hartes, we bowe downe to his body, andMath. 5. worship him for our maker, our King, and our Lord. And that this interpretation is not of mine owne making, it shall nowe appere. S. Hierome vpon those wordes, vota mea reddam, I wil render my vowes, (which I promised) saith. Vota Christi, natiuitas vel passio, vota Ecclesiae, opera bona: vel,Hiero. in Ps. 21. mysterium corporis & sanguinis mei offeram cum his, qui in eius timore haec celebrant. The vowes of Christ are, his birth or pas∣sion: the vowes of the Church are good workes: or els, I will offer (saith Christe) the mystery of my body and blood with them, who celebrate these thinges in his feare. First S. Hierome taketh the vowes of Christ to haue bene the promises, that heThe o∣wes of Christ. made to be borne or to die: but afterward he geueth an other sense, which is more agreable to the letter. For Christe had spo∣ken before of his passion, and had made petition for his resurre∣ction, and saith: he wil now performe the vowes which he made for the obteining of his resurrection.
Those vowes were to haue Gods name tolde, and his  published. To that ende serueth the mystery and sacrifice of his body & blood: for God is thanked in the Eucharist, and praised1. Co. 10 in the cup of blessing, as in y• publike sacrifice instituted by Christ1. Co. 11. to remaine in his Church, vntill his second comming. There∣fore, when he saith, I will performe my vowes, he meaneth: I wil offer the sacrifice of my body and blood, as S. Hierome ex∣poundeth it. And therein S. Augustine fully agreeth with him saying: QuaeAug. cō∣ment. 2. in Ps. 21. sunt vota sua? Sacrificium, quod obtulit deo. Nostis quale sacrifi∣cium? Norunt fideles vota quae reddit coram timentibus eum.Sacrifi∣cium. And afore. Sacramenta corporis & sanguinis mei reddam coram timentibus eum. What are his vowes? The sacrifice which heIn com∣ment. hath offered to God. Knowe ye what maner of sacrifice? TheSacrifice Uowes. faithfull knowe the vowes which he rendereth before them, thatSacra∣ments. feare him. I will render the Sacramentes of my body & blood before them, that feare him. Cassiodorus consentth, saying: Vota mauult intelligi Sacra∣mētaCassiod. in Ps. 21. corporis & sanguinis sui, & caet. He rather would, the voweUowes. be vnderstanded the Sacramentes of his body and blood, theSacra∣ments. which are rendred those being present, which are subiecte to him in holy feare. To be shorte, see what foloweth: the poore shal eateEating. and be filled. These are the vowes whereof he spake before.eda in Psal. 21. S. Bede also writeth: Vota quae feci, cum meipsum in ara cru∣cis obtuli, illa reddam in Ecclesia magna, id est, iterum per quoti∣diana sacrificia meorum in sacramentis offeram. vota dico eadem verè, in cōspectu timentium eum, id ist, quantū ad intellectum bo∣norum: etsi non sint eadem in conspectu malorum, qui nihil in Sa∣cramentis, nisi quod exterius apparet, intelligunt. The vowes. which I made, when I offered my selfe on the altar of the crosse,
those I will render in the greate Church: That is to say, I willSacra∣ments. offer them againe in the Sacramentes, by the daily sacrifices of my (ministres.) I meane the same vowes in dede, in the sight ofSacri∣ices. them that feare him, to witte, concerning the vnderstanding of the good men: albeit they be not the same in y• sight of euil men,Under∣standing. who vnderstand nothing in the Sacramentes, but that whichAppering appereth outwardly. Here S. Bede expoundeth the rendering of the vowes of Christe to be the offering of the very same body & blood, which was offered vpon the crosse: And that the good see by faith, and vnderstand by beleuing more, then the eye seeth. But the euil men will vnderstand no more, then they see: iudging that whichThe sub∣gement of euill men. semeth bread and wine, to be still in dede bread and wine. But the truth is, the same substance of Christes flesh and blood is of∣fered in the Sacramentes: which was offered on the crosse. Concerning my purpose S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Cassio∣dorus, Bedafull well agree, this place to apperteine literally toArnob. in Ps. 21. the Sacrament of the altar. Yea Arnobius, who was elder then all they, saith: that Christ being vpon the Crosse praieth for them that crucifie him, that his praise may bee in the greate Church, and that he may render his vowes before them which feare him. Dum edunt corpus eius pauperes Spiritu, whiles the poore in spirit shal eate his body. Neither doe the Latines only expound this place ater that sorte, but also the Grecians. Euthyms hauing expounded the vowes to be the promisesEuthy. in Ps. 21. of praising Gods name, and the eating of the poore men to be their feeding vppon the doctrine of the Apostles, addeth also the other interpretation, saying: Vel aliter, comedent fideles Salua∣toris corpus cum quo & sanguinem eius bibent, &c. Or els, accor∣ding to an other meauing, the faithfull shall eate the body of our Sauiour, wherewith they shall drink also his blood. And shall be
silled, verily filled with the holy Ghost, and shall extoll God with hymnes and praises in that table. So that the former versicle may conteyne not only a prophecie of the Gospell, but also the mysti∣call Sacrament of that table. In which interpretation the Fathers agree so throughly, that they conferre those words of the palme, their hartes shall liue for euer, with those of Christ, I am the bread of life, and, if any manPsal. 21. eate of this bread, he shall liue for euer. Now if this psalme do li∣terallyIoan. 6. speake of the offering and eating of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of his supper, (as ye see plainly it doth) it can not be auoided, but the same place shal proue, that the body & blood of Christ must be adored in the Sacrament. For y• same yt is eaten is here prophecied also as a thing to be adored. It is sayd manducauerunt & adorauerunt, they haue eaten & haue adored. Both be referred to one thing. But they haue ea∣ten is referred to the Sacrament of the altar, therefore they haue adored, is referred to the same Sacrament. Apostoli vel caeteri sancti (sayeth S. Hirome) manducauerunt corpus Christi. TheHieron. in Ps. 21. Apostles and other saiutes haue eaten the body of Christ: where∣vppon it foloweth that they haue adored it also. S. Augustine expresseth it more plainly: Manducauerunt cor∣pus, & caet. Euen the riche of the earth haue eaten the body of the lowlines of their Lord. They are not filled so, that they wil folow (as the poore men were) but yet they haue adored. Behold three verbs, which all belong to the very body of Christ, eating, ado∣ring,The verbs. filling. The poore in spirite haue eaten and adored (because al nations haue adored before him) and they are filled. The riche haue eaten and are not illed, but yet they haue adored. What haue they both eaten? The body of Christ WherewithThe cases belonging to y• verbs are the poore filled? With the body of Christ. What haue yt riche adored? The body of Christ, but yet they are not filled therewith
because they will not folow the humilitie of Christ. And seing this eating prteyneth to the Sacrament of Christes supper (as it was before prourd) the adoring also apperteyneth to the same Sacrament. That is eaten which appeareth to be bread, there∣fore that self substāce is adored, which appearing bread is in dede the truth of Christes own body. S. Bede expoundeth the adoring thus: Adorabunt, quia cum. quadam exteriori veneratione accedent. They shal adore, because they shall come with a certeyne outward worshipping. Behold, the worshipping of the riche is outward and not from the hart, whereas it ought to haue beue both outward and inward, both in spirit and in truth. But through their hypocrisie it consisteth only in bowing their bodies, because other men do so, and not in true and perfite charitie of God. Moreouer S. Augustin speaketh in an other place of the sameAug. in ep. 120. matter: Suprà dictum est, edent pauperes & saturabūtur, hîc verò,ad Hon ratū c. 27 manducauerunt & adorauerunt, & caet. It was sayd before, the poore shal eate and shal be filled. But here it is sayd, all the richeThe table of Christ. of the earth haue eaten & haue adored. For they also are brought to the table of Christ. And they take of his body and blood. ButAdoratiō. they adore only, and be not filled also, because they folow not. For although they eate (Christ the poore man) yet they disdaine to be poore. And againe, quia Deus excitauit eum a mortuis, &c. Because God hath raised him from the dead, and hath geuen him a name the which is aboue euery name, that in the name of Iesus euery knee should be bowed of heauenly, earthly, and ofWhat brin geth the riche or ye earth to adore. things vnder the earth. They also moued with the fame of his highnes, and with the glorie of his name (which glorie is spred round about in the Church) they come them selues to the table, they eate and adore, but yet they are not filled, because they doe not hunger and thyrst righteousnes. Hitherto S. Augustine,
who speaketh of eating the body of Christ from the table. The riche men come to the table of Christ thence to eate hisFrom the table they eate and adore. body. There also they adore that which they take from the table, and that which they eate. And how is it possible, but that this worshipping and adoring (whereof S. Augustine speaketh) must belong to the table of Christ, that is to say, to his body aud blood which is eaten from his table, when the Priest geueth it to vs? And yet it might not there be rightly adored, if it were not realy present vppon the table. And there it can not be present, vnlesse it ve vnder the formes of bread and wine, which only stand vppon the table. Therefore this prophecie as wel proueth ye adoration, as the real presence of Christes body and blood. Is it not a great blindnes in our new preachers, that whereas the word of God sayeth euen the riche of the earth haue eaten and haue adored, or shal eate and shall adore, (for so one tense doth stand for an other in the holy Scripture) yet they wil haue ye eate, and not adore, to th'intent ye should be more vnkind, thn those earthly riche men were? ¶ The adoration of Christes body is proued againThe secōd Chapiter. out of the Prophet Dauid. THe Prophet Dauid speaking of the Kingdome of Christ, which he exercised vpon the crosse by conquering the deuilIn Ps. 98 and synne, requireth vs, to gene praise to him for it: and not only to him, but euen to his footestole, writing thus: Exal∣tate Dominum Deum nostrum, & adorate scabellum pedum eius quoniam sanctum est. Exalte the Lord our God, and worship his footestole, because it is holy. The Hebrew readeth, because he is holy. It is to be vnderstanded, that Christ in one person hath two natures: to wit, the nature of God and y• nature of man. Dauid
willeth both to be adored, and first he speaketh of the Godhead,God is to be adored absolutely Adoratiō is dew to yt manhod through y• vnion. saying: Exalte the Lord our God. Next after of his humane na∣ture, in those words: Adorate scabellum pedum eius, worship his footestole, for Godly honour is due to his flesh also, because he is holy: That is to say, because his person is the second person in the Trinitie: where vnto the manhod is vnited. And through that vnion, the nature of man is worthy of Godly honour. The Iewes accompted the footestole of God to be the ArkeThe fote∣stole. and temple of Hierusalem: toward which they bowed and ado∣red God in their tyme of prayers. But aswell the Arke, as theThe Arke. Temple were the shadowes of Christes flesh, and that not only as he was in the visible forme of man: but euen as he is mysti∣cally vnder the forme of bread. For the Arke did foreshadow theAngelo. in 2. Re▪ cap. 6. Sacrament of Christes body & blood, as Angelomus hath no∣ted. Sacerdos qui Arcam, & caet. The Priest (Oza) who touched yt Arke with vnaduised rash∣nes, purged the fault of his bolde enterprise with death before his tyme: wherein we must nedes consider, how much he syn∣neth,The body The Arke was the figure of our Lords body. who cometh gilty to the body of our Lord, seing yt deuout Priest is punished with death: who with lesse reuerence then he ought, hastely handled that Arke, which was the figure of our Lords body. Againe the Arke cōteined Manna in it, which was an expresse figure of the flesh of Christ in that respect, as it is toHeb. 9. Ioan. 6. be eaten of vs: as both Christ him self hath declared in S. Ihon,Cyril. li. 4. cap. 19 and S. Paul in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Likewise the Temple was a figure of Christes body, accor∣ding1. Co. 10. as him self sayd: Dissolue ye this Temple (of my body) andThe Tē∣ple. and in three days I wil raise it vp againe. The Arke therefore andIoan. 2. the Temple being the footestole of God, toward which y• Iewes prayed, did signifie: that the flesh of Christ should be adored not only in heauen, whether Christ is entred as into the euerlastingHeb. 9.
, and most holy of holies: but also in the Sacrament of the altar, which is the Arke, Temple, and essell, conteining the self same substance of Manna, which sitteth at the right hand of God the Father. The holy Prophet Dauid requiring vs to adore the footestole of God, requireth vs to adore the flesh of Christ, as well in the Arke of the new Testament (which is the Sacrament of Chri∣stes body) as in heauen it self, because he that hath ascended into heauen, and sitteth at the right hand of his Father, sayd also in his last supper: Take and eate, this is my body: Doe and make. 22. this thing for the remembrance of me. Neither doe I make, or first inuent such interpretation: but the Fathers of the first six hundred yeres left it vnto me, sauing that they expound y• foote∣stole to be, not only the Arke and Temple of ierusalem: butThe arth is y• . also the whole arth in respect of the Godhead, because Esate sayeth: Heauen is my seate, the arth is the settle of my feete. ButEai. 66. herein wee may rest in S. Hieromes aucthoritie, who vpon this place writeth thus. Multae de scabello opiniones sunt, & caet. There are many opi∣nionsHieron. in Ps 98. concerning the orestole, what it should be. But here the Prophete meaneth our Lords body, wherein the maiestie of theThe body of Christe is the . diuine nature standeth as it were on a . How so euer then wee interpret the fotestole, concerning the literall and firs meaning: yet the naturall flesh of Christe, which he assumpted of the virgin, is the spiritual truth, wherevnto the Prophete di∣rected his wordes. That flesh, where so euer it be, is the fotestole of God, and therefore it is euery where to be adored. But as the Arcke deserued a speciall reuerence amonge the Iewes, although it was the bare figure of Christes flesh, in so much that Oza, who touched it rashly, died for it: euen so the Sa∣crament2. Reg. 6 of the altar, which is both the truth ad the figure of
Christes visible body, must by the force of this Prophey be ado∣redDe spiri∣tu sancto li 3. ca. 13 among all faithfull Christians. Therefore S. Ambrose di∣sputing of this fotestole saith: Per scabellum terra intelligitur, per terram autem caro Christi: quam hodieque in mysterijs ado∣ramus. By the fotestole the earth is fotestole, by the earth ye flesh of Christ, which this day also wee adore in the mysteries.Adoratiō of Chri∣sted fleshe in the my∣steries. When he saith, wee adore the flesh of Christ euen at his day in the mysteries: what other thing saith he, then, we adore the flesh of Christe at masse, or in the supper of Christe, or vpon the altar, or vpon the holy table? For all these names mean, that the flesh of Christe is worshipped after consecration vnder the formes of bread and wine. S. Augustine likewise cōsidering yt Dauid willeth vs to adoreAug. in Psal. 98. the footestole of our Lord, and that  saith in the person ofEa. 66. God, heauē is to me a seate, the earth is my footestole, & doubting how we, that professe to adore one God, may worship earth, fin∣deth at the last, that Christ tooke earth of earth, to wit, flesh of theTooke. walked. virgins flesh: and because Christ walked in the very same flesh here, and gaue vs the very same flesh to be eaten to saluation, andGaue. no man eateth that fleshe, except he first hath adored: it is found how such a footestole of our Lords may be adored, and how we may not only not synne by adoring: but how we may synne by not adoring. Behold, the flesh which Christ tooke of y• virgin, in the same he walked, and the same he gaue to be eaten. He toke true flesh and reall flesh, he walked in the substance of natural flesh: therefore he gaue vs the substance of the same flesh to be first adored, and then to be eaten. If you say, he gaue it in a figure: then he walked in flesh in a figure, he tooke flesh in a figure, For the same substance, which he toke and walked in, he gaue vs: albeit he gaue it so, as it might be most conueniently eaten vnder the form of breade,
whereunto all men are most vsed. S. Augustine considering the foolish vnderstanding of theIn Psal. 98. Capharnaits worthely saith (as it were to them) in Christes per∣son: ye shall not eate this body, whiche you see, nor drinke that blood which they shal shed who shal crucifie me. Sacramentū ali∣quodA Sa∣crament. cōmendaui vobis, I haue cōmended a certaine Sacrament to you▪ spiritualiter intellectū viuificabit vos, being spiritually vn∣derstāded it wil make you liue. Et si necesse est illud visibiliter ce∣lebrari, oportettamē inuisibiliter intelligi. Although it must nedes be celebrated visibly, yet it must be vnderstanded inuisibly. The last wordes of S. Augustine must agree with the first,We must eate the bodytakē, but not the body sene. and then it shale true, both that we must eate the self same flesh, which Christ toke of the virgin: and yet not that body, which the Capharnaits saw. why? Did not the  see the body, which Christ tooke of the virgin? How then must we eate the flesh which he tooke, and not that body which they saw? If men will not affect blindnesse, it is easy to vnderstand: that all corporall natures consist of an inuisible substance, and of a vi∣sible forme. The forme of Christes body was that, which the Ca∣pharnaitesThe body sene. saw: but the substance o Christes body is that, which we must eate. Christe tooke not that greatnes and quantitie of flesh of his mother, wherein he walked: for his greatnesse increa∣sedThe body taken. from the state of an infant to the state of a perite man. ThatLucae 1. increased quantitie the Capharnaites saw, but the substance of his fleshe was neither increased nor diminished. That same stan∣dingThe body takē, wal∣ked in and eaten. substance Christ tooke of his mother, in that he walked, and that he gaue vs to eate vnto saluation. That substance we how vnto before we eate it. But the forme & shape of that substance we eate not: for Christ hath geuen it vs vnder the forme of bread, & his blood vnder the form of wine. Now this gift, wherein y• truth of substāce is real∣ly
geuen without the visible form of flesh and blood, is the gift of he Sacrament: that is it, which being spiritually vnderstand edSpiritual vnderstan ding. wil quicken vs to life enerlasting. That was the vnderstanding, which being denied to the proud & stubborn Chapharnaits (whoIoan. 6. would not beleue) was reueled to the humble Apostles, who ta∣riedCyrill. li. 4. in Ioā. cap. 14. with him vntill his last supper. There they lerned, how the same body was geuen them to be eaten: which was taken of the virgin, and which was betraied for vs: And yet not that, which the Capharnites saw: the same inThe same & not the same. substance, but not the same in apparence. For Christ taking bread sayd, This is my body, which is geuē for you: take & eate. ThereLuc. 22. the Apostoles saw that, which semed stil bread: but vnder the form of the bread Christ gaue the selfe same flesh, wherein he walked in this life: and he so gaue it, that it might be adored not only whiles it was eaten, but before: for no man eateth it, nisi prius adorauerit, except he adore it before. That word, before, sheweth,Before. that it is the flesh of Christ before we eate it, and consequently y• it is consecrated by the Priest speaking the words of Christ ouer the bread and wine. S. Augustine was so fully persuaded, that the flesh of Christe was to be adored vnder the forme of breade after consecration: that he teacheth the Christian people to adore it, not as common flesh, but as the flesh of God, for whose sake we adore it▪ thereforeEarth, that is to say Chri∣stes flesh. he saith: Cùm ad terram quamlibet, &c. When thou bowest thy self, or fallest down before any earth, looke not vpon it as earth: but looke vpon that holy one, whose fotestoole it is whiche thou adorest. for thou adorest for his sake. S. Augustin calleth the flesh of Christ earth, because flesh was made of earth. And Christ toke flesh of our Ladies flesh. This flesh he calleth earth. And for asmuch as he had said, that no mā did eate that flesh, except he had adored before: he sheweth, how
we must adore, verily not resting vpon the earth, to wit, vppon the flesh of Christ: but looking to his person, in whom that earth resteth, as if he said: the footestole is to be adored for his sake, that sitteth on that stoole. But now, good Reader, I besech thee, as thou hast care of thy saluation, and doest desire to be enformed of the truth concerning the adoration of this Sacrament, to ponder well these words, Ad terram quālibet cū te inclinas atque prosternis. when thou bowest or laiest thy selfe prostrate before any earth. What meane theseTerra quaelibet. words, Ad terram quālibet, before any earth? Hath Christ moe fleshes then one? For by earth, thou knowest, he meaneth Chri∣stes fleshe. What is it then to say, before any earth? Doubtlesse before any hoste consecrated. Doubtlesse before any flesh of Christ, made vn∣der the forme of bread and wine. that is called any earth, not be∣cause Christ hath any moe then only one body and one blood andThe only one fleshe of Christe is vnder many formes of bread. one earth, which is to be adored: but because that one earth is in many places, after the sorte I said before: to wit, vnder many formes of bread. That is it, which S. Augustine saith: when thou bowest thee, or doest cast thy selfe prostrate before any flesh of Christ, in what soeuer Church, house, or place, in what soeuer altar, pix or table, where soeuer thou fallest doune prostrate before the Sacrament of the altar: adore it, so that thou remember the flesh is to be ado∣red for the persons sake, whose flesh it is. By this place it is inuincibly proued, that it was the customeThe only sense of S. of all Catholike people in S. Augustines tyme to be prostrate, toAugust. wordes. bow doune, and to adore the blessed Sacrament of the altar. ButProster∣nere. that should neuer haue bene suffered in Afrike no more then now it is suffered in England: except the real substāce of Christes fleshInclina∣. had bene certainly beleued of all men, to be present vnder the
formes of bread and wine. Therefore be thou assured, as those, y• now sorbid thee to adore the Sacrament of Christes supper, doe not beleue the flesh of Christ to be really present vnder the form of bread & wine: so they, who willed all Christians vnder paine of syn to adore the earth & flesh whiche they receaued, before that they recaued it, did vn∣doubtedly beleue the reall presence of Christes lesh vnder the vi∣sible formes of bread and wine. This was the faith of the first six hundred yeres, which dured from the Apostles tyme till this our daies, and yet dureth in all Catholike countries. ¶It is proued out of the Prophetes, that it can be noThe third Chapter. idolatrie to worship the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar. MAny things are to be abhorred, which are in these our daies taught againste the truth of the Gospell: yet neuer was any thing so maliciously inuented, so blasphemously vttered, so foolishly mainteined, as to say, that it is idolatrie to worship with godly honour the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar.Idols not takē away For that saying presupposeth, externall idols not to haue bene taken away by the comming of Christ: whiche is against the ex∣presse word of God. It presupposeth also, that idolatry should beIdolatrie maintei∣ned. mainteined among Christians them selues, not only in groes, hilles, and corners: but euen openly, in the middest of the whole Church by publike doctrine, and vniuersall practise, which neuer chaunced, no not among the Iewes. And (which is most abominable of all) it presupposeth, that Christ, who came to end and ouerthrow all idols, and speciallyChrist ge ueth the occasion o idtry. those, which were made by hand of man, now him selfe should geue occasion, why his own people should worship bakers bread
and wine of the grape, and that this idolatry should be commit∣ted by pretense of his owne word: yea that it should be done vn∣to him selfe in his owne mysteries falsely and wickedly, if by any meanes Christ may be falsely adored. Can there yet a more lewd and foolish pointe be added to this opinion? Yea verily. They that teache the worshipping of the Sacrament of the altar to be idolatry, say: the Bishop of Rome was the cause of that worshipping, they teach also the Bishop of Rome to be Antichrist: whiche Antichrist is well knowen to im∣pugne by al meanes the honour of Christ. And yet they confesse, yt2. Thes. 2 both only Christe made and instituted the same Sacrament, and that the Bishop of Rome him selfe worshippeth the same. Thus at the length it commeth about, that Antichrist finding this great mystery made by Christ, setteth it vp to be worshipped of others, and him selfe worshippeth the same, all together pretending the honour of Christ, and yet intending thereby (as they say) to de∣bate his honour. Who euer saw a doctrine so euill hanging to∣gether? Antichrist (as S. Paul saieth) aduersatur, is an aduersarie, that2. Thes. 2 Antichrist is to say, he is one that setteth him selfe against Christ, and aduā∣ceth him selfe aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he doth sitte in the temple of God, shewing (or boasting) him selfe, as if he were God. Behold, Antichrist setteth him selfeThe pope is not like Antichrist against Christ, and much lesse would he be content (as the Pope is) to call him self the vicar of Christ, or seruant of his sernants. Againe, Antichrist is aduanced aboue all that eyther by nature or by deceite of the Deuill is worshipped. His pride is so great, that he wil not only disoaine to bow to any externall ydoll (for that cōmeth of a superstitious feare and pusillanimity) but also he will not yeld to God him selfe. When S. Paul saieth, he is ad∣uanced2. Thes. 2
aboue all that is called God: He meaneth aboue all false Gods, who are Gods by name and not in truth: As Iuppiter, Mars, Uenns, Minerua were. So that we are assured by the ex∣presse worde of God, that Antichrist shall set vp no ydoll besydes his own selfe. He shall say him selfe to be God, and shall shew false signes & miracles able to deceiue those wicked me: who disdayning theWho sh∣be decea∣ued by An tichrist. felowship of the knowen Church, and the saith of their fathers, thinke them selues able to plant a new faith according to the vn∣derstanding whiche they conceaue of Gods worde. That is the chefe way for Antichrist to preuale, if the preaching of nine hun∣dred yeres, and the saith of so many Christian countries may be dispised, and consequently a new religion sought out: at the de∣uising whereof, ye may be sure, y• deuil is president of the coūsel. To come to our purpose, Antichrist is aduanced by him selfe aboue all idols: therefore he shall set vp no idoll besides him self. And consequently if the Pope be Antichrist, he setteth not vp any idoll besides him selfe. But our aduersaries confesse, the Pope toThe pope adoreth y• Eucharis set vp the body and blood of Christe to be adored of all men, and him selfe to adore the same: herefore the Pope is not Antichrist. You will say, he may be a limme of Antichrist, although he beAn obiec∣tion. not Antichrist, him selfe. I answere, euery lymme of AntichristThe ∣swere. is like his head and the rest of the body, whereof he is a lymme: Antichrist is he, that professeth him selfe an aduersary to Christ, and goeth about to diminish his honour. But the Pope profes∣seth him selfe to haue all his whole honour of Christ, and geueth all the whole honour he can deuise, to Christ. He worshippeth the Sacrament of the altar, because it is the body of Christ. He re∣uerenceth the signe of the Crosse, because it is signe of Christ. He praieth to the Saints, which are now in heauen, because they are1. or. 12 members of Christ, being assined, they heare his praier in Christ
theyr head, with whome they make one body.The lym∣mes of An tichrist. Those are the lymmes of Antichrist, who can abyde neither the godly worshipping of Christes body, nor the reuerent vsing of his holy Crosse, nor the inuocation of his dere frindes and members. For if that, which is done to the lest of Christes ocke, be done to him selfe: how much more is that honour, which is done to the Sacrament of his own body and blood; most direct∣ly done to him selfe? wherefore it is out of all peraduenture, that to honour the Sacrament of the altar, it can be no idolatry, ex∣cept Christ him selfe be an idoll. But if Christ be God (as S. Paule saieth) blessed for euer a∣boueRom. 9. all thigs: then surely the honouring of his dody is the wor∣shipping of God, to whō that body is ioyned in oe person. And vnreasonable is it to thinke, that, whereas Christ hath by the taking of his body, deliuered the earth from idols, now the Sa∣crament of the same body should becomme it selfe the greateste idoll that euer was? The kingdom of God, for the comming of the which we daily make petition in our Lordes praier, is perfitely come when it isMatt. 6. The king dō of God. euident to all men, that there is but one God: who both made and ruleth all thinges, and who by the incarnation and passionDeut. 6. of his only begotten sonne redeined and saued al the elect, which1. Tim. 2. shall be most perfitely seen at the day of general iudgement. And therefore Esaias speaking of that day sayth: Eleuabitur dominus solus in die illa, & idola penitus conterentur. The Lorde aloneEsa. 2. shalbe aduanced in that day, and idols shal be vtterly destroyed. In the meane time they are so in parte destroied, as the king∣dome of God is begonne in parte. For Iohn Baptist sayd, theMatt. 3. Kingdome of heauen is drawen nere: and Christe expressely tel∣lethLuc. 17. the phariseis, Ecce enim regnum Dei intra vos est. For be∣hold the Kingdome of God is within you. And in S. MathewMatt. 13.
in maine parables he sheweth, the present Church gathered in his name to be the Kingdome of heauen. Contrariwise Baby∣lon,The king dome of darknes. Samaria, Aegypt, Edom, Tyrus, and Sydon stand in holy scripture to betoken the Kingdome of the deuil, of the world, of Darknesse, of heresie. Now when the Prophetes will shew, that the idols and false religion, which the Deuill hath procured to be set vp, shal be de∣stroied by Christe: they vse to say, the idols of Babylon, or ofIere. 50. Aegypt shal be ouerthrowen. In which forte Ieremie saith: Tell tidinges among the Gentils, and make your voice heard: lift vp a signe, crye out, cease not, but say: Babylon is taken, Bell is con∣founded, Merodach is ouercome, His grauen Gods are con∣founded, their ils are ouercome.Ezec. 30. Ezechiell writeth in the person of God: I will destroie y• coun∣terfait images, and make the idols of Memphis to cease. Mi∣cheasMich. 1. vseth the same phrase concerning Samaria: All the grauen images thereof shalbe broken, And all the rewardes of it shalbeSoph. 2. burned with fyer. And I will bring destruction to all the idols thereof. In Sophonias it is written, that God shal bring doune all the Gods of the earth.Zach. 13. Zacharie also witnesseth, that when the fonte (of Baptisme) shalbe open to wash away the synnes of Iuda and Hierusalem: it shall come to passe in that daie (saith the Lorde of hostes) I will destroie the names of idols from the earth, and they shall omore be had in remembrance: and I will take awaie from the earth false Prophetes and the vncleane spirite.Psal. 9. Last of all Dauid saith to Christ, thou haste sitten vpon theD Deuil is perished throne, who iudgest righteousnes: thou haste reproued the Gen∣tils, and the wicked is perished thou haste blotted out theirIdols are the sword of the names for euer and euer, the swordes of the enemy haue failed, thou hast destroied theire Cities, the memory of them is lostDel.
with the sownde, and our Lorde tarieth for euer. Thus much may  for shewing the destruction of idols and of the power of the Deuill. howbeit a greate booke might be made out of the holy scripture of that argument. S. Augustine confesseth: praedictum esse a Prophetis, quòd vnūAugust. in lib. de diuina∣tione dae∣monum. Deum essent culturae gentes, exterminatis dijs falsis, quos anteà colebant. That it was forspoken of the Prophetes, that the na∣tiōs should worship one God, the false Gods, whom they wor∣shipped before, being cast out. Athanasius writeth thus: Vbi nominatur vel Christus vel fi∣desAthana∣sius de In carnatio neverbi. eius, inde omnis idololatria depellitur, & daemonum insidiae patefiunt. Where either Christ or his faith is named, thence all idolatrie is driuen: and the deceitfull guiles of the deuils are de∣tected and made open. Lo, the name of Christ putteth away all idolatry. I am sure, it can not be denied, but the name of Christ is andThe Pa∣pts be no idolatours euer hath bene among the Papistes: how then are they burde∣ned with so foule a kind of idolatrie, as to worship bread & wine in stede of our makers body and blood? S. Hierome affirmeth,Hieron. in li. 2. in Esaiam. cap. 41. Post aduentum Christi omnia idola conticuisse, all idols to haue holden their peace, after the coming of Christ. It is therefore so true, that all idolatrie hath by the coming of Christ bene remo∣ued from his Church: that lightly not so much as any heretike (how so euer he deuised new spirituall fornicatiōs and idolatry)Spiritual idolatry. yet hath professed to worship any artificiall idoll made with the hands of man. The Manichees in dede adored the visible Sonne, whichThe Ma nichees idolatours wee see shine, as a part of the light, wherein God dwelt: but yet it were more grosse, to adore bread: sithens the Sonne is at the least a heauenly creature, aboue the reache of men, and in great admiration. But the husband man first soweth the corne, and
repeth, putteth it in his , the llet grindeth it, & the bakerBread is not the God of y• Papists. maketh it into a loaf. And is this at the length our God? Are we become so insensible, after the light of the Gospell: as to adore the worke of bakers hands? Did not S. Augustine see at y• leastPsal. 98. the daunger of this idolatrie, when vnder paine of synning he pronounced: that enry man ought to adore any earth or flesh of Chr, before he did eate? Did not S. Ambrose vnderstand thisDe spiri. sancto. li. 3. ca. 12 idolatrie, when he sayd: to this day we adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries? But we so many hundred yeres brought vp in the faith of Christ are so foolish, as to adore a dead peece of bread, as our ad∣uersaries belie vs. S. Chrysostome writeth, that in his tyme ve∣ryIn li. cō∣tra Gen∣tiles. few Cities were left, where idolatrie was vsed. And yet doe all the Cities not only of Mahomete, of the Tartarians, of the ores, but doe all the Cities of Christendome stil commit open idolatrie? For, I am sure, no Protestant aliue cā deuise any Ci∣tie of the Christians vnder the Sonne: where Christes body & blood was not worshipped (as it shall appeare also hereafter) vnder the formes of bread & wine, openly, as well in the Greke as in the Latine Churches these many hundred yeres together. Where was then y• Church of Christ? Was our Sauiour, who was promised to inherite al nations, brought to that straightes:Psalm. . that he had not one chappell reserued to him in all the world, where idolatry was not outwardly committed? And how com∣mitted? by pretence of his owne Gospell, of his owne word, of his own dede. It was Christ, that sayd: This is my body. It wasMath. 26 he, that sayd: Ye beleue in God, beleue also in me. I and my FatherIoan. 14. are one thing or substance. If it be so, wee must worship him: asIoan. 10. wee adore his Father. And his body is vnited to his diuine per∣sone. Yea, say you, but it is not his body: but bread still, appointedAn obie∣ction.
to figure his body. Well Syr, he sayd, it is his body, and all theThe aun∣swer. Church hath so far beleued him: that all Christians haue wor∣shipped it for euer, as being his true body. That faith of theirs1. Co. 15. ioyned with those words of Christ proue to me, that it is his bo∣dy, and therefore no idol. Moreouer, I thinke my self bound, to beleue the Prophetes: who sayd, Christ should destroy y• idols of the earth, which literally is by S. Athanasius, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome and S. Augustine, and by many others expoun∣ded of externall idolatry: whereby men fell doune geuing Godly honour to creatures. Such a worshipping, after the iu∣carnationExternall idolles be destroyed. of Christ, is decayed in the whole world euen among infidels: much more it ought to be decayed among the faithfull. And yet, if our idolatrie be any, it is externall. What say wee then? Is there now a days no idolatry in Chri∣stendome? Are there no false Gods worshipped? yes doubtlesseOutward idolatry. to many. But idolatry partly is outward, partly is inward. The outward idolatry is decayed by the outward and visible coming of Christ into the world: The inward is decayed by the faith and charitie of good people. But because not al, yt be outward Chri∣stians,Inward idolatry. be the true seruantes of God: therefore they still worship idols in their hartes. They adore mony, for the desier where ofGal. 5. they sel benifices and cure of soules without feare, and are con∣tentEph. 5. to robbe euen Churches and monasteries: although they thinke wel inough both of Priests and Monkes, as they vse to say. These inward idols bee not taken away, but where Christ is inwardly professed. And for asmuch as likewise y• outward idols be taken away, where Christ is outwardly professed: it can not be, that those, who beare the name of Catholikes and Christiās, should adore by common consent any outward idoll. Is there then no outward idol at all? Noue surely made with the hands
of men among Christians. But yet there lack not inuisible idols made by the wit of men, whereof S. Cyprian speaketh in this wise. Christi aduentu detectus ac prostratus inimicus, videns idolaCypria. de vnita∣te Eccle∣siae. derelicta, & caet. The enemy detected and throwen doune by the coming of Christ, seing the idols forsaken, and his seates and Temples left voide through the great multitude of beleuers, de∣uisedIdols forsaken. a new guile: that vnder the very title of Christes name he may deceaue the vnwary. He hath found heresies and schismes:Heresies and schis∣mes are y• idols after Christes coming. whereby he might ouerthrow faith, corrupt truth, and cutte of vnitie. Lo, the heresies and the schismes are the idols, that be in∣uented since y• coming of Christ. If you wil knowe a true marke of an idolatour: note him y• diuideth vnitie, that maketh parts, that goeth from agreement. Fifty yeres past there was but one body of the whole West Church. All worshipped one God, one Christ, one body and oneThe vn∣tie of our fore Fa∣thers. blood of his. Al were vnder one shepherd the Bishop of Rome. Al spake one tong in publike seruice of the West Church, all keptLuther y• first idola tour of our age ann. 1517. one faith, acknowledged one truth. Luther arose, and sayd: The Pope was not our head. Straight vnitie was diuided. For one withdrew him self from the rest. Ergo Luther was the first ido∣latour. Anon after he had fellows, & a pretie flock of idolatours very visibly seen and knowen to dwel at Wittenberge. WithinAnn. 1522 fower yeres zuinglius diuided him self, not now from y• Pope, but euen from Luther, and made two idols of one. After whichTwo idols. tyme y• idols haue bene multiplied to the number of aboue threeThre score idols score that canbe named in Germany: as it may appeare in Fri∣dericus Staphylus. And as for the Sacramentaries in England, although theyThe Sa∣cramētary English idoll. haue receaued into the number of their Gods, y• chief idols both Auther and zuinglis: yet they worship the idoll of Taluine
aboue them both. For as S. Hierome saith. Sicut idola fiunt ma∣nuHierom. in Zacha riā. ca. 13. artificis: ita Haereticorum peruersa doctrina, quodcunque si∣mulauerit, vertit in idolum: & facit pro Christo adorari Anti∣christum. As idols be made with y• hand of the craftsmā, so what so euer the ouerthwart doctrine of Heretikes cloketh: it tur∣neth it into an idol, and causeth Antichriste to be adored in stede of Christe. As for example. Martin Luther, or Iohn Caluine being fully determined toThe fra∣ming of an Idoll. breake of from the reste of the Church, syt a deuising, sith they are at a point, not to teache the olde doctrine, what new doctrine they may teache. Then hath the Deuill power vpon them, for so much as they are finaly agred, not to be subiect to any master or preacher in the whole Church of God: no, though it were a whole generall Councell gathered out of all the men in y• earth. For that intolerable arrogancy the Deuill may rule them, as he. Tim. cap. 2. list: & therefore sendeth some wicked opinion into theire mindes, such as he hath plenty of. They a litle while pondering it, per∣happes idge it impossible to be admitted of men: as LutherIn Epist. ad Argen toraten∣ses. iudged of the deniall of the reall presence, wherein he laboured a certaine time, and in that case the Deuill inspireth a newe deuise. But when they are once agreed vpon that they will goe fore∣ward withall: they haue a strong imaginacion how certeine that opinion is, and with an excessiue pride acknowlege them selues the Prophetes of God, and imagine, what glory they shall come vnto among fooles and mad men. Albeit they must take them forThe fo∣lowers of heretikes. no fooles, who soeuer wil forsake the faith approued fiftene hun∣dred yeres together, and folow the new blast of theire trompet. But are they, trow ye, no fooles, because they think them selues none? Thus, when they haue gotten a sufficient schole and au∣diēce, they publish their doctrine vnder y• name of Gods worde, and so erct a phantasticall idoll.
But to say that the blessed Sacrament of Christe is an idoll,The Eu∣charist set foorth on∣ly by Christ can be no Idoll. semeth necessarily to imploy: that Christe iustituted an idoll. which to thinke, it were no small idolatry. For he and noman els made or published this Sacrament, to thend idolatry should cease: whiles wee did only adore that body and blood, which is vnited to the Godhead in one person. But yet if our Fathers did, and wee do worshippe wheaten bread and wine: our idola∣try were more grosse not only then that of the heretikes, but also then y• of the Gentils. But that is vtterly against the worde of God, therefore wee do not worship any creature at all, as where∣in the honour may rest: for the honour that wee geue to the body and blood of Christ, which was taken of the virgine, is accor∣ding to the doctrine of S. Augustine geuen to his holy person:In Ps. 98 who is the naturall Sonne of God, and one substance with his Father; true God and true man. Thus wee saue the truth of the olde Propheies, the faith of our forefathers, the proprietie of Christes wordes in his supper, the honour of his Church, the glory of his name: who gaue no occasion of idolatry neither in worde, nor in dede. ¶ The adoration of Christes body in the Sacrament is proued out of the new Testament.The iiij. Chapiter. S. Paule speaking of Sacramtal eating, saith: he that eateth and drinketh vnworthely, eateth and drinketh damnation to him self, not discerning our Lords body. that is to say,August. in Ioan. tracta. 62 not putting a difference betwene it, and other meates. For S. Hierome, S. Augustiue, Sedulius, and Primasius expoundThe o∣thers in 1. Cor. 11 those words in that meaning. The difference, which is to be made betwene the meate ofTwo dif∣ferences. Christes supper, and other meates, consisteth in two points: in one, that the receauer of Christes Sacrament must prepare himThe first.
self before hand, to be apt to receaue the grace of God in which point Baptisme, penance, holy orders and other Sacraments agree with the supper of Christe. For we may not come (being of lawfull age) to any of those or such like holy mysteries, with∣out due disposing our selues to repentance for our synnes, and to amendment of our life. The second point of the difference betwene Christes supper &The second. other things is: that in the Sacrament of his supper we must examine our selues, euen for the respect of the substance of that meate, which we receaue. In baptisme we try our selues not for any honour, which is due to the water: but for the obteyning of the grace, which is geuen in that Sacrament. But in the supper a farther difference is to be made. What is that? The very sub∣stance, which is taken, is to be honoured and adored. That is it, which S. Chrysoome sayth: Non considerans (vtIn 1. Co. Hom. 28 oportet) magnitudinem propositorum, non reputans muneris magnitudinem. He eateth vnworthely, sayeth S. Chrysostome: Who considereth not, as it behoueth, the greatnes of the things set foorth, not weighing diligētly the greatnes of the gift. He spea∣keth not of the effect, which cometh by the Sacrament: but of the substance of the things set foorth. What are they, but such as ap∣peare Bread and wine, and yet in dede be Christ him self. There fore it foloweth in S. Chrysostome. If thou doest lern diligently,who is set worth. qui sit propositus, who is set before thee: thou nedest to accompt nothing els. Behold, the person and substance set foorth is to be considered only, Nullius alterius indigebis ratione: Thou shalt nede make no accompt of any thing els. For out of that substāce, which standeth before thee, cometh the grace and all other effects of worthy eating: as if he sayd, pro∣uyde to receaue worthely the person set foorth to thee vnder the formes of bread: and thou mayest be secure. So that the differēce
properly belonging to Christes supper is, to make a difference of this substance from al other substances. That is the difference, whereof S. Ambrose saith: He that will receaue worthely this meate, must iudge, that heAmbros. is the Lorde whose blood he drinketh in a mystery. What other1. Cor. 11 meaning can these wordes haue, but that he must iudge him selfe to drinke not wine, but blood: not the blood of an earthly man, but his blood, who is God also. and that he drinketh his blood in a mysterie, to wit, not in his owne forme: but vnder the forme of wine, for he speaketh of Sacramentall drinking, & of that which is taken by mouth. Therefore the very substance, which he drin∣keth, must be disseuered from all other creatures. Nowe, I say, he that is willed so to iudge of the substance of this Sacrament, as the substance of him, who is God, ought to be iudged of: he is willed to adore the substance of this Sacra∣ment,. sith his substance ought to be adored, who is God. For, asIn 1. cor. hom. 24▪ Ipsa mē∣a. S. Chrysostom saith: the very table (to wit, the very meate stāding vpō the table) is the strength o our soul, the synewes of the mind, the bond of confidence, our foundation, hope, health, light, lyfe Thus to iudge o this Sacramēt, & by adoring it with true oue, in it to adore God, yt is to adore not only in spirite & figures, as y• Iewes dyd adore: but also to  in spirite and truth, as ChristIoan. 4. said we should do, because our Sacramēts cōteme y• truth, which they signiied: ot only signifying our Sauiour (as y• old Sacra∣mēts did) but also geuing saluatiō, as S. Augusti doth witnesse. And for as muche as the Sacrament of the body and blood ofIn Psal. 7. Christ is the Sacrifice of the new aw, willed by him to be madeLuc. 22. for the rembrance of his death: we must both in our spirite and in the truth of naturall coniunction be vted and made one with the substance thereof, and also in the truth of Christes flesh exter∣nally conscrated adore God, offering him that reasonable and
diuine sacrifice: to the end we may render and paie the worship of thanksgeuing due for our redemption, in none other substāce then in the same, which redemed vs. For as it is nostrum holo∣caustum,Cypr. de coena do min. our sacrifice wholy burnt by death of the Crosse: so is it nostra hostia pacifica, our sacrifice, wherewith we both geue thanks for peace made betwene God and vs, and also applie to our selues the fruites of that one burnt offerin & truse madeHeb. 10. vpon the Crosse: which was & is the propitiation for our synnes,1. Ioan. 2. and for the synnes of the whole world. This kind of adoration proper to the new testament, is due to God of our behalf, by the Sacrament and sacrifice of Christes body and blood. And herein staneth all that, which the Apostle1. Cor. 11 speaketh of worthy or vnworthy receauing: if the true substance of this Sacramēt be vprightly estemed, and both outwardly and inwardly honoured. And so doth S. Augustine expound y• Apost∣les minde, as now it shal appere. Ianuarius had asked, what S. Augustine thought concerning holy dayes, fasting dayes, or such like customes of the Church: which are diuersly kept in diuerse countries. Among other ques∣tions it was also moued, what were to be more approued: whe∣there to receaue daily the Sacramēt of the altar, or els to absteinAug. in epist. 118 Sacramē tū hono∣rare. sometymes? To this question S. Augustine maketh answer, that neither of them both depriueth the body and blood of our Lorde of honour: if eche of them striue, who may honour best the moste healthfull Sacrament. For as well the Centurion, as Zacheus did honour our Sauiour in maner by contrary meanes: the one by re∣ceauingLuc. 19. him with ioy into his house the other by saying▪ Lord IMatth. 8. am not worthy, that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe. And as among the Iewes  tasted to euery man, accor∣dingSapi. 26. l. 2. Retr. cap. 20. to his owne will, in the mouth of the faithfull: euen so it is to be iudged conceing the receauing that Sacrament (of the
altar) into euery Christians mouth. For both one man for ho∣nours sake, dareth not take it euery day: an other, for honours sake, dareth not once to take it in any day. As Manna would no lothsomnes, so this meate will no contempt. For the Apostle for that cause saith, it to haue bene vnworthely receaued of them: Qui hoc non discernebāt a caeteris cibis, vendratione singulariterA wor∣shipping singular∣ly . debita. Who did not discerne this thing, or make a difference of this thing, from other meates by a worshipping singularly . For straight, when he had said, he eateth and drinketh dam∣nation to him selfe: he said moreouer, Non diiudicans corpus do∣mini, not discerning our Lords body. the which appereth suf∣iently in all that place in the first epistle to the Corithians, if it be diligently marked. Thus far S. Augustine, whose wordes I haue rehersed the more fully: to thintent by the whole argument the Reader might the better iudge his minde. His answer in effect is: the honour ofHonour the Sacrament is the thing chefely to be attended: which sith it is honoured both of him, that for honours sake doth receaue, and of him, who for honours sake doth not receaue: eche of thē auoi∣deth the contempt thereof, and sufficiently putteth a differenceMaking a . betwene it and other meats: which difference being not put, was the cause, that some Corinthians did eate this meat vnworthely. Note well, good Reader, what I shall say: for this place is mar∣ueilouse notable. First S. Augustine speaketh euidently of the Sacrament ofSacra∣ment. Christes supper, and of Sacramentall receauing. 2. He signifieth that this Sacrament must not be dishonouredNo disho∣nouring. by any meanes, nor despised in minde or fact. 3. By dishonouring or despising he meaneth the omitting to geue it due honour in thought or deede, so that by all meanes the honour thereof must not be neglected, or left vndone.
4. We must striue, to honour this Sacrament: but whether it be done by this or by that meane, it skilleth not, so it be honou∣red. 5. It is a kind of honour done to it, sometyme to receaue it in∣to our mouthes for honours sake: sometyme, for y• same honours sake, not to receaue it. Put these two notes together, and it must nedes be: that he meaneth the honouring of that thing, which isThe thing in y• mouth is honou∣red. receaued into our mouthes. Then the honouring of y• Sacramēt is the honouring of that, which semeth bread and wine. but if it were in dede the substance of bread and wine, he would ueuer ex∣horte vs to be so carefull, how to honour a mere creature, were it neuer so greate a signe. But let vs yet goe forward. 6. The Sacrament, which is taken into our mouthes, is also That meat. called a kind of meate, cibus ille, that meate. 7. It is that kind of meate, which the Apostle would to be se∣parated, for honours sake, from other meates.Diiudi∣care. 8. What call ye separating for honours sake? He answereth, it was a fault, not to seperate it, veneratione singulariter debita, with a worship singularly due. 9. what is a worshipping singularly due, but such a worship∣ping:Singular orship. of which sorte there is but one? For that is singular, which is alone, and which hath no fellow. 10. Such a worshipping that only is, which is due to God: for as he hath no fellow in nature, so he hath no partaker in honour and worship. Therefore the Sacramēt, or that meat, which some∣timesGodly ho∣our. for honours sake we receaue into our mouthes, and some∣tymes for honours sake we absteine from: that selfe same substāce is to be honoured of vs with a singular duety of worshipping, or with a worshipping due in a singular manner. that is to say, with godly honour. I seke not hereby to declare only, that S. Augustine is of the
mind to haue the Sacrament and the meate receaued into our mouthes to be worshipped with a singular duety: but much more to shew, that he affirmeth S. Paule to meane so. For the fault of the Corinthians was not, to discerne this meat with a worship∣ping singularly due. For if they had worshipped it, as it ought to be worshipped: they would not haue taken it in their mouthes without they had first prepared them selues for the receauing of such a meate, so singularly to be worshipped. What figuratiue interpretation wil now serue? Is not Sacra∣mentum honorare, good latine? Is not the English of it, to ho∣nour the Sacrament? Is it not plainly said, cibum illum discer∣nere à caeteris cibis veneratione singulariter debita, to discerne that meate from other meates by a worshipping singularly due? Is that a worship, which may be geuen to any creature, which is not vnited to God? The meat in y• mouth must be so honoured, there∣fore that in the mouth is y• real, substācial, natural body of Christ. The Sacrament must be honoured, therefore the substance there∣in conteined is the body of Christ. Otherwise, shall we think, that S. Augustine, who so diligent∣lyAug. de ciui. Dei li. 10. c. 1. always disceeth y• kind of worshipping God, shal we think: that he wil haue material bread to be discerned and separated frō meates, by a worshipping singularly due? Did that greate Clerk so litle vnderstād, what singular worship was: that he gaue that name not only to holy men, or to the iust Angels, but euen to the vnsensible creatures of bread and wine? No, no. S. Augustin neuer doubted, nor none of all the faithfull: but that the Sacra∣mēt of y• altar was to be adored with godly honour, euen by the doctrine of S. Paule: because it conteineth, vnder the formes of bread and wine, the natural substance of Christes body and blood. It is worthy to be remembred, that S. Augustine vseth in this tum. place the word Sacramentum, for the substance of Christes flesh
vnder the signe of bread: otherwyse he would neuer haue taught, that eyther the substance of materiall bread, or the forme thereof, ought to be honoured. For honour can be geuen to no vnreasonable creatures. If this kind of vnderstanding the word Sacrament, be wel consydered: many places in S, Augu∣stine, otherwise very hard, wilbe much the easier to perceaue. Last of al, what should it meane y• S. Augustine saith: y• Sacra∣ment may be honoured by our absteining sometimes from recea∣uing it into our mouthes? It Were surely no honor done to God, if we should at any moment absteine to fede vpō him in faith or spirit. Why is it then some honour to his Sacramēt, not to be re∣ceiued in certaine cases? Was it not counted a vertue in y• Centu∣riō,Matth. 8. whē he said him self to be vnworthy, that Christ should enter vnder the roof of his house? And yet the same Centurion did not refuse, to receaue y• effect & grace of Christes word into his house. There is therefore a difference betwene the corporall coming of Christe into our house or body: and betwene the coming of his grace into our hartes. His grace can not come, except we first be made mete to receaue it: but his body may come to our bodies, & so may condemne our soules, before that we are made mete to re∣ceaue it. His grace therefore must come first to vs by faith and charitie, that we may thereby haue power to receaue worthely afterward his blessed body: least if we receaue it vnworthely, we take it to our damnation. But so great preparation should not be requi∣site, if our bodies receaued none other substance besyde bread and wine: for they are of baser degree, then eating by faith is. But now we may somtime absteine from the Sacrament euen for ho∣nour and reuerence, whiche we beare to it: and yet we may not absteine from eating by faith or spirite. Therefore it is a wor∣thier kind of substance, which is receaued in the Sacramēt: then
the grace is, which is the effect of spirituall eating. And seing it should not be a worthier thing, if it were the sub∣stance of bread and wine: we may be assured, the substance of the Sacrament to be that selfe body, whereof the Centurion sayd: Lord, I am not worthy, that thou shouldest enter vnder my roof. It is the honour of that body, whiche S. Paul and S. Augu∣stineOrigen. hom. 5. in diuersos Euang. respect, and not the honour of bread and wine: in so much, that the faithfull as well in the Greke as in the Latin Churche haue vsed alwas the very same wordes in adoring the Sacra∣crament:In liturg. whiche the Centurion vsed to Christ. one praier to oneChrys. & missall. Lord, the same reuerence to the same God and man.Roman. ¶ That the Fathers of the first six hundred yeres afterThe fyfth Chap. Christ did adore the body and blood of Christe in the Sacrament of the altar. DIonysius Areopagita, scholer to S, Paule, made a praier to the Sacrament of the Altar in these wordes: Sed ô tuDe eccl, Hierar. cap. 3. diuinum sanctumque Sacramentum, &c. but o thou diuine and holy Sacrament, open and display clerely to vs, as it were the veyles and clokes, wherewith thorough the signes of ob∣scurities thou art couered: and fill the eyes of our vnderstanding with suche clere light, as may no more be dymmed. Thus did that auncient Father pray, not to bread and wine, ye may be sure: but to that blessed body of our Lord, which is pre∣sent in the mysteries. Upon whiche place Pachymeres noteth,Pachyme res in his gree Pa rrasis. that S. Dionisius speaketh vnto the Sacrament, as being a thig which hath sense and life. and that worthely. For so the greate diuine Gregory saith: But o passouer, that great (I say) and holy passouer. For, that our passouer, and this self holy Sacrament, our Lord Iesus Christ him self is, to whō the holy man spaketh. Lo, this selfe holy Sacrament is Christ. And as nothing in the
world is our great and holy passouer, besyde Christ him selfe: soThe sub∣stance of our passo∣er & Sa∣cramt is ono this holy Sacrament hath none other substance at all, besyde the substance of Iesus Christ: who couereth him selfe, as it were, with the veyles of bread and wine. As you haue heard the most direct wordes of S. DionysiusChrist. adoring this blessed mystery, and of Pachymeres geuing the rea∣son why he did speake vnto it, as the which is Christe him selfe: now you shal perceaue, that all the other Fathers did beleue the same: in so much as all men will graunt, that they must needes adore that thing, which they confessed to be either Christ, or God, or one in person with the sonne of God.Cyp. li. 2 epist. 3. S. yprian writing of the Sacrament of Christes supper saith: In sacrificio quod Christus est, non nisi Christus sequendus est. In the sacrifice, which is Christ, only Christ must be followed. It is knowll well, what sacrifice we offer: how we take bread and wine, cōsecrating them by the wordes of the last supper, wherein it was said: This is my body, and this is my blood: doe and makeLuc. 22. this thing for the remembrance of me. This consecration of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, is our sacrifice, andOur Sa∣crifice. because Christ is not diuided nor dieth any more, but where his body and blood is, there him selfe is: therefore S. Cyprian saieth: Our sacifice is Christ.Rom. 6. Neither doth he speake of the death and passion, where Christ was our sacrifice bloodily: but he speaketh of the spper of our Lord, where we daily sacrifice Christ vnbloodily. For he speaketh of y• matter of cōsecration, which (he saith) must be wine mingled with water, and not water alone: because Christ made his owne blood of wine mingled with water. Now saith S. Cyprian, In the sacrifice, which is Christ, none must be followed, but Christ. If our sacrifice be Christ, because of bread and wine which we bring foorth the body and blood of Christ is made by his word: is it
possible, that Christe should not be worshipped of S. yprian is to be . with godly honour? If Christ be so worshipped, and our sacrifice be Christ: our sa∣crifice must be worshipped with Godly honour. our sacrifice (I say) because the thing, that is made by cōsecration, is none other besyde that body of Christe: which is the price of the world, and the only sacrifice for mankinde. The same thing S. AmbroseDe ijs qui mit. myst. c. 9 saith, euen as expressie of the Sacrament, which S. Cyprian speaketh of the sacrifice. In illo Sacramēto Christus est, quia cor∣pus Christi: in that Sacrament Christe is, because it is the bodyIgnat. in epist. ad Rom. of Christe. To the same purpose apperteine the words of S. Ignatius calling this Sacrament, the bread of God, the hea∣uenly bread, the bread of life: which thing (saith he) is the fleshAmb. li. 6. de Sa∣cram. c.  Euseb. li. 10. ca. 10. of Christe the Sonne of God. And of S. Ambrose, calling it the nourishment of the diuine substance, And of Eusebius Pamphili calling it Sacrificium Deo plenum. And againe, horrorē afferen∣tia mensae Christi sacrificia. a sacrifice full of God: and the sacri∣fices of the table of Christe making men to tremble and quake.Cyril. li. 3. in Ioā. ca. 37. And of Cyrillus saying, those that receaue those mysteries, to be made diuinae naturae participes. Partakers of the diuine nature. And again, corporaliter in nobis Christum habitare, & participa∣tioneLib. 4. cap. 18. naturali, that by these mysteries Christe dwelleth in vs cor∣porally, and by naturall partaking. And of Isychius, calling theIsych. l. 6 in cap. 22 Leuit. same mysteries the bread of life, & panes mysticos & viuificantes, and mysticall loaues, and those which quicken vs to life euer∣lasting. And is it to be thought, that Christ, that the bread of God, of life, the diuine substance, the sacrifice full of God, which maketh men tremble & quake, that y• mysteries, which cause Christe cor∣porally to dwell in vs, y• the nature of God, whereof we are par∣takers by eating, that the Sacrament of Christes supper, being al
this: yet should not haue godly honour done to it? Did al the Fa∣thers, who wrote thus of that mysterie, honour and worship it according to their own doctrine and writings? If all they and al the rest did professe that, which was vpon y• table of Christ, which was receaued at the holy cōmunion, which dwelleth bodily in vs, to be not only y• flesh and blood of Christ (for those words should be eluded with figures and signes) butThe God head can not be cor∣porally aten but in the Sa crament. to be the substance and nature of God (which nature is not pos∣sible to be eaten of vs corporally, otherwise then as it dwelleth  in the flesh of Christ, which we eate corporally in the Sacramen) seing the nature and substance of God must be ado∣red: it is not possible to imagine, but all y• Fathers gaue Godly honour to the mysteries of Christes holy table. But yet let vsChrys. in 1. Cor. heare a more full witnesse. S. Chrysostome exhorting his people to come to this Sacrament with zeale and most vehement loue,Hom. 24 Hoc. writeth thus: Hoc corpus in praesepe reueriti sunt Magi, &c. The wise men (commonly called the three kings) reuerenced this bo∣dy in the manger, and being men without good religion, & bar∣barouse, they worshipped it with feare and much trembling, af∣ter a long iorney taken. Let vs therefore, who are the citizens of heauen, at the least wise follow those barbarous men. For when they saw y• manger and cottage only, and not any of those things, which thou nowId. In the altar. The Chri stian is better in∣structed. seest: they came with most great reuerence & quaking. But thou seest that thing, not in the manger, but in the altar: not a womā, which might hold it in her armes: but the Priest present, and the holy Ghost copiously spred vpon the sacrifice, which is set foorth. Neither thou lookest barely vpō the body, as they did: but thou knowest the power of it, and all the order of dispensing things. And thou art ignorant of none of those things, which were done by him: and thou hast bene diligently instructed in all things.
Let vs be stirred vp therefore, let vs quake, and let vs prosee openly a greater denotion, then those barbarous  if we come barely and coldly, we ieopard our head into a more ehe∣ment fyre. Hitherto S. Chrysostome. If there were any other refuge left for our aduersaries, they wold neuer admit this place: they would say in words y•, which the masters of them must nedes sometyme think in hart. TheyThe Sa∣cramenta∣ties re∣fuge. would say, what care we for Chrysostome? He was a man, he might erre, he did erre in this matter. But now they may not flee to this miserable refuge. for seing they lacke the Gospel, and the faith of Christian people for nine hundred yeres together, (as them selues confesse: there is no place for them, to hyde their head in, but only among the Fathers of the first six hundred yeres. For this cause they cā not reiect S. Chrysostome, who is one of the chief lights of the East Church. His bookes also they can not deny, and least of all his commentaries vppon the blessed Apostle. What shift then find they to avoide this place? In truth they can finde none, but they must nedes pretēd to say somewhat out of their common places of Khetoricall figures: y• vse where∣of they can father vpon whome they list. S. Chrysostome in these words expressy teacheth as well theNote those com parisons. reall presence, as the adoration of Christ vpon the altar. He com∣pareth the holy mysteries with Christ in the forme and truth of a childe. He compareth the altar, where vpon the mysteries stād, with the manger, wherein Christ lay. He compareth our blessed Lady (which sometyme held Christ in her armes) with the Priest present at the altar, who sometyme handleth the holy mysteries. He compareth the three wise men (who came out of y• East) with the Christian people, who come to heare Masse. He compareth the adoratiō and worshipping, which those three wise men vsed,
with the adoration and worshipping, which faithful men ought to vse at the tyme of or Lords supper. He sayeth, the body of Christ to be the same in both places: but y• cause of worshipping to be greater in them, who come to the holy mysteries. He sayth by the body, Hoc corpus in  sunt Magi, This body the wise men worshipped in the manger. which this body? sure∣ly, whereof he sayd before: Quando id propositum videris, dic te∣cum:The body set foorth. propter hoc corpus non amplius terra & cinis ego sum. When thou seest it, set before (thee) say with thy self: for this bo∣dies sake I am no longer earth and ashes. Behold, he speaketh of the body, which is set before vs. Uerily of that, which at Masse tyme all men see vpon the altar. And againe he sayd of the same,The body holden & ten. Quod etiam nobis exhibuit, vt teneremus & manducaremus. The which also he hath geuen to vs, that we should hold (it) and eate (it). This body then, which is put before vs in y• Church, which is holden and eaten, This body the wise men worshipped in the manger. If our figuratiue diuines expound, this body, for the signe or the representing of this body, as they are wont to doe: then the wise men adored in the manger the signe of Christes body. But if they adored not the signe, but the truth: then, this body is meāt() this true body of Christ. And seing S. Chrysostome sayeth, that the wise men adored this body, meaning by the pronoun (this) that, which we haue in the holy mysteries: it is clere, that he put∣teth it for a most knowen and certeyne veritie: that, we haue pre∣sent before the tyme of receauing, the reall body of Christ vp the altar: And so haue it present: that we are bound to adore it being vpon the altar. Tu verò non in praesepe, sed in altari vides. Thou seest (this bo∣dy)Vides. not in the manger, but on the altar. Lo, it is vpon the altar, and not only comprehended by faith, but by the meane of y• forme
òf bread it is seen.  S. Chrysostome bringeth fower reasons, why Chrystian people should rather worship the body of Christ at Masse: then those wise men did worship it in that homely cottage. First, because they were not Godly men, for so S. Chrysostom doth call them, because they had not the knowlege of al true de∣uotion and Godlinesse: although in that acte they shewed them selues Godly. But we are instructed in all true religion, & there∣fore should souer worship this body of Christ, then they did. Se∣condly, they were Barbarous men: but S. Chrysostome spake to , who were most ciuill & leste Barbarous of all peo∣ple in the world. So much the rather they ought to know it to be their duety, to worship the body of their maker. Thirdly the wise men saw Christe in a manger, where such things are not wont to lye, as must be reuerēced & worshipped: but thou seest this body vpon the altar, which is a place made for holy things to stand on. And so much the more ought we Chri∣stians, to adore the body of Christ being set before vs vpon the altar: then those wise men did adore it in a manger. They saw it also in the mothers armes, which was a woman: neither is any thing, which a woman holdeth & bringeth foorth, wont to be worshipped with Godly honour. Seing therefore, thou seest y• priest present, who is wont to handle Godly things: it were a farre more impiety for thee, not to adore Christes body at the time of masse, when thou art assured by the worde of GodLuc. 22. (who sayd to his Apostles, & in them to al priests) doe and make this thing, that the holy Ghoost faileth not at the consecration to work the body of Christe really present. All this consydered, it is not possible for any man, that lyeth not wittingly and willingly, to say, but that S. Chrysostome aught and beleued, the body of Christe to be really present, and
that it ought to be really adored vpon the altar it self, or in theIn 1. Co. Hom. 24 priests hands. And therefore he saith afterward, Quod summo honore dignum est, id tibi in terra ostendam. I wil shew thee that in the earth, which is worthy of the highest honour. How can S. Chrysostome shew any thing in earth worthy of the highest honour, besyde the body and blood of Christe vnder the formes of bread and wine? For by that, which is worthy of highest honour, he meaeth expresly Christes body: because it isThe she∣wing of Christe. the body of the Sōne of God. And in saying, he will shew it thee, he can possibly meane none other thing, but that shewing, which is by the formes of bread and wine. For if any man should require him, to shew that most high thing, which he promised to shew: questionlesse he would lead him to y• altar, & there would shew him, that which had bene consecrated by the Priest, and he would say vnto him, pointing to the mysteries: this is the body of Christe, and this is his blood. For by that meanes only were he able, to performe his promise of shewing that thing, which is worthy of the highest honour. It followeth yet more plainly in S. Chrysostome by an other similitude. As in the palacies of kings (saith he) not the walles, not the golden roof, but the kings body sitting in the seate of ma∣iestie, is the worthiest thing of all: so is the body of Christe theThe body of Cheste in earth. worthiest thing in heauen. quod nunc in terra vidēdum tibi pro∣ponitur. the which (body of Christe) is now set foorth to thee in earth to be seen. Good Lord, what can be required more of the greatest papist in Europe, then S. Chrysostome saith? Againe yet it followeth: I shew thee not Angels, not Archan∣gels, not the heauens, not the heauens of the heauens: but IThe Lorde she . shew thee, the Lord of all these things. S. Chrysostom saith, he sheweth y• Lord, & that in earth, & vpō y• altar: & yet is there a fi∣gure to escape his most euident words? In faith & truth by such
figures they may defende, y• I also am of their opiniō: but  wise men such wily shifts wil not preuaile. There is noman aliue, but  he wil cōue y• words of S. Chrysostome, as they stand in or∣der: he must cose, y• both he speaketh of y• body of Christ really present in the Sacrament of the altar: and also teacheth, y• vpon y• very alar it ought to be adored, much more iustly of vs Chri∣stians: then it was once adored in the manger or stable, of the three kings. Here wil I detect an other shift of our Aduersaries, who per∣ceauing S. Dionysius, S. Ambrose. S. Augustme and S. Chry∣sostome with diuerse other auncient Fathers, to be so plaine in the matter of adoration, haue deuised to say: that those FathersA shift of the Sacr ms. attribute that vnto the signes of Christes body, which is proper to the body it self: and therefore when they speake of adoring that vpon the altar, they meane, that we should adore y• truth of that thing: the signe whereof standeth vpon the altar. This interpretation is in dede necessarily to be made of them, who haue determined not to beleue the word of God, where in it is sayd: his is my body. But I say, that interpretation is foo∣lish,The Fa∣thers gil∣ty of do∣latry. and should make all the Fathers gilty of idolatry: for they preaching to the common peple teache them expresly, that, which standeth after consecration vpon the altar, to be the true body & blood of Christ: and therefore that it must be adored much more of vs, then the visible body was adored of the wise men. If the interpretation of the Heretikes should be admitted,Theodo retus dia log. 2. they might say the very same of Christes incarnation: and so ex∣pound, what so euer is sayd in y• Bible or in y• Fathers touching his flesh, to be meant of a phantasticall appering of flesh, but not of true flesh. But now let vs bring against these Signifiers an other plaine authoritie, which was by the prouidence of God written (as it were of purpose) to destroy this imagined and fi∣guratiue
adoration of the Sacrament, whereof they speake. Theodoretus disputing wt an Eutychian, who would ChristeTheodo retus dia log. 2. now to consist of the only nature of his deitie, and not any more of the humane nature, which he toke of the virgin, doth reproue him by the example of the Sacrament of Christes supper, in the which Sacrament two things are found: one, which is seen, and that is the signe of bread and wine: the other is not seen, but vnderstanded and beleued, and that is the true body and bloodIn sub∣stance. of Christe. That which is seen, is sayd to remaine in his former substance, nature, and figure, and kind. In his substance, because the formes of bread and wine subsist by the power of God, and haue their being nowe by them selues, as they had it before, in the nature of bread and wine. The same formes remaine in theirIn na∣ture. former nature, because they norish no lesse, then the substance of the bread it self would haue done, if it had remained. They re∣maineIn shape. in their former shape and kind, as being thinges that may be seen and touched, as they might before. Theodoretus then hauing sayd thus much for the one parte of the Sacrament, cometh also to shew the other parte thereof. For his minde is to declare, y• as there be two kindes of things in one Encharist: so the two natures of God and man are in one person of Christe. Therefore the other nature (besyde the formes of bread & wine) is the reall substance of Christes body & blood.Dial. 2. of which parte thus he speaketh . intelligun∣tur autem (esse) quae facta sunt, & creduntur & adorantur, vt pote quae illa sunt, quae creduntur. The mysticall signes are vnder∣standed to be those things, which they were made, and they are beleued and they are adored: as being those things, which they are beleued to be. Note, good Reader, that the mystical signes (which Theodo∣retus
calleth mystica symbola) are vnderstanded to be ,. that they were made. But what? are they  o be that, which they are not? Nay Sy, y• were false vnderstanding, which falshod cā not be in the mysteries of Christ. they are then in dede that, which they are vnderstanded to be. What is that? Theodo∣reus shewed a litle before, that they were after consecration the body and blood of Christ. Therefore the mysticall signes are vn∣derstandedMade. to be the body and blood, not because they be not so: but because they are so, for that they were made his body & blood. and so they are beleued to be, and are adored, or neled & bowed vnto. But how? percase as bearing the image and signes of the body and blood of Christ? No Syr. but as being in dede the bo∣dy and blood of Christ. , as being those things, which they are vnderstā∣ded and beleued to be. They are adored, because they are the body and blood of Christ. , as being: and the word (as) meanethAs. in that place a truth of being (as if it were, verè existētia quae cre∣duntur, being in dede things, whiche they are beleued to be. So speaketh S. Ihon saying of Christ, vidimus gloriam eius, gloriāIoan. 1. quasi vnigeniti à patre, we saw his glory, a glory as of the only begotten of the Father: to wit, we saw the glory of him being in dede the only begotten of his Father. Uppon which place Theophylact saith. , &c. ThisTheoph. in 1. cap. Ioan. particle , in English (as) is not a word that betokeneth a simi∣litude or likenesse: but that cōfirmeth and betokeneth an vndou∣ted determination, as when we see a king comming forth with great glory, we say, that he came forth as a king: that is to say, he came forth as being in dede a king. So that by the iudgement of, Theophylact, that particle , which Thedorite vseth, doth beto∣ken an vndoubted being and determinate truth of that thing, whereof we speak. The holy mysteries are adored, as being those
things in dede, which they are beleued to be. This place is such, as can not be reasonably answered vnto. For the reason of adoring or geuing godly honour to the Sacra∣ment of the altar is, because it is in dede the body of Christ, as it is beleued to be. But it is beleued to be the body of Christe after consecration, therefore it is adored as being y• true body of Christ. For Theodorete before hauing confessed the mysteries to be cal∣ledDial. 2. after consecration the body and blood of Christ, when it was demanded farther: doest thou beleue? that thou receauest the body and blood of Christ: he answered to that question , ita credo. I doe beleue so. Now therefore he affirmeth those mysticalThe be∣. signes to be in deede, after consecration, the body and bood of Christ: which they are beleued to be, and so beleued, that they are receaued of vs. Euery word must be weighed, because we haue to do with He∣retikes, who must find shifts, or els theyr deceite will appere to al the world. First therefore let it be marked, that after consecration the mysteries are called the body and blood. Secondly, that the mysteries are vnderstanded to be the body and blood of Christ. Thirdly, that they are made so. Fourthly, they are beleued to be so. Fitly, they are adored, for that they are in dede those things, which they are beleued to be. And last of all they are receaued. The first saying, the second, and the last, the Sacramentaries can beare ithall: to wit, that they are called the body and blood, and are vnderstanded to be the body and blood, and that the body and blood are receaned. For they would haue them called so, and not be so: thereby ma∣king the namer of them a myssecaller, as one that calleth them by a wrong name. Secōdly, they would haue them vnderstanded to be the body and blood, and yet not to be so: thereby shewing, that they delight in false vnderstandings: for no good men would
haue a thing vnderstanded to be that, which in deede it is not. Againe they would, the body & blood to be receaued. How trow you? In the faith of the man, but not in the truth of the body, thereby declaring: that they diuide faith from truth, as men that haue a presuasion of things, that in dede be not so. But to calling, vnderstanding and receauing Theodoret ioy∣neth also beleuing, adoring and being. And the belee which he speaketh of, is not referred to heauē: but vnto the holy mysteries. They are beleued, they are adored: as being those things which they are beleued to be. The thing that is called or named Christes body & blood, is in dede that thing whiche it is called. Christ can missename nothing at al. For if he should call that, which were before aier, water, or earth, by the names, of fier, stones, or bread: aier, earth and wa∣ter would soner cease to be, & fyre, bread, stones, would come in theyr place, thē God should cal any creature by a wrōg name. He called bread his body, therefore bread is vnderstāded to be made ye body of Christ. You say, the vnderstāding of man taketh his be∣ginningnderstā ding. of senses., which tel me, it is bread. I say, in mattersSeses. belonging to faith, my vnderstanding is informed by GodsFaith. word: which telleth me, it is the body of Christ: and TheodoreteGods worde. saith, it is beleued so to be, and it is worshipped, for that it is so. And he geueth the same very word of worshipping to the holy. mysteries, the which in the same sentence he geueth to the im∣mortall body of Christ sitting at the right hande of his Father. And no wonder. For seing it is one body, whether it be worship∣ped in heauen, or vpon the altar: one worship is always due to it. Thus we haue witnessed by Theodoretus, that the holy my∣steries of Christ are worshipped and adored: not as the signes of his body aad blood, but as being in dede his body and blood.
Therefore worship is not geuen to them, as to images whiche represent a thing absent: but as to mysticall signes, which really conteine the truth represented by them. ¶The adoration of the body and blood of Christ isThe sixth Chapiter. proued by the custom of the Priests and people of the first six hundred yeres. FRom the Apostles tyme to this day, the very same holy mysteries, which were consecrated by the Priest vppon the altar, were adored of the saithful people: which thing is eui∣dently proued out of the Massebooke of the primitiue Church. For the Liturgies or Massesbookes of S. Iames the Apostle, ofIames. S, Clement Bishop of Rome, of S. Basill Bishop of Cesarea, ofClemēt. S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, and the expositionBasil. which both S. Dionysius Bishop of Athens & of Paris, CyrillusChryso∣stome. Bishop of Hierusalem, Germanus Bishop of Constantinopl,Diony∣sius. Maximus the munk, and diuers others haue made vpon the ho∣ly mysteries, do al with one accord teache and confirme: that firstCyrillus Germa∣nus. the Deacon said, Let vs be attent with the feare of God and with reuerence. And straight therevppon (euen before the tyme of re∣ceauingMaxi∣mus. the body and blood of Christ) the Bishop or Priest, who said Masse, holding and lifting vp the consecrated host, said with a lowd voice: Sancta sanctis. the holy things for holy men. The quere and people answered, Vnus sanctus, vnus dominus, vnus Iesus Christus in gloria dei patris cum Spiritu sancto, Amen. one holy, one Lord, one Iesus Christ in the glory o God the Fa∣ther with the holy Ghost, Amen. The Priest by lifting vp the ho∣ly consecrated hoste, prooketh the people to adore and receaue the body of Christ vnder the forme of bread, saying (as it were)Cyrill li. 12. in Ioā. cap. 50. These holy thinges are not for prophane synners, or those, who are not baptized, but for holy Christians: whereby the Priest
meneth, aswel to shew, where the holy things be that he speaketh of, as for whom they be. Uerily they are those, which he hath in his hands, which he lifteth vp, and sheweth to them. Which I do so much the more earnestly presse vppon, because now a dayes the Sacramentaries would make vs beleue: that the holy thinges, which must be adored to sanctisy vs, and which must be adored, be stil in heauen, and not vpon the altar vnder the form of bread. Why doth then the Priest hold vp the sanctified host, & cry, holySancta. things: if those▪ which he sheweth, be not the holy things? Why doth he adde, holy tbings for holy men: if those men, that be holy, shall not content them selues with those holy things: but must looke for a new supper from heauen at the same tyme? But the people of the primatiue Churche well knowing the things that were shewed to be the most holy of all holies (because they are the body & blood of Christ) yet wil not acknowledge them selues to be holy: and therefore do aunswere, that there is one holy, and he their Lord Iesus: whiche words Cyrillus of Hierusalem ex∣poundeth thus: Sacerdos dicit, Sancta sanctis. Sancta scilicet ea, quae in ara pro∣positaCyrill. in catech. mystag. sunt, aduentu Spiritus sancti sanctificata: Sancti & vos cum sitis, sancto spiritu donati, atque ita sancta sanctis conueniunt. Vos deinde respondetis, vnus sanctus, &c.5. The Priest saith: holy things for holy men. Uerily the holyThe holy things. things are those, whiche are set forth in the altar, consecrated by the comming of the holy Ghost. And seing ye are holy indewed with the holy Ghost: by that meanes holy things are mete for ho∣ly men. But afterward ye aunswere, one holy, one Lord Iesus Christ. In dede he alne is holy, as who is holy by nature. For although ye are holy, yet ye are not holy by nature: but by par∣taking, by exercise and by praier. Behold, the holy things re not only in heauen, but also vpon
the altar. S. Chrysostom saith: Cûm dicit Sancta sanctis, hoc dicit:Ad pop. Antioch. 51. Si quis non est sanctus, non accedat. When he saith, holy things for the holy, he meaneth this thing: If any man be not holy, let him not come. And in an other place, Consydera quaeso. Mensa re∣galis est apposita, Angeli mensae ministrantes, ipse rex adest, & cae.61. ad po. Antioch. Marke, I pray you, the kingly table is set before thee, Aungels minister at the table, the king him selfe is present: and thou stan∣destAdora, & com∣munica. by idle, thy garments are foule, and thou carest not. But if they are cleane, then adore and receaue. By conference of these places we vnderstand, that the Priest by saying, holy things for holy men, warned: that none should comme, but those, that were cleane from synne. And yet those, that were holy, might not receaue: before they had acknowleged and confessed by theyr fact and word the king to be present. The confession by wordes, was to answer the Priest: one holy, one Lord, Iesus Christ. The confession in fact & dede, was, to bow doune bodily, and to adore the holy things: which are the body and blood of Christ, and Christ him self. Adore (saith Chrysostom) and communicate: worship, and receaue. The eleuation of the consecrated host was made for these two purposes: that the king of glory should be worshipped vnder the form of bread, & receaued of holy men. By worshipping we conesse, him to be holy by nature in his Godhead and person: by communicating, we partake the fruits of his passion. Of this lifting vp of the holy host Dionysius writeth: Pontifex laudatisDe eccl. sacris dei operibus, ea quae diuinissima suut , sacrificat velHierar. cap. 3. consecrat & laudata oculis subiicit per symbola quae ritè propo∣nuntur. The Bishop hauing praised the holy works of God, doth offer vp in sacrifice, or consecrate the most diuine things: and af∣ter praise geuen to them, he sheweth them to the eyes by meanes of the signes, which are duely set forth.
The consecrating or offering vp in sacrifice of the most diuine things, doth shew the real presence of the body and blood: whichConsecra ting. only are the diuine things, and only may be consecrated, or fi∣nally offered in the state of the new testamēt. The praising of thē,Praising. whiche is made of the Bishop, doth witnesse: that they are not creatures without life, as they were before consecration: but such as may receaue of a reasonable man praise and thanksgeuing of∣fered vp to them. The shewing of them declareth, that other men are prouokedShewing to the like praysing and honouring of them. The shewing of thē by meanes of the signes, declareth their presence not to be intel∣lectuallSignes. only, albeit the maner thereof be spirituall: but their pre∣sence to be reall vnder the formes of breade and wine. For those are the signes, whereof Dionysius speaketh. Neyther must one of these things be considered alone, without the other, as some men consider them: who suppose, they are lifted vp to be only, as it were, a watcheword of lifting vp our harts to heauen: where∣as they are first said to be consecrated, and then to be lifted vp. If the diuine things, that were consecrated, be lifted vp, they be not now a signe only: but they are made the diuine things thē selues, and those diuine things are shewed to vs by the signes.Things, & signes. Lo, there are diuine things shewed, & signes also: but the diuine things being praised are shewed by the signes. What is that to say, but vnder the signes of bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ are shewed: to be praised and honoured of other men, as the Priest him self hath already praised and honoured them? The word signifying the praise of them is . thingsHymnes. praised with an hymne: which worde (hymne) is most peculiar to the things of God: for hymnes are specially dedicated to God in the praise of his workes. S. Basil speaking of the same matter saith: Inuocationis verba,
dum ostenditur panis Eucharistiae & poculum benedictionis, quisDe spiri∣tu sancto cap. 27. sanctorum scripto nobis reliquit? which of the Saincts hath left in writing to vs, the wordes of innocation: whiles y• bread of than∣kes geuing and the cup of blessing is shwed? The word, which S. Basile vseth, is suche, as betokeneth shewing and lifting vp, , doth properly betoken suche a shewing, as is made by listing vp. It is much to be noted, y• S. Basil asketh what Saint, to wit, what Apostle or Euangelist hath left in writing to vs the order of saying Masse, and the praiers, which therein we vse? Non enim iis contenti sumus, quorum & caet. For we are not content with those things, whereof the Apostle or Gospel hath made mention: but both before and after we say certeine other things, as hauing. great strength about the mysteries: which are taken out of the doctrine, which is deliuered without writing. The Apostle and Gospel hath only told the substanciall points of the Masse: but the rest hath bene left vnto vs (as S. Basil saith) by secret doc∣trine: yet by the same auctority which gaue vs the substanciall points. Well, seing that S. Basill speaking of the whole Masse, yet na∣meth it, ostentionem Eucharistiae, the eleuation and sheing of theEleatiō. : he geueth vs to vnderstand, the eleuation to be (next vnto the consecration) a most principall parte of the Masse: in so much as the whole may be named by it. While the bread of y• Eucharist was shewed, these were and, among the Breeks, are the words of inuocation: Vnus sanctus,The wor∣des of In∣ocation. &c. one holy, one Lord in the glory of God the Father, Amen. These words, if they did not belong to the holy things which are shewed: why are they spoken at that tyme? why are they called the wordes of inuocation? the words that acknowlege, so holy thinges to be shewed and holden vp, that they are the only holy,
and one Lord Iesus, who is in equall deitie and glorie with his Father. Maximus in his notes vpon S. Dionysius, after some otherMaxim. in scho∣lijs Grae∣cis in iij. places. interpretations made vpon the shewing of the diuine mysteries resteth in this: that Dionysius meaneth, the lifting vp and ele∣uation of the one blessing (which is y• of the diuine bread) which the Priest lifteth vp, saying: Holy things for holy men. And as it may appeare by Maximus, in the primatiue Church the myste∣ries were twise shewed: at the first tyme the diuine bread alone was listed vp, and before the communion, as wel yt diuine bread as also therewithall the chalice. Germanus writeth thus, Elatio autem in altum diuini corpo∣ris,In Theo∣ria rer. repraesentatcrucis elationem & mortem in ea, & ipsam resur∣rectionem. The lifting vp a high of the diuine body, doth repre∣sentEccles. the lifting v on the crosse, and the death in it, and the very resurrection. After the lifting vp of Christes body and the adoration there∣of,Emissen. the holy communion folowed: of the which Eusebius Emis∣senusHom. 5. in Pasch. writeth in this maner: Cum ad reuerendum altare salutari cibo potuque reficiendus accedis, sacrum Dei tui corpus & san∣guinem fide respice, honora, mirare, mente continge, cordis ma∣nu suscipe, & maximè haustu interiore assume: when thou comest to the reuerend altar, to be refresshed with the healthfull meate and drink: looke with faith vpon the holy body and blood of thy God, honour it, wonder at it, touche it with thy minde, receaue it with an inward swalowing. The first thing to be noted in these words is, that he, which is desirous to receaue the blessed Sacrament of Christes body, must know where to haue it. The second, how to take it: and last of al,Altar. how to vse it profitably. Concerning the place Eusebius sayth, when thou comest to the reuerend altar, to be fed with y• healthful
meate and drink: Doing vs to vnderstand, that the body & bloodHonour. of Christ (which only is our healthful meate and drink) standethHart. vpon the altar, thence to be distributed to the faithfull people. Concerning the maner of taking the sayd body, Eusebius bid∣deth vs honour it, and wonder at it. Concerning the profitable vse thereof, he biddeth vs take it with our hart and minde: for if we toke it with our bodies alone, we should rather take it to our damnation, then to our profite. The English homilies rehersing this place in the secōd tome, haue translated altare the communion: and, salutari cibo potu{que}Fol. 217. spirituall meates. whereas, altare is an altar: and salutare isAltare, a commu∣nion. healthful. But the brethern, who  ouerthrowen altars, were loth by naming them, to recite their own damnation. Eusebius beginneth with the altar, as the which is the groūd of all the rest. Upon the altar the healthful meate is consecrated, & made ready for the faithfull people. There it is looked on, not by the bodily eye (which seeth nothing besyde the outward for∣mes) but by faith: which is taught, the body and blood of Christ to be present vpon the altar vnder those formes. There yt meate is honoured, thence that is taken, which refresheth vs. To that meate the receauer sayd, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shoul∣dest enter vnder my roof. For he that seeth the diuine food lifted vp vnto him, and af∣terward speaketh these words: seing he taketh corporally yt bread into his mouth, and only in respect of that corporall receauing, sayth: I am not worthy that thou should est enter: Doubtlesse he speaketh to the bread it self, & calleth it his Lord. For none other Lord entreth vnder the roof of his mouth, besyde that bread. It is lifted vp, to receaue it, he cometh, to it he speaketh, it entreth vnder his roof. It is therefore a fond pretēse, to say: those words were spoken to God in heauen, & not vnto y• holy Sacrament.
Cyrillus of Herusalem describing yet more particularly theCatech. mystago 5. gesiures of them, who receaue the holy cōmunion, biddeth them to take the King and the body of Christ in the hollow of the right hand, saing, Amen. And to sanctifie their eyes withall, vsing allThe hand taketh the King. diligence: that no crum thereof perish or fal away. But what ne∣ded that precept, if it were the substance of commō bread? Sure∣ly,Amen. seing no such diligence was vsed in Baptisme, we may wellNo crum may pe∣rish. perceaue: that as, because yt substance of water doth still remaine it skilleth not where it fall: so for so much as no crum of bread must be lost, it is not the substance of wheaten bread, which is so carefully kept. After the communion of the body Cyrillus biddeth the peopleBowing. Adoring. come to the chalice of Christes blood, bowing down, & saying in the maner of adoring and worshipping, Amen. Here the right hand receaueth the King, surely not by faith, which y• hand hath not: therefore the King of glory was meant to be taken in the hand by meane of the forme of bread, vnder which our King Ie∣sus Christ is really present. Here is bowing down and adoring at the very instant, when the holy communion is receaued. As therefore when we reade, that the Disciples went back from the place of Christes ascension adorantes adoring: we may wel con∣clude,Luc. 24. that they adored Christ him self, and not only God y• Fa∣ther in him or by him: As againe, when the Centurion sayd of Christ, who was coming to his house, Lorde, I am not worthy, that thou should est enter vnder my roof, we thereby know that he spake to Christ and called Christ his Lord, and not only God in heauen: so when we reade, that the receauers of the holy com∣munionMath. 8. did say at the tyme of receauing the Sacrament, Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should est enter vnder my roof, and yt they did bow downe, adore & worship at the same tyme: we must vndoubtedly conclude, that both the Sacrament was spoken
vnto, and called Lord, and also bowed to, and adored. Thus I haue proued the adoration of Christes body & blood, euen as it is a Sacrament, out of the Prophetes, out of S. Paul,Ps. 21. 98 1. Co. 11. out of the anncient Fathers, out of the publike seruire of the pri∣mitine Church, and out of the custome of the faithfull people. Al which proufes I haue applied to this end: that the body & blood of Christ should be knowen thereby, to be really present in that self Sacrament, which we take into our mouthes. And for so much as that is so, euery faithful man ought to beleue most con∣stantly the sayd reall presence: and to detest the contrary doctrine as a most perniciouse heresy. ¶ The reall presence of Christes body and blood vnderThe vii. Chapiter. the formes of bread and wine, is proued by the testi∣monies of the auncient Fathers. IF euery man is to be credited, and ought to haue authoritie inEuery man to be leued in his owne . his owne arte & facultie, if when we build, we call a Carpen∣ter to counsell, and when we make gardens, a gardener: how much more must we esteme the holy Doctors of the Churche, who are not only cunning by long labour bestowed pon the science of diuinitie: but also haue so vertuously vsed them selues, that they haue bene abundantly instructed in all knowlege, by marnailons inspirations of the holy Ghoste. whose names are so greate, that the very Heretiks can not deny them to be holy Sainctes in heauen: and therefore they pretend to haue the first syx hundred yeres on their side. It is then a good sure way, to worke with the aduise of those auncient Fathers: whose sayings because I haue particularly alleged and examined in euery article and chapiter of my former bookes (as occasion suffered) I thought good not to prosec them now again at large: but rather to shew briefly, by what
generall chapiters a man may be vndoutedly assured of their be∣lefe and doctrine. First, very many Fathers speaking of Christes words or dedes, when ater bread taken and thankes geuen, he sayd this is my body, allege the almighty power of God to defend the ve∣ritie. of those dedes and wordes. Therefore the same Fathers be∣leued those words, this is my body, to be true in so wonderfull a maner, as they sound at the first sight. And seing they meane ac∣cording to their moste vsuall sound, that (this which is pointed vnto (though it seme still bread) is notwithstanding y• substance of Christes body: we ought to think, that those Fathers beleued the reall presence of Christes body. Otherwise, they wold neuer haue alleged his Godhead, or almightie power and omnipo∣tencie for the instituting of a figure and signe of his owne body: sith for the institution of signes and figures such an authoritieHeb. 3. might haue serued, as God gaue to Moyses: who yet was but the feruant of Iesus Christe, and not almighty God. S. Ireneus: How can they be sure, the bread, whereon thankesLib. 5. cap. 34. are geuen, to be the body of their Lord, & the chalice of his blood: if they say not him to be the Sonne of the maker of the world? S. Ireneus was so sure, that Christ through his diuine po∣wer made the bread, wherein thankes were geuen, his owne body: that if the Godhead were denied which should work that presence, no man could be sure of the presence of Christes body: and yet he might haue bene sure of a figuratiue presence, though Moyses had bene the minister of the Sacramēt, and not Christe. S. Cyprian: That bread which our Lorde gaue to the Disciples,In serm. de coena Domin. by the omnipotencie of the word was made flesh. What neded omnipotencie be alleged for a fact, that were not supernaturall? S. Hilary speaking of the Sacrament saith: By the professionLi. 8. de Trinitat. of our Lorde it is truely flesh, and truely blood. Is not this thinge
the truth▪ It may in dede chance not to be true to them, who deny Icsus Christe to be true God. As who should say, if his Godhead may stand, his flesh must nedes be truly present. S. Basilius, to shew y• these wordes, This is my body, makeIn Rog. bre. quae. 172. full persuation, allegeth out of S. Iohn the glory or Godhead, and also the incarnation of Christe: because, except he were both true God and true man, this is my body, should not make fullIoan. 1. persuasion: sith, if he were not man, he should not haue a body whereof those words might be verified. If he were not God, we might dout, how he were able to make his word true: but seing he is God and man, and sayd, this is my body, there is no dout of the presence of his body.De ijs qui init. cap. 9. & lib. 4. de Sacra. c. 4. & 5. S. Ambrosius: Our Lorde Iesus him self crieth, This is my body. he hath sayd, and it is made. S. Chrysostome: O miracle. He hath sitteth aboue & caet. And againe: Let vs euery where geue credit vnto his wordes, spe∣cially in the mysteries. Eusebius Emissenus: Let the very po∣werDe Sace, lib. 3. of him that consecrateth, strengthen thee. S. Cyrillus of Alexandria: Seing God worketh, let vs not askeHom. 5. in Pasch. how. Damascene: We know no more, but that the word of GodIn Ioan. li. 4. ca. 13 is true, strengthfull, almighty: but the maner is inscrutable. No wise man requireth vs earnestly to beleue the words,Lib. 4. which himself doth think to be figuratiue and parabolicall: butcap. 14. he rather should bid vs beware, that we mistake them not, asIn Gen. S. Chrysostome vpon those words (God repented) crieth out:Hom. 22. See a grosse word. not that God repented. God forbid: but God speaketh to vs according to the custome of man. Likewise S.In Ioan. tractat. 4 Augustine saith in respect of those words, (Iohn Baptist is Elias) Our Lord spake figuratiuely. but S. Ihon, saying (IMath. 17 am not Elias) answered properly.Ioan. 1. If now these words, This is my body, were figuratiue: we
should haue ben'e warned by the watchmen of God, to beware of them, and not require d to beleue them, as now we are requi∣red. yea we are so required to beleue them, that it is wonderfullIn Reg. breuior. q. 172. fides. to see and to consyd er: how earnestly the Doctours speake in that behalf. S Basilius: The certeintie of our Lords words who sayd, This is my body, which is geu en for yow: make this thing. for the remembrance of me ingender full persuasion. Surely fi∣guratiue words can not make ful persuasion. because thē selues are imperfite, as lackin g their proper signification: which is the chiefe vertue of words, whereby they should fully informe vs. for no figuratiue speache is so plaine as a proper speache is. Epiphanius: Who so beleueth not the saying to be true, asIn Anco rat. ser∣mon. him self spake it, is fallen from grace and saluation. Cyrillus Hierosolymitatus: Seing Christ him self affirmeth so, and sayth of the bread, This is my body: Who hereafter may be soCatech. bolde, as to doubte?Mysta. 4 S. Ambrosius: Our Lord Iesus him self geueth witnes vntoDe Sacr. lib. 4. c. 5 vs, that we take his body and blood. Ought we any thing, to doubte of his fidelitie and witnesbearing? S. Chrysostome: Because our Lord sayd, This is my body, letIn Math. Hom. 83 vs be intangled with no doubtfulnes: but let vs beleue and see it with the eyes of vnderstanding. Eusebins Emissenns: Let all doubtfulnes of infidelitie depart,Hom. 5. in Pasch. for so much as the author of the gift, him self also is witnes of the truth. S. Cyrillus of Alexandria: Doubt not whether it be true, sithAd Calo syrium. Christ sayth manifestly, This is my body: But rather take y• word of our Sauiour in faith: for seing he is y• truth, he lieth not. AndIn Ioan. li. 4. c. 13. againe, Let vs take great aduantage by the synnes of other men: Geuing stedfast faith vnto the mysteries. Let vs neuer in so highHow. matters either thinke or speake that word, Quomodo? How?
S. Gregorius Nazianzenus: Eate the body and drink the bloodn orat. 4, in. Pa∣scha. without confusion or doubte, if at the least thou arte desirouse of life: Neither do thou withdraw faith from the sayings, which concerne the flesh. The same thing S. Hilary, Leo, Isychius, Theophylact, Paschasius and diuerse others haue spoken, requiring vs not to doubte of the truth of this mysterie, and that specially: because Christes words make full persuasion, and take away al occasion of doubting. But if they be figuratiue, it is not so: for then oneThe doutes of Christes words, if they be fi∣guratiue. may vnderstand this kinde of figure, an other that kinde. One may thinke it to be a Metaphore. An other, that it is Synechdo∣che. The third, that it is Metonymia. The fourth, that it is alto∣gether an Allegorie or parable, and without all ground of Histo∣rie. Others doubt not to expound, This is my body, as if it were sayd: in this, with this, or vnder this, or about this my body is. Yea from that day, wherein the proper and natural sense of those words was denied, I thinke neuer any words haue bene more vncertayne, and more doubted of then, This is my body. Yet the Fathers were so farre from this vncertaintie, that they counted him an infidell and allen from grace and saluation: who so did not beleue them, euen as Christ spake them: To wit, euen so as they sound at the first sight. If the truth of Christes body be the reall substance thereof, they that intreating of the Eucharist, affirme y• truth of his flesh, must nedes meane: that his substance is really present in that Sacrament, whereof they speake. S. Hilarius speaking of the holy mysteries sayth: There is leftLib. 8. de Trinit. no place of doubting of the truth of flesh and blood. Yet surely, if the substance of flesh and blood were not present: not only some place, but the chief place of doubting were left. S. Ambrosius: It is the true flesh of Christ which we take.
Doubt ye nothing at all (sayeth Leo) concerning the truth ofDe Sacr. li. 6. ca. 1. Christes body. By like he spake to Catholikes, for doubtlesse theDe ieiu∣nio mēsis 7. serm. 6 Sacramentaries doubt so vehemently thereof: that they beleue the truth of Christes body to be only at the right hand of his Father. Isychius: He receaueth by ignorance, who knoweth not thisIn Leuit. li. 6. c. 22. to be the body and blood, according to the truth. Damascenus: The bread and wine is not the figure of ChristesDe Or∣thod. fi∣de. lib. 4. cap. 4. body and blood. God forbid. But it is the self deified body of our Lorde. The like assertion Theophylact, Euthymius and diuerse o∣therIn. 6. Io In. 26. Fathers haue. They that name the supper of Christ a figure, a Sacrament, orMatth. a remembrance, do not therby exclude the true substāce of Chri∣stes flesh: but they meane to shew, that it is present vnder the signe of an other thing, after a mysticall and secret maner. S. Cyprian: The diuine substance hath vnspeakably infused itIn serm. de coena Domini. self in the visible Sacrament. S. Hilarius: We take in dede the flesh of his body vnder aLib. 8. de Trinitat. mysterie. Lo, the flesh, the substance of God is present in truth, but vnder a signe. Tyillus Hierosolymitanus: Vnder the figure of bread the bo∣dyCateche si mysta∣go. is geuen to thee. Who now knowing the Sacrament to con∣sist of two parts, wil wonder: that sometyme it is named of the one, and sometyme of the other. S. Augustine: The body and blood of Christ shall then be lifeDe ver∣bis Apost. serm. 2. to euery man: if that thing, which is visibly receaued in the Sacra∣ment, be in the truth it self eaten spiritually. Bholde, there is aUisiblye recaued, spiritually eten. thing in the Sacrament, and so really it is there: that it is visi∣bly receaued. Therefore it is not a spirituall thing only, for no such matter is visibly receaued: but it is there, and thence it must
be eaten spiritually, and in y• truth it self: That is to say, it must not only be taken into the mouth, but into the hart also, & then it shalbe life vnto the receauer. This thing so receaued in the Sa cramēt must nedes be the body of Christ vnder y• forme of bread: for nothing els is to be eaten spiritually. It were to rediouse to allege all, that S. Augustine hath writen in this behalf: but his other words being conferred with these, wil make it plaine, that whensoeuer he nameth it a figure: he meaneth the truth hidden vnder a figure, which is more shortly named a mysticall figure. He that allegeth cause, why the flesh and blood of Christ is not seen in the mysteries, presupposeth (albeit an vnuisible) yet a most reall presence thereof. S. Ambrose sayth, it is not seen in his owne forme: Vt nullusDe Sacr. li. 4. c. 4. horror cruoris sit, & precium tamen operetur redemptionis. To th'end there may be no lothsome abhorring of raw blood, and yet that the price of our redemption may work. So that by his iudgement the truth of blood is present, to worke in vs the effect of Christes death: and yet the foorm of blood is not seen, because we should not abhorre to drink it. Theophylact: Although it seme bread to vs, it is chaunged byIn 2. 6. Matth. vnspeakable operation. Because we are weake, and abhorre to eat rawe flesh (specially the flesh of a man) and therefore it semeth bread, but in dede it is flesh. If these words can be glosed with a figure, then I know not, what shall escape the hands of these fi∣gureFigure makers. makers. They that acknowledge a change of the substāce of bread in∣to Christes body, must nedes meane a real presence of that body, whereinto the change is made. When Iustinus Martyr denyeth vs to take the things conse∣crated as common bread and drinke, shewing also that we haueIn Apol. . learned them to be not only sanctified in qualitie, but to be the
flesh and blood of Christ, which is an other substance: he doth vs to vnderstand, that he meaneth them not to be after consecration the substance of common bread and wine: but to be that substāce, which Christe toke of his mother, when the worde was made flesh. S. Cyprian sheweth the bread, which our Lord gaue to theDe coen. Dom. Disciples, to be changed not in shape, but in nature: Therefore as the forme remayneth, so the substance is changed. S. Ambrose: It is not that, which nature formed: but that,De ijs qui ini∣tiantur cap. 9. which the blessing hath consecrated. If nature formed the sub∣stance of common bread, and the words of blessing pronounced, This is my body: It is not afterward any more the substance of bread, but of Christes body. Grace is affirmed with the deniall of nature. This argument is in maner as large, as that of the reall pre∣sence: but who so listeth to see more therein, let him reade Gre∣gorius Nyssenus in Oratione Catechetica, Cyrillus Hierosolymi∣tanus in Catechesi mystagogica 4. Eusebius Emissenus, in Ora∣tione 5. in Pascha. Isychius, in ca. 6. Leuitici, Theophylact, Euthy∣mius in Euangelia, Damascene li. 4. cap. 14. All that affirme the external sacrifice of Christes body & blood, must nedes teache the real presence thereof: sith that thing, which is absent, can not be externally sacrificed. S. Dionysius Areopagita sayth: The Bishop excuseth him selfDe Ec∣cles. Hi rar. ca. 3. Luc. 22. for that he offereth a sacrifice aboue his worthynesse or power, crying out decently: Thou (o Lord) sayedst, Make this thing for the remembrance of me. Heretikes admit no Eucharists or offerings, saith S. IgnatiusDialo. 3. in Theodorete: because they do not confesse the Eucharist to be the flesh of the Sauiour. A man would haue thought, this had bene made in our tyme against the Sacramentaries. It agreeth
to them so well: or rather they agree with the old Heretikes soLibro. 1. demon. much.Euagel. cap. 10. Eusebius Pamphili: We offer a sacrifice full of God, and dread∣sull,Can. 18. and most holy. We sacrifice after a new maner, according toLi. 4. c. 32 the new Testament, a cleane sacrifice or hoste.Li. 2 ep. 3 Concilium Nicaenum: Let vs vnderstand by faith that LambDe ciuit. of God, who taketh away the synnes of the world, being situa∣tedDei. li. 17 cap. 20. in that holy table to be offered vnbloodely of the Priests: and8. that we take in dede his preciouse body and blood. And againe:In the. 6. boke. 8. the. 4. 5. 6. chap. Neither rule nor custome hath deliuered: that they who haue no power to offer sacrifice, should deliuer the body of Christ to them9. who offer. Hereof S. Ireneus, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine and alIn the. 2. boke the. 7 chap. the. 5. boke the. 9 chap the reste may be readen: for it is a knowen matter, handled of the Fathers moste frequently. What shall I say, that the Fathers teache, that the Sacrament ought to be adored with Godly ho∣nour,10 as I shewed before?the. 2. boke C. 5. &. the 3. boke. 15. . chap. That they teache, euill men to receaue and to touche the body & blood of Christe, & thereby to be gylty of thē, as Iudas was?▪11. That they teache, our bodies to be nourished with ChristesTh. 5. b. 5. chap. flesh and blood: which can not be nourished with a thing absent?.12. That they teache, vs to be naturally vnited to Christe: whilesThe. 2. b. the. 5. chap he dwelleth corporally in vs?13. That they affirme, Christes body to be vpō the altar, vpon theChryso. holy table, in the hands, in the mouthes, and the bloode to be inHom. 24 in. 1. Co. the Cup? That they geue it such names, as only may agree: o the sub∣stanceCypria. de coena Domini. of Christe: calling it, saluation, light, life, Lorde, Christe, an offering wholy burnt, a Sacrament which quikeneth and ma∣keth14. vs liue for euer?The. 1. b. c. what is the  the 4. c. 12 That they teache, euery man to receaue the same substance, one measure, equall portion: which is true neither of spirituall nor of
corporall gifts, but only of y• flesh of Christe really present vnder15. Cypr. de coena. the forme of bread.Hieron. in. 26. That they vse in shewing, how it is sanctified, the verbs: crea∣ting, making, working, consecrating, representing or makingMatth. 16. present, and such like: which are not verified of a matter onlieAugu. de ciuit. l. 10 cap 5. & in Ps. 39. spiritual, or absent in substance? That they speake of it couertly, saying: Norunt fideles, the saithfull know, because if they should plainely declare the truthChryso. thereof, the infidels wold mocke at it, as now the heretikes doc.Hom. de prodit. For it is a mystery aboue all reason of man. which scoffing were not to be feared: if it were a mere figure. for all kindes of religiōIudae. haue ceremonies and figures?17. Augu. li. confess. 9 cap. 13. That they haue applied it to the helping of sowles departed, as being the very self substance, which ransacked hell? That they haue taught, it to be the truth which hath succededCyp. li. 1. in place of the old figures?Epist. 9. 18. That they haue vsed by the knowen truth thereof to proue,Augu. de ciuit. l. 17 cap. 20. that Christe had true flesh and true blood in a visible manner, & two natures in one person. against all the olde Heretiks? That they haue so far preferred it before Baptisme, and the19. Ireneus li. 4. c. 34 other Socraments: that no crumme might be suffered to fall downe, or to be lost? which was not so in the water of Baptisme:Theodo retus in Dialo. for men were baptized in the running water of the flood. That the Catechumeni, who were admitted to the preaching20. of the Ghospel (which is an excellent signe of Christes flesh andCyrius blood) yet might not see the Eucharist: because it was also theCatech. mysta. 4. truth it sel. vnder a signe? that no man might eate it, except heActor. 8. were first baptized, and kept the commandements: and yet the21. Cathechumeni had a sanctified bread also geuen to them, whichDionys. e Eccl. was a signe of Christ, as S. Augustine doth witnesse. Let nowHierar. cap. 3. the discrete Reader weigh vprightly this doctrine so grounded
in holy scriptures, and auncient Fathers, and he shal perceaue:L. 2. c. 26 de pecc. mer. & remiss. that what soeuer our aduersaries bring for the other syde, it may proue the Sacrament to be a figure, which we denye not: but it can not disproue the reall presence of Christes body and blood vnder that figure, which is the thing that we stand in against them. ¶ The reall presence of Christes body is proued by theThe vij. faith of the whole Church of God in all tymes andChapiter. ages. S. Paule disputing against them, who saied that our bodies1. Co. 15. should not arise againe, hath these wordes: Si Christus non resurrexit, inanis est praedicatio nostra, inanis est & fides ves∣tra.The faith of the Church can not be in vaine. If Christ be not risen, our preaching is voyd, and your faith is in vaine. The like may be saied concerning the Sacrament of the altar, in whiche if the true substance of Christes body be not conteined, the Apostles preaching is in vaine, and our faith is nothing worth. But S. Paule acccompteth it a great absurditie, that either of them both should be voyd or in vaine: and yet pro∣secuting farther that argument he addeth, that if Christ be not risen, Qui domierunt in Christo, perierunt. those that haue slepte. Co. 15. in Christ, are perished. Those I say, that haue slept in Christ, that haue beleued in him, loued him, suffred martyrdom for him, those are perished. Right so it is, if Christes body be not vnder the form of bread, all our forefathers that haue slept in Christ are perished. All theyr faith, watching, praier, almose dedes, all theyr charitie, and theyr cōslict against the deuill, the world, and the flesh is lost. They were more miserable then any men. For they liued more hardly in this life, then any of our age doth, and yet all is loste. They were idolatours, they worshipped a false God, they are condened for euer.
This could not S. Paule abyde, this he accōpted for wonder∣full absurd: that a man who is called to the faith and baptized in Christe, who doth his best to serue God with all his hart and thought, that he should be condemned for beleuing that: which al men preached, all taught, all professed. For surely the real presenceAll the Church beleued y• reall pre∣sence. of Christes body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine was beleued through out al the Church: in so much that Caluin, Decolampadius, Zuinglius, Luther, Wyelefe, yea Berengarius did once euery of them with al theyr scholars beleue the said reall presence. For they were baptized and christened al, to be made members of that member of faithfull men, all which did beleue, that Christ in the Sacrament of his last supper had lefte to them vnder the formes of bread and wine his owne body and blood. Whiles thē they were made by baptisme of that Catholike company, them selues also had the same Catholike belefe. and no marnayle: sith all they being baptized when they were infantes, and therefore hauing no actuall fayth of theyr owne, must nedes haue only that faith which the Church had, whereof by baptisme they were made members. but the whole Church East and West belened the reall presence of Christes body, so that when BeringariusBeren∣garius. began to say otherwise, he was reproued of al the Preachers of y• age, he was condemned by three Councels of Bishops kept at Rome and Uercels in Italy, and at Tours in France. He was impugned by Algerus, Laufrācus, Guiundus, and afterwardMarke y• Berenga rius had none to be leue his doctrine, except he changed his ol faith. by Rupertus, Petrus Cluniacensis, and other excellent Clerks of that tyme. The faithful Princes and people abhorred him, and to be short, no man beleued his doctrine, except that he changed his old faith to take a new of Berengarius. For if any other man in the whole Church before Berengarius had openly taught or beleued, that
Christ was ly by a figure in the Sacrament: then could not he only haue bene made rcant, nor had not bene accompted the fa∣ther and first open preacher of that faith. Againe, if the Princes and people had bene of his belefe, they had surely done, as the princes and people of our tyme (who beleue the doctrine of Be∣rengarius) dayly do. They had throwen doune altars, ouerthro∣wen Churches, denyed all outward Priesthod, changed Bishops into superintendents, Priests into ministers, altars into tables, y• chaste clergy into the vnlauul mariage of otaries, they had not preserued the Sacrament of the altar for soden necessities, they had not adored the flesh of God and man vnder the form of bread and wine, they had not bene content with one kind at the holyLike doc∣trine like fruits. cōmunion, one  should not haue said Masse without an other to receaue the communion with him, the sacrifice of the Masse had not bene applied to the liue and dead, monasteries, chantries chappels had not bene so fast erected, and to speake breifly, al that now is mislyked had bene then misliked, if the princes and people of that age had thought, as Princes and people (such as nowe folow  his doctrine) doe thinke. For it can not be otherwise, but that the same fayth will bring forth the same workes: as one manner of tree bringeth forth al∣waise the same manner of fruit. But if it be euid ent to all men,Matth. 7 that fyue hundred yers past and vpward, euen to y• daies of Con∣stantine the great (vnder whom Christ was openly worshipped)Niceph. li. 8. c. 13. Churches, monasteries, altars, chapplles were built, if Priests were estemed, the body of Christ reserued, and adored, it Masses were in vse and in price euery where, and said for the liuing and the dead: out of all controuersie neither Bishops (who kepte Councels against Berengarius) neither preachers and doctours (who taught and wrote against him) neither princes and people (who did and folowed the contrary effect to his doctrine) none▪
I say, of al the Christian men a ublikely professed Brenga∣rius opion: which was, to deny the reall ce of Christes bo∣dy and blood in the Sacrament of the altar. So that only those, whome Berengarius seduced, began thenB rius ca∣ched his doctrine, not being sent of any successo of the Ao stls. first to thinke as he did. wherby two things are manifest, the one that Beringaris went from the doctrine of all the Church, and from that fayth wherein he was baptized: An other, that for so doing he was a seducer and false teacher, to whome none of the Apostles successours (who for that tyme ruled the Church) gaue any commission to preache such doctrine. And yet how could heRom. 10. preache, if he were not sent? or how could he be sent, sith no man would authorise him to preache that doctrine, y• conrary wherof him selfe beleued? Therefore of such false preachers as Berenga∣rius was, God said by the Prophete Ieremie: I sent them not,Iere. 23. and they ranne. For if God set him, he can shew his commission: he can name y• meane, wherby he was sent: he cā bring forth, what successour of the Apostles willed him to preache that doctrine. But if he can not doe so, he cometh of him self, he preacheth with∣out authority, and consequently he is a thefe, a robber, a murdrer:Ioan. 10. and so are all those, that folow him. owbeit for so much as he recanted, it may be well thought: that by penance he was recon∣ciled to God again. And so may his folowers be reconciled, ifBerenga rius re∣canted. according to the example of theyr master they will repent. It was then the vniersall faith of the Church before the tie of Berengaris, that Christes body and blood waspresent really vnder the formes of bread and wine. which being so, if that faith came not to them from the Apostles: who taught it them▪ If faithRom. 10 ome of hearing the word of God preached: the whole Church could not beleue that, which was not preached. If it were so prea∣ched, either that preaching came by lawfull coission, and thenIoan. 20. it was of God, and the doctrine good: or els it came of priuateActo. 15.
, and it must be shewed who were those vspers, that preached otherwise t ey had receaued. Or how is it possible, tt it  a priuate vsurping, which was generally receaued euery where? Or if those that preached the reall presence, were men that went by schisme or hereseie out of y• Church: let y• Church1. Ioan. 2. and faithfull cumpanie be named, whence they went. Let vs goe from step to step. First, six hundred yeres past al the knowē faithful on the arth beleued the reall presence, as it appered euidently, when Beren∣garius afterward began to teache otherwise. For then all prea∣chers, & prelates and people resisted him both in word and dede, as I shewed before. Wel then, those docours and preachers of six hundred yeres old, how came they by theyr beleife? Had they it not of those, who were aboue seuen hundred yeres past? And they againe of theyr forefathers? May we not by that meanes go vpward vntil we come to Christ▪ or where shal we stay? whether in the ninth hundred yere numbring vpward? how then came that selfe hundred age by this faith? If it had it not of the tenth hundred age, it muste make a new faith: aud then it must haue new preachers and Apostles. But what? Did they of the tenth hundred age send any man to preache or no? If they sent none, al the faith must nedes cease at once, whē all preaching ceased. But if they sent also preachers, and made Bishops and consecrated Priests, as before tyme had bene vsed (as it can not be denied but they did) I suppose they sent men of their own faith, and not of a contrarie belefe. It they did so, the preachers of the ninth hundred age must nedes preach the same: that they toke of their auncestours, which was the tenth hundred age. And that, which I say of the tenth hundred age, I meane likewise of the eleuenth, and so vpward vntil we come to Christ. For in euery age the Bishops, who ruled the Church, sent forth
preathers, and willed them alwaies to preach the same Gospell:Galat. 1. which they had receaued, and in case they did otherwise, they cor∣rectedActo. 15. them, excommunicated, and deposed them. Thus hath al∣waies the faith bene preserued from hand to hand, vntill these our daies: in so much that neuer no heresie was begun, but y• man was knowen who began it, and much more they were knowen, who impugned the heresy, and defended the truth. For as it may appere by S. Paul, heresies must be, to thend those that are tried1. Cor.  and perfite, may be knowen. For in al diuisions and schismes the one part beginneth a new trouble, the other mainteineth the old order & custome, & he that tarieth in vuitie is a tried faithful man. But, as I said, he that beginneth the heresy, is knowen, and the place where he preached it, and the Bishop or Patriarch is kno∣wen who reproued it, and the assemble knowen, where it was consted, and the scholars knowen, who ainteined the heresy. And aboue al the Churches are most openly knowen, frō which he heretke departed. When Valntinus began, it could be said to him: thou goest from the knowen doctrine of the RomaineIreneus de haeres. lib. 3. c. 3. Church, of the Corinthian Church, of the Ephesian Church, and so foorth. Let it then be shewed of the Sacramentaries, when that he∣resy of the real presence began: which was so riue a hūdrd yeres before Berengaris published his new doctrine. Let them shew, where those Churches remained, from whiche they depard: who taught the reall presence▪ Let one Bishop be named in theA large scope to detect an heresy. whole earth, who before that tyme reproued the teachers of the real presence as heretiks, in the seuēth, eigth, ninth, tenth, eleuēth, twelueth, thirtenth, fourtenth or fyftenth hundred age▪The tea∣chers of y• reall pre∣sence can not be schisa∣tiks. What shall I say more i so plaine a matter▪ They haue loste their faith, their memorie, their vnderstanding, their common sense: that wil haue the teachers of the real presence to be schisma tiks, or false preachers, or misbeleuers: who can neither shewe
when they began, nor whence they departed, nor where, nor of whome they were reproued. If we be no schisinatikes, who teache and beleue the reall pre∣sence: they must nedes be schismatiks & misbeleuers, who teache the contrary. Yea but, say they, ye are gone from the Apostles, &An obie∣ction. frō y• auncient Fathers. For thus generally they would intangle the matter. But seing to be accused of the schisme, it is moreThe aun∣swere. greuouse, then to be accused of treason: let vs sce, whether it wereAn exam∣. enough in a iudgement of treason, to say to a man of our age: you haue denied your obedience to the king, and yet could name no king, whome the paie had disobeyed. Would not the party accused say: name the king whome I haue disobeied? Mary (saith y• accuser) you haue disobeyed William Conquerour, & Const tine the great. Would not the party accused answere▪ Why syr, I liued not with them, nor vnder them: and therefore I could not depart from their obedience. No but (saith the accuser) thou arte the sonne of him, that disobeied William Conquero. The other answereth: No syr not so. My fathers also were obedient always to the kings, vnder whome they liued, and kept their lawes frō tyme to tyme. If now the accuser could goe no farther, what should the Iudges doe, I praie you? should they condemne the party accused of treason? ight so we are accused of schisme. but from whome did weWe are neither heretiks nor the sonnes of heretiks. depart? from the Apostles? Ue liue not vnder them. Well, but we are the sonnes of them, who departed from the Apostles. May surely. For all our fathers obeied always the successours of the Apostles, and kept all their lawes, and traditions. What say ye now?  ye bring foorth auy of our forefathers, who disobeyed the prelats, which liued in their tyme? Yea but you goe from the doctrine, from the writinges, from the preaching of the Apostles, If we doe so, either we now first
beginne to doe so: or els it must be shewed, when our forefathers began to do so. For we kepe the preaching, the doctrine, the Gos∣pell, which we receaued: and we preache it as we receaued it. We1. Tim. 6. find, that S. Paule said to Timothe: Depositum custodi, kepe that which was committed to thee. We find, This is my body, four tymes writen, with many circumstances, which importe a reall prosence. Besyde, we haue alwaies from the Apostles tyme ta∣ken the vnderstanding of those wordes to be: that, this is the very substance of my body. In so much that our forefathers haue all∣waies adored it, and called it a sacrifice for the liuing and for the dead. In this faith we were borne, in this we liue, and excpt ye shew when and how we went from an other Gospel, or an other faith: we can be no schismatiks. Yea but S. Augustine, say you, and men of his tyme did other∣wiS. Augu∣stine is not agai vs. exound the Gospell. No syr. that can not be so: for then the preachers whome S. Auguine and other  felow Bishopes sent foorth; would not haue deliuerd to our auncestours this be∣leefe. Either shew, when we or our forefathers renosiced the cō∣munion of S. Augustine: or beleue no longer that blessed man, who teacheth euen as we beleue: And so he deliuered to his suc∣cessours, and they to vs. Yea but his bookes haue contrary doc∣trine. No verily nor his, nor any mannes els, that is elder the Berengarius: aleit Bertram perhaps disposed him selfe to mis∣creditBertra suspectd. somewhat, which yet he could not determine, nor hath not plainly vttered. But as we kepe the faith preached by S. Augus∣tine, so we kepe and reuerence his bookes, and knowe what they meane. But if they did speake any thing against the vniuerIn epist. funda∣menti. c. 5. . 19. all saith, him selfe hath in many places declared, that he would vs not to beleue them. Therefore in this behalfe, we are clere, as who neuer departed from the Apostles, nor frō their ▪ But your departing is knowen. I  that it
Berengarius about the yere of our Lord. 1000. I can tell when1000.  renewed the same heresy, when Luther, when Zwinglius1400. began. Who knoweth not where the Churches are, whence they1517. 1522. deprted? To wit, in Italy, in France, in Spaine, in Germany, & so forth. I can tell the Coūcels wherin it hath bene condemned. At , at Uercels, at Tours, in the great Councel of Lateran, at iemia in Feance, at Basill, at Constance, at Florence, at Trent. All things are knowen so manifestly concerning the be∣giuning and proceding of the Sacramentaries, that they can not be denied. To couclude, our faith is  by the testimonie of y• Church, which in al ages hath beleued y• real presence of Christ in the Sa∣crament, in so much that S. Hilary saith: there is no place left ofHila. li. 8 de Trin. douting of the veritie of Christes fleshe & blood. why so? nun enim & ipsius Domini professione, & fide nostra, verè  est; The faith of the  Church. verè sanguis est▪ for now both by the profession of our Lord him self, & by our faith, it is fleshe in dede and blood in dede. Lo, By our Lordes profession and by our faith. S. Hilary confesseth that all Christians beleued, that the Sa∣cramēt of Cjrotes body and blood (whereof he there spake) was his fleshe in dede, and his blood in dede. for he had spoken before of the Sacrament, which be called also a mystcrie, and our Lords meate, and the Sacrament of his flesh to be communicated to vs: which Sacrament is Christes fleshe in dede, and being receaued maketh the same fleshe naturally and corporally to dwell in vs. This was not only the minde of S. Hilary, but he saith, it wasTwo chef  of  truth. the profession of our Lord, and the faith of the Churche: whiche two groids are so sure, that no place of douting is left. For the faith of the hurch doth expound, declare, & witnesse, how Christ our Lord ment: when he said, my flesh is meate in dede. This faith can not be vayne or voide: for by it we ouercomme
the world, the deuyl, and hel gates. By it we know the difference1. Ioan. 5. betwene these words, This is my body: and these, I am the dore,Matt. 16. the vine, the way. the rock is Christ, Iohn Baptist is Elias, andThe faith full neuer beleued these igu∣ratiue speaches. such like. For no man taught in any age, neither Christiā people did at tyme beleue: that Christ was a material dore, vine or way, neither that any rock was turned into Christ, neither that Ihon Baptist was Elias in person. Faith always did vnderstand these propositiōs and such like, to be a phrase of speaking without any effect of working any farther thing. But when a lawfull Priest saith vppon bread at the altar, This is my body: then no faithul man euer douted, but there was wrought the body and blood of Christ. and so our fathers and great grandfathers deliuered to vs that belefe. Certainly a surer rule to vnderstand the word ofIere. 13. God then faith is, neuer was heard of: for it is the life and graHeb. 8 of the new testament, which the holy Ghost hath geuen into the whole Church of God. It is the gift of knowlege to euery good beleuer, which directeth him to al truth. S. Augustine shewing that the Manichees thought the visibleAug. in Ioā. tra. 34. sonne to be Christ, although he might by many meanes haue impugned that errour: yet he specially chose to say, Catholicae Ecclesiae recta fides improbat tale commentum, diabolicam do∣ctrinam esse cognoscit credendo. The right faith of the Catholike Church disproued that fable, and knoweth it by beleuing to be a deylish doctrine. Euen so by beleuing the Sacrament of the al∣tar to be Christes true flesh, we know the doctrine of the Sacra∣mentaries to be a fable aud an heresy. Epiphanius writing of purpose against figuratiue and alle∣goricall interpretatious, geueth likewise a most clere witnesse ofIn Anco. the belefe of all the Church in his tyme, and before him. For dis∣puting what it is, for man to be made according to the image of God, He shewith at the last: whatsoeuer it be, once it is true, be∣cause
God through grace hath geuen man that image: Though we can not tell, wherein it standeth. And for example he bringeth how Christe tooke at his last supper bread and wine, and when he had geuen thanks he sayd: This is my body, and this is my blood.  Epiphanius nameth not these things, because the  should not by his bookes vnderstād our mysteries: & cōsequētly he sheweth, yt the thing cōsecrated is not like neither to the manhod of Christ, nor to his Godhead. For it is of a shape, and (to looke vnto) a dead or vnsensible thing: yet Christ by grace hath said, This is my body, and This is my blood. Et nemo non fidem habet sermoni. Qui nim non credit esse ipsum verum, sicutEuery  beleueth. ipse dixit: is excidit à gratia & salute. and euery man beleueth the saying. For who so doth not beleue the saying, as him selfe said it: he is fallen from grace and saluation. If the word & saying be, this is my body, & this is my blood: If euery man beleue the saying: if he that beleueth not the saying to be true, and so to be true, euen as Christ spake it, as he sounded it, as he vttered it, if he that beleueth not these things, be fallen from grace and saluation: who wil now beleue, that this is the signe of my body, and not the truth thereof? and then he must say likewise, that in dede we are not made according to the image of God. Euery man in the tyme of Epiphanius did beleue not only y• truth of Christes body & blood in heauen, nor only the dwelling thereof in vs by faith: but euery man did belee this selfe saying, this speache, and this proposition, This is my body.The say∣ing it selfe is beleued If this saying must be beleued, it must be true: if the speache it selfe be true, the thing thereby signified is true. But the wordes doe signifie the substance of Christes body (for his body is a sub∣stance) therefore it is true, y• this is the substāce of Christes body. But if it be still bread, it is not so. for material bread is not the body of Christ: therefore it is so the substance of his body, that it
is not bread or wine, which is the signe of his body, as the Sa∣cramentaries teach. In this saying, This is my body, no bread is named, no signe, no figure: ut only the selfe body of Christe which is one certaine substance. Therefore all the Church in the tyme of Epiphanius, and alwaies before, did beleue: the thing pointed vnto in those words, to be the substāce of Christes body. For how so euer it semed vnsensible (as also it is not sene, how we are made according to y• image of God) yet y• saying was be∣leued, euen as Christ said it, sicut ipse dixit, as him selfe said it,As Christ sayd it. without glosing, without additiōs, without figures, orparables: euen as Christ spake it, so it was beleued, and beleued of euery man. And who so did not beleue it, was rekoned a damned per∣son, without grace, without saluation, without life euerlasting. Thus haue we heard two notable witnesses of the faith of the whole Churche, the one a Latine, S. Hilarius: the other a grecian, Epiphanius. But now I will bring foorth not (as be∣fore) the old Fathers bearing witnesse of the belefe of the people: but I will bring foorth the whole people it selfe, yea the people of ye primatine Church. You shall heare al the citizens of ye house of God through out the world witnessing with one voice, in one word, their most constāt faith touching ye Sacrament of the altar. Amen is an hebrew word, which partly wisheth, and partly affirmeth, signifying as it were at once, be it so, and it is so. ItAmen. signifieth be it so, when it is ioyned with praiers and petitions: It signifieth it is so, when it foloweth any parte of Christes doc∣trine, which is alredy pronounced or affirmed. Thence we reade so oft in holy scripture: Amen, amen I say vnto you: which is toIn the iturgies. say, verely, verely. S. James the Apostle, S. Iustin the martyr, S. Clement, S. Cyrill of Hicrusalem, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom doe witnesse: that the people vsed at Masse tyme to answer: Amen. Which thing they did specially twise,
once at the consecration as well of the body as of the blood: and againe at the tyme of communion. At the consecration the Priest in the person of Christ pronoun∣ceth most determinatly ouer bread: This is my body, and ouer wine, This is my bloood. Therefore when the people answer to those blessed sayings, Amen: they affirme the same, that is affir∣med, as though they said with one voice: It is verely the body of Christ, and, it is verely the blood of Christ, whereof you speak. And least you should thinke this cōment to be of myne making, S. Ambrose expounded y• same word before me, saying: Ipse cla∣matAmbros. de ijs qui init. my∣sterijs cap. 9. dominus Iesus, hoc est corpus meū, our Lord Iesus him selfe crieth, this is my body. He calleeh the crying of our Lord, when his minister crieth so in his name. For of that crying he speaketh, as it may appere by the word folowing. Wel: Our Lord Iesus him self crieth out, this is my body. be∣fore the blessing of y• heauenly words, it is named another kind, after consecration yt body is signified. him self calleth it his own blood. before consecration, it is called an other thing, after con∣secration it is called blood. and thou sayest Amen: that is to sayAmen. (as S. Ambrose him selfe expoundeth it) verum est, it is true.The sound of y• speache is to be be∣leued. That the mouth speaketh, let the inward mind confelse: that the speache soundeth, let the hart think. Hitherto, S. Ambrose, who would not bid the people thinke that, whiche the speache soundeth: if the speache were figuratiue. for a figuratiue speache soundeth otherwise, then we ought to thinke thereof: as when we say, God is sory, Christ is made synne, the rok is Christ. As it was the custome of the primatiue Church for the people to say Amen, straight vppon the consecration of the body and blood, whereby they shewed them selues to beleue the wordes of Christ, and the work of the Priest: euen so was it also the custome,Clemens Apostol. that when the tyme of communion came (as S. Clement, and
dierse others doe witnesse) the Bishop should geue the oblationcons  8. cap. 20. to the people, saying▪ Corpus Christi, the body of Christ: and he y• toke it, should say, Amen, it is true, And y• Deacon whē he deli∣ueredCyrillus Catech. y• chalice, did say: sanguis Christi, calix vitae▪ y• blood of Christ,4. Ambr. y• chalice of life, & he that drank said Amen, so it is, or that is true.de Sacr. li. 4. ca. 5 To which custome, being in vse at his tyme, S. Ambrose al∣luding writeth thus: Dicit tibi Sacerdos; corpus Christi, & tu di∣cisDe Sar. li. 4. ca. 5 amen, hoc est verum: quod confitetur lingua, teneat affectus. The Priest saith to thee, the body of Christ, and thou saiest Amen, that is true: that which thy tonge confesseth, let thy hart kepe. But what speake I of S. Ambrose? Would the Apostles haue made all the people to cry amen to that, which had not bene so, as the word did sound? Would they haue made the simple men to wit∣esse their belefe to such words, as neded a farther commēt or in∣terpretation? It is rather to be thought, yea to be most assuredly beleued, that they ordeined that custome: to thend all men might know, that the thing consecrated vppon the altar was in dede the body of Christ? S. Augustine beareth witnesse to the same custome saying:Aug. con tra Faust. Habet magnam vocem Christi sanguis in terra, cùm eo accepto abMan. li. 12. ca. 10. omnibus gentibus respondetur, Amen. the blood of Christ hath a greate voice in earth, when after it is taken, all nations aunswere amen. Haec est clara vox sanguinis, quam sauguis ipse exprimit ex ore fidelium eodem sanguine redemptorum. This is the cleere voice of the blood, the which voice the blood it selfe forceth out of the mouth of the faithfull being redemed with the same blood.Leo ser. 6. de ie∣iun. 7. mensis. Pope Leo the greate agreeth with S. Clement, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine. Sic sacrae mensae communicare debetis, & cae. Ye ought so to communicate of the holy table, that ye doubt nothing at all of the truth of the body and blood of Christe: for y• thing is taken in the mouth, which is beleued in faith. And
Amen, is in vayne answered of them, who dispute against thatThe  dispu ted in which is receaued. This place declareth that some disputation was moued by some of the heresy of Manicheus (who liued inRome a∣gainst the Sacra∣ment. Rome vnder Leo) against the real presence of Christes body and blood vnder the forme of bread. For seing the Maniches beleued not Christ to haue a true body at all, they might well doubt of the truth of his body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar. But that holy Bishop biddeth the people not doubt thereof, shewing that we do not eate the body of Christ only by faith, but also by mouth. Now because Leo setteth the receauing of the truth of Christes body by mouth, against the receauing thereofHeretiks are euer redy, to deny an ex ternall truth in Christes works. by faith only: we may coniecture, that heretikes euen in those days were of the mind, that their ofspring is now of. verily to draw as much truth from Christes works, as may be, and to set all things vpon faith, spirit, and vnderstanding. But Leo pro∣ueth his doctrine by the generall custome of the whole Church▪ wherein the people answering Amen, did in open words wit∣nesse them selues to beleue, that it was true, which the Priest sayd, concerning the body of Christ. Now because some of them, who vsed to say Amen, disputed whether the substance and truth of Christes body were present in the mouthes of the receauers, or no: that Shepherd of Chri∣stesOre su∣itur. flok sayth, that if it were not his true body, and receaued in the mouth: it were in vaine to say Amen: It is true. For seing the Priest bringing meate vnto their mouthes, did say: The body of Christ: if notwithstanding it were only to be receaued in hart, & not in mouth also, it were in vaine to say, Amen, or to answere, it is so, it is true, and yet to think in hart otherwise. To end this matter at the length: The whole Church before Berengarius beleued the reall presence: and they toke that their belefe of their auncestours from hand to hand euen vntill we
come to the Apostles, and by them to Christ. In the primatiue Church the Priest cried out at the altar, This is my body, and this is my blood: All the people answered, it is so: It is true. S. Ambrose biddeth them think as they speake: yea euen as the word soundeth. S. Leo sayth they say in vaine, it is true: if they dispute against the truth thereof. And he teacheth the truth to be, that the same thing is receaued in the mouth, which is beleued in faith. S. Hilary sayeth, No place of doubting is left, sith both by our Lords profession, and by our faith it is verily flesh and verily blood. Epiphanius witnesseth, that euery man beleueth our Lords saying, wherein he sayd, This is my body: And who so doth not beleue it euē as him self spake it, he is fallen from grac and saluation. Seing all these things doe euidently proue the faith of the whole Church to haue bene, that Christes body and blood was really present in the Sacrament of the altar, and really receaued into the mouthes of the faithfull people: it remaineth that thos, who haue bene deceaued in this behalf, do returne agaie to their former belefe: and that, as wel in al other points as i this,1. Tim. 3. they do for euer beleue the Catholike Church, the piller of truth: Knowing for surety, that it can not be a Catholie doctrine, which is begun in our age, or any tyme after th preaching of the Apostles, and that specially, when it is conrary to the faith always preached and beleued. ¶ That no man possibly can be condemned, for beleuingThe ix. the body of Christ to be really present in the SacramentChapiter. of the altar. WHen Christe had almost ended his talke at Caphar∣naum, and shewed his wordes to be spirit and life, perceauing all the fault, why the Iewes thought his
sayinges so absurde, to be, for so much as they estemed him no more then a naturall man, weighing his doctrine by theyr senses & earthely reason: he for declaration of theyr incurable dyssease, &Ioan. 6. for the detection of the cause thereof, sayd: Sed sunt quidam ex vo∣bis, qui non credunt. But there are some of you, who beleue not.Belefe is the chefe thing. For Iesus knewe from the beginning, who they where which be∣leued not. Here we may see the chefe fault in all matter and ques∣tion of the supper of Christ to consist in not beleuing. He that be∣leueth, is safe: but wo to him, that beleueth not. S. Peter beleueth, and confesseth Christ to haue the wordes of euerlasting life. Iudas beleueth not, and therefore he is called aThe al∣mighty power of Christe. deuil. The chefe point of Christiā belefe is, to acknowlege Christ to be God, to be almighty, to be able to make and to doe what soeuer pleaseth him. This point he lacketh, who so denieth Christ to be able to make the substance of his owne body present in di∣uerse places at once, vnder diuerse formes of bread and wine. If herefore any man wil not beleue this, he may be assured his por∣tioDe pass. is rekned with Iudas, who (as Leo hath witnessed) beleuedDomin. serm. 1. not th almighty power and Godhead of Christ. But if all men agree  this point, it is very well: then let vs passe to the nexte. Christ said▪ The bread which I will geue, is my flesh the whichThe will of Christe I will geue for te life of the world. Now are we come from the power of Chist, to the will of Christ. We all were agreed, that he was able to make the substance of his body present vnder diuerse formes of bread, and wine. Nowe these wordes affirme, that he will geue a kind of bread: the substance whereo is his own flesh, euen that flesh, the which he will geue for the life of the world. And if we goe to his last supper, we see bread taken, and after blessing and thankes geuen, he said, This is my body which is ge∣uen for you. And he gaue his twelue disciples twelue fragmētes
or peeces bidding euery one of them, take, and eate: in whichThe dede of Christe deede he sheweth him self to make the substance of his body pre∣sent vnder the formes of bread in diuerse places at one tyme, all∣though not after the manner of locall situation: because his body hath not in the Sacrament actually that naturall dimention and occupying of place, which it hath otherwise. But as he hath or∣deined it to be: so is it vnder twelue diuerse formes of bread. Here I am sure many will stand with me and say they beleueThe  of belefe. not so, to whom I answere: y• by so saying they haue condemned them selues to be of those, of whom Christ said, there are some of yow who beleue not. For yf Christ said by y• which was bread before his blessing, which still seemed bread, yf Christ said thereof this is my bodie, & gaue it vnder twelue peeces or formes: seing they confesse him to be able to make his body present vnder di∣uerse formes, and to haue promised to geue his flesh, and to haue said, this is my body, and to haue geuen it to twelue: how can they deny that his body was present at that supper vnder twelue di∣uerse formes of bread, being whole and all vnder eche forme? The confessing of that which Christ said, is a thing that apper∣teineth vnto faith, because the speaker is God, to whom all faithIoan. 14. belōgeth. To beleue this that God saith, must nedes be a vertue:An obie∣ction. and to discredite it, is a great vice. You will perhap allege, that fleshe profiteth nothing, the wordes of Christ are spirit and life▪The aun∣swer. that is true, & therefore I beleue, that when he said: take, eate thisGen. 1. is my body, he gaue his body not without life & spirit: but yet as really, as euer, by saying, Let the light be made, he made y• light. for his wordes be not dead flesh (which profiteth nothing) but quicken and geue lyfe, how, and when so euer it pleaseth hym, muche better: then the spirit and soule of man is able to quicken & make liuely the body wherein it is. These two sayinges, this is my body, and, my wordes are spirit and life, stande so well to∣gether,
that I beleue the one for the others sake. Christes words neuer lacke spirit and life and power to quicken other thinges, euen as his flesh neuer lacked al kynd of spirit in it selfe: for when the soule was out of it, yet the godhed remayned & corporallyColos. 2. dwelt in it, and the soule returned to it agayne the third day. Therefore when Christ saith, This is my body which is geuen for you, I am bound to beleue, that his body is neither without soule, nor godhead: for ells it were not truly said, it is geuen for vs, yf it were not profitable to vs. Thus you se, that I beleue al yt words of Christ together, and that you not doing so, are (with∣out ye do repeut) certeine to be condemned, for not beleuing these words: take, eate, This is my body. You wyll say, ye beleue theseAn obie∣ction. words, yet not carnally, but spiritually: as it is mete for Christes wordes to be beleued. O syr, he that assigneth a meane, howe heThe aun∣wer. will beleue Christes wordes, in that very faut sheweth hym selfe not to beleue them: for belefe inuenteth nothing of his owne, but followeth the autoritie of God that speaketh. I beleue in deed, that Christes words can not be carnal, as you take carnal words for foule and grosse meaninges. But I see it to be a very cleane and pure meaning, that the moste pure substance of the flesh of Christ, should he geuen vnder the form of bread, to thend it may be eaten of vs: and the chiefe and cleanest thing that we vse to eate, is bread. To geue therefore the chiefe and most healthfull flesh in the world, to be eaten vnder the form of the purest eatable thing, is a very pure and cleane work far from all carnality. You will say, it is more pure, if it be rather beleued to be eatenAn obie∣ction. only of y• harte of man by faith & spirit, then by mouth and body. I answere, that is no pure eating of a corporall thing, which taketh away the truth of corporall eating. Againe both waysThe aun∣swer. of eating are better, then one of them alone. I beleue his real flesh to be eaten with hart and mouth, to be eaten with body & minde,
to be eaten in deede, and in faith. Here faileth your belefe, be∣cause of two true thinges you beleue but one, the other you dis∣credit. To be short, let vs imagine him that beleueth the real presence of Christes body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine, to stand before the seate of Christes iudgement, and that Christe asketh him, why he did beleue and worship his body and blood vnder the formes of bread and wine. May he not wel answere in this wise? I beleued so and did so,1. The belief of a Ca∣tholike. because your maiestie taking bread and hauing blessed, douted not so say, This is my body: which words al my forefathers vn∣derstode to be spoken properly, and to be true as they sounded: & therefore at the commandement of my prelats I adored your bo∣dy vnder the form of bread. If Christ reply that he had preachers2. who tought him otherwise, and cryed to him to beware, least he committed idolatrie: first that obiecti might not be made to any man that died aboue fiftie yeres past, because no preacher taught publikely any such doctrine. Secondly, if so much were said to one of our time, he might answere that he had  forefathers,3. and moe preachers, and those much more anncient, and more ho∣nest men: who required him to beleue Christes wordes, and to worship the body of his maker. Well, now we are come to the point: all the Catholikes haue preahed with one accorde, that it is the true body of Christ, and the Gospell witnesseth that Christ , This is my body. Here is the word of God, and the tradition, and preaching of man ioyned together. I aske whether it be possible for Christ, who requireth nothingMarc. 16 so earnestly of vs, as brief, to  that simple man: who (being otherwise of good )  his word and his forefa∣, and the preachers agreable with both, or not Answere me,
for what fault shall this poore man be condemned? First, to beleue Christ, it is no fault. Secondly, Christ faid: this1. is my body. Thirdly, he, being yet an infant, was of his paren∣tes2. taught: that to be the body of Christ, which was holden ouer3. the Priests head. Fourthly, as many and moe preache vnto him4. when he cometh to laufull age, and say this is the body of Christ, as there are that aterward preache the contrary. Tell me then, what was his fault, for which he may be cōdemned? If you say, his eyes told him, it was not y• body of Christ: he will answere, that for the reuerence he bare to the word of God, he denied theChrys. om. 83. in Matt. fensible instruction of his eyes, as geuing more credit to Christ, then to him selfe. Is that a fault? If you reply, that by that mea∣es he might haue worshipped the ro in stede of Christ: he wil answere, he knoweth not what you meane, he neuer had any rok shewed him by most graue authority, which was said to be Christ. If any suche thing had bene taught him, he for his parte was so obedient to beleue, so willing to adore Christ: that he would haue done any thing, which had bene commanded to him vnder the name of Christ, or of his religion. Is this a fault, why the poore man should be condemned? No surely, seing the Prophet Dauid saieth, Vt iumentum factus sum apud te: I am become as it werePsal. 72. a beast before thee. It is andable (saith Euthymius) that in the sight of God, weEuthy. in Psal. take our selues as beastes: which being so, I can deuise no fault in this poore and simple man. who if he be deceaued, he is decea∣ued by Christ, by his forefathers, by diuerse Catholike and ver∣tuous Preachers, by y• vertue of humility, of obedience, & of pure loue towards God. But on the other side, if Christ call one of them before him, who denieth his reall presence, & aske him why he did not beleue the Sacrament of the altar to be the body of Christe: what will he answer for himselfe▪
Will he say? Syr I beleed your body to sit at the right handThe pro∣testants . of God, the Father, and therefore that your body was not in the Priestes hand? Why then thinkest thou, that I am not able to make the same, which is at the right hand of my father, to be als present vnder the form of bread? Sir whether you be able or no, I can not say, but I haue hard many preachers tel, yt one body cā not be at one time in diuerse places. O howe dreadfully would Christ answere in this case? Did not those preachers, whom thou pretēdest to folow, say alwaies: they preached to thee the sincere word of God? Did they not by that colour ouerthrow monas∣teries, Churches, altars, images of Saintes, and mine owne image and crose? Did they not denie the sacrifice of the Masse, praing for the dead, and such like auncient vsages, only for pre∣tence of the word of God? And now see, how inexcusable they & thou art. I said, Take, eate, this is my body. I said this to twelue men, I gaue eche of them my body, & ad them make that thing, as it is written in the Gospel. I shewed at , that I was signed of my Father, and equall with him in power. theyIoan. 6. them selues beleue that I made al creatures, places, times, of no∣thing: and now is it doubted how I am able to make my body present vnder the orm of bread in diuerse places? Yea to maintaine the better yt argument against my allmighty power, they say, I entred not into my disciples, the dores beingIoan. 20. shut: But eyther preuented the shutting of them contrary to the wordes of my Gospell, or came in by the window (as theues do) or by some hole (as crepers doe) yea any thing is soner beleued then my diuine strength and working. Thou hypocrite, seing the word of God hath it written foure tymes in the new testament, This is my body: how comest thou to talke with me of my  in heauen, as though one of my workes were contrary to the other. If in dede thou haddest bene humbly perswaded, that I
were God, thou wouldest not measure my allmightie power by thy simple wit. Thou art twise condemned: first, for deniall of a truth, and againe for denying it against my expresse word: which thou pretendest to ese, and yet pronoūcest it false. If the pore mn say, he knew not so much, nor saw not the falsehod of that argumēt, and beginne to accuse the salse preachers who deceiud him: Christ maie well say, that he was not deceaued. for before those false preachers began their false doctrine, he had said, This is my body, and this is my blood, and all the world beleued, and taught the rall presence of Christes body & blood fiften hundred yeres together. What cause nowe haddest thou, to beleue a new Gospell, and new preachers thereof? Forsoth Sir, they said the Bishop of Rome had deceaued vs, and we heare say, he is a very euil mā: therefore we thought he had deceaued vs. If in this case Christ tell him, that the Bishop of Rome were y• successour of S.Luc. 22. Peter, and so his vicar, hauing promise by him not to erre in faith: and yet that he alone taught not that doctrine, but that all the Bishops, doctors, & pers of the whole Church taught the same from the beginning: and that Christ him selfe had say the same: that all the , and the Apostle S. Paule had written the same: that al faithful  beleued the same: what excuse can he haue, who  Christ, the Apostles, the Bis∣shops, the Fathers, the preachers, and the whole Church, to fol∣lowe an vp , who began his doctriue so am∣hitiously, and proudly, who ed so euil, & died so terribly: that his very ominable dealing with great Princes, his shamfull  and horrible death might make any good man wearie to think vpon him, much lesse should so many haue folowed him. To  shor wer the pore mā for him selfe▪ what he may, yet he can not denie, but that both Christ said this is my body, & the Church taught the same: and yet he beleued not this to be the
body of Christe, and therefore is one of them, who beleue not: &Hebr. 11. without faith (which is but one) there is no saluatiō, no pleasing of God, no part in the kingdō of heauen. Which thing if they that be aliue will consider, they maie returne againe to the Catholike Churche, and so be made liuely members of that body, whereof Christe is the Sauiour. Herevnto is added the seuenth booke, conteining a con▪ utation of the fifth article of M. Iuels Reply against D. Harding, concerning the reall presence of Christes body in the supper of our Lorde.
The preface of the seuenth booke. Id thought to haue ended my treatise of our Lords supper, with such matter as had bne set foorth in my former six boks. But when I had seen M. Iuels eply against D. Harding, and had  not only contrarie doctrine to that which the Ca∣tholike Chruch beleueth, vttered therin: but also the same vttered with such enormouse misconstruing of the worde of God, and with suche abusing of aunciēt writers, that it semed expedient to detect the falshod thereof: I toke vpō me to answere specially to that article, whiche did unpugne the reall presence of Christes body▪ whereof I had intreated. And because I could neither well confute M. Iuels ply without some respect had to D. Hardings answere, nor conue∣niently put both D. Hardings and M. Iuels whole wordes in ny booke (which alredie was greate enough) I was constrained to take such order, that neither al their wordes might be at large laied foorth, nor the pith of them in any part dissembled. Wherein I haue so behaued my selfe, that M. Iuel shall haue no  cause to cōplaine of me. For I haue to my knowledge omitted no scrip∣ture, no authoritie, no argument of any force, whereunto I haue not aunswered. As for y• bookes of D. Harding & of M. Iuel, they being extāt in most mens handes, nede not to be printed again by me. How fully M. Iuel is answered, the discrete Reader shall iudge, when he commeth to the matter. This much I will say, it was more pain to staie my penne in suche abundance of stuffe as the good∣es of the cause, and euill dealing of M. Iuel gaue me, then to  at any tyme, what might be  answered. One thing I beche the Reader to note most diligētly, that in all this treatise M. Iuel vseth none other meane so coon
to proue his intent, as to set one truth against an other: As though Christes body could not both be in heauen visibly, and in the Sacrament miraculously: or as though because the Sara∣ment is a figure, it could not also contein the truth which it sigu∣reth: Or because Christ is eaten by faith, his body might not be eaten also realy in the Sacrament. But this thing is common to M. Iuel with other of his faction. Marie to leaue ont the true nominatiue cae, and to put in a false, to leaue out the  word which is the keie of all disputation, to conueye wordes of his own, which the authour neuer thought of, to mispoint & mis∣english the testimonies of the fathers, to  their meaning: that I can not tel whether any man hath vsed so much in so litle a treatise, as in this one article of the reall sence e is ound to haue done. Neither is it vnknowē to y• lerned, who hath seen his booke, y• h hath vsed the like falshod in y• other articles also,  by Gods grace the world shal see or it be long. In the meane tyme iudg. the rest by this which I shall set before thie eyes. And praie vn▪ to God, y• either M. Iuel may see his vnhonest dealing &  him selfe, or els that his folly maie be  to al men, to thintent none may perish, beside those, who will not denour by all meanes to lerne,  folow and to embrace the true doctrine of Christes Gos∣pel and of the ▪ tholike Church.
The Chapiters of the seuenth Booke. 1. Maister Iuel hath not answered D. Hrding wel, touching the vvords of Christes supper. 2. That ye supper of Christ is a naked & bare figure accordig to the Doctrine of the Sacramētaries. 3. That Christes bodie is receaued by mouth, & not by faith only. 4. M. Iuel hath not replied vvel, touching the sixth Chapiter of S. Iohn, But hath abused as vvell y• gospel, as diuerse authorities of the fathers. 5. Item he hath not replied vvell, touching the Carpharnaites. 6. Neither conferred the supper vvith the sixth of Iolm, as it ought to be. 7. Neither disputed wel, touching the omnipoten∣ie of Christ in promising the gift of his flesh. 8. Whether the  or  expon̄d more vnpropertie or inconuenientlie ye vvords belonging to Christes supper. 9. A notable place of S. Augustine corrupted by M. Iuel. 10. Of the signification of aduerbs. 11. Of the first author of the Sacramētarie heresie.
12. Of Christes glorified bodie, and the place of S. Hierom expounded. 13. A place of S. Chrysostom examined. 14. The difference betvvene baptisme and oure Lordes supper. 15. The ansvvere to M. Iuel concerning the Nicene Councell, S. Augstine & caet. 16. VVhether Christes bodie dvvelleth reallie in our bodies by his natiuitie. 17. Item, vvhether by faith. 18. The contradictions of M. Iuel in this article. 19. Whether by baptism Christe dvvelleth reallie in our bodies. 20. Item, VVhether by the Sacrament of the altar, or no. 21. Christes bodie is proued really present by S. Chrysostoms vvordes. 22. Item, by the vvordes of S. Hilarie. 23. Item, of S. Gregorius Nyssenus. 24. Item, of S. Cyrill.
¶ Master Iuel hath not answered D. Harding well, touching the words of Christes supper. IVel. fo. 316. The people was not taught in the first 600. yeres toThe first Chapiter. beleue, that Christes body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally in the Sacrament. Harding. Of the termes really, substantially, corpo∣rally & coet. found in the doctors. Iuel. His answere is, that Christes body is corporally vnited to§ 1. vs: but whether it be corporally in the Sacrament, he answereth not one word. Harding. The termes are foūd in the doctors treating of the true being of Christes body in the Sacrament. Sander. Ergo M. Iuel said not truly. For as D. Harding nowThe first vntruth of M. saith it, so he proueth afterward, Christes body to be really in the Sacrament.Iuel. Iuel. In this matter he is able to allege nothing for direct prouf.§ 2. Harding. Christen people hath euer bene taught, that the body of Christ is present verely in the Sacrament, vvhich doctrine is founded vpon Christes plaine vvords. Sander. Ergo, M. Iuel▪ he was able to allege some what.The secōd vntruth. Iuel. It is marueil, the people should be taught without a tea∣cher,§ 3. or without▪ words▪ or those not writen. Harding. Christes vvordes are expressed by three Euangelists and S. Paule, Take, eate, this is my body & this is my blood & coet. San. Ergo M. Iuel hath  plainly  whereby direct proufThe third vntruth of M. Iuel. of Christes real presence is ▪
Harding. Neither saieth our Lord only, This is my body, but to put the matter out of dout, he addeth, vvhich is geuen for you. Iuel. 317. Hereup M. Harding foūdeth his carnal presence. 318.The iii. vntruth. in such grosse sort really and fleshly in the Sacrament &c. San. It is no grosse sort of presence whiche is reall, true, and miraculouse, as being of Christes own institution. Marcion and Apelles (herein your auncestors M. Iuel) thought it a carnall, a grosse, a fleshly thing for Christ to lie nine moneths in his mo∣thers belly. to be nourished there with blood and humours. to be borne naked, to be wrapped in clouts. For a remedie of which absurdities, the one of them deuised that Christ was not really borne: but that which Tertullian saith against Marcion shalbeTertul. de carne Christi. my answere to you. First God (saieth he) hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound men that are wise (in their own conceit) 2. Whatsoeuer is vnworthy of God, is expedient for mā. 3. Be thou assured, Christ had rather be borne then in any parte to make a lye. Now if we applie all these sayinges to Christes presence in the Sacrament, it shalbe lesse carnall, lesse grosse, lesse fleshly to haue the substance of Christes corporall flesh in a spiri∣tuall manner really present vnder the forme of bread, then either to be corporally in his mothers womb, or to think that he made a lye, when he said: take eate this is my body. Iuel. Christ vseth not any of these words. San. I will say with S. Augustine, although the word be notEpi. 174. found, the thing is found. Harding, 130. Though this manner of speaking be not thus expressed in the scripture, yet it is deduced out of the scripture.
Iuel. Christ vseth no leading thereunto.The fifth vntruth. Sander. The worde () id lead the Apostles to that which was in Christes hands, or which lay before him: the wordes (is my body) shewed the substance thereof, as if I shewing to a man that kind of beast, should say, this is a lion: the word (this) leadeth him to that beast which he feeth and whereunto I point. is a lion, sheweth the substance of the thing pointed vnto. This oddes only there is, that a man by pointing & speaking can shew only that which was before: but God, who spake & it was made,Psal. 148 by pointing and speaking doth make that to be the substance of his body, whiche was not so before. Nowe, as when it is truly said this is a lion, it wil follow thereof, vnder this visible forme which I shew, a lion is substantially conteined: so seing Christe pointeth to the Sacrament, saying, This is my body, it will fol∣low thereof: in this Sacrament my body is conteined substan∣tially, corporally &c. Thus Chrises wordes lead vs to his body substantially present in the Sacrament: ergo M. Iuel must sub∣scribe by his owne promise. Iuel. 317. D. Fisher saith: this sense can not in any wise be gathe∣redThe sixth vntruth & a forged . of the bare wordes of Christ. Sander. Wel fisht I promise you, if he fish wel, that catcheth a lie. 1. The blessed B. of Rochester had said, that the vnderstādingContra Captit. of the Gospell is more certeinly obteined by the interpretation of the Fathers and by the practise left by them, then by the bareBabyl. cap. 10. words of the Gospel. For example hereof, he saith, no man shall prone by the bare wordes of the Gospel, that any Priest in these§ ij. In these daes. daies doth cōsecrate the true body and blood of Christ. (Marke good Reader whereof he speaketh) For although (saith he) ChristAl these are y• wor∣des of D. Fsher. him self did in dede make his body and blood of bread and wine, yet except the like be promised and graunted to vs, we can not be sure we do it. but no suche thing is promised. For in S. Ma∣thew§ iij.
(now followeth one of the places alleged by M. Iuell)§ iiij. No word is put, whereby it maie be proued, that in our Masse theIn our Masse. very presence of Christes body and blood is made. S. Mathew§ v. then proueth it not, neither S. Marke. And whereas S. Luke and S. Paule witnesse that Christ said, make this thing for the remembrance of me: albeit that was spoken to the Apostles, yet it is not thereby proued, that the successors of the Apostles maie doe it. Then cometh he to the later words, which M. Iuel citeth.§ vj. Non potest igitur per vllam scripturam probari, quòd aut laicus aut sacerdos quoties id negotij tentauerit, pari modo conficiet ex pane vinoque Christi corpus & sanguinem, atque Christus ipse conficit, cum nec istud in scripturis contineatur. It can not there∣fore be proued by any scripture. what can not be proued M. Iuel: gue me the nominatiue case to the verbe non potest, it can not. What can not? Iuel. D. Fisher saieth, the carnall presence can not be prouedThe vij. vntruth. neither by these wordes (this is my body) nor by any other. San. Then you make carnal presence the nomninatiue case to the verbe, Potest. but D. Fysher spake not thereof. The whole speache which foloweth is that whereof he speaketh, to wit, that either a lay man or a priest shall (when he attempteth it) make the body and blood of Christ of bread and wine as well as Christ did. that thing can not be proued, for asmuch as it is not contei∣ned in the scriptures. But it followeth after, that by y• interpre∣tation and practise of so long time, the holy gost hath expounded to vs these words: Hoc facite make this thing, in such wise, thatLuc. 22. the successours of the Apostles may consecrate Christes body and blood. How manie enormouse faultes haue you committed here in, M. Iuel? first D. Harding affirmed these words: This is my bodie to teache a reall presence. But B. Fisher spake of these wordes Make this thing, and not of the words This is my bodie.
2. D. Harding spake of the real presence whiche wyll manifestlie be proued, if any sacrament at all be commaunded to be made by Christ. D. Fisher spake of this point, whether any man had au∣thoritie by the scripture to make any sacrament at al, or no. 3. D. Harding spake of Christes wordes. B. Fisher of our doinges. 4. B. Fisher neuer doubted but that these wordes, This is my body, when thei were spoken by christ or his Apostles, made and proued the re al presence of his bodie and blood. But he asketh of heretiks, how thei can proue by only scriptures, that any man after the Apostles is able to make the supper of Christ, (not that he douted of the thing it selfe) but he asketh for the prouf thereof out of the new testament. Now for M. Iuel to cite B. FishersM. Iuels faleshod. words leauing out the nominatiue case which immediatly folo∣wed, and to supply a false nominatiue case neuer thought of by B. Fysher: it is a figure of a man that hath repelled al good cō∣science,1. Tim. 1. and therefore it is no wōder if he haue erred in faith, not caring what he writeth, so he maie be counted lerned in their eies that know neither greeke nor latin, neither verb, nor nomi∣natiue case. Iuel. M. Hardings frendes. D. Smith. D. Stephen Gardener, &c.§ 4. can not agree vppon the termes naturally or sensually &c. San. Where is the word of god, M. Iuel, whereof you boast soM. Iuels Euange∣listes. much? are B. Fysher, and D. Smith, and D. Gardener your Euangelistes? to them now you flie to answere S. Mathew, S. Mark. S. Luke, and S. Paule, you haue forbidden vs all the fa∣thers of these nine hundred yeres, and shall it be lawfull for you to answere the words of the blessed Euangelists by a cauil mo∣ued vppon men of our age? al who are wel knowen to haue con∣demned your opinon for heresie, and al thes beleue that naturall presence which you impugne. And that which you bring concer∣ning the sense of the termes naturallie, sensually, or so foorth, is
ke moued only concerning the maner of signifying Christes reall presence, which is no weighty mater when the real presence it selfe is once agreed vppon. Iuel. This article cannot be proued by the old doctours, as M.§ 5. The viij. vntruth. Harding graunteth by his silence. Sander. If it be proued by Christ, whome D. Hardinge citeth, what nede a better doctour? and yet he briugeth also moe doc∣tours then you haue answered to, as it shal appere afterward. Iuel. The question is not of Christes words, but of his meaning§ 6. which must be cōsidered chefely, as the Lawiers and S. AugustineThe ix. . saie. Christ meant not this to be his bodie reallie. Sander. S. Hilarie disputing against the Arrians, whome he intended to confute by the natural presence of Christes bodie ta∣ken by vs really in the sacrament, made this preface to his talke,Ioan. 17. cōcerning y• words wherein Christ praied that the faithful mightLib. 8 de Trinit. be one, as God the Father is in Christ, and Christe in hym. Aut fortè qui verbū est, significationē verbi ignorauit? et qui veritas est loqui vera nesciuit? et qui sapientia est, in stultiloquio errauit? et qui virtus est, in ea fuit infirmitate; ne posset eloqui, quae vellet in∣telligi? loquutus planè ille est vera & syncera fidei Euangelicae Sacramenta. neque solū loquutus est ad significationem, sed etiā ad fidem docuit, ita dlcens: vt omnes vnum sint, sicut tu pater in me, et ego in te, vt et ipsi vnum sint in nobis. Either perhaps doth he which is the word, not know the signification of the word? and doth not he which is the truthe know to speake true things? hath he, which is the wisdom, erred in folish speaking? and is he which is the power, of such , that he can not vtter those things, which he wold haue vnderstanded? he hath spokeu plainlie the true and syncere myseries of the faith of the gospel. Nither hath he spoken only for significations sake, but also he
hath taught for faiths sake: saying thus, that all may be one, asThe ap∣plicatiō of S. ila∣ries wor∣des vnto y• supper. thou O Father art in me, and I in thee, they also may be one in vs. If then Christ much more in his last supper spake in such sort, that he did not only signifie his minde, but also taught vs the faith of the Sacrament: what a folly is it, to pretend that he spak otherwise then he meant? Specially sith in this place we are so farre from any circumstance, which may hinder the proper mea∣ning of Christs speach, y• these words: which is geuen for you, doe put y• matter out of al dout, as D. Harding hath told you before. and that is further proued inuincibly after this sorte: This is myLuc. 22. bodie which is geuen for you: but my body geuen for you is real, substantiall, natural, therefore this is so. This argument can not be answered, except ye say the signe of Christes body was geuen to death for vs. For y• participle  in greeke, in english geue, & the relatiue quod in latine, in english, whiche, doth so res∣traine the noune corpus body vnto that only meaning, wherein it is said the true body is geuen for vs, that no scape may be had beside infidelitie and heresy, whereof I haue spoken at large in my fourth booke, the 6. chapiter. the 18. circumstance. If now this which is pointed vnto, be the reall, natural, and sbstantial bo∣dy of Christ which died for vs, seing this that he pointeth vnto, is meant of the Sacrament, Christ meant, that in this Sacramēt his body is really, naturally, & substantially present. And there∣fore M. Iuel must subscribe.§ vij. Iuel. Christ was the rocke, but yet not reallie.1. Cor. 10. Sander. First these wordes were not spoken of S. Paule withAug. leu. 9. 57. the intent to make any Sacrament, or anie other thing. 2. TwoThe diffe rences be∣twenethis is my bo∣dy, & the rock was Christ. diuerse natures are named in them, which can neuer be one i substāce, but only in qualitie, or in similitude, but this is my body nameth one substance only, and signifieth it alone really present. 3. It was not anie one certeine rocke in number, whereof S.
Paule spake. for the water flowed out of two rocks, in two di∣uerseExo. 17. partes of the wildernes. Either of which did signifie Christ,Num. 20 and they bothe are only one rock in meaning, and in the substāce figured. 4. Therefore S. Pale meant only by the name of the rock, the spiritual rock which in substance was Christ him selfe. They dranke (saith he) of the spirituall rock. But, this is my bo∣dy,1. Cor. 10 is spoken of a real truth made present at Christes supper, and shewed outwardly aparte from Christes own visible body. 5. He saied not this rocke pointing to it, but the rocke. 6. Not, is Christ, but was Christ. 7. Such effectua! words folowed not to shew, that any real rocke was meant: as these words are, whichLuc. 22. is geuen for you: whiche folow and expound the other wordes, This is my body. Iuel. D. Harding must seek helpe of 16 or moe sundrie figuresThe x. vntruth. not knowen to the old Fathers.§ Vi. Sander. 1. You seeke one figure for all, which taketh away the substance of Christes supper frome his externall table, frome his hand, from his word, and from the Apostles bodies. 2. D. Har∣dings figures be to defend Christes words, yours to destroy thē. 3. It is not true that he is constreined to seeke either sixten, or sixe figures, as it shal appere in due place.§ jx. Iuel. the old Fathers thought it no heresie to expound Chri∣stesThe xi. vntruth. words by a figure. Sander. They thought it hereie to expound these words, This is my body by a rhetorical or grāmatical figure, as by Synecdoche or Metonymia, or anie other which may exclude the substanciall presence of the thing figured. Iuel. Christ gaue his disciples (as S. Augustine saith) the figureIn Psal.  of his body and blood. Sander. He did so. 1. but he gaue such a figure of his own body, which is also the substance of his body, as him selfe being a figure
of his Fathers substance, is also the selfe same substance with hisIoan. 10. Father. 2. He gaue a true and not a false signe. And yet it were false, if this which he pointeth to and affirmeth to be his body,These things are handled before. were not in dede his body, seing the words signifie so much, as I haue declared in my second booke, xij. chapter. 3. He gaue a mira∣culouse, & not a common figure, in the secōd booke xiij. chapter. 4. A diuine, & not a rethorical figure, in the secōd booke xiiij. chapter. 5. A mystical, & not an artificial or natural figure, in y• fifth booke sixtenth chapter. 6. He gaue at his supper a figure of the new, and not of y• old testament, that is to yas, a figure which hath the truth in it, and not of that kind whiche only both betoken the truthAug. in Psal. 39. absent from it, which thing S. Augustine declareth most euidēt∣ly, saying: The old Fathers did celebrate the figure of the thing to come; when as yet the true sacrifice (which the faithfull know) wasThe true sacrifice. foretolde in figures. these sacrifices (being as wordes that promise a thing) are taken away. Quid est quod datum est completiuum? What is it which is geuen as accomplishing or performing the old figuratiue sacrifices, which promised a true sacrifice? S. Au∣gustineThe body which ye know is the Sacra ment. answereth, Corpus quod nostis, quod vtinam non ad iu∣ditium noueritis. The body which ye know is the accomplishmēt of the old figures, the which body I would ye might not know to your damnation. And again, exhibita est veritas promissa, the promised truth is presently brought foorth. In this body we are, of this body we are partakers, we know what we receaue. HereM. Iuels abusing of S. Aug. S. Augustine manifestly calleth the body, whiche we receaue in the Sacrament, the very truth promised, which accomplished the the old figures. 7. He gaue a figure, but he spake not a figure. You bring this autoritie to proue that Christes words be expounded by a figure, as though S. Augustine thought the speach to be figuratiue. For so your word, expounded by a sigure, must import, but this au∣thoritie
proueth not your intent. For S. Augustine speaketh ofIn Psal.  Christes deede, and not of his words. 8. The names of body and blood (as they are vsually taken of men) doe signifie such a visible a corruptible, and mortall nature as al we haue, which thing S. Augustine wel knowing, and ofAug. de Trin. lib. 3. cap. 10. all men most depely podering the same, in so much that he was afeard, least childern wold thinke, that Christ had walked none otherwise vpon the earth, then in the shape of bread: for that res∣pect he always teacheth, that the body of Christ in the Sacramēt is the signe and figure of Christes visible body. After suche sorte S. Paule speaketh of Christes fleshe, saying: Although we haue knowen Christ according to the flesh, yet we2. Cor. . know him not. In which words he meaneth not that Christ now lacketh his flesh, but that he now is no more visibly seen in his former mortall shape.These an∣sweres must be noted as y• whiche serue through a the article of this treatise. 9. Your abusing of S. Augustine in this behalfe, if it come of ignorāce, ye are not worthy to be a preacher, as who vnderstand not your booke: if it come of malice, you are not worthy to be a man, as who delighteth in leading soules to damnation. Iuel. Tertullian saith: This is my body, that is to say, the figure of mie bodie.Lib. 4. contra Marc. Sander. He meaneth so, as I sayd before S. Augustine did meane. which solution might serue all this whole article of the real presence. but the truth is so wel armed, that euery word you bring may be turned vppon your owne head. Tertullian dothLib. 5. contra witnesse, that the Marcionites brought forth a place of S. PauleMarc. where it was writen of Christes manhood, accepta effigie seruiPhil. 2. (non veritate) the shape of a seruant being taken, not the truth (said the Marcionite) & in similitudine hominis, non in homine, and in the likenes of a man, not a man. & figura inuentus homo, non substantia, id est, non carne, and found a man in figure not in
substance, that is to say not in flesh. Thus did the Marcionite reason out of the word of God it selfe, to proue that Christ wasM. Iuell like a Mar  in his reaso∣ning. not true man, as M. Iuel now, because the Fathers name the figure of the body, would disproue the true body of Christ in the Sacramēt. But what answereth rtullian? Quasi non & figura & caet. as though the figure, and likenes and shape be not also ioyned to the substance. So say we, the figure whereof we dispute is ioyned to the substance of Christes body so, that y• body & signe of the breade make both but one perfite Sacrament or mysticall figure. And that I will proue yet more plainly out of this veryLibr. 4. contra Marc. place of Tertullian, who speaketh moste literally of bread as it was an old figure of Christes body, whereof in Hieremie it was said, let vs put the word (of the rosse) into his bread, to wit, vpōIere. 11. his body. Christ thē fulfilling the old figures, fecit panem corpusChriste made the bread his body. suum. made the bread his body, as Tertullian saith. If he did so, it could not tary bread any longer. For as ayer being once made fier, tarieth no more ayer, so can not the bread, whiche is made Christes body, be any longer the substance of bread. This groūd being put (whiche is most true, and it is expressed in TertullianNote that the selfe substāce of Christ se∣cretly pre∣sent is the figure. himselfe) goe you forward and say, this is the figure of my body, as long as you wil, yet the ground of that figure can not be the substance of bread (sith it is made alredie the body of Christ) and consequently the substance of Christe it selfe being made of the substance of bread, and mystically conteined vnder the forme of bread, is that figure (of Christe him selfe walking visibly and suffering death) where of Tertullian speaketh. By this meane the worde is fastened into his bread, as Hieremie said, because his bread and his body is all one. Iuel. After consecration (saith S. Ambrose) the hody of ChristDemyst. cap. 9. is signified. San. S. Ambrose doth speake of that signification, whiche is.
made whiles the Priest pronounceth, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body. Our Lord Iesus him selfe, saith S. Ambrose, crieth out, this is my body. Before the blessing of the heauenly wordes it is named an other kind, after cōsecration the body is signified. The which place wel vnderstāded doth vtterly ouerthrow your figuratine opimon. For S. Ambrose presseth vpon the signifi∣cation óf these words, this is my body, and this is my blood. TheNúcup tur. body saith he is signified, the blood is named by mouth. and this signification is made, when Christ or his minister doth consecrate by these heauenly words. Now immediatly before he said, Quid dicimus de ipsa consecratione diuina, vbi verba ipsa domini Sal∣uatoris operantur? What say we of the selfe consecration of God, where the self words of y• Lord our Sauiour do work? Now put together M. Iuel. The words of our Sauiour do signify his bo∣dy & blood, and y• selfe words doe worke, & verily them selues cā worke none other thing then they signifie: therefore the wordes of our Sauiour, which doe signifie Christes body and blood, doe worke and make the same body and blood. That is the signifi∣cation,M. Iuel a dissem∣bler. whereof S. Ambrose speaketh. The which his meaning when you dissemble, you shew your selfe to be an enemie of the truthe. Iu. I am oppressed with the multitude of witnesses.The xij. vntruth. San. As for these witnesses that say the Sacrament is a figure,M. Iuels witnesses. be no witnesses to your belefe, because they proue your intent as well, as if a man would proue by solene witnesses that I had no soule, because I hauc a body. For whereas a Sacrament con∣sistethAugust. epist. 23. of two parts: of an uisible grace and of a visible signe, & whereas the inuisible grace of the Sacrament of Christes supper is the substance of his body made present to vnite vs to him, and the visible signe thereof, is the form of bread: whosoeuer nameth that Sacrament a signe or a figure, whether he meane both the
grace and the signe, or the signe alone, certeinly he ner meaneth to deny the substaciall presence of Christes body, which is the chefe part of the same Sacrament. Iu. It is a bondage and death of the soule (saith S. Augustine) to take the signe in steede of the things signified. San. It is more a miserable bondage and death to exponud the things them selues for the signes, as you doe. S. Augustine mea∣nethDe doct. of such a kind of signes, when ither the thing that appea∣rethChrist. li. 3. ca. 5. to be signified is not at all true according to the letter (as when God is said to be angrie, or to repent) or els whē the thing signified is absent in substance, as it was in the old sacrificesAugust. in Psa. 39 (which yet the Iewes estemed, as if they had bene the truth) As therefore he that being athirst if he come to the yuie bush it selfe & goe no further, he should thereby neuer the more be filled with drincke: so if a man come to an vnproper or to a bare signe, he is miserably deceaued (as those are who come to you for holy orders who were not your selues laufully ordeined Bishopes) But as if a glasse of wine stād in the window to signifie what kind of wine is to be sold, he that cometh to that signe, may quenche his thirst, because the substance whiche is signified to be sold is also there conteined: so he that cometh to y• holy signes instituted by Christ, he shal haue the truth of the signe really present and really geuen to him. He that commeth to baptime is in dede borne by the ver∣tue of that Sacrament, and e that commeth to our Lordes table shall ate by his mouth therein the bread of life really present. ¶ That the supper of Christe is a naked and bare figure, according to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries. HArding. The Sacramentaries hold opinion, thatThe secōd Chapiter. the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, but in a figure, signe or token only.
Iuel. M. Harding vniustly reporteth of vs. San. I must say to you in this case M. Iuel, as S.  said§ 10. to the Arrians, who called Christ, Dominum, the Lord, but yetThe xiij. vntruth. denied him to be God: Dominum licet nuncupes, dominum ta∣men esse non dicis, quia tibi ex communi genere potius, & fami∣liariHilar li. 8. de Tri. nomine, quâm ex natura sit Dominus. Albeit you name him Lorde, yet you meane him not to be the Lorde. Because he is a Lord to you rather by a commō kind and a familiar name, then by nature. Euen so, pretend what honorable opinion or doctrine you list of Christes supper, as long as by nature and substance you thinke not that externall gift to be his body, which him selfe called so: you rather  it by a better name, then meane it to be any better thing, then a bare signe and figure. Ebion although he denied Christes Godhead, yet (as Epi∣phanius. haeres. 30 telleth) he affirmed him to rule Angels, and al that euer was made by God. and his scholars called him a Prophet and the sonne of God. whiche notwithstanding, for so much as they beleued  not to be God by nature, the Catholiks neuer dou∣tedA bar man. to say, that they taught him to be nudum hominem, a naked and bare man. Right so whatsoeuer holynesse be annexed to bread and wine, be it the signe of neuer so great a vertue and ef∣ficacie, be it called neuer so much the body and blood of Christ: yet if it remain stil in the former substance, if the truth whiche it is appointed to signify, be absent, it is bare bread and bare wine,A bare token. & a bare token of Christes body and blood. Amend your belefe M. Iuell, if you will haue vs to amend our termes. Iuel. We fede not the people with bare figures. San. The question is not how ye fede the people by your doc∣trine,The xiiij. vntruth. but what signe you teache the Sacrament it self  be: whe∣ther it be suche a signe as hath present in a secrete manner the truth signified thereby, or els whether it be the signe of a truth
absent in substance. For two kind of signes there are: one whichTwo  of signes. by the truth of his own substance considered and well vnderstā∣ded, doth signifie an other manner of truth belonging to it selfe,Riche signes. as when a loaf of bread beinge true bread in substance is set to signifie true bread also, but yet in that respect as bread is there to be bought & sold: An other signe there is, where the truthe sig∣nified is absent in substance: As when an iuy bush doth signifie wine to be sold. This later kind of signes or figures is vtterlyBare signes. naked, bare, and without the truth which is signified. The question is, whether of these two kinds of signes is in the Sacrament of Christes supper. The Catholikes say the best and richest kind of signes is there, because there is Christes body1. Cor. 11 realy present to signifie, and as it were by seale to witnesse his owne death and passion. You teache the substance of the Sacra∣ment to be still bread and wine, but our signe is more worthy of Christes Godhead, and more properly a signe or a seale in truth of nature, then yours. For as S. Hilary and S. Cyrill teache, Signaculorum ea na∣turaHilarius li 8. de Trinit. est & caet. Such is the nature of signes or of seales, that they set foorth the whole forme of the kind of thing printed in them,Cyrill. in Ioan. lib. 3. cap. 29. and haue no lesse in them selues, then those things haue whence they are sealed. After this sorte God the Father signed Christ, and Christe thereby was the forme, the print, the signe, the figure, theIoan. 6. image of his Father. But as S. Hilarie sheweth, Imago authorisLib. 9. de Trinit. & veritas. He was the image of him whom he represented, & also the truthe. I warrant you, M. Iuel, you fede the people with no doctrine of any such signe or seale present in Christes supper. For you say afterward, that the bread is an erathly thing, & therefore a figure. I pray you can bread be other then a bare figure, if it il remain earthly and corruptible? I say further to you, M. Juel, and ye
beare no false witnesse at all, that your  be more bare,The sig∣nes of the Sacramētaries are more bare then y• old shadowes then euerwere any euen in the old testamēt. For they at the least wise did in apparence of true fleshe and in true blood shedding, foreshewe the fleshe and blood of Christ which should die for vs. Melchisedech likewise had beside his bread and wine the reall body of Abraham present, whome he offered to God, and in himGen. 14. Gal. 3. Jesus Christ his sede. But you hauing bare bread and bare wine without any reall flesh at all either present or offered, must nedesGen. 4. haue a naked signe and a bare figure, such as only Cain had and his brood. Iu. We teache that in the ministration of the Sacraments Christ is set before vs euen as he was crucified vpon the crosse, and that therein we may behold remission of synnes. San. Admit ye ache so. then is your sermon better then your Sacrament. For a man may looke long inowgh vppon the sub∣stāce of bread & wine, before he can picke out of their earthly na∣tureThe  of the Ca∣tholiks not bare. Christ crucified. But if that blessed belefe were mainteined according to the truthe of the Gospell, which after consecracion worshipped the reall body of Christ vnder the forme of bread: thē the token (which conteineth the true body that did for vs in it) is no bare token, but the truth it selfe in substance, and a token of the visible manner thereof. Iu. We teache that Christes body is verily geuen to vs, and thatThe . vntruth. we verily eate it, and liue by it, and are flesh of his flesh. San. How wel you teache it, the thing it selfe will trie▪ but all this proueth not, that your Sacrament hath euer the more in it, vnlesse you say, that you receaue all this vnder y• formes of bread and wine. A goodly matter: your wordes in preaching (to heare1. Cor.  the which infidels may be admitted) shalbe better then the Sa∣craments instituted by Christ. How we are flesh of Christes flesh, I haue shewed in the fifth booke, the fifth chapiter.
Iu. Yet we av not the substance of bread and wine is done ∣way, or that Christes body is let downe from huen, or made really present. San. That is the cause why your Sacraments are still bare & naked. For all the rest which you talke o, is told to mens eares, but nothing is wrought in the Sents. As for your nicke naming of things, as of doing away bread in steede of changing, & of letting doune Christes body from heaen, we must pardon you therein. It is your grace to raile, or rather the lacke of grace in you. We teach bread to be changed into Christes body through his power. Iu. He must mount on highe (saith Chrysostome) who so wilThe xvi. . reache to that body.1. Cor. hom. 24. San. You ouerreached your selfe, when you turned accedere to reache▪ it is to come vnto, & not to reache. For S. Chrysostom spake of cōming to the holy visible table whiche stoode in the vi∣sible Church, and meant that who so commeth to receaue then the holy meate, he must in good faith & life climme vp to heauen, and not that he should goe thither to receaue the mysteries. IpsaChrys. namque mensa. For the very table, that is to say, the meate vpon1. Cor. hom. 24. the table, is our saluation and life. And againe: This  maketh, that whiles we be in this life, earth may vs heauē to vs. Iu. Send vp thy faith (saith Augustine) and thou hast taken him.In Ioan. tract. 50. San. The place is by you abused, and drawen from a misbele∣uing Iew (to whome it was spoken) to the Christian  See, good Reader, my second booke, xxix. chapiter. Iu. In deede the bread tha we receaue with our bodily mouthesThe xvij. . is an earthly thing, & therefore a figure, as the water in . San. The water in baptisme is no figure, but the  is the word comming to the . Those wo   figure: and  no words  spoken whereby the
should case to be that it was, yea because it is saied, I baptise orMatt. 28. washe thee (whiche is not done without water) we are forced to beleue, that the substance of water remaineth. But it is saiedMatt. 26. ouer the bread, This is my body. And after that words spoken & fully past, that which semeth bread, is yet stil a mystical figure, as it may wel appere, in that, a good tyme after consecration y• holy figure of Christes body being reserued vpon the altar, hath bene receaued of the Christian people alwaies in the Church of God at y• end of the seruice. Therefore the figure which is made in the supper, must be so made, that it must remaine when the wordes are past. Nowe that remanent substance is the body of Christe vnder the form of . But if the earthly substance of bread did ill remaine (as M. Iuel saeth) there is nothing at all whicheBread i not the figure of Christ. maie be a figure. For as the water is no figure when the wordes are absent: so the breade could not be a figure any longer, when the words were fully past. Iu. The body of Christ is the thing it selfe, and no figure.The xviij. vntruth. San. You know not what you say. The body of Christ vnder the forme of bread is it selfe both the thing, and also a figure of the mystical vnitie of the Church. SoS. Hilarie teacheth, saying:Lib. 8. de Trinit. Naturalis per Sacramentū proprietas perfectae Sacramentum est vnitatis. The naturall proprietie (or, which is al one, the personal substance or the proper nature of Christ) by the Sacrament (or signe of bread) is the Sacrament of a perfite vnitie. The body of Christ it selfe is a signe as well as the truth, but yet a signe, not only by it self, but by y• signe vnder which it is. Hereof I beseche thee, good Reader, to see my fit booke the fift chapter. The thing it selfe which is no figure, is the grace of corporall vnion, whiche is wrought in this Sacrament with Christ him selfe. Iu. In respect of the body we haue no regard to the figure▪ wher∣ntoThe xix. vntruth. S. Bernard alluding saith: The sealing ring is nothing worth,
it is the inheritance I sought for. San. What a desperate custome is it for you, to  alwaies the Fathers of these last nine hundred yeres, whom you haue al∣readie condemned? If they be idolatours or false preachers, why bring you their witnesses, as to build any thing vpon thē? either you wil and to S. Bernard, or els you in vaine allege him. If you stand to him euen in those words which you take out of him, you are vtterly ouerthrowen. He saith: Manie things be done forThe doc∣trine of. S Bernard. them selues only, as if I geue a ring to a mā only to geue it without any farther meaning. other things be done to signifie, & those areDe coena Domini. called signes, and be so: As when a ring is geuen to put a man in possessiō of an heritage, in this case the ring is not respected for it , but for the heritages sake. So, saieth S. Bernard, our Lord drawing nere to his passiō prouided to adorne his disciples with grace. Thus by him grace is the end or effect of the signe: butThe grace The  what is the signe it selfe? M. Iuel saieth, bread. But I praie you, saith S. Beruard so? No verily. what saith he thē? Vt securi sitis, Sacramēti dominici corporis & sanguinis pretiosi inuestiturā ha∣betis. That ye may be without feare, ye haue the inuestiture of our Lords Sacrament his preciouse body and blood. Behold, the body and blood of Christ is the signe it self wherewith we are in∣uested, or put in possession of grace. As therefore the ring or the booke is present whereby we are put in possession of the heritage or of the prebed: so the body of Christ is really present wherwithM. Iuel tketh y• bread doth put vs in possession of grace. we are put in possession of grace. It is not bread, that is the signe of grace: it is the substance of Chistes body aud blood, whiche is the holy signe, whereof S. Bernard speaketh. and therefore he maketh not the body of Christ the thing it selfe, as M. Iuel cor∣ruptly allegeth. The thing is the grace of God the substance of Christ vnder y• form of bread is y• signe. For Christ cōmeth in his own corporall presence to sease & to indue vs with grace. Hence
it commeth, M. Iuel, that S. Augustine so oft calleth this Sa∣crament a figure, because the body it selfe is here not for it selfe, but to put vs in possession of so great a grace, as the vnion with God is. ¶ That Christes body is receaued by mouth, andThe third Chapiter. not by faith only. IVel. We put a difference betwene the signe, and the thing it self§ 11. that is signified. Sander. In the consideration of a resonable vnderstanding there is alwaies a differnce betwen the signe and the thing, butHeb. 1. not alwaies in substance. For Christ is the figure of his FathersIoan. 10. substāce, and withal the same substance. but not called a figure in the same respect or consideration. For as he is the figure, so he differeth in person from his Father: but in truthe of nature he is also one substance with him. Euen so the body of Christ, as it is vnder the forme of bread, differeth in the manner of being from the body of Christ, which died for vs in form of man. But in sub∣stance it is all one. Euen as Christ being transfigurated had anMatt. 17. other manner of being then he had before, his owne substance tarying still one and the same. Iu. We seeke Christ in heauen.§ xj. San. So doe we to, and yet beleue him also to be with vs vntilMatt. 28. the worlds end. Iuel. And imagine not, him to be present bodily vppon the earthe. San. Neither doe we imagine him present in his bodily shape, but wee beleue and by assured faith knowe, him to be present in bodily substance, whent the bread and wine are consecrated. Our affirmatiue beleefe is grounded vpon the expresse word of God, and vppon the continuall practise of the Church. Your negatiueMatt, 26.
gination is an ool, ormed in  by the  idolatours , , Caluin,  Martyr . Iu. The body of Christe is to be eaten by faith only, and noneThe xx. vntruth. other wise. San. In so saying (if you will also defed it) you are the main∣teiner of a blasphemouse heresie, and  otherwise. and that I wil proue, because your words are directly against the Gospell, & the auncient fathers, and affirme the same which the Arrians did affirme beinge condemned for it of old tyme. Christe after bread taken and thankes geuen, said: take, eate, this is my body. ButMatt. 26. Christe spake of eating by mouth, and not by faith alone, and he saith the thing eaten to be his owne body: therefore his body is not eaten by faith only, but by mouth also, I goe farther with you. Al that was eatē by mouth or by faith at Christes supper, came from Christe. howe could els any man haue it? and it is described in the Gospel: how could we els know it? But all that he is writen to haue geuen came from his hāds, when he saied, take, eate: therefore either his body was not eaten by faith at all (as by his gift there made, and by the Euangelistes rehersed) or his body came then from his owne hands. Can you proue that he gaue his body at his supper, otherwise then by his own hands? where is that writen: For though he wel in vs byEphes. 3. faith, yet no such thing was spoken of at his last supper. Answere the Gospel, M. Iuel, or els blaspheine no more. What soeuer was geuen at Christes supper came from the handes of Christ. shew me els an other gift, and shew me where it is witnessed. He gaue (saith the ) & said, take, eate. no∣thing was eaten at his table, but that whiche was there taken. Nothing was there taken, but that which was there geuen: no∣thi was there geuen, but that which Christ prepared and gaue.. . Christ can be knowen to haue geuen nothing, but that which the
Euangelistes tel & haue wten. They witnesse that he gaue such a ting, which at the least he called his bodie. Now if in that external foode he gaue not his own reall body (as you say) his body was not eaten at all by the gift of his lastIoan. 13. supper, not so much as by faith. If it be so, where or when shall his body be eaten by faith? but if it was eatē by faith (as vndou∣tedly it was by the eleuen Apostles. who were al cleane as Christ said) if that eating of theirs can be proued by the gospell, it must be proued by these words, take, eate: but these words were spo∣ken of that visible thing, whiche Christ gaue to their mouthes: therefore all the eating by faith, that can be shewed to hae bene made at Christes supper, depended at that tyme vpon the eating by mouth. Therefore the body of Christ which at Christs supperCypria. serm 5. de lapsis. must nedes be eatē by faith (if it shal be eatē worthelie as it ought to be) was in the handes of Christe, and thence came to the mou∣thes of the Apostles. and so M. Iuel hath affirmed a proposition directly  the veritie of the gospel. Secdly the  teach y• we eate Christes body by our ∣thes, & no by  only. .  speaking of euil  uing denied Christ, yet came  meates  vp to , vnto or Lords table, faith:  mod in dominum manibus at∣que ore delinquunt, quàm cum dominum negauerunt, they  more again our lord with their handes and mouth,  when thei denied our Lord. Consider wel this saying. An  man  Christ with his tonge before the tyran for feare of death, & eateth of things offered to idols. The same man without  cometh to Christes able. he synneth in both places, and that with his mouth: , by denying Christ, and by  polluted meates: here by touching and eating ur lordes bdie. S.  saith the  committed in , is the more ▪ Why so? Is there aie  more ,  to
deny Christ, & to communicate with idols? How is it then a more gruouse fault to come without repentance to Christes supper, then to deny him both in worde & dede? Studie M. Iuel as long as you will, you shall neuer find any solution wherein you maie , but only this, because he that commeth vnworthely to Chri∣stes table toucheth the reall and substantial body of Christ, inua∣dingDe laps erm. 5. and doing violence (as S. Cyprian there saith) to our Lords body & blood. So that the only cause why it is more heinouse to communicate vnworthely, then to committe idolatrie, or to deny Christ, is the substance of Christ, which is vnworthely touched. Take away the reall substance from the handes or mouth of the receauer, and it is not possible that it should be a greater synne to receaue vnworthely a peece of bread, thē to denie Christ in word, and to committe idolatrie in dede. But as the treason that is committed against the kings owne person is the greatest of all: so the greatest synne that can be bodily committed against Christ, is the touching of his own substance with a polluted mouh. there∣fore S. Cyprian beleued our Lord him selfe and the substance of his body to be receaued into the mouth of the communicant. S. Chrysostome likewise witnesseth vs to take in our hands,Hom. 82 & 83. in Matt. & 24. in 1. in our mouthes, to touche, to eate, to receaue into vs Christes sleshe. Is all this done by faith only? Pope Leo writeth thus of this matter: Ye ought so to cōmunicate of the holy table, that yead Cor. & 60. ad pop. Ant. Leo. de ieiunio 7. mens. serm. 6. doubt nothing at al of the truth of Christes body and blood. Ho enim ore sumitur, quod fide creditur. For that thing is receaued in mouth, which is beleued in faith: but y• true substance of Christ is beleued in faith, therefore the true substance of Christ is recea∣ued in mouth. Whereupon it foloweth, that M. Iuel falsely affir∣meth Christ to be eaten by faith only, & none otherwise. Diuerse other testimonies I will bring hereafter, as occasion shall serue.Cyrill. li. 10. ca. 13. Last of all S. Cyrill reporteth, that a certaine Arrian saied:
Patet quia corpora nostra non dependent  carne Christi, & .  is euident, that our bodies hang not of the flesh of Christ, as braunches of the vine. Neither is the fruit of y• Sainctes bodily▪ but rather spiritall: therefore the Godhead of the sonne is the vine whereon we depend by faith. Thus saied the heretike. To whome S. Cyrillus making answere, saith: because he thinketh vs to be ioyned with Christe by faith and loue, and not in fleshe, let vs say somwhat herein. Doth he thinke vs not to knowe the vertue of the mysticall blessing? The which when it is in vs, doth it not make Christe to dwell corporally also in vs, by communi∣cating of his flesh? Here, S. Cyrill placeth corporall being, against being by faith and loue. Christ by communicating of his flesh dwelleth corpo∣rally in vs, and not by faith and charitie alone: and yet our com∣municating is made by mouth. Therefore M. Iuel doth commu∣nicate with the Arrian, in saying that we eate Christes body by aith only, and none otherwise. For S. Cyrill of purpose to des∣troie that heresi, sheweth vs to  Christ corporally also.§ Xij. Iu. We place Christ in the hart: M. Harding placeth him in theThe xxi. vntruth. mouthe. San. D. Harding placeth him in the hrt and mouth: you place1. him, touchīg his corporal presence, neither in hart nor in mouth. And touching faith, in hart only, and not in mouth. D Harding2. teacheth the flesh of Christ to be ioyned to our flesh for the increa∣sing of spiritual grace: You teach bread to be vnited to our flesh, affirming (beside the word of God) that our bodies eate bread, as our soules are fed with Christe. D. Harding teacheth the meate3. of Angels, which is the Godhead, to be eaten of man really, whi∣les man eateth that flesh, wherein the Godhead corporally dwel∣leth. You teache the Godhead to be eaten by faith alone, as it was eaten before the incarnation of Christ, and none otherwise.Colos. 2.
Iuel. Christes body is meate of the mind, not of the , . . S. Cyprian. San. I find no such wordes in S. .  it who so∣euer doth speake these wordes of the Sacrament, it will folowe that the meate he speaketh of is not materiall bread (for then it should be meate of the belly) but it is only the bread of God, and flesh of Christ. Which in  is not  to fill the bellie, but rather to tame it, and to make vs more temperate and chaste.Te 23. truth. Iu. Beleue and thou hast eaten, saith S. Augustine, of Christes blessed body. San. Thou hast eaten by faith: but not yet in Sacramēt. Those words were spoken of spiritual and nor of Sacramentall eating. Therefore do you  to apply them to y• Sacrament, albeit faith is necessarie also to receaue the Sacrament worthely.§ 13. Iuel. It is better to vse the word figure, then the wordes really,The 24. . corporally. San. It is better to vse the word body, flesh, blood, whiche are the words of scripture then the word figure, which is vsed of the fathers only to shew, in what sort the body and blood of Christe is present vnder the formes of bread and wine: bt not to change y• words of scripture, flesh, body, blood, into other words, figure, signe, tokē (God forebid y• men should vnplace Gods words) but they added vnto the words of scripture other words to expoūd, that this is not Christes visible body, but the  thereof, be∣cause it is the substance thereof vnder an other form▪ but you M. Iuel, are cotent to forget the word of God at this tyme, and to name the Fathers. Are they then aboue the word of God? How long wil you halt? Come home to the word of God, to y• Gospel, to the holy scripture, which M. Harding alleged out of the Euā∣gelistes, and out of S. Paule: and you wandering in  and seeking phrases of speache haue not alleged out of the worde of
God  that effect of the Sacramentall presence, not so much as one syllable. So well you loue the Gospell, whereof you talke so much.The 25. vntruth. Iu. The old Fathers vsed not these words corporally, substan∣cially, in case of being really in the Sacrament. San. It is an impudent mouth which so speaketh. I will con∣strue the Fathers words to you in due place. ¶ M. Iuell hath not replied wel touching the 6. ChapiterThe . of S. Iohn, but hath abused as well the Ghospel, as di∣uerseChapiter. authorities of the Fathers. HArding. The promise of geuing the flesh vvhicheThe  diuision. Christ vvould geue for the life of the vvorld, being only performed in the supper, proueth the same very substance to be in the Sacramente of the supper, vvhiche vvas offered vppon the Crosse for the life of the vvorlde.§ 1. Iuel. This principle is false in it selfe.The 26. vntruth. San. It is a true principle, as it shall appere afterward. Iuel. It is full of daungerous doctrine, and may lead to despe∣tion.The 27. vntruth. Sander. It is daungerous to you, because it sheweth that you must either subcribe, or despeire: but otherwyse it is not daun∣gerous.The 28. vntruth. Iuel. M. Harding supposeth no man may eate the flesh of Christ, but only in the Sacrament. San. You misrport the meaning of D. Harding, who denieth not but that Christes flesh may be eatē spiritually, both by faith (as the iust Patriarches and Prophs had already eaten it) and also by baptisme, according to the whiche way those had eaten it,Ioan. 6. whom Christ before this talke (made at Capharnaum) had bap∣tizedIoan. 4.
by the meane of his disciples. Which two ways notwith∣sanding,Dabo, I will ue. for so muche as Christe promh at Capharm to gne his she afterward to be eaten, that giste must differ both from eating by faith and by baptisme. And therefore D. Harding worthely saith, it was only performed in y• last supper, the which way of geuing his flesh was only to come. and it is not only spirituall, but also reall. Iuel. The words be plaine and general: Vnlesse ye eate the fleshThe xxix. vntruth. of the sonne of man, ye shall haue no life in you. San. It is not saied in S. Iohn, habebitis nullam vitam, ye shall haue no life, but, non habebitis vitam, ye shall not haue life in you. I thinke it escaped you without malice, but yet it chan∣ced not wel, to put the negatiue to the noune, which should haue bene ioyned to the verbe. Christ meaneth, that no man shal haue life, who being of discretion to proue him selfe, refuseth to  the Sacrament of Christes supper. Iu. Seing Christian children receaue not the Sacrament, by M.The xxx. vntruth. Harding it wil follow, they haue no life. San. It wil folow, that they haue not in them selues the fleshe of life, as S. Cyrillus expoundeth these words, non bitis vi∣tam,Lib. 10. cap. 13. id est, carnem vitae, ye shall not haue life, that is to say, the flesh of life, in vobis, id est, in corpore vestro, in you, that , in your body. But you make an vntrue sequele thereof, to say, they shall haue no life at all. For he that is borne againe in bap∣tisme, hath the life of spirituall birth, whiche suffiseth him if he die before the yeres of discretion. but afterward he is und to com for the maintenaunce of his spiritual lie to the Sacramēt of life, which is the supper of Christ.The xxxi. vntruth. Iuel. Christ geueth his bodie not only in the Sacrament, as M. Harding imagineth, but at al tymes to the faithfull. San. You  a pleasure to  vpon D. Harding with∣out
a plaine song D. Harding granteth, that Christ gth him self by faith and , but geueth not his fleshe by sacramnt andCyril. li. 10. cap. 13 naturall participation, which (as S. Cyrill saieth) is obteined by partaking the mysticall blessing: but only in the supper. Iuel. S. Ambrose saieth: Christ geueth this brade to all men,In Psal. 118. daily, and at all times. San. S. Ambrose may well meane either of the gift, whiche is made in spirite to them that beleue & loue god, or in sacrament to them that come to the holy table, which is alwaies  for good men. For he teacheth the Sacrament of Christes supper to be ourAmbr. de Sacra. li. . cap. 4. supersubstancial and daily bread, And wold men daily to come vnto it. Iuel. Then it is false that Christe perfor  promise, andThe . vntruth. geueth his bodie only at the ministrat of the Sacrament. Sander. It is an vnhonest thing, thus to misreporte D. Har∣dings meaning. You mingle the performing of one certain pro∣mise of Christ made in S. Ihon, with geg his bodie any way at al. D. Harding spake not of euerie geuing his body, but of y• geuing wherein he performed only yt promise made in. S. Ihon. Whereafter y• promise of geuing, he saith, his flesh is verely meat,Ioan. 6. & his blood verely drinke: therefore y• substance of Christs flesh is promised to be eaten verily, and not only by faith, but also in a sacrament. That kind of promise was only performed in the laste supper, when he sayd: Take, eate, this is my body which is geuenMatt. 26▪ for you. There was euery word literally performed. For the par∣ticular declaration whereof I beseche the reader to consider that which I haue writen vpon. S. Ihon in the 3. booke the 2. Chap. Iuel. S. Augustine saith: Thei eate Christes body not only in theThe 33. vntruth. Sacrament, but also in verie dede. Behold, not only in the Sacra∣ente.De ciuit. li. 2. c. 20. . San. To  out a peece of the sentence of. S. Augustine, and
such a peece as vtterly changeth the eaning of his words, is it not the signe of one that hath cast of all feare either of god or ofDe ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 20. man? S. Augustine saith thus: some men promise pardon to Ca∣tholiks (though they liue noughtily) because they haue eatē y• bo∣dy of Christ not only in y• Sacramēt, but in very dde. But how y• body of Christ is  in very dede, that M. Iul would not write. and yet it is a peece of the very same clause. The rest of the wordes are, in ipso eius corpore constituti, de quo Apostolus di∣cit. Vnus panis vnum corpus multi sumus. Being stablished in the▪ Cor. 10 selfe body of his, of the which. S. Paule said: we being many are one bread, one body. which yet is againe expounded afterward:  i copore Christi, id est, Ecclesia Catholica sumpserūt bap∣tismum Christi, & manducauerūt corpus Christi. Euil Catholiks  not coudemned (as some men said) because they haue receaued the baptisme of Christ, and haue eaten Christes body in the body of Christ, that is to say, in the Catholike Church. This false opinion proponed in the xx. chapter, is impugnedLib. 21. ca. 20. 25 by S. Augustine in the xxv. of the same booke. Where he sheweth that none other are to be accompted the members of Christ, be∣side those, that tarie euen to yt d in the vnitie and charitie of his mystical body the Church. But M. Iuel playeth the Sophist by taking the word (body) otherwise then S. Augustine meant it. for body. as the cumpanie of Merchants in London make a certaine felo∣ship among thē selues, & therefore may right wel be called a col∣legiate body: euen so the cumpanie of faithull men who beleue and liue well, make a certain body of Christ, which is called his flocke, his elect, his fold, & most often of al, his mysticall body▪ Now M. Iu taketh y• word body (which signifieth both Chri∣stes naturall & mystical body) as if it signified only his naturall body. He wil proue the body of Christ to be eaten without the Sacrament, and therein he taketh it for the natural body whiche
at the right hand of God. He proueth it by S. Augustine, who speaketh of the mystical body, which is the cumpanie of the elect, and the holy Church of God. Is not this man worthy to be a preacher▪ Iu. S. Augustine contrarie to M. Hardings doctrine, so farre for∣cethThe 34. . this difference, that he maketh the eating of Christes body in the Sacrament, to be one thing, and the very true eating there∣of in dede, to be an other thing. San. Why then doe you mingle the one with the other? WhyThe con∣try o . Iuel.  you against D. Harding (who speaketh of the Sacrament ly) that place which spth o an another thing, that is to say, of the mysticall body? You  him vniustly, and condemne your self most ly, He denieth not the mystical body, and ther∣fore is not contrarie to S. Augustine: but he sheweth that Christ promised a real eating beside al other kinds of eating. The pro∣mise of that reall eating you would exclude, by shewing y• Christ may be eaten by other was, then by the Sament▪ as if whē you had dd a an to haue in his house y• armour which he is bound by lawe to haue ready, you would afterward acquit your selfe, if you proued that he had horss in his stable, and oxen in his pasture: As though the hauing of the o proued the lacking of the other. For how many waies o ating Christ sor there are, yet the ating of his real flesh which was promised at Ca∣pharnaum, is thereby rather coed then isproued. Iu▪ S. Augustine saith▪ the Fathers of the old law receaued theThe 35. vntruth.  same body, that is now receaued o the faithfull. Sander. You leaue out some words of S. Augustine, you addeDe vtil. pen. ca. ▪ other of your owne. S. Augustine saith: the old Fathers di eateSpiritual▪ left out by M. Iuel. the same spiritual meate which we eate: & you leaue out the wor spirituall wherein he chefely . His 1. Cor. 10▪ vppon S. Paules words is, that the ol  eate the
spirituall meate. the same (saith he) I can not find how I may vnderstand, but, the meate which we also eate. Some man then will say, was this which I now take manna? is there no∣thing then at this time come, if it was before? is then the slaun∣der of the crosse made voyde? How els did the Fathers eate the same meate, but that the Apostle added spiritalem? the same spiri∣tual meate? Againe: Eundem ergo potum quem nos, sed spirita∣lem, Spiritalē id est, qui fide capiebatur, non qui corpore hauriebatur. The old Fathers drunk the same drinck which we doe, but, the same spirituall drinck. that is to say, which was taken by faith, not which was drunck by body. Is it plaine enough, M. uel, that S. Augustine speaketh not generallie of the same meat, but of the same spiritual meate? why leaft yo that word out? why sayd you in stede thereof, that the old Fathers did eate the self sameWordes falsely put in by M. Iuel. body, that is now receaued of the faithfull? What delight haue you to misreport the auncient Fathers? where is it writen, the self same body? saieth not S. Augustine eundem potum quem nos, sed spiritalem? they dranke the same drinck which we doe, but spirituall? did he not expound the word spirituall, saying the which was taken by faith, and not drunk by body? Note well those wordes, M. Iuel, nō qui corpore hauriebatur, they drank not that which we doe, concerning the drink which is taken into the body. that is to say, they tooke not the blood of Christ into their bodies, as we now do. they toke a signe of Christes blood, as we doe, and among other figures, they had also bread & wine.. euit. 2. At the time of which figuratiue bankets the iust men did fede inExod. 29 spirit vpon Christ: but we fede vpon him also in body. we eateNum. 15. the same in spirit, and also in body, which they did eate in spirit only. We meete with them in the meate as it is spiritual: but we differ in the same and farre passe them, as it is corporal. TherforeTract 26 in Ioan. S. Augustine saith vpon S. Ihon: Spiritalem vtique eandem,
corporalem lteram, quia illi manna, nos aliud▪ they did eate the same spirituall meate, but an other corporall meate they didOur ∣ly meate differeth rom the mat of y• old Fa∣thers. eate manna, we ate an other thing. What is that other thing? where might we learne the name or nature of it? let vs not go to any other man, but to the same blessed S. Augustine, who ne∣uer had any fellow in the Church of God for his  know∣ledge in holy scripture. but the more profound he is, the lesse he is able to be vnderstanded at the first sight, of those who reade him not o great diligēe. Thus he writeth: Quid est manna? &c.Tract.  in Ioan. what is manna? I am, saith Christ, the liuing bread which came down from heauen. and again: It is knowē what God had ray∣ray∣edExod. 16 from heauen. And knowe not the Catechumeni what the Christians take? let them blush then, because they know it not. let them passe ouer by the read sea. Let them eate manna, thatIesus is eatē bodi∣ly of vs after Ba∣ptism. euen as they haue beleued in the name of Iesus, so Iesus may commit himself to them. Thus S. Augustine doth teache, that Iesus himself is our corporall meate in the manna of the new Testamēt. For of corporal meate▪ now he speaketh, of that I say, wherein we differ from the old fathers, and not of that wherein we communicate with them. Christ eaten by faith, is their and our meate al in cōmon. yea the Catechumeni may so eate of him. But Christ neither being receaued into the bodies of the old Fa thers, nor now of yt Catechumeni who lern their faith, is only y• corporall meate or true manna of the faithfull baptized. which isExod. 16 no lesse really taken into our mouthes vnder the forme of bread, then the Iewes did really eate manna fortie yeres together in the desert. Iuel. Euery faithfull man is made partaker of the body andApud Be dam 1. Cor. 10. . blood of Christ in Baptism, whiles he findeth that vnity which is signified by the Sacrament. therefore the faithfull eate Christes body otherwise then in the Sacrament.
Sand. Who denieth but that Christes body may be otherwise aten, then in the Sacrament? But it is not therfore eaten there really? That only D. Harding. affirmed, & you proue that he is otherwise eaten. but yet that other eating (whereof S. Augu∣stine & Beda spake) proueth the real eating, which D. Harding defendeth. For if the body of Christ it self were not vnder y• form of bread, he that is baptized should not partake at all of the Sa∣crament of Christes supper▪ because he neither partaketh in Ba∣ptism of bread nor of wine, but is only made a member of that mysticall body, which in the Sacrament is signified. And how is it signified? let vs heare S. Augustine expounding that vnto vs: who speaking of heretiks and schismatiks (which are out of the Church) saith: Non sunt in eo vinculo pacis, quod in illo exprimi∣turDe ciuit. l. 21. c. 25 Sacramento: they are not in that bond of peace, which is ex∣pressed in that Sacrament. The bond of peace expressed in theExpressed Sacrament, is not only the wheaten cornes molded into one loaf (for that bond is in euery loaf, and not only in that of Chri∣stes supper) but the bond of peace is the body of Christ present vnder the formes of bread and wine: whereof I haue spoken at large in my v. booke in the v. chapiter. ¶ M. Iuel hath not replied wel touching the Ca∣pharnaites.The v. Chapiter. HArding. If Christ in S. Ihon had spoken tropical∣ly,The 3. diuision. the Ievves and disciples vvho vvere vsed to fi∣gures, vvold not haue sayd: this is a hard saying. Iuel. His reason hangeth thus: The Capharnaites vnderstodeThe 36. vntruthe. not Christ: ergo his body is really in the Sacrament. Sander. No syr. but thus: They vnderstode Christ to speake without parables, and Christes words appertin to the Sacra∣ment
(as it was sayd before) therefore his body is really in the Sacrament. ark the words of the Capharnaites, and you shal finde by their answers and by their demands, that they vnder∣stood what Christ promised, but beleued it to be a thing either not possible, or not conuenient. Therefore Christ sayd: there be some of you who beleue not. He sayd not (saith S. Augustine)Tract. 27 in Ioan. there be some among you, who vnderstand not, but he told the cause why they vnderstood not: there be some among you who beleue not, & therefore they vnderstand not, because they beleue not. Iuel. He sayd▪ The bread which I will geue, & caet. of spirituall§ iij. eating. It is the spirit that quickeneth. Vnderstand ye my wordsThe 37. vntruthe. spiritually, saith S. Augustine. San. There is a spirituall eating without the Sacrament of Christes supper, either by faith, or by Baptism. Of that Christ spake not now, because it was not to come: but was already ge∣uen (at the least concerning faith) to all the iust men from the be∣ginning of the world. There is an other both spirituall or wor∣thy, and also reall eating of the Sacrament of Christes supper it self. Thereof he now speaketh, promising to gee it, and at his supper he gaue it both really and spiritually, that is to say, not in a grosse maner, but diuinely and miraculously: whereof ye may see in my third booke, the. xix. and. xx. Chapiter. Iuel. Ye shall not eate, sayeth S. Augustine (with your bodilyThe 38. vntruthe. In Ps. 98 mouth) this body that you see, & caet. I geue you a certeyn Sa∣crament. San. Of this place I haue spoken at large in my vi. b. the. i. Chapiter, and in my. 3. b. the. xiiij, Chapiter. I will now briefly note the chief points. First M. Iuel doth abuse this place, be∣cause S. Augustine had sayd before, that Christ gaue yt same flesh to be eaten, wherein he walked, and which he toke of the virgin.
Wherevnto M. Iuel hath no regard at all. Secondly he taught, that it ought to be adored before it was eaten. Thirdly he na∣meth it the Sacrament, willing vs to consyder it spiritually. Fourthly he nameth it quamlibet terram, any earth, calling▪ the sh of Christ earth. now in saying that we adore any earth, he manisesily declareth that he speaketh of the adoration which is made in diuerse places or altars. Whereas otherwise the flesh o Christ in heauē is but one earth in one place. These things pre∣supposed (all which are in the place of S. Augustine which M. Iuel now allegeth) it will olow that S. Augustine meant, both that Christes flesh is eaten with our bodily mouth in the Sacra ment, and also adored. Therefore when he sayth ye shall not eate this body that you see, he meaneth ye shall not eate it in suche forme as you see it, in such mortall quantitie, or in such a corru∣ptible sort. But if it should be meant, ye shall not eate the sub∣stance of my body (as M. Iuel taketh it) S. Augustines owne words were clean contrarie to them selues for the causes alle∣ged before. Besyde this great dissembling of M. Iuel (who knew the o∣ther words of S. Augustine, and yet only wold haue these to be trā . consydered) he hath also misordered and misenglished diuerse words. 1. He hath translated commendaui, I geue. Whereas the Sa∣crament was not yet deliuered, but was only commended, and set foorth in words vnto the Iewes, when Christ sayd: the bread which I will geue is my flesh. 2. I commendare were La∣tine to geue, yet it should haue bene translated, I haue geuen. 3. For viuificabit, M. Iuel readeth, viuificat, it doth geue life, for it shall geue life. He was oth to haue any commendation past, or any geuing of life to come. For he wold so vnderstand Christes words, that
the gift & the quickening might be present, lest it should apper∣teyn to the supper: Whereas the commendation of the gift was past, in those words (I wil geue, and the geuing of life to come) verily, because the Sacrament should then geue life when it should be receaued. These are miserable shifts to saue your selfe from subscribing. Iu. We haue a spirituall mouth, a spirituall tast, eyes, eares, asThe 39. vntruthe. Basill, Leo, Origen, Tertulliá say, Christ is to be digested by faith, he is the bread of the mind, not of the belli. to beleue in him, that is to eate the liuing bread: therefore Christes meaning is spirituall, and not reall. San. What grosse ignorance is this, to thincke that the reall presēce of Christ in the Sacramēt hindereth my spiritual mouth,A false reasoning. tast, eares, eyes, faith, or minde? All these muste goe together. Christ tooke his body to bring to our bodies the meate whereof our soule might spiritually eate. It is the fondest kind of reaso∣ning in the world by one truth to denie an other, seing both stād together. Is my faith the lesse because Christ was bodily seen in earth? How is then my spiritual feeding the worse, because the foode of life is in my mouth? Doth not Tertullian say, the fleshDe resur rect. car. is fed with the body & blood of Christ, to thend the soule may be made fat of God?§ 4. Iu. M. Harding wil say, eating with mouth and grinding withThe 40. vntruthe. teeth, is a worke spiritual. And so he is a good proctour for the Ca pharnaites. San No that h will not say, except the meate be so eaten, that the manner of eating it be so cleane and spirituall, that although it enter into the mouth, yet the aith both may and doe worke vpon it, by adoration, and participation, as it chanceth in Chri∣stes supper. And therefore Christ said: work the meat which peri∣shethIoan. 6. not which the sonne of man wil geue you. And he meaneth
work it by soule by beleuing, and in body by eating. And the Prophet Dauid saieth: They haue eaten and worshiped. ThisPsal. 21. vnderstanding neither y• Capharnaites had, nor the Sacrmenta∣ries haue, & therefore they grind now common bread with their teeth, where they shal bitterly gnash, if they repēt not y• soner. Iuel. Chrysostom will not suffer this euasion, who sayth to vn∣derstandIn Ioan. carnallie is to vnderstand plainly as the things be vtte∣red,Hom. 47 The 41. . and to thinke vppon nothing els. San. We vnderstand not so. For we seing the forme of bread, thinke vppon the body of Christ which is vnder it. Therefore S. Chrysostom is not against our euasion. Iuel. S. Augustine sayeth, the saying of Christ is a figure or ma∣nerDe doct. of speache.Christ. li. 3. ca 16 San. What you meane by your maner of speache, I can notThe 4. . tell. S. Augustine vseth not those words. But except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, is in dede a figure, and the speaking thereof is figuratiue, because it was not meant that a mā should be visiblie eaten, as flesh is eaten at common tables. But yet that he should be really eaten. Albeit the maner of eating be figu ratiue as we know. And therefore when Christ had consecrated the bread into his body and sayd, this is my body, that speache was not figuratiue, because as the truth of the body was to be eaten, so the maner of the eating it, was determined. And the all was plain to good beleuers, but not to Iudas and his com∣panions, who beleue no more then they see bodily. S. Augustine then calling those words, except ye eat my flesh figuratiue, referreth the figure to the maner of eating. But not to the substance which is to be eaten. For els if by no meane the flesh of Christ might be eaten, it should not be eatē by faith. But if it may be so eaten, it may be eaten by mouth also in that pure maner as it is geuen vs.
Iuel. The figure commaundeth vs to be partakers of ChristesThe 4. vntruthe in transla∣ting. passion. San. It had bene more truly translated, that we ought to com∣municate with Christes passion. Communicare is to partake in the fullest maner that may be. And how can you possiblie com∣municate better or more fully with Christes passion, then to eate worthely the self body that suffered? Whereof S. Paule sayeth:1. Co. 11. How oft so euer ye eate this bread, and drinke the chalice of our Lord, ye shall shew his death vntill he come. That is the commu∣nicating, whereof S. Augustine speaketh. Iuel. And with comfort and profit lay vp in our memorie, that Christ hath suffred death for vs. San. The perfit laying of this matter in our memorie, is withLuc. 22. Penance & loue to eate the thing which is made for the remem∣brance of Christ. Thence cometh power to liue through, or for Christ so really, as he liueth through or for his Father, wt whome he is one thing and nature. Of this whole saying of S. Augu∣stine I haue intreated more fully in my 3. b. the. xiiij. Chapiter. Iuel. This therefore is Christes meaning and the very eatingThe 44. vntruthe. of his flesh. San. Not this which you meane. But this it is, M. Iuel, as I haue told you. The whole, man must eate, as well in body as in soule, because the whole is taken and assumpted of Christ, the whole is incorporated by Baptism, the whole redemed by death, and the whole shalbe crowned with glorie: therefore the true ea∣ting is to eate that meate, which of it selfe cōsisteth of body, soule, and Godhead, to eate it, I say, in body, soule, and spirite, and not by faith only. Iuel. The Capharnaites vnderstoode Christe grossely of éating§ 5. with teeth that whiche Christe spake spiritually: and so would M.The 45. vntruthe. Harding teache the people.
San. D. Harding  no more then he toke of Christ and of the Euangelists. It is no grosie thing vnder the form of bread to eate the bread of life. The Capharnaites went no farther then to theyr teeth and belly. But we make the teeth to serue the mind also. That of Origenes, S. Dierom, S. Augustine maketh not againste vs. Iu. Tertullian saith the Capharnaites thought his speach was§ 6. hard and intolerable, as though he had determined to geue themDe resur rect. car. The 46. vntruthe. his flesh verily and in dede to be eaten (with theyr mouthes) ther∣in, saith Tertullian, stode theyr erroure. San. You know they thought not of eating it vnder the forme of bread. For S. Augustine saith in Christes person: Quis modusTract. 26 in Ioan▪ Cypria. sit manducandi istum panem, ignoratis. Ye know not what waie there is of eating this bread. Therefore the word vere, verilie▪ doth not shew that they toke it to be eaten in substance, without al grosse humours or carnal diuision of his members, but y• they thought they should eate it carnally, as the flesh of oxen is eaten, with the destructiō of Christes flesh. Tertulliā did not referre the errour to the mouth (as you say) but vnto y• maner of taking intoDe resur rect. car. the mouthe. For him selfe teacheth in the same booke, that our flesh is fed with the body and blood of Christ. Iu. Nicolas de Lyra saith: these wordes of Christ in the sixthThe 47. vntruthe. in Ps. 110 of S. Ihon pertein not vnto the Sacrament. Sā. Ye shal neuer haue honestie by allegg y• gloses, which your self haue condemned. But I know your disease: saine you wouldM. Iuel is a gloser haue a witnesse that the 6. of S. Iohn perteineth not to the sup∣per. I will geue you in y• third chapiter of my third booke aboue twentie honest witnesses to proue, that Christ in S. Iohn spake of his last supper, and all they shalbe elder then Nicolas of Lyra.M. Iuel belyeth Nicolas of Lyra. But what? saieth he as you report? He neuer in his life thought vppon that whiche you attribute vnto him. What seeke you to
know his mind vppon the 110. psalme, sith he hath writen vppon the whole sixth chapiter of S. Iohn? Perhaps he speaketh not of the matter vppon the psalmes, or if he doe, it is but by the way, and not of purpose. Wel, it wil serue you, whatsoeuer it be, your hunger and neede is such. Let vs then here Nicolas de Lyra, vpon those words, Memoriam fecit: Our Lord hath made a me∣morieLyra in Psal. 110. of his marueilouse thinges. Thus he writeth: Eucharistiae cibus sapidus est gustui spirituali, propter quod dicit Saluator: Si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane viuet in aeternū. The meate of the Eucharist is a sauerie meate to the spiritual taste. Wherefore ourIoan. 6. Sauiour saieth, if any man eate of this bread he shal liue for euer. Is Eucharistia the Sacrament, or no? Are the other wordes in S. Iohn, or no? It is then perceaued by his comments vppon that psalm, that you speake falsely of him, and in verie deede so falsely, that he is wonderful plaine i al his workes, concerning that the sixth of S. Ihon perteineth to the last supper. As for the Replica which of late is printed with Nicolas of Lyra, remember that it is no part of Lyra, and that you are conuersant in gloses neither with truth, nor with diligence. ¶ M. Iuel hath not conferred the supper with the sixthThe vi. Chapiter. of S. Ihon as it ought to be.§ 7. IVel. Christe in S. Ihon speaking of spirituall eating by faithof the iij. diuision. The 48. vntruth. made no mention of any figure. but in his supper he added an outward sacrament to the same spiritual eating, which the Fa∣thers oft call a figure. San. You can not tel what you say. For if in S. Ihon spiritual eating by faith, be only spokē of, why is it said, dabo I wil geue?Ioan. 6. Whereas spirituall eating was alreadie geuen to al that euer be∣leued, and therefore it was not to come. But the bread whiche Christ wil geue is his flesh, and the gift thereof is to come: there∣fore
it is more then a spirituall eating by faith, whiche was bothM. Iuel is cast by his owne . past and present. but there is no mention of any figure (say you) in S. Iohn. Therefor (say I) seing the promise of his fleshe whiche is to come, is not a promise concerning the figure there∣of, it is surely a promise cōcerning the substance thereof. If it be so, and yet it must nedes be more thē a promise of eating by faith (which was not come) it wil folow, that it was a promise of a bo∣dily eating, aswell as by faith: As if Christ said, the bread whiche I will geue to be receaued bodily at my last supper (as I haue and presently doe geue the same to your soules that doe beleue in me) that bread is my flesh. But leste I should leaue this matter only in confutinge your surmise, it is to be knowen, that when a promise, and a perfor∣manceThe per∣formance doth ex∣pound the promise. of God belong to one thing, the promise is made plaine by the performance thereof: and seing this word, dabo, I will geue is a word of promise (concerning Christes fleshe) we must seeke the performance of it, which will neuer be found to be fulfilled any where, but only in the last supper: and there the old Fathers sought the performance of it, as in my third booke I haue decla∣red. Therefore as all the promises made before Christes cōming, were plaine, when he had taken flesh, and when God from heauē said of him, This is my derebeloued sonne: so is the promise madeMatt. 3. in S. Ihon very plaine, when Christe hauing taken bread andMatt. 26. geuen thanckes brake and gaue, saying: take, eate, This is my body. The words this is, doth answere y• word dabo, I wil geue: for as Tertullian wel noteth, this is, ar words af performing & of fulfilling the promise. Thus he writeth of God the Father, who hauing promised his sonne, did also performe his promise in ge∣uingTertul. l. 4. cont. him really: Itaque iam representans um: Hic est filius , vtique subadditur, quem repromisi. Si enim repromisi aliquādo,Marcio∣em. & poste dicit, hic est, eius est exhibntis voce vti in demōstratione
promiss, qut aliquando promisit. God therefore making him present (saieth) this is my sonne. surely it is to be supplied, whōThis is. I haue promised. For if he promised him at any tyme, and after∣ward saith, hic est, this is he, it belongeth to him who some∣tyme made the promise, to vse the word of bringing foorth reallyExhibē∣ti. or of deliuerance, in shewing the thing promised. Applie this now to our purpose. Christ saied, the bread whichIoan. 6. I wil geue, is my flesh which I wil geue for the life of the world. At his supper after bread taken and blessing vsed, he saith, take,Matt. 2. ete, This is my body which is geuē for you. This is, are words,This is▪ which shew present and bring oorth really, and deliuer the flesh before promised. But these wordes: take, eate, this is my body, make present, and shew, and deliuer Christes body to vs bodily: therefore the promise wherein Christ said, I wil geue, was also meant, I will geue to you bodily, euen by the ministerie of mie hands, and you shal receaue it with your hands or mouthes, or with both together. Which being so, the Fathers who cal Christes supper a figure, must nedes meane such a figure as was promi∣sed. But when the promise was made at Tapharnaum, M. Iuel confesseth (as the truth is) that no mention was made either of bread, or of wine, but only of Christes own flesh: therefore in the last supper, the selfe same substance of Christe is called of the Fa∣thers a figure, because it is in such sort present.Origen. in canti. Iuel. M. Harding putteth no difference betwene things pertei∣ning seuerally to the body and the spirite.The 49▪ vntruth. Sander. Origines doth speake of them, who reading the booke of Canticles (whiche you against his iudgement there set out in the vulgare tong to be readen of euery wanton boye or girle) wold perhaps apply the names of loue (there vsed) carnally. But that it should be any carnal thing to eate Christes flesh either by aith, or (as we do it) by moth, that was neuer thought a wan∣ton
or fleshely thing, as the practise of the Catholiks can wit∣nesse, who neuer came so wantonly to any canal banket, as they came deuoutly to receaue Christes body into their mouthes, pre∣paring them selues with contrition, consession and satisfaction. The spirituall dedes of them shewe, that they vnderstode Chri stes supper moste spiritually. Therefore D. Harding hath not erred in saying, that Christes body is to be ceaued into our bodies. Iuel. The bread is a figure.The 50. . San. Before consecration S. Ambrose confesseth it to be a fi∣gure, but not after the words (this is my body) are said ouevit. Vbi verba Christi accesserint, corpus est Christi, when the words of Christ are come thereunto, it is the body of Christe. Againe Damascene exprey saith: Non est figura panis & vinum corporiDe orth. fi. lib. 4. cap. 14. & sanguinis Christi. absit enim hoc. The breade and wine is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ. God forbid that thing. sed est ipsum corpus domini Deificatum, but is the selfe Deified body of our Lord. Deified is to say, made gloriose and immor∣tall as God is by nature. M. Iuel neuer brought nor can bring any Doctor who said, that bread tarying in his olde substance is after consecration the body of Christe. and yet he teacheth that doctrine, as bold therein as blind bayerd. Iuel. The bread is subiecte to corruption, Christes body is im∣mortall,The 51. vntruth. Lib. 1. cap. 31. therefore Rabanus Maurus saith: The Sacrament is re∣ceaued with the mouth, with the vertue of the Sacramēt the inner man is repaired. The Sacrament is turned into the nourishing of the body, by the vertue of the Sacrament we get euerlasting life. San. This place is alleged that noman is the nere where to1. find it. For  hath writen moe bookes then one or two. Again he is no Doctor to be alleged of M. Iuell. Who estemeth2. one of them, which haue writen these last nine hundred yeres.
and yet seing he bringeth them for him selfe, wheusoeuer he is able to make any colour to peade his owne doctrine thereby, he doth vs to vnderstand, that his resolution is, that no writer of these last nine hundred yeres should be brought against him, but yet that he may bring what him list against vs. Thinke you, M. Iuel, that this  cōdition shalbe taken at your hāds?3. are you not ashamed to cite them, whom you haue ? if you did cite them to mock at them only, or to shew their folly &4. errours, it were tolerable in a man of your profession. But to5. allege them in earnest, to build vpon their words, and to proue your doctrine by some one of them, and that where he disagreeth6. perhaps frō his sellowes, & yet not to admit them where they al agree together, it is (to speake all in briefe) the very point of an heretike, who seketh singularitie wheresoeuer he can find it, and leaueth alwaies vniuersall and Catholike consent. But these words we must take as you geue them vs. be it so,7. Rabanus saith: The Sacramēt is taken with the mouth. is not that against your doctrine M. Iuel, who said the body of Christ is to be eaten by faith only, & none otherwise? did you not speake of the body of Christ, as it is eaten in the Sacrament? But your own Doctor saith, the Sacramēt is taken with the mouth. there∣fore the body of Christ is so taken. and that is expresly proued by the words which follow in Rabanus. With the vertue of the Sa∣crament8. Faise ∣slation. the inner man is filled. For so you should haue transla∣ted satiatur, is filled, and not, is repaired, as you haue done. But howe is the inner man filled with the vertue of the Sacrament, if wheaten bread be the Sacrament? doth wheaten bread fill the soule of man? Moreuer is the vertue of any thing absent from it? is not that9. vertue in the Sacrament, whereby the inner man is filled, sith it is called of Rabanus the vertue of the Sacrament? but the only
of  is the vertue which in this  filleth  soules. Therefore the body of Christ is in the :  the body of Christ is  with our mouthes. Yea but (say you) the Sacrament is turned into the  of the body. I aunswere, that the Sacrament is necessarily there10 meant to be the forme of breade or of wine. whiche in dede non∣risheth our bodies by the power of God, but vnder those formes the vertue lieth, whereby (as  saith) we get euerlasting life. What haue you won now by your Doctor? truely nothing els but your own confusion. For he saith not, that the bread re∣maineth still, as you doe falsely teache. Iu. The Sacrament (saith S. Augustine) is receaued frome the, . . 14. Lordstable. Of some vnto life of som vnto destruction: the thing it self whereof it is a Sacrament (that is the body of Christ) is recea∣ued of euery man to life, and of no man vnto destruction, whoso∣ be partaker of it. San. Here is a heape of falshodes and lyes. To disproue the which, I must first open the Catholike faith which teacheth, that. the Sacramēt of Christes supper is our Lords own body vnder the forme of bread. The thing of the Sacrament is not the body  Christ, as your words put in among those of S. Augustins doFalse . falsely , but the thinge here ment by S. Augustine, is the  of the Churche of God and the mysticall body of Christe, of the . which he knitteth together into one lump by vnspeakable mea∣ues of , loue, , flesh and blood. And that is so plaine in S. Augustin, that I can not sufficiently wonder at your enor∣mous either blindues, or , . Iuel. Thus he writeth in y•August. tract. in . . selfe place where you cite him: Hunc cibum & caet. Christ willeth this meate and  to be vnderstanded the felowship of his bo∣dy & of his . And again, Huius rei Sacramentum, id est,  corporis & sanguinis Christi.  sacramēt of this thing,
that is to , the Sacrament of the vnitie of the body and blood of Christ,  where euerie day, somewhere certeine dayes com∣ming betwene, is prepared in our Lords table, and is receaued  our Lordes table to some men vnto life, to other vnto des∣truction. But the thing it selfe (whereof also it is a holy signe or Sacrament) is receaued of euerie man to life, of no man to des∣truction, who soeuer be partaker of it. Hitherto S. Augustine. M. Iuel saith, the thing it self is y• body of Christ: but if he had not falsely and miserably diuided S. Augustines words, the ve∣ry contrary would haue appeared to the eyes of the Reader.The  case left out. M. Iuel left out two genitiue cases, vnitatis and huius rei, which being repeated in S. Augustine maketh all the matter exceding clere. S. Augustine affirmeth the felowship of the sainctes to be the body of Christ, whereof S. Paule saith, we being many are1. Cor. 10 one bread one body. The Sacramēt, saith he, of this body (which body is the cumpanie of the elect) is receaued frome our Lordes table. Huius rei Sacramentum: The Sacrament of this thing. Of whiche . M. Iuel saieth, of the body of Christ, and meaneth the naturall body which sitteth in heauen: for M. Iuel said before in the same verie paragraph, Christes body is the thing it selfe. Christes body is in heauē, & gloriouse & subiect to no corruptiō. And he made the bread which is in earth, a figure of that body. But saith S. Augustin so? No douttesse. His words be: Sacra∣mentum huius rei,  est, vnitatis corporis & sanguinis Christi &c. The Sacramēt of this thing, that is to say, of the vnitie of Chri∣stesThe  the  of Chri∣stes . body and blood, is prepared in our Lordes table, and thence receaued. The vnitie of Christes body is not his naturall body, but his  body the Churche, whiche before S. Augustine called Societatem Sanctorum, the feloship of the holy men. Now the Sacrament of this feloship and of this vnion is receaued from our Lords table.
Therefore we see two things noted of S. Agustine, the one is the Sacrament it self: The other is that thing whereof it is the Sacrament. The Sacrament is such a substance which may be either life or destruction to vs, because it is the naturall and true body of Christ, which being vnited to God can make vs lie, if it be worthely receaued: and that by his own vertue (which thingIoan. 6. manna the Sacrament of the Iewes could not doe) and the same being vnworthely receaued, destroieth vs, for that we touche and violate the reall substance of our maker. But the thing, whereof that Sacrament is the sige, is hurtful to no man. Why so? Be∣cause it is the nioying or fruition of that feloship, which being not entred into but by vertue and grace, can not possibly make any man to be destroied. For we can not abuse the vertues them selues. All substances we may abuse, and God we may offend▪ but we can not take hurt by faith being faithfull, chast, humble, charitable, temperate, modest, by which vertues we are incorpo∣rated to the mystical body of Christ. This thing therefore which is the ffect of the Sacrament being wrought in faithfull men, is called in S. Augustine res ipsa, the thing it selfe. And was cal∣ledThe  of the Sa∣crament. before, societas Sanctorum, the feloship of the sainctes, and straight after, haec res, this thing, and again, vnitas corporis & sanguinis Christi, the vnitie of Christes body and blood. This thing is destruction to no man, whosoeuer be partaker of it. M. Iuel doth most ignorantly, & I can not tel wt what greaterFine wor des left out. malice, leaue out, huius rei, and, vnitatis, and saith, Sacramentum de mensa dominica sumitur. The Sacramēt is receaued from our Lords table. But S. Augustine said, the Sacramēt of this thing, that is to say, of vnitie is receaued. All those wordes huius rei, id est, vnitatis, were left out of M. Iuel. The which thing doth clene alter the whole sense of S. Augustine. Againe, whereas S. Augustine saide: the Sacrament of this
is prepared in our Lordes able,  Iuel left it . ButOther words left out.  much for me to shew to the reader, that Christes Sacra ment is not only receaued from his table, but also prepared in his table, and first prepared before it be receaued. Prepared by consecration, receaued by cōmunion. It is not common bread as , Iel, wickedly preacheth. For that was prepared before we came to our lordes table: but Christes Sacrament is prepared in his table: it is there first made & thence it is receaued. Wel if the Sacrament be one thing, and the thing of the Sacrament (wher∣of S. Augustine speaketh) be the cumpanie of good men, what will follow hereof? Surely, that the Sacrament is the substance of Christes bodie vnder the foorme of bread. How so? It is not possible, that the body of Christ should be excluded  the Sacra∣ment of his holy table: but al y• is there prepared, or els receaued,Note. eyther it is the Sacramēt it self, or the thing of the Sacrament: but Christs body is not now called of S. Augustin the thing of y• Sacramēt, as it hath ben proued: therefore it is called the Sacra∣mēt it selfe. But y• Sacrament is prepared in Christes table, & re∣ceaued thence, therefore Chrstes body is prepared there & recea∣ued thence. That which is receaued thēce appeareth bread, & that only is prepared by consecration, and receaued by communion: Therefore vnder that visible foorme the bodie is made present by consecration, and receaued into our mouthes by communion. Was there not cause trow you, why M▪ Iuel should leaue out the genitine case iyned with Sacramentum, and take it absolu∣tely for a sacrament, that is to say, for bread? And so to make the thing of the Sacrament to be the body of Christ in heauen? By such falshods mainteined must be mainteined, otherwise it wold fal to the ground.
¶ M. Iuel hath not disputed well touching the om∣nipotencie of Christ, in promising the gift of hisThe vi. Chapiter. flesh. HArding. Christ by shevving his diuine povver,The 4. diuision. vvhereby he vvill ascend into heauen confoun∣deth the vnbelefe of the Capharnaits, touching the promised substance of his body. Iuel. Christ maketh mention of his ascension into heauen, er∣goThe 55. vntruthe. (sayeth M. Harding) his body is really in the Sacrament. San. You leaue out the omnipotencie of Christ, where vppon D. Harding grounded his whole reason, and so you play with him the pelting Sophist. Iuel. If he conclude not thus, he concludeth nothing.The 56. . San. He concludeth that the Capharnaites be confounded for their vnbelefe, as you also be. For seing Christ sayed of his flesh I will geue: And the whole stay why the Capharnaites be∣leued him not, was because they knew not his Godhead, which was able to doe it by so excellent a meanes (as now we Catho∣likes know that he hath done it, and ye will not know) when both they and you here that Chris is God and will ascēd where he was before, you are both confounded, as who measure his workes by your own  reason, and not by his almighty word. For his words are spirit and life: and therefore do workIoan. 6. really whatsoeuer they speake. Iuel. When ye see Christ ascend whole, ye shal see that he ge∣uethAug. in Ioan. tract. 28. not his body in suche ort as you imagine. His grace is not wasted by morsels, sayeth S. Augustine, vsing Christes ascen∣sion,The 57. . to proue that there is no such grosse presence in the Sacra∣ment.
San. True it is that Christ is not present to be wasted by ea∣ting, but yet he is really eaten. And that is clerely mea nt of S. Augustine, when he sayeth, He will not geue his body in that ma∣ner as you thinke. As who should say he will geue it one way, but not that way as you Capharnaites imagine. He will not geue a shoulder to one, and a leg to an other. But the supperMath. 26 sheweth the maner of the geuing: Where bread was taken and§ . after blessing and the words pronounced, Christes body wasin 1. Co. Hom 24 geuen to the mouthes of the Apostles. Iuel. This is the table for Egles, and not for Iayes, sayth Chry∣sostom. San. I haue answered your iangling talk of Iayes in my. i. booke the. xxvi. Chapiter. And haue tured it vppon your own head. Iuel. S. , let vs goe vp with the Lord (into hea∣uen)The 58. & 59. 60. vntruthe. into that greatparlar, and receaue of him aboue the cup of the new estament▪ San. Certein men had imagined that Christ should reign cor∣porally in earth a thousand yeres together, & drinke a new kind of wine, who grounded their heresie vpon these words of Christ: I say vnto you I will not drinke from hencefoorth of this frute of the vine, vntill the day, when I will drink it new with you in theHieron. ad Hedi. quaest. 2. Kingdome of my Father. S. Hierom calling that  Iudai∣cas fabulas, Iewish tales, therwith declareth what kind of wine we must drink in the Kingdome of God, which is the Church, saying: Si ergo panis qui de coelo, & caet. If then the bread which came down from heauen be the body of our Lord, and the wine which he gaue to the Disciples be his blood of the new Testa∣ment, which is shed for many for the remission of synnes, let vs repell Iewish fables, let vs ascend with our Lord vnto y• great parlar spread and made cleane, and let vs take of him aboue the
cup of the new Testament. Hitherto S. Hierom. whose auth ritie M. Iuel hath abused diuerse ways. First you adde to S.Words falsely added. Hierom these two words (into heauen) without cause. For it folowed in S. Hierom, whither we should ascend, coenaculum magnum, vnto the great parlar, there to take of Christ the bloo of the new Testament, aboue, that is to say, not in the stalenes of the letter, but in the newnes of the spirit, as it foloweth after∣ward. And yet againe more plainly, in regno Ecclesiae, in the Kingdome of the Church. And last of all: Impleamus opus eius, & Christus nobiscum bibet in regno Ecclesiae sanguinem suum. Let vs fulfill his work, and Christ will drinke with vs in the Kingdome of the Church his blood. Thus it is plaiue that S. Hierome spake not of going into heauen by faith to drink the cup of the new Testament, but o going vp into the great parlar, which is the Church and King∣dome of God. S. Hierom alluded to the Historie of Christes last supper, which was kept in a parlar spread and strawed (as it isDama sc. li. 4. c. 14 thought) in the mount Syon. Let vs goe thither, sayth S. Hie∣rom, & there let vs receane the new wine whereof Christ spake. S. Chrysostom also alluded to the same parlar saying, y• ChristHom. 38 in Math. maketh this supper, (which now his Priests doe consecrate) as well as he made that, wherein he deliuered his owne banket. Hoc est illud coenaculum, & caet. This is that parlar wherein Christ was then with his Disciples. Hence he went to y• mount of Oliues▪ which sith it is so, it was very euill done of M. Iuel to diuide the verb from his accusatiue case, and to put an other oun betwene, against all reason, grammar, and honestie. S. Hierom sayd, ascendamus cum Domino coenaculum.  vs goe vp with our Lord to the parlar. M. Iuel putteth the noun (in coelum) into heauen, betwene. As if when a man sayd, let vs goe vp to the chamber, he wold put an other word be∣
and say, let vs goe vp into the sliple into (that) chamber. For after he had conueyed into S. Hierom his words (into heThat ∣sely added by M. uen) he secondly turned coenaculum, that parlar. where is (that) in S. Hierom, M. Iuel? (That) was of your putting in, toIuel. make vs beleue that heauen is the parlar, whereof S. Hierom spake. Thirdly M. Iuel left out these▪words which went immediat∣lyOther words of importāce left out. before and shew in what respect S. Hierom spake of going vp: Iudaicas fabulas repellamus. Let vs put away Iewish fa∣bles, and so let vs goc vp with our Lord to the great parlar, by keping that which Christ instituted, and by leauing other fa∣bles. Fourthly whereas in the same very question it foloweth, thatChrist gaue the true broad not Moyses but our Lord Iesus gaue vs the true bread, himself eating, and being he that is eaten: How can M. Iuel find in his hart to allege this place of S. Hierom against the reall presence? For how is our bread more true then the bread of Moyses, if at Christes supper we must goe vp into heauen to eate it? Might not Moyses eating Manna doe the same? How is Christ theConuina & co uium. maker of the feast and the meate it selfe, if common bread be ea∣ten and not his flesh? Is common bread the maker of the feast? If not the maker of the seast, neither is it the meate: for al is one, saith S. Hierom. Iuel. Cyrillus saith: our Sacrament anoucheth not the eatingThe 61. vntruthe. of a man, leauing the minds of the vnfaithfull in vngodly maner to grosse (or flesh) cogitations. Sand. A man would scant beleue how wickedly this place is abused. First these are not the words of S. Cyrill▪ next, he neuer meāt not so much as by dreame any such thing, as M. Iuel doth father vppon him. His own words are spoken vpon such occa∣sion: Nestorius the Heretike sayd that Christ had two persons,Nestor.
and that his hod was not nited  one person to the sonneCyril. ad Enopt. of God. Against whom S. Cyrill saith in that place: proprium orpus dicimus factum esse verbi, & non hominis alicuius seorsumAnathe. 11. & separatim, we say the body of Christ to be made proper of the word, that is to say, to be the words own body. and not to be the body of any man apart or separated. Nestorius replied out of Christes words: He that eateth my flesh tarieth in me. what eate we (sayd the heretike) the Godhead or the flesh? meaning therby to conclude, that seing the Godhead can not be eaten with our mouth, & yet the flesh was really eaten, that there was one person of the Godhead, an other of the flesh. Cyrillus answereth: Doest thou then affirm, that there is an other sonne and Christ, besyde the word (coming) from God, the which hath appered, & to whō alone the matter of Apostleship may be cōmitted? Now follow y• words corrupted by M. Iuel. Num hominis comestio∣nem nostrum hoc sacramentū pronuncias? doest thou pronounceHomo in S. Cyrill doth signi fie a man that is not God. this our Sacrament (to be) the eating of a man? M. Iuel tur∣neth these words, as though S. Cyrillus had set foorth a do∣ctrine of his own, without any respect to the heresie of Nesto∣rius. but the words of S. Cyrill meane, doest not thou affirm that in the Sacramēt (where we eate real and natural flesh) that therein we eate a bare mans flesh, ad not also his flesh that is God? Et irreligiosè ad crassas cogitationes vrges eorum qui cre∣diderunt mentem? and doest thou vndenoutly presse the mind of the faithfull to grosse cogitations? And the words which follow M. Iuel thought good to omit, because they wold haue shewed hi to be a corruptour of good authors. It foloweth. & attētas &c.Ibidem. & doest thon attēpt to handle those things with mans thoughtes, which are vnderstanded by only pure and simple faith? whe∣therThe na∣ture of the Godhead is not atē because the nature of the Godhead is not eaten, therefore should a man say, the holy body of our Lord to be a common bo∣dy?
Quoniam autem est corpus vitae, but because it is the body of life, it doth ge life. for thereby it geueth life to our mortall bodies. hitherto S. Cyrillus, who by al meanes airmeth theNote. real body of Christ to be eaten, and so to be eaten, as the nature of the Godhead is not eaten. Therefore S. Cyrillus speaketh of eating Christes body by mouth, and not by faith only: but the fault which he found with Nestorius was, for that Nestorius wold haue it to be the body of a man only, and not the proper & peculiar body of God the word. Now M. Iuel worse in that be∣half then Nestorius, wold haue our Sacrament to be no flesh or body at all. Nestorius plucked the nature of God from o Sa crament, leauing vs yet the flesh of a bare man. But M. IuelBare mā bare bread deieth any flesh at all to be present, leauing vs only bread and wine, which thing Nestorius durst not say. Nor the deuil durst not then vtter such blasphemy by him: because the scriptures were so plain, and the faith of the whole Church was so much addicted to Christes reall presence, and the practise thereof so ge∣nerall, that it might by no meanes be openly oppugned. I haue spoken more of this matter in my ij. b. in the xxv. chap. Hereof I must nedes warne M. Iuel: As he wold persuade that we eate not Christes flesh because S. Cyrill saith, we do not eate the flesh of a man: so he might say Christ was not born of the virgin, because a man was not born. For S. Cyrill will notCyril. ad Theod. de recta fide per totū lib. graunt him, that according to proper speache a man was born. for he was God & man, but the person was the person of God, and not the person of a man. O the great ty of M. Iuel so abusing S. Cyril, and not caring what he saith. S. Cyril plainly affirmeth these foure things. 1. That Christ is not born a pure and bare man. 2. That Christ is not adored as a bare man. 3. That we do not beleue in Christ as in a bare man. 4, That we do not eate Christ as a bare man. If now
. Iuel will conclude, that we eate him not therfore  all really & corporally in the Sacramēt, he may by the same force cōclude, y• he was not really borne at al, nor is to be really adored nor to be really beleued in. This extreme blasphemie of M. Iuel requireth alone a whole booke to be made against it, as y• which piketh ou of the Fathers (oppgning y• Nestorian heresie) such conclusios, which take away the whole incarnation of Christe and th belefe therof. we eate not a man, saith M. Iuel, therfore we eate not Christ, we adore not a man, saith S. Cyril: therefore saith M. Iuel we adore not Christ. O pestilent instrument of Satan bornAd The∣od. de rect. fid. coll. 278. in our daies, to denie Christ to stablish Antichrist. Christ (saith S. Cyrill) doth geue vs life as God, Sed & manducabilem app nens assumptam carnem filij hominis, but (he geueth vs life also) putting before vs the flesh of the sonne of man assumpted, made apt to be eaten. Is it not plain here, that we eate the flesh assum∣pted? but in dede it is no mans flesh, but the esh of God. forDe rect. id. ad re ginas our lady is thereof called, not hominipara, the bringer foorth of  man, but Deipara, the bringer foorth of God, who had assumptedDeipara. mans nature. And that S. Cyrill, when he sayd the flesh of the sonne of man to be set before vs apt to be eaten, meant of eating by mouth and not by faith alone, it is clere by that which folo∣weth,Colum. 279. vbi supra. non est autem esibile verbum. the word (that is to say, the sonne of God as God) is not able to be eaten. what M. Iuel? is it not able to be eaten by aith? yes verily. But God the word is not able to be eaten by mouth of it self. How then is it eaten? se∣cundum dispensatiuam vnionem. according to the dispensation of the vnion, wherein the word is made flesh: and so whyles we take the flesh into our mouth which is able to be eaten, we take also the word into our mouth, because it dwelleth in that flesh. and so we eate not the flesh of a man in our Sacrament, but the flesh of God.
Iuel. D. Harding will say Christ made mention of his omni∣potentThe 61. vntruthe. power, and therefore in the Sacrament there must nedes be a fleshly presence. San. What vnhonestie is this to reason all this while againstA vile cu∣stom of M. Iuel. D. Harding vppon a false ground, and now to coniecture (as it were) what he will say? as though his words lay not before you, as though he made not mention fiue tymes of Christes di∣uine power. Yet come you again to frame his argument, as if you were a ester or scoffer, whose office it is captiously to suap at words.The 63. vntruthe. Iuel. Nycola de Lyra saith: Christes words perteine nothing to the Sacrament. San. That lye is answered before to your shame, who delight so in abusing authors. Iuel. If Christes body be not in the Sacramēt, is not God om∣nipotent?The 64. vntruthe. San. If D. Harding make no such argument, be not you a good reporter? He sayeth Christes plaine promise ioyned with his omnipotēt power, and with the offense of the Capharnaits, doth shew his words to haue bene proper: and consequētly doth proue his reall presence. You diuide them apart, and so play your parte in isting. Iuel. The old Fathers, Chrysostom, Augustine, Leo, acknow∣legeThe 65. vntruthe. Gods omnipotēcie in Baptism, yet is not Christ really there. Therefore it was vain labour to allege his omnipotencie for the reall presence. San. But Baptism had no promise to be the flesh of Christ: Therefore you haue lost your labour in all that you allege in that behalf. For D. Harding sayed not, wheresoeuer Gods om∣uipotencie is spoken of, that there his real presence is proued, ex∣ceptIoan. 5. the promise be ioyned withall. Christ sayd, the bread whichMath. 26
I will ge is my flesh, and after bread taken and blessing made he sayd: This is my body. And being omnipotēt he was able to perfoorm his word: therefore his will and word ioyned make his reall presence, and not his omnipotencie alone, as you ca∣ill. ¶ Whether the Catholiks or Sacramentaries expoundThe viij. Chapiter. more vnproperly or inconueniently the words be∣longing to Christes supper.The v. diuision. HArding. Because these places report that Christ gaue at his supper his very body, the Fathers say it is really in the Sacrament.The 66. vntruth. Iuel. A thing is taken to make prouf which is doubtfull, and the antecedent is vnproued. Sand. Sayd not Christ: take, eate, this is my body? Say not the Euangelists, that he gaue vnto his Apostles? How then is the antecedent vnproued? Iuel. The Fathers call the Sacrament a figure, a token, a signe,§ ij. The 67. vntruthe. an image, & caet. Therefore Christes words may be taken with a Metaphore, trope, or figure. San. It standeth well together to be a signe and the truthe: As Christ is the image of God, and yet also God. The higherColos. 2. euery signe or image is, the lesse it differeth from the truth: and therefore the figure of Christes body and blood differeth in form, but not in substance from Christ him self, and so albeit the Sacra ment be a figure, yet the words (this is my body) be not tropcall or vnproper. Iuel. Euen Duns saw that folowing the bare letter we mustDoutfull. nedes say, that the bread itself is Christes body. San. Thinke you any man doth beleue you (without alle∣gig
the place) who haue abused so many Fathers already? Or row you we spēd so much time in reading Duns, that we know all that is in him? Iuel. So the words stand. This (bread) is my body.The 68. vntruthe. San. Where stand they so? Is it writen in any place of the Ghospell, this bread is my body? And yet you say the words stand so. I think it be so in your Ghospell: but surely it is not so in ours. Iuel. They sa (this) meant not, this bread, but one certeinThe 69. vntruthe. thing in generall. San. I haue shewed how it is taken in my. 4. booke in the 4. 5. and. 6. Chapiter. it can not signifie bread by any meanes. Nei∣ther doth it only signifie in generall as you say, but it signifieth that which is conteined vnder the forme of bread. Iuel. Est, they expound, erit, it shalbe.The 70. vntruthe. San. It is a shameful pleasure that this man hath in falshod. For we beleue that Christ toke this word est, is, to consecrate hisChryso. body withall, because of all words it signifieth a most presentHom. 60 ad pop. being of a thing. And for asmuch s God worketh in a moment,Antioc. or at the instant of his word, he chose to say this is my body:Nysse. in orat. Ca thec. foorth with making it so, as S. Chrysostom & Gregorie Nyssen affirme. But he wold not say, this shalbe my body, which had bene a promise only, and not the working or making of the my∣sterie.Hoc. Iuel. Erit, they expound: the substance of this vncertaine ge∣nerallThe 71. vntruthe. one thing shalbe changed. San. These interpretations be false, neither is the substance vncertein which is chaunged. For the substance of the bread is changed: and that because Christ affirmeth that, which was bread before he spake, at the end of his speache to be his body, to whose voice the substance of bread geueth place to what him list.
Iuel. Is geuen, they expound, shalbe geuen.The . vnt . San. What a vaine tale is this? seing we vppon the present gist shw an vnbloody sacrifice euen preently made, and there∣fore we vrge always: this is my body which is geuen for you. Although it be also true that it shalbe geuen, and both are true together, the one in the supper, concerning the vnbloody sacri∣fice, the other on the crosse, concerning the bloody sacrifice, but yet against heretikes we vrge most the present gift. This man by mocking vs semeth to say, that Christes body was not geuen at all. For at the supper he will not graunt a sacrifice. And he mocketh at datur for dabitur. Yet if it be meant of the crosse, it must be so expounded of him self, it is geuen, that is to say, it shal be geuen. it is broken, is in the same condition with, is geuen. Iuel. Doe ye this, they expound, sacrifice ye this.The 73. vntruthe. San. Nay Sir. They hauing first controuled your English as imperfit (though not false) afterward will haue hoc facite, also to signifie make this thing, to wit, make my body. The ma∣king of which sacrificed substance must nedes be always a sacri∣fice. I haue spoken hereof in my. iiij. booke the. xiij. Chapiter. Iuel. This bread, they expound, this that was bread.Doutful. San. You should name the place where we so expound it. For according to the circumstance it may be so taken. But much ra∣ther we take it for this food, which is the body of Christ after consecration. Iuel. These verbs he tooke, he blessed, he brake, he gaue, standThe 74. . together and rule one case. San. They stand together in order of writing, but not in or∣der of doing. For if Christ had not sayd: this is my body, before he had broken, S. Paule wold not haue sayed: the bread which we breake is the communicating of Christes body. For it com∣meth1. Co. 10. of the word of God (this is my body) that it is the com∣municating
of Christes body. If then the words of  were spoken before the breaking, what wonder you,  the thing that was taken being changed, we change the construction of those verbs which folow the change? Iuel. He toke bread, he blessed it away.The 75▪ vntruthe. San. You iest: But in dede we teache not the bread to be anni∣hilated or done away, but to be changed into a better substance.Blessing. For blessing bestowed vppon a creature is the abettering of it. Which is not done without some change. Now if the thing pro∣nounced at the tyme of blessing by God, be an other substance, the former nature by blessing is then changed in substance. God blesse me from such a man, who scoth at the holy mysteries. Iuel. He brake the accidents. San. That is true, because there was none other thing left af∣ter consecration to be broken. And that you wold confesse, if you thought Christ to haue vsed a proper kind of speache, which all∣ways you ought to think, if it may possibly be defended as it may and must in the words of the supper. So that the chief que∣stion is of those words, this is my body: The rest must be ruled by them. Iuel. He gaue his body. San. We beleue it a meter gift for Christ, then to geue com∣mon bread. Iuel. Vppon these few words of Christ thus many figures andThe 76. vntruthe. moe they haue imagined. Sand. Is it not  sayd of you, vppon these few words of Christ? as though all these were Christes own words. whereas the foure verbs be all writen of the Euangelists, but neuer a one of them spoken by Christ. which thing S. Ambrose also hath noted. but D. Harding spake only of Christes words, wherein he  his body. in al which you haue yet found
neuer a figure. for this is my body, which is geuen for you, make this thing: are all proper words and signifie most properlie. Iuel. Besy de these figures they haue imagined many moe.The 77. vntruthe. Sand. We haue imagined none, but we teache as we receaued. But wil you geue me leaue, M. Iuel, to repete a few of your fi∣gures,Here be∣ginne the false fi∣gures of y• Sacramē taries. or of your absurd doctrines in this behalfe? and then let the discrete reader iudge, who doth more contumelie to Gods words, you, or we. 1. First ye ioyne together, this, bread, otherwise then the Ghospell hath don: where it is not sayd, this bread is my body,Hoc. this. but this is my body. 2. Ye haue don it cleaue against the Gho∣spell. for hoc (this) is of the newter gender, but panis bread is of the masculine gender. 3. You haue iterated the same fault in ioyning hic (this) being of the masculine gender, to vinum, wine, being of the ter gender. 4. You haue diuided the pronoun (this) both  the body and blood of Christ, with which substantiues only it may agree in right construction. 5. You expound the same pronoun somtime for bread, somtime for the body, when ye say, this is my body, are words of promise. For IIn the 2. come of y• homilies the leafe 213. dare say you meane not, that bread is promised to any mā. If thē the body be promised by these words, this is my body (as Caluin & your homilies say) doutlesse in that interpretation (this) doth appertein to the body, and not to bread. 6. Est, is, you expoundEst. is. for significat, it doth signifie. and that without any example. For that verb (In this is my body) standeth not betwene two seueral natures, as in these words (the rock was Christ) but it only 1. Co. 10. meth one substance of Christes body. 7. You take the very same verb est is properly, referring it to the body of Christ, which  euery maus hart you consecrate by preaching these words, this is my body, as Caluin teacheth. 8. Some other of you will haue the verb est alwaies to stand properly euen in respect of the
bread, because it is a signe of Christes body. and in dede it must nedes stand so. for you know that the verb substātiue is ncessa∣rily eyther expressed or supplied in euery propositiō, in so much y• these words, this doth signifie my body, must be resolued, this is signifying my body. 9. When the verb est, is, in greeke is leftLuc. 22. out by S. Luke, ye supplie it by force of common vse, which lea∣uethIn the words of the . out that verb as being easye to be vnderstanded: and when you haue supplied it, you cast it out again, as though it were su∣perfluouse. 10. The oun (body) you take properlie, when youCorpus. Body. haue taken, est, for significat. 11. The same noun you take vn∣properlie, for the figure of Christes body, when (est) is taken properlie. 12. You expound the relatiue quod which so, as itQuod. which. can not agree with his antecedent, and with the verb solowing together. for when body is taken for the signe or figure of body (as you take it most commonly, and therein pretend to folow Tertullian & S. ) then the relatiue (which) must nedes repete his antecedent in his whole sense. and so the sense is: This is the figure of my body, the which figure of my body is geuē for you. Now as you will say: this is the figure of Christes body. wherof he sayd, this is my body: so you can not say, that the s∣gure of Christes body is geuen for vs. Thus, quod the which, standeth betwene corpus body and datur, is geuen, in such sort, that it can not agree with both: except ye say with Marcion, that a figure is geuen or offered vp to God for vs. 13. Datur, is geuen, you expound dabitur, it shal be geuen, de∣nyingDatur. is geuen. that it is presently true, that it is geuen at the supper. We say it is geuen at the supper, & shall be geuen also vpon the crosse,Facite. doe and make. not denying one truthe by an other. 14. You expound facite, oe ye only, whereas it is also, make ye. we graunt both, ye de∣nie the one sense. 15. Hoc, ye English, this, & expound it in yourHoc. this thing homilies, thus do ye: as if it were sayd fic, or ità, do ye so, or do ye
thus. whereas the true English is, this thing. . In meamIn  for the re∣. commemorationē, ye english in the remembrance of me, where∣as in with an accusatiue case, doth signifie rather, for the re∣membrance of me. as we say, in meam gratiam fac hoc: doe this thing for my sake, and nt in my sake. 17. When you haue expounded est, is, for significat to signifie,Hic. this. then remaineth the pronoun hic, this in the confecration of the blood without a noun substantine. For Hic significat sanguinem meum, can haue at all no substantiue with whom it may agree in case and gender. sanguinem is the accusatiue case, and vinum is the neuter gender. 18. If in these words, this cup is the newIn my blood. Testament in my blood, ye take the noun blood, for the signe of my blood, the new Testament is established in a figure of blood: and so is worse thē the old, which was established in true bloodExo. 24. of oxen. 19. If there you take the name of blood properly and without a figure, likewise in these words, this is my blood of the new Testamēt, it must stand properly, which is against your doctrine. 20. The construction of these words, this cup is shed for you, in S. Lukes words, doth import this sense, The thing with in this cup is shed for you. but you say, the thing within the cup is win: therefore you teache wine to be shed for vs. but we teache the thing in the cup to be reall blood: therefore we teache blood to be shed for vs. 21. When Christ sayed, the bread which I wil geue is my flesh: You so expound (I will geue) that it meaneth also I haue ge∣uen, and I do geue. For you take it spoken only of a spirituall geuing which was both past and present, and therein ye breake the nature of the word. 22. In S. Paule (the bread which we breake is the communi∣cating of Christes body) you expound, signifieth the communi∣cating: As though the Iewes figures did not the same. and yet
there S. Paule distineth our Sacraent from theirs. 23. The cup of blessing which we blesse, you will haue to be a23. blessing. cup of wine still, as though the blessing wrought nothing in it. For if it work any thing, it worketh the blood which at the con∣secration is affirmed present. 24. You make Christ geue thanks to his Father in beginning24. thanksge∣ug. the state of the new Testament, in better words, then dedes: for his words be, this is my body. Yet you will haue him in dede to offer no body at all to his Father in that thanksgeuing, but bare bread and wine still to remain. 25. You teache Christ to be an instituter of shadowes, and to25. Bread wors: thē Manna. geue externally, that is to say, to our mouthes & bodies lesse then Moyses. For Manna was better then common bread, and a gist more miraculouse. 26. Ye expound, to be gilty of Christes body and blood for ea∣ting,26. that is to say, for not eating or resusing to eate. For you1. Cor. 1 teache euill men not to eate the body of Christ, which is against S. Paule. 27. Ye will not haue Christes supper to be an externall sacri∣fice,27. A Sacri∣fice. but to be worse in that point then the Iewish or idolatours altars and tables, who both did sacrifice, and also S. Paule com∣pareth1. Cor. 10 Christes table with theirs. 28. Ye so expound the shewing of Christes death, by eating28. The she∣wing of Christe death. bread a figure of him, that you rather shewe him not to be truely dead, because your figure is yet emptie & voide, which can neuer proue Christes death truely past. 29. Ye expound the not making a difference betwene Christes29. body eaten, and other meates, in suche sort, that ye wil not haue ∣ting. the body present, wherein the difference is to be made. 30. Ye deny our vnion with Christes flesh by corporall partici∣pation,30. Union. which S. Paule teacheth by the example of Adam & EueEphes. . being two in one flesh.
31. Whereas S. Pauie saieth Christe to be so muche better then31. Heb. 1 The name of body & blood. Angels, by how much he had a more excellēt name thē they: you regard not y• name body & blood geuen to y• mysteries of Christ, but affirme them to be still, that they were before, and therefore not to be that excellent substance, which they are named to be. 32. In all the scriptures so great and oft mention being made of32. The pro∣mise made to body & blood. Christes supper as there is, yet no promise can be found made to him who eateth materiall bread and drinketh wine. But all the promise is made for eatinge Christes fleshe and drinkinge wor∣thely his blood. Therefore you affirm bread to be eatē and wine to be drunken in Christes supper beside the word of God. 33. Although Dauid prophecied of cating and adoring, yet you33. Psal. 21. wil graunt no such meat to be geuē to vs which may be external ly adored. 34. Notwithstanding that the prophets teache, that by Christes34. Psal. 9. comming al externall idolatrie shalbe taken away, yet you feareZach. 13. not to say, that Christes owne Sacrament bearing the name of his owne body and blood, is it selfe an idol, which was left with vs to kepe vs from all idolatrie. 35. The sonne of man came as to saue, so to fede the whole man:35. why then denie you the food of life to our bodies, affirming them to eat common bread, and to drinke common wine, whiles the soule is fed by faith with the body and bloode of Christ? 36. If in the Sacrament of the altar we fede vpon Christ by faith36. alone, why is that Sacrament called a supper more thē baptism, where also we must fede on Christ by faith? 37. Seing a figure may also be the truth it selfe whereof it is the37. Heb. 1. figure, as Christ is the figure of his Father and yet the same sub∣stance, what reason haue you, why you would rather detract this hoour from Christes Sacrament, then geue the same vnto it?38. 38. Christ being equal with his Father made promise to vs of hisoan. 6.
ne fleshe, whiche his Father had geen. Why then denie you the gift of Christ to be as real to vs, as his Father gaue him real fleshe? 39. How teache you the words of Christ, which are spirit & life,39. Ioan. 6. to be notwithstanding figuratiue, and consequently deade and voide of al life or strength? 40. Because y• word of God (who was only able to be fed vpon40. Psal. 77. by faith, and so was the food of Angels or soules) woulde be also the meate of man (in respect of the body) it toke flesh ad at his supper sayd to vs: take, eate, this is my body. And yet you make him still to be only the meate of the minde, whereby we are ex∣cluded frome hauing God corporally in vs through the fleshe of Christe. 41. To cōclude, whereas ye find flesh, bodie, blood ioyned with. eating, drinking, taking, partaking, geuing, breaking, distribu∣ting, cōmunicating, dudicating: ye expound all those words fi∣guratiuelie, as though God by so manie waies repeating those words had not strengthned the cōmon and proper significatiōs of them. Let this suffise for this time to shew, that you obserue nor gender, nor number, nor nominatiue case, nor verb, nor ante∣cedent, nor relatiue, nor the condition of the maker of the supper, nor the nature of the sacrament, nor the state and perfection of the Gospel, nor the sayings of the prophetes, nor the ulfilling of the old law, nor the oft repeting of the matters belonging to Christs supper: but onlie to serue the eye and the senses deny al the mar∣ueilousPsal. 110. workes of the new testament, y• remēbrance of al which this one mysterie is affirmed to be. rag no more, M. Iuel, of our figuratiue expositions: sith you haue thus erred in grāmar, in Logick, in Diuinitie, in truth, in faith, in cōmon sense. Iu. If in these words: except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of mā,Origen. hom. 7. in Leuit. ye follow the letter, it killeth.
San. To follow y• letter is to take words as thei sound to an in∣del, as to haue flesh torn in to peeces and so eaten: but he that ta∣keth them as Christ in his supper by his fact did expound them, doth folow y• spirit and not the letter. ¶ A notable place of S. Augustine corrupted byThe ix. Chapiter. M. Iuel. IVel. S. Augustine sayth The Sacrament of Christes body after§ iij. a certain phrase, or manner, or trope, or igure of speache is theEpi. 23. body of Christ.The 78. vntruth. Sander. This place is wickedly abused, because it is nakedly alleged, and falsely englished, whereas it dependeth wholy vpon the words going before, which are these: Nónne semel immolatus est Christus in se ipso? & tamen in Sacramento & caet. Was notmmola ri popu∣lis, id est, d vtili∣atem po pulorum Christ once offered vp in him selfe? and yet in the Sacrament he is offered vp for the people not only at euerie feaste of Easter, but euerie day. Neither surely doth he lye, who being demanded, Eum responderit immolari. Doth answere that he is offered vp. For if the Sacramēts had not a certain likenes of those thinges whereof they are the Sacramentes, they were not at all Sacra∣mentes. Out of this likenes, they take also for the most parte the names of the things thē selues. As therefore according to a cer∣taine anner the Sacrament of Christes body is the body of Christe, the Sacrament of the blood of Christe is the blood of Christ: so the Sacrament of faith, is faith. In these words of S. Augustine it is to be seen euidently, that he putteth a difference betwene the thing, and the Sacrament of that thing. The thing therefore it selfe must be first knowe, and then we shal see how the Sacrament thereof is both like vn it, and taketh the name thereof. The thing it selfe (in ou question) is Iesus Christ, & not onlyThe thīg.
so, but the true body of Iesus Christe: neither only true in sub∣stance, but euen true in shape, in form, in quantitie, and qualitie. Christ was made man in dede, borne in dede, he grew and wal∣ked vpon the earth in dede, according to the true and visible na∣ture and forme of man. He suffered death in the same forme, and did shed his blood apart from his fleshe. Now marke, when it pleased him to depart out of this world, he woulde haue all these thinges beleued of vs, remembred of vs, and folowed, as our weakenes through his grace might suffer. In cōsideration whereof he iustituted a Sacramēt of his ownThe Sa∣crament. body and blood. Of which body? Of that which he had taken, & which was but one. The first point of this Sacrament must be (saith S. Augustine) that it haue a certaine likenes or similitude with Christes own body and blood. and consequently that like∣nes shall make it to haue the name it selfe. What is the likenes (in the sacrament of Christes supper) be∣tweneThe like∣nes of both thigs it and the naturall body of Christ? Seeke as long as you are able M. Iuel, prie, and serche neuer so intierly, you shall find the likenes to be in this point specially, that the substance of Christes body & blood not hauīg any outward image made of them, are made presēt vnder the forme of an other thing: & are so made present, that thereby all the highe mysteries of Christes visible body are mystically set before the faith of the true beleuer. Christ being the sonne of God was made man by turningeThe inc nation. some of the purest blood of the virgin Marie into his own fleshIustin. in Apol. 2. and blood, and that was done without the sede of man, by theDamas. li. 4. c. 14. vertue of the worde and power of the whole Trinitie, through the ministery of the Archangel Gabriell: euen so the purest crea∣tures of bread and wine are made the body and blood of Christ, and turned into the substance of them, not by generation & cor∣ruption, but by the vertue of these wordes, This is my body.
Which thing y• whole Trinitie worketh by the ministerie of the Priest, who is the Angel of Christ.Mala. 2. Christ thus borne and hauing walked in his flesh, came to dieThe pas∣sion. vpon the crosse, where his blood was diuided from his flesh, theAmb. in 1. Cor. 11 soule from the body: but the Godhead taried stil with both. right so this sacrament hath the body consecrated vnder one kind, the blood vnder an other kind, and they are adored of the saithfull a part: yet the person which is one whereunto they are vnited, and the Godhead in that person causeth the two partes to make butEuseb. one Sacrament, and the whole to be vnder eche kind.Emis. 5. Thus the likenes whiche is not in form, but in substance andPascha. in the consecration of true faith betwene Christ him self and thisThe name geuen to the Sacra ment. sacrament, maketh this sacrament to be called his body & blood, although in al respectes it be not so. Upon whiche ground, S. Hierom saith: Dupliciter sanguis Christi & caro intelligitur &c.Ephes. The flesh and blood of Christ is vnderstanded two waies. eitherCapi. 1. that spiritual and diuine, whereof him self said, my flesh is truly meate, and my blood is truly drinke, and except ye eate my fleshe and drinke my blood ye shall not haue euerlasting life: or els the fleshe which was cru cified, and the blood which was shed with the speare of the soldiour. Thus haue we one fleshe and blood in substance consydered &Two con∣syderatiōs of one flesh vnderstanded two waies. and that not falsely vnderstanded (as the Sacramentaries imagine) but truely and in dede. For a false vnderstanding is hated of God. This difference and this likenes is also noted in the present words of S. Augustin, when he saith: Christ was once offered in him self. Note the worde in him selfe, to wit, in his visible shape, form and truth as wel of substance as of quātity. the same Christ is dayly offered in a sacramēt. Are not these S. Augustines words▪ Christ is offered in him self, & Christ is offered in a Sacrament. is it not all one Christ? or is Christe diuided? No, no, al is one substāce, but the mner is not al one.
And farther note very dyligently, good Reader, that of theOne only chefe & bo dy ∣lation. two immolations or offeringes, the one is referred to the other: The one is the signe, token, figure, Sacrament of the other. And therfore the one is but once done, because it was y• great immola∣tionHeb. 10. which absolutely fulfilled al the law & prophets, and it was made vppon the Crosse. The other being made in the Sacramēt1. Cor. 10 & 11. sheweth, kepeth, preserueth and applieth daily the fruits of that one oblation: but Christ is alwaies one in bothe. Now this like∣nes of the Incarnation and passion of Christ made and repre∣sented to the faithfull by the Sacrament of the altar causeth it to be called the body & blood of Christ. And therefore S. Augustine concludeth: The Sacrament of Christes body according to a cer∣tainEpist. 23. maner, is the body of Christ. M. Iuel englisheth these wor∣des (according to his maner) falsely, corruptly, and ignorantly. he turneth, Secundum quendam modum, after a certaine Phrase, orModu. maner, or trope, or figure of speache. True it is that modus doth signifie a maner or meane. Again it may be sometime y• the maner is tropicall or figuratiue: but now it is not so meant. And that is proued two waies. First because S. Augustine saith: the Sa∣crament of the body of Christ according to a certein manner est,Est cor∣pus Chri sti. is the body of Christ. he saith not only it is called the body after a certain manner, but it is the body. Therefore the manner that that he speaketh of, is in the Sacrament, in the thing it self, in the substance thereof, and not only in the phrase, or trope, or figure of speache, as M. Iuel would haue it. Againe, the name whiche the Sacrament taketh, is geuen (as S. Augustine saith) according to a likenes, which is betwene the foloweth  thing. Sacrament and the thing it selfe. That likenes then must be first in the Sacrament really, and afterward (in respect of priority of nature, though not in respect of tyme) the name is geuen. Seing then the likenes of things goeth before the likenes of names:
When S. Augustine saith: the Sacrament of Christes body is the body of Christ according to a certain manner, that manner must respect the likenes of the thinges, before it respecte the likenes of names. Therefore M. Iuel hath erred altogether in translatingFalse trā∣slation. modum, a phrase or manner of speache. But first he should haue sought wherein the things were like. for in dede the likenes in dinerse things is diuerse: In one thing it is in substance, as God the Father and his sonne are like equall, and one in substance: Yet because there is some difference in that they are diuerse per∣sons,Ioan. 10. the sonne is the figure of his Fathers substance accordingHeb. 1. to a certaine manner, to wit, as he is a diuerse person, but not as a diuerse substance. In other things the substāce may differ also,1. Cor. 10 as the rock and Christe, and the qualitie alone may be like. As when Christ is called the vine, the doore, the way. But to cōcludeIoan. 15 with this place of S. Augustine, he saith the holy signes whiche are like vnto the truth take also the name of the truth, & he brin∣geth that rule to shew, that a child baptized maie well be called aithfull, because although he beleue not actually, yet he hath faith in y• he hath baptisme, which i the Sacrament of faith. For saith S. Augustine: Sacramentum fidei quodammodo fides est. The Sacrament of faith after a certaine manner is faith. He saith not only it is called faith after a certain phrase of speache (as M. Iuell would haue it) but it is faith after a certaine manner of being, and not only of speaking. and that being or truth whiche y• infant hath eceaued is so great, that (as it foloweth in S. Au∣gustine)Epist. 23. the Sacrament shalbe of strength to defende him frō the power of the deuill, and from euerlasting damnation. And iudge you, M. Iuel, that to be only a name & not a truth, which is able to bring the child to saluation? It is faith, and it is not faith, as the Sacrament of the altar is Christes body, and not Christes ody. It is not faith in actuall consent of the will: It is faith in
the vertue of that power which the Sacrament printeth in theHabitus fidei. soule of the iufant. it is the habit of faith, and not the act. euen so the Sacrament of y• altar is the substance of Christes body, & not the outward forme thereof, the thing it selfe, and not the shape thereof. The name therefore of faith is geuen to y• child in respect of a truth which by baptism is wrought in the child, although it be not all the truth which is requisite to actuall beleuing. And the Sacrament of Christes supper is called the body of Christe for the substance of the body which is present, although it be not visibly present according to al the māner of a true naturall mans bodie. ¶ Of the signification of aduerbes.The x. Chapiter. HArding. By these vvordes, really, substantially, & cae. The Fathers ment only a truth of being, &§ iiij. not a meane of being after carnal or natural vvise. Iuel. Al aduerbes taken of nounes signifie euer more a quality,The 79. vntruth. and neuer the substance. Sander. An aduerbe hath his name because it is ioyned to theAduer∣bium. verb, and it doth make plaine and fill vp the signification therof: so that if the verb, whereunto it is ioyned, do signifie the substāceAug. de grámat. lib. 1. of a thing, the aduerbe maketh it to signify the same substance more perfectly: as when the king Nabuchodonosor said to Da∣niel:Dan. 2. Verè deus vester, deus deorum est. Your God is verily the God of Gods: The aduerb verily doth not signifie a qualitie (as M. Iuel reporteth) but it doth affirme most vehemently the substance of one God aboue all other Gods, or iudges & rulers. And when the Centurion said, this man was verily the sonne ofMatt. 27. God, it is not to be meant, that Christ was the sonne of God in alitie at all, but only in substance.
Now concerning that some aduerbes be taken of nounes, ituerbs taken o nounes. is to be knowen, y• if they be taken of suche nounes as import ra∣ther a similitude of a substance, then a real truth thereof. in that case M. Iuels resolution will serue, that they shall signifie the manner and qualitie of the thing, as virilter, doth signifie manly, because it commeth of virilis, whiche signifieth manlike, and it commeth of vir, which doth signifie rather the sexe then the sub∣stance of a man. But when the nounes doe signifie the substance it selfe, the aduerbes deriued of them must nedes draw with th the signification of the same substance: as corporalis, carnalis, sub∣stantialis, and naturalis, be nounes which signifie a thing that be∣longeth to the body, the flesh, the substance, the nature of y• wher∣of we speake: and the aduerbes comming of them of necessiti must signifie the truth of that nature whereof we intreate. But whether it shall signifie the qualitie also with the truthe: that dependeth of the circumstance of the thing which is in hand. For example: Christe walked corporally vppon the water. that saying must be vnderstāded, in the truth of a mans body, but not in any such accustomed manner, as other mens bodies are wont to walke vpon the water. For there is no such manner of wal∣king at all. And whereas the aduerbe must be referred wholy to the verbe whose signification it maketh perfite, that saying must be this resolued: Christes bodily walking vpō the water, was aCyril. ad Theod. de rect. fide. am∣bulabat mirè vt Deus. true walking concerning the truth of the flesh which did walke: notwithstanding the manner of the walking did excede the qua∣litie of a mere atural body. Thus the aduerbes shall signifie the truth of the substance of a body walking, and yet not the manner of walking belonging to a natural and true body. Euen so when Syrill writeth, that Christ dwelleth corporal∣lyLib. 10. cap. 13. also in vs, and not only by right faith and charitie, the meaning of him shalbe, that Christ in the true substance of his body dwel∣leth
in vs, although he dwell not in vs after suche manner, as other naturall bodies of men dwel in the places where they are. Thus M. Iuel is cast in his grammar also, whereof he iiteth D. Harding. But to thend his ignorance or malice may appere y• better, I beseche the discrete Reader to consider the ods betwene D. Harding and M. Iuel. D. Harding saieth: when the Fathers teache Christ to be in vs carnally, corporally, or naturally (for al these termes S. Hila∣ry & S. Cyrill haue) then they meane that Christe is in vs by the true substance of his fleshe, and not in suche manner as common flesh is wont to be any where. This saying of D. Harding is so true, y• he neuer thought it nedeful to proe it: yet M. Iuell saith y• the Fathers must meane, that Christ is in vs after a corporall, carnall, & natural māner, & not in substāce. For he saith aduerbs taken of nounes signifie euermore y• qualitie, & neuer y• substāce.M. Iuell excludeth y• signific tion of sub stance frō aduerbs. Wel how think you then M. Iuel? is Christ after a carnal sort in vs or no? It is wel seen by your work y• you think nothing lesse. For he y• grateth the manner of body or flesh, much more should graunt, if he were wise, the nature & substance thereof. because it is not possible, that the qualitie or manner of fleshe should be without the truth of flesh: Sith no qualitie ordinarily consistethqualities can not be ordinarily without substance. of it selfe, but only resteth in the substance of that thing, whose qualitie it is. But a substance may be without qualities, as the substance of God is without all manner of accidents. Now D. Harding affirmeth at the lest wise, the truth of body and of fleshe to be meant by the Fathers without the commonSubstāc may be without qualities. qualitie thereof: Which thing may right well be so. M. Iuel wil haue their sayings meant so, that the substance of flesh and blood shalbe excluded by all meanes. And as for the qualitie of Christes fleshe, he wil haue it corporally in our bodies without any sub∣stance thereof wherein that qualitie may rest. which his opinion
is against all the course of nature. Agayn, when S. Hilarie saith that Christ tarieth naturally inLib. 8. de Trinit. vs, what qualitie wil M. Iuel assigne to that aduerb? shal he tary in vs in the maner of a natural tarying, and yet shal not his true nature be in vs? let vs go a litle farther. S. Hilary saith: Christus natualiter secundum spiritum in se patrem habet, Christ hath the father in him according to y• spirit naturally. How wil M. Iuel expound the worde, naturally? whether, that Criste hath a qua∣litie of his fathers nature in him, & not the whole true substāce? Last of al S. Hilarie expoundeth his owne wordes euen as D. Harding hath done. For as he saith in one place: Ipso in nobis na∣turalitr permanente, he tarying in vs naturally: so he saieth in an other place a litle before, Est ergo in nobis ipse per carnem. Therefore he is in vs him selfe by flesh. Ad again: Naturaliter secundum carnem per eum viuimus, id est, naturam carnis suaeNatura∣liter is re∣solued by S. Hilary  selfe. adepti. We liue by him according to the flesh naturally, that is to say, hauing obteined the nature of his flesh. Consider good Rea∣der that naturaliter viuere, to liue naturally is by S. Hilarie thus resolued, to liue by hauing the nature. And to lie naturally ac∣cording to the flesh, is to liue by hauing y• nature of Christes flesh. Who is now the more ignorant in grammar, D. Harding, or M. Iuel? And yet M. Iuel, in that childish eloquence of his, trium∣pheth vpon D. Harding, & saith childern are taught these things. Iu. God regardeth not the doing of any thing, but the mannerThe 80. ntruth. of doing. But M. Harding will ouerloke the grammar rules. San. That rule is to be vnderstande in matters belonging to manners. But now we dispute of substances, and not of doings. We say Christes body is in our bodies naturally. this truth is to be discussed, and not any morall action of ours.The 81. vntruth. Iuel. Our childern must lerne a new grammar for thse mens pleasure: otherwise these mens dinitie can not stand.
San. Priestes childern may  a new grammar, but as the old faith, so the old grammar wil erue other mens childen. It is verily a verie new grār to say, that aduerbes taken of nounes neuer signifie the substance. Good Scholmasters wil not adme such rules. Iu. Haue these old Fathers nor names nor wordes?The 8. vntruth. San. As though you knowe that they folowe hereafter. when you are come to them, you wilbe quickly werie of them. ¶ Of the first Author of the Sacramentarie hesie. HArding. Berengarius first began openly to shevvThe 6. . the Sacramentarie heresie touching the veritie of Christes body in the Sacrament. Iu. Before M. Harding said, the Messalians were the first fathers§ 2. of this heresie. and so his tales hang not together.The 83. vntruth. Harding. The Messalians opinion VVas, the Sacra∣ment of the altar did nor good, nor euil. And therein they VVere the first parents of the Sacramentarie heresie. San. That which the Messalians did begin priuily by generall disgracing the Sacrament, Berengarius began openly by de∣nying this speciall vertue thereof, which is the real presence. and so there is no contradiction at all, and you are founde but a cauiller. Iu. Ioannes Scotus and Bertram mainteind the same doctrinThe 84. vntruth. before Berengarius. Sander. If these men did barke in priuie corners at anie cere∣monie (which thing yet is not euident to vs) but if it were so, yet thy mainteined it not. For then they had bene condemned of heresy: But if that also were true, you haue gained litle more thē two hūdred yeres, and those but by surmise without knowledge
thereof left in any good historie. And what is that to  hun∣dred yeres of continuall practise, and open doctrine, suche as we Catholiks haue had? Iuel. For farther declaration hereof, it shalbe necessary to open Berengarius iudgement. San. Nay Sir, it is enough to vs, that you are at a stay, & canDe con∣secra. dis. 2. ca. ego Bereng. bring your faith no higher then to Ihon Scote, and Bertram. If your faith began priuily almost eight hundred yeres after Christ, shall we here the declaration thereof? if that may be per∣mitted, the heresy of the Arrians may be heard againe, who was before Bertram. Iuel. Thus Berengarius wrote. San. I care not what he wrote, sith he recāted y• same. The  wil standeth in his force, and no wise man knowing that he re∣peuted his follie, will afterward allege his authoritie for that, which he recalled. Iuel. But his iudgement is confirmed by the Fathers.The 85. vntruth. San. It is not possible, that the Fathers should confirme his iudgement, who impugned their vniuersall tradition, in so muche that he him selfe  his own iudgement. For seing he recanted his whole opiniō, he recanted also that verie errour, which he had cōceiued as by pretense of y• fathers words. What a mades is it for you, to allege any of both in his name? for he in his recanting hath answered his own authorities alleged before out of the Fathers. Iuel. Let vs see the confutation hereof. San. Seing Berengarius is the cōfutour, his own true word is enough to vndoe as muche as his word had falsely stablished before. Iuel. Berengarius was forced to recant in this wise.The 86. . San. Force is not done to the free  of man.
Iuel. I beleue that the bodie of our Lorde Iesus Christ sensiblyThe 87. vntruth. and in very dede is touched with the hand of the Priest, & brokē and rent, and ground with the teeth of the faithfull. San. You haue englished the wordes very spitefully. you haue added (rent) of your owne head. and atteri, doth signifie to be bro∣ken in peeces, or to be wasted, which may be done without grin∣ding. You are so accustomed to falsify things, y• no mans wordes may escape your poison. Iuel. The very glose saith: vnlesse you warily vnderstand these words of Berengarius, you will fal into a greater heresy, then euer he heald any. San. The glosse warneth vs, that all the touching, breaking and wasting or cōsuming is to be referred to the formes of bread and wine: the which thing if you had not left out, you had alle∣ged some one glosse without falsifying the same. Iu. These Fathers redresse the lesse errour by the greater.The 88. vntruth. San. The cause whie Berengarius recanted by those wordes (rather thē by anie other) were two: the one, for y• he had taught in the tyme of his errour, the body of Christ not to be before our eyes. Against whiche words he now saith, it is sensiblie handled. The secōd was, for that the body being vnder the form of bread, and touched by the Priestes hands, and broken by reason of the same form, is thereby shewed most really present. to witnesse the whiche reall presence, S. Chrysostame had vsed the same kind ofIn Ioan. hom. 45. speach before, saying: Nō se tantum videri permittens desyderan∣tibus, sed & tangi, & manducari, & dentes carni suae infigi, & desy∣derio sui omnes impleri. Christ permitteth him self not only to be seen of thē that long after him, but also to be touched, & eaten, & the teeth to be fastened to his fleshe, and all men to be filled with the desire of him. Which notwithstanding M. Iuel writeth in theThe 89. vntruth. margent of Berengarius his conson: This is an horrible blas∣phemie,
not knowing that the denying of this reall presence v∣der those formes of bread and wine, is that horrible blasphemie, whereof he speaketh: And not to speake as S. Chrysostome and other holy Fathers haue spoken. Iuel. Bertram and Ihon Scotus wrote openly against it withThe 90. vtruth. the contentation of the world. San. Against which it did they write? Iuel. Against this, if it be the Catholike faith. Sander. Which this? Whether against the confession of Bereu∣garius? You say the were two hundred yeares before hun what then? wrote thei against the Catholike faith? if they did so, howe could the Catholike world be content therwith? again, where are the words which the world was contented withal? thinck you it lawfull to faine or glose what you list? Iuel. That M. Harding calleth the Catholike faith, is in dede a∣CatholikeThe 91. vntruth. errour. Sander. No errour can be Catholike, because Christe said hellMatt 19. & 15. gates should not preuaile againste his Church. And it is a citie built vpon a hill, which can not be hiddē. The rest of your words shall hereafter be proued vayne. ¶ Of Christes glorified bodie, and the place of S.The . Hierom expounded.Chapiter. HArding. The body vvhich vvas before the deathThe 7. . thereof thrall and frail, is novv spirituall. Iu. M. Harding in the end concludeth against him selfe.The . vntruth. San. You say so, but you proue it not. Iu. Only Stephen Gardener geueth the world to vnderstād, thatThe 93. vntruth. Christ is not yet fully possessed in this glory. thus he saith: the time of the despensation or seruice of his hmilitie remaineth stil, vntil
deliuer vp the Kingdom vnto God his Father. Sand. B. Gardier dot noth say, that Christ is not fully pos∣sessed in his glory for his own part. that is your addition. Again the word (seruice) was of your putting in, least any authority might escape you vncorrupted. How be it B. Gardiner semeth to meane no more therein, then S. Paule sayd before him, wit∣nessingHeb. . that Christ sitteth at the right hand of the maiesty in hea∣uen, minister sanctorum, the minister of holy thinges. for he is yet a minister stil by reason of his mysticall body. If it were any part of our principall purpose to stand vppon that matter, I wold shew you what holy things they were, and how he mini∣stred them by dispensation of his humility during the time of the peregtination of his members, notwithstanding his own glory at the right hand of his Father, wherein he is fully possessed. Iuel. To what end allegeth M. Harding the spirituall state ofThe 94. vntruthe. Christs body? Eutiches sayd it is changed into the very substance of God: which heresie is like M. Hardings, if it be not the same. Sand. I know not what you meane by burdening D. Har∣ding with the heresie of Eutiches: sith the defence of the reall presence is as directly against that heresie, as may be. for how can the naturall and substantiall flesh of Christ be present in the Sacrament, if his flesh were turned into the substance of the Godhead, as Etiches sayd? could that be in the Sacrament, which were not in it self? Therefore the places alleged out of S. Augustine, S. Dionysis, S. Cyprian and other holy Fathers, concerning the truth of Christes humane substance and nature ill remaining and not changed into the diuine substance, or els concerning our mitation or likenes of God, is wholy confessed of vs. neither doth D. Harding meane by the body deied, other then y• body immortal & spirituall: yet so farre aboue our bodies, as the vion in y• person of the naturall sonne of God, excedeth our adoption by grace.
But for so much as you doubted not, M. Iuel, to burden D. Harding with the Eutichian heresie, I will briefly shew, that your opinion is far more like vnto it, then D. Hardings belefe. As Eutiches destroyed the truth of humane flesh in the per∣son of Christ, so the Sacramentaries destroye the truth and reall presence of the same flesh in the Sacrament of the altar. And yet the old Fathers proued, that as the Sacrament of the altar con∣sistedCypria. de coena Dom. & de cons. dist. 2. c. of two things, of the signe or foorm of bread, and of y• body of Christ: so Christ consisteth of two natures, the one diuine, the other humane. But seing the Sacramentaries take away y• reall presence from the visible signe of bread, they falsifie the argumētHoc est quod di∣cimus. of the old Fathers, and further the cause of the Eutichians. For as the Eutichians turned the naturall flesh of Christ into theTheod. in dialo. Godhead: so the Sacramentaries turn the Sacramental eating of naturall flesh into mere diuine and spirituall eating, which is made by faith alone. But as the old Fathers proued against the Eutichians, that Christ who truly suffered death could not suffer it in his diuine nature: so I tell the Sacramentaries, that Christ who aid, take, eate, this is my body, can not be taken into ourMath. 26 hands, or eaten with our mouthes, by faith and spirit aloue. We must haue such an eating, as may proue Christ to haue had reall flesh, because we eate by mouth his reall flesh. So S. HilarieLib. 8. de Trin. proued our naturall vnion with Christes flesh against the Ar∣rians: S. Gregorie Nysen, that Christ had taken true flesh of theIn vita Moysis. Uirgin. For how can a thing (saith he) which hath no body, be made meate vnto the body? So S. Cyrill proueth, that there is but one person, because the flesh which we receaue doth geue lif to our soules and bodies: which it could not doe, except it wereAd Euo. the proper flesh of God, who only geueth life. Thus M. IuelAnath. 11 may perceaue, that his opinion agreeth with the Arrians, Ua∣lentiians, Neorians, Eutichians, And the like might be sayd
of the Marcionites, Manichees, Apellians, & briefly of all those heretikes, who denying a reall truth of Christes diine or hu∣mane nature, were always confuted by the Fathers by the reall truth of Christes manhod and Godhead confessed of the Catho∣likes in this blessed Sacrament. Harding, S. Hierom shevving tvvo vvays of vn∣derstanding Christes flesh, one spirituall (as it is verily meate) an other, as it vvas crucified, declareth the ma∣ner of eating it only to differ from the maner of it being crucified, the substance being all one.§ 5. Iuel. He speaketh neither of the Sacrament, nor of any reallThe 95. vntruthe. presence. San. He meaneth both. Iuel. S. Hierom speaking of the dubble vnderstanding of Chri∣stesThe 96. vntruthe. flesh, meaneth that we haue our saluation in Christ eating him and liuing by him, not for that his flesh was mortal only and crucified vppon the crosse, but for that it was spiritual and diuine, hat is to say, the flesh of the Sonne of God. San. Your glose, M. Iuel, is stark naught. For whereas S. Hierom rekoneth vp two wayes of vnderstanding one and the same flesh, you make such an interpretation, which doth cōfound those  vnderstandings. For if Christes flesh be called of S. Hiero diine and spirituall, because it is the flesh of the Sonne of God, the his flesh was diuine and spirituall vppon the crosse also. For euen there it was the flesh of the Sonne of God. But he calleth it spirituall one way, and crucified an other way: therefore his meaning is, that it is spirituall and diuine flesh, not only for respect of the vnion, but vnder the forme of bread, where it is present to be eaten in a diuine maner, and, as if it were a spirit, vtterly inuisible, and able to be perceaued by no : ad yet for all tat true and reall flesh, euen the same sub∣stance
which was crucified. Any other sense you can not applie to the distinction of S. Hierom: and whatsoeuer els you bring out of S. Augustine or Angelomus, it is not to the purpo. Iuel. S. Hieroms meaning is, that the same flesh being thus di∣uineThe 97. vntruthe. and spirituall, must also spiritually be receaued, and not flesh∣ly, as M. Harding imagineth. San. As though D. Harding brought not the distinction of S. Hierom, to proue that his assertion is not carnal and fleshly, but spirituall and diuine. And yet you still call it as you list, and huddle vp places of the Manichees and Messalians nothing to the purpose. Iuel. S. Hierom him self sayth: Of this oblation which is mar∣ueilouslyDe▪ con∣secrat. dist. 2. c. de Sac. made in the remembrance of Christ, it is lawfull to eate: but of that oblation which Christ offered vppon the altar of the crosse according to it self, it is lawfull or noman to eate: That is to say, in grosse and fleshly maner. San. Who could speake more against your self, then you doe now? The fleshly maner of eating is to eate flesh visible, palpa∣ble, and corruptible, and in that maner as it was vpon y• crosse. This place brought by you (although it be thought to be the saying of Origenes, and not of S. Hierom) yet confirmeth ex∣cedingly the former distinction. For the same substance is eaten which was crucified, euen as the Hoste or thing offered is one in both oblations, but the maner is diuerse. Both these places are in dede very like. Both name the crosse, both name eating. Both make a difference betwene the thing crucified and eaten, but yet not in substance, but in the maner of the presence thereof. Iuel. By these words S. Hierom weth a great difference betwene the sacrifice that is made in the remembrance of Christ, and the very sacrifice in dede that Christ made vppon the crosse. San. The difference is so great, that the thing offered is all
one in substance, but vppon the crosse it is offered as an oblation wholy burnt, and therefore not eaten. In the supper it is offered, as an oblation to kepe the redemption of the crosse in continuall remembrance, and to thank God for the redemption purchased, and to make vs partake the fruits of Christes death by eating worthely the body which died. But if the thing or substance offe∣red be not one & the same, what oblatiō is that, M. Iuell, whichQuae  rabiliter fit. is marueilously made in the supper? What is that wherein we remember and shew Christes death? Is bread and wine y• mar∣ueilouse oblation?  they made  in the remem∣brance of Christ? What marueilouse making can you find in them? Except (which is the very truth) they be made the body & blood of Christ? That is in dede a marueilouse making, a mar∣ueilouse sacrifice, a marueilouse shewing of Christes death? You had lost your wits when you brought foorth this place, which maketh so fore all against you. Iuel. If a man take it fleshly (saith S. Chrysostom) he gainethIn Ioan. nothing.Hom. 47 San. It foloweth in S. Chrysostom immediatly: what say we then? is not flesh, flesh? yes doutlesse. And again these words (the flesh profiteth nothing) were not spoken of the flesh it self, but of fleshly vnderstanding. Whereby it is clere, that he vnder∣standeth fleshly, who deuiseth a grosse & fleshly maner of eating Christes flesh: but not he, who saith the flesh it self must be eaten in his true substance, if the maner be diuine and spiritual, as in our Sacrament it is.De doct. Iuel. It is a figure or foorm of speache (saith S. Augustine)Christ l. 3. cap. 16. illing vs to be partakers of Christes passion. San. You are taken M. Iuel. If you had not brought this place, I wold haue brought it. for if Christ in S. Ihon willeth  to be partakers of Christes passion, seing that partaking mu
be at the lest by faith (for it may also be in a more  both by faith and Sacrament) but seing we must partake of the passion at the least by faith, and you say we eate Christes body none otherwise in the supper, but only by faith: how then can you auoide the place brought by yourlf ou of S. Hierom, where it was sayd, it is not lawful to eate of that oblation accor∣ding to it self which Christ offered vpon y• altar of the crosse? Is it not lawful to eate of Christ by faith euen as he hung crucified▪ will you not then beleue vpon him, as he hangeth in that base & humble condition? I know you will. but your eating is bele∣uing: therefore you eate that oblation according to it selfe, euen according as it is there spread & cōtumeliously handled. But S▪ Hierom saith: noman may eate it so, therefore he meaneth eating by mouth, and not by faith. goe on with me, M. Iuel: but of that oblation which is made maruelously in the remembrance of Christ, it is lawfull to eate▪ and how to eate, but by mouth? for as lawfull eating standeth against vnlawfull eating: so in the one place it is vnlawfull to eate by moth, in the other it is law∣ful to eate by mouth. Therefore S. Hierom speaketh not only of eating Christes diuine and spiritual flesh by faith, but euen by mouth also in the Sacrament. Iuel. S. Hierom calleth the eating of the diuine and spirituallThe 98. . flesh of Christ the remembring that he died for vs. Sand. If that be so, then the oblation it self is eaten of, which Christ offered vpon the crosse, & that secundum se, that is to say, according to it self. How is it possible swetely to remember that Christ died for vs, and not to eate by faith his very death, and the sensible maner thereof? but his esh offered ou the crosse though it may be eatē by faith, yet according to it self it may not be eaten in that corruptible foorm and shape. And contrarie wise the di∣uine & spirituall flesh is so  appointed to be ,
that the  Christ sayd, my flesh is verily meate: therefore S.The di∣ flesh is catē by mouth. Hierom speaketh of eating the diuine & spiritual flesh by mouth, and not only by faith. eating by faith is rather more due to the flesh of Christ as it hangeth crucified, then to any other maner of the same slesh. For we must swetely remember his death, and be partakers of his passiō by faith: but not by mouth. On the other syde we must eate Christes diuine and spirituall flesh, as it is vn∣derstanded in another way distinct in maner from his crosse and passion: therefore that other eating is an eating by mouth, and not only by faith. Iuel. Clemēs Alexādrinus saith: there is a fleshly blood where∣withIn paeda. . 2. ca. 2. we are redemed, and a spiritual wherewith we are anoynted. and this is to drink the blood of Christ, to be partaker of his im∣mortality. As Christes blood is not really present to anoint vs,The 99. vntruthe. o it is not really present to nourish vs. San. Clemens Alexandrinus diuiding Christes blood into carnall & spirituall, agreeth with S. Hierom in the former part of the diuision, that is to say, in carnall blood, but in the later part he speaketh of an other thing. For whereas S. Hierom toke spirituall flesh and blood for the substance of them, as they are eaten and dronken in the Sacrament (which thinge may ap∣pere, for that he citeth these wdrds of Christ: my flesh is verily meate, and except you eate my flesh, ye shall not haue life euerla∣ing, which words are meant of the Sacramētal eating) CleēsIoan. 9. doth not respect so much the Sacrament of the altar it self, as the effect and fruite of Christes carnall blood, how soeuer it be par∣taken. and that is euident by his owne words where he saith, this is to drincke the blood of Iesus, to be partaker of his immor∣tality. To partake the immortalitie of Christ, is an effect which may rise of faith, of Baptism, of penance, of the Sacrament of the altar, and of all other meanes or instruments, whereby the
saluation of Christ may be deriued vnto vs. Clemes therefore speaking of an effect which may e wrought by one meritoriouse cause only (that is to say, by the death of Christ) but vnderstan∣ding the meanes to applie that cause vnto vs to be diuerse, he spake not directly of these manes, but of that spirituall fruite, which either one or moe of them doe bring foorth in vs. For the oynting, whereof Clemens doth speake, is to be referred to theVnctio. 1. Ioan. 2. spirituall grace which is gen to the soule, and not to the sub∣stance of the Sacrament whereof we dispute. It will not therefore folow, that because the blood whereof Clemens doth speake sometime, is not really present when through grace we are ointed with it, that the blood also whereof S. Hierom speaketh should not be really present: sith they two speak not of one kind of spirituall blood. Iuel. This nouris hing and this anoynting are both spirituall. San. That is true, but not both after one sort. For S. Hiero speaketh of the spirituall blood in the substance thereof, as it is verily drink in y• Sacrament: Clemens, as it is fruitfully parta∣ken of vs, and not as it is considered in his own substance. S. Hierome speaketh of the Sacrament, Clemens of the end and fruit of al our belefe. That S. Hierome speaketh of the Sacra∣mēt it is proued, because he citeth suche wordes out of S. Iohn,Ioan. 6. as all y• Fathers and manifest reasons & conference of the scrip∣tures proue to appertein, by the way of promise, to the Sacramēt of Christes supper. Which thing I haue proued in twentie chap∣ters together in my third booke. to which reasons vntil M. Iuel hath answered, he shal geue me leaue to put it for an vndoubted truth, that Christ in the later part of the sixth chapter of S. Ihon speaketh most literally of the gift of his fleshe & blood to be made at his last supper. But Clemens doth speake of that spirituall drinking Christs blood, whereof S. Augustin saith: Hunc cibum
& potum societatem vult intelligi corporis & membrorum suo∣rum,Tract.  in Ioan. quod est sancta Ecclesia. This meate and drinke Christ wil∣leth to be vnderstanded the felowship of his body and members, which body the holy Church is. Now to be partaker of the vni∣ty and spirit which is made in Christes myical body, that is to be partaker of the immortalitie and glorie of our Lorde. For asEphes 5. S. Paule saith, he is the Sauiour of his body.Cont. li. Petil li. ▪ cap. 8. Iu. S. Augustine saith, Iudas betraied Christ carnal, thou hast betraied Christe spirituall. For in thy fury thou betraiedst the ho∣ly Gospel to be burnt with wicked fier. These wordes of ClementThe 100. . and Augustine agreing so nere in  nd phrase with the words of Hierom may stand for sufficiente exposition to the same. San. These wordes goe so nere y• one to the other, tht in sense they differ exceding much. For now S. Augustine taketh Christe spiritual an other way cleaue diuerse from Clement or S. Hierō. and that may be easily seen, if a man will reade the line which fo∣loweth next in S. Augustine. For he saieth: Iudas betraied the lawmaker vto the perfidious Iewes: thou hast betraied to mēChristes reliques are y• holy Bib. as it were reliquias eius, his reliques, to wit, the lawe of God to be destroied. S. Augustin then taketh Christ spiritual, for certaine reliques of Christ, which although they be no partes of his cor∣poral body, yet they belong to him, for y• of his great prouidence toward vs he lest thē to be deuoutly readen & kept. what meane you, M. Iuel, to migle things impertinēt together? Think you, wheresoeuer you find y• word spiritual, y• by & by it perteineth to your purpose? or do you only intēd to abuse yt not lerned reader? The word, spirituall, being maned of spiritus, a spirite, msteIoan. 4. nedes be taken s manie wayes, as y• word spirit is taken whichMatt. 4. doth signifie God, that is to say, the whole Trinitie. For God isRom. 8. a spirit. 2. The holy Ghost of whom Christ was lead into the de∣serte.Heb. 1. 3. Christ him selfe, as S. Cyrillus hath noted. 4. Angels. 5.Psal. 47
6. Spiritual gifts. 7. The soule. 8. The imagination. 9.. Cor. 14 The breath of mans outh. 1. Anger or punishmēt. and manyIoan. 19. other things. By which diuerse taking of this one worde, a of. Cor. 14 diuerse others in the holy scripture, such difficulty riseth to a manGen. 6. (though not vnlerned) that without the help of vnisal tradi∣tion he can not vnderstand them. That whiche you bring out of Athanass appertemeth to the Capharnaites, & to no man els. Iu. Thus M. Harding reasoneth we eate not the flesh of Christ,The 101. truth. that was crucified, ergo Christes flesh is really in the Sacrament. Sander. You leaue out the chefe part of the argument. We eate Christes diuine and spirtual flesh, and yet we eate it not so as it was crucified: therefore S. icrom spake of that eating, whiche is not only made by faith (for so the crucified fleshe may be eaten) but of that, which is made by mouth also. Iu. We can notthen eate the flesh that was crueified: ergo weThe 102. truth. can not really eat Christes flesh, ergo Christes body is not really in the Sacrament. San. Your argument is like to that sophis: You eate not raw sh, but you bought raw flew, ergo you doe not eate that which you bought. S.  saieth: we do not ate the flesh crucified, o wit, as it was crucified, en as he that eateth fleshe doth not  it as it was raw. but as he doth ate that in substance which was in qualitie raw: so we eate really y• same substance that was crucifid, but not in the sam sort, but in a spiritual and in a diuine mauner. not by faith only, but also by mouth. Harding. The Fathers vsed the vvordes really, sub∣stantiallyThe 8. di∣ision. & caet. to put avvay all dout of the being of Christes verie body in the holy mysteries. Iu. He diuineth what they meane, before they speake.The 103. ntruth. San. Nay, because he is sure of theyr wordes, he  theyr minde.
¶A place of S. Chrysoome exponded.The xii. Chpiter. HArding. The Sacramentaries teache our Lordes body to be represented only in figure, signe, and token, being absent in dede. Iu. All the holy Fathers haue vsed those termes.The 14▪ . San. It is a vaine ster of names without truth. They ne∣er ved the term of only figure, nor said not, that the truthe was absent. Harding. Vnder visible signes inuisible thinges be deliuered. Iu. Ergo Christes body is really in the Sacrament.The 10▪ vntruth. Sander. You leae out one pece. For in dede so it must nedes be in that Sacrament, where it is signified really present: other∣wise the signe should be false. For after it is once said ouer bread▪ this is my body, that signe of bread during, the body therein  present, doth dure. Iuel. Chrysostom saith, in the same homily: if Christ died not,The 10▪ ntruth. whose signe and token is this sacrifice? therefore he may be also charged with the Sacramentary quarell. San. You proue it a signe hereby, but not that the truth is ab∣set from the signe, which thing you should haue proued. But I will proue hereby, that the thing or truth signid is really pre∣sent: otherwise this signe could not be a sacrifice. rsed might e be, that defendeth bread and wine to be the final sacrificed sb∣stance of the new Testament. But this that S. Chrysostome de∣mandeth of, is a sacrifice▪ and that of the new Testament, & vsed in Christes Church: therefore it is the reall body of Christ, & yet withall a signe, because it is geuen inuisibly present, to make vs  the visible sacrificing thereof vpon the Crosse▪ 2. It is
said there  S. Chrysostom, at Marciō, Valētins, Maichens. (w deied Christes real flesh an ) are cōfounded by these mysteries. How can that be, if the true flesh of Christ be not real∣ly conteined in them? For a figure of flesh without the truth doth rather helpe those hiks, then confound them. 3. S. Chrysostome sith een there, that it is euident by these3. mysteries, that Christ hath bene already sacrificed. whiche saying can not be true, if his reall flesh be not prsent. For as a figure of Christes fleshe offered vp in all the sacrifices of the olde law, did not proue that Christ was already offred, but that aterwarde he should be offered: so a figure of Chrises slsh now ofred, can not proue that Chist hath bene offered, but only that he shalbeOli Chri sts real fleshe pro∣ueth his death to be past. offered hereafter. But his real flesh being eaten vnder the forme of breade proueth iincibly, that he hath bene already oered, because no flesh is eaten in any holy sacrifice, before it hath bene offered to God: of which point I haue spoken in my fifth booke the first Chapiter. Iu. How light occasions these men take to deceaue the simple?The 107. vntruth. San. What a light occasion toke you euen presently, to deceaue the simple by the name of tokē? which yet so proueth against you in that place, that it is not possible for you to auoide it. Iu. M. Harding knoweth, that Chrysostom speaketh generallyThe 108. ntruth. of al other mysteries. for it followeth: euen so n baptisme the wa∣ter is a thing sensible, the regeneratiō is a thing spiritual. Where∣fore if M. Harding vpon the occasion of these wods wil force his real presence in the one Sacrament, he must likewise force th same in the other. San. D. Harding brought that place only to shew, that the bo∣dy of Christ is not visiblie present. But othrwise baptise and the Eucharist agree herein, that in sensible things other things inuisible and spirituall are geuen. And the things geuen, are ge∣uen
in both, but they are in them selues diuerse. In baptisme the grace of regeneration whiche is geuen, is conteyned and geuen, when the word cometh to the water. For the water & the worde hath the grace of Christ working by it. but in the Sacrament of the altar, the grace cōteined is the naturall body of Christ, which lyth hidden vnder the forme of bread. Thus eche Sacrament hath the gift prent, but not eche rall presence of fleshe: for as flesh belongeth only to the supper of Christe: so regeneration be∣lōgeth only to baptism. & eche grace is present in the visible signe, but afer a diuerse manner, because those Sacramentes are of a  nature, as now I will declare. ¶ The difference betwene Baptism and ourThe xii. Lords supper.Chapiter. Iuel. For as much as these two Sacraments be both of force like,The 109. vntruth. I wil touch what the fathers think of gods working in baptism, The fathers in the Coūcel of Nice bid vs think, that the water isDe san. baptis. ful of heauēly fier, & cae. Basil, the kingdom of heauen is set open.In Matt. hom. 51. Chrysostom: God himself in baptism by his inuisible power hol∣deth thy head. Ambrose: in the water is the grace of Christ and theDe sacr. li. 1. ca. 5. presence of the Trinitie. Bernard: let vs be washed in his bloode,Serm. 3. super missusest▪ & caet▪ By force of which wordes M. Harding may proue, that the power of God, the heauenly fer, the grace and the blood of Christ is really present in baptism. Sander. Manie of these things and other oe are in deed saied of baptism, but yet the reall presence of them all, is not proued thereby. And note, good reader, y• cause thereof which is verie  table, an shall bring great shame of ignorance to M. Iuel. When a thing is affired of a Sacrament, it is not by and by present really therein, except it be signified present in the wordes
ituted by Christ which ake the Sacrament, or of  inferred vppon them: as when it is saied, I baptise and . 28. thee in the name of the Father and of the Sonne and of the holy Ghoste: none other thing is signified reallie present besides th effctuall wasshing. For thereof it is said in the present tense: I baptise thee, that is to saye, I washe thee: Therefore reall bapti∣sing or washing as well of the soule as of the body is made in those wordes. The Trinitie is named, but not signified as really present in y• water (otherwise thē as it is present in all places) but only as working by his power. For in the name of the father is to saie, in y• power & strength of y• father. Thus the power & ver∣tue of god is really presēt, &  or renewig is really made. But if it were sayd at the tyme of washing by the institution of Christ: This is Christ who baptiseth or washeth thee, the doubtlesse Christ should be beleued really present. Albeit there∣fore some Fathers say, God holdeth thy head at the fonte, and other say, the water is full of heauenly fier, and so foorth: yet these are maners of speache without reall or naturall operation according to the letter, because they be not words instituted of purpose by Christ to work a speciall effect in the Sacraments: Although they shew by similitudes, that a reall working of di∣uerse graces is made in the Sacraments. But Christ say in hisMatt. 26. supper, this is my body. In which words the body is affirmed present vnder that signe of bread, wherevnto Christ pointeth. If M. Iuel knew not this ods, he may be ashamed to teache that he knoweth not. If he knew it, why doth he lead men to hell willingly? But because this man goeth about euery where to abuse the holy communion, by shewing like phrases vsed sometymes of, Baptism, as are vsed of Christes supper: I will geue him a copie of certeyn phrases, which either he must find in the holy Scri∣tures
and in the holy Fathers, or els he shalbe corayned to confesse a more corporall and reall presence of Christ in the Sa∣crament of the altar, then in Baptism. First the name of Baptism differeth from the name of Chri∣stesThe die rences betwene baptisme & the E∣charist. body and blood. Baptism signifieth an action of a washing, and therefore it is no work tarying or during in his owne sub∣stance, but only the effect thereof remaineth. But the name of Christes body & blood is the name not only of making a work, but euen of a substanciall work it self: as when we say, a house, a pillar, a tree. Whereof it followeth, that when Christ hath done washing, baptism is past. But when Christ pointing to a visible thing hath said: this is my body: The body tarieth still after the speaking is done, so long as the visible form dureth, which is toHeb. 1. vs the signe of the body present. Nowe as S. Paule noteth that Christ so far passth the Angels, by how much his name is more excellent then theirs: right so the Sacrament of the altar so farre passeth baptism, as Christes own body is a name of more excel∣lency, then the name of washing or cleansing. 2. Baptism must goe before the Eucharist, as Iustinus y• mar∣yr2. saith, which thing is done to thend we may come cleane and pure to the blessed bodie of Christ. Therfore the Eucharist passethIn Apol. 2. it as farre as baptism passeth the vertue of penance, which prepa reth mn of discretion to be baptized. 3. Baptism maie be ministred of dōs, of lay men, yea of wo∣men3. in the time of necessity. The Eucharist is consecrated only of priests, who haue special power geuen them to make Christes body, accordingly as him self said: make this thing for the rememIn Epist. braunce of me. And S. Hierome excludeth Deacons rom thisad Euag. highe office. 4. Baptism may be inistred at any time of the day, but S.4.
Augustine sheweth, that the holy Ghost hath taught the whoIn epi. ad  Church (for the honour of so great a Sacrament) to receaue it only fasting, without a case of necessitie. 5. In Baptism the water must be of necessitie beleued to re∣maine,5. because washing is not made without water: nor it shall neuer be found, that it was taught to be changed. but in the Eu∣chariste no breade or wine remaineth, because no such thing is signified at the time of consecration: and the Fathers teacheoncil. them to be changed into Christes body and blood.Lateran. 6. Baptism was administred in the running water, and no6. regard had of the material water, when the act of washing wasLib. 6. Cate. my stag. 4. in martyro logio done. But the Eucharist was euer so warily administred, that no crum thereof was suffered to fall, as Optatus, Cyrillus of Hic∣rusalem, S. Bede, and others do witnesse. 7. Baptism was neuer adored, though it were reuerenced:Tarsi. 7. the Sacramēt of the altar was alwayes adored with the highestChrys. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. honour due to God alone, as I haue shewed at large in my sixth booke. 8. As Baptisme is the first Sacrament and most necessarie,8. so the Eucharist is the last, and most honorable. That to cleuse vs, this to feed vs. That to marie vs, by consent of mindes to Christ, this to ioyne vs to his flesh and blood by reall copulaiō of bodies. That prepareth to this, & this maketh yt in al degrees perfit. That without this is a true mariage, but yet it is with∣out the last end of mariage which is carual copulation. This cō∣ming to that, and to all the other Sacramentes, maketh vs to be most perfitly vted with Christ. For this cause S. Dionysius Areopagita sayeth: Dicimus er∣go,De eccl. Hierar. cap. 3. & caet. We say therefore other (Sacraments) or signes of ho∣ly things (whose communion is graunted to vs) to be finished y the diuine and perfiting giftes of the Eucharist. And holy
Ephren also writeth thus of the most perite and consummatedLi. 4. de similitu∣dine pla∣tat arbo ris &c. vnion which is made in the same Eucharist, saying: Anima nostra sponsa estimmortalis sponsi, copula autem nuptiarum coelestia Sa cramenta sunt: quia cum manducamus corpus eius & sanguinem bibimus, & ipse in nobis est, & nos in ipso. Our soule is the spouse of the immortall Bridegrome: that which coupleth them in ma∣riage are the celeiall Sacraments, for that, when we eate his body and drink his blood, he is in vs and we in him. 9. Moreouer we are by Baptism vnited to Christ, and not at9. Union. all to Baptism. But by the Eucharist we are sayd to be vnited to the very body which is in the Sacrament, becaus it is all one with Christ himself. Of which difference I will speake more hereafter. 10. Last of all, the perpetuall custome of the people of God,10. and the vniuersall tradition hath always obserued great diffe∣rence betwene these two Sacraments. And thereby any wise man may know what belongeth to the one, and what to the o∣ther. If now M. Iuel will proue Baptism and the Eucharist to be of like force, concerning the meane of vniting vs to Christ, he must bring foorth such phrases, where Baptism may be called of1. Christ him self the body of Christ. Where the Eucharist may be2. sayd to prepare vs to Baptism, as well as Baptism to it. Where3. Baptism is sayd to be worthy the highest honour, as it is sayed of Christes body in the Sacrament. Where the last and highest4. coplatiō is assigned to Baptism, as it is to y• Eucharist. Where speciall consecration of Priests, speciall prerogatiue of tyme, speciall warmesse in vsing the matter is no lesse required to the substance of Baptism, then of the Eucharist. But when some things be like, and some things be different in two Sacramēts, it is great ignorance to reason from the similitude which one
way is betwene them, to destroye an other way those points, wherein they differ. After which sort M. Iuel doth reason. ¶ M. Iuel replieth not well, touching the authoritieThe xv. Chapiter. alléged out of the Nicene Councell. HArding. We behold (saith the Councell of Nice)Diuision . the Lamb of God , put or layd on that holy table, and vve receaue his preciouse body and blood , verily and in dede. Which is to say really.§ 5. Iuel. is not found in the Greke nor in Tunstal. But de∣uisedThe 110. . by M. Harding. San. It will not folow that because the common Greke edi∣tion or B. unstall hath it not, that therefore D. Harding fai∣neth that Greke word. It is found in the actes of the CouncellGaspar of Nice, which are not yet all printed, but they are extant in di∣uerseCassalius libraries. And this place is in many print bookes, whereLusitan. commonly they haue the Greke word , translated intodecalice. Garet. in centen. 4 situm, situate or put. Your self also in the Apologie did allege certein words out of the same acts of the Councell of Nice. Yea you haue done the like euen in this very article: therefore you ought not to be angry with D. Harding for doing the same.The 111. vntruthe. Iuel. Must , which signifieth to be set or placed, nedes sounde a reall presence? San. It must nedes proue a real presence of that thing, which if it were not present, it could not be set vppon the table. Or can you haue a capon set and placed vppon your table, which is not really present?Ephes. 3. Iuel. Christ dwelleth in our hart by faith, and yet not really. San. No wonder, sith a thing may dwel somewhere by faith,Apoc. 5. where yet it is not in dede. As Christ was killed (in the saith of
inst men) from the beginning of the world, yet not in dede, vn∣till he was nailed to the crosse. A being by faith is a lsse pite being, then a being really. And therefore the fewer and the lesse doth not infer the more and the greater. But the Lamb of God is not said to be vppon the holy table by faith, but to be st or layed there. Iuel. S. Hierom sayth, as often as we enter into the sepulcher,Ad Mar∣cllam. we see our Sauiour lying in his shrowd. Yet he lay not there really. San. Not then truly when S. Hierom entred: but he spake in respect of that true place, which Christes body had sometyme occupied. But if the things vpon the holy table neither be now, nor at any time were the body of Christ, how sayd the Councell we behold the Lamb placed vppon the holy table? Iuel. In the Councell of Chalcedon it is demaunded, in whatAct. 1. Scripture lye these two natures of Christ. it is the same word , yet they lye not really in the scriptures. San. The heretike Eutiches, who asked for those two na∣tures in the Scripture, asked for very material and reall words, which being seen and readen might lead him to these two na∣tures.De recta fide. For the words which signifie two natures haue a reall place in holy Scripture, and they haue bene at large declared by S. Cyrillus. But I pray you syr: If a mā should aske you where you find that Greke word , could you shew a sufficient discharge thereof? I think scaut so good as D. Harding can bring for . Once it is not extant in the common booke of the Councels. Iuel. That word signifieth a naturall situation of place and or∣derThe . vntruthe. of parts, such as D. Harding in the next article saith Christes body hath not in the Sacrament. San. Although Christes body in it self hath not any such ex∣tensiue
locally in the Sacrament, yet it hath suchOp. de coena Do mini. lo∣an. 14. a situation as the foorm of bread requireth, which suffiseth to de∣clare a reall presence. For as his Godhead might be shewed in his manhod (he that seeth me, seeth my Father) so his body is placed vnder the foorm of bread, and there may be shewed to a faithfull man. Iuel. The Councell is plaine, that we consyder not basely the bread and the wine that are set before vs. San. He considereth them basely who sayth they remain still in their earthly substance, notwithstāding that Christ after bles∣singRom. 4. & 9. hath called thē by greater names, whose calling is the ma∣king the thing to be that, which it is called. Iuel. It is sayd: lift vp your hartes, so that there is nothing inThe 113. . the action to be consydered, but only Christ. San. It is meant, not only to lift them vp to God, but also to lift them from earthly thoughts of infidelitie, and to beleue that, which Christ sayeth and doth in his holy mysteries, as S.De Dei naura. Chrysostom noteth. I haue spoken of this matter at large in myHom. 4. second booke, the. xxvi. Chapiter. Of Egles I haue spoken, the second booke, the. xxvij. Chapiter. Uerily the thing made, (whereof Christ sayd, make this thing) is to be cōsydered in the myries, and not only Christ in heauen. Iuel. S. Ambrose saith, it is better sene that is not sene.De myst. cap. 3. San. Therefore y• body of Christ which Christ pointeth vnto saiyng, this is my body, is better seue to a faithull Catholik, thē bread and wine, which the vnfaithfull Sacramentarie saith he sth. Iuel. For the same cause S. Augustine saith: In Sacraments weThe 114. . must consider not what they be, but what they represent. sor theyCōt. Ma xim. li. 3. cap. 22. are tokens of things, being one thing, and signifiyng an other, as S. Augustine saith.
San. As they be tokens, they be one thing & signifie an other: and therefore the substance of Christes body is not his death, or passion, or the vnitie of his Churche (which things vnder the foorm of bread it doth signifie) but it is an other maner of thing, to wit, a body immortal, impassible, and out of al daunger of cor∣ruption. how be it S. Augustine disputeth not there, of those which are ye peculiar Sacramēts of the Church (as your words, for the same cause, wold seme to signific) but generallie of all si∣gues, which commonly differ in substance from the things signi∣fied by them. But (as S. Chrysostom well noteth) we must be∣leueIn Math. God in al things, yet speciallie in the mysteries. As there∣foreHom. 83 whē God maketh a signe by water or oile, or any other crea∣ture, we ought to mark, not what substance that thing is, but what it is set to signifie: so when Christ toke bread, and after blessing sayd, this is my body, which is geuen for you, make thisLuc. 22. thing for the remembrance of me, we must note, that he did not appoint any creature to signifie his body, but made a new signe. he made, I say, a signe which might signifie his death. & he sayd to his Apostles, hoc facite, make this thing. Thus we see good cause, why this signe should differ from all other signes: because a naturall thing was not appointed at the supper to signify Christ, but a supernaturall thing was prepared and made there a new, to signify his wonderfull death and resurrection.The 115. vntruthe. Iuel. Touching our beholding Christ in the Sacrament S. Au∣gustine saith: it woketh such motions in vs, as if we saw our Lord him self present vppon the crosse. San. You care not what you heape vp together, so it may make a shew. S. Augustine there speaking properly of the so∣lemnityEaster kept in S. of Easter (which now in England is wholy takē away) age with . saith, although death shall nomore beare rule ouer Christ, yet Anniuersaria recordatio repraesentat quod olim factum est. the
yerely remembrance doth represent that which was done in old time, and it worketh such motions in vs, as if we saw our Lord present vppon the crosse. those signes were externall, and (as it may appere) were made to the senses by preaching and shewing some image of Christ, and by creping to the crosse, and by such like godly ceremonies as the Church of God hath alwaies vsed at Easter. but in our Sacraments (as S. Chrysostom saith) Omnia quae tradidit insensibilia sunt, al things which Christ hat deliuered are without y• cumpasse of y• sēses. S. Augustine there∣fore spake not of y• Sacramēt, but of other external ceremonies.De cons. dist. 2. c. quia cor pus. Iuel. This is it that Eusebius writeth, that the body might be worshipped by a mystery. and that euerlasting sacrifice should liue in remembrance and be present in grace for euer, in this spiri∣tualThe 116. vntruthe. sort, and not fleshly, Christ is layed present vpon the table. San. Beside that you omitt the beginning of this sentēce, you haue also left out foure lines euen in the middest thereof, which doe shew, that because a daily redemption & such as neuer fain∣teth did still run on for the saluation of men, the oblation of the redemption should be euerlasting. By which words EusebiusThe my∣stery. declareth, what kind of mystery the Sacrament of Christes body is: verily such as offereth vp that continuall redemption which Christ hath purchased for vs. For as Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father in heauen by his reall presence there, maketh continuall intercession in his manhod for vs, and causeth the re∣demption of mankind to be alwaies in his force and strength be∣fore God: so the mystery which is consecrated according to his institution in earth, doth from hence offer and present vnto God the same selfe redemption by the very same substance of flesh, which is in heauen. To this end Eusebius sayth: the Sacra∣ment of Christes body and blood is consecrated. and inTransub∣staation. what sort consecrated? The inuisible priest (saith Eusebius) by
secret power turneth the visible creatures with his word into the substance of his body & blood. and again, before y• creatures be consecrated by the inuocation of the highest name (or power) the substance of bread and wine is there: but after the words of Christ, it is the body and blood of Christ. This was the homily which M. Iuel thought good to alleage, that all men might think, that there was nothing writen that made not for his pur∣pose.Ioan. 2. Is that no reall presence, where consecration is so made, that the creatures be changed into the substance of Christes bo∣dy & blood? was not the wine really present at Cana, into which the water was changed? Well, consecratiō is made, the creatures of bread and wine are thanged into the substance of Christes bo∣dy and blood. and in that body & blood, the redemption of man∣kind is offered to God, and is preserued in the remembrance of men: and yet all this while that body and blood by M. Iuels verdit is not present. The change is made by the word of God, & yet that word is figuratiue, if we may beleue M. Iuel. yea butIn serm. ad infan. he hath a phrase in store, I warrant, you to plaier this wound. Iuel. S. Augustine saith: you are vppon the table, you are in1. Cor. 10 apud Be dam. the cup. as the people is layd vppon the table, so and none other∣wise, the Councel of Nice saith, the Lamb of God is layd vpponThe 117. vntruthe. the table. Sand. What, M. Iuel, is the table turned into vs, as Euse∣bius saith the visible creatures are turned into the substance of Christes body and blood? I haue shewed an other where, in my v. booke, the v. chapiter, that euen that our being on the table and in the cup doth proue Christes reall presence. For we should not be there, if our head Iesus Christ were not vnder that forme of bread and of wine, wherein we are signified. Iuel. The Greeke word , verily, by D. Hardings iud∣gment soundeth no lesse then really; but these two words truly
and fleshly haue sundry meanings: and in the sense that ChristThe 118. vntruthe. spake vnto, the one doth vtterly exclude the other. San. If you take fleshly for the substance of flesh, it is all one in speaking of flesh to say truly, and fleshly. but as concerning the corruplible qualities of flesh, so it is not al one. If it had plea∣sed your malice to haue denied Christes presence in heauen (as you deny it in the Sacrament) you might as wel haue mocked all the places brought against you for his reall presence there.M. Iuel eth to a terme or lack of a good an∣swer. with this word, fleshly, as now thereby you mock at his pre∣sence in the Sacrament. This licenciouse wantonnesse in taking aduantage by a fleshly terme, when soeuer you be pressed with a good argument, shal get you neuer the more credit among wise men. The real presence which we defend in the Sacramēt, is not carnall and fleshly, but cleane and pure. in so much that Angels wonder at y• maruelous & vnspekable mystery of Christes body and blood in the Sacrament. Yea S. Chrysostom saith: Quod angeli vidētes, &c. That thing at the sight wherof Angels quake because of the brigthnes which shineth out of it, therewith we are fed, therevnto we are vnited, and we are made one body of Christ and one flesh. And yet is this a eshly kind of presence, M. Iuel? Iuel. He that eateth most spiritually, eareth most truly: asThe 119. vntruthe. Christ is the true vine, the true manna. and we are veily one bread, and the Apostles verily the heauens, and these are the pa∣schall feast wherein verily the Lamb is slaine. San. In comparison of bodilie eating alone spirituall eating is more true, and of a better sort. But a thing both eaten in bodie & in spirit (as the Sacrament is eaten) is farre more trulie eaten both waies, then by one wae alone. Again, when the name of anie thing affirmed of Christ, apperteineth to the true nature of his manhad which he hath assumpted, it is to he verified of him,
not onlie by a metaphor, but in verie dede. Christ is no naturallThe  rence be∣twene Christ be∣ing a true ine and truly . ine, because he assumpted not that substāce to him. Likewise he is not Manna: Albeit he be spirituallie the true vine, and the true Manna. For seing he was not these things really, thei can not be said of him really. But he is man in dede, and therefore offered in dede, killed in dede, buried in dede, and eatē in dede. For now as we beleue the real death of him: so must we beleue the real ting of him, because the truth belonging to eche of them is to be taken according to the true nature of man, whiche he toke. And as it was mete for him to be killed in the shape of man, so he would be eaten in the shape of bread.The 12. vntruth. in Ioan. tract. 26. Iu. S. Augustine vtterly remoueth the natural office of the bo∣dy: What preparest thou thy teeth? Beleue and thou hast eaten. Beleuing in him, is the eating of the bread of life. San. You are one of y• most impudent men that euer any crea∣ture had to doe withall. S. Augustine spake these wordes to the faithlesse Iewes, with whome Christe talked at Capharnaum, who gaped for bodily meate and belly chere. Now when Christ had said, worke the meate which tarieth to life euerlasting, S. Au∣gustineIoan. 6. saieth to the Iew, who soughte to haue his bellie filled, what preparest thou thy teeth? M. Iuel knoweth, that when Ca∣tholikes come to the Sacramēt of the altar, they whet not theyr teeth, as if they came to a carnall banket: but they beleue, & eate first by beleuing, to thend they maie afterward eate by mouthe worthely. And therefore S. Augustine confesseth vs to receaue Christ by mouth also: but by a faithfull mouth, & not by a gloto∣ouse mouth. His words are: Hominem Christum Iesum & caet.Aug. cōt. aduersa∣riū legis & pro∣phetarū. fideli corde atque ore suscipimus. We doe receaue with a faith∣ful hart and mouth the man Iesus Christ geuing his fleshe vnto vs to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk, although it may seme more horrile to eate mās flesh, thē to kil it, & drink mans blood, then to shed it. When S. Augustine saith: we receaue Christ with
a faithfull mouth, he sheweth that his meaning is not to remoue vtterly the naturall office of the body (as M. Iuell most impu∣dently saith) but he meaneth we should not come to the Sacra∣ment for to satisfie our bodily hunger, but with a faithfull harte and mouth. Where if he spake not of reall drinking by mouth, he would neuer haue said, it is more horrible to drink mans blood then to shed it: but now although it be so horrible to drink mans blood in that corruptible sort which mortal blood hath, yet Chri∣stes blood is geuen to vs in a miraculonse manner without cor∣ruption, or lothsomnes, and is receaued euen in the mouthes of the faithful. But I can not so leaue you, M. Iuel. Did S. Augus∣tine vtterly remoue the office of the mouth? Said he not, that for the honour of so great a Sacrament it pleased the holy Ghoste, Vt prius in os christiani corpus dominicum intraret, quàm caeteriEpi. 118. cibi, that our Lords body should enter into the mouth of a chris∣tian man before other meates. and yet is the office of the body remoued, and that vttterly remoued? Where is, M. Iuell, your mind, your wit, your sense? Where is your care of God, regarde to your good name, or the feare to abuse the holy mysteries? Harding. Buce taught the body of Christe to beThe 9. di∣uision. truly and substantially present, exhibited and taken. Iu. Hitherto M. Harding hath alleged nor auncient doctour,The 121. vntruth. nor old Coūcel. San. As though we had not disputed this long time of y• Nicene Councl, where 318. auncient Fathers were gathered together. Iu. What reasons lead him to yeld to the other side for quiet∣nessake,Galat. 2. I remit vnto God.De prae∣script. aduersus Haeret. San. In a matter of suche weight he ought not to haue yelded for quictnes sake, sith S. Paule resisted S. Peter for a matter of much lesse importance, as wherein they rather disagreed in facte,
then in doctrine, as Tertullian witnesseth. Iu. If M. Harding had found any other doctor, he would notThe 122. . haue made his entry with Bucer. San. Beside the Nicene councel which you haue heard already, ye shal heare other doctours anon. Iu. The councel of the eight Cardinals at Rome might ratherThe 123. ntruth. haue bene scoft at, then this brotherly conference. San. The Cardinals sought not a new faith (as Bucer and Luther did) but the purging of old faultes. they came not toge∣ther to set forth a new doctrine, but to amend the life of euil men. Tertullian saieth well: hllic & scripturarū & expositionū adulte∣ratioDe prae∣script. deputanda est, vbi diuersitas inuenitur doctrinae. There the coūterfeting both of the scriptures & of y• expositiōs is to be assig∣ned, where y• diuersity of doctrine is foūd. such diuersity is betwen the Lutherans and Zuinglians, but not betwen the Catholiks.The 124. vntruth. Iuel. If we compare voices, thei of wittemberge were moe in number. Sander. Nay sir, all the Catholike nations of Christendome communicated with the Cardinals. but your doctrine was then scant sixtene yeres old, and had neuer a citie, town or village in the world that wholy communicated with it at that daye. The1. Tim. . number must not be tried by the men gathered in a house toge∣ther, but by the men agreing in the church together. For y• whole Church is one house o god. Iuel. If we compare knowledge, thei were better lerned.The 125. vntruth. San. Of new sprong teachers  said: Omnes tument,De prae∣script. mnes scientiam pollicentur. Al of them do swel (with pride) and euerie one doth promise knowledge. But on the other side, Nemo sapiens nisi fidelis, No man is wise  faithfull. The Cardi∣nals therefore being faithfull were also etter lerned, then your men of wittēberge. Again, Tertullian sheweth that certein men
are wont to saie: whie did this woman, or that man being moste faithfull, most wise, most practised in the Church, goe into tha side? that is to saie, hold this or that new opinion? But he answe∣reth: they are neither to be counted wise, nor faithfull, nor men of practise, whom heresies can change. Therefore those that cam together at wittēberge, seing thei chāged their old faith, & sough out a new, thei could not be lerned as thei ought to haue bene. But otherwise also, thinck you, M. Iuel, that ani wise man wil grant you, that Luther and Bucer with their companions were better lerned, them Contarenus, Sadoletus, Polus, and Theati∣nus with their fellowes? Is it enough for you to haue said it in bare words, without any proufe at all? Iuel. If we compare purposes, thei sought peace in truth andhe 126. utruth. the glorie of god. Sander. Cal you that peace, when thei diuided Germanie from the rest of Christendō? You are of those who wold cure the soresIere. 6. of the people by vine words, saying to them, peace, peace, when as in dede there was no peace. Iuel. If we compare issue, god hath blessed their doings, andThe 127. vntruth. geuen force vnto his word. Sander. Touching your case Tertullian saith: Deverbi admi∣nistratione.De prae∣script. &c. What shall I speake of the administration of the word, sith their whole indeuour is, not to conuert Ethniks, bt to peruert our men? thei rather couet after this glorie to ouer∣throw those that stand, then to raise vp those that are fallen: be∣cause y• verie worke of theirs cōmeth not of their building, but of the destruction of the truth. They vndermine our works, that they may build vp their owne. Thus Tertullian said of you, before you were borne. It is thē small issue that you haue hitherto obteined, by ouerthrowing as outwardy monasteries, Churches, altars, scholes, hospitals: so
inwardly faith, humtie, chatie, obedience, & all  loue of God or of our neighbours. Iuel. These Cardinals espied suche faults as euery childe mightThe 128. vntruth. haue found. San. Neuer a Priestes childe in England is able to vnderstandin iij. to∣mo con∣ciliorum Anno D. 1538. them now that they are found, much lesse euery child would find them, if they were to be sought out. Iu. They neuer redressed any of the same. San. You say not truly. which thing as it might be declared inThe 129. vntruth. manie other points, as wel of making Priests & of geuing beue∣fices, as also in other faults there named: so is it most euident to y• eye cōcerning y• harlats, which neither ridde in coche, nor dwelt in any palace since that tyme, nor went in the tyre of any honest matrone. Iuel. If M. Harding had bene in the Apostles tymes, he wouldThe 130. vntruth. hue made some sporte at theyr Counc.  where or in what house assembled they together? San. They assembled in the house of S. Iohn, as NicephorusL. 2. . hist. ca. 1. Act. ca. 1. Act. 15. thinketh, when they chose Mathias into y• nūber of the Apostles. Againe, they assembled to decide the cōtrouersie risen coucerning the obseruances of the law of Moyses, & in diuerse other places. Whereat D. Harding will make no sporte, because wheresoeuerMatt. 28. Ioan. 20. they assembled, they were laufully assēbled, being sent to y• whole worlde by Iesus Christe. But anie such cousion Luther and Bucer can not shew. Iu. What Bisshop or Pharisee was among thm?The 131. vntruth. San. They had one Bisshop  the lest among , and himIoan.  appointed by Christe, to whome he committed both his shepe and lambes. But in dede all the Apostles were also Bishopes, as it maie apere, in that S. Mathias toke the Bishoprike of Iudas,Psal.  ccording to the Prophecie of Dauid. Were Luther, Bucer andAct. .
Melancthon so made Bishopes? Or will you haue the Churche beginne again in our tyme, as it began or rather toke his perfec∣tion in Christ? Shall Luther be Christ, & will you be new Apost∣les to vs? Heare what Tertulan saith hereof also: Probēt se no∣uosDé prae∣script. Apostolos, &c. Let thē proue them selues to be new Apostles: Let thē say that Christ hath descended againe, & y• he hath taught againe, bene crucified againe, dird againe, risen againe: for so he was wot to make Apostles, & more ouer to geue thē power to do those things, which he him self did. I would therefore declare their power & vertues, but y• I know theyr chefe power to be in y• they do follow the Apostles peruersly. For they did make those y• were dead, to liue: but these doe make those that liue, to die. Hi∣therto Tertullian. Thus ,   lacked Bishops in theyr assembles (as being all sent with full authority into the ) or your assemble had  Bishop at al: Because since Christes assension  had authoritie toRom. 10 preach or to cal assbles, muste nedes  of them, or of theyr successours to whome Christ gaue suche authoritie. But Luther being sent of no man who  ordinarily to the Apostles, must nedes be a false Pr, as who ranne before he was sent.Ior. 23 And truly sith Christe  no him selfe to the authoritie of Apostleship, but was called of God thereunto, and proued his commission by his manifold wores and miracles: it is an into∣lerableHeb. 5. pride for Martin Luther at  worde without anieIoan. 10. other miracle ( y• he was the most fyithiest mā both of mouth and life ther lightly was in he earth) to require all the world to to beleue his new . Iu. S. Augustine  conference and disputation with ∣tius. 178. the Arrian at Hippo, in a priuate house of one Anitius. San. But I  you it was kepte of S. Augustines part to maintein the knowen  faith, and not to ouerthrow if.
Yea it was kept to maintein y• word homusion, which y• heretike Pascentius alleged, not to be in the holy scripture: and therefore that it ought not to be admitted. Iu. There be euer some, that laugh at the repairing of Hierusa∣lem,The. 13. vntruth. as Origen saith. San. You are of that summe: for you laugh at S. Augustine, who brought the faith into England, and at the eight Cardinals, who went about to repaire the wals of the Church. But Orige∣nesIn Cātica Can. 4, speaketh of idolatours and Gentils, who euuied at y• rising and not at the repairing of the wals of the Gospel, because it gre∣ued them to see moe new Christians daily made of iufidels. ¶ Whether Christes body dwel really in our bodiesThe xv. by his natiuity.Chapiter. Iuel. The old Fathers speak not any one word, that serueth to MThe 133. vntruth. Hardings purpose. San. This lying brag can not face the matter, as it shal appere hereafter. Iu. M, Harding proueth Christes body to be really in vs, andThe 134. vntruth. not in the Sacrament, thereby altering the question. Harding. Christ dvvelleth in vs truly, because of our receauing his body in this Sacrament. San. Ergo M. Iuel said not truly, that D. Harding hath al∣tered the question. For that which he now saith, he also proueth. Iu. Four special meanes there be, by euery of which Christes bo∣dyThe 135. vntruth. dwelleth in our bodies, not by imagination, bu ally, sub∣stancially, naturally, fleshly and in dede. San. You had ben better to haue subscribed sour , M. Iuel, than for gredines of denying the real presence of Christes body in the Sacrament, to haue made an assertion so vain as this is.
Iu. Christes body by his natiuitie whereby he ,The 136. . dwelleth in our bodies really, substancially. & caet. San. If you had only said, that Christ by his incarnatiō dwel∣leth naturally in vs, or we naturally in him, that sayinge might haue had a true sense: for that Christ by taking y• nature whiche we are, might haue bene said to dwell among vs, and to be  of vs. But to say not only that Christ, but that his body, not on∣ly dwelleth in vs, but in our bodies, and that not only naturally, but also really, substancially & in dede, to affirm cōstantly so much it semeth to me very hard. First Christes natiuitie no more caused his body to dwel real∣ly in our bodies, then his incarnation. For when the word was. 1. made flesh, euen then it dwelt in vs. Secondly his incarnation. may be considered three waes: one way, as if he had taken  by thought or imagination only, and not in verie dede, of which opinion you are not, as it may appere by diuerse places of your2. booke. Another way the incarnation may be considered accor∣dingDamasc. de orth. fi. li. 3. c. 6. & 11. to that nature, which is generally common to all men: As that thei consist of bodies, of soules, of reason, and of certain ac∣cidents. The question is, whether Christ at his incarnation toke al man kind after such sorte, that he is now the cōmon substance of vs all, or no. Here I know not what M. Iuel would answer, if he were namely put in mind thereof. But his wordes draw to the affirmatine sense altogether. For he saith Christs body dwel∣leth in our bodies by his natiuitie. whiche saying semeth to haue no real truthe in it: except Christ be common man kind whiche is in  man. If he be that vniuersall substance: then I see that as reason, as life, as sense, as fleshe and blood are no lesse in one man, then in an other: so Christe who is supposed to be that ge∣nerall reason, life, sense, fleshe and blood, is supposed likewise to be really in euery mans owne body. But this kind of opinion is
foolish and vain, as it shall appere anon. The third way of considering the incarnation is, to say, that Christ toke not y• common substance of al mankind, but only the whole particular nature of man: so that the  of God hath assumpted so much into his own , as any other  euer had in his  and corruptible . to wit, he hath assumpted the mind, the , the body and the  shape of a true man. According to  ( only is true) S. Paul saith: that he is not  to call vs his bre∣thern,Heb. 2. and that because the children (whome God  to him) had  and blood common among them, & ipse similiter parti∣cipauit eisdem, and he also likewise . , he toke parte, that is to say, he toke to himselfe fleshe and blood for his own part, as they had the same for their parts. And there∣fore as they had a particular  and generation, so Christ was not gathered or taken generally out of the bodies & soules 4. of al men,  he was born of the virgin Marie alone, the sonne. h. 1. of Dauid and of Abraham according to the fleshe. whiche being so, his body was no more really in our bodies by his natiuitie, then one of our bodies is in the body of an other man. For whē we speake of our bodies, we speake of that, which is particular∣ly proper to euery man in his own perso: and not of that which is common to all mankind. But yet certeyn general benefites are deried out of Christes  euen to euery man. Due is, that our nature is in him marucilously honoured and auanced, in so much that it is truly said, man is God, and God is man. Moreouer S. Cyrillus affirmeth, that euery particular manIn Ioan. li . c. 12. shal rise in his owne body at the later day, because of the myste∣rie of Christes resurrecton, who as man conteined all men in him self. But seing they that haue done euill shall rise to be pu∣nishe,
and that more greuously then death it self is (as thereRom. 8. S. llus witnesseth) and yet sith no damnatiō is vnto them who are in Christ Iesus, we may well say, that Christ doth not only not dwell in euery, mans body by his natiuitie, but also that he dwelleth not in their bodies or soules, who either did not partake of his flesh at al by faith, or els did vnworthely par∣take thereof either by Baptism, or by the Eucharist, or any other way. All this notwithstanding, M. Iuel will proue that Christes body dwelleth euen really in our bodies by his natiuitie. And when all is done it will proue either an heresie, or noing, or a dwelling rather in the whole truth of mans nature assumpted, then in any mans body after that sort of dwelling, which is pro∣perly called reall or substanciall. But let vs heare his proof.The 113. vniruthe. Iuel. S. Bernard sayth: the body of Christ is of my body, and is now become mine. San. S. Bernard sayth: Corpus Christi de meo est, the bodySerm. . de Epip. of Christ is of mine. He saith not of my body, as you trāate it. But of mine, y• is to say, of the same kind of stuffe whereof I am. Of the same stock and , of like flesh & blood, but not of my proper flesh & of my proper blood: not really dwelling in my bo∣wels, or in the partes of y body. Again when he sayth, &  est, and the body of Christ is mine, he meaneth, it is mino to take commoditie thereof, mine to vse, mine to , mine to offer, to enioy: but not mine through this only condition, because it is born, but because I am ioyned to it by faith, by Baptism, by Penaunce, and by rauing it into my body at Christes holy table, and by such like meanes. Iuel. A babe is born to vs. San. That is to say, to th'end we should take  by the birth of it. But by the only birth it is not really in our bodies.
it , and not only to vs, or for vs. Iuel. A Sonne is geuen vnto vs. . Unto  who  in him, but not to them who recea∣uedIoan. 1. him not. For he came into his own, and his own receaued him not. Iuel. S. Basill: We are partakers of the word by his incarna∣nation,Ad Caesa rienses. and  called all his mysticall conuersation flesh and blood. San. We partake him in his nature comming to ours, and in ours communicated to him, but not yet in our bodies coing to his bodie, except we also be ioyned to him by som other mean beside his natiuitie.The 138. vntruthe. Iuel. Nyssenus sayth: His body is all mankind, wherevnto he is mingled. San. You haue abused this testimonie, turning the due con∣structionM. Iuel hath erred in constru ction. of the words▪ and haue put that before the verb, which should haue come after the verb. The true construction is: The whole nature of man, wherevnto he is mingled, is the body ofIn dictū Apostol. tunc & filius sub ijcietur. Christ. And he meaneth not the natural body of Christ, which he toke of the virgen by his natiuitie (whereof you intreate) but he meaneth the mysticall body of Christ, whereof he said before: The subiection of the body of the Church, is referred to him,He spea∣keth still of the my∣stical body which doth inhabitie the body. And immediatly before y• words  out by you: Our Lord is the life, by whome it doth hap∣pen to all his body, that it is brought to the Father. Againe: Si Pater diligit lium, & caet. If the Father do loueNote. the Sonne, and we all (that through faith, whereby we beleue in him, are made his body) be in the Sonne: consequene he that loueth his owne Sonne, loueth also the bodie of his soe, euen as he loueth his Sonne himselfe. And we are that bodie. Lo, we are that bodie. He spake not therefore of Christes natu∣rall body.
Iuel. Christ being in the womb of the blessed virgin, beThe . vntruthe. esh of our slesh, and bone of our bones. San. Of the same kind of sh and bone: but not thereby really dwelling in our bodies which belong to our persons. Iuel. In that sense S. Ihon saith: the word was made flesh, andThe 140. . dwelt in vs. San. In what sense? Whether that Christes bodie by his nati∣uitie dwelleth substantially in our bodies? for so you said. but S.Ioan. 1. Ihon said not so. God gaue men power to be made the sonnes of God, to such as beleue in his name, & to such as are borne of God. and when S. Iohn had said, we had power to be the sonnes of God, if we were borne of God, he consirmeth that power geuen to vs, saying: And y• word is made flesh & hath dwelt  vs. Ther∣foreHom. 11. in oan. saith S. Chrysostō, he hath dwelt in vs, that it might be lau∣ful to come to him selfe, & to speake & to be cuersant boldly with him. He was not in our bodies really straight vppon the incar∣nation, but when he dwelt  our nature, whē he was a trúe man as we are, then might we come to him. Priusipsu verbum voluitAug. tra∣ctat. 2. in Ioan. nasci ex homine, vt tu securius nascereris ex deo. The word wold first be born of a woman, to thd  mightest be born of God without feare. Iuel. Therefore Christ calleth himself the vine, and vs theThe 141. vntruthe. braunches. San. It is vntruly sayd, . Iuel. For albeit Christ by his hu∣mane birth be as it were the  of the vine for his owne part, yet he is not to vs the vine, nor we be not the braunches, Ioan. 15. we are graffed into Christ, which is don by saith and Baptism. S. Augustine saith, he is made mā, that the nature of man shouldIn Ioan. tract. 80. be a vine in him, whereof we that are men might be also the braunches. If his only birth had made vs braunches, what ne∣ded a new birth in Baptism?
When S. yrill wold shew, that Christ according to his hu∣maneLib. 10. cap. 13. nature was the vine (which thing the Arrians denied) he went not for the matter to Christes birth only, (for then Iudas and ain had bene braunches) but he went to the Sacrament of Christes supper, to proue that we depend of Christes flesh, as braunches doe of the vine.The . vntruthe. Ephes. 4. Iuel. S. Paul calleth Christ the head, and vs the body. San. S. Paule speaketh of Christes mysticall body: and you should proue that his natural body is really in our bodies. Now if to make his body to dwell really in our bodies, more then his birth be necessary: it is not true, that M. Iuel with such vain brags hath hitherto sayd, that his body by is natiuity dwelleth really, or substancially, or naturally in our bodies. But only that he dwelleth in vs, to wit, in our nature: being made Emanuell, nobiscum Deus, God with men. But thereby Christ dwellethMath. 1. but in one body really, to wit, in that which he made to himself out of the virgins most pure blood. Wherefore S. Cyrillus saith:Prou. 9. In Ioan. li. 1. ca  Habitauit in nobis Dei verbum in templo vno, quod propter nos & de nobis sibi condidit, vt omnes in seipso habēs in vno corpore patri reconciliaret: The word of God hath dwelt in vs or a∣mongOne tem∣ple natu∣rall. vs in one tēple, y• which he made to himself for our sakes, and out of vs: that hauing al in himself, he might reconcile themOne body Ephes. 2. to the Fath in one body. One thing, M. Iuel, I must put you in mind of. You  that Christes body may not be in many places at once. which doutlesse you meane of his naturall body. and his body is by no meanes more natural, then by the natiuity thereof. But you say now, that Christes body by his natiuity dwelleth really, substan cially, and fleshly in our bodies. and certeinly our bodies dwellM. Iuels contrary doctrine. in many places: therefore you are against your own doctrine, as who confesse Christes body by his natiuity to dwell naturally in
all our bodies, which are not only in many places of y• earth, but a great number also are vnder the earth: in al which Christes bo∣dy, according to your doctrine, must dwell corporally. and there∣fore it must be in many places together. ¶ Whether Christes body dwell in our bodies by faithThe xvij. really, or no.Chapiter. IVel. Towching faith, S. Paul saith: Christ by faith dwelleth inEphes. 3. our harts. San. The word (hart) in holy scripture doth not alwayes si∣gnifie that fleshly part of a mans body commonly so called, but S. Paule meaneth, that Christ dwelleth in our minds and wills by faith and charitie: which is made very plaine by the wordsEphes. 3. going before secundum interiorem hominem, according to the inner man. Therefore no dwelling of Christes body really or substancially in our bodies is proued by this place of S. Paule, except we shall say, that Christ hath no real and substanciall body of his own. For if is be a reall substance, what meaneth M. Iuel to affirm it dwelleth really and substancially, where the real sub∣stance thereof it not? if it be a reall dwelling of Christes body inM Iuels phrase de∣fendeth Ioan of kents he∣resie. our bodies in that we beleue in Christ, and yet Christ haue but one reall and substanciall body: by M. Iuels phrase of speache that body may be sayd to haue dwelt really in y• virgins omb, in that she only beleued in Christ. and by such worthy interpreta∣tion the truthe of the incarnation is vtterly taken away. Iuel. S. Peter saith: Hereby we are made partakers of the di∣uinePetr. 1. nature. San. Those wordes generally pertein to all the giftes of God, and specially to y• incarnation of Christ, whereby we communi∣cate most perfitly (if yet we be faithsull) with the nature of God. For when we beleue in Christe, who is man with vs, and God,
with his Father, then wee communicating with his manhood cōmunicate also with the Godhead, whiche dwelleth corporally in Christ. But that cōmunicating may be made, either by faith, or baptism, and other Sacraments. And as the Godhead dwel∣eth incomparably more excellently in Christes own body then it doth in any other thing which dependeth thereof: so the vnion with his nature is made far better by the meane of the Eucha∣rist (with faith and Baptism ioyned together) then by one or two of them alone. And that this place of S. Peter doth pertein to the communicating of Christes flesh in the Sacrament also, Cyrillus of ierusalem doth witnesse, writing thus: Under theCatech. mystic. 4 forme of bread the body is geuen, and vnder the forme of wine the blood is geuen, &c. And so we shalbe made partakers of the2. Pet. 1. diuine nature, as S. Peter sayth. Now M. Iuel hath most improperly placed this Testimonie in the second kind of Christes dwelling in vs, sith it appertey∣neth to all foure ways generally, but most especially to that cō∣munion or ioyning, which is made by the holy Eucharist.Ad Tral. Iuel. So sayth Ignatius: By his passion and resurrection (thatThe 143. vntruthe. is, by our faith in the same) we are made the members of his body. San. S. Ignatius in two places o that Epistle speaketh ofAd Tal∣lianos. such a matter as M. Iuel wold haue, but because his words did not serue the turn, it pleased this corruptour of all good authors to geue him new words. The first place in S. Ignatius is, vt credentes in mortem eius per Baptismū, participes resurrectionis eius efficiamini. To th'intent ye beleuing in his death through Baptism, should be made partakers of his resurrection. Here is not that for which M. Iuel seeketh, because Baptism is also named, whereof as yet it is not his course to speake. Again, here is no reall or substanciall dwelling spoken of. The other place
is: Vos ver inuitat Christus ad suam incorruptibilitatem per passionem suam ac resurrectionem, qui estis membra eius. Christ inuiteth you, who are his members, to his immortalitie, by his passion and resurrection. But this place w not serue M. Iuels ying. purpose. For it is not sayd, we are made the members of his bo∣dy: which is the thing that M. Iuel must proue. That word, bo∣dy, was not in S. Ignatius, but is cast in by M. Iuel. 2. Moreouer though it had bene expressed: it had bene meant of Christes mysticall body (oncerning faith) and not of his na∣turall body, whereof we now dispute. 3. S. Ignatius speaketh not of our incorporating to be now first made by faith in Christes passion, but he saith Christ inui∣teth vs  being his members: he speaketh not of that (we are made) his members. that word (made) M. Iuel ying. made of his own head. 4. S. Ignatius spake of this point, how those that are alrea∣dy the members of Christ (which thing they were not by faith alone, but by Baptism and the Eucharist) how those, I say, were inuited not now to be made members, but to be made immortal with Christ their head. Thus M. Iuel doth order the holy Fa∣thers words. ¶ The contradiction of M. Iuel concerning ChristThe  Chapiter. really dwelling in vs by fai, & not really dwel∣ling in vs by faith &c. WHat shal we say of M. Iuel, who in one and the selfeContradi ction in M. Iuel. same diuision affirmeth two propositiōs cleane con∣trarie? For as here he saith, Christes body dwelleth in our bodies by euerie of the four meanes (of which one is a dwel∣ling341. lin. 4 . & 10. by faith) so afterward expounding out of S. Augustine the very same wordes of S. Paule, whiche he now bringeth for the
dwelling of  body in our bodes really: Thus he aith.341. lin. 26. 344. lin. 24. & 25. Christe is in thee (not really or bodily, but) because his aith is within thee. And those wordes, not really or bodily, are not the wordes of S. , but the wordes of M. Iuell. Who within the cmpasse of two leaues affirmeth more cōtradictions neuer able to be recciled. The one place saith Christes body is in our bodies by faith. The other saith, Christ is not really in vs, but by faith. If there be any ods betwene Christ and his body, it maketh altogether against M. Iuel. For whereas Christe maie be said to be where his body is not, and maie be said to be in vs, when his body is not in our bodies: M. Iuel  in the one place, not only the body of Christe to be really in vs, but also he denieth that Christ is really i vs. and in the other he affirmeth not only Christe to be really in vs by faith, but also his body to be really not only in vs, but euen in our bodies by faith. You pretend some contradiction, M. Iuell, here and there betwen D. Hardings own words, but I  you no such is to be foūd as this is. You note in this article, that D. Harding is contrarie to him self, because he saith in one place, Berngarius first begā317. 81. openly to sowe the Sacramentarie heresie, & in an other he said, the Messalians were the first parents of this heresy. But what a poore contradiction is that, sith one may be the first parent of an heresie in geuing secret occasion thereof, the other may beginne it first in professing it opēly and publikely, as D. Hardings own wordes expressly say. But if D. Hardinges contradiction were like yours, it should saie, Berengarius began this heresie first openly, and Berengarius began it not firste openly. The same termes being kepte, the one shoulde haue affirmed the same thinge, whiche the other had denied. No no, it is for M. Iuel to haue suche contradictions, and for no man els. But what credit shall any man geue to your wordes, sith yo doe not only saie these two contradictiones, but you teache them both? You
hold that Christe is in vs by faith, and therefore that his body is really in our bodies. You set it foorth as a doctrine of yours, you make a preface to it solemly, & say: for answere hereunto it shalbeM. Iuels oroes. necessarie first to vnderstand howe manie waies Christes bodie dwelleth in our bodies, and thereby afterward to view M. Har∣dinges reason. Four speciall meanes there be, whereby Christe dwelleth in vs, and we in him. His natiuitie, whereby he embra∣ced vs. Our faith, whereby we embrace him. The Sacrament of baptism, and the Sacrament of his body. By euerie of these mea∣nes Christes bodie dwelleth in our bodies, and that not by waie of imagination, or by figure or phantasie, but really, naturally, substantially, fleshly and in deede. Are not these your own words, M. Iuel? Are they not spoken of you, not only in the wai of answering (wherein somtime a mā vseth some shift) but are they not your own words setting foorth a doctrine, whiche you would haue beleued and embraced? Well. Why then saie you afterward the contrarie, and that not only once, but in diuerse places? For againe in an other place before,336. lin. 10. you said, Christe dwelleth in our hartes by faith: must he nedes meane, that Christ is really and fleshly placed within our harts? Meane you not there to saie, that though Christe dwell in vs by faith, yet he is not really placed in vs? What meaneth this con∣trarie doctrine? Surely thus it meaneth, y• you knowe not what you saie, you vnderstand not whereof you dispute. You prouide only to contrarie D. Harding, and through him the Catholike Church, and that by al meanes possible to be deuised, by phrases of speache, by the authorities of schole mē, by falsifying y• aunciēt Fathers. And now through vehement bending your self against our reall receauing of Christes bodie into our bodies (which the Catholikes beleue) you haue inuented three other your selfe, in the meane time assuredly beleuing, that there is neuer a corporall
coniunction at all with Christes naturall bodie. Of other petie contradictions I speake in other places. ¶ Whether Christ dwelleth really in our bodies byThe . baptisme, or no?Chapiter. IVel. To increase this vnion God hath specially appointed his holy Sacraments. San. Not only to increase it, but also to make it. For partlyAugust. now all men be baptized being yet infantes (when they doe notEpi. 2. actually beleue) partly though they did beleue, their saith maie be to weake to worke the incorporation, as S. Augustine saeith,Aug. ad Simplic. quaest. 2. and specially of al Christ hath appointed baptism to be (after his coming) so necessary a meane for our incorporatiō to his mystical body (whereof he is the Sauior) y• except a man be born again ofEphes. 5. the water and of the holy ghost, he can not enter into the kyng∣domeIoan. 3. of heauen. Again, some Sacraments are appointed to reconcile vs to god,Ioan. 20. if we synne after baptism. For except we doe penance, we shallLuc. 13. perish all together. Iuel. Thei that are baptized are planted into Christ.Imperti∣nent. San. You should shew, that Christes body is plāted into their bodies, and that really and substantially. . Haue you forgotten your promise? Iuel. Thei haue put Christ vpon them.Imperti∣nent. San. You should shew, that Christes body is put within their bodies euen fleshely. Iuel. By one spirite thei are baptized into one body.Imperti∣nent. San. You should shew, that the naturall body of Christe is by baptising really in their bodies. For the body, whereof S. Paule speaketh, is the mysticall body. Iu. S. Augustine saith: This is the vse of baptising, that thei that
be baptised, may be incorporate into Christ.False . San. It would haue bene englished, hereunto baptising is a∣vailable, that is to say, this is the strength and the force of bap∣tism. But you beleue baptisme to be only a seale of an incorpora∣tion alredie made, and not in dede to incorporate vs into Christ: and therfore you falsified S. Augustine, according to your sham∣ul custome. Well: we are incorporated by baptisme, yet the body of Christ is not thereby shewed to dwell really in our bodies. A man mayIncorpo∣ration. be incorporated to the cumpanie of Marchants in the citie of London, & yet the cūpanie of Marchantes shall not dwell really in his body. All this doth not proue your principall proposition, that by baptism the body of Christ dwelleth really in our bodies. Iuel. Being baptised we are turned into God, saith Dionysius. Sander. The word that he vseth is , which importeth a participatiō of diuine nature howsoeuer it be brought to passe, insomuch that the Angels may so be made (as it were) gods, or be made like to his nature: Therfore it is not proued by y• words of Dionysius, that Christs body dwelleth in our bodies really or substancially by baptism: nor he nameth not turning, but rather aFalse trā∣slation. deification, or a comming to be like vnto god. Iu. Pachimeres saith, we are graft into Christ, and made one na∣tureThe 144 vntruth. with him by holy baptism. Sander. You haue turned him falsely. For  doth notFalse trā∣slation. signifie one nature, but diuerse men of one nature, kinsmen, as it were, and men of the same stock, or of the same route or graf∣finge. It is not al one to be made one flesh, & of one flesh. In baptismsticall eshe. we are al made of one flesh, and we al are graft into one mystical flesh of Christ: but by y• Sacrament of the altar we are (during y• time of the cōiunction) one self flesh with Christes natural flesh.
There we are two in one fleshe, as I haue shewed, in my . boke, y• v. Chapter. But seing you crane ayde of Pachimeres, youEphes. 5. shal heare his mind cōcernig y• blessed sacramēt of the altar, & thēIn eccl. iudge you, whether he say or meane the like of baptism. The bi∣shopIler. c.  (saith he) beleueth, that euen the things which are set forthPar. 2. (he meaneth the bread and wine) were changed into the preci∣ouse. body & blood of Christ, by the holy goost who worketh all. If then the bread and wine be changed into the body and blood. of Christ, yea and that,  into the first paterns (sor so he called them before, & the word  maketh rela∣tion. to al that went before) if then the bread and wine be chāged into those first examples of flesh and blood, which were taken by Christ of his mother: seing we partake those holy mysteries as∣ter the chāge, it is easy io iudge, that Pachymeres taught other∣wise of one vnion to god concerning the meane of Christes sup∣per, then euer he taught concerning baptism. ¶ Whether Christ dwelleth really in our bodies by theThe xx. Chapiter. Sacrament of the altar, or no. IVel. Thus much may sufsice to discry M. Hardings slender ar∣gument.The 145 vntruth. San. Not so, M. Iuell: you must expound the fourth mem∣ber of your diuision. You haue told that Christes body dwelleth really in our bodies by his natiuitie, our faith, and by baptisme: come now and shew how it dwelleth in our bodies really by the Sacrament of the altar. Was not al the other talke made for thatM. Iuell breaketh promise. end? why flie you, when you are come to the very point? but who would not laugh to see this mans doing. He saith Christes body dwelleth really in our bodies, and that four waies. And when he hath endeuored to shew, that it is so in three of the first (in the whiche in dede it is not so) then cometh he to declare in the
fourth way (by which only Christes body dwelleth really in vs, when we receau the Sacrament of his body) there he spendethM. Iuel.  aainst him self. al his strength to declare, that Christes body is not really dwel∣ling in our bodies. Why Sir? Did you so forget your selfe, that you haue mitted your principal part? You wil say perhaps, that D. Harding hath done that for you, and that the places whiche he bringeth, do shew so much. be it so. At the lest then, you should not impugne D. Harding as you doe. If his places proue not y• Christes body dwelleth really in our bodies (as you say thei doe not proue it) then it is your part to proue so much. for you ac∣med it before. Iuel Notwithstanding by the Sacrament of baptisme Christ beThe. 146 vntruth. naturally in vs, yet M. Harding may not therefore conclude, that Christ is naturally in the Sacrament of baptisme. San. It is false, that Christ by the Sacrament of baptisme is naturally in vs. For as the father who begetteth a childe, is not thereby naturally dwelling in the childe (albeit an effect of his nature was one of the causes of the childes nature) so Christe by regenerating vs in baptisme by his worde (whiche is in place ofChry. ad Ro. Ho. 16. the seede) and by water (whiche is as it were the wombe of the mother) doth not thereby dwell naturally in vs, albeit we hae an effect of spiritual grace, whiche came to vs by meanes of his fleshe. Iuel. Bonauentua saith: wel, we maie not in any wise saie, that place falsified. Te 147. vntruth. the grace of god is conteined in the Sacraments as water in a ves∣sel. For so to say it were an errour. But th are said to  gods grace, because thei signifie gods grace. Sā. Bonauētna was a Cardinal of Rome, a scholastical writer, a man lesse then three hundred yeres old, one that said masse: and yet with M. Iuel now he is a good author, & saith well. But yet word  what  you in englishing his words to leaue y• aduerb essen∣tialiter,
essentiallie vnenglished: in which word y• greatest weight of his iudgeent resteth. For he intendeth not to denie, but that the sacraments of the new lawe conteine and geue grace, but he saith: Thei conteine it not essntially as a veel cōteineth water, or as a box holdeth a medicine. Whiche notwithstanding he she∣weth two other waies how thei conteine grace. But I pray you to what end allege you Bonauenture, if not to disproue y• reall presence of Christes bodie in the Sacramente? For (say you) though Christes bodie were in our bodies really, it woulde not therefore be concluded, that it is really in the Sacrament. & how is tat proued? forsoth by S. Bonauenture. did he then say, that Christes bodie though it be really in vs, yet it is not rallie in the Sacrament? Did he meane any such thinge? You shall nowein 4. sent. dist. 1. heare his own words in the same verie place concering the con ference of the Eucharist with other Sacramentes: In illo Sacra∣mentoquaest. 3. est transubstantiatio. Vnde illud quod significatur ibi, ve∣ra est substantia, quam congruit esse per se. In that Sacrament there is : whereby that thing which is signified there, is a true substance, which substance is fit to be by it self. ¶ That Christes body is proued to be really in theThe xxi. Sacrament by S. Chrysostoms words.Chapiter. HArding. By this Sacrament (sayth Chrysostom) Christ reduceth vs, as it vvere, into one lumpe vvith himself. And that not by faith only, but he maketh vs his ovvn body in very dede, Re ipsa. VVhich is no other to say, then really.the 148. vntruth. For it co∣uld ot  said so. Iuel. This place wold haue stand M. Harding in better stede, if Chrysostom had said, Christ mingleth his body with the Sacra∣ment, and driueth himself and it into one lumpe. San. If the Sacament of Christes supper were a thing so
distinct from Christes body, as Christes body is distinct from vs: S. Chrysostom might haue sayd perhaps, that Christ min∣gleth himself with the Sacrament. But now it is a great igno∣rance, that M. Iuel marketh not, the Sacramēt of Christes sup∣per to be of it self the reall body of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wine: therefore to say, Christ is mingled with the Sa∣crament, were to say, that Christ is mingled with him self. S. Chrysostom was wiser then to say so. but speaking of the Sa∣crament he sayth, that Christ mingleth himself really with vs, who worthely receaue that Sacrament. Iuel. Neither will M. Harding say, that Christ mingleth him∣selfThe 149. vntruth. with vs simplie, and without figure. Whereof it foloweth, that much lesse it is so in the Sacrament. San. This is a fine kind of Rhetorick, to make D. Harding beleue he will not say that, which he doth say. He meaneth, that Christes own reall body is ioyned to our bodies, and that sim∣plie (concerning the substance thereof) and without any figure of Rhetorike, or of grammar. but not without a mystical figure, because it is geuen vnder the formes of breade and wine. The (whereof) that you inferre vppon your false surmise is ∣louse vnsensible and fond. Iuel. It is a vehement and a hot kind of speache, such as Chry∣sostomThe 150. vntruth. was most delighted with. San. To speake without sporting, it is so hot, that if you amend not your opinion, it may help to promote you to the  of hell: but to good faithful men it is a mild and calme saying. Iuel. It is a speache farre passing the cōmon sense, and courseThe 151. vntruth. of truth. San. I thought you wold bring it to a phrase or figure of speache. But he  it for a truth, as we shal see anon.The 152. . Iuel. Himself thought it necessarie to correct and qualifie the
rigour of the same speache, by these words, vt ita dicam, which is,  it were, or, if I may be bold so to say. San. You stand altogether vppon phrases and : but S. Chrysostom meant not to correct or qualifie the doctrine, which he taught concerning Christes reall ioyning with vs. But only he shewed himself in teaching it, to  or rather to allude to a si∣militudeWhat cor∣ S. and Metaphore, at the vse whereof he stayed somwhat: As if he had sayd at large, euen as many graines of corne are by vsed. the baker brought into one lumpe of dough: right so Christ and they that doe communicate are made all one with Christ, and  with him in this Sacrament. Now because this similitude is not set foorth at large, but briefly alluded vnto, therefore S. Chrysostom saith (vt ita dicā) that I may so say, to wit, that I may at this time vse this allu∣sion, and this briefsimilitude. So that, the correction is referred only to the word Massa, which is a lump of dough, or of any like thing: and not to the correction of the doctrine whiche is main∣teined both by S. Chrysostom and others, without any correc∣tion or qualifiyng. He writeth vpon S. Ihon, that Christ sayd, he that eateth myHom. 46 flesh, and drinketh my blood tarieth in me, to shew, cum ipso se admisceri: That himself is mingled with him. Again he sayeth:In Ioan. It is brought to passe by the meate which he hath geuen vs,Hom. 45 that we should be turned into that flesh not only by loue, but by the thing it self. Again: Cum suum, & caet. Whē Christ wold shewIn the same . his loue toward vs, he mingled himself with vs through his body. And he brought (himself) into one with vs, to th' end the body should be vnited with the head. Many like words he hath in his sermons to the people of Antioche, in the which he neuerHom. 60 & 61. vseth the phrase (vt ita dicam, that I may so say) because he v∣sed not the similitude of the lump of dough, wherevnto that cor∣rection
perteyneth. Yea what shall we say, if euen in this placeVt ita dicam▪ is no in the greke. S. Chrysostom vse no such qualifying, nor say not (vt ita dicā) for albeit the Latine text reade so: yet the edition of Parise doth winesse, that his Greke words are , seip∣sum miscet nobis, he mingleth himself with vs. Where is now M. Iuels discrete phrase? Where is his corrction? His quali∣fying of the rigour of the speache? To be shorte, where is his an∣swere? Iuel. In such phrase Anacletus sayeth, the power of the holyThe 153. vntruth. Ghost is mingled with the oyle. San. Mercifull God, whither will not this man runne for phrases? He now appeleth to a Pope, whose Epistle he este∣meth as muche as his shew sole: only meaning to make some (not of the wis sort) to beleue, y• he hath answered well, when he hath writē somewhat, although himself beleue not that which he writeth. Doe you beleue this very sentence, M. Iuel, which you allege? How say you? Is the iisible power of the holyOyle. Ghost mingled with the oyle? If you thought so, you wold vse holy oile more then you doe. One thing I must tell you, which I had almost forgotten, it is not in Anacletus, in oleo, in y• oile, as you name it, but sancto Chrismati, to the holy Chrism. ItChāging  wordes of the Fa∣thers. was not for naught that you talked of a phrase. His phrase was such, that you were afeard to vse it. The Chrism had such vertue of the holy Ghost mingled in it, that one who was not of the ho∣ly Ghost could not abide to name it. No not so much as when he had ede to vse the words of the same sentence to serue his turne. Iuel. Alexander sayeth, the passion of Christ must be mingledThe 154 vntruthe. with the oblations of the Sacraments. San. Yet shall we haue an other Pope? I feare me this man wilbe come Popish shortlie. The world goeth hard with his
note booke, when he fleeth to these Decretall Epistles for the profe of any thing, and specially for atine phrases. But one thing I promise you, M. Iuel. You may better proue Masses ot of that Epistle, yea (I goe nere you) out of that self sentēce which you allege, then you may proe any other phrase which shall presently serue your purpose. But if you had not lest out the middle words (which he speaketh of Masse) your brethern wold haue ben so angrie with you for bringing this testimonie, that they wold altogether haue misliked your phrase. The words of Pope Alexander be these: In Sacramentorum quoque oblatio∣nibus,words left out in y• middest of the sen∣tence. quae inter missarum solennia Domino offeruntur, passio Domini miscenda est. In the oblations also of the Sacraments which are offered vnto God at y• solemnities of masses, the pas∣sion of our Lord is to be mingled. And farther expounding his own meaning, he saith, that his passion may be celebrated, whose body and blood is made. If now as the passion of Christ being absent in quality (concerning that Christes body sffereth no∣thing at this present) is yet present in his whole value (concer∣ning that the felf same substance is here, which suffered death for our sakes) if, I say, as the passion is in this wise presentlie min∣gled with the Sacraments and offered vnto God: so M. IuelThe ap∣plying of Alexan∣der his words. w graunt, that Christes body being absent in shape and quality (concerning that it is not sene presently in his own foorme) is yet present in his whole valu (oncerning that the self same sub∣stance is vnder the foorme of bread, which walked visiblie vpon the earth) if, I say, M. Iuel will graunt such a presence of Chri∣stes body, throughe which it may be mingled and really ioyned to vs: then the phrases of S. Chrysostom & of Alexander shalbe somewhat like, and he shall gaine nothing at all. Iuel▪ Nyssenus saith, S. Stephen was mingled with the grace ofAgainst ▪ the holy Ghost.
San. Which saying of his doth right wel proe, that the grac of the holy Ghost was really in S. Stephen, and not only im∣puted vnto him, euen as Christes body is really mingled with our bodies.The 155. vntruthe. Iuel. Chrysostom meant, that we should consyder that won∣derfull coniunction, which is betwene Christ and vs, euen in one person. San. This man dened hitherto, that Christ is really mingled with vs by the reall presence of his body: and now he confessethContra∣riety. more then we aske. For the coniunction which is made in on person, is much greater then euer any other could be. in so much that the ioynig of our nature to the Godhead in the person of the sonne of God, is the highest mystery that euer was heard of.1. Cor. 12 I am not ignorant, that S. Paul calleth as well the head of the Churche, as all the members, by the only name of Christ: nor that S. Cyrill saith, we are all in Christ, and that the commonIn Ioan. li. 1. ca. 16 Ephe. 5. person of mankind was reed in Christ: nor that S. Paul saith of Christ and the Churche, two shalbe in one flesh: nor that Christ concludeth thereof, therefore they be not now twain butMath. 19 one flesh: but all this doth not import that Christ is in vs, & we in him, euen in one person. For S. Cyprian saith, our coniun∣ctionDe coena Domini. with Christ doth neither mingle the persons, nor vnite the substances. Therefore seing we stand now vpon precise truth of doctrine, not writing at pleasure, but disputing of a matter in cō∣trouersie, in this case you might haue forborn this your more bold then wise phrase of speache. For as Damascene hath wellDamasc. de Orth. . li. 2. c. 3 noted, whereas the blessed Trinity is one substance, and we of one substance, and Christ one with God, & one with vs through his dubble nature: yet according to his person (which he calleth Hypostasim) differt & a patre & a spiritu, & a matre &  nobis, Christ in his person, differeth from the Father, from the holy
Ghost, from his mother, and from vs. And yet M. Iuel will bring vs euen into one person..  d pa▪ Iuel. Leo saith▪ the body of him that is regenerate, is made the flesh of him that was crucified. San. Here is the thitd Pope, in whose phrase M. Iuel doth solace himself. He saith that by Baptism we are made the flesh of Christ: and I beleue the same. But he speaketh of his mysticall flesh, whereof no question is betwene vs, and M. Iuel. For we only dispute now of Christes naturall flesh which is not in Ba∣ptism, but only in the Sacrament of the altar.In Io. tracta. Iuel. S. Augustine saith▪ we are made Christ &c. and both he and we are one whoe man. San. Albeit the matter be not great, yet S. Augustine saithOne is not there. not one whole man (as M. Iuel doth nglish it) but the whole man. for he now speaketh not of any one māin nūber nor of any one singular person: but of a mystical body, which cōsisting of di∣uers persons as of diuerse members is made vp & perfited into a whole collegiate body. but S. Chrysostom speaketh of Christes ioyning him self to euery faithfull man one by one at the tyme of receauing his body into our hands and mouthes, as I wil shew anon. Iuel. As we are by baptism made Christes flesh and Christ, inThe 1. vntruthe. the same sense Chrysostom saith, we are made one lump with Christ, and Christ hath tempered and mingled himself with vs. San. If we wil without fraude vnderstand the mind o S. Augustine, of Leo, and of S. Chrysostom, we must not only con∣sider, that they speake of our vniō and ioyning to Christ, but also by what meanes they vtter that their mind. S. Augustine speaketh generally of euerie kind of vniting vsIn Ioa. tracta▪ . to Christ. Leo doth not only saie we are made the flesh of Christ, but shewing the meane, he saieth: . The bodie
of him that is regenerated is made the flesh of Christ. The name of regeneration importeth the meane of Baptism, by which we are grafted into Christe. S. Chrysosome speaketh of an other meane, which is the Eucharist. But what is that meane? BaptismMat▪ 28. al men confesse to be the wasshing with water in the name of the Trinitie. What is then the Eucharist? What is the substance, I sae, whiche in the Sacrament of the altar worketh our vnion with Christe? Is it water? No. Is it bread and wine? Yea, saith M. Iuel. No, sae we. Now then let vs marke y• point, & consi∣der. the whole discourse of S. Chryso, who writeth thus: Be∣cause Christ hath said, this is  bodie, let vs be gled with2. no dout. Thou (saieth Chrysostome) desirest to see his garments, but he deliuereth him selfe to thee: Vt tangas, & in te habeas, so3. that thou maiest touch him, and haue him in thee. Beware there∣fore4. lest after so great benefites, thou begiltie of his bodie and blood, by receauing with an vncleane soule. For it sued him5. not to be made man, to be scourged & crucified, but he mingleth him selfe with vs (or bringeth vs into one lump with him) and hat not by faith alone, but he maketh vs his own bodie, by the thing it selfe. This is the true discourse of S. Chrysostom in thatReipsa. place, as it may appere to any mā who shall reade it. We are thē made one with Christ: to worke the whiche thing, it is common to faith, and to baptisme, or to the Sacrament of ance. But S. Chrysostome saith farther, that the meane of this making vs one, is, in that Christe delieth him selfe to vs. Ipse se ipsum self. tibi tradidit, he deliuereth his owne selfe to thee. And by that meanes he is mingled with thee: not by faith alone, but by the thing it selfe. By which thing? By him selfe, or by his own body: so that the excellency of Christes loue consisteth as much in the  of the vnio▪ s in the vnion it selfe. God might haue saued vs without sending his sonne to take
flesh: but when he sent his only begotten, and made him in his own humane nature (which he assumpted) the meane to saue vs,Ioan. 3. then his loue appered most singularly. Euen so at this tyme, theNote not only the vnion, but y• meane thof. meane of the vnion is that, whereof S. Carysostome speaketh. For whereas there is a meane by faith to vnite vs to God, he saith, Christ was not content to be made man, neither to die for vs, by whiche points the faith of the old Fathers was fulfilled: and therefore it might haue suffised for Christ to haue rested in his natie and in his death, letting our faith through his grace to make vp the knot of vnion without going any farther: but that meane suffised not. He hath brought vs into one lump with him, not by faith alone, to wit, not by the meane of faith alone (after his natiuitie & Crosse) he was not contēt with the meane of his birth, death & faith, but he mingleth him selfe with vs by the thing it selfe. FaithThe con∣structiō of the place. is one word, y• thing is an other. Fide, is the same case, y• re ipsa is: one verb doth serue both. As therefore it must of necessitie been∣glished, efficit he maketh, nos, vs, suum corpus, his own bodie, non solum not only, fide, by saith: so must it be englished, sed, but, re ipsa, by the thing it selfe. The vnion therefore is made by faith, and by the thing it selfe. I come nere you, M. Iuel. I saie the thing it selfe is neither water, nor bread and wine, nor th, nor anie other creature, but only the real substance of Christes bodie & blood. The whichThethin it selfe. bstance is y• meane whereby we are vnited: yet y• same snbstāce is not the meane exept  be deliuered in the Sacrament of the altar. for of that Sacrament, and of the worthie cōmunicating, and of the  thereof, S. Chrysostom now speaketh: it is called not only the bodie of Christ, but Christ him selfe. andBeing. touch. . therefore Christe is said not only to be seen, but to be touched, eaten, and to be within vs.
That bodie and blood of Chri, being consecrated  the holy table, and so seen vnder the forme of bread, being deliuered by the priests hand to vs, and so touched, eaten, and being with∣in vs, that is the thing it selfe, whereby we are nowe made the mystical body of Christ. That hody and blood was made present by changing the bread and wine into thē. And therefore S. Chry∣sostomIn Matt. Hom. 83 saith in y• same homilie: Qui haec sanctificat & transmutat, ipse est. It is Christe him selfe, who maketh holie and changethThe change. these things. That bodie and blood is offered and partaken. and therefore it foloweth immediatly after the wordes whereof we now chefely dispute, that he ought to be cleaner then anie thing, Qui hoc sacrificio participaturus est, who wil partake this sacri∣fice.The sa∣crifice. That hand which breaketh in peeces this fleshe, the moutheHand. which is filled with spirituall fier, the tong whiche is made redMouth. Tonge. with this wonderful blood, ought to excede the sonne beames. ▪ What can be deuised of man more plaine, then to name chan∣ging, sacrifice, hand, mouth, tong, seing, touching, eating, hauing within vs? Al these words are affirmed of these marueilouse gifts of Christes supper. It is not therefore bread and wine, which is res ipsa, the thing it selfe, but it is the body of Christ: and that bo∣dy being made in the Sacramēt of Christes supper, is the meane to make vs one mystical body. therefore that bodie is really pre∣sent in the Sacrament of the supper. How could it otherwise be seen, touched, taken into the hand, into the mouth, & be receaued with the tong, and be in vs, and (whiche is the chefe of al) howe could it be the meane to make vs one bodie?Note the meane of the vnton. For as when by faith or Baptism we are incorporated, faith is present really with vs, and Baptism is really present: so when we are vnited by the bodie of Christ, it must nedes be really pre∣sent.Hom. 60 ad pop. . And how present? If thou wert without a body (saith S. Chrysostome) God had geuen thee his giftes naked and with∣out
bodies. But because the soule is knit vnto the bo dy: In sensi∣bilibus intelligibilia tibi praebet. In things y• are ssible, he geueth thee things which are intelligible, or such as may be atteined on∣ly by vnderstanding. The bodie of Christe therefore as it is the thing it selfe which vniteth vs in his Sacrament: so is it geuen vs in sensibilibus, in things which maie be seen, felt and touched. And to speake all in one, the real bodie is geuen really to vs vn∣der the formes of bread and wine. Moreouer when we are vnited by faith & Baptism, we are not vnited vnto faith, or vnto Baptisme, but by them vnto the flesh of Christe. But of this Sacrament it is said, not only that we are vnited by it, but also vnto it, in so much that S. Chry∣sostomHom 60 ad pop. Antioch. saith: That thing at the sight whereof the Angels quake, neither dare boldely behold it, for the brightnes whiche shineth out of it, therewith we are fed, thereunto we are vnited. Lo, we are vnited to the thing wherewith we are fed▪ and straight S. Chrysostom sheweth, that whereas no shepherd fedeth his shepe60. Hom with his own blood, yea whereas some mothers geue out their childern to be nourished: Christ doth not so, but he fedeth vs with his owne blood, and by all meanes he ioyneth vs to him selfe. If by faith & Baptism only Christ ioyned vs to him selfe, then as it were he should put vs foorth to nurse: for neither faith nor bap∣tism is Christ him selfe. But when he fedeth vs with the reall substance of his own body, and with it not only apprehended by faith, but receaued by mouth: then he fedeth vs by his own self, and by him selfe vniteth vs to him selfe. To conclude, S. Chrysostome saith writing vppon S. Iohn,Hom. 45 Cum suum, &c. Christe intending to shew his loue towards , hath mingled him selfe with vs, by his body, and hath broughtPer cor∣pus suū. him selfe into one with vs, to thend the body should be vnited to the head. Here are foure things to be noted. First that Christe
worketh the vnion. Secondly, that loue causeth him to wor it. Thirdly, that the meane whereby he worketh it is affirmed to be his owne body. Fourthly, that so the body, whiche is the Church, is vnited to the head, who is Christ. In whiche conside∣ration Christ as sitting in the glorie of his father, is the worker of the vnion: His body as present in the Sacrament, is the in∣strument1. Cor. 10 whereby he worketh. Christ as the Sauiour of his bo∣dy, whiche is the Church, is the end whereunto the vnion dothEphes. 5 bring vs. And herein appereth his loue, that he him selfe in his owne substance is the beginning, the middle, the end of the vniō. The fondation, the wall, the top of the spiritual building. The carpenter, the instrument, the dweller in the house of his own handy working. Now, M. Iuel, I will geue you certein phrases to pick out, whereof you shal neuer be able to rid your handes. 1. You proue1. right well, that by faith we are dwelt in of Christ: proue now that such dwelling is made by the thing it self, and not by faith only▪ for els, Christes dwelling in vs by faith is not so reall a dwelling, as that whereof S. Chrysostom speaketh, which is not by faith only, but by the thing it self, to wit, by the reall body of Christ. 2. You say in Baptism we are made Christes flesh, and so we2. are made in dede his mystical flesh: proue now that we are made also his flesh in baptism per corpus Christi, by the body of Christ▪ for els the vnion of the Sacrament wil be more real, because the meane is more reall and more excellent. 3. You proue that we are vnited to Christ by faith and Bap∣tism:3. proue now either that we are vnited vnto faith it self, and vnto Baptism it self, or els the vnion made in this Sacrament, will farre passe the ioyning which is made in the other. For here we are vnited to the same body, wherewith we are fed, & which
we see & touche: but there we be not vnited to the water where∣with we are washed. 4. You say we are made Christ by Baptism: but proue now4. that Christ is there deliuered in sensible things to your hand, to your mouth, to your tonge, so, that you may haue him within you, as it is done in Christes supper. These phrases you must proue to be verified by faith and Baptism, if you will haue as reall a ioyning made by faith, or by Baptism, as is made by the Sacrament of the altar. Iuel. As the breaking of this bread is the partaking of the bo∣dyThe 157. vntruthe. of our Lord, euen so the bread of idols is the partaking ofPrimas. in 1. Co. 10. diuels: and if we eate one bread with idolatours, we are made one body with them. San. You falsifie the words of S. Paule, who is not reported by Primasius to saie, that the breaking of this bread is the parta∣king1. Cor. 1 of the bodie of our Lord, but the bread which we breake is the partaking of the bodie of our Lord. That which S. Paule spake of the substance of the bread, which is the cōmunicating ofFals ying. our Lords bodie, that thing you assigne to the action of breaking. And whereas Primasius saith, the bread of Idols is also the par∣taking of diuels, as the bread which we break, is the partaking of our Lords bodie: it sheweth y• he toke not y• name of bread mate∣riallie, for wheatē bread, but for all kind of meare & drinck which the Idolatours vsed. And therefore he meant likewise, y• the breadBrea. which we breake is no material bread, but a kīd of meate which Christ hath prepared specially for vs. Againe, as the Idolatours did offer their meate vnto diuels, so much more the Christians did offer theirs vnto god. And seīg the Idolators did in will and consent of mind partake with the diuels, to whō they offered: the Christians did partake with God not only in will & mind (those I meane that were faithfull) but also in body and mouth, by re∣ceauing
the natural flesh of Christ into theire bodies. For Christ herein specially had honored his Church, to thēd the external sa∣crifice thereof should be no more any earthli creature, but  his own body & blood, the only propitiatorie sacrifice for al mākind. ¶ It is proued that S. Hilarie taught the body ofThe xxij. Christ to be really in the Sacrament. HArding. If the vvord be verily made flesh, and vve receaue verily the vvord being flesh in ourHilar. de Trini. l. 8 Lords meate, hovv is he to be thought not to dvvell in vs naturally, vvho both hath taken the na∣ture of our flesh novv inseparable to himself, in that he is born man, and also hath mingled the nature of his ovvn flesh to the nature of euerlastingnesse, vnder the Sacrament of his flesh, to be receaued of vs in the com∣munion. Iuel. M. Harding hath not hitherto found, that Christes bodyThe 158. vntruthe. is naturally or corporally in the Sacrament. San. You found such a deuise, M. Iuel, to call for Fathers, for their names, and their words before their place was come, thatM Iuels dissēbling. a mā wold haue thought, when they were once come, you wold haue examined their sayings most diligently. But now, your first shift is, to heape them vp altogether. And whereas in mat∣ters1. of lesse weight you did diide D. Hardings words into a competent number of lines, here you will not answer to the testimonies one by one, least your nakednesse appeare, but lay them all in one, so to hyde your ignorance in answering. Your second shift is to intreate of things out of order, speaking now2▪ of one, now of an other confusely. But I wil bring your words
to their due order, as nigh as I can. Your third shift is, to let goe S. Cyrill and S. Hilarie, and to3. rne to ipertinent sayings of S. Augustine, of S. Bernard, and of Cyrillus, which are already answered. The fourth shift is, to say alsely that M. Harding findeth not4. Christes body to be naturally or corporally in the Sacrament. The which point, God willing, I wil now declare against your dissembling assertion. 1. S. Hilarie disputeth against the Arrians, which thing also1. M. Iuel in this article confesseth. 2. The Arrians alleged against the Godhead of Christ diuerse2. arguments, the which I must nedes repete and set foorth, with the cotation of them vsed by S. Hilarie, because M. Iuel ta∣keth part with the Arrians against S. Hilarie (not in dede con∣cerning the professiō of their heresie) but in that he taketh away the strength of S. Hilaries answer: And applieth that answer to one part of the Arrians argument, which S. Hilarie did vse to a other. 3. S. Hilarie first professeth, that he will refell them ex his3. Lib. 8. de Trinit. ipsis quibus vtuntur, out of the very same things which they vse. 4. The first argument of the Arrians, is this: Of the multi∣tude4. of the beleuers there was one soule, and one hart. Lo, saydAct. 4. they, this is the vnitie of will, and not of nature. 5. S. Hilarie answereth two ways. the first answer is, that5. euen this vnitie which is by faith, cometh not only of the will, but also it hath an vnitie of nature ioyned withall. what nature is that? Forsouth the nature of faith. For the faith is one, as S.Ephes. 4▪ Paul sayth. And therefore it is one certain nature: which being promised, S. Hilarie cōcludeth thus: Si ergo per fidem, id est, per vnius fidei naturam, & caet. If all they were one by faith, that is to say, by the nature of one faith, how is it that thou vnderstan∣dest
not a naturall vnitie in them, who are one by the nature of one faith? 6. Now for Gods sake, good Reader, see how M. Iuel ap∣plieth this geare vnto his purpose, and know him to be a very desperate man. Iuel. Against the Arrians Hilarius reasoned thus. 1. Christ isPag. 346 as really ioyned vnto the Father, as vnto vs. 2. But Christ is ioy∣ned vnto vs by nature. 3. Therefore Christ is ioyned to God the Father by nature. San. In dede S. Hilarie maketh such an argument. But how8. doth he proue, that Christ is ioyned vnto vs by nature? Iu. He proueth it thus: We are ioyned vnto Christ by faith, that9. is, by the nature of one faith, and that is to say, naturally. San. If euer anie man spake ignorantly, falsely, impudently:10. this man is giltie thereof at this tyme. Note, I beseche you, the number of faults committed by him. First he maketh S. Hilarie to bring such kind of proofe, as11. The 159. ntruthe. he doth not bring for proofe of that proposition, which M. Iuell hath set foorth. For S. Hilarie did bring that, which is said of the nature of faith, to answere the argument taken out of the ActesActor. 4. of the Apostles, which I now haue proponed. Secondly, M. Iuel omitted the true and only argumēt which12. S. Hilarie bringeth in dede to proue, that Christ is ioyned vntoThe 160 vntruthe. vs by nature. The which proof of his I will hereafter prosecute at large. Thirdly, M. Iuel doth make S. Hilarie a verie foole in the13. The 161. vntruthe. kind of proof which M. Iuel assigneth him. For whereas by M. Iuels consession he should haue proued, that Christe is ioyned vnto vs by nature: M. Iuel maketh him to saie, that we are ioy∣ned vnto Christ by faith, and so that we are naturally ioyned to him. Where is your memorie, M. Iuell? It is to be proued, that Christ is ioyned to vs, and not only that we are ioyned to him.
And that he is ioyned to vs by his nature, and not only that we are ioyned to him by a nature of faith, whiche is not in him. For Christ hath no faith, because from the instant of his incarnationChrist had not faith but more then faith. his soule and vnderstanding was illuminated with the vision of God, to whose nature it was ioyned in one person. and where clere vision is, there is no faith: in so much that faith shal cease when we come to see God in his glorie. And how is Christ ioy∣ned1. Cor. 13 to vs by that faith, which he hath not at all? Fourthlie M, Iuel ouerthroweth wholie the true argument14. of S. Hilarie, whose intent is onlie as yet to shew, that faythfullThe 162. vntrut. men are one among themselfes by the nature of faith also, and not onlie by wil and consent, as I haue declared before. He spea∣keth I say, of our ioyning one to an other, & not as yet of Chri∣stes ioyning to vs, or of ours to Christ. Fifthlie M. Iuel falsifieth the words of S. Hilarie. for he ma∣keth15. The 163. vntruth. Falsi∣fying. him to say, that we are ioyned to Christ by faith naturaliter, naturally. & he writeth that word in such letters, as he is wont to write the words of the fathers in. But S. Hilarie saith not, nor neuer meāt, that we are ioyned to Christ by faith naturally. Ther is no such word in him. What honest nature thoughe heretofore16. he did beleue M. Iuel, will now any longer stick vnto him, sith he is found to be without al wit or conscience? Trulie Simon Magus was no more filthie in his iuggling knaks, thē this man is. But let vs goe forward in S. Hilarie. The second answer of S. Hilarie to the first argment of the17. Arrians is, that the Christians are one also by the nature of one baptism, and not by Will onlie. Iuel. Likewise he saith, we are ioyned vnto Christ by the re∣generation18. of one nature. and againe: we are ioyned to Christ by the nature of one baptism. hereof he concludeth: therefore are we naturally ioyned vnto him.
Sand. In so few words it is hard for a man udued with rea∣son, to make so many faultes, as M. Iuel hath now committed. First he wil make S. Hilarie proue, that Christ is ioyned vnto19. vs by nature, because we are ioyned to him by regeneration ofThe 164 vntruthe. one nature: Which argument will not hold. for it will not follow y• because we are ioyned to an other by some inferiour meanes, y• he therefore is ioyned to vs by a higher meane. To be ioyned to20. vs in nature is a higher thing, then for vs to be ioyned to Christ in Baptism. How can then the baser coniunction infer of neces∣sitie a higher kind of ioyning? Secondly, M. Iuel doth falsifie S. Hilaries wordes, repor∣ting21. that he sayth we are ioyned to Christ by the nature of one Baptism. S. Hilarie saith it not, but only that all the Christians are one among them selues by these things, and not one natu∣rally with Christ. His own words are: Whereas in so great di∣uersitie of nations, of conditions, of sexes (the faithfull) are one,Lib. 8. de Trinit. cometh it of the assent of will, or rather of the vnitie of the Sa∣crament, because both Baptism is one vnto them, and all they haue put on them one Christ? Therefore what shall the concord of minds doe here, for as much as they are one thereby, because they are clothed with one Christ by the nature of one Baptism?22. Thirdly, it is most impudently affirmed of M. Iuel, that S.The 166. vntruthe. Hilarie concludeth hereof: therefore we are naturally ioyned vn∣to Christ. S. Hilarie hath no such conclusion, neither could he haue any such, because it is not yet his purpose to open, how Christ is ioyned vnto vs by nature. You wil say, is it not then true, that we are ioyned to ChristNote well. by faith and by Baptism? Yeas Syr, and by will also. But note the point we stand vpon: we are not ioyned naturally to Christ, nor he is not ioyned by nature vnto vs by our faith or Bap∣tism.Natural∣ly. It is y• term naturally, which M. Iuel denied at S. Poules
crosse, and that ten D. Harding hath found to appertein to the Sacrament, as it shalbe be made most manifest. That term M. Iuel wold wrest to faith and Baptism. And for that termes sake he is almost become a wicked Arrian, or a naturall. The second argument of the Arrians, is: He that planteth, &23. he that watereth are one. Ergo, sayd they, the vnitie of will is in both them: and they meant of will only, and not any other vnitie. S. Hilarie answereth, that they are one, because to them being24. born again in one Baptism, one ministerie or dispensation of the one Baptism, which doth regenerae, is graunted. So that they are on, because they haue one ministerie, and not only because they  of one minde. At the last S. Hilarie geueth a generall rule: qui per eandem25. rem vnum sunt, naturâ etiam vnum sunt, non tantum voluntate. Those who are oe by the same thing, they are one by nature, and not only by will. The third argument of the Arrians, is: Exemplum vnitatis26. istius (sayth S. Hilarie) & caet. The Arrians haue brought foorth an example of this vnitieIoan. 17. out of our Lords words also, to th'end all may be one: As thou O Father in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in vs. To this argument S. Hilarie answereth, declaring now first27. that, which M. Iuel spake of before out of place. Now first be∣ginneth S. Hilarie to shew, how Christ dwelleth naturally in vs, and we in him. And consequently, how we also dwell in his Father by the meane of him. To this matter should M. Iuel haue applied his solutiō. For vppon the discourse made by reason of this argument, D. ∣ding did ground his proof of Christes reall presence in the Sa∣crament. What saith M. Iuel to this matter?
Iuel. Thus it appeareth by S. Hilarie, we may haue Christ na∣turallyThe. 167 vntruth. within vs by three other sundry meanes: and therefore not only (as M. Harding holdeth) by receauing of the Sacramēt. San. Thus it appeareth, say you, but I haue shewed that no such thing appereth. For S. Hilarie neuer sayd hitherto, that we were naturally in Christ. Iuel. Like as Christ is naturally, corporally, and carnally inthe 168. vntruthe. vs, by faith, by regeneration, and by Baptism: euen so and none otherwise, he is in vs by the Sacrament of his body. San. First you begin with a thing not confessed, nor agred vpon, and thereof you conclude a manifest falshod. Christ is in vs by faith and Baptism, but not corporally in our bodies. But by the Sacrament of his body he is both in vs, and in our bo∣dies in the true and corporal substance of his own flesh & blood. Secondly you distinguish regeneration from Baptism, asThe 169. . though Baptism were not the Sacrament which doth regene∣rate vs euen by S. Hilaries own doctrine alleged before.N. 24. in tis . Thirdly if Christ be none otherwise in vs by the Sacrament of his body, then by faith or Baptism, why do you make it a se∣uerall way from the other named before? Why is that counted by your self a fourth meane of Christes being in vs, which disfe∣rth not at all from the other three? At the length it is tye that I proue out of S. Hilarie (which thing you, M. Iuel, dissemble and denie) Chrisles body to be really present in the Sacrament. It is to be remembred, that whereas the Arrians had sayd a28. vuitie of will to be only betwen God the Father and the sonne, as we likewise are one with Christ by will only (for so thei sayd)The vni∣t of Chri tes birth . S. Hilari doth not in that case rest vpō this answer, that Christ by his birth is one with vs in truthe of flesh & blood, and there∣fore not in will and assent only (as the Arrias pretended, and
as M▪ Iuel did before goe about to pro) S. Hilarie, I say, re∣sted not therein: because the vnitie of nature, which was made with mankind by Christes Incarnation, ight be thought to pertein no more to the good, then to the euill, whereas Christ prayed for the vnitie of good men aloe, that they might be one,Ioan. 17. as God the Father is in Christ, and Christ in him. Therefore S. Hilary seking an other meane of our natural vnitie with Christ,The  of S. thereby proueth, seing the faithfull men are one with Christ notHary. only by faith, or Baptism, but by naturall coniunction, and by corporall partaking of his own substance, that much more Christ is one with his Father in nature, and not in will alone. S. Hi∣larie then must prone, that we are one with Christ naturally. which thing he doth after this ort. The word is verily made flesh, and we take verily the word29. being flesh in our Lords meate: therefore Christ is to be iudged to tary is in vs naturally. Thus doth S. Hilari reason, as IThe con∣clusion. haue now shewed. his cōclusion is: y• Christ tarieth in vs natu∣rally. y• meane to proue it is dubble: one because Christ hath truethe prou flesh and blood, whereby it is shewed to be possible, that he may dwell naturally in vs: the other is to shew, that Christ gaue vnto vs, ad that we take verily the same word being flesh in our Lords meate. whereby the flesh that was able to be geuen to vs, (because it was really assumpted of Christ) cometh in dedeCibusdo minicus. reallie vnto vs by his gift▪ our Lords meate whereof S. Hilarie speaketh is the Sacrament of Christes supper, wherein only he ed vs corporallie with the word being flesh. therefore S. Hi∣larie doth vs to vnderstand, that in the Sacrament we take the. word made flesh. and so verily take it, as the word was verily made flesh▪Pag. 343. Iuel. That we verily and vndoutedly receaue Christes bodyTe 170. vntruth. in the Sacrament, it is neither denied, nor in question.
Sā. You sayd before. pag. 323. that Christ in his supper added anConfuse & contrary doctr. outward Sacrament to the spirituall eating named in S. Ihon: which Sacrament you sayd, was commonly called a figure: and again you sayd the bread is a figure. Last of all, you said out of Rabanus, that the Sacrament is receaued with the mouth: but now you say, it is not denied, y• we verily receaue Christes bodie in the Sacrament. whereof I say it must nedes folow, that Chri∣stes body is receaued with the mouth. For it is receaued in the Sacrament, as here you confesse. and the Sacrament is receaued with the mouth, as you taught before: therefore by your doctrine Christes body is receaued by mouth. which is against your third conclusion pag. 319. Who can tell where to find you? But to re∣turnNot: the worde verè. to my purpose, the aduerb, verily, doth signifie in this place naturallie, really & substanciallie. For as the word is made flesh really: so we take really the word being flesh in our Lords meat. The worde was not made fleshe onlie by our faith, but in truthe of his substance: therefore we take the worde being fleshe not by our faith onlie, but in truthe of his substance. If M. Iuell will haue vs receaue Christes bodie verily, and yet by faith only, it must be made flesh verily, and yet by faith onlie. Ivel. It is the bread of the hart▪ hunger thou within, thirst thou within. San. If Christ being in his diuine nature toke real flesh, and yet maie be hungred within, & is much y• better to vs bread of y• hartThe 171. vntruth. by natural slesh: right so it is extreme madnes to make vs beleue, that Christes bodie genē vnder the form of bread, is therefore the lesse hungred within, or the lesse the bread and foode of the hart. Iuel. The thing that is receaued in spirit, is receaued in dede.The 172. vntruth. San. If it be to be receaued corporally as well as in spirit, (as Baptisme and the Eucharist) then it is false and foolish to say, that it is receaued in dede, when the outward dede lacketh.
This man wil cloth the naked, and fede the pore in spirit: and yet he saith it is done in dede, albeit thei die for cold. Spiritual recea∣uing is true and good, when it shuldreth not out reall receauing. as spiritual resurrectiō is good & true, but yet it is not al y• truth of resurrection. S. Bernard is alredie answered, and S. Cyril.344. The 173. vntruth. Iuel. It is a holy mystery, and a heauenly action, forcing our mindes vp into heauen, and there teaching vs to eate the body of Christ, not outwardly by the seruice of our bodies. San. Is not verè sumimus, we verily take, spoken of taking by the seruice of our bodies? can it be otherwise meant? Again30. it foloweth in the same sentence, that Christ hath mingled the na∣tureUnder. of his flesh to the nature of euerlastingnesse vnder a Sacra∣ment of his flesh to be cōmunicated vnto vs. Mark these words, M. Iuel, which you passed ouer, as if you had ben vtterly blind. The nature of Christes flesh is, I trow, real, it is communicatedSub. to vs vnder a Sacrament. know you not, that sub, is vnder? is not the Sacrament receaued by the seruice of our bodies? didBefore pag. 323. not your self grant the Sacrament to be taken by mouth? If then the nature of Christes flesh be vnder a Sacrament: when the Sacramēt is receaued by the seruice of our bodies, the nature of Christes flesh is receaued by our bodies, & not by faith alone.The 174 vntruth. Iu. The truth hereof standeth not in anie reall presence, but as Hilarius saith, in a mysterie, which is, in a Sacrament. San Whereas S. Hilarius saied: We receaue verily the flesh of31.  his body vnder a mysterie, you report him to saie, in a mysterie. Is that no false dealing? Well: he saith we receaue Christes flesh vnder a mysterie: and by your owne confession a mysterie is a Sacrament: therefore we receaue the flesh of Christes body vn∣der the Sacrament. And the Sacrament deliuered in the laste323. lin. 30. 33. supper is by your confession also outward, and commonly called a figure: therefore we verilie receaue the flesh of Christes bodie
vnder an outward figure. and the outward figure is knowen by our eye to be the figure of bread: therefore vnder the figure of bread we receaue the flesh of Christes bodie, albeit by the figure you meane the substance of bread. Iuel. Our regeneration in Baptisme in a certaine bodily sorteThe 175. vntruthe. teacheth vs the purgatiō of the mind, as Dionysius saith: so it is in the Sacrament of Christes body. San. Can you haue the mind better tanght by an outward ac∣tion, then if you eate the same flesh in body, which we doe eate in faith? Is it possible to haue a greater cōformitie, a more vehemēt figuring, and liuely expressing of al truth? And albeit I haue she∣wed differences before betwen Baptisme and the Eucharist, yet omitting y•, I wil now say  S. Augustin: then y• bodie & bloodDe verb. Apo. ser. 2. of Christ shalbe lise to euerie man, if y• thing which is visiblie ta∣ken in the Sacrament, be eaten in the truthe spirituallie, and be drunken spiritually. M. Iuel would haue one thing ouward∣ly taken, and an other thing eaten inwardly. But S. Augustine saith, that must be eaten in the truthe it selfe spiritually, which is visibly taken in the Sacrament. Iuel. Although Christ be not bodily resent, yet that doth not:The 176. vntruthe. hinder the substance of the mysterie. San. The substance of the mysterie muste nedes be hindered when it is absent. For it can be no mysterie without the substance thereof. The substance of the mysterie is the naturall substance2. of Christ vnder the Sacrament. therefore S. ilarie saith: The naturall propriety by the Sacrament is the Sacrament of the per∣fite vnitie. Of this place I haue often times spoken, and I would gladly heare M. Iuels minde in it. For then should I be sure to know, how I might dispute against him. I can not cōstrue it otherwise, then thus: Naturalis proprietas, the natural proprie∣ty,Proprie∣tas. which is to saie, the natural substance, & he meaneth the sub∣stance
of Christe. For S. Hilarie vseth the ward, proprietas, verie muche and ost for the substance or personall being of God or of Christ. Wel then: Christes naturall substance: Per Sacramentum, by or through the Sacramēt. est, is, Sacramentum the Sacramēt,The word Sacra∣ment is twise na∣med. perfectae vnitatis, of perfite vnitie. The substance of Christe is a Sacrament by or through the Sacrament. these words can haue none other literall meaning, but this: the substance of Christe through the form of bread, wherein vnitie is figured, and vnder which it is, by that meane, I saie, it is the Sacrament of perfite vnitie. how can els the natural substance of Christe be a Sacra∣ment? Of it self alone it can be no holy signe, but by the forme of bread it may be a Sacrament. and yet M. Iuell can not find the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament in al S. Hilarie. Moreouer, S. Hilarie making a preface, that we muste not33. Ioan. 6. speake otherwise in Gods matters, then we haue lerned of him (who said: my flesh is verily meate) & y• there is no place of dou∣ting of y• truth of flesh & blood, concludeth thus: For now both byVerè. the profession of our Lord him selfe, and by our faith, it is flesh in deede and blood in deede. Answer I pray you, M. Iuel. What is fleshe in deede? what is the nominatine case to, est, is? I knoweThe thing takē into our mouth is flesh in dede. none other besyde the worde Sacramentum, the Sacrament, or some like word which doth import the Sacramēt: as to saie, that which the faithfull receaue at Christes supper. For of that thinge S. Hilarie now speakethe. That then is verily flesh: and that is meant by S. Hilarie of an outward thig: for he saith immediatly Haec accepta, these things taken and drunke do bring it to passe, that both we maie be in Christ, and Christ in vs. Besyde this, it followeth, Est ergo in nobis ipse per carnem.34. Christ is him selfe in vs by his leshe: Note how he is in vs, andBy flesh. by what meane: not by the meane of bread and wine, but by the35. By the mysterics. meane of his fleshe. And afterwarde: he is beleued to be in vs by
the mysterie of the Sacraments: ipso in nobis naturaliter perma∣nente.36. Him self tarying naturally in vs, which is the effect of theNatural∣ly. Sacramēts. At the length he concludeth his chefe intent against the third argument of the Arrians, saying: Si ergo nos naturali∣ter37. fecundum carnem per eum viuimus, id est, naturam carnisThe na∣ture of his sleshe. suae adepti, &c. If then we liue naturally according to the fleshe by him, that is to say, hauing obteined the nature of his fleshe, how can he but haue the father naturally in him self according to the spirite, seing he liueth for the Father? Out of whiche place it appereth, that as the substance of God the Father is really in the person of Christ: so S. Hilary meant, that Christes naturall sub∣stance by meane of the Sacrament receaued, is within our own persons. For the naturall being of Christ through the Sacramēt in vs, is the meane to proue, that God the Father is naturally in Christ. But if Christe through the Sacrament were in vs as only eaten by faith, God the Father should be proued to be in his sonne by faith only, and not by nature. whiche thing the Ar∣rians would haue concluded, whom M. Iuel doth help al that he may, and hindereth the prouss of the consubstantiality of Christ with his father. But S. Hilary saith: By the Sacrament of flesh and blood the38. propriety of naturall communion is graunted. Againe: by the39. sonne tarying carnaliter, fleshely (to wit) in truth of flesh in vs.Carnali∣ter. Laste of all, the mysterie of tue and of naturall vnitie is to be40. preached, in eo nobis corporaliter & inseparabilirer vnitis: We. being vnited in him corporally and inseparably. Thus S. Hilarie hath proued most directly, and hath affirmed by diuerse words of one meanig about twelue times, that Christ is ioyned to vs by nature of his flesh: And not by the nature of faith or of baptism, (as M. Iuel most desperately affirmeth) For Christ neither hath anie faith in him, whiche maie be of the na∣ture
of our faith: Nor anie baptism of the same nature of forge∣uing synnes, which our baptism is of. it is the nature of flesh and blood onlie whereby Christ is naturally, carnally, and corporaly ioyned vnto the faithful men at what time thei reaue his my∣steries. This point so euident when M. Iuel dissembled and for∣ged an other, had he not don better if he had subscribed tē times? Iuel. These words, that Christ corporally, carnally, and natural∣lyThe 177. vntruth. is within vs, in their own rigour seme very hard. San. They must nedes seme hard to him who beleueth not. aDe verb. hard talke (saith S. Augustine) but to hard harted mē. incredible,Apostol. serm. 2. but to them who beleue not. Iuel. Hilarius saieth: We are one with God the Father and theThe 178. vntruth. Sonne, not only by adoption or consent of minde, but also by na∣ture, which according to the letter can not be true? San. Why bring you not the latin words where he saith it? wil you now spet  your poyson of lying also against that blssed father S. Hilarius? He teacheth, that Christ and his Father are one nature, and likewise that we and Christe are one nature, be∣cause he toke our flesh of the virgin Marie, and gaue vs the same flesh in the Sacrament, whereunto we being ioyned, prosicere∣mus ad vnitatem patris, might go forward to the vnitie of the sa∣ther. And again he saith, that he rehersed these things (cōcerning our natural vnitie with Christ, because the hereikes falsely affir∣ming the vnitie of will only betwen the father and the sonne, didNote all the words of S. Hi∣larie. vse y• example of our vnitie to god, as though we were vnited to the sonne, and by the sonne to the father by obedience only and deuout wil, without anie propriety of natural communion being graunted to vs by the Sacramēt of flesh and blood: where both by the honour of the sonne of god geuen vnto vs, and by the sōne tarying fleshly in vs, and we being vnited in him corporally and vnseparably, the mysterie of true and natural vnion is to be prea
ched & taught. It is answered therefore of vs to the folly of suri∣ouse mē. Hitherto S. Hilarie, where he teacheth in dede yt we areOur ioy∣ning is by the sonne. ioyned to the Father, but per filium manentē in nobis carnaliter, by the Sonne tarying in vs carnally, to witte, in truthe of flesh: which thing he also teacheth to be doe per Sacramentū carnis et sanguinis by y• Sacramēt of flesh & blood. But yt we are one with God y• Father by nature, or one with God y• Sonne in his diuine nature, it is a most impudēt lye forged vpō S. Hilarie: & you that do forget it, haue passed herein al the bounds of honestie to accuse S. Hilarie of so blasphemouse a saying, as that had bne.The 179. vntruthe. Iu. The Fathers hauebene fain to expound and to mollifie such violent and excessiue kinds of speache. San. Now you shew your self in your own colours, M. Iuel. Whatsoeuer you haue hitherto pretended, you thinke in yourM Iuels true mind of the Fa∣thers. harte, that the Fathers doe not speake well. for violent speaches be no good speaches, and excessiue speaches be not literally true. You would not call them hyperbolicall speaches, least any man should thinke, you inteprete and excuse their wordes by a figureHyper∣bole. ohetorike. But yet al is one to them which vnderstand greke, to say, theyr speaches are more then true, and to say, they are ex∣cessiue. But I muste nedes cal you & accompt you a wicked man for such  speaking. and I require you by the force of this confession of yours to subscribe. For it is enough y• the Fathers doe speake so plainly againste you, that you are constrained to cal it a violent and excessiue speache. It standeth not now in you to say, that they spake more then is true. You haue promised to subscribe, if any one sufficient sentēce were brought foorth out ofM. Iuel hath yel∣ded him∣self gilty. the first six hundred yeres. S. Hilarie is nere vpon the first three hūdred yeres. He sayth, that Christ is naturally in vs by his flesh communicated in a Sacrament, & receaued vnder a mystery, and carnally and corporally tarieth in vs. Therefore you muste sub∣scribe,
not only through promise, but to saue your soule frome hel fyre. But what say we? doth S. Hilarie speake more then is true? Could the Arrians haue wished a better Patrone for their faction, then M. Iuell is? or is not Christe muche bound to M. Iuel, whose diuie nature S. Hilarie defending is said to speake excessiuely? Is not God y• Father much beholden to M. Iuell, who impugneth y• Patrone of his own sonne? Shal not M. Iuel be swetely rewarded for this geare, if he die in this excessiue opi∣niō? Heare, I pray you, what S. Hilary saith of his own doctrine in this very booke: Cura est nobis vt primum. It is our care first to teache those things which are holy, and perfite, and sound, and that our talke not wandering by certain by turnings & windings,About the beginning of the 8. booke. and sodenly appering out of not haunted and creping holes shuld rather shew, then seeke the truth. Thus did he professe to teache perfite and sound things and vndouted truthes, which M. Iuell calleth excessiue, beause they excede the cumpasse of his heresy, & contein y• Catholike truth. And whē S. Hilarie cometh to y• very matter, whereof we speake at this tyme, he doth not only say it is sound, perfice, holy, and true doctrine, but he saith he lerned it of Christ him self: Euen concerning this very point, that the natu∣rall verity of Christe is in vs, for that he sayd: My fleshe is verily meate. But all the Fathers, all the scriptures which resist M. IuelsDe doct. phansie, are hot, violent, excesiue. & as S. Augustine moste trulyChrist. l. 3. cap. 10. faith: If the opinion of any errour hath first possessed the minde, whatsoeuer the scripture affirmeth otherwise, figuratum homines arbitrantur, men thinke it figuratiue. ¶ That the place of  erteineth to the Sacrament of Christes supper.
HArding. Gregorie Nyssene speaking of the breadThe . Chapiter. vvhich came dovvne from heauen, saith: by vvhat meane shall a bodiles thing be made meate to aDe vita Moysis. body? Iuel. Gregorie Nyssene is newly set abroade with sundry cor∣ruptions.The 180. vntruthe. San. If this vaine fable may be admitted, euery man shalbe corrupted when it pleaseth you. If he be corrupted, he is corru∣pted by your faction. for his works haue ben no where so fully printed, as at Bale called in Latine Basilea, which is a citie of your profession. 3. Moreouer you very oft bring his authority: and how are you sure that he was not corrupted at all in those places, which you allege? 4. Yea farther you allege for your purpose this very treatise, and this very side of the leaf, whence D. Harding toke this authority, and that as well before the words brought by D. Harding, as after. Iuel. He speaketh not one word, neither of Christes naturallThe 181. vntruthe. The 182. vntruthe. dwelling in vs. 2. Nor of the Sacrament. San. Out vppon this impudency, M. Iuel: you haue taken vpon you the forhead of a harlot, & are without all feare, shame, or hoestie. Doth not Gregorie Nyssene speake in that place one word of the Sacrament? he speaking of Moyses life, by occasion thereof cometh to shew the wandering of the children of IsraelIn vita Moysis. in the desert: where he saith, fter that thei had drunck of y• stone, all nourishment which thei had brought out of Aegipt failed thē,Manna. and a simple meate to looke vnto, but dierse i tast, was rained down to them. which thing did signifie (saith he) that we must cleanse our minds by saith, by Baptism, by traaile, by all ver∣tue, by doctrine of the Ghospell: so that al Aegiptiaal kind of li∣ing,
to wit, all the multitude of sinnes failing vs, we must re∣ceaue oelestem cibum, quem nulla nobis satio agriculturae artibusThe hea∣uenly meate. produxit, the heauenly meate, which no sowing hath by the art of plowing brought foorth vnto vs. but it is bread prepared for vs, without sede, without plowing, without any other work of man. that bread flowing from aboue is found in the earth. Hitherto he hath said, that we haue a true manna which we must receaue. and how, I praie you, but as the children of Israel did receaue their manna? and then we must receaue it by mouth, as thei did receaue their māna by mouth. But what is our man∣na? Forsoth a meate which came down from heauen (as the old manna did) a meate not gotten out of the ground, but rainig frō heauē? What raining is that? The Incarnation of Iesus Christ who taking flesh of the virgin without the meane of the sede of man, came down from heauen, and was in the earth man amōg men. No (saith the heritike Ualētinus for exāple, or Manicheus) Christ toke no true flesh of y• virgin. Yes saith Gregorius Nissē: Panis enim, et caet for the bread which came down from heauen,The occ sion of Nyssen talke. which is the true meate, which is obscurely signified by this histo∣rie (of Manna) is not a thing bodilesse. Thus much he said against the heretikes who denied the truth of Christes body. well, goe foorth syr, I praie you. For the heretikes will not admit your bare word. proue that which you say. Quo enim pacto res incor∣porea corpori cibus fiet? For by what meane shal a thing, which lacketh a body, be made meate vnto the body? Here GregorieNote the point. Nyssen presuppoeth, that Christ incarnated is made meate vnto our bodies, because he is our true Manna. But, saith he, y• could not be so, if Christ had no true flesh. for a thing without a body can not be made meate vnto the bodie: but Christ is so re∣allie made meate vnto or bodies, yt thereby Nysss proueth he had a true and reall body: so that al the principal mater in that
place is of this Sacrament, and of Christes naturall dwelling in our bodies. Therein Manna is fulfilled. Which Manna rained from hea∣uen1. into the earth, as Christ came from his Fathers bosome in∣to2. the Uirgins womb. The same Manna was afterward eaten by the Iewes corporally, as Christ after his incarnation was corporally eaten at his supper of the Apostles. Before y• Iewes3. did eate Manna, they were prepared wt passing ouer the red sea, with labour and with water of the rocke. And before we come to Christes supper, we are prepared by Baptism and good life and preaching. S. Gregorie Nyssene doth make eating by faith a preparatiō4. to eate the last supper worthely. Oportet fide, Baptismate, & caet. We must cleanse our soules by faith and Baptism, & demum andHe spea∣keth not of eating by faith. so at the length with a purified mind receaue the heauēly meate. It is not eating by faith, M. Iuel, that he speaketh of. Faith goeth before it, and the receauing of this heauenly meate is a farther kind of eating. This meat being y• bread brought foorth5. of the virgin without tylling, is made meat vnto the body. DoeCorpori cibus fit. you heare, M. Iuel? It is made meate vnto the body. Not only to the vnderstanding, but to the body. It is so really made meat vnto the body, that of necessitie thence it is deduced, that it self is6. a bodily and corporal thing. Which argument were none, if itNote this discourse. were not corporally receaued into our bodies. For by faith God the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost dwell in vs, andIoa. 14. make their mansion in our harts, as it were in houses, and our bodies are the temple of the holy Ghost. But such dwelling, as2. Cor. 6. it proueth not God the Father or the holy Ghost to haue bodies: so doth it not proue that Christ hath a bodie. But Christ is so made meate vnto vs, that the reall truth of his body is proued thereby: Thereore it is taught, that his body is made meate to
our bodies in a corporall truth of his naturall substance. This only is the discourse of S. Nyssenus. This meate sauoreth to euery mā who receaueth it, as Man∣na7. did. Therefore it is meant, that it is receaued to fulfill the fi∣gure of Manna, which can not be throughly fulfilled, without the self meate, which came from heauen being receaued into our mouthes and bodies, geue thence that spirituall tast & sauour.Sap. 16. for Manna gaue his swete taste in the mouthes of the Israelits.8. This kind of bread which is able to be turned to all things,Nescit la befieri. and yet not able to be wasted, is no materiall bread, but the food which was born of the virgin. He that prepared this table was Christ, who neuer prepared9. for vs any table so literally, as at his last supper.Qui hāc nobis mē sam prae∣parauit. Yet al this to M. Iuel is not one word concerning the dwel∣ling of Christ naturally in vs, or concerning his reall presence in the Sacrament. Nay, here is not one word touching the Sacra∣ment10. at all, besyde that where he nameth herbs and milke. For those words M. Iuel thought mete meate for his diuinitie, and therefore spied them out, and vttered the same to destroy all the discourse of Gregorie Nyssen: whereas they signifie the effect of grace proceding from the reall esh of Christ. Tell me, good Reader of thy conscience, if thou sawest a mad man running with a naked sword in the streat which were full of children, slaying, and killing all that euer he could come by, tel me I say, wold you not crye out to all men, to beware of him? Wold you not run to saue y• poore babes? wold you not, if nede were, rather lame the mad man▪ thē he should so destroy a num∣ber of persons? God is my iudge, I haue no quarell to the per∣son of M. Iuel. But for as much as I see him run mad, and toM. Iuel is mad. kill innumerable soules of poore men, with greef of hart I crye out against him, and say to you all: beware the mad man. who is
so much the more  mad, because it appeareth not outwardly. But what shal we ? If wh he came to reade Gregorie , he saw neuer a word of that which I haue now declared, and which euery man may see if he will open the booke: If he (I say) saw not one word thereof, doe you not is . perceaue, that his eyes are possed with seme horrible spirit of blindnes? Is not all reason and vnderstanding takē from him? But if he saw all that which I haue told, and therein found so many words spoken of the Sacrament, and those so effectuall against his errour: what shall we then think or say? Is it possi∣bleExtreme malice. that so great a malice may be in any man, as to delight in de∣ceauing willingly poore and ignorant men, and to lead them al to infidelitie? If such malice may be in man, whome shall we trust, and in what danger are the simple and  people? Whether it be blindnesse or malice in him, take this rule to thy comfort against all  that euer shall chaunce: Trust noA rule for y• simple. one man aliue. Trust no one generation of men, the beginning of whose doctrine thou hast knowen or heard of. Trust only the whole bodie of Christ, the whole Catholike Church, the whole cumpaine of the faithfull, the whole succession of Bisshops, ofEp. 118. insolētis∣simae in∣saniae. Priests ioyned also with the faithfull forefathers. That which hath once prled through all the knowen Church, that beleue in Christes name. For to dispute against it, S. Augustine saith it is the point of a most proude . But the whole ChurcheMath. 5. can not faile. It is a citie built by God vppon a hill, which can not be hid. It is the piller of truth, as S. Paule sayth. To that1. Tim. . vniuersall practise and belefe if thou committe thy soule, and doe as it commaundeth, it shalbe saued in that  body of Christ, whereof only he is the Sauiour. Leaue Iuel, Cranmer,Ephes. 5. Ridley, Latymer, leaue all that tarie not in the tried faith, and stick only to that interpretation of Gods word, which the Ca∣
receaued and deliuered euen from the Apostles tyme to this day. Iuel. The purpose of Gregorie Nyssen was only to speake ofThe 183. vntruth. Christes birth. San. His purpose was to speake of the miracles done in the wildernes vnder Moyses, of y• which Māna being one of y• chefe,Exod. 16 it did both signify the birth of Christ by the falling of it from hea∣uen vpon the earth, & the Sacrament of the altar, whiles it was afterward taken into the bodies of the Israelits, as we eate real∣ly the flesh of Christe which he toke of the virgin.The 18▪ vntruthe. Iu. In like manner of speache S. Hierom saith: the wheat wher∣of the heauenly bread is made, is that, of which our Lord said, my flesh is meate in dede. San. I marle what you meane to say the manner of speache is like, whereas by your assertiō Gregorie Nyssen speaketh only of Christes birth. But S. Hierom speaketh not thereof, but ofIn Esa. cap. 62. Christes body and blood, as it is receaued in the Sacrament. Thus you are againste your self. For in deede as S. Hierome speaketh of that wheat and of that wine, which is Christ himself, not only being borne of the virgin, but also eaten at his supper: euen so doth Gregorie Nyssen speake as wel of the supper as of the birth of Christ. Iu. And to this purpose saith Amphilochius, onlesse Christ hadthe 18. . bene borne carnally, thou haddest not bene borne spiritually. San. To what purpose did he say it? For I see not howe your wordes hange together, but only that you patche vp a number of sentnces. as sone as one is done, you bring in an other, withM. Iu  o . a therefore, or in like manner, or to this purpose, or in this sense, and he saith: & so foorth. But if they were particularly ▪ it is but a heape of words without order, dependāce, or any good reason. To what purpose, I praie you, ,
Christ had bene borne carnally, thou haddest not bene borne spiritually? I see noe other purpose therein, but that Christes birth is necessarie to our saluation: and tht because if the birth had not gone before, we could not haue eaten that bodie in the Sacrament, whiche had not bene at all borne.The 186. vntruthe. Iu. As Nyssen saith, Christ is made our bread: so he saith, he be∣cōmeth strong meate vnto the perfite, herbs vnto the weake. &c. San. Here you presuppose that Gregorie Nyssen saith: Christ is made our bread, and nothing els. But I haue shewed you that he saith, howe can a thing bodilesse be made mate vnto theying. body? As for the wordes whiche you name, I finde them not in Gregorie Nyssen so vttered, as you report them. He saith Christ is bread, but D. Harding forced not his argument vppon that worde alone. For he may be bread, and herbs, and milke vnto vs both in the Sacrament, and without it. but he is bread, herbs and milke to vs in our mouthes, as Manna was vnto the Iewes, only in the Sacrament.The 187. vntruth. Iuel. Gregorie Nyssen holdeth, that we receaue Christes bodie otherwise then in the Sacrament. for he saith: who so hath abun∣dātlie drunk of the Apostles springs, hath already receaued whole Christ. San. You misse in your prouf: For you should proue, that who∣so drinketh of the Apostles spring, he receaueth Christes bodie: & you proue, that he receaueth Christ. A man maie receaue Christ in his hart, and yet not haue Christes bodie in his bodie. Christ be∣ing the name of the person maie be verified as wel of the diuine, as o the humane nature. But there Gregorie Nyssen spake of his diuine nature: which thing is most clere, because he speaketh of eating by faith so, as it agreeth to the whole Trinitie. And therefore it foloweth: I & mie father will come vnto him.Ioan. 14. Lo, he wil come so as his father cometh, to wit, by his diuine na∣ture. But beside that, S. Nyssen speaketh of his birth, and of hys
being meate vnto our bodies, which is olie done in the Sacra∣ment of the altar.The 188 vntruth Iuel. M. Harding reasoneth thus: Christ was borne, ergo his bo die is reall in the Sacrament. San. O dissembler. he reasoneth cleane contrarie, with Gregorie Nyssen. Christ is made meate to our bodies in the Sacrament: Therfore he was reallie born, as I haue alreadie shewed. Iuel. This conclusion is childish.The 189 vntruth. San. Yours is childish: But D. Hardings is so stronge, that if the eating of Christ proue his birth, it will followe, that as he is born reallie, so much more he is eatē really. otherwise, if he were onlie eaten by faith, thence we could cōclude no more but a byrth by faith: which is against Gregorie Nyssenes purpose. Iuel. If he conclude not this, he concludeth nothing.The 190. vntruth. San, If you speake as you think, you are byside your sell. For as by the real eating of Christes fleshe, his birth is concluded of S. Nyssen: so y D. Harding the reall eating is noted as a most knowen truth presupposed by S. Gregorie Nyssen. ¶ That M. Iuel hath not well answered the places ofThe  Chapiter. S Cyrillus. HArding. Cyrillus saith: vvhen the mystical blessing is become to be in vs, dothe it not cause Christe to dvvel in vs corporally, by receauinge of Christes bodie in the communion? The same thing he saith in di∣uerse other places. Iuel. Cyrillus expoundeth him selfe natural vnion is nothingThe 191. vntruth. els, but a true vniō, we are by nature the childern of anger, that is, in dede, and truly.
San. The words, which you allege as out of Cyrillus, be . in him. His words are: Si naturalem vnionem dixerimus,  dicemus, If we cal it a natural vnion, we shal cal it a true . But you haue put in a certaine phrase of your own, addinge these. words non aliud quàm none other thing but, that is nothing, M. Iuel, but alitle falshod. There is ods whether it be said, a natural vnion is a true vnion, or els, a naturall vniō is none other thing but a true vnion. For that which is natural, is true: but there is sumwhat more conteined in the name of nature, which the name of truthe doth not expresse. We are the true sonnes of God, but we are not y• natural sonnes of god. wheresoeuer thereforea thingNaturall. is called natural, it is at the lest true, but not by and by, nothing els but true. That which you said of S. Augustine: Corporaliter, nō vmbraliter sed verè et solidè, I could not find it vpō y• 67. psal. But thinke you, M. Iuel, that when S. tyrl teacheth Christ to be the natural sonne of god, he wolde be contented if an Arrian should slep foorth and say, that to be the natural sonne of god, is nothing els but to be the true sonne of god? Whiche beinge once graunted, he that is a child by adoption, is also the true sonne of god: Therfore the Arrian wil conclude, that Christ is the sonne of god by adoption. But let vs come nere to the purpose. let natural dwelling stād for true dwelling. What of that? saith S. Cyril only that Christ is naturally vnited vnto vs? saith he not also, that y• mystical bles∣sing maketh him to dwell corporally in vs? wil that word, also,Corporal∣. be excluded by a true dwelling, or hath M. Iuell an other phrase to answere it withal? Iuel. S Paul saith: the Heathens are bcome concorporal, and partakers of the promise in Christ Iesu, in the same sense.Ephes. 2. San. In whith sense, M. Iuel? meane you, that as natural soThe 192. truth. likewise corporal cont̄iō meaneth nothing els, but a true con∣ction
True in dede it is, but true in the truth of nature & of bodie, but not  true in the truthe of faith and speaking. S.Ephes. 2. Pe saith: The Heathes are cōcorporal with the Patriarches & Prophets, that is to say, of one body mystical, of one society & : Theresore, saieth M. Iuel, when S.  Christ to dwel corporally in vs by reason of the holy communiō, he meaneth, that Christe and wee are all of one mysticall body. Meant he nothing els, M. Iuel? as though it went not before: Non negamus & caet. We denie not, but that we are ioyned spi∣rituallySpiri∣tually. to Christ by right faith and syncere loue. Lo, there is theBy faith. coniunction which maketh vs one way members of that bodie, whereof Christ is y• head. But S. Tyrill goeth to an other higher meane of the same coniunction, adding, that the mystical blessing (which is the Eucharist) maketh Christ to dwel also in vs corpo∣rallyCorpo∣rally als. by communicating his body. S. Cyril nameth dwelling, in comparison of ioyning: corporally, in comparison of spiritually: by communicating Christes body, in comparison of these words: by right faith and syncere charitie. Therefore it must nedes be, that the corporal dwelling of Christ in vs according to his flesheAccording to flesh. (which also S. Cyril nameth) is an other kind of vnion, thē faith and charitie loue. But the giftes are corporall with the faithfull Iewes not by faith alone, but as S. Hilarie declareth, by the nature also of baptism, & by the nature of Christes flesh. For they are grasted into the cumpanie of the elect by all these means which Christ prouided for y• end. they beleue in y• same God, are baptized in the same fount, are reconciled by the same Sacramēt of penance, fed, nourished, and consūmated by eating really the same fleshe of Christe. What doth that word corporall helpe you now, M. Iuell? It signifieth no more, but that the Iewes and Gentils are of one feloship. but the meanes of making them one remaine notwithstanding to be declared.
Iu By the wordes, corporally and naturally, a ful perfite spiri∣tuallThe 193. ntruth. coniunction is meant, excluding all manner of fantasie. San. So that with you corporally and naturally doth signifie nothing els, but not fainedly. How say ye then, when we are knit to God by right faith and syncere charitie, is it a fained con∣innction, or no? If it be a true, & not a fantasticall coniunction, then the words whiche affirme Christe to be ioyned also vnto vs corporally and naturally, being added ouer and aboue the ioy∣uing by right faith and syncere loue, must not only ane a true ioyning (whiche was already made) but also an other manner of ioynig, which is both true in effect (as y• ioyning by faith was) & also true in the corporall mingling of Christes flesh to our fleshe. Otherwise, what meant the aduerbe, quo{que}, also? We be ioynedQuo{que}. by faith, and also corporally. Is that (also) nothing? Furthermore, if corporally be nothing els to say, but truly and without imagination, how cōstrue you these words of S. Paul?Colos. 2. All the fulnes of the Godhead dwelleth corporally in Christ? is it only to say, it dwelleth truly in Christ? well: but it may dwell truly in Christ, though Christ be not man: therefore by your ex∣position a phrase is found, whereby y• truth of Christes body may be wiped away, whensoeuer it pleaseth the Protestants. Consy∣der, M. Iuell, that you are not Capitaine generall of the whole army. Satan him selfe had taken that cure vpon him, before you were borne. It is he that directeth all y• soldiours of his campe. What place in his army doe you occupie, I doe not know. This I am sure of, your Capitaine intendeth fully to displace Christe as much as lieth in him, not only frō dwelling corporally in our bodies by the blessed communion, but also from taking real flesh of the blessed virgin. Satan him selfe would haue an other Mes∣sias to be prepared for. Iudge you, whether you helpe towards his comming, or o. He coueteth to persuade, that corporally doth
meane truly and nothig els: wherore it foloweth, that corpus is latin for the truth and for nothing els: and seing Christ toke of our lady corpus a bodie, by you it is meant he toke t truthe ofWith M. Iuel our lady, & nothing els. Or can you avoid the yoke, the ∣dance,corpus, is  for truth. the mutuall respecte that is betwene bodie, & bodily, cor∣pus, and corporally? Whatsoeuer one of those names, whiche are in one yoke, doth signifie, the other doth signifie after the same rate. If bonitas be goodnes, bonus is good, & bene is well▪ cor∣porally is of the same yoke with, corpus, body. If bodily doth meane truly, corpus doth meane truth, so Christ toke truth of our Ladie: and what is that? forsouth it is whatsoeuer it pleaseth M. Iuel. So that it be no phantasie, it maie be then faith or charitie, or els bones without flesh, or skinne without flesh and bone. To this point M. Iuels diuinity leadethvs. O miserable time, O cor rupted maners. The noun corpus bodie, and the aduerb corpo∣raliter corporallie do not onlie signifie a truthe, but a truthe of bodie: and in Christ it signifieth a truthe of flesh and of blood. Iuel. Otherwise there must nedes follow this great inconueni∣ence, that our bodies must be in like maner corporally, natural∣lyThe 19 vntruth. and seshly in Christes body. For Hilarius saith we also are natu∣rally in him. and Cyrillus: we are corporally in Christ. San. It is most true, that both we are in Christ corporally, and he in vs during the time of the coniunction. For when a ioy∣ning of twain is made, it must nedes be, that y• one is ioyned to y• other: whiche is no absurditie at al, because that twaine, to wit,Ephes▪ 5. Christ and his Church, should be in one flesh. it is the doctrine of S. Paule. And as flesh is made one with him who really eateth and digesteth it: so is Christ ioyned most really to him, that wor∣thely receaueth his body. Iuel. That we be thus in Christ requireth not any corporallThe 195▪ vntruth. being.
San. That were a fine kind of being, M. , that Christes body should be in vs corporally, and yet the being should not be corporal. In dede the maner is not corporall. But if you exclude the truth also of corporall being, you speake cōtrarie to the word it self. For the word corporally can signifie no lesse then a corpo∣rall truth. Iuel. It requireth not any locall being.The 196. ntruthe. San. It is a local being, in respect that the substance of Christ occupieth the same place vnder the form of bread, which the sub∣stance of bread did occupie before. And when we haue that kind of bread in vs, euen so Christes being is locall in vs. Iuel. Christ sitting in heauen is here in vs, not by a natural, butThe 197. vntruth. by a spirituall meane of being. San. The being of Christ in vs by spirit is also naturall con∣cerning the nature of his Godhead, which is euery where. But cōcrning the grace which is created in vs, it is a spiritual being after the rate as euery cause is in his effect. Iuel. S. Augustine saith: After that Christ is ascended he is inImperti∣nt. vs by his spirit. And S. Basil, and again S. Augustine saith the like in diuerse places. And Christ spake in S. Paule, & caet. San. You are now in a common place, M. Iuel. Who denieth but Christ being in heauen, is here in spirit? Wil that take away his being here in body, when bread is turned into his body: Shall one truth always displace an other with you? These be sowters arguments to say, Christ is God: therefore he is not man. He is in heauen: ergo he is not in earth, &c. Iuel. This coniunction is spirituall, and therefore nedeth notThe 198. truthe. neither the circumstance of place, nor corporall presence. San. The coniunction is spirituall, but the  of wor∣king it is brought to passe by the corporall substance of Christ. M. Iuel hath forgotten that we now , whether Christ be
in the Sacrament corporally, for thnd to make a spirituall con∣iction by this meane of his own flesh, or no: as if a man to cō∣t an heretike, do not only write vnto him, but also doe come him self and by disputation of mouth do persuade him, the con∣uersion is spirituall, but the meane of working it, is by corpo∣rall prsence. Iuel. The coniunction that is betwene Christ and vs, neitherEuill vn∣. doh mingle persons, nor vnite substances. But it doth knit ourDe coena Domin▪ affects together and ioyne our willes, saith S. Cyprian. San. S. Cyprian in the same place expoundeth himselfe to meane, that we are not made by this vnion, the second person in : for (saith he) the only Se is consubstanciall, or of the same substance with hi Father. But we by eating his reall flesh in this Sacrament, are made  vnto the Sonne of God: Atteyning thro the flsh vsque ad participationem spiritusEphes. 5▪ euen to the  of the pirit of Christ. Again, whereas our vnion with Christ is  in the holy Scriptures to y• vnion wich is in : as in matrimonie the wife & husband tarie oth  persons, and eche of them kepe their seuerall substances, notwithstanding that or a tyme they are vnited in flesh: right so is it in this blessed mysterie, where Christes flesh is ioyned to our flesh for a tyme only,  'nd y• spirit of Christ by so excellent a meane (as his own flesh is) may be more fully partaken. Thus it is clere, that S. Cyprian saith the same thing with vs, who likewise dend our vnion with God to be made in will, and hart: and not that we be at any tyme made consubstanciall with the blessed Trinitie. But the meanes of vniting vs to God are not our  only, but the nature of faith, the regeneration of Baptism, and the reall flesh of Christ receaued vnder y• forme of bread, The whih reall presence of Christes fesh S. Cyprian
so plainly teacheth, that I can not suiclently me at the ∣dencie of M. Iuel▪ Who knoweth him, to teache, 1. That the bread is changed in nature, and not in forme. 2. That vnder  Sa∣ctamēto. Sacrament we eate the bread of Angels in earth, the which selfe same we shall eate more manifestly in heauen without a Sacra∣ment.Sine Sa∣amēto. 3. That this doctrine came newly from Christ alone, that Christian men should drinke blood, which thing was for∣bidden to the Iewes: and seing it was not forbidden them to drink Christes blood in faith, but only to drinke common blood in their mouthes, it foloweth euidently, that the Christians by this new order of Christ, drink blood into their mouthes also, & not by faith alone. Al these argumēts, besyde many other which are in the same sermon, declare euidently, that S. Cyprian vtter∣ly abhorred from this blasphemouse heresie of the Sacramen∣taries. Iuel. The cōiunction because it is spiritual, true, full, and per∣fit,The 199. vntruth. is expressed by this terme corporall. San. As though God because he is spiritual, true, ful, & per∣fit, he might therefore be called corporall. Who euer heard of such diuinitie? Because it is spiritual, it is termed corporal. Because it is red, it is called grene. because it is chalke, it is named chese, Nede these words any confutation? Were not the writer of them worthy to be rebuked rather then to be refelled? Iuel. Corporall coniunction remoueth all maner light and ac∣cidentallCōtrarie to himself. ioyning. San. If all accidentall ioyning be remoued, only substancial ioyning remaineth. A substancial ioyning requireth the substan∣ces to be present which are ioyned together. If then we are sub∣stancially ioyned to Christes body, our bodies and his must be present. For the substance of our soules is not without the cum∣passe of our bodies: Neither can they be substancially ioyned to
Christes body, as long as they are absent from the real body of Christ. As for the ioyning which is made by faith or charitie, it is made by an accident, and not by substance. Iuel. It is vtterly vntrue, that we haue Christ corporally with∣inThe 200. vntruthe. vs, only by receauing the Sacrament. San. Neuer a Father by you named saith as you doe. and therefore you speake of your own head, whom no man that wise is, wil beleue. For seing we can not haue him corporally within vs, without his body be within vs, and yet none other thing is his body beside y• which is deliuered at his supper, by that meane only he may be corporally in vs. Iuel, By M Hardings construction, the child is damned, whoThe 201. vntruth. dieth without receauing the Sacrament of Christes body. San. Neither he, nor no Catholike teacheth so. Baptism suffi∣seth, as we beleue, vntill a man come to the yeres of discretion. Iuel. Without natural participation of Christes flesh there isThe 202. vntruthe. no saluation. San. If it be so, it is you that teache the damnation of al those who receaue not the Eucharist. for only in the Eucharist we par∣take the nature and substance of Christes flesh in it self. But we partake the grace thereof by faith and Baptism. Iuel. S. Chrysostom saith: In the Sacrament of Baptism weThe 203. vntruth. are made flesh of Christes flesh, and boan of his boanes. San. Those words you haue not in S. Chrisostom, Who in hat place confesseth plainly, that those who are partakers of the holy mysteries can tel, how thei are foormed Germanè ac legitimè exIn epi. ad Ephes. hom. 20. ipso. properly and lawfullie out of him. Moreouer he geueth an other sense expounding ex ipso, for secundum ipsum according to him, saying: as Christ was born without the sede of man, so we are made the same thing in baptism. Thirdly he sheweth that we were taken out of Christes side, as Eue out of Adam. But the
proposition that you haue framed in his name, is not in him, but although it were in him, yet it is not to the purpose. For it is one thing to be made of the flesh of Christ, whiche maie be meant of his mystical flesh, and an other thing to partake his fleshe natu∣rally. We are made of his flesh by spiritual meanes. For to be of his flesh it is to belong to his flesh, that is to say, to be members therof by any meane at al. But when we speake of natural or cor poral partaking of flesh, we exclude al mystical flesh, and restrain the talke onlie to Christes own real fleshe, whiche he toke of the virgin Marie. Last of al, y• reason why certain places of holy scripture are in∣terpreted somtime of baptisme, & somtime of Christes supper, is, because in the old time in manie coūtries y• Sacramēt of Chrites body was geuen straight after baptism, as it maie appere in. S,De eccl. Dionysius Areopagita, and in S. Ambrose: in so much that som∣timeHierar. ca. 2. & 3. these two Sacramēts are so intreated of in S. Cyprian, Eu∣sebius Emissenus, and S Augustine, as if thei were one Sacra∣ment,De Sacr. li. 4. ca. 3. for that thei were ministred together. But in so weightie aAd Quir. li. 3. ca. 25 hom. 5. epi. 106. matter as we now intreate of, it was not vprightlie done of M. Iuel to make a proposition of his owne, and to set it out in the name of S. Chrysostom. Iuel. M. Harding is not yet able to find, that Christes bodie isThe 204 vntruth. either corporally receaued into our bodies, or corporally present in the Sacrament. San. It is you that are not able to find it. for D. Harding hath found it, and shewed it many wayes. and as I haue she∣wed it in S. Chrysostom, in S. Hilarie, & in S. Gregorie Nys∣sen: so wold I shew it at large out of Cyrillus, but that partly this booke is growen alredie to great, partly a marueilouse number of places in S. Cyrillus doe proue, both Christes body to be corporally receaued into our bodies, and to be corporally
in the Sacrament. 1. Cōcerning vs, he saith: It behoued this earthly body should1. be brought to immortality cognato cibo. by meate of his owneIn Ioan. li 4. c. 14. substance. for so himself expoundeth the word afterward, saying:Ad Euo. anath. 11. that Christes body is cognatum nostris corporibus, hoc, est con∣substantiale. It is of kin with our bodies, that is to say, of the same substance. 2. As two waxes being melted are mingled together: so he2. that receaueth Christes flesh and blood, is mingled with Christ.Lib. 4 cap. 17 It is not possible to vnderstand the mingling of two waxes to be other, then reall and substanciall. For wax hath neither faith nor spirit. 3. D. Harding hath alleged fiue or six most plain sentences,3. which may e sene in his booke. To none of all which M. IuelCyril. li. 10. ca. 13. li. 11. c. 26▪ & 27. hath iustly aswered, or scant sayd any word. reade also S. Cy∣rl, in Ioan. li. 3. cap. 36. lib. 4. cap. 18. &c. Now touching the corporall presence of Christ in the Sacra∣ment, it is to be vnderstanded, that S. Cyrillus calleth the Sa∣cramentBenedi∣ctio. of Christes body and blood, mysticam benedictionem, the mysticall blessing. and therefore he exhorteth the faithfull pe∣ple to come to receaue it, & to be partakers thereof, as the whichIn Ioan. li. 4. c. 17. putteth away both death and disseases. Of this benediction and Sacrament thus he writeth. 1. It differeth from Manna, because the benediction is verily1. meate: whereas Manna was a figuratiue bread. But if the Sa∣cramentLib. 4. cap. 16. consted of materiall bread, and were not Christs flesh, it were no more the true bread, then Manna was. A litle blessing (to wit a litle peece of the consecrated foode) draweth the whole man to it: Et sua gratia replet, and filleth him2. with his owne grace. Therefore the Sacrament hath grace of hisLib. 4. cap. 17. own, and is no common bread: because then it shold not drawe
vs vnto it, but it should be turned into vs▪ but nowe the bene∣diction, that is to say, the Sacrament draweth vs to it: therefore it self in his own substance is the flesh of Christ.Ad Euo. anath. 11. He declareth the worde of God to be life according to nature, & y• it hath made his flesh able to geue life. Et hac ratione facta est nobis benebictio viuificatrix. And by this meane the Sacrament is made of power to geue vs life. Marke the degrees: the life it selfe is first in the sonne of God, and afterward in the fleshe as∣sumpted, and so is the Sacrament able to geue life. how hangeth this discurse? but only because he presupposeth it for an vndou∣ted truth, that in the Sacrament the flesh of the sonne of God is really present. After he had shewed that the Catechumeui can not partake ofIn Ioan. l. 12. c. 50 our mystical benediction, he saith: The ministers crie with a loud voice to those who come to ye mystical blessing, Sancta sanctis, ho∣ly things for holy men. Meaning the touching & ye sanctification of Christes body to agree only to those, who are sanctified with y• holy Ghoste. He calleth the mystical blessing the body of Christ, and sheweth, that those who come to it, doe touch Christ: whiche is of necessity vnderstanded by the meane of the foorme of bread, vnder the which Christ is. But if Christe were not really vnder that forme of bread, why are the Catechumeni kept frome it? For.  of the faith. seing they confesse the faith with a loud voice (as there S. Cyril∣lus doh witnesse) and seing they may by their faith eed vppon Christ in heauen, shew me a reason, M. Iuel (if you be able) why he that may eate Christe in faith, may not eate the bread (as youi. 2. de peccat. me & re mis. c. 26 terme it) which is the signe of him. Specially sith S. Augustine confesseth, that they also had a kind of halowed bread (but not y• body of Christ) geuē to them. We geue this reason hereof, because in the Sacrament of the body of Christe, his own body is really present, whiche is of suche honour, that no meane sanctification
should suise for the admitting therunto. And for as much as the Catechumeni, who be not yet baptized, haue not that grace of the holy Ghost which is geuen in baptism, they are not sufficiēt∣ly prepared to receaue this marueilouse sacrifice, and dreadfull myerie: whiche you not withstandinge repute so vile, that you crum your potage dishes with it, & sometymes caste that, which is left in the cup of your own blessing, vpon the ground, as I my selfe sawe it done in king Edwardes tyme at a communion in Gloceter shere. You make in words muche of it, but your dedes do shew your blasphemouse hartes. Harding. The Catholike fathers sithence Berenga∣rius,The 11. . haue vsed the termes really, substancially, &c. to exclude Metaphores and figures, and to confesse a most supernaturall vnion vvith Christ by meane of his na∣tural flesh, really (though not locally) present. Iuel. These Doctors liued within these three hundred yeres,The 50. vntruth. and are such as M. Harding thought not worth the naming. San. He named none that were sithens the six hundred yeres after Christ, because he saw your impudēt proclamation to haue bound him to y• tyme. But otherwise he neither lacked sufficient witnesses, elder then Berengarius, nor iudged them vnworthy the naming. And because by these your insulting wordes, you se to loke for some witnesses aboue three hundred yeres olde, I will geue you a taste euen of the best that were from the first six hundred, vntil the last three hundred yeres after Christ. With∣in which time many notable fathers haue liued. How thinke you by Damascene, who saith: the bread & wineDamasc. de Orth. d. li 4. cap. 14. and water is superturally changed by the inuocation and the comming of the holy Ghoste into the body and blood of Christ. And that he proueth, because our Lord said: this is mi (not fi∣gure
of body) but body, and (not figure of blood) but blood.in ▪ . Saith not Theophilact, that the bread is with secrete wordes by mysticall blessing and comming of the holy ghooste changed26. in Matt. & in 6. Ioan. into our Lords fleshe? saith he not, it appereth bread, but in dede is fleshe? again, why doth it not appere flesh? because we should not abhor from the eating thereof. For if it had appered flesh, w had bene vnpleasantly affected towarde the communion. Is there any dout, but he who telleth that the bread is changed into flesh, and sheweth why yet it doth appere bread and not flesh, did verely beleue the real presence of Christes flesh vnder the form of bread? or is he not more impudent then any halot, who wil stād in dense, that Damascene & Theophilact beleued not tansub∣stantiation, as we do? and yet these two are not only aboue three hundred, but also aboue seuen hundred yeres old. Saith not Haymo, licet panis videatut, in veritate corpus Chri∣stiin 1. Cor. 10. est, although it me bread, it is in truth the body of Christ? Saith not igius, that after consecration it semeth bread andin Cano. Missae. in lib. de corp. D. in Sacra. wine, but in truth it is the body and blood of Christ? Saith not Paschasius, although the figure of bread and wine be hre, yet after cōsecration they are to be beleued to be nothing at all, but the flsh and blood of Christ? What shall I speake of Lanfrancus, Iuo, , An∣selmus▪Most of thē wrote ast Be . , Algerus, Euthymius, who were al notable men for lerning, and al aboue three hundred yeres old? I come to S. Bernard, whom you haue alleged manie tis in this yourBernar. in srm. de Sācto Martino Not car∣lly cōcer ning the  of . work. Thus he writeth: Euen to this day the same flesh is exhi∣bited to vs (which the Apostles had sone in his manhod) but yet spiritually forsoth, not carnally. For there is no cause why we should say either y• apparitiō, which was made to the fathers of y• old testament, either that presence of his flesh which was exhibi∣ted to the Apostles, to be dnied in these oure daies. For to them
who faithfullie consider the matter▪ it shalbe clere that neither ofCarnis ipsius ve∣ra substā tia in Sa∣cramēto. both lacketh. For the true substance of the flesh it selfe is present now also to vs no dout verilie but (that it is so) in the sacramēt. Here is, M. Iuel, the true substance of Christes own flesh affir∣med to be no lesse present (in a spiritual maner, but not in a car∣nal manner of being) as it was present to the Apostles who saw Christ in flesh. I omit Nicholaus Methonensis, and , and Phots Grecians, Albertus Magnus, Alexander de Ha∣s, Inocentius the third, with diuerse moe aboue three hūdred yeres old. Iu. Their doctrine is without cōfort. thei hold that the bodie ofThe ▪ vntruth. Christe remaineth no longer in our bodies, but only vntill the formes of the bread and wine begin to alter. San. That doctrine, M. Iuel, is not without cōfort, in so much as the Sacrament serueth as a meane to bring to vs the body of Christ: which when it hath deliuered vnto our bodies, a coniun∣ction is made by touching and eating Christ: out of whiche con∣iunction made by flesh▪ riseth a marueilouse commoditie to our spirite and soule. So that albeit when the formes of breade and of  be altered, the body of Christe can not be affirmed to be corporally in our bodies any lōger: yet a grace, vertue & strength is left stil with vs of inestimable operatiō toward life euerlastīg. If this do seme absurd to M. Iuell, how thinketh he of al thoseLuc. 8. whome Christ healed by touching them with his fleshe? was it not a corporall and real touching, because Christ ceased to touche any more, when the helth was once procured? was not all Chri∣stesMatt. 28. comming and walking in fleshe, true, real, and corporall, be∣cause when the tyme of his humble dispensation as , he departed bodily out of our sight, and taried with vs in his godhead and power?
Moreouer I haue said often times, our cōton with ChristEphes. 5. in this Sacrament is like the carnal copulation betwen the wife and husbād, where twain are in one flesh. A great mysterie saith S. Paule, in Christ & his Church. As, therefore the man and wife being corporally ioyned tarie not alwayes together, but after a tyme departe a sunder, and yet for all that, of their coniunction iue commeth, and they kepe yet alwaies the bonde of wedlock and of loue in eche of them: so after that Christe hath vnited him to vs vnder the foorme of bread, he departeth in bodily presence when those foormes cease to be, vnder whiche it pleased him to comme to vs: but the vertue of that coniunction tarieth still.The 207. vntruth. Iuel. Some others say, that as sone as our teeth touch the bread, straight wayes Christes body is taken vp into heauen. The words be these: Certum est quod quàm cito species dentibus teruntur, tam cito in coelum rapitur corpus Christi. San. Haue you not yet done with gloses, M. Iuel? I marueil not. For the greatest flour of your gardē lieth in gloses and phra∣ses. But yet if the gloses e of them selues not at al tymes moste wary (because they were made in grea security of y• faith, the au∣thors of thē neuer thinking y• such a desperat generatiō of ∣leuers should haue sprong vp) surely you ought not to make thē trā∣ation. more odiouse then they deserue, by false and corrupt translation. You haue englished nowe, teruntur, touched, and species, bread, for you say, as sone as our teeth touch the bread, the body is takē into heauen. But species, doe signifie the formes of bread & wine, teruntur doth signifie, are wasted or consumed. The which wordTerere. in Berengarius cōfession you could turne, by the word, grynded. thus at one tyme terere, is to grynd with you, at an other tyme it is, to touch. Why M. gloser of gloses, is terere latine to touch & to grind? But you haue a new kind of malice in your hart which can make new latine, new english, new Gospell, new faith and
a new Church at your pleasure. Iu. Here a man may say vnto M. Harding, as he did before to theThe 208. vntruthe. Arrian heretike. San. You can not so speake to D. Harding, as he spake to the Arrian heretike, to whome he spake not by his owne authoritie, but by the authoritie of S. Cyrillus, who disputing against an Arrian heretike, saied vnto him, as D. Harding may right well say vnto you. An fortassis putas & caet. What troweth this ArrianCyril. in Ioan. lib. 10. c. 1. heretike parhaps, that we knowe not the vertue of the mysticall blessing? Whiche when it is become to be in vs, doth it not cause Christ to dwel in vs corporally also, by receauing of Christes bo∣dy in the communion? Thus farre S. Cyril, whose words tou∣ched M. Iuel a thowsand yeres before he was borne, because his heresie is one in this behalf with the Arrian heresie, who taught vs not be corporally ioyned by naturall participation to Christe (as braunches are ioyned to the vine) but aughte, euen as M.M. uell agreeth  y• Arrians Iuel doth, that we depend of Christ by faith, and none otherwise. And troweth M. Iuel now, that he may talke to D. Harding by his own contemptible authoritie, as D. Harding talked to him out of S. Cyrillus? Bring, if you can, M. Iuel, a saying of aboue a thowsand yeres old, where D. Hardinges doctrine may be ac∣cused of heresie. Iuel. Commeth Christ to vs from heauen, and by and by forsa∣kethThe 20 vntruth. vs? San. As Christe at his incarnation came not frome heauen by forsaking his glorie, but by assupting flesh of the virgin: so nowe at the time of the consecration his body commeth not doune frō heauē, but the bread is changed into his body, and by that meane his body is present with vs. and as after his resurrection he as∣cended into heauen: so after the communion the formes of bread and wine being consumed, Christe caeaseth to be corporally with
vs, to thend we should again desier his presence, and well know these two chefe pointes of our belefe: the one, that the end of the ioyning consisteth in spirit, rather thn in flesh: the other, that the flesh of Christ really eaten is the meane, whereby we haue accesse to the spirit of God with trust and confidence. Iuel. Or that we eate Christe and yet receaue him not? or hauThe 210. vntruthe. him not? or that he entreth not, & caet. San. We eate him, and receaue him, and haue him, & he entreth into vs. Who teacheth the contrarie, but that your owne shadow troubleth you? Iuel. He saith, this presence is knowen to God only: then it fo∣loweth,The 211. vnruthe. M. Harding knoweth it not. San. He sayd not, this presence, but the maner of the presence is knowen to God only: and so is it in dede. But why doe you  his wordes? Iuel. So this article is concluded with an Ignoramus.The 212. vntruthe. San. Not so, because the question is not of the maner of Christes presence, but of his real presence, though the maner be vnknowē. But did you call that an gnoramus, if we know not how ChristIgnora∣mus is vnder the foorm of bread? I am sure, you know not howe the vnion was made in the virgins womb, are you therefore repro∣ued as ignorante? In dede if ye belue not Christes presence, yeNon cre dius. haue concluded this article with a Non credimus, whiche is a worse fault, then Ignoramus. For he that beleueth not, shalbe conMarc. 19. demmed. Iuel. The old lerned Fathers neuer left vs in suche doutes.The 213. vntruthe. San. S. Cyrillus in this very matter, willeth vs to geue strong faith to the mysteries, but to leaue the way and knowlege of hislib. 4 in . c. 13. worke vnto god. the first part you haue broken. The first and last D. Harding hath obserued, and you shalbe concluded with a dam naberis, if ye repent not. S. Chrisostom saith, it is the part of a
scholar, not to serch out curioufly the things which the master af∣firmeth,In oā. hom. 45. but to here, and to beleue, and to looke for a conuenient time of soyling the question. Iuel. Emissenus saith. Christ is present by his grace.The 214. vntruthe. San. You haue put a false nominatiue case.  doth say, that Christ consecrated the Sacrament of his bodie and blod to thend: Perennis illa victima viueret in memoria, et semper praesens esset in gratia, that euerlastig sacrifice should liue in remembrāce, and be alwaies present in his grace. It is victima, the oblatio or sacrificed hoste which is present in grace. for in dede the act of crucifying is vtterlie past, but the sacrifice is present in his grace: for so muche as it is present in that flesh, whiche suffered death. Againe, he saith not y• it is present bi his grace (as you haue tur∣ned it) but in his grace. You wold haue grace to be the meane of presence: but it is not so. Grace is the effect of presence: But the meane of the grace in this Sacrament is the presence of Chri∣stes own body. Iuel. S. Augustine saith: Christ in vs by his spirit.Imperti∣nent. San. That is true also, when he is in vs by his flesh: for in that flesh his spirit dwelleth. And he that denieth Christ to be in vs by his owne flesh, taketh away the chefe way, by whiche the spirit of God may be in vs.the 215. vntruthe. Iuel. Ye shall not eate this body that ye see: it is a certain Sa∣crament that I deliuer you. San. The words of S. Augustine are, I haue commended orComm daui. psl 98. set foorth a certain Sacrament to you, and not, I deliuer you a crtain Sacrament. For this was spoken of S. Augustine in Christes person in respect of the talke had a Capharnaū: Where the Sacrament was commended, before it was deliuered. ButIoan. 6. that which was commended at Capnaum, was only the same flesh which  for vs: Therefore that flesh must be deliue∣red
not in a visible and sensible maner, but yet in truth of geuing by body, and of taking by body. For of such geuing and taking Christ spake, as by the last supper it may appere, where he per∣oormedMath. 26 his promise. But M. Iuel was lothe, that relation should be made to the talke had at Capharnanm. For then he saw, that the very reall flesh must be the thing which should be deliuered. again he wold not haue either the commendatiō past, or the gift to come: and therefor he turned, commendaui, into, trado. I haue cōmended, into, I deliuer. Indede, M. Iue, Christ deliuered his flesh as well at Capharnaum, as at his supper byFalsi∣ying. your doctrine. But not so by the doctrine of the Ghospell: Where the promise is shewed to be made at Capharnaum, and the per∣foormance at the last upper. In which supper neither the body which the Iew s saw was deliuered, and much lesse bread or wine, which was not promised: but vnder the forme of bread & wine, that flesh and blood was deliuered, which at  was promised.The 216▪ vntruthe. Iuel. Thus the holy Fathers say: Christ is present, not cor∣porally. San. Both S. yril and S. Hilarie haue the word corporal∣ly, as I haue shewed, concerning the Sacrament.The 217. vntruthe. Iuel. Not carnally. San. S. Hilarie hath the word carnally in the 23. chapit. the number 37. of this booke.The 218. vntruthe. Iuel. Not naturally.In Ioan. li. 10. c. 13 & 11. c. 26 San. S. Hilarie hath the term naturally diuerse times, & S. Lyrill calleth it naturall partaking, and naturall vnion. Iuel. But as in a Sacrament, by his spirite and by his grace.Imperti∣nent. Sa. Here appereth what stuff you haue fed the reader with all in your whole booke. For partly you deny a truthe which is,
that Christ is not corporally present, and that you doe against the expresse word of God, and the Fathers, as I haue shewed: partly you proue that your heresy by an other truthe, which ra∣ther stablisheth then hindereth the real presence. For Christ can not be better present in spirit and grace, thē if he be present in his flesh, therein to conuerte to vs his spirit and grace. for the cause of his taking flesh was, to make his flesh an instrument to deli∣uer his spirit and grace to our flesh, to thend no meane of proui∣ding for our saluation might be omitted by so louing a Father. In consideration whereof S. Ambrose saith:Ambros. lib. 6. de Sacram. cap. 1. Thou that takest his flesh, art made partaker of his diuine substance in that food. Note that the spirit & substance of God cometh to vs by taking Christes flesh.
¶ The Conclusion. COnsider first, good Reader, that of moe then twenty arti∣cles, there is but one answered, & y• not the longest. where∣in if aboue two  faultes and vntrutes (without curiouse searching) be : what may a man thinke of the whol booke of M. Iuell? how many hundred, yea M. Iuels kd of rea so thousand vntruthes may you think to be conteined therein? who when he proueth his matter bt, and least of all abuseth himselfe, his proufe is none other, then to say one thing is not true, becausefo. 319. another is true. Thus he teacth Christ to be eaten by faith and337. 324: spirite, and thinketh that thereof he may conclude, Christ is not eaten in the sacrament by moth. Christ is corporally in heauen:323. therefore his bodie is not vnder the forme of bread. The Sacra∣ment is a figure, & therefore by his iudgemēt it is not the truth. As well he might say, a man hath a soule, and therefore no bodie: or Christ, is man and therefore not God.Abusin of the holy scriptures In Disputinge of the holie scriptures he neuer answereth to these words (which is geuen for you) beyng the most principall poynt of D. Hardings answere: he neuer considereth the promise316. made by Christ in y• tyme to come, Dabo I wil geue: but talketh of it, as if it were past and present. He hath Englished non habe∣bitis vitam, Ye shall haue no life. He expoundeth that we are flesh320. of Christes flesh and bone of his bones by his natiuitie: whereas320. thereby Christ is of vs, because he toke our nature, rather then we of him: except by faith we begin to deped of him. Moreouer he thereby makethe Christe the vine, and vs the branches: after341. which rte  & Iudas are braunches of the true vine which is Christe. For Christes natiuitie perteineth to their nature also.341. He tneth out of Priasius, in stede of, the breade whiche we breake, the breaking of the bread: attributing that to the actiō of343.
breakinge, which S Paule did attribute to the substaunce of the bread which we breake. He bryngeth late writers, to buyld his doctrine vppon their4. M Iuels Doctours words, such as he hath refused to admyt agaynst himselfe, as S.317. Bernard, Scotus, Nicolaus de Lyra, Bonauēture, D. Fisher,319. B. Tunstall, D. Smith, and the gloses of the Cannon lawe: and324. yet he leaeth so to their authoritie, that in the matter of churche156. eruice, he hathe no higher doctors to proue that in the primi∣tiue church y• praiers were in a knowē tonge, besyde, S Thomas and Lyra, whose resolution notwithstanding he wil not followe therein.5. He setteth all diuinitie vppon phrases of speache, thinking hePhrases of speache. hath aunswered sufficiently, if he can shewe a speach any thing341. like, vsed in an vnlike matter: by y• which order he may disproue342. the diuine nature of Christ, because men are also called Gods. &c.343. 344. And the vnitie of substance in the Trinitie, because the faithfullIoan. 10. are called one, as Christ and his Father are one. He may defend y• word to be none otherwise made flesh, then he graunteth breadIoan. 17. Ioan. 1. to be made Christes bodie. And y• water at Cana of Galile none otherwise to be made wine, then he graunteth the wine of Chri∣stes342. 425. supper to be made blood. To be short, he hath begunne the high way to set all the mysteries of Christ only vppon phrases. And consequently to bring the most helthfull knowledge of di∣uine matters, to a talke and maner of speach. But in handling his phrases he neuer maketh any discourse out of y• Scriptures, to shew like reason betwene diuerse places by him selfe alleged: but as children in grammar scholes picke Latin phrases out of Plautus, Terence, or Salust, not being able to iudge how y• one phrase differreth from the other: so hath he most ignorantly done in the Scriptures and in the Fathers.6. He compareth the Eucharist to Baptisme, both for like pre∣senceFalse com parisons.
of Christ in both, and for like adoration of both, and would341. haue most things like betwene them: Whereas though in some∣what they agree, yet in most things they difer excedig much, as I haue declared. He allegeth phrases cōcerning the holy Chrism,342. and yet he beleueth not the phrase which himself bringeth. He missexpoundeth y• sayings of the Fathers, interpreting spi∣rituall7. False commts. flesh (whereof S. Hierom intreateth) to be so named be∣cause it is the flesh of the Sonne of God, thereby denying (if that332. interpretation be true) the flesh of Christ (as it was crucified) to be the flesh of God. For it is sayd of S. Hierom to differ (af∣ter that maner) from the spirituall flesh. He taketh y• word flesh342. in Leo, and the word bodie in S. Augustine, and the same word320. bodie in Gregorie Nyssen, for Christes naturall flesh, and natu∣rall341. bodie, which were spoken of his mysticall flesh and his body the Church.8. He missenglisheth many words: Atteri at one tyme to be grin∣ded,False trāslatiōs into En∣glish. at another to be touched, Which is properly neither of both. Accedere, he calleth to reache. And in the same sentēce he tur∣neth328. hoc corpus y• body, because he wold haue it thought absent,347. whereas it ought to be englished, this body: which pronoune319. (this) doth declare, that S. Chrysostom spake of the body which341. was present vppon the altar. Valet, he turneth, this is the vse: , one nature, whereas it is of one planting, or pertey∣ning to one nature. De meo est, it is of my body. Secundū quen∣dam modum, after a certain phrase and maner of speach. He repor326. teth of S. Hilarie who sayd, sub mysterio, as if he had sayd, in a mysterie: Whereas it is to be englished, vnder a mistery. but that sub, vnder, greaueth him to the hart, because it betokeneth the344. presence of Christ so real, that it is vnder the mysterie, which weSlaun∣ers. take into our hands and mouthes at the holy communion. He slaundereth vs in saying we expound est, for erit, and erit,9.
for transubstantiabitur, and datur, for dabitur, benedixit, for, he326. blessed it away, & in place of it, he putteth another substance. For we teach the chaunging, and not the putting away of a substāce.328. He burdeneth D. Harding with contradiction, which is none:331. With Eutiches heresie, which heresie is directly against y• which D. Harding defendeth. He sayth D. Harding will haue children condemned who receaue not the Sacrament: which he neuer meant, nor sayd.10. He calleth for Doctors before the time and place, and when∣sting. they are come, he heapeth them altogether, and disputeth cōfuse∣ly327. of their sayings: so that any man may perceaue his euill con∣science,341. & vaine bragging. For where the points are most easy,342. there the staieth longest, where they are mot hard, there he iug∣gleth, and runneth in and out, hoping to cast a myste before the Readers eyes.11. He denieth adverbs taken of nounes to signifie the substanceChildish errours. of any thing, which is a childish ignorance: as likewise in the326. words of Gregorie Nyssen to beginne the construction with corpus, and to make humana natura to followe the verbe est,341. whereas he should haue done the contrarie in his construction, though the words there be placed out of order.12. He addeth words of his owne betwene the Doctors words,Cray convece not only such as may expound things otherwise hard, but euen324. such as weigh downe the question betwene vs and him: which344. & caet. thing is so common with him, that almost no longe sentēce esca∣peth a parenthesis of his owne patchinge in. He missapplieth things, attributing that to the Sacramentall13. False ap∣plications eating, which S. Augustine spake to an vnfaithfull Iew. not319. regarding how he mingleth vnlike things. & that which Cyril∣lusIn Ioan. tract 26. & 50. spake against the heresie of Nestorius, concerning that we eate the flesh of no bare man, but of God, he reporteth as if it had
bene a Catholike doctrine taught without disputation, and as if the sense were: we eate not by mouth at al the flesh of Christ. And that which S. Augustine speaketh either of the figures318. of the old law, or generally of all signes, he maketh serue against the holy mysteries of Christes supper, which do farre excede other siges & figures. It were to much to reckō vp, how oft he erreth in this behals: yet this may not be omitted, y• he applieth the answere made by S. Hilarie concerning the vnion betwene346. our selues by faith, as though he had sayd it of Christes vnion with vs. a matter of great weight is so shamefully belied. He writeth things expressly contrary, as that by faith Chri∣stes14. body dwelleth in our bodies really and corporally, and thatContra∣dictions. Christ dwelleth in vs not really or bodily, but because his faith341. is in vs. Againe what contradiction is it to say, all accidentall344. 345. coniunction is remoued, and yet not to grant a reall and sub∣stantiall323. coniunction? to say, the Sacrament is taken with our343. mouthes, and that we vndontedly receaue Christes body in the319. 345. Sacrament: and yet that Christes body is not receaued into our mouthes really, but by faith only? That our coniunction with Christ is called corporall, because it is spirituall?15. He vseth a point of so great and shamefull dishonesty, as oneA moste shameles shift. boy in scholes wold not vse in reasoning against an other: Ma∣king D. Harding to reason so, as he neuer thought os: as to say,321. 1. The Capharnaites mistoke Christes words. 2. Christ spea∣keth324. of his ascension. 3. We eate not the flesh that was cruci∣fied.333. Uppon euery of which propositions, and many suche like, he maketh D. Harding conclude, ergo Christes body is really in the Sacramnt: Either falsifying the whole argument, or leauing out a principall part, or putting that in one part, which should haue stode in an other. And when he hath done his feat, then to amend the matter he is wont to come in, with a But
M. Harding will say, & cet. A man of good conscience and of learning wil rather make his aduersaries reasons stronger, and then answere them when they are at the worst, then to dissemble the strength of them, and only to blere mens eyes with defacing his Aduersaries strong argument by falsifying his proof. D.324. & caet. Harding requireth only, that men of vnderstanding wil vouth∣safe to reade his words againe, after M. Iuel hath made his ar∣gument, and then to consider his vnhonest report, a witnesse of his euill conscience. He falsifieth the doctours, by making them to say more, then16. False ad∣ditions to the Fa∣thers words. they do say. He putteth into S. Hierom these three words (into heauen) that, whiche doe vtterly change the sense. He reporteth that S. Augustine teache th the olde Fathers to haue eaten the selfe same body that is receaued now of the faithful: all the which wordes are forged. In the words of Cyrillus he did put in these324. 321. three wordes, non aliud quàm. He maketh S. Hilarie to say, that344. we are one with Christ by faith naturally.346. He leaueth out certein words of the doctours, whiche were of17. importance touching the principall question. The nominatiueWords of importāce falsely left out in the doctours words. case in the B. of Rochesters words, conueying in also a false no∣minatiue case in steede of the true. In S. Augustines wordes in one place he left out the genitiue case vnitatis, and, huius rei, and in the same place the verbe, praeparatur in mensa Domini. In the317. third place, the noune adictiue spiritualem, wherein the whole323. weight of the cause rested: in the fourth, the ablatiue case, in ipso321. 320. eius corpore constituti. In Anacletus he left out Chrismati, put∣ting342. in oleo for it. In Alexander, he omitted Missarū solennia. In342. 341. englishing y• wordes of Bonauēture, he left out the adue essen∣tially.324. In S. Hierō he left out repellamus Iudaicas fabulas, which336. wold haue shewed whereof he spake. In alleging usebins Emissenus, he left out three linesin y• midest, ioyning y• foormer
part with the later. He affirmeth Gregorie Nyssen not to speake one worde of the18. 343. Sacrament, and therein formeth D. Hardings argument: ChristMost im∣udēt lies is borne of the virgin, ergo his body is really in the Sacrment. whereas Gregorie Nyssen said cleane contrarie: Christ is made meate to to the body, ergo he was borne of the virgin. and there∣of D. Harding concluded, ergo he was as really made meate to our bodies in the Sacrament, as euer he was really borne, sithe his being real meate proueth his birth. He saith, one Iohn Scote and Bertram wrote openly against the real presence, with good contentation of the world. a more impudent lye was neuer vtte∣red329. by man. He disgraceth S. Hilarie, and priuily fathereth vppon him a19. great blasphemy: as though he taught that we are one with GodFalse ac∣cusing of S. ilary the Father and the sonne in nature of the Godhead: whereas his mind was nothing so, as I haue declared before.344. He calleth the Fathers wordes, spoken in the matter which is20. in question betwen D. Harding & him, hot, violent, rigorouse,Gilty. excessiue: therein plainly yelding him selfe giltie that he ought to344. By this point he eldeth himself gilty. subsribe, as who would not find fault with those three most ler∣ned and auncient Fathers words, Hilarie, Chrysostome, Cyrill, vnlesse he clerely saw them to speake vtterly against his doctrin. I beseche God to geue him grace to amend these enormouse faults. It is better, M. Iuel, once to subscribe hartely, then to be damned for euer. Now to leaue M. Iuel, and to speake these few words to thee (good Christian Reader) I chose to speake so copiously of this1. argumēt, partly because it is the safer way to offend in that side, partly because this one questiō is the ground of a great number oe, whiche depend of it. For if the body and blood of Christ be
really present vnder the formes of bread and wine (which thing nowe is most fully prod) there is no doubt of transubstantia∣tion, as the which is the most conueient way to make the bo∣dy2. present. Againe, wheresoeuer that body is, it can not be but a propitiatory sacrifice: sith it is the substance once bloodily sacrifi∣ced, wherein the merite of that sacrifice still remaineth. Thirdly,3. seing that body being risen from death, dieth no more, the whole must nedes be vnder eche soorme: and therefore albeit the conse∣cration muste be necessarily made in two kindes, to represent the death of Christ (where his blood was apart from his flesh) yet no lesse merite, vertue, & grace cometh to him, who receaueth wor∣thely one kind alone, then if he receaued both together. Fourth∣ly4. there can be no dout, but the body of the sonne of God both ought to be adored, & being present for vs may be preserued for our necessity. So that all these truthes and many moe depend of this one, wherein the reall body of Christ is proued to be pre∣sent in the Sacrament. And seing it is proued present by the word of God (as it hath bene declared in the third, fourth, and fifth bookes) seing it hath bene taught to be adored (as it is declared in my sixth booke) seing it is  to be taken into our , mouthes, and bo∣dies, and to nourish our very flesh to resurrection, & to be made meate to our bodies, which haue neither faith nor spirit, but on∣ly flesh and bones to receaue it withal: seing the doctrine taught by M. Iuell and his fellowes against the real presence is by the word of God found to be vaine, false, wicked, and is directly cō∣futed in the first, second, and seuenth bookes: last of al, seing as in this one article M. Iuels  are in parte disco∣uered, so  many other they shalbe shortly (God willing) layed  the  of all : it remaineth that the whole Catholike faith so  defended and iustified, be most eruestly bleued,
and according to the commaundement of Christ, most strongly confessed, to th'end he that cōfesseth now this truth of Christ be∣fore men, may be acknowleged of Christ before his Father at the day of iudgement, where God send vs a comfortable sentence, that we may liue with him in glorie for euer, Amen. Approbatio septimi Libri. QVoniam Librum istum legerunt, & approbant  Theologiae & idiomatis Anglici eru∣ditissimi, quibus ego summam hac in re fi∣dem deberi iudico, tutò & vtiliter emitti potest. Cunerus Petri, Pastor Sancti Petri Louanij. 20. Decemb. Anno. 1565.
A briefe table of the vvhole vvorke. 1. First, because the whole booke doth concerne specially the real presence of Christes body in the Sacramēt, if the Reader wil see any thing perteining thereunto, he shall finde it in the chapi∣ters which are prefixed before euerie booke. 2. Secondly, of adoration it is intreated in y• six first chapiters of the sixth booke. And that the Sacramēt of the altar can be no idol. 292. 3. Of transubstantiation as occasion serued, he shall find. fol. 234. &c. item 314. B. & 315. 4. Of the sacrifice of y• masse, fol. 32. 33. 34. 197. 217. 216. 217. 223. vs{que} ad 233. 5. Of reseruation, 35. b. 36. 37. 6 Howe the Sacrament of the altar is a figure 59. 60. vs{que} ad 72. & 137. b. vs{que} ad 146. & 280. 7. That euill men eate Christes body in the Sacrament. 43. vs{que} ad 50. & 276. 8. Of the mysticall body of Christ, whiche is the Church. fol. 260. vs{que} ad 269. 9. Of the figures and prophecies of the old Testament. 214. b. vs{que} ad 223. 10. The faith of the whole Church concerning the Sacrament of the altar. 316. b. vs{que} ad 324.
Faults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. , 5 1. 7. liue. , 7 2 17 mean, 11 1 4 name is more like, 17 2 29 is it more like. aboue, 19 1 24 alone. doctrinethis, 20 2 11 doctrine of this. a truth lesse, 21 1 21 a truth no lesse. che, 28 1 24 such. redy by dede, 29 2 12 ready either by dede. diuine, ibidem   31 liuing. saying, 50 2 13 sauing. that filleth, 73 2 20 that he filleth. denieth par. 82 1 8 denieth any par∣cel. made meate, 86 2 9 made meete. now came, 87 1 9 now come. vs ne, 89 2 15 vs a new. maner prices eodē that ye sonne,     18 other prices.   107 1 28 y• which the sonne of his bread, 108 1 20 of this breade. be said, 112 1 5 be saued the ycal, 15 1 2 mystical. weth howhe 118 2 2 sheweth that he. geue ye flesh, 120 1 16 geue that fleshe. of grace, 123 2 18 of glorie. signa quo, 124 1 31 signa quae. mysteries 126 1 6 mysteries. Cyril∣lus besyde that. besyde,         wil geue it. 127 2 29 I wil geue. but one, 128 2 11 spake but once. but teache, 136 2 31 but thei teach. out al quest 137 2 31 out of al question. old fashon, 143 2 5 old falshod. word of life 147 2 17 wood of life. tem lin 18.         not to be 148 2 3 Christ to be. where yet, 167 2 wel yet. & of God, ibidem   15 and if it be the ho∣nour of God. hoc, that 172 2 24 hoc this. seme to stād, 177 1 15 seme to sound. this Hieru. ibid. 2 15 this is Hierusalē. they should 179 2 7 as they sound. and really 180 2 11 and real. Chrystom, 182 1 Chrysostom. meaneth vs, 184 1 5 moueth vs. , ibidē   2 to change. Faults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. and gather, ibidē   25 and to gather. God man, ibidē 2 7 both God & man miraculoush 186 2 19 miraculously. vnder your, 191 2 7 vnto your. miserable 194 1 4 miserable racking. taking.         corpus 185 1 3 corporis. the cause, 198 2 4 the sense. faithful whē 202 1 31 faithful. when cup is the 203 1 6 this cup the same mēber 209 2 6 same number. it is not, 211 1 7 is it not. by naturall 212 2 3 supernatural. corde vos 227 1 24 certè vos of me and ibidem   30 of me to thend in y• (dede ye may be mindfull of me, and I say vnder 233 2 16 I say ye body that died vnder. dedes that 34 2 13 dedes in that am a vine, 252 2 28 am the true vine. any mystical 266 1 12 only mystical. corpore vni. ibid.   25 capite vniretut▪ but in the, 268 1 23 but by the. carnis Chri sti? ibid.   31 carnis Christi &c. his Church. 269 1 24 All ye foloweth frō these words (and his church) to the end of the v. Chap. should come in at the end of th vi. chap.   did it 272 1 8 so did it. was dead? ibidem   9 was dead. els past in, 273 1 19 els in. 274 1 4 Christ. Certenly. by act, 180 1 31 by art. not once to, 299 1 3 not omitte to. Corinthi∣ās was not, 300 1 4 Corinthiās was▪ not. corpus 302 1 10 corpus est Chri sti. Christi,         did al the, ibid 2 1 did not al the. in dede 306 1 18 in dede the things. things,         that mēber, 317 1 12 that number. or beleue 320 1 9 or  no. no▪        
aults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. of a shape, ibid. 2 8 of a rounde shape. specially 322 2 31 specially twise. awise,         very faut, 325 2 15 very fact. no leading, 333 2 1 no word leading. is a figure 332 2 15 is the signe. thee they 331 2 2 thee that they also. also,         sixtēth cha. 334 2 9 tenth chap. yas, ibidem   10 say. yet we, 335 1 12 yet now we. the word ibid. 2 13 the wood. But it is 346 2 2 But is it. (or flesh) 356▪ 1 26 (or fleshly) to what, 359 1 31 to be what. Faults. Fo. Pa. Li. Corrections. the cōsecra 364 2 21 the consideratio tion,         the vine, 365 2 14 the true vine. speake vnto 381 2 2 spake vnto y• Ie∣wes the. the,         and drink, 382 1 30 and to drinke. be cōmon, 385 2 26 be the common. is be, 388 2 15 i it be. therof it not▪ ibid.   17 thereof is not. more cōtra. 390 1 5 mere cōtradiction one vnion 392 1 15 of our vnion. God or. 405 1 2 God the father or. chariti loue 412 1 21 charitie alone. gifts are cor. ibidē y• ethniks are cōcorporal▪       superturally 417 1 29 supernaturally. ¶ Other smaller faultes in misplacing of letters & points, I leaue to the iudgement of the discrete Reader. LOVANII. Apud Ioannem Foulerum▪ Anno Domini 1566. Mense anuar.
