2985 99850830 16060
¶The Actes of the Apostles, translated in∣to Englyshe Metre, and de∣dicated to the Kynges moste excel∣lent Maiestye, by Christofer Tye, Doctor in Musyke, and one of the Gentylmen of hys graces moste ho∣nourable Chappell, wyth notes to eche Chapter, to synge and also to play vpon the Lute, very necessarye for studentes after theyr studye, to fyle theyr wyttes, and also for all Christians that cannot synge, to reade the good and Godlye sto∣ryes of the lyues of Christ hys Ap∣postles. 1553
Syrack. XXXII. If God to rule, do thee elect Pryde not thy selfe therin As one of thyne, be in effect Thy people so to wynne. Let care for them, be thy repast That wysedome be their choyse And when thy dutye, done thou hast Syt downe wyth them reioyce. Of honour then, receyue the crowne In wysedome to excell For wisdom, wynneth great renowne whych doth become thee well. Hynder not Musyke.
¶ To the Uertuous and Godlye learned Prynce, Edwarde the .vi. by the grace of God, King of Eng∣lande, Fraunce, and Irelande, Defendour of the Fayth, and on earth next and imme∣diatly vnder Christe, of the Churches of England and Irelande the Supreme head, your graces humble, louynge, and obedi∣ent seruaunte Christofer Tye, wysheth the continuaunce of God hys feare to dwell in your graces heart, longe to raygne in muche honoure, healthe, wealthe and vic∣torye. COnsydrynge well, most godly Kyng The zeale and per∣fecte loue: Your grace doth beare, to eche good thyng That geuen is from aboue. And that your grace, oft tymes doth looke To learne of the last daye: The whiche ye fynde, with in gods booke That wyll not passe awaye.
Whose boke is geuen, in these your dayes Wherin ye do reioyce: And eke prayse hym, in al his wayes And that with thankeful voyce. Which doth make glad, your subiectes all And moueth them to learne: Gods lyuelye worde, and how they shal The truthe therby discearne. Beholde O Kynge, of God electe And ye shall right well se: That as your highnes, is affect So wyll your Subiectes be. Youre grace may note, frō tyme to tyme That some doth vnder take: Upon the Psalmes, to wryte in ryme The verse pleasaunt to make. And some doth take, in hande to wryte Out of the booke of Kynges: Because they se, your grace delyte Insuche like Godlye thynges. And last of all, I youre poore man Whose doinges are full base: Yet glad to do, the best I can To geue vnto your grace
Haue thought it good, nowe to recyte The storyes of the Actes: Euen of the twelue, as Luke doth wryte Of all their worthy factes. Unto the text, I do not ad Nor nothynge take awaye And though my style, be grosse and bad The truth perceyue you maye. Your Maiestye, is not to teache Thapostles wordes are playne: With ynkhorne termes, they dyd not prea¦che But sought an easye vayne. Playnely to speake, their maisters wyll The people to enstruct: That they their callynge, myght fulfyll In truth them to conduct. Prayinge your grace, not to thynke now That I do condescende: The pleasaunt style, to disalow But do it much commende. But he that shal, of scripture treat Yf he wyll please God well: Of force he must, such termes forgeat The truth playnely to tell.
My Ignoraunce, thus to excuse I haue my mynde exprest: I trust your grace, wyl not refuse To make of it the best. And yf your grace, shall in good part My symple worke so take: My wyttes to this, I will conuart All vayne thinges to forsake. My callynge is, another waye Your grace shall here in fynde: By notes set forth, to synge or playe To recreate the mynde. And thoughe they be, not curious But for the letter mete: Ye shall them fynde, harmonious And eke pleasaunt and swete. That such good thīges, your grace might moue Your lute when ye assaye: In stede of songes, of wanton loue These stories then to playe. So shall your grace, please God yt Lorde In walkynge in hys waye: His lawes and statutes, to recorde In your heart nyght and daye.
And eke your realme, shall floryshe styll No good thynge shall decaye: Your subiectes shal, with right good wyll These wordes recorde and saye. Thy lyfe O Kynge, to vs doth shyne As Gods boke doth thee teache: Thou dost vs fede, with suche doctrine As Christes elect dyd preache. The lyuyng God, graunt thee to raygne In great honour and wealth: Thy vertuous life, good Lord mayntayne And sende thee prosperous health. Thy dere Systers, the sprite them leade To loue the worde of God: Whiche shall them stande, in better steade Then doth their whole liuelod. Thy whole counsayle, the Lorde preserue And graunt to man and wyfe: To craue of hym, not ones to swarue From hys swete worde of lyfe. Amen. CHRIST dyd ascende, vp in to heauen As ye shall after reade: Mathias vvas, of the eleuen Electe in Iudas steade.
Meane. In the foremer treatyse to thee Dere frend The o phi∣lus: I haue written the Tenor. In the foremer treatyse to thee Dere frend The o phi∣lus, I haue writen the ve ri te,
Countertenor. In the foremer treatyse to thee Dere frend The o phi∣lus I haue written the ve ri- Bassus. In the former treatyse to thee Dere frend The o phi∣lus, I haue wrytten the verite the
Meane. ve ri te, Of the Lord Christ Ie∣sus, Whiche he to do and eke to teache, Began vntyll the Tenor. Of the Lorde Christ Ie∣sus, Which he to do and eke to teach, Began vntyll the
Contertenor. te of the Lorde Christ Ie∣sus, Whiche he to do and eke to teache, Began vntyll the Bassus. ve ri te of the Lord Christ Ie sus, Whiche he to do and eke to teache, Began vntyll the
Meane. daye: In whiche the sprite vp hym dyd feache, To dwell aboue for aye. Tenor. daye: In whiche the sprite vp hym dyd feache, vp hym dyd feach, To dwell aboue for aye.
Countertenor. daye: In whiche the sprite vp hym dyd feach To dwell aboue for aye. Bassus. sprite vp hym dyd feach vp hym dyd feach, To dwell aboue for aye.
IN the former, treatyse to thee Deare frende Theophilus: I haue written, the verite Of the Lorde Christ Iesus. Whiche he to do, and eke to teache Began vntyll the daye: In whiche the sprite, vp dyd hym feache To dwell aboue for aye. After that he, had power to do Euen by the holy ghost: Commaundemētes, then he gaue vnto His chosen least and moost. To whome also, him selfe dyd shew From death thus to reuyue: By tokens playne, vnto his few Euen fortye dayes alyue. Speaking of Gods, kyngdom wt heart Chusynge together them: Commaundynge them, not to depart From that Ierusalem. But styll to wayte, on the promys Of hys father the Lorde: Of whiche ye haue, hearde me or thys Unto you make recorde.
For Iohn with water, dyd baptyse But ye shall baptist be: Euen with the sprite, that is ryghtwyse Within fewe dayes trust me. When they were then, all hym before They moued hym to tell: If at that tyme, he woulde restore The kyngdome to Israell. He sayde to them, I do recorde The knowledge is not youer: To know the tymes, that God the Lorde Hath kept in hys owne power. The holye ghost, receyue shall ye Whiche shall teache you to do: And ye shall all, my wytnes be Ierusalem vnto. In all Iury, and Samarye To wytnes I you sende: And preache my worde, that shall tarye Euen vnto the worldes ende. When he had sayde, these wordes aloude Whyle they behelde the lyght: He was vp take, into a cloude Strayght way out of their syght.
And while they lokt, vp sted fastly To heauen as he vp went: Beholde two men, stode there them by And whyte was their garment. Whiche sayd ye men, of Galile Why gase ye vp in vayne: Thys Iesus thus, vp take from ye Shal thus come downe agayne. Then dyd returne, eche one of them From Oliuet the mounte: A iorney from, Ierusalem One Sabboth daye I counte. When they came to, Ierusalem A parlare there was dyght Where dyd abyde, eche one of them That I wyll nowe recyght. Peter and Iames, Iohn and Andrew Philip and eke Thomas: Bartylmewe Iames, Symon Mathew Iudas that Iames sonne: These all abode, with one accorde In supplication styll: And dyd desyre, of God the Lorde Hys promyse to fulfyll.
¶And wemen that, wer ertens With them to heauen yd call: Besydes the mother, of Iesus And eke hys brethren all. ¶In those dayes Peter, stode vp stoute Emyds them all trulye: To vewe the names, which was aboute An hundreth and twentye. ¶And sayde ye brethren, the scripture Muste nedes fulfylled be: Whiche Dauid by, the spirite so pure Of Iudas dyd foresee. ¶Whiche dyd gide them, that toke Iesus To hys confusion sure: Who numbred was, for one of vs In ministration pure: ¶And nowe he hath, possest the grounde Of great iniquitie: Dispayre hath driuen, hym to confounde Hys lyfe vpon a tre. ¶He brast in two, the mydst aboute Hys bodye was so swowne: Hys bowels all, they gushed oute As it is ryght wel knowen. ¶The dwellers at, Ierusalem Doth cal the felde thys day: Acheldama, the which with them The blode felde is to say. ¶The boke of psalmes, doth thus declare Be voyde hys dwellyng place:
Another shall, euen for his share His byshoprycke enbrace: ¶Wherfore of these, the which with vs Hath bene in companye: At all suche tymes, as Christ Iesus Went in and out vs by. ¶Euen from the first, baptisme of Iohn Tyll Christ went vp certayne: To witnes we, must ordayne one Of Christes rysynge agayne. ¶And they right soone, appoynted two Ioseph hight Barsabas: Whose surname was, Iustus also The other Mathias. ¶They prayd & sayd, thou Lord canst tast All heartes and them discus:
Whiche of these two, shewe that thou hast Geuen felowshyp with vs. ¶That one may exercise, the place Of ministration well: Thapostle shyp, from whiche Iudas By his transgression fell. ¶And they gaue forth, their lots wt spede Which wrought by power from heauen: Mathias was, elect in dede And went with the eleuen. THE commynge of, the holy ghost Peter dyd preache in dede: Euen at Ierusalem, vvhere most The faythfull dyd encrease. Meane. When that the fyftye daye was Tenor. When that the fyftye daye was Countertenor. When that the fyftye daye was Bassus. When that the fyftye daye was
Meane. cum, Whytsonday full of grace, They came together al and some, In to a certayne Tenor. come, Whitsonday full of grace: They cam together al and sum Into a certayne place: place:
Countertenor. come Whitsonday full of grace: They came together all and some, In∣to a certayne place, a certayne Bassus. come, Whitsonday ful of grace: They cam together all & some Into a certayne place: place:
Meane. place, And sodaynlye a sound oute brast, From heauen as it had bene, Tenor. And sodaynlye, a sound oute braste, From heauen as it had bene: The commynge of a myghtye
Countertenor. place, And sodaynlye, a sound out braste, From heauen as it had bene, The Bassus. And sodaynlye, a sound out braste, From heauen as it had bene, The commynge of a
Meane. The commynge of a myghtye blaste, Fyllyng the house with dene. Tenor. blast, Fyllyng the house with dene: dene: WHen that the fifty, daye was come Whitsonday full of grace: They came together, all and some In to a certayne place. ¶And sodaynlye, a sounde out braste From heauen as it had bene: The commynge of, a mighty blast Fyllynge the house with dene.
Countertenor. commynge of a myghtye blaste, Fyllyng the house with dene. Bassus. myghtye blaste, Fyllyng the house with dene: dene: Clouen tounges dyd, to them appeare Lyke as they had bene fyre: And sat vpon them, euery where To fulfyll their desyre. ¶The holye ghost, dyd them aduaunce To tounges ryght wyse and sage: Euen as the sprit, gaue vtteraunce So chaunged their language.
¶And there dwelt at, Ierusalem Iewes that feared the Lorde: Of euery contrey, some of them That came to beare recorde. ¶Now whā this voyce, came thus to pas The multitude dyd more: They came together, where it was And were amased sore. ¶For euery one, heard his owne tounge That he had vsed longe: They wondred all, bothe olde and younge And sayde them selues amonge: ¶Beholde are not, these men new sprong Euen out of Galile: How heare we then, eche one his tounge Wherein right borne were we. ¶Parthians, Medes, and Elamits Mesopotamians: And men of Iurye, Luke recytes Wyth Capadocians. ¶The Pontans, and the Asyans Phrigi, and Pamphilie Of Egipt, and the Lybyans Dwellinge Sirene nere bye. ¶Straūgers of Rome, Iues Proselits Tharabians sayde thus: They spake our tounges, which truly hyts Of God the workes wondrus. ¶They were amased, & sore afrayde Wōdringe at this straunge syne:
And other mocked, them and sayde They are full of newe wyne. ¶Peter stode vp, the trueth to tell Straynynge his voyce to them: Of Iury and, to those that dwell Euen at Ierusalem. ¶Be thys wel knowne, vnto you all And with your eares heare saye: These are not droncke, as ye them call Thys thyrde houre of the daye. ¶But this is it, that spoken was Of the prophet Ioell: In the last dayes, shall come to pas Sayth God as I shall tell. ¶I wyll powre out, sayth God the Lorde My spyryte vpon all fleshe: Your sonnes and, daughters shall recorde Yonge men shall see thynges freshe. ¶Your olde men shall, dreme dremes al∣wayes On my seruauntes wyll I: Powre out my sprite, euen in those dayes And they shall prophecy. ¶Wonders in heauen, I wyll prouoke And on the earth great chaunge: Blode, fire and the, vapoure of smoke Whiche shal appeare right straunge. ¶The Sunne shal turne, into darknes The Moone eke into blood: Before the daye, of great Iustes The Lorde shall thynke it good.
¶And it shalbe, euen in those dayes Who so wyll mercy craue: And call vpon, the Lorde alwayes Doutles he wyll hym saue. ¶Ye Israelites, be ye not deffe But heare thys yf ye can: The Lorde Iesus, of Nazarethe Of God approued man. ¶Amonge you was, miraculus Great wonders he dyd showe: God wrought by hym, thinges wonderus Emidst of you ye knowe. ¶Hym haue ye taken, by the handes To scourge him with a rod: After he was, geuen you in bandes By the foresyght of God. ¶Ye haue hym crucifed, and slayne But God agayne him raysed: And losed hym, from deathe and payne In him styll to be praysed. ¶Because it was, impossible To withstande his great myght: For Dauid which was, credible Dyd prophecie aryght. ¶I sawe God alwayes, before me He is on my ryght hande: That I shoulde neuer, moued be My heart dyd vnderstande. ¶Great ioyes my heart, dyd fele in dede My tounge was glad also:
My fleash dyd lyue, without all drede In hope voyde of all wo. ¶Because my soule, to make his mone In hell shall not left be: Ne yet suffer, the holye one Corruption for to see. ¶Thou hast of lyfe, shewed me the lyght With ioye my heart possest: Euen with, thy countenaunce so bryght My soule is brought to rest. ¶Ye men & brethren, my wordes marke Let me speche frely haue: Euen of Dauid, the Patriarke For he lyeth dead in graue. ¶And his sepulchre, doth remayne With vs vnto thys daye: No dout he was, a prophet playne And knewe what God dyd saye. ¶Not onely saye, but also swere And in hys othe repeate: The fruites of hys, loynes shal prospere And syt vpon his seate. ¶In that Christ in, the fleash shoulde ryse He ryght well sawe before: And sayde he shoulde, ryse vp ryght wise And lyue for euermore. ¶Hys soule shoulde not, be left in hell Hys fleash corrupt nought shall: God hath hym raysed, vp right well Wherof we wytnes all.
¶Syns now that he, by the right hande Of God exalted is: And by the Lorde, doth vnderstande The holy ghostes promis. ¶Now of hys wordes, ye knowe the ende As ye may heare and see: Dauid to heauen dyd not ascende: But truly thus sayde he. ¶The Lorde vnto, my Lorde dyd saye Syt thou on my ryght hande: Untyll I make, thy foes to staye Thy fote on them to stande. ¶All Israell, knowe thys certayne And therin to persist: The same Iesus, whome ye haue slayne God hath made Lorde and Christ. ¶When they hearde this, their hearts did fall And sayde Peter vnto: And eke to the, Apostles all Brethren what shall we do. ¶And Peter sayde, to them repent And then Baptisme begynne: In Christ his name, by whom God sent Remission of synne. Ye shall receyue, the holy goost The promyse so dyd fall: To you and yours, in euery coost Such as the Lorde shall call. ¶He bare witnes, of great comforte Exhortynge them eche one:
To saue them from, thou towarde sorte And generacion. They that his preachinge, dyd imbrace Were baptist euen through out: There came to them, that day by grace Thre thousande soules about. They dyd folowe, thapostles lore Doctrine and companye: Breakynge their breade, and euermore In prayer certaynelye. And eke of euery soule the fere Of God on them dyd fall: Wonders and sygnes, were shewed eche where By the apostles all. And such as dyd, beleue Gods wyll Together kept in bandes: To haue all thynges, in comen styll They solde their goodes and landes. Departynge them, euen in the Lorde As euery man had nede: Beinge daylye, with one accorde In the temple in dede. In euerye house, the breade to parte Their meate to eate aryght:
With ioye, and singlenes of hearte Praysynge the God of myght. They had fauour, with euery one The Lorde added right fre: Unto the congregacion Suche as shoulde saued he.
The contentes. THE halte restored, is certayne Euen to hys perfecte strengthe: And Peter preched, Christ right playne As ye shall reade at lengthe. Meane. Peter & Iohn, they toke their way The temple vp in Tenor. Peter and Iohn, they toke their way The temple vp in- Treble. Peter & Iohn, they toke their way The temple vp into: Aboute the nynth, houre for to pray As they were wont to do. A certayne man
both halt and lame, Euen from hys byrth ryght poore: They brought and layd, dayly the same Euen at the tem ple dore. Tenor. Peter and Iohn, they toke theyr way The temple vp in to: Aboute
the nynth houre for to praye, for to praye, As they were wont to do, A cer∣tayne mā, both halt & lame, Euen frō his byrth ryght poore They brought and layd, dayly the same Euen at the tem ple dore.
Meane. Peter and Iohn, they toke theyr way The temple vp in to: About the nynth houre for to praye, As they were wont to do, A certayne man bothe halt & lame, Euen frō his byrth ryght poore, They brought and
layd dayly the same Euen at the temple doore. Basse. Peter and Iohn, they toke theyr way The temple vp in to, Aboute the nynth, houre for to praye, for to praye, As they were wont to do, A
certayne man, both halte and lame, Euen frō his byrth ryght pore: They brought & layd: dayly the same, Euen at the temple dore▪ PEter & Iohn, they toke theyr way The Temple vp in to: About the ninth, houre for to pray As they were wonte to do. certayne man, both halt and lame Euen from his byrthe ryght pore: They brought and layd, daylye the same Euen at the Temple dore. Whiche is called, the Beutifull That he myght almesse craue: Of them that went, to the temple Some helpe of them to haue.
And when he sawe, Peter and Iohn Ryght nere the temple drew: Theyr almesse he, dyd axe anon And they both dyd him vew. And sayde to hym, loke thou on vs And he was well a payde: Hopinge of them, to haue almesse But Peter to hym sayde. Siluer and golde, nowe haue I none But suche as God gaue me: By vertue of, the holye one The same geue I to thee. Nowe in the name, of Christ Iesus Of Nazareth aryse: In company, to walke with vs And prayse the Lorde most wyse. He toke hym then, by the ryght hande And lyfte hym vp at length: Upon hys feete, he strayght dyd stande Hys bones receyued strength. And he dyd sprynge, stande, walke & start In at the temple dore: Lepynge, praysynge, euen with his heart The lyuynge Lorde therfore.
The people all, dyd hym well see Prayse God for hys good state: And they knewe well, that it was he Whiche begged at the gate. They were fylled, with great wondryng And were amased sore: Euen at thys mans, sodayne healynge That was so lame before. Thys healed halt, helde fast also Euen of Peter and Iohn: The people ranne, to them in to The Porche of Salomon. When Peter saw, them wonder so These wordes to them he spake: Ye Israelittes, I saye of who Thys wondrynge do ye make. Or why loke ye, with stedfastnes On vs as we coulde do: By our owne power, or holynes Thys cure thys man vnto, The God of Abraham and Isacke And Iacob thys hath done: God of our fathers, without lacke Hath glorifed hys sonne.
Iesus whom once, refused ye In Pilates presents playne: When he had iudged, hym to be Losed from deathe and payne. But ye denyed, the holy one A murtherer to saue: And eke kylled, the Lorde alone Hys lyfe ye woulde not haue. Whiche God hath raysed, from the deed Wherof we wytnes can: Through fayth in hys, name confirmed Hys name vpon thys man. Whome ye dyd see, and knowe also When fayth in hym dyd ryse: Whiche fayth hath geuen, this man vnto Hys health before your eyes. Nowe dere brethren, I knowe that ye Haue done thys wycked dede: Through ignoraunce, as semeth me Whiche dyd your rulers leade. But God before hande, he dyd vtter And eke his prophetes wylled: To teache that Christ, the death shoul suf∣fer Which he hath now fulfylled.
Repent ye now, I say repent And turne to vs this daye: That all your synnes, nowe euident May cleane be done awaye. For when the tyme, of refreshynge Shal come to vs with spede: In presentes of, the Lorde and Kynge Aboue all Kynges in dede. And when God shall, hym sende the day Before preached to vs: Unto you all, which is to saye The Lorde and Christ Iesus. Whiche must haue heauen, vntyl al thyng Whiche he hath spoken playne: By Prophetes syns, the first begynnyng Restored be agayne. For Moyses to, the fathers sayde The Lorde rayse vp wyl he: A Prophete, vnto you for ayde Muche lyke euen vnto me. Hym shal ye heare, and not controule But in hys wordes reioyce: The tyme wyl come, that euery soule Whiche wyll not heare hys voyce
Shalbe destroyed, without all dout Whiche tyme wyl not be longe: That all such shall, be cleane throune out The people from amonge. The Prophetes all, syns Samuell And thence forth hath alwayes: Tolde of the truth, ryght passynge well And eke spake of these dayes. The Prophets children, all are you That by the couenaunt came: To our fathers, whiche God dyd vou And sayde to Abraham. In thy sede shall, the kynredes all On earth be blest in vs: Fyrste vnto you, God dyd vp call Hys onelye sonne Iesus. And hym he hath, sent vnto you Eche one of you to blesse: That euery one, of you shoulde now Tourne from hys wickednesse. THE Apostles, vvere in pryson cast They vvere to preache forbod: But they toke them, to prayer fast Renouncynge men for God.
Trebel. When that the people, taught they had There came to them doutles: Priests & rulers as men nye mad, And eke the Saduces, Whome it greued that they should moue, The people and them leade, That Iesus Christ
by powre aboue, Shoulde ryse vp from the deade. The Tenor. When that the people, taught they had, There came to them doutles: Priests & rulers as men nye mad, And eke the Saduces, Whom it greued
that they should moue, The people and them lead: That Iesus Christe by power aboue Should ryse vp from the deade, should ryse vp from the deade. Meane. When that the people, taught they had Ther cam to them doutles▪ Priests and
rulers, as men nye mad, as men nye mad, And eke the Saduces, Whom it greued, that they should moue The people and them leade, That Iesus Christe, by powre aboue, Should ryse vp from the deade, from the deade.
Basse. When that the people taught they had There came to them doutles: Priests & Rulars as mē nye mad, as mē nye mad, And eke the Saduces Whome it greued that they should moue, The peo∣ple and them leade: That Iesus Christ
by powre aboue Should ryse vp from the deade, from the deade. WHen that ye people, taught they had There came to them doutles: Priestes & rulers, as men nie mad And eke the Saduces. Whome it dyd greue, yt they should moue The people and them leade: That Iesus Christ, by power aboue Shoulde ryse vp from the deade. And they layd hādes, on thē strayght way And put them all asyde: In prison fast, tyll the next daye For it was then euentyde. But those that heard, the worde euen then Beleued out of hande: The numbre then, of those wonne men Was well nye fyue thousande.
And it chaunced, the next daye was Eche ruler and Elder: The Scribes Annas, and eke Cayphas Iohn and Allexander. And eke all those, that were with them There of the hye Priestes kyn: Then gathered at, Ierusalem Where they were then brought in. And when they stode, before the same They axed them sayinge: Shew by whose powre, or in whose name That you haue done thys thynge. Peter ful of, the holy goost Sayde vnto them ryght well: Ye rulers all, both lest and moost And chiefe of Israell. Yf we thys daye, muste testify Of the good dede and dole: Delt to the sicke, man and eke by What meanes he is made whole. Be it well knowen, to them that lyst And ye that rulers be: That in the name, of Iesus Christ Of Nazareth worke we.
Whome ye haue, crucified and slayne God hath from death now raysed: By whome this man, is whole certayne The Lord therfore be praysed. This is the chefe stone cast a syde Of you that buylders be: Whiche in the chiefe place shall abyde Of the corners saye we. For neyther is there, saluacion In anye sauinge he: Nor other name, there is not one Wherin made safe we be. When they behelde, the boldnes then Of Peter and of Iohn: And knewe them both, vnlearned men And laye people eche one. They dyd muche muse, and knew iustly That they were with Iesu: And dyd beholde, the man stand by The whiche was healed new. Commaundynge them, to stande asyde And from their counsell goo: Consultinge there, and sayde prouyde With these men what to do.
A wondrus signe, is done by them And eke is iustly knowne: To all them in, Ierusalem The thynge abrode is blowen. But that they shal, hence forth therfore No further noyse the same: Let vs charge them, to speake no more To no man in hys name. They gaue to them, commaūdment new That they should no man ayde: To preache or teache, of their Iesu But Peter and Iohn sayde. Yf it be ryght, as ye thynke it In syght of God the Lorde: Your words to kepe, Gods to omit Iuge ye and so recorde. For we wyl speake, the truth euen so Wherof we knowe the grounde: They thretened them, and let them go No faut in them was founde. The people also, praysed God The lame awaye went rounde: Who was of age, ful fourty and od Which was made whole and sounde
As soone as they, were then let go They to their felowes went: Expressynge their, great payne and wo And eke imprisonment. By the hye Priestes, and Elders all And what to them they sayde: When they heard that, they loude dyd call And gaue God thankes for ayde. And sayde thou Lorde: thou God of blys Madst heauen and earth for vs: The sea and all, that ther in is By whome Dauid sayd thus. Why dyd the heathen, fume and fret What rage in them now sprynges Why dyd the Iuishe, people set Their myndes vpon vayne thynges. The Kynges and Rulers, dyd persist In wycked councell longe: Agaynst the Lorde, and hys sonne Christ Whiche he sent vs amonge. For of a trueth, agaynst the Lorde Whome thou annoynted hast: Herod, Pilate, with one accorde Helde with the Gentyls fast.
The people eke, of Israell Increased more and more: To do what thy, handes and councell Determyned before. Nowe Lorde beholde, their threatnynge sworde And graunt to thy elect: With confydence, to speake thy worde Good Lorde do vs protect. So that thyne hand, stretche forth yt same Healyng and signes to vs: That we do wonders in the name Of thy dere sonne Iesus. As soone as they, had prayed anone The place began to shake: They were full of, the holye one The worde boldly they spake. The multytude, that dyd beleue Were of one sprit and harte: Eche one to other styll dyd geue In commen they dyd parte. And with great power, they dyd witnes The resurreccion all: Of Iesu Christ, yea and doutles Great grace on them dyd fall.
Not one amonge, them all dyd lacke For who had house and lande: Solde all and dyd, kepe nothynge backe To haue in hys owne hande. They layde all downe, at the fete than Of thappostles in dede: Distributynge to euery man Accordynge to hys nede. Ioses who was, of an olde wonne Of thappostles eche one: Called Barnabas, whiche is the sonne Of Consolacion. A Leuite borne, woulde not doe yll Had lande and eke solde it: And layd the pryce, downe with good wyll At the Apostles feet. The Contentes. ANANIAS vntruth vvas knovvne And hys vvyues to their shame: Thappostles vvere, in pryson throvvne Reioysynge in the same.
Meane. A certayne man, who was named Ananias trulye: With Sa∣phira his wyfe framed, Unto the Lorde a lye. Who sellyng then a pece of lande, Kept backe parte of the pryce: The which
his wyfe dyd vn der stande, They wrought with one ad vice. Countertenor. A certayne man who was named A na ni as trulye: With Sa∣phira his wyfe framed, Unto the Lorde a lye, Who sellyng
then a pece of lande, Kept backe parte of the price, The which his wyfe dyd vnderstand, They wrought wyth one aduice. Tenor. A certayne man who was named A na ni as trulye: With Sa∣phira
his wyfe framed, Unto the Lorde a lye, Who sellynge then a pece of lande Kept backe parte of the price, the which hys wyfe dyd vn derstand, They wrought wt one aduice, with one aduice, they wrought.
Basse. A certayne man, who was named A na ni as trulye: With Sa∣phira his wyfe framed, Unto the Lorde a lye. Who sellyng then a pece of lande, Kept backe parte of the price The which
his wyfe, dyd vnderstand, dyd vnder stand, they wrought with one aduice, they. A Certayne man, who was named Ananias trulye: With Saphira hys wyfe framed Unto the Lorde a lye. Who sellynge then, a pece of lande Kept backe part of the pryce: The whiche hys wyfe, dyd vnderstande They wrought with one aduyce. The other part, then layde downe was At the Apostles fit: And Peter sayde, Ananias By what meanes chaunceth it. That Sathan hath, fylled thyne harte To cause thee thus to lye: Uto the holy, ghost and parte Of thy lyuelode denye.
Pertayned it not, to thee that howre And after it was solde: Was not the parte, in thyne owne powre That thou dost nowe witholde. How chaūceth it, that thou shouldest then Thus brynge thy selfe to wo: Thou hast not lyed, onely to men But vnto God also. And when he was, trulye thus tryed Hys doyinges was abhorde: He strayght gaue vp, the ghost and dyed For triflynge with the Lorde. Great feare then came, vpon eche heade That thys dyd heare and see: The yonge men rose, vp and hym leed Where he shoulde buryd be. And it chaunced, within the space Of thre houres thys was done: Hys wyfe not knowynge came in place Appearynge there ryght soone. And Peter sayde, to her tell me Solde ye the lande for thys: And she ryght soone, to hym sayde ye I haue sayde as it is:
Then Peter sayde, I wyll recorde That ye dyd both consent. To tempt the sprit, of God the Lorde As it is euydent. Beholde the fete, of them that haue Buryd thy make thys daye: Be redye to, put thee in graue Then she fell dead strayght waye. The yonge men then, came in and founde Her dead lyinge at hande: They bare her forth, and in the grounde Layde her by her husbande. And therwith came, on them great feare That sawe thys done of ryght: Euen on all those, that then were there To see that feareful syght. By the Apostles handes was wrought Ryght straunge and wondrus thinges Amonge the people, which then sought To heare their good tydynges. With one accorde, they all were gone To prayse their Lorde and Kynge: With in the porche, of Salomon And that with thankes geuynge.
Of thother sort, there was not one Durst ioyne hym selfe them to: And yet of them, some longe had gone To learne the best to do. The numbre of, those men that dyd Beleue the Lorde hys lore: Men and women, God be praysed Encreased more and more. That in so much, they brought bedsteades For sycke in to the stretes: And some were layed, in standyng beddes And eke some in palletes. That at the least, Peter myght come Nye to them that laye there: When he came by, to shadow some Of them that sore sycke were. Ther came also, a multitude From cityes rounde aboute: To Ierusalem, to seclude Sycknes from them through out. And such as were, vexed euen there With vncleane sprites eche one: Were brought to them, then euery where And were made whole anone.
The chiefe priest then, rose vp certes And all that with hym were: Whiche is the sect, of Saduces Who then dyd stampe and steare. Of thappostles, not one went quight In prison they were set: The angell of, the Lorde by nyght Them out of prison let. And brought them forthe, & eke sayde than Go steppe forth and speake ryfe: With in the Temple, to euery man The wordes now of this lyfe. When they heard yt, they with good wyll Into the temple went: Soone in the morne, for to fulfyll The Lordes commaundement. The chief priest came, and they that were Wyth hym in that forenone: And called councell, to them there To knowe what myght be done. Then of the children, of Israell The elders were also: Of them that sat, there in councell And bade some for them goo.
When they then went, to them that had The pryson then in cure: They dyd retourne, as men nye mad Shut was the pryson sure. The kepers standynge at the dore To wayt vpon their charge: And yet of them, they had no pore God had set them at large. When the chiefe priest, and he that is Euen of the temple chefe: And eke the hye pristes, heard of this They mused with muche grefe. Then came one forth, and sayde beholde Those that in pryson were: Stande in the churche, and are full bolde To teache the people there. The ruler went, with dilygence And ministers of trust: Which brought them with, out violence For they feared the worst. Lest that the people, shoulde them stone And so their purpose fayle. They brought them secretly alone Before the whole counsayle.
The chiefe priest sayde, to them at large Be ye not worthye blame: Syth that we dyd, you strayghtly charge Not to teache in thys name. Beholde he sayde, then vnto them The Lorde of your Iesus: Hath fylled all, Ierusalem To brynge hys bloude on vs. Peter and Iohn, they coulde not staye But boldly sayde euen then: We ought of ryght, God to obaye Before you that are men. The God of our, fathers raysed Iesus our helpe to be: Whome ye haue slayne, and eke hanged Uniustly on a tre. God raysed hym, with hys ryght hande To saue suche as repent: That Israel, myght vnderstande Hys mercye to them sent. And we be recordes of thys cost Concernynge our comfort: And eke also, the holy ghost Geuen to the loyall sort.
They hearynge that, their wrath dyd swel And sought meanes them to sley: Then stode vp one, of their councel An auncient pharisey. Who was named, Gamaliell A doctor of the lawe: Amonges them all, he dyd excell Of whom they stode in awe. He▪ dyd commaunde, to put asyde Thapostles then strayght waye: That none of them, shoulde there abyde To heare what he woulde saye. Ye men of Israel, take hede Beware what ye entende: Agaynst these men, or ye procede Marke what wyll be the ende. Before these dayes, one Theudas Arose wyth bragge and boste: Foure hundred men, then slayne ther was There gathered in hys hoste. And all the rest, that there abode That vnto hym had sought: Were scatred here, and there abrode And strayght way brought to nought.
And after that, arose a man Iudas of Galile: When tribute first, with them began Men thynkynge to be fre. So that muche people to hym drew Whiche was to theyr decaye: For death to hym, dyd then enseu He slayne they fled awaye. And now I saye, refrayne you then And let these men alone: For yf their counsel, be of men It wyl decaye anone. But yf it be, of God certayne Ye can it not deface: But shalbe founde, to striue in vayne And fight agaynst Gods grace. And then to hym, they dyd agree And called the apostles all: They bete them all, none dyd scape free Suche chaunce to them dyd fall. And gaue to them, commaundement new When they had beate them so: To speake no more, of their Iesu And then they let them go.
From that councell, they dyd depart Reioysynge in the same: That they myght byde, such payne & smart Onely for Christ hys name. And in the temple, the dyd teache The trueth playne to discus:
In euery house, styll they preache The Lorde, and Christ Iesus, DEACONS appoynted, to the borde To minister at their nede: And the Apostles, to the vvorde Steuen vvas accused in dede. Meane. In those dayes as, the nombre playne, Of the disciples Tenor. In those days as, the nombre playne, Of the disciples Countertenor. In those dayes as, the nombre playne Of the dis ci ples Bassus. In those dayes as the nombre playne, Of the dis ci ples
Meane. grew, A grudge arose, and grefe certayne, That daylye dyd re∣newe, Amongst the Greks a- Tenor. grew, Agrudge arose and grefe certayne, That daylye dyd re∣newe A mongst the Greks, a-
Countertenor. grew, A grudge a rose and grefe certayne, That daylye dyd re∣new, Amongst the Greks agaynst Basse. grew, A grudge a rose and grefe certayne, That daylye dyd re∣new, Amongst the Greks agaynst
Meane. gaynst Thebrues their wydows dispi∣syng, Would not alow but them re∣fuse, in dayly mi ni▪ string. Tenor. gainst Thebrues their widows dispi∣syng, Would not alow but them re∣fuse, In daylye mini stryng In
Countertenor. Thebrues theyr widows dispi∣syng, Would not alowe, but them re fuse, in Bassus. Thebrues, theyr widows dispi∣syng, Would not alow, But them refuse In daylye mini∣daylye
ministryng. daylye mi ni stryng. IN those daies as, the nūbre plaine Of the disciples grewe: A grudge arose, & grefe certayne That dayly dyd renewe. Amōgest the Grekes, agaynst Thebrues Their widdowes despysynge: Woulde not alowe, but them refuse In daylye ministrynge. The twelue called, the multitude Of the disciples all: Together then, they dyd conclude And sayde to great and small. It is not mete, that we shoulde slake And from Gods worde to swerue: Nor that we shoulde, our selues betake The tables for to serue.
dayly ministryng, ministryng. stry nge, In daylye ministryng. Wherfore brethren, amonge you seke Seuen men of honest fame: Ful of the sprit, and wisdome eke To take in hande the same. But we our selues, wyll styll applye Not carynge for the borde: To praye and preache, continuallye And minister the worde. Unto these wordes, of good effect Agred bothe lest and most: And faythful Steuen, was then elect Full of the holy Ghost. Philip Prochor, and Permenas With Nican dyd approche: So dyd Simon, and Nicolas Conuert of Antioche.
Before thappostles in their state Not wayed by goodes or landes: But after prayer, were approbate By laying on of handes. The word of God, encreased wyed The numbre then was suche: That the dysciples multiplied With in Ierusalem muche. Theyr foremer lyfe, they dyd repent And so dyd manye, a prist: Which then became, obedient Unto the fayth of Christ. And Steuen then full, of fayth and power Great wonders shewed he: So that the people euery hour Straunge miracles myght se. Out of the synagoge dyd lepe Some sectes of hypocrites: The lybertins, one sect we clepe Another Syrenyttes. Lykewyse of Alexandria And men bothe more and euen: Of Cilice and of Asia Disputed styll with Steuen.
The sprite they coulde, not ouercome So God dyd hym aduaunce: With great knowledge, & highe wisdome Suche was then his vttraunce. They sent in men, hys wordes to trye Whiche came and sayde doutles: We hearde him speake, blasphemuslye Agaynst God and Moyses. And they dyd moue, the people there The Scribes and elder sorte: With force to brynge, hym in daunger By meanes of false reporte. Before the councell, they hym brought And matters dyd deuyse: As false witnes, had then out sought Whyche was nothynge but lyse. And sayde thys man, wyll not refrayne Blasphemus wordes to sounde: Thys holy place, he doth disdayne Our lawe thus confounde. Thus he in effectes, with poyson breathe Our fayth for to deface: And sayth Iesus, of Nazarethe Shall soone destroye thys place:
And so shall chaunge, the ordinance That Moyses gaue to vs: Which is to vs, no small greuance By meanes of this Iesus. The councell then, in that their rage Dyd vewe hym in their syght: And dyd beholde, his fayre visage Moste lyke an Angell bryght.
The Contentes. STEVEN to aunsvvere, doth not refuse To hys accusers ethe: And doth rebuke the vvycked Iues They do hym stone to deathe. Meane. Then sayde the chefe priest is it so, Ye men and eke bre- Tenor. Then sayde the chefe priest is it so, Ye men and eke bre- Countertenor. Then sayde the chefe priest is it so, Ye men and eke bre- Basse. Then sayd the chefe priest is it so, Ye men and eke bre-
Meane. therne, And all ye fathers herke vn∣to, My words and then dis∣cerne, Ther dyd appeare to Abra- Tenor. therne, And all ye fathers herke vn∣to, My words and then dis∣serne, Ther dyd appeare to Abra-
Countertenor. therne, And all ye fathers herke vn∣to, My words and then dis∣serne, Ther dyd appeare to Abra- Bassus. therne, And all ye fathers herke vn∣to, My words and then dis∣serne, Ther dyd appear e to Abra-
Meane. ham, The God of great glo∣rye, before that he dwelt in Carran, Tenor. ham, The God of great glo∣rye before that he dwelt in Car-
Contertenor. ham, The God of great glo∣rye, Be fore that he dwelt in Bassus. ham, The God of great glo∣rye, Be fore that he dwelt in Car-
Meane. In Me so po ta mye. Tenor. ran, In Mesopotamye. THen sayd the chiefe, priest it is so Ye men and eke bretherne: And all ye fathers herken vnto My wordes and then discerne. There dyd appeare, to Abraham The God of great glorye: Before that he, dwelt in Carran In Mesopotamye. And sayd to hym, come out of hande From thy kyn and contre: Make hast and come, into the lande Whiche I shal shewe to thee.
Countertenor. Carran In Mesopotamye. Bassus. ran, In Mesopotamye. Out of the lande, then of Caldey Retourned he with spede: The Lords commaundement to obey Dwelt in Carran in dede. Soone after ye, shall vnderstande As hys father was deade: He brought him then, into the lande Where nowe your lyfe ye leade. He gaue hym none, inheritaunce Not one fote bredth by name: But promysed, he woulde aduaunce Hym to possesse the same.
Besyde all thys, yet neuerthelesse A promesse he made fre: Unto hys seed, that to possesse When yet no chylde had he. God without dout, spake on thys wyse Hys seed shoulde dwel and slepe: With straungers, that should them despise And them in bondage kepe. And so to scourge, them cruellye Foure hundred yeares with rod: But yet those people, soone wyll I Iudge sayth the lyuynge God. And after that, I wyll them plant To serue me euery where: And then he gaue, hym the couenant Of circumcision there. And he begat, I sake ryght soone And dyd hym circumcise: At the eyght daye, it was so done And I sake in lykewyse. Begat Iacob, all thys is sure And ryght well knowne of clarkes: Howe that Iacob, by the scripture Begat twelue Patriarkes.
The Patriarks, then in their rage Ioseph to Egypt solde: From all distres, in that viage God dyd hym then with holde. And gaue hym grace, and great wysdome In Pharos syght the Rynge: Who dyd appoynt, hym in great rome To rule in euery thynge. Then came a derth, in all the lande Egypt and Canaan: Therof the griefe, coulde not withstande Lackynge the foode of man. Our fathers in, their scarsyte Hauynge no sustinaunce: In Egypt heard, that corne shoulde be Iacob made puruiaunce. And first sent out, euen hys sonnes owne The seconde tyme also: To hys brethren, Ioseph was knowne And they eke to Pharo. Then Ioseph wolde, hys father dere As he had well foresene: And all his kyn, to be brought nere Thre score soules and fyftene.
Ioseph to Egypt descended And our fathers euen them: Whiche died and were, all translated Eche one into Sichem. And were put in, the sepulcor That Abraham bought fre: For coyne of the, sonnes of Emor In Sichem layd to be. And when the tyme, of promes drewe Nye which that God had sworne: To Abraham, the people grewe In Egypt that were borne. Untyll another Kynge arose Whiche not of Iosephe knewe Full craftely, the same dyd glose Our kynred to subdue. And dyd entreate, our fathers yll And made them cast out playne: Their children yonge, their lyues to spyll That none shoulde there remayne: And in that tyme, borne was Moyses A fayre childe in Goddes syght: Which in hys fathers, house doutles Thre monthes was fed a ryght.
And then cast on, the water depe The doughter of Pharo: Dyd take hym vp, and dyd hym kepe For her owne sonne also. He was well sene, in the wysdome Of the Egyptians gyse: Ryght stronge in dedes, he dyd become And in hys wordes ryght wyse. When he of age, was fourtye yere Then in hys heart dyd dwell: A loue to seke, hys bretherne dere Chyldren of Israell. And when he sawe, one suffer wronge Euen of hys brethren dere: Hym to defende, he bode not longe As ye shall after here. He dyd Thegipcian ouerthrow That dyd hys brother smyght: Thinkyng hys brethren, well to know And vnderstande a ryght. That God the Lord, euen by his hande Their saftye shoulde prepare: Which none of them, dyd vnderstande The storye doth declare.
The next day then, he dyd asspire To stay them in their stryfe: To make them frendes, was his desire In loue to leade their lyfe. And sayd to them, with wordes right wise Syth eche is others brother: The fonder is, the enterpryse For one to hurt another. But he that dyd, hys neyghboure wronge Thrust hym away sayinge: Who made thee ruler, vs amonge To rule in euery thynge. I wel perceyue, thou wylt me kyll As thou dydst yester day: The Egypcian, hys bloude to spyll And so make me away. At those wordes Moyses, fled anone As he thought best to do: Into the lande, of Madion Where begat sonnes two. When fourty yeres were past awaye An Angel dyd recorde: In wyldernes, of mounte Sinaye To hym from God the Lorde.
With in a flame, of burnynge fyre Which lyghted in a bushe: And caused Moyses, to drawe nere To see that fyrye flushe. And as he drue, nye to beholde The voyce of God downe came: Which sayd to him, with wordes ful bolde Thy fathers God I am. I am the God, of Abraham The Lorde vnto hym sayde: Isacke and Iacobs, God I am Which Moyses sore desmayd He trembled and, durst not drawe nere Suche feare on hym dyd fall: Then sayd the Lorde, now Moyses here And marke what say I shall. Put of thy shoese, euen out of hande Let it be done with spede: The grounde wheron, thy fete do stande Is holy grounde in dede. Ryght perfectlye, I do nowe see The heuynes appere: Of my flocke that, in Egypt be And eke their gronynge chere.
And I am come, them to defend And saue for euer more: Wherefore beholde, I do thee send Into Egypt therfore. This is Moyses, to whome they sayde Who made the here a ruler: The same God sent, to them for ayde To rule and eke delyuer. Euen by the handes, of the Angell Which in the bushe dyd lyght: The same brought them, out passing well And shewed straunge thinges in syght. In Egypt wonders, dyd appere And in the red see flete: In wildernes, men saw thinges clere Full fortye yeres complete. This is Moyses, the whiche dyd tell And also make report: To the children, of Israell These wordes of much comfort. A Prophete shall, the Lorde for ye Rayse vp ryght good and iust Euen of your brethren, lyke to me Hym shall ye heare and trust.
And in the congregacion Thys Moyses was doutles: And hearde the voyce, of God alone Euen in the wyldernes. Whiche then dyd talke, assuredlye With thangel of the Lorde: Upon mounte Sinay, certaynlye Our fathers doth recorde: The worde of lyfe, receyued he To geue to vs was sent: Our fathers wolde, in no wyse be To hym obedient. But thrust him from, them with despyght Their heartes turned echeone: Into Egypt, to go with myght And sayde vnto Aron. Make gods for vs, both more and les For we can not discus: What is become, of thys Moyses That from Egypt brought vs. To make a Calfe, thys was their choice And offred sacrifyce: Unto the same, and dyd reioyce In that their owne deuyce.
Then turned God, from them trulye And gaue them vp with thretes: To worship starres, wyth in the skye Foresayde of the prophetes. O ye the house, of Israell Gaue me your Sacrifyces: Meate offeryngs fortye yeres to tell Wyth in the wildernes. Soone dyd ye take, and not defarre The tabernacle than: Of Moloch ye, and eke the starre Of your great God Remphan. Fygures to whome, oft ye dyd vow And worship them eche one: Wherfore I will, translate all you Beyond great Babylon. The tabernacle, our fathers had Within the wildernes: As he appoynted and them bad Speakyng vnto Moyses. That he shuld make, it according As he before dyd see: The which our fathers receyuynge Brought in with Iosue.
Into the lande, of the gentyls Whiche God draue out and chyd: Before our fathers as exyls. Tyll the tyme of Dauid. Whiche fauour found, with God ye Lorde Desyrynge then that he: Myght synde an house, of mete accorde For Iacobs God to be. An house for hym, buylt Salomon But yet the hyest I ken: Dwelthe not in temples, made of stone Wrought by the hands of men. As he declareth, by hys wrst The Prophet sayinge this: Heauen is my seat, where on I sit The earth my fote stole is. What house then wyll, ye me behest Sayth God tell you I shall: Whiche is the place, then of my rest Hath not my hande made all. Ye styffe neckte all, both least and most With heartes and ears ye seke: Styll to resist, the holy Ghost As dyd your fathers eke.
The prophetes all, your fathers lore Nedes persecute them must: And eke slew them, which taught before The commynge of the iust. Whose murtherers, and traytours now Ye are and to them knit: The Angels gaue, the lawe to you▪ And ye haue not kept it. When they hearde thys, great was their grefe Their heartes did cleaue in two: Gnashynge on hym, euen with their tethe And knewe not what to do: He was ful of, the holy ghost Hys eyes to heauen dyd stande: Which sawe the glory, of the Lorde And Christ on hys ryght hande. And sayde beholde, the heauens I se Appeare for my lyuelod: And eke the sonne, of man to be At the ryght hande of God. Then they cryde out, with rorynge voyce And stopt their eares and brethe: Thus in their rage, they toke their choyce And stoned hym to deathe
The witnesses, their clothes downe layde Then at a mans fete euen: Whose name was Saule, which then as∣sayde With them to stone good Steuen. Which cryde and sayd, Lord Christ Iesu Receyue my sprite thys daye: He kneled downe, all thys is trew And on thys wyse dyd saye. Laye not thys synne, Lord to their charge Thus he dyd call and clepe: Of that their synne, them to discharge And so he fell a slepe. The Contentes. HOVV Philip came to Samary Simon the vvhyche dyd fayne: Philip dyd baptyse vvyllynglye Eunuch the chamberlayne.
Meane. The death of Steuen dyd Saule cō∣fort Who dyd a gre with them That wold haue slayne the godlye Tenor. The deathe of Steuen dyd Saul cō∣fort Who dyd a gre with them That wold haue slayne the godly
Countertenor. The deathe of Steuen dyd Saul cō∣fort who dyd a gre With them That wold haue slayne the godly Basse. The death of Steuen dyd Saul cō∣fort who dyd a gre with them That wold haue slayne the godlye
Meane. sort, Then at Ie ru sa∣lem scatred they were both far and nye, And through the regions Tenor. sort, Then at Ie ru sa∣lem, scattred they were both far and nye, And through the regions
Contertenor. sort, Then at Ie ru sa∣lem scattred they were both far and nye, And through the regions Bassus. sort, Then at Ie ru sa∣lem, Scattred they were both far and nye, And through the regions
Meane. crept, Of Iu rye and of Samarye, The twelue onely except. Tenor. crept Of Iurye and of Sa∣marye, The twelue onely except. THe death of Steuē dyd Saule com∣forte Who did agre with them: That would haue slayne, the godlye sorte Then at Ierusalem. Scattred they were, both far and nye And through the regions crept:
Countertenor. crept Of Iu rye and of Samary, The twelue onely except. Bassus. crept, Of Iu rye and of Samarye the twelue onely except. Of Iury and, of Samarye The twelue onelye except. Deuoute there were, that dressed Steuen Of whome stones brake eche lym: Besydes their oyntmentes, to hym geuen They dyd wepe ouer hym.
But of the congregacion than Saul spared no mans lyfe: But sought the house, of euery man And drewe out man and wyfe. In pryson fast, he dyd them place But those that went about: Dyd preache the worde, of lyfe and grace Euen as they went throughout. And Philippe came, a cytye to Which was of Samarye: And preached Christ, as he to do Had power geuen from an hye. The people then, with one accorde Hys words ryght well out sought: In that they sawe, that God the Lorde Straunge thynges by hym had wrought. For vncleane sprites, with corynge voyce Came out of sundrye men: That were possest, and had no choyse But cald on Philip then. The palseyes he, dyd heale also And therof was not coye: The halte he heald, that coulde not go In whome became great ioye.
A certayne man, there was whose name Was Simon truth to tell: Which here tofore, the very same In witchcrafte dyd excell. Uvho the people, bewycht to fore That dwelt in Samarye: And eke reporte, he coulde do more Great thynges miraculouslye. He was had in, great reuerence Of all that there abode: Whiche sayde no dout, he doth commence The myghtye power of God. Because of hys, continuaunce By hym they set muche bye: He mocked them, and dyd aduaunce Hym selfe with sorcerye. When Philipes words, they dyd wel vew Who taught of Gods kyngdome: And in the name, of Christ Iesu Baptised they dyd become. Simon hym selfe, dyd then beleue And baptised was also: Abydynge styll, by Philipes sleue And woulde not from hym go.
But wondred much, then to beholde The signes that he dyd see: And miracles, so manifolde By Philip done to be. Thapostles hearyng, that were glad Then at Ierusalem: That Samarye, receyued had The worde of God to them. And sent Peter, and Iohn aryght To them in to that cost: Who when they came, prayde that they myght Receyue the holy Gost. Which was as yet, on them not come That shoulde them all renew: Baptised they were, both all and some Onelye in Christ Iesu. Then dyd they lay, their handes right soone On them both lest and most: And eche man dyd, when that was done Receyue the holye gost. When Symon dyd, beholde and se By handes that they dyd laye: The holy ghost, receyue myght he He offred them money.
And sayde also, geue me thys powre On whome my handes shall lye: He may receyue, euen in that houre The holy ghost ther by. Then Peter sayd, whose wordes abhorde Thy goodes nowe peryshe with the: That thinkst the giftes, of God the Lorde With goodes well gotten he. Thou hast no parte, nor felowshyp In thys our busynes: Thy harte away, from God doth slyp Repent thy wyckednes. And praye to God, thy thoughtes may fall That in thy heart now be: For thou art full, of bytter gall Wrapt in iniquite. Then Simon sayde, for thys my mis Lyft vp your heartes with me: And pray to God, that none of this Unto my charge layde be. And when that they, had testifyde And taught the worde to them: They dyd returne, that tyme and tyde Unto Ierusalem.
And they dyd preache, the Gospell still In Cityes as they went: Through Samarye, as was the will Of hym that had them sent. The angell of, the Lorde dyd saye To Philyp and hym lede: Arise and go, towardes myddaye Unto the waye wyth spede. That gothe downe from, Ierusalem To Gaza in desert: And he arose, and went on then Euen wyth a louyng heart. And nowe beholde, a man certayne Of Ethiopia: Which was a noble Chamberlayne Then commyng from Gaza. He had the rule, of great Substans Euen wyth the Quene Candace: Quene of the Ethiopians Her tresorer he was. Ierusalem fayne he woulde get Onelye therin to praye He homewarde red, in his Charet Of the prophet Esaye.
The sprit of God, to Philip sayde Go nere to yonder man: And ioyne thy selfe, to hym for ayde And Philip to hym ran. He sawe the boke, then in his hande And heard him on it rede: And sayde doste thou, now vnderstande What thou doste rede in dede. The Chamberlayne, the truth dyd tell And sayde he well espyde: He coulde not vnderstande it well Except he had a gyde. Of Philyp then, full fayne he wext And wolde him to drawe nere: And syt wyth hym, to playne the text That he of hym dyd here. The Tenor of, the text certayne Was this that he dyd saye: He as a shepe, led to be slayne: And as a Lambe downe laye. Before his sherer, wyth meknes, His mouth not once vnsparde: Because of that, his humblenes They dyd hym not regarde.
Who shall declare, and eke exspound His generacion playne: His lyfe is taken, from the ground, Then sayde the Chamberlayne. I praye the frende, be thou content To open yf thou can: The prophets wordes, by hym selfe mene Or by sum other man. Philip opened, his mouth so pure The trueth then to discus: And dyd begyn, the same scripture And taught hym Christ Iesus. And as they went, styll on their waye A water he dyd spye: The Chamberlayne, to hym dyd saye Se here thys water bye. What shal me let, baptysed to be Then Philip to hym sayde: Yf thou beleue, wyth heart ryght fre Thou mayst not be denayde. He answered him, I do beleue That Christe is God his sonne: Willynge the Charet, not to meue, Tyl that good worke were donne.
They with good wyll, went downe bothe twayne And in the water were: Bothe Philip and, the Chamberlayne Whom Philip baptised there. This done they dyd, come out agayne The sprite of Godly lore: Toke Philip from, the chamberlayne He coulde see him no more. Then on hys waye, he passed thus Reioysynge in hys heart. And Philip was founde, at Azotus The people to conuart. And he dyd walke, the contrey styll Preachynge continuallye: In all their cytyes, taught vntyll He came to Cesarye. The Contentes. PAVLE is conuerted to the Lorde The Iues he do the confounde: Tabythas lyfe, Peter restorde VVhen she lay deade on grounde.
ij. partes in one. Saule breathing out threat∣nyngs abrode, the faythfull to re∣sist, Agaynst the lect of Tenor. Saule breathing out threatnyngs a∣brode, The faithfull to re∣syst Agaynst the
Contertenor. Saule breathing out threatnyngs a∣brode, The faythfull to resyst agaynst the lect of God the Bassus. Saule breathyng out threatnyngs a∣brode, The faythfull to resyst A∣gaynst thelect of God the
Meane. God the Lorde, went vnto the hye priest, And ernestlye dyd hym desyre, his letters to graunt Tenor. lect of God the Lord, went vnto the hye priest, And er nest lye dyd hym de syre, his letters
Countertenor. Lorde, went vnto the hye priest And ernestlye dyd hym de∣syre, his letters to graunt out Bassus. Lorde, went vn to the hye priest, And ernestlye dyd hym de∣syre, his let ters to graunt
Meane. out, Unto da mas co to enquire, the Synagoges About. Tenor. to graunt out, vn to Da∣masco to enquire the Synagogs about SAule breathing out, threatninges abrode The faythful to resist: Agaynst the lect, of God ye Lorde Went vnto the hye prist. And ernestly, dyd hym desyre Hys letters to graunt out:
Countertenor. vn to Da mas co to enquyre, the Synagogs about. Bassus. out, Unto Damasco to enquyre, the Synagogs about. Unto Damasco to enquire The Sinagoges about. To fynde such as, on Christ beleues Man or woman of them: That he might bring, thē boūd as theues Unto Ierusalem.
But as he went, and was come nye Damasco for thys thynge: He was beset, then sodaynlye With lyght from heauen shynynge. And strayght vnto, the earth fell he And heard a voyce recorde: Saule, Saule, why persecutest thou me He sayde what art thou Lorde. Then sayde the Lorde, Iesus I am Whome thou dost tosse and torne: It wyll be harde, for thee mad man Agaynst the prycke to sporne. He tremblynge then, sayde on thys wyse Lorde what wylt thou I do: And then the Lorde, bad hym aryse The citye go in to. And ther it shall, be tolde to thee Men hearynge ther this noyce: Amased were, that no man see But hearde a certayne voyce. And Saule arose, then from the grounde Hys eyes he then opened: And sawe no man, but hearde the sounde Of suche as hym then led.
Who brought hym then, to Damasco Thre dayes hys syght was blancke: He sawe no lyght, great was hys wo He neither eate nor drancke. A certayne disciple, there was That at Damasco lay: Who was named, Ananias The Lorde to hym dyd say. Ananias, worke myne aduice Here Lorde he dyd repeate And then the Lorde, bad hym arise And go into the streate. Whiche streate is called strayght in dede And further more, do thus In Iudas house, looke thou with spede For one Saule of Tharsus Beholde he prayth, and he hath sene A vision brought to pas: Wherin appeard, as it had bene The man Ananias. Who as he thought, to hym drewe nere To helpe hys heauye plyght: And by hys handes, as myght appere He shoulde receyue hys syght,
Then answerd he, the Lorde direct And made of Saule complayntes: Howe he had delt, with hys elect In Iury that were saynctes. And here he hath, authorite From the hye priestes to staye: And bynde all those, that call on thee The Lorde to hym dyd saye. Go on thy wayes, and do these thynges For he is geuen to me: To beare my name, before all kynges And where the Gentyls be. And eke chyldren, of Israell For I wyll hym betake To suffer great thynges, passynge well Onelye for my names sake. Ananias, went on hys waye And vnto Saule drewe nere: And eke hys handes, on hym dyd laye And sayde Saule brother dere. The Lorde that dyd, appeare to thee In the hye wayes so bryght: Hath sent me nowe, to make thee see Wherfore receyue thy syght.
The holy ghost, shal thee suffies And fyll thee with good tales: And thē fel thinges, downe from hys eyes Lyke as they had bene scales. He dyd receyue, hys syght certayne So dyd he then baptym: And eke dyd eate, his meate agayne Whiche dyd well comforte hym. And certayne dayes, Saule would not go But kept with the elect: Whiche then abode, at Damasco The fayth there to erect. Saule preached Christ, with heart ryght fre The sinagoges dyd vse: Anouchynge Christ, Gods sonne to be That all muche dyd muse. Some sayde is not, thys man the same That latelye spoyled them: Whiche then dyd call, on Christ his name Euen at Ierusalem. And also came, for thys entent Yf any suche he founde: Before thygh priest, them to conuent And eke to brynge them bounde.
But Saule in strength, encreased so The Iewes he dyd resist: Which then dyd dwel, at Damasco Affirminge verye Christ. Within a whyle, Saule preachynge styll Whose wordes abrode were blowne: The Iewes toke, councel him to kyll The whiche to Saule was knowne. They dyd laye wayte, both day and nyght And on the gates dyd watche: Full cruelly, agaynst all ryght Hys lyfe then to dispatche. But the disciples, knowynge all Their purpose then to tell: By nyght they put, him through yt wall Downe in a great basket. When he came to, Ierusalem Disciples beyng theare: He sayed to ioyne, hym selfe to them But they dyd hym muche feare. And scarsly woulde, beleue that God Thys thynge in hym had wrought: But Barnabas that there abod Hym to thappostles brought.
And dyd declare, to them also That sene the Lorde he had: In the hye way, as he dyd go And what the Lorde hym bad. And how he had, ryght boldely done The synagoges throughout: In preachynge Christ, to be Gods sonne Damasco rounde about. And then he had, the company Of them with ryght good wyll: And in the citye, taught boldly The name of Iesus styll. And he dyd speake, and eke dispute Euen with the Grekes certayne: He stoutly stode, them to confute And they wolde him haue slayne. But when the brethren dyd espye They would haue slayne hym thus: They brought him vnto Cesarye And sent hym to Tharsus. Then dyd the congregacion lye Throughe Iewry al at rest: And Galile, and Samarye Were edified and blest.
The feare of God, they dyd support In eche countrey and cost: They multiplyd, in the comfort Euen of the holye ghost. And it chaunced, as Peter went And of all countreys felt: The Lorde vnto, the sainctes him sent Which then at Lidda dwelt. A man he founde, of heauye there Whose name was Eneas: The which had kept, his bed .viii. yere Sicke of the Paulsye was. Eneas then, dyd Peter saye Christ Iesus comfort thee: Aryse and make, thy bed strayght waye And then arise dyd he. And al Lidda, and Assaron Of this doth beare recorde: Which saw the man, and ther vpon Dyd tourne vnto the Lorde. There was a woman, at Ioppa A disciple she was: Whose name was called, Tabitha Which is to saye Dorcas.
Full of good worckes, she was alwayes And eke in almes tryed: It chaunced so, euen in those dayes That she was sycke and dyed. When they had washt, her certaynlye And in her Chamber layde: Because Lidda, was Ioppa nye Then the disciples sayde. That Peter was, then at Lidda And sent one to report: That their desyre, was to Ioppa He shoulde to them resort. Peter arose, and quicklye sought For them that Dorcas kept: Into the Chamber, they hym brought Where all the wydowes wept. And shewed suche coates, as she dyd make And also dyd conuert: Unto their vse, for Christ hys sake And Peter sayde depart. He kneled downe, and eke dyd praye And on the dead dyd crye: Tabytha nowe, aryse I saye And she lyft vp her eye.
And when she sawe, Peter thre stande Her selfe she dyd vp rayse: And then he toke, her by the hande And lyft her vp strayght wayse. Unto the saynctes, and widowes then A lyue he brought her out: And it was knowen, vnto all men In Ioppa rounde about. And manye that, were them amonge Beleued then eche where:
And he abode, in Ioppa longe With Simon Tanner there. The contentes. HOVVE Peter savve, the vision playne And then the Lorde sent hym: To Cornelye the good Captayne The Heathen receaue Baptym. Meane. Then was ther one Corne li- Tenor. Then was ther one Corne li- Countertenor. Then was ther one Corne li- Basse. Then was ther one Corne li-
Meane. us, which dwelt at Ce sa∣rie, A Captayne good and graci∣us, of those of I ta- Tenor. us, which dwelt at Ce sa∣rye, A Captayne good and graci∣us, of those of I ta-
Countertenor. us, which dwelt at Ce sa∣rye A Captayne good and gracy∣us, of those of I ta- Bassus. us, which dwelt at Ce sa∣rye A Captayne good and graci∣us, of those of I ta-
Meane. lye, Deuout he was, and God dyd feare So dyd his fa me∣lye, Tenor. lye, Deuout he was, and God dyd feare, So dyd his fa me∣lye, In almes great and
Countertenor. lye, Deuout he was and God dyd feare So dyd his fa me∣lye In almes great and in Bassus. lye, Deuout he was, and God dyd feare, So dyd his fa me∣lye, In al mes
Meane. In almes great and in pray∣er abode conti nu al lye. Tenor. in prayer a bode con∣tynuallye contynuallye. THen was there one, Cornelius Whiche dwelt at Cesarye: A Captayne good, and gracius Of those of Italye. Deuout he was, and God dyd feare So dyd hys famelye: In almes great, and in prayer Abode continuallye.
Countertenor. in pray er a∣bode, continuallye, Continuallye. Bassus. great and in prayer and in prayer abode continuallye. Unto hys syght, God dyd bewraye Hys angell glorius: About the nynth, houre of the daye Whiche sayde Cornelius. Who loked vp, hym to beholde And was afrayed certayne: He sayde how Lorde, may I beholde To knowe the matter playne.
The angel sayde, then in that place Thyne almesse and prayers all: Dyd come before, the throne of grace When thou to God dydst call. Wherfore to Ioppa, sende anon Some trustye messenger: And byd hym call, for one Simon Whose surname is Peter. In Simon tanners, house he is Lodged by the sea syde: Who shall thee teache, the worde of blis Wherin thou shalt abyde. And when the angel, that spake thus Departed was and gon: Then strayt way dyd, Cornelius Two seruauntes call vppon. And eke a deuoute, sougyer On hym that dyd attend: He tolde hys mynde, and for Peter To Ioppa dyd them send. Then on the morne, they rose right soone And went fast on their waye: But Peter went, about hygh noone Up in a loft to praye.
When hunger dyd, moue hym to eate Wishynge for sustenance: While they for hym, prepared meate He fell into a trance. And sawe ye heauen, then cleaue in twayne A vessell downe dyd glyde: And to his syght, appeared playne▪ A shete both large and wyde. The corners knyt, hauynge therin Fourfoted beastes ful fayre: Wormes of eche sort, also vermyn And eke foules of the ayre. There came a voyce, to hym and sayde Ryse Peter kyll and eate: But Peter then, as one dismayde Began thus to entreate. And sayde no Lorde, that I refuse It were synne as I meane: For I in meate, dyd neuer vse Thynges common or vncleane. The voyce then spake, the seconde tyme And sayde of thys be sure: What God doth clense, is voyde of crime Make thou it not vnpure.
Thys was done thryse, in hys presens The truth to tell you playne: The vessell then, dyd vanyshe thens Up in to heauen agayne. When Peter thus, was in great dout What thys shoulde signifie: Beholde the men, that were sent out From captayne Cornelye. Enquired where, Simon dyd dwell Before the dore standynge: Desyrynge one, to them to tell Where was Peters lodgynge. While Peter in, hys mynde dyd muse What thys straunge syght myght be The sprite to hym, these words dyd vse Beholde these men seke thee. Aryse and do, thy selfe prepare To go with them an ende: And haue no dout, nor yet no feare For I to thee them sende. Then Peter to, the men downe went And sayde lo I am he: Hath any man, you to me sent What is your wyl with me.
They sayde captayne, Cornelius A iust man without blame: Whiche feareth God, most gracius Of good reporte and fame. Amonge the people, of the Iues Was warned by an angell: To sende for thee, to heare good newes Of Gods most holye Gospell. Into the house, with good entent He dyd them leade to hostage: The next daye then, forth Peter went With them euen in their vyage. And certayne brethren, of Ioppaye Dyd beare hym companye: So dyd they all, on the thirde daye Come vnto Cesarye. Cornelius then, with hys kynred And frendes especiall: Whome he together had called Wayted for Peter all. And as Peter, by chaunce came in The Captayne dyd hym mete: In presence of hys, frendes and kin Fell downe at Peters fete.
To worshyp hym, then at a brayde Cornelius then began: But Peter toke, hym vp and sayde Stand vp I am a man. So Peter led, hym forth with talke Untyl he entred in: Where he dyd fynde, much people walke And then he dyd begyn. And sayde to them, ye knowe before That heauye is the daunger: For vs the Iues, by Moyses lore To ioyne with a straunger. But yet the Lorde, hath shewed to me That I shoulde call no more: No man vncleane, what so he be I douted not therfore: To come as soone, as you dyd sende To knowe what it myght be: I aske you now, therfore the ende And cause ye sent for me. It is now sayde, Cornelius About foure dayes a go: Synce that I was, muche desyrus To fast and praye also.
Then in my house, at the nynth houer As I was there prayinge: Beholde one stode, of myghtye power By me in bryght clothynge. He sayde to me, Cornelius Thy prayer is accept: Thy almes dedes, are precius And in remembraunce kept. Before the face, of God always Which is our God alone: Therfore with spede, sende to Ioppaye And call for one Simone. Whose surname, is called Peter At Inne he doth abyde: And lodge with Simon the tanner Not far from the sea syde. When he commeth, he shall playnly Do thee to vnderstande: What is my wyll, and then dyd I Sende for thee out of hande. It is well done, that thou art come For we are here present: Before the Lorde, bothe all and some To heare hys commaundment.
Wyth open mouthe, Peter sayde then From truthe I will not waue: Before the Lorde no sortes of men Preeminence can haue. But all suche as, feareth his grace And worketh ryghtwisenes: Wyth his mereye, he doth embrace Acceptyng more and les. The word that God, to Israell Through Iesus Christ dyd sende He is the Lord, ye know ryght well In euery coast and ende. How it was than, bruted amonge The Iues in eche countre: But fyrst of all, how that it spronge Euen out of Galile. After Iohns Baptyme, and preachyng God wyth his holy brethe: And strength anoynted priest and Kynge Iesus of Nazarethe. Whiche went aboute, and much good dyd To those that were in payne: From Satans force, he dyd them ryd God was wyth him certayne.
Of all he dyd, the Iues vntyll And in their chefe Cite: We witnes are, whom they dyd kyll And hanged vpon a tre. Whome God dyd rayse, ye thyrd daye next And shew him openlye- Not to all men, as sayth the text But vnto vs onelye. Whome God dyd chose, to beare witnes Whiche fead wyth meate and bread: And dranke wyth him, alyue doutles Arisen from the dead. And vs to preache, commaunded he And to enstruct eche head: That God appoynted, hym to be A iudge of quicke and dead. The Prophetes all, witnes with fame That all beleuers wynnes: Through hys merites, and holy name Remission of their synnes. Whyle Peter yet, these words dyd tell That God dyd hym afforde: The holy ghost, on them all fell That hearkned to the worde.
The faythfull people, of the Iewes Which Peter with hym led: Amased were, sore at those newes When that Gods sprite was shed. And powred on, the heathen sorte Whom they without delay: With diuers tonges, heard make reporte Of Gods high prayse alway At that tyme Peter dyd aunswere May any man vs let: Or els forbyd, but that watere Amonge vs may be fet.
To baptise these, both lest and most Which here in presence be: Endewde nowe with, the holy ghost To grace as well as we. And to prepare, these to Baptym He charged them strayght wayes Then in Gods name, they moued hym To tarye there fewe dayes. AND Peter doth, declare the cause VVhy he to the heathen vvent: Paule Barnabas, doth preache the lause Of hym that then them sent. Meane. Thappost les and bretherne were Tenor. Thappostles and bretherne were Contertenor. Thappostles and bretherne were Bassus. Thapposltes and bretherne were
Meane. glade, Through out Ie ru sa∣lem, to heare the heathen receyuyd had, The worde of God to Tenor. glad, Throughout Ie ru sa∣lem, To heare the heathen receyued had, The worde of God to
Countertenor. glade, Through out Ie ru sa∣lem To here the heathen receyuyd had the worde of God to them, Bassus. glad, Throughout Ie ru sa∣lem, To heare the heathen receyuyd had, The worde of God to them,
Meane. them, When Peter to Ie ru sa∣lem, Came to his iorneys ende, Tenor. them, When Peter to Ieru sa∣lem, Came, to his iorneys end, They of the cir-
Countertenor. When Peter to Ie ru sa∣lem, Came to his iorneys end, They of Basse. When Peter to Ie ru sa∣lem, Came to his iorneys end, They of the
Meane. They of the cir cumci si∣on wyth him dyd then contend. Tenor. cum ci sion, Wyth him dyd then contend contend. THapostles and brethren were glad Throughout Ierusalem: To heare the heathen, receiued had The worde of God to them. When Peter to, Ierusalem Came to hys iorneyes ende: They of the circumcision With hym dyd then contende.
The countertenor the cir cumci si on wyth hym dyd then contend. Bassus. circum ci si on wyth hym dyd then contend. And sayde of late, thou wenst into Thuncircumsyde in dede: With them to eate, whiche thynge to do Our lawe hath not decrede. Peter began, then to debate The thynges as they dyd chaunce And sayde I was, in Ioppa late Prayinge and in a traunce.
As I in dede, playnelye had sene A vessell descendynge: A large whyte cloth, as it had bene From heauen then downe commynge Let downe it was, by corners fower And so it came to me: Within the whiche, when it came lower Myne eyes playnely myght se. Fourfoted beastes, that semed fayre Uermen and wormes there layde: And also foules, out of the ayre A voyce to me then sayde. Peter aryse, slee thou and eate And I sayde Lorde, God shylde: For in my mouth, came neuer meate Then common or yet defylde. And then the voyce, dyd aunswere me From heauen with good accorde: Count not those thynges, vncleane to be That cleansed hath the Lorde. Thre tymes thys thynge, was brought a∣bout As I haue shewed you playne: And all thynges was, without all dout Up take to heauen agayne.
And then beholde, immediatlye There came to me thre men: The which were sent, from Cesarye Onely to seke me then. And then the sprite, to me dyd saye Do thou thy selfe prepare: To go with them, forth on their waye And haue therof no feare. Moreouer then, syxe brethren went In companye of vs: Unto the house, of hym that sent Which was Cornelius: How he had sene, he shewed to vs The aungel of the Lorde: Whiche sayde to hym, Cornelius To Ioppa sende thou worde. To Simon Peter, one of myne Who shall tell words to thee: Wherby that thou, and eke all thyne No dout shall saued be. And then as I, began to preache The sprite on them fel thus: As dyd on vs, when we dyd teache The Lorde and Christ Iesus.
Then in my head, I dyd recorde Great thinges that I then wayde: Whiche were the words, of God ye Lorde That he in dede had sayde. Iohn with water, he dyd baptyse But ye shal baptysed be: Euen with the sprite, that is right wyse Within fewe dayes trust me. Then forasmuch as God dyd geue To them as vnto vs: When we dyd fyrst, preache and beleue The Lorde and Christ Iesus. What was I then, that I should seace And eke the Lorde denye: When they heard yt, they helde their peace And God dyd glorifye. And sayd also, that God had sent The Gentils euen the same: Their former lyfe, then to repent Beleuyng in his name. Those that before, abrode were dryuen Through persecution stronge: The which arose, about good Steuen From place to place went longe.
Untyll they came, to Phenices Cipers and Antioche: Unto the Iewes, both more and les Onlye they dyd approche. And eke of Cipers there were some And of Sirene also: To Antioche, when they were come Unto the Grekes dyd go. And preached then, the Lorde Iesus Whose hande with them abod: A great numbre, beleued vs And turned vnto God. Of these thinges tydinges came anon Unto the eares of them: That were the congregation Then at Ierusalem. And they sent forth, one Barnabas To Antioche in peace: When he came there, right glad he was To see the fayth encrease Exhorting them, not once to start Sith God had them restorde: Unto his grace, that they with heart Should cleaue vnto the Lorde.
Ryght good he was, euen from his youth Full of the sprite and fayth: Much people he, vnto the truth Dyd wynne the storye sayth. Then Barnabas, to Tharsus sought To see Saule there approche: Upon whose sight, right soone he brought Hym vnto Antioche. And it chaunced, that one whole yere They kept together styll: Euen with the, congregacion there And taught the Lorde hys wyll. That in so much, thelect that were At Antioche euen then: Were those in dede, that first dyd beare The name of Christen men. In those dayes from, Ierusalem The Prophetes came to vs: To Antioche, and one of them Was named Agabus. Whiche by the sprite, then signified Great dearth shoulde then succede: And that throughout, the worlde so wyde Whiche came to passe in dede.
In Claudius dayes, the Emperour Thelect them selues dyd bynde: Eche man accordynge to hys power Some succour then to sende. Unto the brethren, in Iurye Whiche thynge they brought to pas And sent vnto, the Elders bye Saule and eke Barnabas. The contentes. HERODE doth persecute Christes flocke And doth slaye Iames in dede: In pryson he, doth Peter locke The vvormes Herode doth fede.
Meane. And in that tyme Herode the Kynge, He dyd his hands let slyp, To trouble men of good ly- Tenor. And in the tyme Herode the Kynge, He dyd his hands let slyp, To trouble men of good lyuyng,
Countertenor. And in that tyme Herode the Kyng, He dyd his hands let slyp, To trouble men of good ly- Bassus. And in that tyme Herode the Kyng, He dyd his hands slyp, To trouble men of good ly-
Meane. uyng, And Godlye fe low∣shyp, He dyd slee Iames Iohns brother deare, Euen wyth the swerde in Tenor. uyng, And Godlye fe low∣shyp, He dyd slee Iames Iohns brother deare, Euen wyth the swerde in
Countertenor. uyng, And godlye fe low∣shyp, He dyd slee Iames Iohns brother deare, Euen wyth the swerde in Bassus. uyng, And god lye fe low∣shyp, He dyd slee Iames Iohns brother deare, Euen wyth the swerd in dede
Meane. dede, Because the Iues well pleased were He further dyd pro cede. Tenor. dede, Because ye Iues wel pleased were be cause the Iues wel pleased were he further dyd procede.
Countertenor. dede, Be∣cause the Iues wel pleased were he further dyd procede. Bassus. dede, Because the Iues well pleased were, He further dyd procede.
ANd in that tyme, Herode the kynge He dyd hys handes let slyppe: To trouble men, of good lyuynge And godly felowshyppe. He dyd slaye Iames, Iohns brother dere Euen with the swearde in dede: Because the Iewes, wel pleased were He further dyd procede. It was the dayes, then of swete bread And he caught Peter fast: With violence, voyde of all dread In pryson dyd hym cast. Delyuerynge hym, a charge gaue he Unto quarternions fower: Of souldiers there, then kept to be Tyll that the feast were ouer. Entendynge then, once easter past That out he shoulde be brought But Peter was, in pryson fast Tyll God for hym had wrought Then prayer was made, without ceasyng Of all the godly menne: Unto the Lorde, out hym to bryng Of that foul fylthye denne.
When Herode would, haue had hym sene And brought before the route: The same nyght Peter, slept betwene Two souldiers stowre and stoute. Bounde with two chaynes, in lodginge pore And so he fell a slepe: The kepers standynge at the dore The prison fast to kepe. Beholde the Aungel, of the Lorde Was present in that tyde: The lodge to lyght, he then restorde And smote on Peters syde: And styrred hym, who lay in bandes And sayde aryse vnbewrayde: And then the chaynes, fel from his handes The Angell to hym sayde: Gyrde thou thy selfe, and haue no drede Thy Sandales bynde on thee: Thy mantell cast, on thee with spede And then come folowe me. He folowed hym, and made no dene And wylt not what done was: But as a vision, he had sene Whiche thaungel brought to pas
When they the first, watche dyd frustrate The seconde watche also: They came vnto, the yron gate That goth the cytye vnto. Which opened by, the owne accorde They passynge through by nyght: And then the Aungell, of the Lorde From Peter vanished quyght. When Peter to, hym selfe came well He sayde I knowe and see: That God hath sent, me hys Angell Which hath delyuerd me. Out of the hands, of kynge Herod And all hys whole counsayle: And from the Iewes, I thanke my God That neuer dyd me fayle. And as he thought, thys thynge vpon To Maries house dyd go: Which was the mother, of one Iohn And called Marke also. Where diuers were, gathered to praye There Peter knockt with spede: A damsell came forth, to heare saye Named Rhoda in dede.
And when that she, knewe Peters voyce The dore she dyd let pas: She ranne in fast, and dyd reioyce To tell where Peter was. Declarynge playne, that heard she had Hym speake in the entre: And then they sayde, that she was mad But she sayde it was he. Then sayde they all, it maye betyde His Aungel there to be: But Peter styll, dyd there abyde And eke styll knocked he. And when they had, opend the dore Where Peter then dyd stande: They were astonied, ryche and pore But he helde vp his hande. And wylled them, to holde their peace And shewed them what was past▪ Howe that the Lorde, dyd hym releace Where he in chaynes laye fast. And he sayde then, go shewe thys thynge To Iames and, brethren eke: And he went thence, before day sprynge Another place to seke.
Assoone as it, was fayre lyght daye The souldiers made great mone: Eche one to other, began to saye Howe is thys man thus gone. When Herode then, for hym dyd call And naught of hym heard saye: He dyd examine, the kepers all Commaundynge them awaye: And he descended, from Iewrye To Cesarye anon: With them of Tire, he was angrye And with them of Sidon: And they came all, then to obtayne By intercession than: To Bassus made, hys chamberlayne Desyrynge peace eche man. Because their countrey, where they fedde Chiefely by hym dyd stande: And they and theirs, were norishedde Onely by Herodes lande. Upon a daye, appoynted well Herode hym selfe made neate: In fyne and royall, apparell And set hym on hys seate.
To them gay wordes, then spake Herod The people then dyd shoute: And sayde he speaks, more lyke a God Then lyke a man no doute. The aungell then, immediatlye Dyd strycke him with Gods rod: Because he dyd, not geue the glorye Unto the lyuynge God. The wormes of hym, toke their repast And he gaue vp the ghost: The worde also encreased fast And grewe in euerye coost. Then Barnabas, and Paule went soone Unto Ierusalem: When they their office, had well done And toke Iohn Marke with them. The Contentes. PAVLE Barnabas, dyd God prefer And dyd the heathen teache: And eke agaynste, the socerer At Antioche dyd preache.
Meane. At Antioche ther dyd re∣mayne among the flocke of Christ: some prophets & some teachers Tenor. At Antioche ther dyd re∣mayne among the flocke of Christ▪ some prophets & some teachers
Countertenor. At Anti oche ther dyd re∣mayne among the flocke of Christ: some prophets and some teachers Bassus. At Antioche ther dyd re∣mayne among the flocke of Christ: some prophets & some teachers
Meane. playne sent from the Lorde most hyest, As Bar nabas Simon Ni∣ger and Lucye of Si- Tenor. playne sent from the Lorde most hyest, As Barnabas Si∣mon Niger and Lucye
Contertenor. playne sent from the Lorde most hyest, As Barnabas Simon Ni∣ger and Lucye of Siren, The Bassus. playne sent from the Lorde most hyest, As Barnabas Simon Ni∣ger and Lucye of Si-
Meane. rene, The Tetracks nurse, felow was there whose name was Manahen. Tenor. of Siren The Tetracks Nurse, fe∣low was ther whose name was Manahē, AT Antioche, there dyd remayne Amonge the flocke of Christ: Some prophetes, and some teachers playne Sent frō ye lord most hiest. As Barnabas, Simon Niger And Lucye of Sirene:
Countertenor. Tetracks nurse, felowe was ther whose name was Manahen. Bassus. ren, The Tetracks Nurse, felow was ther whose name was Manahen. The Tetracks nurs, felowe was ther Whose name was Manahene. And also Saule, was there in place Who as they ministred: And eke dyd fast, and pray for grace Gods sprite on them was shed.
Whiche dyd commaunde, & to them sayde Sende Barnabas and Saul: To worke the worke, before them layde Wherto I dyd them caul. Then dyd they fast, and also praye As they were wont to do: And eke their hands, on them dyd laye And then they let them go. And by Gods sprite, when they were sent They came to Seleucye: From thence dyd sayle, so that they went To Ciprus directlye. And when they came, to Salomine In the churche of the Iewes: Their hearts and mynds, they did encline To preache them there good newes. To serue with them, there for a whyle They had one Iohn by name: And when they had, gone through the yle To Paphos then they came. A sorcerer there, of them was founde A false prophet a Iue: Whose teaching was, not sure ne sounde Hys name was Bariesu.
With Sergius Paule, a man prudent Whiche rulde the whole countre: With all hys trayne, he dyd frequent Familier then to be. The same ruler, to hym dyd caule And willed to come nere: Both Barnabas, and also Paule Of them goddes worde to here. But Elymas, the sorcerer So they declare hys name: Dyd wyll the ruler, to forbere To fayth hym selfe to frame. Saule named Paule, then in that cost Full feruent at a brayde: Who was full of, the holye Gost Beheld hym then and sayde. O full of all, subtylitye And eke disceytfulnes: The deuyls chylde, and enemye To grace and ryghtwysenes. Thou doest not cease, styll to peruart By damnable discorde: But dost alwayes plucke frō mans heart The strayght wayes of the Lorde.
And nowe beholde, thou man vnkynde The Lordes hande is on thee: And for a tyme, thou shalt be blynde The Sunne thou shalt not se. Immediatlye, then for hys pryde Uppon hys eyes dyd stande: A myst that made, hym seke a gyde To leade hym by the hande. The ruler then, dyd see the case And not therat repyne: But mused muche, and dyd embrace The Lorde and his doctrine. When Paule frō Paphus, toke shippyng And all hys companye: Forth on their waye, they went saylyng To Perge of Phamphilye. To see his frendes, Iohn was right fayne And dyd depart from them: And so returned, whome agayne Unto Ierusalem. They wandryng ther, went from Perga And soone they dyd approche: The lande then of, Pisydia And came to Antioche.
Into the sinagoge they went Upon the Sabbothes daye: And sat them downe, with good entent No man dyd saye them naye. But when the lecture, of the lawe And prophetes there were done. The ruler then, whiche there them sawe Sayde vnto them ryght sone. Good bretherne nowe, we do you praye The people to exhort: Yf any sermon, ye can saye To them for their comfort. Then Paule stode vp, there in presens And beckned with hys hande: He prayde them all, to kepe sylens Gods worde to vnderstande. He sayde ye men, of Israell And ye that God do feare: And all that here, amonge you dwell I praye you geue good care. God of this people, dyd elect Our fathers vs beforne: Auancynge them, that were reiect As forreners farre borne.
In Egypt lande, both daye and nyght In bondage they dyd dwell: The Lorde then with, hys arme of myght Dyd brynge them out ryght well. And fourtye yeares, he dyd them spare In all their wyckednes: To punishe them, he dyd forbare With in the wyldernes. Seuen nacions then, in Canaan He wasted well I wot: Partynge the lande, to euery man Accordynge to hys lot. Then to the tyme, of Samuell The iudges gaue trulye: Amonge them there, yeares for to dwell Four hundreth and fyftye. And after that, a kynge to craue They woulde not cease ne blyn: The sonne of Cis, Saule God them gaue Of the tribe of Beniamyn. Twise twentye yeares, he ware ye crowne No lenger raygned he: For God the Lorde, dyd put hym downe And hys posterite.
He set vp Dauid, to be kynge And ruler in hys place: And dyd reporte, of hym saynge Dauid I do enbrace. One Iesses sonne, whom I haue founde A man Ientell and kynde: He is to me, both sure and sounde To fulfyll all my mynde. Of thys mans sede, a sauiour The promyse thus doth tell: God hath brought forth, Iesus the flour And kynge of Israell. But after Iohn, had run hys race He sayde I am not he: I meane Messias, full of grace Whome ye take me to be. But lo one doth, come after me Whose shoes vpon hys fete: Of such hyghnes, and dignite To lose I am vnmete: Ye men bretherne, and children all Of Abraham by discent: To you that feare, God great and small Thys worde of lyfe is sent.
The dwellers in, Ierusalem The rulers well I wot: And all suche then, as were with them In dede they knew hym not. The prophetes voyce, that were red Eche Saboth them amonge: With suche blyndnes, then were they led, They coulde take then but wronge. And though of deathe, they found no cause In hym most innocent: The Prophecyes, in euerye clause Were ended as they ment. In denying him, to mortall fate They dyd them all fulfyll: When they made sute, to Pons Pilate, This innocent to kyll. Then all thynges done, in eche degre As scripture wolde it haue: They toke his bodye, from the tre And layed it in the graue. God raysed hym, on the third daye From deathe to lyfe certayne: He shewed hym selfe, without delaye, When he was risen agayne.
And manye tymes, appeared he Full lyuelye vnto them: That went with him, from Galile Unto Ierusalem. Which are his witnes, to eche sort Appoynted of the Lorde: And we also, to your comfort Gods promyse do recorde. Which to our fathers, he dyd frame Howe God to their ofsprynge: Fulfylled hath, in Christ the same From death hym reuiuynge. The seconde Psalme, recordeth playne Thou art my sonne sayeth he: The father sayeth, this daye certayne I haue begotten thee. In that he raysed, hym anon From death nothynge dismayde No more to se, corruption On thys wyse then he sayde. The fauour grace, and eke good wyll That I Dauid dyd vow: Full faythfullye, I shall fulfyll And parforme it to you.
Therfore he sayeth, in the lyke place Thy sonne the holye on: Thou shalt not suffer, in no case To see corruption. As for Dauid, hys tyme dyd kepe To serue gods wyll trulye: And after that, fallynge a slepe Was layde hys father bye. His Cors dyd waste, and putrefye But God hys sonne dyd he: Make quicke agayne, and certaynlye Dyd no corrupcyon se. Knowe ye therfore, ye brethren all Through him ye may purchace: Which is preached, to great and small Forgeuenes of trespace. And from all things, ful sure to be Acquited and made sure: Which Moyses lawe, in no degre Coulde clense be ye ryght sure. But who so that, wyl geue credence And in the fayth abyde: Through him is cleare, from all offence And also iustified.
Beware therfore, I do you reade And kepe ye from the lake: Lest those thynges fall, vpon your heade Wherof the prophetes spake. Ye dispisers, beholde and muse At your distruction now: For in your tyme, a worcke defuse I worke euen vnto you. Whiche in no wyse, ye shal beleue Who so of it you tell: The whiche is wrought, you for to greue Because ye do rebell. When that the Iues, were all forth gon Out of their holye place: The Gentyles them, besought anon To preache the worde of grace. And them to teache, through out the weke Betwene the Saboth dayes: What meanes & wayes, that they myght To please the Lorde alwayes. Their holye congregacion then So ended Luke recytes: On them dyd wayte, there many men Both Iues and Procelytes.
To these good men, that dyd abyde Spake Paule and Barnabas Exortynge them, not once to slyde From God ne from his grace. The Saboth day, then next folowynge The citie whole well neare: Together came, much desyrynge Gods holy worde to heare. But when the Iewes, sawe suche a route They were full wrath I deme: Reuilyng Paule, with wordes fulstoute Beginning to blaspheme. But Barnabas, and Paule was bolde And sayde it doth behoue: Gods worde to you, first to be tolde Whiche sent is from aboue, But syth ye do, it nowe denye Auoydynge it with strife: And thynke your selues, now vnworthye Of euerlastyng lyfe. And eke the worde, so precious Ye take for crafte and gyles: Lo here the Lorde, hath wylled vs To tourne vnto the Gentyles.
I haue set thee, to be a lyght The Gentyles for to gyde And them to saue, as I behyght Throughout the earth so wyde. The Gentyles then, offred thys grace Of it they were full fayne: Gods worde with thankes, they dyd em∣brace Beleuynge it certayne. And those that God, had ordayned To euerlastynge lyfe: Abode in fayth, the worde dyd spread Throughout the countrey ryfe. Wherfore the Iewes, them dyd abhore And moued without pytye: The women of, worshyp and honore The chiefe men of the cytye. Agaynst poore Paule, and Barnabas And woulde without offence: A persecution brought to pas. Expellynge them from thence. Out of that coast, when they nedes must To go they made them mete: And for a witnes, shoke the dust Agaynst them of their fete.
And they came to, Iconium Accept of least and moste: And Gods elect, were all becum Full of the holye goste.
The contentes. THAPOSTLES at Iconium Dyd preache vvith good aduice: The people vvoulde, both all and some To them do sacrifice. iiij. partes in ij. It chaunced in I∣conium As Tenor. It chaunced in I∣co ni um As they oft Contertenor. It chaunced in I co ni∣um As they oft▪ Bassus. It chaunced in I co ni∣um As they oft tymes dyd
Meane. they oft tymes dyd vse together they into dyd cum the Si na∣goge of Iues, where they dyd preache Tenor. tymes dyd vse together they in∣to dyd cum the Si na∣goge of Iues, Where they dyd
The countertenor tymes dyd vse to gether they in∣to dyd come the Sinagoge of Iues, Wher they dyd preach and one- Bassus. vse together they in to dyd cum the Si na goge of Iues where they dyd preache
Meane. and onelye seke gods grace then to atcheue that they so spake to Iue and Tenor. preache and on lye seke Gods grace then to at cheue that they so spake to
Countertenor. lye seke Gods grace then to atcheue That they so spake to Iue and Greke That Bassus. and onelye seke Gods grace then to atcheue That they so spake to Iue and
Meane. greke That ma ny dyd be∣leue, be leue. Tenor. Iue and Greke That manye dyd beleue. IT chaunced in, Iconium As they oft tymes dyd vse: Together they, into dyd cum The sinagoge of Iewes. Where they dyd Preache, and only seke Gods grace then to atcheue: That they so spake, to Iewe and Greke That many dyd beleue.
Countertenor. manye dyd be leue be∣leue. Bassus. Greke That manye dyd beleue beleue. But then the Iues, of vnbelefe The Gentyles on dyd call: And styrde their mindes, to much mischefe Agaynst the bretherne all. And they longe tyme, dyd there persist Gods worde styll to recorde: And quit them selues, boldly in Christ By helpe of God the Lorde.
¶Whiche then, gaue testimonye vnto The worde euen of hys grace: And caused them, great thynges to do Whiche by their handes toke place. ¶The people dyd, them selues deuyde As they were then affect: Sum frō the Iues, woulde neuer slyde Nor sum from Christes elect. ¶When yt the Iewes, & gentyles woulde Assaulte make them vpon: Their rulers wrought, all yt they coulde By counsel them to ston. ¶Whose coūcel knowen, they made no host But fled vnto Lystra: And Derba cytyes, of the cost Of Licaonia. ¶And eke vnto, the region That lyeth there rounde about: And preached Christ, to euerye one And his Gospel through out. ¶There sat a man, of lytle myrth At Lystra, lame of fete: A trepell was, euen from his byrth And neuer walked yet. ¶Who heard Paule preach, ye story sayth And Paule behelde the man: And dyd perceyue, that he had fayth To be made whole euen then. ¶Paule sayd to him, with chereful voyce Upon thy fete vp stande:
And he start vp, and dyd reioyce And walked out of hande. ¶And when the people, dyd beholde What Paule had done that daye: With mightye voyce, they were full bolde To brute these thynges and saye. ¶Nowe in the speche, of our countre Gods are come downe vs to: In likenes nowe, of men ye se And what straunge thinges they do. ¶And Barnabas, they called thus The name of Iupiter: And called Paule, Mercurius Because he was preacher. ¶And then the priest, of Iupiter Bystyrd both fete and handes: Which dwelt before, the Citye there Brought oxen and garlandes. ¶To the church porche, and dyd aduyse The people and them caule: With him then to, do Sacrifyce To Barnabas and Paule. ¶But whā Thappostles, herd their knac∣kes They myght it not abyde: But rent their clothes, thē on their backes And ran with them to chyde. ¶They cryed and sayde, vnto them then Why haue ye done thus now: For we are both, but mortall men In all poyntes lyke to you.
¶And we do preache, you verytyes, That lyes myght be abhorde To turne you from, these vanytyes, Unto the lyuynge Lorde. ¶Who made the heauens, & eke ye landes That they shuld styll be his: He made the sea, euen with his handes And all that in them is. ¶Whiche in tymes past, euen in those dayes Dyd suffer and permit: Eche man to walke, in his owne wayes Geuen vp to his owne wyt. ¶Neuertheles, his heauenlye wyttes Left witnes to declare: In that he shewed his benefyttes From heauen rayne to prepare. ¶And frutfull seasons, gaue at wyll To vs both more and les: And in the ende, our heartes dyd fyll Wyth foode and great gladnes. ¶And all these wordes, wold scarce entyse The people to forbeare: But that they wolde, do Sacrifyce Unto them both euen there. ¶And certenly, Iues dyd there approche The whiche dyd euen then cum: Immediatlye, from Antioche And from Iconium. ¶And got the people, to consent With stones Paules bloude to shed
And through the cytye, they hym rent Thynkynge he had bene deed. ¶And yet as the, disciples stode Aboute him to lament: He dyd arise, and for hys fode Into the citye went. ¶And he abode, there all that nyght Euen vnto the next daye: Then Barnabas, and he a ryght To Darby toke the waye. ¶And in that Citie, they dyd preache While they dyd there soiorne: To all men Iesus, Christ did teache And then they dyd retorne. ¶To Lystra and, Iconium To Antioche and there: Strengthned the soules, of all and sum That there disciples were. ¶Exhortynge them, not to relent But in the fayth remayne: Affirmynge that, through much torment We must to heauen attayne. ¶And they then by, election Ordayned elders ther: In euerye, congregacion By fastynge and prayer. ¶That God to thē, his grace might sēde To worke his wyll moste Iust And thus to God, dyd them commend In whome they put their trust
¶And they went through, Pisidia And taught the people styll: And came vnto, Pamphilia Their callynge to fulfyll. ¶And when they had, declared playne Gods worde then in Perca: They dyd descende, forth with agayne Into Attalia. ¶From thence by shyp, they all sayled To Antioche a pace: From whence they were, delyuered To God and to hys grace. ¶Who had them longe, preserued styll From cruel men and mad: Euen by his grace, to worcke his wyll Whiche they fulfylled had. ¶When they were come, and to one stead The congregacion brought: Ther was rehearst by eche mans head That God by them had wrought. Howe he the doore, of fayth vntyde The Gentyls in to call: And there longe tyme, they dyd abyde With the disciples all. Imprynted at London by Nycolas Hyll, for Wyllyam Seres. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum.
