A2901 11602378 47901
portrait of George Alsop Anno Dō: 1666. Aetatis Suae 28. View here the Shadow whose Ingenious Hand Hath drawne exact the Province Mary Land Display'd her Glory in such Scaenes of Witt That those that read must fall in Love with it For which his Labour hee deserves the praise As well as Poets doe the wreath of Bays H.W.
A CHARACTER Of the PROVINCE of MARY-LAND, Wherein is Described in four distinct Parts, (Viz.) I. The Scituation, and plenty of the Province. II. The Laws, Customs, and natural Demea∣nor of the Inhabitant. III. The worst and best Ʋsage of a Mary-Land Servant, opened in view. IV. The Traffique, and vendable Commodities of the Countrey. ALSO A small Treatise on the wilde and naked INDIANS (or Susquehanokes) of Mary-Land, their Customs, Man∣ners, Absurdities, & Religion. Together with a Collection of Histo∣rical LETTERS. By GEORGE ALSOP. London, Printed by T. J. for Peter Dring, at the sign of the Sun in the Poultrey: 1666.
To the Right Honorable Caecilius Lord Baltemore, Absolute Lord and Proprietary of the Provinces of Mary-Land and Avalon in America. My Lord, I Have adventured on your Lordships accep∣tance by guess; if pre∣sumption has led me into an Error that deserves cor∣rection, I heartily beg In∣dempnity, and resolve to repent soundly for it, and do so no more. VVhat I present I know to be true, Experientia docet; It being
an infallible Maxim, That there is no Globe like the occu∣lar and experimental view of a Countrey. And had not Fate by a necessary imploy∣ment, confin'd me within the narrow walks of a four years Servitude, and by de∣grees led me through the most intricate and dubious paths of this Countrey, by a commanding and unde∣niable Enjoynment, I could not, nor should I ever have undertaken to have written a line of this nature.
If I have wrote or com∣posed any thing that's wilde and confused, it is because I am so my self, and the world, as far as I can per∣ceive, is not much out of the same trim; therefore I resolve, if I am brought to the Bar of Common Law for any thing I have done here, to plead Non compos men∣tis, to save my Bacon. There is an old Saying in English, He must rise betimes that would please every one. And I am afraid I have lain
so long a bed, that I think I shall please no body; if it must be so, I cannot help it. But as Felton in his Resolves says, In things that must be, 'tis good to be resolute; And therefore what Destiny has ordained, I am resolved to wink, and stand to it. So leaving your Honour to more serious meditations, I subscribe my self, My Lord, Your Lordship most Humble Servant, George Alsop.
To all the Merchant Adventurers for MARY-LAND, together with those Commanders of Ships that saile into that Province. SIRS, YOƲ are both Adventurers, the one of Estate, the other of Life: I could tell you I am an Adventurer too, if I durst presume to come into your Com∣pany. I have ventured to come abroad in Print, and if I should be laughed at for my good mean∣ing, it would so break the credit of my Ʋnder∣standing, that I should never dare to shew my face upon the Exchange of (conceited) Wits again. This dish of Discourse was intended for you at first, but it was manners to let my Lord have the first cut, the Pye being his own. I beseech you accept of the matter as 'tis drest, only to stay your stomachs, and I'le promise you the next shall be better done. 'Tis all as I can serve you in at present, and it may be questionable whether I have served you in this or no. Here I present you with A Character of Mary-Land, it may
be you will say 'tis weakly done, if you do I cannot help it, 'tis as well as I could do it, considering the several Obstacles that like blocks were thrown in my way to hinder my proceeding: The major part thereof was written in the intermitting time of my sickness, therefore I hope the afflicting weak∣ness of my Microcosm may plead a just excuse for some imperfections of my pen. I protest what I have writ is from an experimental knowledge of the Country, and not from any imaginary suppo∣sition. If I am blamed for what I have done too much, it is the first, and I will irrevocably pro∣mise it shall be the last. There's a Maxim upon Tryals at Assizes, That if a Thief be taken upon the first fault, if it be not too hainous, they only burn him in the hand and let him go: So I de∣sire you to do by me, if you find any thing that bears a criminal absurdity in it, only burn me for my first fact and let me go. But I am affraid I have kept you too long in the Entry, I shall desire you therefore to come in and sit down. G. Alsop.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THE Reason why I appear in this place is, lest the general Reader should conclude I have nothing to say for my self; and truly he's in the right on't, for I have but little to say (for my self) at this time: For I have had so large a Journey, and so heavy a Burden to bring Mary-Land into England, that I am almost out of breath: I'le promise you after I am come to my self, you shall hear more of me. Good Reader, because you see me make a brief Apologetical excuse for my self, don't judge me; for I am so self-con∣ceited of my own merits, that I almost think I want none. De Lege non judicandum ex
solâ linea, saith the Civilian; We must not pass judgement upon a Law by one line: And because we see but a small Bush at a Tavern door, conclude there is no Canary. For as in our vulgar Resolves 'tis said, A good fce needs no Band, and an ill one deserves none: So the French Proverb sayes, Bon Vien il n'a faut point de Ensigne, Good Wine needs no Bush. I suppose by this time some of my speculative observers have judged me vain∣glorious; but if they did but rightly consider me, they would not be so censorious. For I dwell so far from Neighbors, that if I do not praise my self, no body else will: And since I am left alone, I am resolved to sum∣mon the Magna Charta of Fowles to the Bar for my excuse, and by their irrevocable Sta∣tutes plead my discharge, For its an ill Bird will befoule her own Nest: Besides, I have a thousand Billings-gate Collegians that will give in their testimony, That they never knew a Fish-woman cry stinking Fish. Thus leaving the Nostrils of the Citizens Wives to de∣monstrate what they please as to that, and thee (Good Reader) to say what thou wilt, I bid thee Farewel. Geo. Alsop.
THE AUTHOR TO HIS BOOK. WHen first Apollo got my brain with Childe, He made large promise never to beguile, But like an honest Father, he would keep Whatever Issue from my Brain did creep: With that I gave consent, and up he threw Me on a Bench, and strangely he did do▪ Then every week he daily came to see How his new Physick still did work with me, And when he did perceive he'd don the feat, Like an unworthy man he made retreat, Left me in desolation, and where none Compassionated when they heard me groan.
What could he judge the Parish then would think, To see me fair, his Brat as black as Ink? If they had eyes, they'd swear I were no Nun, But got with Child by some black Africk Son, And so condemn me for my Fornication, To beat them Hemp to stifle half the Nation. Well, since 'tis so, I'le alter this base Fate, And lay his Bastard at some Noble's Gate▪ Withdraw my self from Beadles, and from such, Who would give twelve pence I were in their clutch: Then, who can tell? this Child which I do hide, May be in time a Small-beer Col'nel Pride. But while I talk, my business it is dumb, I must lay double-clothes unto thy Bum, Then lap thee warm, and to the World commit The Bastard Off-spring of a New-born wit. Farewel, poor Brat, thou in a monstrous World, In swadling bands, thus up and down art hurl'd; There to receive what Destiny doth con∣trive, Either to perish, or be sav'd alive.
Good Fate protect thee from a Criticks power, For if he comes, thou'rt gon in half an hour, Stifl'd and blasted, 'tis their usual way, To make that Night, which is as bright as Day. For if they once but wring, and skrew their mouth, Cock up their Hats, and set the point Du South, Armes all a kimbo, and with belly strut, As if they had Parnassus in their gut: These are the Symtomes of the murthering fall Of my poor Infant, and his burial. Say he should miss thee, and some ign'rant Asse Should find thee out, as he along doth pass, It were all one, he'd look into thy Tayle, To see if thou wert Feminine or Male; When he'd half starv'd thee, for to satisfie His peeping Ign'rance, he'd then let thee lie; And vow by's wit he ne're could understand, The Heathen dresses of another Land: Well, 'tis no matter, wherever such as he Knows one grain, more then his simplicity. Now, how the pulses of my Senses beat, To think the rigid Fortune thou wilt meet; Asses and captious Fools, not six in ten Of thy Spectators will be real men,
To Umpire up the badness of the Cause, And screen my weakness from the rav'nous Laws, Of those that will undoubted sit to see How they might blast this new born Infancy: If they should burn him, theyd conclude hereafter, 'Twere too good death for him to dye a Martyr; And if they let him live, they think it will Be but a means for to encourage ill, And bring in time some strange Antipod'ans, A thousand Leagues beyond Philippians, To storm our Wits; therefore he must not rest, But shall be hang'd, for all he has been prest: Thus they conclude. — My Genius com∣forts give, In Resurrection he will surely live.
A Land-skip of the Province of MARY LAND Or the Lord Baltimors Plantation neer Virginia By Geo: Alsop Gent map of Maryland
To my Friend Mr. George Alsop, on his Character of MARY-LAND. WHo such odd nookes of Earths great mass describe, Prove their descent from old Columbus tribe: Some Boding augur did his Name devise, Thy Genius too cast in th' same mould and size; His Name predicted he would be a Rover, And hidden places of this Orb discover; He made relation of that World in gross, Thou the particulars retail'st to us▪ By this first Peny of thy fancy we Discover what thy greater Coines will be; This Embryo thus well polisht doth presage, The manly Atchievements of its future age, Auspicious winds blow gently on this spark, Ʋntill its flames discover what's yet dark; Mean while this short Abridgement we embrace, Expecting that thy busie Soul will trace
Some Mines at last which may enrich the World. And all that poverty may be in oblivion hurl'd. Zoilus is dumb, for thou the mark hast hit, By interlacing History with Wit▪ Thou hast describ'd its superficial Treasure, Anatomiz'd its bowels at thy leasure; That MARY-LAND to thee may duty owe, Who to the World dost all her Glory shew: Then thou shalt make the Prophesie fall true, Who fill'st the World (like th' Sea) with know∣ledge new. William Bogherst.
To my Friend Mr. George Alsop, on his Character of MARY-LAND. THis plain, yet pithy and concise Description Of Mary-Lands plentious and sedate con∣dition▪ With other things herein by you set forth, To shew its Rareness, and declare its Worth; Compos'd in such a time, when most men were Smitten with Sickness, or surpriz'd with Fear, Argues a Genius good, and Courage stout, In bringing this Design so well about: Such generous Freedom waited on thy brain, The Work was done in midst of greatest pain; And matters flow'd so swiftly from thy source, Nature design'd thee (sure) for such Discourse Go on then with thy Work so well begun, Let it come forth, and boldly see the Sun; Then shall't be known to all, that from thy Youth Thou heldst it Noble to maintain the Truth,
'Gainst all the Rabble-rout, that yelping stand, To cast aspersions on thy MARY-LAND: But this thy Work shall vindicate its Fame, And as a Trophy memorize thy Name; So if without a Tomb thou buried be, This Book's a lasting Monument for thee. H. W. Master of Arts. From my Study, Jan. 10, 1665.
To my Friend Mr. George Alsop, on his Character of MARY-LAND. COlumbus with Apollo sure did set, When he did Court to propigate thy Wit, Or else thy Genius with so small a Clew, Could not have brought such Intricates in view; Discover'd hidden Earth so plain, that we View more in this, then if we went to see. MARY-LAND, I with some thou∣sands more, Could not imagine where she stood before; And hadst thou still been silent with thy Pen, We had continu'd still the self-same men, Ne're to have known the glory of that Soyle, Whose plentious dwellings is four thousand mile.
The portly Susquehanock in his naked dress, Had certain still been Pigmye, or much less; All had been dark (to us) and obscure yet, Had not thy diligence discover'd it: For this we owe thee Praises to the Skie, But none but MARY-LAND can gratifie. Will. Barber.
A CHARACTER Of the PROVINCE of MARY-LAND. CHAP. I. Of the situation and plenty of the Pro∣vince of Mary-Land. MARY-LAND is a Province situated upon the large ex∣tending bowels of America, under the Government of the Lord Baltemore, ad∣jacent Northwardly upon the Confines of New-England, and neighbouring
Southwardly upon Virginia, dwelling pleasantly upon the Bay of Chaesapike, between the Degrees of 36 and 38, in the Zone temperate, and by Mathe∣matical computation is eleven hundred and odd Leagues in Longitude from England, being within her own im∣braces extraordinary pleasant and fer∣tile. Pleasant, in respect of the multi∣tude of Navigable Rivers and Creeks that conveniently and most profitably lodge within the armes of her green, spreading, and delightful Woods; whose natural womb (by her plenty) maintains and preserves the several di∣versities of Animals that rangingly in∣habit her Woods; as she doth other∣wise generously fructifie this piece of Earth with almost all sorts of Vegeta∣bles, as well Flowers with their varieties of colours and smells, as Herbes and Roots with their several effects and operative vertues, that offer their bene∣fits daily to supply the want of the In∣habitant, whene're their necessities shall
Sub-poena them to wait on their com∣mands. So that he, who out of curio∣sity desires to see the Landskip of the Creation drawn to the life, or to read Natures universal Herbal without book, may with the Opticks of a dis∣creet discerning, view Mary-Land drest in her green and fragrant Mantle of the Spring. Neither do I think there is any place under the Heavenly altitude, or that has footing or room upon the circular Globe of this world, that can parallel this fertile and pleasant piece of ground in its multiplicity, or rather Natures extravagancy of a super-abounding plenty. For so much doth this Country increase in a swelling Spring-tide of rich variety and diver∣sities of all things, not only common provisions that supply the reaching sto∣mach of man with a satisfactory plenty, but also extends with its liberality and free convenient benefits to each sensi∣tive faculty, according to their several desiring Appetites. So that had Nature
made it her business, on purpose to have found out a situation for the Soul of profitable Ingenuity, she could not have fitted herself better in the traverse of the whole Universe, nor in convenienter terms have told man, Dwell here, live plentifully and be rich. The Trees, Plants, Fruits, Flowers, and Roots that grow here in Mary-Land, are the only Emblems or Hiero∣glyphicks of our Adamitical or Primi∣tive situation, as well for their variety as odoriferous smells, together with their vertues, according to their several effects, kinds and properties, which still bear the Effigies of Innocency accor∣ding to their original Grafts; which by their dumb vegetable Oratory, each hour speaks to the Inhabitant in silent acts, That they need not look for any other Terrestrial Paradice, to suspend or tyre their curiosity upon, while she is extant. For within her doth dwell so much of variety, so much of natural plenty, that there is not any thing that
is or may be rare, but it inhabits within this plentious soyle: So that those parts of the Creation that have borne the Bell away (for many ages) for a vegetable plentiousness, must now in silence strike and vayle all, and whisper softly in the auditual parts of Mary-Land, that None but she in this dwells singular; and that as well for that she doth exceed in those Fruits, Plants, Trees and Roots, that dwell and grow in their several Clymes or habitable parts of the Earth besides, as the rare∣ness and superexcellency of her own glory, which she flourishly abounds in, by the abundancy of reserved Rarities, such as the remainder of the World (with all its speculative art) never bore any occular testimony of as yet. I shall forbear to particularize those several sorts of Vegetables that flou∣rishingly grows here, by reason of the vast tediousness that will attend upon the description, which therefore makes them much more fit for an
Herbal, then a small Manuscript or History. As for the wilde Animals of this Country, which loosely inhabits the Woods in multitudes, it is impossible to give you an exact description of them all, eonsidering the multiplicity as well as the diversity of so numerous an ex∣tent of Creatures: But such as has fallen within the compass or prospect of my knowledge, those you shall know of; videlicet, the Deer, because they are oftner seen, and more participated of by the Inhabitants of the Land, whose acquaintance by a customary fa∣miliarity becomes much more com∣mon then the rest of Beasts that inhabit the Woods, by using themselves in Herds about the Christian Plantations. Their flesh, which in some places of this Province is the common provision the Inhabitants feed on, and which through the extreme glut and plenty of it, being daily killed by the Indians, and brought in to the English, as well as
that which is killed by the Christian Inhabitant, that doth it more for recre∣ation, then for the benefit they reap by it. I say, the flesh of Venison becomes (as to food) rather denyed, then any way esteemed or desired. And this I speak from an experimental know∣ledge; For when I was under a Com∣mand, and debarr'd of a four years ranging Liberty in the Province of Mary-Land, the Gentleman whom I served my conditional and prefixed time withall, had at one time in his house fourscore Venisons, besides plen∣ty of other provisions to serve his Fa∣mily nine months, they being but seven in number; so that before this Venison was brought to a period by eating, it so nauseated our appetites and sto∣machs, that plain bread was rather courted and desired then it. The Deer here neither in shape nor action differ from our Deer in England: The Park they traverse their ranging and unmeasured walks in, is bounded
and impanell'd in with no other pales then the rough and billowed Ocean: They are also mighty numerous in the Woods, and are little or not at all affrighted at the face of a man, but (like the Docs of Whetstons Park) though their hydes are not altogether so gaudy to extract an admiration from the beholder, yet they will stand (al∣most) till they be scratcht. As for the Wolves, Bears, and Panthers of this Country, they inhabit commonly in great multitudes up in the remotest parts of the Continent; yet at some certain time they come down near the Plantations, but do little hurt or injury worth noting, and that which they do is of so degenerate and low a nature, (as in reference to the fierceness and heroick vigour that dwell in the same kind of Beasts in other Countries) that they are hardly worth mentioning: For the highest of their designs and circumventing reaches is but cowardly and base, only to steal a
poor Pigg, or kill a lost and half starved Calf. The Effigies of a man terrifies them dreadfully, for they no sooner espy him but their hearts are at their mouths, and the spurs upon their heels, they (having no more manners then Beasts) gallop away, and never bid them farewell that are behind them. The Elke, the Cat of the Mountain, the Rackoon, the Fox, the Beaver, the Otter, the Possum, the Hare, the Squirril, the Monack, the Musk-Rat, and several others (whom I'le omit for brevity sake) inhabit here in Mary-Land in several droves and troops, rang∣ing the Woods at their pleasure. The meat of most of these Crea∣tures is good for eating, yet of no va∣lue nor esteem here, by reason of the great plenty of other provisions, and are only kill'd by the Indians of the Coun∣try for their Hydes and Furrs, which become very profitable to those that have the right way of traffiquing for them, as well as it redounds to the
Indians that take the pains to catch them, and to slay and dress their several Hydes, selling and disposing them for such Commodities as their Heathenish fancy delights in. As for those Beasts that were carried over at the first seating of the Country, to stock and increase the situation, as Cows, Horses, Sheep and Hogs, they are generally tame, and use near home, especially the Cows, Sheep and Horses. The Hogs, whose increase is innume∣rable in the Woods, do disfrequent home more then the rest of Creatures that are look'd upon as tame, yet with little trouble and pains they are slain and made provision of. Now they that will with a right Historical Survey, view the Woods of Mary-Land in this particular, as in reference to Swine, must upon necessity judge this Land lineally descended from the Gadarean Territories. Mary-Land (I must confess) cannot boast of her plenty of Sheep here, as
other Countries; not but that they will thrive and increase here, as well as in any place of the World besides, but few desire them, because they com∣monly draw down the Wolves among the Plantations, as well by the sweetness of their flesh, as by the humility of their nature, in not making a defensive re∣sistance against the rough dealing of a ravenous Enemy. They who for cu∣riosity will keep Sheep, may expect that after the Wolves have breathed them∣selves all day in the Woods to sharpen their stomachs, they will come without fail and sup with them at night, though many times they surfeit themselves with the sawce that's dish'd out of the muzzle of a Gun, and so in the midst of their banquet (poor Animals) they often sleep with their Ancestors. Fowls of all sorts and varieties dwell at their several times and seasons here in Mary-Land: The Turkey, the Wood∣cock, the Pheasant, the Partrich, the Pigeon, and others, especially the
Turkey, whom I have seen in whole hundreds in flights in the Woods of Mary-Land, being an extraordinary fat Fowl, whose flesh is very pleasant and sweet. These Fowls that I have named are intayled from generation to genera∣tion to the Woods. The Swans, the Geese and Ducks (with other Water-Fowl) derogate in this point of setled residence; for they arrive in millionous multitudes in Mary-Land about the middle of September, and take their winged farewell about the midst of March: But while they do remain, and beleagure the borders of the shoar with their winged Dragoons, several of them are summoned by a Writ of Fieri fa∣cias, to answer their presumptuous con∣tempt upon a Spit. As for Fish, which dwell in the watry tenements of the deep, and by a provi∣dential greatness of power, is kept for the relief of several Countries in the world, (which would else sink under the rigid enemy of want) here in
Mary-Land is a large sufficiency, and plenty of almost all sorts of Fishes, which live and inhabit within her seve∣ral Rivers and Creeks, far beyond the apprehending or crediting of those that never saw the same, which with very much ease is catched, to the great re∣freshment of the Inhabitants of that Province. All sorts of Grain, as wheat, Rye, Barley, Oates, Pease, besides several others that have their original and birth from the fertile womb of this Land, (and no where else) they all grow, in∣crease, and thrive here in Mary-Land, without the chargable and laborious manuring of the Land with Dung; in∣creasing in such a measure and plenty, by the natural richness of the Earth, with the common, beneficial and con∣venient showers of rain that usually wait upon the several Fields of Grain, (by a natural instinct) so that Famine (the dreadful Ghost of penury and want) is never known with his pale
visage to haunt the Dominions of Mary-Land. Could'st thou (O Earth) live thus ob∣scure, and now Within an Age, shew forth thy plenti∣ous brow Of rich variety, gilded with fruitful Fame, That (Trumpet-like) doth Heraldize thy Name, And tells the World there is a Land now found, That all Earth's Globe can't parallel its Ground? Dwell, and be prosperous, and with thy plenty feed The craving Carkesses of those Souls that need.
CHAP. II. Of the Government and natural dispo∣sition of the People. MARY-LAND, not from the remoteness of her situation, but from the regularity of her well-ordered Government, may (without sin, I think) be called Singular: And though she is not supported with such large Reve∣nues as some of her Neighbours are, yet such is her wisdom in a reserved silence, and not in pomp, to shew her well-conditioned Estate, in relieving at a distance the proud poverty of those that wont be seen they want, as well as those which by undeniable necessities are drove upon the Rocks of pinching wants: Yet such a loathsome creature is a common and folding-handed Beg∣ger, that upon the penalty of almost a perpetual▪ working in Imprisonment, they are not to appear, nor lurk near our vigilant and laborious dwellings.
The Country hath received a general spleen and antipathy against the very name and nature of it; and though there were no Law provided (as there is) to suppress it, I am certainly con∣fident, there is none within the Pro∣vince that would lower themselves so much below the dignity of men to beg, as long as limbs and life keep house to∣gether; so much is a vigilant industrious care esteem'd. He that desires to see the real Plat∣form of a quiet and sober Government extant, Superiority with a meek and yet commanding power sitting at the Helme, steering the actions of State quietly, through the multitude and di∣versity of Opinionous waves that di∣versly meet, let him look on Mary-Land with eyes admiring, and he'le then judge her, The Miracle of this Age. Here the Roman Catholick, and the Protestant Episcopal, (whom the world would perswade have proclaimed open Wars irrevocably against each other)
contrarywise concur in an unanimous parallel of friendship, and inseparable love intayled unto one another: All Inquisitions, Martyrdom, and Banish∣ments are not so much as named, but unexpressably abhorr'd by each other. The several Opinions and Sects that lodge within this Government, meet not together in mutinous contempts to disquiet the power that bears Rule, but with a reverend quietness obeys the legal commands of Authority. Here's never seen Five Monarchies in a Zealous Rebellion, opposing the Rights and Liberties of a true setled Government, or Monarchical Authority: Nor did I ever see (here in Mary-Land) any of those dancing Adamitical Sisters, that plead a primitive Innocency for their base obscenity, and naked deportment; but I conceive if some of them were there at some certain time of the year, between the Months of January and February, when the winds blow from the North-West quarter of the world,
that it would both cool, and (I believe) convert the hottest of these Zealots from their burning and fiercest Con∣cupiscence. The Government of this Province doth continually, by all lawful means, strive to purge her Dominions from such base corroding humors, that would predominate upon the least smile of Liberty, did not the Laws check and bridle in those unwarranted and tumul∣tuous Opinions. And truly, where a Kingdom, State or Government, keeps or cuts down the weeds of destructive Opinions, there must certainly be a blessed Harmony of quietness. And I really believe this Land or Govern∣ment of Mary-Land may boast, that she enjoys as much quietness from the disturbance of Rebellious Opinions, as most States or Kingdoms do in the world: For here every man lives quiet∣ly, and follows his labour and imploy∣ment desiredly; and by the protection of the Laws, they are supported from
those molestious troubles that ever attend upon the Commons of other States and Kingdoms, as well as from the Aquafortial operation of great and eating Taxes. Here's nothing to be levyed out of the Granaries of Corn; but contrarywise, by a Law every Do∣mestick Governor of a Family is en∣joyned to make or cause to be made so much Corn by a just limitation, as shall be sufficient for him and his Family: So that by this wise and Janus-like providence, the thin jawed Skeliton with his starv'd Carkess is never seen walking the Woods of Mary-Land to affrighten Children. Once every year within this Province is an Assembly called, and out of every respective County (by the consent of the people) there is chosen a number of men, and to them is deliver'd up the Grievances of the Country; and they maturely debate the matters, and accordng to their Consciences make Laws for the general good of the peo∣ple;
and where any former Law that was made, seems and is prejudicial to the good or quietness of the Land, it is repeal'd. These men that determine on these matters for the Republique, are called Burgesses, and they com∣monly fit in Junto about six weeks, being for the most part good ordinary Housholders of the several Counties, which do more by a plain and honest Conscience, then by artificial Syllo∣gisms drest up in gilded Orations. Here Suits and Tryals in Law sel∣dome hold dispute two Terms or Courts, but according as the Equity of the cause appears is brought to a period. The Temples and Grays-Inne are clear out of fashion here: Marriot would sooner get a paunch-devouring meal for nothing, then for his invading Counsil. Here if the Lawyer had no∣thing else to maintain him but his bawl∣ing, he might button up his Chops, and burn his Buckrom Bag, or else hang it upon a pin untill its Antiquity
had eaten it up with durt and dust▪ Then with a Spade, like his Grandsire Adam, turn up the face of the Creation, purchasing his bread by the sweat of his brows, that before was got by the mo∣tionated Water-works of his jaws. So contrary to the Genius of the people, if not to the quiet Government of the Province, that the turbulent Spirit of continued and vexatious Law, with all its querks and evasions, is openly and most eagerly opposed, that might make matters either dubious, tedious, or trou∣blesom. All other matters that would be ranging in contrary and improper Spheres, (in short) are here by the Power moderated, lower'd, and sub∣dued. All villanous Outrages that are committed in other States, are not so much as known here: A man may walk in the open Woods as secure from being externally dissected, as in his own house or dwelling. So hateful is a Robber, that if but once ima∣gin'd to be so, he's kept at a distance,
and shun'd as the Pestilential noy∣somness. It is generally and very remarkably observed, That those whose Lives and Conversations have had no other gloss nor glory stampt on them in their own Country, but the stigmatization of baseness, were here (by the common civilities and deportments of the Inha∣bitants of this Province) brought to detest and loath their former actions. Here the Constable hath no need of a train of Holberteers, that carry more Armour about them, then heart to guard him: Nor is he ever troubled to leave his Feathered Nest to some friend∣ly successor, while he is placing of his Lanthern-horn Guard at the end of some suspicious Street, to cach some Night-walker, or Batchelor of Leache∣ry, that has taken his Degree three story high in a Bawdy-house Here's no Newgates for pilfering Felons, nor Ludgates for Debtors, nor any Bride∣wls to lash the soul of Concupiscence
into a chast Repentance. For as there is none of these Prisons in Mary-Land, so the merits of the Country deserves none, but if any be foully vitious, he is so reserv'd in it, that he seldom or never becomes popular. Common Ale-houses, (whose dwellings are the only Receptacles of debauchery and base∣ness, and those Schools that trains up Youth, as well as Age, to ruine) in this Province there are none; neither hath Youth his swing or range in such a pro∣fuse and unbridled liberty as in other Countries; for from an anient Custom at the primitive seating of the place, the Son works as well as the Servant, (an excellent cure for untam'd Youth) so that before they eat their bread, they are commonly taught how to earn it; which makes them by that time Age speaks them capable of receiving that which their Parents indulgency is ready to give them, and which partly is by their own laborious industry purchased, they manage it with such a serious, grave
and watching care, as if they had been Masters of Families, trained up in that domestick and governing power from their Cradles. These Christian Na∣tives of the Land, especially those of the Masculine Sex, are generally con∣veniently confident, reservedly subtle, quick in apprehending, but slow in resolving; and where they spy profit sailing towards them with the wings of a prosperous gale, there they become much familiar. The Women differ something in this point, though not much: They are extreme bashful at the first view, but after a continuance of time hath brought them acquainted, there they become discreetly familiar, and are much more talkative then men. All Complemental Courtships, drest up in critical Rarities, are meer strangers to them, plain wit comes nearest their Genius; so that he that intends to Court a Mary-Land Girle, must have something more then the Tautologies of a long-winded speech to carry on his
design, or else he may (for ought I know) fall under the contempt of her frown, and his own windy Oration. One great part of the Inhabitants of this Province are desiredly Zealous, great pretenders to Holiness; and where any thing appears that carries on the Frontispiece of its Effigies the stamp of Religion, though fundamentally ne∣ver so imperfect, they are suddenly taken with it, and out of an eager desire to any thing that's new, not weighing the sure matter in the Ballance of Rea∣son, are very apt to be catcht. Qua∣kerism is the only Opinion that bears the Bell away: The Anabaptists have little to say here, as well as in other places, since the Ghost of John of Leyden haunts their Conventicles The Adamite, Ranter, and Fift-Monarchy men, Mary-Land cannot, nay will not digest within her liberal stomach such corroding morsels: So that this Province is an utter Enemy to blasphe∣mous and zealous Imprecations, drain'd
from the Lymbeck of hellish and dam∣nable Spirits, as well as profuse pro∣phaness, that issues from the prodigality of none but crackt-brain Sots. 'Tis said the Gods lower down that Chain above. That tyes both Prince and Subject up in Love; And if this Fiction of the Gods be true, Few, Mary-Land, in this can boast but you: Live ever blest, and let those Clouds that do Eclipse most States, be alwayes Lights to you; And dwelling so, you may for ever be The only Emblem of Tranquility.
CHAP. III. The necessariness of Servitude proved, with the common usage of Servants in Mary-Land, together with their Priviledges. AS there can be no Monarchy with∣out the Supremacy of a King and Crown, nor no King without Subjects, nor any Parents without it be by the fruitful off-spring of Children; neither can there be any Masters, unless it be by the inferior Servitude of those that dwell under them, by a commanding enjoynment: And since it is ordained from the original and superabounding wisdom of all things, That there should be Degrees and Diversities amongst the Sons of men, in acknowledging of a Superiority from Inferiors to Superi∣ors; the Servant with a reverent and befitting Obedience is as liable to this duty in a measurable performance to him whom he serves, as the loyalest
of Subjects to his Prince. Then since it is a common and ordained Fate, that there must be Servants as well as Ma∣sters, and that good Servitudes are those Colledges of Sobriety that checks in the giddy and wild-headed youth from his profuse and uneven course of life, by a limited constrain∣ment, as well as it otherwise agrees with the moderate and discreet Servant: Why should there be such an exclusive Obstacle in the minds and unreasonable dispositions of many people, against the limited time of convenient and necessa∣ry Servitude, when it is a thing so re∣quisite, that the best of Kingdoms would be unhing'd from their quiet and well setled Government without it? Which levelling doctrine we here of England in this latter age (whose womb was truss'd out with nothing but confused Rebellion) have too much experienced, and was daily rung into the ears of the tumultuous Vulgar by the Bell-weather Sectaries of the Times:
But (blessed be God) those Clouds are blown over, and the Government of the Kingdom coucht under a more stable form. There is no truer Emblem of Con∣fusion either in Monarchy or Dome∣stick Governments, then when either the Subject, or the Servant, strives for the upper hand of his Prince, or Master, and to be equal with him, from whom he receives his present subsistance: Why then, if Servitude be so necessary that no place can be governed in order, nor people live without it, this may serve to tell those which prick up their ears and bray against it, That they are none but Asses, and deserve the Bridle of a strict commanding power to reine them in: For I'me certainly confi∣dent, that there are several Thou∣sands in most Kingdoms of Christen∣dom, that could not at all live and subsist, unless they had served some prefixed time, to learn either some Trade, Art, or Science, and by either
of them to extract their present live∣lihood. Then methinks this may stop the mouths of those that will undiscreetly compassionate them that dwell under necessary Servitudes; for let but Pa∣rents of an indifferent capacity in E∣states, when their Childrens age by computation speak them seventeen or eighteen years old, turn them loose to the wide world, without a seven years working Apprenticeship, (being just brought up to the bare formality of a little reading and writing) and you shall immediately see how weak and shiftless they'le be towards the main∣taining and supporting of themselves; and (without either stealing or beg∣ging) their bodies like a Sentinel must continually wait to see when their Souls will be frighted away by the pale Ghost of a starving want. Then let such, where Providence hath ordained to live as Servants, either in England or beyond Sea, endure the
prefixed yoak of their limited time with patience, and then in a small computa∣tion of years, by an industrious endea∣vour, they may become Masters and Mistresses of Families themselves. And let this be spoke to the deserved praise of Mary-Land, That the four years I served there were not to me so slavish, as a two years Servitude of a Handi∣craft Apprenticeship was here in Lon∣don; Volenti enim nil difficile: Not that I write this to seduce or delude any, or to draw them from their native soyle, but out of a love to my Country∣men, whom in the general I wish well to, and that the lowest of them may live in such a capacity of Estate, as that the bare interest of their Livelihoods might not altogether depend upon persons of the greatest extendments. Now those whose abilities here in England are capable of maintaining themselves in any reasonable and hand∣som manner, they had best so to re∣main, lest the roughness of the Ocean,
together with the staring visages of the wilde Animals, which they may see after their arrival into the Country, may alter the natural dispositions of their bodies, that the stay'd and solid part that kept its motion by Doctor Trigs purgationary operation, may run beyond the byas of the wheel in a vio∣lent and laxative confusion. Now contrarywise, they who are low, and make bare shifts to buoy themselves up above the shabby center of beggarly and incident casualties, I heartily could wish the removal of some of them into Mary-Land, which would make much better for them that stay'd behind, as well as it would advantage those that went. They whose abilities cannot extend to purchase their own transportation over into Mary-Land, (and surely he that cannot command so small a sum for so great a matter, his life must needs be mighty low and dejected) I say they may for the debarment of a four
years sordid liberty, go over into this Province and there live plentiously well. And what's a four years Servitude to advantage a man all the remainder of his dayes, making his predecessors hap∣py in his sufficient abilities, which he at∣tained to partly by the restrainment of so small a time? Now those that commit themselves unto the care of the Merchant to carry them over, they need not trouble them∣selves with any inquisitive search touch∣ing their Voyage; for there is such an honest care and provision made for them all the time they remain aboard the Ship, and are sailing over, that they want for nothing that is necessary and convenient. The Merchant commonly before they go aboard the Ship, or set them∣selves in any forwardness for their Voy∣age, has Conditions of Agreements drawn between him and those that by a voluntary consent become his Servants, to serve him, his Heirs or Assigns, ac∣cording
as they in their primitive ac∣quaintance have made their bargain, some two, some three, some four years; and whatever the Master or Servant tyes himself up to here in England by Condition, the Laws of the Province will force a performance of when they come there: Yet here is this Priviledge in it when they arrive, If they dwell not with the Merchant they made their first agreement withall, they may choose whom they will serve their prefixed time with; and after their curiosity has pitcht on one whom they think fit for their turn, and that they may live well withall, the Merchant makes an Assign∣ment of the Indenture over to him whom they of their free will have cho∣sen to be their Master, in the same na∣ture as we here in England (and no otherwise) turn over Covenant Ser∣vants or Apprentices from one Master to another. Then let those whose chaps are alwayes breathing forth those filthy dregs of abusive exclamations,
which are Lymbeckt from their sottish and preposterous brains, against this Country of Mary-Land, saying, That those which are transported over thither, are sold in open Market for Slaves, and draw in Carts like Horses; which is so damnable an untruth, that if they should search to the very Center of Hell, and enquire for a Lye of the most antient and damned stamp, I confident∣ly believe they could not find one to parallel this: For know, That the Ser∣vants here in Mary-Land of all Colo∣nies, distant or remote Plantations, have the least cause to complain, either for strictness of Servitude, want of Provi∣sions, or need of Apparel: Five dayes and a half in the Summer weeks is the alotted time that they work in; and for two months, when the Sun predominates in the highest pitch of his heat, they claim an antient and customary Priviledge, to repose them∣selves three hours in the day with∣in the house, and this is undenia∣bly
granted to them that work in the Fields. In the Winter time, which lasteth three months, (viz.) December, Ja∣nuary, and February, they do little or no work or imployment, save cutting of wood to make good fires to sit by, unless their Ingenuity will prompt them to hunt the Deer, or Bear, or recreate themselves in Fowling, to slaughter the Swans, Geese, and Turkeys, (which this Country affords in a most plentiful manner:) For every Servant has a Gun, Powder and Shot allowed him, to sport him withall on all Holidayes and leasu∣rable times, if he be capable of using it, or be willing to learn. Now those Servants which come over into this Province, being Artifi∣cers, they never (during their Servi∣tude) work in the Fields, or do any other imployment save that which their Handicraft and Mechanick endeavors are capable of putting them upon, and are esteem'd as well by their Masters,
as those that imploy them, above mea∣sure. He that's a Tradesman here in Mary-Land, (though a Servant) lives as well as most common Handicrafts do in London, though they may want something of that Liberty which Free∣men have, to go and come at their plea∣sure; yet if it were rightly understood and considered, what most of the Li∣berties of the several poor Tradesmen are taken up about, and what a care and trouble attends that thing they call Li∣berty, which according to the common translation is but Idleness, and (if weighed in the Ballance of a just Rea∣son) will be found to be much heavier and cloggy then the four years restrain∣ment of a Mary-Land Servitude. He that lives in the nature of a Servant in this Province, must serve but four years by the Custom of the Country; and when the expiration of his time speaks him a Freeman, there's a Law in the Province, that enjoyns his Master whom he hath served to give him Fifty Acres
of Land, Corn to serve him a whole year, three Sutes of Apparel, with things necessary to them, and Tools to work withall; so that they are no sooner free, but they are ready to set up for themselves, and when once entred, they live passingly well. The Women that go over into this Province as Servants, have the best luck here as in any place of the world besides; for they are no sooner on shoar, but they are courted into a Co∣pulative Matrimony, which some of them (for ought I know) had they not come to such a Market with their Virginity, might have kept it by them untill it had been mouldy, unless they had let it out by a yearly rent to some of the Inhabitants of Lewknors-lane, or made a Deed of Gift of it to Mother Coney, having only a poor stipend out of it, untill the Gallows or Hospital cal∣led them away. Men have not altoge∣ther so good luck as Women in this kind, or natural preferment, without
they be good Rhetoricians, and well vers'd in the Art of perswasion, then (probably) they may ryvet themselves in the time of their Servitude into the private and reserved favour of their Mi∣stress, if Age speak their Master defi∣cient. In short, touching the Servants of this Province, they live well in the time of their Service, and by their restrain∣ment in that time, they are made capa∣ble of living much better when they come to be free; which in several other parts of the world I have observed, That after some Servants have brought their indented and limited time to a just and legal period by Servitude, they have been much more incapable of sup∣porting themselves from sinking into the Gulf of a slavish, poor, fettered, and intangled life, then all the fastness of their prefixed time did involve them in before. Now the main and principal Reason of those incident casualties, that wait
continually upon the residencies of most poor Artificers, is (I gather) from the multiplicity or innumerableness of those several Companies of Tradesmen, that dwell so closely and stiflingly to∣gether in one and the same place, that like the chafing Gum in Watered-Tabby, they eat into the folds of one anothers Estates. And this might easi∣ly be remedied, would but some of them remove and disperse distantly where want and necessity calls for them; their dwellings (I am confident) would be much larger, and their conditions much better, as well in reference to their Estates, as to the satisfactoriness of their minds; having a continual im∣ployment, and from that imployment a continual benefit, without either beg∣ging, seducing, or flatering for it, en∣croaching that one month from one of the same profession, that they are hea∣ved out themselves the next. For I have observed on the other side of Mary-Land, that the whole course of
most Mechanical endeavors, is to catch, snatch, and undervalue one another, to get a little work, or a Customer; which when they have attained by their low-built and sneaking circumventings, it stands upon so flashy, mutable, and transitory a foundation, that the best of his hopes is commonly extinguisht before the poor undervalued Trades∣man is warm in the enjoyment of his Customer. Then did not a cloud of low and base Cowardize eclipse the Spirits of these men, these things might easily be diverted; but they had as live take a Bear by the tooth, as think of leaving their own Country, though they live among their own National people, and are governed by the same Laws they have here, yet all this wont do with them; and all the Reason they can render to the contrary is, There's a great Sea betwixt them and Mary-Land, and in that Sea there are Fishes, and not only Fishes but great Fishes, and then
should a Ship meet with such an incon∣siderable encounter as a Whale, one blow with his tayle, and then Lord have Mercy upon us: Yet meet with these men in their common Exchange, which is one story high in the bottom of a Cellar, disputing over a Black-pot, it would be monstrously dreadful here to insert the particulars, one swearing that he was the first that scaled the Walls of Dundee, when the Bullets flew about their ears as thick as Hail-stones usually fall from the Sky; which if it were but rightly examined, the most dangerous Engagement that ever he was in, was but at one of the flashy battels at Finsbury, where commonly there's more Custard greedily devou∣red, then men prejudiced by the rigour of the War. Others of this Company relating their several dreadful exploits, and when they are just entring into the particulars, let but one step in and in∣terrupt their discourse, by telling them of a Sea Voyage, and the violency of
storms that attends it, and that there are no back-doors to run out at, which they call, a handsom Retreat and Charge again; the apprehensive danger of this is so powerful and penetrating on them, that a damp sweat immediately in∣volves their Microcosm, so that Mar∣gery the old Matron of the Cellar, is fain to run for a half-peny-worth of Angelica to rub their nostrils; and though the Port-hole of their bodies has been stopt from a convenient Eva∣cuation some several months, they'le need no other Suppository to open the Orifice of their Esculent faculties then this Relation, as their Drawers or Breeches can more at large demon∣strate to the inquisitive search of the curious. Now I know that some will be apt to judge, that I have written this last part out of derision to some of my poor Mechanick Country-men: Truly I must needs tell those to their face that think so of me, that they prejudice me
extremely, by censuring me as guilty of any such crime: What I have written is only to display the sordidness of their dispositions, who rather then they will remove to another Country to live plentiously well, and give their Neighbors more Elbow-room and space to breath in, they will croud and throng upon one another, with the pressure of a beggarly and unnecessary weight. That which I have to say more in this business, is a hearty and desirous wish, that the several poor Tradesmen here in London that I know, and have borne an occular testimony of their want, might live so free from care as I did when I dwelt in the bonds of a four years Servitude in Mary-Land. Be just (Domestick Monarchs) unto them That dwell as Houshold Subjects to each Realm;
Let not your Power make you be too severe, Where there's small faults reign in your sharp Career: So that the Worlds base yelping Crew May'nt bark what I have wrote is writ untrue, So use your Servants, if there come no more, They may serve Eight, instead of ser∣ving Four. CHAP. IV. Upon Trafique, and what Merchan∣dizing Commodities this Province affords, also how Tobacco is planted and made fit for Commerce. TRafique, Commerce, and Trade, are those great wheeles that by their circular and continued motion, turn into most Kingdoms of the Earth
the plenty of abundant Riches that they are commonly fed withall: For Tra∣fique in his right description, is the very Soul of a Kingdom; and should but Fate ordain a removal of it for some years, from the richest and most popu∣lous Monarchy that dwells in the most fertile clyme of the whole Universe, he would soon find by a woful experiment, the miss and loss of so reviving a sup∣porter. And I am certainly confident, that England would as soon feel her feebleness by withdrawment of so great an upholder; as well in reference to the internal and healthful preservative of her Inhabitants, for want of those Medici∣nal Drugs that are landed upon her Coast every year, as the external pro∣fits, Glory and beneficial Graces that accrue by her. Paracelsus might knock down his Forge, if Trafique and Commerce should once cease, and grynde the hilt of his Sword into Powder, and take some of the Infusion to make him so
valorous, that he might cut his own Throat in the honor of Mercury: Galen might then burn his Herbal, and like Joseph of Arimathea, build him a Tomb in his Garden, and so rest from his labours: Our Physical Collegians of London would have no cause then to thunder Fire-balls at Nich. Culpeppers Dispensatory: All Herbs, Roots, and Medicines would bear their original christening, that the ignorant might understand them: Album grecum would not be Album grecum then, but a Dogs turd would be a Dogs turd in plain terms, in spight of their teeth. If Trade should once cease, the Custom-house would soon miss her hundreds and thousands Hogs-heads of Tobacco▪ that use to be throng in her every year, as well as the Grocers would in their Ware-houses and Boxes, the Gentry and Commonalty in their Pipes, the Physician in his Drugs and Medicinal Compositions: The
(leering) Waiters for want of imploy∣ment, might (like so many Diogenes) intomb themselves in their empty Casks, and rouling themselves off the Key into the Thames, there wander up and down from tide to tide in contem∣plation of Aristotles unresolved cu∣riosity, until the rottenness of their cir∣cular habitation give them a Quietus est, and fairly surrender them up into the custody of those who both for professi∣on, disposition and nature, lay as near claim to them, as if they both tumbled in one belly, and for name they jump alike, being according to the original translation both Sharkes. Silks and Cambricks, and Lawns to make sleeves, would be as soon miss'd at Court, as Gold and Silver would be in the Mint and Pockets: The Low-Country Soldier would be at a cold stand for Outlandish Furrs to make him Muffs, to keep his ten similitudes warm in the Winter, as well as the Furrier for want of Skins to uphold his Trade.
Should Commerce once cease, there is no Country in the habitable world but would undoubtedly miss that flou∣rishing, splendid and rich gallantry of Equipage, that Trafique maintained and drest her up in, before she received that fatal Eclipse: England, France, Germany and Spain, together with all the Kingdoms — But stop (good Muse) lest I should, like the Parson of Pancras, run so far from my Text in half an hour, that a two hours trot back again would hardly fetch it up: I had best while I am alive in my Doctrine, to think again of Mary-Land, lest the business of other Coun∣tries take up so much room in my brain, that I forget and bury her in oblivion. The three main Commodities this Country affords for Trafique, are To∣bacco, Furrs, and Flesh. Furrs and Skins, as Beavers, Otters, Musk-Rats, Rackoons, Wild-Cats, and Elke or Buffeloe, with divers others, which
were first made vendible by the Indians of the Country, and sold to the Inha∣bitant, and by them to the Merchant, and so transported into England and other places where it becomes most commodious. Tobacco is the only solid Staple Commodity of this Province: The use of it was first found out by the Indians many Ages agoe, and trans∣ferr'd into Christendom by that great Discoverer of America Columbus: It's generally made by all the Inhabi∣tants of this Province, and between the months of March and April they sow the seed, (which is much smaller then Mustard-seed) in small beds and pat∣ches digg'd up and made so by art, and about May the Plants commonly appear green in those beds: In June they are transplanted from their beds, and set in little hillocks in distant rowes, dug up for the same purpose; some twice or thrice they are weeded, and succour∣ed from their illegitimate Leaves that
would be peeping out from the body of the Stalk. They top the several Plants as they find occasion in their predominating rankness: About the middle of September they cut the To∣bacco down, and carry it into houses, (made for that purpose) to bring it to its purity: And after it has attained by a convenient attendance upon time, to its perfection, it is then tyed up in bundles, and packt into Hogs-heads, and then laid by for the Trade. Between November and January there arrives in this Province Shipping to the number of twenty sail and up∣wards, all Merchant-men loaden with Commodities to Trafique and dispose of, trucking with the Planter for Silks, Hollands, Serges, and Broad-clothes, with other necessary Goods, priz'd at such and such rates as shall be judg'd on is fair and legal, for Tobacco at so much the pound, and advantage on both sides considered; the Planter for his work, and the Merchant for adven∣turing
himself and his Commodity in∣to so far a Country: Thus is the Trade on both sides drove on with a fair and honest Decorum. The Inhabitants of this Province are seldom or never put to the affrightment of being robb'd of their money, nor to dirty their Fingers by telling of vast sums: They have more bags to carry Corn, then Coyn; and though they want, but why should I call that a want which is only a necessary miss? the very effects of the dirt of this Province affords as great a profit to the general Inhabitant, as the Gold of Peru doth to the straight-breecht Commonalty of the Spaniard. Our Shops and Exchanges of Mary-Land, are the Merchants Store-houses, where with few words and protestations Goods are bought and delivered; not like those Shop-keepers Boys in Lon∣don, that continually cry, What do ye lack Sir? What d' ye buy? yelping with so wide a mouth, as if some Apo∣thecary
had hired their mouths to stand open to catch Gnats and Vagabond Flyes in. Tobacco is the currant Coyn of Mary-Land, and will sooner purchase Commodities from the Merchant, then money. I must confess the New-England men that trade into this Pro∣vince, had rather have fat Pork for their Goods, then Tobacco or Furrs; which I conceive is, because their bo∣dies being fast bound up with the cords of restringent Zeal, they are fain to make use of the lineaments of this Non-Canaanite creature physically to loosen them; for a bit of a pound upon a two-peny Rye loaf, according to the original Receipt, will bring the costiv'st red-ear'd Zealot in some three hours time to a fine stool, if methodically ob∣served. Medera-Wines, Sugars, Salt, Wickar-Chairs, and Tin Candlesticks, is the most of the Commodities they bring in: They arrive in Mary-Land
about September, being most of them Ketches and Barkes, and such small Vessels, and those dispersing themselves into several small Creeks of this Pro∣vince, to sell and dispose of their Commodities, where they know the Market is most fit for their small Ad∣ventures. Barbadoes, together with the several adjacent Islands, has much Provision yearly from this Province: And though these Sun-burnt Phaetons think to out∣vye Mary-Land in their Silks and Puffs, daily speaking against her whom their necessities makes them beholding to, and like so many Don Diegos that be∣cackt Pauls, cock their Felts and look big upon't; yet if a mn could go down into their infernals, and see how it fares with them there, I believe he would hardly find any other Spirit to buoy them up, then the ill-visaged Ghost of want, that continually wanders from gut to gut to feed upon the undigested rynes of Potatoes.
Trafique is Earth's great Atlas, that supports The pay of Armies, and the height of Courts, And makes Mechanicks live, that else would die Meer starving Martyrs to their penury▪ None but the Merchant of this thing can boast, He, like the Bee, comes loaden from each Coast, And to all Kingdoms, as within a Hive, Stows up those Riches that doth make them thrive: Be thrifty, Mary-Land, keep what thou hast in store, And each years Trafique to thy self get more.
A Relation of the Customs, Manners, Absurdities, and Religion of the Susqueha∣nock Indians in and near Mary-Land. AS the diversities of Languages (since Babels confusion) has made the distinction between people and people, in this Christendom-part of the world; so are they distin∣guished Nation from Nation, by the diversities and confusion of their Speech and Languages here in America: And as every Nation differs in their Laws, Manners and Customs, in Europe, Asia
and Africa, so do they the very same here; That it would be a most intricate and laborious trouble, to run (with a description) through the several Na∣tions of Indians here in America, con∣sidering the innumerableness and diver∣sities of them that dwell on this vast and unmeasured Continent: But rather then I'le be altogether silent, I shall do like the Painter in the Comedy, who being to limne out the Pourtraiture of the Furies, as they severally appeared, set himself behind a Pillar, and between fright and amazement, drew them by guess. Those Indians that I have convers'd withall here in this Province of Mary-Land, and have had any oc∣cular experimental view of either of their Customs, Manners, Religions, and Absurdities, are called by the name of Susquehanocks, being a people lookt upon by the Christian Inhabitants, as the most Noble and Heroick Nation of Indians that dwell upon the confines of America; also are so allowed and
lookt upon by the rest of the Indians, by a submissive and tributary acknow∣ledgement; being a people cast into the mould of a most large and War∣like deportment, the men being for the most part seven foot high in latitude, and in magnitude and bulk suitable to so high a pitch; their voyce large and hollow, as ascending out of a Cave; their gate and behavior strait, stately and majestick, treading on the Earth with as much pride, contempt, and dis∣dain to so sordid a Center, as can be imagined from a creature derived from the same mould and Earth. Their bodies are cloth'd with no other Armour to defend them from the nipping frosts of a benumbing Win∣ter, or the penetrating and scorching influence of the Sun in a hot Summer, then what Nature gave them when they parted with the dark receptacle of their Mothers womb. They go Men, Women and Children, all naked, only where shame leads them by a natural
instinct to be reservedly modest, there they become cover'd. The formality of Jezabels artificial Glory is much courted and followed by these Indians, only in matter of colours (I conceive) they differ. The Indians paint upon their faces one stroke of red, another of green, another of white, and another of black, so that when they have accom∣plished the Equipage of their Counte∣nance in this trim, they are the only Hieroglyphicks and Representatives of the Furies. Their skins are naturally white, but altered from their originals by the several dyings of Roots and Barks, that they prepare and make use∣ful to metamorphize their hydes into a dark Cinamon brown. The hair of their head is black, long and harsh, but where Nature hath appointed the situa∣tion of it any where else, they divert it (by an antient custom) from its growth, by pulling it up hair by hair by the root in its primitive appearance. Several of them wear divers impressions
on their breasts and armes, as the picture of the Devil, Bears, Tigers, and Panthers, which are imprinted on their several lineaments with much diffi∣culty and pain, with an irrevocable de∣termination of its abiding there: And this they count a badge of Heroick Va∣lour, and the only Ornament due to their Heroes. These Susquehanock Indians are for the most part great Warriours, and sel∣dom sleep one Summer in the quiet armes of a peaceable Rest, but keep (by their present Power, as well as by their former Conquest) the seve∣ral Nations of Indians round about them, in a forceable obedience and sub∣jection. Their Government is wrapt up in so various and intricate a Laborynth, that the speculativ'st Artist in the whole World, with his artificial and natural Opticks, cannot see into the rule or sway of these Indians, to distinguish what name of Government to call them by;
though Purchas in his Peregrination be∣tween London and Essex, (which he calls the whole World) will undertake (forsooth) to make a Monarchy of them, but if he had said Anarchy, his word would have pass'd with a better belief. All that ever I could observe in them as to this matter is, that he that is most cruelly Valorous, is ac∣counted the most Noble: Here is very seldom any creeping from a Country Farm, into a Courtly Gallantry, by a sum of money; nor feeing the He∣ralds to put Daggers and Pistols in∣to their Armes, to make the ignorant believe that they are lineally descen∣ded from the house of the Wars and Conquests; he that fights best carries it here. When they determine to go upon some Design that will and doth re∣quire a Consideration, some six of them get into a corner, and fit in Juncto; and if thought fit, their busi∣ness is made popular, and immedi∣ately
put into action; if not, they make a full stop to it, and are silently reserv'd. The Warlike Equipage they put themselves in when they prepare for Belonas March, is with their faces, armes, and breasts confusedly painted, their hair greazed with Bears oyl, and stuck thick with Swans Feathers, with a wreath or Diadem of black and white Beads upon their heads, a small Hatchet, instead of a Cymetre, stuck in their girts behind them, and either with Guns, or Bows and Arrows. In this posture and dress they march out from their Fort, or dwelling, to the number of Forty in a Troop, singing (or rather howling out) the Decades or Warlike exploits of their Ancestors, ranging the wide Woods untill their fury has met with an Enemy worthy of their Re∣venge. What Prisoners fall into their hands by the destiny of War, they treat them very civilly while they re∣main with them abroad, but when they
once return homewards, they then begin to dress them in the habit for death, putting on their heads and armes wreaths of Beads, greazing their hair with fat, some going before, and the rest behind, at equal distance from their Prisoners, bellowing in a strange and confused manner, which is a true presage and fore-runner of de∣struction to their then conquered Enemy. In this manner of march they con∣tinue till they have brought them to their Barken City, where they deliver them up to those that in cruelty will execute them, without either the legal Judgement of a Council of War, or the benefit of their Clergy at the Common Law. The common and usual deaths they put their Prisoners to, is to bind them to stakes, making a fire some distance from them; then one or other of them, whose Genius delights in the art of Paganish dissecti∣on, with a sharp knife or flint cuts
the Cutis or outermost skin of the brow so deep, untill their nails, or ra∣ther Talons, can fasten themselves firm and secure in, then (with a most rigid jerk) disrobeth the head of skin and hair at one pull, leaving the skull almost as bare as those Monumental Skelitons at Chyrurgions-Hall; but for fear they should get cold by leaving so warm and customary a Cap off, they immediately apply to the skull a Cata∣plasm of hot Embers to keep their Pe∣ricranium warm. While they are thus acting this cruelty on their heads, se∣veral others are preparing pieces of Iron, and barrels of old Guns, which they make red hot, to sear each part and lineament of their bodies, which they perform and act in a most cruel and barbarous manner: And while they are thus in the midst of their tor∣ments and execrable usage, some tear∣ing their skin and hair of their head off by violence, others searing their bodies with hot irons, some are cutting their
flesh off, and eating it before their eyes raw while they are alive; yet all this and much more never makes them lower the Top-gallant sail of their Heroick courage, to beg with a sub∣missive Repentance any indulgent fa∣vour from their persecuting Enemies; but with an undaunted contempt to their cruelty, eye it with so slight and mean a respect, as if it were below them to value what they did, they couragi∣ously (while breath doth libertize them) sing the summary of their Warlike Atchievements. Now after this cruelty has brought their tormented lives to a period, they immediately fall to butchering of them into parts, distributing the several pieces amongst the Sons of War, to in-tomb the ruines of their deceased Con∣quest in no other Sepulchre then their unsanctified maws; which they with more appetite and desire do eat and digest, then if the best of foods should court their stomachs to participate of
the most restorative Banquet. Yet though they now and then feed upon the Carkesses of their Enemies, this is not a common dyet, but only a parti∣cular dish for the better sort; for there is not a Beast that runs in the Woods of America, but if they can by any means come at him, without any scru∣ple of Conscience they'le fall too (with∣out saying Grace) with a devouring greediness. As for their Religion, together with their Rites and Ceremonies, they are so absurd and ridiculous, that its al∣most a sin to name them They own no other Deity then the Devil, (solid or profound) but with a kind of a wilde imaginary conjecture, they sup∣pose from their groundless conceits, that the World had a Maker, but where he is that made it, or whether he be living to this day, they know not. The Devil, as I said before, is all the God they own or worship; and that more out of a slavish fear, then
any real Reverence to his Infernal or Diabolical greatness, he forcing them to their Obedience by his rough and rigid dealing with them, often appear∣ing visibly among them to their ter∣rour, bastinadoing them (with cruel menaces) even unto death, and burn∣ing their Fields of Corn and hou∣ses, that the relation thereof makes them tremble themselves when they tell it. Once in four years they Sacrifice a Childe to him, in an acknowledgement of their firm obedience to all his De∣villish powers, and Hellish commands. The Priests to whom they apply them∣selves in matters of importance and greatest distress, are like those that at∣tended upon the Oracle at Delphos, who by their Magick-spells could com∣mand a pro or con from the Devil when they pleas'd. These Indians oft-times raise great Tempests when they have any weighty matter or design in hand, and by blustering stormes inquire of
their Infernal God (the Devil) How matters shall go with them either in publick or private. When any among them depart this life, they give him no other intomb∣ment, then to set him upright upon his breech in a hole dug in the Earth some five foot long, and three foot deep, covered over with the Bark of Trees Arch-wise, with his face Du-West, only leaving a hole half a foot square open. They dress him in the same Equipage and Gallantry that he used to be trim'd in when he was alive, and so bury him (if a Soldier) with his Bows, Arrows, and Target, toge∣ther with all the rest of his implements and weapons of War, with a Kettle of Broth and Corn standing before him, lest he should meet with bad quarters in his way. His Kinred and Relations follow him to the Grave, sheath'd in Bears skins for close mourning, with the tayl droyling on the ground, in imitation of our English Solemners,
that think there's nothing like a tayl a Degree in length, to follow the dead Corpse to the Grave with. Here if that snuffling Prolocutor, that waits upon the dead Monuments of the Tombs at Westminster, with his white Rod were there, he might walk from Tomb to Tomb with his, Here lies the Duke of Ferrara and his Dutchess, and never find any decaying vacation, unless it were in the moldering Consumption of his own Lungs. They bury all within the wall or Pallisado'd impalement of their City, or Connadago as they call it. Their houses are low and long, built with the Bark of Trees Arch-wise, standing thick and confusedly together. They are situated a hundred and odd miles distant from the Christian Plan∣tations of Mary-Land, at the head of a River that runs into the Bay of Chaesapike, called by their own name, The Susquehanock River, where they remain and inhabit most part of the Summer time, and seldom remove far
from it, unless it be to subdue any For∣reign Rebellion. About November the best Hunters draw off to several remote places of the Woods, where they know the Deer, Bear, and Elke useth; there they build them several Cottages, which they call their Winter-quarter, where they remain for the space of three months, untill they have killed up a sufficiency of Provisions to supply their Families with in the Summer. The Women are the Butchers, Cooks, and Tillers of the ground, the Men think it below the honour of a Masculine, to stoop to any thing but that which their Gun, or Bow and Arrows can command. The Men kill the several Beasts which they meet withall in the Woods, and the Women are the Pack horses to fetch it in upon their backs, fleying and dressing the hydes, (as well as the flesh for provi∣sion) to make them fit for Trading, and which are brought down to the
English at several seasons in the year, to truck and dispose of them for course Blankets, Guns, Powder, and Lead, Beads, small Looking-glasses, Knives, and Razors. I never observed all the while I was amongst these naked Indians, that ever the Women wore the Breeches, or dared either in look or action predomi∣nate over the Men. They are very con∣stant to their Wives; and let this be spoken to their Heathenish praise, that did they not alter their bodies by their dyings, paintings, and cutting them∣selves, marring those Excellencies that Nature bestowed upon them in their original conceptions and birth, there would be as amiable beauties amongst them, as any Alexandria could afford, when Mark Anthony and Cleopatra dwelt there together. Their Marriages are short and authentique; for after 'tis resolv'd upon by both parties, the Woman sends her intended Husband a Kettle of boyl'd Venison, or Bear; and
he returns in lieu thereof Beaver or Otters Skins, and so their Nuptial Rites are concluded without other Ce∣remony. Before I bring my Heathenish Story to a period, I have one thing worthy your observation: For as our Grammer Rules have it, Non decet quenquam me ire currentem aut mandantem: It doth not become any man to piss run∣ning or eating. These Pagan men na∣turally observe the same Rule; for they are so far from running, that like a Hare, they squat to the ground as low as they can, while the Women stand bolt up∣right with their armes a Kimbo, per∣forming the same action, in so confident and obscene a posture, as if they had taken their Degrees of Entrance at Venice, and commenced Bawds of Art at Legorne.
A Collection of some Letters that were written by the same Author, most of them in the time of his Servitude. To my much Honored Friend Mr. T.B. SIR, I Have lived with sorrow to see the Anointed of the Lord tore from his Throne by the hands of Paricides, and in contempt haled, in the view of God, Angels and Men, upon a publick
Theatre, and there murthered. I have seen the sacred Temple of the Almigh∣ty, in scorn by Schismaticks made the Receptacle of Theeves and Robbers; and those Religious Prayers, that in devotion Evening and Morning were offered up as a Sacrifice to our God, rent by Sacrilegious hands, and made no other use of, then sold to Brothel-houses to light Tobacco with. Who then can stay, or will, to see things of so great weight steer'd by such barbarous Hounds as these: First, were there an Egypt to go down to, I would involve my Liberty to them, upon condition ne're more to see my Country. What? live in silence un∣der the sway of such base actions, is to give consent; and though the lowness of my present Estate and Condition, with the hazard I put my future dayes upon, might plead a just excuse for me to stay at home; but Heavens forbid: I'le rather serve in Chains, and draw
the Plough with Animals, till death shall stop and say, It is enough. Sir, if you stay behind, I wish you well: I am bound for Mary-Land, this day I have made some entrance into my in∣tended Voyage, and when I have done more, you shall know of it. I have here inclosed what you of me desired, but truly trouble, discontent and busi∣ness, have so amazed my senses, that what to write, or where to write, I conceive my self almost as uncapable as he that never did write. What you'le find will be Ex tempore, without the use of premeditation; and though there may want something of a flourishing stile to dress them forth, yet I'm cer∣tain there wants nothing of truth, will, and desire. Heavens bright Lamp, shine forth some of thy Light, But just so long to paint this dismal Night;
Then draw thy beams, and hide thy glo∣rious face, From the dark sable Actions of this place; Leaving these lustful Sodomites grop∣ing still, To satisfie each dark unsatiate will, Untill at length the crimes that they commit, May sink them down to Hells Infernal pit. Base and degenerate Earth, how dost thou lye, That all that pass hiss, at thy Treachery? Thou which couldst boast once of thy King and Crown, By base Mechanicks now art tumbled down: Brewers and Coblers, that have scarce an Eye, Walk hand in hand in thy Supremacy; And all those Courts where Majesty did Throne, Are now the Seats for Oliver and Joan:
Persons of Honour, which did before inherit Their glorious Titles from deserved merit, Are all grown silent, and with wonder gaze, To view such Slaves drest in their Courtly rayes; To see a Drayman that knows nought but Yeast, Set in a Throne like Babylons red Beast, While heaps of Parasites do idolize This red-nos'd Bell, with fawning Sa∣crifice. What can we say? our King they've murthered, And those well born, are basely buried: Nobles are slain, and Royalists in each street Are scorn'd, and kick'd by most men that they meet: Religion's banisht, and Heresie survives, And none but Conventicks in this Age thrives.
Oh could those Romans from their Ashes rise, That liv'd in Nero's time: Oh how their cries Would our perfidious Island shake, nay rend, With clamorous screaks unto the Heaven send: Oh how they'd blush to see our Crimson crimes, And know the Subjects Authors of these times: When as the Peasant he shall take his King, And without cause shall fall a murther∣ing him; And when that's done, with Pride assume the Chair, And Nimrod-like, himself to Heaven rear; Command the People, make the Land obey His baser will, and swear to what he'l say.
Sure, sure our God has not these evils sent To please himself, but for mans punish∣ment: And when he shall from our dark sable Skies Withdraw these Clouds, and let our Sun arise, Our dayes will surely then in Glory shine, Both in our Temporal, and our State di∣vine: May this come quickly, though I may never see This glorious day, yet I would sympathie, And feel a joy run through each vain of blood, Though Vassalled on t'other side the Floud. Heavens protect his Sacred Majesty, From secret Plots, & treacherous Villany. And that those Slaves that now predo∣minate, Hang'd and destroy'd may be their best of Fate;
And though Great Charles be distant from his own, Heaven I hope will seat him in his Throne. Vale. Yours in what I may, G. A. From the Chimney-corner upon a low Cricket, where I writ this in the noise of some six Women, Aug. 19. Anno To my Honored Father, at his House. SIR, BEfore I dare bid Adien to the old World, or shake hands with my native Soyl for ever, I have a Consci∣ence inwards tells me, that I must offer
up the Remains of that Obedience of mine, that lyes close centered within the cave of my Soul, at the Altar of your paternal Love: And though this Sacrifice of mine may shew something low and thread-bare, (at this time) yet know, That in the Zenith of all actions, Obedience is that great wheel that moves the lesser in their circular motion. I am now entring for some time to dwell under the Government of Nep∣tune, a Monarchy that I was never ma∣nured to live under, nor to converse with in his dreadful Aspect, neither do I know how I shall bear with his rough demands; but that God that has car∣ried me through those many gusts a shoar, which I have met withall in the several voyages of my life, I hope will Pilot me safely to my desired Port, through the worst of Stormes I shall meet withall at Sea. We have strange, and yet good
news aboard, that he whose vast mind could not be contented with spacious Territories to stretch his insatiate de∣sires on, is (by an Almighty power) banished from his usurped Throne to dwell among the dead. I no sooner heard of it, but my melancholly Muse forced me upon this ensuing Distich. Poor vaunting Earth, gloss'd with un∣certain Pride, That liv'd in Pomp, yet worse then others dy'd: Who shall blow forth a Trumpet to thy praise? Or call thy sable Actions shining Rayes? Such Lights as those blaze forth the vertues dead, And make them live, though they are buried. Thou'rt gone, and to thy memory let be said, There lies that Oliver which of old be∣tray'd
His King and Master, and after did assume, With swelling Pride, to govern in his room. Here I'le rest satisfi'd, Scriptures ex¦pound to me, Tophet was made for such Supre∣macy. The death of this great Rebel (I hope) will prove an Omen to pre∣sage destruction on the rest. The World's in a heap of troubles and con∣fusion, and while they are in the midst of their changes and amazes, the best way to give them the bag, is to go out of the World and leave them. I am now bound for Mary-Land, and I am told that's a New World, but if it prove no better then this, I shall not get much by my change; but before He revoke my Resolution, I am re∣solv'd to put it to adventure, for I think it can hardly be worse then this is:
Thus committing you into the hands of that God that made you, I rest Your Obedient Son, G. A. From aboard a Ship at Graves∣end, Sept. 7th. Anno To my Brother. I Leave you very near in the same condition as I am in my self, only here lies the difference, you were bound at Joyners Hall in London Apprentice∣wise, and I conditionally at Naviga∣tors Hall, that now rides at an Anchor at Gravesend; I hope you will allow me to live in the largest Mayordom, by eason I am the eldest: None but the
main Continent of America will serve me for a Corporation to inhabit in now, though I am affraid for all that, that the reins of my Liberty will be something shorter then yours will be in London: But as to that, what Destiny has ordered I am resolved with an ad∣venterous Resolution to subscribe to, and with a contented imbracement enjoy it. I would fain have seen you once more in this Old World, before I go into the New. I know you have a chain about your Leg, as well as I have a clog about my Neck: If you can't come, send a line or two, if not, wish me well at least: I have one thing to charge home upon you, and I hope you will take my counsel, That you have alwayes an obedient Respect and Reverence to your aged Parents, that while they live they may have comfort of you, and when that God shall sound a retreat to their lives, that then they may with their
gray hairs in joy go down to their Graves. Thus concluding, wishing you a com∣fortable Servitude, a prosperous Life, and the assurance of a happy departure in the immutable love of him that made you, Vale. Your Brother, G. A. From Gravesend, Sept. 7. Anno To my much Honored Friend Mr. T. B. at his House. I Am got a shoar with much ado, and it is very well it is as it is▪ for if I had stayed a little longer, I had certainly been a Creature of the Water, for I had hardly flesh enough to carry me
to Land, not that I wanted for any thing that the Ship could afford me in reason: But oh the great bowls of Pease-porridge that appeared in sight every day about the hour twelve, in∣gulfed the senses of my Appetite so▪ with the restringent quality of the Sal Beef upon the internal Inhabitants of my belly, that a Galenist for some dayes after my arrival, with his Bag-pipes of Physical operations, could hardly make my Puddings dance in any methodical order. But to set by these things that hap∣pened unto me at Sea, I am now upon Land, and there I'le keep my self if I can, and for four years I am pretty sure of my restraint; and had I known my yoak would have been so easie, (as I conceive it will) I would have been here long before now, rather then to have dwelt under the pressure of a Re∣bellious and Trayterous Government so long as I did. I dwell now by pro∣vidence
in the Province of Mary-Land, (under the quiet Government of the Lord Baltemore) which Country a∣bounds in a most glorious prosperity and plenty of all things. And though the Infancy of her situation might plead an excuse to those several imperfections (if she were guilty of any of them) which by scandalous and imaginary con∣jectures are falsly laid to her charge, and which she values with so little no∣tice or perceivance of discontent, that she hardly alters her visage with a frown, to let them know she is angry with such a Rascality of people, that loves nothing better then their own sot∣tish and abusive acclamations of base∣ness: To be short, the Country (so far forth as I have seen into it) is incom∣parable. Here is a sort of naked Inhabitants, or wilde people, that have for many ages I believe lived here in the Woods of Mary-Land, as well as in other parts
of the Continent, before e're it was by the Christian Discoverers found out; being a people strange to behold, as well in their looks, which by confused paintings makes them seem dreadful, as in their sterne and heroick gate and deportments; the Men are mighty tall and big limbed, the Women not alto∣gether so large; they are most of them very well featured, did not their wilde and ridiculous dresses alter their origi∣nal excellencies: The Men are great Warriours and Hunters, the Women ingenious and laborious Housewives. As to matter of their Worship, they own no other Deity then the Devil, and him more out of a slavish fear, then any real devotion, or willing acknowledge∣ment to his Hellsh power. They live in little small Bark Cottages, in the re∣mote parts of the Woods, killing and slaying the several Animals that they meet withall to make provision of, dressing their several Hydes and Skins
to Trafique withall, when a conveni∣ency of Trade presents. I would go on further, but like Doctor Case, when he had not a word more to speak for him∣self, I am affraid my beloved I have kept you too long. Now he that made you save you, Amen. Yours to command, G. A. From Mary-Land, Febr. 6. Anno And not to forget Tom. Forge I be∣seech you, tell him that my Love's the same towards him still, and as firm as it was about the overgrown Tryal, when Judgements upon Judgements, had not I stept in, would have pursued him un∣till the day of Judgement, &c.
To my Father at his House, SIR, AFter my Obedience (at so great and vast a distance) has humbly saluted you and my good Mother, with the cordialest of my prayers, wishes, and desires to wait upon you, with the very best of their effectual devotion, wishing from the very Center of my Soul your flourishing and well-being here upon Earth, and your glorious and everlasting happiness in the World to come. These lines (my dear Parents) come from that Son which by an irregular Fate was removed from his Native home, and after a five months dange∣rous passage, was landed on the remote Continent of America, in the Province of Mary-Land, where now by provi∣dence
I reside. To give you the parti∣culars of the several accidents that hap∣pened in our Voyage by Sea, it would swell a Journal of some sheets, and therefore too large and tedious for a Letter: I think it therefore necessary to bind up the relation in Octavo, and give it you in short. We had a blowing and dangerous passage of it, and for some dayes after I arrived, I was an absolute Copernicus, it being one main point of my moral Creed, to believe the World had a pair of long legs, and walked with the bur∣then of the Creation upon her back. For to tell you the very truth of it, for some dayes upon Land, after so long and tossing a passage, I was so giddy that I could hardly tread an even step; so that all things both above and below (that was in view) appeared to me like the Kentish Britains to William the Conqueror, in a moving posture. Those few number of weeks since
my arrival, has given me but little ex∣perience to write any thing large of the Country; only thus much I can say, and that not from any imaginary con∣jectures, but from an occular observa∣tion, That this Country of Mary-Land abounds in a flourishing variety of de∣lightful Woods, pleasant Groves, love∣ly Springs, together with spacious Na∣vigable Rivers and Creeks, it being a most healthful and pleasant situation, so far as my knowledge has yet had any view in it. Herds of Deer are as numerous in this Province of Mary-Land, as Cuc∣kolds can be in London, only their horns are not so well drest and tipt with silver as theirs are Here if the Devil had such a Vagary in his head as he had once among the Gadareans, he might drown a thousand head of Hogs and they'd ne're be miss'd, for the very Woods of this Province swarms with them.
The Christian Inhabitant of this Province, as to the general, lives wonderful well and contented: The Government of this Province is by the loyalness of the people, and loving de∣meanor of the Proprietor and Gover∣nor of the same, kept in a continued peace and unity. The Servants of this Province, which are stigmatiz'd for Slaves by the clappermouth jaws of the vulgar in England, live more like Freemen then the most Mechanick Apprenti∣ces in London, wanting for nothing that is convenient and necessary, and according to their several capacities, are extraordinary well used and re∣spected. So leaving things here as I found them, and lest I should com∣mit Sacriledge upon your more se∣rious meditations, with the Tauto∣logis of a long-winded Letter, I'le subscribe with a heavenly Ejaculati∣on to the God of Mercy to pre∣serve
you now and for evermore, Amen. Your Obedient Son, G. A. From Mary-Land, Jan. 17. Anno To my much Honored Friend Mr. M. F. SIR, YOu writ to me when I was at Gravesend, (but I had no conve∣niency to send you an answer till now) enjoyning me, if possible, to give you a just Information by my diligent obser∣vance, what thing were best and most profitable to send into this Country for a commodious Trafique. Sir, The enclosed will demonstrate unto you both particularly and at large,
to the full satisfaction of your desire, it being in Invoyee drawn as exact to the business you imployed me up∣on, as my weak capacity could ex∣tend to. Sir, If you send any Adventure to this Province, let me beg to give you this advice in it; That the Factor whom you imploy be a man of a Brain, other∣wise the Planter will go near to make a Skimming-dish of his Skull: I know your Genius can interpret my meaning. The people of this place (whether the saltness of the Ocean gave them any al∣teration when they went over first, or their continual dwelling under the re∣mote Clyme where they now inhabit, I know not) are a more acute people in general, in matters of Trade and Commerce, then in any other place of the World; and by their crafty and sure bargaining, do often over-reach the raw and unexperienced Merchant. To be short, he that undertakes Mer∣chants
imployment for Mary-Land, must have more of Knave in him then Fool; he must not be a whindling piece of Formality, that will lose his Im∣ployers Goods for Conscience sake; nor a flashy piece of Prodigality, that will give his Merchants fine Hollands, Laces and Silks, to purchase the bene∣volence of a Female: But he must be a man of a solid confidence, carrying al∣wayes in his looks the Effigies of an Execution upon Command, if he sup∣poses a baffle, or denyal of payment, where a debt for his Imployer is le∣gally due. Sir, I had like almost to forget to tell you in what part of the World I am: I dwell by providence Servant to Mr. Thomas Stocket, in the County of Baltemore, within the Province of Mary-Land, under the Government of the Lord Baltemore, being a Coun∣try abounding with the variety and di∣versity of all that is or may be rare.
But lest I should Tantalize you with a relation of that which is very unlikely of your enjoying, by reason of that strong Antipathy you have ever had gainst Travel, as to your own particu∣lar: I'le only tell you, that Mary-Land is seated within the large extending armes of America, between the Degrees of 36 and 38, being in Longitude from England eleven hundred and odd Leagues. Vale. G. A. From Mary-Land, Jan. 17. Anno To my Honored Friend Mr. T. B. at his House. SIR, YOurs I received, wherein I find my self much obliged to you for
your good opinion of me, I return you millions of thanks. Sir, You wish me well, and I pray God as well that those wishes may light upon me, and then I question not but all will do well. Those Pictures you sent sewed up in a Pastboard, with a Letter tacked on the outside, you make no mention at all what should be done with them: If they are Saints, unless I knew their names, I could make no use of them. Pray in your next let me know what they are, for my fingers itch to be doing with them one way or another. Our Government here hath had a small fit of a Rebellious Quoti∣dian, but five Grains of the powder of Subvertment has qualified it. Pray be larger in your next how things stand in England: I understand His Majesty is return'd with Honour, and seated in the hereditary Throne of his Father; God bless him from Traytors, and the Church from Sacrilegious Schisms,
and you as a loyal Subject to the one, and a true Member to the other; while you so continue, the God of order, peace and tranquility, bless and pre∣serve you, Amen. Vale. Your real Friend, G. A. From Mary-Land, Febr. 20. Anno To my Honored Father, at his House. SIR, WIth a twofold unmeasurable joy I received your Letter: First, in the consideration of Gods great Mercy to you in particular, (though weak and aged) yet to give you dayes
among the living. Next, that his now most Excellent Majesty Charles the Second, is by the omnipotent Provi∣dence of God, seated in the Throne of his Father. I hope that God that has placed him there, will give him a heart to praise and magnifie his name for ever, and a hand of just Revenge, to punish the murthering and rebellious Outrages of those Sons of shame and Apostacy, that Usurped the Throne of his Sacred Honour. Near about the time I received your Letter, (or a little before) here sprang up in this Province of Mary-Land a kind of pigmie Rebel∣lion: A company of weak-witted men, which thought to have traced the steps of Oliver in Rebellion. They began to be mighty stiff and hidebound in their proceedings, clothing themselves with the flashy pretences of future and ima∣ginary honour, and (had they not been suddenly quell'd) they might have done so much mischief (for ought I
know) that nothing but their utter ruine could have ransomed their headlong follies. His Majesty appearing in England, he quickly (by the splendor of his Rayes) thawed the stiffness of their frozen and slippery intentions. All things (blessed be God for it) are at peace and unity here now: And as Luther being asked once, What he thought of some small Opinions that started up in his time? answered, That he thought them to be good honest peo∣ple, exempting their error: So I judge of these men, That their thoughts were not so bad at first, as their actions would have led them into in process of time. I have here enclosed sent you some∣thing written in haste upon the Kings coming to the enjoyment of his Throne, with a reflection upon the former sad and bad times; I have done them as well as I could, considering all things:
If they are not so well as they should be, all I can do is to wish them better for your sakes. My Obedience to you and my Mother alwayes devoted, Your Son G. A. From Mary-Land, Febr. 9. Anno To my Cosen Mris. Ellinor Evins. E 're I forget the Zenith of your Love, L et me be banisht from the Thrones above; L ight let me never see, when I grow rude, I ntomb your Love in base Ingrati∣tude:
N or may I prosper, but the state O f gaping Tantalus be my Fate; R ather then I should thus preposterous grow, E arth would condemn me to her vaults below. V ertuous and Noble, could my Genius raise I mmortal Anthems to your Vestal praise, N one should be more laborious then I, S aint-like to Canonize you to the Sky. The Antimonial Cup (dear Cosen) you sent me, I had; and as soon as I received it, I went to work with the Infirmities and Diseases of my body. At the first draught, it made such ha∣vock among the several humors that had stoln into my body, that like a Conjurer in a room among a company of little Devils, they no sooner hear him begin to speak high words, but away
they pack, and happy is he that can get out first, some up the Chimney, and the rest down stairs, till they are all disperst. So those malignant humors of my body, feeling the operative power, and medi∣cinal vertue of this Cup, were so ama∣zed at their sudden surprizal, (being alwayes before battered only by the weak assaults of some few Emporicks) they stood not long to dispute, but with joynt consent made their retreat, some running through the sink of the Skulle∣ry, the rest climbing up my ribs, took my mouth for a Garret-window, and so leapt out. Cosen, For this great kindness of yours, in sending me this medicinal vertue, I return you many thanks▪ It came in a very good time, when I was dangerously sick, and by the assi∣stance of God it hath perfectly reco∣vered me. I have sent you here a few Furrs, they were all I could get at present, I
humbly beg your acceptance of them, as a pledge of my love and thankfulness unto you; I subscribe, Your loving Cosen, G. A. From Mary-Land, Dec. 9. Anno To my Brother P. A. Brother, I Have made a shift to unloose my self from my Collar now as well as you, but I see at present either small pleasure or profit in it: What the futu∣rality of my dayes will bring forth, I know not; For while I was linckt with the Chain of a restraining Servitude, I had all things cared for, and now I have all things to care for my self,
which makes me almost to wish my self in for the other four years. Liberty without money, is like a man opprest with the Gout, every step he puts forward puts him to pain; when on the other side, he that has Coyn with his Liberty, is like the swift Post-Messenger of the Gods, that wears wings at his heels, his motion being swift or slow, as he pleaseth. I received this year two Caps, the one white, of an honest plain counte∣nance, the other purple, which I con∣ceive to be some antient Monumental Relique; which of them you sent I know not, and it was a wonder how I should, for there was no mention in the Letter, more then, that my Bro∣ther had sent me a Cap: They were delivered me in the company of some Gentlemen that ingaged me to write a few lines upon the purple one, and because they were my Friends I could not deny them; and here I pre∣sent
them to you as they were then written. Haile from the dead, or from Eternity, Thou Velvet Relique of Antiquity; Thou which appear'st here in thy purple hew, Tell's how the dead within their Tombs do doe; How those Ghosts fare within each Mar∣ble Cell, Where amongst them for Ages thou didst dwell. What Brain didst cover there? tell us, that we Upon our knees vayle Hats to honour thee: And if no honour's due, tell us whose pate Thou basely coveredst, and we'l joyntly hate: Let's know his name, that we may shew neglect; If otherwise, we'l kiss thee with respect.
Say, didst thou cover Noll's old brazen head, Which on the top of Westminster high Lead Stands on a Pole, erected to the sky, As a grand Trophy to his memory. From his perfidious skull didst thou fall down, In a disdain to honour such a crown With three-pile Velvet? tell me, hadst thou thy fall From the high top of that Cathedral? None of the Heroes of the Roman stem, Were ever such a fashion'd Diadem. Didst thou speak Turkish in thy unknown dress, Thou'dst cover Great Mogull, and no man less; But in thy make methinks thou'rt too too scant, To be so great a Monarch's Turberant. The Jews by Moses swear, they never knew E're such a Cap drest up in Hebrew:
Nor the strict Order of the Romish See, Wears any Cap that looks so base as thee; His Holiness hates thy Lowness, and instead, Wears Peters spired Steeple on his head: The Cardinals descent is much more flat, For want of name, baptized is A Hat; Through each strict Order has my fancy ran, Both Ambrose, Austin, and the Fran∣ciscan, Where I beheld rich Images of the dead, Yet scarce had one a Cap upon his head: Episcopacy wears Caps, but not like thee, Though several shap'd, with much di∣versity: 'Twere best I think I presently should gang To Edenburghs strict Presbyterian; But Caps they've none, their ears being made so large, Serves them to turn it like a Garnesey Barge;
Those keep their skulls warm against North-west gusts, When they in Pulpit do poor Calvin curse. Thou art not Fortunatus, for I daily see, That which I wish is farthest off from me: Thy low-built state none ever did ad∣vance, To christen thee the Cap of Mainte∣nance; Then till I know from whence thou didst derive, Thou shalt be call'd, the Cap of Fugitive. You writ to me this year to send you some Smoak; at that instant it made me wonder that a man of a rational Soul, having both his eyes (blessed be God) should make so unreasonable a demand, when he that has but one eye, nay he which has never a one, and is fain to make use of an Animal conductive for his optick guidance, cannot endure
the prejudice that Smoak brings with it: But since you are resolv'd upon it, I'le dispute it no further. I have sent you that which will make Smoak, (namely Tobacco) though the Funk it self is so slippery that I could not send it, yet I have sent you the Substance from whence the Smoak derives: What use you imploy it to I know not, nor will I be too importunate to know; yet let me tell you this, That if you burn it in a room to affright the Devil from the house, you need not fear but it will work the same effect, as Tobyes galls did upon the leacherous Fiend. No more at present. Vale. Your Brother, G. A. From Mary-Land, Dec. 11. Anno
To my Honored Friend Mr. T. B. SIR, THis is the entrance upon my fifth year, and I fear 'twill prove the worst: I have been very much troubled with a throng of unruly Distempers, that have (contrary to my expectation) crouded into the Main-guard of my body, when the drowsie Sentinels of my brain were a sleep. Where they got in I know not, but to my grief and ter∣ror I find them predominant: Yet as Doctor Dunne, sometimes Dean of St. Pauls, said, That the bodies diseases do but mellow a man for Heaven, and so ferments him in this World, as he shall need no long concoction in the Grave, but hasten to the Resurrection. And if this were weighed seriously in the Bal∣ance of Religious Reason, the World
we dwell in would not seem so inticing and bewitching as it doth. We are only sent by God of an Errand into this World, and the time that's allotted us for to stay, is only for an Answer. When God my great Master shall in good earnest call me home, which these warnings tell me I have not long to stay, I hope then I shall be able to give him a good account of my Message. Sir, My weakness gives a stop to my writing, my hand being so shakingly feeble, that I can hardly hold my pen any further then to tell you, I am yours while I live, which I believe will be but some few minutes. If this Letter come to you before I'me dead, pray for me, but if I am gone, pray howsoever, for they can do me no harm if they come after me. Vale. Your real Friend, G. A. From Mary-Land, Dec. 13. Anno
To my Parents. FRom the Grave or Receptacle of Death am I raised, and by an om∣nipotent power made capable of offer∣ing once more my Obedience (that lies close cabbined in the inward most apart∣ment of my Soul) at the feet of your immutable Loves. My good Parents, God hath done marvellous things for me, far beyond my deserts, which at best were prepo∣sterously sinful, and unsuitable to the sacred will of an Almighty: But he is merciful, and his mercy endures for ever. When sinful man has by his Evils and Iniquities pull'd some pene∣trating Judgement upon his head, and finding himself immediately not able to stand under so great a burthen as Gods smallest stroke of Justice, lowers the Top-gallant sayle of his Pride, and with
an humble submissiveness prostrates himself before the Throne of his sacred Mercy, and like those three Lepars that sate at the Gate of Samaria, resolved, If we go into the City we shall perish, and if we stay here we shall perish also: Therefore we will throw our selves into the hands of the Assyrians, and if we perish, we perish This was just my con∣dition as to eternal state; my Soul was at a stand in this black storm of afflicti∣on: I view'd the World, and all that's pleasure in her, and found her altoge∣ther flashy, aiery, and full of notional pretensions, and not one firm place where a distressed Soul could hang his trust on Next I viewed my self, and there I found, instead of good Works, lively Faith, and Charity, a most horrid neast of condemned Evils, bearing a supreme Prerogative over my internal faculties. You'l say here was little hope of rest in this extreme Eclipse be∣ing in a desperate amaze to see my estate
so deplorable: My better Angel urged me to deliver up my aggrievances to the Bench of Gods Mercy, the sure support of all distressed Souls: His Heavenly warning, and inward whispers of the good Spirit I was resolv'd to en∣tertain, and not quench, and throw my self into the armes of a loving God, If I perish, I perish. 'Tis beyond won∣der to think of the love of God exten∣ded to sinful man, that in the deepest distresses or agonies of Affliction, when all other things prove rather hinderan∣ces then advantages, even at that time God is ready and steps forth to the sup∣portment of his drooping Spirit. Tru∣ly, about a fortnight before I wrote this Letter, two of our ablest Physici∣ans rendered me up into the hands of God, the universal Doctor of the whole World, and subscribed with a silent ac∣knowledgement, That all their Arts, screw'd up to the very Zenith of Scho∣lastique perfection, were not capable
of keeping me from the Grave at that time: But God, the great preserver of Soul and Body, said contrary to the ex∣pectation of humane reason, Arise take up thy bed and walk. I am now (through the help of my Maker) creeping up to my former strength and vigour, and every day I live, I hope I shall, through the assist∣ance of divine Grace, climbe nearer and nearer to my eternal home. I have received this year three Let∣ters from you, one by Capt. Conway Commander of the Wheat-Sheaf, the others by a Bristol Ship. Having no more at present to trouble you with, but ex∣pecting your promise, I remain as ever, Your dutiful Son G. A. Mary-Land, Apr 9. Anno I desire my hearty love may be re∣membred to my Brother, and the rest of my Kinred. FINIS.
These Books, with others, are Printed for Peter Dring, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Sun in the Poultrey, next door to the Rose Tavern. ELiana, A most Exquisite New Romance, formed by an English hand. Fol. The Valley of Vision: Or, a Clear Sight of sundry Sacred Truths; deli∣vered in Twenty One Sermons, by that Learned and Reverend Divine Richard Holesworth, Doctor in Divinity. 4. An Exposition on the whole Book of Solomons Song, commonly called the Canticles; wherein the Text is Explain∣ed, and useful Observations raised there∣upon; by John Robotham Preacher of the Gospel. 4.
The Marrow of the Oracles of God: Or, divers Treatises, containing Di∣rections about Six of the Weightiest things can concern a Christian in this Life; by N. Byfield, late Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex. The 13. Edition. 12. large The Principles, Or, The Pattern of Wholsome Words; containing a Col∣lection of such Truths as are of necessity to be believed unto Salvation, separated out of the Body of Theology; by N. Byfield, Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex. 8. Scrutinia Sacra; Or, the Souls nar∣row search for Sin, in seven dayes So∣lemn Penitentials; by Thomas Phete∣place, Doctor of Physick. 8. Tears in time of Pestilence; by John Featly, Doctor in Divinity. 8. Templum Musicum; Or, the Musical Synopsis of the Learned and Famous Johannes-Henricus Alstedius, being a Compendium of the Rudiments both
of the Mathematical and Practical part of Musick, of which subject not any Book is extant in our English Tongue; by John Birchensha. The Ladies Directory, in choice Ex∣periments and Curiosities of Preserving in Jellies, and Candying both Fruits and Flowers; by Hannah Wolley. 8. The Cooks Guide: Or, Rare Re¦ceipts for Cookery; by Hannah Wolley. A Choice Banquet of Witty Jests, Rare Fancies, and Pleasant Novels▪ Fitted for all lovers of Wit, Mirth, and Eloquence 8. Troads Englished: Whereunto is added several Excellent Poems and Pa∣negyricks upon divers Occasions; by S. P. Esq A Comment upon the Two Tales of our Renowned Poet Sir Jeffray Chau∣cer, Knight. 8. Courteous Reader, In the first Epistle Dedica∣tory, for Felton read Feltham.
