a3328a 99825436 29818
An answer to a Paper Entituled, A Letter to a Friend, upon the dis∣solving of the late Parliament, and the calling of a New one together, with a List of those that were against making the Prince and Princess of Orange, King and Queen. SIR, AS by the strain and stile of your Letter, I may easily repute you one more precipi∣tant than prudent, and more passionate than po∣litick: So may I on rational Grounds, from the drift and design of your Letter, conclude you a great Jacobite, or vail'd Favorite of the late K. James: For in pretence of vindicating the pre∣sent King's Interest, you first set up Marks of your own making, or Suppositions of your own Invention (which ought not to be supposed) and then fighting, with the Maggots of your own brain, to please your own fond fancy, you dis∣charge the Artillery of your pretended Zeal and Loyalty, at your own foolish proposals. And for all you pretend, by your Wit and Loyalty, to antidote the fate which besel his Majesty's Pre∣decessors, viz. the robbing him of his peoples affe∣ctions, and then of his own Authority; yet could you not have fallen on a readier and surer way, to raise animosities in the Kingdom, and bred jealousies in the hearts of the Kings best Subjects. For at first you suppose a controversy where re∣ally there is none, viz. whether it was the Kings wisdom, or to please himself with an Exercise of Regal power, and to look Great, that made him dissolve this Parliament. Then Worthy Sir, (your own wisdom acquiescing with what his Majesty did) you take up the Cudgels in his Vindicati∣on, whilst there is few or none to strike at. Tho his Majesty, in his last Speech to the Par∣liament, when it was Prorogu'd, spoke more sense, and gave greater Reasons for what he did (tho in few words) than in all your long, learned, Legomachical Apology. Next, you cast an Aspersion on the Members of Parliament, that they were ignorant of what was fit to be done: and therefore you tell them, that the K. sent them about their business, for not uniting the Protestants, and vindicating our Laws and Liberties, and punish those who had subverted our Constitution, &c. Truly Sir, there is much in this; for it wlil be found a difficult thing to unite the Church of England with Dissenters, tho' they seemtodiffer but in matters of Ceremony. But if they did not make it their Business to vindicate the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, and design (in the right place) to punish those who had subverted the Kingdoms Constitution; they were neither good Christians, just Judges, nor wise States-men; nor any ways fit to stand at the Helm of publick affairs. But, till you prove your assertion, your contumeli∣ous speeches are but an aspersion. The next thing you propose out of your wisdom, is a speedy means to clear the Kings Descent into En∣gland, from being an ambitious Usurpation. Tru∣ly Sir, I believe there are few men of sense that will repute the Kings Expedition to England an Unrighteous Invasion, unless such busie men as you, by sowing such seeds of Dissatisfaction, and setting up such suppositions of Sedition and Fa∣ction, gain the Weather-gage on a right Under∣standing, and lead the people to open Rebellion; and tho' you be pleased confidently to say, that His present Majesty holdeth his Crown precari∣ously, and that King James's Abdication is easily reversible, yet no man that is Master of his Reason, and knoweth the circumstance of the late Revolution, and the present state of Great Britain, will be so Foolish as to believe any such thing, Unless he, likewise, believe that it is an easie matter to turn Britain to a Bedlam, and all the Inhabitants thereof to Mad-men; who would willingly forfeit their Religion, Lives, Laws and Liberties. Truly Sir (as I have said) you could have fallen upon no surer way to do both King and Country a diskindness, than by supposing, un∣der the pretence of a good meaning, those Re∣bellious Controversies, which may breed Jea∣lousies, make the best. Subjects question the Foundation of their Loyalty, and deny their Allegiance to our present King. For how can those Gentlemen (who because in the twinkling of an Eye, they were surprized with a sudden and unexpected Change and Revolution of Go∣vernment, and could not be resolved in a mo∣ment, nor be satisfied in Conscience, at a word, whether they owed any Allegiance to King James or not) be now pleased to see their Names Listed, Posted, and exposed as Dissenters from the present Government, Stigmatiz'd with the Title of Jacobites, and not likely to be true and lasting friends to King WILLIAMS Soveraignty? and consequently, unworthy to be Members of Parliament, or to have any hand in State Affairs, and undeserving of the King's favour? Now how can any Parliament at this rate be reputed free, When they ly under the lash of such disgraceful and murdering aspersions? I shall not meddle with more of your Letter; but take this of me: Men of least Conscience soonest satisfie greatest scruples, and he's neither good Divine or good States-Man, that would divide a Kingdom against it self: For as Salust de Bello Jugurth. saith, Concordia res parvae crescunt, Discordia autem maximae delabunter. Callicratidas being affronted by King Cyrus in his Embassie, when he returned to Sparta, broke out in these words: I shall use the best of my en∣deavours, to reconcile the Greeks among themselves, that they may be the more formidable to these Bar∣barians, and leaving off all Controversies among thesmelves, they may no more stand in need of help from that prodigal King. And of this Man's re∣solution Conrad Lycosthenes speaketh thus: Singu∣laris profecto fuit prudentiae vir, quod perspexit Graecos non alia magis ratione posse reddi Barbars formidabiles, quam si depositis intestinis simultatibus, mutam inter se concordiam sancirent. Plut. in Lacon apoph. Scipio Africanus asked Tyresius, how the Numantians, who were once reputed so War∣like a People, were so easily broke and over∣thrown. Tyresius answered, concordia Victoriam, Discordia exitium praebuit. Thus Concord and Unity are the Sinews, Strength, and Victory of a Nation, which, (with Faith, Truth, and God's favour) I pray this Isle of Britain, and all true. Christians may long enjoy. With Allowance.
