A3549 R24184 8043498 40765
AN APOLOGY FOR THE FAILURES Charg'd on the Reverend Mr. George Walker's PRINTED ACCOUNT Of the late Siege of Derry, IN A LETTER to the Undertaker of a more Accurate Narrative of that SIEGE. Printed in the Year 1689.
AN APOLOGY FOR THE FAILURES Charg'd on the Reverend Mr. George Walker's PRINTED ACCOUNT OF THE Siege of Derry. SIR, YOUR Inventory of those momentous Mi∣stakes you offer to demonstrate in the late Printed Account of the Siege of Derry,
with your Reflections on 'em was survey'd by some of our Club, Men of approv'd Prudence and Moderation, who also pay a great deference to the celebrated Mr. Walker: Their una∣nimous Verdict is, You Publish these Ani∣madversions, with the accurate Journal of that Siege, which by this time you expect∣ed: This they judge of absolute Necessity, as being the most apposit medium to give resurrection to the Memory of as well the yet living, as the lately expir'd, of that great Body of Northern Scots, (of late the Ter∣ror of Papists, and Envy of an ambitious Party in Ireland) which the above Account endeavours to extinguish, and bury with some ingenious Scars in the Grave of per∣petual Oblivion. I had sent you this Commission last Week, had it not been recall'd upon a Motion made, and carried by the major Vote, that no se∣cond Narrative on this Subject, how accu∣rate soever, be Printed, but with a Salvo of the Honour, with which his personal Me∣rit, auspicious Conduct, in his Government of Derry, with his Majesty's gracious Ac∣ceptance thereof, have already invested Mr. Walker. This Vote we took for an embaras∣ment as insuperable as Kilmore Boom; till last Night one of our Number undertook
to remove it, by a just Apology he said he had provided for Collonel Walker, abridg'd in a Letter to you, intended chiefly to re∣ctifie some dangerous Mistakes of yours con∣cerning that excellent Person: The Letter being read and approv'd, I here present you with the Inscription, Preface, Subscription omitted. On behalf of the Collonel I offer this double Plea: The First, That 'tis his Infe∣licity, not his Sin, to be mistaken for the Author of those Misrepresentations, with which you charge his Narrative. The Se∣cond, To discover their genuine Parents, with some of the occult Causes of their Production in this juncture. The Arguments evincing the former, are, 1. This Narrative is guilty of manifest vi∣olation of the prime Rule of History: (viz. That nothing be inserted for truth, but that whose intrinsick Evidence commands the Read∣er's belief, or borrow'd, renders it at least cre∣dible.) Your Animadversions present us with many Instances of this kind; the exact Jour∣nal will with more. 2. This Account peremptorily, and very immodestly, confronts the Verbal Narratives
Collonel Walker occasionally gave of that Siege, all along his Journey, before his arri∣val at London; very eminent instances whereof I have already transmitted both from Scotland and some remoter parts of England, which I am ready to produce, when they may prove serviceable to Mr. Walker. 3. This Narrative pretends to give the Hi∣story of Transactions in that Garrison, where∣of Collonel Walker was neither Spectator nor Actor, viz. Of the four Months that pass'd between the first locking the Gates, and his Arrival at Derry; Collonel Walker having neither in Derry furnish'd himself with a Journal of that time, nor consulted those Per∣sons who alone were qualified to give him a full Account of all the Proceedings in that interval; though he knew 'em to be in Lon∣don while he prepar'd his Narrative, and had the opportunity of daily Converse with 'em. 4. This Narrative quite divests the first and principal Actors of the Honour of that first Service, without which this Narrative had beeu a Non-entity; in special, Counsel∣lor Cairns, who declar'd for the then Prince of Orange, and the Protestant Religion; who form'd the Multitude into Companies after
locking the Gates: Transferrs it on those whose only claim to it is the Narrator's Bounty, or, if you please, his Charity. 5. This Narrative transmitts not half that imperfect Journal (now in London) whence 'tis borrowed; and (which seems at least very indecent) is so far from emblazoning the matchless Gallantry of even the chief Commanders, (as well as those first Actors above hinted) that it either passes over in silence their Actions, or their most remarka∣ble Circumstances, which would prove its chief Ornament; a due Account whereof would command the Reader's Admiration, and eternize the Actor's Memory, eminent Instances whereof we expect from your Nar∣rative. Now besides the Disparagement such failures reflect on the Historian, I doubt it will be sound an arduous Undertaking to ac∣count for 'em to the surviving Relations and Posterity of those Hero's, (especially the in∣comparable Collonel Baker) whose insupport∣able Sorrows under their irreparable loss might be somewhat alleviated by their reviewing in the Monuments of unsuspected History the renowned Lives and glorious Transits of their deceased Relations. 6. The intire Texture of this Narrative dis∣covers
its being contriv'd under the Conduct of mortal Prejudice against the Northern Scots Presbyterians: Notorious in three equally groundless and immodest Calumnies. 1. Against Mr. Osborn, the Vindication of whose Innocen∣cy will merit room in your Narrative. 2. In Mr. Hewson's being plac'd in the same Cate∣gory with Mr. Osborn, though many thousands yet alive in Ireland and Scotland are ready to testisie, nor does himself deny it, that Hewson was discarded some Years ago by the Northern Presbyters, and to this day lyes under Sentence of Deposition pass'd on him by all their Pres∣byteries for notorious Scandals; is no more a Member of Mr. Osborn's Communion than of Mr. Walker's. 3. Most eminently, in not in∣serting thye Names of the seven Non-consorm∣ing Ministers in Derry, under pretence of want of Information, after a List of their Names was put into Mr. Walker's Hand, by the same Gen∣tleman now in London, from whom Mr. Wal∣ker had the Diary. 7. This Narrative gives Collonel Walker the first Figure in Martial Exploits, in which I presume his Modesty will own, he had several Equals, some Superiors in Derry, besides Col∣lonel yiBaker; of which some are on tip-toe to give him demonstration, (which they say his Narrative exacts from 'em) did they not re∣vere
his Gown more than they fear his Sword. It invests him solely with the whole Conduct, and that in the quality first of Chief, after of sole go∣vernor: whereas thousands yet surviving confi∣dently averr, he had not been Assistant Governor, but by Collonel Baker's Interest, much less chief, had nor that Gentleman's Modesty in comple∣menting Mr. Walker with the Precedency in their joint Subscriptions, given him the opportunity of converting Collonel Baker's civil Ceremony into a sacred, and very significant to the Churches Service, of which more anon; thus, Cedunt arma togae; thus he carried the Ho∣nour, first of Chief, ever after of Sole Go∣vernour of Derry, for whom the Garrison intended neither. I have contented my self at present with a bare allusion to some Persons and things in these Arguments, have studiously avoided giving 'em due form and full strength; part∣ly out of the deserence I bear to Mr. VValker's Person; partly because this will fall properly within your Province in your intended Narrative. Sussice it, they answer the end they are produced for, viz. To evince that an History obnoxious to the heavy charge these Premises inserr, can with no Modesty vouch a Person of Mr. VValker's Character for its genuine Author; some one
of these taken single, being of sufficient force (much more the whole Conjunct) to blast the Credit of any History what∣ever. In summ, this History bears no more resemblance to the excellent Governour of Derry, than Simon Magus to Simon Peter: But if any be found so hardy as to at∣tempt an Attaque upon either these Pre∣mises or the Conclusion, pray Capitulate with 'em for a Cessation of Arms 'till your Narrative is Printed, and then I promise to give 'em Battle, if they please, before the Walls of Derry: Mean while I take leave of the first part of my Apology for the Collonel, and proceed to the second; in my Conduct to which, I doubt not to make some Advantage of those very Bloc∣kad's by which you endeavour to prevent my Passage. The first, and I hope princi∣pal, is, Object. If it be an unpardonable Crime, to entitle Mr. VValker to those Misadventures of which you impeach his Narrative, what Hecatomb can attone for the bold Adven∣ture of the High and Sacred Dedication prefix'd to it? For a full Answer to this formidable Objection, (which will go a great way to compleat the Apology) I humbly offer to your second thoughts, whether you
are not in equity oblig'd to allow in the Person of Mr. George VValker, the discrimi∣nating qualities of late Governour of Derry, and Rector of Donnogh-moor: In the former you are to consider him in a Martial Capa∣city, in the latter an Ecclesiastick: In the former he own'd no Superiour terrene but his Sovereign, in the latter many, in spe∣cial his Diocesan: In the former he com∣manded thousands without controll, in the latter he must obey, not dispute the Au∣thority of his Superiours: In the former he sought for King VVilliam, Queen Ma∣ry, and the Protestant Religion, in con∣junction with you Presbyterians, avoiding all discrimination of the Church and Kirk∣party, (which then would have proved fatal) in the latter he was oblig'd to pub∣lish his Narrative under the Conduct and Command of his Ecclesiastick Governours: consequently in a Method might equally sub∣serve the Churches Honour and Interest, and disserve those of the Kirk. If you would know who these Ecclesiasticks are, to whom you owe the most injurious mistakes in this Narrative, pray enquire who that very Re∣verend Prelate from Ireland is, who went as far as Barnet to meet Collonel VValker, re∣ceiv'd him into his own Coach, conducted
him to London; under whose menage Mr. VValker was observ'd to act while he was preparing his Narrative. This Bishop with some others of his Club can inform you best of any. I shall then adventure to give you their Names, when the Act of Scandalum Magnatum, as it respects that Order, is re∣peal'd, which I dare affirm, will be found the Interest of both Church and State. 'Till then, I beg your Excuse. Obj. If you further Object, it suits not over well with Mr. Walker's Cha∣racter, to pass such things in his Hi∣story as have nothing to support their Credit, but the bare Command of his Ecclesiaftick Superiors. Sol. I confess all the Distinctions in Scotus your subtle Countrey-man must leave this Objection unanswer'd, upon the Principles of you Presbyterians, whose nigh thirty Years Sufferings, Con∣tempt and Indigency, you owe to your opposing your private Coscien∣ces
as the proximate Rule of your Actions, to the conscience and Com∣mands of your Superiors. But upon Mr. Walker's Principles 'tis easily blown off: For though our Church pre∣tends not to Infallibility, in determining Points of Faith, yet she pretends, and I hope justly, to uncontrollable Au∣thority to her Commands over her infe∣riour Clergy, and to the dictates of the publick Conscience over the pri∣vate; and therefore though Mr. Wal∣ker might modestly concert the Truth of those Passages, which bear not so much as its imperfect Colour, yet might he at no hand dispute insert∣ing 'em, if his Superior require it. Mr. Walker could not forget, though you may, that Modern Doctrine, ve∣ry edifying to the Embracers as well as Inventers of it, viz. That where the Matter of my Superior's Command is doubeful, (as undoubtedly in this Case
it was) his Command makes it my undoubted Duty to obey: Obedience to my Superior being my undoubt∣ed Duty, complying with my doubt∣ing Conscience being a business of very doubtful and dangerous Event: Though I'm very apt to believe, had some men among us foreseen it would ever be their own fate to take San∣ctuary in the private (and as they call'd it) pretended Conscience, (which is the pittiable, I say not ridiculous misfor∣tune of all those of our Clergy who now refuse to Swear Allegiance to the best of Kings) they would heretofore have less ridicul'd it. But to compleat Mr. Walker's Vindication, and the solu∣tion of your Objection, I'm forc'd to reveal an Horribile Secretum, whose Dis∣covery by Mr. Walker, had prov'd as fatal as Calvin's Horribile Decretum, (on which you know who among us betray'd horrible Ignorance of Latin
as well as Divinity) 'tis this. On that memorable Evening of lock∣ing Derry-Gates, in an Assembly of the chief Citizens, consulting their Bi∣shop, then present, whether they should receive a Popish Regiment of King James's Army, then approaching to seize the Garrison for that King's Service, the good Bishop having long before ebib'd the Doctrine of Passive Obedi∣ence, gravely exhorted them to the Affirmative; assuring them (though with the loss of the Garrison for King William and the Protestant Religion) they should thereby become a Victim to the sanguinary Cut-throats, yet the Loyalty of their Obedience to their ONLY lawful Sovereign, would abun∣dantly recompense their deepest Suffer∣ings: Upon which one Irwin, (I'm told) a young Presbyterian Scot, cry'd out, My Lord, your Doctrine's very good, but we can't now hear you out; and immedi∣ately
getting the Keys, with some others of his Fellows, lock'd all the Gates, a few Minutes before the two formost Companies demanded entrance in King James's Name: Can you ima∣gine, had Mr. Walker been sui juris, his Narrative would not have afforded at least one Line to the Resolution, Gal∣lantry, and inestimable serviceableness of this Action? without which, this Account of the following Gallantry display'd on that Stage had probably issu'd in a second History of Massacres, exceeding those of 41. But to return to the Bishop; he finding his Doctrine the oftner repeated, less credited by Church∣rebel Jack Presbyter, left the City some days after to the disloyal Whiggs. Now, Sir, make Mr. Walker's Case your own, and suppose your Merit (as indeed his is) above the Deanry of Der∣ry, vacant, (by Mr. Manby's exchanging
the Communion of the Church of Eng∣land for the more encharming Imbraces, as he pretended, of the Mother-Church) and the Bishoprick too, by the Bishop's Abdication: Yet upon your Canonical Obedience tell me, could you do less in Mr. Walker's Circumstances than cover this pernicious Counsel of your Diocesan, which created Nature can't expiate, and assure your Sovereign, God intimates to the World the Church of England de∣fends and maintains their Majesty's In∣terest, and the Protestant Religion; and improve your Rhetorick to perswade their Majesties the Dissenters are at best unserviceable to either Interest. I hope, Sir, by this time you are satis∣fied of Mr. Walker's Innocency in his Publishing the above Account. You Presbyterians distinguish between the Action and the Anomy, or Irregulari∣ty of it, which latter you say in the Original makes the sin: You will also
grant that the bare Instrument is often blameless, when the principal efficient is very culpable: I plead for no more on behalf of this worthy Gentleman, and so conclude his Apology; though I heartily wish he had not given me the trouble, am perswaded himself does, he had not given the occasion to any to believe very applicable to him (step∣ping out of the Bishops Coach) that Passage of the SatyristJuv. Sat. 10. lin. 278, ad lin. 282. respecting Con∣sul Marius, (if the comparison be not too mean for the Collonel's Merit,) — quod illo cive tulisset Natura in terris, quid Roma beatius unquam, Si — animam exhalasset opimam, Cum de Teutonico vellet descendere curru?
I intended, my hand being in, to bestow a cast of my Office upon these Gentlemen, whose alone Com∣mands could qualifie Mr. Walker to plead Not Guilty to your Charge; and to have assign'd the leading Reasons of their exerting their Authority over him in this juncture: But being doubtful of their Grati∣tude, I shall leave to themselves that Province; mean while will furnish you with some Queries, I'd have you lodge with 'em; to which, their Answers, whether Categorical or Equivocal, will discover these Reasons, and peradventure what lies somewhat deeper. Qu. 1. Whether these Gentlemen, I mean the West∣minster Ecclesiastic Club; or if you please, Committee for the Church of Ireland, were not sollicitously ap∣prehensive of the too great Figure the Northern Scots made for many years past? Being unquestionably the greatest Body of Protestants in Europe, intirely united in Principle, Interest, Alliance and mutual Ac∣cord; who, upon an Estimate made of their Num∣ber three years since, were found to amount to Eighty Thousand Fighting MenPray see for this the inge∣geniously Penn'd Letter to the truly Honourable Sir Arthur Royden about that time.; and upon a more exact since, to about a 1000000. Whether they were not sufficient to have preserved intire the Province of Ʋlster, and by their assistance to the English in all other parts, ei∣ther to have sav'd the whole Kingdom from being lost, or before this time to have retriev'd it, without putting our King or Kingdom of England to any
other charge than Arms, Ammunition, one Chief Commander, little or no Treasure, had Arms been sent 'em any time before March last? Whether the matchless Prowess and Services of those sew Innis∣killin-Men, with those in the Garrison of Derry, do not determine this Quere in the Affirmative? Qu. 2. Whether, suppose Presbytery and Prelacy plac'd on a level, share equally in the Favour of King and Parliament, with the Church-revenues and Dignities; every individual being left to his proper choice (all which Conditions I humbly conceive pre∣requisit to the right stating the Question) in that great Northern Body, the Tyth fall to the Church of England's share? I know who would venture a Pole, e're they yielded that: if the danger of incur∣ring the Guilt of Sacrilege did not deter 'em. Qu. 3. Whether these Gentlemen don't in judg∣ment determin the second Query in the Negative? Since one of their Club, a Gentleman of great Sense, as intelligent in Irish Affairs as any, upon the report of so many thousands dying in Derry by Famine, spoke plainly among some of his Gown, what others would perhaps for State-reasons have minc'd, viz. Twas no matter how many of them dy'd, for they were but a pack of Scots Presbyterians. And I'm perswaded had Mr. Wr. when he brought the Colonel to London, left the Parson at Donnoh-moor, a pack of Presby∣terians they had been still. But pray deal gently with the young Man Mr. — for his Father's
sake, who, as I have heard, was the most Scotiz'd Presbyterian Minister of the English Nation. Qu. 4. What Counsels, what Instruments may be justly charged with the unattoneable Guilt of retard∣ing the Conveyance of those Arms and Ammunition (till the Season was lost) which might have sav'd, or speedily reduc'd Ireland? Not our most gracious Sovereign, whose Royal Propension, repeated Roy∣al Commands for the speedy and effectual relieving the Protestants there, His Majesties Royal Concern for the Delays of the Conveyance of these Succours, his Subjects of the first Figure attest, and the Rebels dreaded the event of, Not the Dissenters, nor mo∣derate Conformists, both whose accurat accounts of the condition of Ireland were last Spring frequently confronted by Letters from Eutopia, till the doleful event discover'd the truth of the former, and Fiction of the latter. Not the City of London, whose for∣wardness to spare no Treasure, or if need were, Hands, in that Service, whose unparallel'd Hospi∣tality, and incredible Charge in maintaining distres∣sed Protestants from Ireland, as well all England over, as in the City of London, all of you that re∣tain any Sparks of Honour and Gratitude admire and Celebrate. Qu. 5. Whether those unaccounted (but not un∣accountable) baffles giv'n to the reliefs sent to Derry, first by Colonel Coningham, &c. and afterwards by — do not issue from the same Spring with
the Delays mentioned in the next preceding Query? Whether the Romance of Kilmore Boom will attone for the loss of those Thousands of Souls (near a My∣riad by this time) of immortal Memory, that perish∣ed in Derry for want of those Succours, Royal Bounty so amply provided, Royal Care order'd the speedy and seasonable conveyance of? But of this enchant∣ed Boom at more leisure. Qu. 6. Whether some Men are not satisfy'd (I don't say endeavour) Ireland be entirely lost, (tho themselves have large Stakes there to lose) and re∣main unreduc'd for some years, rather than Dis∣senters be employ'd in retrieving it, share in the Rewards of that Service, make some Figure in their Country, be rendred capable of their Prince's Fa∣vour, of Honours and Offices in common with their Fellow-Subjects proportionably to their Merit? I'le exclude from this Category (and with their own ap∣probation) all the moderate Sons of the Church of England both Clergy and Laity; yet am sure some such Men there be. These Gentlemen can perad∣venture discover 'em. Qu. 7. Whether, if all Protestant Subjects were equally forward with the Dissenters for the Service of the King, Kingdoms, and Protestant Religion, the late King James's Arrival in Ireland had not been effectually prevented? And besides, either the sa∣ving, or retrieving of Ireland, the Rebellion in Scotland had not been either prevented or crush'd in
the Egg, as well as the execrable Plot in Edinburg, whose Origin, says some, is the same with that Kings Declaration, lately Printed in London, and dispersed in England, and no body doubts, lies nearer Westminster than Edinburgh? Whether if Dis∣senters had been entrusted with the Conduct, or em∣ployed in the Service of the Fleet, they had not at least guarded the Brittish Seas against the French Py∣rates, if not have given a good account of the French Fleet? Qu. 8. Whether if his Majesty were vested with as unlimited Empire over the Hearts, Estates, and Ser∣vices of all other Protestants in his Dominions, as of all the Dissenting Protestants at home, and all Pro∣testants abroad without exception, it would not ren∣der him the most August, most Potent, and incom∣parably the most happy Monarch on Earth? As by natural Right, Personal Merit, Divine Disposal he is already of all the Christian Orb? Whether all Papists, and all other Persons disaffected to their Majesties Sacred Persons, Government, and Protestant Religi∣on, had not before this been remov'd from King∣dom, Camp, and his Majesties Service, unless they gave sufficient Security of their peaceable and Loyal Behaviour? Whether one Disloyal Dissenter, or dis∣affected to the Government can be produc'd in their Majesty's Dominions in this Reign? Whether Gene∣ral Schomberg on the Head of 50000, or if need were, a 100000 Men, might not by this time make the Walls of Paris quake? If not in their Majesty's
Name take peaceable possession of the Louvre, and display in the heart of Paris the English im∣perial Banner? Whether his Majesty would need any aid from any of his Allies to Suppress any Rebellion in his Dominions; or at all employ any Forreign Forces, except in extending his Empire beyond the Alps, &c, or in both Indies? Qu. 9. What these Gentlemen will advance to∣wards Printing the C. History of Ireland in the two last Reigns, almost ready for the Press? We'll give 'em City-Security to do 'em in it as much right, as Mr. W's Narrative has done the Presbyterians wrong. We'll tell nothing but the Truth, though not the whole Truth, it being impossible to represent to the Life all the good Services (some being very secret) of some of the Bishops, especially the three Archbishops now living: whether to the Catholick Cause, in their zealous Espousal and advance of the York-Interest, and thereby of the Irish Catholicks: Or to the Church, in their conferring of Livings and Ecclesiastic Dignities on the Inferiour Clergy, (whose Qualifications and Conversations the Historian ac∣counts for) in proportion to their Talent of railing genteelly at the Phanaticks. In their affronting, yea, silencing (some) of their own Clergy, for Preaching boldly the Doctrin of the Church of England against the Papists: In the Bishops turning Informers to the Government against the Dissenters, exposing them to the Odium of the Government, contempt of Man∣kind: In their Persecuting, Fining, Confining, Im∣poverishing
them, cum multis aliis— The unrea∣sonableness of the Printer drives the Historian to this involuntary Address to these Gentlemen: For he says, he wont take for Printing this, being a large Folio, ten times the Sum he paid for Mr. Wr's Copy; unless the two Irish Archbishops now in Westminster will promise Verbo Sacerdotis to take off nine parts of the Impression for Ireland, the tenth being more than he hopes to have vent for in England. The Arch∣bishop of Dublin, he says is a poor Spiritual Prince; has receiv'd of our publick Fund of Charity to di∣stress'd Protestants from Ireland, not above a 1000 l. that he can hear of; has in England not above 10000 l. in Bank, design'd for a Purchase; therefore expects his Brother Archbishop should be bound with him. 10. Lastly Quaeritur, Sir, of your self, whether by this time you do not foresee consequence enough in any imaginable Answer may be given to these Questions for concluding it necessary in these Gentle∣men to have improv'd as they did, their Empire over Mr. Wr. in this juncture; though they might foresee the event somewhat prejudicial to him, per∣nicious to your Party? I must also inform you, some of these Gentlemen are no less study'd in Politicks than in Divinity; the former being their constant, if not sole business ever after Consecration; the lat∣ter only subserves the former; which seldom hap∣pens, but when in a Sermon (the Quintessence of two or three years profound premeditation) the Go∣vernment
is to be gravely reminded of the Churches infinit Service to the State, above all possibility of a full reward; or to prescribe to the Government some new method of hampering the Fanaticks, whom the Churches neither Grace nor Wisdom could ever reclaim; who are never thankful for any of the Churches Blessings, neither for Oxford-Oaths, Five-mile-Acts, twenty pounds Fine per Month, Mouth-padlocks, Meal-tub-Plots, Irish Witnesses, nor all the Devices of Old Nick himself, to reduce 'em to Canonical Obedience. You must further know, these Gentlemen bear a very Sympathizing Sense of the Odium the Clergy of England, especially some of the Bishops have incurred from all Protestants abroad, and some of their own Communion at home, for their Ingratitude (to mention nothing higher, if higher may be) to our most gracious So∣vereign, after having but a little before magnify'd him to the Stars, though still below his Merit, as the only Saviour of their Lives under God, as well as Protector of their Estates and Dignities. Now the incomparable Sagacity of these Gentlemen discover'd an opportunity, and they had the Grace to improve it (the like having been never presented before, perhaps never may again) of not only wiping off all this Reproach, but also of acquiring a greater Glory (and why not Reward too) to the Church of England, than perhaps any modest English-man will challenge to the whole Nation; and all this by the Service (you know of whom, but) attributed to one of their undignify'd Clergy. Pray observe
the Modesty of the Dedication — God Fights their Majesty's Battels—but by the hand of the Church — Defends and maintains their Maje∣sty's Interest and the Protestant Religion. I don't wonder this Mystery should not ea∣sily enter your Presbyterian Skull, since it re∣quires equally with Transubstantiation, a Head Abdicated of Reason and Five Senses: my own Pate, though of somewhat a more Ca∣tholick make than yours, has a deadly hard tug on't. For though I can (to magnifie the Service of our Church) allow you Ʋlster Scots and Eng∣lish Dissenters should pass for Powder-monkies of the Churches Army (except the Inniskilling men, whose hopes must not yet be quite for∣lorn) and that half of the Earl of Angus's Re∣giment in Scotland should pass for Cowards, (it being Canonico-Prelatically impossible, tho Schis∣matico-Presbyterially certain, so despicable a handful of the deepest-dy'd-Kirk-Whiggs should utterly defeat, without hopes of ever again ral∣lying, our Churches Host; consisting, very few excepted) of the Churches best Sons and Cham∣pions in Scotland, which the Sequel demonstrates; for the Whigs there did not so much boast of the Victory, as the Tories here bewail'd the Discom∣fiture.
Yet can I by no means yield, the renowned General Schomberg should not make a Thumb at least, and the Dutch, Germans, and Swisses he Commands (who were never seen to turn their Backs on any Enemy, but after Victory) should not make one Finger more, of that invincible hand, that defends and maintains the King's Interest, and the Protestant Religion. It wants Confirmation, That the Fingers of the Dutch, in the Face of their Enemy, are em∣ployed only in turning up their Mustacho's, to teach Teague a more decent way of taking Snush, or in concerting the Antiquity of Min-Heir and Mounsieur, while the Hand of the Church is preparing Mandates, with a Present of Leaden Padderines to be sent Post by the French and Irish to Saint Patrick in Purgatory. However, I doubt not these Gentlemen's fa∣tal necessity, or pious Zeal for recovering the so-lately-decay'd Stock of the Churches Credit, will excuse (if not hallow) their pious Fraud in thus managing Mr. Walker, to most of the true Sons of the Church; and therefore I pray, it may to you; and so much the sooner, because this with the preceeding Apology for Mr. Wr. removes all Letts to your Printing your design'd Narrative, except a License, which the Arch∣bishop
above-named, upon your presenting him with these Queries will infallibly procure. Thus far that Gentleman's Letter, and with it an assurance that I ambition the Character of, SIR, Your Faithful Servant. FINIS.
