A3513 R38504 17525460 106537
ANTISCORBUTICAE. PILLS against that Epidemic Disease the Scurvy, with all its Symptoms, which for the Instruction of the Ignorant, are the Putrefaction of the Gums; rotten, black, and loose Teeth, stinking Breath, laziness and dulness of the Limbs, and the whole Body, Giddiness in the Head, sudden Flushings, heat and redness in the Face; some have risings on their Body, as if stung with Bugs, Spots in the Legs and Thighs, of a Red, Black, Pur∣ple, or Blue Colour; others have an Itching in some or all parts of the Body, a shortness of Breath, red Gravel in the Urine, like Brick-dust; strange Pains and Aches in several parts of the Body; Fluxes of the Belly, Dyssenteries, swellings and breakings out in the Body, which these Pills certainly Cure, by Purging away those Tartareous Humours which occasion this Disease. They likewise open the Obstructions of the Womb, Liver, Spleen, and Stomach, and therefore an admitable Remedy for the green Sick∣ness, and such as want their Monthly Terms. The black or yel∣low Jaundice, Hypocondriack Vapours; and all Diseases of the Head, viz. Vertigo, or Swimming of the Head, Palsie, Coma, Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy; they are a soveraign Remedy for the Dropsie. They cleanse the Stomach, Mesoraick Veins and Passages of the Chyle, and Nutriment. In fine, consult the Paper of Dire∣ctions for the use of these Medicines, to those Diseases for which they are recommended, and I dare be bold to assure you of a good success: for I recommend them for nothing but what Thirty Years Experience of the Galenical Practice, and above Twenty in the Study of Ghymistry approves. Those that drink the Spaw, Tunbridg, Epsom, Barnet, Astrop, Dulledge, Islington, Waters, can∣not use a better Remedy, and in all cases where Purging in requi∣red. The Box containing 18 Pills, Price 1 s. 6 d. SOLAMEN, MISERIS. WHich causes Expectoration, and is an admirable Medicine for the Asthma, Ptysick, Catarrhs, and Rheums: In a short time it takes off the tickling Defluxion that falls from the Head upon the Lungs; it opens and takes away all Stoppages and Pains of the Stomach, Lungs, and Chest, therefore an ex∣traordinary
Remedy for the Consumptive. It Cures a new Cough, or Cold, though never so violent, in three or four times taking; and old Ones in a small time. It takes off all Loosness, and Vo∣mitings, and Surfeits, especially after hard Drinking. The Mea∣sses, and Small Pox it brings out to Admiration. It is an Infal∣lible. Remedy for all windy Distempers, as the Colick, Griping of the Gurs; it is admirably comfortable to the Sciatical, and those that have Aches or Pains in their Limbs whatsoever. But for the Tooth-ach, I believe there is not the like Remedy, for in an Hour or less it gives ease, whether the pain be in a sound or rotten Tooth, in one or all the Teeth; not by stopping them. but by taking it inwardly, it dispels the Rheum that causes the Pain; as yet it never fail'd me. The first Dose takes off the vio∣lent pain, the next perfectly cures it. Price 1 s. 6. d. the Pot. EXUKIANO: Or, the only Venereal Antidote without Mercury. BEing an easie course of Physick, of that admirable Virtue, as to expell all Venereal Malignities gotten by soul Men or Women: Never failing to remove all Sharpness, or heat of Urine, in twice or thrice taking. It cures all Ulcers and Fistulaes in the Throat, Womb, or any part of the Body, if timely used, it flings off the Venom, and prevents a Pox. It never fails to cure the Whites and Weakness of the Back. And whereas most affirm, it's not to be cradicated without Mercury, I can shew the contrary to any Artist, and I'll be bound to give him 500 l. if he can make it appear I have the least of it in these Compositions. And if he has been so unfortunate, as to have been abused with Mercury, I have a Secret to kill it. The whole Parcel contains two Doses of purging Powders, a Glass of Elixir, and a Pot of Balsom. Price, 3 s. Many have been cured with one, but two never fail. All these Remedies hold good several Years. They are to be Sold at My House at the Carv'd Fosts in Stone-cutters-street, between Shooe-Lane and Fleet-ditch. Where I am to be spoken with every Morn∣ing till 11, and from 5 to 9 every Evening. And at Mr. Troughton's Bookseller, near the Broad Gate in Coventry. Mrs. Moores, a Salter, next Door to the White Hart Inn in Southwark, Mr. Henry Barber's in Ship Alley in Well Close. The Poor may have Advice for Nothing.
