a3452 99830253 34703
An ANSWER to the Weavers CASE. WHere they Alledge, That Great Numbers of Weavers as well French Pro∣testants as English, do make Alamodes and Lustrings in England. Answer, There are few or none but the Royal Lustring Company, that make any Black Alamodes and Lustrings in England, except such as have already wrought for the said Company which have been drawn from them by ill Mens perswasions. 1. They are very sensible that there are considerable quantities of French Lustrings and Alamodes Imported in England, to the Prejudice of the said Manufacture here. Answer, Agreed. As to the 2d. Objection, That the Lustring Company do intend to prevent all other Weavers (but what works to them) to make the same Silks, Contrary to a Clause in their Patent. Answer, The Lustring Company by their Patent have the Sole Power of making and dressing Black Alamodes, Renforces and Lustrings in England Exclusive to all o∣thers; and that by the Approbation and Satisfaction of the Weavers Company, Lon∣don, declared by them before the King and Council, at a hearing before the passing the Patent, and no such Clause inserted as is objected. 3. The forfeit is One Hundred Pound for all such Persons as shall buy any Goods not Seal'd, besides the forfeiture of the Goods. Answer, That is to prevent the defrauding His Majesties Customs, &c. 4. They say that the Weavers in England that make the said Silks, and are not of that Company (which are, and would be, a far greater Number than those Employed in the Lustring-Company) if they were not interrupted in their lawful Calling. Answer, There were no Weavers that made Alamodes in England at the time the Pattent was obtained, but what was made by one of the Pattentees: So that no Man can say he is interrupted in his lawful Calling, when he is only debarred from that he never had. And had not the Lustring Company forwarded this Undertaking, there had not been (in all probability) any of those Silks made in England, at this time: But by the great Care and Charges of the said Company, many Thousands of Poor are Imployed at this time by them, to the great Relief of those poor Weavers that could find no Imployment by those of the Weavers Company; and more might be Imployed, if they pleased. 5. They say the Lustring Company will make their Men Work at their own Price or to leave off Working, &c. and so discourage the growth of that Manufacture and by Monopolizing sell at what Price they please. Answer, The Lustring Company is so reasonable to their Workmen, that they have no cause to Complain; and as it is the Companies Interest to promote its growth, it cannot be supposed they should be against their own Interest, and such a Publick Good they have so long labour'd for. 6. As for the Clause the Weavers desire to have all Allamodes and Lustrings made in England by Weavers that are not of the Company, to be Seal'd, and a Penalty be laid upon those that are appointed to Seal, that shall refuse to Seal their Silks Answer, It is unreasonable the Weavers should desire any such things, seeing they agreed and consented to the Pattentees in the obtaining the Patent, and also acknow∣ledge that it would be of great Good to the Publick if they could settle it in this Kingdom, it being a New Invention, as it doth also appear by the Report made by the Commissioners of the Customs to the Lords of the Treasury upon a hearing of the Weavers Company. And if there was a Penalty for not Sealing the Weavers Silks, it would encourage the Smugglers to get their Silks to be Seal'd upon pretence they were made in England, and the Persons appointed to Seal being afraid to undergo the Penalty for not Sealing, will Seal all that is brought to them. So that the French Smugglers will have their Goods protected by the Seal, and the French Trade and Correspondence with France will be kept on Foot, so that the latter Evil will be greater than the First. The Lustring Company have offered the Weavers to receive any of them in their Company upon as equal or better Terms than themselves.
