C1584 R17525 12281841 58737
King DAVID's Deliverance, and Thanksgiving. Applied to the Case of Our King and Nation, In Two SERMONS, The one preached on the Second, the other on the Ninth of September. 1683. By JOHN CAVE, Rector of Cold-Orton in Leicester∣shire; And Chaplain to the L. Bishop of Durham. Si quis unquam fuit inter Reges, qui Davidis expressam & maximè luculentam imaginem referret, is sanè es, ita ut nemo tecum eatenus comparandus esse videatur. Amyrard. Epistola ad Regem nostrum antè Paraphras. in Psalmos. Tum demum timentur Reges, cum in populos incidit Domini pavor. E periculis evadunt, cum Deus dat salutem, & os eruit ex gladio maligno. Bochart. Epistola ad eundem. The King's Glory is great in God's Salvation: Honour and Majesty hath he laid upon him. Psal. 21.5. LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. M.DC.LXXXIII.
TO THE Right Honourable, and Right Reverend Father in God, NATHANAEL, Lord Bishop of DURHAM, And Clerk of the Closet to his Majesty. MY LORD, I Most humbly dedicate these plain Discourses to your Lordship; which though unworthy of your notice, I hope, may not be altogether un∣useful to some part of our World, at least not to those of my own Charge, among whom I am chiefly bound (by my best endeavours) to promote Religion and Loyalty. I know your Lordship favours the Subject; and that you support and adorn it, much more by your great and eminent Example, than ever I can do by Argument or Eloquence: Yet I have reason to conclude, that your singular Goodness and Candor, will easily overlook, or pardon, what your Wisdom cannot patronize.
And because I am well assured, that your Lordship is sufficiently apprehensive of the evil and spreading Effects of some Mens popular Prints, as well as Preachings, I hope you will be pleased to allow of my affectionate opposition, un∣der the conduct of more powerful Reasoners. It is, I confess, too evident, that the Misactings of the real Papists, and of our counterfeit Protestants, proceed rather from perversness of Will, and frowardness of Tem∣per, than from error of Judgment, or scruple of Consci∣ence: And therefore they seem to need more the Schoolings of the Law, and the Rebukes of Authority, than the Illuminations of the Gospel, and the Warnings of the Scrip∣ture, the Doctrines, Exhortations, Perswasives of our Re∣conciling Ministry: And if they are not already past feeling, and incurably obstinate, are like to profit more under an equal distribution of the Acts of Justice, than a right division of the Word of Truth. Yet I have still the charity to think, that many of those, who by their fair Colourings, and plausible Pretences, have been drawn into Conventicles, Covenants, and the Society of a very vile Cause, do not err altogether of malicious wickedness, but partly through simplicity of Heart; like some of those who followed Absolom. And therefore though too guilty, yet not incorrigibly so, nor quite past the Cure, at least not the benefit of softer Remedies; and such we are commissioned to administer, meek Restauratives, and rational Confirmations.
But if our Sermons alone will not prevail with such as these, they may happily give edg and success to the Secular Sword, and make even the Law a ministration of Love, as well as of Terror, by teaching them to be subject, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience; and to be Active, as far as honestly they can, before they be Passive in their Obedience; assuring them, that praesumptio est pro Authoritate imponentis, that where they have not a clear and undoubted evidence of the contrary, they may safely con∣clude, that Right and Truth are on the Governor's side. My Lord, I publish this Discourse principally for the sake of such Men as these, who have been preached into a dislike of our Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity, and therefore may happily be preached out of it again: Men whose Intentions possibly have not been so bad as their Cause; but their simple Hearts have been beguiled with the good Words and enticing Speeches, of those that promised Liberty and Refor∣mation, while themselves were the Servants of Corrup∣tion, and of a base Interest. Yet truly, My Lord, I cannot expect any very good Fruit of my own, or of much better Sermons on the same Oc∣casion, even among this sort of Men, if that visible Hand of Providence, which hath of late so signally detected the Hypocrisy of their Party, hath not already opened their Eyes, touched their Hearts, and in a good measure
wrought off their Prejudices, and prepared them for contrary impressions. But if this Publication, and the Prayers that attend it, obtain not all the good Ends of its Design; yet I shall think it speeds well, if it meets with your Lordships Approbation, or kind Acceptance, as a real, though a very mean Testimony of my grateful sence, of your ample and obliging Bounty, to, My good Lord, Your Lordships most faithfully and humbly devoted Servant and Chaplain, JOHN CAVE.
King DAVID's Deliverance, and Thanksgiving. SERMON I. PSALM 18.48, 49. He delivereth me from mine Enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me; thou hast delivered me from the violent Man. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, (or con∣fess unto thee) O Lord, among the Hea∣then; and sing Praises unto thy Name. THis Psalm, is a Song of Thanksgiving, penned by King David, in comme∣moration of his many wonderful and gracious Deliverances, from the Con∣spiracies and Assaults of his Enemies, the Philistims, Syrians, Moabites; particularly, rebellious Absalom, and bloody Saul;
as appeareth by the Course and Method of the Story, where it is recorded, 2 Sam. 22. In it, with an enlarged and exilient Spirit, the Spirit of a King, and of a Saint, he celebrates the Almighty Power and Goodness of God, by describing his Dangers in the most black and terrible Images; and his De∣liverances from them, in all the advantages of Representation, which the Wisdom of Royal and Religious Gratitude could supply.Vers. 4, 5. The Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Floods of ungodly Men made me afraid. The Sorrows of Hell compassed me about; the Snares of Death prevented me. He go∣eth down to the Grave, yea, to Hell it self, to sample his Sorrows and his Fears, the devilish Ma∣lice and Cruelty of his Enemies. He goeth up to the Rocks, the high places of Strength and Safety, yea, to Life and Salvation it self, in its Eternal Fountain, to furnish him with some suitable Illu∣strations of that great Mercy, which so miraculously subdued his Enemies, and supported his Empire. In the Verses before my Text; The Lord liveth, and blessed be my Rock; and let the God of my Sal∣vation be exalted: It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the People under me. What follows is the Text, to which I shall limit my Discourse at this time. He delivereth me from mine Enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me; thou hast delivered me from the violent Man.
Therefore will I confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen: and sing praises unto thy Name. In these words we have an account, I. Of David's Deliverances from his Enemies, vers. 48. II. Of his devout acknowledgment of, and thankful return for those Deliverances, vers. 49. First, We have an account of David's Delive∣rances; and therein these Observables. 1. The Terms. 2. The Author. 3. The Manner thereof. 1. The Terms of it, or the Evils from which he was delivered; expressed, 1. More generally; from his Enemies. 2. More particularly; from the violent Man. 2. The Author of those Deliverances; and that is God himself, He hath delivered me from mine Ene∣mies: Thou hast delivered me from the violent Man. 3. The Manner of these Deliverances; Thou hast exalted me, above those that rise up against me.
Secondly, We have a devout Acknowledgment of, and thankful Return for these Deliverances and Preservations: Therefore, , so the Septuagint renders it, will I confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen; and sing praises unto thy Name. I purpose to speak of these in their order. 1. Of the Mercy, David's Deliverances. 2. Of the Duty, David's Confession and Thanks∣giving. And then make what Comparisons we fairly may, between King David's, and our King's Deliveran∣ces; to excite us to the performance of the same Duty, to promote the same religious Joy and Praise, at the time of our Solemn Thanksgiving and Festivity. I. First then for David's Deliverances. Delive∣rance and Preservation, are Acts whereby God re∣peats the Wonder and the Mercy of his Creation, and giveth, as it were, a new Life, in the continu∣ance of the Old; a kind of Resurrection, and re∣vival, without any real death.Psal. 102.8. The People that shall be created, shall praise the Lord; i. e. say some, the People brought from a low and despicable con∣dition, next to nothing, or the People delivered from an imminent destruction. The Deliverance of a King, hath on it some spe∣cial prints and signatures of the Divine Power and Goodness. God delivered David from the Lion,
and the Bear, and the uncircumcised Philistine, when he was in a more private Capacity; but his Prote∣ctions in his Royalty were more eminent and re∣markable, and therefore he magnifies them in the Verses next to my Text. Great Deliverance giveth he to his King, and sheweth Mercy, that is, signal and extraordinary Mercy, to his Anointed. And when he sings a new Song of Praise, Psal. 144.10. this is the Burthen of it, It is he that giveth Salva∣tion to Kings, who delivereth David his Servant from the hurtful Sword. In King David's Deliverances, we may observe; First, The dreadful Evils and Dangers from which he was delivered: expressed, 1. More generally by Enemies. Enemy is a word common to Men, with Devils; and David, who stiles his Enemies, as you heard, Floods of ungodly Men, compares his Sufferings under them, to the Sorrows of Hell, the effects of a deep and devilish Malice. Though not only the Lives, but the other Rights and Properties of Kings, are made by God more sacred and inviolable, than those of other Men; and though Obedience to Authority, is the Mother and the Nurse of VVelfare,. in Aeschilus his expression; yet through the instigation of the Devil, the first Plotter of all Mischief, (who is naturally and originally , a professed Ene∣my to God, and consequently to all who resemble him in Power and Goodness) are Discontents
raised, Sedition and Rebellion moved against the best Governors. Moses met with great opposition and contradiction; even his own Kindred, Aaron and Miriam, began to malign him. To pass by other Instances, we have a full one before us; David, I mean, A Man after God's own Heart, one who professed and countenanced the True Religion; and a King of God's own making, crowned, anointed, and placed in the Throne, as it were, by his immediate Hand; who though he was a wise and gracious Prince, and ruled them prudently by his Power; yea, though he was popu∣lar for some time, and whatsoever the King did, pleased the People; I say, notwithstanding all these happy Concurrences, these Conspiracies, as I may so speak, of Vertue, Right, Prudence, Clemency, He could not sit quiet and safe in his Govern∣ment; He found many Enemies, both at Home and Abroad. His own Son rebelled against him; And with Absolom went two hundred Men out of Jeru∣salem.2 Sam. 15.11. He attracts the People's Eyes, by a Princely Grandeur, and steals away their Hearts by a po∣pular Compliance, fair Speeches, and obliging Condescentions. He rises up early, and stands in the way of the Gate; and if any Man came nigh him, to do him obeysance, he put forth his Hand, and took him, and kissed him. By these Artifices, he soon gained many Associates, who followed him, some of them perhaps in the simplicity, but the most, and the most considerable, in the malice and wickedness of their Hearts, to the great en∣dangering of the Crown and Life of his Father.
So apt are the Sons of Belial, who can bear no Yoke, to be complaining and quarrelling, not only under the most Just, but under the most mer∣ciful and easy Rule. The Spirit that is in us lusteth to Envy, and is ever and anon murmuring at petty Grievances, and clamouring at every little Restraint of our Licentiousness, as a violation of our lawful Li∣berties and Privileges, and thereupon grounding Pretences for Rebellion; which David (in vers. 43. of this Psalm) calls, the Strivings of the People. The beginning of which Strife,Prov. 17.14. as Solomon wisely observed, is as when one letteth out Water, which hath but a slender utterance at first, but it soon swells and rages, bears down all Dams, riseth a∣bove all Banks and Bounds, and spreads into a Flood of Ʋngodliness, an irresistible Torrent of Fury, Cruelty, and Treason: Which minds me of the 2. Second Thing, and that which was the great∣est and more particular Evil, from which David was delivered, the Violent Man; Men, whose Dis∣contents, at some seeming Errors in his Govern∣ment, soon expressed themselves in diminishing and defamatory Speeches,Psal. 89.51. wherewith they reproach∣ed the Footsteps of God's Anointed: And from these proceeded to Seditious Petitions and Remon∣strances, under the colour of preferring a Suit, or Cause, as is expressed 2 Sam. 15.4. Or in the Language of our Times, a Grievance of the Sub∣ject. These Discontents, by degrees, were con∣firmed into a Resolution to seize his Guards, and
his Person, and so to give Limits to his Dominion; which perhaps he intimates by that gathering of the Abjects, and rascality of the People together a∣gainst him;Psal. 35.15. or elsewhere, by the gathering of the Mighty; or more frequently, by their besetting or compassing him about on every side; which traite∣rous Machinations, terminated in the highest in∣stance of Disloyalty, a violent attempt upon his Sa∣cred Life. But if the Violent Man may not here be inter∣preted indefinitely, or for a Band of Regicides; may we fix it upon Absolom? Perhaps not; His Cruelty, it may be, was not so great as his Ambiti∣on; and he might be content to spare his Father's Head, if he could take the Crown from it; or else leave that horrid part of the Plot, to the manage∣ment of Achitophel and his bloody Complices. Saul rather seems to be the Violent Man in the Text; but we shall not stay to decide the compe∣tition, where each of them seem to have but too just a claim to this ugly Character. Proceed we then to the Second observable in David's Deliverances, and that is the Author of them, the great Governour of the World. He hath delivered, Thou hast delivered. Indeed, all Deliverances are the Works of God himself.Psal. 68.20. He is the God of Salvation, to him belong the Issues from Death. It is he alone that hath Goodness, Strength, and Wisdom, sufficient to dis∣cover concealed Dangers, and to deliver from
them: Goodness to exercise his Wisdom, and exert his Strength: Strength, to serve and perfect his Goodness; Wisdom, to guide and manage; both for a seasonable Detection, and an effectual De∣feat, of the Conspiracies of subtil and evil-minded Men. But there are some reserved Cases which are more proper to God, in which his Hand and Power is more visible; and those are Cases of great Ex∣tremity; such as Jonas's in the Whales Belly; the three Children in the fiery Furnace; Daniel's in the Lion's Den; David's in the depths of his Distress, and when he was wholly destitute of all humane Aid: I looked upon my right hand, and beheld,Psal. 142.4. but there was no Man that would know me, Refuge failed me; no Man cared for my Soul. Then he adds, vers. 5. I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my Refuge, deliver me from my Persecutors, for they are stronger than I; thou art the helper of the helpless. So here in my Text, when Faction and Sedition was grown up to the height of Cruelty and Vio∣lence; when the Plot was come to the Birth, and the Fatal Blow ready to be given, then God deli∣vers by his Prerogative, and David attributes it to him, not only eminently, but exclusively. It is God that avengeth me, it is God, and none but He; Thou hast delivered me from the Violent Man; Thou, and Thou only. And he gathers so much confi∣dence from the single protection of his God, as I may so speak, that he defies whole Troops and Armies of his Enemies:Psal. 27.3. Though an Host should en∣camp against me, my Heart should not fear.
He had found, by experience, that when God alone appeared for him, neither the Valour of Ab∣salom, the Policy of Achitophel, nor the Power of Saul could prevail against him; but he delivereth him from all his Enemies; from these, and from the worst of them, the Cruel, the Violent Man. And so much for the Author of David's great Deliverances, The Lord, strong and mighty. We come next to consider, in a Third place, The manner of this Deliverance; which maketh it still greater, and more to be re∣garded. It was a Deliverance from all his Enemies; the Murmurers of the Country, and the Rioters of the City; the Invaders of his Prerogative, and the Con∣spirators against his Life; neither was it only a Deliverance from them, but a lifting him up above them, and a confirmation of his Dominion. We shall stay here a little to open these Parti∣culars, and shew you, First of all, That it was a compleat Delive∣rance. Secondly, That it was an advantageous Delive∣rance; it put Him, and his Affairs, into a much better posture than they were in before. First, I say, It was a compleat and entire Deli∣verance; a Deliverance from all his Enemies, and from all the Mischief and Violence they plotted a∣gainst him.
Sometimes our Escape from one Enemy, doth but expose us to another; and when we flee from a Lion, a Bear meets us. Sometimes God delivers from Death, but yet de∣livers up to Captivity: As he would not suffer his People to be destroyed by Shishak King of Egypt, Nevertheless they shall be his Servants,2 Chron. 12.8 that they may know my Service, and the Service of the Kingdoms of the Countries. He delivers them from Destruction, but not from Slavery; or he delivers out of Cap∣tivity, but not without some Marks, or Scars, of their former hard Usage and Endurance: They are saved, like a Brand snatch'd out of the Fire, in the Prophet Amos his Comparison; scorched,Amos 4.11. but not consumed. Sometimes he vouchsafeth compleat Deliverance, as he did to Daniel; the Lions were so far from devouring him, that they did him not the least hurt: And as he did to the three Children; the Fire was so far from consuming them, that it did not singe them, nor so much as the smell of it remain upon them. And so it was here in this Case before us. Da∣vid was delivered from all his Enemies, and from all the Effects of their Enmity; from the Strivings of the People, and the Violence of their Managers; from that sort of Enemies that could colour and palliate their Designs, speak Peace to their Neigh∣bours, and pretend fair to their King; no less than from open and declared Rebels, who carry Wea∣pons in their Hands, as well as Mischief in their Hearts. Nay further, he was delivered, not only
from Death, but from Seizure and Imprisonment; from all Restraints of Power, and Diminutions of Royalty: as appeareth more fully by the Particu∣lars of his Acknowledgment; Psal. 116.8. Thou hast delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from falling. And for this rea∣son he stiles it Great, because it was entire and compleat Deliverance. Nay more than so; Secondly, It was a beneficial and advantageous Deliverance; It placed him in better Circumstan∣ces than he was in before; and by an admirable Contrivance of the Divine Providence, his Danger confirms his Safety; and the subduing of the Peo∣ple, contributes to his greater Exaltation. He delivereth me from mine Enemies; yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me. He speaks it with a special Emphasis; and it may de∣note these two things. 1. An Establishment of his Throne. 2. An Encrease of his Glory. 1. It denotes, An Establishment of his Throne; a new Guard and Defence upon his Person and Go∣vernment. Thou liftest me up, (it is as much as if he had said) thou settest me out of the reach, above the Power of those that rise up against me.Psal. 30.7. Lord, by thy Favour, thou hast made my Mountain to stand strong. God gave him a new security of his Life and Peace; not only by giving him the Necks of his Enemies, delivering them mercifully into his Hands,
the Hands of Justice, who had traiterously lifted up their hands, the hands of Violence, against his Crown and Dignity. But also awakening Him, his Counsellors, and Magistrates, by the escape of so imminent a Dan∣ger, to greater Care and Vigilancy for the time to come. It was Machiavel's Observation of the State of the Roman Empire,Cum Urbl Romae, tanta Imperii mag∣nitudo fatalis effet, opprimi & vehementis∣sime affligi e∣am oportuit, ut deinceps cautior, pru∣dentior{que} fie∣ret ad tantum Imperii mo∣lem acquiren∣dam. Mach. Disp. l. 2 c. 29. That seeing it was destin'd to so much Grandeur, it was convenient that it should be often Oppressed and Afflicted, or at least Threat∣ned and Endangered; that her Rulers might be∣come more prudent and wary in defending of it, and procuring that greatness and splendor it was to arrive unto. It was not therefore without reason, that St. Au∣gustine thought it necessary for those Heathens, who deified all their Benefactors, to build one Altar, and pay some Homage to their Enemies, as repu∣ting them one sort of Benefactors. Doubtless, they keep not only the Courage, but the Wisdom of a Nation awake, and make other Princes, as they did David, more safe, by making them less se∣cure. But as it denoteth the Encrease of his Safety: So, 2. Of his Glory and Honour. In the time of trou∣ble,Psal. 27.5. he shall hide me in his Pavilion. Which speaks no less the Obscurity, than the Safety of his Condi∣tion: But in the time of Deliverance, He shall set me up upon a Rock; as it follows, my Head shall be lifted up, above my Enemies round about me. It speaks
the Height and Eminency of his Power and Greatness, as Opposites illustrate one another: The confusion of his Enemies, makes his Crown flou∣rish; and his past Sufferings, enlarge the Felicities of his present Peace, like the Sun's shining with a greater clearness after an Eclipse. God communi∣cates some of his Glory with his Goodness, which leaves a Beauty, Gloss, or Lustre, upon the Per∣son, like the shining of Moses his Face, when he was with God in the Mount: And as he giveth great Deliverance, and sheweth great Mercy, so he giveth great Glory to his King, to David, to his Anointed. And he expresseth the same in the 25th Verse of this Psalm; Thy hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath made me great. Thy Gentleness, the Septuagint renders it, , thy Discipline: and the Hebrews derive it, (as Dr. Hammond and others have observed) from a Verb, which signifies to humble or depress; plainly intimating, that Da∣vid's distress and danger, set him higher in Honour and Dignity than he was before: His Triumphs made him more glorious than his Tranquillity; and he had never been so great in Chronicle, if he had passed all his days in Peace. With what Shouts and Acclamations of Israel was he welcomed home from his long Exile? How doth the Pomp of his Restauration greaten, pro∣portionably to the Obscurities and Indignities of his Rejection? Therefore when he thankfully recounts the Divine Mercies in other Deliverances, he stiles God,Psal. 62.7. not only his Salvation, but his Glory, as be∣fore, Psal. 3.8. My Glory, and the lifter up of my
Head, Which justifies our note upon this Circum∣stance of his Deliverance in the Text; Thou hast lifted up my Head above those that rise up against me; that is, Thou hast given greater Lustre to the Jew∣els of my Crown, and advanced me to greater Ho∣nour in the eyes and esteem of my People. I may add one thing more here, That this lift∣ing up, may seem to be a Pledg of his Heavenly Glory, and of that never-fading Crown which should flourish upon his Head, when everlasting Confusion covereth his Enemies. And thus much for what I thought requisite to be spoken upon the first part of my Text, David's great and glorious Deliverance; great, in respect of the Evils he was delivered from; great and glorious, in respect of the Author, and manner of his Deli∣verance. We come next to II. The second General, David's devout Acknow∣ledgment of, and thankful Return for this his Delive∣rance. And if we look forward to his form of Thanks∣giving, we shall see how congruous and suitable it was to the manner of his Deliverance;Psal. 30.1. I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made mine Enemies to rejoice over me. I will extol thee, because thou hast advanced me; I will re∣joice in the Lord, because my Enemies rejoice not over me. But to keep to the Text, we may Ob∣serve there,
First, His pious and devout Acknowledgment; I will confess unto thee: So I crave leave to read it, not only because it is so rendred by the Septuagint, and in the Vulgar Latin; but because it removes the seeming Tautology of our Translation, and affords some distinct Matter of useful and seasona∣ble Discourse: For it seemeth to denote, 1. If not David's conviction of the Being, and over-ruling Power of God, yet at least a further confirmation of his Faith therein; and in that wise and good Providence, which interesteth it self in humane Affairs; and more especially in the order∣ing and governing the Kingdoms of the World, and protecting in them his own Deputies and Re∣presentatives; concluding also, from some nota∣ble Circumstances in his own Case, that verily there is a Revenge for the Wicked, as well as a Re∣ward for the Righteous; Verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth. 2. It denotes his Resolution to adhere to this God, and to continue stedfast in the practice and defence of his true Religion, against all Tempta∣tions and Oppositions; I will confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles. The Gentiles them∣selves, 'tis true, by that small knowledg which Sin had left them, did discern somewhat of God in the most signal and remarkable Passages of his Providence; yea, their Poets sung unto, and cele∣brated the Praises of their Gods, under the Title of , The Givers of good Things.
The Roman Captains having conquered their Ene∣mies,In gremio Jo∣vis Optimi Maximi depo∣nitur, quoties laetitiam nova victoria attulit. Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. 15. c. 30. took part of the Laurel wherewith the Trum∣peters were crowned, and laid it in the Lap of Ju∣piter: But these Gentiles, who were Aliens to the Common-wealth of Israel, were no less strangers to David's God, neither did they glorify him as they ought, and were thankful to him. Nay, in his Trouble and Affliction, they were ready to reproach him, and other true Israelites, for their trust in God: for whoever they were, who upon all sad Occasions, were saying to him, Where is now thy God? It is said expresly, Psal. 44.14. Thou makest us a by word among the Heathen;Psal. 42.3. And therefore, though his confusion in other respects was continually before him, he shews, that he was not ashamed of his God, nor a weary of his Service, by owning him in the sight of the Heathen, who so much despised and dishonoured him, by their Ido∣latries and vain Superstitions. 3. This Confession argueth his confidence in the Divine Aid, his dependance upon God for help and succour in the like danger. For after this man∣ner his Faith was wont to reason, and draw con∣clusions, from his own and others Experiences:1 Sam. 17.37. The Lord hath delivered me out of the Paw of the Li∣on, and out of the Paw of the Bear; and he will de∣liver me out of the hand of this Philistim. And, Psal. 22.4. Our Fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. What doth he con∣clude from hence? Why, that God would be equal∣ly gracious, and deliver him too.
And indeed, the experience of former Delive∣rances, may well give confidence of the continu∣ance of them, that he that hath, doth, and will still deliver. For to be sure, 1. There can be no failure in his Ability and Power. In Men, there is many times this defect; so that we cannot wisely and safely conclude of the one from the other, of future from former kind∣ness, because their Power and Opportunity, if not their Friendship, may cease. But now there is no such fear in reference to God; His strength and might never abates; His Hand is not shortned that it cannot save, nor his Ear heavy that it cannot hear. Darius set his Heart upon Daniel to deliver him, and laboured it,Dan. 6.21. but could not effect it; but God sent his Angel, and shut the Lions Mouths. There is like∣wise, 2. In God a perpetuity of affection; 'Tis of the Lord's Mercy that we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not. And it is observable, how our good King glo∣rieth and flourisheth in this Confidence, yea, de∣spiseth the Force and Policy of his Enemies there∣upon.Psal. 2.1, 2. Why do the Heathen rage, and the People ima∣gine a vain thing? 'Tis, we know, spoken pro∣phetically, of Christ's Kingdom; but it had a pri∣mary relation to his own, as the Type of that. And he expresseth a great assurance, that his Throne shall stand firm and unmoveable; and all the Plots and Conspiracies, the Rage and the Malice of wicked Men against it, shall prove but vain Imagi∣nations, and Impotent Attempts. Thus much for
David's Confession, and devout Acknowledgment of God's merciful Deliverance. I will confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles. I come now to the Second and last part, David's chearful Thanks∣giving; I will sing of thy praise. The ancient People of God were wont to record their special Mercies and Deliverances; as in their Chronicles, in the Names of their Children, and of their Places; so likewise in Spiritual Songs and Psalms. Thus did Moses, Israels Deliverance out of Egypt; Deborah and Barak, their victory over Sisera, and Jabin King of Canaan. Isaiah pens a Song of Thanksgiving be∣fore-hand, for the Peoples return out of Captivity, Chap. 26. We have Hezekiah's Song too, after re∣covery from his desperate Sickness. But to come home, we have David penning this gratulatory Psalm, and several others; yea, we read elsewhere of what, and to whom he sung; I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, Mercy to my Self, and Judg∣ment to my Enemies; Ʋnto thee,Psal. 101.2. O Lord, will I sing: And he danced to his own Pipe, his Practices were Praises, and all the Motions of his Life kept time and pace with the Musick of his Mouth. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, &c. He shews his Thankfulness, not only in a suddain Rap∣ture, or passionate transport of Joy, but in a stea∣dy practice of Piety; as appeareth by the following part of that Psalm, where he seriously resolves up∣on the well-ordering and governing of himself,
his Family, his Kingdom, that he would be holy and upright in his Conversation; that he would suffer no notorious wicked Person in his Court; nay, that he would endeavour to reform, or root out all such out of his Dominions. I will early destroy all the Wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all the evil-doers from the City of the Lord. I have done now with David's Thanksgiving, real as well as vocal; yea, I have done with my Text too, as it concerns his Case; but begin to consider it as it concerns our own, , as St. Paul speaks, to transfer and apply it to our own King, and his Deliverance; the Blessings we all en∣joy thereby, and which this Day doth justly remind us of. And I doubt not but it will be easily made appear, how well the Text and the Occasion suit and agree together; and that there is a manifest corre∣spondence in the Subject, the Terms, the Author, and the manner of the Deliverance. It will behove us to compleat the Parallel by our devout Confession and Thanksgiving; which I shall endeavour to assist you in, by my Exhortation and Persuasives at the close of my Discourse. But we are first to compare the Deliverances, and there to shew; 1. How they agree in the Subject: And here I need not tell you that they were both Kings, a∣gainst whom there is (or at least should be) no rising up, Prov. 30. And that their Monarchical Government was, after the Image of God's Mo∣narchical,
and such as continued in the World with∣out interruption, for 3000 Years together; yet it is worth your better notice, how much our Gra∣cious Sovereign resembleth the good King in the Text. 1. In his way of Education; being trained up, for some time, in the same School, the School of Affliction, where many Princely Vertues are most easily learned; not only Piety and Patience, but Prudence, Caution, Thrist, Clemency, Modesty, and Moderation in time of Prosperity. After David was King, God would not admit him to the exercise of his Kingly Power, before he had spent some Years under this Discipline: Which was exactly the Case of our present Sovereign, who was no ill Proficient under it, as will appear when we come, by and by, to observe his Royal Qualifi∣cations: But in the mean time I would note this, That though our King was the Son of Nobles, and this Kingdom the Inheritance of his Father's, and his by an indisputable right of Succession, as Da∣vid's was not; yet there was as immediate an Hand of God in his Restauration, as in David's Advance∣ment. The Builders refused them both, and threw them among the Rubbish of the People; but God in their several times, made them the head-Stones of the Corner, and his Doings were alike visible, and wonderful in each of them. So that by a different, a peculiar, and more in∣timate relation to Heaven, He may be said to be God's King, and his Anointed, and his Person, and
Power more sacred and venerable, upon that ad∣vantage of Royalty. And if his Justice, in punishing none but the Violaters of his Laws; or his Mercy, in pardoning so many of them; If his Prudence in Govern∣ment, or his condescending pleasantness in Con∣versation; Nay, if above all, His Constancy in the true Religion, are any ways apt to strengthen Loyalty, or sweeten Obedience, He is in all these another David: And I give you this transient view of them, to render the Villany of his Ene∣mies, black and horrid as Hell it self, without Plea or Paint, without the mixture of any fair Colour, the least degree of excuse or mitigation. Which brings me to the second thing in the Pa∣rallel. 2. The Evils our David was delivered from, and they too were Enemies, and Sons of Violence. 1. Enemies of all Sorts, of several Countries, of all Ranks and Qualities. Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; Roman, English, and Scotch Enemies. Enemies of the Hills, and of the Valleys; Enemies of high, as well as hot Blood; Princes, Nobles, Commons, and Mechanicks. Yea, the Enemies of our Lord the King, seem to resemble those of our Lord Christ, the Spiritual David; Soribes, Pharisees, Sadduces; Lawyers, Preachers, Hobbists, who say there is neither Angel, nor Spirit; and by an easy Consequence, neither God, nor Devil.
Precisians, and Zealots, who would engross all Religion; and prophane dissolute Persons, who profess none. And it is very observable, that these sort of Men had a large share in the late Damna∣ble Conspiracy. And the Character which Eusebius long ago gave their Forefathers in Infidelity, fits them exactly well; , A Confederacy, Band, or Club, of Atheistical De∣ceit, Men throughly Antimonarchical, who can no more endure a God in Heaven, than a King upon Earth. He had Preaching, Petitioning, Voting, Associa∣ting Enemies; such as, if you would believe them, hated only Arbitrary Power, dreaded Popery, stickled for Legal Privileges; and had no worse Design in seizing the King's Guards, than the Defence of his Person, the Reformation of his Council and Ma∣gistracy, and the Security of Religion; by finding out a better Successor to the Crown, than God had yet provided. But we may conclude, from very ill Effects of the like demure and plausible Pretences to the Fa∣ther, how much Mischief was intended the Son, even by the same sort of Men, who thus palliate Treason, speak Peace to their Neighbours, and are ready, upon all Occasions, to suggest to them, that it is only their Love to their Country, and their Zeal for their Religion, which brings their Loyalty into suspicion. Whereas in truth, with all their fair Professions of their own Innocence, and good Affection to the Government, they take all Oppor∣tunities, either secretly to whisper false Fears and
Dangers into their Neighbours Heads; or else to fill them with open Complaints and Invectives a∣gainst the Remisness of some, or the Rigor of others, in Publick Places, till at last they so poison and enrage their shallow Admirers, that they are ready, upon the first Occasion, to break out into open Hostility; and to break through all Difficul∣ties and Dangers, to accomplish their Bloody Pur∣poses; and so to become the other sort of Ene∣mies we spoke of; if not more dangerous, yet more daring and violent, who are all for killing, and ta∣king possession. Who are for smiting the King; but not the King only, as Achitophel was, but will have his dearest and only Brother, his prime Counsellors, Judges, Magistrates, to share his Fate: And in their breathings out of Slaughter, saying with that Enemy, Exod. 15.9. We will pursue, we will over∣take, we will divide the Spoil; Our Lust shall be sa∣tisfied on them; we will draw our Sword, and our Hand shall destroy them. Sure theirs would have been the Lust indeed, the Sport and Wantonness of Cruelty, to have killed, and flayed, and stifled, as in their Revenge and Rage they pro∣pounded. The Jesuited Papist, that Man of Blood and Massacre, to be sure will be presently taken upon suspicion for the Violent Man in our Case; and upon a through-examination of his Principles and Practices in our own Kingdom, and that not only in the days of our Fathers, but in this present Age, we can by no means acquit him. He had his
Head and Hand deep enough in the Popish Plot, and no doubt acts still a subtil and spightful part among the several Sects of our Dissenters. But in good earnest, they deal a little too hard∣ly with him, who would lay this Plot too at his Door, and give out, That those very Men, who open so loud against Popery, and will never be gotten off of that haunt, are themselves Papists: But the folly of this setting the Devil against him∣self, and making Satan to cast out Satan, is mani∣fest to all Men, whose Reason and Knowledg is not as implicit and blind, as the Papist's Faith and Obedience. Methinks they had better try whether they can∣not help their Cause a little, by making the Iniquus Homo in the Text, the same with the Inimicus Ho∣mo, the Envious Man in the Gospel, as St. Hierom doth; and so shift off the Plot, not to the Jesuit, but to the Devil himself, their common Counsellor and Prompter. The King knows, and we all know very well who our Violent Men were: The great complai∣ners of Violence and Oppression, the True Prote∣stants, that seldom or never came to Church, or at least came not to our Solemn Prayers, or came not up to the heights of our Regular Service. Such whom Indulgence and Toleration had em∣boldned to rebel for Dominion, and to abuse their Liberty of Assembling for Devotion, to meet together for War. In a word, a sort of Fanatick Miscreants, who were as far from being true Prote∣stants, as they were from being good Subjects.
And it is God that hath in good measure avenged our David of these Violent Men. One fell by the Hand of God; Another by his Own: Some have suffered the Justice of the Nation; some are fled from it, and the rest are reserved in Custody; where we leave them to the Justice of the Law, and the Mercy of God: And proceed to the 3. Third Particular; The Author of the King's and the Nations Deliverance from them. God is seen indeed in the Judgments that he executes; but they are his strange Work, which he delights not in: But Mercy is his Darling Attribute, most natu∣ral and proper to him, as I may so speak, and he glorieth most in it. Punishment is an Act of Power; but Protection and Mercy, are the Works of Honour: And therefore Princes depute their Administration of Justice, and their Power of punishing, to their Officers; but Acts of Grace and Pardon, they reserve to themselves, as a more sacred Impress, and more immediate Character of Royalty. In like manner, God, who is glorious in all his Attributes, singles out his Goodness, his Acts of Protection and Deliverance, as the most eminent displays of his Glory and Greatness. For when Moses desired to see his Majesty in its most ample extent, in all its Pomp and Grandeur, he only caused his Goodness to pass before him. And as his Glory is seen more or less in every Act of his Good∣ness,
so it shines out fully in the preservation or deliverance of good and great Men, who are Publick Blessings; in whose Sufferings, and in whose Salvation so many partake, as being the Shields, the Supporters and Foundations of a Na∣tion, in the Scripture-Allusions. And seeing the Shields of the Earth belong to God, as in regard of their Honour and Office, so in regard of God's special care of, and watchful Providence over them, (He being their Shield, as they are ours) some Beam or Ray of the Divine Soveraignty seem∣eth to be eclipsed in their Dangers; but all its Glory breaks forth in their Deliverance. As all Kings are God's Kings, and his Anointed by Name and Office, by special Propriety and Re∣presentation; So the King in the Text, and our King, are his, by most signal and eminent Preser∣vations, Protections, and Deliverances; such as proclaim their Divine Author, preach God to an unbelieving World, and give him all the visibility that his Nature is capable of.Psal. 58.11. So that a Man (any Man, a mere Man, one that hath none but the light of Natural Reason to see by) may say, Verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth. However, that taking Title of Liberatores Pae∣triae, The Saviours of their Country, should have been misapplied, to the Murderers of their King; God hath been really our Juvans Pater, our migh∣ty Helper in distress, the Father and Author of his Majesty's Deliverances, in a most apparent manner,
at several times, and by various means, I had almost said Miracles. And if we do not trace the Providence of God in relation to him, so far back as his wonderful escape at Worcester; We must reflect upon it in his coming home from Exile, because perhaps we have not yet, in the Story of any Times, at least not of our own Nation, a more plain discovery of the Hand of God; a more convincing demonstra∣tion,Dan. 4.32. That the most High ruleth in the Kingdom of Men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will. And, I hope, it may help to promote the Joy and Thanks∣giving of this present Day, and to confirm our Faith in the Divine Power and Mercy. If we call to mind his Wonders of Old, particularly that great Miracle of his Majesty's Restauration; A Work which was accomplished by the Arm of God made bare, devested of all Humane Assistance. For our Gracious King (whom God keep-long there) was not possessed of his Throne, until his Friends had in vain tried all ways to restore him, and his Ene∣mies essayed whatsoever their utmost Malice and Cunning could suggest against him: A formidable and succesful Army was scattered without a Blow; a Victory obtained without Fighting; the Enmity slain without the Wounds of our Enemies: Ter∣rible things, which we looked not for, were wrought for us by the Hand of the Almighty; in a kind of Parallel and Proportion to the Deliverance of Israel at the Red Sea; We all stood still, and saw the Salva∣tion of God.
And truly, whilst we consider the indefatigable and crafty Endeavours of the Popish Faction ever since, to introduce their Religion, either by laying aside, or taking off [quâcunque arte, omni-ratione] an Heretical Prince, as they esteem ours. And on the other hand, whilst we consider the menacing Ambition and Revenge of others, whom I would rather call Protestors than Protestants, the Inte∣rest they had in the factious enraged Multitude, whom they had stirred up, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, did the People against Moses and Aaron; and the assistance they had from their many Preachers of Sedition, who in their several Quar∣ters, or Congregations, like Sheba the Son of Bichri, blew a Trumpet, and said, We have no part in Da∣vid, neither have we any portion in the Son of Jesse: Or like the Gracchi at Rome, who could talk the People into Mutiny at their pleasure. Or, lastly, like Demetrins the Silver-smith, who by one Sedi∣tious Oration, filled with Ʋproar the whole City of Ephesus. Again, whilst we consider how many Seditious and Scurrilous Pamphlets were put into trusty Hands, who were ready to lend them to some, and talk them over to others, with their own Ad∣ditions and Remarks, for the more effectual pro∣moting Rebellion and Treason throughout the Land, for the conjuring up of those Venti Typhonici, restless and violent Spirits, whose work it is to take Peace from the Earth, and to cast all into Con∣fusion.
Once more; Whilst we consider the great spreading of that Malignant Popish Principle, even amongst our True Protestants, (as they loved to call themselves) That Finis dat, non tantum ama∣bilitutem, sed bonitatem mediis; and that we may do Evil that Good may come of it; that we need not stick at any thing, though never so lawless and violent, for that which we think to be God's Cause, and the Interest of Religion; I say, whilst we consider the variety of the Enemies of the Go∣vernment, their Quality, Number, Strength; their Stratagems, Associations, Conspiracies, we cannot but discover Miracles of the Divine Power and Goodness in our King's continued Defence and Preservation; only short, if short at all, of those of his happy Return to us from a tedious Exile. Yea, what a visible signal Hand of Providence was there in his, and the Kingdom's Deliverance from this Plot, the most barbarous and bloody that was ever laid since the Gun-powder Treason! For how much of Accident and Casualty soever there appeared to be at first in the Fire at Newmarket, we cannot but conclude, by the happy Event, that God was in the midst of that Fire; and that it was not kindled so much in Judgment to the particular Sufferers, as in Mercy to the King, and to the whole Nation; a Fire of Defence, and not of De∣struction: And we may say, We were delivered (without a Comparison, without a so as) by Fire.
God, who is sometimes said to make his Angel-Ministers a Flame of Fire, may by as easy a Figure, be said to have made that flaming Fire, a Guardian Angel, a Minister of Preservation to the King and Kingdom; And that when the Conspirators were ready to seize upon the Royal Prey, and di∣vide the Spoil, crying out with David's Enemies; Ah, so would we have it; persecute and take him,Psal. 71.11. for there is none to deliver. And methinks 'tis strange, that the Plotters of, and Well-wishers to that hateful Iniquity, should not be more forward to give glory to God, who hath spoken to them out of the Fire; and that in so re∣markable a Circumstance of their Defeat, they should not be more ready to own the Eye and Hand of that God,Psal. 33.10. who bringeth the Counsel of the Heathen to nought, and maketh the Devices of the People to be of none effect. Strange! that they should be no more ready to acknowledg with us,Psal. 37.39. That the Salvation of the Righ∣teous is of the Lord; and that he is their strength in the time of Trouble. That it is he that avengeth our King; he that subdueth the People; he that deli∣vereth him from his Enemies, and from the Violent Man. But so much for the Author of this Deliverance, the God of our Salvation. 4. For the manner of it; It was a Defence and a Dignity, as well as a Deliverance.
1. It was a Defence. God hath made it a new Settlement to his Throne; an addition of Strength and Security to his Empire, by washing off the Paints, the Colourings, and Counterfeits, both of Religion and Loyalty; shewing him who are True Protestants, and who are False Brethren; who are good Subjects, and who are Movers of Sedition, and inordinate Seekers of Preheminence. In a word, who are the Friends, and who are the Enemies, not only of the Succession, but of the Monar∣chy. Yea, God by this Deliverance, hath told our King, and his Magistrates, as by a Voice from Hea∣ven, how much it concerns them to keep a watch∣ful Eye, and a strict Hand, upon Men of such lewd, loose, and dangerous Principles; to mark their Motions, observe their Tendencies, and by prudent and timely Restraints, to ourb the first stirrings of Rebellion. Yea, from the miscarriage of this Attempt, we may conceive some good rea∣son to hope,Psal. 36.12. Psal. 37.15. that the Workers of Iniquity are already fallen, and are so cast down, that they shall not be able to rise. Their Sword shall enter into their own Heart, and no weapon formed against us shall prosper; But the Transgressors shall be destroyed together,Psal. 37.38. Isa. 60.18. and the end of the Wicked shall be cut off; and such Vio∣lence be no more heard in our Land. We have reason to hope, that God who hath graciously delivered the Soul of our King from this Death, also hath now delivered his feet from falling; that he hath not only stilled the Raging of the Sea,
the Noise of the Waves, the Tumults of the People; but thereby brought our Soveraign into his Haven: And that the Winds and Storms which so lately shook and threatned our Royal Oak, have only set∣led it, and given it a surer and firmer rooting; and that our Government stands upon a more sta∣ble and durable Basis than heretofore, if God so please. 2. We may look upon the Deliverance, for which we bless God this Day; not only as an occasion of mending our Fences, of strengthning our Gates, and our Guards, and consequently re-establishing of our King's Throne; but also as a means in the good Hand of God, of enlarging his Dignity and Great∣ness; God thereby encreasing his Glory, bringing forth his Righteousness as the Light, and his Judg∣ment as the Noon-Day; making his Majesty more terrible in the Eyes of his Enemies; more dear and honourable in the Hearts of his Friends, as a new Blessing from the Hand of God our Saviour.
SERMON II. PSALM 18.49. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, (or con∣fess unto thee) O Lord, among the Hea∣then; and sing Praises unto thy Name. WE have heard what are the Mercies, and manifold Advantages of our King's Deliverance; We are to see next, What is to be the Return of his and our Devotion: Yea, we are taught already, by the Royal Pat∣tern in the Text, it must consist of two parts. I. An humble Confession. II. A solemn Thanksgiving. I am not here to tell you the King's Duty, but our own, by his pious Declaration, and his appoint∣ment of this Day's Solemnities: He hath told us himself, That he very well understandeth it, and will be our great Example in his religious perfor∣mance thereof.
When David kept a Fast, all the People took notice of it,2 Sam. 3.36. and it pleased them, they were deligh∣ted to do as their King did. And it is the happiness of this Day, which we now celebrate, and we ought thankfully to acknowledg, that we may bless God in our Congregations, from the Example of the Court,Psal. 68.26. and the King, the Fountain of Israel. And that, First; By such a Confession unto him, as im∣plieth, 1. An acknowledging and owning, though not by a new, yet by a repeated and renewed Ho∣mage, the Infinite Being, Power, and Providence of God; that the Lord liveth, and that to him belong the Issues from Death. That Power belongeth unto him; and in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. That he is able, not only to work, but to com∣mand; not only to command, but to create Deli∣verance, and fetch it out of the greatest distress and desolation, when there is none to help, or vain is the help of Man. That he goeth forth in his strength, conquering, and to conquer: That he hath repayed Fury to our. Adversaries, and Recompence to our Enemies; given Salvation to our Prince, and delivered Charles his Servant from the murthering Blunderbuss. God, who dwelleth in a Light inaccessible, which neither the Eyes of our Sense or Reason can bear; doth yet, after a sort; shew himself in this lower World to pious Observers, in the ordinary effects of his Wisdom, Power, and Mercy: But is much
more visible in such extraordinary Acts of Prote∣ction and Deliverance, as this which we now cele∣brate; upon this there are such special impresses of Divinity, that we must be sensless and stupid, at least Irrational as well as Irreligious, if we do not see and own God in it; if we do not regard the Lord in such Works; consider and acknowledg him in such wonderful Operations of his hands. 2. This Confession implieth, a stedfast adherence to God; a walking in his Name, being faithful to his Covenant, constant in his Religion, zealous for his Glory, in the midst of the greatest temptati∣ons to Apostacy. We must confess him among the Heathen. When the King, like that religious Emperor, sets his Crown upon the Bible, and the Power of the Prince, is a guard and support to the Power of Godliness; when the profession of the True Reli∣gion maketh us Rich and Honourable in the World, and all about us are ready to commend, encou∣rage, and wish us good Luck in the Name of the Lord; God will want no Votaries, none to make their boasts of him, and to tell of all his marvellous Acts. When God causeth the South Wind to blow up∣on his Garden, and the Sun of Prosperity to shine gently upon his Field, the Church, the shallow-rooted Corn will put forth, and spring up as fast as the rest; but it cannot abide unseasonable Weather, too much Heat or Cold nips or blasts it. Every one will be a Saint, when Religion is in Credit, and Godliness is Gain; but when Tribula∣tion
or Persecution ariseth, because of the Word, by and by, many are offended, and slink away from a perillous Profession. Such were the Samaritans, that when the Jews were in prosperity, would profess themselves to be of the Jewish Religion; but when the Jews were in Adversity, would disclaim them and their Reli∣gion. Such were those wavering Time-servers, who were Protestants in King Edward's Reign, Papists in Queen Mary's, and as true Protestants again as ever in Queen Elizabeth's Days. And many such there are now among us, whose Religion is their In∣terest; who are wise to understand the Times, and to save their Purses. But if Worldly Considerations make other Men Converts, God grant they may never make us Apo∣states: That neither the spoiling, nor the encrease of our Goods, may move us from our Christian Sted∣fastness and Resolution. It is storied of a famous Nobleman,Hormisdas. who when he was deposed from all his Honours, because he would not forsake his Reli∣gion, and afterwards restored to them again, as a new Temptation to renounce it; He gave this re∣solute Answer to the King of Persia, Si propter ista me denegaturum Christum putas, ista denuo accipe; If you think I value my Honours above Christ, pray take them from me again. We have another In∣stance, not altogether unlike this, in St. Basil; The Emperor sent to him to subscribe the Arrian Heresy;Theod. and ordered his Agent to treat him, at first, with fair and enticing Speeches, and the pro∣mise of great Preferments: which he did; but to
them the good Man replied, Alas! these are Arts to inveigle Children; but we that are nourished and taught by the Holy Scriptures, are readier to suffer a thousand Deaths, than to renounce one Article of our Creed. And when he that dealt with him, pro∣ceeded from Entreaties to Increpations, and told him, He was mad; his meek return was, Opto me in aeternum sic delirare, God grant I may be always thus mad, that neither Enmity nor Friendship, Fears nor Hopes, may move me, or draw me off from bearing Testimony to the Truth of Jesus. We do not, we cannot confess to God aright, if we are not as ready to own him, and glory in him, among his Enemies, as among his Friends; when the Profession and Practice of the True Religion of our Saviour, shall bring us to taste of his bitter Cup; and we shall be hated of all, that is, of the generality of Men, for his Name's sake, for adhe∣ring to his Truths, as they have been delivered in the Scriptures, and taught in the best and purest Ages of the Church. Then, and not till then, will it appear, that we are acted by David's Spirit, when we are ready to speak, if need be, of God's Testimonies, even before Kings that oppose them, and not be ashamed of them. Then do we approve our selves the Ser∣vants and Worshippers of Daniel's God, when we own him with the hazard, nay, with the certain loss of Reputation, Liberty, and utmost danger of Life it self. This Constancy and Courage for the Truth, was it which denominated those Heroick Christians, of
former Ages, Confessors; namely, their taking up their Master's Cross, and owning him among their Heathen Persecutors. My Brethren, through the infinite Patience and Goodness of God towards us, who have deserved no such thing, we have been delivered from our Blood-thirsty Enemies, Papists, and another sort of Men, who have made use of the Protestant Name, as a Cloak to secure them in opposing of the Protestant Cause, and undermining the Esta∣blished Religion: And we are at present exempt from those Sufferings and Martyrdoms, which in other Ages, and in our own Country, have been the Lot of God's most faithful Servants. But alas! we know not how soon our Heaven may overcast again, and the Clouds follow after the Rain. The great Fear is, lest the Papists should imitate the True Protestant Policy, and either pursue their Old, or set on foot a New Plot, in hopes that if it do, or do not take, they may leave it at other Mens Doors; and as easily now make the World believe, that it was a Phanatick Plot, as the Phanaticks could hope to perswade us, that theirs was a Popish One; and so the latter end of our Fears and Troubles, may prove worse than the be∣ginning. It will be the wisdom of our Piety, in the midst of our Jubilees and Triumphs, to prepare for new Dangers and Trials, and to resolve, That the God of our Mercies and Deliverances, shall be our God in every Condition; that his Rod as well as his
Staff shall comfort us; and that we will put our whole trust in him, as well when he slays, as when he saves us. This God shall be our God for ever and ever; he shall be our Guide, even unto death: And this minds me of a Third Particular, in this our Confessing and Ac∣knowledging of God's Almighty Goodness in our Deliverance; and that is, Dependance upon him for relief and rescue in the like distress. Let not our Courage sink, our Spirits be disquieted or de∣jected, with misboding Apprehensions of Future Evils; but let us humbly trust in his continued Aid, who hath been our present help in Trouble, considering that, Donando debet, as St. Cyprian speaks, God's past Blessings and Deliverances, if we make a good use of them, are Pawns and En∣gagements of Future; I say, if we make a due return for them, and a right improvement of them. Which brings me to the upshot of all, the main Duty of my Text, and of this Day espe∣cially. II. The speaking, singing, living, of Praises un∣to the Name of our God. What we have spoken already concerning Confession unto God, may de∣note a serious and wise consideration of his do∣ings towards, and dealings with us, and some more silent shews of our Gratitude, in our adherence to him, and affiance in him. I am now to speak of the Solemn Proclamations of his Greatness and Goodness, which we are to make with the Voice of Thanksgiving: When we have exercised our
observing Faculty, in regarding the Works of the Lord, we must employ our Mouths to express the Thanks of our Minds, and make known his Faith∣fulness to all Generations.St. Basil in Psal. 28. , Action must follow Contemplation in our Case. And when we have considered the Operation of God's Hand, our Mouth must praise him with joyful Lips, not concealing his loving-kindness and his Truth from the great Congregation. We must employ the best Organ we have, our Tongue, (which the Royal Psalmist stiles our Glory) in this best, this heavenly, this glorious Service of Praise. And in∣deed, if a grateful Affection live in our Hearts, it will proceed forth of our Lips; there will be a Conspiracy, and faithful Correspondency, between our Mind and our Tongue; if the one be sensible, the other will not be silent. We shall talk of his loving-kindness in the Morning, and of his faithful∣ness every Night, uttering abundantly the memory of his great Goodness, and singing of his Righteousness, making known to the Sons of Men his mighty Acts, and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom, accord∣ing to the Expressions of our sweet singer in sun∣dry places. Acknowledgments of the Divine Goodness, and solemn Testifications of our thankful sense thereof, (how indisposed and averse soever our sluggish Minds are thereunto) was always, and ever will be, the principal and most noble part of all Reli∣gion, immediatly addressed to God. It is the only Heavenly Work that can be done upon Earth, the only joyful Employment which shall last to all
Eternity; and which should ever wait for God in Sion, and upon all occasions, be exercised here in the Assemblies of the Faithful. When the ordinary effects of the Divine Provi∣dence, do in any advantageous manner present themselves to our view; when we peruse the Volumes of Story, and therein observe the various Events of humane Actions; especially the seasonable Rewards of Vertue, the notable Protection and Delive∣rance of Innocence; and the deserved Punish∣ments of malicious Wickedness. Then is it sea∣sonable to sing unto the Lord a new Song; to praise him in a high and exalted strain, especially upon so signal a manifestation of Mercy and Judgment, as that was which we celebrate this Day. It was once said of Claudian, That he wanted Matter suitable to the excellency of his Wit. But where is Wit and Eloquence worthy of this Sub∣ject? Who can utter these mighty Works of the Lord? Who can shew forth all his Praise? None so well as our chief Musician, whose Tongue was as the Pen of a ready Writer. And we cannot do it better, than in a Psalm of his composing. We have seen in Scrip∣ture, how they were wont to praise God with Songs and Hymns. And besides David, we have instan∣ced in Moses and Miriam, Deborah and Barak, &c. and may add Simeon and Anna. In the Christian Church, after they had ended their Love-Feasts, they began their Hymns, which were either taken from the Scriptures, or of their own composition: Which Pliny takes notice of, as of a great part, nay, as of the whole in a manner
of their Worship; that they did, Secum invicem carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere; That they joined to∣gether in singing a Psalm to Christ as their God. And indeed, it hath been the general and authorised pra∣ctice of all Nations, in all Times, by composed Hymns, and panegyrical Elogies, to express their Gratitude for the Gifts of Nature, and for the Be∣nefits indulged by Providence. And shall not this stir our Emulation, and kindle our Sacrifices? Shall not our Devotion keep pace with, if not outgo theirs? Shall we not feel our Transports in so af∣fecting an Occasion? and in this sense give thanks unto the Lord among the Heathen, and sing Praises unto his Name? Surely, if we consider the necessity, as well as the comeliness and expediency of the Duty, the Admonitions of the Prophets, as well as the Precepts of Philosophers, and the Examples of both; if we consider the greatness and imminency of the Dan∣ger, and consequently the blessing of the Delive∣rance, we shall not want our Hallelujahs, we shall not want any incitement to, or assistance in this Duty of Thanksgiving; but as we have great reason to bless God, so I hope we shall make our boasts of him all the Day long. What a deluge of Confusion were these poor Nations running into? How deep were the Dis∣contents of the People? How ready the Tinder of unsatisfied Spirits, in all Parts, to take Fire, and break out into a devouring and irresistible Flame? Which would soon have made this good Land, that was before them like the Garden of Eden, to have
been behind them like a desolate Wilderness. How near was the Glory departing from our Israel? How near was the Crown falling from our Head? and all our Happiness expiring with the Breath of our No∣strils? We know not where the Rage and Cruelty of our Enemies would have stop'd: We know not how many besides his Royal Brother, should have fallen on the Right, and on the left Hand of the King. But we know, it was resolved to follow the Blow at Majesty, with a Massacre; and that se∣veral Persons of Quality, and Place, the Magi∣strates of our Great City, and Subjects every where, of most eminent and tried Loyalty, were designed for immediate slaughter. If this Conspiracy had taken place, we should not, in all likelihood, have been so much as a People, or a very miserable People, if any at all: For it is not so many Heads of Men jumbled together, but so many placed in a due subordination, under Rule and Government, that make a People, a Body or Society of Men. The very Life and being of a Nation, are the Laws and Ordinances of it, whe∣ther Civil or Sacred: The Civil to make it a King∣dom, and the Sacred to make it a Church. When those are at any time demolished or dissolved, we cease to be either Nation or Church; and you may write Lo-ammi upon it, yea, Lo-ruhamah,Hos. 1.8, 9. no Peo∣ple, nor yet no Pity. And these were destined to speedy destruction, with all their sure Supporters, by the Men of Violence we have before described. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce;Gen. 48.7. and their Wrath, for it was cruel: yea rather, blessed be the
most High God, who hath delivered these Enemies into our Hand, and strangled all their teeming Hopes between the Womb and the World. Indeed, the horror of the Mischief intended, may a little chill the Mirth of this Days Thanks∣giving, and cause us to rejoice with trembling, even at this our Deliverance: Yet may we hope withal, that that which damps the Blaze, will continue the Burning; that such Abatements will help to keep Life in our Joy, and prolong, if not perpetuate our Sacrifice of Praise. Perhaps, the contrivance of this Bloody and Barbarous Design was therefore permitted, that the disappointment might be had in everlasting remem∣brance, and celebrated as it is this Day. It may be this was done, that we might say no more, The Lord liveth, who hath delivered us from the Treason of pre∣tended Catholicks; but the Lord liveth, who hath delivered us from the Tyranny and bloody Rage of wild Fanatical Enthusiasts. How should such Considerations as these, the Considerations of our great Dangers, and our gra∣cious Deliverances, enlarge our Hearts, fill our Mouths, act our Lives with the Praises of the Lord? What Memorials, and Monuments, and Ebenezers should we every where erect? And how seasonably may we at this time take to our selves words, The words of the Royal Prophet David? Blessed be the Lord,Psal. 124.6. who hath not given us a Prey to their Teeth.Psal. 68.20. He is our God, even the God of whom cometh Salvation. God is the Lord, by whom we e∣scape Death. God hath shewed us his Goodness plen∣teously;
and God hath let us see our Desire upon our Enemies. And after these, the words of the Courtly Prophet Isay, in a way of holy Triumph over our Enemies. Associate your selves, O ye People; and give ear,Isa. 8.9, 10. O ye of all Nations: or rather, ye of the seve∣ral Sects and Parties in this Nation, Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Take counsel toge∣ther, Plot, Conspire, and it shall come to nought: speak the word, appoint one Time and Place after another, for the execution of your bloody Pur∣poses, and it shall not stand; for God is with us. And that our glorying may not be in vain, it will concern us very much, to add Real Thanks to our Verbal; not only to offer Praise, but to order our Conversations aright. Our Thanks must not stay in Words and Instru∣ments, but proceed on to return of Affections and Actions. It must be Actio Gratiarum, a doing, a working of Thanks, as one speaks. When David had represented the difficulty, if not the impossibility of giving God due and full praise; Psal. 106.1. Who can shew forth all his praise? He tells us, vers. 3. who come nearest do∣ing so, viz. they that keep Judgment, and he that doth Righteousness. Tacitus, speaking of certain words of Tiberius, saith, they were praeclara verba, sed non pro Tiberio, very excellent words, if Tiberius had not spoken them. The like may we say of Psalms, and Forms of Thanksgiving, in the Mouths of ungodly Men, they are good in themselves, but not graceful in them:
For,Prov. 17.7. excellent Speech becometh not a Fool; nor is praise comely for any but the Righteous: And Tacitus hit upon the reason of this too; Nec enim ad hanc formam caetera sunt. His other Actions accord not with these, but found forth God's Dispraise and Dishonour, in a louder accent than this, wherein his Tongue and Lips speak his praise. Canticum novum & vetus homo malè concordant. I think it is St. Bernard's; The singing of a new Song, without the leading of a new Life, is a most unpleasant Dis∣cord in our Gratitude. All Men, the worst of Men, are bound indeed to praise God for his Mercies, common and special. It lieth upon them as a Duty, but it belongs not to them as a Privilege. Ʋnto they Wicked, saith God, What hast thou to do to take my Covenant into thy Mouth?Psal. 149.3. But Israel may rejoice in God. Let them praise him in the Dance, in the Dance as well as with the Song; in their Ways and Walkings before God, as well as with their Words unto him; in the regular Motions of their Lives, as well as with the Chantings of their Voice, or the Melody of Timbrel or Harp: for the Lord takes pleasure in his People, and in their Services. It is their Honour and their Priviledg to serve him; and he is pleased to own it as his Glory, to be served by them: He that offereth Praise, glorifieth me,Psal. 58. ult. i. e. if his Praise be attended with a well-ordered Conversation. We then thank God, as we ought, for his Good∣ness, when we become good our selves; when we serve him with the Mercies we receive from him;
and the mortifying of one Lust, will give more glory to God, than the singing of a thousand Psalms. We extol and honour God indeed, when we look upwards our selves; when we mind heavenly Things; when we walk in a way which is above to the Wise: Or in St. Basil's Expression,Hom. in Psal. 29. p. 181. , when we dis∣creetly pursue or hasten towards everlasting Hap∣piness; When we live up to the Principles of our Religion, and give God the Worship and Homage be∣longing to his Majesty. We make great shews, when we assemble and meet together, as we do this Day, to render Thanks to Almighty God, for the Benefits received at his Hands. And if this were to be performed with words only, with Hosannah's and Hallelujah's, and Gloria Patri's, and Psalms, and Hymns, peradven∣ture we should do it well enough; but in the mean time, by our Lives and Actions, we provoke the Almighty with all variety of Offences: We do, daily and hourly, such things as we know are highly displeasing and odious to him. But we may assure our selves, these things will not only marr the Musick of our Thanksgiving, but render our Deliverances as insignificant as our Praises. Yea, every Sin, after such a Mercy as this, hath a double Guilt, the Guilt of Ingratitude, as well as Disobedi∣ence; and therefore threatneth us with new and greater Punishments, and to bring us nearer, if it may be, to Ruin, than we were before. Seeing thou, O God,Ezra 9.13. hast given us such a Deli∣verance as this; should we again break thy Command∣ments?
Wouldst thou not be angry with us, till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant, nor escaping? I will therefore, with St. Jude, ver. 5. put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how the Lord having saved the People out of the Land of Egypt, afterwards destroyed them that believed not. Never any People held their Happiness by a fairer Charter than Jerusalem, yet their Sins forfei∣ted their Privileges, and defaced their Glory. And though God speak concerning a Nation, to build, and to plant it; if that Nation do evil in his sight, he will repent of the good wherewith he aid he would benefit them. Let us therefore, I beseech you, not only thank∣fully acknowledg, but piously improve our Mer∣cies, lest our Sins provoke God to let loose our Enemies again upon us, and suffer them to strike Home, to execute their Malice, and quench the Light of our Israel. Let us not grow careless,Isa. 14.29. because the Rod of him that smote us, is broken, lest out of the Serpent's Root come forth a Cockatrice. Much less let us rebel against him, who hath subdued our Enemies, and so fall by that very Hand of his which delivered us out of Theirs; or rather destroy our selves, after so miraculous a Rescue and Preservation. We learn this from the Heathen Historian;Livy. Om∣nia prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos, adversa sper∣nentibus; It shall go well with those that fear the Lord, whilst those that despise him, shall fall before him.
Valerius Maximus attributed the Prosperity and Flourishing of the Roman Empire,Non mirum si pro eo Impe∣rio augendo pettinax in∣dulgentia De∣orum excubu∣it, quod tam scrupulosâ cu∣râ parvula quoque mo∣menta religio∣nis examinare videretur. to their great care, and scrupulous exactness, in every Part and Ceremony of their Religious Worship. Hence Religion, and the Fear of God, is by Plato stiled the Defence of Power; The Kings and the Peoples Life-Guard both. And Plutarch tells us, that it is , the Band of all So∣ciety; and that we may as easily build a City in the Air, as settle and establish a Common-wealth, where there is no Fear of God to support it. And the Wise King Solomon, who spoke by Divine In∣struction, assures us, that it is not only the Strength and Safety, but the Glory and Honour of a King∣dom. Righteousness exalteth a Nation, puts a Dignity and Excellency, as well upon a People, as upon Private Persons. Yea, the very Shadow thereof,Deus osten∣dit praeclaro Romanorum Imperio, quantum va∣lerent virtutes Civiles etiam sine vera Reli∣gione. Epist. 5. ad Marcellin. hath proved (like St. Peter's) Healing to a State. For it was St. Austin's Observation, of the fore-named ample and glorious Empire, that God prospered it for their Civil Vertues, though they had no True Religion: Yea, the Son of Syrach seems to attribute much to a Negative Holiness; Ecclus 35.3. To depart from Wickedness, is a thing pleasing to the Lord; and to forsake Ʋnrighteousness, is a Propitiation. Now if the upholding of Civil Order, and the Publick Restraint of the Extravagant Appetites and Lusts of Men, be such an Honour and safety to a Nation; How much more is the Profession of True Religion, and the Practice of Real Righteous∣ness? If Hypocrites have their Reward; How much
more will David's Integrity and Uprightness, pre∣serve both King and People? It entitles as well to Temporal, as to Spiritual and Eternal Blessings;Isa. 1.19. If ye be willing, and obedi∣ent, ye shall eat the Good of the Land. Let it therefore be our common Care, as it is our joint Interest, to forsake those Sins of ours, which weaken our Government, and waste our Land; which sap the Foundation, and shake the Fabrick of Church and State, more than any other Underminers and Conspirators. Let us endeavour, in our several Places and Ca∣pacities, to shew forth that exemplary Piety, and uniform Obedience, which becometh the Gospel; which is the Strength and Ornament of the Prote∣stant Cause, our Sanctuary in Trouble, and the Glory of our Prosperity. Yea, let our honouring of the King, proceed from our fear of God; Our Loyalty be the genuine Fruit of our Religion; and the Conscience of God's Ordinance and Command, be the Promoter and Guide of our subjection to the Civil Power. And considering that our Obedience to our Supe∣riors, who are God's Vicegerents and Ministers, is an eminent instance of our true Obedience to God himself; it will not be amiss, nay certainly, it will be most seasonable at this time, to give it its due place in my Exhortation, to that Holiness and Righteousness of Life, which is the best expression of our Thanks. The Excellent Photius, in his Notes upon the 13th to the Romans, presseth subjection to Gover∣nors,
as a proper way of glorifying God; Thou gainest by being a Subject;Apud Oecu∣menium. not only because thou fulfillest the Command, , because thou dost honour God, in the honouring the Power ordained by him. I might forbear, me-thinks, to put you in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, whilst you have before you so many plain Scriptures, and so many exemplary Providences, preaching and pressing that Doctrine. The Deli∣verance we celebrate; the Discovery and Punish∣ment of the Traytors, as well as the Lessons of the Day, tell us aloud, that God justifies and abets Rule and Soveraignty, and requireth subjection thereunto. We are taught this, I say, by the Word of God, which engageth us to this Obedience, by as oblig∣ing Principles, as it doth to any part of Religion. And we are taught it too, in The Second place, by the Works of God. 1. By the eminent Judgments that have pursued and seized notorious Rebels. 2. By the admirable Preservations and Protections of Soveraign Princes. 1. By the final Judgments of God upon Rebels and Traitors. We find many of them in the Scrip∣ture History; and we find there too, that none of them went to their Graves in peace. Achitophel,
Absolom, Sheba, Abner, Abiathar, Joab, Athaliah, Zimri, Adoniah: They all paid dearly for the Mischief they did, and ended their days in disho∣nour, and left nothing behind them but the Memo∣ry of their Sin, and the Record of their Curse. Yea, if we examine other Chronicles, we shall find Instances of the same nature. Suetonius, in the Life of Julius Caesar, observed, that there was hardly one of his Murthers, (though a Heathen, and an Arbitrary Prince) that survived the Wickedness three Years,Vid. Isaac. Casaub. Not. ne{que} sua morte defun∣ctus est; all dying violent Deaths, some by Ship∣wrack, some in Battel; some by the Hand of Ju∣stice, others by their own. And Marcellinus re∣lates it of the Conspirators against Gordianus the Younger, Quod velut clarescente justitiâ cruciabilibus interiere suppliciis; That they died with exquisite Tortures, that Justice might become more conspicuous in their Sufferings. All Stories are full of Examples of this kind, and no wonder, seeing it was a Truth known to a Pro∣verb in Solomon's time;Prov. 24.22. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not with them that are given to change: For their Calamity shall rise sudden∣ly, and who knoweth the ruin of them both? Whoso breaketh a Hedg, a Serpent shall bite him; whose removeth Foundation-stones,Eccl. 10.8, 9. shall be hurt there∣with. Those that break the Laws, which are the Fence and Security of a Nation, expose themselves to certain Ruin.
Those Turbulent and Seditions Persons among the Jews, who assumed to themselves the blazing Title of Zealots, who yet had more Heat and Pas∣sion, than Judgment or Religion; being prone to Mutiny and Faction, and ready to pretend Consci∣ence, even for Rebellion it self; though they brought Desolation upon their own City,. Jos. l. 7. c. 30. Ruin up∣on their Nation, they brought withall the severity of God's Judgments upon themselves. For as ma∣ny punishments, as it is possible for Man's Nature to endure, were heaped upon them, , as long as any breath of Life re∣mained. St. Jude making mention of such as did despise and speak evil of Dignities, vers. 8, 11. says, That they perished in the gain-saying of Core. This Core (or Korah) was a Levite, who by his Office was to have taught Jacob God's Judg∣ments, and Israel his Law; but he being one of those who corrupted the Covenant of Levi, and did things very unbecoming his Character, drew three principal Men of the Tribe of Reuben, and then two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly (famous in the Congregation, Men of Renown, popular Persons, and great Patriots) into his Confederacy; and having gathered his Associats together, against Moses and Aaron, they stuck not to affront them, and throw dirt into their Faces: But by these Mens strange perishing in this gain-saying of theirs, the very Women (who usually make a part in such Factions) were convinced, that by this way of
opposing Moses and Aaron, they opposed God himself, the Ordainer and Abetter of their Autho∣rity; for the Daughters of Zelophehad could say, Our Father died in the Wilderness,Numb. 27.3. and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the company of Korah. Nay, the very words of the Spirit of God, concerning Da∣than and Abiram,Numb. 26.9, 10. are express to this purpose; These were famous in the Congregation, (the great In∣dependents of those Times) who strove against Moses, and against Aaron, when they strove against the Lord; and the Earth opened her Mouth, and swal∣lowed them up together with Korah, when that Compa∣ny died; what time the Fire devoured two hundred and fifty Men, and they became a Sign. A dreadful Sign indeed, unto all them who af∣terward should follow their steps; to whom, St. Jude saith, is reserved the blackness, of darkness for ever. For what better end may they expect, that dare adventure upon the like Turbulent and Seditious Courses? The Levite begun the Faction there; and if he was not the beginner, we are assured, by his Majesty's Declaration, that he was the chief Promo∣ter and Manager of our no less Damnable Conspi∣racy. Our Fergusson, as their Korah, by the like false Persuasions, draweth the Nobles after him; and no doubt made use of the same Motive, viz. the Ruler's assuming too much to himself, and his invading the Peoples Rights and Liberties, there∣by to instigate them to that resistance; which if it escape the like punishment in this World, as it
seldom doth, shall be sure, if unrepented of, to re∣ceive the same Damnation in the next: Because, whosoever resisteth the Power, resisteth the Ordinance of God; and he will make them know so, sooner or later, by the Vengeance which he executeth upon such Resisters. And, 2. By those wonderful Preservations which he vouchsafeth to the Persons of Kings; their Prote∣ctions being great and extraordinary, as their Dan∣gers are: Whence they had the Title of  given to them by the Ancients; particularly by St. Chrysostom, , We pray for Kings, whom God takes into his pe∣culiar Care and Safeguard. How many Assassins have found themselves daunted with the Rays of Majesty? And,Gowrie's Consp. fol. 6. like Gowries Man, who when he was prepared to kill King James, trembled in his presence, and fell to adore him. How divinely was the same King preserved from a deeper laid Treason, when the Match was ready to give fire to the Powder? I cannot stay to instance in the many Preserva∣tions and Deliverances of his Glorious Predecessor Queen Elizabeth. We may see this Goodness of Almighty God to Princes, Protestant Princes, his Kings, and his Anointed, nearer home, and in a more affecting Instance, our own gracious Soveraign, whose many admirable Deliverances, speak him the special Fa∣vourite of Heaven.
Perez was wont to call himself,Camb. Eliz. Part 2. Monstrum For∣tunae, the Prodigy of Fortune; and our Prince may appear to us, Monstrum Providentiae, the Prodigy of Providence; taking the word, as Sca∣liger applieth it to Virgil, Monstrum sine labie, a Pro∣digy of Perfection. And let us beseech Almighty God, still to deliver him from the Evil Man, to preserve him from the Violent Man, to keep him from the Snare they have laid for him, and from the Grins of the workers of Iniquity; and that we, and all his Subjects, duly con∣sidering whose Authority he hath, may faith∣fully serve, honour, and humbly obey him, in God, and for God, according to his blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord; who with him, and the Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth, ever one God, World without End. Amen. ERRATA. Pag. 16. Line ul read . Pag. 17. l. 2. Pag. 24. l. 24 Pag. 53. l. 25. .
An Eucharistical Ode to God our Deli∣verer, on the happy discovery of the late Treasonable Conspiracy. I. THou Great JEHOVAH, Mighty King, Who can enough thy Praises sing? Or e're enough thy mighty Acts make known, Which thou great God hast shown To us thy chosen Flock; To us thy small, but still beloved Stock? Wondrous, O Lord, are all thy Works, and great, Thy Mercies ever Infinite. Thou Sion's Foes does still defeat, And bring'st their darkest Plots to light. II. Great King! had'st thou not lent thine Aid, And all our Foes dismaid; Had not thy piercing Wisdom all their Secrets seen, We, thy peculiar Lot, had been
Under th' insulting Tyranny, Of a Malignant Enemy; Who would have all thy Temples raz't, And laid their stately Buildings waste; Religion would have been no more, Nor any left thy Holy Name t'adore, But we should all have gone, Hurri'd, by a relentless Foe, to swift Destruction. III. But silly Mortals think in vain, E're to obtain What the Almighty does deny, In vain they his great Power defy, And think in vain to hide, what he can soon espy. He all their subtil windings sees, And all their hidden Mysteries His all-discerning Eyes can trace Them, through all their hidden ways; Can all their deep Designs reveal, Tho dark as Night, and laid as low as Hell. IV. 'Twas He, the Mighty HE, Who sav'd us from the Enemy,
Did save our King and Land, From out the fierce Destroyers violent Hand. Their specious Shews, and subtle Arts, Could not deceive the searcher of their Hearts. He true Religion could descry, From mere Hypocrisy: He knew those painted Tombs outside, Did but within a rotten Carkass hide; He knew their Secret Plots, and them betraid, Into the Snare which they for others laid. V. So perish all, who Israel's Peace molest, Who Israel and God alike detest. May Sion's Foes be to confusion brought, And all who her Destruction sought; Who would have Israel's King destroy'd, And all the Royal Race beside. May all such Plots as these Be brought to light, and may at ease Our Israel enjoy an everlasting Peace; While we our daily Hallelujah's sing, To our Deliverer, Israel's Mighty King.
VI. Begin, my Song, begin, And thou great God of Verse and Harmony, Some of thy Fire into my Breast infuse, Inspire my dull and groveling Muse, That I may Verse, such as may please thee, bring, Such as the God-like David us'd to sing; Such as shall worthy be, Of Heaven and Thee. Grant I may sing thy Praise In fittest Numbers, tuneful Lays, Which may thy wondrous mighty Works declare, And make thy bounteous Acts appear: That the deluded World may all believe, 'Tis God, our God alone, can Safety give. VII. When Wicked Men begin to rage, Thou only canst their Wrath asswage, Thou who can'st still the Winds, can'st calm the Seas, And make 'em sink into a tranquil Peace: Thou Men, more boisterous than they, Can'st eas'ly calm, for all things thee obey:
All things act by thy command; All things are moved by thy Hand, And Men in vain thy mighty Power withstand. VIII. All Creatures, if they could, would sing thy praise, But Man alone knows all thy ways: Him thou hast exalted, far Above what other Creatures are: Hast made him Lord of all below, And taught him how both Good and Ill to know. He then shall never cease to sing, Of all thy wondrous Acts, O King; Of all thy Kindness lately shown To this our Nation. We all extol thy Name with one accord; Extol and magnify thee only, gracious Lord. Hallelujah. JOHN CAVE the Son, of Linc. Col. Ox. FINIS.
