C544 R34785 14709213 102713
AN APPEAL from the Supream Court of Judicature of Holland, Zealand and West-Friesland, To the KING of GREAT BRITTAIN; Or The Case briefly stated between George Carew Esquire, Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of Sir William Courten Knight deceased, with his Will annexed, And The Heirs of Sir Jacob Cats, late Pensionaris of Holland and West-Friesland. Printed in the Year 1674.
The Case between George Carew Esquire, Administrator of Sir VVilliam Courten, and The Heirs of Sir Jacob Cats, late Pensionaris of Holland. SIr Jacob Cats became bound in the Ci∣ty of London, unto Sir William Courten of London Knight, by a writing ob∣ligatory dated the 29 of July 1631. in the penalty of 3000. Pounds, condi∣tioned for the payment of 2080. Pounds on the 12. of February following, according to the Custome of England. The money was not paid but continued at interest during Sir William Courten's life, who dyed in the Year 1636, indebted to severall Persons seventy thousand Pounds Sterling and upwards, and leaves William Cour∣ten Esquire, his Son and Heir his sole Executor. William Courten the Executor having contracted many debts of his own, became insolvent, and absented him∣self in the Year 1643. from his Creditors, and also from the further administration of his Fathers Estate; but before he left the Kingdom, Mr Jacob Pergens, a free Denizon of England inhabiting at Amsterdam, addressed himself to Mr. Courten for satisfaction of some
money, due to him from Sir William Courten, and Mr. Courten himself as Pergens pretended. William Courten the Executor by a Letter of Attorney and Assignment, dated the 31. of October 1643, grants and transfers the said Bond of 3000. Pounds unto Mr. Pergens, with power to sue Sir Jacob Cats for the said debt and dammages to his own use. In the Year 1645. Jacob Pergens summons Sir Jacob Cats (then Pensionaris of Holland) into the Provinciall Court at the Hague, and declares against him for the said moneys; During the said controversie Sir Jacob Cats applyes himself to the Commissioners concerning Banckrupts in England, who had a Commission (grounded upon the Statutes in such cases made and provided) to inquire after Mr. Courtens particular Estate for satisfaction of his own debts, but being advised that the Commissioners had no legall Authority to inter∣medle with Sir William Courtens Estate, which was ly∣able in another right for the payment of his own pro∣per debts, Sir Jacob Cats declined from any further Treaty with them. Nevertheless the Commissioners by their writing Authentick, prohibited Sir Jacob Cats to pay any money to Jacob Pergens upon the said Bond. Then Pergens soon after obtained a Decree out of the Provinciall Court, to cite and admonish to Commissioners in England, if they had any right or pretence to the said Bond or mo∣ney
due thereupon, they should institute the same be∣fore the said Provinciall Court at a day certain, or be condemned in perpetuall silence, whereupon the Commissioners appeared by their Advocate. Then Pergens by an insinuation prohibited Sir Jacob Cats from payment of any money to them or to any other, or to make any agreement with them; Yet notwithstanding (de bene esse) on the 18. of July 1653. Jacob Pergens pro∣cured an Assignment of the said Bond from the said Commissioners for 400. Pounds, to the end they might let their Process cease, whereby Pergens might proceed against Sir Jacob Cats, which he did accordingly. But pendente lite William Courten the Executor dyed intestate in Italy, whereby the action abated against Sir Jacob Cats, according to the known rule in Law: Quod actio personalis moritur cum persona. Afterwards upon the Kings most happy restaura∣tion, Letters of Administration of the Goods, and Chat∣tels, Rights, Debts, and Credits of Sir William Courten with his Will annexed, were granted on the 14. of July 1660. to the said George Carew; yet notwithstanding Jacob Pergens (who had formerly by another fraudulent pra∣ctise, gotten into his hands 85000 gilders from the East-India Company, upon pretended assignment from the said William Courten) prevayled with the Provinciall Court on the 4. of November 1661. to give Sentence in the said cause against Sir Jacob Cats, and condemned him to pay
the said money, due upon the said Bond, unto Jacob Pergens, and interest thereof at 8. per cent, soon after Sir Jacob Cats dyed, and his Heirs appealed from the said Sentence to the supream Court of Judicature at the Hague. Then George Carew, in his quality as Administrator, intervened in the said cause, before the Lords of the said supream Court, in the month of May 1662, where having by his Request in writing to their Lordships made known his right and property to the said money, concluded in his Demand that Pergens should be con∣demned to acquiess in the said cause, and deliver up the Bond, as having no right to the Money by the said Assignments from Mr. Courten, or the Commissioners, conformable to the Laws of England, where the debt was contracted and the Bond made, and also demand∣ed that the Heirs of Sir Jacob Cats should be ordered to pay the Money, due upon the said Bond to the said George Carew, in his quality as Administrator of Sir William Courten, the same being an unadministred effect of Sir William Courten's Estate. Then the Advocates of both sides desired time to consult concerning the Laws of England in that point, and to inform the Court therein accordingly. The Case being drawn up, and agreed by the Ad∣vocats of both parties, severall of the Judges in Eng∣land gave their opinions upon the same, under their
hands before a publique Notary, which was transmit∣ted to the supream Court of Judicature of Holland: Wherein was affirmed that by the Law of England, the Bond of Sir Jacob Cats could not be granted or assigned to Mr. Pergens, either by the Executor or Commissioner. That after the death of William Courten (Executor in Auter droit) the action against Sir Jacob Cats abated, but when the Ad∣ministration was granted to Carew, the said action was pro∣perly to be received by him as having the only right in Law to the said debt, the property being not changed by any Act of Mr. Courten or the Commissioners, but remained as assets liable to the Testators debts according to the nature and priority in Law, and the intervention of Carew in the said cause was a continuance of the said action, Carew having the right of pro∣secution to receive the same, allowing the said Pergens in equity his costs of suit. Then Pergens made a dilatory & impertinent excep∣tion, that he was a Burger of Amsterdam, although his dwelling-house was in the Hague, and pretended he ought to be first impleaded before his Competent Judges there, and not in the Hague before the supream Court of Judicature where the suit depended: where∣upon the Court rejected Mr. Carews suit, and decreed that the Heer van Carnisse, and the rest of the Heirs of Sir Jacob Cats, should pay the said Money to Pergens with mitigation of the Interest, and that Pergens should give them Caution to be saved harmless against Carew,
which was respectively done to the apparent wrong of Mr. Carew, and severall of his Majesties good Sub∣jects in England, that claim under Mr. Carews admi∣nistration the effects of Sir William Courten's Estate un∣administred. Wherefore they appeal to the King of Great Brit∣tain, for protection and means to recover their just rights, being of most dangerous consequence against the Law of property, to suffer Forreign Courts of Judicature to intrench upon the Laws of England, or to wrong the Judicature thereof. And the rather for that the Lords of the supream Court at the Hague, were preadmonished by severall learned Advocates there, as follows: 1. That Mr. Carew being a Stranger, was to be admitted at his first in∣stance by the instructions of their own Court. 2. That the Court were positively obliged to give judgement according to the Law of England, where the Money was lent and the Bond was signed. 3. That by the Laws of Nations all Courts of Justice were to give Sen∣tences, in Cases of Contracts, according to the Law of the Country where such Contracts were made. 4. That the supream Court was the proper place of Judicature in this Case of Intervention, and that if they did not admit Mr. Carew prima instantia, they would do him an apparent injustice, and wrong both the Judicature of England, and of the United Netherlands; Yet the Pensionaris Iohn de Witt being a Kinsman to Mr. Pergens his Wife, prevailed with some of the Lords of the supream Court, to deny Mr. Carew that ordinary Justice, which ought to be administred to all Strangers, whereby he hath suffered to his dam∣mage 5000. Pounds Sterling and upwards. FINIS.
