C7300 11192168 46638
A Mixt Poem, Partly Historicall, partly Panegyricall, UPON THE Happy Return of His Sacred MAJESTY Charls the Second, AND HIS Illustrious Brothers, the DUKES of YORK and GLOCESTER. With Honourable Reflections upon some State-mar∣tyrs, and the Renowned Generall. Not forgetting the Rump and its Appurtenances. By J. C. Gent. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bettertun at his shop in Westminster-hall. 1660.
To his most beloved Brother Captain GILBERT CROUCH. Good Brother, IT hath ever been the Ambition of Writers to climb as high as they can to an Honourable Patronage, even to Heaven it self, if the Nobility of the subject might autho∣rize the Presumption; Now Poets, rankt (especially by the more earthly part of the World) amongst the most airy of Pen-men, are priviledg'd by common Opinion to soar up with the Highest: But my present Obligations instruct me to the contrary. As Loyalty was the Muse inspir'd this Poem; so Love shall appoint the Dedication. Though my weak Muse hath sometimes borrowed the expeditious Aids of the Presse, yet not till now appeared in publick: As she never knew the triumphs of Fame, so she never felt the blushes of Dishonour, was never injurious to any per∣son but her self. But in this subject, Secresy had been a kind of Combination, Privacy a privative Treason; so ill do clandestine joyes become an universall Jubilee. That I come behind in the reare of our Poetique Forces, must be imputed to some unkind contingencies; my thoughts be∣ing conceived with the first, but by some misprisions met
with hard labour from the midwifry of the Press. Never∣thelesse, it will be honour enough for me, if I may have leave to wait upon (as their obsequious shadows) the heroick Poems of those 3. Seraphims, Waller, Cowly, & Lluellin, whose sudden march alarum'd both Ʋniversities. Mine, if they come not too early, will come soon enough to blush. But in earnest, I must thank the Presse for a second benefit, besides the manifestation of my Allegiance, that it furnisheth me with a kind occasion of acknowledging unto the ungrate∣full world, even in Print, the many kindnesses I have recei∣ved from so good a Brother. In fine, You, whose Heart and Sword so long maintained the Royal Cause, are obliged to protect the Heraulds of it Accept therefore, Good Bro∣ther, (which compellation I prefer before all Titles) accept of this Poem (whose onely merit is its Subject) as a mark of Loyalty to my Prince, and as a Token of my Love to your self, from Your most Affectionate Brother, John Crouch.
Upon the happy Return of his Sacred Ma∣jesty CHARLES the Second, &c. HAil, Second Charls, who (Our Blest Phoenix) came From the spic'd Ashes of a Martyrs name. Welcome (Great Soul!) sent to revive the Dead; Heavens Plant! nurst up to graft a Monarchs Head. Stop here, and bleed my muse—O Cursed Ax! Made victim'd Majesty pay three Kingdomes Tax. Mount, mount, my Soul, mount to another sphere, Leave my dead Trunk a Mourning Statue here. Death's service is too flight, 'twill not suffice; Our Altars ask a living Sacrifice: If piles of slaughter'd souls could have appeas'd Incensed Heaven, we long since had been eas'd. Charls, and three Kingdomes Life at once return, And chill the Ashes of that Royall Ʋrn; The Sun at his Meridian height appears, Drinks up the Tribute of his Fathers Tears.
Bow, Bow, my Muse; after so long a dearth Of Loyalty, adore and kisse the Earth, Long cold, but since the Loyal Spring begun Warm'd with Reflections of the Brittish Sun. Then rise and snatch, O snatch those orient Rayes! Twine them about thy Brows instead of Bayes: Those Beams which Majesty for lustre weare; I must turn Indian Priest, and Worship here. I'm rapt above the Moon, but must not stick So Low, am Sun-burnt, and not Lunatick. Sweat, sweat, Star-gazers, till your Hearts grow pale, You that for Lucre set the Heavens to sale. Hang thy self Lilly in thy Northern Chain, Thy darling Swede must die, and Charls must Reign: Thou, whose praedictions animated strife, Go now (sad wretch) speak truths to save thy life. The Bells i'th' Strand was crackt, it now appears, When they rung No King for a hundred years.Mr. Lilly at the five Bells in the Strand, be∣fore several persons, pro¦ved by his Astrologie that there should be no King in England for an hundred years. Fly Needham, thou ingenious Devil, fly, Gall'd with the late Kings hellish Hue and Cry; Before the Rope, for thy last comfort, look On Interest will not lie, that Dooms-day book; Where thou, with a malicious Ravens pen, Describing our Black Prince (the best of men)
Mad'st a false parallel 'twixt the Soul and Face, Better skill'd in complexions, than in grace. Whose two Diurnals weekly did disperse Venome and Rancour through the Universe; VVhich stufft with Mischiefs, Flatteries, and Lies, Poyson'd all, but the Antidoted wise. VVho, when thy treasons wanted their pretence, Kindly bestowdst them upon Providence: Serv'dst every Interest, though with partiall odds, Didst worship two Protectors, thy two Gods. Go black-mouth'd Cerberus, bark aloud and cry 'Tis Conscience will not, (Interest may lie) Tremble proud France, which barbarously sent Our King the second time to banishment; Be wise in time, and pawn thy Flower de luce, To purchase, not a full peace, but a truce; For our Queens sake, perhaps we may be led To give your Crown back for your Card'nals head: That Machivilian Cap, who to advance His private int'rest more than that of France, Hir'd our Grand Rebell, who for his full pay, He sent for Gold to Hispaniola. The gratefull States-man could no lesse dispense Than the whole Indies for a Recompence; Cromwell's ambition would accept no lesse, Than an Exchequer might be bottomlesse.
I cannot blame that Tyrant of Renown, Who wanted Love, and Gold, to make his Crown. Bring the Turks Crescent to its lowest Wain, Onely be good and kind to civil Spain; Prompted by Heaven t' espouse the Stuarts Right, Spain save thy Portugall and Indies by't. France shall no more raise with a jealous shrugg The Spanish Faction for the English Bugg; Nor shall our apish folly more advance The Vanities, and Antick modes of France; We'l leave thee to thy fears, and cold despair, Not to be heightned by the purest Air. Though we are Protestants, we shall not stick To own the Spaniard, The King Catholick: But call thy Red-cap, Devil, or worse man, And scarce believe his King a Christian, Quake at your late Auxiliaries advance; Remember, England has a King of France. But where is Crumwell, once so gay and brave, Thief of three Kingdomes, now not worth a Grave? VVhere's that prodigious Camell, whose strong back Carried three Nations Treasure for its Pack: That Crocodile, that murtherer of Souls, The Whale that shov'd men out o'th' world by shoals.
Whose rage spar'd no degree, no sex; whose pride, VVould nothing that opposed it, abide. Ask poor Tredah the number of her slain, VVhose streets had onely silence to complain: VVhere piles on piles of dead, wide breaches fill'd, VVhich cool blood butcher'd, and wild fury kill'd. One person (he aDr. Ber∣nard. Priest) the storm did passe, To tell how kind the Sacrificer was. Read Worsters story, and you'l read the sence Of Crumwels malice, and Heavens providence, To what a low Ebb had he brought our state, VVhen oneMrs Jan Lane. weak Woman stood 'twixt Charls & fate. O may she never lose her glorious Name, Unlesse it be t' advance her House and Fame. But they seem few, which horrid war destroy'd, The Sword of Justice too must be his Bawd; A Court's dress'd up in Scarlet, that the place May shew the colour of his Heart and Face. Three Kingdomes Head upon the Block must lye, To give proud Bradshaw's Robes a second dye. May courteous time his name and memory rot, May the unmatcht example be forgot: If the day must be own'd, O let it come, To consecrate the good Kings Martyrdome.
Vultures kill Doves, the blood of Innocence spilt; A Kings pure blood, by th' impure hands of guilt: As if that black Crime by design had meant To give th' out-vy'd world a new President. Hambleton, Holland, Capel, (three Peers fall) To make one Breakfast for this Caniball. Capel, who dying shew'd to crown his merit, A Roman Courage, and a Christian Spirit. But when great Derby fell, Crumwell began T' uncrown the King first in the Isle of Man. Derby, that Regal Lord, whose Loyal Head Deserv'd a Coronet of Gold, not Lead. Shrewsbury must scape, by a Divine reprieve, So mortall 'twas to love the King and live. All are not mark'd for Sacrifices, some Heaven rates above a Civil Martyrdome. But the Fiends Altar is not fatted yet, Till twoD. Hew∣, Love. Priests sacred blood besprinkle it, Penruddock, Slingsby, many more must go, To enlarge the book of Martyr's Folio. For all this Cromwel breathes securely, hath His beds of Roses, and his milky path, Treads air and Pinacles; thus Cedar-tall, He knowes no Earth, on which to stand, or fall.
Now Parliaments are summon'd, but in vain, Wise Cato's all, come in, go out again. O strange Vicissitude of Earthly things! Crowns, Scepters, Thrones, more mortall than their Kings, Oft dye before 'um, as if to be High, Were to be chang'd; we rise, we fall, we dye. Yet Height is no impulsive cause of ill, We might sit high, and safe, could we sit still: But we must move Excentrick, cannot see VVe tread the Globe of mutability. Honour is that great Boon the Gods bestow, Their Image stampt on mortals here below: And makes them shine like Gods on earth, till they Poorly their Honour to their ends betray. Now Vice Vertues white Herauldry must stain, Honour contemn'd, is mixt with earth again. Thus is our Ruine measur'd by our Rise, And Greatnesse brings the greater Precipice. Now are the old Peers into corners thrust, Their titles mingled with the Nations dust; What were those Starres, when this black night begun, Borrowing their beams from that late Man i' th' Moon? Now noble Stars, but Sunlesse had not light To view themselves, much less t' adorn their Night:
The Heraulds office all imploy'd, to bring Crumwels Descent down from some Brittish King. But fate prevents his pride, the Prince oth' Aire With one good Whirlwind cures our long despair; He that had rais'd such Earth-quakes in his Life, Could not depart without the Elements strife, Trees twisted up by th' roots, and tossed high, Sent by the winds to brush th' infected Sky. Thus, thus the proud Leviathan was hurld With Curses and black tempests out oth' world. And now his gratefull Vassals when he's dead, Put a rich Crown upon his uselesse head, And so ingeniously their Mock-Prince deride, Emblematizing why the poor man dy'd: Who with one impious gripe three Kingdomes got, Alas, all King, except his Name and Hat. Great Cromwell's gone, now Rome may live in hope, Let's sing Te Deum for the rescued Pope. But Richard, spurr'd on by ambitious friends, In peace the Protectorian Throne ascends; With spread arms graspt the Chair, but could not reach, He was too small (god wot) to fill the breach.
They that so near the blessings of a Crown Had brought the Old Sire, pull the Filly down Poor Squire, I pitty thy unkind advance, Left heir to mercy, thy Inheritance. This Mercy too had far more easie been, Hadst not possest thy Fathers Seat and Sin, The seat of Scorners (our Protector call'd) And from that Seat by thy own Vassals hal'd. But who knows what this civil Gentleman meant? Some say he sufferd for this good Intent; Though he the Scepter sway'd, & some months stood, He kept his hands white, dipt them not in blood: Pull'd down the Scarlet Court; good Heavens for this May he gain pardon, and the Kings hand kiss. Now the restor'd Rump, Jehu-like drives on, Scorns all Protectors, either God, or man; Neither confirm the Creatures, nor quite fail, Hold the Fanaticks in an even scale. Project on Project, Tax on Tax they raise, Never had England such improving dayes: For now our pious Governours, well advis'd, Turn'd Jews, and our Obedience circumcis'd. Baptists and Quakers our sole Princes sway, Scarce one Religious man left to obey.
The Orthodox to Conventicles take, VVhile bold Fanaticks the Church Visible make; VVho neither Anthems sing, nor Chapters read, All inspir'd, as the worm crawles in their Head. Now, now the Steeples in sad tremblings were, Some with old Age and Ruine, most with fear. Doubtlesse good luck preserv'd the merry Bells, To ring in good time the Fanaticks Knells. But see how naturall tis for one to raign, Lambert for Lambert, Booth for King again: No sooner blaz'd a Comet from the East, VVhen with faint beams The Sun declin'd i'th' West; VVithout dispute the Almighty One then meant To do his work by a single Instrument. Lambert, proud of a Vict'ry without Fight, Rears his hopes to a Protectorian height; The Army gather into mutinous Heards, March up, and pluck their Masters by the Beards. The Rump turns backwards on a fatall broach, Rise and do reverence to the Swords approach; But Lambert, spight of Countrey, Rump, and City, Winds up three Nations into one Committee, Ycleped Safety; but event ere long, Declar'd the Bastard Child was Christn'd wrong. The Common-wealth is to be Minted new, But what the stamp should be no Conjurer knew.
O Architects than Babells more unskill'd! Strange Platonists, without Idea's build Mean time new Workmen from the Scottish Land Prepares themselves, with sharp tools in their hand; Out of the frozen pole starts a good Swain, Rigs up, and wheels Charles long-dismounted Wain; The Lambertonians shrink, refuse to Move, Encourag'd by apostate friends Above; Who for a little Coyn, and lesse applause, Leave their Lieutenant and the Good old Cause. Now the Rump rules the Roast again i'th' East, Serv'd up to Usher in a second Feast; Up marches George undaunted, though he find Armies before him, Armies left behind; Through all the awakened Counties as he went, The loud Aire Ecchoes, A Free Parliament. The people from all parts like Snow-balls rowl, Love and praise Monk, as if they knew his Soul. No person of a King one word durst start, He still sleeps safe in every Loyall Heart. Monk climbs to London, where he found (fame saith) His Masters half perswaded of his Faith. They vote their Gold to th' Touch-stone, and (O Fates!) Send him commands to unhinge the City Gates.
But the Sagacious Generall smells their Ends, (To make him odious) hastens to his Friends. Triumphant London her proud Joyes expresses In Acclamations, Shouts, and frank Caresses: The Rump now flye-blown, quit their seats, but thence Shall not be forc'd by Sword or Violence: But as the Hammer makes Naile strike out Naile, So the Secluded Head thrusts out the Taile. Now, not till now, the wise Mysterious Monk Whispers with Charls from his oraculous Trunk; The Generall had (with Reverence I infer) Onely the King his Privy Counceller. O Secrecy, the Midwife of Designes! Betray'st not, but bring'st forth thy Golden Mines, Wrought and sublim'd by Industry and Art: Charls owes much to Monks Head, more to his Heart. Had either Fear or Joy this silence broke, Perhaps the Thing it self had never spoke England hath long ador'd a George in paint, That was the Picture, but this George the Saint: God acts with the same Methods he begun, VVe had the shadow first, and then the Sun. Secluded Members Act, Vote their consent For the just freedom of a Parliament.
They rise, when forthwith from their burdned Hives, Ripe Bees swarm out, all prodigall of their Lives: The Bells to their new Hive these clusters Ring, Where, with one humming Vote they call their King. Great Charls's call'd home, not manacl'd, nor chain'd, But to the height of his just power maintain'd: Monk was not so much Presbyter to bring A Royall Captive home, instead of King, That he himself might his return deplore, As made more Exile than he was before. Charls is proclaim'd with all Imperial Dues, Whilest every hollowing Street sends Heaven the news. Such Flames into the aire proud Bonfires sent, Threatned to change the Cognate Element. Event, by truth, false Prophets does beguile, London was (and yet stands) one burning pile: No sooty Pyramids of smoak aspire, Th' whole City is one Elementall fire: Shouts damp all sounds, the Air opprest with throngs, The next great Pest must be Decay of Lungs. The active fire-works sinsg'd the Moons bright horns, The Man had much adoe to save his Thorns; Light speaks the Sun, Expression Souls; O then! What Joy, what Bonfires in the hearts of Men.
Clip, clip your VVings, my Joyes, soar not too high, Lest you unfit me for humility; May the just Adoration of a Crown Humble my joyes, and weigh my Raptures down. Great Charles, brought upon Angels wings, appears, The long despair, of prayers, of sighs, of tears, VVelcome three Kingdomes Love, methinks all three Now in my hearts triangle panting be. Welcome three Brothers, and three Kingdomes Joyes, One Mighty Monarch, and two Great Vice-Royes, VVelcome blest Prince, sent in a needfull hour, VVhom Heav'n restor'd to shew its slighted power; O may your Reign bring back the Age of Gold May Love's soft hand your Sword and Scepter hold: Some say the Heavens, some say the Earth do move, But sure both Globes turn on the poles of Love. O that the whole worlds pride sat on my knee, It all should bend to your Dread Majesty: Since lowest things durst brave your Empire, now, All heights and Pyramids under Heav'n shall bow. All hearts are pleas'd, except such hearts as prove Gall-drencht, not born to be belov'd or love; The City now long squeez'd and wire-drawn, made The Citadel, and Mart of Europe-trade▪
The Ship-wrackt Merchants in full Change resort, Conceive both Indies brought home with the Court. For ever, London, shut thy Heart and Hands Against all factious and rebellious Bands: 'Twas time to King it, when thy purse and fame Lore'd to th' Imperious Bank of Amsterdam, The Countrey has reapt a liberall crop of all Their hopes, fancy their Garners in Whitehall. The Loyal Rusticks scarce a Psalm will sing, Unlesse each Stanza chaunt the name of King. The chastest Virgins unespous'd, unwo'd, Feel Throes of joy, and think themselves bestow'd: Law and Religion (sick twins) gasping lay, Now that protects this, while for both she pray. The Muses (O Heavens) in their sackloth slain! Are by three Graces brought to life again. Burdens are balms; tax now, Sir, for your good, Not our Estates, but Lives; not Coyn, but Blood: Blest Halcyon dayes! if any thing annoyes Your Kingdomes now, 'tis that you kill with Joyes, Your Return had made three Realms one Sacrifice, Had not their guilt allay'd their Extasies. Monarch of Hearts, the summe of Heavens Expence, Heir by Succession, King by Providence; Heaven Crown your VVisdom, which has quencht our Warrs, Not by subduing Rebels, but the Starrs. FINIS.
