C7415 R41334 31355018 110310
Cruel and Barbarous News From GHEAPSIDE in LONDON: Being a True and Faithful RELATION Of an horid Fact, acted by an unhuman Mistriss upon the body of her Apprentice, who for want of the fear of God, hired two men to strip him naked and bind him to a Spit, intending to Roast him alive, but by the providence of Al∣mighty God was prevented, for having stoped his mouth with a clout, turning him about until he was very much scorched, with striving for life the clout draped out, and then crying out murder the Neighbors by violence broak open the door, and delivered the poor wrech from the unmercy∣ful Flames, from which the Lord deliver us. Printed for W. P. 1676.
Cruel and Barbarous News From GHEAPSIDE, in LONDON: HOW many wicked, cruel and unhu∣man Acts of Murder do we almost dayly hear of, so that we may justly crie out with the Prophet, The people have sold themselves to do wickedness, and for want of the fear of God, they still run on in their wicked courses until they destroy both body and soul to all eternity, not once thinking that they must one day give an account for all their wicked works which they do here commit; But
wo unto them that do harbour such thoughts in their brest, much more to commit such unheard of cruelties: Alas poor souls they think not what an∣swer they must make before the great Tribunal seat of God; then they would wish they had never been born, or the mountains to fall upon them, or the Hills to cover them from the presence of the most high God. But now to leave this digresion and come to the Relation of this unhuman fact. I think that if it be considered in all the circumstances, there has not been heard of, in our age, a Fact more barbarous then what this Relation gives you, of a Scale-makers wife living near unto Cheapside. She was of light carriage, and used to frequent Taverns and Play∣houses, as many people do report; for she allwais took Coach when she went out, but as she came back again she alighted in Cheapside, and came home a foot, because she used to frequent a house thereabout, or not far from the place where she was set down. Her husband being as I told you before a Scale-maker and a Common-Council-man of the City was many times from home about his occasions, & did little think that his Wife did follow such lewd courses and bad company; but one day coming home before he was expected, asked the Apprentice where his Mistriss was, to which he answered he
knew not, and within a short time after she came home and all was quiet. About two or three daies after her husband being from home, she sent the Apprentice into Cheap∣side to call a Coach, which he did according to her command, and the Coach man came to the door with him, and she being ready equiped for her (not long journey) away she went. This Apprentice, that afternoon had been a broad in the City about his Masters business, and as he was coming home, saw his Mistris alight out of the Coach, and went into this suspected house which I before told you of, and when he came home was a∣bout his Imployment, and soon after his Master came home and asked him where his Mistris was, and he told him that she was at one Mr. Drapyers, O said his Master doth she lay up her time in a Baudy House, Srah goe and call her, and so he did, and when she came home her Husband asked what her business was at that house, and told her that it was counted a Baudy House, (she could have told him that) but she said she had been there to see a Sick body, and so pasified her Husband. The next Morning when her Husband was gon out, she asked the Apprentice how his Master knew where she was, and he told her that he saw you goe
thither; Sirrah said she I will make you an example to all teltails, and from that time, & ever after, told him that he should beweare how he told any more tails, and he poor wrech little thinking what Barbarous thoughts she harboured in her Breast. Upon a-time when she knew her Husband was from home, sent for two Men which she had more love for, then she had for her Husband; called in the Boy and told him that he should die the cruelest death that ever could be thought on, or devised, and imediately the two men that were there, layd hold on him, and striped him naked unto the skin, and bound him to a Spit, and having kindled a Fire and stopped his Mouth with a Clout, layed down this poor harmless Creature to the Fire, and turned him round until he was sorely scorched, but with long striving for life he got the Clout out of his Mouth, and cried out Mur∣der, and with many doleful screeks and cries that the neighbours made all possible speed to deliver this poor, innocent and harmless wretch from this a∣maising and horrid death, which through Gods infinite blessing they attained. Whilest they were comforting this poor crea∣ture, and hearing him give this present Relation, his Mistriss and the two men her wicked assist∣ants made their escape.
This sad newes being noised abroad in the City, the Apprentices presently made a rising, intend∣ing to have pulled down the house, but the Right Worshipful the Lord Major, and his Officers and Constables of the City, and their assistants, de∣sired them to forbear, promising them that if either the Woman, or the two cruel men her com∣panions, could possibly be apprehended, they should be proceeded against according to Law. Finis.
