D142 12233809 56669
A strange and true RELATION OF A YOVNG WOMAN possest with the Devill. By name Joyce Dovey, dwelling at Bewdley neer Worcester. With a particular of her actions, and how the evill spirit speakes within her, giving fearefull an∣swers unto those Ministers and others that come to discourse with her. As it was certified in a Letter from Mr. Iames Dalton unto Mr. Tho. Groome, Ironmonger over-against Sepulchres Church in London. ALSO A Letter from Cambridge, wherein is related the late conference between the De∣vil (in the shape of a Mr. of Arts) and e Ashbourner a Scholler of S. Johns Colledge, neer Trinity Conduit-Head, a mile from Cambridge, who was afterward carried away by him, and never heard of since, onely his Gown found in the River. Imprinted at London by E. P. for Tho. Vere at the upper end of the Old-Bailey. 1647.
A Letter sent from Mr. James Dal∣ton to Mr. Tho. Groom, Ironmonger, over against Sepulchres Church, London. IT is the property of humane nature to desire newes, and therefore having seene the last Diurnall (out of which I could pick but smal crums of comfort) I afterward saw a Letter imparting good Newes, which should come by the Post to Birmingham, that the two Kingdomes were reconciled, and a peace concluded. I pray you send me what newes you have, which I shall endeavour to requite by this ensuing Relation, which although I received it but at the se∣cond or third hand, yet by such persons, as I nothing doubt the truth hereof: Sir 'tis thus: At Bewdley, seven miles from us, there is a young Woman (by name Joyce Dovey) one who formerly was little taken notice of for Religion, untill about 4. years since, who after the hearing of a Sermon, see∣med to be much wrought upon and dejected, who af∣terward fell into some passions, and (as was conceived by her friends) Convulsion fits, which in time grew
stronger upon her, and observed especially to take her in the time of private prayer, or performance of other pious duties; whereupon they procured a de∣vour religious young man, to b in the house, and to be as a Keeper unto her; the bruit whereof increa∣sing, there came to visit her a Chaplaine of a Regi∣ment, and a Captaine, who by some discourse, and o∣ther informations, strongly imagined, that shee was possessed; whereupon about three weeks or a month since, her Keeper lift up his heart to the Lord in prayer, without uttering of words, that if she were possessed, the Lord would be pleased to make it ma∣nifest, which no sooner conceived, but the Devill an∣swers with swearing, Wounds, Blood, &c. that thou shalt know; and this observe generally, that he makes the womans tongue and organs instruments of speech, but it is in a bigger and grosser tone then her ordina∣ry speech, and when he speaketh, she looketh fiercely with something arising big in her throat, and com∣monly with swearing, and especially by the life of Pharoah: When any discourseth with her about wordly businesse, she will familiarly talk with them, but when any use speech of Divine matters, shee is most troubled. It is further reported, that M. Burrowson Minister there with others came to see her, to whom M Bur. said, thou foule spirit, thy power is limited; to whom was re∣plyed, Thou lyest, my power is over all the world, and my Kingdome is the greatest: To another that said, Thou foule uncleane spirit, what hast thou to doe to vex a poore creature, was answered, I have Commis∣sion and power to tempt you all. Three Souldiers, (they say,) came to see her, who talking of Papists,
Crucifixes, and Crosses, presently appeared in her breast or throat two Crosses, whereupon the Soul∣diers being agast, began to get away; haw, haw, haw, sayes the Devill: now (sayes her Keeper) they are afraid, and the Devill laughs at them. Shee usually goeth abroad, and comming to the House of an ho∣nest religious man, where many came in after her to se her, she began to be so distempered, that she could not goe home that night; and as they were at prayer in an upper Chamber, she was on a sudden caught up into the window, and the greatest part of her body thrust thorow a great casement, but her Keeper ha∣ving an eye unto her, stept unto her, and caught her by the coats, and took her in again: She is oft thrown against the walls, and into the fire, but all without any hurt: One time being cast into a great fire, some would have taken her out, but her Keeper said, let her alone, and observe the providence of God, and strait-way she was snatched out without humane help, not having any hurt, or so much as the smell of fire on her clothes: She hath snatched a paire of Cizzers from a womans girdle, and applyed them to her throat; and another time a knife from another, in an admirable quick way, and strook her breast, yet both without so much as a scarre in either place: She hath throwne a Bible into the fire, which was not burned. On a time one comming into the house, to discourse with her Keeper, and to take some observations in writing concerning her, they went into an inner chamber, and as he came forth with the paper in his hand, shee fell upon him very violently, and would have taken the pa∣per from him, but he contended with her very tough∣ly,
and after a long conflict, gave her the repulse, who having kept the paper without tearing, onely a little corner, but not a word torne off, he voluntari∣ly threw it downe on the ground, saying, Devill thou hast not power to take it up, and so took it up himselfe and departed. It is very like I have not heard of all the passages concerning her, which if any of note come unto my knowledge (as I beleeve I shall shortly see a Cata∣logue of the particulars) if they come not to pub∣like view (which I suppose will be ere long) I shall further acquaint you therewith (God willing.) No more at present, but with mine and my wives kind remembrance unto you, my Sister, and Cousens Henry and Mary, I rest, 14. Decemb. 1646: Your very loving and affecti∣onate Brother, JAMES DALTON.
A Leter from Cambridge, wherein is related the late conference betweene the Devill (in the shape of a Master of Arts) and one Ashbourner a Scholler of S. Johns Colledge, neer Trinity Conduit-Head, a mile from Cambridge, who was afterward carried away by him, and never heard of since, only his Gown found in the River. SIR, BEfore I acquaint you with mine own occasions, I think it expedient to let you heare in the first place, how matters stand here. I hope Sir this great Tempest which lately was, has not been much hurt∣full to you at London, though unto us at Cambridge, a place where strange businesse hath been acted of late, but that which is most strange, one Ashbourner a Schol∣ler of S. Iohns Colledge, whom the Devill▪ that Ma∣lignant Sophister) did surprize, being serious with himselfe, and meditating about his studies, at a place call'd Trinity Conduit-head, a mile from Cambridge, who appearing to him in the shape of a Mr. of Arts, or (as some say) like a Gentleman, asked the Lad where∣fore he was so discontented, who answered, because I cannot understand that which I reade; Let me see
thy Book (which was a Magirus) quoth the Devill, which the Lad shewing, he immediately expounded the places that were difficult, so that the Scholler won∣dred he understood it so clearly; but yet see sir, how the Devill caught advadvantage from this, for at last having propounded two questions to the Scholler, 1. An Deus sit Omnipotens. 2. An Malum sit ens priva∣tivum vel positivum, asked him whether he would bee his scholler, promising him if he would, he should goe to Padua (a famous University in Italy) where he would instruct him in all manner of Learning, and help him to his degree of Doctor of Divinity in a eekes time: The Lad consented, and ti'd himselfe sure with this Obligation Dabo tibi animam si vis dare mihi Doctrinam & sapientiam: But as God would have it, the Lads conscience was stricken with feare, retur∣ning to the Colledge in apprehension of what he had done, but the soule being so precious, and the very thing that the Devill alwayes aymes at, was sold at too low a rate, and little comfort could he find from any; so that by continuall trouble of the evill spirit, he is either gone to Padua, the place afore-mentioned, or else has drowned himselfe, his Gown being found in the water, (but nothing of him) two dayes after he left the Colledge. FINIS.
