D1801A 12138530 54823
Christopher Dodsworth's Proceedings against the Ex∣portation of SILVER by the JEWS and others. Mr. Cory's Affidavit. JOhn Cory, of the Parish of S. Clemens Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Gent maketh Oath, That about the Month of May 1689. he this Deponent was desired by the Right Honourable the Earl of Monmouth to bring one Mr. Michal Levy, a Merchant and Jew to speak with him; which soon after this Deponent accordingly did, at his Lordship's House at Parsons Green: where, in this Deponent's hearing, his Lordship told the said Mr. Levy, That the occasion of his sending for him, was to acquaint him, That their Majesties wanted Mony, and that he be∣lieved the Jews to be a wealthy People, and could lend them a considerable Sum upon the Act of Parlia∣ment, at seven per cent, for carrying on the War against France, and that if ever they expected Favour from the present Government, then was the time to deserve it, by complying with their Majesties Occasi∣ons, or Words to that effect. To which Mr. Levy replyed, in this Deponent's hearing, That there was not above seventy or eighty Families in England, and of them not above seventeen or eighteen were Men of any considerable Estate; nevertheless he would use his Endeavour to serve their Majesties in what they desired; but nothing further was done in it. And this Deponent did soon after receive intimation, That the Jews had made Entry in the Months of June and July of one hundred forty eight thousand and two hundred Ounces of Silver, or thereabouts, for beyond the Seas, as by the Custome-house Books may appear, to which this Deponent refers himself. And this De∣ponent did soon after intimate the same in Writing to the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury; who sent it inclosed to the Commissioners of the Customes: Who sent to this Deponent to speak with him upon the said matter; which he ac∣cordingly did, and averred the Entries of the said Sil∣ver. But the Commissioners were pleased to answer this Deponent, That Forreign Silver imported might be exported; and Mr. Booth in particular gave him an undue Reprimand for his endeavouring to serve their Majesties in such an important affair: So that it went beyond the Sea unsearched, as this Deponent verily believes. John Cory. Jurat vicesimo quarto October. Anno secund. Will. & Mar. Rex & Regin. coram me N. Lechmer. Mr. Lawrence Swann's Affidavit. LAwrence Swann of the Parish of S. Saviours South∣wark, in the County of Surrey Founder, maketh Oath, That this Deponent, at the Request of Cap∣tain Leneve, a Custome-house Officer, on Saturday the thirteenth day of this instant September, did go on board the Soes-Dyke-Yatch, to see some Bars or Pigs of Silver, amounting to about thirty thousand Ounces, and a quantity of Pieces of Eight, to the number of about five thousand; which by the said Captain were seized: And this Deponent saith, that upon view of the same, he informed the said Captain, That the quantity he then set aside was Bad, the whole whereof amounted to about sixteen thousand Ounces, as this Deponent was informed, and verily believes the same to be. And this Deponent further saith, That he, at the Request of the said Leneve, made an Essay of ele∣ven Grains, which to the full value was not worth above four Shilling the Ounce, which should be worth five Shillings and two Pence the Ounce. And this De∣ponent verily believes the Pigs or Bars were cast in England. Geo. Bradbury. Jurat decimo octavo die Septem. Anno secundo Willielmi & Mariae Rex & Regina, co∣ram me Lawrence Swann. Mr. Attorney General's Opinion. VVHether divers sorts of Silver, imported and melted down together into Pigs, whereby the Quality of the whole Mass being altered, be not a Manufacturing of it? And whether it can then pro∣perly be called Bulloyn, or ought to pay Duty out∣wards? It seems to me, that by reason of the Alteration it has undergone here, it doth not remain Forreign, Bulloyn, but may be liable to Duty outwards. 20 Sept. 1690. George Treby Mr. Dodsworth's Petition to the Lords Commissi∣oners of the Treasury. To the Right Honourable, the Lords Commissioners of their Majesties Treasury; The humble Petition of Christo∣pher Dodsworth Merchant, sheweth, THat of late Years the Exportation of Silver out of this Kingdom has been so great, that the Working Goldsmiths, the last Sessions of Parliament, petitioned for Redress thereof, and in their Petition and Paper they assert, That the Mill'd Mony of this Kingdom is usually melted down and exported, not only to their own Disadvantage, but to the Nation in general, (a Copy of which Petition and Paper are annexed). That your Petitioner taking notice thereof, hath examined and found, That by the Entries at the Cu∣stome house London, from the third of March last to the 11th of this instant September, about 600000 Ounces of Silver hath been publickly ship'd off for Holland or other Forreign Markets. That the Law gives leave for Exportation only of Forreign Bulloyn, and that he was informed if it were melted down here, 'twas an English Manufacture, and ought to pay Custome outwards; and being advised, that above 60000 Ounces was lately ship'd and ship∣ing off, your Petitioner acquainted Captain Leneve and Mr. Wright two Officers of the Customes therewith, and went in person with them on board one of the Ships, where they found about 35000 Ounces, and that about 16000 Ounces was found mix'd Metal, not worth 4 s. per Ounce, when the Standard was 5 s. 2 d. and thereon concluding it an English Manufacture, the Officers seized it, as per Affidavit. annexed appears. That soon after they acquainted the Commissioners of the Customes thereof, who drew up a Quaere to be put to Mr. Attorney General (a Copy whereof is likewise annexed) and both Parties concluded to be guided thereby, as to point of Law; But Mr. Attor∣ney's Opinion favouring the payment of the Customes, Sir John Worden declared against breaking an old Custome, and would not give any order for bringing that which was seized on Shore; and in fine discourag'd the whole Proceeding, so that the Officers are fearful to act any farther.
That the Custome of the parcel now so lately ship'd amounts to 800 l. and for 6 Months past to 6000 l. Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays your Lordships to take this into your Consideration, both with re∣gard to their Majesties Revenue and the publick Good, and hear what may be said by Counsel on both sides, if to your great Wisdom it shall seem meet; and that in the mean time such Pigs of the said Silver, as upon view shall be found to be cast in England may be brought into the King's Warehouse and there remain. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. Mr Dodsworth's Petition to the Commissioners of the Customes. To the Honourable Commissioners of their Majesties Cu∣stomes. The humble Petition of Christopher Dodsworth Merchant, Sheweth. THat your Petitioner having waited on the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, about the Exportation of Silver, their Lordships have referred the consideration thereof to your Honours, and in regard considerable Quantities of Silver have been shipt since the Seisure made by Mr. Leneve, without examination whether manufactu∣red in England or not, and that both Parcels, together with others, are still on board some Ships in the River. Your Petitioner humbly prays this Honourable Board either to cause all the Silver now on Board the said Ships to be brought on Shoar to the King's Ware∣house, and there examined, or two able Workmen may be sent on Board with your Petitioner, to ex∣amine what Pigs of the said Silver are of English melting down and manufacturing; and such as are so to secure in the said Warehouse, till the case be legally decided, And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. Mr. Dodsworth's Affidavit. CHristopher Dodsworth, of the City of London Mer∣chant, maketh Oath, That he this Deponent having on the 26th of September last past waited on the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, with his Petition and Papers annexed about the Exportation of Silver, their Lordships were pleased to refer the Consideration of the same to the Honour∣able Commissioners of their Majesties Customes, to give their Opinion therein with expedition; which Reference he presented to their Honours the 30th day of the faid Month of September, when Sir John Worden said, they were of the same Opinion as before: Which this Deponent believes was, That no Examination should be made whether the Silver in question was of English Manufactory or not, nor that the Seizure made by Captain Leneve of part thereof should have any effect. This Deponent further saith, That he waited again on the said Commissioners of the Customes this present 2d of October 1690. and desired to know if their Honours had given their Report, but Sir John Worden answered, They were extream busie and could not yet give their Opinion: And this Deponent verily believes, the Vessels on which the said Silver is ship'd, are now ready to depart. Geo. Bradbury. Jurat 2. Octobris 1690. coram me Chr. Dodsworth. They are gone with about 110000 Ounces of Silver, the Custome whereof omounts to 1375 l. Copy of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury's Letter to the Commissioners of the Customes. Gentlemen, VVHereas the Lords Commissioners of their Majesties Treasury referred to you, the 27th of September last, the Petition of Christopher Dodsworth, directing you to make your Report thereupon with all convenient Speed; but you having not yet sent us the same, their Lordships direct you forthwith to your Report upon the said Petition, which in the ∣sence of Mr. Jepson is signisied to you by, Gentlemen, Treasury Chamber Octob. 7. 1690 Your most humble Servant William Lowndes. The Ships went away on Saturday the 4th of October. Mr Dodsworth's Petition to the H. of Commons To the Honourable the Knights Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, the humble Petition of Christoph. Dodsworth Merchant, Sheweth, THat your Petitioner having for some Months past taken notice of the unusual shipping for Holland great quantities of Silver, by the Jews and some others, and also being acquainted that the Working Gold∣smiths had, the late Session complained thereof in this Honourable House, asserting that the Mill'd and other heavy Coyne of this Kingdom was melted down, oc∣casioned him to enquire, Whether the Silver thus ship'd out was really Forreign Silver, as entred in the Custome-house, and so by Act of Trade 15 Car 2. to pass out free, or Silver melted down here, and so an English Manufacture, which by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage 12 Car 2. continued anno primo Gull. & Mar. ought to pay Custome ad valorem. That on Saturday the 13th of September last your Pe∣titioner, together with Captain Leneve and Mr Wright, Officers of the Customes, and Mr, Swann an Artis, went on Board one of the Ships outward bound, where they found about 35000 Ounces of Silver, all of English casting, about 16000 Ounces was found on the Test to be worth not above 4 s. per Ounce, and consequently a mix'd Metal; this the Officers seized, and on Monday following acquainted the Commission∣ers of the Customes therewith: Who did not only dis∣courage that Seizure, but suffered about 70000 Ounces more to be ship'd off, without Examination whether English or Forreign, and without Payment of Duty, though Mr. Attorney General was of Opinion, That such as was altered in England was lyable to the Duty. That thereon your Petitioner laid the case before the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, who refer'd him to the Commissioners of Customes, from whom no Report came till the Ships were gone. Copies of all his Papers relating thereunto are ready to be produc'd. That for 16 Months past about 1400000 Ounces of Silver hath been thus exported (which some Custome Officers say is more than was in 16 Year before, ex∣cept to the East-Indies) and the Custome thereof un∣paid amounts to 17500l. sterling. Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays this Honour∣able House to take the Premises into Consideration, both with regard to the King's Revenue and the Publick Good, and order thereon as to your Hon∣ours great Wisdom it shall seem meet, And your Petitioner shall ever pray, &c. The Names of the Exporters of Silver, as by the Custome∣house Entries appear. Jews ALvato de Costa, Jacques Gonsalez, Alphonso Rodreguez, Antonio Rodreguez Marques, Joseph Bueno, Antonio Gomezsera, John Fermaco, Caleb Ppall, Solomon Levi, Peter Henriquez, Peir Henriquez, Symon Gato, Elias de Meudza, Pas. Levi, John De Leau, Antonio Corea, Joseph Meex, Jasper Francisco, Joseph Papez, Symon Byrloam, Josias Malez, Symon Francia, Moses Carroen, George De Lapo, John depont, Joseph Levi, Jasper Perrero, Joseph Marquez, James Carroon, Mor∣decay Isaac, Deigo de Medina, Oder Pomea, Antonio Rodriquez, Peter Perrera, Isaac Gomez, Peter de Faxaia, William de Coc∣quet, James Zibezberto. Dutchmen. John Scopens, John Vanhine, John Vanderpool, G, Vanvolgli, Derrick Symons, Solomon Blockar, John Van∣derhorne, Geo. Vanderboon. Englishmen. William Robertson, Peter Jackson, John John∣son, Geo. Smith, John Palmer, John Bryan, Tho. White, Alex∣ander yer, John Vallentine, John Thompson, Peter Ramsay, Tho. Allen, John Sweetaple, Peter Newman, Peter Harris, Antho. Stone, Peter Bull, John Sherriff, Joseph Butler, John Phillips, Alexander Goodman, Joseph Bull, William Harton, Will: Snelling, Walter Nash, James Seymour, Sir Stephen Evans.
