D2000 R37756 17009977 105773
OF Times and Seasons THEIR MYSTERY. By the Lady Eleanor. DAN. 2. And Daniel answered and said, The Name of God be praised; for Ages of Ages; for Wisdom and Strength are his; for he changeth the Times and Seasons, &c. Printed in the Year. 1651.
A PREFACE or APPEAL. THe Revelations Gospel; bless∣ed Book of the Prophet Da∣vids Generation cometh not (as testifies) by flesh onely, this Man-childe of the Woman seed, but diversly as in days of old God spake then; so now of his Sons coming after one and the same way, by things past, as though present, as follows of that Tyrant Herod again and his fol∣lowers; who with an Iron Scepter, the Revolted Nations subdues, whose Rod instead of Kissing, to depose him, taking Counsel with one consent.
Touching which Sacred Oracles, for as much as no few having taken upon them, unacquainted with such Pedigrees Mystery, untimely to gather of this Paradise Tree, this hidden Manna, consisting of Times Mystery and Seasons; breathed by the Father the breath of life. There∣with Miracles and Gifts of Tongues not Equivalent. Have here conceived not amiss concerning this Conception by the Holy Ghost, the Fathers proper Dar∣ling, by a touch to thee Reader: VVhich living Tree to unfold what date it bears. Off-spring of David arrived its Maturity or Period at∣tained. Those Olive Leaves pre∣scribed for healing the Nations ma∣lady or evil, to his servants the Pro∣phets
for whose cure aforehand be∣ing revealed, by him stiled his friends servants, not being of their Masters Privy Counsel, even things shortly to be done, attends or waits no lon∣ger; as shews, for the time is at hand (Rev. 1. cap.) Notwithstanding his then reply, it is not for you to know times and seasons, precious reserves in the Fathers own hand, or dispose for after ages; which Key of David pretended to be in their pocket, a Legacy left onely to them and their assigns, a strain or note too high for vulgar spirits. His eye-salve anointed with Balaams. And thus of Jew and Gentile, born under one Planet or Sign, on this wise signified, no obscure Characters, (Rev. 12.) And there appeared a great
sign in Heaven, a woman clothed or a∣rayed with the Sun, inthroned above the Moon, Crowned with twelve Stars, no other the Golden Zodiacks signs, assigned to those parts, she pained to be delivered: the party otherwise cal∣led a prisoner. At such a time appears, &c. not any thing more perspicu∣ous and clear. VVhere inlarged thus. And there appeared another sign in Heaven, Behold a great Red Dragon, having seven Heads, &c. And he stood before the Woman, even points to the sign Virgo, by the word Virga, Arod; where Scorpio follows. The Dragons Tail imparts no less, the third part of Stars drawing after him, with Michaels alarm, the Arch∣angels. The Suns appointed progress displayes about the fall September,
&c. Day and Night, when going to halfs for the hours: with the Ser∣pents loosing his place then, by the flaming sword expelled, wherewith proceeding sufferings of this her seed, no new Gospel but that from the beginning, as he wrote to that Lady. So of this Deified persons description, adorned with those Celestials inno∣cence in its colours, she in travel, &c. That Ostetrix where imbrew'd, stood before her in his proper colours also with open mouth, drawn from head to tail, the Episcopal Antichristian Order (attended with his Train) sti∣led The old Serpent the Devil, that Father rather, as much to say, Anno Dom. Octobris Michaelis, Coram Pa∣tri totius Angliae, &c. Such a one she appeared, personally to receive their
judgement, thence even to be carri∣ed away by water close prisoner to the Gatehouse, witness. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the Woman, as a flood, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood; wherewith he in the seven∣teenth Century shut up in the Ark Noah. Those days cast into the account. As Item, Against them his waging VVar; those keeping the Commandments: Idolatry for questioning it: Incensed that rem∣nant that had not bowed the knee to Baals Altar. All with one voice. How marvel∣lous are thy works: VVitness Babes, Sucklings, Heavens, Moon and Stars, ordained to praise his Name, whilst others as faln into a Lithargy, snoring
