D2665A 99826724 31129
Private Forms OF Prayer, Fitted for the late Sad-Times Particularly, A Form of Prayer for THE Thirtieth of Ianuary, Morning and Evening. With Additions, &c. London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, and to be sold by William Not, at the White Horse neer the little North door in Saint Pauls Church-yard, 1660.
Private Forms of Prayer Fit for Sad Times: Heretofore Printed at Oxford, and used (occasionally) upon Dayes of Solemn Humiliation and Fasting, In his late Ma∣jesties Royall Chappell of blessed and glorious Memory. ALSO A Form of Prayer for the 30th. of Ja∣nuary, Morning and Evening. Likewise Prayers of Intercession for the Use of such as Mourn in Secret. Together with a Collection of severall other Prayers. PUBLISHED, That the world may take notice of the Powerfull (though Private) aydes, contributed by the joynt hands and hearts of such as were Gods Remembrancers and Mourners in Sion, during the late distractions in Church and STATE. London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, and are to be sold by William Not, at the White Horse neer the little North-door in St. Pauls church-yard, 1660.
St. James 5. 12. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. St. Math. 5. 4. Blessed are they that moune for they shall be comfor∣ted. Psal. 6. 5. 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtlesse come again with rejoycing, bringing his shes with him.
The Preface. OUr Saviour Com∣pares the King∣dome Mat. 13. 45 of Hea∣ven, to a Mer∣chant Man: And Merchants when they send out a Ship observe their Returnes We have been Long Adventu∣rers to Heaven, and God hath been pleased at last to give us a gracious returne; to answer our Prayers even beyond our ex∣pectation and hopes. When we were with the Dis∣ciples in the storme, at Lord Mat. 8 25.
save us, We perish: Then did our saviour who before seemed to sleep (being awakened by the continued and faithfull pray∣ers of the seven thousands who had not bowed their knees to Baal) rebuke the winds and the waves still the raging of the Sea, and the madnesse of the people. And We trust now (as Verse 26. then) there will follow a great happy calme. Hereupon As the very Hea∣then, When they had suffered shipwrack and got safe to land, were wont [appendere voti∣vam Tabulam] to consecrate a votive table, and bang it up to the honour of their preserver Neptune. As David after the slaughter of Goliath dedicated the Sword wherewith he had slain him, and
had it kept behind the Ephod in the Tabernacle. As God Commanded that a Pot of Manna should be kept for the Generations to come; that their Posterity might see how he fed their Fathers in the wil∣dernesse. As even in the Land of Ca∣naan, the bitter herbs were still reserved in the eating of the passeover, in memory of that bitter servitude, they underwent in the House of Bondage. So are these Prayers here, like the bitter herbes, or a bun∣dle of Myrrhe, collected, re∣served and consecrated, To him, to whom they were devoutly offered up, the Father of mercies, and God of all Scilicet ut fuso Tua∣rorum San∣gune cen∣tum. Consolation. To him, who accepts a little
Frankincense piously offered, no lesse then a Hecatombe. Sic capitur minimo thu ris honore Deus, Ovid. To him who heareth Pray∣ers, and hath not rejected ours. To him, who hath turned our captivity, not his mercies from us. It is of thy Goodness O Lord, that we were not utterly consu∣med, It is because thy Compas∣sions faile not. Not unto Us, O Lord, not unto Us, but unto thy name give the Praise. And the same gracious God, who hath so happily begun, so wonderfully carried on, and done so great things for us al∣ready, whereof we deservedly rejoyce; He in his own time, perfect his own work, his own way, and make us a happy Church and Nation.
May, O may those black dayes never returne, which at first extorted these mournfull Threnodies, which are here presented for thy Consolation, Quae suit urum pati. Mminisse dulce est—Sen. (in looking back upon that which is past;) not thy use with respect to the future, of which may there never be any more oc∣casion. But for the time to come, may these Prayers be turned into Praises, this Euchologium into Doxologies, our Elegies into Hosanna's, and our La∣mentations into Hallelujah's. And let all the People say Amen.
Private formes of Prayer fit for sad times. The Contents. SEntences of the Spture. Page 1 A general Confession. 3 A Le any. 7 A prayer for forgivenesse. 17 The Absolution. 19 The Lords Prayer. 19 A Psalm instead of venite exultemu. 21 Proper Psalms and . 25 A Forme Collected out of the Psalms. l. Page 26 II. 28 III. 30 Psal. 51. 33 With (part of) the Commination pray∣ers. 37 Eight Prayers or Collects. I. Page 39 II. 40 III. IV. 42 V. VI. 43 VII. VIII. 44 Prayers for the afflicted Church of Eng∣land. 45. 47.
A Collect for Charity, 50 The Conclusion. 50 A Forme of Prayer for the 30th of Ia∣nuary. Preface. Page, 55 A generall Confession. 61 A Letany. 65 A Pryer for forgivenesse. 75 The Lords Prayer. 77 Lamentations out  Jeremiah the Pro∣phet. 78 Proper Psalms and first Lesson. 82 A Forme collected out of the Psalmes. I. P. 83 II. 85 III. 87 Second Lesson. IV. 90 V. 92 The Creed. 94 The Lords Prayer. 95 Thirteen other Prayers. I. 96 II. 102 III. 104 IV. 112 V. 113 VI. 117 VII. 119 VIII. 124
IX. 130 X. XI. 132 XII. 134 XIII. 135 A Proper prayers or the 30th. of January. 136 Evening prayer for the 30th. of Ianuary. The Letany of the Church. 145 The Confession of sinnes. 157 The absolution. 158 The Lords Prayer. 158 Proper Psalmes and I. Lesson. 159 A Forme Collected out of the Psalms. 160 II. 162 III. 164 Second Lesson. IV. 167 V. 169 The Creed. 171 The Lords Prayer. 172 XIII. Prayers or Collects. I. 173 II. 175 III. 178 IV. 180 V. 183 VI 186 VII. 195 VIII. 198 IX. X. 199
XI. 200 XII. XIII. 201 A proper prayer for the 30th. of January. 203 An Anniversary prayer for the 30th. of Ja∣nuary. 212 Prayers of Intercession for the use of such as Mourn in secret. Proper Psalms and lessons. pag. 28 A Preparatory prayer. 219 King Davids prayer for the Church and people. I. 223 II. 224 III. 225 IV. 227 King David's tears. 229 Jeremiah's Lamentations Prophetical of these times: I. 231 II. 233 Daniel's prayers and Confession. 135 Praers for the King, I. 247 II. 238 III. 280 A Letany of Intercession. 244 A Prayer for the Church. 253 A Prayer for the Queen Mother and the Royall Progeny. 254
A prayer for the afflicted. 255 An humble and submissive expostulation with God upon Oliver Cromwells Proclamation against the Loyall Clergy. 258 A prayer for the Church of England. 268 A prayer for the Kings Birth-day May 29. 276 The Ministers prayer for the people. 279 The peoples prayer for the minister. 282 Aother. 286 Proper psalms for severall occasions. 288 Proper Lessons for severall occasions. 289 A prayer for the King. 291 Another, with Prince Charles his Letany 292 A prayer for the Church. 297 Five other prayers or Collects. I. 298 II. 300 III. IV. V. 301 A prayer for the Clergy. 332 A prayer to be said during these sad times of trouble 304 A prayer for preservation from the ene∣my. 312 A Confession of sins, and prayer for pardon. 314 A Prayer for the King. 318 A prayer for the preservation of the Uni∣versity and City of Oxford. 330
A prayer drawn by his Majesties speciall directions and dictates for a blessing on the treaty at Uxbridge. 323 A prayer for peace. 325 A prayer for the ending of the present trou∣bles. 329 IX. Collects. I. 334 II. III. 335 IV. V. 336 VI. 337 VII, VIII. 338 IX. 339 Certain additionall Prayers. In the time of war, 339 A Prayer for a Souldier, 3 A Prayer upon the re-admission of the for∣merly Secluded Members, February 1. 1659. 348 A Prayer upon the Assembling of the pre∣sent Parliament, April 25. 1660. 351 A Thanksgiving for his Majesties safe ar∣rivall and return to his kingdome, May 25. 1660. 354
Private Forms of Prayer, fit for these sad Times. Psalm 10. vers. 1. WHy standest thou so far off (O Lord:) and hidest thy face in the need∣full time of trou∣ble. Psal. 3 v. 1, 2, 3. Lord, how are they increased that trouble us? many are they that rise up against us. Many one there be, that say of our soules: there is no help for them in their God.
But thou, O Lord, art our de∣sender: thou art our worship, and the lifr up of our heads. Ier. 10. 24. Correct us, O Lord, and yet in thy judgement, not in thy fury, least we should be consu∣med and brought to nothing. Psal. 130. 3. If thou Lord wilt be extream to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?
O come let us worship, let us humble our selves, let us fall low, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Then this generall Confession to be said, all kneeling. O Thou Judge eternall, we the finfullest of all the sons of Men; that have abused thy Mer∣cies, provoked thy judgments, unsheathed thy glittering sword, forced all the Arrows and Darts out of thy Quiver, and with our multiplied, abominable crying sins, brought down a desolation on a most pleasant land (that former delight of thine) the glo∣ry of all lands. We, that after thy wrath was poured out upon us, have yet further encreased our sinns, as
thou hast encreased the weight and number of thy Judgments upon us; walked most unprofita∣bly and obdurately under all thy disciplines and visiations; suffered all thy pretious me∣thods of reducing us, (thine ad∣monitions and thy stripes) to be utterly lost and frustrate among us, brought down a blast and mildew upon all that hath been undertaken to repaire our breaches and reduce our Peace. We do now at length in th remorse and bitterness of our soules, desire to cast our selves down upon the ground before thee; to confess and acknow∣ledge thy patience and Long suffering, that we have not been under the sharpest of thy dis∣pleasure; and to adore thy good∣ness whatsoever becomes of us; though it be in the shame and confusion and Condemnation both of our bodies and our soules
Lord, this is the mildest that we have reason to expect from thy Iustice in retribution to our sins: and whatsoever is less then this, whatsoever the bitternesse of our up be in this life; though thou shouldest cast us into the place of Dragons; give us to drink of the wine of astonishment, the most stupifying deadly poi∣on; number us all to the sword, poure out thy fire and brimstone upon us. Yet if by thus chastizing of us here thou please to rescue us from that sadder doome of be∣ing condemned with the world, This is a most inestimable mercy of thine, beyond all that we have hitherto so unworthily enjoy∣ed. Lord, we desire and professe to acquit thy justice in thy pro∣ceedings, to adore the bounty of thy goodness and patience to∣wards us; that we have not long ago been as Admah and Zeboim, as
Sodom and Gomorrah, that we have this day liberty to ap∣proach thee. Lord, that it may yet be thy good pleasure to come home to every one of our soules, to strike our hearts, to break up these fal∣low grounds of ours, that all thy pretious seed be no longer so cast away among thorns. And by the power of thy mighty controw∣ling, convincing spirit, that thou wouldest once subdue all the re∣sistances of our spirits against this most holy, most reasonable motion of humiliation within us. Lord, this is the one earnest desire of our soules, that hath cast us low this day before thy footstoole, with cryes and tears and earnest groans, that thou wouldest have this mercy upon us, that thou wouldest thus pow∣erfully reveale thy self unto us, who hast thus long smitten & im∣portunatly called unto us. That
being returned unto thee in fast∣ing, weeping and mourning and renting of our hearts; we might be capable of thy returns unto us, of the further impressions of thy grace; and never more contradict, or quench, or grieve that spirit of thine, which hath thus long contended and wre∣stled with us; that so it may be seasonable with thee to give us the comfort of thy help again, and the confidence to approach thy pce, to praise that Ma∣jesty,  hath not cast out our Prayer, nor turned his mer∣cy from us. To whom be all honour and glory, power and praise, now and for ever, Amen. O Lord the great and dread∣full God, keeping Covenant and Mercy to them that love thee, and to them that keep thy
Commandments: We have sin∣ned with our fore-fathers; We, our Kings and our Priests, our Nobles, and all the People of this Land, and have rebelled even by departing from thy precepts and thy judgements. By our impious and godlesse thoughts of thee, our confiden∣ces in the arme of flesh, by pla∣cing our affections too much up∣on earthly things, by neglecting to love ad delight in thee, by presuming of thy me and yet continuing in , we have provoked and red a∣gainst thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By our want of reverence to thy service, not considering the awfulnesse of thy presence, and that honour due to thee in thy House, by our formall and hy∣pocritical worship, by open pro∣phanation
and sacriledge; by shews and pretences of Piety, to cover our worldly and wicked designes; we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By vain and rash Oaths, Bla∣sphemies and Peruries; especi∣ally our carelesse breaches of Oathes made to our Soveraigns, forgetting that such are the Oaths of God; and that thou thy self in a more especial man∣ner, art a strict avenger of them; by our execrations of our selves, our brethren, and our enemies; we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By our undervaluing thy pub∣lique Service, and neglecting to
bear a part in it, by mispending of that time, either there or else∣where, in wanton or worldly thoughts and imployments, and not keeping the spiritual sabath unto thee, in serving thee truly, all the dayes of our life [By not duely observing the times of Festivity or fasting, appointed by just Authority, according to the example of thy people in all ages], we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnes belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By not duely acknowledging thine Ordinance and Authority in the Persons of our Superiours, by speaking evill of Dignities, and reviling the Rulers of thy People, by groundlesse jealousies and suspicions, misjudging and censuring their Actions; [And at lst proceeding to that  and most rrid pitch of violation of that
Image of thine imprinted on them;] by being as a People that strive with their Priests; by our not obeying them that have the rule over us, and not submitting our selves to them, who by thy ap∣pointment watch over our souls; by neglecting our care of those Committed to our Charge, not Correcting those sins which have Cryed loud for exemplary Pu∣nishment, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By rash Anger, Malice, Hatred and Revenge, and the bloody effects thereof; by uncharitable Contentions and Divisions, Fa∣ctions and Animosities, by Cru∣elty and Unmercifulnesse, and communicating in the sinnes of Blood, we have provoked and rebelled against thee:
O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confuson of face, as at this day. By the manifold sins of Un∣cleannesse, by seeking or not avoiding the occasions thereof, by Idlenesse, Intemperance and Drunkennes, by immodest words and gestures, by our shamelesse boasting, or not blushing at those sinnes, we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By Thefts, Rapines and Op∣pressions, scandalizing thereby the Honour and Iustice of a good Cause; by vexatious suites so much pra∣ctised and countenanced, by ex∣actions, by unjust gains in bar∣gaining, by defrauding the la∣bourer of his hire, by want of due care in expending what we have, and a good Conscience
in acquiring more, We have pro∣voked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By lying, detraction and con∣tumely, by endeavouring to advan∣tage a good Cause, by falshood and unjust means; by censuring and rash judgments; by false wit∣ness and perverting the course of Justice; we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By desire of change and un∣contentednesse in our Estates; by giving our selves over to lust∣full, covetous and inordinate affections; by desiring Peace not so much for thine honour or the publick good, as the satisfa∣ction of our own private lusts; by neglecting acts of Chari∣ty,
and doing as we would be done to; and not doing our duty in that state of life un∣to which it hath pleased thee to call us; we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at this day. By our want and neglect of those necessary Christian duties, of humiliation and godly sor∣row for sins, of due indignation, and revenge upon ourselves for them; of confessing and forsa∣king, of restitution and satisfa∣ction to others, and by not bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance; we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By impatience under thy cor∣recting hand, by not endeavour∣ing
our amendment by it, in reflecting upon our own sins as the causes of it, by despising thy chastisements, in not rejoycing in lations, and not glori∣fying thee, that hast counted us worthy to suffer for righteous∣ness sake; we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at this day. By fretting ourselves because of the ungodly, and being envi∣ous against the evill doers; by not loving our enemies, not blessing them that curse us, not doing good to them that hate us, nor praying for those that despightfully use us, and perse∣cute us; we have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at this day.
By presuming to do evill that good may come thereon; by placing piety in opinions, by straining at Gnats and swallow∣ing of Camels, in scrupling at indifferent things and making no conscience of known sins: we have provoked and rebelled against thee, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at this day. By running into open pro∣phaneness, under colour of a∣voiding superstition; by guid∣ing our conscience by humour and fancies, and not by the cer∣tain rules of thy Law; by ha∣ving itching ears, and heaping to our selves teachers, and by having mens persons in admira∣tion because of advantage: we have provoked and rebelled a∣gainst thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at this day. Who can tell how oft he of∣fendeth; O cleanse thou us from these, and from our secret sins. Try us, O good God, and search the ground of our hearts, prove us, and examine our thoughts, and look well if there be any other way of wickedness in us, and lead us in the way e∣verlasting. A Prayer for forgivenesse O Almighty and most mer∣cifull Father, who art the Lord, the Lord God, mercifull and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodnesse and truth, keeping mercy for thou∣sands, and forgiving iniquity, transgressions, and sins. Look down upon us with thy com∣passionate eyes, who are here be∣fore thee, in the bitterness of
our soules, and doe now with troubled spirits, with broken and with contrite hearts; most humbly beg pardon for these multitudes of our offences. Look, we humbly beseech thee, upon the bloud of thy Sonne, which speaks better things then that of Abel; for his sake spare us, Lord, spare thy people, that these sins rise not up against us: for his passions sake expose us not for a prey to their cruell hands, who would both devour and deride us. R. Spare us, O Lord, spare thy peo∣ple for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and be mercifull to all these our sins, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest onely. ALmighty God, our heavenly Father, who of his great mer∣cy hath promised forgiveness of sins to all them which with hear∣ty repentance and true faith turn unto him: Have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins, confirm and strengthen you in all goodne, and bring you to everlasting life, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. The Lords Prayer. OUr Father which art in hea∣ven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will e done in earth, as it is in hea∣en. Give us this day our  bread. And forgive us  espasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptatio but deliver us from evill, A∣men. Priest. O Lord open thou our lips, Answer. And our mouth shall shew for thy praise. Priest. O God make speed to save us, Answ. O Lord make haste to help us. Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without endAmen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord: Answ. The Lord's name be praised.
A Psalm instead of Venite exul∣temus. O COME, let us humble Psal. 95. our selves, and fall down before the Lord with reverence and fear. 2. For he is the Lord our God, and we are his people, and the sheep Psal. 100. f his pasture. 3. If a man will not turn, Psal. . God will whet his sword, he ath bent his bow, and made it eady. 4. Let us repent and turn from r wickedness, and our sins shall be Acts 3. given us. 5. Let us turn, and the Lord ill turn from his heavy wrath, Jonah 3. d will pardon us, and we shall t perish. 6. For we acknowledge our Psal. 5 ults, and our sins are ever before. 7. We have provoked thine ger, O Lord, and thy heavy Lam. 4.
displeasure is kindled against us. 8. But there is mercy with thee, Psal. 130. that thou mayst be feared, and t art full of compassion. 9. Thy hand is not shortned, Isaiah 65. that thou canst not help, neither is thy goodness abated, th thou wilt not hear. 10. Thou hast promised, O Lord, that before we cry thou wilt hear , and whilst we yet speak, that th wilt have mercy upon us. 11. They that trust in th shall not be confounded, neith shall any that call upon thee  despised. 12. For thou art the only Lord who woundest, and dost heal aga Tob. 3. Job 5. Ose. 6. who killest and revivest, bring even to hell and bringest back  gain. 13. Our fathers hoped in th they trusted in thee, and tho Psal. 22. didst deliver them. 14. They called upon thee, a were helped, they put their trust
thee, and were not confounded. 15. O Lord, rebuke not us in thiue indignation, neither cha∣sten Psal. 6. us in thy heavy displeasure. 16. O remember not the sins and offences of our youth, but according Psal. 25. to thy mercy think thou upon us, O Lord, for thy goodness. 17. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord, heal us for our bones are vexed. 18. And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our Baruch 3. Jonah 2. fouls, we remember thee, and we cry unto thee, Hear, Lord, and have mercy. 19. For thine owne sake, and for thy Holy Names sake, incline Dan. 9. thine ear and hear, O mercifull Lord. 20. For we doe not pour out our prayers before thy face, trusting in our own righteousness, but in thy great and manifold mercies. 21. Wash us thoroughly from our wickednesse, and cleanse us Psal. 51. from our sins.
22. Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeeds. 23. Make us clean hearts, O God, and renew a right spirit within us. 24. Help us, O God of our salva∣tion, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins, for thy name sake. 25. The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God, shalt thou not despise. 26. O be favourable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Ierusalem. 27. So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever: and Psal. 79. will alwayes be shewing forth thy praise from generation to generation. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. Psalmes for Morning Prayer. Psal. 6. 31. 38. 39. For Evening Prayer. Psal. 90. 91. 102. 130. 149. For first Lesson read some one of these chapters. Ezra 9. Nehem. 9. Isai. 58. Joel 2 Ezek. 33. Or, Isai. 1. Jerem. 5. Jerem. 9. Ezek. 22. Micah 6. Or, Amos 4. Ezek. 14.
I. HEar our voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our complaint come before thee, let it enter even into thy eares Our heart is in heavinesse, O let  make our Prayer unto thee in an acceptable time. Lord our iniquities are against us, our rebellions are many wherewith we have transgressed against thee: But we confess our wickednesses, and are sorry for our fins. Our confusion is daily before us, fearfulness and trembling are come upon us, and an horrible dread hath overwhelmed us, and it is thy great rcy only that we are not consumed, for we have sinned, O Lord, we have transgressed and done wickedly, yea we have rebelled, and departed from
thy precepts, and from thy Comman∣dements. Innumerable troubles are come about us, our sins have ta∣ken hold upon us, that we are not able to look up, yea they are more in number then the hairs of our heads, and our hearts have failed us. O Lord, righte∣ousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, be∣cause of all the offences we have committed against thee. Yet compassion and forgiveness is with thee, though we have rebelled a∣gainst thee. O Lord, according to thy goodness, we beseech thee, let thine anger and thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine upon thy servants. Incline thine ears and hear, open thine eyes and behold our afflictions; for we doe not pre∣sent our supplications before thee, in our own righteousness, but for thy ma∣nifold and great mercies. We have sinned against hea∣ven and against the, and are
no more worthy to be called thy Sons. Yet, O Lord, hear, O Lord forgive, nsider and doe it, deferre not for thine own sake, O our God. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. II. HEar our prayers, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and hearken unto the words of our mouth, for strangers are risen up against us, and Tyrants, which have not God before their eyes, seek after our Souls. Cast us not away in the time of our weekness: for sake us not when our strength faileth us. O remember not our offences,
but according to thy mercy think thou upon us for thy goodness. O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in misery. The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our troubles. Turn us, O God our Saviour, and let thine anger cease from us: send down from on high and deliver us, take us out of these many waters. Why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pa∣sture? Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and trou∣ble? for our soul is brought low un∣to the dust, our belly cleaveth to the ground. Look upon our adversity and misery: and forgive us all our sins. Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake: so
sall it be known that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord hast done it. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. III. VVE will cry unto the Lord with our voyce, yea even unto God will we cry with our voyce, and he shall hearken unto us. For the Lord is gracious and long-suffering, and of great mercy to them that call upon him. The Lord is nigh unto all them that be of a contrite heart, and will save such as are of an humble i∣rit. And now, Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is even in thee;
For our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did'st deliver them; they called upon thee and were holpen, they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. The Lord will be a defence for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of trouble: and they that know thy name will put their trust in thee, for thou Lord never failest them that seek thee. The merciful goodness of the Lord endureth for ever and ever, upon them that fear him: and his righte∣ousness upon Childrens Children; even upon such as keep his Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to doe them. Thou therefore that art a Sa∣viour to all that trust in thee, thou that upholdest all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that healest the broken in heart, and givest me∣dicine to heal their sickness, thou that art the Father of mer∣cy
and God of all consolation, that art comfort to the sad, and strength to the weak, hear thy servants, we beseech thee, look down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy salvation. Glory be to the Father, and to the S, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now d ever shall be, world without end Amen.
After the Second Lesson, Psal. 51. All kneeling. 1. HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness; according to the mul∣titude of thy mercies doe away mine offences. 2. Wash me throughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. 3. For I acknowledg my faults, and my sin is ever before me. 4. Against thee onely have I sin∣ned, and done this evil in thy sight; that thou mightest be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged. 5. Behold I was shapen in wick∣edness, and in sin hath my mo∣ther conceived me. 6. But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shalt
make me to understand wisdome se∣cretly. 7. Thou shalt purge me with Hysope, and I shall be cleane: Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. 8. Thou shalt make me hear of joy and gladnesse, that the bones which thou hast broken may re∣joyce. 9. Turne thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeed 10. Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take n thy Holy Spirit from me. 12. O give me the comfort of t help again; and stablish me with t free spirit. 13. Then shall I teach th wayes unto the wicked; and sin∣ners shal be converted unto th 14. Deliver me from blood∣guiltinesse, O God, thou that  the God of my health; and
tongue shall sing of thy righteous∣nesse. 15. Thou shalt open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall shew thy praise. 16. For thou desirest no sacri∣fice, else would I give it thee; but thou delightest not in burnt offer∣ings. 17. The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: A broken and a contrite heart, O God, shalt thou not despise. 18. O be favourable and gracious unto Sion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem. 19. Then shalt thou be plea∣sed with the sacrifice of righte∣ousness, with the burnt offerings and oblations: Then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine Altar. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c.
Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father which art in heaven, &c. Minister, O Lord, save thy ser∣vants. Answer, Which put their tru in thee. Min. Send unto them help fro above. Answ. And evermore mighti∣ly defend them. Min. Help us, O God, our Savio Answ. And for the glory  thy names sake deliver us, b mercifull unto us sinners, fo thy names sake. Min. O Lord, hear our prayer. Ans. And let our cry come unt thee.
Let us pray. O Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our pray∣ers, and spare all those which confess their sins unto thee; that they (whose consciences by sin are accused) by thy mercifull pardon may be absolved, tho∣rough Christ our Lord, Amen. O Most mighty God and mer∣cifull Father, which hast compassion of all men, and hatest nothing that thou hast made; which wouldest not the death of a sinner, but that he should ra∣ther turn from sin and be saved: Mercifully forgive us our trespas∣ses; receive and comfort us which he grieved and wearied with the burthen of our sins. Thy proper∣ty is to have mercy, to thee only it appertaineth to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, O Lord, spare
thy people whom thou hast re∣deemed; Enter not into judge∣ment with thy Servants, which be vile earth, and miserable sin∣ners; but so turn thine ire from us, which meekly knowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; so make hast to help us in this world, that we may e∣ver live with thee in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Then shall the people say thi that followeth, after the Mini∣ster. TUrn thou us, O good Lord, a so shall we be turned; be favo rable, O Lord, be favourable to t people, which turn to thee, in weepi fasting and praying: For thou art mercifull God, full of Compassion, l suffering, and of great pity. Thou sp rest▪ when we deserve punishment,  in thy wrath thinkest upon mercy Spare thy people, good Lord, sp
them, and let not thine heritage be brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, and after the multitude of thy mercies look upon us. I. O Most mercifull and gracious Lord, we wretched and mi∣serable sinners, humbly beseech thee in mercy and compassion to behold our great afflictions; for thy wrath is gone out, and thine indignation is kindled against us: We confesse, O Lord, that thy udgements are just, for we have multiplied our transgressions like the sand of the Sea; and the cry of them hath been so great, that it hath pierced the heavens, and called for vengeance against us: But we beseech thee, O Lord, forget not thou to be gracious, and shut not up thy loving kind∣nesse in displeasure; turn thee
again and be mercifull unto thy Servants. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name; O deliver us, and be mercifull unto our sinnes for thy names sake. Take thy [sword] and all other judgements from us, that we be not consumed by the means of thy heavy hand up∣on our sins. O satisfie us with thy mercy, and that soon; so shall we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, give thee thanks for ever, and will alwayes be shew∣ing forth thy praise from gene∣ration to generation. Grant this, O mercifull Father, we beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, our onely Saviour and Redeemer, A∣men. II. OEternal God and most gra∣cious Father, we confesse th by our manifold transgressions, we have deserv'd whatsoever thy Law hath threatned against sin∣ners:
Our contempt of thy Di∣vine Service is great, and we hear thy Word, but obey it not. Our charity to our Neighbour is cold, and our disobedience abounds. Religion is with many of us, as in too many places besides, made but a pretence for other ends, then thy service; and there hath been little or no care among us, to keep Truth and Peace toge∣ther, for the preserving of both Church and State. Forgive us, O Lord, forgive us these, and all other our grievous sins. Send us light in our understandings, rea∣diness and obedience in our wils, discretion in our words and acti∣ons, true, serious, and loyal en∣deavours for the peace and pro∣sperity of our Ierusalem, the uni∣ty and glory of this Church and State; that we may love it, and prosper in it, that we may be gui∣ded by thy grace in this life, and received to thy glory in the life
to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. III. GRant we beseech thee. Al∣mighty God, that we which for our evill deeds, and our great unthankfulness are worthily pu∣nished; by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relie∣ved, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. IV. ALmighty and most mercifull Father, who for our many and grievous sins (those especi∣ally which we have committed since our last solemn Humilia∣tion before thee) mightest most justly have cut us off, but in the multitude of thy mercies hast hi∣therto spared us: Accept we most heartily beseech thee, our unfeigned sorrow for all our for∣mer transgressions; and grant we may never so presume of thy
mercy, as to despise the riches of thy goodnesse: But that thy for∣bearance and long suffering may lead us to repentance, and a∣mendment of our sinfull lives, to thy honour and glory, and our eternal salvation at the last day, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. V. ALmighty and everlasting God, which hatest nothing that thou hast made, and doest forgive the sins of them that be penitent: Create and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our wretchednes, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ. VI. GRant Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so ordered by thy gover∣nance,
that thy Church may joy∣fully serve thee in all godly quietness, through Jesus Christ, Amen. VII. ALmighty and Everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities and miseries, and in all our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend us, through Christ our Lord, Amen. VIII. O Lord, we beseech thee, fa∣vourably to hear the pray∣ers of thy people, that we, which are justly punished for our offen∣ces, may be mercifully delivered by thy goodness, for the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Saviour, who liveth, &c.
Let us pray for the whole state of Christs holy Catholick Church, particularly of our distressed Mother, the afflicted Church of England. O Lord God of thine inheritance, who conveyest many blessings to the children of men, by the prayer and Mi∣nistery of thy Church, let our prayers obtain of thee mercies and deliveran∣ces for her. O Lord, thou hast planted thy Church in the humility, and poverty, and death of thy Sonne; thou hast watered it with the blood of thy A∣postles and Martyrs; thou hast made it flourish and spread forth its bran∣ches, by the warmth and heat, and graces of thy Holy Spirit; and hast ac∣cording to thy promise, still preserved it in the midst of all enmities and dis∣advantages. Thy Lawes and righteous Com∣mandments
have been a scorne and derision to Iews and Gentiles; the flesh of thy servants hath been meat for the beasts of the land; And still she wears the purple robe of mockery, and the crown of thorns, which at first she took from the head and side of her dearest Lord. At last, O Lord, be gracious unto thine inheritance; help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name; let not thine enemies devoure the Church, and lay wast her dwelling places: Be mercifull unto our sins, preserve all those that by malice of their enemies are appointed to death, or prison, or any other misery. Let us still enjoy the freedome of thy Gospel, the food of thy Word, the sweet refreshings of thy Sacraments, publick Communions in thy Church, and all the benefits of the society of Saints; and let not our sins cause thee to remove the Candlestick from us. But make thy people and the sheep of thy pasture secure and glad in thy salvation; that we may shew forth thy
praise in this world, and in the world to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that sittest upon the Cherubims, stir up thy strength and come and help thy people that prayeth unto thee for mercy and Protection. Thou hast made Affliction the portion of thy chil∣dren in this life, thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and givest them plenteousness of tears to drink; Yet be pleased to shew the light of thy countenance upon us, to lighten our darknesses, to relieve our miseries, to heale our sicknesses; and let not thy Church become a strife unto her Neigh∣bours, but reunite her Divisions, and make her not a prey to them that would devoure her, and then laugh her to scorn. O Lord, hedge her about with thy mercies, with the custody of An∣gels, with the Patronage of Kings and Princes, with the hearts and
hands of Nobles, and the defence  the whole secular Arm, least the wil Beasts of the field pluck off  Grapes, destroy the Vintage, a root up the Vine it self: but let  so flourish under the beams of thy fa vour and providence, that it may  root, and spread and fill all lands that the name of the man of thy rig hand, the God and man Christ Ies may be glorified, thy Church enlarg and defended, and we blessed with  health and salvation: Grant this, O Lord, for Iesus Christ his sake, our onely Saviour and Redeemer. A∣men.
O Saviour of the world, save us, which by thy Cross and pre∣cious blood hast redeemed us, help us we beseech thee, help this eeding Church, O thou God of our salvation. Though thou hast no a long ti giuen Satan and his instruments power  all that she hath, yet, O Lord, spare her life: Let there be still a renant left to praise thee, And when by these sharp trials thou hast vindicated her integrity, be pleased to blesse her, as thou didst Job's latter end, by giving her a double portion of all reall advanta∣ges And though thou hast now vio∣lently removed thy. Tabernacle, yet, O Lord, let not one pin of it be lost: But erect it again amongst us in the wonted order and beauty, for thy goodnesse sake, for thy mer∣ sake, for thy Son Christ Iesus
sake, ur onely Lord and Saviour, Amen. O Lord, which dost teach us that all our doings without charity are nothing worth; send thy holy Ghost, & poure into our hearts that most excellent gift of charity, the very bond of peace and all virtues; without whic whosoever liveth is counted dea before thee. Grant this for thine onely Son Jesus Christ's sake. The Conclusion. THe Almighty Lord, which is a most strong tower to all them that put their trust in him; to whom all things in Heaven, i earth, and under the earth, do bow and obey, be now and ever∣more our defence.
The defence of this afflicted Church: The defence of these di∣cted Realmes: The defence of all ch who do, or suffer for the testimony f a good Conscience: The defence of e blessed and holy offices of our Mo∣r the hurch: The defence of this nd all other congregations that meet gether in thy holy fear: The defence  our dear relations, both at home nd abroad: The defence of our n persons: The defence of our souls, dies and estates. And make us all to know and el, that there is no other name nder heaven given unto man,  whom, and through whom, we ay receive re-establishment in our eligion, restauration of our Li∣rties, reconciliation with thee r God, together with peace and fety among men, felicity here, d salvation hereafter, but one∣ the name of our Lord Iesus rist.
To whom with the, O Father and the blessed spirit,  ascribed, as i most due, all H nour, and Glory, Praise Might, Majesty, Dominio and Adoration of all A∣gels, of all Men, and of  Creatures, now and for Amen, Amen.
A FORME OF Prayer FOR the Thirtieth of Ianuary.
A form of Prayer for the 30th of January. Preface to be read standing. 1. RIghteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talke with thee of thy judgments; where∣ore doth the way of the wicked rosper? wherefore are all they appy, that deal very treacher∣usly? 2. Thou bast planted them, yea, ey grow and bring forth fruit: ou art neare in their lips, and rre from their reines, where∣re holdest thou thy tongue, ile the wicked devoureth the
man that is more righteous th e? 3. They have condemned an killed the Just, and he doth no refist them: 4. They make a man an offend for a word, and lay snares for him, that reproeth thm in the gate,  turn aside the Iust for a thing of nought. 5. They say, let us lay w for blood, let us lurke privily fo the Innocent blood,  cause; we shall find  substance; we shall  es with spoile: 6. Wherefore they  their Net, and burn Iucense  their Drgg; because by it. thei ption is fat, and their eat plen s. 7. Art not thou from everlast∣ing, my Lord, my God, my ho∣ly one? O Lord, thou hast  them for Judgment:  mighty God, thou hast establi∣ed them for Correction.
8. But thoug the righteous be prevented by death, yet shall he be at rest. 9. For his soule pleased the Lord; therefore he hath hasted to take him from among the wicked. 10. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us for utter destruction; but they are in peace. 11. For though they be pu∣nished in the sight of men, yet is their reward full of immorta∣lity 12. And after a little chasten∣lug they shall be greatly rewar∣ded, for God hath proved them, and found them worthy for him∣self. 13. As Gold in the fire, hath he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. 14. Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labours, and their works follow them. 15. For if we have been plan∣ted with him in the likenesse of his death we shall also be in the likenesse of his resurrection. 16. O our God, we are asha∣med, and blush to lift up our faces to thee; for our iniquities are increased over our beads, and our trespasse is gone up to Heaven; since the dayes of our Fathers, have we been in a great trespasse, unto this day; and for our Iniquities have we, our Kings, and our Priests, been delivered to the sword, to captivity, to a spoil; and to confusion of face, as it is this day. 17. What shall we say, or how shall we clear our selves? God hath found out the Iniquity of his Servants: We have trans∣gressed, and rebelled; thou hast not pardoned. 18. Thou hast covered with an∣ger, and persecuted us, thou hast slain, and not pittied.
19. The Lord hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devou∣red the foundations thereof. 20. For the sins of her Prophets, and her Priests, that have shed the blood of the Iust, in the midst of her. 21. And now, O Lord, thou art most Just in all that is come upon us; for thou hast done right but we have done wickedly. 22. Behold we are before thee in our trespasse, for we cannot stand be∣fore thee because of this. 23. O Lord, though our ini∣quities testifie against us, yet do thou it for thy names sake, for we have sinned against thee. 24. Be not wrath very sore, neither remember iniquity for ever. 25. Be mercifull, O Lord, to thy people, whom thou hast re∣deemed, and lay not innocent blood to the charge of thy peo∣ple.
26. Deliver us from bloud-guil∣tiness thou God of our health, and our tongue shall sing of thy righte∣ousness. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end:Amen.
O come let us worship, let us bumble our selves, let us fall low, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Then this General Confession to be said, All kneeling. OThou Judge Eternall, we the sinfullest of all the sons of men, that have abused thy Mercies, provoked thy Judge∣ments, unsheathed thy glitter∣ing Sword, forced all the Ar∣rows and Darts of thy Quiver, and with our multiplied abomi∣nable crying sins, brought down a desolation on a most pleasant Land (that former delight of thine) the glory of all Lands. We, that after thy wrath was poured out upon us, have
yet further encreased our sins, as thou hast encreased the weight and number of thy Judgements upon us; walked most unprofitably and obdu∣rately under all thy disciplines and visitations; suffered all thy pretious methods of reducing us (thine admonitions and thy ripes) to be utterly lost and ate amongst us, brought down a blast & mildew upon all that has been undertaken to re∣pair our breaches, & reduce our peace. We do now at length, in the remorse and bitterness of our souls, desire to cast our selves down upon the ground before thee, to confess and acknowledg thy patience and long-suffering, that we have not been under the sharpest of thy displeasures; and to adore thy goodness, whatso∣ever becomes of us, though it be in the shame, and confusion, and condemnation, both of our bo∣dies and soules. Lord! this is
the mildest that we have reason to expect from thy Justice, in retribution to our sinnes: And whatever is lesse then this, what∣soever the bitterness of our cup be in this life, though thou shouldest cast us into the place of Dragons, give us to drink of the Wine of astonishment, the most stupifying deadly potion, number us all to the sword, pour out thy fire and brimstone upon us: Yet if by thus chastizing of us here, thou please to rescue us from that sadder doom, of being condemned with the world, this is a most inestimable mercy of thine, beyond all that we have (hitherto) so unwor∣thily enjoyed. Lord! we de∣sire, and profess, to acquit thy Justice in thy proceedings, to adore the bounty of thy Good∣ness and patience towards us, that we have not, long ago, been as Admah and Zeboim, as Sodom and Gomorrah, that we have this
day liberty to approach th Lord! that it may yet be t good pleasure, to come home  every one of our soules, to strike our hearts, to break up these fal∣low grounds of ours, that all th pretious seed be no longer  cast away amongst thornes: And by the power of thy mighty, controuling, convincing Spirit, that thou wouldest once subdue all the resistances of our spirits against this most reasonable mo∣tion of humiliation within us. Lord, this is the one earne desire of our souls, that hath ca us low (this day) before thy foo stool, with cries, and tears, & ear∣nest groans, that thou wouldst have this mercy upon us, that thou wouldest thus powerfully reveal thy self unto us, who hast thus long smitten and importu∣nately called unto us; that being at last returnd unto thee, in wee∣ping, fasting and mourning, and renting of our hearts; we might be capable of thy returns to us,
of the further impressions of thy grace, and never more contra∣dict or quench, or grieve that spirit of thine, which hath thus long contended and wrestled with us; that so it may be sea∣sonable with thee, to give us the comfort of thy help again, and the confidence to approach thy presence, to praise that Majesty, which hath not cast out our prayer, nor turned his mercy from us; to whom be all honour, power, glory and praise, now and for ever, Amen. O LORD, the great and dreadfull God, keeping Co∣venant and mercy to them that love thee, and to them that keep thy Commandments, we have finned with our forefathers; We our Kings, our Priests, our No∣bles,
and all the People of this Land, and have Rebelled, ev by departing from thy Precepts and thy judgements. BY our impious and godlesse thoughts of thee, our confi∣dences in the Arm of Flesh, by placing our affections too much upon earthly things, by neglect∣ing to love and delight in thee, by presuming of thy mercies, and yet continuing in our sin we have provoked and Rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By our want of Reverence to thy Service, not considering the awfulness of thy presence, and that honour due to thee in thy house; by our formall and hy∣pocritical worship; by open pro∣phanation and sacriledge, by
shews and pretences of piety to cover our worldly and wicked designes, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By vain and rash Oaths, blas∣phemies and perjuries, especial∣ly our careless breaches of Oaths made to our Soveraign, forget∣ing that such are the Oaths of God, and that thou thy self in a more especiall manner, art a strict avenger of them; by our execrations of our selves, our Brethren, and our Enemies, we have provoked and rebelled a∣gainst thee: O Lord, righteousnes belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day.
By undervaluing thy publick Service, and neglecting to bea a part in it; by mispending o that time, either there or else∣where, in wanton or worldly thoughts and imployments, and not keeping the spiritual Sab∣both unto thee, in serving th truly all the dayes of our life; by not duely observing the times of Festivity, or Fasting, appoint∣ed by just Authority, according to the example of thy people in all ages, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By not duely acknowledging thine Ordinance and Authority in the persons of our Superiours; by speaking evill of Dignities, and reviling the Rulers of thy People, by groundless jealousies and suspitions, misjudging and censuring their actions; and at
last proceeding to that highest and horrid pitch of violation of that Image of thine imprinted on them: By being as a People that strive with their Priests; by not obeying them that have the rule over us, and not submitting ourselves to them, who by thy Appointment watch over our souls; by neglecting the care of those committed to our charge, not correcting those sins which have cryed loud for exemplary punishment, We have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By rash anger, malice, hatred, and revenge, and the bloody ef∣fects thereof; by uncharitable contentions and divisions, facti∣ons and animosities; by cruelty and unmercifulness, and com∣municating in the sins of blood;
We have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By the manifold sins of un∣cleannesse, by seeking or not a∣voiding the occasions thereof, by idlenesse, intemperance and drunkennesse, by immodest words and gestures, by our shamelesse boasting, or not blush∣ing at those sins. We have pro∣voked and rebelled against thee; O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By Thefts, Rapines, and Op∣pressions, scandalizing thereby the Honour and Justice of a good Cause, by vexatious suites so much practised and counte∣nanced, by exactions, by unjust gains in bargaining, by defraud∣ing the labourer of his hire, by
want of due care in expending what we have, and a good con∣science in acquiring more, We have provoked and rebelled a∣gainst thee; O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By lying, detraction and con∣tumely, by endeavouring to ad∣vantage a good Cause by fals∣hood and unjust means; by cen∣suring and rash judgments; by false Witnesse and perverting the course of Justice, we have pro∣voked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By desire of change, and un∣contentednesse in our Estates; by giving ourselves over to lust∣full, covetous and inordinate affections; by desiring Peace not so much for thine honour or the
publique good, as the satisfaction of our own private lusts; by neg∣lecting acts of Charity, and do∣ing as we would be done to; and not doing our duty in that state of life unto which it hath plea∣sed thee to call us. We have pro∣voked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By our want and neglect of those necessary Christian duties, of humiliation and godly sor∣row for sins, of due indignation and revenge upon ourselves for them; of confessing and forsa∣king, of restitution and satisfa∣ction to others, and by not bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, we have provoked and rebelled against thee: O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day.
By impatience under thy cor∣recting hand, by not endeavour∣ing our amendment by it, in re∣flecting upon our own sins as the Causes of it, by despising thy chastisements, in not rejoycing in tribulations, and not glorify∣ing thee, that hast counted us worthy to suffer for righteous∣nesse sake, We have provoked and rebelled against thee. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By fretting ourselves, because of the ungodly, and being envi∣ous against the evill doers; by not loving our enemies, not bles∣sing them that curse us, not do∣ing good to them that hate us, nor praying for those that de∣spightfully use us, and persecute us, We have provoked and re∣belled against thee; O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By presuming to do evill that good may come thereon; by placing piety in opinion, by straining at Gnats and swallow∣ing of Camels, in scrupling at things indifferent, and making no conscience of known sins, we have provoked and rebelled a∣gainst thee; O Lord, righteousnesse belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. By running into open pro∣phanesse, under colour of avoi∣ding superstition; by guiding our conscience by humours and fancies, and not by the certain rules of thy Law; by having itching ears, and heaping to our selves teachers, and by having mens persons in admiration, be∣cause of advantage; We have provoked and rebelled against thee:
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. Who can tell, how oft he of∣fendeth; O cleanse thou us from these, and from our secret sins. Try us, O good God, and search the ground of our hearts, prove us, and examine our thoughts, and look well if thre be any other way of wicked∣nesse in us, and lead us in the way everlasting. A Prayer for forgiveness. O Almighty and most merci∣full Father, who art the Lord God, mercifull and graci∣ous, long-suffering and abun∣dant in goodnesse and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, and forgiving iniquity, trans∣gressions and sins. Look down upon us with thy compassionate
eyes, who are here before thee, in the bitternesse of our soules, and doe now with troubled spi∣rits, with broken and with con∣trite hearts, most humbly beg pardon for these multitudes of our offences. Look, we humbly beseech thee, upon the blood of thy sonne which speaks better things then that of Abell; for his sake spare us, Lord, spare thy people, that these sins rise not up against us: for his passions sake expose us not for a prey to their cruell hands, who would both devoure and deride us. R. Spare us, Lord, spare thy people, for the glory of thy name; O deli∣ver us, and be mercifull to all these our sins, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
OUr Father which art in hea∣ven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in hea∣ven. Give us this day our daily ly bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evill. Amen. O Lord open thou our lips. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end: Amen.
LAMENTATIONS out of Jeremy the Prophet. LOok down, O LORD, in the Bowels of thy pitty, and lend a tender ear unto the voice of our Lamentations. Our Ad∣versaries are the chief, our ene∣mies prosper: For thou hast af∣flicted us for the multitude of our transgressions: The Crown is fallen from the head, wo unto us, that we have sinned. O Lord, behold our afflictions, for the Enemy hath magnified himself. The Adversary hath spread out his hand upon all our plea∣sant things; they have entred into, and have prophaned thy sanctuaries: They have seen us low, and they have mocked at our Sabboaths, our solemn feasts are become their scorn, and our devotions their derision.
O Lord, behold our afflictions, for the Enemy hath magnified himself. Thou art become our Enemy, thou hast increased among us Mourning and Lamentation, be∣cause thou hast despised in the indignation of thine anger both the King, and the Priest. See, O Lord, and consider, for we are become very vile. All our people sigh. The yoak of our transgressions is bound by thy hand, they are wreathed and come up upon our necks, thou hast made our strength to faile, thou hast delivered it into their hands, from whom we are not able to rise up Thou hast tro∣den us as in a Winepresse; our enemies heare our trouble, and they are glad thou hast done it. Behold, O Lord, for we are in di∣stresse: Our bowels are troubled, our heart is turned within us; for we have grievously Rebelled, abroad the
sword devoureth, at home there is  death. Our enemies have opened their mouth against us, they hiss and they gnash their Teeth, they say, We have swallowed them up; certainly, this is the day that we looked for, we have found, we have seen it. Thus are we in derision all the day long, Wee are become their Song, and their Musick. O Lord, behold our afflictions, f the enemy hath magnified himself. They have cryed unto us, de∣part ye, ye are unclean, depart, depart; touch not; yea, the men have said, they shall no more soourn here. O Lord, behold our afflictions, for the enemy hath magnified himself. The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord is taken in their pits, and slaughtered by
their hands; of whom yet we said, under his shadow we shall live among the midst of these sad distractions. O Lord, behold this, and behold our afflictions, for the enemy hath very highly magnified himself. Thus do we call to minde our afflictions, and our miseries, the Wormwood and the Gall, our souls have them in remembrace, and they are humbled in us, and therefore have we hope. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions faile not. They are new every morning, great is his faithfulnesse. For the Lord will not cast off for ever; but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his Mercies. For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is no and ever shall be, world without end▪ Amen. The Psalms for the Day 7. 10. 22. 37. First Lesson, 2 Chron. 35. from  20. ad fin. Lament. 5. Zac 12. v. 10. ad finem.
A Form Collected out of the Psalms. I. HEar our voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our complaint come before thee, let it enter even into thy ears. Our heart is in heavinesse, O let us make our Prayer unto thee in an acceptable time. Lord, our iniquities are against us, our rebellions are many wherewith we have transgressed against thee: But we confess our wickednesses, and are sorry for our sins. Our confusion is daily before us, fearfulness and trembling are come upon us, and an horrible dread hath overwhelmed us, and it is thy great mercy onely that we are not consu∣med, for we have sinned, O Lord, we have transgressed and done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled, and departed
from thy precepts, and from thy Com∣mandements. Innumerable troubles are come about us, our sins have ta∣ken hold upon us, that we are not able to look up, yea, they are more in number then the hairs of our heads, and our hearts have failed us. O Lord, righte∣ousnesse belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, because of all the offences we have committed against thee. Yet compassion and forgivenesse is with thee, though we have rebelled a∣gainst thee. O Lord, according to thy goodnesse, we beseech thee, let thine anger and thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine upon thy servants. Incline thine ears and hear, open thine eyes and behold our afflictions, for we doe not pre∣sent our supplications before thee, in our own righteousness, but for thy ma∣nifold and great mercies. We have sinned against hea∣ven and against thee, and are
no more worthy to be called thy Sons. Yet, O Lord, hear O Lord, forgive, consider and doe it, deferre not for thine own sake, O our God. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, ad ever shall be, world without end, Amen. II. HEar our prayers, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and hearken unto the words of our mouth, for strangers are risen up against us, and Tyrants, which have not God before their eyes, seek after our Souls. Cast us not away in the time of our weaknesse: forsake us not when our strength faileth us. O remember not our offences,
but according to thy mercy think thou upon us for thy goodness. O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in misery. The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our troubles. Turn us, O God our Saviour, and let thine anger cease from us: send down from on high and deliver us, take us out of these many waters. Why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pa∣sture? Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and trou∣ble? for our soul is brought low un∣to the dust, our belly cleaveth to the ground Look upon our adversity and misery: and forgive us all our sins. Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake: so
shall it be known that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord hast done it. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. III. WE will cry unto the Lord with our voice; yea, even unto God will we cry with our voice, and he shall hearken un∣to us. For the Lord is gracious and long-suffering, and of great mercy to them that call upon him. The Lord is nigh unto all them that be of a contrite heart, and will save such as are of an humble spi∣rit. And now, Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is even in thee;
For our Fathers hoped in thee they trusted in thee, and thou di deliver them; they called upon thee and were holpen, they put their tr in thee, and were not confounded. The Lord will be a defence for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of trouble: and they that know thy name will p their trust in thee, for thou Lord never failest them that seek thee. The mercifull goodness of the Lord endureth for ever and ever, up them that fear him: and his righte∣ousness upon Childrens Children; even upon such as keep his Cove, and think upon his Command to do them. Thou therefore that art a Sa∣viour to all that trust in thee, thou that upholdest all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that healest the broken in heart, and givest me∣dicine to heale their sicknesse, thou that art the Father of mer∣cy
and God of all consolation, that art comfort to the sad, and strength to the weak, hear thy servants, we beseech thee, look down from Heaven, behold and visite us with thy salvation. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.
The second Lesson, appointed by the Calendar of the Church, for the 30th. of January, throughout all time, is the 27. Chapter of the Gospel according to St. Matthew. GIve the King thy judge∣ments, O God. The Lord hear him in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Ia∣cob defend him. Send him help from his San∣ctuary: and strengthen him out of Sion. Let the King rejoyce in thy strength, O Lord: let him be excee∣ding glad of thy salvation. Grant him his hearts desire, and deny him not the request of his lips. [O Lord, gird him with strength
into the battaile: throw down his Enemies under him. Make them to turn their backs upon him: and disperse them that hate him.] Deliver him from the strivings of his people. Deliver him from his cruell Enemies, and set him up above his adversaries; thou shalt rid him from the wicked man: and why? because the King putteth his trust in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most high, he shall not miscarry. Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in horses, but we will re∣member the name of the Lord our God. Save Lord, and hear us, O King of Heaven, when we call upon thee. Be thou exalted in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. Glory be to the Father, and
to the Sonne, and to the Hol Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is no and ever shall be, world without end▪ Amen. V. O Lord God, that doest build up Hierusalem, and gather together the outcasts of Israel. Wherefore art thou absent so long Why is thy wrath so hot against t sheep of thy pasture? O think upon thy Congrega∣tion: whom thou hast purcha∣sed and redeemed of old. Think upon the tribe of thine in∣heritance: and mount Sion, where thou hast dwelt. Lift up thy Feet, and disperse all those our Enemies: which have done evill in thy sanctu∣ary. For they have broken down the carved work thereof with Axes and
Hammers: they have defiled the welling places of thy name, yea, they aid in their hearts, let us make ha∣ock of them altogether. O God, how long shall the Adversary doe this dishonour? ow long shall the Enemy blas∣heme thy name, for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy hand, hy pluckest not thou thy right hand ut of thy bosome to scatter the ene∣y? Arise, O God, maintain thine wn cause: Remember how the foolish man blasphemes thee daily. Forget not the voice of thine Ene∣mies: the presumption of them that ate thee encreaseth ever more and more. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.
The Creed. I Believe in God the Fath Almighty, maker of heave and earth: and in Jesu Christ his onely Son our Lord which was coneived by the ho∣ly Ghost, born of the Virgin M∣ry, suffered under Ponce Pilat was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into heaven, and fitteth on the right hand o God the Father Almighty: from thence he shall come, to judge the quick and the dead. I be∣lieve in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholike Church, the Communion of Saints, the for∣givenesse of fins, the resurrecti∣on of the body, and the life e∣verlasting, Amen.
Let us Pray. The Lord be with you. And with thy spirit. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. OUr Father which art in hea∣ven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in hea∣ven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them that trespasse against us. And lead us not into temptation: but de∣liver us from evill, Amen.
O Thou most mighty Creator and wise Ruler of all things, who hast reserved the disposall of all events to thine own all∣seeing Wisdome, and never per∣mittest any thing to be done by the malice of men, or Devils, but what thou discernest absolute∣ly most usefull and profitable for thy Servants. Thou who a good beyond all that we can judge or chuse, even when thy judgements are most terrible and astonishing; We thy sinfull creatures, do here prostrate our souls before thee, desiring to a∣dore and tremble at thy pre∣sence, to admire the finger of thine own hand, in that great vengeance, which did (as upon this Day) befall us; Lord, it is the provocation of our ns that hath reached up to heaven, that hath brought down these
amazing punishments upon earth: thou hast abounded to us in mercies, beyond all the Nations of the world, granted us all the advantages we could pray for, and we murmured a∣gainst thy bounty, rebelled a∣gainst thy most obliging me∣thods of melting and over com∣ing an obdurate people: And then, what remained, but that thou shouldest withdraw those graces which we had so long a∣bused and prophaned? Deprive us of all our ornaments, leave us naked and bare, cast us out into the open field, to the loathing of our persons? Judge us, as wo∣men that break wedlock and shed blood, are judged; and give us blood in jealousie and fury? And thus hast thou in thy just displeasure proceeded with us: thou hast abased our glory, thou ha in our very faces, thou ha reproach upon all that  cious amongst us: Thou
hast permitted an host, not one∣ly against the daily sacrifice, to cast down the truth to the ground; but even against thine own Ordnance, thine own in∣scription, the Image of thine own power amongst us, and in all this to practise and prosper: Lord thou hast called us to lamenta∣tion and bitter mourning, be∣yond the weeping of Rachel f her children, or the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo: Lord, they are our re∣bellions against thee, which thou hast Visited upon our late Soveraigne, our beloved I∣siah; and (to the aggravation of our sin and woe) they were our hands that executed this butchery upon him. In this tho hast more then delivered up th Nation unto Sathan, to the ad∣versary, to buffet and thresh us; thou hast delivered us  selves, to assassinate our ▪ Our greatest sin is our
punishment: The utmost of our provocations against thee, is the utmost of thy inflictions upon us: And yet (O Lord!) all these ac∣cursed effects of our sins have not served to alien us from them: none repenteth of his way, or saith, what have I done? But e∣very one rusheth into his course, as the horse rusheth into the bat∣tell. And since (O Lord!) we have not in this , heard the things that  to our peace, what can we expect, but that they should for ever be hid from our eyes? That our mea∣sure being filled up, and thy righteous servant removed by our violence, from holding up our Pillars, we should all become one common Ruine? That the earth should swallow us up for Coras sins; or the destruction of thine own antient people the Je should be the reward of the obduration of thine own people; And then (O Lord!) tis thy
great mercy to our late Sove∣raign, that thou hast taken him away from the evill to come And it is the joy of our hearts in the midst of our lamentations that having so fitted him for thy self, given him that wonderfull measure of Patience, Constancy and Magnanimity, thou we pleased to crown all these Gra∣ces with perseverance here, and in exeha  his crown of thornes  incumbrances of a broken Kingdome on earth hast received him into a partici∣pation of thy crown of Glory. As for us (O Lord!) we are laid at thy feet, to hear what the Lord God will say, concerning us: whatsoever thy purposes are we desire to embrace them Chri∣stianly, though it be to cast us a∣way, as straw to the dung-hill; but if yet there may be place of mercy, Lord, lift up the lig of thy countenance and be graci∣ous to the remnant of thine he∣ritage;
To this end, O Lord, con∣vert us from the evill of our wayes; and our enemies from the cruelty of theirs; thou God of purity and peace, grant that we be no longer a wicked, nor a self-destroying Nation; but that we may all at length, joyn together in a serious unfeign humiliation for the shed  that precious innocent bl, and all those other sinns that have brought down thy deser∣tions on us; Grant this for Je∣sus Christ his sake. Amen.
II. O Lord! this is a day  trouble, of rebuke and blas∣phemy, a day wherein a wonder∣full and horrible thing was  in our land, most  blood, shed with more barbarous aggravations, then we know where to paralell on this side the murder of thy dear Son▪ And because sentence against this evill work hath not been er∣ecuted speedily, the hearts  this people are wholy set in th to doe evill; this respite, which thou hast given us to work o Repentance, hath served on to compleat our sin, by adding an obstinate impenitency to  former Guilt; and so fitting us for that finall excision which thou hast threatned to obdurate sinners. And now, (O Lord,)
this fearful expectation of judg∣ment, and fiery indignation is all that remains unto us, who have thus despised the riches of thy mercy: Yet (O Lord) out of these depths do we desire to call upon thee: Lord hear our voice; and (if that finall sen∣tence be not irreversibly gone  against us) be pleased yet to turn thy wrath away, and not to suffer thy whole displeasure to arise? To this end, thou O Lord, who breakest the gates of brasse, and smitest the bars of Iron in der; be thou pleased to rend these unrelenting hearts of our to work in every one of us such a sense of our horrid abominati∣ons (especially, that of this day) as may cast us down in the low∣est degree of Humiliation and Contrition before thee: that so we may be capable of that exal∣tation which thou hast promised to the humble, that Comfort which thou hast assigned to
Mourners, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. III. O Lord God, that rulest over all the Kingdomes of the earth, that hast threatned that for the sinnes of the Land, the Kings thereof should be many; and hast told us, that if we doe wickedly, we should be consu∣med, both we and our King: We miserable and wretched sinners, do here in the bitternesse of our soul ostrate our selves before thy Throne of Grace, acknow∣ledging against our selves, that we have made thee to serve with our sins, and wearied thee with our iniquities; so that in the fiercenesse of thine anger, thou hast wounded us with the wound of an enemy, and chasti∣sed
us with the chastisement of a oruel one: for in the indigna∣tion of thy fury, thou hast despi∣sed the King and the Priest: Wo unto us, that we have sinned, the Crown is fallen from our Head, and the beauty of our Israel is slain by the hands of wicked men. Thou hast suffered the Breath of our Nostrils the Anoin∣ted of the Lord, to be taken in their Pits, of whom we said, un∣der his shadow we shall have Peace and Protection: The fire out of the Bramble hath devour∣ed the lofty Cedars; the Base are risen up against the Honour∣ale; the Subjects against their King, whom (after much con∣tumelious usage) forgetting the Oath of God, their own Cove∣nant, their own Protestation, and their often reiterated Vows, to preserve his Person, Crown and Dignity; and all this, with their hands lifted up to thee our God of Truth; have yet brought
him as a Lamb to the slaughter and with wicked hands h murdered thy Vice-gerent,  though he had not been anoint∣ed with oyle: A wonderfull and horrible sin is committed in the Land, over passing the deeds of the wicked; a sin that no Nati∣on, no people ever committed, and such as the Sun never saw, since it withdrew its light at the Passion of thy dear Son, our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ: Other Re∣bels have murdered Kings, but (as it was, in it self a deed of darknesse, so) they acted th sin in darknesse, shunning the light; But this Paricide  committed with a high hand, presumptuously, in the fight of the Sun, and owned as an Act of Justice: The cry of this Innocent blood of a righte∣ous King, of our own King, a King too good for so wick∣ed a People, is entered into thy presence, and cals loud to
thee for vengeance upon this whole Nation; so that we may justly expect that thou shouldest ot us and our posterity out of this Land, which is made an a∣bomination, stained & polluted with the blood of thine Anoint∣ed Servant and Martyr: But the Judge of all the earth will not destroy the Innocent with the Guilty; for though our sins are many and grievous, yet in our tears we will wash our hands from this sin, saying, our hands have not shed this blood; And therefore when thou shalt make inquisition for blood, lay not (we beseech thee) this blood to our Charge! Be mercifull, O Lord, be mercifull unto thy peo∣ple, whom thou hast redeemed, and let not this Innocent blood be required, neither of us, nor of our Posterity: For, as (before this great wickednesse was com∣mitted) we prayed against it, and in our Devotions entred our
Protestation in Heaven, before thee, against so impious, so h lish Resolutions of the bloody Assassinates: So, since these sons of Belial have brought their mis∣chievous imaginations to passe, for which our soules are woun∣ded and humbled within us, we do from our hearts detest this Damnable Parricide; and doe from our souls renounce this ab∣horred Murder of thine Anom∣ted Servant, our late Soveraigne King Charls: Saying with Iacob, O my soul, come not thou into their Secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united; for in their anger they have slain a man, the best of men, the Lords Anointed; Cursed be their An∣ger, for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel! yea, we wil yet pray against their wickednes, for now they go on to strengthen one wickednesse with another: They Decree unrighteous De∣crees, and write grievous things
which they have prescribed, thereby to establish wickedness by a Law, to remove the bounds of the People, and destroy the very Foundations. But O thou preserver of men, and God of all order, blast all their designes which tend to nothing but A∣narchy and Confusion, and de∣struction and scandal of the Chri∣stian Religion; but let all their turning of things upside down be esteemed as the Potters clay; Let it be in thy sight, as the Rebel∣lion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; and now (O Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh) let not the Congregation of the Lord be as sheep which have no shepheard; Though our breach be great like the sea, yet thou canst heal it: Be mercifull (we beseech thee) to these three Kingdomes united under one Crown by establish∣ing the King in his Fathers Throne; Plead thou his cause, and (that thou mayest give rest
unto the Land) make his w prosperous; direct all his Co sels, and Crown all his Design with success; raise him up frie abroad, and at home turn  hearts of the People to their So∣veraigne; upon whom, we  seech thee to double the G and Graces of his Father, as t didst the spirit of Elijah, on  sha; Cloath him with Maj & Power, that he may subdue  Rebellious, and appear terrible to thine and his Enemies: that so he may restore the daily S∣crifice, thy publique Worship  Service, relieve the Oppress and bring the punishment of t Innocent blood of his Father, upon those Murderers that shed it, as water spilt upon the ground: Hasten, O Lord, by him to restore Peace and Righteous∣nesse, Truth and Equity; Let them kiss each other under his government! O let the wicked∣nesse of the wicked come to an
end, but guide thou the just: Give O Lord, rest from our fears,  from our sorrows, and from he oppressions under which we n; Let thine hand, O Lord,  own towards thy servants, nd thine indignation towards hine and the Kings Enemies:  down, O Lord, from hea∣, and behold from the habi∣tion of thy holinesse and of thy glory; restraine not (we be∣ thee) thy zeale, nor thy strength, nor the soundings of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercies rds us: Heare us, O Lord,  King of Heaven, when we cl upon thee, and grant our , and that for Jesus Christ sake, our onely Lord and Saviour, Amen.
IV. BLessed Lord! in whose fight the death of thy Saints  most precious, we magnifie thy name for those wonderfull  ions of thy Grace on our  Martyred Soveraigne, which en∣abled him so happily to tran∣scribe the Copy of his blessed Master in a Constant, Meek suffe∣ring of all barbarous indigniti and at last resisting even  blood, and even then pursui that glorious Pattern, and pra∣ing for his Murtherers: Let  Memory, O Lord, be ever ble among us, and his example effi∣cacious upon us, that we may follow him, as he follow'd Christ▪ And, O Lord, we beseech thee, let not his blood out-cry hi Prayers; but let those that spilt the one, obtain benefit by the o∣ther:
that by their Conviction and Repentance, his Innocency may receive the happiest attesta∣tion, our Religion be vindicated from the scandall of so horrid a fact, our Nation secured from the vengeance of that blood, and thy mercy glorified in the Con∣version of so great sinners; and all for Jesus Christ his sake, A∣men. V. O Just and Righteous Judge, who didst once for the in∣quity of thy People Israel, give up thy Ark into the hands of the Philistines. We thy sinfull Crea∣tures, that are now under as great a degree both of guilt and punishment, doe here cast our selves down before thee, acknow∣ledging that we are not worthy any longer to retain the honour
of Christian Profession, that have so long defamed it by enormous Practises; and that we, who lo∣ved darknesse more then light, deserve to have our Candlestick removed, and to be given up to that undation of Atheism and Prophanenesse, which now in∣vades this gasping Church: yet, O Lord! deale not with us after our sins, but turn thee again thou Lord of Hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visite this Vine; do not abhor us, for thy names-sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory: Be∣hold, see (we beseech thee) we are all thy People; though a re∣bellious and stiff-necked genera∣tion, yet thy name is called up∣on us; leave us not, neither for∣sake us, O Lord God of our sal∣vation; but, though thou feed us with bread of Adversity, and water of Affliction; yet let not our Teachers be removed into a corner; but let our eyes see
our Teachers; let not Sion com∣plain, that she hath none to lead her by the hand among all the Sons that she hath brought up; but provide her such supports in this her declining Condition, that she may have a seed and Remnant left; And in what de∣gree soever thou shalt permit this storm to encrease upon this poor Church, be pleased propor∣tionably to fortifie and confirm all those that are Members of it, that no one may be shaken or moved with these Afflictions, nor pervert that glorious advantage of suffering for thee, into an oc∣casion of Apostatizing from thee; But that we may all run with pa∣tience the race that is set before us, and cheerfully partake of the Afflictions of the Gospel; that in suffering for Christ here, we may reign with him for ever hereafter and all for Jesus Christ his sake our onely Lord and Saviour, A∣men.
O Lord guard the Person of thy Servant the King▪ Who putteth his trust in thee. Send him help from thy holy Place: And evermore mightily defend him. Confound the designes of all those that are risen up against him. And let not their rebellious wick∣ednesse approach near to hurt him. Let the Curse of Saul light up∣on the endeavours of those men, who contrive or Imagine mis∣chief for him: And let the blessings of David re∣maine upon his Head, and upon his Seed for evermore. O Lord, hear our Prayer. And let our Cry come unto thee.
VI. O Lord God of Hosts, who didst deliver David, thy ser∣vant from the perill of the Sword! Hear us we beseech thee most miserable sinners; who do here poure out our souls before thee, intirely desiring the prote∣ction of thy hand upon thy Ser∣vant the King, let him finde safe∣ty under the shadow of thy wings, and preserve his Person as the Apple of thine own Eye: Suffer not that Sword, which thou hast put into his Hands, to be wrested out by the hand of man; but blesse his Counsels with successe, and his enterpri∣ses with Victory; that he may become a terrour to all those that oppose him, and as the dew of the latter rain, upon the
hearts of all those that do still continue loyall to him: And O thou that takest no delight in the misery of one single sinner, spare mercifull Lord; spare a great, though most sinfull Nation; pit∣ty a despised Church and a di∣stracted State; heale those wounds which our sins have made so wide, that none but thine own hands can close them; and in the tendernesse of thine unspeakable compassion, hasten to put so happy an end to these wasting Divisions, that thy ser∣vice may be more duly celebra∣ted, thine Anointed more con∣scienciously obeyed; that the Church may be restored to a true Christian Unity, and the King∣dome to its former Peace; And that for his sake, who is the Prince of peace, and that shed his precious blood to purchase our peace, even Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, with the O Father, and the blessed spirit,
be all Honour and Glory, world without end, Amen. VI. O Thou most mighty Creator and wise Governour of all, that hast for our sins and provo∣cations given us to drink of a most bitter astonishing cup; and demonstrated by thy late pro∣ceedings with us, how inexo∣rable thou art towards us; who have been so obstinate and ob∣durate toward thee, that would not hear in that our Day the things belonging to our peace; and now they are hid from our eyes: We, those wretched Crea∣tures of thine, do yet desire to adore, and prostrate our soules before thee, to put our hands upon our mouthes, and our mouths into the Dust, and ac∣knowledge all Honour and Glo∣ry
to be due unto thee, whatsoe∣ver becomes of us: Though to these amazing Calamities, thou shouldest yet super-add thy fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and all the horrors of astonished hearts, and the eternal Worm and Flames, the due portion of the damned in Hell: O Lord, thou art most just in all thy judg∣ments; and infinitely merciful, that we live to call upon thee this day: O that these sharp last necessary methods of thine, may at length prove successefull on these thy gasping forlorn pati∣ents, that thy great work of re∣covery and change, the clean∣sing of our polluted leprous souls may be effectually wrought upon us, by this hand of thine▪ Lord, save us, from these sad effects, by a powerfull removall of the Cause, or else we certainly pe∣rish: To this end, O Lord, we resigne our selves up to thy di∣vine Methods; be they the shar∣pest
that thou seest necessary to dispense to us; we desire to em∣brace them cheerfully, and not to interpose any thought of ours in contradiction to thy most safe, most medicinable prescriptions. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good; not ours but thy sacred will be done! Be it unto us according to thy good pleasure: In the mean time, Lord permit us to intercede for others, that are not worthy to pray for our selves: O let the sorrowfull sighing of the poore, of the oppressed, and there is no Comforter; let the black gloo∣my Calamities that are fallen upon him, that is more worth then ten thousand of us, come before thee. Let thy Protection still continue unto him, if it be thy sacred Will, Thy Host of guardian Angels, that once ap∣peared in the Mount, the Horses and Charriots round about E∣lisha, environ and surround that
sacred Head; and by thine own wayes and means, and in thine own season, restore him (with out the effusion of any more blood) to his Fathers Crown & Thron: And, Lord, that it might yet be an acceptable time, a sea∣son wherein thou mightest be ac∣cessible to our Prayers, which we offer up in great Humility, for thy poore, wasted, disconsolate Church amongst us, That thou wouldest repair her breaches, re∣store her dayes as of old, that thou wouldest arise, and have mercy upon Sion, and Compas∣sionate to see her in the Dust: Lord, where is thy Pitty? And the sounding of the Bowels, thy zeale to the place where thy rest dwelleth? Will the Lord absent himself for ever? And will he be no more entreated? Are his mercies clean gone for ever? and his promises come utterly to an end for evermore? Lord, remem∣ber thy old loving kindnesses
which thou swarest unto David in thy truth: Arise, O Lord, and come into thy Rest, thou, and the Ark of thy strength: But if these Calamities and Desola∣tions must still go on, and ad∣vance to the height of an irre∣mediable ruine; yet, O Lord, in∣termix thy sweet and Comfort∣able Allays with this bitter Cup; Take us into thine immediate hand of Protection and Guid∣ance, sanctifie all thy methods unto us, and by the same omni∣potent work, whereby thou bringest a most glorious light out of the blackest darknesse, be pleased to produce all thy Di∣vinest good things, out of the saddest evils, and (if it may yet be thy blessed will) to work the same work by the return of thy Mercies, which the continuance of thy punishments is wont to be assigned for: And Lord, re∣ceive us all under the safe guard of thy Divine Presence, the pillar
of fire and Cloud to cover and direct us: That in every turn of thy hand, we may see and ad∣mire thy glorious and gracious Disposals, and by the happy ex∣perience, that even this also is to us for good, we may be for ever engaged to ascribe unto thee all Honour, and Glory, and render unto thee the uniform obedi∣ence of our hearts, world with∣out end, Amen, Amen. VIII. O Most gracious Lord God, the Creator of all things; but of men and all mankinde a tender Compassionate Father in Jesus Christ: Thou that hast enlarged thy designes and pur∣poses of Grace and mercy, as the Bowels and blood-shedding of thy Son, with an earnest de∣sire,
that every weak or sinfull man should partake of that A∣biss, that infinite treasure of thy Bounty: Thou that hast bequea∣thed unto us that Legacy and Example of a sacred inviolable Peace, a large diffusive Charity; we meekly beseech thee, to over∣shadow with thy heavenly grace, the souls of all men, over all the world: (O Lord, thou lover of soules!) to bring home to the acknowledgment and embraces of thy Son, all that are yet stran∣gers to that profession, and in whatsoever any of us, who have already received that mercy from thee, may be any way use∣full or instrumentall to that so glorious an end, to direct and encline our hearts towards it; to work in us all an holy zeale to thy Name, and tender Bowels to all those whose eternity is con∣cern'd in it! O give us a true se∣rious full comprehension, and value of that one great Interest
of others as well as of our selv shew us, (the meanest of us) some way to contribute towards it (if it be but our daily affectionate Prayers) for the enlarging of thy Kingdome, and the care of ap∣proving all our Actions, so as may most effectually attract all others to this profession; And for all those that have already that glorious name of thy Son called upon them, blessed Lord! that they may at length (according to the many Engagements of their profession) depart from iniquity: That that holy City, that new Ierusalem may at length (according to thy promise) de∣scend from Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband Christ: That, that Tabernacle of God with men, may be illu∣striously visible among us; that we may be a peculiar People, and thou inhabiting in power a∣mong us: That we which have so long professed thee, may no
longer be content with that form of knowledge, which so of∣ten engenders strife, contenti∣ons, animosities, separating from and condemning one another, and that most unchristian dete∣stable guilt of blood; but endea∣vour and earnestly contend for the uniform effectuall practise of all the precepts of thy Son, the Fruit and Power of Godlinesse: That all the People and Princes of Christendom, the Pastors and Sheep of thy fold, may at length (in some degree) walk worthy of that light and warmth, that knowledge of those graces, that the Sun of righteousness with healing on his wings, hath so long poured out upon us; Lord, purge and powerfully work out of all our hearts, that prophanenesse and Atheisticalnesse, those sacri∣legious thirsts and enormous violations of all that is holy: those Unpeaceable, Rebellious, Mutinous, and (withall) Ty∣rannizing
cruell spirits, those prides and haughtinesses, judge∣ing and condemning, defaming and despising of others; those unlimited ambitions and co∣vetings joyned with the Invasi∣on & violation of others rights, those most reproachfull excesses and abominable impurities, which (to the shame of our un∣reformed obdurate hearts) do still remain unmortified, unsub∣dued among us: but above all, those infamous Hypocrisies of stiborning Religion to be the Engine of advancing our secular designes, or the disguise to con∣ceale the foulest intentions, of bringing down that most sacred name, whereby we should be sa∣ved, to be the vilest instrument of all Carnalities; And by the power of thy controwling Spirit (Lord) humble and subdue all that exalts it self against the obe∣dience of Christ: And when thou hast cast out so many evill
spirits, be thou pleased thy self to possesse and enrich our souls, to plant, and root, and confirm, and secure in us all those preci∣ous fruits of Piety, and Faith, and Obedience, and Zeal to∣wards thee; of Purity and Meeknesse, and Simplicity, and Contentednesse, and Sobriety in our selves; of Justice, and Charity, and Reaceablenesse, and Bowels of Mercy and Com∣passion towards all others: That having seriously and Industri∣ously, (as our Holy Vocation engageth us) used all Diligence to add unto our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue patience and Per∣severance in all Christian Prac∣tise, we may adorn that Pro∣fession which we have thus long depraved; and having had our Fruits unto Holynesse, we may attain our End, ever asting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
IX. O Long suffering and eter∣nal King, (that for the Condemnation that for sin came into the World) wert lift∣ed up upon the Cross, and taken from this earth by that shamefull death, and hast shewed forth thy self to all that Chuse to follow thy stepps, a Pattern and Copy of long-suf∣ferance and Patience: and of∣feredst up thy Intercession to∣thy Coeternal Father, for those Enemies of God which Crucified Thee! Do thou (O Lord!) Thou the same Lover of Man∣kind, afford thy Mercy and par∣don to all those that are Ene∣mies to us; which either by Treachery, or Reproach, or Contumely, or Envy, or by any other means, (through the sub∣tilty of Calumny of the Devil,
that lover of Hatred) have ex∣pressed their Madness or Malice against us; But especially those that have embrued their hands in the blood of thine Anointed: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; Lord! lay not this sin to their Charge, or to the Charge of a sinfull, wretched People! Change thou their Counsels from that mis∣chievous, to a sweet Christian temper of gentleness; in∣fuse into their hearts sincere and unfeigned Love; bind them fast to us in the inviolable Bands of Spiritual friendship, and (by what means thou knowest most fit) make them Partakers of eternal Life: and (O thou Father of Compassions) pitty all those afflicted that trust in Thee; draw all to the divine love of thee; be thou president in all things, and assistant to all, together with us thy sinful and unprofitable Servants; and make
us all Heirs of thy Kingdom; for unto Thee it belongeth to shew Mercy, and to save us (O our God) for thine is the Power for ever, Amen. X. O Lord, We beseech thee Mercifully Hear our Prayers, and spare all those which Con∣fess their sins unto thee; that They, whose Consciences by sin are accused, by thy Merci∣full Pardon may be absolved through Christ our Lord, Amen XI. O Most mighty God and Mercifull Father, which hast Compassion on all men, and hatest nothing that thou hast
made: which wouldest not the Death of a sinner, but that he should rather turn from sin and be saved: Mercifully forgive us our Trespasses; receive and Comfort us which are grieved with the Burthen of our sins! Thy property is always to have Mercy; to thee only pertaineth to forgive sins: spare us there∣fore good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou hast re∣deemed; enter not into Judg∣ment with thy servants which are vile earth and Miserable sin∣ners, but so turn thine ire from us which meekly acknowledge our Vilenesse, and truly repent us of our Faults, so make hast to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord! Amen.
XII. TUrn thou us O good Lord! and so shall we be turned; be favourable, O Lord be fa∣vourable to thy People which turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying; for thou art  Merciful God, long-suffering, and of great pitty: Thou spa∣rest when we deserve punish∣ment, and in thy wrath thinkest upon mercy: spare thy people, O Lord! spare them, and let not thine Heritage be brought to nought; Hear us O Lord! for thy Mercy is great, and after the Multitude of thy mercies look upon us through Ies Christ our Lord, Amen.
XIII. O Lord the only begotten Son Jesus Christ! O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, have Mercy upon us; Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive our Prayers; Thou that sittest at the Right hand of God the Father, have Mercy upon us! for thou only art holy, thou on∣ly art the Lord, thou only O Christ! with the Holy Ghost, art most high in the Glory of God the Father, Amen. The Peace of God which passeth all understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds in the Knowledge and Love of God, and his Son Iesus Christ our Lord. And the Blessing of God Al∣mighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst you and re∣main with you alwayes, Amen.
A proper Prayer for the Thirtieth of Ianuary. O Blessed Lord God, who by thy Wisdom guidest and orderest all things most sutably to thy Justice, and performest thy pleasure, allwayes in such manner, that thou canst al∣so appeal to us, whether thy wayes be not equall: We, thy poor afflicted People, fall down before thee, acknowledging the justice of thy proceedings with us, and that the amazing Judgement, which as this day besel us (in thy permitting cru∣el men, sons of eliall to execute the fury of their Rebellion upon Our late Gracious Sove∣raign, and to imbrew their
hands in the Blood and Mur∣der of the Lords Anointed) was drawn down by the great and long provocations of this Nations sins against thee: For all which, and our own parts in which, we sinfull wretches here met together, desire to humble our selves before thee, and to tremble at thy presence in this dayes sore vengeance, the effect as well as desert of our impieties, the work of our own hands upon our selves, thy heavy Judgement, but our most horrid sin, for which alone (did not multitude of other sins cry out against us) thou mightest justly descend down upon us all, as thou didst in So∣dom, and leave us no other me∣morial then to be the frightfull Monuments of thy Indigna∣tion and fury to all Posterity. Gracious is the Lord, and mer∣full, therefore it is, that We are not consumed! O let thy long∣suffering
and patience lead us to repentance: And now Lord, looking on this particular signal Judgement, as thy last Trump warning us to fly from the wrath to come; We come forth to meet our God, mourning in our prayers before thee, and begging the aversion of thy further dis∣pleasure, and the removall of these plagues of long continu∣ance from us; for the all-suffi∣cient merits of the death and sufferings of our blessed Saviour. O forgive our great and mani∣fold transgressions, and for his bloody Passions sake, deliver this Nation from blood-guiltinesse, that of this day especially, O God of our Salvation. Let not our crying sins intercept our Prayers, or thy blessings; but hear the voice of our tears and hearing forgive and heal us: re∣tire not quite from us into thine own place, laugh not at our ca∣lamities, neither mock in this
day of our vifitation: Vindicate thine own Cause, and thine own Providence, that it may appear unto men, that thou bearest up the Pillars of the earth; and that by thee Kings do reign. And though thou hast suffered our Enemies to proceed to that high pitch of violence against our late King, even to kill and take possession of his Throne and Revenews: Yet frustrate now at length their bold hopes and de∣fires; let not their mischievous imaginations prosper, least they be too proud; let them not be able to establish themselves in that prosperity and greatness they have fancied; let them not say of his Family, God hath forsaken them, let us persecute them: shew some good token on his seed for good, that their ene∣mies may see it, and be ashamed: ecause thou, Lord, hast holpen and comforted them. Bow the hearts of the Subjects of this
Land, as thou dist those of Isra∣el to David, that they may ac∣knowledge and receive joyfully the Heir of these Kingdoms; and fasten thou him as a nail in a sure place; behold his injuries; and have compassion on his In∣nocency; and let the desire of his enemies perish like that of the Hypocrite; but bring him, maugre all their oppositions, to a peaceable possession of that Throne, to which by his Birth-right thou hast designed him, and establish him in the Just Rights of his Family. O Lord, we wait on thee this day for this blessing; make no long tarry∣ing, but according to the time thou hast plagued us, send us deliverance. Snatch the prey out of the Lyons teeth, and pull us out of the burnings like a fire∣brand: We beseech thee, that We may this day spread befor thee the words of Rabshekah, the proud railings, and scornfull re∣proaches
of our enemies: Be∣hold this day their exaltation, and our mourning: O Lord, our eyes are towards thee! for whom nothing is hard; let it not seem a small thing to thee, that we suffer, but concenter our Pray∣ers with the many thousands that call on thee; That salvati∣on may come to our King, and through him thy blessing of peace unto thy People. Think upon all those that are peace∣able, and faithfull in the Land, and deal thou with us accord∣ing to thy Word, wherein thou hast caused us to put our trust; Let the world see that there is a God that judgeth the earth, and send deliverance to his peo∣ple in their needful time of trouble. But whatsoever thy purpose is, let not us behave our selves, frowardly, but with all Christian humility; run the race that thou settest before us, and qatiently bear the indignation
of the Lord, because we have sinned against him. And we meekly beseech thee, that if the Divine Decree of thy Justice withstand our Petitions, our prayers may return into our own bosomes; and that thou wilt make thy judgements tem∣poral and not spiritual upon us; but assist us with strength pro∣portionable to our temptations; that we be not delivered to evil: but that in wel-doing we may commit our selves to thee our God, as unto a faithful Creator: And that both our King and we may say with all Christian sub∣mission and cheerfulness: It is the Lord, let him do what seem∣eth him good. And here O Lord we of∣fer unto thee all possible praise and thanks for all the Glory of thy Grace that hath shined forth in thine Anointed, our late Soveraign, and that thou wert pleased to own him (this
Day especially) in the midst of his Enemies, and in the hour of death, and to endue him with such eminent Patience, Meek∣ness, Humility, Charity and all other Christian Virtues, accord∣ing to the example of thine own Son, suffering the fury of his and thine Enemies, for the pre∣servation of thy Church and People. We Praise thee also for the Courage and Comfort thou hast given unto us of his Party, by that owning and assisting him, or any that have suffered in that Righteous Cause. And we beseech thee give us all grace to Remember and provide for our latter end, by a Careful studious imitation of those bles∣sed patterns of thy Saints and Martyrs that have gone before us, that we may be made worthy to Receive benefit by their pray∣ers, which they, in Communion with thy Church Catholick, of∣fer
up unto thee for that part of it here Militant and yet in sight with, and danger from the flesh, that following te Blessed stepps of their Holy Lives and Deaths, we may also hew forth the Light of a good example for the Glo∣ry of thy Name, the Conversion of Enemies, and the improve∣ment of those Generations we shall shortly leave behind us, and then with all those that have born the Heat and burthen of the day (thy Servant whose Sufferings and Labours we this day commemorate) receive the Reward of our Labours, the Harvest of our Hopes, even the Salvation of our own souls, and that for the merits and through the mediation of thy Son our Blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen.
Evening Prayer FOR the thirtieth of Ianuary. The Letany. O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Fa∣ther of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Son Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.
O God the Son Redeemer, &c. O God the holy Ghost pro∣ceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the holy Ghost, &c. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy upon us mise∣rable sinners O holy, blessed and glorious Tri∣nity, &c. Remember not, Lord, our of∣fences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed by thy most precious blood, and e not angry with us for ever. Spare us good Lord. From all evill and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and affaults of the devil, from thy wrath and from everlasting ation. Good Lord deliver us.
From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain-glory, and hy∣pocrisie, from envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitable∣ness. Good Lord deliver us. From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh and the devil. Good Lord deliver us. From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence, and famine, from battel, and mur∣der, and from sudden death. Good Lord deliver us. From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false do∣ctrine and heresie, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and Commandment. Good Lord deliver us. By the mystery of thy holy in∣carnation, by thy holy nativity & circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation. Good Lord deliver us.
By thine agony and bloudy sweat, by thy Cross and passion, by thy precious death and buri∣all, by thy glorious Resurrecti∣on and Ascension, and by the coming of the holy Ghost. Good Lord deliver us. In all time of our tribu∣lation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of Judgement. Good Lord deliver us. We sinners do beseech thee to hear Us (O Lord God) and that it may please thee to rule and govern thy holy Church univer∣sally in the right way. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee in righte∣ousnesse and holiness of life, thy servant, CHARLS the second our most gracious King and Governours. We beseech thee to hear us, good rd.
That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, and that he may ever∣more have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honour and glory. We beseech thee to hear, us good Lord That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory over all his ene∣mies. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord That it may please thee to bless and preserve the Queen Mother, the Duke of York, the Duke of Glocester with all the rest of the royall Progeny. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of the Church, with true knowledge & under∣standing of thy word, and that both by their preaching and living, they may set it forth,
and shew it accordingly. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility with grace, wisdom, and understanding. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to blesse and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace to execute justice, and to maintain truth. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to blesse and keep all thy people. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all Nations unity, peace, and concord. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and diligently to
live after thy Commandments. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the spirit. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred and are de∣ceived. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and help the weak∣hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our feet. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to succour, help, and comfort all
that be in danger, necessity, and tribulation. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to preserve all that travell by land or by water, all women labour∣ing of childe, all sick persons and young children, and to shew thy pitty upon all priso∣ners and captives. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to provide for the fatherless chil∣dren and widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecu∣ters and slanderers, and to turn their hearts.
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to for∣give us all our sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives ac∣cording to thy holy word. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us. Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us. O Lamb of God that takest away the sins of the world. Grant us thy peace. O Lamb of God that takest away the sins of the world.
Have mercy upon us. O Christ hear us. O Christ hear us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father which are in hea∣ven, &c. And lead us not into temp∣tation. But deliver us from evill. A∣men. The Versicle O Lord deal not with us af∣ter our sins. Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities. Let us pray. O God mercifull Father, that despisest not the figh∣ing of a contrite heart, nor the
desire of such as be sorrowfull, mercifully assist our prayers that we make before thee in all our troubles and adversities, whensoever they oppress us: and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtilty of the Devil, or man worketh against us, be brought to nought, and by the provi∣dence of thy goodnesse they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no per∣secutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, though Jesus Christ our Lord. O Lord arise help us, and deli∣ver us for thy Names sake. O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the noble works that thou diddest in their dayes, and in the old time be∣fore them. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honour.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, &c. As it was in the beginning,  now, &c. From our enemies defend us, O Christ Graciously look upon our afflictions. Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people. Favourably with mercy hear our prayers. O Son of David have mercy up∣on us. Both now and ever vouch∣safe to hear us, O Christ. Graciously hear us, O Christ, gra∣ciously hear us, O Lord Christ. The versicle. O Lord let thy mercy be shewed upon us Answer. As we do put our trust in thee.
ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, aker of all things, Judge of all men, we acknowledge and wail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we from time to time most greivously have committed, by thought, word, and deed, against thy divine jesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against us: we do ear∣nestly repent, and be heartily sorry for these our misdoings, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us: the burden of them is intolerable. Have mer∣cy upon us, have mercy upon us, most mercifull Father, for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christs sake, forgive us all that is past, and grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newnesse of life, to the honour and glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, who of thy Gr mercy hast promised forgiveness of sins to All them, which with Hearty Repentance and true Faith turn unto Thee; Have mercy upon Us, pardon and de∣liver us from all our sins, Con∣firm and strengthen us in all Goodness, and bring us to E∣verlasting Life through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. OUr Father which art in hea∣ven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in hea∣ven Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them that trespasse against us. And lead us not into temptation: but de∣liver us from evill, Amen. O Lord open thou our Li, And our Mouth shall shew fth thy Praise.
O God make speed to save , O Lord make haste to help us. Glory be to the Father, and  the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. Psal. 42, 43, 55, 59, 64, 94. The First Lesson. 2 Sam. 1. After the Lesson.
A Form Collected out of the Psa I. HEar our voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our complaint come before thee, let it enter even into thy ears. Our heart is in heaviness, O let us make our Prayer unto thee in an acceptable time. Lord, our iniquities are against us, our rebellions are many wherewith we have transgressed against thee: But we confess our wickednesses, and are sorry for our sins. Our confusion is daily before us, fearfulness and trembling are come upon us, and an horrible dread hath overwhelmed us, and it is thy great mercy onely that we are not consu∣med, for we have sinned, O Lord,  have transgressed and done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled, and departed
from thy precepts, and from thy Com∣mandments. Innumerable troubles are come about us, our sins have ta∣ken hold upon us, that we are not able to look up, yea, they are more in number then the hairs of our heads, and our hearts have failed us. O Lord, righte∣ousnesse belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, because of all the offences we have committed against thee. Yet compassion and forgivenesse is with thee, though we have rebelled against thee. O Lord, according to thy goodness, we beseech thee, let thine ger and thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine upon thy servants Incline thine ears and hear, open thine eyes and behold our afflictions, for we do not present our supplications before thee, in our own righteousness, but for thy mani∣fold and great mercies. We have sinned against hea∣ven and against thee, and are
no more worthy to be called thy Sons. Yet, O Lord, hear, O Lord, forgive, consider and do it, deferre not for thine own sake, O our God. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. II. HEar our prayers, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and hearken unto the words of our mouth, fo strangers are risen up against us, and Tyrants, which have not▪ God before their eyes,  af∣ter our Souls. Cast us not away in the time of our weaknesse: forsake us not when r strength faileth us.
O remember not our offences, but according to thy mercy think thou upon us for thy goodness. O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in misery. The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our troubles. Turn us, O God our Saviour, and let thine anger cease from us: send down from on high and deliver us, take us out of these many waters. Why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so  against the sheep of thy pa∣. Wherefore hidest thou thy face,  forgettest our misery and trou∣ble? for our soul is brought low  te dust, our belly cleaeth to the gd. Look upon our adversity and misery: & forgive us all our sins. Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake: so
shall it be known that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord hast done it. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, in now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. III. WE will cry unto the Lord with our voice; yea, even unto God will we cry with our voice, and he shall hearken un∣to us. For the Lord is gracious and long-suffering and of great mercy to them that call upon him. The Lord is nigh unto all them that be of a contrite heart, and will ave such as are of an humble spirit. And now Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is even in th;
For our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them: they called upon thee and were holpen, they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. The Lord will be a defence for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of trouble: and they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee, for thou Lord never failest them that seek thee. The mercifull goodness of the Lord endureth for ever and ever, upon them that fear him: and his righte∣ousness upon Childrens Children; even upon such as keep his Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them. Thou therefore that art a Sa∣viour to all that trust in thee, thou that upholdest all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that healest the broken in heart, and givest me∣dicine to heal their sickness, thou that art the Father of mer∣cy,
and God of all consolation, that art comfort to the sad, and strength to the weak, hear thy servants, we beseech thee, look down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy salvation. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.
The second Lesson, Heb. 12. or St Iames 5. IV. GIve the King thy judge∣ments, O God. The Lord hear him in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Ia∣c defend him. Send him help from his San∣ctuary: and strengthen him out of Sion. Let the King rejoyce in thy strength, O Lord: let him be exceed∣ing glad of thy salvation. Grant him his hearts desire, and deny him not the request of his lips. [O Lord, gi him with strength
unto the battaile: throw down his Enemies under him. Make them to turn their backs upon him: and disperse them that hate him.] Deliver him from the sirivings of his people. Deliver him from his cruell Enemies, and set him up above his adversaries; thou shalt rid him from the wicked man: and why? because the King putteth his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most high, he shall not miscarry. Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in horses, but we will re∣member the name of the Lord our God. Save Lord, and hear us, O King of Heaven, when we call upon thee. Be thou exalted in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. Glory be to the Father, and
to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. V. O Lord God, that dost build up Hierusalem, and gather together the outcasts of Israel. Wherefore art thou absent so long? Why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pasture? O think upon thy Congrega∣tion: whom thou hast purchased and redeemed of old: Think upon the tribe of thine in∣heritance: and mount Sion, where thou hast dwelt. Lift up thy Feet, and disperse all those our Enemies: which have done evill in thy sanctu∣ary. For they have broken down the carved work thereof with Axes and
Hammers: they have defiled the dwelling places of thy name, yea, they said in their hearts, let us make ha∣vock of them altogether. O God, how long shall the Adversary do this dishonour? how long shall the Enemy blas∣pheme thy name, for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy hand, why pluckest not thou thy right hand out of thy bosome to scatter the ene∣my? Arise O God, maintain thine own cause: Remember how the foolish man blasphemes thee daily. Forget not the voice of thine Ene∣mies: the presumption of them that hate thee encreaseth ever more and more. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.
The Creed. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus Christ his onely Son our Lord, which was conceived by the ho∣ly Ghost, born of the Virgin Ma∣ry, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into heaven, teth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: from thence he shall come, to judge  quick and the dead. I be∣lve in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholike Church, the Communion of Saints, the for∣givenesse of sins, the resurrecti∣on of the body, and the life e∣verlasting, Amen.
Let us Pray. The Lord be with you. And with thy spirit. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. OUr Father which art in hea∣ven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in hea∣ven Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them th trespasse against us. And lead us not into temptation: but de∣liver us from evill, Amen.
I. O Lord! this is a day of trouble, of rebuke and blas∣phemy, a day wherein a wonder∣full and horrible thing was com∣mitted in our land, most sacred nnocent blood, shed with more barbarous aggravations, then we know where to parallel on this side the murder of thy dear Son; And because sentence against this evill work hath not been ex∣ed speedily, the hearts of this people are wholy set in them to do evill; this respite, which thou hast given us to work our Repentance, hath served onely to compleat our sin, by adding an obstinate impenitency to the former Guilt; and so fitting us, for that finall excision which thou hast threatned to obdurate sinners. And now, (O Lord,)
this fearful expectation of judg∣ment, and fiery indignation is all that remains unto us, who have thus despised the riches of thy mercy: Yet (O Lord) out of these depths do we desire to call upon thee: Lord hear  voice; and (if that finall  tence be not irreversibly g out against us) be pleased  turn thy wrath away,  to suffer thy whole displease to arise? To this end, thou O  who breakest the gates of  and smitest the bars of  sunder; be thou pleased to  these unrelenting hearts of  to work in every one of us  sense of our horrid abom ons (especially, that of this day) as may cast us down in the  est degree of Humiliation and Contrition before thee: that  we may be capable of that ∣tation which thou hast promi to the humble, that Comfort which thou hast assigned to
Mourners, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. II. BLessed Lord! in whose sight the death of thy Saints is most precious, we magnifie thy name for those wonderfull effu∣sious of thy grace on our late Martyred Soveraign, which en∣abled him so happily to tran∣scribe the Copy of his blessed Master in a Constant, Meek suffe∣ring of all barbarous indignities, and at lost resisting even unto blood, and even then pursuing that glorious Pattern, and pray∣ing for his Murtherers: Let his Memory, O Lord, be ever blessed among us, and his example effi∣cacious upon us, that we may follow him, as he followed Christ: And, O Lord, we beseech
thee, let not his blood out-cry his Prayers; but let those that spilt the one, obtain benefit by the other: that by their Con∣viction and Repentance, his In∣nocency may receive the happi∣est attestation, our Religion be vindicated from the scandal of so horrid a fact, our Nation se∣cured from the vengeance of that blood, and thy mercy glo∣rified in the Conversion of so great sinners; and all for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen. O Lord guard the Person of thy Servant the King! Who putteth his trust in thee. Send him help from thy holy Place: And evermore mightily defend him. Confound the designs of all those that are risen up against him. And let not their rebellious wick∣ednesse approach near to hurt him.
Let the Curse of Saul light up∣on the endeavours of those men, who contrive or Imagine mis∣chief for him: And let the blessings of David remain upon his head, and upon his ed for euermore. O Lord, hear our Prayer And let our crycome unto thee.
III. O Lord God Infinite in Power, by whom the Thrones of Kings are establish∣ed, and their persons made sa∣cred; Take we beseech thee, in∣to thine immediate and divine protection, thine anointed Ser∣vant the King; that no sacrile∣gious profane hand may come near to touch him: In all his wayes let thy Spirit guide him; and thy holy Angels pitch their tents about him. O Lord! comfort him in his troubles, defend him in his dangers, support him in his cause, shew some token on him for good; even now, O God, when the Sons of violence are in their pride, and triumph over him whom thou hast exalted;
designing and rejoycing to root out that religion which thine own right hand hath planted. Defeat their purposes O thou preserver of men, and let not their mischeivous imagi∣nations any longer prosper, but blast all their Counsels, wither away all their Armies like grass, scorched by the Sun. Bow down at last their stiff necks, and obdurate hearts, to a desire of that peace which hath so long been an abomination to them: That this miserable Nation may no further pursue their own ruin, but being by so ma∣ny bitter punishments made sensible of thine anger for this unnatural division may at last be reduced within their first obedience, to the glory of thy Name, the vindication of our defamed religion, the comfort of our afflicted King, and the happiness of this yet bleeding
dom. And confirm all this to Us, O Lord, by the merits and through the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. IV. O Eternal and supreme Ma∣jesty, we most humbly be∣seech thee to pour down the Richest of thy Mercies on thy servant the King, to take him into thine Immediate and espe∣cial protection, and proportion thine Assistances and RElief to the Greatness of his Needs and Destitutions: O what great troubles and Adversities hast thou shewed him! Thou h set up the Right hand of his E∣nemies, and made all his Ad∣versaries to rejoyce; thou hast taken away the Edge of his Sword, and givest him not Victo∣ry
in the day of Battail: thou hast put out his Glory, and Cast his Throne down to the ground Lord! how long wilt thou hide thy self, for ever? Behold, O God our Defender, and look up∣on the face of thine Anoynted: and though thou hast permitted our sins to reduce his Affairs to this Hopelesse Condition, yet from thence let thy Soveraign Mercy raise him: O Lord! we know not what to do; only our Eyes are upon Thee: O magnifie thy strength in this his greatest weakness, and by thine own power effect that, towards which he hath nothing of Humane Contribution: create peace for , and Create the means for the obtaining it. Protect his red person, direct and pros∣er all his designes, fasten him as  Nail in a sure place; and hang on him all the Glory of his hers House; that he ay be the Repairer of the
Breach, the Restorer of Cities to dwell in; that he may be a Nursing Father to thy Church, and may Comfort the waste places of Sion: But if our sins have so far incensed thee, that as thou hast taken away one King in thy wrath, so thou wilt not give us another, except it be in thine Anger: if thou hast designed him to succeed his bles∣sed Father, not in his Throne, but in his sufferings: grant him likewise to succeed him in his Virtues; Confirm to him that inward Soveraignty over his own Passions, more valuable then a Thousand Kingdoms. Chuse him for thy self in the Furnace of afflictions, and make him so cheerfully to wear his Crown of Thorns, with his Sa∣viour here, that he may receiv a Crown of Glory from him hereafter; and that for the Me∣diation of Jesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour, Amen.
V. O Thou blessed and only Po∣tentate, most just in thy Judgements, and wondeull in thy mercies: we thy sinfull Creatures cast our selves down before thee, desiring in all hu∣mility to adore that Justice of thine, which hath suffered our iniquities to prevail against the cause and enterprises of our So∣veraign; and yet to praise and magnifie that mercy which hath  suffer'd them to prevail inst his person; but hath in  midst of the greatest and ost amazing dangers, provided him a way of escape; plucked him as a brand out of the fire; and by thine own gracious pro∣ction, at once defeated both the fears of his friends, and nd the hopes of his Enemies:
Praised be the Lord, which hast not given him over for a prey unto their teeth: And since thou hast been pleased thus far to condescend to the prayers and groa of thy servants: O  not our Lord be angry, and we will speak, beseeching thee, who hast thus powerfully rescued him from Egypt, not to suffer him to perish in the Wilderness, but though his passage be through the red sea, yet at last to bring him to a Canaan: O thou whose wayes are in the great deep, who madest Iosephs imprisonment the way to hi advancement, and the impo∣verishing of Iob, the means of doubling his wealth; let the same over-ruling Providence dispose of all late adverse events, to those ends, which all Loyall hears gasp after: Lord! be thou pleas'd to breathe upon the y bones, and they shall  liv in thy sight. In the mea
time, O Lord! let thy com∣forts refresh his soul in the midst of these sad calamities: sanctifie them unto him, that he may come out of these tribulations, like gold out of the fire, puri∣fied, but not consumed; that so, whatsoever becomes of his transitory Crown here, he may by a constant enduring of temp∣tations be secured of that Crown of life which fadeth not away; grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and on∣ly Saviour, Amen:
VI. O Thou King of Nations, who dost according to thy will in all the Kingdoms of the Earth: who hast made us drink deep of the Cup of trembling, and yet seemest to have bitter dregs behinde for us: We thy wretch∣ed Creatures, that have highly contributed to that common weight of sin, under which the Land sinks, humbly prostrate our selves at thy feet, desiring with all sincere contrition, to confesse that thou art Righteous in all that is hitherto come up∣on us: All that we have hitherto sufferd, being but the sad arrears of the sins of our Peace, when we waxed fat and kicked against thee. And that thou shalt likewise be most just in the utmost of thy future inflictions, which (what
ever they prove) cannot exceed the sins of our calamitous dayes, who, in the time of our distress have sinned yet more against the Lord; who have passed through the fire to Moloch with an undaunted obstinacy, suffer'd all the flamings of thy wrath, rather than we would renounce any of our detestable things: Nay (as if our old were too in∣firm) we have made new Leagues with death, new agree∣ments with hell, proceeding from evil to worse, and making every new Calamity, thou sendst to reclaim us, the occasion of some fresh impiety. And now, O Lord, wilt thou not visit for these things? shal not thy soul be aven∣ged on such a Nation as this? We are they, O Lord! that have perverted all thy dispensations toward us, grown wanton un∣der thy mercies, and desperate under thy Judgements, and is there any third method left for
those that have frustrated both these? Behold, O Lord! these desperate, these gasping Patients at thy feet, who have lost sense and motion to all things, but the resistance of their remedy: O give us not utterly over! but continue to administer to us whatsoever may remove this stupefaction, and bring us to a feeling of our own condition: And what sharpnesse and severi∣ty soever thou disceruest neces∣sary for that purpose, forbear not, O Lord! to give us those wounds of a friend: O say not concerning us, why should ye be smitten any more? but rather cast us into the place of Dra∣gons, and cover us with the sha∣dow of death, if by so doing we may be brought to remem∣ber the Name of the Lord our God: Lord! this is the one great necessary wherein we are principally concern'd to sollicite thee; that our Eyes may be
opened, that we may see every one the plague of his own heart, that so (instead of those Athe∣cal disputes we make of thy providence) we may all oyn in an humble Adoration of thy Justice; and (confessing that our destruction is of our selves) ab∣horre our selves and Repent in dust and ashes: And when by th greater deliverance thou hast put us in a Capacity of the lesse; then, be thou pleased to be jealous for thy Land, and py thy people. Consider the troubles we suffer of them that hate us; and let not all the evils  little before thee, that  come upon us, upon our Kings, upon our Priests, and upon all this people. Restore us our Judges as at the first, and our Councellors as at the begin∣ing; and Comfort us again ter the time wherein thou hast agued us; And for the years erein we have suffered adver∣sity:
But if in recompence of having made thee serve with our sins, servants must Rule over us, though they have dominion over our Bodies and goods at their pleasure, yet O Lord! let them not have dominion over our souls: Let not all our oppressi∣ons make us act any thing con∣trary to our Christian professi∣on, much less wholly renounce it; But what ever other judge∣ments we must groan under, Lord deliver us not up to that Barbarism and irreligion which hath already made so great a breach upon us. We cannot but confess it most just in thee to permit Us; who have so long resisted the power of Godliness, to proceed now to Cast off the very form; and that we who would not receive the Love of the truth, should be given over to strong delusions to believe Lyes: And this saddest effect of thy wrath hath already
overtaken many among us, and doth universally threaten the rest: for since thou hast laid waste the wall of thy Vineyard, what can we expect, but that it should be trodden down? Thou hast broken our two staves, Beau∣ty and bands; all Order and Unity (the necessary supports of a Church  at once perishing from amongst us: the solemn feasts are forgotten in Sion; her Elders sit upon the ground and keep silence, while they om thou hast not sent, run; while they, to whom thou hast  spoken, prophesie; and  these is prophaness gone into all the Land. We, O Lord! which might once have gone with the multitude to the house of God, are now driven into seret Corners to celebrate the most solemn parts of thy ser∣vice, whilest it is become more safe to blaspheme, then to adore thee publiquely: This, this, O
Lord, is the unsupportable pa of our afflictions, the sting of all our miseries: If we had been only sold for Bondmen, and Bondwomen, we could have held our peace; but, thine ab∣horring thine Altar, and casting off thy Sanctuary, this is for a Lamentation, and must be for a Lamentation: Thy servants think upon the stones of Sion, and it pityeth them to see her in the dust; O Let not all those tears & prayers that are poured out for her, return empty: And because thou thy self hast re∣commended unto us the efficacy of importunity; be thou plea∣sed to give us that grace, to ∣cite and stirre up all that make mention of the Lord, that they may give thee no rest, till thou establish our Ierusalem again a praise upon Earth: To that end, O Lord, give us Pastors af thine own heart, such Priest whose lips may preserve know∣ledge,
and make us diligently to seek the Law at their mouths, and grant that we, being by this deprivation taught the value of such precious advantages, and the sin of our former con∣temning them, may unani∣mously contend for the regain∣ing them; by a cordiall univer∣sall forsaking of those sins which have turned away these good things from us: Extend the same mercy to those who have been the most actively instru∣mentall to this sad devastation both of Church and State: Withdraw from them those treacherous prosperities which make them think, that thon art even such an one as themselves, and by unravelling that webb of strange successes, wherewith they have hid their shame, dis∣cover them to themselves, and to all whom they have sedu∣ced: O let not the temporall ruines, which they have
brought upon us, become the eternall Ruin of any one soul among them, but convince them of the horror of their guilt, and let that convince∣ment work that godly sorrow, never to be repented of: That so thou mayst give them their portion, not with Hypocrites, but with Penitents; and that for his sake, whom thou hast set forth to be our Propiti∣ation, Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
VII. O Mercifull God, we thy wretched sinfull Creatues, who have no other qualification for thy mercy; but that one of extreme misery, do yet presume to approach thee, humbly be∣seeching thee, to look not on our merits, but our wants, and by removing all those obstacles, which our sins have interposed against our succours, to render us accessible to thy comforts and reliefs; and then dispense them to us, O Lord! in such order and measure, as thy wisdom shall see expedient, and when thou seest us fit to be again en∣trusted with our outward peace, be pleased to restore it to us: but in the mean time deny us not the inward, nor any of those means which are necessary
to the procuring or maintaining of it: To this end, O Lord! con∣tinue to us the light of thy truth and let not all these unfruitfull works of darkness, which we have hitherto committed in that light, provoke thee to ex∣tinguish it. Avert O Lord, all those sad portents that threaten destructi∣on to this Church: And though thou hast given Satan and his instruments power over all that she hath, yet, O Lord, spare her life; Let there still be a remnant left to praise thee, and when by these sharp tryalls, thou hast vindicated her integrity, be pleased to bless her, as thou didst Iobs latter end, by giving her a double portion of all real advantages: And though thou hast now violently removed thy Tabernacle, yet O Lord, let not one pin of it be lost, but erect it again (amongst us) in the wonted order and beauty; and though
she have lyen among the pots, yet let her be as the wings of a Dove, which is covered with sil∣ver wings, and her feathers like gold; let her builders make haste, and her destroyers, and those that have laid her waste, go forth of her: Deliver her from those Bruitish Pastors which have made this thy plea∣sant portion a desolate wilder∣ness, but give her such guides, as may by their doctrine build us up in our most holy faith, and by their example, shine as lights in this perverse generation; and make us so to obey them which watch for our souls, that they may give an account of them with Joy and not with grief; Grant this, mercifull Lord, for his sake, who is the Shepheard and Bishop of our souls, Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
VIII. ALmighty and everlasting God, which hatest nothing that thou hast made, and dost forgive the sins of all them that be penitent; create and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we, worthyly lamenting our sins, and knowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission & forgiveness, through Jesus Christ, Amen.
IX. GRant we beseech thee Al∣mighty God, that we which for our evill deeds are worthily punished, by the Com∣fort of thy Grace may merciful∣ly be relieved, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. X. ALmighty God, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy Family, for the which our Lord Jesus Christ was con∣tented to betrayed, and given up into the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the Cross, who liveth and reigneth, &c. Amen.
XI. ALmighty and Everlasting God, by whose Spirit the whole Body of the Church is governed and sanctified, receive our supplications and prayers, which We offer up before thee for all eates of Men in thy ho∣ly congregation, that every member of the same in his vo∣cation and Ministery may truly and godly serve thee, through our Lord Jesus, Christ, who liveth and reigneth, &c. Amen.
XII. Assist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and prayers, and dispose the way of thy servants toward the attainment of everlasting sal∣vation, that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, they may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Christ our Lord, Amen. XIII. ALmighty God, which hast promised to hear the Petiti∣ons of them that ask in thy Sons Name, We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to Us, that have made now our
prayers and supplications unto Thee, and grant that those things which We have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.
A proper Prayer for the Thirtieth of Ianuary. O Blessed Lord God, who by thy Wisdom guidest and orderest all things most sutably to thy Justice, and performest thy pleasure, allwayes in such manner, that thou canst al∣so appeal to us, whether thy wayes be not equall: We, thy poor afflicted People, fall down before thee, acknowledging the Justice of thy proceedings with us, and that the amazing Judgement, which as this day befell us (in thy permitting cru∣el men, sons of Beliall to execute the fury of their Rebellion upon Our late Gracious Sove∣raign, and to imbrew their
hands in the Blood and Mur der of the Lords Anointed) was drawn down by the great and long provocations of this Nations sins against thee: For all which, and our own parts in which, we sinfull wretches here met together, desire to humble our selves before thee, and to tremble at thy presence in this dayes fore vengeance, the effect as well as desert of our impieties, the work of our own hands upon our selves, thy heavy Judgement, but our most horrid sin, for which alone (did not multitudes of other sins cry out against us) thou mightest justly descend down upon us all, as thou didst in So∣dom, and leave us no other me∣morial than to be the frightfull Monuments of thy Indigna∣tion and fury to all Posterity. Gracious is the Lord, and mer∣cifull, therefore it is, that We are not consumed! O let thy long∣suffering
and patience lead us to repentance: And now Lord, looking on this particular signal Judgement, as thy last Trump, warning us to fly from the wrath to come; We come forth to meet our God, mourning in our prayers before thee, and begging the aversion of thy further dis∣pleasure, and the removall of these plagues of long continu∣ance from us, for the all-suffi∣cient merits of the death and sufferings of our blessed Saviour. O forgive our great and mani∣fold transgressions, and for his bloody Passions sake, deliver this Nation from blood-guiltinesse, that of this day especially, O God of our Salvation. Let not our crying sins intercept our Prayers, or thy blessings; but hear the voice of our tears, and hearing forgive and heal us, re∣tire not quite from us into thine own place, laugh not at our calamities, neither mock in this
day of our visitation: Vindicate thine own Cause, and thine own Providence, that it may appear unto men that thou bearest up the Pillars of the earth; and that by thee Kings do reign. And though thou hast suffered our Enemies to proceed to that high pitch of violence against our late King, even to kill and take possession of his Throne and Revenews: Yet frustrate now at length their bold hopes and de∣sires; let not their mischievous imaginations prosper, least they be too proud; let them not be able to establish themselves in that prosperity and greatness they have fancied; let them not say of his Family, God hath forsaken them, let us persecute them: shew some good token on his seed for good, that their ene∣mies may see it, and be ashamed: because, thou Lord, hast holpen and comforted them. Bow the hearts of the Subjects of this
Land, as thou didst those of Is∣rael to David, that they may ac∣knowledge and receive joyfully the heir of these Kingdoms; and fasten thou him as a nail in a sure place; behold his injuries, and have compassion on his In∣nocency; and let the desire of his enemies perish like that of the Hypocrite; but bring him, maugre all their oppositions, to a peaceable possession of that Throne, to which by his Birth∣right thou hast designed him, and establish him in the Just Rights of his Family. O Lord, we wait on thee this day for this blessing; make no long tarry∣ing, but according to the time thou hast plagued us, send us deliverance. Snatch the prey out of the Lyons teeth, and pull us out of the burnings like a fire∣brand: We beseech thee, that We may this day spread before thee the words of Rabshekah, the proud railings, and scornfull re∣proaches
of our enemies. Be∣hold this day their exaltation, and our mourning: O Lord, our eyes are towards thee! for whom nothing is hard; let it not seem a small thing to thee, that we suffer, but concenter our Pray∣ers with the many thousands that call on thee: That salvati∣on may come to our King, and through him thy blessing of peace unto thy People. Think upon all those that are peace∣able, and faithfull in the Land, and deal thou with us accord∣ing to thy Word, wherein thou hast caused us to put our trust; Let the world see that there is a God that judgeth the earth, and will send deliverance to his people in their needfull time of trouble. But whatsoever thy purpose is, let not us behave our selves frowardly, but with all Christian humility, run the race that thou settest before us, and patiently bear the indignation,
of the Lord, because we have sinned against him. And we meekly beseech thee, that if the Divine Decree of thy Justice withstand our Petitions, our prayers may return into our own bosomes; and that thou wilt make thy judgements tem∣poral and not spiritual upon us; but assist us with strength pro∣portionable to our temptations; that we be not delivered to evil: but that in wel-doing, we may commit our selves to thee our God, as unto a faithful Creator: And that both our King and we, may say with all Christian sub∣mission and cheerfulness: It is the Lord, let him do what seem∣eth him good. And here, O Lord, we offer unto thee, all possible praise and thanks for all the Glory of thy Grace, that hath shined forth in thine Anointed, our  Soveraign, and that thou wert pleased to own him (this
Day especially) in the midst of his Enemies, and in the hour of death, and to endue him with such eminent Patience, Meck∣ness, Humility, Charity and all other Christian Virtues, accord∣ing to the example of thine own Son, suffering the sury of his, and thine Enemies, for the pre∣servation of thy Church and People. We Praise thee also for the Courage and Comfort thou hast given unto us of his Party, by that owning and assisting him, or any that have suffered in that Righteous Cause. And we beseech thee give us all grace to Remember and provide for our latter end, by a Careful, studious imitation of those bles∣sed patterns of thy Saints and Martyrs, that have gone before us, that we may be made worthy to Receive benefit by their pray∣ers, which they, in Communion with thy Church Catholick, of∣fer
up unto thee for that part of it here Militant, and yet in sight with, and danger from the flesh, that following the blessed stepps of their holy Lives and Deaths, we may also shew forth the Light of a good example, for the Glo∣ry of thy Name, the Conversion of Enemies, and the improve∣ment of those Generations we shall shortly leave behind us; and then with all those that have born the Heat and burthen of the day (thy Servant whose Sufferings and Labours we this day commemorate) receive the Reward of our Labours, the Harvest of our Hopes, even the Salvation of our own souls, and that for the merits, and through the mediation of thy Son, our Blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen.
An Aninversary Prayer for the Thirtieth of Ia∣nuary. O Most mightie God, terrible in thy judgements, and won∣derfull in thy doings towards the Children of Men, Who in thy hea∣vie displeasure hast suffered this day, that execrable thing to be done among Us, which We cannot men∣tion without horror, nor remember without astonishment. We thy poor afflicted Creatures,  dejected looks, and bleeding hearts, humblie confesse in the be∣half of all the people of this wretch∣ed land, that our crying sins have en the Cause that the Crown is th fallen from our head, and an inno∣cent
King given up to the rage of cruell and bloudie men. But O Gracious God, lay not the guilt of this bloud (the shedding of which none but thy blood can expi∣e) lay it not on the whole Nation; for thou hast yet a remnant among Us, who having neither hands nor earts defiled with it, do still mourn in secret, and bewail the committing of that fact, which heaven and earth ors. But if thy justice must be satisfi∣ed, Let the thunder of it light upon their heads, and theirs alone, who ot only contrived and acted so foul a murther, but are as yet so far from being touched with any remorse or repentance for it, that they justi∣fie their sin, and in an high blasphe∣ie pretend thy Name, and Glorie, for all that they have done. Lord in thy good time consider is; Consider not only what they ve done to that royall Martyr, who  raignes with thee in Glorie; But with what eagernesse they have
since pursued him, To whom Thou hast given the Crown, saying, with those wicked Husbandmen, This is the Heir, let us kill him that the Inheritance may be Ours. But, O mercifull God, let not this wicked imagination of theirs ever take effect; but set thy watchfull Providence as a continual fence about him: shew some token on him for good even now; O Lord, when they have swallowed him up in the pride of their strength, and think they have made their hill so strong, that thy can never be moved. This is thine hour, O Lord; this is thy time; Now shew thy self: O Th who art the Iudge of the W , judge equally between hi and those sons of Belial. Thou seest thy Church is laid waste, thy People oppressed, thine A∣nointed cast out, as an unprofitable Branch; his Armies overthrown,  Friends ruined, his Enemies mighty, his Hopes vanished, and all human remedies consumed.
But Thou art the same God that fittest between the Cherubims, be the Earth never so unquiet. Hear Us therefore in the midst of our con∣fusions. Restore to Us the light of our eyes, the King whom thou hast given Us. Be from henceforth his Guide and his Counsel, and his mighty Delive∣rer, and never leave him till Thou hast made the Stone, which those Builders have set at nought, the head∣stone of the Corner; That We may evermore rejoyce in the felicitie of thy Chosen, and falling down before thine Altars, give thanks to Thee in the great Congregation. Grant this, O God, for his sake that pleads for Us, even Iesus Christ the righte∣ous, Amen.
Prayers OF Intercession FOR The use of such as Mourn in Secret, for the Publike Cala∣mities of these Nations. London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, 1660.
Lessons appointed to be read on this Occasion. Psalm. 80. 90. 102. Nehem. 9. 2 Chron. 13. Judges 9. Ezra. 9. 2. Sam. 15. 16. 17. 18. 20. Ezek. 9. 22. Numb. 16. Isaiah 22. Rom. 13. Amos 4. Iames 5. 1 Pet. 2. Joel 2. 1 Thes. 5.
A Preparatory Prayer. O Lord, I find in that Book of thine, which cannot de∣ceive me, That the oftner thy ser∣vant Abraham prayed, the more he got ground upon Thee; and came at last to that holy Confidence, as not only to Pray to Thee for Him∣self, but to be importunate, and press thee in the behalf of others. Lord, I confess my Case is different: For Abraham was the Father of the Faithfull; But I am not worthy to be reckoned
among his Children. He had the Honour to be called thy Friend; but My sins have been such, that, unless Thy Mercy intercede, may make thee look upon me as thine Enemy. He prayed to Thee for a People of whose sins he was not Par∣taker; But my address is to Thee for them, in whose iniqui∣ties I am involved, & have some way or other deeply contri∣buted to the hastning and bring∣ing down those terrible Judge∣ments of Thine, which now lie so heavie on us: So that alas! I am unworthy to appear before Thee for My self; and how shall I then dare to supplicate Thee for Others? O that there were a Moses to stand in the Gap to turn away thy wrathfull Indignation from us! O that there were a David, a Daniel, a Ieremy to pour out their souls before Thee! Yet hear Me, O my God; For
though these Holy Saints have now no being upon Earth; Yet their Prayers remain upon Re∣cord, for every soul that mourns in Secret, to make use of O Holy and Blessed Spirit, kindle but the same Fervency in my Heart (while I repeat their Words) as was in Them; And I know I shall be Heard.
I. King David's Prayer for the Church and People. O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pasture? O think upon thine Inheritance, which thou hast purchased, and Re∣deemed of old. Lift up thy feet, that thou mayst utterly destroy every E∣nemy that hath done Evil in thy Sanctuary. For behold, they break down all the caed Works thereof, with Axes and Hammers. Yea, they have said in their hearts, Let us make havock of them altogether; And thus have they designed to ruin all
the Houses of God in the land. But O God, how long shall the Adversary do this dishonour? how long shall the Enemy Blaspheme thy Name, for ever? Arise, O God, maintain thine own Cause; Remember how the Foolish man blasphemeth thee daily. But, O deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove into their Hands: For the Presumption of them that hate. Thee, increaseth more and more. O God make speed to save us. O Lord make haste to help us.
II. O Lord God of Hosts, how long wilt thou be angry with thy People that Prayeth? How long wilt thou feed us with the Bread of Tears? and give us plenteousnesse of Tears to drink? O Turn us again, Thou God of Hosts; shew us the Light of thy Countenance, and we shall be whole. Remember that Thou didst once plant a Vine amongst us: And when it had taken Root, it filled the Land. Our Hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the Boughs thereof were like the Goodly Cedar Trees. But now, thou hast broken down her Hedge, so that all they that go by, pluck off her Grapes. The wild Boar of the Wood
doth root it up, and the Beasts of the Field devour it. Yet turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts; shew us the Light of thy Countenance, and we shall be whole. For we will not go back from thee; O let us live, and we shall ll upon thy Name. O God make speed to save us. O Lord make haste to help us. III. HOld not thy Tongue; O God, keep not still silence; Refrain not thy self, O God. For o Thine Enemies make a murmuring, and they that hate Thee, have lift up their Head. They have imagined craftily against thy People, and have taken Counsell against thy se∣cret ones. Behold they have cast their heads
together with one Consent, and are Confederate against Thee. They have said, Come let us root them out that they may be no more a People, and that their Name may be no more in re∣membrance. They come daily round about  like Water, and compasse us on eve∣ry side. But, O my God, make them like unto a Wheel, and as the stubble before the Wind: Who say, Let us take unto Our selves the Houses of God in Pos∣session O make their Faces ashamed, O Lord, that they may seek Thy Name. O God make speed to save us. O Lord make haste to help us.
IV. O God thou hast cast us out, and scattered us abroad; Thou hast been displeased at us, O Turn thee unto us again. Thou hast moved the Land and divided it: O heal the sores thereof, for it shaketh. Thou hast shewn Thy People heavy things, and given us a Drink of Deadly Wine. Thou hast made us to turn our backs upon our Enemies, so that they which hate Us spoil our Goods. Thou makest us to be rebuked of our Neighbours, to be laugh'd to scorn, and to be had in derision of them that are round about us. But though all this be come up∣on us, yet do we not forget Thee, nor ave our selves frowardly in Thy Coant.
Our heart is not turned back, nor our steps gone out of thy Way. No, not when thou hast smitten us into the place of Dragons and covered us with the shadow of Death. Up Lord, Why sleepest thou? Awake, and be not absent from Us for ever? But O why hidest Thou Thy Face; and forgettest our Misery and Trouble? For our soul is brought low, even unto the Dust, and our Belly eaveth unto the ground. Arise, help us and deliver us for Thy Mercies sake. O God make speed to save us. O Lord make haste to help us.
King David's Tears. O My God, why hast thou forsaken Thine Anointed, and art displeased with him? For Lo Thou hast broken the Co∣venant of thy servant; and cast his Crown to the Ground. Thou hast overthrown all his Hedges, and broken down his strong holds. So that all they that go by spoil him, and he is become a Rebuke to his Neighbours. For thou hast set up the Right hand of his Enemies, and made all his Adversaries to rejoyce. Thou hast put out his Glory, and hast cast his Throne down to the Ground. The Dayes of his Youth hast Thou seasoned with Bitternesse, and covered him with dishonor.
But Lord, how long wilt thou ide thy self, for Ever? and shall thy Wrath still burn like Fire? Remember, O Lord, the rebuke that Thy Servant hath, and how he doth bear in his Bosom, the Rebukes of many People And let his Adversaries be clothed with sham; But upon his Head let his Crown flourish. O help him against his Ene∣mies; for vain is the help of Man. O God make speed to save Him: O Lord make haste to help Him.
Jeremiah's Lamentations Pro∣pheticall of these Times. HOw hath the Lord covered us with a Cloud in his an∣ger, and cast down from Hea∣ven unto Earth the Beauty of Israel, and remembred not his Footstool in the Day of his Wrath? For Lo, he hath bent his Bow as an Enemy: He hath swallowed us up, and hath not pittied; He hath made desolate the Kingdom and the Princes thereof. He hath cast off his Altars, and abhorred his Sanctuary, and hath given into the Hands of the Enemies the Walls of his Palaces. He hath caused our solemn Feast and Sabbaths to be forgotten, and hath despised in his Indignation the King and the Priest.
For the Lord hath now ac∣complished his' Fury; He hath poured out his fierce Anger; He hath kindled such a Fire in Sion, as hath devoured the Palaces thereof. For the sins of the Prophets, and and the Iniquities of the Priests, who have shed the blood of the Iust in the midst of her. For the Breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord hath been taken in their Pits; Of whom we said, under his shadow shall we live in Peace. But we have Transgressed and Rebelled, and Thou hast not pardon∣ed. And therefore our eyes have as yet failed in our vain help; For in our Watching, we have watched for a Nation that could not save us. Behold, O Lord, and Consider to whom thou hast done this. O Lord, Thou hast seen his Wrong, Judge thou his Cause.
Thou hast seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations against him. Thou hast heard all their Re∣proach, O Lord, and all their Imaginations against him. The lips of thos that have risen up against him, and their Devices against him all the Day. O God make speed to save him. O Lord make haste to help him. II. REmember O Lord, what is come upon us; con∣sider and behold our Reproach. For our Inheritance is turned to strangers; our Houses to Aliens; our Necks are under Persecution; we labour and have no rest. Our Fathers have sinned and
are not, and we have born our Iniquities. Yea, servants rule over us, and there is none that delivers us out of their hands. Our Elders have ceased from the Gate, and our Young men from their Musick. The Ioy of our Heart is ceased, our Dance is turned into mourning. For the Crown is fallen from our Head, and Wo unto us that We have sinned. For this our heart is faint, for these things our Eyes are dim. But wherefore dost thou for∣get us for Ever, and forsakest us so long time? O Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; Renew our dayes as of old; And do not utterly Reject us, be not for ever Wroth against us. O God make speed to save us. O Lord make hast to help us.
Daniel's Prayer and Confes∣sion in the Behalf of Him∣self and his People. O Lord, the Great and dreadfull God, We have sinned, and done wickedly, and have Rebelled, even by depart∣ing from thy Precepts and from thy Iudgements Neither have we hearkned to thy Servants the Prophets, which spake in thy Name, to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and all the People of this Land. O Lord, Righteousness be∣longeth unto thee, but unto us Confusion of Face, as at this Day; unto all that are near and far off through all the Coun∣tries, whither thou hast driven them, because of the Trespasse
that they have trespassed against thee. For we have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God, and therefore the Curse is poured out upon us. Even such a Curse, as that under the whole Heaven hath not been done, as hath been done unto Us. But now, O Lord our God, accord∣ing to all thy Righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine Anger and thy Fury be turned away from us. Hear the Prayer of thy ser∣vant, and cause thy Face to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is now desolate. O my God, incline thine Ear and hear; Open thine Eyes and behold our Desolation. For I do not present these supplications before thee for our own Righteousnesse, but for thy Great Mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord Forgive, O Lord do, delay not, for Thine own sake, O my God, and for
thy Peoples sake, that are called by y Name. O God make speed to save us. O Lord make hast to help us. Prayers for the King. LOrd Remember our distres∣sed King, and all his Troubles, Amen. Let thine Hand hold him fast, and thine Arm strengthen him, Amen. Let not the Enemy be able to do him violence, or the Son of Wickedness hurt him, Amen. Let thy Truth and Mercy be ever with him; and in thy Name, let his Throne be exalt∣ed, Amen. O be thou his Father, his God, and his strong Salvation, Amen.
And let him be as the Fi born, and Glorious among t Kings of the Earth, Amen. O God make speed to sav him: O Lord make haste to help him. II. O Most Powerful Lord God, the only disposer of all the Kings and Kingdomes of the Earth, who for the Punishment of the Crying sins of this Nati∣on hast extinguished our Glory, and cast the Throne down to the Ground, Give us not over utterly to Ruine and Confusi∣on; But bring back in thy good time the Heir of these King∣domes, like the Sun with Heal∣ing in his Wings, to repair the Breaches already made, and
prevent the Desolations that reaten us. And however thou hast been pleased to cast a cloud upon im in the Morning of his Days, yet leave him not in this storm. Forsake him not, Thou that art the God of his salvation; But look upon his Wrongs, and have Compassion on his Inno∣cency. O let it never be in the Pow∣er of men to barr him from the Throne, to which by his Birth thou hast designed him; But Guide him with those Counsels, and prosper him with that suc∣cess, as may settle him in his Throne in Peace. Or, if the Guilt and Wick∣edness of his Opposers shall still continue to hinder this, Do it after thine own way, O God, with thy mighty hand, and stretched out Arm; That they may both know and feel, that
thou art the Protector of Kings and the Refuge of all them, who have no other Trust but Thee. Grant this, O Lord, for the Glory of thy Name, and the Comfort of thy desolate Church and People, Amen. O Most Mercifull God, the on∣ly Sanctuary of sad and di∣stressed souls, Look down I be∣seech Thee upon thy servant, who here with bended Knees and a wounded spirit prostrate my self before Thee. For Wo unto us, we have lived to see the Crown fall from our Heads, and the Glory departed from our Is∣rael, even the Anoynted of the Lord, driven to fly before wicked men, and they, who have divided his Inheritance triumphing over him. But thou, O Lord, how long, how long shall Bloody Designs and Rebellious imaginations prosper? Shall not the Judge of
the whole Earth do Right? Or hast thou forgotten to be Gra∣cious, and shuttest up thy ten∣der Mercy in displeasure? O No: Thou art the same God, who in the midst of Judg∣ment remembrest Mercy. Thine Arm is not shortned that thou canst not save, nor thine Ear heavy, that thou canst not hear. Arise then, O Lord, Arise, Let the World see, that thou art the Father of the Fatherless, and the Helper of them to Right that suffer Wrong. Shew it, O Lord, especially at this time, in multiplying all thy comforts upon our distressed King. And, as thou hast strangely and Wonderfully delivered him from those who so eagerly hunt∣ed after his Life; So let it ap∣pear to the World that: thou hast not done this to make him more miserable, or to continue him in the Condition of an Exe; But rather, that thou
hast reserved him for Faithfull Hands, and fairer Opportuni∣ties and more prosperous suc∣cesses. And though that was not the Time, nor those the Means, by which thou hast designed to re∣store the Kingdom to him, Yet that thou hast not forsaken him, but that He is still in thy Care, still under the shadow of thy Wings, who alone art able to do more for him, then we can pray for; and Gloriously to bring him back again, by wayes we cannot think of. In the mean time, O Lord, whilst thou think∣est fit to keep him under the sharpnesse of this Discipline, Teach him to kisse the Hand that chastens him, and humbly to submit his Earthly Crown to thy Divine Will and Pleasure; knowing, that thou canst either Restore him That, when it seems good to thee, Or else give him a Crown infinitely more Glori∣ous,
which no man can take from him. Lord, He is more Precious to thee, then he can possibly be to us: Dispose of Him therefore in the multitude of thy Mercies, And let thy Holy Spirit take so  Possession and Guidance of im, that among all the Diffi∣ties of his most perplexed Af∣s, he may constantly per∣form his Duty towards thee, and live and dy thy faithful Servant in Jesus Christ, Amen.
A Letany of Intercession. O That thou wouldst hear me O God! that thou wouldst so prepare my Heart, that thou maist hear me! that thou wouldst hear me once more, though I am but Dust and Ashes! That thou wouldst hear me for all those, whom by the Bonds of Duty, and Charity, or Affection, I am bound to Pray for! O Lord hear my Prayers. And let my cry come unto thee.
The Letany. THat it may please thee to Bless the whole Catholick Church of thy Son Christ, as it hath been planted in his Death, and watered in his Blood, so it may be still nourished by his Sa∣craments, and governed by his Word; That the Uncharitable∣nesse of men may not make the Rents and Divisions of it wider, and that howsoever we may dif∣fer in the superstructions, the Foundations of Christian Faith may never be cast down. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to look compassionately on this persecuted part of thy Church, now driven from the Publike Altars into Corners and secret Closets, that thy Protection
may be over us where ever we shall be scatteted, and a Rem∣nant prefervcd among us by whom thy Name may be Glo∣rified, thy Sacraments Admini∣stred, and the souls of thy ser∣vants kept upright in the midst of a corrupting and of a corrup∣ted Generation. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to be Gracious to Him, who was once defigned by Thee to be the Nursing Father of this thy Church; But for the sins of both Priests and People is now cast out as an unprofitable Branch; And that in thy due time thou wouldst deal with him, accord∣ing to the Innocency of his Person & the Justice of his Cause. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to comfort him in the sadnesse of his spirit, and Guide him in the Perplexities of his Mind, and support him in the straits and
necessities of his Fortunes. To raise him Friends abroad, and to Convert or confound the hearts of his Enemies at Home; To do some mighty thing for him, which I in particular know not how to Pray for, and by the se∣cret Working of thy Provi∣dence, to make the Stone which the foolish Builders among us have refused the Head-stone of the Corner. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to preserve him with an unspotted soul, and an unshaken Faith and that no splendor of any Earthly Crown may so dazle him, as to make him forget ei∣ther himself or thee; or do any unworthy thing to lose that Heavenly Crown which thou hast prepared for him, and no∣thing but his own sins is able to keep from him. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to
shew Mercy to the Queen his Mother, the Dukes his Brethren in Exile with him, and the rest of that scattered and oppressed Family; to guide them thy Counsels, to defend with them with thy Power, to provide for them in thy Mercy, and to make them in their severall ways, In∣struments of thy Glory and our Happiness. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to deal Graciously with that Rem∣nant left of the Loyall Nobili∣ty, and all others of that ruined side, who have chosen rather to suffer in thy Cause, then to par∣ticipate with the sins of a more successefull Party. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to spread the wings of thy Pro∣tection over all those whom thou hast made near and dear unto me; to preserve them safe in body and soul from the snares
of their enemies, and the ini∣quity of the times, that no sin may lay waste their Conscien∣ces, nor no evill come neer their dwellings. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to re∣compence all those whom thou hast raised to be Instruments of any good unto me; such as have taken care of my soul, and in∣structed me in the way to hea∣ven; such as have counselled me, when I have gone astray, supplyed me in my wants, com∣forted me in my heaviness, and have had that high Charity for me, as to Reprove me when I have sinned. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake That it may please thee to let the day-spring from on high, shine upon all those who sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death; who either do not know thy Name, or knowing it, are carried by strong delusions into
the wayes of Error and false Perswasions. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to confirm those, who as yet stand fast on the foundations of thy Holy Truth; that neither the persecution of the Church in which they were Baptized, nor the temptations of the times, nor the snares of cunning men, who watch all advantages, may make them fall from their first Faith, and miserably wander after their own imaginations. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to comfort and raise up those weak and dejected spirits, which are ready to sink under the burthen of a troubled or Afflicted Con∣science, that as thou hast shew∣ed them their sins, and the pu∣nishments due for them, so thou wouldst shew them their Savi∣our; and, by directing them to lay hold on his Cross, keep them
from a Finall and Everlasting ship wrack. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to hear the groans and cries of all those that are Afflicted, either outwardly or inwardly, in bo∣dy or soul; Especially such, who being oppressed for Conscience sake, have no place to fly unto, nor no man careth for their souls. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to listen Compassionately to the deep sighing of the Prisoners, and by thy mighty Power to de∣liver such, who for obeying thee and a good Conscience, are or shall be designed to death or ruin. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to soften the hearts of all un∣righteous Judges; who now have the Power over us, and to make them know with tremb∣ling
that there is a Judge higher than they. O hear us for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to forgive all who more particular∣ly are Enemies to me & mine, all that way have any traduced or slandered me, even to turn their hearts and to extend their Cha∣rity to them, in all those de∣grees of mercy which I desire may be shewn to my own soul. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake. That it may please thee to hear all those servants of thine, who either have the Charity to pray for me, or desire my Pray∣ers for them: But above all, that it may please thee to hear the Prayers of thy Son Jesus Christ, who now fits gloriously on thy Right hand, to intercede both for me, and them. O hear me for thy Son Iesus sake. O Lord, hear my Prayers; and let my cry come unto thee. O Lord, pardon my prayers, and
let not my sins and mine un∣worthinesse interpose between thy Mercy-seat and me, Amen. A Prayer for the Church. ALmighty and Everlasting God, who only workest great marvells, shew the express of thy Goodness to thy desolate and persecuted Church, that now sits mourning in her dust and Ruines, torn by Schism, and stripped and spoiled by Sa∣criledge. And thou which after a long Captivity didst bring back thy People to re-build their Temple, Look upon us with the same eyes of Mercy: restore to us once again the Publike Worship of thy Name, the Reverend Administration of thy Sacra∣ments; Raise up the former Government of Church and
State. That we may no longer  without King, without I rie without God in the World. But may once more enter thy Courts with Praise, and serve thee with that Reverence, that Unity and Order, as may be acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A Prayer for the Queen Mo∣ther, and the Royall Pro∣geny. ALmighty God, the Foun∣tain of all Goodnesse, we humbly beseech thee to be gra∣cious to the Queen Mother, to comfort her in her Afflictions, and to direct her wayes and Counsells as may most conduce to the setling of her Posterity here in Peace. Enlarge thy Blessings upon all
the Royall Family, those that  driven to fly for Refuge into rraign Lands. Take them  into thy care, cover them der thy wings, and in thy due time make them so many instruments of thy Glory and our Happiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A Prayer for the Afflicted. O Lord God, Mercifull & gra∣cious, the only Sanctuary and Refuge of all that are in Misery and Trouble; Hear I beseech thee the groans and cries of all that are Afflicted outwardly or inwardly, either in body or Mind, Especially such who suf∣fer in a Righteous Cause, whose loyalty hath been more dear to them then their Fortunes, and a good Conscience more preci∣ous
then their Lives: conside them, O God, in their severa Extremities, whether at hom or abroad: comfort them  their Distresses, supply them i their Wants. Let the sorrowfull sighing o all that are oppressed, come be∣fore thee, and by the Great∣nesse of thy Power, preserv thou them that are appointed to die. Convert and soften the hard hearts of their implacable Ene∣mies and asswage their thirst of blood, which still cries more and more. Or, if thou otherwise hast decreed to bring any more of us through this Red Sea into the Land of Promise, prepare us for this passage, and guide us by thy blessed Spirit through the shadows of death. Continue our Christian courage and con∣stancy to the uttermost; strengthen our Faith, confirm
our Hope, and let our Charity erflow, even to the forgiving  them, by whose unjust Sen∣e we perish. That so dy∣g in thy Peace, we may enter to the Joyes prepared for us, rough the Mediation of our saviour, who hath gone the same y before us, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, Amen.
An humble and submissive  postulation with God, when  Orthodox and loyall Clergy we so mercily silenced, by that blou Urper, who by Proclamatio forbid them either to preach or  publickly in Churches; or priva ly in Families, not suffering th so much as to teach School. O That thou wouldst hea me, O God, that tho wouldst hear me once more, wh am but Dust and Ashes, while presume, yet with all humbl Rerence, to expostula with thee the great and Glor ous God, in behalf of this pe secuted and afflicted Church!
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet Jer. 12. 1. let me talk with thee of thy Judgements: wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou hast planted them, yea they have taken root; they grow, yea 2. they bring forth fruit [such as it is, the Apples of Sodom and the Grapes of Gomorrah] Thou art near in the mouth, but far from their reins. But wherefore hath the Lord done this unto this Land? what meaneth the heat of this great Deut. 29. 24. anger? O my Lord, if thou the Lord art with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all thy Mercies Judg. 6. 13. and deliverances, which our Fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? did he not deliver us from superstition, igno∣rance
and prophanesse, from perse∣cutions of the right hand, and sepa∣rations on the left? Did he not save us from our open and professed enemies? and wilt thou now suffer us to be destroyed by our own selves? Say Lord, hast thou quite forsaken us, and wilt thou deliver us over in∣to the Midianitish hands of our own Mothers sons? How long shall Iijm and Ziim, the beast of the Island be let Isa. 34. 14. alone to leap upon thy Mercy∣seat, which was wont to be fen∣ced with Cherubims? Or art thou weary of our service, that thou thus goest about to disgrace the Throne of thy Glory, and seemest Jer. 14. 21. to abhr both the cry of our Prayers, and the voice of weeping? For behold Lord, we have Psal. 126. 5. sown in tears: when is it that we shall reap in Joy? When wilt thou turn again the Captivity of Sion. 4. Is it not enough that she hath Cant. 2. 2.
been so long, as a Lilly among the Thorns, but wilt thou now suffer the Thorns to overtop and to choak up this Lilly? Or shall the envious mans tares roy the wheat, which hath been Mat. 13. 25. en in thy field. If there be a necessity that He∣s should be, yet, is there any 1 Cor. 11. 19. ity that they should bear sway? yea, there is no necessity but that thy Truth should pre∣vail. O Lord God, terrible in thy judge∣s, but yet most fatherly in thy cies; when shall we hear thee say in this Church of ours, as thou didst sometimes to thy afflicted Israel. Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God, that pleadeth the Isa. 51. 22. cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand, the cup of trembling, even the egs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again. But I will put it into the hands of them that afflict thee;
which have said to thy soul, bow down that we may go over? Arise O Lord, and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou Psal. 102. 13. have mercy upon her, yea the time is come. And why thy servants think upon her stones, and it pitieth 14. them to see her in the dust. It pittieth them to see, that there is none to guide her among all the sons that she hath brought up. Isa. 51. 18. It pittieth them to see the Priests of the Lord slenced, and those lips Mal. 2. 7. sealed up, which preserve know∣ledge. It pittieth them to have their Teachers removed into a cor∣ner, and that their eyes cannot Isa. 30. 20. see their Teachers? It pittieth them; and yet doth it not pitty thee, O Lord, who art the God of pitty and compassion. Art thou not satisfied with the blood already spilt among
us, but standest thou still ith a sword upon thine Al∣tar? Must Aarons rod be suffered to ther in thine own house, in thine, Numb. 17.  sight, while Corah's and, Da∣han's do bud and blossom? Canst thou, O God, look on, and see the golden pot ravish'd from thine own Tabernacle? Heb. 9. 24. Canst thou endure to be in Mat. 5. 14. the Temple, and see those Lights of the Sanctuary put out, which thou thy self hast light up? Wilt thou suffer the Labou∣rers to be driven out of thy own Vineyard, after their working so long there by thy Divine ap∣pointment? Shall thy House of Prayer be∣come at length a den of Theives; Mat. 21. 1. and thou thy self stand by as uncon∣cernd? whilst they rob thee of thine Honour? Thou that saidst to the waves, Mat. 8. 26.
be ye still, wilt thou suffer the winds to arise, the contrary winds of false Doctrine, and to Eph: 4. 14. blow against this Ship, which thy self hast so long been in wilt thou sleep in the Ship, while thy Disciples are cast over board? Lord, carest thou no we perish? When shall thy Ministers tak down their Harps from the Wil Psal. 137. 2. upon which they hang. When shall they be permit∣ted . openly to sing the Lord song, though in this strang Land? When, O when shall we see the 1 Sam. 7. Ark of God to return back from the House of Dagon, and David 2 Sam. 6. 14. dancing before it? When wilt thou open the mouths of thine own Zacharias's, the Priests Luke 1. of the Lord, that were called to wait upon thee at thine Altar, but who are now struck dumb, from of∣ating before thee?
When wilt thou extend mer∣ Ezra. 9. 9. into us in the sight of those at hate us, who are set over us,  give us a reviving, to set up the ouse of God, and to repair he Desolations thereof, and to give a Wall in Iudah and in Ie∣salem? When shall we accompany the Tribes, even the Tribes of the Lord Psal. 122, 4. unto the Lords House, there to te∣stifie unto Israel, to give thanks un∣ the Name of the Lord, for the ation of our Religion in the  of so many fiery trialls, and the restauration of our Liberties af∣r so sharp a captivity? When Lord, shall we be al∣lowed to eat bread again freely in thy House; yea, though it be but to gather the rums that fall from our Masters table? How long shall it be, ere thou bid  look with joy vpon Zion, the Citty Isa. 33 20. of our Solemnities, as thou didst bid thy People the Jews. When wilt thou comfort us,
and say, your eyes shall see Ie∣rusalem a quiet habitation, a Ta∣bernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes thereof shall be removed, nei∣ther shall any of the cords thereof be broken? O how amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts? Psal. 84. 1. My soul hath a desire and longing to enter into thy 2. Courts, and to go unto thine Altars. But Lord, It is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the Fa∣ther hath put in his own Power. Acts 1. 7. And therefore I desire hum∣bly to submit the successe of all our Prayers and Supplicati∣ons, of our actions and suffe∣rings, together with the time of our deliverance, unto thy sole pleasure, earnestly beseech∣ing thee, for thy Grace (which is alone sufficient for us) that 2 Cor. 12. 9. we may cheerfully wait upon thee (without thinking thy stay
too long) till thou have mercy on us. The Lord our God is a God of Jer. 51. 56. compences, and shall surely requit r Enemies. But The Lord is our Judge, the Isa. 53. 22. Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. Thou art the Lord; and there∣fore, 1 Sam. 3. 18. Lord, even when thou pleasest, and what thou pleasest. Not our time, but thy time: Not our way, but thy way: Not our Will, but thy Will Mat. 26. 30. be done. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is Heaven, Mat. 6. 10. Amen.
A Prayer for the Church  England. O Lord, look down in mercy and compassion upon o dear Mother, the afflicted Church of England, to whose breasts thou hast applyed us, And grant, that we may draw from thence neither blood nor wind, but the sincere milk of 1 Pet. 2. 2. thy word of an holy Conversa∣tion. Behold Lord, she is none of those Mothers, which are for the dividing 1 King. 3. 26. of their children; O preserve thou her children, that they also may none of them be for the dividing of their Mother! Make her yet once more hap∣py in a Moses and an Aaron: in Isa. 49. 23. nursing Fathers to go in and out before this People, and ho∣ly Ministers to stand before
thee our God: and suffer not e sins of this Nation to be onger, to pull down the walls our Sion and Ierusalem, then s thy goodness and mercy to ild them up again. O that this Church of England Genes. 17. 18. ay live in thy sight! For which end, behold her Priests, how they keep silence, Psol. 39. 2. even from good words, which is pain and grief unto them; and are denied even a place between the Porch and the Altar, though only to weep there for the spa∣ring Joel. 2. 17. of the Temple. Behold her Virgins, how they Prov. 29. 18. , least for want of a Vision, the People perish; and her Widdows,  they make Lamentation, to see Iudgement begin so severely at the 1 Pet. 4. 17. House of God. Behold, how she her self, like another Racheb, weeps for her Ier. 31. 85. Mat. 2. 11. children, because they are not; because they are not suffered to comfort their own Mother, and
to defend her from all such wh mock at her Sabbaths and s lemn Feasts, and make her se vice and Devotions their de sion and scorn. O Lord, behold her Afflictions for the Enemy hath magnified him self Lam. 1. 9. against her. See, O Lord, and consider for she is become very vile: But we trust, by how much she i become vile in the eyes of man, she 2 Sam. 16. 12. shall be the more precious in the sight of thee her God. And, though others set light by her blood, yet thou hast promised not to despise her team especially, when thou thy self hast washed them in the blood of thy Son. O therefore we beseech thee, put thou her Tears in thy bot∣tle; Psal. 56. 8. and let not her sighs and her groans seem little in thy sight. Accept of those Humi∣liations, and graciously answer the Prayers which are offered up in secret for her. Visit, O
visit her in Mercy and Compas∣sion, now after the time that thou hast afflicted her, and for Psal. 90, 15. the many years wherein she hath suffered Adversity. Let that purple Robe of mockery, wherewith first thy self wert clad, and now of late this Church of thine, be changed at length into garments of joy and gladnesse. Let that Crown of thorns, which was taken from thy Temples and platted upon hers, be now taken from both: and crown her instead thereof, with Roses out of her own Sharon. Let the Print of the nails in thy Cant. 2. 1. hands and feet, be as the Balm of Gilead to heal and close up the wounds which are made in hers. And let the hole in thy precious side, be a safe hiding-place and Sanctua∣ry, till this Persecution be overpas∣sed. Though this year be begun in bitterness, yet O suffer it not, to end so. But cause it to be
proclaimed the acceptable ye Isa. 62. 1. of the Lord to all that mou in Sion. As thou hast given unto t Church an Head of gold, so don Dan. 2. 13. let her stand like Nebuchadneza Image upon feet of clay. Thoug she be made to lie among the po yet thou canst cover her again wi silver wings, making her feather Psal. 68. 13. like gold. Thou art Almighty, and can do it: yea thou art Almerciful Psa. 86. 17. and wilt do it: O then shew he (now especially) some toke for good, that they which hate her may see it, and be asha∣med, because thou, O Lord, ha holpen her and comforted her. Give her instead of a Rent, a Girdle, instead of vain Repetitions, the Holy Spirit and Office of Prayer for the bread of Adversity, the blessed Manna of thy Word and Sacra∣ments; and for the cup of trembling and astonishment, the cup of salva∣tion.
Suffer not Pharaoh's thin and sted Ears of corn to de∣ Gen. 41. 24. those full and good Ears, which have sprung up here in Gods field. Neither do thou punish our former (slighted) nty with a succeeding famine of thy Word. Give unto her beauty for ashes, the  Isa. 61. 3. of Ioy for mourning, the gar∣ Prayer for the spirit of bea∣ss. Give her the custody of Angels, the Patronage of Kings and Princes, the hearts and ds of Nobles, the prayers and tears of Priests, and the de∣ce of the whole secular Arm. O thou that hast the Key of Da∣ Rev. 3. 7. that openest and no man shut∣, open thou the mouths of thy Mi∣rs, and suffer no more any man  them. Open thou the doors of  own House for thy servants to  in, and let no one dare upon  pill of their souls to keep us out.
And since we have taken up∣on us to speak unto our Lord (not for the sparing of a Sodom but of this thine own Sion) le not our Lord be angry and w Gen. 18. 32. Judg. 6. 39. will speak unto him once more Preserve her, and all her sons an daughters in all storms, and again all temptations; in this present storm and against the present and all fu∣ture temptations, that we may do no∣thing to scandall our holy Calling, by sacrificing our Consciences to the pur∣chase of our case. Give us innocence mixt with prudence, the Doves eye in the Serpents head. And teach us to Ne devo∣ret Serpens Columbam. Mat. 10. 16. beware of the Dragons Poyson, even when we are made to feel the Dragons sting And when the winds shall blow fiercest against thine Ark, yet then we beseech thee to pre∣serve the Vessel, though thou shalt change the Pilots; And however in thy secret wisdom thou mayst suffer many of the Lights to be blown out, yet we
pray thee Lord, be not so severe upon our justly-deserving sins as to remove the Candlestick All this, and whatsoever else thou e more needfull for our bleed∣ing Mother, or for any of her persecu∣ted Children, we beg at thy mercifull hands, for thy Sons sake who pur∣chased this Church with his own blood, Iesus Christ our Saviour; To whom with thee, O Father, and the ever blessed Spirit, be all Honour and Glory, Submission and Adora∣tion in all places, at all times, in all Estates and Conditions by all men and Angels, World without End, Amen, Amen.
A Prayer for the Kings Birth∣day, May 29. O Lord God, the great dispo∣ser of Kings and Kingdomes, and who in thy Mercy didst de∣sign thy servant our persecuted Soveraign Lord King Charls to be the Heir of these Kingdomes, though in thy secret Judge∣ments towards this sinfull Na∣tion thou hast suffered the sons of violence to keep him hither∣to from inheriting his Fathers Throne. We thy unworthy servants are here net together, upon the Anniversary Day of his Nativi∣ty to offer unto thee a gratefull commemoration & our humble thansgivings for thy great Bles∣sing in bestowing upon us at first so hopefull a Prince; And with∣all,
to bewail our unworthi∣ness of having so good and gra∣tious a Prince as yet to exercise his Raign over us; we bewail those many sins of ours, where∣by we have helped to cut off the Royall Father, and whereby we still assist to the keeping our of his Royall Son. However, we beseech thee, O Lord, to grant, that as thy hands did fashion him, and as he was fearfully and wonder∣fully made in his Mothers womb, so his heart may still be in those hands of thine, to pre∣serve him from all danger, and to mould him to all Christian and Princely Graces. Give him years of Happiness and Joy, for those years of bit∣terness and sorrow wherewith thou hast afflicted his soul. Cause him to know, that the end for which he was born, was not so much to govern others, as to submit himself to thee; and
to lay his Crown and Scepter at the Feet of the Lamb. And grant Holy Father, that that as now he has finished twenty nine years of his life, and Anno 1659 most of those years under the se∣verity of thy Discipline; So he may spend the Remainder of his life, (and may have those years doubled and trebled to him,) in the successes of thy favour. As thou dost add days to his years; so let it be thy good plea∣sure to add happiness to his days; exchanging his Banishment into restauration, and his Crown of thorns into a Crown of Ma∣jesty here, & of Glory hereafter. This day didst thou take him out of his Mothers womb, to live here a little time. O mayst thou at the last day take both him and us out of our Mothers womb again, even the grave, and the womb of the Earth, to live with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen, Amen.
The Ministers Prayer for the People. O Most mercifull Lord God, and Lover of souls, who hast given Commandment to thy Priests to weep and to pray between the Porch and the Al∣n, and to cry, spare thy people, O Lord, spare them. O most blessed Jesu, who art n everlasting Priest, and the great Shepheard and Bishop of our souls. O most holy Spirit, who dost sanctifie and preserve us, build∣ing us up into an holy Temple, for thy self to dwell in. O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, who delightest in the Con∣version of sinners, and to see
souls daily added unto thy Church. Bless this whole Congregati∣on, and have mercy upon this Parish, who are committed to my charge to take care over their souls. Lord, I am unworthy of so great an honour, and too unfit for so great a Burthen, yet in obedience to thy Call, I have undertaken it; and I trust by thy Assistance, to be able to feed both thy sheep and thy Lambs. Keep them always within thy Fold, that they may never wander nor go astray; preserve them from Wolves, though they should be set in the very midst of them. Teach them to know thy voice, and to be obedient to thy Call. And when any of them shall straggle into the Wildernesse, yet then Lord, do not thou leave them
their own way; But be thou gratiously pleased to look after hem; and when thou hast found them, give them a ready wil∣lingness to accept of thy shoulders, and to be carried ome. With thee there is Balm for their wounded consciences: and in thy side there is oyl for for their broken hearts. Let thy staff, O Lord, be a sup∣port to the weak, and let thy rod instruct and correct the refractory. And so bless them all in their bodies, in their souls, in their Estates, both with thy tempo∣rall and spirituall mercies, that, here in this life, they may live in Love, Peace, Plenty, and all Godliness; that so in the Life Eternall they may be made joynt Partakers of Glory, and raign for ever with the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world.
To whom, be all honour and glory, power and praise from this time forth and for evermore, Amen. The Peoples Prayer for the Mi∣nister. O Lord God, who of thy mercy hast bestowed upon us Preachers of Righteousnesse, and who for our benefit hast ap∣pointed the Priests lips to pre∣serve knowledge. O Lord Jesu Christ, who hast sent labourers into thy Vine∣yard to dress and trim it, and there to reach us fruit from the Tree of life. O holy and blessed Spirit, who satest in the likenesse of fi∣ery tongues upon the Apostles to inspire, thy Church, and of whose gift it is, that a succession
of Ministers is continued among us even to this day. O holy, blessed, and glori∣ous Trinity, let me never but be thankfull to thee for all these thy Gifts. Preserve me by thy Grace, that I may never be of the num∣ber of those who love to strive with the Priest. And that I may at no time deserve to be struck blind with the dust from a Di∣sciples feet. Keep me from surping upon the Ministers Office, from de∣frauding him of his right, from maligning his person, from ca∣lumniating his Doctrine, and from abhorring to be reproved by him. But grant, Lord, that I may readily hear and embrace the Message that thou art pleased to send by him, be it of mercy or of judgement, alwayes saying with old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth best in his own eyes.
And here among many other thy servants who wait upon th at thine Altar, bless Lord, more particularly, that servant of thine to whom thou hast com∣mitted the charge of my soul. O never let him sooth and flatter it, but (as I give him oc∣casion) let him discipline and correct it. Give him Grace and Cou∣rage to speak boldly in the name of Jesu. And since thou art delighted with those that tremble at thy Word, Lord, make me one of their number that thou mayst delight in me. Let me never stop mine ears, nor withdraw my self from hearing thy servant, who speaks home to my conscience. But when he shall have wounded mine heart with the sword of thy Spirit, O give him power and wisdom to pour as well oyle as vinegar into those happy wounds.
Lastly, Grant Lord, I beseech e; that he, by whose prayers nd instructions, thou art gra∣ously pleased to advance my spirituall good, may by thy grace and favour be protected by thy Providence, assisted by thy great mercies, comforted and relieved in all his necessities bodily and ghostly. And let me never but thus pray for him, who in discharge of his duty both prays and weeps for me. Lord, grant him deliverance from unreasonable and wicked men, who (with so much danger to himself) endeavours to pre∣serve me from the power of the Devil. That so at last both Priest and People, the Minister and his Congregation, the Shepheard and the whole Flock, may walk hand in hand to heaven, and be joyfully translated from the Church militant here, to the
Church triumphant above through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour, Amen. Another. O Most gracious Lord God, who hast promised to hea the Prayers of others for us, and our Prayers for others, but both theirs and ours, through the powerfull intercession of thy Son. Grant I beseech thee, that I may reap benefit by the Pray∣ers of all such who are chari∣tably mindfull of recommend∣ing me and my necessities to the Throne of Grace. Particularly, touch both the heart and tongue of thy Ser∣vant—with a coal from thine Altar. give him zeal and intention in all his Devotions. And since we are taught by thy holy Spirit, that the effectual servent Prayer of a Righteous man availeth much, grant him
Lord, to be Righteous in all his ways, Faithfull in his Calling, and a sincere Example of holy life and godly Conversation; That so, those Prayers which he offers up for my self and others, may be the more acceptable in thy sight, and be the sooner graciously answered with thy Benediction and Blessing both upon our bodies and souls: and all for the precious blood∣sheddings sake of thy beloved Son, and our blessed Mediator Jesus Christ, Amen.
Psalms for pardon of sins. Psalm. 6. 25. 32. 38. 51. 10 130. 143. For Protection from our Enemies and from the punishment of sins. Psalm 3. 7. 9. 10. 11. 13. 17. 27. 31. 35. 54. 56. 57. 141. For the Church and all faithfull People. Psal. 53. 74. 79. 80. 94. 137. For the King. Psalm 21. 61. 89. 132. For Peace—46. 122. 133. In time of Persecution and publick Calamity. Psalm. 52. 64. 73. 61. 142. 120. In time of War—43. 144.
Lessons. IUdgments upon Rebellion. 2 Sam. 18. Saint Iudea Numb. 16. Epist. Idgements up∣ Tyrants and lse Prophets. Mic. 3. Mat. 7. 23. Mar. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 3. The Iudgement of re∣ving the Candle∣ick, and threats of it. 1 Sam. 4. Mat. 21. Ezek. 3. Rev. 2. Threats against Disobedience and Promises to the Obedient. Deut. 28. Luke 6. Joshua. 23. sa. 59. Jer. 5. Lamentation for Iudge∣ent on a nd. Lam. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat. 20. Isa. 64. Luke 13. Jerem. 4. 9. Baruch. 2. 3. 2 Esdras 3. 4.
Exhortation to Repentance and Faith. Deut. 4, 6, 8, 11. Mat. 6. Isaiah 58. Hosea 4, 6. Exhortaion to Fasting and O∣bedience. Joel 2. Jonah 3. Jerem. , 3, 7, 6. Examples for pati∣ent sufferings, and Exhortations there∣to. 2 Sam. 15. Heb. 12. 2 Mac. 6, 7. 1 Pet. , 3, 4. Jam. 4, 5. Temporary Pros∣perity and Eter∣nall Punishment of the wicked. Job 21. Jer. 12. Act. 12. Habbac. 1. Mal. 3. Wisdom 5. Persecution of the Church. Exod. 5. Revel. 12, 13. Comforts to the Pe∣nitent and Holy. Ezek. 9. Mat. 5. Revel. 7.
Some Prayers for the King and Church, &c. heretofore printed. A Prayer for the King. O Lord God, who hast com∣manded us to pray for Kings, and all that be in Au∣thority, that under them we ay lead a quiet and peaceable fe in all godliness and honesty; esse thy Servant our King, at he may use that Sword ou hast put into his hands, for e protection and reward of he good, and the punishment f them that do evill, and give grace unto us, and all other his Subjects to fear, reverence, and bey him as thy Minister, not nly for wrath, but for consci∣ce sake, least contemning ine ordinance, we incur that
damnation thou hast threatne to all those that resist the high powers. Hear us, O Lord, f his sake, who is the Prince  the Kings of the Earth, eve Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Most gracious Lord God the Ruler of Princes whe they are in their thrones, an their Protector, when they a in perill, look down mercifull from Heaven, we most humbly pray thee, upon the low estate  thine anointed our King; com∣fort him in his troubles, defen him in his dangers, strengthen him in his good resolutions, and command thine Angels to pitc their tents round about hi that he may be defended fro the hands of all those that de∣sire his hurt, and may be re∣established in the just rights o his throne, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O God the Father of Heaven,
have mercy upon him and de∣er him. O God the Father, &c. O God the Son Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon him nd deliver him. O God the Son, &c. O God the holy Ghost pro∣eeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon him d deliver him. O God the holy Ghost, &c. O holy, blessed and glorious rinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy upon him and deliver him. O holy, blessed and glorious, &c. Remember not Lord his of∣fences, nor the offences of his fore-Fathers; neither take thou engeance of his sins; spare him good Lord, spare thy servant om thou hast redeemed with thy most precious blood; and e not angry with him for ever. Spare him good Lord. From all evill and mischief,
from the Insurrection of wicked doers, from the frowardness and madnesse of the People. Good Lord deliver him. From mouths full of cursing and bitternesse, from all thos that speak evill of dignities, and from those that slander the foot steps of thine Anointed. Good Lord deliver him. From them that are confede∣rates, and speak so disdainfully against him, and from all thos that hate him without a cause. Good Lord deliver him. We sinners do beseech thee t hear us, O Lord God, and tha it may please thee to look upo the face of thine Anointed, and to visit him with thy salvation. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to plead his cause against them tha strive with him, and to figh against those that fight again him.
We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to hear him in these dayes of his trouble, and to send him help from thy Sanctuary. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to arise and maintain his cause, and to remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to give him patience in this time of adversiy, untill the pit be digged up for the ungodly. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee in the multitude of the sorrows that he hath in his heart, to let thy comforts refresh his soul. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee not to deliver him over to the will of his adversaries, nor to false wit∣nesses risen up against him; or to such as speak wrong. We beseech thee, &c.
That it may please thee, to defend him under thy wings, and that thy faithfulnesse and truth may be his Shield and Buckler. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to sa∣tisfie him with thy mercy, and that soon, so that he and we may rejoyce all the dayes of our life. We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.
A Prayer For the Church. LOrd, who hast promised to thine Apostles to be with them alwayes unto the end of the world, and for a supply of their mortality, hast in thy gra∣cious providence over thy Church, continued a perpe∣tuall succession of Bishops and Pastors to feed their severall Flocks, whereof the Holy Ghost hath made them overseers: In∣spire them by thy grace, that their lips may preserve know∣ledge, and the people seek thy Law at their mouth. Bless them, O Lord, with the blessings of Levi; blesse their substance, and accept the work of their hands; smite through the loyns of them that rise up against them, and of them that hate them, that they rise not again, that they may
shine forth as lights before us, holding forth the word of life, till we all come in the unity of Faith, and the knowledge of Je∣sus Christ, unto that perfection and fulnesse of thine everlaing Kingdome, Amen. ALmighty God, and gracious Father, we confess against our selves, that we are most wor∣thy of all the Judgements that thou hast threatned against us, these Kingdomes, and this Church, which is now under the Crosse, and neer to utter ruin and extirpation, unless thy mercy step in between thy fierce wrath and our hainous sins. And howsoever the voice of our cry∣ing sins hath ascended into thine ears, and stirred up de∣stroyers to root us out, that we be no more a people, and that thy name be no more called up∣on, nor hallowed by us; yet we most humbly beseech thee to
hear the prayers and supplicati∣ons, with strong cryings and tears which once our blessed Sa∣viour offered for us upon the Crosse, and in the garden, and which he daily represents unto thee. And for his all-sufficient merits, which speak better things than the blood of Abel, hear not the cry of our sins, but the cry of his blood, and therein wash all our sins. Let our great miseries and dangers suffice for that which is past, and let that Oratour in thy own bosome, even thine own fatherly good∣ness perswade and prevail for us, and purchase our deliverance and safety. Hear us for our selves and others, Look upon us with the eyes of pitty and com∣passion, consider our enemies how many and how mighty they be, and they bear a tyran∣nous hate against us. Our goods, our lands, our lives will not suf∣fice their boundlesse ambition:
our religion, our souls, and if it were possible, our God, is that they strike at: curse thou their anger, for it is fierce, and their wrath, for it is cruel. Divide them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel: As, for us, deliver us out of their hands, and unite us together in the bond of peace, that being freed from our many and tyrannous enemies, we may ever bless thy sacred and holy name, and evermore serve thee without fear in all holiness and righteousness all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. WE beseech thee, Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to our defence against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
GRant we beseech thee, Al∣mighty God, that we which for our evill deeds are justly punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved, through Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities and miseries, and in all our dangers and ne∣cessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend us, through Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty God, which art more ready to hear, than we to pray, and art wont to give more than either we desire or deserve: pour down upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things, where∣of we are afraid, and giving
unto us that, that our prayers dare not presume to aske, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. A Prayer for the Clergy. O Most mercifull Father, Lord God of all Order and Peace, who hast appointed Bi∣shops and Pastors to be our spi∣rituall guides, to oversee, and to feed us in their taking care for our Souls: We most humbly beseech thee, suffer not a Re∣bellious Novelty by violence to remove this most Ancient Christian Institution. Fight thou for them whose Arms are their Tears and Prayers; and let not the Patrimony which belongs to thee, be made a prey to the rapine of these wicked times. That so by the goodnesse of thy mighty
strength this poor Church may continue till he come again, who is the Shep-heard of our Souls; even Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom &c. THe Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, A∣men.
A Prayer to be said during these sad times of Trouble. O Lord our God, mercifull and gracious, and abun∣dant in goodnesse and truth, who dost according to thy will in the Armies of Heaven, and rulest over all the Kingdomes of the Earth, in whose hand is power and might, and none is able to withstand thy Arm; we most vile sinners approach be∣fore thy Throne of grace, be∣wayling those manifold trans∣gressions that have provoked thy wrath and indignation against us, We know, O Lord, that affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground, but it is thou that with rebukes dost chasten man for sin. We confess
that we were a wealthy and a carelesse Nation, and our Land was as the garden of Eden; our deliverances were great, and thy blessings were multiplied: we dwelt alone without fear of evill, and were become the en∣vy of those that were round a∣bout us. Peace was within our Walls, and plenteousnesse with∣in our Pallaces. But when we had eaten and were full, and had waxen fat, we kicked against thee our Maker, who hadst done so great things for us: our heart was lifted up and forgot thee our God, and lightly esteemed the rock of our salvation. We loathed the Manna that rained down upon us; our Peace be∣came a wearinesse, and we snuf∣fed at our happinesse; we mur∣mured against Moses in our Tents, and made light of thine Annoynted, whom thou hadst set over us. Therefore hast ou recompenced our wayes
upon our own heads, and suf∣fered our destruction to proceed from our selves: our wicked∣nesse doth correct us, our back∣sliding doth reprove us, and our iniquity is become our ru∣ine. Thou hast broken us with a grievous breach: thy anger hath divided us, and thy fury hath dashed us one against ano∣ther. Thou hast mingled a spi∣rit of perverseness in the midst of us; and made us a Nation void of Counsell and under∣standing: instead of Peace thou hast sent bitternesse, and hast sent a fire into our bowells; and it is kindled round about us. And now, O Lord, behold, the sword is drunk with our blood, and we are numbred to the slaughter: the high-wayes are unoccupied, and the Tra∣vailers go through by-paths: our fields are divided our inhe∣ritance is for a spoil, and our substance to the robbers. We
are become a reproach to the foolish people, and servants ar rule over us. The mean man is risen against the Honou∣rable, and the fire out of the amble devoureth the lofty dars; our Women are cast out of their pleasant places, and the robe is pulled from the ged; there is no respect had to the Priests, nor favour to the Elders. Thy Sanctuaries, even the excellency of thy strength, are prophaned, and they have defiled the places where thine honōur dwelleth, and yet still the seat of wickednesse frameth mischief by a Law; and it turn∣h judgement backward, and ddeth justice stand afar off; d deviseth deceitful matters against those that are quiet in the Land. Nay, there is a ly∣ing Spirit gone out into the mouth of the Prophets; they prophecy falsely, and the peo∣ple delight to have it so, and
they strengthen the hands o evill doers, that they turn  back from their wickednesse. Thus are we covered with a cloud in thine anger, and our beauty is cast down to the ground. But, O Lord, shall thine Indignation be poured out for ever? shall thy jealousie burn like fire? O passe by the transgressions of the remnant of thine heritage, and take a∣way the rebuke of thy people! O remove from us reproach and contempt; and strengthen the spoyled against the destroyers! Bow down thine ear, and con∣sider the oppression of the poor, the sighing of the needy, the groaning of the Prisoners, that are fast bound in misery and Iron. Lift up thy self, be∣cause of the rage of thine Adversaries; consider the deso∣lation they have made in thy Courts, and all that the Enemy hath done wickedly in thy
Sanctuary. And yet still they are compassed with pride, and doath themselves with violence as with a garment. How long, O Lord, shall they boast them∣selves in mischief? how long shall they decree unrighteous decrees, and write grievousnesse which they have prescribed? O make not a full end with us, but correct us in mercy, though thou leave us not altogether unpu∣nished. Helps us, O Lord our God; for we rest on thee, and under the shadow of thy wings, shall be our refuge untill this Tyranny be overpast. Disap∣point therefore the devices of the crafty; let not the Re∣bellious exalt themselves any more, and suffer not the Ta∣bernacles of the Robbers to prosper. And as thou hast be∣gun to shew thy Servants thy greatnesse, and thy mighty hand, so continue thy marvel∣lous loving kindnesse to those
who put their trust in thee. The Battail is thine, O Lord, thou hast preserved us from the Arm of flesh; yea, it is thou that hast wrought all our works in us, even when there was no might against that great company that came against us. When we were few in number, and there was none to help us, then thine own Arm brought salvation, and thy righte∣ousnesse sustained us. O perfect therefore thy handy work! Give salvation to our King, and deliver CHARLS thy Servant from the perill of the Sword, bind up his soul i the bundle of life, gird him with strength to the Battail, con∣tend with those who contend with him, subdue thou the peo∣ple under him, and suffer no weapon formed against him to prosper. O deliver him at length from the strivings of the People, and lift up his head
above his Enemies round about him, give him the shield of thy salvation, and let thy gentle∣nesse make him great: put a stop at last to the madnesse of the people, say to the destroying Sword, it is now enough: send us a seasonable and quiet calm: visit us with the joy of thy Countenance, and make us glad according to the dayes wherein thou hast afflicted us. O restore to us our solemn Assemblies: bring us back into thy Courts to praise thee, and let us once more worship thee in the beauty of thy holinesse! Save us, O Lord, from our Enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us. That so we may serve thee without fear, living a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godli∣nesse and honesty, looking for the blessed appearance of the great God, and our Saviour Je∣sus Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be all ho∣nour
and praise, world without end, AMEN. A Prayer for preservation from the Enemy. O Eternall God and most mercifull Father, we hum∣bly beseech th to be mercifull unto us, and in the Riches of thy unspeakable mercies, be near to help and succour us, in all those extremities which our sins threaten to bring upon us. The Rebellious are strengthned against us, by our multiplied Rebellions against thee: and we deserve to suffer what our Ene∣mies threaten, even suddain surprizall and destruction to de∣solation. But there is mercy with thee, that thou mayst be feared: and there is mercy with
thee that they may not be fear∣. Shew us therefore thy mer∣y, O Lord: and let us so fear ee, that we may be never for∣d to feel or fear them. And hen thou wilt correct us for ur sins, O Lord, in judgement emember mercy, and let us all into thy hands, and not in∣to the hands of men: let us fall to thy hands, and not into he hands of ungracious and godly men: into thy hands, nd not into the hands of sacri∣gious and seditious men: into thy mercifull hands, and not into the cruell hands of thine and our enemies; even for Jesus Christs sake, our only Mediator and Redeemer, AMEN.
A Confession of Sins, and Prayer for Pardon. O Lord of heaven and earth, God of the spirits of all flesh, we a most sinfull, and therefore now a most miserable People, do in the bitternesse of our afflicted Souls, humbly fall down at the foot-stool of thy grace, most sadly bewailing our many and most hainous sins. We have multiplied our iniqui∣ties into a violation of thy whole Law, having neither per∣formed to thee our God, nor to man, the duties thou requirest of us, so that by onr wicked works, we have denied that most holy faith, whereof our Mouths have for so long a time made profes∣sion. These things, O Lord, have we done, and because in
goodnesse thou wert pleased to eep silence, how many of us have thought wickedly, that thou ert altogether such an one as ur selves; which either didst approve, or at least wouldst not punish the Crimes that we do∣ed on. And now in thy just judgments thou hast set our sins in order before our eyes; in the continued scourge of this sting Rebellion, we may well perceive, that the sins we have done, have not been barely in∣firmities, but Rebellions against thee. In the Rapines, acted up∣on the substance thou hast given , we cannot but consider, that by Oaths and Blasphemies, we have robbed thee of thine Ho∣nour, and have oft-times stollen much of that precious time which should have been spent in thy service. Nay we have ad∣ded sin to sin, so that one Crime hath brought forth another Transgression, and thou hast
shewed us even this in thy Judg ments we now feel, in that th present War hath brought forth an infectious disease, and dot now threaten famine to us. We confesse, O Lord, with all thank∣fulnesse of heart, that thou hast been pleased to sweeten the bit∣terness of this Cup by many strange successes, by frequent and unexpected Victories, and yet thou hast so allayed each favour of thine hand, with the mixture of some sudden crosse, that herein, thou hast set our Repentance too before the sight of our eyes, and lets us see 'tis mixt with so much coldnesse & Hypocrisie, that there may be as much guilt in such a kind of Repentance as before there was in our sins. Yet return, O God, in great mercy, return unto the many thousands of thy people: do thou accept, and increase in our hearts detestatiō of all wick∣edness, that our sorrows for sin
may be as compleatly perfect,  we desire thou shouldst make ur Peace, and that for times ereafter, our hearty observance of thy whole Law may still run along with such sorrows. O let ot thy scourge end in a desola∣tion, nor thine anger go on un∣to the height of an everlasting mine: But hear us, mercifull Father, hasten the aversion of these thy sharp judgements from us, and let not the noise of this accursed Rebellion be any longer heard in our streets. Scatter thou the People that de∣light in War, and let the blessing of Peace be upon the Heads of all those who strive and pray for this blessing; and that for his sake, by whose hand thou givest every blessing, Jesus-Christ our Lord Amen.
A Prayer for the KING. O Lord God, infinite  power, by whom th thrones of Kings are established, and their Persons made sacred; Take, we beseech thee, into thy immediate and divine pro∣tection, thine Anointed Servant the King, that no Sacrilegious prophane hand come near to touch him: in all his wayes, let thy Spirit guide him, and thy holy Angels pitch their Ts about him; Comfort him in his troubles, defend him in his dangers, support him in his Cause, blesse him in the confu∣sion of all those that rise up against him; shew some token on him, even now, O God, when the Sons of Violence are in the highest of their Pride,
when they have joyned Nation o Nation, Covenant to Cove∣nant, and Army to Army, to ull down him whom thou ast exalted, and to Root out hat Religion which thine own ght hand hath planted. De∣t their purposes, O thou preserver of men, and let not their mischievous imaginations ny longer prosper; but blast ll their Counsells, wither a∣way their Armies like grasse orched by the Sun, bow down a last, their stiff necks, and ob∣durate hearts to a desire of that Peace which hath so long been  abomination to them, That this miserable Nation may no further pursue their own Ruine, d take pleasure in shedding their own blood; but being by so many bitter punishments made sensible of thy Anger for this unnaturall division, may at last be reduced within their first obedience, to the glory of thy
Name, the vindication of o defamed Religion, the joy  our afflicted King, and the hap pinesse of this yet bleedin Kingdom. And confirm all th to us, O Lord, by the merits and through the mediation o thine own dear Son Jesus Chris our Lord, Amen. A Prayer for the preservation of the University and City of Oxford. O Almighty God, who are the only sure Refuge and strong Tower of defence to all them that put their trust in thee, receive our humble Petition; save this City, this Nursery of thy Church, and thy afflicted People, from the hand of their Enemies. We know that unlesse thou keep the City, the Watch∣man
watcheth but in vain; un∣sse thou defend us, our Foun∣dations, which are laid in dust, cannot stand firm. We acknow∣ledge our own weaknesse, and t which makes us weaker, our full demerit; But thou art oth the Lord of Hosts & Prince of Peace, able to destroy the strongest Army with an Army of most despicable Creatures, with things of nothing, with sudden weaknesse and follies, with a mour or imagination. Thou canst bring us to the brink of destruction, and call us back a∣gain; Look down therefore, most mercifull Lord, upon this Place, and according to thy onted goodness, resist the proud, and give grace to the humble, that run to the shadow of thy wings for succour: Thou that stillest the raging of the Sea, and the madnesse of the People, say to the one, as to the other, hither shall thy proud
waves come and no further. Suffer not the purpose of our Oppressors to stand, nor their Counsells to prosper, nor their Force to prevail; But set thy hook into their nostrils, to turn them back, or confound them, according to thy good pleasure and secret wisdome, by which thou disposest all Events, beyond the means and reach of man; But arme thy lowly Servants with Faith and Patience, raise our Spirits, guide our Consul∣tations, strengthen our hands, help our wants, bless our en∣deavours with success; That we being delivered like them that dream, may praise thee as men awaked out of dust; and ha∣ving seen and escaped thy Ro may serve thee ever hereafter, with true obedience, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savi∣our, Amen.
A Prayer drawn by his Ma∣jesties speciall direction and Diates, for a blessing on the Treaty at Uxbridge. O Most Mercifull Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a People sorely af∣flicted by the Scourge of an un∣natural War, do here earnestly beseech thee, to command a blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for the establishment of an happy Peace. Soften the most obdu∣rate Hearts with a true Christi∣ desire of saving those mens blood, for whom Christ him∣self hath shed his. Or if the guilt of our great sins, cause this Treaty to break off in vain, Lord let the Truth clearly ap∣pear, who those men are, which
under pretence of the Publick good, do pursue their own pri∣vate ends; that this People may be no longer so blindely mise∣rable, as not to see, at least in this their day, the things that belong unto their peace. Grant this gracious God, for his sake, who is our Peace it self, even Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
A Prayer for Peace. ALmightyGod, terrible in thy Iudgements, but more won∣derfull in thy Mercies, who tur∣nest man to Destruction, and a∣gain, thou sayst, Come again ye children of Men; we miserable sinners, prostrate this day before thee, humbly confesse, with Hor∣ror in our Hearts, and Confusion in our Faces, that every one of us hath, more or lesse, contributed to that vast heap of crying fins, which hath now in so high a measure draw down thy ven∣geance on us; that we have a∣bused thy Patience so long, till we have at last turn'd it into Fu∣ry, compelling thee, by our of∣ten provocations to visit us in blood, to make us tear out our own bowells, and by a strange
unnaturall War, raised we know not why, (thy Iustice and our Sins excepted) to become exe∣cutioners of our selves, and so to sin afresh in the very punish∣ments of sin. But alas! what profit is there in our Blood? or what Glory can come to thee by our Ruine? Let it suffice, O God, that thou hast thus far rebuked us in thine Anger; but consume us not utterly, for we are all thy People. Say to the destroy∣ing Sword, It is enough, and let it be no longer drunk with the blood of thine Inheritance; But look down upon our unfamed Humiliation, hear the Prayer which in the bitternesse of our Souls we pour out this day be∣fore thee, accept of our Repen∣tance, and where it is defective, let thy Holy Spirit make it up with Groanes that cannot be ex∣pressed. Look upon thy Moses who standeth in the gap, be∣seeching thee to turn thine an∣ger
from thy People; remem∣ber what he hath suffer'd, and the heavy things that thou hast shewn him; and in the day, when thou makest Inquisition for Blood, for∣get not his desires of Peace, the endeavours which he hath used, and the Prayers which he hath made to thee for it. Return all this, O Lord, with comfort in∣to his Bosome. And since thou hast already wrought so much for him, as to bring these un∣happy entangled differences to a Treaty, take not off thine hand, till thou hast untied every knot, and cleared every difficulty. Send thy Spirit into their hearts, who are entrusted with this great work, give them Bowels of Com∣passion, toward their bleeding and piring Country; strike a Sense into them of the blood already shed, and the Desolation to come, which threatneth all if they prevent it not. But above all, let thy feare run through all their
consultations, that remembring the sad account, which in the last great day will be required of them, they may lay aside every Sin, and every Interest that may divert them from the wayes of Peace; and by the guidance of thy Wisdom (for in this all hu∣mane wisdom failes) find out those blessed expedients as may re∣store the voice of Joy and Peace into our Dwellings, in such a way, as may be most to the Glo∣ry of thy Great Name; the Settle∣ment of the true Religion so long professed among us, the Honour and Safety of the Kings Sacred Person, and the Good of all his People. Hear these our Prayers, and perfect this great work, through the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
A Prayer for the ending of the present Troubles. O Most just and powerfull Lord God, to whom ven∣geance belongeth, we cannot but acknowledge, that the ma∣nifold miseries which have be∣fallen us, are the due reward of our deeds, and that we have de∣served, that the things which be∣long to our Peace should still be hid from our eyes. For when of thy own free mercy thou wert pleased to grant us a long time of plenty and prosperity, more then thou gavest to any the Nations that are about us, we became weary of our happi∣nesse, and by our ingratitude pulled down upon us those judgements which now threaten desolation to this late flourish∣ing
kingdom. And since the time of our affliction, thou hast given us space to repeat, and we re∣pented not; Iniquity hath still more and more abounded. As heretofore thy mercies did not allure us, so now thy judge∣ments have not humbled us to a serious consideration of our mis∣deservings. Now, O Lord, we finde our selves intangled, and wearied by our own Counsells; The troubles of our heart are in larged; Our iniquities and the punishments which attend upon them, are a burden too heavy for us to bear. And therefore in the anguish and bit∣ternesse of our souls, we return unto thee, humbly beseeching thee, in whom alone is our help, to have respect unto the Prayers of thy servants. O shut not up thy loving kindnesse in displea∣sure, let not thine anger burn against the sheep of thy pasture: But bind up the breach of this
People Let the sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, Be∣hold the tears of the distressed Orphans and Widdows, and of all such as are oppressed and have no comforter. How long, O Lord, holy and true, doest thou forbear to command de∣liverances? Remember thy tender mercies which have been ever of old, and save us as thou hast done heretofore. Remem∣ber thy promise of deliverance to those who call upon thee in the day of trouble. And when the blood that hath been shed calls aloud for verigeance, O then hearken unto the voice of thy Sons blood, which speaks better things; behold the Lamb of God, who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities. And to this end, regard the sincerity of thine Anointed, maintain thine own cause, and preserve
unto him that power which thou hast given him: bind his soul in the bundle of life, let mercy and truth preserve him, and let his Throne be establish∣ed for ever before thee. Blesse them that are peaceable and faithfull in the Land: And as for those that have risen up a∣gainst him, we beseech thee, melt and mollifie their hearts to the entertainment of compassi∣on and love; reclaim them to obedience, lay not their sin to their charge, but guide their feet into the way of Peace. Give to those that have done wrong, the grace to repent, and to those that have suffered wrong, minds ready to forgive. And if any shall be averse from Peace, O thou that art the wonderfull Counsellor, turn their wisdome into foolishness, confound their practises, and let their mischief return upon their own heads. And when thou hast vouchsafed
to give us that tranquillity which we beg at thy hands, give  grace to embrace it with all thankfulnesse, to obey our Go∣vernours, to live at unity among our selves, evermore blessing thy glorious name, which is exalted above all bles∣sing and praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
Collects. I. LOrd raise up we pray thee, thy power and come a∣mongst us, and with great might succor us, that where as through our sins, and wickednesse we be sore let and hindred, thy boun∣tifull grace and mercy through the satisfaction of thy Son our Lord, may speedily deliver us, to whom with thee and the ho∣ly Ghost be honour and glo∣ry, world without end, Amen.
II. ALmighty and everlasting God, which dost govern all things, in heaven and earth; mercifully hear the supplicati∣ons of thy people, and grant us thy peace all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. III. ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look up∣on our afflictions; and in all our dngers, and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend us, through Christ our Lord, Amen.
IV. GOd who knowest us to be set in the midst of so ma∣ny and great dangers, that for mans frailnesse; we cannot al∣wayes stand uprightly. Grant to us the health of body and soul; that all those things which we suffer for sin, by thy help we may well passe and overcome, through Christ our Lord, Amen. V. O Lord, we beseech thee favourably to hear the prayers of thy People, that we which are justly punished for our offences, may be merciful∣ly delivered by thy goodness; for
the Glory of thy name through Jesus Christ our Lord, who li∣veth and reigneth world with∣out end, Amen. VI. LOrd, We beseech thee to keep thy Church and hou∣shold continually in the true Re∣ligion, that they which do leane only on thy heavenly grace may evermore be defended by thy mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
VII. WE beseech thee Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to be our defence against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. VIII. GOd the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom, nothing is strong, no∣thing is holy; increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou being our ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporall, that we fi∣nally lose not things eternall. Grant this Heavenly Father
for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord, Amen. XI. LOrd we beseech thee, let thy continual pitty cleanse and defend thy congregation, and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succour, preserve it evermore by thy help and goodnesse, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Certain additionall Prayers. In the time of War. O Almighty God, who art high above all Nations, and whose glory is above the Heavens, the comfortable suc∣cesse
of all enterprises is from thee onely to be looked for; Thou art he which givest victo∣ry unto Kings, to thee it is all one to save by many or few, thou canst make one to chase a thousand, thou canst cause the hearts even of the most valiant to melt, their hands to be weak, their minds to faint, and their knees to fall away like water. If thou fight for us, we cannot miscary. If thou favour us not, we must needs be discom∣fited. O be gracious unto us, and be on our side, now that men are risen up against us. They take crafty Counsell a∣gainst thy Church, and con∣sult how to cut us off from be∣ing a Nation, and by what means to quench the light of thy Truth which hath shined in our streets. Their desire is to imbrue their hands in blood, and to advance their own am∣bition by our overthrow. O
turn their Counsels into fool∣ishness; Let not their mis∣cheivous imaginations prosper, lest they be too proud. O our God, make them like unto a wheel, and as the stubble before the winde, Scatter the People that delight in War. Go out, O Lord, with our Armies, give wisdom and cou∣rage, to our Captains, gird them with strength unto the battell, be with our Souldiers, teaching their hands to war, and their fingers to fight. Assist all the Consultations, prosper the Policies, crown those enter∣prises with good successe which are undertaken for the common good and comfort of the Weal∣publique. Doubtless O Lord, we have deserved thine anger, and our sins do cry loud in thine ears for vengeance, and it were but just with thee, if thou shouldst make us a prey and spoil unto our Enemies; But
O, Gracious God, let us now fall into thy hands, for thy mercies are great, and let us not fall into the hands of men, whose displeasure at us, is not for our sins, but for our Profes∣sion and Religions sake, and that they may fill their own in∣larged and insatiable desire, with those blessings of wealth which thou hast given us; Put therefore thy hook into their nostrills, and bring them back by the same way they came. Let it appear that thou art in the midst of us, and that we shall not be moved: That thou wil help us, and that very early. Let there be no invasion, no go∣ing out, nor no crying in our streets. But set thou Peace in our Borders. Make strong the bars of our gates, especially, let the Gospel of thy Son sound yet lowder among us; that by it many Souls may be gathered unto thee. So we thy People and th
sheep of thy Pasture shall praise thee for ever, and from Generation to Generation, we will set forth thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour, A∣men.
A Prayer for a Souldier. O Lord, it is thy glory to be called, The Lord of Hosts: and it is thou alone, from whom, when men have made their most politick and puissant prepara∣tions, the victory must be looked for. Draw my heart, I beseech thee, from all relying upon my own valour, or upon the strength of the battail in which I stand: and teach me to look upward, and to wait and trust only upon thee. Thou givest conquest, and thou givest courage: thou de∣liverest from the perill of the Sword, or else makest death a means of happinesse to thy ser∣vants. Forgive my sins, I pray thee, and assure me of pardon
by the witnesse of thy Spirit, that the guilt thereof make not my heart to tremble within me, and to behold death as a mes∣senger to convey me into hell. If thou (O Lord) bee on my side, peace being made betwixt thee and my soul through Christ, what can be against me, what hazard can befall my soul? Nothing shall be able to de∣prive me of thy love. Let not spoil, or blood, or mine own advancement, be the ends of mine attempts, but make me to aim only at thy glory in the defence of thy truth, and in the good and safety: of the Kingdome where∣in I live. The issue of all things to thee (O Lord) is known, but to man it is hidden: Prepare me therefore indifferently to whatsoever shall befall me. If I die give me comfort in my last breathing, and take my soul
into thy gracious hand: If I be taken captive, give me patience, give me wisdom and godly cou∣rage, to do nothing contrary to the honour of my Country, or prejudicial to the profession of a faithfull Christian, If I return with life and victory, make me thankfull: Keep me from taking from thee any part of thy glo∣ry. Preserve me from those riotous, lascivious, and blasphe∣ming courses, which are the usuall fruits of good successe: let me not think devotion to be an enemy to resolution, or that a religious fear of thy Majesty, doth abate the spirit that should be in a Souldier: but settle me in this, that the assu∣rance of a lawfull cause, the hope and confidence of a better life, by the merits of Christ, the care to please thee, and to de∣pend upon thy power, are the only true grounds of valour, which can give a man boldnesse
and life in the day of battel. Vouchsafe me these, and all other needfull favours, in and for Christ Jesus sake, Amen.
A Prayer upon the strange re∣volution on the twenty first of February, 1659. when the formerly secluded Mem∣bers were readmitted into the House of Commons. O Most mighty God, who sittest upon the Cherubims, be the people never so impati∣ent; and after thine own counsells governest all that is done among the children of Men. We most humbly confess, that it is for our sins, that thou hast so often changed thy rod, and brought such variety of confusions upon us; that all the world stands a gaze to see what will become of such a peo∣ple, that will not see the things that belong unto their peace.
But, O gracious God, though we forget our selves, forget not thou thine own goodnesse; for there is yet time for mercy, and such an expedient left as may cure all our wounds, and close up all our divisions; by restoring him who was once designed by thee, to be the common Father of us all, though we like rebelli∣ous children have disdainfully cast him from us. And as thou hast begun al∣ready to shew some glimme∣rings of our future happiness, by unexpectedly dissolving the Assembly of those (Achitophels) who by their dark counsels, have so long obstructed it: so go on (we most earnestly beg of thee) and let not the sins of this wretched Nation hinder thee from compleating, what thou hast for thine own glory so wonderfully begun. Work powerfully upon the
minds of all that are any wayes concerned in the redeeming of our peace; Give them but as much honest courage to do right, as they have formerly shewn in acting all those mis∣chiefs, that have been done among us, O plead the cause of an oppressed KING; strenghthen the hands and hearts of all that appear for him; direct his counsels, prosper his enterprizes, make his very ene∣mies to be at peace with him, and when thou shalt vouchsafe to us our former happiness both in Church and State, give us then thankfull hearts to im∣brace it as a blessing from thy hands alone, who hast wrought these great wonders for us, for Iesus Christ's sake. Amen.
A Prayer upon the Assembling of the present Parliament, April 25. 1660. O Most great, most wise, and most powerfull Lord God, in whose hands are the hearts of all men, and turned them as thou doest the rivers of wa∣ters. Shew thy power and come among us, and be present at this great meeting, when after so many years of confusion, there's once more a consultati∣on had to settle this distracted Church and Nation; and as there is nothing hid from thee, who seest the very thoughts and ends, and divided interests of them that meet together; so there is nothing so impossible to thee, but that thou canst by
the hidden workings of thy Providence unite what thou findest divided, and over∣sway every counsell and design, and every imagination that shall set it self against thee. Let there be no root of bit∣ternesse among them which are intrusted in this great work, no thoughts of revenge; No Am∣bition of making themselves great; no particular or separate interest of their own; but in∣stead of these, give them bowels of, compassion towards their bleeding and expiring Coun∣try; strike a sense into them of the blood already shed, and the desolation yet to come, if they prevent it not. And let thy fear run through all their consultations, that re∣membring the sad account, which in the last great day will be required of them, they may unanimously set themselves to find out those blessed expe∣dients
as may restore the voice of joy and peace into our dwel∣lings, in such a way as may be most for the glory of thy great Name, the righting of those that are opprest, and the setling of the happinesse of this Church and Nation, upon the right ba∣sis of that former government, from which it hath stood so long, so unhappily divided. And his as being neither impossible to thy Power, nor unusuall to thy Mercy, we most humbly beg for his sake, to whom thou canst deny nothing, even Jesus Christ the righteous, Amen.
A thanks giving for his Maje∣styes safe arrival and returne to his Kingdome. May 25. 1660. GLory be to God on high on earth, peace, good will to∣wards men. We praise thee, we blesse thee, wee worship thee, We glorify thee; and at this time, in a more especiall manner, with the high∣est expressions of our devoutest hearts. We most humbly give thanks unto thee, For that thou hast been pleased out of thine in∣finite goodness, mercifully to look down upon the late low e∣state of our gracious soveraign. That thou hast brought him from so much scornfull neglect, in so most unjust, so tedious a
banishment, to appear now so terrible unto his enemies, both at home and abroad, that thou hast blessed him through the sole strength of thine own arme, by thine own way, and at thine own time, so much beyond the hopes and expectation of Man, with so signal, and with so dry & bloud∣lesse a victory. O Lord God, heavenly King. God the father Almighty; O Lord the onely begotten Son Jesus Christ; As thou hast thus begun with thy wonderfull providence to showre down thy blessings upon the head of the King, and upon the hearts of his subjects, so con∣tinue these thy favours to him and us; and perfect we beseech thee, that glorious work, which none but thine own strength can finish, the establishment of the throne in righteousnesse, the set∣tlement of the Church in purity, and the uniting of these king∣doms
in a well grounded and lasting peace. And to that end, thou that takest a way the sins of the world take away for ever, from this sinfull land and Nation, the foule sin of rebellion, together with its monstrous of-spring, the crying sins of sacrilege, of perju∣ry and hypocrisy. Thou that fittest at the right hand of God the Father, smi through the loynes of those sons of Eelial, who oppose the peace of Jerusalem, and that have evill will at ion. Lord make the enemies of our gracious Soveraigne to fall down before him like Dagon be∣fore the Ark. That they may neither have heads to plot, nor hands to put in practice any mischievous design against him. So shall we still blesse and mag∣nifie thy Name, in the midst of the great Congregation; so shall we thy servants never
cease to be still praysing thee, and saying, Thou onely art holy, thou onely art the Lord, thou onely O Christ, with the Holy Ghost, art most high, in the glory of God the Father. To thee be all praise, and ho∣nour, and glory, ascribed, world without end, Amen. Errata. Page 119. for VI. r. VII. p. 135. l. 19. r, & of, p. 141. l 20. r. & will, p r. l. 1. r. Psalms, p. 22. l. 1. for Anin. r. Anniversa∣ry, p. 218. l. r. dele appointed &c. p. 339. l. 3. for XI. r. IX.
