D2948A 99827223 31639
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of William Dyre Gent. Sheweth; THat whereas their late Royal Majesties King James and King Charles the First, of ever blessed Memory, did (upon the Re∣signation of the Grand Charter) Grant by their Letters Patents, several Colonies in that part of America called New-England, beginning in the West, to the Lord Mougrave, running East∣ward to Hudsons River. Secondly, To his Grace the Duke of Richmond. Thirdly, To the Earl of Carlisle. Fourthly, To the Lord Edward Gorges. Fifthly, To the Marquess of Ha∣milton. Sixthly, To Captain John Mason; and Lastly, To Sir Fardinando Gorges. All or most of which Colonies having been Planted and Peopled at the Charge, and by the Noble Encouragement of the Proprietors, and many Adventurers, do increase and flourish daily: Notwithstanding some of those, and them not the least considerable; are much ob∣structed in their Prosperity and greatly Ruined by the continual Disputes and Controver∣sies arising from their unsetled Limits and Bounderies, which hath occasioned much dis∣sention amongst the Governments, Treason of the Massathusets usurping a Power and imposing Laws, or Tyrannical Edicts upon the Inhabitants of the Provinces of Mayn and Newhampshire, using Acts of Hostility against the Institutions of the Proprietors (and in direct opposition to Your Majesties express will and pleasure strictly commanding the contrary) have subverted the Government setled there by your Majesties Commissioners in the year 1666. to the Injury and Disquiet of the Commonalty; and Contempt of Your Royal Authority. Wherefore, to Compose the matter, and put an end to the aforesaid Diffe∣rences, and for setling Peace, Union and Concord amongst Your Maje∣sties Subjects and Plantations; it is most humbly Pray'd, that Your Sa∣cred Majesty will be Graciously pleased to purchase of Mr. Mason and Mr. Gorges, the abovesaid Provinces of Newhampshire and Mayne, which now may be bought at an easie Rate, the which will give your Ma∣jesty an absolute and immediate Dominion of all New-England, and bring into Your Majesty the most considerable advantages that either have been, or are to be made by any of those Your Majesties Plantations, as shall be demonstrated by Your Petitioner with Your Majesties Leave. And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, &c.
AN EXPERIMENTAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL Description Of the PROVINCES of Mayn and New Hampshire in North-America; now belonging to Mr. John Mason and Far∣dinando Gorges Esquire, with a brief Collection of such ad∣vantages as are to be made by the same if in case they were in your Majesties possession, and setled under your immediate Government, most humbly offered to Your Majesties Conside∣ration; By W. D. Gent. First concerning the Entrance, Latitude and Course of Merrimeck River for decision of the Nor∣thern bounds of the Massathusets Colony in New England. THe River Monomack, alias Merrimack, hath its inlet, or Easterly beginning about 22 miles North and by East from Cape Ann, the North side of the said Rivers Mouth being in 42 degrees and 57 minutes Northerly Lati∣tude, running West Southerly, as far as  the South, and Salis∣bury on the North, where the River is about half a mile over, and the Tor∣rent swift, though mitigated by an Island in the midst thereof; and from thence to Haverhill VVest, South-VVest, and so continues its course VVest∣ward as high as any settlement of English, or discovery hath yet been made, and is said to proceed from the Lake of Troquoies, which falls into Hudsons River, and this of Merrimack; but to my certain knowledge there is no principal branch, nor part of Merrimack that lies or extends more Northerly then the North-side of the entrance or Rivers mouth, three English miles to the Northward of which, into the Land, was built a little Hutt called Bound-house; which said Cottage, or place where it stood being in 43 degrees of Northern-Latitude, is the Septentrional Confines of the Massathusets line, nor did they pretend to any more, till the New-setled Plantations in the Provinces of Mayn and New-hampshire, being without Govern∣ment, and in danger of the Salvages, craved their Temporary protection, which having been long continued, is now by the Bostonians claim'd as their Rights. Indeed, if Merrimack River or any branch of it were found to run so far Northward as 45 degrees, and then taking into the Land three English miles farther North, from whence stretching a direct line Eastward into the Atlantick Sea, it must be own'd, that then the Pro∣vinces of Mayn and New-Hampshire do fall inclusively within the Massathusets bounds. And so likewise, from the Southward of the South-west stream of Charles River, and three English miles Southward of that running a due South course into the Ocean, will be compre∣hended the Provinces of Novum-belgium, New-haven, Conecticutt, Rhod-Island, and New-Ply∣mouth: The thoughts of which boundless possessions might swell them of the Massathusets Colony into an ambitious conceipt of being absolute Lords and Proprietors of a Great Em∣pire, and so arrogate to themselves a Liberty of prescribing Laws, and exercising their Do∣minion over all the Inhabitants of New-England. But, to prevent their Title to so Copious a Claim, and settle other Patentees into their just dues; It's presumed, there is nothing more plain and demonstrable (both from the course of the Rivers, and the express words of the Charter) then that the intent of the Patent, and
bounds of the Massathusets Grant, was, three English miles to the Northward of the Nor∣thernmost banks of Merrimack, taking it Gradually into the Land parallel with the River as it runs up into the Countrey, which is West-Southerly; and, in the same manner not to exceed three English miles to the Southward of the South-west part of Charles River, still taking it up along the said Rivers side, and not from the heads or extream Branches thereof, and then three English miles to the Southward or Northward of each River, and so run by course into the Sea: which would include all the Southern and Northern Colonies abovesaid, rendering their Patents insignificant and improperly Granted. Wherefore the hope of Your Majesties suffering Subjects depends wholly upon Your Majesties Gracious Clemency, Wisdom and Ju∣stice for Relief in the matter; it being only in Your Majesties Royal Power to put a final issue to the Controversies: which is earnestly desired by all that wish well to Your Majesties inte∣rests, and may be happily, honourably and successfully done by Your Majesties Purchasing the Provinces of New-Hampshire and Mayne, of the abovesaid Proprietors, which are situated and furnished according to the Description here following. THe Province of New-Hampshire, which was the assignment of Captain John Mason, is bounded on the South and South-west by the Massathusets line North-Eastward upon the Province of Mayne, on the East and South-East, by the Sea, stretching Westward into the Continent, and lies between 43 and 44 degrees of North-Latitude; in which is comprised Newhampton, with several other Towns, Villages and spacious Farms pleasantly situated, some fronting the Sea, some within Land, and some upon the South-West-side, or part of Pascata∣way-River, where are built many Commodious and profitable Saw-mills, for cutting Plank, Timber and Boards. THat part of America called Province of Mayn, takes its beginning at the entrance of Pasca∣taway River, extending up the same to the River Newchewannick, to the extream part thereof; and from thence North-West, 120 miles, and from the mouth of Pascataway Ri∣ver aforesaid North-Eastward along the Sea-coast, to Sagadehock; and up the same to Kene∣beck-River, as far as the head thereof, comprehending several Islands in the Sea, viz. the North, half of the Isles of Shoalds, Nantucket, Martins-Vineyard, Capanawagon, Richmonds-Island, the Clap-board Islands, and sundry others of very great importance for Fishing, Farm∣ing and Planting. The Climate and Air of this Province (as well as that of New-Hampshire) is Temperate, Sweet, Cleer and Healthy; the Soyles Fertile; the Harbors, Ports and Havens commodious and safe, and the Countrey every where well furnished with Rivers, Brooks, Lakes, Ponds, Streams and Springs; with store of Champion-Ground, Ranges, Level-Land, Meadows, Swamps, Thickets, Marches, Uplands, Hills, and fruitful valleys: where growes Tall Ce∣dars, sturdy Oaks, brave Elmes, tough Walnut, and streight Chesnut Trees; Fragrant Birch, brown Beech, and multitude of Ash, Maple, Asp, Holly, Ivie, Hazle, Hawthorne, Shumach, Willow, Buttonwood, Alder, Poplar and Sassafras; with curious Cypress, Fir, Sprewse and Pines of a vast magnitude; and the most incomparable Timber for building Ships in the World. There are also plenty of Vines which naturally yield three sorts of pleasant Grapes, the first a large Whitish and mellifluous Grape, the second a Purple colour of the same size, and ve∣ry delicious, the third a small Black Winter-grape, somewhat tart, but very wholsome and good. As for Orchard and Garden-Fruits, there are Apples of all sorts, Pears of most kinds, Peaches, Malagatoons, Quinces; Apricocks, Plums, Cherries, Currants, Hurts, Strawber∣ries, Cramberries, and Blewberries, also Musk-mellons, Water-mellons, and Cucumbers, with all manner of Plants, Herbs and Roots; each Tree, Herb, Plant and Root, according to its kind, brings forth Nuts, Berries, Fruit and Seeds. The Pastures are cloathed with Grass, and the Fields produce plenty of Wheat, Pease, Barly, Rye and Oats, with some other sorts of Grain, in which Fields and Grounds are bred and raised huge droves of good Cattel, Horses, Sheep and Hogs. But the natural inhabitants of the abovesaid Woods, Hills and Swamps, are incredible numbers of wild Beasts, as Bears, Moose, Deer, Wolves, Foxes, Bevers, Otters, Minks, Mar∣tins, Musquashes, Sables, Squirils, Rackoons, Wild-Cats, Hedg-hogs, Porcupines, Wild Rab∣bets, Hares and Woodchucks. The Bowels of the Earth being no less enricht with plenty of Iron, Ore, Tin, Copper, Lead, Coals, Sulphur, and other Minerals, which voluntarily offer themselves to publick view, with∣out searching after, as if Nature were willing to discover, and disburthen her self of what our Ingenuities are slow in seeking. Nor know I any reason why Richer Mines should not there be found, as well as in the Neighbor-Colonies; in regard there is more external probality, and visible encouragement in these Provinces then was in any of them.
The Production of the Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, is infinite quantities of fresh-water Fish, as Bass, Salmon, Trouts, Carp, Perch, Pinkerin and Pouts; also the Salt-water and Sea-coasts abounding with Whales, Grampuses, Seals, Herring-hogs, Porposes, Sharks, Dog-fish, Stur∣geon, Hollibut, Cod, Haddock, Hake, Pollock, Mackeril, Soles, Scate, Alewives, Smelts, Eeles, Lamprons, Frost-fish, Cole, Thornback, Herrings, Capeline and Shad; and of Shell∣fish there be Lobsters, Muscles, Oysters, Crabs, Perriwinkles, Tortoise, Clams, Cockles and Scollops. The Islands adjacent, together with the Woods, Sea, Rivers, and Shoares, yield swarms of Fowl and Birds, as Turkeys, Pheasants, Heath-hens, Partridges, Quailes, Eagles, Hawks, Ra∣vens, Crowes, Stares, Owles, Cormorants, Cranes, Bitterns, Herns, Kites, Pidgeons, Thrushes, Turtle-doves, Swans, Geese, Brants, Murrs, Penguins, Mallard, Teal and VVidgins, with abundance of other Sea-fowle and small Birds, all which variety of Creatures, being there placed by the infinite Providence of Almighty God, are so beneficial for the subsistance of Mankind, as contributes much to the Peopling and Planting of that Countrey, which in the Summer is most delightful and pleasant by the lovely shady Groves, sweet singing Birds, and cool Christal springs. VVherefore if the great worth and intrinsick value of the aforesaid Provinces were duly considered, and by Your Majesties Gracious Favour brought under the obedience of Your Roy∣al Authority, there are certain and almost incredible advantages to be made, as well conduci∣ble to Your Majesties benefit, the honour of Your Crown and Dignity, as also to the publick good of that place a this Nation, as may appear in the several particulars following. Imprimis. Were the Provinces of Mayn and New-hampshire Purchased by Your Majesty, your Majesty hath then the absolute, real, actual Dominion and Soveraignty of those Seas, with the sole propriety and benefit of all Fishing used on the Coasts of New-England, and may at your Royal Pleasure settle a Duty or Impost upon all Fisheries there, without intrenching upon the Liberties of the Bostoners Patent, the abrogation of their Priviledges, or the least wrong to the Inhabitants, and also in a short time reduce, or win those of the Massathusets and Plymouth Colonies to a ready Subjection and compleat Obedience. 2. From hence Your Majesty may be (at all times both in Peace and War) supplyed with Masts, Tarr, Timber, Plank, Boards, and Pipe-staves, at a much cheaper, and easier rate then now your Majesty is, or by any other means can be; wherein consists very much the safety of your Majesties Maritime Affairs. 3. In these Provinces your Majesty may settle a very considerable and profitable Trade with the Indians, for Beaver and all other peltry; in regard they border so near upon Nova-scotia, and are as well furnished with Lakes, Ponds and Rivers as that Countrey is, and also with little charge improve all Mines and Minerals of worth there. 4. By Your Majesties being the of your Subjects, the prosperity of Your Plantations, the encouragement of Trade, Na∣vigation and Commerce, be inexpressibly advanced, by uniting the Colonies, and securing the Ports and Countrey from invasion. 5. To the aforesaid places Your Majesty may in time of peace imploy some of Your great Flemish Prizes to bring over Masts, Deales, Timber and Staves, which will be of singular benefit both to Your Majesty and this Nation. 6. By having the Propriety of these Provinces, Your Majesty will receive a considerable Revenue out of the Fish taken and made there, as also by a small Duty upon all kind of Tim∣ber and Raft that shall be Exported, which will be advantagious and of great value, in re∣gard those Commodities are not to be had in any other part of New-England, but in the Pro∣vinces of New-hampshire and Mayne, which may now be Your Majesties for a small sum of Money, or Trifle, compared with their true value and Consequences. These particulars are in all Humility, Duty, and submissive Obedience Laid at Your Maje∣sties Feet, and most Loyally proposed by a Faithful Subject, to the end Your Sacred Majesty may be Absolute in your Soveraignty, Greater in Riches, Name and Power, and that Your Roy∣al Commands may be with reverence obeyed, Your Majesties Laws executed, the Protestant Religion cherished, the Priviledges of Your Majesties Subjects enlarged, Learning propagated, and all Vertue encouraged. And that Your Majesties good Subjects in those parts may not only have the Name of Your Majesty, but also Your Power amongst them, and thereby live Peaceably, Happily and Quietly under Your Majesties Royal Government, which Heaven grant may be long, long and Prosperous. FINIS.
