E2430 09822288 44190
TVVO SPEECHES MADE By the Speakers of both Houses of Par∣liament to his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax Ge∣nerall: After the Army had guarded the Mem∣bers to sit in safety, on Friday the 6. day of August. 1647. AND An ORDINANCE of both Houses of Parliament making his Excellency Consta∣ble of the Tower of LONDON, and giving him power to make a Lieutenant. A Moneths pay given to the Souldiers and under Officers of the ARMY, for a gratuity: And the VOTES concerning the Guards. With severall Orders concerning the ARMY. ALSO An Order of both Houses appointing a Committee to examine the Mutiny on Munday seven night, whereby the Speakers and Members were driven from the Parliament. And a Thanksgiving appointed to be kept on Thursday August 12. 1647. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.
TWO SPEECHES Made by the Speakers of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, to his Excellency Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX Generall AFTER The Army had guarded the Members to sit in safety, on Friday, Aug. 6. 16 47. Die Veneris, August 6. 1647. HIS Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax ha∣ving guarded the Lords and Com∣mons, (with the Speakers) of both Houses, to Westminster, and the Houses being sate, They Ordered, the Right Honourable the
Earle of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, and William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the House of Commons, to ac∣quaint His Excellency with Votes which were then made. THE Earl of MANCHESTER (Speak∣er of the House of Peeres) his Speech to His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. A Chaire being set (in the House of Peeres) by the Lords seats, for Sir Thomas Fairfax, in which the Generall sate, and his Officers in the House without the Barre, the Earle of Manchester declared to his Excellency: That hee was commanded by the Lord, to ac∣quaint his Excellency how sensible their Lord∣ships are of the many good services which his excel∣lency hath done for the Kingdome; and that they had taken the reasons expressed in the Declaration of his comming to London into consideration,
and doe approve thereof; and that they had comman∣ded him to give his Excellency thanks for the con∣stant care which he hath alwayes had of the peace and safety of the Kingdom, desiring him to goe on in taking care for the security thereof for the future, desiring that his Excellency will appoint such a guard for the Parliament as may be a sufficient se∣curity to the Members to sit (in the house) in safety. William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the House of Commons, made the like speech to the General in that House, his Excellency sitting in a Chaire, nere the Speaker. Die Veneris Aug. 6. 1647. Resolved upon the question by the Lord and Commons in Parliament. That Thursday the 12 of this instant August, be set apart for a day of thanksgiving, to be kept by both Houses of Parliament, at the Abby at Westminster And that Mr. Martial and Mr. Nye bee de∣sired to preach before the Houses on that day. Die Veneris 6. Aug. 1647. It is Ordered, and Ordained, by the Lords,
and Commons in Parliament assembled, hat his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in Chiefe of all the Garrisons and Forces in the kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales, under pay) be appointed and constituted Constable of the Tower of London, for the space of one whole yeare, except both houses of Parlia∣ment shall otherwise determine, And it is al∣so Ordered, and Ordained, that his said Ex∣cellency shall nominate and appoint a Lieu∣tenant of the Tower under him. Die Veneris; August 6. 16 47. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, I. That they doe approve of his Excellencies comming to guard the City and Parliament. II. That thanks be given to his Excellency for his care of the safety of the City and Par∣liament. III. That it be left to the Generall, to appoint
what Guard his Excellency shall think fit, for the security of the City and Parliament. IV. That in consideration of the many good services of the Army, The summe of one Moneths pay be given as a gratuity to all the Souldiers and under Officers of Horse, Foot, and Dragoones that are under Commission Officers, as a gratuity from the Kingdome. V That a Committee of ten Lords and twen∣ty of the house of Commons be appointed to sit in the Painted Chamber, to morrrow in the afternoon, an so de die in diem, to exa∣mine the businesse of the mutinying, and the forcing of the Members on Munday was se∣ven-night at the Parliament doores, and to finde out the Authors, and fomenters there∣of, and all such as did prosecute the same, as also the Contrivers, and promoters of the Petition declared against. Die Veneris Aug. 6. 1647. 1 Resolved upon the question, by the Lords in Parliament assembled,
That a Committee be appointed to draw up a Declaration from the Houses, to the Ar∣my to be read in the head of every Regia∣ment. 2 Resolved upon the question by the Lords in Parliament assembled. That it is the opinion of this House, that all things done by the Members; since the Speakers and other Members were driven a∣way from the Parliament, be adnulled, and of none effect, this to be communicated to the House of Commons. Die Veneris Aug. 6. 1647. Resolved upon the question, by the Commons in Parliament assembled, 1 That they will send Answer to the Lords Message, concerning the adnulling of what hath been done during the absence of the Speakers, by messengers of their owne. 2 That it be taken into consideration on Mun∣day next. FINIS.
