E585 R40476 19339280 108698
CLAVIS FIDEI, OR THE KEY OF FAITH. Written in Latine by JOHN ELLIS D. D. and Rector of Whitfield in the County of Oxford. AND Propounded by him in Publick Lectures up∣on the Apostles Creed, to the Students of Harts Hall in the University of OXFORD. Faithfully translated into English by W. F. for the good and benefit of the ingenu∣ous Reader, as an help to build him up in his most holy faith. 2 Tim. 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. 1668.
To the Right Worshipful The VICE-CHANCELLER, And to all other the Reverend Ma∣sters and Heads of Colledges in this University of CAMBRIDGE: W. F. Wisheth all increase of the true Grace of Christ, and the blessed frui∣tion of the Glory of God in Heaven. Right Worshipful, I Humbly beseech you to pardon my bold∣ness in presenting these rude and unpolished lines to your learned views: You whom God hath set on high, and like Stars of the greater ma∣gnitude which shine forth
more bright then others; or like as the Celestial Signs moving in their own proper Sphere, govern the several parts of mans body: so in like manner you Reverend Doctors and Heads of Colledges, moving in your Sphere, do superintend and govern the whole Body of this Famous University, being under your Care and Tuition. I had not presumed to present this small Tract to your Wor∣ships, if that of the Poet had not came into my minde, Au∣daces fortuna juvat: whereupon rushing on you unawares, and at an adventure, I beseech your Worships pardon, and that you would be so far pleased as to
grace this small Treatise with your favourable acceptance, which contains in it certain ob∣servations upon the Apostles Creed; or as the Author there∣of John Ellis a Reverend Doctor of Divinity styled it, Clavis Fi∣de the which in a Translation from Oxford to Cambridge, hath in a short space learn'd in plain English to speak its mother tongue: and I rather implore your patronage and protection of it then any other, by reason of the calumnies and aspersions that some may cast upon me the Translator thereof, (qui nun∣quam gradum suscepi) and al∣though I was no Scholar brought up at the University,
yet à teneris unguiculis, even from my tender years I have ever bin a lover of learning, and a Scho∣lars servant, there being about thirty and nine years expired since I was first a servant to Mr Thomas Buck, at the Art of Printing: but having h a long vacation from my em∣ployment of composing letters (in that late and epidemical time of Plague and Pestilence) I began to consider with my self how to spend my time to the best advantage, and ta∣king this small Book into my hand, and here and there per∣using it, I did at last assay to translate it, the which through Gods assistance I have finish∣ed,
and exposed to publick view. And now at length ho∣ping of your Worships favour∣able acceptance and patronage of it, your unworthy servant shall ever be paying that which is but his duty to do, the debt of gratitude and thankfulness to you, though never to the full: Si ingratum dixeritis, om∣nia dicitis; for as one well spake, An ungrateful man is no man, but an enemy to God and man: but your humble servant hopes that your Worships shall have no cause to say so of him, nor yet suspect him to be guilty thereof: but he shall ever pray to Almighty God, that he would so water your studies
with the dew of his heavenly benediction, that after this painful life ended, he would translate you from hence into the Kingdom of his dear Son. The which he prays for, who is, and shall ever remain, Your Worships most humble and obedient servant William Flower.
To the Courteous Reader. I Here propose to thy view this small Treatise; the which if thou wilt bestow the pains to read, thou wilt finde much matter comprized in few sheets; and I doubt not, if thou readest it with under∣standing, but that thou mayest finde ma∣ny things contained in it which may be of no small advantage to build thee up in thy most holy faith: For without faith (as the Apostle St Paul intimates unto us) it is impossible to please God. It may be styled a Breviary, or certain short obser∣vations upon the Apostles Creed; or more properly, The Key of Faith: wherein many mysteries of faith are opened and made evident to thy understanding. And as a Cabinet containing in it many jewels of great value, if it be kept continually lock'd proves to be of little or no use to the owner; in like manner, this book, if it had remained still in the original, had been of as little use to thee; but now being
translated, and accommodated and fitted to thy capacity, this Key of Faith doth now open unto thee, and as it were unlock those mysteries of faith which were hid from thy understanding. I have heard from the Pulpit, by one that was well vers'd in History, and a learned man, that the Proceres, or Noble∣men of Poland, did use to stand up at the reading of the Creed, with their swords drawn in their hands ready to defend it, in case any should offer to oppose it; how much more then should we of the true Ca∣tholick faith endeavour vi & armis, as much as in us lies to vindicate the same; for the Creed is commanded by publick Authority to be learn'd of all, even by children, when they come to years of dis∣cretion, and whatsoever is commanded in general, ought to be every ones particular concernment. For as the Nautick Chard, or Compass doth direct the Mariner that hath skill in it, qui oculum ad astra, manum ad clavum habet) to steer his course aright to whatsoever place he is bound, that he runs not precipitately upon
dangerous rocks or shelves: in like man∣ner this little book may be some help to direct thee to look up to God by an eye of faith, that thou splitst not thy self upon the dangerous rocks of unbelief and igno∣rance; and it may by Gods assistance bring thee into safe harbour, even to heaven the haven of happiness; whilest others re∣maining in unbelief, making shipwrack of faith and a good conscience become cast∣aways. Lege ac perlege, veruntamen nè dijudica antequam perlegisti; Read it over and over, but judge not before thou hast throughly perused it: and if thou reapest any benefit give God the glo∣ry, for I acknowledge my self to be but a weak instrument for such a work as this: yet as near as I could, (avoiding circumlocutions or hyperbolical phra∣ses) I have expressed the scope and meaning of the Author verbatim. There is contained in this small Tract the my∣stery of the Trinity explained, so far forth as is necessary for thee to know, and likewise many excellent observations upon the Incarnation of our Saviour, with
the manner of his crucifixion expressed ad vivum, to the life; and in all the other Articles of the belief being briefly hand∣led, thou wilt finde many excellent obser∣vations, much comprized in few words. And to conclude, I wish that these preci∣ous truths were imprinted in our minds as well as in this book, the which God grant. Courteous Reader, Farewell in the Lord Jesus. W. F.
The Key of Faith. EVen as the river that watered Paradise was divided into four heads; so in like man∣ner is the doctrine of the Church: to wit, The Apostles Creed, the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer and the Sacraments. First, we are to live in the Church by faith. Secondly, to come unto the rule of life by precepts. Thirdly, lest we faint, we are to take heed by prayer; and when notwithstanding all these, we are yet weak, we are to have recourse to the seals of grace; which are the Sa∣craments. First, faith is necessary. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. For the sum of faith is contained in the Apostles Creed, or Symbol. It is called a Symbol, because it is a token or mark by which Christian Souldiers are dis∣cerned
from others: or , from contributing, as if it were compiled and composed by the Apo∣stles. However it is said to be the Apo∣stles, because it comprehends the sum of the faith which the Apostles preach'd. We are to search the Scriptures, and to beleeve those things which are contain∣ed in them: but above all, the special and fundamental places which are sim∣ply necessary. Lib. 6. confess. cap. 6. S. Austin writes, they are to be blamed, not to be listened to, if perhaps there be any such that should say, How knowest thou that those books which are ministred to us by men, are the minde of the onely true and uner∣ring God: for that for it self it is chiefly to be beleeved. Notwithstanding there are enough , evidences, which evince and clear it, that the Scripture is inspired from God: whereof these are the most choice; The authority of the writers, who were in an extraordinary manner called and sent forth. The ma∣jesty of the doctrine. The amplitude and clearness of the miracles. The truth of
the prophesies. The sanctity of the Bi∣ble: nothing is here to be found dis∣sonant to piety and truth, nothing of contradiction. And to add to this, the sublimity of the mean style, and the sublime humility. To conclude, the har∣monious truth of either Testament: that which lieth hid in the Old, is manifest in the New. But the Symbol or Creed it self, which is taken out of the Scriptures, contain∣eth in it twelve Articles, and is as it were the a A cir∣cle in heaven wherein the twelve Signs are. zodiack of a Christian. But these may be reduced to four parts: The first concerning God the Father, who hath made all things. The second con∣cerning God the Son, who hath re∣deemed mankinde. The third, concern∣ing the H. Ghost, who hath sanctified the faithful. The fourth, concerning the Church and its priviledges, which the Lord hath communicated to it. But some one may say,  The works of the Trinity which have a reference to the creatures are undivided, common to all the three Persons, how cometh it
then to pass, that creation is attributed to the Father, redemption to the Son, sanctification to the H. Ghost? This cometh to pass,  not to exclude, but to distinguish between the Persons, and the order of their acting. Omitting these, let us come to the Articles them∣selves. The first is, I beleeve in God the Fa∣ther Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth. It is said I beleeve, not we be∣leeve; because every one ought to have a special faith of his own, explicit not implicit, or taken upon trust. We can∣not see well with other mens eyes, nei∣ther is it sufficient to have an opinion in divine matters. The disputation of Gregory de Valen∣tia is of no force; Lib. 6. Analys. fidei cap. 13. in which he thus as∣serts concerning a man that is not Theo∣logically learned: That if he prefer the Romish Church for its outward autho∣rity before the Reformed, then God shall have nothing to object against this illiterate man in that most dreadful Tri∣bunal: for God doth not require of him
this, that he should come to the know∣ledge of the truth by searching into the doctrine, since that he understands not Theological controversies. These things saith he. But let him say what he will, every one certainly ought to hold the substance and saving sense of the Arti∣cles, although not all the most difficult circumstances of questions from thence arising. But now to beleeve, is not onely to know and give assent to those things which are propounded in the Gospel, but also to acquiesce and rest satisfied in them. It is not all one to beleeve a God, and to beleeve God, and to beleeve in God. In the two first senses sinners and devils do agree, the third sense none attain to, unless they be such who have faith formed in them: in this manner to beleeve is to go into God by good works, 3 Sent. Dist. 23. saith the Master of the Sen∣tences. To beleeve a God, is to know there is such a God. To beleeve God, is to confess that he is true: but to beleeve in God requires application, that he is my
God. There is a faith found that is not right. There is a faith that is feigned, and it is of the hypocrites; the Apostle saith, that the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and faith un∣feigned, 1 Tim. 1.5. There is a kinde of dead faith, and it is that of sinners, or of those that are still in their sins; Faith without works is dead, Jam. 2.26. There is a kinde of weak faith, and it is of the luke-warm, Receive you him that is weak in the faith, Rom. 14.1. There is like∣wise a little faith, and it is of the fearful, therefore Christ said, O thou of little faith why doubtest thou? Matth. 14.31. Hitherto we have treated concerning faith it self, now concerning the objects of faith, of which God is the principal, whom not to know is death, and whom to know is life. And first, it is to be de∣monstrated, that God is. This may be proved out of the book of Nature, inas∣much as he is the Creator, and out of the book of Scripture, in that he is Creator Conserver and Redeemer. Sum part. 1 quaest. 12. Art 7 God may be known, although not comprehended, as Aquinas saith.
These arguments that are drawn from nature do prove that there is a God, which notwithstanding are common to Scripture also; to wit the most beautiful order of the creatures, as, the heavens de∣clare the glory of God, Psal. 19.1. the un∣derstanding of man, the knowledges of principles, and the knowledge of this principle, That God is, Rom. 1.19. the tremblings of consciences in sinners, the rewards of good men, the punishments of the wicked, the political order, the heroick vertues, the invention of arts, the prediction of future events, the end and profit of all things, the impossibility of the progress of causes without end. It may be proved likewise out of Scri∣pture, well-nigh by infinite testimonies, by divers apparitions, by stupendious miracles, by the writings of the Pro∣phets, and by the admirable event of things. He therefore that denies that there is a God, is not void onely of rea∣son, but sense also, as Avicēna is reported to have said. It is manifest therefore that there is a God; now let us see what he is.
God cannot be defined because he is immense; he may be described Philo∣sophically and Theologically. Philosophically, God is a Spirit, suf∣ficient of himself, and the cause of all good. Theologically, God is the most per∣fect being, one in essence, three in Persons. The Theological description differs from the Philosophical, first in perfe∣ction; for it adds something unknown to nature concerning the Trinity, and unfolds or explains that which is known to nature. Secondly, in effect, natural knowledge renders men onely inexcu∣sable, Rom. 1.20. but supernatural knowledge is saving: hence then the true God differs from the gods of the Gentiles, in Attributes, Persons, Works. In Attributes, because they are not rightly and entirely understood by them that are without the pale of the Church. In Persons, because the Gentiles are ignorant of the Trinity. In Works, because the wonderful works of God,
and especially that of the Redemption, are not perceived by them who are out of the Church. But now omitting other proprieties, which amongst Schoolmen are handled at large, I will first shew, that God is one: the Lord he is God; there is none else besides him, Deut. 4.35. Further∣more, chief Majesty is competent to no more but one. None can be the most perfect, unless he be but one: but God contains in him all possible perfection by reason of the latitude of his essence. Yea there can be but one onely Omni∣potent. And if there should be more Gods, they are all imperfect, or the rest are superfluous, both (which to say) is absurd. Besides, that which is Infinite can be but one onely; neither can there be but one first cause of all things: and to conclude, it is most necessary that the onely chief good be but one. God there∣fore is one, and the onely one, as Saint Bernard saith. Yet there are many that are called Gods.  But this is done improperly either
by reason of a certain similitude or like∣ness, or according to the opinion of vain man. First, by a certain similitude, as either for eminency of nature and wis∣dom, as Angels; or for excellency of office, as Magistrates; or for exceeding great power, as the Devil; or for the oo too much indulging of it, as the belly. Secondly, out of a false opinion of men, Idols are called Gods. It appears therefore that God is one, now we are to shew that he is three in Persons. Tho. Par. 1. q. 32. art. 1. . Sent. dist. 3. The Trinity cannot be proved by the light of nature, as Thomas teach∣eth against Scotus. Yet Lumbard fetch∣eth some footsteps of the Trinity from the creatures; especially from the three faculties of the soul, the understanding, memory, and will. But these do onely produce a confused knowledge, not a distinct. God is three but not threefold, for he is a most simple being of himself: and we use the name of Trinity, not because the Scripture saith so, but be∣cause it doth not contradict it, and for
the thing it self it is in the Scriptures, though not the very word, that being implied, this not expressed; and you may interpret Scripture in convenient words; especially by reason of the de∣ceit of Hereticks, concealing their here∣sies for the most part under Scripture expressions. In many places of Holy Writ, it doth evidently appear, that there are three Persons, Matth. 3.16. The Father proclaims it This is my beloved Son, The Son is baptized, and the Holy Ghost descendeth in the likeness of a dove, 1 Joh. 5.7. There are three that bear witness in heaven, The Father is of himself, the Son from the Father be∣gotten from eternity, The Holy Ghost proceedeth from both. The Father is distinguished from the Son, but not an∣other essence, and so of the rest. But in this matter better is a faithful igno∣rance, then a rash knowledge. I con∣clude therefore with Robert Holcot, Quaest. 10. a most famous Professor in our Uni∣versity of Oxford; who, as Gabriel
Biel relates it, Quaest. 10. De∣term 1. sent. dist. 13. qu. 11. saith thus modestly. Dignè loqui de Personis Vim transcendit rationis Excedit ingenia. Quid sit nasci, quid processus, Me nescire sum professus. Thus Englished. To speak condignly of the Persons three Transcendeth reason in a high degree, It doth exceed all wits. What it is to be born, what the a Aliàs proceed∣ing. process, I understand it not I do profess. Some one perhaps may say,  that the three Persons are not essence.  But this is true of a finite essence onely.  More∣over, that where there are three and one, there are four; but in God there are three Persons and one essence,  yet they are not really distinct.  But it may be ob∣jected, that their essences are distinct whose operations are distinct.  We an∣swer, that this is to be affirmed onely of persons that have a finite being. The first Person then of the Trinity is called the Father. The name of the Father
is taken sometimes personally by way of distinction from the Son, and sometimes essentially in reference to the creatures, for the whole Divine essence. The first Person is called Father, either in respect of Christ, or in respect of us. Or like as Durandus sheweth, he is the Father of all generally, the Father of Christ singularly, and the Father of the elect especially. Credo in Deum, I beleeve in God: It refers not onely to the Father, but also to the Son and Holy Ghost: and the Father is called omnipotent, not excluding the other Persons. God is omnipotent, because he can do all things, what he pleaseth; all things that do not imply a contradiction, and which are not repugnant to his nature: and because he doth all things without difficulty, or by his beck onely, because he alone hath power of doing all things, and for that he is the Author of all crea∣ted power. If it be said, that God cannot die, sin,  lye. We answer,  God can do those
things which imply power, but nothing that argues impotency or weakness: for this would not stand with his perfection. And if it be said, that he cannot do those things which are contradictory. We answer, that this would be inconsistent with his immutability. I pass by niceties. This is the most principal thing, seeing that God is om∣nipotent; he that feareth God hath not any thing beyond that he need to fear; and if God be with us who can be a∣gainst us. It follows in the Creed, that God is the Creator of heaven and earth, that is of the whole world. Creation is the producing of some∣thing out of nothing; it is either imme∣diate, of the first lump; or mediate, of things produced out of that lump. This power of creating belongs to God alone, it appertains not to the creatures: be∣cause there is nothing presupposed in that work, part. 1. quaest. 45 art. 5. which is capable of disposi∣tion by the action of the instrumental agent; as Thomas sheweth touching
the manner of the emanation or pro∣ceeding of things from their first prin∣ciple. And assuredly Suarez in his Me∣taphysical disputations, and Pererius in his book of Natural Philosophie, prove this thing very notably. It may be de∣monstrated out of Scripture, that the world was created by God, and by natu∣ral reasons also: for there is no infinite progress of causes and effects in nature, and the world is the first and most excellent effect; therefore it is from the first and most excellent cause. The Philosophers err therefore, who either with Aristotle dream of the worlds eter∣nity, or suppose with Plato an uncreated matter; or with Democritus, Leucippus, Epicurus, bring in atoms, and a con∣curring of them by chance. Hermogenes errs, who affirmed the world to be co∣eternal with God, and the Stoicks who feigned two beginnings. But the Philosophers object,  if the world be not eternal, God did not always govern it: therefore he was sometimes idle. We answer,  He was not therefore
idle. But what then did he do? It may be said, that he chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world, Eph. 1.4. or as S. Austin answereth: For them that do too curiously enquire After such things, he made th' infernal fire. But every thing that hath a beginning hath his end; the world hath no end: ergó. Here is a distinction to be made between things that have their begin∣nings by a natural generation, and such as have them by creation, both which, those as well as these, God may either preserve, or reduce them into nothing. But it may be said again, that he who is lord and governour actually, is more happy then he who is such an one po∣tentially: therefore, either the world was from eternity, or God is made more happy by the creation. We answer, that no felicity can ac∣crue to God from the creature, who is most perfect and happy in himself. The world was created of God the
Father, by the Son, and the H. Ghost. All things are created out of nothing, not out of the substance of God, nor out of any preexistent matter. But out of nothing comes nothing. This is true in a natural way or course,  or as proceeding from men. But man is not created out of nothing. It is true in respect of the next matter, but not in respect of the first. He created all things most wisely, and very good. But the Prophet saith,  There is no evil in a city that God hath not done, Amos 3.6.  This is to be understood of the evil of punishment, not of the evil of sin. Besides, the world was created, not of a sudden, but in the space of six days. In the beginning, Gen. 1. In the begin∣ning of the universe, or generality of things, so Basil and Ambrose. Hom. 1. Hexam. l. 1. de gen. ad literam c. 1. Before all created things, saith S. Austin. And it was created for the glory of God, and the profit of men. Under creation the providence of
God is comprehended; God doth still work by preserving, but not by creating things. As there is nothing made but by his creating essence, so nothing thrives without the power thereof keeping and preserving it, In Mo∣nol. c. 12. Tom. 3. as Anselm saith. For providence is Gods action or working, whereby he doth liberally, wisely, well and powerfully preserve and govern all things for the glory of his Name, and the salvation of the godly. It is the action of God, for it is not an idle intuition or looking on, but an effectual administration of things. The most minute or least things are subject to Gods providence; as sparrows, hairs, worms. God is all eye, because he seeth all things, yea the most abject of them. And excellently saith S. 1 Offic. cap. 13. Ambrose. If it be not an injury and disparagement to God to have made the most small things, much less disparagement is it to him to govern them being made. God doth act most freely. God is not sub∣jected to necessity, but necessity to him.
The Stoicks err, who tie God to a fatal necessity of causes: God doth all things wisely, to certain ends, contrary to that of the Epicureans, who affirm that all things come to pass by fortune: Chance and fortune are words used by the un∣learned, saith S. Basil, Conc. 8. in Psal 32. Lib, 1. Retr. c. 1. nothing comes by chance in respect of God, but in regard of us: and S. Austin doth acknowledge, that he did ill to use the name of fortune so often in his writings: God worketh powerfully, and cannot be hindred by any might, bound by any law, wearied by any impotency or weakness: God doth all things well, because he is the best; out of the most evil things he bringeth good, and maketh use of evil things to a good end: But the provi∣dence of God is either universal or par∣ticular. That of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.9. Doth God take care for oxen? is not spoken absolutely, but comparatively; that God hath not the like care of beasts that he hath of men; his care towards men is greater. Neither is it any obstacle that many
things are so confused,  Confused things are governed by God, but not con∣fusedly; and in the seeming confu∣sion there is some order. Neither doth the inconstancy of weather hinder any whit; for snow, hail, ice, they do his will. It becometh us to admire the works of God, but not to search too curiously into them. Neither do mon∣sters and natural defects hinder. These are , the transgressions of nature, according to Aristotle his fourth book of the generation of animals, They forsake not the order of the universal cause, but of the particular onely; or according to Thomas, they fall short of the ultimate or last end, which is the perfection of the thing generated, but not of their nearest end: for nature still worketh and formeth somewhat at the least. And if any one doth speak concern∣ing sins. We answer, that sins are not actions, but are accidental to actions; which are good of themselves and from God likewise. But some one may say,
sins happen by the providence of God. It is true, by the providence of God per∣mitting, determining, directing them to the best ends, but not effecting, or being the procuring cause of them. Let them be confounded, who do think or imagine God to be the Author of evils or wic∣kedness: Lib 4. de Orthod∣xa fide, c. 20. this is the vote or wish of Da∣mascen. And if it be said, that the same evil work is attributed both to God and the sinner; as the selling of Joseph, or the crucifying of Christ. We answer, that this is done in a diverse respect; it is attributed to the sinner, as it is an evil work, but to God as it is a good one. This is the reason of that common simile of a hors-man riding on a lame horse, its halting or lameness proceeds not from the hors-man, but from the horse it self; Joseph's brethren sold him out of malice: God permitted this out of mer∣cy, lest he should have been slain; for his own glory, and for the great advan∣tage and profit of his servant. The Jews crucified Christ out of ill-will, God the Father permitted this out of his greatest
good will towards men. Judas betrayed Christ out of covetousness, our heavenly Father out of love. They err, who affirm that God doth incline and force the will of the wicked to commit great and grievous sins; to have formed man in his mothers womb with a perversness of nature, and a ne∣cessity of sinning; or to this end to have created Esau to lead a wicked life, or to move a thief to kill the innocent, and him that is not prepared to die. This is most certain, that God doth not ap∣prove of wickedness, neither is he the cause of it: yet all things subject them∣selves to his providence; all his creatures, rational or irrational; all events, good or evil. But his principal care is of his elect: His providence in respect of them is most special. We should do well there∣fore to be patient in adversity, thankful in prosperity, and hope for the future. For our God is omnipotent good and true. Hitherto of the first part of the Creed, the second follows, which is con∣cerning
faith in Christ in these words: And in Jesus Christ his onely Son our Lord, &c. The second Person is true God, not mere man, otherwise he were not the object of our faith. He is called Jesus in the Hebrew  or  that is a Saviour, because he saveth his people, Jeschuah, Jeho∣scuah. Matth. 1.21. This name JESUS is honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, a jubile or rejoycing in the heart. Others have had this name Joshua, a Captain or Leader, and Joshua the High Priest: But they by the imposition of men, Je∣sus by the denunciation of an Angel. Those were saviours by a figure and ty∣pically; but Jesus truly and in his own nature. They brought corporal good things, and Jesus spiritual. They were ministers or servants, He the Master. Jesus is a Saviour , or super∣latively, He alone saveth excluding the creatures. There is no other name given under heaven, whereby they may be saved, Acts 4.12. He saveth from the evil of sin, and from the evil of punishment:
the cause being taken away the effect ceaseth: let therefore every faithful soul rejoyce and say, O Jesu be thou to me a Jesus, or Saviour. Secondly, our Mediator is called , unctus, anointed, à  ungo, to anoint; but in Hebrew he is called  And as he hath his Hebrew name Jeschuah, Maschi∣ach. because he was to be the Saviour of the Jews; so he hath his Greek name Christ, because he was to be the Saviour of the Greeks, that is of the Gentiles and other nations: for all the Gentiles were called Grecians as S. Epist. 200. Austin saith, because from the time of Alexander the Great, the Greeks ha∣ving the rule almost over all nations, did propagate their tongue together with their Empire. As the Prophets, Priests and Kings were wont to be anointed; so likewise Christ was anointed, although not in regard of the signe outwardly, and ceremonially, yet in respect of the thing signified, inwardly and really. He was anointed, because he was or∣dained to the office of a Mediator, and
endued with gifts for the accomplishing of the same work of this duty. The be∣stowing of gifts was in reference to his humane nature, the ordination to his office was according to either nature. Christ was anointed to be a Prophet and a Teacher, who should make known the will of his Father: to be a High Priest and a Priest, that by the sacrifice of his body he might redeem us, and that he might always intercede for us: to be a King, that he might guide us by his word and Spirit. This is our duty then that by the odour of his ointments we should run after him. Draw thou us O Lord Jesus, and we shall run after thee. From Christ we are called Chri∣stians, and this name was first given them at Antioch, Act. 11.26. Of his fulness we have all received, and he hath made us kings and priests to God our Father. We are kings that we should fight against Satan, the world, yea and against our selves. Fortior est qui se, quàm qui fortissima vincit.
He's stronger that subdues himself by far, Then he that conquers greatest walls by war. We are Priests, that we may sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise, prayer, con∣trition, alms, righteousness, and in fine, serve him in all things appertaining to a Christian life. We are Prophets, that we may know God, and knowing him we may truly profess him: that we may be Christians not onely in outward profession, but also by inward communion; that we may be members of the Church, not onely in appearance, but also in reality and truth. As for the remaining titles of our Medi∣ator, He is next of all called the Son of God. He was his Son according to the Di∣vine nature, being light of light, and God of God. And according to the hu∣mane nature after the common manner in respect of creation, and after a special manner in respect of conception. The Son is the onely begotten, for he hath
no brethren according to eternal genera∣tion, nor according to his extraordinary conception; yet the elect are called Christs brethren by reason of the Fa∣thers adoption, and likeness of humane nature; for their liberality, charity, and for some kinde of conformity they have with Christ. Besides, our Mediator is called Lord. Lord was a title of the Emperours, so high, that Cesar Augustus would not be so called, as Dio and Tertullian testifie; deeming himself to be unworthy of so great a name. It seems he did this by Divine instinct, that that glorious Title being untouch'd, might remain to the onely Son of God, The King of kings, and Lord of lords; who straight after came into the world. But at this time the Turks call their Emperour the great Lord, and the Tartarians, Persians, and others of the East countrey, Sultan, that is Lord. Jesus is our Lord by right of creation, because all things were made by him, Col. 1.16. by right of redemption, which
we have through his bloud, Col. 1.14. By right of principality; for he is the head of all principality and power, Col. 2.10. By right of preserving his unto salva∣tion; for he giveth life eternal to his sheep, Joh. 10.28. By right of the Fathers constitution, because the Father hath put all things un∣der his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, Eph. 1.22. and hath made him heir of all things, Hebr. 1.2. His Dominion therefore extends not onely unto us, but unto all creatures. Seeing therefore Christ is the Lord of us all, we ought to be humble and meek one towards another; for we are fellow servants of the Lord. Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven, saith S. Paul, Col. 4.1. And seeing that Christ is the Lord, let us adhere to him alone, otherwise we shall have very many strange lords, whom to serve, it will be most miserable.
Most truly said S. Ambrose, O how ma∣ny lords hath he who hath not one? he hath so many lords or masters as he hath sins: yea holy father, he hath so many mistresses as lusts, and certainly, thou thy self being judge, lust is a most furi∣ous mistress. Let us therefore serve the Lord Jesus onely. And if we be no∣ble and generous Christians, let us not admit of any other government. As Thomas Aquinas observeth of horses, that a spirited and wel-mettled one will not admit of any other rider but his own master, and is moved onely at his beck. Hitherto of the titles of the Media∣tor; he is further to be described, accord∣ing to the degrees both of his exinani∣tion or humiliation, and likewise of his exaltation. First, Christ did empty himself, and became very low. The word is made flesh, Joh. 1.14. The Son of God is made the Son of man, that the son of man might become the son of God. He is now who was, and what he is he was not, De Trin. lib. 0. saith S. Hilary. Our Mediator is become God
and man, that he might conjoyn God and man together again, who were sepa∣rated and disjoyned. And if it be said,  that the flesh of Christ could not be united to our flesh, because our flesh is sinful.  We answer, It doth not follow, for sinfulness is acci∣dental to our flesh, not of the substance or essence of it; so that Christs flesh may be united to our flesh, but not as to the sinfulness of it. If it be said that no accession can be made to God, we say That is true, if meant of perfection, but not of union. If further any object,  that the humane nature cannot come or be united to God. It is true, unless that God assume it. That it is most ignominious for God to be a creature.  It is most ignominious for him to be changed into a creature, but not to be united with it, without the change of his essence. But although there be in Christ two natures, yet there is onely one Person. Although he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ, as S. Athana∣sius
professeth in his Creed. The hu∣mane nature of Christ doth not consti∣tute a person, because it subsists not of or by it self, but it is upheld or sustained in and by the Word. If it be objected,  that God and man are two persons. We answer,  That it is true, if they be not united. If it be said, that dead and always li∣ving, are not the same. It is true, that they are not the same, according to the same: But Christ was so according to his divers natures. If it be enquired, How is the Incarna∣tion attributed to the Son? We are to know, that the Incarnation is the work of the whole Trinity by inchoation, and of the Son alone by termination. He assumed our nature, which the Father formed in him, out of the substance of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost. This substantial knitting or joyning although produced by all the Persons, yet formal∣ly it did not knit or conjoyn the humane nature with any, In 3. p. D. Thom. but with the Person of the Son: as Suarez copiously, and other
Divines. And of the two natures there was an union made hypostatically, or personally: not physically as the form is united to the matter: nor spiritually, as the elect among themselves, and with God; nor by help and assistance, as the mariner to the ship; nor relatively, as a friend to a friend, nor mystically, as in the Sacrament; the two natures were united inconfusedly, unchangeably, not admitting of any division, inseparably. Inconfusedly, each nature having their properties remaining; but the proper∣ties of one nature by communication of idioms is attributed in the concrete to the person denominated from either na∣ture: as that God hath purchased his Church by his bloud, Acts 20.28. The Lord of glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. this is spoken according to his humane nature. This speech ought to be taken in the concrete, not in the abstract: and it fol∣lows not, that because God is said to suffer, therefore the Deity suffered. Secondly, the natures were united, inconvertibly, that is without the change
of the Divine into the humane, or of the humane into the Divine. Thirdly, individedly, without divi∣sion of natures, although not without distinction: they are not two, but one Christ. Fourthly, inseparably, this union re∣mains for ever. At the death of Christ his soul was separated from his body, but the Divine nature remained united to both after its own manner; the natural union was dissolved, and not the per∣sonal. Thus far concerning the Incarnation in general. The parts thereof follow, the conception of Christ and his nativity. Conceived by the Holy Ghost. Not of the essence, but by the effici∣ency of the Holy Ghost: This particle of, doth not denote the matter, as if that Christ was of the Holy Ghost, for he was of the fathers according to the flesh, Rom. 9.5. God also is immutable, and the Word assumed our flesh, and is not changed into it: but of signifies the effi∣cient
cause; because by the vertue and power of the Holy Ghost Christ was conceived. His conception by the Holy Ghost speaks the miraculous forming of the flesh, or body of Christ without the help of man: then, the sanctifying of it from original sin, and the hypostatical union of it with the Word. The body of Christ is thought to have been made simul & semel, toge∣ther and at once perfect, not successive∣ly, as the bodies of men are in the space of fourty days; otherwise Christ should not have been conceived a man, but an embryo; yea he was inspired with a rea∣sonable soul. Wickedly did Apollinaris say that the soul of Christ was his Di∣vinity. His soul was heavy and sad, which is not competent to the Divinity; at his death his soul departed from his body; but his Divinity did not recede or depart. He was conceived for us, behold his love! how can we conceive to express it? He was conceived of the Holy Ghost,
behold his wisdom! that he might be free from sin: let us mourn by reason of our impure conception. Let every one say with David, Behold, in iniquity was I conceived, Psal. 51.5. His pure con∣ception will cover our impurity, if that hereafter we endeavour to be pure. So was his conception, his nativity succeeds. Christ was born, that he might signi∣fie to us the truth of his humane nature. Born of Mary, to shew that he was of the fathers, to wit, David and Abraham, of whom Mary came. Born of the Virgin Mary, lest he should be defiled with ori∣ginal sin, and that the Scripture should be fulfilled; this the Prophet foretold, Isai. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son. Neither were the Sybils silent in this matter, if those things be true which are written of them. And truly Boetius in his Tractate of Scholastical discipline, re∣ports a wonderful thing, to wit, that there was found in Plato's tomb a plate of gold, in which was written, I beleeve
in the Son of God, that is to be born of the Virgin. And such a like story Nicepho∣rus tells of a certain man, that in the time of Constantine and of his mother Irene, there was a stone chest found un∣der the earth with this inscription, The Messias shall be born of a Virgin, and I be∣leeve in him. Out of all these ariseth the confirma∣tion of our faith, and firm consolation, that a Saviour is born, and born to us, Isai. 9.6. When he was rich, he became poor for us. For our sakes he was disgra∣ced of men, and contemned of the vul∣gar; he was humble, because he would not have us to be proud; he was born of a poor Virgin, that he might shew to us, that we ought not to boast in riches and honour; and that he might teach us to be contented with the meanest condi∣tion. The Virgin brought forth her Son, & she wrapped him in swadling clothes, having taken him first in her Virgin arms, into the which he being new born the Angels had laid him, as Suarez con∣jectures. The Pastor of Israel manifested
himself to be a good Shepherd to the shepherds. The Angels brought news of great joy that should be to all people, for that a Saviour was born, Christ the Lord, in the city of David, and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God. Jesus the bread of life was born in Bethlehem the house of bread. He was born in a stable, that we should not so much care for sumptuous Palaces; in which place afterwards there was built by S. Beda de locis san∣ctis & alii. Helen a most sumptuous Church to the honour of the Virgin the Mother of God. Concerning the manner of his birth, it was wonderfully singular, and sin∣gularly wonderful. Of this thing Saint Austin doth very admirably discourse, saying thus, Let the incredulous Jew tell me, how, or in what manner the dry rod (to wit Aarons) budded and blossomed, and brought forth almonds; then I will tell him how the Virgin con∣ceived and brought forth. But truly nei∣ther can the Jew explain the one, nor I the other. Divine mysteries are not to
be discussed or searched out by the under∣standing, but to be adored by faith, saith S. Gregory. I beleeve therefore that it is enough for us simply to beleeve, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. And certainly we ought piously to hold and maintain it, that the blessed Mo∣ther of our Redeemer always remained a Virgin. She was a Virgin before, in, and after her bearing or bringing forth. The which S. Jerom at large proves a∣gainst Helvidius. And that place, Mat. 1.25. He knew her not till she brought forth her first-born Son, notes that he knew her not at all. The like you have, 2 Sam. 6. and the last verse; where it is said, Michal the daughter of Saul had no childe until the day of her death, that is, she never had any. But how is Christ said to be the first∣born, if he had no brethren? We an∣swer, that Christ is so called, not because there was not any son after him, but be∣cause there was none before him. And where in the Scripture there is mention made of the brethren of Christ,
there cousin-germans and kinsmen are understood: so Abraham said unto Lot, We are brethren, Gen. 13.8. Hitherto of the nativity of Christ, his passion followeth. He suffered under Pontius Pilate. The whole life of Jesus was a passion, he suffered in his circumcision, in his flight into Egypt, in fasting fourty days, and in his temptation by the Devil, he suffered in the want of the chiefest feli∣city, he suffered all kinde of evils, all humane infirmities, sin excepted: he endured poverty, injury, and the sense of the wrath of God, but without de∣spair; and to conclude, he suffered death it self, according to his humane nature. To teach that Christ felt no pain in his flesh, nor true sorrow in his soul at the time of his passion, is contrary to truth and heretical; as if it should be said, he took not upon him to be true and real man, but onely his similitude: So truly saith the Master of the Senten∣ces, The Divine nature did rest, 3 Sent. dist. 14. that the humane might suffer; but it upheld the hu∣mane
in its agonies, that it might over∣come. The cause moving God to subject his Son to sufferings, was either inward, or outward. The inward was the love of his good pleasure. The outward three∣fold: the misery of sin, from whence was mercy; sin it self, from whence ju∣stice; and the tyranny of the Devil, from whence revenge: the end and fruit of Christs passion are the same in a di∣verse respect; the end in respect of Christ, the fruit or benefit in respect of us; and they are two, the glory of God, and our salvation. The Judge under whom he suffered was Pontius Pilate the Governour of all Judea for Tiberius the Emperour: that it might be evident that Jesus was the true Messias, who was not to come till the sceptre was wholly taken away from Judah, Gen. 49.10. which came now to pass, Judea being overcome of the Ro∣mans. Then it is also said that he suf∣fered under Pilate; that the truth of that which Christ spake concerning his being delivered up to the Gentiles might
be manifest, Matth. 20.19. Besides, be∣cause his sufferings under Pilate were most heavy and grievous. For Pilate scourged Christ, and with thongs, not by his own, but by the hands of the exe∣cutioners, saith S. Jerom. Soon after, when his body throughout was torn with scourges, being crowned with thorns, adorned with a purple robe, and a sceptre of reed, by a new kinde of moc∣kery, as it were to act in a theatre, Pi∣late brings him in a King of misery to be beheld of the people, and saith, Be∣hold the man. By which words he would have moved the Jews to pity. But they, O hard-hearted men as they were! used Christ very unmercifully: made choice of Barabbas, one notorious for lewd pranks, to be released from punishment, and were very instant requiring that the most innocent Jesus might be crucified. Pilate could have denied them, but he would not: and against his conscience he delivered Jesus into the hands of his enemies. Moreover, Pilates wife, In Chr. 10. An. Chr. 34. whom Lucius Dexter calls Claudia Procula, was
earnest with her husband that he would give no rigid sentence against Christ: but the threats of the Jews did more sharply prick him then his wifes advice. Perhaps Pilates wife dream'd that he should smart for it, which afterwards fell out accordingly, when he was sent an Exile into Vienna in France: as Jose∣phus, Ado, and others report: and we read that afterwards out of desperation he laid violent hands upon himself. Furthermore Christ suffered under Pilate an ordinary Judge, that he might absolve us from the severe judgement of God; and to conclude, that his innocen∣cy might be demonstrated: for Pilate gave him this testimony that he found no cause of death in him, Joh. 18.38. Therefore God would have him exami∣ned, and so by consequence it was very clear, that Christ was delivered to death, not for his own, but for our sins. Against this passion of Christ under Pilate it may be objected,  that he was slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. how therefore could this be under Pilate?
To this we answer,  that Christ was slain from the beginning of the world, by appointment, election, power, effica∣cy, acceptation, but not by execution. He was slain from the beginning, in the minde and purpose of God, in an ideal passion but under Pilate in a real. But Pilate seems to be absolved from the guilt,  because he did nothing but what God decreed beforehand to be done, Act. 4.28.  To this likewise it may be said, that God did not preordain the hatred of the Jews towards Christ: but foreknowing it, did purpose to make good use of it, and by his precognition, or foreknowledge of the evil, determi∣ned the redemption of mankinde by the death of Christ. The action displeased him, the passion was acceptable. The shameful act of the Jews and Pi∣late displeased God extremely; but the passion of Christ, and the redemption of mankinde from thence arising was ex∣ceeding acceptable, Prosp. ad objecta Gallo∣rum, resp. 13. decreed from eter∣nity and preordained. Which is Prospers and other Doctors judgement in the
point. From what hath been spoken it is manifest, how that the wicked do exe∣cute the counsel of God although they purpose no such thing, and yet notwith∣standing are not exempted from blame. But some one may say,  Christ ought to suffer; and therefore neither Pilate nor the Jews may seem to have sinned. He ought indeed upon supposition,  a necessity being derived from a voluntary decree of his dying: for Jesus suffered because he would, otherwise he could have escaped his enemies hands. Ye have heard that Christ suffered and under whom. It follows in the Creed, that he was crucified, Mat. 27.23. And they are urgent to have this pu∣nishment of the cross inflicted on him before any other, as being the most cruel, lingring and shameful death of all. The offender was exposed alive to the view and mockery of all people: hanging on a tree he was accursed, Deut. 21.23. All kinde of hanging, not onely among the Jews, but among the Romans also, was of most extreme infamy and disgrace;
as both Seneca and Livy testifie. Seneca e∣pist. 101. Liv lib. 14. And this seems to be the reason, that he who is hang'd on high, is judged in a manner unworthy to tread on the earth with his feet: and therefore he is lifted up from it. Wherefore Christ that he might make himself of no account, did under∣go this most vile and accursed kinde of death, and took that curse upon himself that was due to us, Gal. 3.13. But wherefore would God have his Son rather to be crucified then other∣wise punished; the reason was saith Ter∣tullian, That he who overcame by the tree, to wit the Devil, by his envious working, might be overcome also by the tree. Se∣condly, that by his suffering of the most cruel punishment, he might procure for us a most copious redemption, by satis∣fying to the full the Divine justice: so o∣thers, and from hence cometh our chief∣est consolation. Thirdly to satisfie the figures and oracles of the Prophets, Ità S. August. lib 6. de Civ. Dei. c. 32. in the which it was fore-signified: For the brasen serpent being lifted up in the wil∣derness, Num. 21. Joh. 3. & the sacrifices
which were lifted up on high, Levit. 7. were the types of Christ crucified. And as Isaac bare the wood whereon he was afterwards laid, Gen. 22. so likewise did Christ the wood of the Cross. One part of the mount Moriah was without Jerusalem, wherein S. Jerom informs us out of a tradition of the Jews that Isaac and Christ likewise were offered up. This place was afterwards called the mount of Calvary: by reason of the sculls of the condemned that were there put to death. Here Adams scull as some think was found, whom Tertullian and other of the Ancients deemed to have been buried under the Cross; some also affirming, that the bloud of Christ hanging upon the Cross, ran down upon Adams scull, which manifests to us, that he and his posterity beleeving in Christ should be saved by his bloud: and this was beleeved by the godly, as S. Cypri∣an averrs in a Discourse of the Resurre∣ction. Which opinion is pious enough, but I know not how true. In general, it is evident that from the bloud of
Christ there is a vertue derived most ef∣ficacious unto salvation. Let us in the mean time bewail our sins, for the which Christ was pierced through with nails: and as the Israelites looked on the bra∣zen serpent, let us in like manner, by the eyes of faith look upon Jesus, and we shall be healed; and as much as in us lies let us be crucified unto the world: for this cause let him be wholly fixed in our heart, who was wholly fastned upon the Cross for us. And so pass we from his crucifixion to his death. The Lamb of God expired on the Cross, at the same time that the even∣ing lamb, or the daily sacrifice was offer∣ed up in the Temple: to wit at the ninth hour with the Jews, which an∣swers to our third hour in the afternoon. The death of Christ was voluntary, no man took his life from him; but he laid it down of himself, Joh. 10.18. which is certainly apparent from his strong cry on the Cross, when others being about to die, lose their speech, and do onely
wheez in the throat. Not without cause said the Centurion greatly admiring: This is the Son of God, Mat. 27.54. The bowing of his head sheweth the same, whereas other men die before they bow their head. And because the death of Christ was voluntary, therefore merito∣rious; otherwise he would not have been punished for our disobedience. Se∣condly, his death was innocent, which the whole History proveth, and the con∣fession of his enemies. Thirdly, his death was precious, the dignity whereof was from the dignity of the Person, and so equivalent to eternal death. Christ ought to die by reason of the justice of God. Sin is an offence or inju∣ring of him who is mans Summum bo∣num, or highest good, and therefore to be expiated by the greatest punishment: he therefore that was our surety was to taste of death, by reason of the truth of God, who spake concerning the fruit of the forbidden tree, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die, Gen. 2.17.
It behoved Christ to die for the ful∣filling of the prophesies, and by reason of the prediction of Christ himself con∣cerning his death, Joh. 12.33. For the confirmation of the Testa∣ment of his grace, which was to be per∣formed by the death of the Son of God, Heb. 9.6. From the death of Christ, as it were out of a fountain floweth our redempti∣on: hence primarily is justification, Rom. 8.34. hence regeneration, or the restau∣ration of corrupt nature; our old man is destroyed by the power of Christs death, and sanctification is obtained: the death of Christ doth much weaken ori∣ginal sin in a Christian, and although the death of Christ be past, yet to this present time it doth mortifie our sins: because its vertue and efficacy endureth for ever. If so be that we apply this uni∣versal remedy of the heavenly chief Phy∣sician to our hearts. Let us therefore with the Apostle exult for joy and say, a Mors mortis morti mortem, mors morte re∣demit. O death where is thy sting, &c. 1 Cor. 15.55.
This bondage of death Jesus under∣took that he might procure unto us the liberty of eternal life. True real death seiz'd upon him, that we might attain to true life, saith S. Ambrose. But if Christ died for us,  why then must we die?  We answer, Our death is no satisfaction for sins, but an admoni∣tion to us of the reliques of sin inherent in us: a cleansing us from them, and a passage into eternal life. Holiness is the end of our redemption, let us not then indulge our selves in pleasures. The most sweet Jesus vouchsafed to die for our sins, and because of this his unspeak∣able love, we should rather choose to die, then to rush into sin▪ But, oh the misery of it! most holy Jesu, how few mortals are so affected with sorrow for the do∣lours of thy death, that they love holi∣ness of life and piety. Christ laid down his life for his friends, yea for his enemies: let us in like manner love others if occasion require; which thing the most holy Apostle S. John ur∣geth in his 1 epist. ch. 3. v. 16. This love
is heartily to be wished, but can hardly be expected from a sort of men too too cru∣el. To conclude, death to beleevers is nothing but a disguised thing to scare them; let us therefore be faithful unto death and not afraid to die. Hitherto of the death of Christ, his bu∣rial follows. The bodies of the dead ought to be decently buried. They are esteemed in∣humane who neglect this. Amongst these were the Lotophagi, Historici & Geo∣graphici passim. a people of A∣frica, who cast the bodies of their friends into the sea. The Sabeans, who threw the carcases of kings amongst dung-hils. The Scythians, who to honour those whom they loved, did in their banquets devour their dead carcases. The Hyrca∣nians, who gave them to dogs or wilde beasts. All these are detestable. But although the death of Christ were ignominious, yet his burial was ve∣ry honourable. For he was buried by men of quality; Nicodemus a great Lawyer, and Joseph a Counceller and Citizen of Jerusalem. These were disciples before
but secretly, now they appear openly; so great was the vertue of his passion. Moreover, many noble and religious wo∣men helped forward this work. The ho∣nour of his burial is evident also by other circumstances: his body was embalmed with abundance of spices and wrapped in costly fine linen. Christ was buried in a new sepulchre, hewn out of a rock, lest that if another should have been buried there, another might have been said to have risen; as the Fathers note. The New man would be buried in a new se∣pulchre, and in a garden, that his body might be sowen there, and bring forth the fruit of resurrection. That as in a garden Adams sin was committed, so in a garden it might be expiated and satis∣fied for. As his nativity was from the unstained bed or chamber of a Virgin; so likewise his burial might not be defi∣led by any dead body. He would be bu∣ried in another mans sepulchre, that as he was born in another mans house, so being dead, he might lie in a grave that was another mans. And he would not
have a proper burial place, or sepulchre of his own, who had no proper cause of death in himself. The sepulchre of Christ was a place of the chiefest devo∣tion. S. Jerom speaking of Paula saith, That at her entrance into the sepulchre of the Lord, she kissed the stone and the very place where Christ had lien. The pilgrimage to this glorious sepulchre hath been most famous from all parts of the world. The Turk a most malicious enemy, getteth much profit by the visi∣tation of the place; which for this cause, or for fear of punishment, he hath not yet destroyed. I think it not necessary for us to take so long a journey, we may meditate on this matter more safely at home. And although there is appointed a solemn procession at Lovain for the memory of Christs burial, where the blessed Virgin and other women sorrow∣fully following the dead corps, are wont to be represented; yet we doubt not but that a pious soul may perform this with∣out such pomp or ostentation. Christ was buried, that the types of
the Old Testament might be fulfilled; to wit that of Jonah and others. As Jo∣nah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so Christ foretold concerning himself, Matth. 12.40. Be∣sides, he was buried, that it might appear that he was truly dead: and that we might know that our sepulchres are sanctified by his being buried; no more to be horrid places, but sweet and quiet chambers, in which we may rest until we shall be raised up; hence our burying pla∣ces are called , places for the dead to rest or sleep in. We therefore being buried with Christ by baptism into his death, ought to walk in newness of life, Rom. 6. v. 4. where the Apostle alludes to a rite of baptism, which was by plunging: for his body who was baptized in this man∣ner, was in a sort buried in the waters. And they that were baptized were wont to be thus plunged thrice in the waters, by an allegorical similitude to represent Christ dead, and three days immersed or drowned in the Sepulchre. But S. Chry∣sostom
saith, the tropological meaning of it was, to signifie that as Christ by his corporal death is dead unto this world, so we likewise by a spiritual death should die to the same world; and to sin its lord and king; and with a purpose to lead a new life, as Tertullian expounds it; Let not sin therefore reign in our mor∣tal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof: let us not be buried as it were in sleep and wine, but let us reckon our selves dead unto sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The death of Christ is explained, pro∣ceed we to his descension into hell. Hell in the Scriptures is taken many ways: properly for the place of the dam∣ned, metaphorically for the greatest sor∣rows and infernal anguishes: moreover for the grave, and sometimes for extreme ignominy. Hence arise the diversities of opinions concerning this Article. Some interpret it of the grave, but if so, the same should be twice put in, and decla∣red by a more obscure one, which in so perspicuous a Compendium it is not
likely would be done. It matters not much that this Article was left out in the Nicene Creed; perchance the reason of it was because it never came into dis∣putation. Howsoever Eusebius who was present at the Council, delivereth the same; as also S. Athanasius in his Creed, received by the Church, although he omits the burial. Others expound it of the torments of hell. Which if they un∣derstand thus, that Christ before his death felt torments equal to the infer∣nal, this opinion is pious enough; but if their meaning be, that after his death he did really feel the pains of hell, it is impious: for before this all things were finished. If we say as Durandus doth, that Christ descended into hell vertu∣ally, or effectively, that is to destroy hell in the behalf of the faithful: or if with others, that Christ descended to the lowest degree of exinanition, or empty∣ing himself: verily these opinions con∣tain nothing in them of falshood: But some refer this descension to the soul of Christ. This opinion that you meet
with in Noels Catechism, our Church seems to approve of; in this sense Christ is said to have descended into hell, that he might demonstrate himself to be Conquerer over the devil, and all the in∣fernal host, that he might strike terrour into the devils, and triumph most pow∣erfully over them. Many write many things concerning this matter. But my judgement is, that this Article ought not to be handled subtilly or scrupulous∣ly, Our English Confession hath so ap∣pointed it in the third Article. Even as Christ died for us and was buried, so also is it to be beleeved that he went down into hell. Here is nothing determined of the manner of his descension. Let idle wits by their curious speculations search out this, and here if I be not deceived they will finde somewhat to do. Let it suffice us to beleeve, that Christ de∣scended into hell, and hath performed all things necessary to our salvation: but for the manner how, this hereafter will be better known. The Papists who have been bold very
accurately to describe the parts of hell, are not yet agreed, whether Christ de∣scended onely into the limbo of the fa∣thers, or into Purgatory also: whether he delivered any from thence out of his special grace and favour, as Thomas doth conjecture: or whether he delivered all, as Bonaventure and Gabriel: or whe∣ther also he descended into the place of the damned, as Bellarmine affirms. They feign that he descended that he might deliver the Fathers out of limbo: but we say plainly that limbo is not known or mentioned in Scripture, that the souls of the godly were in the hand of God, not in hell; that the Fathers were re∣deemed by vertue of the merit of Christ, the Lamb slain from the begin∣ning of the world, and not at length freed by Christs descension. Neither is it any obstacle,  that Christ did preach to the spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3.19.  That place is thus explained, Christ by the spirit, that is, by his divi∣nity, went, that is, being sent to the Church by the Father from the begin∣ning,
and preached, not by himself, but by Noah to the spirits in prison, that is to men, whose souls are now in hell, who were in time past disobedient, that is be∣fore the floud, while they then lived. But it may be objected out of the same Apostle,  that the Gospel was preached to them that were dead, 1 Pet. 4.6. Here lieth the fallacy in the words or sentence;  The Gospel is preached to the dead, that is, to those who were dead, when Peter wrote these sayings: but it was preached to them when they were yet alive. Others with S. Austin interpret this verse of the Gentiles being spiritually dead before conversion. I confess many places out of the Fa∣thers are brought against the Prote∣stants: but this consequence holds not good; some affirm it, therefore it is true. We must know also, that the Fathers have uttered many things Rhetorically concerning the efficacy of Christs de∣scension into hell, and have amplified them in lofty expressions: acting like Ecclesiastical Orators, and therefore ma∣king
use of Rhetorical figures, not onely to teach magisterially, but also to per∣swade and move the affection. Let o∣thers contend concerning this matter: but thou O. Christian soul, hold this faith, that thou hast faith sufficient to beleeve, that the descension of Christ is the cause of thy ascension on high. And so from the degrees of Christs exinanition, and the state wherein he was, before he made it evident that he was alive, let us pass to the degrees of his exaltation, amongst which the first that offers it self is the resurrection from the dead. The third day he rose again from the dead. Christ is said to have risen again on the third day, not fully complete, but being begun: which is typified by Jo∣nah, Matth. 12.40. It seemeth not∣withstanding that Christ was not three nights in the Sepulchre, no not so much as by parts; but onely the night of the Sabbath, and of the Lords day. Here therefore it is to be noted that their days
were reckoned from one mid-night  the other. Christ was in the Sepulchre part of Good Friday, all the Sabbath day, and part of the Lords day, on the which he rose early in the morning. And so the Romans who then ruled over the Jews, did compute their days and nights. Christ rose on the third day: not sooner, that it might manifest him to be truly dead: not later, because he would not hold his disciples and others any longer comfortless. He rose, that by his resurrection from the dead he might declare himself with power to be the Son of God. And this was merely an effect of his divinity, to quicken himself by his own vertue and power; wherewith, being the Son of God, he was invested. That the Father is said to have raised the Son is no hinderance to this, Eph. 1.20.  This cometh to pass by reason of the unity of essence in both,  which is so great, that whatsoever the Father doth, the same also is the Son said simply to do.
He rose that he might demonstrate himself to have satisfied for our sins, and to have purchased true righteous∣ness for us. Unless he had risen, we had been yet in our sins, all our faith would have been in vain, 1 Cor. 15.17. He rose for his own and his Fathers glory, for the dignity and authority of his Person. Be∣cause of his office, he ought to reign for ever, and always to intercede for us. He rose for our salvation, for our justificati∣on, for our regeneration, for our resurre∣ction and glorification. That he might raise up our bodies at the last day; the head being risen, the members cannot but rise: like as Adam brought death upon himself and his posterity, even so Christ life; the Lord makes the faithful coheirs of his glory; let us therefore rise again to the life of grace, and perse∣vere in the same. It is objected that these benefits flow from the death of Christ.   We answer, that Christ did merit them by his death: but they are declared and applyed by his resurrection. And if it be further said,
that these benefits were given to the faithful beleevers under the Old Testa∣ment; our answer is, This was done in respect of the resurrection to come. But may some say, the ungodly also shall rise again. They shall rise again in∣deed, but to the judgement of condem∣nation, not of absolution. And these things out of many concerning the re∣surrection of Christ. His Ascension follows. Jesus like the Sun at his full meridian ascendeth the highest Heaven. He a∣scended from the mount of Olives to Bethany, and not onely into the aereal and starry heaven, but also into the em∣pyreal, into the seat of the Blessed. He a∣scended according to his humane nature.  But we have it S. John 3.13. the Son of man was then in heaven.  But this was spoken by communication of idioms, whereby the properties of either nature are attributed to one and the same Per∣son of Christ, by what name soever ex∣pressed. He was there then according to his Divinity.
But he that descended hath also ascended,  saith the Apostle,  Ephes. 4.10. He did not descend as man, it seems therefore that neither did he ascend as man. But here the kinde or manner of the predi∣cation is changed; the Divinity descend∣ed, that is, did shew it self in a place where before it had not so discovered it self. And even as Jesus did discover or manifest himself in his humane nature, in like manner he ascended. He ascended on the fourtieth day af∣ter the resurrection; in this space he would instruct his disciples concerning his kingdom. He ascended visibly and locally: he ascended into heaven. But S.  Paul saith, he ascended far above all heavens,  Eph. 4.10. That is say some, far above all the starry heavens: others determine that this doth not denote the sublimity of the place, but the excellen∣cy or highness of the Divine Majesty; because he hath all things in subjection under him. Some will have Christ to be in a void space above the heaven, and with his feet to stand upon the outmost
surface of the highest Heaven where the Saints live under him. But the words of the Apostle compel us not to the belief of this. He may be said to have ascend∣ed far above all heavens, when he a∣scended into the supreme or highest Heaven, and to the most worthy place therein: even as we say, not onely he that gets up to the very top, is said to a∣scend a tree or a tower, but he also that climbs up to the higher boughs or steps, although he stays beneath the top. But it may be objected,  that Christ promised he would be with us to the end of the world.  But this is to be understood of the Deity of Christ, of his grace and power spiritually, not of his humanity, and corporally. Christ a∣scended, that he might intercede for us: and although the intercession of Christ was before his ascension; yet it depend∣ed upon this glorious intercession. It was made before in the worth of the sa∣crifice that was to be offered, but now of that which hath been offered. Secondly, Jesus ascended as an eagle, that we al∣though
but worms, may ascend with him. Adam had shut up heaven, Christ opened it again. And although Enoch and Elias ascended before him, yet it was not by their own but Christs power, by which also he himself ascended. Thirdly, Christ ascended, that he might give the Holy Ghost: and although he was given before, yet it was in regard of the Ascension, and after it in a more plentiful manner. Hitherto of the Ascension of Christ, his sitting at the right hand of the Father followeth. The right hand is attributed to God per , that is, by a borrow∣ed speech from men, and it signifies the chiefest power and glory. To sit at the right hand, is a phrase taken from the custom and manner of kings, who place those whom they honour at their right hand, and cause them whom they set o∣ver the affairs of the kingdom to sit to∣gether with them. So Christ is said to sit at the right hand of God the Father, because the Father, after he had finish∣ed
our redemption on earth crowned him with the chiefest glory, above all Angels and men in heaven, and declared him to be Head and King of the Church, by whom he would immediately govern all things both in heaven and earth, and whom he would have to be adored of all creatures, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, saith the Pro∣phet, Psal. 110. The sitting therefore at the right hand of God, is the singular and proper digni∣ty of Christ , God and man, conferred upon him by the Father after his Ascension. And it consists, First, in the perfection of his Person, or the equa∣lity of the Word with the Father, which indeed he did not then first of all re∣ceive, but it being vailed in the time of his humiliation, he did again make ap∣parent or manifest. Secondly, this digni∣ty consists in the perfection of the hu∣mane nature; which, the infirmities be∣ing put off or laid aside, is adorned with supereminent and surpassing excellency of gifts, wisdom, and power. Thirdly,
this dignity consists in the perfection of his office, because Jesus is constituted or appointed Head of the Church. This true Trismegist is King, Prophet, Priest. And although he was the Head of the Church before, yet was not that accord∣ing to both natures nor always exalted. Fourthly, the dignity of Christ con∣sists in the perfection of his honour, be∣cause he ought to be acknowledged and extolled by all as Lord of all. All things are put under Christs feet by reason of his glorious victory, and although some things may seem to be refractory to him; yet they are to be repressed by him at his will and pleasure. It may be objected against the sitting of Christ at the right hand of God the Father,  that S. Stephen saw him stand∣ing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55. But by this posture he expressed Christ his readiness to assist them that are his Champions;  as when Christ is said to sit at the right hand of God, thereby is shown the Majesty of Christ glorified; therefore both of them are
true in a diverse respect. Besides, some may argue after this manner, The right hand of God is every where; the hu∣mane nature sitteth at the right hand of God; therefore it is every where. But in this argumentation you are to say, there are four terms, as in this which fol∣lows; The sea compasseth the whole world; a certain city is situate by the sea: therefore a certain city compasseth the whole world. Neither also doth the uniting of two inseparable things re∣quire, that wheresoever one is, the other should be; but onely that they are somewhere together, and not at a di∣stance. This is evident in the soul and in the head, which are united insepara∣bly: and yet, not wheresoever the soul is, there is the head, when as the soul is in the feet, where the head is not. But let us give over this subject, and be of good courage. Christ sitteth at the right hand of God the Father, interceding for us. O how great a comfort is this? Let us therefore embrace the Lord Jesus with our chiefest love, and do his will:
so we shall be blessed when he shall come to judgement: of which there is mention made in the next Article. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. That word [From thence] designs the place from whence the Judge shall come, namely from heaven. He shall come from thence, whither the disciples saw him ascending, Acts 1.9, 10. And although the work of judgement may be assigned to every one of the Persons, according to decree, consent and autho∣rity; yet the exercise of this visible act, and the execution is committed to the Son, as he is the Son of man. As for that place,  Joh. 5.22. The Fa∣ther judgeth no man: to it we say thus, He judgeth no man alone and without the Son,  but by the Son. Neither doth that of Christ in any wise contradict this, when he saith, Joh. 12.47. I came not to judge. He speaks there concerning his first coming in the flesh, in the which he came not to condemn the world, but to save it;
and not of his second coming, which is unto judgement. Neither is that which is said of the Apostles, that they shall judge the twelve tribes, Matth. 19.28. and of the Saints, that they shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.7. any let hereunto; for this shall be done of them by way of approbation, not of authority. The end of Christs Advent or Co∣ming is explained by the distribution of the subjects; that he may judge both the quick and the dead: under which terms all men altogether are compre∣hended, who are said to be quick of dead, in respect of that state which pre∣cedes the judgement: The quick being they whom the last day of judgement shall surprize alive, who in a moment shall be changed from a mortal condi∣tion to an immortal. The dead, those, who from the beginning of the world have departed this life, and before the last day, shall be raised up at length by the trump of the Arch-angel, and pre∣sented before the judgement-seat of
Christ: and the Angels are included al∣so who kept not their first station, Jude, v. 6. and are therefore reserved in chains under darkness, to the judgement of the great day, 2 Pet. 2.4. It may be objected,  that the devil is now judged, Joh. 16.11. and he that be∣leeveth not is condemned already, John 3.18. We answer,  that this is done in part, to wit, in the word of God, in their own consciences, or in respect of the begin∣ning of their punishment, but they shall be judged afterwards, in regard of the manifestation and promulgation of the judgement already made; the exaspe∣ration of the punishment, and the con∣summation of the torments both of bo∣dy and soul. The last judgement shall be set up, that every one may receive what he hath done in his body, whether it be good or evil; and that the justice of God may be published to the praise of it. Since God is just, it is necessary that it be perfectly well with the good and
godly, and that the wicked and impious be for ever miserable; this very thing is not done in this world, therefore it is righteous to recompense to them who trouble the godly, trouble; and to you who are troubled rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, 2 Thess. 1.7. That there shall certainly be a judge∣ment, this we know against the Epicu∣reans; but the year, moneth, day and hour, we know not; no, not the Angels in heaven, Mark 13.32. The Fanaticks err, who either out of an enthusiastical revelation, or Arithmetical calculations, and Astrological prognostications, do set down the time when the judgement shall be, but without a right judgement. Let us in the mean time prepare our selves all our days, and moments of our lives for the coming of Christ; and let us take heed lest that day come upon us unawares, and finde us unprepared. The last day is hid from us, that we might watch all our days: it is always un∣known, that it may be always expected;
let therefore that terrible trumpet ever make this noise in our ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgement. The second part of the Creed was concerning the Son of God, the third follows, of the Holy Ghost. I beleeve in the Holy Ghost. We are to beleeve, that the Holy Ghost is God, and that he is the third Person of the Trinity, equal to the Fa∣ther and the Son in all perfection. This is clear out of Sacred Writ, and the do∣ctrine of the Church, which do render equal glory, to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Yet it may be said,  that he who re∣ceives from another, is not his equal. But the Holy Ghost hath received something from the Father and the Son: Ergó. This is true of him who receiveth part from another,  in time, successively, and by grace: but the Holy Ghost received from the Father and the Son the whole essence from eternity and by nature. Some may object, that he that is sent,
is not equal to him that sendeth: but this doth not hold, where the mission or sending is by a voluntary consent. He is called a Spirit, because he is a spiritual essence, and that by way of ex∣cellency, because he is far above all cre∣ated spirits. It may be objected,  that the Father and the Son are by way of eminency Spirits, and holy. So they are indeed absolutely,  and by∣nature: but this is attributed to the Holy Spirit by appropriation, as it were a characteristical note, and because his proper office is to sanctifie the elect. He breathes into our hearts good mo∣tions, and he himself was breathed from the Father and the Son, as from one principle or beginning: and this is that which the Oriental or Eastern Fathers do teach, when they say that the Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father, by the Son: even as we say an apple co∣meth from the root by the branch, yet the root and branch are not two princi∣ples. The pool ariseth from the river,
and the river from the fountain: but the water of the fountain, river and pool, are all one and the same. The Father as the fountain, begetteth the Son, as the river. The Father and the Son, as the fountain with the river breathe forth the Holy Ghost, as it were a pool: yet their essence is one and the same. The late Grecians are accused, because they think that the Holy Ghost did not pro∣ceed from the Son: neither will I con∣tend very much to excuse them; but if their doctrine were with moderation explained, perhaps the difference be∣tween them and us may seem to be in words and not in the thing it self. And if any urge us more morosely, that it is no where said, that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Son; we will not contend about the word, if he be grant∣ed to be the Spirit of the Son no less then of the Father; and to be sent from the Son as from the Father; which is all one in sense as to proceed. Neither do I beleeve that the Grecians will deny this. Certainly this procession is done in
an unspeakable manner, and how it may be done, is not for us to search over∣curiously. The Spirit is said to be Holy, because he is essentially holy; when as the An∣gels are so by the grace of creation, be∣leevers by the grace of adoption. And again he is said to be Holy, because he is the Author of true or perfect holi∣ness: he is a quickening Spirit, because he is the efficient cause of spiritual life in our souls. The body is dead without the soul, and the soul is dead without the Spirit. Let us say with David, O Lord renew a right spirit within us, Psal. 51.10. and so the short third part of the Creed is briefly explained. The fourth follows, I beleeve the holy Catholick Church. I beleeve the Church was, is, shall be, and that I am a lively member thereof: I beleeve not in the Church: the affiance of the heart is to be direct∣ed onely to God. This Church is a company of men that are called, who do embrace the word of God, and that
rightly use the Sacrament. The Church is called Ecclesia, from the Greek word , to call forth. The conven∣tion or meeting of Citizens amongst the Athenians, who were called forth by the Cryer from the rest of the com∣pany to hear the judgement of the Se∣nate, had that name given them: an∣swerable to which there are a company of the faithful amongst Christians, who by the preaching of the word are called out of the kingdom of the devil, to hear Gods will and pleasure. The Church is called holy, because it is san∣ctified by the most precious bloud of Je∣sus, because by his merits it is purified through the word, sacrament and faith, and because it is taken up in the holy exercises of Divine worship, and Chri∣stian charity. They are not true mem∣bers of the Church, who abroad in the world shine in sanctity, and at home a∣bound in iniquity: nor those, who are like to the lascivious Monks, whose body is in the Quire, and their minde in their chamber: of whom Innocentius
said of old, In the night they embrace venery, and in the morning they adore the Virgin. From outward sanctity we can∣not necessarily conclude the inward ho∣liness of the Church. But beloved, be you holy within and without. To be Saints and seem so is good, to seem and not to be such is worst of all. Feigned sanctity is double iniquity, saith S. Austin. To proceed, The Church is called Catholick, that is, Universal. This word is not written in the Scriptures, but after the times of the Apostles it be∣gan to be used. The Church is so called, because it is gathered out of all kinds of men throughout the whole world, and be∣cause it doth profess and approve of the Catholick doctrine of the Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles, by an una∣nimous consent. So Catholick is the same with Orthodox, and it is opposite to heretical: as it was first of all oppo∣sed to the Arrian heresie, and to others, not judging aright of the Trinity. And they were called Catholicks, who did
follow the true doctrine of the Divinity of Christ as it was expounded by the Nicene Council. This signification of Catholick is the most principal one. Where there is not an universality of the faith, there the universality of time and place is of no avail. If any one should say that the Church of Rome is Catholick in respect of place.  It is a contradiction in the adject;  be∣cause all and one do not agree; The U∣niversal and Individual, the whole and the part. Neither is the Romish Church Catholick in respect of the doctrine of it, because it is foully fallen from the faith, and fosters most grievous errours. Neither doth that make for it, that it is called Catholick. For it is not e∣nough to be so called, but to be such. We are not to look what is done, but what ought to be done. The Pontifi∣cians are called Catholicks by us, but either according to their own opinion, or ironically, even as they call us the Reformed. But ours is the true Catho∣lick Church, because the doctrine there∣of
was declared by the Apostles throughout the whole world, and be∣cause it is entertained and received by men of all sorts, because it was propo∣sed in all ages, although not in a like degree, and for that it is consonant and agreeable to Holy Writ. Let others please themselves in the beautiful shell of a name, we had rather obtain the ker∣nel of the thing. Hitherto concerning the Church, now let us treat something of the Com∣munion of Saints in the Church. Communion is a relation between two or more having something com∣mon. Saints are the members of the Church, which are said to be holy, either for the imputation of Christs righteousness, or their begun confor∣mity to the law, or for their separation from the world. The communion of Saints is the common possession and interest, which the members of the Church have a∣mongst themselves in Christ their
Head, and all his benefits and gifts. This communion therefore consists, First, in the union of the members of the Church with their Head Christ, which is not the subsistence of the bo∣dy of Christ within our bodies, but the inhabitation of the same Spirit. And truly they are three, yea four times blessed, whose fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: concerning which Saint John speaketh in his first Epistle, chap. 1. verse 3. Good God, what a noble as∣sociation is this? What is more de∣sireable in this life then to have per∣fect amity with God the Father and Christ, by faith, by hope, by reci∣procal love, by mutual colloquies, ob∣sequiousness, joy, by the communi∣cation of good things, as it is be∣tween a father and an adopted son, between the bridegroom and the bride? I beseech you therefore by the plen∣tiful effusion of the bloud of Jesus on the Cross, that ye walk with God, or have your conversation with God:
not in the darkness of unbelief, or of sin, but in the light of faith, grace and vertue. God by his nature is light, void of darkness, if ye would be joyn∣ed to him, ye must of necessity bid adieu to darkness, and your delight∣ful sins. The second part of this commu∣nion is the union of the members of the Church between themselves, We being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another, saith the Doctor of the Gentiles, Rom. 12.5. and from thence the holy man doth infer golden or precious precepts; amongst some other these, Let love be without dissimulation: Communicate or distribute to the necessity of the Saints: rejoyce with them that rejoyce; weep with them that weep: be of the same minde one towards another: as if he should say, I would have such a sym∣pathy or fellow-feeling among you Christians, as to be equally affected both with the good and evil things of all, whether in prosperity or adversity.
Beloved Auditors, yeeld ye obe∣dience to these admonitions of the Apostle. Be ye endued with huma∣nity, or brotherly love, charity, meekness, bounty: let it be a shame to Academians, who ought to be more rational creatures then others; to be given to anger, brawlings, envyings, disobediences, evil-speaking, inhu∣manity and revenge; shun these vi∣ces which become not the Students of humane learning, and after the examples of the Christians of the Pri∣mitive Church, Be ye of one heart and of one minde, Acts 4.32. And if ye shall forgive others the injuries that are offered unto you by them, ye shall also obtain remission of sins from your heavenly Father. The which is treated of in the following words: I beleeve the remission of sins. Forgiveness of sins is the will or good pleasure of God, whereby he forgiveth beleevers both the sin, and the punishment due to sin for Christs
merits sake. Yea, their most enor∣mous sins shall be forgiven; for it is repugnant to the infinite goodness of God to be overcome by any hu∣mane wickedness. He doth injury to God that despaireth of his mercy; rightly Saint Augustine against those words of Cain, Genes. 4. Mine ini∣quity is greater then that it may be forgiven. After this manner saith he, Thou lyest Cain, for the goodness of God is greater then the iniquity of all men; and elsewhere he hath written, That greater is the mercy of God then the misery of all men. Verily, it is a most excellent speech of his unto God in his meditations: Although O Lord, I have committed that for which thou mayest condemn me, yet thou hast not lost that whereby thou mayest save me. It is most true, for if a sinner do repent, the Lord will not remember his iniquities. Let the wicked forsake his way, and turn a∣gain unto the Lord, and the Lord will
have mercy on him, Isai. 55.7. In God there is omnipotent mercy, and merciful omnipotency; such is the benignity of his omnipotency, and the omnipotency of his benignity, that there is nothing that he will not, or cannot forgive a beleeving soul: yea, oftentimes beyond remission God be∣stows most abounding grace. What cannot repentance do? Who in the secular state sinned more enormously then Paul? Who in the religious more out of measure then Peter? Yet they by repentance did not onely at∣tain to the ministery, but also the ma∣gistery of holiness. But to explain this Article more fully. We must know, that God is the principal efficient cause of remission; He alone can forgive sins primarily, or by chief authority. But the Priests or Ministers of the Church are onely administring causes as they are mes∣sengers of the Divine forgiveness. God
onely of himself forgiveth sins, be∣cause he cleanseth the soul from the inward blemish or stain, and releaseth it from the debt of eternal death; but he hath not granted this to the Priest; to them notwithstanding he hath given the power of loosing and binding, that is, by shewing them they are loosed and bound, 4 Sent. Dist. 18. as Lom∣bard writes. Some may say,  that it is not agree∣able with the justice of God to forgive sin, and not to punish it. This is true,  if he punish it neither in the sinner, nor in another; to wit, the surety: But God hath punished sin in Christ. Some may object again, that it is an unjust thing to punish the inno∣cent for the offender. We answer, It is not, if the innocent party offer himself spontaneously to punishment, if he can go through it and get out of it; and if this tend to the glory of God, and the salvation of men,
all which conditions do meet very well in Christ. It may be further objected, that this remission of God is not freely bestowed; because satisfaction was re∣quired to the forgiveness of sin. But we say, the satisfaction required was not made by us, but by another. If we be urged still, that he who on such condition forgiveth, doth not forgive freely. It may be answered, It is true, unless the party that re∣quires it doth also give the satisfa∣ction: But God the Father hath gi∣ven his Son, that he might satisfie for us. Hitherto Of the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, or flesh, followeth. Credo resurrectionem carnis. I beleeve the resurrection of the body, or flesh. It is a very difficult thing to un∣derstand by the sense or perception of
corrupt reason, how or in what man∣ner the same body should rise again, after so many transmutations, and be reunited to the same soul: And there∣fore many in the Areopagus derided Paul, when they heard of the re∣surrection of the dead: yet by the light of faith it is most clearly ma∣nifest that there shall be such a re∣surrection; It will not be difficult to them to beleeve this, who do be∣leeve, that with God there is no∣thing difficult: the restitution of the body or flesh is by far easier then its first constitution or forming. It is of lesser concernment by much to re∣store that which hath been, then to make that which never had any be∣ing. He which could make all things out of nothing, can easily raise a∣gain our bodies out of something; to wit, restore them out of the dust of the earth: and why should we ad∣mire, that that could be born again, which hath had a being, when as
we behold that to have a being which never had any before. Holy Job in the Old Testament, an Evangelical man before the Gospel, doubted not of this thing: I know, saith he, that my Redeemer liveth; and after that worms shall consume this body of mine, yet in my flesh I shall see God: whom I shall see for my self and not ano∣ther, Job 19.25. Thy dead men shall live, saith Isaiah to the Lord, together with my dead body shall they arise, chap. 26. verse 19. And in the New Testament, the Lord Je∣sus, John 5.28. doth most appa∣rently attest the self-same thing: The hour shall come, in the which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice; and they which have done good, shall come forth unto the resurrection of life; but they that have done evil unto the re∣surrection of condemnation. S. Paul also very notably confirms the resur∣rection by very many arguments, 1 Cor. 15. the which arguments I desire
you to search out from thence. The Sadduces therefore have er∣red, who beleeved not the resurre∣ction, Acts 23.8. and the Epicure∣ans, who practise the like with them; to whom death is the utmost bound and end of all things. It may be objected out of Ecclesi∣astes, chap. 3. verse 19. that there is one and the same event both to man and beast. But the beasts rise not again, therefore neither do men rise again. To this we answer,  The Preacher speaks there according to the judge∣ment of a natural man, whom he brings in the speaker; and afterwards refutes his opinion: Moreover, he speaks of the general qualities of man and beast, but not the special; and he shews wherein the similitude holds between men and beasts; to wit, in the natural death; but he doth not speak of the state and condition after the natural death.
Besides, bodies shall arise again the same in number, and with perfection and beauty: in the same form, as it is likely, which men attain to, if they come to mans estate. Our bodies shall be like to the glorified body of Christ, , not , in quali∣ty, not in quantity; & aliqualiter, non aequaliter; and after some fashion, but not equally. Our bodies shall be spiritual, not in substance, but for certain qualities and proprieties: they shall have agility, subtilty, and be in∣corruptible. The Anabaptists err, who denie that bodies shall arise again the same in number: and affirm that at the se∣cond coming of Christ new bodies shall be created. Origen also was in an errour, who was of this opinion, that it should be an aereal body, not a carnal that should rise again: It is very warily warded in the Creed, that the very self-same flesh shall arise. For the resurrection is
of the same body that did fall: as the word it self implies. So far concerning the doctrine of the resurrection. That which remains for me to do, is to warn and admo∣nish all, yea and my self too, that even now we would arise to the life of grace, that by so doing we may hereafter arise to the life of glory, of which there is mention made in the last Article; I beleeve the life everlasting. In hell this is the state of the wretches there, that they have death without death, in a dreadfull manner; an end without an end, a defect with∣out defect: because that death always liveth, and the end is always begin∣ning, and the defect knows not how to cease: death destroyeth and ex∣extinguisheth not. God preserve and keep us from this eternity; which that he may do, let us repent, a∣mend our lives, correct our pride: for it is not so easie a thing to be saved
as men say. If we do this, we shall en∣ter into life everlasting. This life is the eternal being of those that live in heaven, which is an eternal well-being. It is cal∣led eternal life, not in regard of that part which went before, but of that which is behinde, because it is to en∣dure for ever. In this life there will be the ne∣cessary presence of all good, and the necessary absence of all evil. What∣soever shall be lovely will be there present, nothing shall be desired, that shall not be there: there shall be life without death, day without night, security without fear; pleasure with∣out grief, tranquillity without toyl, beauty without deformity, strength without weakness, rectitude without perversness or frowardness, love with∣out malice, truth without falshood, felicity without misery. The bles∣sed shall rejoyce for the pleasantness of the place which they shall pos∣sess;
for the delightful society in which they shall reign; for the glo∣rified body which they shall have; in regard of the world which they have contemned, of hell which they have escaped, yea in respect of God, whom they shall behold for ever and ever. In the life eternal there are the most choice delights, and the great∣est store of riches. The good things which are there exceed all understand∣ing, and therefore much more, that which can be said of them. I will therefore admire in silence, what I can∣not express by speaking. Lastly, it is to be noted, that this word Amen, is added to the Creed, as the seal of faith; as if a Christian should say, I beleeve all these things to be most true.
S. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. ult. cap. ult. Non alius est finis, nisi per∣venire ad regnum, cujus nullus est finis. There is no other end, but to attain to that kingdom, whereof there is no END.
