E712 12415793 61645
A NEW REMONSTRANCE FROM IRELAND: DECLARING The barbarous cruelty and inhumanity of the Irish Rebels against the Protestants there. ALSO AN EXACT DISCOVERIE of the manners and behaviour of the Irish Renegadoes here in England, with infallible Notes whereby they may be knowne and distinguished, together with the places they usually frequent, and many other things remarkable. LONDON, Printed for GEORGE TOMLINSON. 1642.
A Remonstrance of the manners and behaviour of the Irish Renegadoes, with many other Passages very remarkable. THe Irish Renegadoes go not without the company of women, whom they call their wives, but where they were married, or by whom, or when, God knoweth: but instead of a ring, they put a cord about their middles, and so it is concluded on very ridiculously. Their travelling here is most commonly by their false passes, which they make good in this manner. When they are in Ire∣land, they know that wheresoever they land, they shalbe fitted with a Scribe to make them any writing to fit them for any parts of England, go they where they will, and commonly most of them are for london, quickly getting acquaintance of Noblemens Footmen, and such like, and then they are sure to be provided of any bodily sustenance; and these kind of people doe rob the poore and the lame of all such provision as they should have given them at the gates. Now when these Renegadoes have beene so long in London, that they have gotten store of money and good cloaths, then downe they come about S. James tide to Bristoll in their old cloaths, and false Passes made at London, because they will beg by the way, and send their other cloaths by the Carriers, and when they are at Bristoll, away go the old cloaths, and put on their new, and then have they a false landing briefe, from Minhead or some other landing places neer adjoyning, and other false writings, as if it came from some great man of authority in Ire∣land, which shall certifie their great losses there, as if they were of the Gentry indeed, when as they never lay in a bed of their own in all their lives. They are exceeding prevailing by reason of the smoothnesse of their language, and get great store of money; for the countrey-gen∣tlemen and gentlewomen are soon won by them, giving them freely of any thing their house affords, when the distressed people of our owne nation shalbe sent empty away, with ill words, and many times stripes most cruelly. These kinde of people live at great expences: I have heard the Hostesse of their Inne in Bodminster Parish declare to some the last S. James tide, that five of these begging rogues in six dayes spent
seventeen pound at her house: and for their better sort of apparell, it is not mean, but of rich skarlet and gold lace: it may be thought, that they play the parts of Gipsies, or Juglers, and break shops in London for their costly things, which are of no small price, but as one of them said, his suit of apparell was not so little worth as 35 pound. In the time of Gondamores being here in England, he made great use of these, and sent them into all parts of the Kingdome for spies, giving them mo∣ney to buy perfumes and other trinkets; and by this means they as men of trades ranged all the kingdome over, and were so perfect in the height and strength of all our forts, and also in knowing the shelves and depth of all ports, that there was not any shipping, of what burden soever, but they knew well where such and such a ship of any burden might ar∣rive, and where not. They are wonderfull intelligencers, and give great advantage to the enemy: for not long since an English souldier being taken prisoner in Spaine, and questioned before the Dons and other great ones appointed for the time and place, they asked him how high the hoe at Plimmouth was, and he told them it was very high; nay said one of them, who had a writing in his hand, it is no higher then a man may well leap over with a staffe: now there were behind him two Irish Friers who had given this Noble-man this writing, with divers others the like, who had been any where in our Kings Dominions for the advantage of the King of Spaine their Master, as they affirmed. M. Scot, a worthy Divine, and the Preacher appointed to the English Companies in Vtright in Holland, having declared in three Books the damnable plots and devices of Gundamore whiles he was in England, Gundamore vowed his death, and gave good store of money to one of these renegadoes, absolved him of all his sins (as this animall thought) and sent him into Holland to murder this good man: this villaine ha∣ving been in Holland a whole yeer and a halfe to that purpose, at length came upon him unawares in a place where he meditated nigh the wals of the City under Pine trees, with his sword thrust him through the body, supposing he had kild him, and ran away with his sword naked in his hand; some souldiers being nigh at hand, met him, and held him, whilest others went to finde out the businesse; and when they found M. Scot groveling on the ground, they asked him how it was with him, and who had done this villanous mischief unto him? he answered, he did not know: then they brought this man to him, who, when he saw that he was not dead, was much vext, and said, art thou yet alive? and
he said, yea; and art thou he that hast done this unto me? he said, yea: M. Scot said, wherefore hast thou done it? and he said, if I have slaine thee, I am saved; if not, I am damned: so M. Scot prayed God to for∣give this murderer, and to forgive him, and so died: and the other being executed, repented not at all, but declared privately to some wherefore he did it. An Englishman coming to Dublin, and being landed, he asked if he might have any good lodging nigh at hand, an Irish man in a mantle hea∣ring it, told him, if he would go along with him, he should have good; the party went with him to a victualling-house, and sitting down in a chaire, called for some Tobacco (the Hostesse being a widdow, and not within) the Irish man told him he should have it presently: the Eng∣lish man drew his purse, wherein was good store of coyne, and putting his hand therein to draw out some money, the Irish man standing by, stabbed him with his skeane in divers places of the body, snatcht his purse from him, ran away, and threw his skene all bloudy over a cham∣ber doore where an English man being drunk lay asleep. The Hostesse coming in and seeing a man sitting in the chair as though he were asleep, went nigh him, and perceiving the blood run from him in abundance, cried with a lowd voice to her neighbours, and said, see here, the man is wounded, and they coming in, the man presently died, but none could tell how: the Officers searching the house found an English man on a bed sleeping, and the skene in his chamber which the man was kild withall, and they caried him to prison, and this innocent man was exe∣cuted for the Irish mans fact, as afterward the villain confessed. This Irish man travelled toward Waterford, and went into an English mans house on the way side not foure miles from Waterford, and staid there two dayes: his manner was to sleep all day, and drink all night: it be∣ing market day on the Saturday at Waterford, it happened that a Tan∣ner rode by which knew the man of the house, and he called to him, ask∣ing him how he did; the Host answered, he thanked God, very well, and made him drink; so away went the Tanner towards the market, promising to cal there again at his return: all this while the murderous villain lay listening on his bed, supposing that the Tanner would receive money at Waterford, and come there with it, thinking if he could get him to drink with him by any wile, he should pay deerly for it before they parted. Now it came to passe as he returned that he drank with him, and they were merry, and the Irish man kept him there till night, so that he was fain to lodge with him: towards midnight, the Tanner
being soundly asleep, this villain cut off his head, and wrapped straw a∣bout his body and it, and having a candle, and every body asleep in the house, he set the straw on fire, and away he went, and took the Tanners money, cloke, and horse in the field, and rode to Waterford towards the morning, and harboured himselfe in an Irish Ale-house: all this while the house burnt, the host, his wife and daughter slept, untill the straw in the beds burnt their feet, and did not know how to help themselves, but all the house being burnt, they thought that the Tanner and their mur∣derous guest had been likewise burnt: but when they searcht, there was nothing to be found but the Tanners bones, and his head severed from his body: then they suspected this villain, who took away the Tanners horse, and were confident of the trechery. Now some Irish neighbours and a Constable came and apprehended the Host and his daughter, and said, that they had robbed the Tanner of great store of money, and burnt the house of purpose; and so led them away to Waterford, and put them in prison, by the command of the Maior: but by great friendship they got liberty for their daughter to beg food for them, and to seek for this villain, and it happened, that as the maid was at the kay, prying to finde him out, that he came (with the Tanners cloke on his back) unto a Ma∣ster of an English Bark, to agree for his passage for England, and the maid knowing him by the cloke, cryed out alowd, and said, This is the man that hath burnt my Fathers house, and this is the Tanners cloke: the villain hearing this, ran through a long street with his sword drawn, and no Irish man would stirre to take him: but a souldier ran on him, and threw him down, and other souldiers did help to aid him; and being brought before Sir George Flowre, he confest the burning of the house, and on the gallowes, the other murder at Dublin, and he was hanged and quartered for this petty treason. The rebels lately took an English Minister, and put him to wonder∣full torments. First they did saw his legs off in the middle, and then after about the middle of the thighs, and then his arms above the wrists, and also above the elbow, and then cut two slices from his brests, al∣wayes charging him to alter his Religion, which he would not do for all their tortures; then they took a hot iron and pierc'd it to his heart, and so he died. The late Bishop of Limrick, Doctor Web, a Wiltshire man, a great Scholler, and a worthy house-keeper, being in the Castle of Limrick as long as the Castle held out, unto foure dayes, for he being buried in lin∣nen, as fit as the time and place required, after the yeelding up of the
said Castle, when it was in the Rebels hands, they took him out of his grave, and unstript him out of his linnen, and abused his body very base∣ly, in a most barbarous manner, without all Christianity or humanity. My Lord Esmond, who commands the Fort of Dungarvan, and hath done worthily in these late wars in Ireland, having one onely son, who before the wars was thought to be a good Protestant, but is now quite revolted, and sides with the Rebels, and sent his father word, that if he could at any time come within reach of him, he would sheath his sword in his bowels: his father receiving this answer, was much grie∣ved at it, having no more sons. Since this his message to his father, he being then and always among the Rebels, who know not well what to judge of him, sent word to his Father, that if he would not yeeld up the Fort of Dungarvan unto them, they would hang up his son: well, said my Lord, and I pray you do it; for if you do it not, if ever I take him, I will. This is according to the Scripture; for in the latter age shalbe the father against the son, and the son against the father. I pray GOD be mercifull to us all. There was at S. JAMES tide last an Irish man which came newly from Ireland, and went into Bristoll, and a Warder that kept the gate, with some others, took notice of him, and followed him; the Irish man went boldly where the Maior was in the Tolsie, and delivered him his landing briefe, hoping for a reward; it happened, that at the instant that there was an English Gentleman in the Tolsie which came newly from Ireland also, who beholding well this Irish mans countenance, at length took hold of him, and said, Gentlemen, this is the man which rifled me in Ireland, and took from me any money and my cloaths, and thereupon I will take my oath, and so he did, and they committed him to prison till the Sessions. Many of the Irish that are lately come over into England, and have robbed and undone many good English men, deny themselves to be I∣rish, and say they are Scots: that ye may the better discover them, ob∣serve these directions following. 1. Cause them to pronounce any word which hath the letter H In it, as Smith, Faith, &c. which they cannot do, not one among an hun∣dred, but pronounce Smith, Smit; and Faith, Fait. 2. To know their Religion, cause them to say their prayers, as the Pater Noster and the Creed, in English, which they cannot well do. 3. Vncover their bosomes, most of them weare Crucifixes, especial∣ly the women.
4. Concerning their false passes, separate them asunder, and so exa∣mine them. Captain George Courtney, a man of great discent, son unto Sir Wil∣liam Courtney, of the house of Pawdra in Devonshire, dwelling at Newcastle in Munster in Ireland, a man of great authority there, and chiefe Constable of Limrick Castle and Askeiton, with many other Ca∣stles under his command, being a man of other great revenues, and a no∣ble house-keeper, and one that delighted to see his tenants thrive, hath lately had a sharp and bitter time of his being in the Castle of Limrick, for he held out long after the city was in the enemies hands, and though there was a great want of victuals and ammunition, so that many were starved, yet had it not beene more for their sakes which were ready to starve then otherwise, he would never have come thence upon any con∣dition or quarter; he is a man of an undaunted spirit, and nobly minded, and religiously affected in the true way of a Protestant: the shallow∣nesse of my capacity is not able to give him the least part of his well-deservings, but being a Warder formerly to the Castle of Limrick; I presumed to write part of his worth, not forgetting the valiant minde of his eldest son Sir William Courtney, who lately hath adventured himselfe with a few in battell, against a multitude, and had a great vi∣ctory of the Rebels. Of the barbarous cruelty of the Irish ye heare daily, being people of no Religion, but as heathens, and cannot yeeld any account of their faith, therefore let us think of them as they are; and so I leave them, villanous and faithlesse for the most part. There are two or three towns in Ireland, Waterford, Washford and Dungarvan, very perillous for the advantage of the Rebels there, for of late the Dunkerks have brought thither great store of powder and other ammunition, especially at Dungarvan, and those Dunkerks arrive daily out of those parts, and take Barks both of the English and Scots, and bring in there, and the poore men of those Barks are prisoners, and in great misery. These things here inserted, being of truth, and not false, are the bet∣ter worth observing, wherefore, Gentle Reader, affoord me your good opinion, and I shalbe beholden unto you. THOMAS EMITIE.
