F930 12773843 93714
AN ANSVVER TO THE ARTICLES PREFERD AGAINST EDVVARD FINCH, Vicar of Christ-Church, by some of the Parishioners of the same. Whereunto is added a just and mo∣dest Reply, to a most Scurrilous, Scan∣dalous, and Malicious Pamphlet (as by the Title may appeare) of an un∣certaine AVTHOR. By EDVVARD FINCH, Vicar aforesaid. Printed in the Yeare, 1641.
TO THE READER. READER, ENvious Pamphlets, and scurrilous Frontispieces, the deare delight, and itch of this Scribling Age, are but ad Populum phalerae, rather the act of Malice, then Ingenuity. For my part, I am Vir dolorum, The chastisements of my youth∣full fraileties are upon me, and so to retort virulent language upon my Delator, were more to betray, then fortifie my innocence. It was not of old, Deus in turvine, God in the whirlewind, or in the earthquake, but In au∣ra tenui, in the still voice. Certainely, 'twold have argued more of God in the man, if hee had beene lesse blustring in his distractions. To thrust out onely the right Eye was modest cruelty in Naash the Ammonite; But Philistinelike to put out both Eyes, and to pro∣duce
the Sampson a laughing stocke, this is at least, Laesa patientia. To murther me in my Morality, in my Religion, to make me the peoples scorne, to condemne both my person and function to a night more horrid then that of Egyptian darknesse. But as David of Shimei, forbid him not, it may be the Lord will looke upon mine affli∣ctions, and do good unto me for his cursing me this day. Leaving the wretch to the re∣pentance of his fact, and the pardon of his and my good God; my businesse now makes to thee Gentle Reader, Let me in the bowels, of our Saviour implore thee, impartially and without prejudice, to peruse the briefe and modest contents of my just and forc't Vindi∣cation. In this doing thou shalt at once both oblige and felicitate Thy much humbled, E. F.
MY ANSVVERE TO EACH ARTICLE in Order, as I delivered it be∣fore the Grand Committee. Article 1. FIrst, That the said Master Finch is very officious and observant in worshipping the great Idoll lately erected in the said Church, viz. the Altar. TO the first, I utterly denyde and doe any offi∣ciousnesse or observancie in worshipping the Altar, as is alleged: onely thus much I con∣fest, That I never came into the Temple to execute my Ministeriall Function, but I gave a decent reverence to God, being his owne house, and not on∣ly at the Administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but also when I came to the Font at the administration of the Sacrament of Baptisme, and with as much reverence and humility, appearing be∣fore so great a Majestie, whose unworthy Minister I was, and am, when I was conducted by the Officer into the Pulpit.
Artic. 2. That he exacteth sometimes twenty shillings a piece, and many times more, for funerall Sermons, himselfe seldome preaching any of them, and affirmeth his Pulpit to bee his Shop, and therefore must improve it to the utmost. To the second I confest, that I demanded for the most part of the most able sort, twenty shillings for a Funerall Sermon; to those of an inferiour rancke, I either tooke ten shillings, or upon notice of their ina∣bilitie, (though they were desirous to bury their friend in a fashionable way, being the last duty, or of∣fice of love they could performe for them) I gave it them freely, and not onely forgave them my owne duties, but perswaded the rest of the Officers of the Church to doe the like. Artic. 3. That he is very carelesse and negligent in executing his Pastorall dutie, having appeared scarce twice in twelve moneths to Officiat the same, nay, not once in a yeare. To the third I confest, that by imprisonment, I was inforc't to execute my place by others, allow'd Preachers, sufficient and able men, my selfe not being sufferd to come abroad, without great charges, which I was not able to disburse. Artic. 4. 5. at he ordinarily preacheth in his Surplice.
That he also weareth his Surplice in going the Perambu∣lation of the Parish. To the fourth and fifth, I answered, that I held the wearing of the Surplice to be a matter of indiffe∣rencie in it self. But it was ever accustomably worne in that Church: For besides that it is Parochiall, it is also (by the Foundation of H. 8.) Cathedrall, where all solemnities of that nature are used. Artic. 6. That he hath not for many yeares beene resident in the Parish, but lets to farme his Vicaridge-house To the sixth I confest, I let my house, constrain'd thereunto by Imprisonment, as before, but is no Vi∣caridge house as is alleadged. Artic. 7. That he maketh no conscience of Oathes, but is a frequent violater of Gods holy Name, by often swearing thereby, with fearefull and horrid Imprecations, and execrations, as was most abundantly proved. To the seventh, I did (as it was fit for me and eve∣ry good Christian to doe) acknowledge Swearing to be a great and most abominable sinne; but denyed that I ever usde it frequently. But said, that if at any time through passion and forgetfulnesse I had offen∣ded my God that way, I humbly before them crav'd pardon of him in the first place, to give me grace,
that I might never offend any more in that kind, and entreated their Christian compassion to passe it by upon promise of amendment. Artic. 8. That he is a common haunter of Tavernes, and Ale∣houses, and is often and openly drunke. I denyde it, otherwise then upon necessitie, socie∣tie of Neighbours and friends, and I hope without offence, or scandall. Artic. 9. That he hath exacted excessive Fees, as ten shillings for a Christning. I denyde any exaction of Fees, other then my Predecessors had formerly taken, nor so much nei∣ther, and no ten shillings for a Christning, neither came it in proofe. Artic. 10. That before he will performe his duty in Burials, and upon other occasions, he will have his lawlesse and unconsci∣onable demands satisfied, whereof some of the Petitioners have complained to the Diocesan, but it seemes his correcti∣on was gentle, for no amendment hath followed. To the tenth I gave this Answer, that the Article answered it selfe; for it pretended a Complaint, and
a Correction, and n man is to be punisht twice for one fault. But before whom this complaint was, and when it was, for my part, I know not of it, nor ever heard of it. Artic. 11. That he hath demanded, and taken for Burials of Pa∣rishioners, ten and twelve pounds a piece, and hath shut, or caused to be shut up the Church doores, and not suffered the ground to be broken for Parishioners, untill his undue exactions have beene satisfied. To the eleventh I denyde it. Artic. 12. 13. 14. 15. That he hath administred the Communion to a dying wo∣man, when he was so drunke, that he forgot the Service, failed in rehearsing the Lords Prayer, and at his departure was not able to returne to his place of abode without leading. That at the same time he caused all present with the said woman to depart the roome, and then enjoyned the sicke par∣tie to confesse unto him all her secret sinnes. That being so alone with the said woman, he demeaned himselfe so uncivelly, and used such unseemely gestures to∣wards her, that she was faine to cry out for her husband to come in. That afterwards for performance of this good service a∣bout the said woman, he sent for a Fee of three shillings foure pence. To these, I confest that I was sent for to admini∣ster
the Sacrament to a dying woman, then dwelling at the George in Warwicke lane. I confest likewise, that I desired two or three women that were there to depart the roome, that I might speake one word to the sicke party. And it was this. If any sin trouble your conscience, you shall doe wel to reveale it, and I will give you the best comfort I can. Shee replyde, she thankt God there was none at all, where∣upon I called in the company immediatly, and wee went to the performance of what I came for, namely, the administration of those holy Misteries of the bo∣dy and blood of our blessed Sauiour. But that I was drunke I utterly denyde it, neither was it positively proved, but meerely by the threats of some of the Prosecutors, as I can make appeare, fairely extorted from them, and that in a doubtfull and ambiguous sence too. The husband and the women acquitted me before the Committee for any ill behaviour, or incivility, or any outcry made by the Woman. Artic. 16. 17. That November 5. 1639. he would suffer no Ser∣mon to bee Preached, unlesse out of the Collection for the Poore, he might have a Fee of thirteene shillings and foure pence, but finding the Collection to be small, he tooke ten shillings. That this last November 5. 1640. he would neither preach himselfe, nor suffer any other to preach. To these I answered, that I did acknowledge to have received ten shillings for a Sermon on the 5. of November last was Twelumonth, from my then Cu∣rate,
master Thomas Risdon, who came to me from the Parish, as he pretended, with an earnest request, that I would give way to it, and he would preach. But from whence the money came, I profest ingenuously, I did not to that day know, nor doe I yet. It is knowne in my whole practise, for neere upon 11. yeares, I have beene more carefull to adde then to diminish from the poore, which has causde some differences be∣tweene my selfe and some of the Parish, which is still an heart-burning, I am afraid. As for an instance, Master Whales 100. l. mis-imployde contrary to the expresse Will of the Testator; the mis-imploiment of which, I know has beene out of the Poores way many a summe of money, which they feele the smart of. I added over and above, that in regard of the Commemoration of that blessed and happy Delive∣rance on the above named day, at Saint Pauls Church whither some Reverend and grave Divine is, by the right reverend Father in God the Lord B. of London, chosen out of one of the Universities (my Church being so neere there was never any Sermon there be∣fore. But the Right Honourable the Lord Major, the Aldermen his Brethren, with the rest of the grave Citizens of every Parish, doe in a solemne manner go thither. And the next 5. of November I was never so much as askt. If I had, I would willing∣ly have given way to it. And this year there was one. Artic. 18. That he and his wife having for many yeares lived a∣sunder with much obloquie, he keepeth company with divers
women, suspected of incontinency. To this I answer'd, that I knew not any woman I kept company withall, any waies suspected of incon∣tinencie, unlesse it were by such scandalizing Pam∣phleters, who first raisde the same, and study nothing more then to take away men and womens reputati∣ons. Besides, I have answered those Calumnious as∣persions in two severall Courts, and beene freed in both, viz. In the Arches, and upon an Appeale against me in the Court of Delegates. Artic. 19. That hee hath since his being Vicar of the said Parish much opposed the Lecture, which without intermission hath for many yeares beene continued in the West end of the said Church, called the Old or Lower Church, (early in the mor∣ning on the Lords day) not suffering any one to preach the same, unlesse he the said Vicar might have extraordinary hire for permitting of it, viz. about fortie pounds at one time, and twenty pounds at another time, and divers other summes at other severall times, and at this present twenty pounds a yeare, and yet not contented therewith, he threatens to arrest the present Lecturer, unlesse he may have his unjust demands satisfied. This I denyde, And I wonder they were not a∣shamed to make it an Article, since divers of the Pa∣rish know the cleane contrary, and others also Nay, some did professe to me, that I had been very just and earnest in setting it up, and had not deluded them as
others did. And without my paines and zeale in it, they had conceived no hopes of it. For which they gave me many thankes, and said, I should find the love of the Parish ever hereafter, which you may see and judge by the presenting of these Articles, what the requitall of my love shewed to them has found. Artic. 20. That he detaineth and keepeth away divers Bookes be∣longing and appetaining to the said Church. To this I answered, that by direction from that Honourable Assembly, the Churchwardens recei∣ved the Booke of the Foundation of H. the 8. and the Register book of Burials, Marriages, and Christ∣nings, which was alwaies accustomably left in the Chest in the Church. My selfe having one Key, and each Church-warden another, according to a Canon in that case provided. Artic. 21. That many times in receiving his owne exacted Fees for Burials, hee hath also received Duties due to the Church-wardens for the use of the Poore of the said Parish, and de∣tained them to his owne use. To the last I denyed it, But admitted▪ I said I was responsable by Law; and when the accounts were brought in by the Church-wardens, which alwaies use to be at Easter, I would give satisfaction for what could be made justly appeare to be due to them on my part.
An Answer to the pretended proofs, which the Author hath falsly colected, and inserted in his Pamphlet. THat the Communion Table was removed, I grant it; but that was no particular act of mine, but a command from Authority at a publike Visita∣tion. I doe not remember that my selfe set any help∣ing hand to the removall of it; but if I did, I am sure I used no insolent or proud gesture, either at my ap∣proaches to it, departure from it, or passing by it, as is falsly suggested: but what I did was, as in my an∣swer to my first Article. That I bow at the Name of Iesus, I confesse it, in∣duced thereunto by the practice of the Church, for many hundred yeares, and conceiving it to be due by the Text, Phil. 2. 10. Concerning exacting of Fees (a thing for which I stand so much condemn'd) I have given an answer to the Articles in generall, but will give the Reader satisfaction in the particulars alleaged. And 1. For Master How: Hee was indeed an ancient Parishioner, and one to whom (so long as he liv'd) I was much beholding; and because he was one that honour'd the Church, and the well establisht Go∣vernment
thereof, and was indeed a Benefactor (if it may be so properly call'd) by his dayly sollicitati∣on of friends, to a good value. I gave order he should be decently and solemnly enterr'd, and attended on to his grave by those that appertaine to the Church (the Quire.) It was desir'd Master Risdon should preach, I gave way to it, but it was not perform'd, and the reason was this. There came an Order from Au∣thoritie, that there should be no night Funerals, upon a complaint made by the Heralds at Armes; the Ex∣ecutor of master How had notice of this, and that the whole Solemnitie must bee finisht by foure a clock; this was promisde, till past six we waited, at last Master Risdon said unto me, I neither will, nor dare preach, because it is past the Canonicall houre, and against the Order of the Lords, nor is it safe for you to bury it this night, let us attend no longer, but be pleased to give order that the Church doores may be shut up. Whereupon they were; presently after the Guests invited to the Funerall came with the Coarse, and knockt, I caused the doores presently to be open'd, and the Body was buried presently. Without a Sermon indeed, because of master Risdons former refusall, not out of any denyall of mine. It was never prov'd that I had five pound for a Sermon for him, and that master Ioyce, who was brought as a witnesse, knowes well, and so does one master Iohn Wright a Gentleman of our Parish, who was by at the agreement, and will testifie that it was for the ground, and the other Church-officers duties, which for my share came but to five shillings, besides the ground which was in the Chancell, and by conse∣quence,
the benefit of opening of it, and interring of the Body, totally belonging to me, for which I had three pound laid down, of which master Wright lent the Executor twenty shillings. 2. For master Darnton, I confesse, that he dying in my Parish, I did expect as large a proportion for my duties, as any that should come out of another Parish to Officiate in my Pulpit. He mistooke him∣selfe that said, I call'd it my Shop. Indeed, this I said, both upon that and the like occasion to himselfe and others, that it was my livelyhood, and that I had reason to make the best benefit, aswell as any of them of their shops; and this I hope may receive a favourable construction. That I deny'd absolutly that Doctor Holeworth should preach his Funerall Sermon, is utterly false, but as master Pettit, I pre∣sume, upon occasion will testifie for me, I said, I thought my Pulpit honour'd by him, and so indeed I doe, and ever shall; He is knowne to be a man so generally learned, a man of so rare abilities and in∣dowments of nature, and on whom God hath be∣stowed such an admirable gift and faculty in the way of his Preaching. That I spent my time as the Taverne while the Funerall was Solemnizing, is like the rest of the Authors Scandals, maliciously inser∣ted, and utterly false: neither did any such thing come in proofe. To the Articles concerning my Superstitious affe∣ction to the Surplice, and other (as he ignorantly termes them) Popish practices; which I thanke God, I am farre from, and hope in God, ever shall be. I
have answered to them before; and his vaine bab∣ling Tawtologie, and multiplication of termes, to infuse suspicion against me, in point of my Religion, into the peoples heads, my practice being known to be otherwise, shall not make me wast my time, and tire the Reader. As for the Article concerning my Drunkennesse, It was testified by Master Risdon, the Lecturer, who for feare of losing his quarterly Contribution might happily be drawne to say that, which I daresay, and he himselfe had since said, he will not, if he came up∣on his oath, sweare for a World. And it was ob∣serv'd by many, that hee gave his Testimony very faintly, and not without being jogged and egged for∣ward by one William Greenhill, a Chandler, that stood behind him, (That Arch-incendiary of Christ-Church Parish who, together with his brother in Law Iohn, I know not what to call him more, have beene the Plotters and Contrivers of these Articles in Parli∣ament against me, and the Procurers of witnesses to testifie upon them, as I will make appeare. Were it not by meanes of these two, I am confident, and so are many more besides me, that my selfe and Pa∣rishoners should live as lovingly, and as peaceably, as any Pastor and people in England. But this by the way. In briefe, I beleeve 'tis an hard matter to sweare positively when a man is drunke: but he that glanc't at that testimony, let him knocke at his owne breast, and see if he bee not guilty himselfe of that sinne, and in a higher measure too, which he laies to the charge of others, though thats no warrant for
me nor any other to sinne, because I can produce Presidents. Concerning the Administration of the Sacrament to the dying woman, her husband himselfe did be∣fore the Committee, and will any where else cleere me for any rudenesse, or any incivillity, which might cause her to cry out, and so did Mistresse Iohnson her Neighbour in Warwick Lane, and the rest of the Women then present. All that one of them said, was this, that she conceited me to be distemper'd in drinke, and that she we might; my distractions and griefes have been so many, my miseries and afflicti∣ons so great, that when it is well knowne I have nei∣ther eat nor dranke that day, by my lookes, discourse, and unwonted alteration of speech, I have been sup∣posed to be distemper'd, and I desire the Reader to judge of me in a Christian way, and to beleeve this to be true. The improbabilitie to tempt a dying wo∣man in an uncivell way, being in all mens opinions, so abominable, rediculous, that I should injure my selfe to God, about a confutation which the Witnes∣ses did for me. Concerning my Sermon which I Preacht on the 5. of November, about two yeares since, it was alleged by one Bamfoard, that I should deliver words to this effect, The Plotters in that businesse were but a few male-contented Persons, and that they desir'd at their death that this act might be forgotten, and that I should say, that I thankt God that it was so almost, and I hop't 'twould bee quite forgotten.
Should I have deliver'd any such Doctrine in a Pulpit, or spoken such words in any place whatsoe∣ver, upon the perprecation of so horrid and damnable Treason as that, a Treason never to be forgot while the World lasteth; I confesse, I deserv'd to suffer the same, if not a farre greater punishment then they did; Hanging, drawing, and quartering were not considerable punishments, they were too low for the offence in me, because a Minister; and I could not for shame sue for any mercy heere. And it is a wonder, if not a miracle to mee, that in so great a Congregation as mine is, not one of the Auditors were able to testifie any such thing but himselfe, and he but fumblingly neither. I am sure there are divers of the Parish, learned men and good Schollers, ma∣ny that have tenacious memories as he can possibly have. But God forgive him for casting such an hor∣rid aspersion upon me, I doe forgive him from my heart, 'twas a mistake in the carriage, that's my construction of him, in point of Charitie. And as it falls out, 'tis well I pen all I Preach, as the Pam∣phleter sayes, in a written Booke, for by that means, I am able to give the Reader satisfaction, and set it downe word for word as I deliver'd it. The words upon which I Preacht, were these, Or despisest thou the riches of Gods goodnesse, &c. After I had spoken of the riches of Gods goodnesse in generall, I descended to particular instances, wherein this Kingdome, above all other Nations whatsoever, had reason to contemplate of the riches of his goodnesse. And first I instan'st, for blessing us with the glorious Sunne-shine of the Gospell, in a perspicuous and
cleere way, wholly hid from many, and darke unto others, &c. Then I shewed how the riches of his goodnesse had be ne manifested to us, in his mani∣fold and sundry Deliverances, from 88. the Pesti∣lence, and from the Gunpowder-Plot, and there I tooke occasion to say thus much. This dayes So∣lemnitie, I hope, we shall never forget; but as once a yeare publikely, so every day privately comme∣morate, A day on which the King himselfe and his Issue, that State, and all the Commons assembled in the High Court of Parliament should at one instant have bin blown up, and our Kingdom brought to ut∣ter desolation. This could not certainly be any pro∣ject or invention by mortals, how politike soever: Certainely the Devils broke loose from Hell, and took upon them humane shapes to lay the ground-worke of so great a Conspiracie. No History can paralell it, no Age come neere so cruell an intention, so bloody a Designe, tending to the utter extirpation and dis-hereditation of us, and all our Posterities, rights and interests to the Worlds end. The subject is mooving, and able to melt the most stony and ob∣durate heart. And I am perswaded that though the desire of change and innovation in Religion, or hope of Honour and preferment (being formerly discontented persons, which works much in such spi∣rits) or desire of gaine, or profit, or some such like thing: yet they themselves could not choose but have some relactancie, and startle at it, being a fact of that high nature, so generally prejudiciall to the Countrey in which they received their birth and e∣ducation, all their meanes, livelyhood, and subsi∣stancie
in this world. Resolute I know they were e∣ver to the last moment of their lives, and little or no confession, no signes of sorrow or repentance could be drawne from them, though strongly laboured that way for the good of their soules. Yet there were amongst them that did professe, not onely a dis∣like, but even an utter loathing and detestation of so horrid and prodigious a Treason, And wisht this, that no records might be registred, no remaines might be kept, wherby it might appeare to Posteritie: what enemies and slaves they had beene? how vilianous and treacherous to their owne Countrey? Non igno∣ta Cano, Their Confessions are extant, and I have read some of them to this purpose. Tis greater to con∣ceive the horridnesse of this Treason, then to endea∣vour to aggravate it with words and language. No tongue how fluent soever, being able to set forth the foulenesse, the Devillishnesse of it. Vox fancibus hae∣ret, I am at a stand, and will forbeare to name if any more, but leave you to meditate on the riches of Gods goodnesse in that great deliverance. Pardon good Reader, my rediousnesse, it stands me upon to be punctuall upon such an allegation as this, and laid downe to be fully prooved. Let any that has read that and reads this, and compare them together, see if any such doctrine can be pickt out of that part of my Sermon, but meerely the contrary. 'Twas a profitable inversion of my words, for them to make me more odious (as they have done in the rest) to the Honourable Court of Parliament, which I hope they will take into their grave considerations, and not suffer me to groan under the pressure of their
malicious accusations. Touching the proofe that I had taken for the Ser∣mons, at seven of the clock on Sabbath day mornings severall summes of money of the Parish, I confesse. And thus it was, The Parish after the choice of a Le∣cturer there, before they stirr'd, at the motion of a worthy and eminent member of that Honourable House of Commons, whose Name I dare not be to bold with. For my willingnesse to condescend to let them have a free choice of a man they lik't of, did voluntarily under their hands, as will appeare in the Vestry Booke, give me 20. pound a yeare, as an addi∣tion to my small Living, to bee paid by 5. pound a quarter, this fell short. The Sicknesse drew on, it was thought fit that Lecture, above others (because it was a Lecture, to which all persons, both out of the City and Suburbs, Out-places, and By-Alleys, which might breed a generall Contagion) should surcease. When it pleasd God, to stay his hand, a new Lecturer was chosen, and the money I receiv'd from them was not for the setting up of the Lecture, but for the ar∣reares of the 20. pound unpaid, and that they know very well. Touching the Testimony of the Coachman, I hope the World will conceive, that it is no argument of Incontinency to ride abroad in a Coach, and take the ayre. And I hope the world will judge that if every man had made choice of his Mate, and inten∣ded any incivility, and vile and obscene gestures, cer∣tainly we would not have beene so impudent as to
call up a Coachman to be witnesse of it. Besides the fattest of the three was my own Sister, since dead, and I hope with God. And I hope the World wil in Cha∣rity beleeve, that God has not given me over to a re∣probate sence, to be so unnaturall, as insuch, as is al∣ledg'd to pollute and defile my own Sister. That sup∣posd, I hope the World will yet further in Charity beleeve, that I would not stand by and see another be uncivill, and shee so immodest, flesh and blood would not have endur'd that. And for setting them downe at Newgate, and studying there to make an excuse to their Husbands, where they had been, for my part, I know no such thing, neither am I acquainted with any such conditions in Women. And because the scandalous Pamphelter sayes, we arriv'd at a house fit for our intention, I shall satisfie you in that, The place wee arrived at, was the signe of the Goat at Hammersmith. For which cause, the ridiculous fellow, in the Frontispeece of his abo∣minably absurde Pamphlet, pictures a Coach with persons in it, and over the head, Away for Hammer∣smith. The ground of his fond conceit. The per∣sons that live there, and have done for many yeares, are of that credit and repute, so generally known for their honesty and sufficiencie, that they would scorn, if they had suspected any such thing, to have suffe∣red the least shew of incivilitie in their house; and besides, they knew us all to well for that. But to aggravate proofes in a continued malice, I beleeve they hired this journeyman Coachman for a small matter (for he is fouly slander'd if that will not doe it) to say any thing they would have him
Concerning my frequenting Mistresse Stevensons company, I could hardly avoid that, because I dye∣ted and lodged in the house: and for Mistresse Valen∣tine, her husband going to Sea, left me in trust with the mannaging of his whole estate, and the bringing up of his Children. David Lloyd his servant, and di∣vers others, can, and will at any time be ready to te∣stifie: but never kept company with any of them both, in any uncivill way. Concerning the woman he calls my wife, which I doe not, nor have reason to acknowledge to be so, reasons not onely knowne to my selfe, but many more, 'tis as false as malicious. Concerning Mistresse Valentines Kinswoman, I neither know her, nor to my remembrance ever saw her above once, and that was in the Kitching at the Chequer at Dowgate, an open and publike place, for all commers, and therefore unfit for such a lust∣full desire as hee mentions her. Neither did I ever know her name, till of late, and upon enquiry I finde that before shee was married, her name was Margaret Sweet, one that liv'd by making of Buttons (a pro∣fession I dislike not, I speak it not for that) but shee seldome wrought not aboue once or twice in a month, but ranne up and downe after severall young men, no constant abode at any certaine place, but ran from lodging to lodging, a common Tale-bearer, and make-bate betweene party and party, and noted for this among all her kindred, that they could never be∣leeve one word that proceeded out of her mouth. Let the World judge what a witnesse this demure creature is. And the Pamphleter tels me one thing,
which I never knew of, that a Bishops wife may bee a Lady, we have no such honour conferr'd upon their wiues in our Kingdome, and in other parts they are not married. But the Devill ow'd him a shame, and be forgot himselfe before he was aware. Concerning the Testimony of one Benson, that liv'd once at the Queenes head in Smithfield, but now at the Bull head in Cheapeside: It is alleg'd that I should speake in his house six yeares agoe, at a dinner upon occasion of discourse, these words, That man which has a handsome woman to his Wife, and was jealous without a cause, it was lawfull for her to make (so the Pamphleter deserv'd, nay, the testimony of Benson) him a Cuckold; and rather then he should not be made one, I would ride an 100. miles to doe it my selfe; that this point of Doctrine I had preacht, and would preach, and that to all eternitie: I take God to witnes, as I shal answer it at his Tribu∣nall, when I have most neede of his mercy, I neither remember any such, either words, or meeting. And what is spoken in mirth at a Table, may in six yeares be easily forgotten; and the former part to be jocu∣lar and inoffensive. The latter troubled me, that I should Preach it, whereupon I besought the Com∣mittee that they would be pleasde to aske Benson, and the rest, whether he, or any of them present, who were my Accusers in other matters, and my constant Auditors, whether he or any of them had ever heard me preach it, or no. They conceiv'd it to be a very ma∣terial question, and accordingly demanded it, the rest were silent (not an argument of consent, but of ig∣norance,
as not knowing any thing of the matter) and Benson answered, no indeed, I never heard him preach it. This being only a merry speech (if any such speech did proceed from me) will, I hope, be conceived not to be an offensive of any such nature, as the Pamphle∣ter would have it. Heartily sorry I am, if any such inconsiderate words past from me, and I hope, God and the Parliament, will forgive my extravagant language. Concerning my comming in unseasonably, when I lay in the Cloysters with Master Stevensons wife, pretended to be testified by the then Porter of Christ Hospitall, Master Phillips; it is utterly false, there never was any such thing, he never affirm'd any such thing, and I have inserted a Copy of his renunciation, under his owne hand, the Originall whereof I have. And this it is, KNow all men whom this doth concerne, Against the Scandalous Papers publisht in Print, against Master Finch Vicar of Christ-Church, That Iohn Phillips the late Porter to Christ-Hospitall, doth, and will prove and maintaine; That Master Finch did never, at any time, at what houre soever of the night, he went foorth, or came in at the Gates, to his Lodging at M. Stevensons, misbehave himselfe in words or deeds to the said Porter, as is publisht, but alwaies demean'd himselfe courteously to him, not gi∣ving any cause of grumbling or mumbling at him. And for his sweet heart Mistresse Stevenson, as is suggested in the Booke, he never saw any more familiarity between
them, whereby to show any cause of suspicion of secret love, more then to any other woman. Subscribed IOHN PHILLIPS. This was a proofe much insisted upon, and of which there was taken by the Committee more then ordinary notice. And therefore this appearing to be utterly false, I hope it will be conceiv'd, that the o∣ther Articles are aswell Scandalous, by adding to them more then was delivered before the Comittee, aswell as his Testimony is wonderfully enlarg'd, and cleane altered by the Pamphlerer from what he spake. Concerning the two Sisters mentioned in the Booke, 'till long since the publication of it, I never understood who they were, but by accident I was in∣form'd, that it was one Mistresse Buckle and Mistresse Iordan; In the first womans company I never was, and if she dyed of the Pox, and her head dropt off in the Coffin, that concernes not me, and I beleeve it a meere slander. In mistresse Iordans company I was twice, and no more, upon a difference, mistresse Iohn∣son and mistresse Whitney, both of my Parish, refer∣red to master Iames Waters the then Churchwarden, and my selfe. And this divers are living to testifie. Thus the Pamphleter ends his proofes in parti∣cular, alleaging that more such foule and scandalous things might have beene proved, but glances at the heads of none. Indeede he need not, these were suf∣ficiently
bad, if they were true, but I thanke God they are not. Ex ungue Leonem, Let the World conceive but thus much by this little, that if he had had any other crime, of any consequence whatsoever, or his malice could have invented, what favour I had beene like to finde from a brasen fac't fellow, void of all sense and truth, that hath dip't his pen so falsely and injuri∣ously against me. He might aswell have inserted in his Booke, that I writ diverse and sundry Letters, betweene two and three hundred to be seene, sent to the Lady Wolley de∣ceast, for severall summes of money, for the reliefe of Prisoners, poore Schollers, decea'st Ministers Widdowes, setting up of new married couples, and many more such Stratagems, converting it all to my owne use, without having yet given any account. He might aswell have inserted, that I seldome taught any Schollers, whose friends were of ability, but I got money from their Parents, for the above named uses, and kept it to my selfe. He might have inserted that I was found behind a Grammar Schoole doore, young, and know not mine owne name, nor the off∣spring from whence I came. His naming of places of Scripture, in the thun∣dring of judgements, concernes all men aswell as my selfe: and I hope neither I, nor any other of the Clergy, take them ascendently from the foot of us to the head; for to those the fellow chiefely, but
most ignorantly, applies them. His termes upon me of Athisticall, son of Beliall, and putting on a Whores forehead, carrying my selfe most proudly and inso∣lently, are termes I returne upon himselfe, as being most guilty of them; I take them as scurrilous and rayling language, and therefore passe them by with scorne and indignation. I doe onely observe one thing in a word, to see how the foolish fellow con∣tradicts himselfe; he accuseth me for Officiating shamelesly in mine own person, and presently after condemnes mee, that I seldome or never come a∣mongst them. And for that, Courteous Reader, suspend your Judgement when time shall serve. I hope to give a cleare satisfaction to all men, for for∣bearing as yet my constant personall performance. To conclude, he condemnes me that I commit many of the forsaid condemn'd Superstitious, wic∣ked, and drunken practises afresh without any blush∣ing, or the least signe of relenting. For the satisfaction of the Reader, I have inserted this ensuing Petition. To the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons House of Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the Parishioners of Christ-Church, London. Sheweth THat the Petition and Articles have beene here∣tofore presented to this Honourable assembly,
charging Master Edward Finch, Vicar of the said Pa∣rish, with severall misdoings, in part attested by wit∣nesses, upon hearing before the Grand Committee for Religion; Which we find him to have fallen in∣to his time of many Suits, Troubles, and Imprison∣ments, and consequently, will admit of the more fa∣vourable construction, and he more capable of pitty; that the end aym'd at by the said Petition, who wish the reformation not the ruine of the said M. Finch. Wherefore they are humble Sutors to this Honourable Assembly, that the said Petition and Articles may bee withdrawn, & no further disquisition be therupon had, that the said M. Finch may be restored to the good opi∣nion of this Honourable Assembly, and left to Officiate his Cure amongst them, as to his duty belongeth, and by which all his livelyhood that he hath in the World, and that but a slender one neither. And they shall ever pray This Petition which I have to show was subscri∣bed by most of the Gentry, and divers other persons of quallity, honestie and abilitie in the Parish. And many more hands I might have had, had I regarded the number of the men, above the integrity and worth of the persons. This hath not as yet been presented unto the Par∣liament; the weighty Affaires of the State consider'd, I hope it will be conceiv'd to bee rather modesty in me, to forbeare pressing upon their more urgent busi∣nesses, then negligence in following my owne occa∣sions. In all humility I cast my selfe at the feet of that
Honourable Assembly, imploring their favour and charitable construction of me; and deploring my own misfortune, that any sincere and well intended Ministery hath not brought forth so good fruit, by reason of some particular prejudices cast upon me, as I hop't it would have done, and which I continually prayd to God it might had done, and still may. I have now done, and referre all to thy conside∣ration, Courteous Reader. And I could have harti∣ly wisht that the Pamphleter, had rather spent his time in the due execution of that profession where∣unto God hath called him. Doing what belongs to him without Dissimulation, not consuming his time in writing of lame and ridiculous Rhimes (I cannot for shame call them Verses, for feare some that have read them should laugh at me) and setting forth Scur∣rilous Pamphlets, without any sense, wit, truth, or approbation. FINIS.
