G871 13109909 97612
A GLORIOVS VICTORIE OBTAINED BY SIR WILLIAM WALLER, and Sir WILLIAM BALFOURE, against the Lord Hoptons Forces, neere Alsford, on Fryday last March 29. BEEING An exact Relation of the whole manner of the fight, which con∣tinued from eight of the Clock the same morning till, six at night, wherein the Lord Hoptons, Forces were routed, with the taking of all their Ordinance and Am∣munition, Bagge, and Baggage, and his Army, put to flight: The Lord Iohn (brother to the Duke of Lenox) the Earle of Forth, Generall of his Ma∣iesties foot-forces, the Lord Ruthven, and divers other eminent persons slaine. With the names of severall Commanders, and Officers of note, which were then taken prisoners. Sent in a Letter from an Intelligent Officer in the Armie to his friend in London. with a true Coppie of the thanksgiving for the same, appointed to bee read in all Churches about London on the Lords day, March 31. Printed according to Order. April 1. Printed for Thomas Bates, and are to bee sold in the Old Baily, Anno Dom. 1644.
A glorious victory obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLER, and Sir WILLIAM BELFOUR, against the Lord Hoptons Forces neare Alsford, on Friday last, March 29. HAving so fit an opportunity to tender my respects un∣to you, I should have been very ungreatefull, if I had omitted it, besids the great mrcy of God in prosper∣ing the proceedings, and giving successe unto our Ar∣mies, could not but be pressing motives to ingage me to acquaint your self and the rest of my good friends (to whom I desire you to shew this Letter) of his gracious dealings towards us. On Monday last, March 25. we were drwan forth from a Town called Traford, into a heath appointed by Sir William Waller for the meeting of all his forces, where we appeared a considerable ar∣my of above 10000. horse and foot; Major Generall Brown with the London Regiments were designed to quarter that night at West∣meane, whereupon our Quarter-master advanced thither with a party of horse, beate the enemy out of the Town, took the Officer that commanded the enemies forces, and some common souldiers prisoners, besides a good booty. On Tuesday, March 26. part of one of our Troupes under Cap∣tain Bosvile commanded by his Cornet, advanced within half a mile of the ford where the Enemy quartered, and took away two fat Beeves, divers Swine, Calves, and other provisions ready drest, and carrying to the enemy, with an horse loaded with other pro∣vision, and brought them to us. The same day also, five of Sir
VVilliam VValler's horse which were scouting forth, chased 16  the enemie, and tooke three of them prisoners: Such a spiri feare had the Lord put into the enemie, according to that prom of his, Deut. 28. 7. VVednesday and Thursday nights, we lay  the open field, about three miles from Alsford, where the ene kept a garison. The day we marched from VVestmeane, th faced us all the way in our march with a great body of theirs, a we quartered within a mile of each other on Wednesday night.  Thursday, March 28. we skirmished all day long with severall p¦ties, wherein we slew divers of the enemy, and took some prisone This morning, Fryday March 29. we drew forth into the fiel the London Regiments, viz. The white and yellow Regiments w first drawn forth against the enemies forelorne hope, which w about eight of the clocke, who came off bravely at last, thoug at first they were put to some streight, and a Captaine of our Foroc missing; Then Sir VVilliam Belfour came in to our ayd with foue thousand horse about one of the clocke in the after-noone: After which the maine bodies were ingaged, and had a sharp bickerin it was a great while doubtfull to which side the victorie would ha¦pen; But at length (through the assistance of the Almighty) o Forces caused the enemy to retreat, and routed them with small losse on our side. We took in the fight above an hundreth prisoner, with all their Ordinance, Ammunition, Bagge and Baggage (the names of the most eminent whereof I have hereafter expressed besides those which were taken in the chase (whereof I have not yet intelligence) we pursued them, and had the slaughter of them for five or six miles, continuing our pursuit till after six that night, their Body of Foot dispersed foure or five severall wayes, we hope not to be rellied againe possibly. We are assured by a Captain of theirs, now in hold, that the Lord Iohn (brother to the Duke of Lonox) is slaine, and was carried off in a Coach, and buried here at Alsford: And I hear also by good hands, that the Earle of Forth Generall of his Majesties forces w
also slaine in this encounter; and that not a Captaine of the Lord Hopt. forces, but are either taken, wounded, slain, I cannot as yet tell the certaine number that are wounded, or were slain, & therefore I will not trouble you with uncertainties, yet I viewed the Field, which was full of dead bodies, besides what most needs be slain in the pursuit, which as yet we have no certain intelligence of: In their flight they set fire on divers houses in Alsford; and intended to have fired the whole Towne, had we not prevented them: They cried out as they ran away▪ The kingdome is lost, and the truth is, God was seen most miraculously in the carriage of this action, es∣pecially towards the conclusion thereof. Our Commanders car∣ried themselves with an undaunted resolution and courage during the fight, and amongst the rest, our ever honoured Generall Sir VVilliam VValler, and the renowned Major Browne, ingaged themselves all the time both with the Horse and foot, using many incuragements to animate the Souldiers. In all the fight we lost not that we know of above twenty men, and I hear Serjeant Major Thomson had his leg shot off, whereof he is not likely to recover, and some 20 prisoners at most, and but few wounded: The E∣nemy had the greatest strength they could make in the Field, having drawne forth most of their Garisons from Banbury, Oxford, Wal∣lingford, and Abington, which addes much to the glory of the Victory. Wee intend to march the morrow morning for VVinchester, resolving to cleare the way foorth with, in pursuit of the enemy. The Lord Hopton himselfe wee heare is fled to Basing house, and the rest is dispersed to Salisbury & other places. Let God alone have all the glory of this, and all others successes which he vouch∣safes unto his people against the implacable enemies of his Truth, and let us say with David Blessed be God who hath taught our hands to war, and our fingers to fight, Sir I have nothing else to enforme you at present, but rest. Alsford, Friday night. March 29. Yours to command, H. T.
A CATALOGVE OF THE PRISONERS taken at the battell, near Alsford on Friday Mar. 29. 1644. Sir Edward Stowell Colonell of Horse and Foot. Colonell Bear, Lieutenant Coll. Kingston. Captain Price. Captain Chidleigh. Captain Blackston. Captain Seymour. Captain Catesby. Ensigne Cooper. Lieutenant Kite. Ensigne Melos. Ensigne Marsh. Ensigne Medley. Cornet Constable Cornet Ducket. Iohn Morley Physitian,
BY THE MAIOR To every Minister within the Citie of London, Li∣berties, Line of Communication, and Bills of Mortalitie. THe extraordinary blessing of God upon the Forces under the command of Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belfour a∣gainst the Army, led by Sir Ralph Hopton, for the destruction of the Parliament, this City and kingdome, in a battaile near Winchester, yesterday being Fryday being the 29 of March instant, which con∣tinued from 8 a clock in the morning untill night, wherein the e∣nemy was obsolutly routed, and pursued many miles with good execution, being signified unto me by the most Honourable Com∣mittee of both kingdoms, requires a more solmne thankesgiving then upon so short warning can be performed; especially consideting that this mercy hath beyond expectation cast in from heaven into our bosoms so soon after a long Fasting and Humiliation, after the sad blow about Newark; I doe heartily (according to the order of the said Committee of both Kindomes) desire and require you to mor∣row being the Lords Day, to give notice of this goodnesse to your Congregation, using your best indeavours to quicken them to the highest pitch of thankfulnesse to the God of our mercies, and to in∣gage their hearts and hands yet further, To help the Lord against the Mighty, with their prayers and all others, helps of Money, Armes, Horse, men, and other provisions for the instant, making up and supplying of a body of horse and foot to go out and follow the e∣nemie,
to prevent the rallying of his men, or raising of new▪ Forc to do further mischiefe▪ that God may give a speedy end to the p¦sent Calamities, and restore a stable peace in this aflicted Natio to the comfort of all Gods people in all the kingdomes. And what God shall move the hearts of men to subscribe & c¦bute, or what men they shall send out or mentaine, to this most ¦cessary service, not only my self, but the Committee of the Militi do make it your joint request that you, with some others well affe ed, would set down in writting and returne upon Monday morni next without faile, to the Committee of the Militia at Gild-Hal Dated the 30. of March, Anno Dom. 1644. Iohn VValaston, Major. FINIS.
A GLORIOVS VICTORIE, OBTAINED By Sir WILLIAM VVALLER, and Sir WILLIAM BALFOURE, against the Lord Hoptons forces, neere Als∣ford, on Friday last March 29. BEING An exact Relation of the whole manner of the fight, which continued from eight of the Clock the same morning, till six at night, wherein the Lord Hoptons forces were rou∣ted, with the taking of all their Ordinance and Ammunition, Bagge, and Baggage, and his Army put to flight: The Lord Iohn (brother to the Duke of Lenox) the Earle of FORTH, Generall of his Majesties foot-forces, the Lord RUTHEN, and dîvers other eminent persons slaine. With the names of severall Commanders and Officers of note which were then taken prisoners▪ Sent in a Letter from an Intelligent Officer in the Armie to his friend in London With a true Coppie of the Thanksgiving for the same, appointed to be read in all Churches about LONDON on the Lords day. MARCH 31. Printed according to Order. April 1. Printed for Thomas Bates, and are to be sold in the Old-Baily. 1644.
A glorious Victory obtained by Sir William VValler, and Sir VVilliam Belfour, against the Lord Hoptons forces neare Alsford, on Friday last, March 29. HAving so fit an opportunity to tender my re∣spects unto you, I should have been very un∣grateful, if I had omitted it, besides the great mercy of God in prospering the pro∣ceedings, and giving successe unto our Armies, could not but be pressing motives to ingage me to acquaint your self and the rest of my good friends (to whom I desire you to shew this Letter) of his gracious dea∣lings towards us. On Monday last, March 25. we were drawn forth from a Town called Traford, into a heath appointed by Sir William Waller for the meeting of all his forces, where we appeared a considerable army of above 10000. horse and foot; Major Generall Brown with the London Regiments were designed to quarter that night at Westmeane, whereupon our Quarter-ma∣ster advanced thither with a party of horse, beat the
enemy out of the Town, took the Officer that com∣manded the enemies forces, and some common soul∣diers prisoners, besides a good booty. On Tuesday, March 26. part of one of our Troopes (under Captain Bosvile) commanded by his Cornet, advanced within half a mile of the ford where the E∣nemy quartered, and took away 2 fat Beeves, divers Swine, Calves, and other provisions ready drest, and carrying to the enemy, with a horse loaded with o∣ther provision, and brought them to us. The same day also, five of Sir VVilliam Waller's horse which were scouting forth, chased 16. of the enemy, and took 3. of them prisoners: such a spirit of feare had the Lord put into the enemy, according to that promise of his, Deut. 28. 7. VVednesday and Thurday nights, we lay in the open field, about 3 miles from Alsford, where the enemy kept a garrison. The day wee marched from VVestmeane, they faced us all the way in our march wth a great body of theirs, and wee quartered within a mile of each other on VVednesday night. On Thursday March 28. wee skirmished all day long with severall partees, wherein we slew divers of the Enemy, and tooke some Prisoners. This morning Fryday March 29. we drew forth into the Field, the London Regiments, viz. the white and yellow Regiments were first drawne forth
against the Enemies forlorne hope, which was a∣bout 8 of the clock, who came off bravely at last▪ though at first they were put to some streights, and a Captaine of our Forces missing; then Sir VVilliam Belfour came into our ayd with 4000. horse about one of the clock in the after-noone; After which the maine Bodies were ingaged, & had a sharp Bickering, it was a great while doubtfull to which side the Vi∣ctory would happen; But at length (through the assistance of the Almighty) our Forces caused the Enemy to retreat, and routed them with small losse on our side. Wee tooke in the fight above 100. Pri∣soners, with all their Ordnance, Amm Bag & Baggage (the names of the most Eminent whereof I have hereafter expressed) besides those which were taken in the chase (whereof I have not yet intelli∣gence) we pursued them, and had the slaughter of them for 5 or 6 miles, continuing our pursuit till after 6 that night, their Body of Foot dispersed 4 or 5 severall waies, wee hope not to be rallied againe possibly. We are assured by a Captain of theirs now in hold, that the Lord John (Brother to the Duke of Lenox) is slaine, and was carried off in a coach, and buried here at Alsford; and I hear also by good hands that the E▪ of Forth Generall of his Majesties Forces was also slain in this encounter; and that not a Cap∣taine
of the L. Hopt. forces but are either taken, woū¦ded, or slain, I cannot as yet tel the certain numbthat were slaine, & therefore I will not trouble you with uncetainties, yet I viewed the Field, which was full of dead bodies, besides what must needs be slaine in the pursuit, which as yet we have no certaine in∣telligence of; In their flight they set fire on divers houses in Alsford, and intended to have fired the whole Towne, had we not prevented them; They cried out as they ran away, The Kingdom is lost, and the truth is, God was seene most miraculously in the car∣riage of this action, especially towards the conclusi∣on thereof. Our Commanders carried themselves with an undaunted resolution and courage during the fight, and amongst the rest, our ever honoured Generall Sir William Waller, and the renowned Major Browne, ingaged themselves all the time both with the Horse and Foot, using many incouragements to animate the Souldiers. In all the fight we lost not, that we know of, above twenty men, and I hear Ser∣jeant Major Thomson had his legg shot off, whereof he is not likely to recover, and some 20 prisoners at most, and but few wounded; The Enemy had the greatest strength they could make in the Field, ha∣ving drawne forth most of their Garrisons from Ban∣bury,
Oxford, Wallingford, and Abington, which addes much to the glory of the Victory. We intend to march to morrow morning for VVin∣chester, resolving to clear the way forthwith in pursuit of the enemy. The Lord Hopton himselfe wee heare is fled to Basing house, and the rcst is dispersed to Salis∣bury & other places. Let God alone have all the glo∣ry of this, and all other successes which he vouchsafes unto his people against the implacable enemies of his Truth, and let us say with David, Blessed be God who hath taught our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. Sir, I have nothing else to enforme you at present, but rest. Alsford, Friday night. March 29. 1644. Yours to command, H. T. A Catalogue of the Prisoners taken at the Battaile neare Alsford on Friday March 29. 1644. Sir Edward Stowell Colonell of Horse and Foot. Colonell Beard, Lieutenant Coll. Kingston. Capt. Price. Capt. Chidleigh. Capt. Blackeston. Capt. Seymour. Capt. Catesby. Ensigne Cooper. Lieutenant Kite. Ensigne Melos. Ensigne Marsh. Ensigne Medley. Cornet Constable. Cornet Ducket. Iohn Morley Physitian.
By the Major To every Minister within the Citie of London, Libertyes, Line of Communication, and Bills of Mortalitie. THe extraordinary blessing of God upon the Forces under the command of Sir William Waller, and Sir William Bel∣four, against the Army led by Sir Ralph Hopton, for the, destruction of the Parliament, this City and Kingdome in a battaile neare Winchester, yesterday being Fryday the 29 of March instant, which continued from 8 a clock in the morning untill night, wherein the enemy was absolutely routed, and pur∣sued many miles with good execution, being signified unto mee by the most Honourable Committee of both Kingdoms, requires a more solemne thankesgiving then upon so short warning can be performed; especially considering that this mercy hath been be∣yond expectation cast in from heaven into our bosoms so soon after a long Fasting and Humiliation, after the sad blow about Newark; I doe heartily (according to the order of the sid Committee of both Kingdomes) desire and require you to morrow, being the Lords Day, to give notice of this goodnesse, to your Congregation, using your best indeavours to quicken them to the highest pitch of thankfusse to the God of our Mercies, and to ingage their heartsand ands yet further, To help the Lord gainst the Mighty, with their prayers and all others, helps of Mo∣ney, Armes, Horse, men, aud other provisions for the instant,
making up and supplying o dy of Horse and Foot to go out and follow the the enemie, to prevent the rallying of his men, or raising of new Forces to doe further mischiefe, that God may give a speedy end to the present Calamities, and restore a stable peace in this afflicted Nation, to the comfort of all Gods people in all the Kingdomes. And what God shall move the hearts of men to subscribe and contribute, or what men they shall send out or maintaine▪ to this most necessary service, not onely my selfe, but the Com∣mittee of the Militia, doe make it your joynt request that you, wih some others well affected, would set down in writing, and returne upon Monday morning next without faile, to the Committee of the Militia at Guild-Hall. Dated thi 30. of March, Anno Dom, 1644. John Wollaston, Major. FINIS.
