H1063 12158672 55228
THE DISEASE OF LONDON: OR A NEW DISCOVERY Of the SCORVEY. Comprizing The Nature, Manifold Diffe∣rences, various Causes, Signs, Prognostics, Chronology, and several Methods of Cu∣ring the said DISEASE by Remedies, both Galenical, and Chymical, together with Anatomical Observations, and Dis∣courses on Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, Rheu∣matisms, Gouts, Malignant Fevors, and Small Pox, with their several Methods of Cure and Remedies. Likewise particular Observations on most of the Fore-mentioned Diseases. By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and in the Time of the Rebellion, Fellow of the College of Physicians at the Hague. LONDON, Printed by T. James, for W. Thackery, at the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1675.
TO THE MOST MIGHTY, AND MOST INVINCIBLE MONARCH, Charles II. KING of Great BRITAIN, France, and Ireland. WHen your People, Great SIR, had for many Years been Afflicted with Maniacisms, and Fascina∣ted Distempers of their Minds, in a moment You miraculously Cured them upon Your Blessed
Restauration; a good Crisis, whereof not the Influence of the Stars, but of Divine Providence was the Primar Efficient. The Diseases of their Estates were no less Great and Dangerous, some had Lost all, others had Little left, to these likewise your Unparallel Justice was a Sove∣raign Remedy, by Restoring to every one what was his just Right. Moreover that their Lives might be Praeserved from the pernicious Attempts of Em∣pirics, You have Re-establisht a College of Experienced Phy∣sicians, and to these your Royal Laboratory sheweth out of what Materials, and in what Manner
the best Remedies are to be Praepared; So, as You are the Greatest KING, You are the greatest Physician, whence I have praesumed to lay this Treatise at the Feet of Your most Gracious Majesty, humbly craving Your Protection against the Scorvey of this Age, and imploring Your Royal Clemency for a Pardon for this Address, am in all Duty bound to Acknow∣ledg my self, The most Humble, most Obedient, and Meanest of Your Ma∣jesties Subjects, Harvey.
THE PRAEFACE. IT is Observable, that the First Solid Foundation of Physick was laid by the Great Architect of that Art Hippocra∣tes, in an Isle called Coos; and it is no less Remarkable, that the truest Super∣structure was made on it, in this Island, by the Famed College of Physicians of London; It was a Member of that Society, Doctor William Harvey, of Immortal Memory, that had laid another Basis, by Detecting the Circulation of the Blood, for which this Britain may as justly Merit the Title of Di∣vine, as the other Cous. The Rubbish that was cast about it by Parisanus, Leighnerus, and others to Obscure it, tended to render it more firm; notwithstanding, this was so smoothly removed by that Incomparable Phy∣sician,
Sir George Ent, the now Praesident of the College, in his Apology, that all Vniver∣sities did then adjudge those void of Appre∣hension, that did not readily Embrace that Principle, and that it was Impossible, for any man to Arrive to be a Physician without the knowledg of it. For many Ages the World was Ignorant, whence the superfluous Moisture proceeded, which we hourly spit out, until the out-let, viz. The Ductus Salivales were discovered by the Learned Doctor Wharton, a Fellow of the College; and though it was generally be∣lieved, nothing could be further declared, touching the structure of the Liver, yet so Elegant a description of its most Intime parts, and dissemination of its Vessels, Cho∣lidochus, and a very exact pursuit of the Limphaeducts was made by the most Accom∣plisht Doctor Glisson (the late Praesident) in his Anatomia Hepatis, that in a manner it appeared, as if nothing had been solidly Written of it by any before him. That some Distempers had escaped the Ob∣servation of the Graecian and Arabian Physi∣cians, was evidenced by the eminently Learn∣ed Doctor Bates, Doctor Glisson, and Doctor Regemorter, Collegues, in that excellent Trea∣tise de Rachitide. In all my Travels, I had
never the good Fortune to be particularly ac∣quainted with a Person equal in Litterature, Experience and Observation with Doctor Bates; I must confess, I went ever from him more knowing, than I was before. The Pharmacopoea compiled by the whole Body of this Apollinean Society, doth justly Merit the Character of a most Elaborate work, from those, that shall compare the several compositions in it with their Original, where the amendments of Omitting of superfluous, incongrous, or Asymmetrous ingredients, and substituting of necessary and proporti∣onate Correctives, are to every Eye very Obvi∣ous; and their Care, that those Medicines be Neatly, and Artificially praepared by the Apo∣thecaries of London, hath proved so success∣ful, that Travellers are Obliged to Attest, that Pharmacy is in no Forreign part so much Improved, as it is here; and therefore why is not the London Theriaca Andro∣machi aequal to Venice Treacle, which lat∣ter oft times consists only of the two third parts of the Ingredients, and the better half of them Garbles? Or why should the Con∣fectio Alkermes of Monpelier exceed that of London? I must confess our Apothecaries set an higher Price upon their Medicines and their Labour too, than the French, and not without Reason; for you must agree to me,
that an English Apothecary, who puts on three pair of Sleeves a Week; and comes Neatly about your Posteriora, doth better de∣serve a Shilling for giving you a Glyster, than a French Apothecary wearing his Half-shirt a Month, Two-pence. That by the way, but still I must say, that Medicines are no where so Neatly, so Honestly, and so Skilfully praepared as here at London, and in that par∣ticular you may easily believe me a Judg com∣petent enough, since when I was a Student in Physick, Lodging purposely at an Apotheca∣ries House, I have spent many a half hour at the estil and Mortar, and did arrive to that Proficiency, that I could praetend to dispence Methridate, or make up a Paracelsus Em∣plaster, with any of the Trade. It is not so much in Pharmacy, as Chy∣rurgery, the French claim the Superlative; It is confessed, a French-Man shall very dex∣terously take off six Legs or Arms, to One of an English Surgeon; he shall make an Inci∣sion with his Scissors, as far as he can well reach with his sisul robe, let it go as far as it will between the Muscles, or the Cutis and the Membrana Carnosa, when an English Surgeon shall only clap in a Dorsil into the Orifice: He shall force in two of his Fingers into a Wound as far as he can possibly reach, though the Orifice will scarce admit a Probe
without great pain; whereas one of our Sur∣geons shall gently stroak the coagulated Blood, or lodged Matter towards the Orifice. This is the Difference, but the Issue is, that of those six Members Amputated, four or five of the Patients shall retire into the other World, whereas on the other side probably five among the six shall be praeserved with their Legs on. Touching those large Incisions, it's observa∣ble, that in making them they oft cut a Vein or Artery asunder, and cause Mortal Haemor∣rhages, or at least oft create incurable Vl∣cers; whereas the other without putting the Patient to that Extremity of pain, or dan∣ger, shall safely and easily Cure him in a few dayes. Of how dangerous a Consequence the forcing of Fingers into Wounds doth oft prove, is abundantly Evident to all Experi∣enced Surgeons. It must be granted, that in some Cases Members cannot be praeserved, likewise Incisions may be necessary, where Matter is suspected to lodge remote; or a Fin∣ger sometimes may be gently slid into a Wound, to clear it of coagulated Blood or Matter, that's lodg'd near the Orifice; but to practice Surgery as I have seen it in most parts of France (excepting only the Cha∣rity Hospital at Paris, where in my younger Years, for to acquire a competent knowledge in that part of Physick, I had leave to dress
for some Months) is not comparable to the Practice of English Surgeons; so that con∣sidering the French Practice I have oft ad∣mired, that in some Countries, you shall scarce see a Person of Quality, but must have his French Surgeon at his Elbow, as if no Body could Cure a Clap but a French Sur∣geon; for I cannot imagine what other Bus∣ness they can have for him, now Duels are grown so much out of Fashion. That I do not Write this out of a Praejudice, but from a real Truth, you may apprehend from my particular Humour, which sometimes in∣clines me, to be extremely pleased with French Company. I must now return to give you likewise an account of the Practice of Phy∣sick, wherein the Fellows of the College have proved so wonderfully Successful, that their Methods of Curing the most stubborn of Dis∣eases, may serve for a fit Pattern to all the World to Practice by, and I cannot deny, but in many Cases it hath proved so to me, which to acknowledg is the sole occasion of my Introducing this Discourse. But possi∣bly it may appear strange, that of a Society, whose Fame is spread as far as the Art of Physick it self, I should not endeavor to be a Member. In relation to that particular, I am Obliged to give you Satisfaction; it is many Years past, (viz. In the time of Re∣bellion)
when I first arrived at London, to Initiate my Practice in Physick, at which time I ought to have entred into the College, but findng, that the Humour of some was much towards Preaching, Praying, and all the Knacks of Phanaticism, others driving a way quite contrary; in fine the dif∣ference was such, that I concluded I should scarce make up my account among them, and therefore judged it more Expedient, to pur∣sue my Advantages abroad; but now finding the College Re-establisht, and Revested with their Ancient Lustre, and many to have got in, who when I begun to Practice, were not come from the Grammar School, if I should come in I must give Praecedency to those Youngsters, which I imagine I shall never do. My next Affair is to praeacquaint you with the Design of this Treatise; I do assure you, I have Inserted nothing in it, but what I have found to be true, and have used my ut∣most Endeavours to Trac all the Steps of this General Disease; I have Imparted to you some Secrets, which when you know, and have Tried, you will have Reason to believe, I had no other Drift in Divulging this Octavo, than sincerely to serve the Publick. June, 10. 1675. Hatton Garden. Farewel.
THE DISEASE OF LONDON. CHAP. I. Containing A Praemissory Discourse of the SCORVEY. 1. The Design of the Treatise. 2. The Synonyma's and Derivation of the Scorvey. 3. Whether the Scorvey was known to Hippocrates or Ga∣len? that it's contagious and haeredi∣tary. 4. That the Scorvey is of about 200 years standing. I Will not resume, what by others hath so oft been chaw'd upon, and that take for a reason, if I do not tell you a Story out of Eugalen, Solomon Albertus, or Wierus, a sort of people, that from one another re-col∣lected
a most prodigal number of Scorbutick Symptoms, by the same Rule of Arithmetical Progression, Ga∣len made use of in mustering his Cen∣turies of Pulses, an impertinent vari∣ety, more imaginary, than percepti∣ble by the subtillest Aranean Tact. By what I here condemn, you may conjecture, I praetend to divulge some∣thing particular, in such terms, as shall as little tire you in the reading, as me in writing. To commence my Dis∣course from the Description of my Subject, seemeth most expedient, wherein an exactness ought to be aimed at, exceeding what hitherto hath been heeded, which may oblige such, as when meeting with a distem∣per, they are not well acquainted with, are compelled to tell the Patient, it is the Scorvey. § 2. Scorbutus and Scorvey (quasi Scorbey) are words bastardized from Scorbeck, a Westphalian Primitive, denoting a Hoarse Throat, probably a Symptom, that antiently attended that Disease, and in these dayes is now and then observed a Concomi∣tant,
especially among the Danes, where it passed by the name of Scher∣mund; who moreover being oft rack'd with tearing pains in their legs, gave them the name of Schor∣bein, or Tear-leg. By the way, I must here take notice of a vulgar error, in the Orthography of the word Scurvey, which ought to be written Scorvey, as being derived from the word Scorbeck. The Low Dutch discerning; it oft ex∣erciseth its fury on the Guts, by causing insufferable Gripes, chuse to call it Scheurbuyck or Tear-belly; also de Blawe Shuit, from those blew spots, that haunt Scorbutick Legs. From the stink of Breath and foulness of the Gums, the Italians name it La Marcia di Bocca, or Scornobocca, implying a corruption of the mouth. But if it be proper to derive the denomination of a Disease from its chief Symptoms, the word Gingipedium (crassa & pingui Miner∣va) expresseth its nature more amply, declaring it most incommodious (gin∣givis & pedibus) to the gums and legs; and it may be conjectured, this kind of Nomenclature was twisted together out of those two Antick
words latinized  and , the former denoting a foulness of mouth, from ; or a foul mouth, from , the latter being expounded a Disease of the legs, as may be inferred from Pliny Histor. Natur. lib. 35. cap. 3. In Ger∣mania trans Rhenum castris a Germa∣nico Caesare promotis, maritimo tra∣ctu fons erat aquae dulcis solus, qua po∣ta intra biennium dentes deciderent, compagesque in genibus solverentur, stomacacen Medici vocabant, & Scelo∣tyrben: i. e. The Campagne being removed by Germanicus Caesar to the other side of the Rhyne in Germany, there was onely one Fountain of sweet water, in a tract near the Sea, where∣of drinking, in two years time their teeth would fall out, and the compo∣sure of their knees would be quite relaxed; the Physicians called it Sto∣macace and Scelotyrbe. § 3. The use of these words seem∣eth to be of a far ancienter date, than Pliny's age, since Strabo a Sub∣ject of Augustus Caesar, in the Six'h Book of his Geography, about the
end, relates the Roman Army, that was transported into Arabia, to be in∣fested with a Disease called Stomacace and Scelotyrbe. Galen also in that Book de Definitionibus Medicis, makes men∣tion of a Scelotyrbe. But not onely, whe∣ther those Maladies implied by these two obsolete words, but whether those great Spleens described by Hippocrates de Morbis Intern. 2. Praed. 2. Prognost. the Black Jaundice, the Ileos Haema∣tites, or the Black Vitiligo (being a deformity of the Skin, haunted with large duskish spots) be not the same Disease, Modern Physicians term the Scorvey, hath been controverted by most, that have handled this Subject. That each of these have a resem∣blance in their Causes and Symptoms to the Scorvey, needs no debate; for according to Hippocrates in the prae∣cedent Citation, in those great Spleens The Belly is puffed up, afterward the Spleen doth also swell, and is hrd, and acute pains happen to the Spleen, the colour is also changed and looks black, pale, and like a Pomegranate shell; and an ill smell cometh out of their mouth, and the gums scent ill and separate from
the teeth; and on the legs there break out Vlcers, also nocturnal Pustuls; and the parts are extenuated, and their ordure is not evacuated. The Ilios Haematites is also decipher'd with features not unlike the former: The Disease, saith Hippocrates, beginneth about the Autumn, and therein these things happen: There commeth an ill scent out of the mouth from the teeth, and the gums separate from them; and blood floweth out of the nostrills; and sometines ulcers break out on their legs, and other things appear, and the co∣lour groweth black, and the skin thin. The curiosity praedominating so much among Authors, touching the iden∣tity of primaeval and subsequent Dis∣eases, might be construed very super∣fluous; for the result, whether it be so or not, contributeth no more light to the scrutiny of the Scorvey, than a Candle to the Sun at Noon-day; though perchance exercitii gratia, and for reputation of being versed in Antick Lectures, it may be per∣mitted to be ventilated. The opini∣on of the major part of the learned, infers from the near alliance of Sym∣ptoms,
the Great Spleens of Hippo∣crates to be the Scorvey; and some o∣thers by the same reason are convin∣ced, the Black Jaundice, the Ileos Hae∣matites and Black Vitiligo, are no other. If this inference be received, Hypochondriack Melancholy, Hyste∣rick Passion, Quartan Ague, and most other Splenetick Maladies, may be reduced as Species to the Gender of the Scorvey. But upon a strict sur∣vey your aestimate will conclude, that the distinction of Diseases doth not depend so much on common acci∣dents, as properties; or to speak phy∣sically, on Pathognomonics, derived from a Specifick qualification, in their Causes, Parts affected, and Sym∣ptoms. Thus the progumenal cause of the Scorvey, though its vulgarly at∣tributed to Melancholy, or rather Salt vitiated or degenerated to a praeterna∣tural, and in that qualification may be a common parent to this, the Great Spleens, Black Jaundice, and the rest; yet the more nice insinuation of others hath detected the Salts of the Blood so specifically receded from their natural Constitution in the Scor∣vey,
and to have indued such pere∣grine qualities, that they are not ca∣pable to give birth to any other Dis∣ease than this. Moreover, by most the part affected and harth of the praeal∣leged distempers, are determined u∣nically the Spleen; in the Scorvey the Stomach (by some the Pancreas) the Spleen and Liver; and some do al∣so accuse the brain, though per dente∣ropathiam. Among the Symptoms the difference is most perspicuous, the exufflation of the Spleen is not al∣wayes discovered in the Scorvey, though in great Spleens never absent: In the Ileos Haematites there is loss of blood by Stool, attended with tear∣ing Gripes; which in this distemper is not assumed for a Pathognomonic. The Scorvey: is particularly malig∣nant, because it is contagious, and so radicated, that for some months, and fraequently years, it doth praedo∣minate over the most potent of Medi∣cines; and Infants oft bringing Scor∣butick Seminaries with them into the world, speak it haereditary; insomuch that on some Families the Scorvey hath been intailed with their Estates.
These Praedicates certainly are not convertible with the fore-mentioned Diseases, and therefore ought not so rashly to be pronounced the Scorvey; which moreover is Endemick, the o∣thers Epidemick and Pandemick. Thus far no sensible error can be incurred, if upon comprise of the whole, these Diseases are conceded to be Scorbu∣tick, in the same terms, as one may aptly explain a Pleurisie, an Empye∣ma, an Inveterate Cough, and many other Pulmonic Diseases, Asthmatic, but not an Asthma; unless derived from Saline Scorbutic Procatarctic and Proe∣gumenal Causes. § 4. The Scorvey, in respect of its primar appearance, seems to bear no certainty in Chronology, since some describe it a distemper, that for some Ages hath harrassed the crazy inhabi∣tants of the world; others will not al∣low it a Disease of longer date, than Authors of the last Century record its first budding among the Danes, Sax∣ons, and Westphalians; which is with∣in the time of Two hundred years at most. This latter sentiment is easily
supported by this Argument; viz. No Disease described by any of the Greek, Latine, or Arabian Physicians, doth exactly quadrate in Parts affect∣ed, Causes, and Symptoms with this Northern Scorvey; and therefore may be inferred a new up-start Dis∣ease: especially that sort of Scorvey, which in my Little Venus I term Epi∣demick. Probably an objection may be offer'd, that since those Procatar∣ctic and Proegumenal Causes, had their being many Ages past, and con∣sequently an influence on humane Bodies, they must necessarily (ac∣cording to that trite Axiome, Posita causa ponitur effectus) have constitu∣ted their effect, viz. the Scorvey. To this is replied, History maketh no report of those occasions, that are im∣powered to produce this Malady. The Graecians, among whom those great Spleens of Hippocrates, being nearest of kin to the Scorvey, were so popular, lived in a benign air, and were constantly imployed in Warlick Exercises, whereby they were divert∣ed from Melancholy, or other dull Passions, from Excess of Sleep or
Sloath, and other inconveniences: so that those External Causes, that now concur in the production of the Scor∣vey, had no praevalence on them; and therefore improbable, our Distem∣per should have been engender'd then, or any time before. But waving other Causes, and considering only, it is an Endemick Disease, which hath its chief dependance on the Air, and particular disposition of the Clime, wherein alterations happen by evapo∣rations from Sea or Earth, and Coe∣lestial Irradiations, which being so various and fraequent, it's no wonder, if the Scorvey be a recent producti∣on, or if every moneth or year Dis∣eases of new aspects emerge. CHAP. II. Of the Mouth-Scorvey. 1 The general kinds of the Scorvey, and what the Mouth-Scorvey is; the degrees of the Mouth-Scorvey. 2. That little hard Swellings of the Mouth and a Ranula, are Scorbu∣tick.
3. That a vagous recurrent Tooth-ache is Scorbutick. 4. What a Scorbutick Thrush is. 5. The va∣riation of the colour of the Gums in the Scorvey. 6. That a Stinking Breath is Scorbutick. 7. That small Fistula's in the Angles of the Mouth and Root of the Gums are Scorbutick. INto two great branches the Scorvey seems to be divaricated, namely a foul Scorbutick Mouth, or rather the Mouth-Scorvey, and Scorbutick Legs, or Leg-Scorvey; to which very aptly a third may be added, to wit the Joynt-Scorvey. The former con∣sists of Swelled, Laxe, Spungy, Dis∣coloured, sore Gums, loose Teeth, that in process of time do inevitably rot or cariate, and a stinking Breath; which as they ascend through various degrees to an extremity, do render the disease very incommodious, have∣ing observed the tumefaction of the Gums in some so luxuriant, as to ob∣struct the Lips in closing, appearing more like a Fungus grown to the Jaw, then Gums; on the contrary in o∣thers,
the Gums have been intirely corroded away, so as the , or juncture of the Teeth, and Jaw, might have been evidently discerned; and you may receive it for a truth, that the corrosion was continuated with that rapid violence, in the Lips of a certain Scorbutick Dutchman, who for cure was admitted into the Hospital at Leyden, that being quite devoured, the Teeth were left bare, and exposed to the Air: wherefore note, that the first degree of a foul or pu∣trid Mouth is a swelling of the Gums, through a thin serous or ichorous blood, soon after disposed to be pres∣sed out of its bounds, with the least touch of a Finger, insomuch that it's fraequently observed, that Scor∣buticks biting a peice of bread, the remainder in their hands will ap∣pear all bloody about the edges: Hereupon the Gums fissure or cleave, afterwards changing into phagedaenic ulcers, which not seldom are suc∣ceeded by malignant cancerous ulcers, threatning an extream deformity and devoration of all the circumjacent parts.
§ 2. More than once I have given advice for little hard unaequal swellings about the inside of the Lips, some∣times under the Tongue, of a livid, or not infraequently of an ash colour and dolorous. These by Chyrurgi∣ons are termed Cancers of the Mouth, and indeed are little less than Cance∣rous, and consequently Scorbutick. Neither would I have you judge it a Paradox, if I assert an Endemic Cancer in whatsoever part, to be an extream degree of a Scorvey; as hereafter may be more plainly repraesented. Of the nature of the praemised Cancers in the Mouth, doth participate a Ranula, a Tubercle under the Tongue, so cal∣led, because being an impediment to the free motion of the Tongue, in pronouncing words, that contain the Liquids L or R, it occasions them to sound frog-like. The Cure hereof is vsually attempted by Astringents and Acids, as Oyl of Vitriol and others, whence seldom or never a succes being answered to the intention of the Chy∣rurgion, converts his hopes to the sharp Steel, or the Fire. But were it
supposed scorbutick, as many other signs accompanying, do certainly evince it to be, might infallibly per∣form the Cure by a Scorbutic To∣pick. § 3. A vagous re-current Tooth-ach, especially in Women, doth often act a part in the Syndrome of a Mouth-Scor∣vey, which in distinction to the ordi∣nary Tooth-ach, hath concomitant a very grating pain, with a violent sa∣livation of thin saline Rheum; and as it is that, which for Cure hath been an Opprobrium Medicorum, for their frustraneous applications, so the most facile and indubious method of sola∣ging this pain by Antiscorbuticks, is an argument, there hath been a Hallu∣cination, in discerning the true cause of it. § 4. Grandines, or little whitish hard swellings, of the bigness of a Radish seed, with a small perforation in the middle, and running about the Tongue, Gums, Palate, and inside of the Cheeks, is a Scorbutick Thrush, and cured onely by Antiscorbuticks.
And those that have been curious Ob∣servers in their practice, can attest, there is a periodical swelling of the Tonsils (or Almonds under the Ears) and a relaxation of the Vvula and Palat, which must be accounted a∣mongst the Diagnosticks of a Mouth-Scorvey; and such being render'd in∣finitely worse by the use of ordinary astringents, I have cured with a Gar∣garism of Betony, Sage and Scorvey-grass, Elder and Rosemary-flowers, and Nettle-seeds, boyl'd in white Wine and Water, with a few drops of spirit of Sal-armoniac, instilled in∣to the decoction; but not without assistance of internal Medicines. § 5. The discoloration of the Gums in a Scorbutick Mouth first appears in a deep red, afterwards in a spotted yellow, then duskish and leadish, and at last a cadaverous pale, or a cancer∣ous black. The Veins about the Gums, under the Tongue, and the inside of the Lips, shew unaequal, swell'd and ill-colour'd. The sore∣ness of the Gums feels sometimes burn∣ing, or as if prick'd with Needles;
other times the pain lies deep about the Periostium, or Membrane of the Jaw, not unlike the Tooth-ach. § 6. Among the Pathognomonics of a Mouth-Scorvey, none is more cer∣tainly concomitant than a Stinking Breath; insomuch that it is beyond all contradiction, where there is a continual stink of Breath, (evident causes, as Ulcers of the Mouth, Throat and Lungs always excepted) there is a confirmed, or at least a growing Scorvey: and among all those Scor∣buticks I ever was concerned with in relation to their cure, I never found that symptom absent; which if by the course of some years it be established in a deep radication, is refractory to all cure; if recent, all hope is repo∣sed in a strict Scorbutick method. And for this so ungrateful symptom, the sle Specifick is the Urinous Spirit of Sal Armoniack. Now upon the As∣sumption, that the Scorvey is an Ende∣mick Malady to our Island, you must suppose a stinking Breath very popu∣lar, which indeed will not be dispu∣ted by one, that possesses the right use
of his Nose; and those that are ex∣quisitely sensible in that Organ, shall tell you, that the Cabins of Ships ex∣pire a stronger Air of Scorbutick stinking Breaths, than of Pitch or Tar. § 7. This Chapter we will limit with the subnexion of another Scorbutick Symptom, not much receding from a stinking Breath, viz. Fistuls in the Angles of the Mouth, and Root of the Gums, which being squeezed three or four times a day, render a very pu∣trid matter, the spring whereof is or∣dinarily deprehended in a Scorbutick small Glandul. CHAP. III. Of the Leg-Scorvey. 1. A Description of the Leg-Scorvey. 2. A more ample Declaration of its Symptoms. 3. Of Scorbutick Vl∣cers. 4. Of Scorbutick Leg-pins. 5. Of Varicous Legs. § 1. THe Scorvey particularly exer∣ting its enmity on parts so distant as the Mouth and Legs, speaks
it a Disease, requiring a more distinct Consideration; and therefore as in the former, so in this latter is designed to give you a very articulate Descripti∣on: but observe by the way, that a lassitude and feebleness of the Knees is common also to a Mouth-Scorvey. The Leg-Scorvey comprehends a great lassitude and weakness of the Knees and Ankles, spots and blotches of several figures and colours on the Shins, and particularly just below the Knee, and also near the Ankles, Pu∣stuls, uneven Tumours and Tubercles of Purpre Variegated Red. Oedema∣tous Legs, with thick, hard, callous, livid, or sometimes brown red Skin about the Ancle, ulcers on the Shin, and near the Ankle, pains of the Knees, likewise deep pains along the Shin∣bone, continuing all day, but raging most in the night, are all fraequent con∣comitants of the Leg-Scorvey. § 2. The feebleness of the Knees and Ankles coming gradually upon you; without any evident praeceding Dis∣ease, or any suddain alteration of looks, or habit of body; is an Item
sufficient to imform you what's at hand: Namely, Spots first red, and then yellow, livid, and at last of an ash colour; upon this expect blotch∣es along the side of your Legs, ap∣pearing first reddish, then yellowish very like an Erysipelas, but yet dif∣ferent from it, because there is not that heat and smart in Scorbutick blotches; neither are they so fiery, or corrode∣ing, a to be converted immediately into ulcers, but grow rough and peel off. These generaly are succeeded by pustles, turbercles, or boches and tumors; at first of an uncertain co∣lour, in one part deep red, in ano∣ther pale; though upon a small interval of time turn deep red all over, grow∣ing exceeding painful and hot, a sign of their being ready to burst out into Ulcers, or nasty Scabs. § 3. Scorbutick ulcers, especially those on the Shins, and near the Ancle, upon a short continuance grow callous about the Lips, within painful, as if prick'd with Needles; their flesh appearing torn, uneven, of an ill aspect, the Lips tumid, the matter undigested
thin, and ichorous, at length turns sor∣did, phagedaenic, and cancerous; the bone underneath contracts a Caries or Spina Ventosa. §. 4. Scorbutick Leg-pains, either haunt the Tendons about the Knee and Ancle, or the Membranes of the Muscles, or the Periostium. A Ten∣dinous pain, is a shrinking or contra∣cting Soreness; that of the Membranes of the Muscles sharp and distending, that of the Periostium contunding and grating. §. 5. To these add a Varicous Leg, when the Veins are Tumefied to an extraordinary Protuberance. The Effect of all these praemised Symptoms doth for the most part Result into Gross, Deformed, Tumefied Legs, some appearing full of Botches, others Tumefied, so as to pit upon the pres∣sure of a Finger, and variously Dis∣colour'd all over, like the Shins of those, that sit too near the Fire in the Winter; such Monstrously Tumefied Legs are fraequently observed amongst Dutch Skippers.
CHAP. IV. Of the Joynt-Scorvey. 1. Symptoms of the Joynt-Scorvey. 2. Description of the Joynt-Evil. 3. External Rheumatisms Scorbu∣tick. 4. Internal Rheumatisms Scorbutick also. 5. Frangibility and Cracking of the Joynts. 6. The Gout is not a Pain in the Joynt. 7. The Seat of the Gout. 8. The kinds of the Gout. §. 1. THat they are incommoded with an Universal Sore∣ness of Limbs, especially Arms, Shoulders, Neck-bones, and along down their Back, about the Brest, and round the Middle, with a Lassi∣tude, or Weariness, and no Disposition at all to stir or move, but inclined to Drowsiness and Heaviness, is the Com∣plaint of many, upon the least alteration of Weather, who beyond all (perad∣venture) must be termed troubled with the Joynt-Scorvey; provided the said Lassitude be not such, as ordinari∣ly is a praecursor to a Fevor. Neither
is this Species, or sort of Scorvey only circumscribed with the praenumera∣ted Symptoms, but is also applicable to those, whose Articles or Joynts are subject to Crackle upon a sudden Mo∣tion. §. 2. The Scorvey infesting the Joynts, doth by means of an Aflux of Virulent Humors, not seldom pro∣duce gross Tumors and Tubercles, of a fiery purple appearance, and a very painful Sensation, to which is conse∣quent an Immobility of the Articles, and not long after the Skin being so Cancerously tumefied, as frequently happens about the Joynts of the Fin∣gers, Knuckles, Wrists, Elbows, Knees, Ancles and Toes, is perforated by an horous, Raw, Indigested, Thin, Serous, Livid, and sometimes yellow Sanies or Matter, which Gleeting through a small Orifice, that soon grows Callous, and therefore not being totally and freely Evacuated, occa∣sions the Bone to Cariate, which com∣monly by Exfoliation, or rather Cor∣rosion, Nature doth expel in little shatter'd mouldering splinters. The
impure Nutriment the Conception as∣sumeth in the Womb, rendreth Chil∣dren more subject to this kind of Scor∣vey, than others of Riper years, and is vulgarly stiled the Joynt-Evil, and some will know it by no other Name than the Kings-evil, which properly denotes only Scrophulous and Strumatick Kernels and Tumors, though beyond all scruple are of the same Production with the former, and consequently highly Scorbutick. Nei∣ther are a Fistula Lachrymalis, and other malignant Issues near the Angles of the Eyes, or those Epiphora's, or run∣ing of the Eyes, different in Causali∣ty and Constitution from either of the fore-mentioned. §. 3. Another sort of Joynt-Scor∣vey is specified in Rheumatisms, which generally declare themselves by pains of the Joynts, or rather in some by Tortures of the extream Articles, as Wrists, Knuckles, Joynts of the Fin∣gers, Elbows, Shoulders, Hips, Knees, Ancles, Toes, and worst of all, when the impetuous flood of Salin Rheum streams to the Neck, and Back-bone.
(Spina Cervicis & dorsi.) Pains of this Nature are so Violent, that for Acuteness are not parallel'd by ordi∣nary Gout-pains. In like manner this sort of Rheumatism doth oft rudely afflict the sides of the Head, decur∣ring from the Bregma, to the upper and lower Mandibles, and Roots of the Teeth, shooting like Darts from one part of the Head to the o∣ther, and with so quick a Perculsive motion, that Lightning and Blasts seem slow to it. §. 4. Practical Observations de∣clare to us a two-fold Rheumatism, External and Internal. The former is just now praemised: The latter is discovered by Internal, Acute, Fugi∣tive pains, moving Erratically from one Bowel to another, thence possi∣bly to the Guts, and thence again it may be to the Ambient Skin, or to some other Bowel, or the Brest; the quality of these Internal pains, is for suddain and violent Motion, resem∣bling External Rheumatisms; and for Acuteness, forceth the Pati∣ent to scriech out, lamenting his
pain, now in one place, praesently after in another, and suddenly a∣gain in another, to no small Amaze∣ment of his Visiters; since for a small interval being free from pain, feel∣ing himself very well, and entertain∣ing his Friends with Discourse, on a suddain a shooting pain shall take him, and alter the Scene to a contrary Disposition. Internal Rheumatisms are generally of a taedious continua∣tion, though the pains are far more brisk at one time than another, and sometimes do make a Truce with the Patient for a few Dayes or sometimes Weeks, but in the interim detain him in a neuter Estate, which can be determined neither well nor ill, but weak; and thus I have heard of several, whose Recovery was scarce accomplisht in several Years; but that might partly be imputed to the ill address of the Physician, being un∣skil'd in managing that Disease. §. 5. Among divers Joynt-Scorbu∣ticks, it hath been Remarked, their Bones have been very Frangible, that upon very small occasions, they have had the misfortune of breaking their
Legs, Arms, Bones of the Hand, and Fingers; but before this can arrive, another Symptom doth ever praecede, namely, a Cracking and Noise of the Joynts, when they are moved. It argues him much a stranger to Practice and Experience, that never observed an Arthritick or Gouty-Scorvey, be∣ing such a sort of Counter-natural affection, as besets the parts near the Joynts with Corrosive Salin Ichors, and through them attaques them with ve∣ry Lacerative and Terebrating pains, and such as commonly in the Night season Duplicate their Fury. In this Disease, as it's Genuine distincti∣on from other Gouts, would certain∣ly very much conduce to the Solace∣ment of the Patient, and his compleat Recovery; so it would no less add to the Reputation of the Physician, and therefore shall in their places amplifie upon it's Description, Causes, Signs and Cure. §. 6. Two Bones being tied toge∣ther, that place where they meet is properly termed the Joynt, from be∣ing joyned together, or Juncture, or Articulation. Physicians also stile it
an Article, but improperly, the word Articulus importing a Diminutive of Artus, Latiniz'd from , a Mem∣ber. Moreover, Bones that are Di∣arthrotically joyned, are fastened to∣gether, besides particular Ligaments, by a common Ligament or Band growing usually from the lower part of the Apophyse of one Bone, and inserted into the upper part of the A∣pophyse of the other Bone. This common Ligament or Band is in point of substance tough, thick, dense and extensive, and by reason of its close Compacture, and immediate Adhaesion and Circumvesture, doth refuse pas∣sage to all Arthritick humours, whence may be Deduced, the Gout is not properly to be termed a Joynt-disease; whereunto this Instance contributes an unquaestionable Evidence, that the Internal parts of the Joynt being Car∣tilaginous, and the Ambient parts Liga∣ments, are both Insensible and Inca∣pable of Sensation: So that we must conclude the Universal Sentiment up∣on this particular a vulgar Error, growing from an Inadvertency and blind Ignorance in Anatomy.
§. 7. We are therefore to state the Parts nearest adjacent (above or below) to the Joynt, the Seat of the Gout, which by reason of the Termi∣nation of the Tendons, and Circum∣vesture of the Periostium, are exqui∣sitely Sensible, and exposed to the greatest Tortures. §. 8. The Joynts that are most commonly haunted by the Gout, are the Hip, where it's called the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout; the Knees, where it's termed the Knee-Gout, or Gonagra; the Feet, which comprehends also the Ancles, and here it's named the Podagra, or Foot-Gout; and the Hands, including also the Wrists, thence called Chiragra, or Hand-Gout. Besides these, most other Joynts, as Shoulders, Elbow, and Back and Neck-bones, are sometimes also at∣tacqued by those furious pains. Why these last recited Junctures are not so much exposed to Gout pains, as the former, is, because being wrapt about with fleshy Tendons, and Muscles, re∣ceive thence a great assistance of heat and warmth, whereby the temperament
of those parts are much comforted, the External cold resisted, and those Saline Acrimonious Ichors soon dissipated. The periodical Revolutions of these Arthritick Scorveys, are an Ar∣gument to me, they are subject to a Praedominance of both the Lumina∣ries: For from the Seasons produced by the Suns Peragration, they are Re∣suscitated Spring and Fall; and the Lunar Circuits occasion their appear∣ance, and Return in many Bodies as ordinarily, as the monthly Ma∣ladies of Women, scarce any Sex or Age under Twelve or Fourteen, being exempted from the fore-mentioned Arthritick Scorvey; But it's otherwise in the Gout, which ordinarily rather invades the Crazie Bodies of Super-an∣nuated Persons. In contra-distinction to an Arthri∣tick Scorvey, that's fixt to a part, viz. To the Hip, Knee, or Foot, as hath been just now Praeliminated; there is also observed an Arthritis vaga, or Fugitive Arthritick Scorvey; but this being not different from an External Rheumatism, whereof hath been men∣tioned before, shall supersede any fur∣ther Explanation.
It will hardly escape the Animad∣version of many Perusers, that I have beyond the Sentiment of other Phy∣sicians, reduced the Praeternatural af∣fections treated of here in this Chap∣ter, within the Latitude of the Scor∣vey. Wherefore that I may not de∣serve a Sinister Censure, I will offer those Arguments, that to me were suf∣ficient Motives, which if to others they seem less persuasive, I need only tell them, I may with as much right range them in the Train of the Scorvey, as Eugalen, Solomon Alber∣tus, Wierus, and twenty more have given place to half the known Sym∣toms of the Diseased Body of Man, in the List of Scorbutick Attendants. Touching the Insertion of the Scor∣butick Lassitude in the first Article, all Authors that have Treated on the Scorvey, have granted that Symptom almost so Universal, as to be a Pathog∣nomonick inseparable. In relation to that of the second Article, most may find difficulty, to Identifie it with the Scorvey, since it's not easie to discern one and the same Disease, to be the same in two or more
several Patients; much less a Disease that's so Various and Multiform, featu∣red with several Shapes and Signa∣tures in several Subjects: Wherefore I must be obliged to a Recital of cer∣tain Marks, and received Rules, where∣by Authors do either Diversify or Identifie Diseases. Causes of the same Nature and Effi∣ciency, though Univocal, do not al∣wayes produce the same Effects, and therefore consequently (though two or more Diseases are engendred by the same Efficients, and out of the same Matter) they may be different Disea∣ses, whence may be objected, that those Joynt-Diseases, though issuing from the same Causes the Scorvey is deri∣ved from, it's no Argument they should be termed the Scorvey. By this As∣sertion, the Peripatetick Maxim seems to be suspected, viz. Posita causa, po∣nitur effectus; ergo posita causa Scorbu∣tica, ponuntur effectus Scorbutici: And all Diseases that are produced by a Scorbutick cause, must be the Scor∣vey. You must observe the truth of this Theorem doth depend upon certain
Limitations, namely, a cause to be qualified to produce the same Effects, must be Univocal, and a causa per se; for otherwise (though granted Uni∣vocal) its causality may be per acci∣dens. Depravated, and Occasioned to an Aberrancy by other causes: For instance in the Scorvey, imagine it's Production from a corrupt Melancho∣ly; that may Stagnate in the Spleen, which being supposed in two several Bodies; in the one possibly it may constitute Symptoms, that are com∣monly Concomitants of the Scorvey; in the other, because there may be a mixture of Vitiated Choler, or of a Serum affected with an ill Quality, or a great Infirmity of some Entrail; the aforesaid supposed Scorbutick cause shall be so Obtused, Altered, or In∣dued with a different Efficiency, that the Diseases so produced, shall be no Scorvey, but some other Counter-na∣tural affection. This may also very properly be exemplified in Coelestial Causes, among which conceive a Pla∣net in such a Sign, and such a Degree, by his influence to produce certain Effects, upon any supposed Sublunary
body; at its return to the same Sign and Degree, possibly it shall not be a cause of the same Effects, because through the Radiations of other Fir∣mamentary lights, it's influence shall be directed and limited to another Effect much different: Whence ha∣ving rendred the Ground of the Va∣riation of Symptoms in the Body of Man obvious, my next affair is to propose a Theorem whereby Diseases are Identified. Diseases are computed the same, that are constituted by the same Univocal Causes, not aberring further per acci∣dens, than that those symptoms that are effected per se, may in Number and Specification exceed those, that are produced per accidens. Moreover, Diseases by their Intrinsick significa∣tion imply Parts primarily affected, whereof they are Diseases; and therefore Diseases cannot be Iden∣fied, unless the parts affected prima∣rily be the same; which we must now explain to be the same in the Scorvey, and in the Joynt-Evil, and Gout-Scor∣vey. None vary from this Opinion, that the parts Primarily and Original∣ly
affected in the Scorvey, are all the chief parts of the Inferior Cavity, that appertain to the Natural Faculty, whose office is to Confect the Chyle, Elaborate and Depurate the Blood, which are the Stomack, Spleen and Liver. The Chyle in those, that are affli∣cted with the Gout and Joynt-Evil, receiving a Malign Tincture and Im∣pression, from an ill qualified Dissol∣vent, is a praegnant Evidence, the Stomack is a part affected; and the aforesaid Chyle upon its arrival with∣in the Spleen and Liver, induing a quality of a Malignanter efficacy, ex∣presly proves, both those Entrails aequally parts affected, and conse∣quently the parts radically or prima∣rily affected are the same. Neither can I discern any difference in the Causes of both, residing in a corrupt Salt, fixt or volatil. It must then be the difference of symp∣toms, that creates suspicion of the Diversity between these Joynt-Dis∣eases, and the Scorvey, which as was intimated before, may be remarked in all Universal Diseases, varying in
two or more Bodies, in several symp∣toms, and yet are deemed the same Disease: A continual acute Feaver (which I call an Universal Distemper, because it's symptoms are Universal, and disturb all the parts of the Body in their several Functions) in one is attended with Vomitings, in the other with a Looseness, in a third with nei∣ther; which nevertheless, are known and determinated Concomitants of a continual acute Feaver in all. In thi Labyrinth, the Position stated in the beginning of this Paragraph, con∣ducts me to an Expedient of surpas∣sing the difficulty, viz. The symptom that Identifie Diseases, do immediate∣ly, and per se, emanate from them, in or near the parts affected: For in∣stance, if the Heart be seized with a Disease, the Pulsation doth general∣ly express it, being a symptom that immediately consecutes the Distem∣per in the part affected, which is the Heart; the like may be observed in all Diseases. These must be such as properly are terms Pathognomonick, and by Industry, and fraequent Expe∣rience, may be discerned in most Di∣stempers,
though symptoms that are occasioned per accidens are Infinite, and common to many Diseases. Now to our Affair; In the recited Joynt-Diseases, and Gout-Scorvey, the ra∣dical symptoms are an ill Confecti∣on of the Chyle, or a vitiated Elabo∣ration or Depuration of the Chyme; a propagation of Malign Seminaries, in the Bowels and Blood, that renders Diseases contagious, Haereditary, and most Obstinate; these being likewise symptoms in the Scorvey, I judge I have justly Identified them; but that will more amply appear in my subsequent Discourse. Add hereunto, that in Identified Diseases, the Procatartick causes are the same, which in these various kinds of the Scorvey, is veri∣fied in a Salin Air and Diet, whence both the Internal, Antecedent and Continent causes afterwards take their Original, which also for a certain space continue the same, until that by a continuated morbifick Action and Calcination, they pass into a contrary Nature, from an Acid, to an Alcali, as among Chymical processes, appears in Acid Tartar, which by Calcinati∣on
makes a Transition into an Alcali∣ous Salt of Tartar; nevertheless as the Acid Salt of Tartar, and the Al∣calious Salt of Tartar, though con∣trary, do both retain the same name of Salt of Tartar; so an Acid Scorvey, and an Alcalious Scorvey, retain the same Denomination of a Scorvey, or are Identified in the same Name. Be∣fore I limit this Chapter, I must pro∣pose an Argument of a greater Con∣sequence, namely, That those Joynt-Diseases and Gout-Scorvey, are only to be removed by an Antiscorbutick course; but not such as is directed by the praescriptions of the Vulgar, who are as blind in these Distempers, as they commonly are in Feavers and Small-Pox.
CHAP. V. Of the Causes of the Mouth-Scorvey. 1. A scrutiny into some Procatartick and occasional Causes of the Mouth-Scorvey. 2. The Internal cause of the Mouth-Scorvey proved. 3. The praeparation of Mercury Sublimate corrosive examined. 4. The Spittle is Imbued with several sorts of Salts at several Seasons. 5. That it is not every Acid is the cause of the Sorvey. 6. Of Spirit of Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, and Tartar. 7. That some Acids are good Remedies against the Scorvey. 8. Chymical Theorems. 9. Turbith Mineral examined. 10. How a Salivation is Occasioned. 11. Observations uon the Dissection of the Stomach. 12. Why one is apt to Spit after the taking of any ungrateful Medicine. 13. Ani∣madversions upon the Ferment of the Stomach. 14. The Succus Pancre∣aticus
Silvii rejected. 15. That the Succus Pancreaticus doth never Se∣cundum Naturam flow to the Sto∣mack; that naturally it is not Acid, but Sweet. 16. Why Nature hath endued the Pancreatick juice, with a lentour and sweetness. 17. Proof that it is sweet. 18. Why the Stomack is provided with so great a number of Lymphatick Channels. The man∣ner of the Concoction in the Stomack. 19. That the Digestive faculty is most potent about the upper Region of the Ventricle. 20. The manner of separation of the Concoct∣ed from the crude Chyle, with several Remarks upon the Dissolvent, or Mock-ferment of the Stomack. 21. The manner how Liquors turn Acid. §. 1. BY a Scrutiny into some Proca∣tartick and Occasional Causes, we may possibly be Conducted into a Path, of discovering the Immediate and Continent causality of the Mouth-Scorvey; and therefore converting our Observation on the Effects of Spi∣rit of Vitriol, Nitre, Vinegar, &c. We
shall on the aestimate of the use of a∣ny of them, mixt with Powders into Dentifrice, or Instilled into a Li∣quor for a Collution of the Mouth, award, they are as offensive as any Internal cause, by Rotting and Black∣ing the Teeth, raising Pain and Swel∣ling in the Gums, and moving a thin Sputation. §. 2. Mercury externally by Con∣friction forced into the Pores, or In∣ternally taken in the form of a sub∣dued Sublimate, or Praecipitate, soon Ravages the Mouth, exactly like, a Scorbutick Cause, since it for∣ces up a Humour from within, that swells, Fissures, Ulcers, Pains the Gums and the Mouth, Looseneth and Rots the Teeth, Salivates, and occa∣sions a fowl stink of Breath; all which symptoms, if we can demonstrate to take their rise from Effluviums issuing from an Acid Salt, mercurial praepa∣rations have all their dependance on, and which within their most intime and centrical Particles, do contain a most Subtile Vibrating and Volatil Salt, will result into a praemiss, whence no
Ingenious Reader, but with me, will conclude a Mouth-Scorvey to be En∣gendred by a corrupt Acid Salt ren∣dred fluid, and a Volatil Salt conver∣ted into corrosive, inordinate in mo∣tion, and united with a Fuliginous Salt. That you may be convinced of this Hypothetick proposition, take Inspection into the various processes of Mercurial Elaborations, where you find Mercury fixt (but very imperfect∣ly) into Praecipitates, Sublimates, Spirits, and Salts, of divers Shapes and Colours, viz. Into White, Red and Yellow Praecipitates, by Aqua Fortis, Spir. Nitr. Spir. Sal. Ol. Vitr. all which, take notice, are vehement∣ly Acid; and thence conceive, that the Volatil Salt, or Fugitive Spirits, latent in Mercury, are only to be tied by an acid Vinculum. If upon this you design to reduce Mercury (whe∣ther Praecipitate, or Sublimate, or a∣ny other Praeparation) to its former shape of Quick-silver, it's easily at∣tained, by freeing it from that acid Vinculum, in mixing it with a propor∣tion of Calx Viv. Gypsum, Soap-ashes, Sal Tartari, &c. and driving it through
a Retort, whereunto it readily yields by means of those Alcalized, or fiery fixt Salts, mortifying the Acid. So that by the Rule of Contraries, if an Alcali reduces Mercury, the Conse∣quence is, it was detained by an Acid. §. 3. The Sequel is farther illustra∣ted in the praeparation of Sublimate Corrosive, the Quick-silver being first grinded with Salt Peter, Vitriol, or Common Salt, wherein being latent a most potent Acid (as appears by their Reverberatory distillations) doth soon invade and penetrate the body of the Mercury, and thereupon en∣countring with its most subtil and fugitive Minims, arrests, and in some degree doth fix them, qualifying their Volatil levity with it's ponderous Acid, and therein it's discernably as∣sisted by affusing a few drops of di∣stilled Vinegar, or other Acid Spirit, whilst the Salts and Mercury are grind∣ing together. Upon this Mixture, that Salin Lixivious taste of the Salts, before their Coalescence with the Mercury, is changed into a pontick
Acid taste. And because Ther eben∣thine is so praegnant of an Acid spirit (as the Rectified spirit thereof to the Tongue, is a palpable proof) it's therefore the chief refine, that is ca∣pable of subduing Mercury, where∣unto it's Lentour and Glutinous facul∣ty doth very much contribute. §. 4. Hence let us make a nearer approach, to what is a Branch of my Subject, and necessarily conclude, that Spittle (Saliva) is endued with a Turgency of Acid Particles, far more potent, than sharp distilled Vinegar, because it's so effectual in Amortizing or Fixing Quick-silver, which may likewise be performed by the Acid juice of Limons: But observe like∣wise, that Spittle is rendred Acid, only towards the latter end of the Concocti∣on of the Stomack, from the Acour of the Dissolvent Liquour, and therefore the Morning-fasting-spittle is recom∣mended for the purpose above men∣tioned. Moreover, take this Re∣mark with you, That the Spittle is imbued at several seasons with seve∣ral Salts; sometimes with Volatil, o∣ther
times with Lixivial salts, some∣times with Acid, and sometimes with mixt salts, according to the contents in the Capacity of the Stomack, and about it's tunics; so that all sorts of spittle is not proper for the Amorti∣zing of Mercury. §. 5. Now upon Compute of the whole matter, though your Reason may reap so much satisfaction, as to believe potent Acids, the sole subdu∣ers of Mercury, and capable of arrest∣ing its Fugitive particles; yet we must not be so facil, as to concede all Acids pernicious in the same Latitude with Mercury coagulated, of acting upon Liquours of the Body, and rendring them Scorbutick aggressors; for the greater number of Acids, Admini∣stred with rules of Caution and Pru∣dence, obtaining a virtue of Repel∣ling and Suppressing some kind of Scorbutick symptoms, bear an evi∣dent Testimony of the contrary. §. 6. Spirit of Salt Marin (I mean not the Graecian Impostor's, but) dexter∣ously praepared, according to the rules of the Spagyrick Art, hath acquired a good Character to some Physicians,
for praescribing it to their Scorbutick Patients: And I were to blame for my silence, should I praetermit the great Effects of Spirit of Nitre, Phi∣losophically purged from its Arseni∣cal fumes, not a few Scorbuticks ow∣ing their Recovery to this Acid from very obstinate accidents, that were true issues of that Disease. Neither can the performance of these praecited inciding deoppilative Acids, be justly called into doubt, since from the Spi∣rit of Vitriol, and Vinegar, (used in the Condiment of Capers, Samphire, &c.) though of a styptick Energy, advantage hath been received in the Cure of Scorbuticks and Spleneticks: If then these Corroding and Cerbe∣rous Acids merit a reception so just among the Apollinean Faculty, cer∣tainly, those that are acquainted with the true Process of the Acid spirit of Tartar, being so Penetrative, Atte∣nuating, Digestive, Ecphractick, and yet of an amicable Acour, can prae∣tend to a greater secret to Eradicate the Scorvey. By the way, ob∣serve, It is not against an Acid Scorvey they are such excellent Remedies, but
against a Lixivial one, which in the progress of this Discourse will be far∣ther Explained to you. §. 7. From this Praecurrent Illu∣stration, we may be assured in Opinion, that Acids by their native Qualification, or Corrosive to some Scorbutick bodies, and therefore it must be through a praeternatural Affe∣ction, they are enforced to constitute the Principles of the fore-cited Ma∣lady. On this occasion, it will not be Dissonant, to Analyse Mercury (as it is reduced to a Praecipitate, or Subli∣mate, or other Coagulated body, by acid Salts or Spirits) into its most Intime Syntheticks, whence the Ge∣nuine Procreatives of the Scorvey will more distinctly Emerge. §. 8. In order to the Unravelling of this so close knitted Mineral, I must first Repraesent to you these by me received Hermetick Theorems. 1. All Alcalies are contrary to Acids, and consequently do extinguish them, or if encountring in a lesser proportion only praefract them. Affuse the Alca∣lized Liquor of Tartar, to the Acid Oyl of Vitriol, in their just propor∣tions,
the Production will be a Salt of Tartar, much praefracted in its Al∣calized faculty, and a Salt of Vitriol much obtused in its Acidity; but if the Alcaly of Tartar be superiour in measure to the Acid of Vitriol, then it doth reduce the Vitriol to a Capul Mortuum, and intirely extinguish its Acidity. 2. All Volatil Salts are fixed by Acids. The Volatil salt of Harts∣horn, or Amber, being Irrorated with Spirit of Salt, is soon laid in sleep, and loses its Wings. 3. There is no Alcali, but in its in∣time and centrical Particles, contains a most Acid, Corroding, and Per∣forating Salt. Likewise, There is no Acid Salt, or Spirit, but in its cen∣trick Particles is lodged a most Ig∣neous Alcaly. Within the centrick of the Acid Oyl of Vitriol, there is an Igneous and Caustick alt. 4. Volatil Salt is nothing but the fixt Salt of any Body, Volatilized by the ad∣mixture of Sulphurous Particles. 5. The Purgative, or Vomitive, or other active faculty of Bodies, doth Emanate from their Volatil Salts, ei∣ther
by Irradiation, or Atomical Ef∣fluviums. From the Application of these to any particular Praeparation, we are to expect, what now we Dive into. To this purpose, let our ordinary Turbith Mineral, as it is in the London Pharmacopoea Transcribed by our Phy∣sicians out of Vnzerus, who Records the Invention of it to Adam Bo∣denstein, be our Subject, as best known to my Perusers, both for its Use and Process; though possibly this remarque may escape their know∣ledge; that whereas Directions are given in the Dispensatory, for affusing an Anatick proportion of dephlem'd Oyl of Vitriol to Mercury, purged from its plumbeous Recrements, which Evaporated, leaves a white residence in the bottom of the Bolt-head, to be sweet washt into a yel∣low Powder; the praescription of the fore-mentioned Bodenstein, requires an addition of Salt of Vitriol, in pro∣portion of half the weight to the Oyl of Vitriol, which renders the Re∣sult of the Elaboration less Churlish, and more effectual.
Your view on this discerns the most compact body of Mercury, dissolved by the Acid of Vitriol, its Fugitive spirits detained, or Volatil salt part∣ly fixed by its Pontick Liquor, or Acid Salt, and through their mutual Re-action so Elaborated, that in this Conjunct state have assumed neuter Faculties, not to be deprehended in either Singular: For the one is so emi∣nent in the Adstrictive, that in Hae∣morrhages both Internal and Exter∣nal it performs, what other Restrin∣gents or Emplasticks fail in. The other, viz. Quick-silver aims at no other Effects, than its weight or gra∣vity is capable to produce; but up∣on their Coalition, they remove most obstinate Diseases by Vomit, Stool, Urine, Sweat, and Salivation. From the Inference of the first and second Spagyrick Theorems, you must be convinced, it is the Volatil Salt of Mercury, and no other Constitu∣tive principle, is here Coagulated, because performed by its opposite, a fixing Acid, and thereby somewhat praefracted; for through the a∣batement of its Vibrating and Pene∣trating
Faculty, it's experienced not so capable, to Amalgamate the nobler Metals into a Calx. From the reper∣cussive particles of the said Mercuri∣al Volatil Salt, the Acid of Vitriol is not only obtused, but rendred a dis∣solvent corruptive Acid, whereas na∣turally it's known a great Praeserver from putrefaction and dissolution. And if you give credit to the fifth Axi∣om, which long Experience hath esta∣blisht firm and indubious among most Practicians; you must assert, not only the Vomitive and Purgative faculties to be issues of the Mercurial Volatil Salt, but also its Salivative quality; which explain'd in manner following, seems to me to be evident enough, how it exerts its power. §. 10. Turbith Mineral, or other crude Mercurial praeparation, is no sooner swallowed down into the Sto∣mack, but through its most subtil vo∣latil Salt, doth attaque the Salts, that are floating in the Liquor, the capa∣city of the Stomack is ever furnisht with more or less, (for an absolute driness, would certainly be attended
with a most dangerous Hiccoch, or Convulsion of the Stomack) which in some proportion converting into Particles of its own Nature, doth soon occasion a Turgency in the Li∣quor of the Stomack, (being an Ef∣fect of the Contrariety and Combat between the Mercurial Volatil Salt, and the Acid.) And the Lymph con∣tained in the Lymphaticks of the Sto∣mack, which Turgency continuated to the Ductus Salivales under the Tongue, and the others that termi∣nate about the Cheeks and Gums, causeth an overflowing of the fore∣said Lymph or Serum, where it's cal∣led Spittle or Saliva, quasi Sal Li∣quor, ceu Salsus Liquor, or Salt Spit∣tle, for such it is. Here we must make a Digression to a succinct Ex∣planation of the Fabrick, and Li∣quor of the Stomack, discovering the Nature of it, whence it Sourceth, and through what Creeks and Inoscu∣lations it makes its Irruption, and thence it will prove more facil, by a further pursuit to render the man∣ner of Salivation Obvious to the meanest Capacity.
§. 11. Experiment in this Case makes the strongest Plea, and there∣fore I will offer you my Observati∣on, Upon the Dissection of a Dog, fed with salt Meat intermixt with Sublimate Corrosive, and thereup∣on most thirstily Lapping a great quantity of Water, wherein Pease had been boyled, and immediately strangled. I was chiefly intentive on a strict view and research of the Sto∣mack, in whose External Surface or Tunic, being a process of the Perito∣naeum, the Coeliac Arteries appeared very tumid and full, and eery where discernable to the Eye, accompanied with Lymphatick Vessels, that were also no less Turgid, and supported by a number of small Glanduls, which at other times remain hidden, because there is not so great a Confluence of Lymphatick matter, to swell them up. The Crusta carnosa and the In∣terior Tunic, separable in a Dog from one another, through this superfluous Irrigation were Fungous, and upon a pressure the Lympha exstilled at little Pores or Orifices; which probably may be conjectured the extremities
of the Inosculations of the Lympha∣tick Vessels. The dispersions of the Branches and Terminations of the foresaid Coeliac Artery, through the middle and inward Tunic, were ex∣treamly distended with Humors, and the Lymphatics every where through∣out both Tunics, no less visibly bur∣den'd with moisture, and upon a dili∣gent observe of their track, were found to ascend the Oesophagus, and to per∣forate the great Glanduls, and thence to the Tonsils, the Ranine, and other Glanduls of the Mouth. §. 12. Before I detected the Expa∣tiation of these Lymphatick Channels, could not out of any Author supply my self with the Reason, why upon the assuming of any ungrateful Medi∣cine, Purgative or Alterative, after a small interval, the Mouth doth sali∣vate a thin pellucid Serum; which from the praemised Discourse seems very evident: For upon the Combat between the Dissolvent Liquor (or that which is improperly called the Ferment) and the Volatil Particles of the Medicine, happens a Turgency,
which by continuation being likewise Impressed upon the Lymphaticks of the Tunics of the Ventricle, and Oesopha∣gus, must necessarily occasion an over∣flowing at the Termination of the Ductus Salivales, both of those under the Tongue, and the other on the sides of the Gums. §. 13. By the way, I must make one observe, how unsuccessful Au∣thors have been, in Imposing the name of Ferment upon the Acid juice of the Stomack, and describing its Source, or Original. The word Ferment, (as you may read more at large, in the first part of my Treatise, De Febribus, Cap. V.) is Universally taken to be that, which Clarifies and Exalts any compound Liquor, that's newly made by Decoction, Infusion, Expression, or otherwise, to a greater Perfection, by means of a Simpering (for Fer∣mentum takes its Derivation a Fre∣mendo, and not Fervendo) or a small Ebullition, whereby the Liquor is Sub∣tiliated or Attenuated, and the Hete∣rogeneous bodies separated into a Froth and Lees. This Signification
can in no manner be applied to the foresaid Acid juice, performing only the Office of Dissolving the Victuals received in the Stomack, and Coae∣quating it into a Cream, or Chyle; a word Originated from  to Dis∣solve: Wherefore there being only a Dissolution of what's Ingested, o a Production of Chyle attained by means of this Dissolvent Acid, and no Depuration or Exaltation; it doth more properly require the name of a Dissolvent Liquor, than of a Ferment, and consequently there is no Fermen∣tation in the Stomach, but only a Dissolution, and Coaequation; whence may be remarqued, how Truth is oft over-ruled by an impetuous Current of Opiniaters. §. 14. The source whence this A∣cid juice should stream, was for a long time asserted the Spleen, effusing through the Vas breve, into the Sto∣mack, which the Curiosity of Ana∣tomists observing not to be Pervi∣ous at its Termination, concluded there must be some other passage, through which the said Juice was
conveighed; but none durst praesume to assign it, until Sylvius, the late Physick-Professor of Leyden, did at∣tempt to prove this Acid juice to be engendred in the Pancreas, and there∣fore named it Succus Pancreaticus, whence through the Ductus Virsungia∣nus was by Regurgitation forced up into the Stomack. This Conception of Succus Pancreaticus hath so fond∣ly been Nursed by him, that in his Idea nova Prax. Medic. he doth Im∣peach it, to be the Productor of most Diseases. Much less than a Demon∣stration, for scarce a probability of this Acid Pancreatic Succus hath been offer'd by him, which so much Disgust∣ed Monsieur le Vasseur, a Physician Re∣gent of the Faculty of Paris, that he un∣dertook to Demolish that Principle in a small tract written in Latine, wherein he doth fiercely Impugnate his Trium∣virate of Morbifick Causes, (as he stiles it in his own Ideom) though without obtaining any Advantage on his Adversary, the one being no more Auspicious in Refelling the Acid Pancreatic juice, than the other in asserting it.
§. 15. In the first place, I find no Difficulty in maintaining, that the Succus Pancreaticus is at no time Se∣cundum Naturam propelled into the Stomack; for the Grand Channel, which is the Ductus Virsungianus, ter∣minating near the Confines of the Duodenum, and the Ilion, and Dis∣burdening the superfluous Juice into it, is naturally according to the Pe∣ristaltick motion, being performed by the Contraction of the Circular Fi∣bres, expelled and carried down∣wards; and if at any time it is forced into the Stomack, that must needs happen by means of the Inversion of the Peristaltic motion (namely, the Circular Fibres contracting from below upwards) which undoubtedly is Con∣vulsive, being occasioned through a Sti∣mulation of the said Juice, Vitiated or Obstructed, and is absolutely Con∣tra Naturam. But if according to the Tenour of this Discourse, the Pancrea∣tic Juice is Regurgitated into the Sto∣mack; is so far from Pleasing or De∣lighting it, through that amicable Acour, that's Fictitiously attributed to it, that it occasions a maukish
Nauseousness and Salivation, which Re vera are effects of a sweetish thick moistening Water, contrary to what flows from the Causality of an Acid Humour; and nothing is observed, to have a greater share, in dissolving the Tone of the Stomack, and contribu∣ting Matter to those Slimy Ropy Crudities, plaistered to the sides of the Stomack, than this Incrassated Pancre∣atic juice. So that it must be belie∣ved, that this kind of Fallacious Doctrine is by those, that for their seeming parts are placed in the School Chairs, violently Imposed upon their Scholars, who Imbibing this in their Infant Studies, like Principles of Re∣ligion, aesteem it a great Crime, ever to doubt of what their Masters in∣fused into them. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem, Testa diu, &c. §. 16. In its natural Qualification, I am assured, the Pancreatic juice par∣takes of no Acidity, proof thereof shall be offered you below. The
Pancreas to me, seems to be the Sinck of the Lymphatick Vessels, whither they Post the superfluous Lymph, that hath done its Task, to be Evacuated as an Excrement. But here the Wis∣dom of Nature is very remarkable, in Inserting the Ductus Pancreaticus, or Virsungianus into the Duodenum, neighbouring so near to the Ductu Cholidochus; the one namely the Cho∣lidochus, serving the Gall Bladder, (Cystis bilis) as a Conduit to Dis∣gourge the overflowing Choler into the Guts, which otherwise through its extream Amaritude, and Lixivious cor∣rosive Salt, being rendered so Superla∣tively sharp and detergent, would offer violence to the most sensible small Guts, and soon gnaw off its Internal Tunic, were it not that meeting with this Sweetish, Thick, Moistening Water, Extilling from the Ductus Pancreati∣cus, it was soon allayed, and qualified with its Lenitive and Dulcifying Len∣tour. A further use Nature hath De∣stined it to, is to Moisten, and render the Internal Tunic of the Guts Glib and Slippery, for to Promote, and Fa∣cilitate the descent of Excrements, be∣ing
moreover the material Cause of that Pituita, or Fleam, which is ever found in the small Guts, in the state of Health. Neither do I give the least Credit to those Capricious Opi∣nions, the fore-named Sylvius hath Superstructed upon so Erroneous a Fundamental, as this Acid Pancreatic juice, viz. 1. That there daily happens a mild Effervescency between the Bilis and that Juice, which I am confident a Healthful Person is altogether In∣sensible of, unless Indulging his Ape∣tite in a large Rouse of Strong Li∣quor. 2. That through a Vitiate Acidity of this Juice, are occasioned Dysente∣ries, Gripes, Vomitings, and what not; read Chap. V. Lib. Praecitat. 3. That all Diseases depend on the Praeternatural disposition of his Tri∣umviral Humour: To wit, Fleam, Choler, and this Pancreatic juice; but for all this, not one syllable of Proof, rather introducing a Thou∣sand Absurdities on the Neck of an∣other. §. 17. I am now Arrived, where I
am to Illustrate to you, the Pancrea∣tic juice is so far remote from being Acid, that it's perfectly sweet. It's a Concession granted by all, That Moisture is more apt to turn Acid in an Extinct Body, than Living; as ap∣pears in Veal, which being kept too long, expires an acid steam. If so, then, 1. The Pancreatic juice, obtaining an Acidity in a Living Body, must necessarily assume a greater Acidity in a Body Expired; which is observed contrary, for the Juice that is expressed out of the Pancreas of a killed Calf, hath a clammy sweet taste, and cer∣tainly is endued with a far sweeter savour, whilst it contains a proportion of Volatil Salt within the Channels of a Living Body. 2. The Pancreas it self Raw or Boyl'd, pleases the Palate with a sweet taste, beyond any other sort of Flesh, which qualification can not be in a Body that engenders an Acid Juice, or daily is Irrigated with it. Propter quod unum quodque tale est, illud magis tale est. 3. Lymphatick Vessels about the Stomack, and those of the Pancreas,
both Deriving from the Spleen, and having a Communication and Com∣merce in the same Contents, namely Juices or Lymphs, It is not to be doubted, but both Juices of the Sto∣machick and the Pancreatick Lymphae∣ducts, participate of the same Nature, and Taste, which being deprehended sweet in the Stomack Lymphaeducts, can be no other in the Pancreatick. Medicines that Create some Labour to the Stomack, and move a Turgen∣cy in the Lymphatics of the Stomack, occasion an overflowing of the Ductus Salivales, or a Salivation of that very Lymph, or Juice, that was floating about the Ventricle, which is com∣monly pronounced by all, to have a Sweetish or Subdulce taste in the Mouth, and doubless, that of the Pancreas is not different. The man∣ner how is expressed before. 4. An Argument may be Deduced a causa; The Lymph of the Stoma∣chick and Pancreatick Vessels is Re∣plenisht, and well Saturated with Vo∣latil Salt, whose Nature is Experien∣ced, to Expel and Extinguish all Aci∣dity, and so consequently the fore∣said
Lymph must prove sweet, and in no wise Acid. §. 18. The Lymphatick Vessels be∣ing in great numbers directed from the Spleen to the Stomack, to Trans∣port thither a proportion of Lymph, that in the Percolation of the Blood, was attracted and assuged in∣to the said Lymphatick Vessels, being thorowly Saturated with Volatil Salt, transported through the Pores of the Stomachick Nerves, and Coeliac Arte∣ries, is Effused into the Stomack at such times when it hath received Victuals to Digest; for thereupon the Arterial Blood, and Vital Spirits are moved and attracted, and a heat Excited, whereby the Lymph being Attenu∣ated, rendered Turgid and the Ves∣sels Tumefied, is forced into the Sto∣mack in that quantity, as doth suffi∣ciently Relax the said Lymphaeducts. This Lymph by means of the said Vo∣latil Salt, is so Subtil, Penetrating, Attenuating, and Rarefying, that U∣niting with the Volatil Particles of the Liquor ingested, and that which by Mastication of the Victuals lies
Perfused and Dissolved, doth soon dis∣unite and dissolve the Vinculum of the solid Victuals, and being thorow∣ly mixed with the Liquid, is speedily reduced into a Cream or Chyle. Whilst this Attenuation and Solution is per∣forming, there is a Turgency occasi∣oned in the Capacity of the Stomack, which streightning the Arteries, that Amplexe the Stomack, do through Renix duplicate their Pulsation in Fraequency and fortitude, (as appears upon feeling the Pulse of the Carp after Dinner or Supper) whereby the Heat is much intended, and Copious Effumations of Vital Spirits or Arterial Volatil Salt, immitted into the said Capacity, which do most vigorously assist the Dissolution and Concoction of the Stomack. §. 19. That the Concoctive Facul∣ty is most Active, and Potent in the Fund, or bottom of the Stomack, hath been hitherto the blind Opinion of most Anatomists, upon Surmisal, that the Acid Ferment, which bears a great part in the Concoction, through its Gravity and Praeciptative quality,
is chiefly floating about the lower Re∣gion of the Ventricle: But if we sup∣pose, the Digestive Operation to be performed principally, by virtue of the Volatil Salt contained in the Pores of the Lymph, being of a Subliming and Ascending Nature; the Stomack by reason of those greater Nerves of the Sixth pair, and Fibres of the great∣est strength, Circumvesting the up∣per part of the Stomach to be most Robust, and the Heat and Dissolvent steems to be Reflected, Collected, and Augmented there; it must be confessed, that the Digestive Faculty is most Energic about the upper Re∣gion of the Ventricle. The next Par∣ticular in order to be Explain'd, is, when and how the Juice that is Con∣cocted, is separated from that, which is not yet perfectly digested, and af∣terwards Transmitted through the Pylorus, or Inferior Orifice of the Stomack, into the small Guts. That the whole content of Victuals and Drink is not so long retain'd in the Stomack, until the entire Mass be to∣tally Digested, is Experinced by all, that observe their Stomacks after
Meals, to grow gradually Lighter and less distended, and their Appetites like∣wise to return Gradually, and so conse∣quently the upper part of the Chyle be∣ing first Concocted, and swiming a-top like a Cream, is first praepared, and ready to be Effused thence in this manner: The Chyle being thorowly per∣fused with a great proportion of Volatil Salt, is so Rarefied and Tumid, that it now exceeds its bounds, and by as∣sistance of that Aculeous quality of the aforesaid Salin Particles, stimulates the Oblique Fibres to Expulsion, and still as in the same manner the Sto∣mack is gradually disburdened, so the Fibres gradually Contract and Corru∣gate the Tunics into a smaller Com∣prehension, until the whole be Trans∣mitted, and the Stomack reduced to a scarce greater Circumscription than a Fist. Several particulars here are of Remarque. The first, That the Finer and most Coaequate matter is Extermined first, and that which is somewhat of a gros∣ser Pulment next, until at last the coursest and Faeculent part succeeds to be wrought upon, which being Tough,
Tenacious and Glutinous, requires an Acid Dissolvent, by whose force, to∣gether with the Continuation of the heat, Animal and Vital Spirits, or Vivid Volatil Salt fuming out through the Pores of the Nerves and Arteries, the matter is more potently Incided, Comminuted and Dissolved, and the said Acid Dissolvent, or Mock-Ferment, obtaining a Pontique or A∣micable astringent Acidity, is quali∣fied thereby, to praecipitate the gross remainder of the Chyle into the Duo∣denum, and afterwards to fortifie, and Corroborate the distended and defa∣tigated Fibres of the Stomack by a gentle Astriction. The Second, That the Ventricle be∣ing full, the Pylorus or lower Orifice is Erected high, to praevent the too sudden Expulsion of the Chyle, and therefore no part but what is upper∣most, and rendred Turgid, by being throughly Imbued with Volatil Salt, can be Transmitted; but as the Chyle Ebbs lower, so the Pylorus seems like∣wise to Decline downwards by the Contraction of the Fund of the Sto∣mack, to give an easier passage to the
weighty and drossy remainder of the fore said Chyle, to which, should the Pylorus continue Mounted, at so great a distance from the Inferi∣our Region of the Ventricle, the Tra∣jection or Expulsion would prove ex∣tream difficult. The third is, That the last remain∣der in the Stomack, upon every com∣pleat Concoction, is nothing but Dross, among some Physicians called the Scoria, which being Commixt with the Acid Mock-Ferment, is prae∣cipitated into the Duodenum, where by reason of the Acrimony of the Commixt Acid, vellicates the said Gut, at the Terminations of the Cho∣lidochus, and the Ductus Pancreaticus, Irritating the former to Disburden its Cargo of Choler, and the latter its Incrassated Glutinous Lymph, of which three only the Excrements of the Guts do consist, viz. From the Dross or Scoria of the Stomack, they Derive their Matter and Consistency, from the Pancreatic Lymph their Clammi∣ness and Cohaesion, and from the Cho∣ler their colour, from the quantity whereof it's more or less Yellow,
Red, or Luteous, and from the commixture of all their stinck doth Derive. The fourth Observe is this, That whilst the Body is seated in a Health∣ful state, the sweet Cream of the Chyle not being irritative, passes the Duodenum and the other small Guts, without being Perturbated, Com∣mixt, or Corrupted with the foresaid Excrementitious Choler, or Pancrea∣tic Lymph, which ever as I said be∣fore, are disburdened at last, sepa∣rately from the Alimentary Juices. The fifth Discovers an Error of Opi∣nion of some of the Learned in Phy∣sick, who strive to maintain, that it is the Red Dregs of the Blood, is Eva∣cuated through the Ductus Pancreati∣cus, which they name Gloces Sangui∣nis, not being unlike the Dregs of Red-Wine, which partly they say con∣sists of thick Melancholy, that hath perform'd its Task, and partly of the Red of the Blood, that was too long Retain'd, and somewhat Adust. Of this Opinion the Learned Professor Vander Linden, of Famous Memory, was the Author, and also did (among
the rest of his Disciples) Instil it in∣to me many Years past, but having only his  for it, and upon Anatomical search into several Sub∣jects, not finding any Red Dreg or Lee, or any thing else, except the oft fore-mentioned thick Pancreatick Lymph, have justly deserted that Te∣net. The sixth puts me in mind of the Praeparation, all solid Victuals re∣quire, namely of being Masticated, Ground small and even by the Teeth, and withal Perfused with Spittle, which almost consisting of the same Princi∣ples and Volatil Salt, the Dissolvent Lymph of the Stomack doth, is a sin∣gular assistent to the Concoctive part. That the Spittle is so praegnant of Vo∣latil Salt, is clearly Evinced from it's Dissolutive virtue, Softening and Discussing almost any Pustle in less time, than any Medicine whatsoever; and supposing the Spittle to be so Turgid of Volatil Salt, much more the Dissolvent Lymph of the Sto∣mack. The seventh Annotation is, That during three fourth parts of the time
of Concoction, the Dissolvent Juice is no wise Acid, but on the contrary partakes of an Igneous Alcalized vo∣latil Nature, abounding with Pene∣trative, Dissolutive and Pungitive, or Mordicant Effluviums and Steems, as may be observed by those, that oc∣casionally Belching at the mid-time of Concoction, or before, or somewhat after, are so vehemently Stung, Bit∣ten, and Inflamed in their Throat, and along the Oesophagus, that it is not in the power of Brandy, or other Ar∣dent Spirits, to imitate those Effects. But the Volatil Salts being together with the Chyle, passed out of the Sto∣mack into the small Guts, the Dissol∣vent Lymph is left Acid, to accom∣plish the Digestion of the Gross and Faeculent remainder, which towards the latter part of Digestion, or some six or eight hours after Meals, in some quicker, in others slower, is upon an Eructation or Belching perceived in the Mouth, not only Sour, but Acid with an Adstriction, not unlike the A∣cid Spirit of Vitriol. §. 21. To those that are knowing in
the Analytick part of the Spagyrick Art, it's very Obvious, that Com∣pound Liquors consist of a Volatil Salt, and an Acid Tartar, as plain∣ly may be Demonstrated in Wine, whose Volatil Salt or Spirits being extracted, and dissolved from the Union with the Fixt Particles, through the attraction of the igneous effluviums of the Ambient Air, the Acid Tartar doth immediately appear in the taste of the remaining Liquor, which then is called Vinegar, or Sour Wine. In the same manner most other Liquors and Decoctions being deserted of their Volatil Salt, by Attraction of the Sun-beams or Ambient Air, do likewise immediately turn sour. Spit∣tle though sweet, when it's egested out of the Mouth, grows Acid, as soon as its Volatil Salt is Exhaled. Upon so perspicuous an Illustration, I cannot imagine you expect further proof, that the Dissolvent Lymph of the Stomach is not at all Acid, but contrary, as soon as it's effused into the Stomack, it's Subdulce or Sweet∣ish, and continues so until it's Body is Expanded, Pores opened, and it's
Volatil Salts and Spirits Extracted to the Circumference, and then it's grown Igneous Colliquative and Mordicant, and at last, the Volatil Salt being partly Evaporated, and partly Attracted into the Vasa Lactea (like Wine changing into Vinegar) turns ab∣solutely Acid, Inciding and Astrictive. Arguments in greater number, and of no less Evidence, I could here offer to your Consideration, but do praeter∣mit them to avoid the Suspicion of judging my Reader so Obstinate an Opiniater, as not to be perfectly Convinced of the truth of the Prae∣mises, by what is already proposed. Neither would I have you conclude, that I have Steer'd beyond my Rhomb, in Expatiating into so Ample a Dis∣course of the first Concoction or Chy∣lification; for the true Theory of the Office of the Stomack, and its man∣ner of Operation, is a great Funda∣mental of the Art of Medicine, the Ignorance whereof (God mend it) among Physicians, is a great occasion of their too great Correspondence with the Sexton and Grave-maker. What Principles, or rather Praenome∣non,
an Eminent Physician of the Ci∣ty, had assumed in Informing him∣self with the manner of Production of the Scorvey, and its Causes, I could never apprehend from his Receits; But this is most certain, that a Pati∣ent of this Physician, a Person of Quality, and a very near Relation to a Pear of the Realm, for the Benefit of Air, living at Woodford in Essex, had the strength of walking Abroad, made use of Medicine praescribed by him, but within two dayes Ghosted. Whether the said Medicines, set the Humours a float, or whether our Do∣ctor had been upon the Merry-pin before he Praescribed, was much doubted.
CHAP. VI. 1. That the Material Cause of the Mouth-Scorvey is an Acid Lymph of the Stomack. How a Salivati∣on is Continuated; the Cause of those Anxieties in a Salivation. 2. The Nature and Kinds of Acids. The Effects of the Acid of Vinegar, Vi∣triol, Nitre, Salt Marine, Tartar, Antimony, and Sulphur. 3. That there is a Difference in Nature in Acids, and likewise in Alcalies be∣tween themselves. §. 1. IN Mercurial Salivations, wherein (as hath been hint∣ed before) every Particular doth so ex∣actly resemble the Scorbute, I find the Material Cause is the Liquor of the Stomack, and the Lymph of the Sto∣machick Lymphaeducts, which like a continuated Stream is forced up; but how this Issue of the Mouth is sup∣plied, ought to be further inquired into. Although many of these Water Ri∣vulets
from the Brain, and other parts of the Head, do Communicate with those, that are terminative within the Mouth, yet it must be received for a Truth, that the great Source and Spring is about the Stomack, and the Pancreatick Lymphaticks, which lat∣ter streaming so Impetuously upwards, are the chief Cause of the Constipa∣tion of the Belly, being otherwise greatly promoted, in its natural Quo∣tidian Evacuation by the wonted de∣scent of the Pancreatick Juice, Re∣laxing and Lubricating the passage of the Guts. The Anxiety attending a Salivation, is a Symptom oft very Urgent, and depends on a streight∣ned passage of the Blood, through the Ventricles of the Heart; for be∣ing deprived of the greatest part of its Volatil Salt, imbiled by the Lymph or Serum, which is now too much drained from the Blood, the Pulsifick Faculty for want of the Volatil Salt, must necessarily Languish, and the Blood being too dry, and Coagula∣tive, must needs pass the Heart with great difficulty. Neither is this the sole Cause, but being accompanied
with a stoppage of the Salivation, as oft happens, the Salivable Matter doth Regurgitate to the Lymphaticks a∣bout the Hypochondria, where it doth Duplicate the Anguor, which in some I have observed so extream, that they owed their narrow Escape to very Opportune Remedies, and most, if not all, that have the ill Fate, to be Banisht the World in a Salivation (which the Surgeons and Apothecaries of this Town are so Unsuccessful in) have been stifled by these Angours. §. 2. The Blood floating through its Chanals, naturally is Indued with a sweetness, but in a Salivation, and the Scorbute, turns Acid; the man∣ner how, is the great Secret of this Theory. Praemissorily it's requisite, to propose the Nature and Kinds of Acids, which are various. The Acids of Vineger, Vitriol, Nitre, Common Salt, Tartar, Antimony, Allom, Sul∣phur, &c. all obtain a Specifick dif∣ference, as is rendred Obvious by their Properties and Efficiency. The Acid of Vineger is particularly obser∣ved Potent, in Attracting the Sulphur
of Minerals. The Acid of Vitriol is Diametrically opposite to the Alcali of Tartar. Nitre by force of it's Acid, doth Amortise the Volatil Salt of any Mineral; Abstract it oft from Mercury, and the result will be a Dul∣cified Arcanum Corallinum, a Medicine singularly reputed for a mild Vomi∣tory and Dejectory; upon further re∣peated Cohobations, the foresaid Ar∣canum deserts its Cathartique Facul∣ties, and is limited to a Diaphore∣tique. The like Effects it produces on the furious Body of Butyrum An∣timonii. The Acid of Salt Marine is the sole Dissolvent of Gold, espe∣cially when united with the Acid of Nitre, and then constitute the true Aqua Regia, which is in nothing diffe∣rent from the common Aqua Regis, ab∣stracted from Vitriol, Nitre, and Sal Armoniac, except that the former far exceeds the latter in Purity and Force: For though the common Aq. Regia be made out of Aq. Fort. Co∣hobated upon Sal Armoniac, it's most certain, that the said Aq. Fort. is no∣thing but the Spirit of Nitre, that of Vitriol being too ponderous to ascend
through the same degree of Heat; and the Sal Armoniac, from which this is propel'd, contributes nothing, but its Acid Spirit of Salt, which constitutes the Body of the said Sal Armoniac; for the Volatil Salts of Urine and Soot, which defer to it a Specifique difference from other Salts, being Alcalies, are Amortised, and Extin∣guisht by the Acid of Nitre, and con∣sequently in their Extinction, must necessarily by Reaction obtuse, and hebetate the Acid of Salt, and Nitre, whence it appears this sort of Aq. Reg. must yield to the other, in point of Efficacy and Virtue. In the Thirsts of Hydropicks, the said Acid Spirit of Salt, through it's penetrative Faculty doth excel all others, in Allaying and Conquering the Exiccative Quality of those fiery Salts, that are daily Meteorised to the upper Orifice, or supream Region of the Stomack, and there occasion those insatiable Droughts. There is a Subject of Ad∣miration in the Acid Spirit of Tartar, considering there is nothing so Re∣mote, or Abstruse in the Body of Man, but it will find out and Insinu∣ate
into; but what is more than this, contrary to the Nature of most Acids (whose Operation is universally by Urine) it's a great Diaphoretique, and provokes Sweat potently. Antimony, if like Vitriol it may be called the third part of an Apothecaries Shop, it's Acid Spirit merits the chief place in it; for beyond all Peradventure, he that's unacquainted with this great Acid, is by some thought Ignorant, how to Cure a Malignant Feaver è Fundamento. The Acid Spirit of Sul∣phur, though usually termed the same with Spirit of Vitriol, hath that difference, that it contains a sixt Prin∣ciple, whence it derives a power, to six the most Fugitive of Minerals, which is denied to Spirit of Vitriol. §. 3. Put to Illustrate this more plain, that some Acids are very dif∣ferent, and in a manner almost as con∣trary to each other, as an Alcaly is to them; only make trial upon the Magistery of Coral or Pearl, which is commonly praepared, by their Disso∣lution in Spirit of Vinegar, (where∣upon happens an Ebullition) Exhala∣tion
of the said Spirit, and Edulcora∣tion; upon this Magistery affuse some different Acid, as Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, or any other, there will arrive ano∣ther Ebullition, as smart, if not smar∣ter than the former, but of a shorter continuance, which Evinces, there is a great Contrariety; as appears further in this particular, that one Acid will praecipitate, what's contain∣ed by Dissolution in the other. There is no less Contrariety between Alcalies, for Sulphur dissolved by a continuated Ebullition in the Capitel or Lixive of Calx viv. is praecipita∣ted by Urine. Any of the Aroma∣tique Oyls, be it of Cinamon, Cloves, &c. is Incrassated, and Coagulated into a thick Balsam, by affusing Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniac to it, which is an infallible Character of Contrariety between them, and (by the way) is lookt upon as a great Secret, where∣by a Balsam may be made without the Mixture of Wax, or Oyl of Nut∣megs. Besides these, it is to be Re∣marked, Acids are either Natural, or Corrupt. The former bears the part of a Constitutive Principle in all Na∣tural
Bodies, though being praedomi∣nated by an Alcaly, or ballanced to a temperament ad Justitiam, is not ex∣posed to be discovered by sense; but by a Chymical dissolution into their Elements, the Acid is ever discovered to Universal view to be one. All Salts, (not being Alcalious) though the Acid lies dormant and hidden in them, by the force of Fire through a Retort, do de∣prome their Acid; all sorts of Wood do exert the like Acid, being forced in the same manner through a Retort; which Acid before this Analysis, could not be deprehended in them by Taste or Scent. A strict Proof will not be re∣quired, I imagine, that there are some Acids, that are corrupt; Apples and Pears when they begin to Rot, smell and taste sour, and so do Flesh-meats, and most Artificial compound Liquids corrupting, as Beer, Syrups, Meathe, Broaths, and most sorts of Decoctions, also natural Compound Liquids, as Milk, Wine, &c. None of these Acids, but by any Naturalist will be termed Corrupt. But what is more, Bodies that are primarily Acid, are subject to be Converted into a corrupt Acid,
as appears in the Juice of Limons, Oranges, Pomgranates, and others, which being exposed to the Rays of the Sun, do decline into a corrupt Acid, far remote from their Natural. The variety of Acids beyond this last inserted distinction, is great: A∣cids are either Pontique and Styp∣tique, as some deep red Wines, Vitri∣ol, and many Vitriolate Praeparations; Acerbons, as immature Pears, Apples, Plumbs, &c. Austere, as some sort of Wines, that taste sour and harsh. There is also an Acre-Acidum; a sharp Acid, without any Stypticity or Auste∣rity, as the Acid of Spirit of Salt Ma∣rine. In Mucilages is also a particu∣lar Acid to be observed, which may be termed Acidum Mucilaginosum. Some use may be made of describing Acids▪ by names derived from Acids in Minerals, whereunto the Acids in the Body bear a proportion and re∣semblance, as in some it's remarkable, they experience a sour styptique taste upon their Tongues, not without some likeness to Copper, which may not improperly be called a Nitrilat Acid. In the same manner other Acids may
be termed nitrous, aluminous, &c. By the way I am to advertise, that I am not ignorant, that Natural Philo∣sophers distinguish Tastes into acid, sharp, austere, &c. which here I do resume as kind of Acids; referring the truth thereof to the arbitrement of any ones sense; but those Natura∣lists following the umbrage of reason more than Notion, abstracted from Experimental Philosophy, no wonder they failed in this particular. I must here divert my Reader from opinioning me to have deserted my line, in bringing on the board the na∣ture and distinctions of Acids; which I affirm is no wise forreign to this mat∣ter; for it is from the praemisse I am to deduce and illustrate, there is in the humors of the Body discoverable a natural Acid; that they are sub∣ject to be converted into corrupt A∣cids; and the manner how. If to all Physical Bodies there con∣curs an Acid, a a Constitutive Princi∣ple, whereby the Alcala is bound and coagulated into a body, it cannot be denied to the humors, which for fur∣ther proof being mixed with Brick
dust, the Mass formed into Cakes, dried, and forced through a Re∣tort, you shall find in the Recipient an Acid spirit of great Energy and Vertue in Hydropick Maladies. This is the natural Acid is Latent in Hu∣mors, and not to be discerned by Sense, because it is praedominated by the Volatil Salt being of an Alcalious Nature. To continue the , in the next place it's to be declared, the Humours, and particularly the Chyme is susceptible of a putrid Acid. The vulgar Barber-Surgeons and Bleeders, give their Testimony, that the Blood by Phlebotomy extracted out of seve∣ral diseased Bodies, to their taste hath appeared Aluminous, Austere, and in some Scorbutiques very sensibly Acid or Sour; their Breath hath also ex∣pired a sour steam, and those Tormi∣na or taring pains of the Guts, which Scorbuticks are so much exposed to, are sometimes caused by a Pituita A∣cida, or Acid Phleam, terebrating the Tunics of the Guts. For brevity I do praetermit many other Arguments, inferring the Blood in Scorbuticks to be Acid, as the evident Derivation of
Symptoms from an Acid, will in the process of this Discourse more am∣ply Demonstrate; only in conclusion of this Paragraph, I do say, That if it be granted, that Milk doth oft turn sour and curdle in the Breast, it's as probable the Blood in the Vessels doth turn sour and Coagulous, they being in constitutive principles, but little different from one another. I cannot very well avoid animadverting on an Objection, that Prima fronte seems to carry some force, viz. That if the Blood be supposed Acid in the Scor∣vey, then all Acid Medicines must ren∣der the Blood more Acid, and the Disease worse, as is implied by that trite Theorem in Physick, Similia si∣milibus conservantur, & contraria contrariis curantur; and consequent∣ly Alcalies should be furnished with a virtue, to subdue the said Acid, be∣ing their contrary. The praemitted dissertation contans as to this a very satisfactory Answer, wherein it is very perspicuously Exhibited, that many Acids are è Diametro contrary to one another, as according to the rule of contraries (Contraria sese mutuo pel∣lunt
ex eodem subjecto) appears by the several Ebullitions (a sign of contra∣riety of two different Acids) in the above-mentioned Praeparation of Ma∣gistery of Pearl or Coral: Wherefore most Acids, especially Spirit of Salt Marine, Juice of Sorrel, Limons, Ci∣trons, &c. are so deservedly extoll'd in some Scorbutick Distempers, and se∣conded with good success; though I must confess, they are most properly and chiefly useful in a Lixivial Scorvey. The field of Acids is large; There∣fore which of them this Scorbutick Acid doth most imitate, will be expe∣dient to propose next. Upon pervolv∣ing those Authors, that have treated on this Distemper, I find them so closely adhaering to Similies abstracted from Wine and Vineger, that I judge it a matter more facil, to draw a Drunkard out of a Tavern, than them from their course notions upon Wine and Vinegar. He that resembled Scorbutick Blood to Wine, that's turn'd Ropy, hugs himself in that subtle Invention, and in the am∣ple recompence of being applauded by the young sucking Physicians. This word Ropy is oft intended for stringy, or strea∣ky,
there being long streaks separated from the whole fluid Body, and float∣ing in the thin liquor, as appears in Milk that's turned sour and grown Roapy: But such I could never yet observe in Scor∣butick Blood, though I have examined a great number of Porringers. Blood that's tenacious, obductible and gluti∣nous (which thence may be termed pen∣dulous) I do very fraequently meet with among Scorbuticks, but that's no o∣ther, then what flows in the Veins of most Cachecticks. The Cause assign'd (by my Author) of the Roapiness of the one and the other, is an over-fret∣ting; wherefore, he saith, the Scor∣vey is oft subsequent to a continual Fever: And why not then to all Fe∣vers, there being as much an over-fretting in the one as in the other? Whence this is the consequence, that all Scorveys are produced by Fevers, or Over-frettings; And what over-fretting of the Blood are Seamen and others subject to, that derive the Se∣minary of their Scorvey from the Salin Air of the Sea? I could never yet understand any. He proceeds, and would perswade you to believe, that
through this over-fretting, the Sul∣phur and Salts are separated from the Mass of the Blood, and being abandon'd to the Urine, render it Red like unto Blood; as if the Urin of all Scorbu∣ticks were of that tincture. If this praetended Roapiness may be attri∣buted to the Blood, it must be that, which is contained in the Vessels of the Mesentery, whence gross Humors are purged away in great Streaks and Ropes: But that it should be Streaky within the Vessels, because it appears so, when by Carthartick Physick its purged thence, Non valet ratio. For a farther Explanation up∣on Ropiness, I refer to Chapter 11. Others affirm, the Blood in the Scor∣vey to turn Acid like Vinegar. By the way, you must not apprehend the Blood to decline to the same Degree of Acidity Vinegar is of; for that must necessarily Infer a Total extinction of the Dogmatick Innate and Influent heat; but that it only recedes from its Dulcor and Sweetness, to a Crude Austerity and some small Acidity. It will not be out of purpose, to Exa∣mine how an Acidity is introduced
into Wine, and consequently be∣cometh Vinegar; whence probably may be Extracted the Cause of Acidi∣ty in Scorbutic Blood. Peripatetique Philosophy asserts Wine to change in∣to Vinegar by Putrefaction and Cor∣ruption. Putrefaction (being by some accounted only a tendency to Cor∣ruption) is Defined by the Stagirite a Corruption of the proper Natural heat in each moist Body, occasioned by a forreign Heat that's without. This applied to the Generation of Vine∣gar, infers that Sourness to proceed from an Extinction of the Natural heat or Spirit of Wine, by an Exter∣nal Heat. I cannot but admire here, that a Liquid Body should issue from a praeceding Liquor by Putrefaction, and that without any Foetor or stinck, which is asserted to be an inseparable Accident; and what is more, that a Body should be engendred by Pu∣trefaction, which of all others is the greatest praeserver from Putrefaction; for such Vinegar is esteemed to be. Wherefore it's more Rational, and Consentaneous to Experiment, tht Wine consists of fixt Salt, Sulphur,
Volatil Salt, and Lymph, or in the Spa∣gyrick phrase, Mercurius. The Fixt Salt is the Acid Tartar; the Volatil (Incorpo∣rated with the Sulphur) being dissol∣ved into a small proportion of Lymph is the Spirit, which as long as it con∣tinues United with the Fixt Salt, doth obtuse the Acidity, and renders the whole Mixture sweet, as the Wine appears to the Palate, but being sepa∣rated from it (as hath been hinted before) the Acid Tartar dissolved in the greater proportion of the Lymph, in effect is the Vinegar; so the way to make Vinegar, is to Abstract the Spirits or Volatil Salt from the Wine, by suffering it to Exhale, or by Expo∣posing it to the Sun, or Heat of a Fire, which Attract the foresaid Volatil Salt, or by adding a small Measure of sharp Vinegar to a greater of Wine, which with an united force of the Fixt Salt, do soon Extinguish and Expel the Vo∣latil, and then the praevailing remain∣der is Converted into Vinegar. The Method chiefly in use among the Vine∣gar-makers in France is this; They take two Barrels of a long shape, which there they call Flutes, and be∣ing
well cleansed, they put into each of them Four, Six, or Eight Quarts (according to the bigness of the Ves∣sel) of the strongest and sharpest Vi∣negar, being made Boyling hot, and thereupon stop the Bung-hole very close, then they Roul and Move them to and fro for Six Hours together, until the Vinegar is grown cold, after this they run it out again, until there is not a Drop left, and then lodge the Barrels in a warm place, and fix them so, that they may lie fast and not stir; upon this they make two Holes (which they call the Eyes) in each of them with a Piercer, about a foot from the bottom, and pour into those Holes through a Funnel, some Eight or Ten Quarts of the best Vinegar, and a Week after they pour Two Quarts of Decayed Wine to it through the same Holes, to make Vinegar of, a Week after that they put as much more to it, and so every Week they add as much more to it, until the Bar∣rels are a little more than half full, and then they encrease them every Four dayes, until they are quite fill'd, which they draw off to two Thirds,
for to Sell; and afterwards fill up their Flutes again gradually. From whence I infer all Wines to be actually Vinegar, and Spirits, that is to be Physical Compounds, containing actually the Principles of Acidity in them, and Volatil Salt of an Alcalious Nature; and on the other hand I de∣ny, That in Vinegar the Acidity is Introduced or wrought into it per se, by the Efficiency of the Sun or other Extraneous heat, but only per acci∣dens, by separating the Volatil from the Fixt Salt, or Reducing it into it's Principles. In the Generation of Vinegar there are several alterations observable, be∣ing Ascents and Degrees, tending to that extream Acidity Vinegar is of: In the first place, Wine changes to a Muddy and Turbid Countenance, loosing that Diaphaneity and aequality of Substance and Colour it had, be∣cause the Constitutive Particles have changed their Position and Situation; for in Wine that's declining towards the Eger, the Volatil Salt, which be∣fore had aequally expanded the Fixt Acid Salt, Exhaling or Receding,
the said Fixt Salt doth somewhat Coa∣gulate, and Unites nearer in its Particles, whereby this Obscurity and Turbation is Introduced. In this de∣gree the Wine hath something chan∣ged its Taste, and Drinks flatter, but no kind of Sourness doth then ap∣pear; for though the Acid Salt seems to get ground upon the Volatil, it's not yet arrived to any mark of Aci∣dity, because the aforesaid Acid is Commixt with a slimy dull Tartar, which Obtuses its Sourness, and is the principle Cause of the Obscurity and Turbidness in the Wine. It is not long after, that a little Sourness may be discovered by the Taste, and Tur∣bidness observed to diminish; for as the Wine gains in Sourness, so it lo∣seth in Obscurity, the Acid freeing it self from the slimy Tartar, praecipi∣tates it to the bottom, or by Inciding and Attenuating it, dissolves it into Lymph, whereby it's Clarified and grows Pellucid, and consequently as it grows Soure so it grows Clearer, until it becomes perfect Vinegar, and then it's likewise grown perfectly Dia∣phanous.
Now you may easily imagine, it is not my Scope, only to offer my Rea∣der the Theory of Vinegar, or to In∣form him, how to Arrive to be a Vi∣negar-maker, but by a way of Com∣parative (for Notions in Physick frae∣quently spring from that Method) to the Blood, to Illustrate its manner of recess from it's Natural towards a Scor∣hutick Acidity. Wherefore first you are to apprehend, the Blood in its Native Constitution is sweet, or of the Qualification of a Pingue Dulce, it's nitorous or shining, of an aequal Temperament and Mixture, imagine ad Justitiam, and not Perturbated or Coagulated, but Fluid and Smooth; by reason of its Volatil Salt is so Pene∣trative, and Insinuating (though when it's Tapt out by Phebotomy, appears thick) that Quick-silver the most In∣sinuating of all Minerals is Gross to it; for it's Observable, the Blood doth daily pierce to the most Intime and Remote Pores of the most com∣pact parts of the Body, viz. Bones, Mem∣branes, &c. Lastly, The Blood, though consisting of a Fat and Unctu∣ous substance, the Taste of it is Smart and Piercing.
It is in all these and more particulars the Blood in Scorbuticks doth under∣go an Alteration. I shall begin with a short Comment upon its Acidity, unto which it gradually recedes from its Natural sweetness; but the kinds of Acids being many, it's requisite to assign, which of them this Distemper is grounded on. The Volatil Salt of the Blood suffer∣ing any impair by depravation, dimi∣nution, or extinction, the natural Aci∣dity of the said Nutritive Liquor, doth acquire a praedominance, or sometimes an absolute power, in the same manner as was asserted above, touching the change of Wine into Vinegar. If ob∣taining a praevalence, renders the state of health neutral, but if by conquest it hath got an absolute power, de∣notes the temperature and mixture of the Mass of Blood dissolved, which onely happeneth in those, that die of old age. But supposing, that upon the affection of the Volatil Salt, the natu∣ral Acid lieth exposed to injuries (read Chap. 11.) which during the in∣tire Vinculum of both, it was defended from; then the foresaid Acid degene∣rates
from its natural into a vitiated, putrid, or corrupt Acid, which ipso facto doth constitute a disease. This praemised, I assert, that a recent, or confirmed Scorvey is the adaequate ef∣fect of a putrid Acid; The others, namely austere, or pontique, are cau∣ses onely of melancholy, hypochon∣driac and mesaraie distempers. Proof hereof may very well be made by ar∣guments, desumed from the effects, that issue from the causality of a pu∣trid Acid. First we will examine the blood of Scorbuticks, which upon view I have fraequently remarqued, to be of a dull countenance, and in no wise nitorous, of colour livid, or sometimes cineritious, or in others re∣sembling the whites of Eggs, inter∣spersed with opaque streaks; in point of consistency thick, cohaerent, con∣globated and tenacious, being also overflown with a turbid serosity, of gust palpably acid, and here and there a nitrou Acid, both in scent and taste, and at no time gratefully acid; in ini∣tiated Scorbuticks the serosity disco∣vers a crude, austere, or sometimes pontique Acid. The evidence here
is strong, being demonstrable to one of the surest Senses, viz. the Taste, and that desumed from the Serum; which by reason of the Salts and Tin∣cture it extracts from the humors, af∣fords a most praegnant discovery of the constitution and complexion of the Blood. But we shall insist no lon∣ger on that sense, but convert our dis∣course to experiment; instil a few drops of Spirits consisting of a Volatil Salt (viz. Spirit of Sal Armoniac, Cornu Cervi, Soot, &c.) into a small proportion of Blood; their effect will render it fluid, nitorous, serene, of a most pleasing red, and rescue it from a dissolution of the Humors: But on the other hand, Acid drops, viz. of Nitre, Salt, &c. occasion immedi∣ately a Coagulation of the said Hu∣mors, and a separation of their serum, leaving those in a turbid commixture, dull, opaque, cineritious, and of an ill whitish fleam colour. Whence we may rationally praesume, Scorbutick Blood so exactly resembling what is impressed on any other Blood by these Acids Spirits, to derive its vi∣tiated constitution from an Acid,
which must necessarily be a putrid one, as shall be explained hereafter. In the next place, let's make Inspection into the Characters of Scorbutick U∣rin, which for consistency is uncertain, most times muddy, turbid and thick, sometimes thin and opaque; for co∣lour pale and whitish, though in some few of a raw bloody colour, like wa∣ter, where raw flesh hath been washt in; for contents various, sometimes a copious sediment of an Ash colour, with a scum swimming on the surface like Tallow, other times a small sedi∣ment. By scent is detected a particu∣lar stinck, not like what's expired from other Urin. The causality of these qualities in the fore-mentioned Urin doth lie between an Alcaliou Lixivi∣al Salt, and an Acid Salt. The first con∣tributes a muddy deep yellow, and sometimes a saturated red tincture to the Urin, and therefore relating to some inveterate Scorvey, doth conse∣quently lodge the faculty of engen∣dring a Scorbutick Urin of a recent Distemper in the latter, viz. an Acid Salt. Moreover, the same Experi∣ment of Instillation of different drops
into Vrine, produces the same evi∣dence it did upon the Blood. That this Scorbutick Acid is putrid, appears by its production and inseparable ad∣haerence of a stink, for which a suffi∣cient testimony may be taken from the breath of Scorbutics, the steams that evaporate from their Bodies, the ill scent of the Serum of the Blood and Vrine, which all stink abundantly. To make at praesent any further convi∣ction, that a Putrid Acid is the inter∣nal cause of the Scorvey, by deriving any more Symptoms from its efficien∣cy, will be superfluous, in regard, that will be singularly explained in the par∣ticular mention we shall make of them. The cause of a Putrid Acid shall be proposed in Chap. 11.
CHAP. VII. Of the Procatarctic or Exter∣nal Causes of the Mouth-Scorvey. 1. That Mercury fraequently used, proves ordinarily an occasional cause of the Mouth-Scorvey. 2. That a Salin Air and Salt Diet are the principal external Causes of the Scor∣vey. 3. Whether a Salin Air or Salt Diet be the more principal Cause. 4. How Salt Meats cause an Acidity in the Blood. 5. That the Drink brewed about London is brackish. 6. That Gluttony and Debauchery are two grand Scorbutique Abettors. 7. How the other Non-naturals con∣tribute to the engendring the Scor∣vey. §. 1. A Salivation excited by Mer∣curials, and accompanied with its usual attendants, is beyond all peradventure a Mouth-Scorvey; and for that reason Hartman and other
Chymical Authors, affirm Mercurial Medicines pernicious, and altogether improper in Scorbutique Distempers; and consecutively to this Assertion, I have fraequently observed, that such as have been obliged to make use of Mercurial Remedies against their Vene∣real Maladies, do ordinarily fall into the Scorvey, which sometimes proves more stubborn than the Distemper, which the said Mercurials were in∣tended against; So that we must set down Mercury, to be one among the number of occasional Causes of the Scorvey. §. 2. Gross faeculent and obstructive Diet, especially if overcharged with Salt, or rendred hard and compact with Smoke, as dried Neats Tongues, Bacon, Sausiges, Red Herrings, Dried Salmon, Hung Beef, &c. do not on∣ly contribute matter, but obtain also a peculiar faculty of impressing a Scorbutic Idea on it. Of the same na∣ture are Melancholic Meats, as Beef, Pork, Geese, Ducks, Salt Fish, and all other Fish, that are bred in standing Waters, as Eels and others; also Pick∣led
and Marinaded Fish, as Pick∣led Herrings, Anchovies, &c. The next of the Non-naturals, that bears a great part in this morbisique pro∣duction, is a Salin Air, rendred thick and constipative by Vapors and Damps, Nitrous Evaporations out of the Earth, filled with putrid steams of Sinks, Gutters, Ditches, Muddy and Dirty Streets, and Sulphurous Smokes of Chimneys, stagnating and pent up be∣tween narrow lanes and corners, and seldom serenated or purified by the rayes of a clear shining Sun, nor frae∣quently ventilated with Easterly brie∣zes; and such is the Clime of Lon∣don, where the Air is experienced close, dull, damp, salin and muddy, over-spread with dense, dark, salin Clouds (attracted out of the Sea) for two third parts, if not three fourths of the year; during which time the wind seldom blows Easterly, or is fa∣vored with a smiling Sun. §. 3. These two are accounted the principal external Causes; the former aggressing the Body within, the latter without; but to which of these the
sole causality may be imputed, hath been controverted between some Mo∣dern Authors, the one party, whose opinion induceth them to believe the Scorbut to make its first assault on the Blood and Animal Liquor, by en∣tring the external pores, state the Air the chief and original efficient: The other, apprehending the Stomach and its Ferment, to receive the first efforts, proclaim Diet the principal Agent. In favor of the former sentiment, these ar∣guments seem persuasive, 1. The Scor∣vey being assented by most an Ende∣mick Disease, which generally derives its production from the Constitution of the Clime, infers a verdict for the Air: and, 2. This is further con∣firmed, by being also aesteemed a∣mong the number of Contagious Ma∣ladies, which are universally commu∣nicated by Transportation of morbi∣fique Miasms, whereof necessarily the Air must be the chief Vehicle, and consequently a more principal cause than the other. 3. Symptoms bearing Characters more obvious to sense, of∣fer an evidence very plain; wherefore if the Animal Faculty be the first suf∣ferer,
as appears by the Symptoms, viz. Lassitude, Drowsiness, Noise in the Ears, &c. and that the said Sym∣ptoms of Lassitude, &c. be percei∣ved by the Patient, while his Stomach and its Ferment continue in their vi∣gor, and exempted from any praeter∣natural affection, then it's undeniable, but the Air is the primar Agent. Those who espouse the contrary arbi∣trement, assert the faculty of the Sto∣mach to be impaired, and next after the Blood to be vitiated, before the appearance of any Lassitude, or other Animal Symptom; moreover, that the word Endemic, importing only a common Disease among people (from  and ) doth not exclude the ge∣neration of a Disease to be from a Viti∣ated Diet, or any other Non natural. Touching its contagion, they affirm a Disease may be primarily engendred within the Entrails, and afterwards prove contagious: But lastly, whether the decision hereof be any whit mate∣rial, in relation to the Cure, is left to the Reader.
§. 4. The next circumstance that's worthy of inquiry, is the manner, how a Viiate Diet, or impure Air, doth cause an Acidity in the Humors. We will suppose, That a Salt Diet i. e. Salt Meat, and Brackish Drink. is the most common Efficient of the Scor∣vey, which being ingested into the Stomach, doth chiefly act on the  Nervorum, consisting in a great pro∣portion of Volatil Salt (whose office principally is, by contraction of the Fbres to corrugate the Stomach) and Spirits of the Arteries. It is then this extraneous Marin Salt, that at∣tracts and absorbes the foresaid Volatil Salts, with the liquor they are con∣tained in, in great measures; and here∣upon occasioning a great Drought, forceth the Stomach to covet vast quantities of Small Drink; whereby the Stomach is immoderately cooled and relaxt; the foresaid Volatil Salts rendred fixt, and Spirits drowned and extinguisht; moreover the said Extraneous Salt having absorbed and attracted the Volatil Salts into its Cen∣trals, they meet with the Acid, that's latent in its Bowels (as appears upon
driving Salt Marin through a Retort) which through its contrariety to Al∣calies, amortises the fore-mentioned Volatils. The consequence upon this is, that the digestion is not perfected, and the contents not justly dissolved and coaequated, but remain crude and imperfect, whence must happen Cru∣dities and Obstructions, which after∣wards prove a Basis for all other Dis∣eases to be establisht on. §. 5. It is not to Salt, or other un∣wholsom Meats, we must solely ad∣scribe this Scorbutick Effect, but lay part of the charge on Drinks, that are used among us; in particular the Beer and Ale that's brewed about the City; the Water whereout they are brewed being absolutely brackish, or imbued with a proportion of Salt, though not so great as to be discovered by the Pallat. That Water containing a Tin∣cture of Salt, is thereby capacitated to make the stronger Drink, is most certain, and for that reason, because the Water being somewhat brackish in England, and therefore making the strongest Liquor, it's thence English
Beer is reputed the best and strongest in other Countries. Consequently to this Remarque, I find, that Beer or Ale brewed out of Thames Water, is more vigorous and spirituous, than what is made of other Water, because the former by having a commerce with the Sea, is more Salin; and thence it is also that North-down and Hull-Ale exceed Thames-Ale in strength, as be∣ing nearer to the Sea. This may like∣wise be confirmed by the practice of some Brewers, who to render their Drink the stronger, do commonly fling some small quantities of Salt into their Brewing; wherein exceeding sometimes a due proportion, doth impress so great a seasoning on their Beer or Ale, that it's manifestly per∣ceived brackish by those that drink it. The reason of this sort of process is grounded on the insinuating and at∣tractive Vertues of Salt, attracting the intire life and soul out of the Malt. Neither are Chymists ignorant of these attractive faculties, who when they are to extract a Spirit or Oyl out of Aromatics or Cephalic Herbs, generally dissolve a handful
or two of Salt into the Water, while it's in digestion. Apothecaeries do al∣so experience, that Roses lying a few dayes in Salt, yield a water much more odoriferous, than if Distill'd off sim∣ple. These Instances are produced to make proof, that the water of London is Salin, and consequently highly Scorbutick. But probably an Objection may be started, that though Thames Water from its communicati∣on with the Sea, may be suspected Sa∣lin, Why should other Waters where∣out Drink is also Brewed, be aesteemed so? To this I answer, That the Air of the City being perfused with salt Clouds, attracted out of the Sea, (which is no great distance thence) doth sufficiently imbue it with that Tincture: Moreover, the Earth over which those Waters stream, contri∣butes to it a Saltness, being brackish, as may appear to any ones Gust, that will adventure to taste it; now that Clay Ground, and other sorts of earth, do exude or sweat out a Salsugo, or Saltness, is abundantly manifested in Salt Pits; and undoubtedly the Pit-water which Caesars Army made
use of for two Years together, when they were quartered near the Rhine, sourced from a salt Pit, though not so much Impraegnated, as to be distin∣guisht by the Palat, or at least the foresaid Water was imbued with some Mercurial Vapours (but the former is more probable) which af∣terwards gave them a Disease like the Mouth-Scorvey; they being subject to a Vacillation and elaps of their teeth, with pains of their Gums. One sort of Water we have not yet taken no∣tice of, which is of standing Pools, as that is reported, whereout that Li∣quor is Brewed, which goeth by the name of Shoreditch Ale, for strength being Superlative to all other. No doubt but Water by stagnating, doth contract a Putrefaction and Saltness, which being thorowly allayed with the Cream of a fat brackish Clay, is naturally praepared to Brew thick fat Ale; whence that Water is vulgarly termed strong bodied, whereas Spring water is accounted thin weak Water, and not capable to Extract the intire strength of the Malt, as the other is; which is true enough spoken. This
Discourse doth also infer sour Beer, or Ale, to be very pernicious, likewise decayed Wines. §. 6. Among the next relating to both the praeceding Branches, we must impeach Gluttony and Debauche∣ry, for two grand Scorbutick Abetters. The former by imposing too great a burden on the Stomack, doth so much obtuse the Volatil Salts, that the Acid thereby gaining a praedomi∣nance, and thereupon soon growing putrid, occasioneth Crudities and Obstructions, and so an Inlet to the Scorvey. The latter refers to excess of Drinking strong Liquors, parti∣cularly French Wines, through which the Stomack suffering fraequent inun∣dations, their Spirituous and Volatil particles are attracted Crude, and Un∣digested into the Vessels, which in a short interval of time, Obnubilate and Drown the Volatil Salts of the Nerves and Arteries, as not being suf∣ficiently praepared to be Assimilated to them; and these Efforts being oft repeated, do at last Vitiate, Eva∣porate, and Amortize the Spirits.
On the other hand, the Liquor that's remaining in the Stomack, is left A∣cid and Acrimonious, in the same man∣ner as was Instanced in the making of Vinegar. §. 7. From what is here Discour∣sed, relating to the manner of a Sa∣lin Diet occasioning a Scorvey, may easily be Collected, how a Salin Air operates the same effect, viz. By en∣tring the External Pores, and be∣ing inspired down by the Lungs, doth assault the Vital and Animal Spirits and Salts. 2. By contracting the Pores through its Exiccative and Absorbing quality, and constipating them by its grossness and crassitude of substance, whereby reverberating and locking up within the Body the uliginous steams, that stifle or smother the Spirits, and fixe the Volatil Salts, in manner, that they assume the Nature and Qua∣lity of a Marine Salt. Touching the remaining Non-na∣turals, viz. Motion and Rest, Sleep and Wakefulness, Excretions and Re∣tentions, and the Passions of the Mind, though they come not within the no∣tion
of Primar sole Efficients, yet do potently contribute to the production of the Scorvey, by as much as by their inordinate use, they aggress, vi∣tiate, diminish, and extinguish the Vo∣latils, and give an increment to the Acid; which how it's effected, may easily be deduced from the praemises. To these adde a Melancholic Comple∣xion and ill Constitution of the Bow∣els, especially of the Spleen; also Fevers continual and intermittent, par∣ticularly a Quartan, which doth frae∣quently expatiate into the Scorvey, caeteris concurrentibus. Upon this praeliminated Explicati∣on a decisive touching the controver∣sie in Par. vii. may easily be attempt∣ed; viz. That both can be admitted principal Efficients in the Scorvey; for many though observing the exact Rules of Diet, have notwithstanding by living in a Salin Air, contracted the Scorvey, which as hath been copi∣ously expounded, is sufficiently quali∣fied to produce the Distempers fore∣mentioned. Moreover those that derive the Scorvey from a Contagion (which hath been oft observed) do at∣tract
the Scorbutic Seminaries and Mi∣asms through the Air, without the least concurrence of Diet, as having been regular and wholsom. On the other part, a Salt Diet continued for some proportionable time, hath engen∣dred the Scorvey in such places, where the Air could not be suspected ill, and of this there are examples numerous enough; but waving that, I will evi∣dence it in a praesident, that is more fraequent, and of a shorter producti∣on. Drunkenness in such whose Blood is not apt to be kindled into a Fevor, hath in a short interval occasioned an universal lassitude and weakness in the Knees, Spots and Blotches about the Legs and other parts of the Body, laxity, discoloration, and soreness of Gums, pain and loosness of the Teeth, a sour stinck of Breath, &c. which Symptoms do plainly declare it to be the Scorvey, and that produced with∣out the suspicion of an ill Air. So that either may be aesteemed a princi∣pal efficient, though where both do concur as principals, there it occasions the Scorvey to be Endemic; but where it is contracted from either singly, there it's Sporadic.
CHAP. VIII. Of a second different internal Cause, being the cause of some Leg-Scorveys, and many or most Terminato∣ry Scorveys; namely Sa∣ponary Blood. 1. Instance, That there are two sorts of Causes (contrary to each other) of the Scorvey. 2. The Constitution of the Blood in an Alcalious Scorvey. 3. The Error of Sennertus and others in asserting the Cause of Roapy Blood. 4. The true Cause of Roa∣py Blood. 5. Proof by Experiment of the Lixivial Constitution of the Blood in the Scorvey; and why the Blood is termed Saponary. §. 1. THe Tenor of the next prae∣ceding Chapter implies a Purid Acid, praedominating over the Volatil Salt, to be a cause of one
sort of Scorvey; here we intend to propose a Scorvey different from that, wherein the Volatil Salt being vitia∣ted and augmented in too great a pro∣portion, over-ballanceth the Natural Acid, and produceth a Constitution of Salts and Humors, likewise Sym∣ptoms, that are absolutely Scorbu∣tique, but of a fiercer and more ma∣lignant quality. By the way, I must praevent my Reader from any haesita∣tion, wherein it may appear strange to him, that Symptoms that bear the same countenance, should be derived from two contrarily different Causes. As to this, it is an Observation evident enough in other Diseases; for instance the Colick is sometimes occasioned by Bilious Lixivious Humors, corro∣ding the internal Tunic of the Guts, in which case they usually suffer a Contraction in longitudine; some∣times it's caused by an Acid flatuous phlegmatic Humor, and here the Guts are affected in latitudine. On the for∣mer is imposed the name of an Hot Colic, and on the latter a Cold Co∣lick; the same may be also observed in Pleurisies and many other Distempers.
§. 2. The Constitution of the Blood in this kind of Scorvey is far different from what it is in the other; for here the Blood runneth into a thick cohae∣rent Fluor, like Syrup, doth not coa∣gulate or concrease; but continueth in the same form, without the separa∣tion of the Serum, that in the other commonly floats on the top. The dif∣ference is likewise in colour and taste; here the Blood appears in a purple, and to the taste its Lixivial and Acri∣monious. Touching the Symptoms; the Acid Scorvey exercises its fury most on the parts above the Navil, the Al∣calious Scorvey, chiefly on the parts below, what farther distinction is re∣markable, you shall read elsewhere. §. 3. Certainly it was a great Hal∣lucination in Sennertus, but far grea∣ter in others, that have wrote since on that Subject, to praetend an Acid the cause of Pendulous Blood (a term the Recentiors have borrowed from the fore-named Sennertus, though ill ver∣ted into English Roapy, as hath been animadverted before) which rather
causeth a Coagulation, as appears by Experiment, upon instilling Acid drops into Blood or Milk; and yet this Acid is so abominably stretcht by a late Author, who obtaining a parti∣cular knack of writing a Story smooth∣ly, doth endeavor to adaptate it to Symptoms in general of all sorts of Scorvey; whence I find, neither he nor those that harbour his Notion do arrive to a success of curing some Leg-Scorveys, aequal to that of the Mouth-Scorvey, but are oft render'd infinitely worse. §. 4. The cause of this thick in∣crassated cohaerent Blood, that if pou∣red into a Porringer, hangs in short ropes or long drops, like Balsom or liquid Soap, when poured off, I im∣pute to the fixation of the Volatil, which united to the Fixt Salt of the Blood, doth alcalize and calcine it, whence assuming the nature of other Calcined Salts (as Salt of Tartar and Nitrum fixum) doth attract and ab∣sorb the Serum of the Blood, and some moisture out of the Air, where∣by that and the whole mass is turned into a Deliquium, and so becometh
thick (the Serum being absorbed) cohaerent and pendulous; because part of the Blood is naturally gluti∣nous, which being tied closer toge∣ther in its particles by the absorption of the thinner and serous parts, must needs prove pendulous; of a taste lixi∣vious, because such all Calcined Salts appear to the Palat; and of a purpre colour, because the Blood is adusted from a florid red into blackness. §. 5. That the Blood of these Scor∣butics, which are here mentioned, is qualified in the manner described, will appear to any, that shall give them∣selves the trouble of examining Scor∣butick Blood, when occasionally ex∣tracted by Phlebotomy; but least such as desire to be satisfied in this point, have not a ready opportunity of exa∣mination, we will endeavor to con∣vince them of this truth by experi∣ment. Take Blood that's found, and possibly extracted for praevention or abating a Plethory, instil into it Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniac, or of any other Volatil Salt, it shall praeserve it in its fluor, colour, consistency, mixture
and other qualities, until it be eva∣porated, and then the said Blood by coagulating into a Mass, will separate from its Serum: But if instead of this, you affuse a small quantity of Calci∣ned Fixed Salt, that's runned into a Deliquium, it will incrassate the Blood, change it into a deep purpre, render it pendulous and lixivial to the taste. After all, proving the particu∣lar Symptoms to issue thence as proper immediate effects, will crave an unde∣niable conclusion; but that shall be re∣ferred to a further inroad into this Dis∣course. I must not retire from this Subject, before I give the reason, why I have named this sort of Scorbutic Blood, Soapy, or Saponary; namely, because like Soap consisting of Tallow and Lix∣ivial Salt, the Blood in this kind of Scorvey, is also composed of a defla∣grated incrassated Sulphur and a Lixi∣vial Salt, both commixt and united into one Body; but how and through what causes it is rendred so Soapy, shall be told you in the next Chapter.
CHAP. IX. Of the Procatarctic Causes of Lixivial Alcalized Salt, in Scorbutique Blood. 1. That Volatil Salt is nothing but Fixt Salt volatilized by the commix∣ture of Sulphureous Particles is pro∣ved by Experiment. The manner how a Volatil Salt is fixable. 2. The remote Causes of Saponary Blood. 3. That Salt is capable to produce two contrary effects, viz. an Acid and an Alcali. 4. A farther proof of the Saponary Synthesis of Scor∣butic Blood. §. 1. THe Fixt Salt of the Hu∣mors is the Original and Conservative of the Volatil, for (ac∣cording to one of the Hermetick Theorems formerly recited) a Subtil Sulphur penetrating into the pores of the Fixt Salt, closely knits it self with its particles, and being of a subliming nature, that is derived from the
igneous minims it contains, doth le∣vitate, sublime, and volatilize the said Salt. Experiment doth assert this a certain truth; affuse Spirit of Wine on Calx Vive (which beyond all Ob∣jection is praegnant of Fixt Salt) after a short digestion, abstract it, and some part of the Fixt Salt will be vo∣latilised and sublimed with the Sulphur of the foresaid Spirit. Possibly here may be demanded, how doth it ap∣pear any of the Fixt Salt is volatili∣ved? Hereunto I answer, 1. By the Taste, the foresaid Spirit proving more igneous, vibrating and pungi∣tive to the Tongue. 2. Spirit of Wine, by reason of its Sulphur, is inflamable to the last drop; but being united to this Volatilized Salt, doth very diffi∣cultly receive a flame, or when infla∣med, will scarce continue. One Ex∣periment being too scanty, I will of∣fer you another. Volatil Salt of Am∣ber is fixed by abstracting Spirit of Salt from it; and being so fixt, affuse on it Spirit of Wine, digest them a while, and then abstract the Spirit of Wine from it, and you shall find the Fixt Salt volatilized again. Hence I
infer, 1. That the Fixt Salt is not on∣ly the original matter, but also the sole conservative and nourisher of the Vo∣latil, by yielding new sublimable parts. 2. That the Constituent principles of a Volatil Salt are a Sulphur and a Fixt Salt. This being allowed or at least praesupposed, doth detect the manner, How a Volatil Salt is fixable, viz. by divelling the Sulphur from it, or strip∣ping it of its force and efficacy; so that those externals that act against the foresaid Sulphur, are to be aesteem∣ed the Procatarctic Causes of ren∣dring the Blood Scorbutic, and of lixiviating its Fixt Salt. §. 2. The same remote Causes, which in one of the praecedent Chap∣ters were declared Efficients of a Pu∣trid Acid, are also impowered to lixi∣viate and alcalize the Fixt Salt of the Blood, though not in the same man∣ner, or univocally, but per accidens, and aequivocally; so the Sun is virtu∣ated to produce contrary effects aequi∣vocally, in engendring Cold and Hot Bodies, moist and dry. A Salin Diet and Salin Air, by vertue of their Salt
Marin, do absorb and concentrate the Sulphurous minims of the Blood, which being inflamed, and rendred corroding, partly through its own na∣ture, partly by its union and am∣plexe of the Saline parts, and being withal thereby Fixt, are both praeci∣pitated to the Fixt Salt of the Blood, whereunto also uniting, do all be∣come Soapy and Lixivial. Secondly, The Fuliginous Salts, that are too co∣piously occasioned in Saline Scorbu∣tic ebullitions, are a principal cause, but for a more ample satisfaction I re∣fer you to Chap.. How greatly the familiar sipping of Brandy and o∣ther adust Spirits, do contribute to the inflaming the Sulphurous particles of the Blood and lixiviating of it, is sufficiently obvious; likewise that fuming Tobacco, under the notion of concentrating and fixing the Sulphu∣rous and Volatil particles, doth lixi∣viate and fix the Blood, needs no farther proof. §. 3. Least I should leave the least scruple, that might induce the Reader, to supect the contents of this Discourse,
I apprehend it expedient, to remove this Objection, which is offered by way of Quaery, How can a Salt Diet or Air, or rather Sea Salt, occasion two contrary effects, viz. of rendring the Blood Acid, and Lixivial or Alcalious. I hin∣ted before, that these effects are de∣rived in a various manner, to wit, an Acidity is caused, as was explain'd for∣merly, by the separation of the Vola∣til Salt and Subtil Sulphur, which is an effect per accidens; an Alcali is impressed on the Salt of the Blood, by an effect the Marin Salt produces per se; for through its igneous facul∣ty, and especially when its tumid with the absorbing the Sulphur of the Blood, it alcalizes the Fixt Salt. 2. The fore-mentioned Marin Salt is not only naturally fiery, but vigorous∣ly augmented in its igneous quality, by its conjunction with Lixivious Salt, or Excrementitious Choler, that naturally ought to be separated and evacuated by the Gall Bladder and Cholidochus, whose passages in a con∣firmed Leg-Scorvey are commonly for a time constipated, the Excrements of
the Guts through their paleness and livor signifying as much; but withal observe, that the Cystis Bilis and Du∣ctus Cholidochus continue obserated only for a certain space; for after∣wards the foresaid passages are forced open, by the abundance of gross lixi∣vial Choler, which then impresses a deep red Tincture on the Excrements of the Guts. Furthermore observe, That commonly the Mouth-Scorvey praecedes a Leg-Scorvey, and seldom do both invade the Body at the same time, but one upon the neck of the other; so that if the Mouth-Scorvey continue any considerable space, the Leg-Scorvey must necessarily fol∣low. §. 4. Observe likewise, That some continual and intermittent Fevors, especially Quartans, do sometimes exchange into Alcalious, but no Acid Scorveys, as by their internal Causes and Symptoms, which the deep red Tincture and vehement stink both in Urine and Ordure, likewise a very sa∣line Sweat and Spittle, do attest lixivial, is evidently declared; and that which
doth positively evict the cause of these kinds of Scorbuts to be Alcalious and Saponary, is their Cure, which is chiefly to be performed by Acids, as Spirit of Salt, Antimony, &c. and by Subtil Sulphurs, and Volatil Salts; but in no manner by Fixt Alcalies, upon which an irreparable detriment hath oft en∣sued. Lastly, To prove the undeni∣able truth of these Observations, the vulgar management of Sea-men (who are out upon long Voyages) in their Scorveys, which so inevitably they are incident into, using nothing but Acids, as Spirit of Salt, Juices of O∣ranges and Limons, wherewith they are abundantly stored, tells us, it's an Alcalious Saponary Scorvey they are subject to, against which an Acid is the diametrically contrary Remedy.
CHAP. X. Comprizing the Examination of Scorbutic Principles proposed by a late Author. 1. The Summary of the learned Oxo∣nian Authors Treatise on the Scor∣vey recited, and proved erroneous. That Scorbutic Blood is neither Rancid nor Roapy in the sense in∣tended by the Oxonian▪ 2. A reci∣tal of several absurdities necessarily ensuing on the concession of the Hy∣pothesis offered by the foresaid Author. 3. That Roapiness in the Blood is not occasioned by the com∣mixture of a lesser proportion of Sul∣phur with a greater of Acid Salt. §. 1. AGainst what is asserted in the two last praeceding Chapters, nothing of moment can be farther objected, than the authority of our Oxonian Author, who for his learning, concise, smooth and elegant mode of Writing, may justly be cha∣racterized
the English Fernelius, ae∣steeming withall, that he hath in some sense surpassed uglen, Salomon Al∣bertus, Wierus, Sennertus, and the rest, that have treated on the Subject of the Scorbut; and among those his other superlative qualifications, I must also take notice of his Modesty, not peremptorily asserting, but like a Car∣tesius affirming only a probability of that, whereon his whole subsequent Discourse is grounded as its Basis; Tract. 2. de Scorbuto, Edit. Amsterd. fol. 230. where the word run thus, It's probable, that the Blood in the Scorbutic affection is atered, in a man∣ner not unlike Wines, that grow Ran∣cid or Roapy, as oft as they are over∣heated (that is over-fretted) for this is an Argument, that that Disease doth not depend so much upon Dregs, mixt with the Blood, as on a habitual in∣temprament of the Blood; because a Radicated Scorvey is so difficultly cu∣red, and sometimes never. Moreover it may be stated, that the intempera∣ment of the Blood, which is the parent of the Scorvey, is two-fold, as it is in Wine, namely Sulphurous and Salin,
and Salin and Sulphurous. The whole Theory of the Scorvey is by the Au∣thor fore-mentioned briefly summed up in those few lines, which to exa∣mine, is the chief affair of this Chap∣ter. First, He tells us, It's probable; But why is it probable? Because pro∣bably it seemed so in some inconside∣rable little Analogies and Resemblan∣ces: I may as well affirm, that it is probable, his Horse is a Mare, because viewing him at a distance, he seems like one. Certainly, he that by too much stretching of the Cloth, endeavors to make all sorts of Habits and Shapes out of it, must necessarily make a very incongruous Suit. This our Author hath practised in most of his Tracts, abstracting Notions from Wine to illustrate his Theory of Diseases; as first in relation to Fevors; Because Wine is apt to be fretted, it's probable the lood is also subject to a fret; whence a necessary conclusion is drawn, That the Blood so fretting is either a Fevor, or rather the cause of a Fevor; but A probabili ad necessar∣um non valet consequentia. Neither doth the similitude quadrate, the one
being a derivative from a Vegetable, that naturally is disposed to the fore∣said alteration; the other from a Vive Animal, that when declining into a Fevor, is praeternaturally affected. Moreover this fretting quality that Wines are incident into, is only of one kind; but the frets or fevors of the Blood are various and very diffe∣rent, as Quotidians, Tertians, Quar∣tans, &c. Secondly, In relation to Convulsions, Because the Blood is di∣sposed to fret in all the Vessels of the Body, it's probable, that in the fretting of the Nervous System, it doth impel heterogeneous Copula's and Explosive Particles into the Liquor Nervosus, and irritate the Nervous Systeme to an explosive motion, through which a Spasmodie affection and a praeternatu∣ral Diathesis of the Brain, are occasi∣oned. A pretty kind of Rhetorick, exchanging the old significant terms, into those that are obscure and aequivo∣cal; however these Probables might very well be admitted, especially being gar∣nished with those pretty affected Phra∣ses; provided the Phaenomenon and re∣semblance were omewhat more paral∣lel,
and conform to Experiment; from which that they are infinitely diffe∣rent, I shall particularly instance in the comparison of Rancid and Roapy, or rather Scorbutic Wine (for such he would have it to be) with Scorbutic Acid and Scorbutic Lixivial, and Sa∣ponary Blood. That Wines by over-fretting become rancid, is agreed on by all Wine-Coopers, which in their usual phrase, they do not term rancid, but say, It tastes of the fret, that is, Fuliginous, Empyreumatic, and Pi∣quant, but not Acid; neither when they are over-fretted as much as they can be, do they immediately taste o∣therwise than what is set down. Their Cure is performed, as he sets forth, by being drawn off the Lees; which in a plainer way is to be understood thus; if it be observed, that Wines are inclined to fraequent frettings, or over-frettings, as all Wines are in the Summer season, especially if lying in a warm Cellar, to praevent the for∣mer, they endeavor to cool the place, where they lie, by stopping up all the Lights, and oft dashing cold water over the Floor. The later, viz. Their
aptness to over-fret, is remedied by pouring a proportion of new Milk to the Wine, or Ison-glass dissolved, or other materials that are impowered to appease, allay and sweeten the heat and fury of the Sulphurous Spirits; but when Wines are absolutely over-fretted, then indeed to draw them off the Lee, is the next remedy. The cause of an over-fret or rancidness, he asserts to be an imbodying or cogula∣tion of the Sulphureous particles with the Salin, so as the former exceed the latter in proportion. This Aetiology may easily conduct the Reader into mistakes, supposing the Constitutive Principles of Wine, viz. The Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, to be distinctly contained therein, whereas it must be conceived, they are so intimately cae∣mented together in their minimal par∣ticles, that there is not the least drop, but contains the foresaid principles in its least individual physical particle, so that you are not to imagine, that in Wine, that is thus declining, the Sul∣phur swims in one part, the Spirits in another, and the Salt in another, but that the Subtiler Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury, being united into one, do abscede from the grosser, into whose room and cavernicles external hete∣rogeneal principles succeeding out of the ambient air, occasion such various alterations, as render the Wine ran∣cid, roapy, &c. Those Heterogene∣ous Corpusles, if they are sulphu∣rous, as in the Summer season they generally are, then they alterate the Wine into rancid; if more gross and salin, a at other seasons they are, it becomes roapy. But Wines being sub∣ject to these alterations in all Climes, and Humane Bodies onely in some particular sorts of Air, which there∣fore (together with a vitious diet) ren∣der the Diseases thereof ; this alone is an Argument sufficient to e∣vince the Alterations of the Blood and Wine not to be comparative, and consequently the Simile to be dis∣sonant. Secondly, Suppose the Simi∣le allowed in Fevors, that as Wines fretting are indued with an intense heat, through the exaltation of their Sulphur, so the Blood fretting is at∣tended with a dyscratic or intempe∣rate heat, which for the praesent shall
also be allowed the name of a Fevor; then consequently the Blood must be deemed Scorbutic, because rancid; for Wines during their fretting are ever rancid, and taste of the fret; and so all compounded Liquors, as Beer, Ale, Metheglin, &c. whilst they are working, are rancid. §. 2. The absurdities that follow the Hypothesis, are, 1. That there is no moving living Creature, but is troubled with the Scorvey in one part or other; for whilst the Chyle is fer∣menting in the Stomach, or the Blood fretting in the Vessels, which accord∣ing to the dictates of Fermentators happens at all times, they become rancid. 2. In France I find Fevors more fraequent, than in any other Countrey, which in the sense of my Author are all attended with fretting, and very probably some with over-fretting; yet I could never observe any there afflicted with the Scorvey, and if they are, I am certain they have no proper name for it in French. 3. That all Heats, Spots, Blotches, and Pustles, that burst out into the Face
and ambient skin, upon a fretting of the Humors, are Scorbutic Sym∣ptoms, pag. 234. l. 3, 4. which many Wine Drinkers are subject to in many places, where the Disease and name of the Scorvey are as little known, as the Man in the Moon. 4. That the fore-mentioned Scorbutic Eruptions, are onely safely cured by Remedies, that demulce and enifie the incongru∣ous Ferment (as its stiled fol. 340. l. 18. which is expressing an ignotum per ignotius) such are Starch, Gum Arabic, Gum Dragant, &c. These I am assured, never yet removed Scor∣butic Eruptions, I cannot tell what they might operate at Oxford, and the Market Towns about it, where Scorveys are not so numerous, as to abstract observations from them, suf∣ficient to teach the world a new Do∣ctrine of Scorbutic Dyscrasies, and Copula's. But this I dare declare for a truth, that real Scorbutic pur∣pre, and yellow, some red Blotches, and Pustles, I have removed, and known others to do the like, onely with Antiscorbutic Volatils; which manner of Cure doth in
no wise square with the Notion of Rancid blood. However it must be assented, that many Eruptions, such as are recited in pag. 234. have been extermined by Contemperative Me∣dicines, and Bleedings; but then they were not of the genuin Scorbutic is∣sue. In summa, admisso absurdo uno conceduntur mille. Wines that have been disturbed by an Overfret, do seldom long continue only Rancid, but after a short interval, are incident into a Putrid Acid, far different from Vinegar, and in that particu∣lar, may more exactly square with Scorbutic Blood; but it is not from Emplastic Lenients these Wines re∣the least Rectification, for through them they are rather rendred far worse. For the removing this sort of dyscrasy, Coopers experience the scenting the Cask with Brimstone, to be very effectual in manner follow∣ing; They dip a Linnen-rag into mel∣ted Brimstone, which being grown cold and coagulated on the Cloth, is kindled into a flame, and hung through the Bung-hole into the Cask,
until the flame be burnt out, and upon that the Bung-hole is stopt up close again; for the same purpose Lime, burnt Allom, and other Materials, that are praegnant of an Alcalious Salt, are commonly used. 5. Upon the con∣cession of the Authors Rancid Hypo∣thesis, the Blood of Scorbutics of that degree, ought to appear smoaky, Soo∣ty, Empyreumatic, not easily Coagu∣lable; on the contrary, it's observed Acid, Coagulable, Ill coloured, &c. I will conclude this Branch with a Caution, That all Innovators ought rather to Demonstrate their Notions a Posteriori, that is, they ought to In∣vent and Illustrate the Cause, by the Effects and Symptoms, and not to in∣vent Notions of Causes, and by their Virtuality, or by what they probably seem capable to act, to assign their Ef∣fect; for that is oft contradicted by Experiment. §. 3. The other Branch falling un∣der our consideration, is the Roapi∣ness of Wines, wherein the Coopers generally observe a Gradation of Al∣teration; for first they begin to Pall,
and grow Flat, next they fall into Clots and Lumps of Gelly, and then they say, the Wine drinks tender; at last, their Clots running into one, causeth the Wine to become Roapy. This the worthy Author affirms, is oc∣casioned by the association of a lesser proportion of Sulphur, with a great∣er of Acid Salt, or Tartar. It's an Universal Remarque, that Sulphur and an Acid Salt, without some o∣ther Intermedium, that is amicable to both, are insociable; for affuse a menstruum purely Acid (as Rain wa∣ter acuated with Oyl of Vitriol, Salt Nitre, &c.) to Sulphur, and digest it ad Infinitum, no Tincture shall be Ex∣tracted, but upon the least digestion with a Lixive, or any Unctuous Liquor, the Sulphur yields its whole body, and entirely unites. 2. It's averred, pag. 234. l. 31. That Roapy Wines are re∣duced by fixt Alcalies; which on the contrary, I know some that arrive to their Mark, by dissolving Roch-allom into them, that by all is agreed to be an Acid, and consequently doth sub∣vert this Roapy Hypothesis. 3. The blood of those Scorbuticks, that con∣tract
their Distemper on a long Voy∣age at Sea, must be allowed to be ei∣ther Rancid or Roapy. That it's the latter, the Symptoms mentioned Tract. de Scorb. pag. 234. l. 21, 22, 23. declare, viz. Cutaneous Eruptions, Sloath of Limbs, Difficulty of Brea∣thing, &c. with which Scorbutic Sea∣men are sufficiently infested. The re∣medies used successfully by them are Acids, viz. Juice of Limons and O∣ranges, Tamarinds, Spirit of Salt, &c. on the contrary, they experience Spi∣rits of Scorvey-grass, of Sal Armoniac, and others of that nature Detrimen∣tal. The Argument collected hence a Juvantibus, which are Acids, evinces their Blood to be Alcalious and Lixi∣vial. So that I may safely conclude, that our Authors Hypothesis is not only Erroneous, but too scanty, since it only appoints Contemperatives, and Volatil Alcalies for Remedies; and those being mis-applied (as too frae∣quently happens) are unpowered to render the Disease far worse, and pro∣vect it into a Terminative Scorvey. 4. I discover a great Contradiction, in illustrating some Alcalious and Lixi∣vial
Symptoms, to proceed from Acid causes, viz. Pendulous Blood, which though not agreable with his supposal, he asserts that the lixivial parts abscede from the Blood, by being dissolved in the Serum, having quite forgotten his Pendulous Acid principle. Thus I read, pag. 256. in Sign. 8. the Aetiology of Lixivial Vrin expounded, which Pa∣raphrase is no where received, but in the Latitute of 51 . 5ly. To evade all Objections, and to render Noti∣ons more Plausible, his Discourses are observed, to be armed with a Quina∣ry number of Principles, viz. Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth, by which to Illustrate the Nature of Bo∣dies, will prove as superfluous, as (in his own phrase, pag. 3. l. 28. Diatr. de Fermentatione) to say, a House doth consist of Timber, Wood, Stones, Brick and Lime. For a Spirit being a composite of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, signifies it self to be a Princi∣piatum, and not a Principium. For proof, I offer the most Alcolized Spi∣rit of Wine, which in the process of Spiritus Calcis, being oft abstracted from Calx Vive, its Volatil Salt (which
formerly I have demonstrated to be Fixt Salt, rendred Volatil by the admix∣ture of Sulphur) is refixt, and detain∣ed by the Alcali of the Calx, so that at last nothing passes the Alembic, but a pure Lymph; whence it's evident a Spirit is a Compound, and no Prin∣ciple, which ought to be Simple. The next multiplication of Principles is the stating Earth, and Salt, different Ele∣ments, which in effect are realiter the same, though of distinct Nominati∣on. Earth is an immature Salt, which by Digestion easily passeth into a Sa∣lin body. The Terra damnata of Vi∣triol, affords an indubious Argument for Evidence: This though very well washed from the Fixt Salt it contain's yet being exposed to the warm Sun for some long time, and then washed over again, yields a considerable quantity of Vitriolat Salt, which that it is not attracted out of the Air, but engendred by Digestion of its Sub∣stance, appears by the diminution of weight of the said Terra damna, after it is washt. So that the differ∣ence between Salt and Earth, is no other than between Stone and Brick,
or a Heterogeneous Copula, and an In∣congruous Ferment. CHAP. XI. Containing Practical Ob∣servations Praeliminary to most Scorveys. 1. Acute Symptoms praecurring an Acid Scorvey. How it is Originally en∣gendred. 2. Mixt Symptoms, part∣ly Chronical, and partly Acute, praecursors of an Acid Scorvey. 3. Chronical praevious Symptoms. 4. That those praevious Ebullitions mentioned in the praecited Observati∣ons, do not render the Blood Rancid. The Notion of Rancid Blood dange∣rous in Practice. §. 1. THe Practical Observations which I do here propose, will render Obvious to you, how the Blood declines into a putrid Acidity. It is a remarque I have at sundry times made, that some Bodies, before they
expressed any Sign or Character of be∣ing molested with an Acid Scorbut, undergo a smart Ebullition of the Li∣quors in the Vessels, depending upon an accension of the Spirits, and defla∣gration of the Bituminous Particles of the Blood, whereunto some Ca∣tarrh, Rheumatism, Lassitude, Pain in the Head or Bowels, or some other Symptoms, are attending, which ren∣der it dubious, whether this sort of Fever be Essential or Symptomatick; however Antifebril Remedies, as Bleeding, Purging, Contemperatives, and Sudorificks are praescribed, the success whereof in the space of three or four dayes, commonly amounts to the abatement of the Fevor and other Symptoms, though not to a perfect Restitution of Health, the Patient for some short time possessing only the condition of a neutral State; here∣upon manifest Scorbutic Symptoms begin to take up their quarters with him, as Lassitude, Sloath in Moion, Difficulty of Breathing Indigeston of Stomach, Interrupted leeps, and Di∣sturbed with Dreams, Spots, Blotches, and the like.
§. 2. The content of the praemi∣sed Paragraph I do affirm to be the Morbisique transaction in some, though in others I likewise observe, that the praeceding Ebullition, or Tumultua∣tion of the Blood is not so vigorous, as to cause them to think more, than that they are only a little out of order, and so the Juices of the Vessels detume∣fying, leave them in a kind of neutral state; which manner of Ebullition and Intumescence oft returning, in∣creasing and decreasing, doth at last result to the same Effect, as if it had been as smart, as what is above de∣scribed. These are certain and true Observations, any Physician may make on Bodies, before the Scorvey declares. A third Observation I shall subjoyn, after the Explication of the two former. By these praevious com∣motions the Blood is grown extream∣ly Turbid and Disturbed in its parts, mixture, consistency, ntour, sa∣pour, and other qualities, like Wa∣ter in a River, that grown Muddy and Thick upon a Storm, raising those Impurities, that lied on the bottom.
Now the faeculencies and Acid tarta∣rous Humours, that by stagnating in the Vessels of the Mesentery, and other remote parts, being raised, and commixt with the Mass of Blood, choak up and extinguish the Spirits and Volatil Salts, damping withall the flaming of the Bituminous parti∣cles, upon which the Ebullition ceas∣eth. The cause of these Ebullitions is the saltnes, induced into the Hu∣mours by a Salin Air and Diet, which obtaining a power of condensing, and congregating the Spirits or Volatil Salts, and sulphurous or bituminous particles of the Blood, cause an ac∣cension of the foresaid Volatil Salts and Sulphurs, whereunto by constipating of the Pores the gross Salin Air doth also very much contribute. In this conflagration the Volatil Salts are in a great part dissipated and consumed, the other part stifled, choakt, or extinguisht by the rising of the Acid salin dregs, whereby the whole Mass is not only turned Acid (how the dissipation of the Volatil Salts occasion an Acidity, you have read before) but grows putrid
Acid by the commixture of fuligi∣nous acrimonious Salts, that through the foresaid Ebullition and conflagra∣tion are occasioned, and through the constipation of the Pores repelled into the Blood. The cause of the latter Observation may easily be col∣lected, from what is here set down touching the former. §. 3. A third remarque taken from Scorbutics is, that many gradually and insensibly without any such prae∣vious Ebullitions, as are above men∣tioned, undergo an alteration in their Temperament and Faculties; first ob∣serving a sloath in their Limbs, nau∣seous spitting in the Morning, an ill brass taste in their Mouth, crudities and imbecillity of Digestion; after∣wards do succeed Spots, Laxity, and Discoloration of Gums, stink of Breath, and so the rest in order. The Cause of this sort of Morbifique pro∣gress is the blood, gradually declining to a putrid Acid, in the same manner as hath been explained in one of the fore-going Chapters. Though the first of these three Obser∣vations
seem to have some resemblance to the nature of Rancid Blood, occa∣sioned by Fretting or Fermentation, and the manner of Cure appointed in the oft cited Treatise de Scorbuto, to be performed by Demulcers of the Blood, as Phlebotomy, and contem∣peratives; upon a more deliberate consideration, you will conclude their difference almost contrary to each other; for, 1. All Ebullitions, especially that expressed in the Illu∣stration of the foresaid first Observa∣tion, are not Fermentations. 2. The worthy Oxonian Author infers all Ran∣cid Blood Scorbutic, though it be still on the Fret, which is greatly r∣roneous, the Scorvey being a Chro∣nic or long taedious Disease; this a praevious distemper, that is soon re∣moved, or at least altered into a con∣trary Intemperament, viz. From an Acrimonious hot, to an Acid cold Disease. 3. The foresaid Notion is highly dangerous, and oft proves fa∣tal, in deriving thence a Method of Cure; for forming Indications, that this being a hot sulphurous Distem∣per, lenient and cooling Remedies are
indicated, which if long continued after the Fermentation is quieted, and an Acid disposition introduced, do render the Disease incurable. §. 4. It is only in some, that this Ebullition is a praecursor to the Scor∣vey, whereas the Notion of Rancid Blood doth infer all Scorveys, that are not depending on pendulous blood, effects of an immoderate Fer∣mentation. CHAP. XII. Declaring a further Illu∣stration of a Saponary Leg-Scorvey. 1. The Symptoms of a Saponary Leg-Scorvey. 2. Proof that the Bitu∣minous parts of the Blood, do easily unite with the Fixt Salt. Pendu∣lous Blood is not miscible with Acid Salt. §. 1. I Have formerly observed, that an Acid Scorvey, upon a long
continuation, changeth into a Sapo∣nary Scorvey, which a was hinted be∣fore, is the Cause of some Leg-Scor∣veys, whose Symptoms, are Infla∣med, Tumefied, Corroding, Phage∣daenic, Cancerous Ulcers, Hot burn∣ing and pricking Nocturnal Shin-pains, fraequent glowing of the Calves of the Legs and Plants of the Feet, an Erysipelas Phlegmonodes of the Legs, salin pungitive Rheumatisms and De∣fluxions to the Periostium of both the Fossils; besides a saturated Lixivial Urin, a fuliginous fowl Stinck of the Body; the Blood when extracted by Phlebotomy appears of a deep in∣flamed Subpurpureous aspect, besides many other Symptoms, all which to any Judicious Physician are sufficient Testimonies of an Alca∣lious constitution of Humours. But this is not all; for the Blood in this Case is not only Alcalious, but Sapo∣nary, as now will be made apparent to you. There being a large propor∣tion of impure Sulphur, or gross Bi∣tuminous Particles, mixt with the Humours in this degree of Scorvey, the Alcalious fiery Salts do easily at∣tract,
Colliquate, and Unite them to their own Particles, which absorbing the Serum in a great measure, must needs render the Blood thick, cohae∣ring, and a little obductible. §. 2. That the Bituminous parts of the Blood are so apt to be united to the Fixt Salt, is evident from the ready commixture of Tallow, Train Oyl, or other unctuous bodies with Pot-ashes in the Composition of Soap, from the resemblance whereunto (as formerly hath been intimated) I have termed the fore-mentioned constitu∣tion of Blood Soapy, or Saponary. The same Promptness of Unition seve∣ral other Chymical Praeparations do likewise confirm, as in particular; the Ebullition of Sulphur with the dis∣solution of Salt of Tartar, Fixt Ni∣tre, or a Lixive of Calx vive, in the process of Lac Sulphuris; also in the Praeparation of Hartman's Sulphur of Antimony, where the Antimony being fused by the violence of a ventous Fornace, and instilled into the deliqui∣ous Oyl of Tartar, its Sulphurous parts are immediately Imbodied with the
Alcali of the foresaid Tartar. Whence we may plainly Collect, that in our Authors Pendulous Diathesis of the Cruour, which by him is supposed to be Acid, there is no probability of their ready Coalition. And after all, I must tell you, that the Blood in that sort of Scorvey, which is not Rancid, as he terms it, is not absolutely Roapy or Pendulous like Syrup, Barbadoes Treacle, or Therebinthin, as the Oxonian Professor intends it, but far different. CHAP. XIII. Of the Causes of Scorbutic Symptoms. 1. The Cause of a Scorbutic Lassitude and Imbecillity of Limbs. That a Scorbutic Lassitude is not occasioned through a Fermentation of the Ner∣vous Liquor and the Extravase Blood. That the Nervous Juices are not contrary to those of the Veins and Arteries. 2. The Cause of a Dyspnoea, or Difficulty of Breath∣ing. 3. The Cause of a Low, Quick,
and Inaequal Pulse. 4. The Cause of a thick Red Vrin. 5. Of Spots and Blotches. 6. Of the Bleeding of the Teeth, and Haemorrhages. 7. Of Fainting and Palpitation of the Heart. 8. Of Erratic Fevors. §. 1. IN course I ought next to A∣dapt these praeceding Causes to their Effects, viz. Scorbutic Symp∣toms, in which I judge I shall not find that difficulty, or be Obliged to strain the former, to square them with the latter, since I arrived to the Know∣ledg of them by the Observation of their Effects. I shall commence with the Explication of the Cause of Las∣situde, and Sloath of Limbs, as ordi∣narily the first budding in a Scorbutic Body. A Lassitude, Debility, and Sloath of Limbs, are Affections of the nerves, which originating from the mar∣row of the Brain & Back, must necessari∣ly derive their Causes thence, unless we should conceive them naturally to draw in a both ends; but there being usual∣ly concomitant other Symptoms of an affected Brain, as Drowsiness, Obtuse∣ne of the Internal senses, &c. doth
amply confirm, what is asserted. Where∣fore the Blood according to the first Observation mentioned in Chap. 11. being affected with a tumultuation, the Spirits and Volatil Salts are inflamed, and rendred Acrimonious, which be∣ing the principal constituents of the Animal Juices, must necessarily prick the Nerves, through which they pass, and incommode the Nervous parts, to which they are transmitted. As for the Imbecillity and Sloath of Limbs, also the obtusion of the Animal Facul∣ties, they depend on the intemperature of the Animal Spirits, not being potent enough to perform their Offi∣ces with alacrity, to which their accu∣stomed just Temperament is absolute∣ly requisite. By the way you are not to apprehend here, that the said Las∣situde is occasioned through a Fermen∣tation, hapning upon the appulse of the Nervous Liquor (rendred praeternatu∣rally Acid) to the Articles, and there meeting with Lixivial Blood; for the constitution and temperament of the Nervous juices are not so extreamly dif∣ferent from that of the Blood, as to be contrary to it, which in this sort of
Fermentation or Ebullition is neces∣sary it should: I can conceive no more difference between them, than be∣tween Spirit of Wine and Wine, which former cannot be indued with any other qualities, than what it derives from the latter. And here it is, that trite Maxime is verified, Vitium prim coctionis non corrigitur in secunda, nec secundae in tertia. So that, if the constitution of the Blood in the Ar∣teries be Acid and not Lixivial, the Animal juices must likewise be Acid and not Lixivial, as being engendred by a further digestion out of the said Arterial blood. Hence I argue, that Arthritic pains in the Scorvey do not proceed from a Fermentation between an Acid Nervous Liquor, and Lixi∣vial blood about the Joynts; moreo∣ver as you shall be further satisfied be∣low, the Lixivial Salts, that are cast forth to the circumference in an Acid Scorbut, do not partake of an Acri∣mony, or at least not so intense, as to excruciate the Limbs with those insuf∣ferable pains. But after all, the indi∣cation desumed in this case from the Nervous Liquor, assigns an Alcalious
Medicine, and that which is collected from the Lixivial Blood, indicates an Acid; an absurdity not to be admit∣ted in Physick, that one and the same Disease should require two Medicines per se contrary to one another. Neither can I assent to that opinion Tr. de Sc. p. 250. l. 25. which asserts the cause of a Spontaneous lassitude and weakness of the knees and legs, to be an infarction of the pores of the Musculs with Excrementitious humors, through which the Animal Spirits are obstructed in their passage; for it is not observed, that there is any Tu∣mor or Tension in the flesh of the said Musculs, but commonly hangs lank and laxe; on the contrary, where there is a real Tension and Tumefa∣ction of the Musculs of the Legs, which some gross Bodies are subject unto, we do not find any other, then a small compression of the Nerves and Ten∣dons, notwithstanding which, the Animal Spirits have their free influxe and refluxe, and the Limbs their sense and motion; wherefore if there be no obstruction or constipation in this case, much less in the other, and conse∣quently
it must be the Animal Facul∣ty and Loco-motive Spirits, being praeternaturally affected, that are the occasion of these last fore-mentioned Symptoms. §. 2. The Dyspnoea or difficulty of Breathing, that so oft is implicated with the Scorvey, depends on the stag∣nating of gross Acid Blood in the Ve∣na Arteriosa or Arteria Pulmonalis, Arteria Venosa or Vena Pulmonalis, and in the Pores of the Parenchyma of the Lungs; for every Systole propel∣ling the streams of Blood into the fore∣said Artery faster, than it is received through the Pores of the Parenchy∣ma into the Lung Vein, the Lungs must necessarily be stuffed, swelled up, and consequently much oppressed by the weight of this stagnating Blood. But that I may praevent you from lap∣sing into the same error my Author is fallen into, it's convenient I ac∣quaint you here with the meaning of Dyspnoea or difficulty of Breathing; Respiratio Anhelosa, or short and thick breathing, or in the common phrase, Short windiness, Asthma,
or improperly Phtysick and Orthopnaea, or the worst and extream degree of Phtysick and their difference; for qui bene distinguit, bene docet. In a Dyspnoea the breathing is somewhat long and slow, with the sense of an oppression or weight, as if something kept the Lungs down. A Respiratio Anhelosa is a quick and thick Brea∣thing, as you may perceive in your self, after any smart Exercise, as Run∣ning, or Carrying a Weight, &c. An Asthma is a thick and short breathing, accompanied with a whee∣sing noise, and commonly also with a Cough. An Orthopnaea is a long and slow expiration, and a quick catch∣ing (as it were) inspiration, attend∣ed with such a stifling, that the Pati∣ent is forced to sit upright, thrusting his Mouth up and gaping for Air. A Respiratio Anhelosa is also frae∣quent among Scorbuticks, and is oc∣casioned by a Putrid Acid Blood, that is (as I have told you before) Fuli∣ginous and Acrimonious, by means of those sharp sooty steams it irritates, and prompts the Lungs to a quick breathing, to prevent stifling, and to
attract a clearer Air instead of those sooty Evaporations, which in some I have observed so copious, that their Tongue was covered with a black scum, not unlike what is fraequent∣ly taken notice of in continual ardent Fevors. §. 3. As the Pulse in respect of quickness and aequality of motion, doth proportionably correspond with the Respiration in a healthful, and like∣wise in a morbifique state; so it doth in the Scorvey, where in this degree it's quick, fraequent, and unaequal in motion, which is occasioned by the same cause, viz. by Acid Fuliginous Blood, stimulating the Vital Faculty of a quick motion, and imposing a necessity on the Ventricles of the Heart to an expeditious explosion of the A∣crimonious Cruor. The inaequality of Pulsation depends on the unaequal mixture of the Blood with those Fuli∣ginous steams (or Heterogeneous Copu∣la's) that do so unaequally vellicate the sides of the Ventricle. §. 4. A ruddy and thick Urin is
most commonly an attendant of a Praeliminary Scorvey, which is com∣prehended and specified in the two foremost Observations of Chap. 11. the production whereof is a dissoluti∣on of those deflagrated Salts and Sulphurs in the Serum, which after∣wards is praecipitated by the Putrid Acid, that's ever a sequel to the Scor∣butique Ebullition, and so abandon∣ed to the Kidneys and Ureters; but as the said Ebullition doth onely oc∣casionally happen now and then, so the fore-mentioned ruddy Urin doth onely appear on those occasions. For the greater part the Urin is turbid, and copiously saturated with a thick sedi∣ment, that is apt to furr to the sides and bottom of the Chamber-pot, be∣ing nothing else, but an excretion of crude indigested Tartar, or Acid Salt, from the Mass of Blood; if at some seasons the Urin appears thin and a∣qeous, that may happen either thorow the potent coagulative quality of the acidity in the Blood, not separating the superfluous and excrementitious Tartar; or through some obstruction of the passages, leading to or from the
Kidneys, suffering the thin only to pass, and retaining the thick. More∣over observe, that in those thick drab∣by Urins, upon some standing the gross sediment is apt to sinck to the bottom, leaving the middle clear and transparent, and a cream swimming on the top, which is nothing but the mucilaginous part of the Tartar, through its lightness recovering the surface of the Urin. §. 5. Spots and Blotches of seve∣ral colours do ordinarily survene a Scorvey, and are caused by a conden∣sation of the sulphurous parts of the Blood, that are deflagrated, and Vola∣til Salts amortized through the Acid, in the pores of the ambient Skin or Cutis, where they are deposed or deserted by the Acid Blood, with∣drawing it self from them, and through its penetrative faculty insinuating in∣to the Veins, returns by the circula∣tive motion into the Body; whereas the others being so much obtused, are rendred incapable of reverting into the Vessels. These Spots and Blotches are not dolorous, because the acrimony
of the deposed Salts is obtused; their colour if red, they derive from the Sulphurous or Bituminous parts of the Blood, mixt with the Volatil or A∣mortized Salt; if yellow, from an ad∣mixture of part of the Acid Salt, con∣densed and obtused by the reaction of the said Volatil Alcali, which now mentioned obtused Acid, if left com∣mixt in a greater proportion with the Alcali, and with a lesser proportion of the Bituminous Particles, render those Blotches of a livid tincture. The production of Scorbutic Pu∣stles and Botches differ from Spots and Blotches in this only, that the Salts in these latter are diluted, or dissolved in some part of the Serum, which in the former are more condensed and coagulated. Some of these are with∣out pain, others are painful; the lat∣ter hapening, because the acrimony of the foresaid Salts is not totally ob∣tused by reaction. §. 6. The bleeding of the Teeth, fraequent Haemorrhages of the Nose, and Haemorrhoids, also immoderate Menstruations, and sometimes a bloody
Flux, are Symptoms of this Disease, occasioned through a serous Acid Blood, rendred acrimonious and cor∣roding by the Imbibition of fuliginous Salts, corroding the termination of the Vessels. Note, that in most Scorbu∣tics are two sorts of Blood, viz. A gross and faeculent Blood, coagulating and praecipitating it self from the more ferous and fluid parts. The gross Blood floats about the Entrails and lower parts, and is ; so the other being more fluid and light, is more apt to be , and to stream up∣wards. Those intollerable Gripings of the Guts without a loosness, which Scorbutics here are so miserably tor∣tur'd with, are likewise occasioned by the same corrosive Humors, or ra∣ther nitrous acid Juices, infesting the nervous, and consequently most sensible Tunics of the small Guts. That the cause of these Autumnal Epidemic Gri∣pings of the Guts, the Inhabitants of this City are so much exposed to, is a Nitrous Acid, appears partly by the Pro∣catarticks, viz. Liberal Drinking cold sour Small-beer, when they are heated by the aestuating Rays of the
Sun, going cool in their Clothes, and lying half Naked in Bed, immo∣derate eating o Horary Fruits; and partly by the Cure (Argumentum a Ju∣vantibus) Volatil Salts and Aroma∣tics, not only giving ease, but oft re∣moving the Distemper. But that these Acid Juices should distil from the Brain through the Nerves, or be the Liqour Nervosus rendred Acid (as our Learned Author asserts in a late Treatise intitled Pharmac. Irration.) and all this while the Brain continue unaffected with any Symptom, Non credo. Whence fraequent Spitting, Laxity, Discoloration, Corrosion, and pain of the Gums and Teeth do proceed, hath been declared formerly. §. 7. The Fainting and Palpitati∣on of the Heart is caused by fuliginous acre steems, suffocating the Heart in the former, and Vellicating its Ventri∣cles in the latter. From what hath been already ex∣plicated, may easily be Collected the cause of Vomiting, Nauseous∣ness, Punctorious pains of the sides
of the Breast, tearing pains of the Sto∣mach, Loosness, Head-ache, &c. §. 8. Those Erratick Fevors, that ordinarily are observed to attend the Scorvey, are oft occasioned by a copi∣ous quantity of Fuliginous Salts, that have been Deflagrated, and by their long continuance have attracted some proportion of impure Sulphurs, and so take flame again. CHAP. XIV. Of the Description of the Scorvey. 1. The Description of the Scorvey. 2. Whether it be an Occult Disease, or Morbus totiu substantiae. 3. Whe∣ther it be a Similar or Organical Dis∣ease. 4. Which is the part Primari∣ly and Principally affected. §. 1. THe Scorvey being seated in several parts of the Bo∣dy, occasioned by various Causes,
and attended with a train of all man∣ner of Symptoms, appears as if it had no certain Essence, and consequently is not capable of a description so Pa∣thognomonic, as other Distempers, and therefore you must be contented with such as can be given of it, viz. The Scorvey is an Universal, Multiform, Variable, Endemic, and Contagious Disease of all the parts of the Body, par∣ticularly of the Stomach, Spleen, and Liver, occasioned by a Salin Blood, and attended with a Cachexia of all the parts, Spontaneous Lassitude, Pesan∣ture and Imbecillity of the Limbs, but especially of the Knees, difficulty of Breathing, sore and lax Gums, Spots, Blotches, Pustles, &c. The Univer∣sality of this Distemper consists, 1. In Attaquing all People generally more or les, inhabiting a Scorbutic clime. 2. In a Praeternatural disposition of all the parts. It's Multiform, because it assumes all shapes of Diseases, there being scarce any Distemper, which in one Symptom or another, it doth not resemble. Moreover, it's a Cold, Hot, Dry, and Moist Disease, as it's Symptoms do plainly demonstrate,
viz. Inflamed hot Pustles, Erysipelas, cold Oedematous Legs, moist Rheu∣matisms, dry Scabs, &c. It's also va∣riable in all manner of respects, 1. Va∣riable in the Subjects, there being scarce two in a Hundred, whose Symp∣toms are alike. . In the parts affected, being commonly chiefly rooted in the Stomach, sometime, in the Spleen, other times in the Liver; moreover, per  oft transferring its head quarters from one part to another, and exchanging the whole Syndrome of Symptoms into another quite different, and also in progress of time passing from an Acid into a Lixivial and Sapo∣nary Scorvey, or from a Mouth-Scorvey, into a Leg-Scorvey, and thence into a Joint-scorvey, or sometimes into a Ter∣minative Scorvey. That this Distemper is endemic (Tam ratione aeris quam aquae) hath been declared elsewhere; and cer∣tainly it is Contagious, since most En∣demic Maladies are so, there being ordinarily Miasms, or perfect Scorbu∣tic seminaries transported, by means of the Vehicle of the air from one Bo∣dy to another, which obtaining a power of producing their like out of
the humours of such Bodies, into which they are transferred, engen∣der an absolute Scorvey, in a far less space of time, than if it had prima∣rily took its rise in that manner, I have heretofore explained. All the parts of the Body and Humours being tho∣rowly infected with the Scorbutic Seminaries, the Spermatic parts cannot be free, which must there∣fore also render this Distemper  and Haereditary. 1. By means of the Semen of the Parent, and its plastic faculty. 2. Of the Uterin Blood. 3. Of the Milk assuged by the Infant, whence we may term it . 4. Of the Contact () of the Lips of the Mouth, and Ambient Skin of the Body, where∣by the Scorbutic  is transferred to the Child, by being Kissed or Hug∣ged by the Parents, and lying by them in Bed. But because you shall not only be satisfied with my Informa∣tion, give me leave to acquaint you what Platerus, the Learned Professor of the fore-going Century at Basil, re∣ports of it, pag. 355. This Malignant Disease when it first discovered it self
in the Maritime Nothern parts, and proved Contagious, gave me no small suspition, That from remote Countries, which these People that cross the Seas do in our Age discover, almost to the extream Borders of the Earth, and where possibly it is familiar; it was Transported first to these places that are near the Sea by Seamen. §. 2. Definitions or Descriptions are rarely so perfectly made in the Art of Physick, as to rescind the occasion of all Objections from Cavillers, and there∣fore to praevent that Risk, I will be Opponent to my self, in forming seve∣ral Doubts and Objections against the Definition by me proposed in this Chapter. First, I offer thi Quaesti∣on, Whether the Scorvey be a Mani∣fest or Occult Disease, that is as Ferne∣lius doth term it, a Morbus totius sub∣stantiae? Some that Argue from Au∣thorities, probably may offer the Sen∣timents of Platerus, Sennertus, Steeg∣hius, and others. The first of these asserts the Scorvey to be an Occult Malignant, and absolutely Venomous disease. The second gives us a defini∣tion
(which as I said before, the Scorvey is not capable of, as having no essential difference) in these terms. The Scorvey is an Evil and Occult qua∣lity, or disposition, impressed on the whole Body, but chiefly on the Bowels, that are destined for Nutrition, arising from a gross Melancholy Humour, that's I∣chorous or Serous, and corrupted in a peculiar manner, or, saith he, It is a certain Evil Nutrition, or Ill Habit of the Body, &c. The last expresses it, to be a Moist distemper of the Spleen, occasioned through the putrefaction of the thick Humour, which the Spleen delights in. The formost Opinion may easily be Refelled, since the Symptoms of the Scorvey may be plainly deduced from Causes, that are obvious and manifest. 2. All Venoms do immediately assassinate the Heart, dissolve the Vinculum vitae, and have this Qualification appropriated to them, that they are only to be Expel∣led by their Antidotes; but common Observation tells us, that the Scor∣vey moves gradually, is more ordina∣rily seated in the Spleen, or Stomach, than the Heart, and is Cured by Me∣dicines,
that Operate by a Manifest, and not Occult quality, namely such as are of a subtil igneous and colli∣quative faculty, as Scorvey-grass, Wa∣tercresses, &c. The second Definiti∣on savours much of the first, and ren∣ders it a morbus totius substantiae, which that it is not, appears from the for∣mer Answer. Steeghius will have it a Moist disease, and asserts Melancholly a Drying humour, the continent cause; which however per accidens may pro∣duce a Moist distemper; but waving that, it is most certain, that in many Scorbutics the Spleen is not affected, and therefore cannot be described to be a Moist distemper of the Spleen. §. 3. The next Quaery is, Whe∣ther is the Scorvey a Similar, or Dis∣similar Disease? Some that do allow the Scorvey a Disease of very ancient date, adjudge it a Dissimilar disease, and in particular a Disease of Magni∣tude, viz. A great Spleen. Pet. Fo∣restus asserts it a Compounded disease, and not Simple. The fittest answer to this in short is, That primarily it is
a Similar, and secundarily a Dissimi∣lar Disease. §. 4. The third Quaestion is, Which is the part Principally and Originally affected in the Scorvey? Horstius states the Spleen the part affected, others the Stomach only, and many the Stomach, Spleen, and Liver. If in some it be observable (as it is) they are trou∣bled with luxuriant glowing Gums, and vacillation of their Teeth, with∣out the concomitance of other Symp∣toms, in all probability it's the Sto∣mach is the only part affected, there appearing no Sign or Symptom of any other entrail, that's affected. On the other hand, if no other Symptoms E∣merge, besides blewish Scorbutic Pustles or Blotches, it may rationally be con∣cluded, no other part is affected but the Spleen. It has been also observed by Forestus, and Reusnerus, that the Spleen and other Entrails have not ap∣peared much affected in some deceased Scorbutics, but the Liver chiefly, wherein was observed a great discolo∣ration, and dissolved unity of its sub∣stance. Whence we may deduce,
that a Scorvey that's contracted by a Salin Diaet, the Stomach is originally and primarily affected, in that which is occasioned through a Salin Air the Spleen, but after some continuance they become all parts aequally affe∣cted. CHAP. XV. Of the Differences of the Scorvey. 1. A distinction taken from the Growth of the Scorvey. 2. From the man∣ner of its Origination. 3. From the parts primarily affected. 4. From the Internal Cause. 5. From the Concentration of Symptoms. 6. From Praedominant Symptoms. 7. From the Occultation of Symptoms. 8. From its manner. 9. From the place, where it reigneth. 10. That these Distinctions are of great Vse. §. 1. SUbjects that consist of a muta∣ble Nature require exact di∣stinctions, which are to be desumed,
1. From its growth, whence the Scorvey is called either Praeliminary, Liminary, Recent, Inveterate and Terminative. A Praeliminary Scorvey, I must confess, is very Improperly named a Scorvey; for being absolutely considered in it self is no Scorvey, but in a Relative and Subsecutive way I have Imposed that Denomination only Doctrinae gratia, to express the root whence a commen∣cing Scorvey doth spring and bud forth. This being praemised, I intend those Ebullitions comprehended in the Observations that are Delineated in Chap. 11. for a Praeliminary Scor∣vey, because they praecede, and are generally Praeliminary to a Scorvey. A Liminary Scorvey is that, which up∣on the quietation and subsidence of a Praeliminary Ebullition buds forth. A Recent Scorvey is a confirmed Scor∣vey, but of no long standing, and is answerable to the augment of the Di∣stemper. An Inveterate Scorvey is a Distemper of a long continuance, and alludes to the state of the Disease. A Terminative Scorvey is that Disease whereinto it doth pass, and puts a ter∣mination to the Distemper and Life al∣so;
as a Scorbutic Dropsie, or Con∣sumption, &c. for it is such a sort of Disease the Scorvey doth at length ter∣minate into, and so prove Mortal. §. 2. From the manner of its Ori∣gination, in which respect it's either Haereditary and Connate, when it's derived from the Scorbutic indisposi∣tion of the Parents; or Adventitious, which is engendred some time after one is Born; and this is twofold, for it's either Contagiously adventitious, when gotten by Infection, or Non-na∣turally Adventitious, that is, when con∣tracted through fault of some of the Non-naturals, as Salt diaet, Salin Air, Melancholy, want of Stirring, &c. §. 3. From the parts Primarily and Principally affected, this Disease is termed an Hepatic, Splenetic, or a Stomachic Scorvey. §. 4. From the Internal Cause, it's stiled either an Acid, Lixivial, or Sa∣ponary Scorvey. §. 5. From the parts where the
Symptoms do concentrate and clot to∣gether, it derives the name of Mouth-Scorvey, Leg-Scorvey, or Joynt-Scor∣vey; By the way I must give the Rea∣der this Advertisment, That in a Mouth-Scorvey the Symptoms are not so limited, or circumscribed, as to extravague no farther than the Mouth, but that some slight superficial Sym∣ptoms of the other kinds are also at∣tendant, viz. A great weakness or feebleness of the Knees, spots about the Legs and Arms, Blotches in several parts, especially in or near the Groin, Ambulative glancing pains about the extreme parts, &c. So likewise in a Leg-Scorvey some Symptoms of the Mouth and other parts are remaining. So that this distinction doth chiefly take its denomination from the greater number of urgent and remarkable Symptoms, that haunt the Mouth, Legs, or Joynts. §. 6. From some praedominating Symptoms the Scorvey oft takes a par∣ticular Nomenclature; from an Asth∣ma it's called an Asthmatick Scorvey; upon the same account it's stiled a
Rheumatic Scorvey, a Torminous or Griping Scorvey, a Diarrhoeous Scorvey, an Emetic or Vomiting Scorvey, a Flatu∣ous Hypochondriac Scorvey, a Cutane∣ous Scorvey, viz. of Spots, Pustles, Blotches and Pimples, an Vlcerous Scorvey, a Dolorous Scorvey, &c. §. 7. From the occultation or hid∣denness of the Symptoms within the Body, it may be called an inward, hidden, or Latent Scorvey, which doth not manifest it self in Symptoms that are external and evident, as Spots, Mouth or Leg Symptoms; but without the Concomitance of these, there is onely observable a Neutrality in point of Health, a defection of Ap∣petite, some small oppression of the Breast, a diminution of ones usual in∣clination to stirring, and some little hebetude or dullness of the Senses, &c. or a Manifest Scorvey, appearing in external Symptoms. §. 8. From its manner, it may be termed a Mild or Malignant Scorvey. From the Countrey or place where it reigneth, its called an English, or Dutch
Scorvey; also a Sea, or Land Scorvey. §. 9. It is not to increase the bulk of this Tract, but the great use that may be made of these differences and distinctions, as you will in their pro∣per places observe, hath been the oc∣casion of inserting them in this Chap∣ter; the truth hereof will manifest it self, when you come to understand, that many patients are frustrated of their hopes of Cure, and some prae∣cipitated to their Tomb, thorow the neglect and error in making a right di∣stinction of their Disease, its degrees, and its various mutations, which sometimes is to a contrary distemper; and it is here chiefly, that I praetend to be particular, whereas the Vul∣gar Hackney Physician neglecting the Journal of progressions in Maladies, followeth onely the common Tract of Method and Remedies, and therefore fraequently misseth his scope of resti∣tution of health.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Diagnostick Signs of the SCORVEY. 1. The Signs of a Praeliminary Scor∣vey. 2. Signs of a Liminary Scor∣vey. 3. Signs of a Recent Scor∣vey. 4. Signs of an Inveterate Scor∣vey. 5. Signs of a Terminatory Scorvey. 6. Signs of an Hepa∣tic Scorvey. 7. Signs of a Stoma∣chic Scorvey. 8. Marks of a Sple∣netic Scorvey. 9. Notes of distin∣ction of an Acid, Lixivial, and Sa∣ponary Scorvey. 10. Directions to discover a Latent Scorvey. 11. The dfference between an English and Dutch Scorvey. §. 1. A Praeliminary Scorvey is not onely discovered by praeceding Scorbutic Procatarctics, but also by the Pulse and Urin, the former beating not so unaequal, as in continual putrid Fevors; neither is the heat so pungent, but glowing only,
that is obtuse and fuliginous: the lat∣ter is commonly of a higher colour, than in an ordinary continual Fevor it can arrive to in so short a space of time, and very abounding in a gross ruddy sediment. Moreover the ebul∣lition of Blood is of no long conti∣nuation, but in a few dayes is apt to fall and subside, unless provoked by the error of the Physician or Pati∣ent. §. 2. A Liminary Scorvey some do decipher by these four Pathognomonic Signs, 1. A livid and deadh Com∣plexion of the Face. 2. An itching deep redness of the Gums. 3. An Oppression of the Brest and Respirati∣on, also of the Sides about the Bastard Rib. 4. A Painful Feebleness of the Knees. These we grant to be com∣mon Signs in an evident commencing Scorvey, but not Pathognomonic, be∣cause they do not alwayes attend eve∣ry Scorbutique; for I have met with some, that without those Symptoms before-mentioned, have been disfigu∣red with livid Scorbutique Spots, likewise some whose Mouth and ad∣jacent
parts were affected, without the least sense of feebleness in their Knees, or Oppression of Respiration; Lastly, Those that are molested with a Latent Scorvey, are exempted from several of the praenumerated Signs. To these common Diagnosticks must be added a fifth, A great heavi∣ness of all the Body, and lumpishness or dulness of the internal and exter∣nal Senses. 6. The Appetite in some is obtused, in others it's so much sharp∣ned, that they are apt to covet more than they can digest. 7. A , or the digestion of the Stomach some∣what impaired of its wonted vigor; as appears by a small heaviness and drowsiness after Meat, and accom∣panied with Belchings and Winds murmuring downwards. 8. The Urin is less transparent, and grown a little turbid and drabby. 9. All these may be confirmed, by considering the Procatarctic Causes, viz. Whether they have lived in a Scorbutic Air, or fed upon Salt Diaet, or by reason of Imprisonment, or other volunta∣ry Confinement, have neglected all manner of Exercise, or whether they
have been under some occasional Me∣lancholy, or whether some usual eva∣cuation, as the Menstrua, Haemor∣rhage at the Nose, or Haemorrhoids, Issues in the Arm, Neck, or Leg, or in any other part, be not suppressed. Or whether they are not Splenetic or Hypochondriac; or have lately been troubled with a Quartan Ague: Or whether their Parents were not subjected to the Scorvey, whence it might be aesteemed Haereditary; or lastly, whether they do not daily converse with Scorbutiques, where∣by it might become Contagious. Con∣sider also the Juvantia, and Nocentia, what things help them, and what hurt them. §. 3. The signs of a Recent, or Augmented Scorvey, are, 1. A spongy swelling of the Gums, which upon the least pressure, or biting a piece of Bread, are apt to exudate Blood. 2. A great stink of the Mouth. 3. Loos∣ness of the Teeth. 4. Spots like Flea∣bites, and Freckles dispersed over the whole Field of the Body, but thick∣est about the Mouth, Temples, Arms,
Breast, and Knees; some are Red, o∣thers Yellow, Grayish, Duskish, Pur∣pre, or Blackish, easily disappearing in one place, and emerging again in another. 5. A deeper transmutati∣on of the Complexion into an ill ha∣bit of Body, the looks seeming Yel∣lowish, Greenish, deep Red, Sal∣low or Swartish. 6. The Oppression of the Lungs, Breast and Sides is con∣siderably increased, insomuch that when they stir or rise up, they are sub∣ject to faint and gasp for Breath, which continueth so long, until they sit, or lay themselves down again. 7. Puf∣fing up of the Stomach particularly after Victuals, and Tension of the Bel∣ly. 8. The weakness of their Knees and Ancles, is likewise much augmen∣ted, which renders them far more Impotent in going, or moving. 9. It's observed, that in many the whole train of Symptoms is apt to be in∣tended or increased every fourth day, in some every third day, that is every other day (for Physicians do reckon inclusive) in others at certain seasons every day. 10. In this degree they are usually Costive. And 11. troubled
with Pain and Stiches all over. 12. Suppression of the Menstrua in Wo∣men, in stead whereof, they are molest∣ed with a sort of painful Whites. §. 4. In an Inveterate Scorvey, these Praecited Symptoms and Signs, as they have taken deeper Root, so have also assumed a greater Intension and stubbornness; for in this degree the Patient is deprived of all power of Moving or Stirring; the Sinews, Ten∣dons, and Muscles, are apt to be stiff and contracted. He is molested with Vagrant, Ambulative, Distending, Creeping, Vellicating, or Lancina∣ting Pains of several parts of the Bo∣dy; bruising Ossifragous () pains in the midway of a Limb be∣tween the Joynts, torturing most in the Night; Red, Yellow, Purpre, or Blackish splotches, especially about the Knees, which sometimes being concomitated with a Tumor, and ex∣tending thence downwards as far as the Foot, and meeting altogether in one tumefied Splotch render the Leg to ones view, as it were all over Le∣prous; a fraequent recurring Me∣lancholy
passion, Hiccoch, choak∣ing Coughs, and copious Salivati∣ons, violent Palpitations of the Heart, deep Swoundings strenuous Vomitings, tearing Iliack pains, which a famous Author names a Dysenteria Incruenta, but how properly, let o∣thers judge. The Pulse variable, in∣aequal in motion and strength, most times low and thick, and sometimes vermicular, though at other times strong and violent, that is Thumping. The Urin is inconstant, oft turbid and whitish, sometimes thick and reddish, seldom thin and pale; deep Red, or purpre Tumor and Pustles, scattering over the Surface, Redness of Face, Tumors and Impostumes of all kinds, according to the Temperament of the Grieved. The foresaid Splotches oft do peel off in Scales of several co∣lours and figures, or exchange into Erysipelas's, these and likewise Botch∣es do pass into Ulcers, some of which are superficial, profound, simple, in∣flamed, callous, dry, sanious, puru∣lent, &c. In some few the Veins un∣der the Tongue, and about the inside of the lower Lips are varicious; some
also they are debilitated by great Sweats, which they are exposed to. In an Inveterate Scorvey, they are oft Loose and subject to fall into violent Fluxes of the Belly, or Diarrhaea's, and Lienteries, which if continuing, pass into a Terminatory Distemper. The tormenting pain in the Back, cal∣led Lumbago, and resembling the pain that's occasioned by the Stone of the Kidneys, is very brisk in this degree, as also spurious Pleuritick pains. §. 5. The Signatures and Symp∣toms of a Terminative Scorvey (which is the extream degree, whereinto the forgoing passeth either per , or , are, 1. A Scorbutic Phage∣daenic, cancerous or gangraenous Ul∣cers, and Caries or Rottenness of the Bones. 2. A Scorbutic Fistul, which may happen to several parts. 3. A Scorbutic Dropsie, which commonly proves an Ascites, though I have also remarqued the Scorvey hath made its Exit, through an Ansarca, and Tym∣panie. 4. A Scorbutic Atrophy and Marasmus. 5. A continual very flu∣ent
and drivelling Salivation, which one in Throgmorton-street hath labou∣red under several years, and will cer∣tainly conduct him to his Grave. 6. Scorbutic Convulsions, and Epi∣lepsies. 7. Fraequent Syncopees. 8. Scor∣butic Palsie, and Tremors. 9. Scor∣butick Apoplexie. 10. Scorbutic Quartan, Tertian, Erratic, Hectick, and continual Malignant Fevers. 11. Scorbutic Orthopnaea, and Perio∣dical Coughs, and Asthma's. 11. Scor∣buticks Phthiss, or Pulmonique Ul∣cerous Consumption. 13. A conti∣nual Flux of the Belly, as a Dysente∣ry, or Lientery. §. 6. The Signs of an Hepatic Scor∣vey, are, 1. Deep, Red, or Yellow∣ish prurient sanguinolent Gums. 2. Red, Yellowish, or Cineritious Spots and Splotches about several parts of the Body, especially about the Breast, Neck, and Face, also Pustles and Bumps of the like tincture in the same places, that prove somewhat Incommodious by a Pruriginous itching quality, also Erysipela's, Shingles, and Ring-worms; some of those Spots and Splotches of
an Ash and Citrin colour I have obser∣ved to be indued with a faculty so corroding, that their seat hath been deep in the Skin, much below the Surface. 3. The Complexion of the whole habit of Body, tending to a Cineritious or Subcitrine defoedation, and in some to a Verdure. 4. A Stich or pricking, and in many a weighty depressing pain in the right side, un∣der the short Ribs, particularly upon a deep caprisant Respiration. 5. A soreness, pain and oppression in the right Hypochondre, when lying on the left side. 6. Difficulty of Respirati∣on, the Urin and Pulse uncertain, ni∣orulent Belchings, besides several other signs common to a Liminary, and Recent Scorvey. §. 7. A Stomachic Scorvey is dis∣cerned, 1. By a pale Tallow habit of Body, white Spots like Cacatrix's, much lighter than the Skin, pale Pu∣stles and Oedematous Tubercles, chiefly about the Stomach, Breast, Neck and Groin. 2. Oedematous Legs. 3. Laxe fungous pale ichorous Gums. 4. Fluent spitting. 5. Infla∣tion
of the Stomach, heavy Digesti∣on, sour Belchings, and discharging of Wind both ways. 6. Distension of the Belly; whereunto add some of the common signs. §. 8. The marks of a Splenetic Scor∣vey are, 1. Livid luxuriant Gums, that are apt to be Fisured, Ulcered, grow putrid and stink, and at length through a Phagdaenic Sanies are apt to be corroded away. 2. Blew livid Spots and Splotches, which by Deteriora∣tion turn black, and oft-times Ulce∣rate, and commonly haunt the left side of the Body more than the right. 3. Sour Belchings, Winds Murmur∣ing and Fluctuating about the Guts between the Hypochonders, Stitches, Pricking, or Gravitating pains in the left side under the spurious Ribs, Me∣lancholy passions, Palpitations, sud∣den Faintnesses, Vertigo's, Inflations and pains of the Stomach, which some∣times reach as far as the Back, in man∣ner, imitating those of the Stone in the Kidneys, also Vomitings, which in some is so continuous and perma∣nent, that they scarce ever Eat or
Drink without returning some part of it immediately, or after a short inter∣val; and notwithstanding are obliged to Eat and Drink often, to suppress the gnawing pain of their Stomach, which is occasioned by a putrid Acid Serum, vellicating the Tunics of the Stomach, lying on the left side proves easiest to them, a livid blearing up of the under Eye-lids; a Haemorrhage of the left Nostril, and many other Cha∣racters expressed in the general Se∣meiotic. §. 9. An Acid Scorvey not differing from a Stomachic, a Liminary, and Recent Scorvey; a Lixivial Scorvey be∣ing oft comprehended under an Hepa∣tic, and a Saponary under an Invete∣rate and Terminatory Scorvey (which Identifications are only to be under∣stood ) are easily known by those Notes I have already praemised, whereunto may be added for confir∣mation, the most certain sign desu∣med a Juvantibus and Nocentibus, viz. an Acid Scorvey yields to Alcali∣ous Remedies, a Lixivial to a Scor∣butic Acid, a Saponary to a mixt Re∣medy.
The Mouth, Leg, and Joint-Scorvey, needs no further Illustration for discovery, than what I have set down in their particular Chapters. §. 10. A Latent Scorvey requires Experience and Industry in the Physi∣cian, who must take his Dimensions of Conjecture, 1. From the Air wherein the Patient Liveth. 2. Diaet. 3. From such Symptoms, which can∣not so Directly or Relatively be ap∣plied to any particular Disease besides this, as a Recurrent Lassitude, and sloath of Moving, dulness of the Senses, difficulty of Breath, pesanture of Body, inflation of the Stomach, heaviness and dulness after Meat, winds about the Guts, Coughs and Catarhs fraequently returning, besides several other Neutral symptoms, which do neither determine a man absolutely Well or Ill. Lastly, Observe that where two such Non-naturals, as a Salin Air and Diaet, have so absolute an Influence on Bodies, scarce any Dis∣ease can seize on a man, which doth not partake of a Scorbutic Tincture, neither can it be well Cured, without
abstracting a Coindication from the Scorvey. §. 11. A Dutch Scorvey in Symp∣toms is very different from the Eng∣lish; they using generally a Diaet more Excrementitious than ours (as gross thick Beer, Roots, Cabbage, Salats, Milk, Roak-Flesh, Pickle-Herring, and other Fish) are more Exposed to all the supposed Pathogno∣monics and Syndrome of a Mouth and Leg-Scorvey, than we, who feed com∣monly on Meats of more Nutriture and less Excrementitious, and there∣fore are not so much Exposed to that general Catalogue of Scorbutic Symp∣toms, but most commonly to those that are Latent, (and Recited in the praeceding Paragraphs) and some o∣thers more evident, as Spots, Blotches, Pustles, Cutambulous Pains, Griping of the Guts, Vomiting and Gnawing Pains of the Stomach, Hypochondriac Winds and Vapours, Catarrhs, Coughs, also to those of the Joint-Scorvey.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Causes of a Termi∣natory-Scorvey. 1. The Cause of a Scorbutic Dropsie. 2. That the Heart is the part prima∣rily affected in a Convulsion, Palsie, and Apoplexy. §. 1. THis Chapter I have reser∣ved for the Aetiology of a Terminatory Scorvey, in whose train the Dropsie being placed in the Front, shall Commence my Discourse on that. The ill success that attends the Vul∣gar Cure of an Asctes, or Water-Dropsie, by hot drying and Lixivial Medicines, as Elycampane, Orris Roots, Cyperus, Calamus Aromaticus, Juniper, Salt of Worm-wood, Centaury, and a Hundred more, is a plain Convictive, that the Cause is most erroneously as∣sumed, to be a Refrigeration of the Liver, and it's Obstruction through Phlegmatic Humors. But on the o∣ther
hand, when we shall take into Consideration, that a Scorbutic Drop∣sie is easily, and certainly Cured, if attempted in time by mixt Remedies, (whereof Spirit of Tartar, of Salt Marine, single or composite, and such like Acids, are the Basis) besides the Symptoms attendant signifying a Lixi∣vial Original, is to me a clear Demon∣stration, that it proceeds from a Cal∣cination of Choler in the Liver, which thence resulting into an Alcalious Salt, dissolves per Deliquium, and so be∣comes Qualified to Penetrate into the most intime pores of its Parenchyma, where it subverts its Temperament, and through its Absorbitive Exhaust∣ing faculty parches its substance, and Indues it with a Salin dissolving Qua∣lity, whereby the whole Mass of Chy∣mus is daily dissolved into a Serum. The Universal Current of Blood de∣riving hence an Absorbing and Exic∣cating faculty doth about the Stoma∣chic Vessels so exsuge the Mouth of the Stomach, that Hydropics are conti∣nually obliged to moisten it, by In∣gurgitating large measures of Drink, whence the Ltex seri doth so immen∣surably
accresce, that through its in∣tumescence generally some Vessel or other about the Abdomen, and par∣ticularly about the Mesentery, doth burst, or at sometimes through the Acrimonious quality of the Salin Se∣rum the said Vessel is corroded through, among Physicians termed, a ; for it's not possible, so great a quantity of Water, as is some∣times collected in the capacity of he Abdomen, should sweat through the pores (per .) But this is certain, that oft in a Commencing Dropsie, or one that's Recent, and of no large Circumscription, the Serum may exstil through the Osculations of the Vessels (per ) and it is this kind of Dropsie is capable of an expedite Cure, whereas the other that depends on a , is for the great∣er part Incurable; for suppose, that the Extravasate Serum is all, or in a great measure drawn off by Hydrago∣gous Purgatives, still the consolidation of the corroded Vessels is not only dif∣ficult of its own nature, but in a man∣ner impossible, because of the daily praeferfluxe and appulse of the corro∣sive
Salin Serum, to the discontinu∣ated Orifices of the said Vessels; add hereunto the ineptitude of the salin constitution of the Liver and corro∣ding Alcalious Blood to be sweetned, and reduced to their pristin Tempera∣ment. By the way, let me observe the Error of Hofman in his Institutes, attributing the causality of a Dropsie, to a Diminuted or Abolisht faculty of the Kidneys, not attracting the Se∣rum, which is manifest, doth happen per accidens; because the Serum ha∣ving taken another Channel, is devi∣ated from its usual appulse to the E∣mulgents. But since I find my self for the praeent Imbarqued on this Subject, the Affinity of the Matter perswades me to Expatiate into some other sorts of Dropsies, that are not Scorbutique, namely such, as sometimes do happen to Women after their lying In, also to some upon a liberal draught of cld Water, and to others upon the conti∣nuance of a Skir of the Spleen or Li∣ver, or upon a taedious harassing of a Tertian or Quartan. In the first case there being a vast Coacervation of Humours in the Hypogastri Vessels,
by reason of the retention of the Men∣strua, during the whole time of Child∣bearing, which upon the pains of La∣bour attracting a greater Conflux thi∣ther, and the great heat of the adja∣cent parts rarefying the said Humours, occasion some of the Lymphatic Ves∣sels to burst, whereunto being con∣comitant a copious Haemorrhage of the Matrix, causeth a vast expense of Spirits, whereby the Bowels do all suffer a subversion of their tempera∣ture, that afterwards proves an occa∣sion of engendring crude aqueous Hu∣mours; these upon their circulating reversions distilling out of the foresaid bursted Vessel into the capacity of the Abdomen, produce a Dropsie. The like may happen upon a draught of cold Water, violently repelling the Humours to the Vessels of the Abdo∣men, which partly through the vio∣lence of the Impulse, and partly through their being crouded toge∣ther, occasion a Rupture of some of the Lymphaeducts. Here I must Ani∣madvert further, how ridiculous a cnceit it is of most Physicians, im∣porting the said Dropsie to be caused
by the sudden extinction of the innate or influent heat of the Liver, which afterwards doth engender Aqueous Blood; as if that entrail should be left so naked, or be so meanly fortifi∣ed by Nature, as not to be capable, to resist the quality of cold Water at so great a distance; for certainly the cold is much broke and obtused by the Sto∣mach, and other parts, before it can arrive to the Liver; or as if that cold quality, which is impressed upon the Liver, could not be easily remedied by hot Medicine: But what do I in∣sist so long upon these Trisles, since the whole Body of Physick is filled with them? How a Dropsie is engen∣dred upon a Skir, Tertian, or Quar∣tan, you may be inform'd from the Praemises, wherefore I will return to Confirm the cause of a Scorbutic Drop∣sie to be an Alcalised Blood, by the Calcination or Reverberation of the Bilis, which the Liver is alwayes fur∣nisht with throughout all its parts, to subtiliate and depurate the reflu∣ent Blood, which being performed, the superfluous part of the said Bilis is abandoned to the Cystis. The
Symptoms concomitant and superve∣nient do strongly Corroborate that Sentiment. 1. The Insatiable-Drought, the Atrophy of the Superi∣or parts, the Lixivial ruddy Urin, tor∣rid Tawny Complexion of Body, cancerous depascent Ulcers of the Legs, the salt Lixivial taste of the Se∣rum, when Tapt out Per paracentesin; who but an insipid Medicaster can de∣rive them from any other than an Al∣cali, or a reveherated Bilis? §. 2. A Convulsion, Palsie, and Apo∣plexy, are the next particulars, that highly merit a serious deliberation, the more, because they ordinarily prove so dangerous and terminative. In the concept of their part primarily affected, seat, and internal Cause, I have for several years with the Gene∣rality of my Profssion, attributing too much to the Dictates of Antiqui∣ty, sloathfully erred, until that by a stricter scutiny and observation in practice I had detected their true Fountain and Original, which I now propose to you. That the Heart is the chief seat, and part primarily and
principally affected of the forementi∣oned Diseases, appears 1. By the Pulsa∣tion of the Arteries, which before any Convulsion, Palsie, or Apoplexy doth seize on the Patient, doth very much vary from its Natural, in re∣spect of Fortitude, Order, Frequen∣cy, Aequality of Motion, and many other specifications; which certainly express the heart primarily and princi∣pally affected; confer further with the 6. Arg. 2. By the Respiration, whose variation from its ordinary Function in several respects, praeceding those recited affections, also signifie the same to be the part principally affe∣cted. 3. From the consideration of the Office and Function of the Heart, which, besides the Vivification and Irradiation of the whole, is, to be the sole and Primum Mobile of Motion of the Animal Spirits; for through the Pulsation of the Arteries about the Brain, and more especially about the Plexus Choroides, it causes Efforts, Im∣petus, and impulsive motions on the Animal Spirits; so that it is from those Impulses these receive their energy and vigor, and therefore consequent∣ly
the Heart being affected, those Im∣pulses must also be depravated or dimi∣nisht. 4. If at any time those Symp∣toms are abated or removed, it is by means of Cordials, which here for di∣stinction, and the scope they are in∣tended for (though improperly) may be termed Cephalic-Cordials, Cepha∣lico-Cardiaca, as Spirit of Castor, Am∣ber, Rosemary, Pyony, &c. These undoubtedly are nothing more than Cordials, and rectifying the Blood, comforting the Vital Balsam and Spi∣rits of the Heart, and reducing them to Ordination, aequality of Motion and Vigour. From ordinary Cordi∣als they differ in this only, that con∣sisting of a more durable and compact Sulphur and Spirits, they continue their Operation longer, in comfort∣ing the Heart, and oppugning the Salts of the Blood, by reason of the Compactness and Crassitude of their substance, whereas those that are vulgarly termed Cordials, and in∣tended only to comfort the Spirits by assimilation, consist of a lighter, fu∣sive, and exhalable substance; as Spi∣rit of Wine, Treacle-water, Aqua
Mirabilis, &c. 5. Observing, that in some Cases the foresaid Symptoms receive a considerable abatement and benefit from Phlebotomy, it is easily Demonstrable, that this is performed, by detracting some part of the bur∣den, that oppressed the Heart, and its Pulsifique and Impulsive motions. 6. Galen, lib. 2. de caus. puls. c. 12. seems to intimate what is here asserted, in these words: Pulsus convulsivus est, in quo ad utrumque terminum arteria tenditur, quem convulso sequi solet. So that a convulsive Pulse (which sig∣nifieth the Heart to be affected prima∣rily) doth praecede a Convulsion, which following must be deemed a Symptom of the former. Touching the manner and difference of those three Symptoms, I conceive, that a Convulsion is occasioned by Irritati∣on, a Palsie by Relaxation and Obtu∣sion, and an Apoplexy by Dissolution. But to Illustrate it further; When the Arterial Blood consisting of an acri∣monious pungitive Salt, and appelling to the lower part of the Brain (which is the most sensible, and near the Prin∣cipium Nervorum) is agitated smartly
by the vibration of the Arteries or hard and violent pulsations (for in all Convulsions Pulsus sunt duri & tensi) those subtiler particles of the Blood are adacted violently into the Pores of the tender parts of the Brain, which being thereby extremely discompo∣sed, do violently impel the said pun∣gitive Particles into the Nerves (or in some cases only make a smart Im∣pression of their Idea on the Animal Spirits contained in the Nerves) and being protruded to the Tendons of the Muscles, through their sti∣mulating quality incite them to con∣tract and distend themselves, to be freed or discharged of those aculeous Particles. Moreover, take notice, that the vulgar Explicatory of Con∣vulsions, wherein the Nerves are de∣clared to be primarily and chiefly convelled, which being continuated to the Muscles, do likewise occasion their being convelled is greatly Er∣roneous; for only the Tendons are sub∣ject to Convulsions, they being the chief instrument of the Motus Sponta∣neous, and only subject to a Motus De∣pravatus, and Violentus, whereas
the Nerves are not appointed to move or to be moved, but to convey the Spirits. Secondly, When a Nerve is punctured, or cut asunder (as hath oft happened by the Indexterity of Surgeons in Phlebotomy wounding the Nerve in the Arm in stead of the Vein) it's only apt to be surprized with a very great pain, but never known to be convelled. Wherefore I would not have my Reader judge the Dictates of the Ancients to be In∣fallible, since besides what is fore-men∣tioned, it's manifest in many of their Positions, which hitherto by this cre∣dulous Age are received for Truths: I shall only give you this Instance for Proof; The Causes of a Cephalalgia, or Head-Ache, is by them asserted to be Acrimonious, or distending Humors and Winds, corroding or distending the Membranes or Meninges of the Brain. Nothing is more false than this, or savours more of Ignorance in Anatomy; for neither of the Menin∣ges are in the least sensible, as may be observed by the Probe, wherewith touching the Dura meninx, though roughly, (when lying bare upon the use of the Trepan) is not in the least per∣ceived
by the Patient. Secondly, Whence should the sense be derived, there being not any Nerve, or so much as a Nervous Fibre transmitted to it from the Brain. In Summa, in the Brain, Stomach, and Liver, though they are daily Dissected and Examined by Physicians in their ex∣pired Patients, many particulars are passed by, that have not been disco∣vered until very lately, which is to be attributed to their Negligence and Unskilfulness; for indeed now a∣dayes, if a Physician hath but once or twice dissected a Sheeps-head, or a Calves-pluck, he thinks himself suffi∣ciently qualified to Challenge the Ti∣tle of an expert Anatomist; thus we see, that an expert Anatomist of this kind, observing that one of the jaw Muscles of a Sheeps-head had two Bellies (whence its also called Diga∣stricus) immediately concluded all Muscles to be Biventres; an able Head-piece for an Anatomist. A Palsie is an imperfect Apoplexy, or a Levis Apoplexia, and differ only gra∣du, secundum magis & minus, and therefore do easily pass into one ano∣ther,
according to the Tenor of the Doct. of Hipp. Galen 3. de loc. affect. 10. further tells you, That where all the Nerves have at once lost their sense and moti∣on, that affection is called an Apo∣plexy, but that which only happens to the right or left side is a Palsie. The causes in general are twofold, 1. A Material. And, 2. A Formal Cause. The former is a gross Sapona∣ry Blood, which through its thickness is rendred incapable of being so sub∣tilized by the Brain, as to distil into the Nerves, and that part that is Insi∣nuated into the Nerves, being too ob∣tuse and gross, to receive the Impul∣sive motions and Impetus, prove una∣ble to actuate or distend the Nerves and Fibres, and therefore move the Members very weakly, or not at all, whence I term it a Relaxation in op∣position to the said distention. The Formal Cause is the pulsifique faculty of the Heart, which is rendred soft, slow, and dull, and therefore Incapa∣ble to exercise it's Impulsive motions. Moreover observe, that though the
Blood is Salin-Alcalious, it is not A∣crimonious, because it is obtused by a mixture of gross Unctuous and Bi∣tuminous Sulphur, that obtuses its Acri∣mony; for otherwise were it Acrimo∣nious, and purely Lixivial, it would prove Vellicating and Dolorous, and consequently Convulsive. The Aetio∣logy of the other Terminatives may be easily deduced from the interspersed Discourses. CHAP. XVIII. Chronology of the Scor∣vey. 1. In what place, and with what Conco∣mitants the Scorvey first appeared, in what particulars its Symptoms in∣creased. 2. A recital of several Primitive Authors that have wrote on the Scorvey. §. 1. TO whatever various Senti∣ments touching the first Rise and appearance of this Distem∣per, every particular Physicians Fan∣cy
may lead him, I am certain by all the Indagation I could make among Physical Records, the name of Scor∣vey (what touching Identified Symp∣toms hath been discoursed among the Ancients, let that rest) is not menti∣oned in any Author prior to Euritius Cordus, by his Botanology, and Olaus Magnus, who in his Hst. Gent. Sept. relates, There was a certain Campane Disease, which did afflict those, that were Besieged and Closed in, and seemed to grow from eating of Salt Victuals, was increased through a cold Exhalation out of the Walls, and was called the Scorboch. But Georg. Fabrit. Lib. 2. Annot. in his History of the year 1486. saith, This year was reigning a new and unheard of Disease in these Countries (which were Sile∣sia, Bohemia, and the parts adjacent) which the Seamen of Saxony, called Den Scarbochk. Whence I collect, this Disease had some few years be∣fore been Extant in Saxony, and Denmark, possibly in 1483▪ or 84. Moreover two things are observable, 1. That this Scorbutic Evil praesently after its first Origination, was more
fierce, and Malignant, than the ensu∣ing Twenty or Thirty years; for the said Fabritius in the account he gives of it, tells us, this Distemper tended immediately to Ulcers; which if not timely remedied, became Gangraenous, and Mortal. The Second is, That there was an Interval of some years, before it spreaded into Countries, that were less Northern; for Balduinus Ronsaeus, who to me appears the first, that wrote on the Scorvey, è Professo, in his Treatise de Magns Hippocratis lienibus, pliniique Stomacace, or Sce∣letyrbe, seu vulgo dicto Scorbuto, print∣ted at Antwerp, in the year 1564. doth express this Disease, was but newly arrived among them, and was so strange to them, that many scarce knew, what to make of it. Guil. Lemnius, a Zelander, wrote a Trea∣tise on the same Subject a little while after. Forestus in his Observ. Lib. 22. Obs. 20. Writes, that the Scorvey, was not only formerly unknown, but ma∣ny that were troubled with it, Died of it; likewise that one Dorpius, a Priest of Lovain, died of the said Disease many years since, the Lovain
Physicians being extremely surprized at it, who had not yet determined any thing concerning it, being an E∣vil, that was yet new and unknown, and so was its Name, Essence, and much more the manner of Curing it. Scorbutic Authors tell us, that West∣phalia was pester'd with it next after Denmark and Saxony, in the year 1500. the next Frizeland, then Flan∣ders, and Brabant, in 1556. where it was occasioned by eating of Rye, that was brought from Prussia, there being at that time a great scarcity of Wheat; afterwards Holland, and Zeland; in a manner, as if this Distemper had by Contagion crept from Country to Country. Many years it remained on that Coast, before we were sensi∣ble of it here in England; for there are many Physicians yet living, who in the former part of their Practice, had not so much as heard of the Name of this Disease, whereas within the last 20 or 30 years past, it's grown ve∣ry familiar among us. The next Author that wrote on the Scorvey after Ronsaeus, was Echtius, whose Epitome of the Scorvey was
Printed a little after the said Ronsaeus, next to him was Wierus, de Scorb. printed in 1567. next Salomon Alber∣tus, whose History of the Scorvey, with the addition of a new Symptom then appearing, which was a contra∣ction of the Cheeks, was published in 1594. Hieron. Reusnerus, his Exercit. on the Scorvey, in 1600. Severinus Eugalenus his Book of the Scorvey, in 1604. Langius his two Epi∣stles on the Scorvey, in 1607, or 8. Horstius on the same Disease, in 1609. Stubendorf upon Eugalen, in 1614. Dreyer, Brunner, Brucaeus, Albinus, Smid, Sennert, all Authors on the Scorvey, in 1622, 24, and 27. Be∣sides these several others have Obiter and Cursorily touched on this Dis∣ease, as Bauhinus, Dodonaeus, Agricola, Carrichter, Dryander, Mithobius, Fo∣restus, Rolfink, Barbet, and Twen∣ty more.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Praesages of the se∣veral Degrees and Kinds of Scorvey. 1. The Prognostic of a Praeliminary Scorvey. 2. Of a Recent Scor∣vey: 3. Of an Haereditary Scor∣vey. 4. Of a Contagious Scorvey. 5. Of an Endemic Scorvey. 6. Of a Stomachic, Hepatic, and Sple∣netic Scorvey. 7. Of an Acid, Lix∣ivial, and Saponary Scorvey. 8. Of an Asthmatic, Rheumatic, Tormi∣nous, Emetic, and Diarrhaeous Scor∣vey. 9. Of a Latent Scorvey. 10. Of an English Scorvey. 11. Of a Mild Scorvey. 12. Of Spots and Blot∣ches. 13. Of Ulcers. 14. Of Spots and Blotches of an Ash-colour. 15. Of a Livid Palat. 16. Of a Scorbutic Pulse. 17. Of an Epigi∣nomenal Scorvey. 18. A Progno∣stick applicable to Children. 19. Of a Reverting Scorvey. 20. Of Ter∣minative Scorveys.
§. 1. THe fore-knowledge of the Danger, various Mutations, Facility, or Difficulty of Cure of a Distemper, is so neces∣sary, that a Physician can by no means be thought accomplisht, that is not well instructed in that particu∣lar, for which reason I shall Congest what Observations others and my self have made upon it, and recommend them to your reading. A Praeliminary Scorvey, if not well Distinguisht, and rightly Cured, may either be Transitory into a dangerous Malignant continual Fever, or a Li∣minary Scorvey, either of which may be praevented by a very facil Cure. §. 2. A Recent Scorvey being neg∣lected for six or eight Months, either by not making use of any means at all, or at least such as are in effectual, pas∣seth into an Inveterate Scorvey, that generally proves very stubborn to Re∣medies; being in some Cured by a long continued Course, in others only palliable, so that its fraequently return∣ble, either every Spring and Fall, or
every Moon; in others it's absolutely Incurable. §. 3. An Haereditary, Connate, or Syntrophous Scorvey, is Mitigable, but not intirely Curable. §. 4. A Contagious Scorvey being only Liminary, or Recent, yields ea∣sier to Remedies, than one that is Non-naturally adventitious. §. 5. A Distemper contracted by a Salin Air is not so obstinate, as one en∣gendred by Dyaet, provided the Pati∣ent takes the advantage of changing the Air. §. 6. A Splenetique Scorvey is worse than an Hepatic, and that also is worse than a Stomachic. §. 7. An Acid Scorvey is more cor∣rigible than a Lixivial, and that more than a Saponary, which fraequently proves Incurable. The measures of a Mouth, Leg, and Joynt Scorvey in ge∣neral, are very consonant to the last praeceding distinction.
§. 8. An Asthmatic, or Syncopal Scorvey, is attended with danger, and oft with a sudden death; a Rheumatic is taediou, and oft survened by a Fe∣vor; a Torminous is ordinarily very deplorable, and an Emetic distemper is of aequal danger with the former, and oft proves fatal. Diarrhaeous and Lienteric Scorveys are very Chroni∣cal, and fraequently Mortal. A Fla∣uous Hypochondriac, an Vlcerous, and a Dolorous Scorvey are very difficultly conquered, or if at any time Cured, are easily returnable. §. 9. A Latent Scorvey is easily or difficultly Cured, according to the length of time since it hath invaded the Body, and according to the quality of the Symptoms, and parts affected. In general, a Latent Distemper doth more easily admit of Cure in the beginning, than a manifest one; but in the Aug∣ment or State is far more difficult than the other, because there is no dis∣charge of Scorbutic matter towards the Circumference, as in the other, and consequently the Spirits must be more oppressed.
§. 8. An English Scorvey is univer∣sally milder, and less refractory than a Dutch Scorvey. §. 11. A Mild Scorvey may conti∣nue or be protracted to ten, twenty, or thirty years; a Malignant one doth sometimes terminate Life in two, six, or twelve Months, in some sooner, in others later; some arrive to their pe∣riods gradually, that is by a gradual decay of Spirits, and contabescency of Body; others die suddenly, and possibly when they least think of it. §. 12. Spots and Blotches, the near∣er they come to a black colour, the worse they are, and if they burst out into Ulcers, signifie a greater Malig∣nity, and difficulty of Cure. It is observable, that in some before they Die, those Blotches do disappear by reverting into the Body, but soon af∣ter death appear again. §. 13. Vlcers of the Legs are not easily chekt, but on the contrary if irritated, like Cancers indue a fier∣cer Nature, which fraequently inclines
to a Gangraene, and Mortification. §. 14. Spots and Blotches of an Ash colour, especially if Corroding and Itching, in some are never Cured. Cutaneous Tumours if apt to retro∣cede and burst out again, praesage a Palsie. A Palsie though Cured, leaveth a contraction of some of the Tendons, or a subjection to Convulsions behind it. §. 15. In a Mouth-Scorvey, if the Palat and Throat turn Livid, that is Leadish, or Blackish, prognosticates Death to be at the door. §. 16. A weak Pulse, and debility of Body in this Distemper are not al∣wayes dangerous, because that former may be occasioned by vapours and steems, and the latter by putrid Acid Blood. Neither are Convulsive Mo∣tions, that survene Scorbutique Fe∣vors, of an aequal danger with those, that accompany other Distempers; for these soon cease, and their cause being Acrimonious steems, are in a short time dissipated.
§. 17. A Scorvey succeding a Quar∣tan Ague, or a continual Malignant Fevor, proves for the greater part ve∣ry Malignant, Obstinate, and in some Incurable. §. 18. Children and Boys are most incident to the Kings-Evil, and Joint-Evil, young Men to the vagrant Gout, and old Men to the fixt nodous Gout. Boys and Girls are not so much expo∣sed to the Scorvey as Men or Women; because the Constitution of the for∣mer is not so Salin, as the latter, and therefore when at any time they are surprized with it, are easier Curable. Old Men if Scorbutique, carry their Distemper commonly along with them to their Grave. A Mouth-Scorvey is more familiar among the younger sort, and a Leg-Scorvey among those that are past thirty. §. 19. A Body that hath been once Cured of the Scorvey, if attacked the second, or third time, shall find the Cure to advance much more slowly than before. Few Distempers of this kind are remedied without an exact Diaet,
though never so slight, and if they be any thing Inveterate, or Terminatory, the best Medicines without a Diaet a∣vail nothing. §. 20. Terminative Scorveys, though Curable, require a long continuated strict course of Medicines; some are absolutely Incurable. These Prognostics are to be under∣stood absolutely considered, without the help of Remedies, which being praescribed according to the Rules of Art, dexterously praepared, and Me∣thodically applied, are sufficiently im∣powred to frustrate the most of praedi∣ctions, alwayes that excepted, which implieth a Period determined by the Creator, whereunto this Trite Versi∣cle hath its Reference: Contra vim mortis, non est Medica∣men in hortis.
CHAP. XX. Of Praeservatives against the Scorvey. 1. Praecepts relating to the Air. 2. Rules of Diaet. 3. Praecepts refer∣ring to the rest of the Non-natu∣rals. §. 1. IT is not in a bare Speculati∣on of the Nature, Causes, and Signs of Diseases, the Art of Medicines doth Acquiess, but like o∣ther practical Sciences and Arts, de∣signs its Theorems for Practice; where∣fore since I have sufficiently laid down whatever appertaineth to the Theo∣ry of Scorbutique Infirmities, it's re∣quisite I should now declare the Pra∣ctique, which comprehends the Pro∣phylactique and Therapeutique. The former being otherwise called the Con∣servative, in this case directs the means whereby to praeserve a Healthy Body from the Scorvey, which consist chief∣ly
in Rules, and praecepts of making use of the six Non-naturals. §. 1. Make choice of a thin serene perflated In-Land Air, and therefore shun the Sea-coasts, Bogs, Waterish, Stincking, and Close places. §. 2. Let your Diaet be chiefly up∣on fresh Meats, that are Nutritive, of easie digesture, and not very Excre∣mentitious; so that you must avoid all Victuals that are stale, stincking, salt, gross, obstructive, Excrementitious, and of hard digestion. Within the Verge of this Rule are meats, that have been kept too long, until they had acquired a French Haugou; like∣wise Pork, Brawn, and all sorts of Hog-meat, as Black-puddens, Sau∣siges, Beef, Ducks, Geese, Tripe, Flower-Puddens; most sorts of fried Victuals, as Pancakes, Stakes, Eggs fried, Collops of Bacon, &c. Most sorts of Fish, Salats, all Souced, and Pickled Meats, &c. Which are all Scorbutique. Let your Drink be clear, well fermented, fresh, sweet, and temperate; not stale, or sour, ill
tasted, thick and muddy, heating, or cooling. Thus much for the quality; for quantity you must be moderate, in respect both of Eating and Drink∣ing. Let your times of Meals be sea∣sonable, seven in the morning, twelve at Noon, and seven at Night in the Summer, and in the Winter one Hour later. Your Breakfast and Supper ought to be light, and moderate, but your Dinner somewhat more solid and plentiful. Particularly avoid Cof∣fee, new raw Cider, Brandy, and To∣bacco. §. 3. Sleep moderately, use Exer∣cise, but not violently, keep your Body in order; that is between Loose and Bound; shift your Linnen once or twice a Week, to praevent the stop∣page of your Pores by the Condensa∣tion of Sweat, and sooty steems, that stick to your Shirt. What concerns the passions of the Mind, I will only recommend to you the Old praecept Bene age & laetare, Do well and be chearful; and so here let us end this Chapter.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Therapeutique in the Scorvey. 1. General Indications. 2. Indicati∣ons taken from the Air, also from the quality of the Humours. 3. In∣dications abstracted from the quan∣ty of the Humours. THe Therapeutique or Curative performs its part, by directing Methodically Remedies, contained in the Pharmaceutique and Chirur∣gique. §. 1. The Methodical Directions do flow from the Indications, which are taken from two general Heads, viz. 1. From the Strength of the Body. And, 2. From the affections against Nature; from both which like∣wise Coindications and Counter-indi∣cations are desumed. Among the Affe∣ctions against Nature, the Causes of a Disease, and in our Case of the
Scorvey are the principal Indicants, next are the urgent Symptoms, and lastly the Disease itself. §. 2. The Salin Air among the Pro∣catarctics being the Ground and Ori∣ginal efficient, indicates its change in∣to a better, which is such, as hath been described in the first Rule of the prae∣ceding Chapter; whose second Ca∣non doth likewise contain Directions, that answers the Indication, desumed from a Scorbutique Diaet, another grand Efficient; these two together with the rest of the Non-naturals be∣ing provided against in the same Chapter, we are to apply our selves to those Indications, which the Inter∣nal antecedent Causes do point at, viz. 1. A Salin putrid, or gross fuliginous coagulated acid Blood, indicates Re∣medies, virtuated to dulcify, atte∣nuate, deprate the Humours of those sooty particles, and volatilize the salin parts, that are too much fixed. 2. A Salin lixivial thick chyme rquires Re∣medies, that by obtusing the fiery alc∣lious Salts, may reduce it to an unctu∣ous sweetness, or a Pinge-dulce, and
though their inciding property render it thin and fluid. 3. A Saponary consti∣tution of the Blood doth assign Reme∣dies, that obtain a power not only of allaying the alcalious qualities of the Salts, but also of depurating and vola∣tilizing the incrassated Sulphurous Par∣ticles, that are fixt and imbodied with the Alcalious Salts. §. 3. In respect of their too much increased quantity, they seem to direct the Physician to Diminution or Substraction, which is accomplisht by Pharmaceutical and Chirurgical means. The latter are, 1. Phlebotomy, for disbur∣dening and depleting some part of the whole, which in Hepatic and Stomachic Scorveys is to be performed in the right Arm; in a Splenetic in the Left, and in a Pleuritic Scorvey in the Arm of the same side. After a competent Interval, for derivation from, and easing of the part affected, a particular substraction of Blood out of the Hemorrhoide veins by the application of Leeches is of great use in an Hepatic or Splenetic Scorvey. In Women, especially if there be either a Total or partial sup∣pression
of the Menstrua, the Saphae∣na ought to be opened. The measure of what quantity of Blood is requisite to be subducted, is to be taken from the degree of Plethory, Age, Sex, and o∣ther common Circumstances. 2. Fontanels or Issues, than which no means, whether Chirurgical, or Pharmaceutical, seem more advanta∣geous and necessary, both for a prae∣servative, and Curative. Touching the Place, where an Issue is most proper to be made; in a Splenetic Scorvey is in the inside of the Leg above the Knee, an Inch or two higher than the Ga∣tering place; but here the Surgeon is to be very cautious, that in making the Incision, he doth not wound some of the Vessels, that pass just under∣neath, which is fraequently done if made too deep, and sometimes not without danger. In an Hepatic Scor∣vey the Right Leg is most proper, in a Stomachic either, it matters not. The Mouth-Scorvey indicate; an Issue in the Left Arm, or in some cases in the Neck, or Right Arm, or in some very few on the Head, on the place of meeting of the Sagittal and Coro∣nary
Suturs. In the Leg-Scorvey an Issue above the Knee is more rational. In the Joint-Scorvey more Fontanels than one are necessary, to be made in the Arm or Leg, and some∣times in the Neck also, according to the circumstances of the Disease. Children that are Born of Scorbu∣tic Parents, receive a great benefit from Issues, that are made in the Neck or Arm; but for praevention, that the Scorbutic stain wherewith some Child bearing Women are contami∣nated, shall be communicated to the Child in the Womb, nothing is of aequal force to an Issue in the Arm. The too much increased quantity of Scorbutic Humours indicating Phar∣maceutical evacuations, is to be di∣minisht, or abated by Laxatives or Eccoprotics, and Purgatives or Ca∣thartics. The former are usually prae∣mised before Bleeding (where requi∣red) and Purgatives.
CHAP. XXII. Of Antiscorbutic Laxa∣tives. 1. An excellent Praeparation of Aloes. 2. A description of the Francfurt Pills. 3. Of Aloes Rosata, and Bontius his Pills of Tartar. 4. Of the Virtue of Aloetic Pills. 5. Two particulars to be observed in the Praeparation of Aloes. 6. Some other Laxatives proper also in the Scorvey. §. 1. ALoes is the chief Laxative, and indeed the Basis of most Purgative Pills; but in regard that it's offensive to the Stomach and Liver, and that by reason of its bitter Acri∣monious Lixivial parts, it's of a na∣ture so Colliquative, and Irritating, that it's apt to force the Blood out of its Vessels, and particularly to excite a Tenesmus, and Haemorrhoidal pains, ne∣cessarily requires such Correction and Praeparation, as may render it not only
less hurtful, but also particularly ap∣propriated to the Stomach. The prae∣paration, which I have fraequently Experienced, to excel all others, is this following. ℞ Aloes Succotr. gros. pul. ℥i. Flor. Ros. rub. ʒi. ss. Spir. Sal. com. gut. xl. Spir. Vin. non rectif. ad. Supereminent. iiii digit. f. digest. in ciner. per hor. xii. coletur & evapor. ad extr. consist. cui adde Ol. Garyophyl. vel. Nuc. Muscat. stillat. gut. xx. Dos. a gr. xv. ad lx. §. 2. Tthe Francfurt Pills, otherwise called Pil. Angelicae, Invented by Hart∣man Beyer, have not only kept up their Reputation for many years, but to this day are accounted of great Virtue in Germany and Holland against Scorbutic Distempers, insomuch, that many Thousand Boxes of them are every Year dispersed to all Neighbouring, and some remote Countries also, so that they are found to be as stabil a Commodity to the Francfurter Apo∣thecaries,
as Treacle to the Venetians, or Confectio Alkermes to those of Mon∣pelier. The gain that hath been ac∣quired by them, is the occasion their Praeparation hath been kept so private, though at praesent is grown publick enough. The description I had of it at Francfurt is various, some praepa∣ring them one way, some another, though in the whole it comes much to one. The most received Praepara∣tion is that, which consists of an in∣complete and complete Extract of Aloes. In manner following, The incomplete Extract is. ℞. Aloes Succotr. lb s. Aq. Borrag. lb i ss. Diger. per hor. xxiiii. colatura fort. express. evap. ad consistentiam. The complete Extract is. Materiae inspissat. assund. Suc. Card. Ben. ℥vi. aliis ℥viii. Digerant. rursus per hor. vi. & ex∣pressio evaporet. ad spissit. Extract.
§. 3. In Italy the praeparation of Fabritius ab Aquapendente was, and is still of aequal Fame with the former, and is nothing but Aloes Rosata, where∣of the said Fabritius for many years together was wont to take every day a little before his Supper half a Scru∣ple, for a praeventive of Diseases and a prolongative of Life. Leonard. Donatus writ an entire Tract upon the Description, Virtues, and Use of Aloes Rosata, concluding the last Chapter with this Expression, That as the Romans anciently through Sobrie∣ty lived to the Age of Six Hundred Years, so he hoped to Live no less by the use of Aloes Rosata. Bontius his Pl. Tartar. are also of excellent use for the same purpose, the Description whereof you have in Scroders Pharmac. §. 4. It is among the Records of Experience, that Aloetic Pills are a most safe and effectual Praeservative from the Scorvey, being at convenient times used once or twice a Week or oftner; they are likewise a great Prae∣parative, that may be praemised be∣fore
a Curative Method of a Recent, and Inveterate Scorvey. They offer no violence to Nature, which the Vul∣gar Mountebancks Universal, or Scor∣butic Pills, Elixirs, and praetended purgative Cordials do in so rude a measure, that many have and daily do purchase them with the loss of their Lives. Were I obliged to set down the Names of all those bold ad∣venturous Elixir-purchasers, or Pill-Chapmen, that in one Year only are untimely posted away to their Graves by those Deleterious Medicines, it is not twice the Bulk of this Treatise would contain a space large enough for a Register. How gently those Aloetic Pills cleanse the Stomach, the Guts, and Mesaraics of their Drossy Mucilagi∣nous and Tartarous Dregs, and that without the least perturbation of Hu∣mours, alteration of Body, change of Countenance, impair of Strength, or any ill attendance, may be admired. That they gently remove Obstructions, excite an Appetite, and render the Body vigorous and prompt to Motion, is a most certain Truth.
§. 5. Two particulars are to be ob∣served; The one is in relation to their Praeparation, viz. That they be praepa∣red singly, without the admixture of those praetended correctives contained in the Composition of Hiera Picra, Ruffi, Mastichin, and such like; for all that Farrago or Miscellany of Asarum spic. croc. &c. in the Hiera; Myrrhe, and Saffron in the Ruffi, doth not only so much increase the Mole of a Dose, that in stead of two Pills of simple Aloetics, you are obliged to swallow down Eight or Nine, but it occasions also a Tumultuation and Ebullition in the Stomach, and all the Vessels, inflames the Body, and sets all the Humours afloat. The second is in relation to their proper Use and Exhibition, where you are to take notice, that they are only appropriated to an Acid Scor∣vey, being otherwise very praejudicial in a Lixivial, and Saponary Scorvey, also to all hot and dry Temperaments, lean and thin habits of Body, and such as are subject to Haemorrhages of the Nose or Haemorrhoides, or excessive Menstrua.
§. 6. The Laxatives proper in a Lixivial or Saponary Scorvey, are Po∣lypody, Sem. Cartham. Epithym. Cas∣sia, Manna, Tamarind. Prun. dam. Passul. Tartar. Rhen. Crud. Crem. Tartar. Syr. Ros. sol. Out of these may be composed Decoctions, or Bolus's; or in stead of them may be substituted Laxative Glysters. CHAP. XXIII. Of Scorbutique Purga∣tives. 1. The great virtues of Senna. 2. Of Agaric, and Mechoacan, also of Halo-cathartics, and Gum-cathar∣tics. Of composite Medicines. 4. A Caution in Purging Scorbutic Bodies. 5. A Purgative Apozem. 6. A Ca∣thartic Powder. 7. Antiscorbutic Pills. 8. A pleasant Purgative Ele∣ctuary. §. 1. CHymical Practisers cannot with greater Truth affirm, that Antimony is capable to Cure all
Diseases, then in the same sense I may confidently assert, that Senna before all others is the most noble, safe, and effectual Vegetable Purgative, where∣by most Distempers depending upon a Cacochymy, may be perfectly remo∣ved, and especially those, that are Scorbutique. §. 2. Agaric and Mechoacan, are the next Purgatives, that seem to be specifically appropriated to Scorbutic Cacochymies. Besides these, all Hy∣dragogal Cathartics in general are ex∣perienced, to contain a peculiar facul∣ty of Evacuating, and purging aboun∣ding vitiated Acid Salts, and among those Syr. è Rham. Cath. is praefer'd for a mild and safe Halo-Cathartic. Those of a more rude nature, and conse∣quently more proper for Robust Bo∣dies, and inveterate Diseases, are Ela∣ter. Gut. Gamb. Gialap. Extr. Esul. Suc. iridis nostr. soldanel. Gum Cathartics in obstinate Cases are of admirable Virtues, but must be used in their due season; such are Gum Ammoniac especially, Opopanax, and Sagapenum.
§. 3. Thus much for the Simples, the Composits are these following; but before I proceed upon them, let me recommend one Rule of Caution to you, That the less Compounded Medicines are, the more certain are their Effects, and less subject to disturb the Spirits: For a Medi∣cine that consists of manifold Ingredi∣ents, though perchance it may per∣form the same Operation, will occa∣sion a greater Perturbation, and with so much uncertainty, that you shall not know, to which of the Ingredi∣ents, the success is to be chiefly ascri∣bed. Moreover, though for Orna∣ment and the Dubiousness of the Di∣stemper a Polypharmacal praescription may be allowed, yet in Scorbutique Maladies, where the Blood upon the least irritation is so apt to be ex∣agitated, and moved into a tumultu∣ous Ebullition or , it's incom∣patible. §. 4. Secondly, Be mindful of this Remarque, that Scorbutics, because they are so much exposed to an Op∣pression, and Depauperation of Vital
and Animal Spirits, as appears by their low inaequal Pulses, the imbeci∣lity of their Joynts, and oppressed Re∣spiration, cannot bear much Purging, especially by violent Cathartics, nei∣ther is there that Concoction () nor Separation () of Humours, which are necessary before Evacuati∣ons; wherefore purge seldom, and that only with gentle Medicines, un∣less the Robust Constitution of the Body, or the Radication or Greatness of the Distemper should require it. §. 5. The forms of Purgative Prae∣scriptions, viz. of an Apozem. ℞. Rad. Polypod. q. Helen. an. ℥ss. Fol. Agrimon. Asplen. an. M i. ss. Sum. Absynth. P. i. Passul. m. ℥.i Fol. Sen. or m. ʒvi. Agar. albis. ʒi ss Tartar. Rhenan. ʒi. Zing. ℈ii ss Coq. in Aq. Fon. q. s. in Colat. lb i dissolv. Syr. Ros. sol. ℥i ss M. f. Apoz. pro iii. dos. matut.
§. 6. Of a Powder. ℞. Crystal. Tartar. ℈ii. Flor. Sal. Armon. chal. ℈ss Scammon. Sulphur. gr. vi. vel viii M. f. Pul. Capiend. in juscul. cochl. i. vel ii. §. 7. Of Pills. ℞. Fol. Sen. or. ʒii. Nitr. Tartar. ʒi. Resin. Scammon. ℈i. Ol. Garyophyl. gut. x. Syr. e Rham. Cath. q. s. M. f. Mass. Pill. Dos. ʒi. Others of great Virtue. ℞. Aloes praep. nost. vel Rosat. ʒss. Tartar. Vitriolat. ℈i. Resin. Gialap. gr. iiii. vel. v. Ol. Garyophyl. gut. ii. Syr. ros. Sol. q. s. M. f. Pill. vii. deaurentur.
§. 8. Of an Electuary. ℞. Mechoacan. ras. ℈i. Gialap. pulv. gr. xv. Ol. Stil. Macis. gut. iiii. Man. Calabr. Pulp. Tamarind. an. ʒii. Sy. Ros. sol. q. s. M. f. Elect. This last praeceding I have oft in a Lixivial Scorvey praescribed with suc∣cess to those, whose Stomach could not bear an ill tasted Medicine. CHAP. XXIII. Of Antiscorbutic Altera∣tives. 1. Antiscorbutic Alteratives. 2. Spa∣gyric Antiscorbutics. 3. An Anti∣scorbutic Decoction of great Virtue. 4. An Antiscorbutic Liquor. 5. A Liquor by expression of Juices. 6. A Liquor by Infusion. 7. An Antiscor∣butic Spirit. 8. A different process
to abstract Antiscorbutic Spirits. 9. An Antiscorbutic Syrup. 10. A different process of praeparing the Elixir Proprietatis. 11. That Cro∣cus Martis as it is praepared by the Oxonian Author, is very hurtful in the Scorvey. 12. That Steel pow∣der in some cases, is poysnous. 13. That Vitriolum Martis is Astrin∣gent and not Ecphractic. 14. Tun∣bridg Waters examined, and their true Principles discovered. How they ought to be used with Benefit. 15. Barnet and Epsom Waters Ex∣amined. §. 1. IN an Acid Scorvey these fol∣lowing are aestimated Speci∣fic Antiscorbutics, viz. Cochlearia Hort. Garden Scorvey-grass, being the chief of all the rest, the next is Na∣sturtium aquaticum Water-cresses, Be∣cabunga Brooklime, Sedum minimum Wall-peper, Armoracia Horse-radish, Persicaria Arsmart, Arum wakerobin, Se∣men sinapi Mustard-seed, Semen Erucae Rocket-seed, Saponaria Soopwort, Che∣lidonium majus Selandine, Guaiacum, Cortex Winterani, the Flowers and Spi∣rits
of Sal Armoniac, Spirit of Soot, and of Harts-horn. §. 2. There are also other Simples, which though they are not Virtuated with so Specifique and Anticorbutic a faculty, yet by deobstructing and de∣terging the Bowels and Mesentery, and attenuating the gross Tartarous Blood, they are oft Experienced singularly to contribute to the Cure of Scorbutics, viz. Rhaponticum verum, Helenium Elicampane, Iris Florent. Orris Gen∣tiana, Centaurium minus, Absynth. Wormwood, Betonica Betony, Sal∣via Sage, Petasitis Butter-burre, Fi∣lix Fern, Chaemaedris Germander, Baccae Juniperi, Sambuci Elder, Ebuli Dwarf-Elder, Satureia. Here∣unto may be added the common Sple∣netic Vegetables, as Fumaria, Fumi∣tory, Cort. Rad. Cappar the Bark of Capper-Root, Cort. Tamarisc. Cort. Fraxini Bark of Ash, Ceterach Spleen∣wort, Agrimonia, &c. The Hermetic Art recommends Tin∣ctur. tartari, Tinct. Antimon. tartar. Elix. Proprietat. The ordinary Chymical Salts, as
Sal Absynth. Cochlear. Card. Centaur. by as much as they participate of the Nature of Common Salt, are absolute∣ly hurtful. Among the Common Spices, Pepper is experienced to be of an Ebullititious nature, and very praeju∣dicial to all Scorbutics, and therefore ought to be omitted in those Prae∣scriptions the Learned Oxonian hath recommended to the Publick. What concerns the forms of Com∣positions out of these forementioned Simples, it is to be remarqued, that Electuaries, Tablets, Powders, and Syrups also, unless praepared according to that or the like manner I shall pro∣pose below, are of little or no use, and are only interspersed by Authors among their forms for pomp, or to add to the Bulk of their Tracts; for it's the Volatil Salt is the sole energic part of these Vegetables, which in the prae∣paration of Conserves, and Syrups, and in reducing them into Powders for the use of Tablets, doth Evapo∣rate; wherefore I shall only offer to you some few select Forms of Deco∣ctions, Infusions, Distill'd Waters, Spirits, and Juices.
§. 3. The form of a Decoction of lit∣tle Trouble, and less Charge, but of great Virtue. ℞ Scob. Lign. Sanct. ℥ii. Lign. Sassafr. ℥i. Sal. Tartar. ʒi. Coq in Aq. font. lb iiii. ad con∣sumpt. medietat. in Colat. infund. fol. Cochlear. hort. M. iiii. Beca∣bung. M. ii. Absynth. M. ss. Cort. aurant. ʒii. Coletur & reserve∣tur in Ampul. Vitr. Dos. ℥iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis. In the Winter when Herbs are scarce, I have frequently recommended this following with good Success. ℞. Fol. Cochlear M iiii. Chelidon. maj M ii. Bac. Junip. ℥i. Contundantr in mort. marm. sen∣sim affund. Vin. alb tenuior. lb i. exprimatur Liquor & reponatur in ampul. vitr. qui residendo cla∣rescat. Dos. ℥iii. vel iiii. bis vel ter per diem.
§. 5. Of a Liquor by expression of Juices. ℞. Fol Cochlear▪ succulent. q. l. Fol. Becabung. Nasturt. aquat. an. part. med. Contund. in mort. marm. pist. lign. Liq valide express. lbii. adjician∣tur. Cort. Winteran. ℥ss. Cort. ex∣ter. aurant. ʒii Croc. Anglic ʒss. in phiola probe obturata per hor 12. digerantur calore leni, dein liq. coletur & in vitr. reponatur. Dos. ℥iiii. bis per diem. §. 6. A Liquor by Infusion. ℞. Rad. Armorac. ℥i. Rad. Gentian. ʒii. Fol. Nastur. aq. M ii. Fol. chamaed. Saponar. an. M i. Flor. Centaur. min. P i. Rad. Zedoar. ʒi f. infus. per noct. in Aq. Sassafr. odorif. Vin. alb. an. lb i. Coletr. de colat. capiat. ℥iii. vel iiii. pro Dosi.
§. 7. ℞. Rad. Helen. rec. ℥ii. Raphan. ℥i ss. Lign. Sassafr. ℥.i. Fol. Cochl. Cichor. an. M x. Fol. Salv. Beton. an. M ii. Sed. min. Persicar. an. M i. Baccar. rec. Junip. Samb. an. ℥ii. Destillentur per vesic. cum refrige∣rio suspendendo in rostro alembic. croc. anglic. in pet. ligat. ʒi ss. ca∣piat ℥iii. pro Dosi. §. 8. Spirits that are drawn by way of Fermentation do, besides the trou∣ble and length of time required, suf∣fer a considerable loss in their Volatil and Spirituous particles, which to evade, hath given me the occasion to find out a way, whereby the said Spi∣rits are Extracted in a greater quantity with very little Trouble or Cost, and much exalted in their virtues. This following I have oft Distilled, which may serve for a form for all the rest of the said Antiscorbutique Vegetables. ℞. Rad. Armorac. ℥iii. Lig. Sassafr. Cort. Win. Aur. an. ℥ss. Fol. Salviae M i.
Sum. Absynth. vulg. P i. Sal. Armoniac. ℥ii. Vin. alb. lb i. contusa & concisa digerantur per hor. xxiiii. dein de∣still. per Alemb. vitr. in cujus cu∣curb. fuerit calc. Viv. lb ss. Dos. a gut. xx. ad gut. xxxx. §. 9. An Antiscorbutic Syrup. ℞. Succ. rec. expr. Cochlear. ℥viii. Suc. Anagal. aquat. ℥iii. Suc. Betonic. Card. Ben. an. ℥i. Sacchar. alb. lb i. depurando oq. ad spissit. Syr. crass. cui fri∣gefact. affund. Spir. Cochlear. & Anagal. Aq. praedicto modo simul destil. ℥i. M. f. Syr. §. 10. What relates to Elixir Pro∣prietatis, praepared according to the process of Crollius, it's a Medicine beyond all Objections very proper against the Scorvey; but two Inconve∣niencies I apprehend in it, 1. By the immediate affusion of so great a pro∣portion of Spirit of Sulphur, the other Ingredients are Adusted or Burned,
whence the Elixir afterwards contracts an Empyreumatique scent and taste. 2. By reason of the Various Digesti∣ons and Distillations is consumed a great deal of time, attended with some needless Cost and Charge. Both these the College of Physicians of the Hague endeavoured to avoid, by directing the procedure in their Pharmacopoea, Fol. 106. in this manner, ℞. Aloes puriss. Myr. Elect. Croc. Anglic. an. ℥i. tritis ac vasi vitreo angust. orisic. inditis, superaffunde Spir. Vin. rect. lb i ss. Ol. Sulphur. rect. ʒvi. Vase optime clauso f. digest. in VB. per dies quatuordecim; tinctura ab∣strahatur, quae per decant. separata servetur usui. Although by this praescription they seem to have superated those two fore∣mentioned Inconvenients; there is a third remaining, which renders it ve∣ry Incommodious for Exhibition, namely, that upon the Instillation thereof into any Aqueous Liquor, it's apt to be praecipitated in the form of
a Mucilage, all which to avoid hath given me the occasion, to praepare the Elixir Proprietatis thus: ℞. Aloes Succotr. Myr. Elect. an. ℥i. Sal. Mrin. bene exiccat. ℥iiii. Distil. per retort. vitr. in aren. cleo destill. affund. spir. vin. rect. lb i ss spir. salis rect. ℥i. addendo Croc. arglc. ℥i. post digest. 4. dier. in ciner. dcant. Vel. Adjiciatur Croc. Angl. ℥ss. & di∣ger. per dies 4. dein distil. in cu∣curbit. humil. appendendo extre∣mitat. rostri alembic. croc. odora∣tis. nodul. inclus. ℥ss. Guttulae oleosae supernatantes sepa∣rentur per tritor. & saccharo albis. dissolut. addantur liquori distillato. §. 11. Medicines praepared of Steel have their particular uses, even in this sort of Scorvey, being designed to sweeten the Blood, by obtusing or a∣laying, and imbibing the putrid Acid Salts of the Blood; to this purpose the Learned Oxonian Author doth sin∣gle
out from all other praeparations that fort of Crocus Martis, which by a long continuated Calcination is ele∣vated into an Acool, and totally strip∣ped of its Salin and Sulphurous parti∣cles, imagining that the foresaid Cro∣cus through its droughty natury, doth Appetere and Absorb all Acrimonious Salts and Sulphurs of the Humours, as being Consentaneous to those it is now deprived of. This Mode of Reason∣ing is most certainly verified in the Nature and Effects of Antimonium Di∣aphoreticum, Coral, Pearl, &c. But nothing is more Erroneous, than the applying it to the Aetiology (as he may term it) of that kind of Crocus Mr∣tis; for abstract from it Vinegar, or any other Acid, by Destillation, and you shall Experience it, to come over every whit as Acid, as when it was Affused. Wherefore it ought to be abandoned from being used in any Di∣stemper, excepting in some Loosnesses or Haemorrhages, where and when Em∣plastics may be judged serviceable, and in those cases I have observed the Ef∣fects of Terra damnata Vitriol. dulc. far more ample, having oft praescribed it with Success.
§. 12. All praeparations of Steel, that consist in the form of Powders, are at∣tended with an unavoidable inconve∣nience, being apt through their weight to descend to the bottom of the Sto∣mach, and sometimes to penetrate through the Pores of the inward Tu∣nic, and there lodg between the Tu∣nics, occasioning so great an oppressi∣on, that the Patient is rendred subject to almost Incurable Palpitations and Lipothymies; for the Steel Powder is only with the greatest difficulty, and sometimes never to be Expelled from between that Tunics; insomuch that under that notion it may be termed Synonymous with Venoms, against which the Magnet Stone powdered and exhibited Internally, is the only Antidote. Not many years since I dissected one that expired of a Dysen∣tery, against which an Apothecary had for many dayes given two and three Drams of Crocus Martis astring. for a Dose; the same praeparation that is so much Extoll'd by my Author. Up∣on the separating of the Tunica Ru∣gosa from the middle Tunic, I dete∣cted a vast quantity of red sand, which
upon Examination of what had been taken, I found was some of the Cro∣cus Martis this skilful Glyster-pipe Doctor had given. §. 13. Those that consider Salts to be dissoluble, praefer Vitriolum Mar∣tis before Chalybeat Powders, design∣ing thereby to avoid the Permanence of the latter in the Body; but then are certainly Frustrated in their scope of reserating oppilations, there be∣ing nothing so praevalent in an Obstru∣ctive and Astrictive quality, as the foresaid Vitriol of Steel, which that you may give the greater credit to, this I do discover to you as a great Medicine for stenching Haemorrhages, and it is by this sole praeparation I have Cured a great number of Spit∣ting of Blood, and several Women of immoderate Uterin Fluors, both San∣guinolent, and White. Wherefore it must be deemed an Error Albo cal∣culo notandus in those, that praetend to imitate Diuretic Mineral Waters, such as the Savenier at the Spaw, and the Wells of Tunbridg, by dissolving of Chlybeat Vitriol in Spring-Water: But how great a Detriment this must
necessarily import, may be best under∣stood from those, to whom they have been praescribed. Notwithstanding by mean of another Method, Artifi∣cial Mineral Waters may be praepared so effectual and pleasant withall, that they shall in a great measure excel the Natural. By the advantage of these it is I have freed several from Lixivial Scorveys, that had proved obstinate to all other Methods. Touching the use of Purgative Mi∣neral Waters, viz. Barnet, Epsom, Dulledg, Chigwel, Stretham, Northall, &c. To some Scorbutics they have proved Auxiliary, to others Hurtful. §. 14. The Virtue of those Diure∣tique Mineral Waters is derived, from a permixture of some crude Elements of Iron, imperfectly Coagulated or Compounded into Particles, with Wa∣ter sourcing near and washing through the Matrices of the said Crude imper∣fect ferruginous Elements; or to be more plain, the said Mineral Waters do consist of a dissolution of Vitriolat Salt, volatilized by the Sulphur of Iron. From the Vitriol it is, the Wa∣ter
is disposed to turn black upon the addition of Galls; from the Volati∣lizing Sulphur associating to it some of the Subtilest, Acid, Piercing, and Insinuating Particles of the Vitriol, it is, that they prove so excellent in driving down the Urin; and from the Exhalability of the said Volatil Salt or Sulphur, volatilizing the purest part of the fixt Salt, it is, they upon a very small interval loose their Diuretic Virtue, especially if violently shaken or mo∣ved, by being transported by Horse or Cart; though notwithstanding that, they will not lessen in their aptness of turning black by Galls, as long as they continue Impraegnated with the fixt Vitriolat Salt, which probably may be long enough; but in the In∣terim I would have you to escape that Error, many unpolisht Philosophers commit, in judging the said Water to continue vigorous in its Urinating qua∣lity, as long as it continues alterable by Galls. On the contrary, as soon as it hath suffered the loss of all its Volatil Salt, which is in very few dayes, it doth assume a binding ob∣structive quality, and that in so dan∣gerous
a manner, that some have di∣ed of it; for the Water remaining in their Bodies, and not being carried off, had suffocated the Vital flames of the Heart and Arteries. Those that have made Observation on the number of such, that have been hurried out of the World both at the season of their drinking the Waters of Tunbridge, or soon after they had left them off, may very well conclude, either, that the said Wa∣ters were not proper for their Distem∣per, or that as too frequently hap∣pens, their Bodies were insufficiently praepared; for it is far from a propor∣tionable praeparative, to Exhibit only a Dose of Stomach Pills, or a little Pulv. Senae comp. maj. but upon the use of a proper Purge or two some good Aperitive praeparation of Steel ought likewise to be mixt with a Ca∣thartique, and then they will Expe∣rience their Bodies to have been well praepared by the safe and successful use of the Waters upon it. §. 15. The Waters of Barnet, Ep∣som, &c. are rendred Diuretic, Pur∣gative,
and sometimes Vomitive, through an Imbibition of some Imma∣ture principles of Copper, as appears on the tryal by Lapis Calaminaris, or Sal Armoniac. The Cathartique and Emetique Faculties issue from the Sul∣phur of Venus. Among other numerous capricious Chalybeat praeparations, I find no form so agreable, and greatly success∣ful, as the Tincture of Steel; but not when praepared after the usual sloven∣ish Mode. Some sorts of Dulcifying Medicines in many Cases do wonder∣fully contribute to the Cure of an Acid Scorvey, by obtusing the Acri∣mony of the Blood; such are most Testaceous Simples, as Coral, Pearl, Crabs-Eyes, Crabs-Clws; Oyster, Mus∣cel, and Egg shells; add to these An∣timonium Diaphoreticum, Bezoard. Mineral. Bezoard. Jovial. Magister. Jovis, Chalk. &c.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Specific Alteratives in a Lixivial and Saponary Scorvey. 1. Antiscorbutic Simples of the first Order. 2. Simples of the second Order. 3. Simples of the third Or∣der. 4. A Narrative of a Scorbutic Case. 5. Some other Antiscorbutics. 6. An account of another Scorbutic Case. 7. A third Scorbutic Case. 8. Some other Chymical Antiscorbu∣tics, and a Description of the Au∣thor's Nitrum Tartarisatum. 9. The great Virtues of this Nitrum Tarta∣risatum. §. 1. THe Simples that are indu∣ed either, 1. With a Lentour or Mucilaginous moisture. 2. With an Acidity· Or, 3. With a cooling detergent Faculty, are aesteem∣ed very proper, and useful in an Al∣calious Scorbut. Through the first
of these Qualities, they Lenify and Mitigate the Acrimonious Salts of the Humors; through the second, they Hebetate the corroding Alcali; and through the third, they move, atte∣nuate and divel the Pendulous parts of the Blood, withall Clarifying or De∣purating it from its Impurities. 1. Of the first Order. Are, Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, Mallows, Marsh-mallows, the four greater Cold Seeds, Jujubees, Sebestens, Corrents, Liquorish; Gum Arabic, Dragant, Milk, and in some Cases the Milk Diaet. 2. Of the second Qualification. Are, Acetosa Sorrel, Trifolium Acetosum Wood-Sorrel, Oranges, Limons, Ci∣trons, Cremor and Spiritus Tartari, Spiritus Dianae, Spir. Sulphuris, Vitri∣oli, Salis com. nitri, Veneris Ex aeru∣gine, Antimonii, Spir. acid. Guaiac. Juniper, Liquor Corallorum, Perlarum, Crystalli acidae nitri, &c. 3. Of the third Ranck. Are, Ligustrum Privet, Aparine Clivers, Chelidonium minus Pilewort, Num∣mularia Money-wort. 4. These four are by Authors pro∣claimed
Specifics in the Scorvey, the frequent Experience of their Use in some Scorbutiques confirming them to be such; but their Ignorance, through what manifest Virtue their Effects are performed (these being di∣ametrically contrary to the other Ig∣neous Volatil Specifics) renders them incapable of judging, to what sort of Distemper, in what manner, and at what time they ought to be applied. A while since, a Patient made her complaint to me of sharp running pains, flying up and down her Limbs, a pricking in her Gums, glowing of the Calves of her Legs, and sometimes of the Shins, a gnawing pain about her Ancles, especially upon much stir∣ring, heats and pustles in her Face. She had made use of several Physicians, whose Opinion concluded her Distem∣per to be the Scorvey, and therefore had praescribed several Decoctions, and Infusions of Scorvey-grass, Water∣cresses, &c. Distill'd Waters, and Spirits of the like Ingredients, all which she found, had rendred her much worse, but some two Years before, confessed she had derived much be∣nefit
from them, but now they ex∣tremely aggravated her Symptomes. This method of Cure I perceived de∣pended on Indications, desumed from those pestilent principles of Rancid and Pendulous. The Error flowed from apprehending this an Acid Scor∣vey, which plainly appeared to be Lixivial. I praescribed her this Le∣nitive: ℞. Pulp. Cass. Tamarind. an. ʒii. Mechoacan. alb. ras. ʒss. Pul. sen. comp. maj. ℈ss. Crem. Tar. ℈i. Syr. ros. sol. ʒii. M. f. Bol. ii. Deaurentur. Capiat mane cum custodia. This Operated very gently and well, upon one days interval it was repeated. The fourth day she took this following Drink, and continued it three Weeks. ℞. Rad. Buglos. ℥i ss. Fol. Aparin.
Nummular. an. M. iiii. Decoq. in Ser. lact. q. s. ad lb i ss. In Colat. dissolv. Cryst. Tar. ʒi ss. M. f. Apoz. pro 4 dos. mat. & vesp. Once a Week she made use of the above written Bole. In the space of her whole Course of Physick, she was Blooded once in the Right Arm, and once at the Haemorrhoides. The suc∣cess of these Means restored her per∣fectly to her former Health, in less than a Month, which she hath enjoy∣ed ever since. How easily is a Distem∣per Cured, whose Cause is rightly un∣derstood; whereas had this Woman adhaered to the praescriptions of her pendulous Physicians, she would cer∣tainly have been among her Ancestors long ere this. Others I Cured of the same kind of Scorvey (Praemissis Vni∣versalus) chiefly by this following: ℞. Rad. Sarsaparil. ℥iii. Rad. Chin. non carios. ℥i. Rasur. Eboris ʒvi. Coq. in aq. font. lb vi. ad consumpt. unius tertiae, sub fin: coct. adde. Rad. Cichor.
Scorzon. an. ℥i ss. Fol. Chelidon. min. M. vi. Colaturae assunde Elix. Antimon. fulv. ʒi. ss. M. Capiat ℥iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis, Note, that Sarsa and China are made use of in this Decoction, not for their Sudorifique faculty, but for a quality they are endued with of sweetning the Blood, by obtusing its Acrimo∣nious Salts, through the Lentour, which their farinaceous substance con∣tributes to the said Decoction. 5. To those four principal Anti∣scorbutic Vegetables may be added these following, Scorzonera Hisp. Vi∣pers-Grass, Clematis Daphnoides Peri∣winckle, Rhaponticum vulgare Great Centaury, Virga Aurea Golden Rod, Rumex acutus Ditchdock, Hispidula Catsfoot, Auricula muris Mouseare, Aquilegia Columbine, Rad. Graminis, Geranium Rupertianum Herb Robert, Pyrola Sea-lavender, Cichoreum Succory, Sempervivum majus Housleek, &c. 6. The difference in qualities of these
Simples cannot escape your Adverten∣cy (though all agreeing in the same faculty, of oppugning Lixivial and Saponary Scorveys) some being tem∣perate, som cold and moist, others cold and dry, and astringent; for which reason you may praesume, their use is limited to Diseases, though Lix∣ivial, yet attended with particular Symptoms, so that they are not pro∣miscuously to be applied. But be∣cause Practical Instances may serve you for a more clear Example, I will give my self that trouble, of setting down the Case of a Patient, who Re∣paired to me the last praeceding Year; it was a great heat in the Epigastrical Region of the Abdomen, that chiefly incommoded him, which for the most part exercising its fury in a fixt place, that sometimes was at the bottom of the Stomach, sometimes a little lower (which must be in the Pancreas) and sometimes on the Left-side, where the Spleen resides; so that here was a Lix∣ivial Scorbutic Humour, that from the Spleen was tossed to and fro to the Stomach, or sometimes to the Pancre∣as through the Splenic branch and Vas
Breve; the other Symptoms were a nidorulent crudity of the Stomach, a dejected Appetite, thick reddy spu∣mous Urin, low inaequal Pulse, diffi∣culty of Breathing, and purpre Pu∣stles erupting and retroceding in the Face. Those several eminent Physi∣cians (that is eminent for a numerous Practice) subsequent to their Opini∣on, that it was the Scorvey, had for se∣veral Years treated him, with those common igneous Antiscorbutics, un∣til his daily Experience of the prae∣scribed Medicines discovered to him, it was to those unskilful Courses of Physick he must impute a great part of the growth of this Disease. His Bo∣dy being very thin and exanguious counter-indicated Bleeding. The Cru∣dities of his Stomach and Infarctions of the Mesaraiac Vessels by Lixivial pen∣dulous Blood required Lenitives, mixt with some gentle Cathartics. ℞. Elect. Linitiv. Man. Calab. Pulp. Tamarind. an. ʒii ss. Nitr. Tartar. nostr. gr. xxv. Diss. in decoct. Prunor. dam. & sem. foen. ℥iii. M. f. Pot.
This he used twice a Week; in his interval days took this following Drink for five Weeks, and was perfectly re∣stored to his former Health; but for confirmation of his Cure, I ordered him to drink the Waters at Tunbridge for one and twenty days. ℞. Rad. Tarax. ℥i. Fol. Chelidon. min. M iii. Semperviv. maj. M i. Glycyr. ras. ℥ss. Coq. in ser. lact. q. s. ad lb i. Coletur. & instil. Elix. Antiscorb. nostr. ℈ii. M. f. Apoz. Sine sacchar. vel Syr. §. 7. To another Scorbutique, whose Palpitations and Lypothymies had rendred him very languid and weak, besides Purgatives and Bleed∣ing at the Haemorrhoides, praescribed this. ℞. Rad. Scorzon. Vincetox. an. ℥i. Fol Chelidon. min. Aparin. an. M ii. Virg. Aur. M i.
Hord. Mund. P i. Glycyr. ras. ℥i ss. Coq. in Aq. font. q. s. ad lb i ss. In Colat dissolv. nitr. Tartar. ʒi. & instil. tinct. mart. gut. xv. M. f. Apoz. Capiat ℥iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis. In case a Scorbutique of this kind is afflicted with a Diarrhoea, or Dysen∣tery, you must make choice of Li∣gustrum, Auricul. Muris, or Hispidula; if Dysepulotic Ulcers of the Legs be the praevailing Symptoms, praefer Virg. Aur. Pyrola, Symphyt. Petr. or Bellis. It is this sort of Scorvey and its sub∣divisions (which hitherto hath not been observed by any) that occasions so many ambulative Patients, wan∣dring from one Physician to another, among whom some are so ingenious to confess, they do not know what name to give the Distemper, or what to make of it. §. 8. Besides these forementioned I have found a singular Virtue in Steel drops, praepared after my Mode; like∣wise
in an Elixir Antiscorbuticum, the Basis whereof is Antimony stripped of its venenous Sulphur, and rendred cooling, Diuretic, and a very high Mun∣difier of the Blood. Neither have I ever observed a Medicine in most Scorbutic Cases, to exceed the power∣ful faculties of my Nitrum Tartarisa∣tum, the praeparation whereof is, as followeth; but for your praevious in∣formation, you are to take notice, that in praeparing Antimonium Dia∣phoreticum, I am used to add a triple proportion of Salt Peter, pulverised and sifted, to crude Antimony, likewise poudered and sifted; this being mixt together, I put by little Ladlefuls into a Pipkin made Red hot in a Re∣verberating Fornace, covering the Pipkin upon every Injection of the said mixture; and having Injected all, I cover the Fornace with a great Tile, and let it Calcine, until the Coals be burned out. The Mass be∣ing yet warm I pouder, and put it into a large Bason, on which suppo∣sing the Mass to be a Pound in weight, I pour about a quart of warm Water, and stir it very well about, afterwards
let it stand four or five hours, that the Powder may settle on the bottom, decant the Water into an Evapora∣ting body, affusing to it half a pint of distill'd Vinegar, evaporate it to a Pellicle, and set it in a Cellar or other cool place, and there let it continue three or four days to Crystalize; col∣lect the Crystals, and evaporate the remaining Liquor again to a Pellicle, afterwards set it on Crystalizing, and so proceed, until all is passed into Crystals. Dissolve the Crystals into distilled Spring-water, strain it, Evapo∣rate, and Crystalize it over again, un∣til it prove very pure and transparent. What relates to the remaining Calx of Antimony, proceed to your ablutions, until the Powder be perfectly Edulco∣rated; it is not here I desist, but make a farther progress to a maturation, and protrusion of the essential or centrical Sulphur, and then I find it to be a Medi∣cine, that deserves a singular Character in many Distempers. §. 9. I ought not to recede from the praeparation of Nitrum Tartarisa∣tum, without giving a description of
its Dose and Virtues; from half a Scruple to two Scruples, it hath per∣formed effects in the Scorvey and some other Chronical Distempers, which could never be expected from the Ar∣canum Duplicatum, Tartarum Vitrio∣latum, or such Hermaphroditic prae∣parations, and Neutral Medicines; for besides its penetrative, incisive, de∣tergent, and deoppilative Qualities, it doth retain a proportion of Antimo∣nial Salt, Centrical Sulphur, and a true Idea of what ever excellent Fa∣culties Antimony in its best praeparation is enricht with, so that there is scarce any Impurity (whether Manifest or Latent) in the Blood or Bowels, that can escape its energy; But when you have made use of as many Ounces of this Nitrum Tartarisatum as I have, I doubt not but you will have cause to give the same Character of it I have here Expressed.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Cure of a Stomachic Acid Scorvey. 1. An Observation on the structure of the Stomach. That it is the Tu∣nica Fungosa is the Seat and Matrix of many Chronical Diseases. 2. The Method of Curing a commencing Sto∣machic Scorvey. Antiscorbutic Pills. An Antiscorbutic Decoction. 3. E∣metics and Gum Cathartics are most effectual Remedies in an inveterate Stomachic Scorvey. Gum-Pills. 4. Corroboratives proper after a Course of Purgatives. 5. Spe∣cifics against an Hepatic Scorvey. §. 1. I Must necessarily praemise one Observation touching the structure of the Stomach, before I can render the Indications plain and obvi∣ous. Its contexture doth consist in four Membranes. The first I call the Tunica Mucosa, or the slimy Coat, being desti∣ned by Nature for a defence of the ner∣vous Tunic from those Acrimonious
moistures, the Stomach upon every digestion doth abound with. This Tunic if at any time it be abraded, occasions great Pains, Vellications, continual Singultitions, and enormous Vomitings. The second from those various Sulcations and Wrincklings may aptly be termed the Tunica Ru∣gosa. This Tunic is very Nervous, and consequently indued with a most exquisite sensibility, derived from the Ramifications of the External branch of the sixth pair, and from the Plexus sexti paris mesentericus; the use of it is, to corrugate the Stomach, and to amplex the ingested Victuals firmly and strictly. Both the forementioned Tunics late Authors have improperly named the Crusta Carnosa. The third I call the Tunica Fungosa, consisting of a laxe spongy flesh, serving to give an ample space and passage for a large pro∣portion of Arterial Blood, from whose praesence and praeterflux in its Circula∣tion, the Stomach doth receive a suf∣ficient heat to dissolve, concoct, and elaborate its contents into a Chyle. Another great use is, that it is subser∣vient in the nature of a Concoctory,
where the crude Blood circulating is to be Digested or Concocted into a sweeter and aequal Mass; so that you must make this Annotation, that it is here the gross, and phlegmatic crude Blood doth so frequently stagnate; whence that pesanture and load at the Stomach, which the Sick do so com∣monly make complaint of in most Distempers, is occasioned, and not from crude viscous Humours in the capacity of the Stomach, which Phy∣sicians, with the Ignorant vulgar, term a Cake of fleam; for were this a truth, a detergent Aloetic Laxative would at once scour the Stomach, and disbur∣den it of those weighty Humours, or at least a Galiard Vomit cannot be supposed to fail in that Indication; but on the contrary we find, that in many Cases scarce a score of proper Purgers, or half that number of E∣metics will accomplish the design; however this is not to be apprehend∣ed so strictly, but that some crude Hu∣mours may float, or through their te∣nacity adhaere to the sides of the Sto∣mach, and may be as conveniently re∣moved thence by a detergent Laxa∣tive.
It is in this Tunic, where many Distempers take their root, which generally proves of so difficult an era∣dication; but be not so facil, as to erre with the gross of Physicians, in ima∣gining, that it is those thick mucila∣ginous humours, penetrating through the Tunica Mucosa and Nervosa, do lodge in the Tunica fungosa, and con∣stitute the Cause of those durable pe∣santures of the Stomach; for the said Humours are nothing near proporti∣oned in subtility to pass through the thick and compact bodies of the fore∣mentioned Membranes. The fourth Tunic is the common Tunic, derived from the Peritonaeum. §. 2. This sufficeth to inform you, that in a commencing Stomachic Scor∣vey nothing is more properly Indica∣ted, that an Aloetic Eccoprotic praepa∣pared, as hath been proposed before, and repeated once, or twice, and some∣times thrice a Week, and in the Inter∣val dayes a Detergent and Antiscorbu∣tic decoction. Thus I have Cured se∣veral with these following praescripti∣ons, being sometimes a little varied
to answer their several Tempera∣ments, Ages, and other Circum∣stances. ℞. Aloes nost. praep. ʒii. Cort. Winteran. Nitr. Tartarisat. an. ʒss. Syr. Ros. sol. q. s. N. f. Mass. Pil. Equavis ʒa. formentur Pil. No. ix. & deaurentur. capiat Pil. iiii. vesp. sub ingress. in lect. & Pil. v. sequent. au∣rora, superbibendo haust. liquor. sequent. ℞. Fol. Cochlear. hort. M iiii. Fol. Becabung. M ii. Sum. Absynth. vulg. P i. Flor. Centaur. ʒi ss. Cort. Aurant. ℈ii. Infund. in Aq. Cochl. Vin. alb. an. lb i. Expressio reponatur in ampul. vitr. sumat ℥iiii. ter per diem horis Medicis. §. 3. From the clogging and bur∣den of the Tunica Fungosa we are to desume this Indication, that a safe and well praepared Antimonial Vomit is
particularly pointed at, which through its most subtil Sulphur doth penetrate in a very short space through the whole Body and every part of it, dis∣solve the most tenacious Humours, and by stimulating the Nervous Tunic of the Stomach doth dislodge, and throw off those obstinate adhaerents; and among those numerous praeparations, I could never yet find any more safe and effectual, than my Antimon. Resuscitat. the process whereof is described in my Great Venus. But where a Vomit is counter indicated by the unaptness and difficulty of evacuating that way, take your refuge to Gum Cathartics, which used for Eight, Ten, or Fourteen days, oft do wonders. The following Mass of Pills in cases of this nature I have several times praescribed, with a success suitable to the Excellency of its Ingre∣dients. ℞. Aloes succotr. Gum. Ammon. an. ʒii. Solvantur in tinctur. gentian. q. s. iustillat. Spir. Vitriol. philos. gut. xx. solutio coletur & evapor. ad mella∣gin. addendo deinceps.
Spec. Diasen. ʒiii. Sal. Chalyb. nostr. ʒii. Nitri. Tartar. ʒi ss. Bezoard. Jovial. ℈ii ss. Ol. Succin. gut. xv. Elix. Proprietat. q. s. M. f. Mass. Pilul. Dos. a ℈i. ad ʒi. §. 4. Since in Scorbutic Distempers, longer Courses than of a Fortnight or three Weeks, do not only occasion a Fatigue, but a weakness also to the Stomach, a confortative Electuary ought to be made use of for six or seven days, and then return to a repe∣tition of the foregoing Course; for Chronical Diseases, especially Scorbu∣tics, proving very obstinate, require fraequent reiterations of Medicines. A Confortative Stomachic Electuary. ℞. Conserv. Anth. Salv. Absynth. pont. an. ℥i. Pulv. Stom. ex aron. Quercet. ʒi. Zedoar. Cort. Winter. an. ʒss. Elix. Proprietat. gut. xxxx. Syr. cort. citr. q. s. M. f. Elect.
Capiat quotidie ad magnitud. ca∣stan. duabus horis ante pastum. §. 3. An Hepatic Scorvey is vigo∣rously oppugned by these two speci∣ficks; Aparine, and Chelidonium minus. Most cooling vulnerary Vegetables do also very much conduce to the Cure of this Distemper; hereunto add Agri∣mony and Lapathum acutum. CHAP. XXVI. Of the External Cure of the Mouth-Scorvey. 1. The Description of a Mouth-Liquor. 2. A Liniment for the same use. 3. A Collution for the Mouth against Vlcers of the Gums. §. 1. BY what means to act against the Internal root of an A∣cid Scorvey, hath been formerly de∣clared; how to rescind this Branch, the Mouth-Scorvey, by extrinsic Re∣medies, is the purport of this Para∣graph. The correcting and subduing
the putrid acour of the Blood, ap∣pelling to the inward parts of the Mouth, and there occasioning a Va∣cillation of the Teeth, painful, spon∣gy, tumefied and discoloured Gums, I have more than once proved success∣ful in, by this following Liquor. ℞. Fol. Cochlear. M viii. Fol. Salv. P iii. Post contus. in mort. marm. expri∣matur succus, inq. dissolv. Alum. rup. ℥i. Colcoth. Vitriol. ʒii. repon∣atur in vesio. Suil. quae strict. clausa suspendatur in aq▪ tepid. donec Alum. & Vitr. fuerint penitus solut. dein destil. e cucurb. humil in aren. resi∣dentia denuo suspend. in vesic. & repetatur destil. Linteo praescripto Liquore imbuto confricentur gingivae bis vel ter per diem. This Liniment in some manner doth imitate the Virtues of the former. ℞. Fol. Salv. sic. pulv. ʒi. Rad. Tormentil. pulv. ℈ii. Flor. sal. armon. chalyb. ʒss.
Balaust. pulv. ℈i. Mel. Crud. q. s. M. f. Liniment. Quo saepius inung. gingivae. §. 3. If by reason of a greater A∣crimony and Putrefaction of Humours the Gums grow Ulcerous, nothing seems parallel to this Collution. ℞. Lixiv. calc. viv. ℥iiii. Tinct. gum. Lac. ℥i. ss. Elix. Proprietat. ʒss. Alum. Vst. ℈ii. Colcoth. vtriol. ℈i. Mel. ros. ℥i. M. f. Collut. oris. Qua saepius gingivae madeiant. CHAP. XXVII. Of the External Cure of the Leg-Scorvey. 1. Description of the Authors Lapis Sa∣lutis. 2. A Liniment against Vl∣cers of the Legs. 3. A Cicatrizing Powder.
§. 1. DEpascent and Dysepulotic Ulcers are those obstinate Symptoms, that require a particular regard, against which my Lapis Salu∣tis hath been Experienced to be very praevalent. ℞. Vitriol. Rom. ℥iiii. erus. Litharg. Arg. Vitriol. Mart. an. ℥ii. Virid. aeris. ℥i. Coq. in Acet. acr. ad supereminen∣tiam duorum digit. semper agitan∣do, donec acquirant consistent. luti, addita Bol. Armen. ℥i. coq. ad du∣ritiem lapidis. Hujus particula solvatur in Vin. rub. adstring. q. s. quo lotis ulceribus applicentur iis∣dem plumaceoli eo madefacti. §. 2. In case the Ulcers be very foul, the following Liniment may serve for an excellent Deterger. ℞. Ol. Jovis Mercur. ʒi· Mel. Rosat. ʒvi. M. f. Liniment.
3. ScorbuticVlcers of the Legs, though exquisitely deterged and in∣carned to the Surface, nevertheless prove Dysepulotic, or difficult to be a∣catrized by common Epuotics, whose defect is oft wonderfully supplied by the amalgamation of Lead, being sub∣tilly pulverized, laevigated, and in∣spersed pretty thick on the said Ulcers, and covered with unarm'd plegets, or dry Lint. In conclusion of this Chapter, I shall onely insert this Caveat, to for∣bear using any kind of Unctuous grea∣sie Medicines, be they Emplasters, Unguents, Liniments, or Oyls, they being all of a putrefactive nature, e∣specially in this sort of Ulcers. What concerns Spots, Blotches, or Pustles, they do not require any par∣ticular applications, since they usual∣ly vanish with the rest of the internal symptoms, upon a due course of Me∣dicines.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cordials. 1. Cordial Simples. 2. The form of a Cordial Julep. 3. Analeptics. § 1. THe Vital Faculty being commonly very languid in Scorbutic Distempers, indicates Cordial Refectives, and Analeptic Cor∣roboratives. The former are chosen out of fragrant and spirituous Vegeta∣bles, viz. Flor. Borrag. Buglos, Ros. Viol. Calendul. Summit. Melis. Ceras. Nigr. Mala Citrea, Serpil. Citrat. Menth. and Flor. Aurant. which latter in Ver∣tue, Efficacy and Propriety, is a Spe∣cific Cordial in most Hypochondriac Maladies, by far exceeding all the fore-mentioned; and therefore can∣not but wonder, that Physicians have of late years estranged themselves from the use of it: But in this as in many others I find some to be very mutable; sometimes Acids, and Coolers are to be praescribed in Fe∣vors, otherwhiles they aesteem them
pernicious, and hot Volatils are only to be recommended; and so the like instability of Practice may be obser∣ved in several other Distempers; what principle this flows from, you may easily conjecture. To these may be added the less heating Aromatics, as Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamon, &c. like∣wise Wine, some vinous Composites, and some Alexipharmacs. §. 2. Out of these several Compo∣sitions, may be praescribed this fol∣lowing, which hath been experienced not to be unpleasant, nor ineffectual. ℞. Aq. stillat. ceras. nigr. tot. citr. Serpil. citr. aurant. an. ℥i ss. Aq. Cinam. tenuior. Vitae Matth. an. ℥i. Suc. Kerm. ʒi. vel Confect. Alkerm. ℈iiii. Syr. Melis. ℥i ss. Spir. Menth. ʒi. M. f. Jul. Capiat. cochl ii. vel iii. urgente languore. The Citron and Limon Thyme wa∣ter
I suppose to be Distilled upon a praevious digestion with half water and half small French Wine. Aq. Mira∣bil. I seldom make use of, because it's a Water very unpleasant, and consist∣ing of disproportioned Ingredients. You must manage your Election of the foresaid Cordials according to their proprieties against an Acid, or Lixi∣vial Scorvey. §. 3. The Analeptic Corrobora∣tives are chiefly Broaths made of a Cock, Chicken, or Veal, with the ad∣dition of Barley, or a Crust of Bread, Cordial Flowers, and a small pro∣portion of Mace. CHAP. XXIX. The Cures of a Scorbutic Atrophy, of the Gout, and of Convulsions. A Scorbutic Atrophy is remedied by reducing the Blood to its natu∣ral temperament, whereby its rendred Nutrititious, and apt to repair the dis∣sipated parts.
Goats Milk, wherein Antiscorbutics have been boil'd, is universally recei∣ved for a great Remedy in this Case. Likewise this following in a Lixivi∣al Atrophy. ℞. Rad. Consolid. ℥i. Fol. hepat. stellat. M iiii. Fol. Chelidon. min. M ii. Ligust. M i. Flor▪ Borrag. P ii. Decoct. limac. vit. & ped. vervec. lb iii. post digest. quatuor horar. de∣still. è cucurb. vitr. humil. in ci∣nerib. de quo capiat ℥iiii. ter per diem scilicet hora 8. 11. & 4. po∣meridiana. §. 2. Against Scorbutic arthritic vagous pains, I find nothing aequal to my Tin∣ctura Chalybis, and Tinctur. Antimonii Fulva, either or both being in proper Vehicles exhibited for 14, or 21. dayes. This Observation I affirm is univer∣sal in this Climat, that all or most Arthri∣tic pains both Vagous and Fixt are ei∣ther Scorbutic or Venereal, that is de∣pending on a Venereal impression or
Tincture, which some former Malignant infection (though cured 10 or 20 years past) hath left; for all Varolous diseases leave a stain or impression on the parts, which is as little deleble as the mark of a Blast, or a Cicatrix of a Malig∣nant Ulcer; for this reason these sorts of Gouts shall never be Curable, or indeed scarce palliable without Anti∣scorbutic or Antivenereal Specifics, or both mixt with Arthritic Medicines. Scorbutic Arthritic fixt pains I have oft removed by my Spir. Arthritic. ex∣tracted from the Sulphur of several Minerals. For an Anodine and Pallia∣tive Topic, against the said Joynt torments, I only apply a Cinnaber Em∣plaster, but not that recommended in my Great Venus. §. 3. Some Scorbutic Convulsions this following Elixir doth vigorously op∣pugnate. ℞. Elix. praeon. praep. cum Spir. acid. Succin. ℥ss. Sal. Antimon. nostr. ℈ii. M. Capiat. gut. xx. vel xxx. ter vel quater per diem in Decoct. anti∣scorb.
The Antispasmodics contained in the London Dispensatory, are chiefly these; Vngula alcis, cranium huma∣num, viscum querc. Aq. Ceras. nigr. Li∣lior. convall. Flor. tiliae, paralys. rutae, Aq. Poeoniae compos. Spir. lavendulae compos. Spir. & tinct. castorei. Spir. Lumbricor. Spir. Angelic. Aq. Petasit. compos. Syr. infus. Flor. poeon. item Syr. Poeon. compos. Syr▪ de beton. compos. likewise Ol. Succin. Spir. C. c. & Ol. Guaiac. I have known two ounces of Aq. Gentian. compos. to do wonders, in suddenly removing Convulsion fits in Men and Women. The most proper form for Exhibiti∣on of the fore-mentioned Specifics a∣gainst Convulsions is a Julep praescri∣bed in this or the like manner. ℞. Aq. flor. til. rnt. ceras. nigr. an. ℥i. Aq. Poeon. comp. ℥i ss. Tinct. Castor. ʒi. Rad. Poeon. p. Castor. p. Vngul. alc. ras. an ℈ss. Syr. Poeon. comp. ℥i. Ol. Succin. rect. gut. x. M. f. Jul.
Capiat part. med. ante paroxysm. Convulsiv. & alteram post parox. For a Topic nothing is comparable to Balsamum Succini. In some Scorbutic Convulsions an Electuary may be proper to praevent the Paroxysms, because it's not so soon digested, but remains a good while in the Stomach to disperse its Virtues to the parts affected. ℞. Conserv. Flor. Poeon. m. herb. paralys. anth. an. ℥i. Rad. acor. condit. Nuc. Moscat. cond. an. ℥ss. Confect. Mithridat. ʒi ss. Rad. Poeon. pulv. Castor. pulv. Vngul. alc. ras. an. ʒss. Syr. de Paeon. comp. q. s. Ol. Succin. rectif gut. xv. M. f. Elect. Capiat ad magnit. castan. duabus horis ante cibum.
CHAP. XXX. Of Malignant Fevors, and Small Pox. 1. The Cause of Malignant Fevors. 2. The Cause of the Small Pox. 3. The Cure of the Small Pox. §. 1. THe Malignity that so oft is Concomitant and Su∣pervenient to continual Fevors, con∣stantly almost Reigning in and about London, seems chiefly to derive its Original from the ill temperature of the Air, which as hath been declared, is Salin and Scorbutic. That this is the principal Procatarctic, is evident from these two Reasons: 1. Because Persons differing from one another in the use of all the other Non-naturals, are subject to be surprised by the same Malignant Fevor, which consequently must then solely be derived from the Air, that only of all the Non-naturals being the same, and common to all. 2. Because many of those, that have the misfortune to fall Sick of a Malig∣nant
Fevor, have been most temperate and regular in their Diaet, Motion, and Resting, Sleeping and Waking, Ex∣cretions and Retention, and Passions of the Mind; so that it must be the Air only, that lies imputable of this Ma∣lignant Effect; add hereto, that Eng∣lish Bodies when incident into Fevors in some other Climates, are not afflicted with those Malignant Symptoms. The causality through which a Salin Air produceth such Malignant febril Ef∣fects, is by disposing the Body to en∣gender great measures of gross Fuligi∣nous and very Acrimonious steems, which by reason of the constipation of the External pores, and of other In∣ternal obstructions are repelled, and incorporated into the whole current of the Blood, kindle and inflame its Bi∣tuminou parts, whose flames are there∣by rendred Malignant and venomous to the Spirits, which then prove the immediate Cause of those Malignant Symptoms. 3. By this means the Blood soon becomes Lixivially Salin, Saponary, and runs into a gross deli∣quious Oyl, as plainly appears, when occasionally tapt out by Phlebotomy.
Now the great difficulty of reducing this unctuous saponary Blood to its former qualification, and freeing it from that gross Salin and crimonious Fuligo, is the Cause, that renders Ma∣lignant Fevors so indomitable, and extremely pernicious. Upon this Hy∣pothesis, which your strict Scrutiny and Observation in Practice will a∣bundantly confirm, how Deleterious the ordinary Method of Curing the said Fevors, and how contrary those hot Cordials exhibited by spoonfuls prove, is easily discovered; for in∣stead of moving Nature to sweat by an Incisive, Attenuating, and Volatili∣zing quality, and by Amortizing the Lixivial Salts, they render the said Salts more Lixivial and absorbing, and consequently dispose the Body not to∣wards, but against Sweating. Nei∣ther are the Times or Seasons observed for exhibiting of Medicines, that are accordingly to be varied in quantity quality and other circumstances; a certain directory of all which can ne∣ver be attain'd by Indications, desu∣med from that impertinently impro∣ved Notion of Fermentation, which
hath been the occasion of posting hun∣dreds to the jaws of Orcus. What measures ought to be taken in point of Management and Cure of this Distem∣per, I have already proposed in my Tractatus Theoret. & Pract. de Febri∣bus; But in short, the necessary prae∣misses not being omitted, I do repose a great confidence in an Antifebril Eli∣xir, consisting of Ingredients of a mixt nature; and in Spir. cornu cervi prae∣pared in a peculiar manner. §. 2. The Small Pox being in some kind not unlike the foregoing Di∣stemper, I will only give my Senti∣ment, with Directions relating to the Cure, and then take leave. I cannot give Credit to the received Opinion, importing, that the Small is caused by some impurities, the Foetus contracted in the Womb, which afterwards Na∣ture doth cast forth into those viru∣lent Pustles: this among the rest is cer∣tainly a Deliramentum Antiquitatis; for considering that in Guinee, most parts of Africa, and almost through∣out whole Asia, the Natives, or in∣deed the Strangers are never surprized
with the Small Pox, though their Im∣purities contracted in the Womb (if any after many years interval) can∣not be supposed less than ours, we must conclude, that it is rather an En∣demic Disease, peculiar to the Northen Climes, or rather a seasoning or alte∣ration of the Nature of Man, arriving out of the Microcosm of his Mother into the Macrocosm, impressed by the rudeness and difference of tempera∣ture of the Air of Northern Climes from his primogenial Temperament, which needs no other Confirmation, than the Instance of those Guineans, Indians, and others, who soon upon their arrival into those Climes are at∣taqued by the Small Pox, which I can term nothing but a Seasoning, in like manner, as Northern Bodies are season∣ed with other Diseases of the Climate that transport themselves to Virginia, Barbados, or other parts of the West, or East-Indies. That some undergo this seasoning of the Small Pox, soon after they are crept out of the shell, others when they are grown up to ri∣per years; and some not at all, being praevented by some Mortal Distem∣per,
is occasioned, through the strength of Nature, some Bodies are indued with above others (that under∣go the fore-mentioned seasoning soon after their Birth) whereby they are rendred capable to resist the alte∣rative impressions of the Air. Since then it is so obvious, that the Air is the principal External efficient, you must necessarily apprehend, that where the Air is Salin and Scorbutic, the Small Pox proves much more Ma∣lignant, and fraequently mortal, and that, by reason the Blood becomes Lixivial, Saponary, and Absorbing, which to dispose to a Diaphoresis, or Breathing, by those hot inflaming Cor∣dials is in some as impossible, as to force Water out of a Flint; but on the contrary, the Salts of the Humors being rendred more Lixivial and Ab∣sorbing by them, they do not only through that absorbitive and droughty Faculty exhaust and dry up the Serum of the Blood, but concentrate and re∣tract, or draw in from the circumfer∣ence those voltil fuliginous Salts, toge∣ther with the External Salts engendred in the Air, which otherwise Nature is
striving to cast forth; and hence it is, that Old Women and Nurses by giving only large measures of plain moi∣stening posset Ale, very small Ale boyld, or thin Fig-drink, prove infi∣nitely more successful, than many if not most of Physicians: But now I must tell you also, that some of the ingeni∣ous Practicers of the College of Lon∣don, taking their measures from the event the management of Old Wo∣men doth procure, and the ill Exit that attends the advice of other Physi∣cans, do abandon all those hot aduring Species, and distill'd Waters, and praescribe temperate Moistening Dia∣phoretic Decoctions, and distilled Wa∣ters, whereby they justly deserve the Character of most Experienced and Learned Physicians, scarce one in a very great Number stooping to the Conquest of his Distemper, and that by reason of their apt and exquisite praescriptions. In fine, there are no principles, either those of Dogmatic putrefaction, or that of Fermentation, which to me do so evidently expound the causality and reason of all those Symptoms and Changes, that so ordi∣narily
happen in the Small Pox, and Measels, than the Hypothesis I have pro∣posed; and what concerns the Practi∣cal Indications they are such, that in Success and happy Event, I am confi∣dent exceed all others. §. 3. The Alexiterial simples are Rad. scorzoner. hisp. Vincetox. fol. Galeg. Scabios. flor. Calend. sem. Aquileg. fruct. caric. (in case of a Loosness or Vo∣miting Rad. Bistort. and Tormentil.) aq. Card. Ben. Scabios. Malv. the Com∣posites are Aq. Scord. compos. Dias∣cord. not that of Fracast. as it is set down in the London Pharmacopoea with the addition of Pepper, Ginger, Cinamon, &c. which must necessarily be very pernicious in this Distemper, Spec. e chel. caner. Diamarg. frig. Car∣diac. Magistral. and such like The Decoct. Lent. though commend∣ed almost in every Author, I am certain is not agreeable to this Distemper in our Climat. Spir. Corn. Crv. particularly praepared, and Elix. Antifebil. are aequal to any of the fore∣mentioned. This Treatise being swelled beyond my In∣tention, am Obliged to omit particular Ob∣servations, and Conclude. FINIS.
