h2623 12198946 56068
New-Englands Sence, OF OLD-ENGLAND AND JRELANDS SORROWES. A Sermon Preached upon a day of generall Humiliation in the Churches of NEW-ENGLAND. In the behalfe of Old-England and Jrelands Sad condition. By WILLIAM HOOKE, Minister of GODS Word at Taunton in NEVV-ENGLAND. Intrusted in the hands of a worthy Member of the Honou∣rable House of Commons, who desired it might be Printed. Imprimatur JOSEPH CARYL. LONDON, Printed for John Roell, at the Signe of the Sunne in Pauls-Church-yard, 1645.
NEW ENGLANDS SENCE, OF OLD ENGLAND, AND IRELANDS SORROWES. 2 SAM: 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-Rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of King Maacha a thou∣sand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand footmen. 7 And when David heard of it, he sent Ioab, and all the host of the mighty mn. 8 And the Children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entring in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ishtob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field. 9 When Ioab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians. 10 And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them in array against the children of Ammon. 11 And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt helpe me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and helpe the. 12 Bee of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and the Cities of our God; and the Lord doe that which seemeth him good. THe occasion of this warrs was this. Na∣hash the King of Ammon (he who once de∣manded the right eyes of the Gileadites, and to lay it as a reproach upon all Is∣rael, upon condition of covenanting with them) is
now dead. He had been, it seemes, a friend to David, in opposition, probably, to Saul who was an enemy to them both. David looked at the expressions of his love, and left his heart to him that searched it, accounting it an office of humanity to comfort him concerning the death of his Father. His kindnesse is misconstrued by the Princes of the children of Am∣mon, who detracting from the syncere intentions of upright David, hasten to their King and fill him full of jealousie and prejudice against David, as if he had not sent Embassadors, but Spies; not Confor∣ters, but Traytors. The young King is overthrowne in the entrance of his government by evill Counsel∣lors, whose suggestions he receives in stead of the comfort of Davids Embassadors, which cost him deare. His Counsellors were indeed his Traytors, not the Messengers. Alas, how fearefully is the King misguided in the threshold of his raigne, by such who should have better advised him? It is well said of a Byshop upon these words; Happie is that State, where both the Counsellors are faithfull to give onely good advice, and the King wise to discerne good advice from evill. But what doth Hanun doe? He takes the servants of David and shaves off the one half of their beards, and cuts off their garments in the middle, and sends them away. The newes of it is brought to David, who sends to meet them; because they were greatly ashamed, and he said, Tarry at Iericho untill your beards be growne, and then returne. And when the children of Ammon saw that they
stanke before David, they sent and hired the Syri∣ans, &c. In the words, there is, first, A preparation for warr by the Ammonites against David. Secondly, Davids addressing himselfe for an encounter. In Ammons preparations, there is, First, The ground of it, which was; because they saw that they stanke before David. Secondly, The hyring of Auxiliaries out of Syria, and that at a deare rate, viz. For a thousand talents of silver, 1 Chron. 19.6. In Davids addresse for encounter, we have, first, his sending of Ioab, with all the host of the mighty men. Secondly, The subtiltie of the Ammonites, who were so wise as to devide their forces, and to leave the Syrians to fight in the open fields, whom they durst not trust at the entrance in of their Cities, while themselves put the battaile in array before the gates, that so also they might (if need were) have opportunity to retire. Thirdly, The wisdome of Ioab in ordering the battell the best way, in the strait he was in. Fourthly, a co∣venant of mutuall assistance between Ioab and A∣bishai, as need should require. Fiftly, Ioabs words of encouragement to Abishai, yea and to himselfe. Be of good courage, & let us play the men, &c. Which are the words that I have especially lookt at for the occasion of this day. But some things I shall briefly observe in the way to them. First, for the ground of Ammons preparations; They saw that they did stinke before David, by rea∣son
of the abuse they had done to his Embassadors. Whence we may observe. Observation. That Indignities and inhumane carriages to Em∣bassadors of Peace, is that which will make the E∣nemies of GOD to stinke in the nostrils of his People. Doe not expect a parallel text for proofe, for such practices have bin very rare till of later yeres. There is no sinne but it stinkes in the nostrils of God, but as for men, it must be very grosse be∣fore it hath so ill a savour; and such are especially grosie sinnes against the second Table, as being committed against the greater light. Of this kind I remember for the present but one more in Scrip∣ture, and that was the bloody treachery of Simeon and Levi against the Sechemites, to whom there∣fore their Father Iacob said, Yee have made me to stinke among the inhabitants of the land, Gen. 34.30. For such dealings are against the light of blindest nature, especially such usage of Embassa∣dors, whose name hath ever bin honourable by the law of Nations. Vse. First, This gives us to see one speciall cause why the Prelats in England doe this day stinke in the rostrils of Gods people, yea of many such as have but little Religion in them, there indignities and abuses offered to the Lords Embassadors have bin infinite and intollerable. Alas! what are the in∣solencies of Hanun here, to theirs? For first, He
and his Ammonites never saw the tythe of that light that these have done. Ammon saw not the light of Israel; nor Israel the light of England. Secondly, those indignities done by Hanun, were farre inferiour unto these. For first, He onely cut the beards and garments of these Messengers, whose beards grew out againe at Iericho, and whose gar∣ments might be changed for longer; whereas these have pared the Eares of the servants of God, which can never grow againe; and stigmatized the Faces with indelible characters. And therefore, secondly, Hanun came not so neare to the persons of those Messengers, for hee medled onely with beards and garments, the cutting off of which shed no blood; whereas these have offered bloo∣dy indignities to the Lords Embassadors. Third∣ly, those Ammonitish insolencies brought upon Messengers onely a civill inconformity in hayre and vestments to the manners of Gods Israel: whereas the practises of these men have forced a Spirituall conformity on Gods Ministers, to the manners of that great Strumpet and Mother of whoredomes. Fourthly, Davids messengers were abused onely in Beards and Garments; but these have been Convented, Suspended, Deprived, De∣graded, Excōmunicated, Imprisoned, Impillored, Fined, stript of all, Exiled, and exposed to great extremities. Thus the indignities considered in themselves were farre inferiour unto these. Third∣ly, Hanun never sinned herein against Conscience, as these have done; for he was misguided by his
Princes, and so hee knew not that the Messengers were Spies: whereas the Prelats have offered horrible indignities to many such of whose inte∣gritie they have themselves first given ample testi∣mony. Fourthly, Hanum did nothing obstinatly, for his Nobles perswaded him; but with these, all the Noble men in the land could not prevaile with that Arch-Ammonite and his followers, to deale favourably with the Lords Embassadors. Fiftly, If we looke upon the Messengers, Hanuns inhumanitie was offered to the messengers of a mortall Prince, but these men have most dread∣fully abused the Embassadors of the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. For the Lord hath sent his Messengers to England, and one they have beaten, another they have killed, a third they have stoned; or that which is as bad. Againe, the Lord hath sent more Servants, and they have done to them likewise. Lastly, those were sent only to minister a little comfort to a man who (it seemes) had no great need of it; but these have been sent to publish the Gospell of everlasting Peace to the wearied. O monsters among men that these Prelats are, trained up by Tygers, whom no incestuous of-spring of Lot can parallel by a thousand degrees! that if such Prodigies among men doe this day stinke in the nostrils, not of Israelites onely, but even Ammonites also, wee have great cause of thankfulnesse, none of wonder. Secondly, This may shew us the sad estate of
these noisome enemies of CHRIST and his Messen∣gers; for seeing they are thus unsavory, what are they good for? What use can there be made of unsavory Salt? It is neither fit, saith Christ, for the Land, nor for the Dung-hill. It is good, saith he, for nothing, but to be cast out, and troden un∣der foot of men, Math. 5.13. An unsavory Am∣monite may be good either for the land or for the dung hill. Moah was troden downe as straw for the dung-hill, Isa. 25.10. But an unsavory Pre∣late is good for neither, as being unsavorie Salt. The most noisome Dung that is, is good enough for the dung-hill; but unsavory Salt is not, be∣cause it is so farre from making barren land fruit-full, that it makes fruit full land barren. And such salt are the enemies of CHRISTS Embassadors, that where-ever a Prelate hath been cast, the place (though fruit full before) hath soone proved bar∣ren in Religion round about him. For as they have no favour of life in themselves, they cannot endure either that Minister or People that have: Oh what will become of them now, whom the very dunghill doth reject? Who shall lament for them now, saying, Ah my brother; or, ah Lord; or, ah his glory, when they shall be cast forth beyond the gates of Ierusalem? As for other men, though ne∣ver so vile, or degenerous, that are still good e∣nough for the dunghill; men will find some mean imployment or other to put them to. If there be refuse people in a land, thou shalt have a drumme beaten up to call them together, that they may be
sent forth in some service against the enemies of the land: whereas these want both ability and fide∣lity for such a service. Yea, should they come and crouch for a piece of silver, or a morsell of bread, saying, put us into the Priests Office, or as it is rendred after the Original, put us into somewhat about the Priesthood, as much as to say, make Pa∣rish Clarks of us, that we may eat a peece of bread; they are not fit for it, for they cannot say, Amen, to the prayers of Gods people this day. They are not fit to occupy any roome in Church or Common wealth; they are not fit for Pulpit, or Presse, for Church-government, Counsell-Table, Parliament, Iusticeship, Traffique, who have thus long traded onely for the mother of Whoredome, and who be∣gin now to weepe and mourne, because no man buy∣eth their Marchandise any more, Revel. 18. 11. They are not then good for warre, nor peace; for Prince, not people; for Church nor State: onely being wiser in their Generation, then the Chil∣dren of light, like that wicked Steward they have robbed and spoiled, and feathered their nests, be∣fore they were turned out of their Stewardships, as being conscious to themselves, that digge I can∣not, and to begg they are ashamed. Thirdly, This should make us this day more earnest with God for England, that he would purge the Land of this filth; for otherwise how noy∣some will that Countrey be wherein there are so many unsavory creatures. Not that we desire any other purging of them, then their deposing and re∣pentance
for their horrible indigaties, and inhu∣maities to the Embassadours of the King of Kings. And thus much for the grounds of Am∣mons Preparations to muster up Forces against David, because they saw, that they stanke before him. Secondly, we have their hiring of Auxiliaries to defend them in their wickeduesse: They sent and hyred the Syrians of Beth Rehob, and the Syri∣ans of Zoba, &c. Observation. When wicked men are come to that height of sinne, that they stinck in the nostrils of Gods peo∣ple, they will rather dye, then confesse and repent of their wickednesse. We have the like example in the Benjamites against the eleven Tribes. And it is made good this day in the Prelates against England. For wheras they should have put on sackcloth on their loines, and ropes upon their necks, and gone to the King and Parliament, saying; Your servants say  pray you let us live; they have stood out rebellious∣ly, and protested against Parliamentary procee∣dings. Nay, their monies have gone most profuse∣ly for the hiring of Syrians, and the maintenance of warres against the Scots, calling it, Bellum Episco∣pale; The Bishops Warre. It was 1000. talents of silver that the Ammonites expended to hire helpe against the Israel of God, when first they had of∣fred them such a moustrous indignity: But how many thousand talents these have disbursed and
collected among themselves, and their Clergy, and Popishly affected partie, it is not easie for to say. For, The Angell of the Lord hath powered out his vi-all upon their Sun, and they have been scorched with great heat, and have blasphemed the name of the Lord which hath power over these Plagues; and they have not repented to give him glory. REV. 16. 8. 9. But whom now doe the Ammonites hire? but a sort of flagitious Pagans, that neither looked in∣to the price of other mens blood, their own soules, or the justnesse of the cause? A thousand talents have soone bought them to fight the battels of the Devill against the Lord of Hosts. Observation. There is no cause so wicked or deplored, but money will hire some mercinarily minded to abet, who wil damne their soules for a little silver. And how many such there have been even in the Chri∣stian world, the Prelates better know then wee. What forlorne creatures, Papists, Atheists, Neu∣ters, and mongrell Protestants, had they procured to fight against the Scottish Nation? When wic∣ked men are conscious to the insufficiency of their cause, they muster up the greater forces, and place their affiance in the arme of flesh; that what inno∣cence here could not doe, three and thirty thou∣sand Pagans joyned to the forces of Ammon shall. But thus much shall suffice to be spoken of Am∣mons Preparations, both their ground and helps. Secondly, in Davids providing to encounter them, we have, First, his sending of Ioab, with all
the Host of the mighty men. David, you see, is sencible of the horrible abuses done to his Em∣bassadors. Observation. Indignities offered to Embassadors, redound to their King, who cannot be insensible thereof, espe∣cially, they being Embassadours of Peace. And thus it is with God; as it is written, The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his messen∣gers, rising up betimes, and sending, because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: but they mocked the Messengers of God, and despi∣sed his words, and misused his Prophets, untill the wrath of the Lord arose, and there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Cal∣dees, who slew the young men with the sword in the house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or may den, old man, or him that stooped for age; he gave them all unto his hand. 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16, 17. And now under the Gospell; when the Lord of the Vineyard sends his servants to the Hus∣bandmen, and the Husbandmen beat one, and kill an∣other, and stone a third; and when hee sends yet more servants, and they doe unto them likewise; surely he will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his Vineyard to other Husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their season. Matth. 21. 33. Beloed! CHRIST is this day sensible of all the abuses that have been offered by the Prelats to his Messengers. How often hath he cryed from hea∣ven
if that poore soule had not been utterly deafe, Laud, Laud, Why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kicke against the pricks. Oh! CHRIST in his Messengers hath given his back to the smi∣ters, and his cheeks to them that have plucked off the haire; his beard hath beene cut, and his gar∣ments curtold by these Prelatique Ammonites. The Messengers of Iesus have bin made a spectacle to the world, Angels, and men; they have beene made partakers of Christs sufferings, and have fil∣led up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in their flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church. And is Christ sensible, and shall not these Ammonites heare of it? Yes; for he is now awaking as out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of Wine; Ah! saith hee, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies, and put them to perpetuall shame. But so much be said of this. Ioab now approaching with his Forces; when loe, the Adversaries have cunningly devided them∣selves, some standing at the entrance of the gates of the Citie, the residue in the open field. Ioab a wise Generall, and prepared for difficulties, fore∣casteth the best way of encounter, and fitting himselfe to assault the Syrians, leaves the Am∣monities to his brother Abishai, but with this co∣venant of mutuall assistance (for I must now put sundry things together) If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me, but if the Children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then will I come and help thee.
Observation. When Gods Israel hath to doe with many po∣tent, subtill, most wicked and desperate enemies, they had need to enter into a covenant of mutuall helpe and assistance. Abraham was confederate with Mamre, Eschol, and Aner, when hee was to encounter with the foure Kings that had carryed away his cousen Lot, prisoner, Gen. 14. 13. 24. Yea, it is lawfull for us herein to learne wit of an enemy; For thus the e∣nemies of Israel confederate themselves. Come, say they, let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may bee no more in remem∣brance. Yea, they have consulted together with one consent, and are confederate against Israel; the Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moah, and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalech, the Philistims, with the inhabitants of Tyre; Assur also is joyned with them, they have holpen the children of Lot, Psal. 83. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And in the daies of Ahaz it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephra∣im, Isa. 7. 2. And this covenanting in case of opposing many, powerfull, cunning, wicked, desperate Enemies, is very requisite; Seeing a Kingdome divided cannot stand, which firmely united by confederacie is not easily vanquished, when every mans interesses are anothers, and the same ingagements common unto all. And this Antichrist knowes well enough; for hee being set forth most lively
under the Type of Antiochus Epiphanes in the 11.th of Daniel, his heart is said to be against the holy Covenant, vers. 28. by and by hee is said to have intelligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant; yea, and to have indignation against the holy Covenant, vers. 30. And such as doe wicked∣ly, against the Covenant, He is said, to corrupt by flatteries, vers. 32. Marke these expressions. His heart is against the holy Covenant. His very heart riseth at the name of Covenant, and Covenanting, and Covenanters, and those are the most odious people with him in all the world. Yea, he hath in∣dignation against the holy Covenant. Hee could teare it in his teeth; the very gall of bitternesse ri∣seth in him at it. And with whom hath he intelli∣gence, but with them that forsake it? They are his Counsellours, that either fall off from the Co∣venant, or are learned to declaime and raile against it. And such as doe wickedly against the Cove∣nant, he corrupteth by flatteries. If there be any who are more malicious then others against the Covenant, and the Covenanters, who will goe about to breake the League, to raise Armes, to hatch Treasons, to confound Kingdomes, Common∣wealths and Parliaments, and to bring all things into combustion, that he may fish in troubled wa∣ters, O these are his white boyes, these he smooths and stroakes, and flatters, these shall have Preben∣daries, Bishopticks, Cardinals Caps, and great preferments, &c. And no marvaile, for these Co∣venanters is the ruine of Antichrist; for he could
never have beene, if the Covenant had beene kept, his Babel can never be built where men keep close to God and one another. Vse. First, this sheweth us the wonderfull goodnesse  of God in foure particulars, which should melt our hearts this day. First, in uniting the Honourable Nation of the Scots by Covenant against the Prelates, in their late defence against their Tyranny. Which how powerfull and successefull it was, we may easily see, not onely by the carriage and issue of things on their parts, but also by the continuall attempts of the Prelates to have devided them. Secondly, In the firme brotherly Union of England and Scotland, as it were of Joab and Abi∣shai; and that too, by such an occasion, as the Pre∣lates hoped should have engaged them in blood, the one against the other, like Manasseh against Ephraim, or as if Ioab and Abishai should cut one anothers throats. Thirdly, In uniting both houses of Parliament, they having to do with such Ammonites and Syri∣ans. It is such a knot, that the very Sword of Alex∣ander, we hope, shall not easily cut asunder. A Kingdome united into one body, will endure a mighty shock. Men standing single are soone jusled downe, most difficult, when they are all im∣bodied into one. Fourthly, In uniting the hearts of all the Chur∣ches in this Land to one another, and all of them
this day to our deare Countrey, in opposing the common Adversry. Fr what hath England said to us of late? If the Papis, Prelats, and Atheiss be too strong for us, thn you shall help us; and if at any time the enemy be too strong for you, wee will help you. O let us all enter into Covenant with England, to live and dye against these Ammonites and Syrians. Secondly, If so necessary bee a Covenant of mutuall assistance against a common Enemy, such a one as we heare of; how much more had the Is∣rael of God, need to enter into Covenant with the Lord of Hosts, in opposing such an Adversary. What is a Politicke to a Religious Covenant? When the Israelites fled, and fell before the men of Ai; the Lord gives the reason of it unto Ioshua, Iosh. 7.11. Israel hath finned, and they have trans∣gressed my Covenant which I commanded them; for they have taken of the accursed thing, &c. Where by the way, you may see how neerely this Cove∣nant uniteth, that what one doth, (which the rest might with circumspection have prevented) is imputed to them all. The Lord will never have need to say to England, or to us, If the Malignant party with their Cavaliers be too strong for mee, then shall you help me; but we shall have need so to say to him; and therefore wee had need see that we be in covenant with him. And where a people are in Covenant with God, and cleave onely to him, having cast away whatso∣ever is displeasing to him, hee enters himselfe
presently the Generall of all their forces, leades their Armies, and fights their Battails. And then who can bee against us? For one shall chase a thousand, and ten, ten thousand; because their Rock will not fell them, nor the Lord shut them up. And so much for the Covenant of mutuall assistance. We are now come to Ioabs words of Encou∣ragement: wherein we have; First, an Exhorta∣tion. Secondly, a Resignation. An exhortation to be Valiant in fighting the Lords Battels; and a Resignation of their wills into the Lords hands. First, of the Exhortation. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, & for the Cities of our God. And here we may observe the grounds of their encouragement, viz. They were to fight for all that they had, or were; God, and their Countrey; Church, and State; soules and bo∣dies; their owne, and others. Observations. When Religion and Policie, Church and Com∣mon-wealth lye at stake, Gods people had need to encourage themselves, and one another. Therefore we shall finde, that when the people of God were to go to battell against his enemies, both the Lords, the Priests, and the Officers, did (All) give them encouragement, Deut. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The place is pregnant to this purpose, and worthy our reading. Excellent are the words of Nehemiah to this point, Neh. 4.14. He said to the Nobles and Rulers, and the rest of
the people, Bee not afraid of your Enemies; re∣member the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your Brethren, your Sonnes, and your Daughters, your Wives and your Houses. They were to fight for the Lord, whose cause was then in hand; and for the Common-wealth, and each mans private interesses: therefore saith he, Be not afraid of your Enemies. Vse. First, this sheweth us, how direct a way it hath pleased the Lord herein to guide both Houses of Parliament to walke in, viz. A way of undaunted courage and resolution, as if they should say to one another, as once those Trojans, The onely way to safety to the Conquered, is to turne desperate. Some may thinke they transgresse their limits; No, for how can they take lesse courage to them∣selves, who being beset behind and before with Sy∣rians and Ammonites, are to bestirre themselves for their people, and the Cities of their God. God and England, and every Shire and Citie in England, doe this day cry out unto them, saying; Bee strong and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be dis∣mayed; for the Lord your God is with you whither∣soever you goe. Therefore let us not onely have high thoughts of them, and such as are alwayes Honourable, but magnifie the Lord who hath put such resolutions into them. Secondly, let these words of Joab sound in our eares this day. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our God.
Beloved! I cannot but look upon the Churches in this Land this day, as upon so many severall Regi∣ments, or bands of Souldiers lying in ambush here under the fearn and brushet of the Wildernes, like the lyers in wait beside Gibeah, against the wretch∣ed rebellious Benjamites. I know wee are little dreamt of at this time in any part of Christen∣dome, our weapons being as invisible to the eye of flesh, as our persons are to all the world. So much the better; we shall fight this day with the greater safety to our selves, and danger to our ene∣mies; among whom, I am confident in the Lord, thousands shall fall, and never know who hurt them. We arrogate nothing to our selves; for if the weapons of our warfare are mighty, it is not through us, but through God. But if the Israel of God would have thought of a way of quickest discomfiture to the adversary, what course could they have taken better, then to have divided their Forces, and to have sent some to lye in wait in the wildernesse, to come upon the backs of Gods Ene∣mies with deadly Fastings and Prayer, murthe∣rers that will kill point blanke from one end of the world to the other. Here then is our station, therefore be we of good courage, and let us play the men at this time; and first, For our God. For he is ours, Beloved, and we trust he is Englands: and shall we see our selves bereft of him? Can the Israel of God endure to see Idols and Idolothites to stand in his place, and Dagon to bee exalted a∣bove the Arke? If Israel be robbed of their God,
what have they more? What are the people, or Cities, if they bee not the people and Cities of our God? They are even like the world without the Sun. God therefore and Religion lie at stake; and therefore let us play the men. First, Gods worship lyeth engaged: all the pure and unmixt Ordinances of CHRIST JESUS call for helpe this day. The Word of God lifteth up its voice this day unto us, like a banished Vir∣gine; O how have I been abused by the corrupt Glosses of these moderne Pharisees? How have the Scriptures beene wrested? The Word pro∣phaned in Pulpits? Christ fought against, with the word of his owne mouth? Doctrines of Devils maintained with pretence of Scripture? The Mes∣sengers of Christ persecuted and hunted like Par∣triges upon the Mountaines; for holding sorth the Word in his native lustre? O deliver the Word of God out of this Captivity! The Seales of righteousnesse cry alowd to us this day; They crave reduction to the rules of the Gospell. Eve∣ry Ordinance pleads for vindication, travelling in paine under the captivity of beggarly Rudiments. O, say they, we have been dealt forth these many scores of yeares under Gospell-light, in such ful∣some formes, that men abhorre the offerings of the Lord. Oh! The Whoore hath quaffed, and made herselfe drunke with her Pandors, and Paramours, and with her cunning and uncleane Merchants, in the vessell of the Lords Sanctuary. Beloved! Let us hold; and heare no more of
these sad complaints; for who can have pitic, and patience too? Have we the blood of Protestants in us? Doth the spirit of JESUS runne in our veines? It is enough: We cannot want courage, nor but play the men for God and pure Religion. And if any people under the Sunne, who more then we, whom the gracious hand of heaven hath asserted from that spirituall bondage, under which we once did groane? It is a truth, we saw but litle in com∣parison of what now we doe, when we left our Na∣tive homes; as much it is not that yet we see, tho, blessed be the Lord for what we doe. But is there any people in the world who have tasted more of the sweet of God, and Christ, and Ordinances, then we in this Land have done? Doe any know the price of God and Christ, more then wee here? I beseech you in the Lord, Consider, and let the spi∣rit of Christ rise in you at this instant, and wrestle and strive this day in Prayer; let us loose a joynt with Iacob, but we will be Israelites this day. Let us play the men according to the knowledge, fence and experience that we have of God and Christ. Let us halt to our dying day, but we will returne laden with the spoile of Rebels. Secondly, as Gods worship lieth ingaged, so  by consequence his Name; And what saith Ioshua to God upon the day of afflicting his soule? What shall be done to thy great Name? When the Mini∣sters of the Lord were to weep between the Porch and the Altar upon the day of their fasting, they were to say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them; wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God? Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pitty his people, as it followeth. And shall not this argument then move us, which ever prevailed with the Lord? Moses, Joshua, the Priests, no sooner urge Gods glory, but the Lord answereth them. Oh! how then hath Gods honour been layd in the dust by those Prelates, who now with their ho∣nours begin to lye there themselves? What in∣sultings have they used? What triumphes have they often led? And as if they had bound our Christ like Sampson, and put him to grind in the Prison house (as in some sence they have.) Oh! how have these Lords of the Philistims gathered themselves together to offer sacrifice to their Da∣gon, to burne Incense to their Drag, to their pow∣er, their Policies, Prelacies, Confederacies, Con∣jurations, Superstitions, and so rejoyce? Saying, Our God hath delivered Christ our enemy into our hand, the destroyer of our Prelacies, who slew many of us. And thus, could they but get the day again, they would say, and Dagon should up as high, and CHRIST be throwne downe as low, as ever. And can we endure so much as the thought of it? The Lord forbid. O let us play the men for our God, and our Christ, whose glory is more worth then ten thousand worlds of soules. O let us set to it this day with all our courage; let every veine, and
joynt, and limbe, and affection in us, pray this day; O Lord God, remember thine honour, wee pray thee, and strengthen us, we pray thee, that we may once be avenged on these Philistims against their Lords; for our two eyes. Yea, as Sampson said, Let me dye with the Philistims: So, let us dye with these Phi∣listims, if need were. Let us kill our selves with fasting and prayer, to destroy them, and to pull downe the Temple of their Dagon, all the fabrick of the Hyrarchie, upon the heads of these supersti∣ous Prelates. Thirdly, Let us consider how inglorious a Na∣tion  is without God. when the Arke was captiva∣ted, the glory was departed from Israel. The Ark was the testimony of Gods presence; so that when God doth not testifie his presence with a People, they are without glory. If the World bee beautified by the presence of the Sun, so great glory attend the Court where the King is resident: How doth the special presence of the Prince of the Kings of the earth, beautifie that Land where it is? Yea, there is not onely a spirituall glory, visible onely to a spirituall eye, resulting from the spe∣ciall presence of the Lord among a people; but also an externall, and visible glory. When Ieho∣shaphat walked in the first waies of his Father David, and lift up his heart in the waies of the Lord; and that a great Reformation was wrought in the Land, and that he had spread the Word all over his kingdome; it is said, That hee had riches and honour in aboundance; and The feare of the Lord
fell upon all Kingdoms of the Lands that were round about Iudah, so that they made no warre against Ie∣hoshaphat. Yea, the Philistims and Arabians brought him great presents, insomuch that Ieho∣shaphat waxed great exceedingly, and hee built in Iudah, Castles, and Cities of store; and hee had much businesse in the Cities of Iudah; and the men of Warre, mighty men of valour, were in Ie∣rusalem. So that Iudah had aboundance of exter∣nall glory, even the glory of riches, and honour, and power, and greatnesse, and peace, and homage from forreigne States, and of great emploiments, and of mighty men of valour. Wherefore, seeing God is come neerer to England, then formerly, and hath of late made such gracious tenders of himselfe, and hath found better acceptance then formerly; O let us conclude in dayly prayer, and this day especially, for his presence to be continu∣ed, and more cleerely manifested then ever. For if he should now withdraw againe, wee are to ex∣pect no glory to rest among them. You know how little honour hath been visible in that Land of late yeares; It hath for a long time beene a Land of sorrow, of mourning, and not of joy and rejoyce∣ing. It hath not been called Naomi, but Marah; it hath not been a Crowne of Glory, nor a Royall Diadem in the hand of the Lord; but been termed for saken and desolate. But now the day hath be∣gunne to dawne, yea, the Sunne seemes to be risn on it, if it strike nor in againe, and a Tempest en∣sue upon it; which the Lord forbid. O why should
we give the Lord any rest, till it be called Hephzi∣bah, and Beulah, My delight is in her, because she is marryed to the Lord. For when once a Land is joyned to the Lord, hee is married to it, and then his delight is in it, and hee will cloath it with honour and glory. And thus much for the first ground of the Exhortation. Secondly, the other is the State and Common∣wealth,  which lye ingaged; our people, and our Cities. Even Politick Priviledges are of weighty consequence, and moment. But in what a way, both people and Cities in that Land, have beene dealt with for many yeares past, we need say no∣thing, when it is clearely represented to the view of the whole world in the late Remonstrance of the state of that Kingdome. When men judge un∣justly, and accept the persons of the wicked, and rid not the poore and needy out of the hand of the wicked, nor do justice to the afflicted; when they will not know, nor understand, but walke on in darkenesse; what followeth? All the Foundati∣ons of the Land are out of course, Psal. 82.5. The Heavens, Sea, and dry Land have been shaken, and there hath been both a Church-quake, and a State∣quake in that Land, which hath removed Founda∣tions, and swallowed up both people and Cities. For when Foundations are not onely shaken, but out of course, and removed, what have people, and Cities to stand upon? There is no man in such a case, who can say, I stand upon sure ground, I feare
no colours, I am able to beare out my just actions. For if they should say, we will have recourse to our Foundations; alas, they are out of Course, they are removed, and none knowes where to find them. Beloved! It is a fearefull thing to have but the foundation of an house undermined, the corner stones removed, and the pillars pulled downe; but when whole Cities, and Townes, and Shires of people, shall be undermined, and neere blown up, oh how dreadfull is it? When a People who can say, We are Romans, neither did we buy our freedom, but are the lawfull and legitimate heires of Liberty, shall be scourged uncondemned; and when Cities that were formerly Cities of Refuge, where the af∣flicted might find succour under municipall Laws, shall be invaded by destroyers; what cause have men to doe as David and his followers, when they had recourse to Ziklag, thinking to have found shelter there; but loe, the Citie was burnt, and their wives, and sons, and daughters taken Cap∣tives? Even lift up their voices and weepe, untill they have no more power to weepe. When a man may say as David; In the way wherein I walked, they privily laid a snare for me: I looked on my right hand, and behold, there was no man would know mee, refuge failed me: this is miserable. For a man thinkes himselfe safe in his way, and if he be in the Kings high way, he thinks much to have a snare laid for him; and none but Cutters will way lay a man there. For Edom to assault Israel, when they
promised to walke on, only in the Kings high way; O barbarous and inhumane! Numb. 20, 17, 20. But when a man shall be assaulted in such a case, and he looks on his right hand, and on his left for help, and can see none, then his purse, if not his throat is indangered. Surely it is uncomfortable travelling in such Countries. Brethren! Liberty is more precious then life, inasmuch as death is the cōmon lot of all men, but servitude the portion only of men destined to mise∣ry. And if a people be sold for bondmen, and bond∣women, what can countervaile the Kings damage? And seldome is it, that cruelty rests satisfied with bondage, but makes his progressions to further de∣grees of blood. When people & Cities cannot say Municipia, but Manipia, what remaines but death; as when the Ephramites could not pronounce Shib∣boleth, but onely Sibboleth, presently they dyed for it. If goods and liberty be in the power of mens wills, why not also life? There is much compri∣zed in people and Cities, even all that is Politick, Oeconomick, or Private; but I instance onely in the greatest mischiefe. Let us therefore use the words of Queene Hester vnto Ahasuerus, and di∣rect them unto God. If we have found favour in thy sight, O Lord, and if it please the King, let our lives be given us at our petition, and our people at our request; for our people are sold to bee destroyed, and slaine, and perish. If any say, How are we concerned in the mise∣ries of other men, so long as we are free. I say, It
toucheth us, as Lots captivity touched Abraham, who mustred up his men, and took his confederats along with him, Mamre, Eshcol, and Aner, and de∣livered him out of bondage. And if we forbeare to deliver them that are drawne unto death, and those that are ready to be slaine; if wee say, we knew it not or what did it concerne us? He that pondereth the heart confidereth it, and hee will render unto us according to our workes. Prov. 24.11.12. Wher∣fore Let us play the men for our people and Cities. What though it be well with us? Let us yet re∣member the afflictions of Joseph; yea, and the words of Ioseph to Pharaoh's Butler; Thinke up∣on me when it shall be well with thee; and shew kind∣nesse, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of mee unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house. For thus in effect speaks England and Ireland to us this day, and all the Cities in them; now that it is well with you, think upon us, and shew kindnesse unto us, and make mention of us unto the God of heaven, that we may fully once be delivered out of the house of bondage. Oh, saith such and such a Citie, there are so many thousand soules in me, who cannot discerne between the right hand and the left. But if it be not well with them, how can it bee well with us? If the Arke, and Israel, and Iudah, abide in tents, and the people of God are encamped in the open fields, what comfort can we have in our houses, food, or wives? What though we are so farre from them in place? The needle in the
Compasse is never quiet till it pointeth to the North, at a thousand times greater distance. Affe∣ctions touched with grace, stand firme from one end of the World to the other. Nehemiah's heart stood right towards Jerusalem, when he was in Persia; and though hee was not in an humbling Wildernesse, but an alluring Pallace, even in Shushan, yet Jerusalem came into his minde. For when Hanani, and certaine men of Iudah came thither to him, he asked them concerning his bre∣thren that were left of the Captivity, and con∣cerning Ierusalem. And when they told him of the great affliction and reproach, he sate downe and wept, and mourned many daies, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, Neh. 1.1, 2, 3, &c. Wherefore let that Word of the Lord sound of∣ten in our eares; Ye that have escaped the Sword, go away, stand not still; remember the Lord a farre off, and let Ierusalem come into your minds. Ier. 50.51. And though we have but a day, or two, wherein to joyne all our Forces in the Land together, and to give the Adversaries a broad side; Yet let us now and then make excursions by our selves in private, now that the Lord cals for help against the Migh∣ty. Are we not all the Voluntarie of IESUS, whose People shall be willing in the day of his power? neither is there any restraint unto the Lord, to save by many, or by few; by whole Churches, or by single persons. Let us therefore be often ad∣venturing by our selves, like Ionathan and his Ar∣mour-bearer against the Philistims. If ever we af∣flicted
our soules, let it be in these daies; for we may partly understand by Bookes the number of the yeares which God will accomplish in the de∣solations of Ierusalem. So that, we set our faces unto the Lord God, to seek by Prayer and Sup∣plications, with Fasting, Sack cloth, and Ashes. There is at this time a great battell between Mi∣chael and the Dragon, and the Angels. The Beast and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies have gathered themselves together to make warre with the Lambe. All the Principalities, and Powers, and Rulers of the Darknesse of the World, and Spirituall wickednesses in High places, are up in Armes this day, and there is scarce a Devill left behind in Hell. If ever therefore, now Let us quit our selves like men; the weapons of our Warre-fare are not Carnall, but mighty through God. Let us pray against them, as Moses against Amalek; and Preach against them, as the Priests under the Law, when the Host went out against the Enemy; and sing against them, as Iehosophat and the men of Iudah did against Moah, Ammon, and Edom; and live against them, as it is written, When the Host goeth forth against the Enemy, then keepe thee from every wicked thing. Deut. 23.9. Every Ordinance of God is a deadly murtherer. O let us walke and sleep in our Armour and ne∣ver be unfurnished of promises touching the con∣fusion of Babel, and her builders. Let the cause of God affect us deeply, and the people and Cities of our God be alwaies in our eyes. And let the
desolations of Christendome awaken us to fre∣quent Prayers, and constant sympathy; and the bloud of Gods people (particularly) in Ireland, be to us as the bloud of Grapes and Mulberies are to Elephants, to provoke them to fight. Oh those incarnate Irish Devils! let them be often in our sight. Their blasphemies, their burnings, their robberies, their rapes, their rostings, their strip∣pings, rippings, hangings, drownings, dis-mem∣brings, butcheries, the very shambles of the Devil erected in Ireland, would be alwaies in our eyes and eares. And yet when we have done all, let us referre the issue to the Almighty, saying; Let the Lord do what seemeth him good. The last thing, is their resigning up their wills into the hands of GOD; whereof a few words, and I end. Ioab is not wanting in the use of all meanes to obtaine victory, yet lookes above them, and refers the issue to the Lord of Hosts; teaching us, Doctrine. To neglect no meanes of Victorie, yet to de∣pend upon the Lord onely for a gracious issue. For there is no trusting in our bows or swords, it is the Lord that saveth us from our enemies. It is not the race to the swift, for then Ioab knew that his brother Asael had not dyed by the hand of Ab∣ner. Neither is it the battel to the strong, for then he knew, that Goliah should never have fallen by the hand of David. The Horse is prepared against the day of Battell, but victory is of the Lord.
Vsc. First, Let this teach us to seeke the Lord, that none of this may ever rest upon the arme of flesh, nor number the people; as once David did. Hee had a Catalogue of all the mighty men, 2 Sam. 23. and now too, he will have a list of all the Souldiers in his Kingdome, 2 Sam. 24. He Ido∣lized the carnall strength of Israel, and remem∣bred not the Word of the Lord, which said, When thou takest the summe of the children of Israel, af∣ter their number, then they shall give every man a ransome for his soule unto the Lord, that there bee no plague among them, when thou numbrest them. Exod. 30.12. Let us remember England in this particular; It lyeth under great temptations to this kind of Idolatry. The Union of the two Na∣tions, two Houses, all (or most) of the Shires by Petitioning for Reformation, the setling of the Warrefare of the Kingdome at Sea and Land, the mervellous wisdome, and undaunted resoluti∣on of Parliament, their successe in many matters, the eyes of many on them, and the applause that is given them, besides whatsoever other tempta∣tions, and armes of flesh; may soone solicite the hearts, even of the godly, much more of others, to carnall confidence, that they may never lift up their eyes unto the hilles from whence commeth their helpe. Sisera, Midian, Goliah, Senacherib, Zerah, fall by their carnall props; when Barak, Gedeon, David, Jonathan, and Asa, resting upon the Lord
in the use of small meanes, returne victorious. Two dayes weeping & fasting was little enough for the eleven Tribes to gaine the day of Benjamin. O let not Gods people rest in Councell, Number, Cou∣rage, Ammunition, but in the Lord of Hosts. Secondly, Let not us then place any affiance in  our Fasting daies, but refer al to God when we have ended them. If the Devill cannot make us convert our Prayers unto Idols; he will see whether hee cannot convert them into Idols. Lastly, Let us lay our hearts this day in the Lords hand, as once Eli & Hezekiah being threat∣ned, as here Ioab ready for the onset, did. The People of God, both in old England and new, have waited on his providence both by earthly and hea∣venly meanes. Now let the Lord doe what seemeth him good. If it shall seem good to him, that Eng∣land, Ireland, or Scotland, shall suffer yet further, the will of the Lord be done. What remaineth, but for us to magnifie Gods justice, and to put our mouthes into the dust? Especially, (as for England) considering how long the Prelacie hath fought against Christ, and kept him out of his Kingdome: What bloody brazen-faced Idola∣tries have bin committed there? What Atheismes, Blasphemies, Adulterie, Prodigies of pride, grin∣ding of faces, selling of the Poore, countenanced Sabbath breakers, derision of holinesse, shedding the blood of the Saints, have been common in that Land; and in a speciall manner, considering the sinnes of Gods deare people there, particularly of
his Messengers in their lon continued subjection unto the power of Antichrist, in the Prelacy, the warpings and shrinkings of some, the fearefulnes and cowardize of many (for which, for mine own particular, I desire to be humbled while I live) the reading of that abominable Booke of cursed liberty, contributing to the Superstitious Pom∣pousnesse of Paules, and to the raising of Forces against the Scots, (a dreadfull bloody sin) reading, or permitting to be read, Proclamations, and Pray∣ers in the Churches against them. I say, conside∣ring all this (to mention no more) though we have used what meanes we can, and though they should doe the like, yet let our expectations of successe be low, let us humbly submit our selves to the will of the Lord, saying; Let him doe what seemeth him good. If it seem good to him to pardon the Land, O blessed be such gentlenesse; If otherwise it seem good to him to correct it, blessed bee his justice. What soever he doth, is good; therefore let him doe it. And any mercy at any time, is enough for great transgressors. FINIS.
