R817 13697766 101441
A RELATION OF THE Bloody Massacre IN IRELAND; Acted by the Instigation of the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, who were Promoters of those Horrible Murders, Pro∣digeous Cruelties, Barbarous Villanies, and Inhuman Practices Executed by the Irish Papists upon the English Protestants: With an Account of the Spanish Inquisition. Licensed Decem. 23. WHen their Plots were ripe for Execution, we find their first proceedings against the English various; some of the Irish only stripping and expelling them; others murdering Men, Women, and Children without mercy; all resolving univer∣sally to root out all the Protestants of Ireland: so deeply malicious were they a∣gainst the English Protestants, that they would not so much as endure the sound of their Language. The Priests gave the Sacrament unto divers of the Irish, upon condition they should neither spare Man, Woman, nor Child of the Protestants. One Hulligan a Priest, read an Excommu∣nication
against all those, that from henceforth should relieve or harbour any English, Scottish, or Welch-man, or give them alms, whereby many were Famished to dearth. The Friars exhorted them with Tears, not to spare any of the English. The day before this Massacre began, Anno, 1642. the Priests gave the People a dismiss at Mass, with liberty to go out, and take possession of all their Lands, as also to strip, and rob, and despoil them of all their goods and cattle. The Irish, when this Massacre began, perswaded many of their Protestant Neighbours to bring their Goods to them, and they would secure them, and hereby they got abundance peaceably into their hands, whereof they cheated the Protestants, refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the Protestants at first of them, that they gave them Inventories of all they had, and digged up their best things that were hidden in the ground, and deposited them in their Custody. They also got much into their hands by fair Promises, deep Oaths and En∣gagements, that if they would deliver them their goods, they would suffer them, with their Wives and Children, quietly to depart the Country; and when they had got what they could, they afterwards murdered them. Having thus seized upon their goods and cattel, ransackt their houses, got their persons, stript Man, Woman, and Child naked, and so turned them out of doors, strictly prohibiting the Irish under great penalties, not to give them any relief; by means hereof many miserably perisht through cold, nakedness, and hunger, In the Town of Coleraine, many of these poor people that fled thither for succour, many thou∣sands died in two days, so that the living could not bury the dead, but laid their Carcasses in ranks in vast and wide holes, piling them up as if they had been Herrings. One Magdalen Redman deposeth, that she, and divers other Protestants, amongst whom were two and twenty Widows, were first robbed, and then stript Naked, and when they had cover∣ed themselves with Straw, the bloody Papists threw in burning straw amongst them, on purpose to burn them; then they drove them out into the Woods in Frost and Snow, where many of them died with extream Cold, and those that survived, lived miserably by reason of their many wants. Yet though those bloody Villains exercised such inhumane Cruelties towards the poor Pro∣testants, they would commonly boast, That these were but the beginning of their sorrows, for in∣deed they made it good; for having disarmed the English, robbed them of their Goods, stript them of their Cloths, and having their Persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner of abominable Cruelties, horrid Massacres, and execrable Murders. For their were multitudes Murdered in cold Blood, some as they were at Plough, others in their Houses, others in the High-ways; all without any provocation, were suddenly de∣stroyed. In the Castle of Lisgoole, were about one hundred and fifty Men, Women and Children con∣sumed with Fire. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to Mac Guire, upon compofiti∣on, and faithful promises of fair quarter, as soon as he and his entered, they began to strip the People, and most cruelly put them to the Sword, Murdering them all without mercy. At Lissenskeath, they Hanged and Killed above one hundred of the Scottish Protestants. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were more numerous, their Murthers were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty. Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissenskeath, desired to speak with Mr. Middleton, who ad∣mitted him in, he first burnt the Records of the County, then demanded one thousand Pounds which was in his custody of Sir William Balfores, which as soon as he had, he caused Mr. Middle∣ton to hear Mass, and to swear that he would never alter from it, and then Hanged him up with his Wife and Children; Hanging and Murdering above one hundred Persons besides in that place At Portendown-Bridg, there were One thousand Men, Women, and Children, carried in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River. Yea, in that Country there were four thousand persons drowned in several places. Some aged Men and Women, these barbarous Papists inforced their own Children to drown them; yea, some Children were compelled unnaturally to execute their own Parents, Wives
forced to hang their own Husbands, and Mothers to cast their own Children into the Waters, af∣ter which themselves were Murthered. In Sligo they forced a Young Man to kill his Father, and then hanged him up. In another place they forced a Woman to kill her Husband, then caused her Son to kill her, and then hanged the Son; yea such was their malice against the English that they taught their Children to kill English Children. The Irish Rebellion. depictions of Protestant martyrs during the Irish Rebellion One hundred drown'd in a River. Boys forced to kill the Protestants. In one place and hundred and forty English were taken and driven like Cattle for many miles together. Other companies they carried out to a place sit for execution, and then murdered them. One hundred and fifteen Men, Women, and Children, they sent with Sir Philem Oneal's Pass till they came to Portendown-Bridg, and there drowned them. At another time One hundred and forty Protestants, being thrown in at the same place, as any of them swam to shore, the bloody Villains with the But ends of their Muskets knockt out their Brains.
At Armagh, O Cane got together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were a dayes journey, they were all murdered, and so were ma∣ny others, though they had Protections from Sir Philem Oneal. The Aged People of Armagh were carried to Charlemont, and there murdered. Presently af the Town of Armagh was burnt, and Five hundred Persons murdered and drowned. In oman were Forty eight Families Murdered. In one house Twenty two Pro∣testants were burned. In Kilmore all the Inhabitants were Stript and Massacred, being Two hundred Families; the whole Country was a Common Butchery; many thousands perished by Sword, Famine, Fire, Water and all other cruel Deaths, that rage and malice could invent. At Casel they put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, kept them twelve Weeks in great misery. Some they barbarously mangled, and left them languishing; some they hanged up twice or thrice, others they buried alive. In Queens County, an English Man, his Wife, five Children, and a Maid, were all hanged together. At Clowns seventeen Men were buried alive; some were wounded and hanged upon Tenter-hooks. In Castle-Cumber, Two Boys wounded and hung upon Butchers Tenters. Some hanged up and taken down to confess money, and then murdered. Some had their Bellies ript up, and so left with their Guts about their Heels. In Kilkenny, an English Woman was beaten into a Ditch, where she died; her Child about six years old, they ript up her Belly, and let out her Guts. One they forced to Mass, then they wounded him, ript his Belly, took out his Guts, and so left him alive. A Scottish Man they stript and hewed to pieces, ript up his Wifes Belly, so that her Child drop out; many other Women they hung up with-Child, ript their Bellies and let their Infants fall out; some of the Children they gave to Dogs. In the County of Armagh they robbed, stripped, and murdered abundance of Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the Sword, some they hanged, some they star∣ved to death; and meeting Mrs. Howard, and Mrs. Frankland, with six of their Children, and themselves both with Child, they murdered them all, ript open the Gentlewomens Bellies, took out their Children, and threw them into a Ditch. A young Scottish Womans Child they took by the heels, and dash'd out its Brains against a Tree; the like they did to many other Children. Anne Hill, going with a young Child on her Back, and four more by her side, they pulled the Child off her Back, trod on it till it dyed; stripped her and the other four Children naked, whereby they dyed of Cold. Some others they met with, hanged them up upon a Wind-mill, and before they were half dead, cut them in pieces with their Skeins. Many other Protestants, especially Women and Children, they pricked and stabbed with Skeins, Forks, and Swords, slashing, cutting, and mangling them in their Heads, Faces, Breasts, Arms, and other parts, yet killed them not, but left them wallowing in their own Blood to languish, starve, and pine to death. The Castle of Lisgoole being sat on fire by these merciless Papists, a Woman leapt out of a Window to save her self from burning, whom they presently murdered; many fled to Vaults and Cellars, were they were all murder'd. One Joan Addis they stabbed, and then put her Child of a quarter old to her Breast, and bid it Suck English Bastard, and so left it to perish. One Mary Barlow had her Husband hanged, her self with six Children, strip'd naked in Frost and Snow, after which sheltering themselves in a Cave, they had nothing to eat for three Weeks but two old Calve-Skins, which they beat with stones, and so eat them hair and all. In the cold weather, many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages, and sexes, being turned out naked, perished of cold and hunger; thousands of others were drowned, cast into Ditches, Bogs, and Turf-pits; multitudes miserably burnt in Houses; some that lay sick of Feavers they hanged up; some Men, Women, and Children, they drove into Boggy Pits, and knockt them on the heads. The Irish Trulis that followed the Camp, cried out, Kill them all, spare neither Man, Woman, nor Child. They took the Child of Thomas Stratton, being about twelve Years old, and boil∣ed him in a Cauldron. One good wise Lin and her Daughter they carried into a Wood, first
hanged the Mother, and then the Daughter in the hair of the Mothers head. In some places they plucked out the Eyes, and cut off the Hands of the Protestants, and turned them into the Fields, where they perished. The Women in some places, stoned the English Wo∣men and Children to death. One Man they shot through his Thighs, digged a hole in the ground, set him in upon his Feet, fill'd up the hole, left our only his Head, where he languished to death. Another Man they held his Feet in the fire, till he was burnt to death. In Munster they hanged up many Ministers i a most barbarous manner. One Minister they stripped naked, and drove him through the Town; pricking him with Darts and Rapiers, till he fell down dead. These barbarous Villains vowed, That if any Parents digged Graves to bury their Children in, they should be buried therein themselves. They Pped one William Loverden naked, then killed him before his Wife and Children. Divers Ministers-bones that had been buried some Years before, they digged up, because they were, as they say, Patrons of Heresy. Poor Children that went out into the Fields to eat weeds and grass, they killed with∣out all pity. In one place they burnt two Protestant Bibles, and then said, It was Hell fire they burnt, Other Bibles they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them; saying, They would do the like to all Puritane Bibles. They took the Bible of a Minister, called Mr. Edward Slack, and opening it, they laid it a in puddle of Water; and then stamped upon it, saying, A plague on it, this Bible hath bred all the quarrel. At Glastow, a Priest, with some others, drew about forty English and Scottish Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then told them, They were in a good Faith; and for fear they should fall from it and turn Hereticks, he with his companions presently cut all their throats. In the County of Tipperary, near the Silver-works; some of these barbarous Papists met with eleven English-men, ten Women, and some Children; whom they first stript, and then with Stones, Pole-axes, Skeins, Swords, &c. they most barbarously Massacred them all. In the County of Mayo about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were Ministers, were upon Covenant to be safely conveyed to Galway by one Edmond Burk, and his Souldiers; but by the way, this Burk and his company began to Massacre these poor Protestants; some they shot to death, some they stab'd with their Skeins, some they thrust through with their Pikes, some they drowned: The Women they stript naked, who lying upon their Husbands to save them, were run through with Pikes; so that very few of them escaped with life. In the Town of Sligo, Forty Protestants were stript and locked up in a Cellar, and about mid∣night a Butcher provided for the purpose, was sent in amongst them; who with his Axe butcher∣ed them all. In Tirawly thirty or forty English, who had yielded to go to Mass, were put to their choice, Whether they would die by the Sword or be drowned? They chose the latter, and so being driven to the Sea-side, these barbarous Villains, with their naked Swords forced them into the Sea; the Mo∣thers with their Children in their Arms, wading to the Chin, were overcome by the Waves, where they all perished. The Son of Mr. Montgomery a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with his School-master, who drew his Skein at him; whereupon the Boy said, Good Master whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me. Yet this merciless Tiger barbarously murthered him without all pity. In the Town of Sligo, all the Protestants were first robbed of their Estates, then cast into Goal, and about mid-night were all stript naked, and were there most cruelly and barbarously murthered with Swords, Axes, Skeins, &c. Some of them being Women great with Child, their Infants thrust out their Arms and Legs at their Wounds; after which execrable murthers, these Hell∣hounds laid the dead naked bodies of the Men upon the naked bodies of the Women, in a most immodest posture; where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish, who beheld it with great delight. Also Isabel Beard, great with Child, bearing, the lamentable cries of those that were murthering, ran out into the Streets; where she was murthered, and the next day was found with the Childs feet coming out of the Wounds in her sides: Many others were murthered in the Houses and Streets. Mr. Starkey, School-master at Armagh, being above one hundred years old, they stript him na∣ked,
then took his two Daughters, being Virgins, whom they also stript naked, and then forced then to lead their aged Father to a Turf-pit, where they drowned them all three. To one Henry Cowl, a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his life, if he would marry one of their Truils, or go to Mass, but he chose death rather than to consent to either. Many of the Protestants they buried alive, sollacing themselves, whilst they were digging down old Ditches upon them. They brake the Back-bone of a Youth, and left him in the Fields, some days after he was sound, having eaten the Grass round about him; neither then would they kill him out-right, but removed him to better Pasture, wherein was fulfilled that saying, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruelty. In the County of Antrim, they murthered Nine hundred fifty four Protestants in one morning, and afterwards above Twelve hundred more in that County. Near Lisnegarvey, they forced Twenty four Protestants into a House, and burnt them all. Sir Philem O Neale boasted, That he had slain above Six hundred at Garvah, and that he had left neither Man, Woman, nor Child alive in that Barony of Munterlong. In other places he murdered above Two thousand Persons in their Houses; so that many Houses were filled with dead bodies. The Lord Mont Garret, caused divers English Souldiers that had been taken about Kilkenny, to be hanged, hardly suffering them to pray before their death. One Fitz Patrick an Irish Papist, enticed a rich Merchant, that was a Protestant, to bring all his Goods to his House, promising safely to keep them, and to re-deliver them to him, but when he had got them into his possession, he took the Merchant and his Wife, and hanged them both. The like he did by divers others. Some English-mens Heads they cut off, and carried them to Kilkenny, and on the Market-day, set them on the Cross, where many, especially the Women, stab'd, cut, and slashed them. A poor Protestant Woman, with her two Children, going to Kilkenny, these bloody Miscreants baited them with Dogs, stabbed them with Skeins, and pulled out the Guts of the Children, whereby they died; and not far off they took divers Men, Women and Children, and hanged them up; one of the Women being great with Child, they ripped up her Belly as she hanged, so that the Child fell out in the Cawl alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down till their Bowels were torn out. How many Thousands of Protestants were there thus inhumanly butchered, by sundry kinds of death, we cannot ascertain. In the Province of Ʋlster, we find vast numbers murdered, as before; what the number of the slain was in the three Provinces. I find not upon Record, but certainly it was very great, for you have these passages in a general Remonstrance of the distressed Protestants in the Province of Munster. We may (say they) compare our woe to the saddest parallel of any Story: Our Churches are prophaned by Sacrifices to Idols: Our Habitations are become ruinous heaps: No Quality, Age, or Sex, priviledged from Massacres and lingring Deaths, by being robbed, stript naked, and so exposed to cold and samine. The famished Infants of murdered Parents swarm in our Streets, and for want of food perish before our Faces, &c. And all this cruelty that is exercised upon us, we know not for what cause, offence, or seeming provocation it is inflicted upon us sin excepted saving that we were Protestants, &c. We can make it manifest, that the depopulations in this Province of Murther, do well near equal those of the whole Kingdom, &c. And thus in part you have heard of the merciless Cruelties which the bloody Irish Papists ex∣ercised towards the Protestants. Let us now consider, at least some of Gods Judgments upon the Irish, whereby he hath not left the innocent Blood of his Servants to be altogether unrevenged. These bloody Hell-hounds, themselves confessed, That the Ghost of divers of the Protestants which they had drowned at Portendown-Bridge, were daily seen to walk upon the River; sometimes singing Psalms; sometimes brandishing naked Swords; sometimes shreaking in a most hideous and fear∣ful manner. So that many of the Popish Irish which dwelt near thereabouts, being affrighted herewith, were forced to remove their Habitations farther off into the Country. Catherine Cook testified upon Oath, That when the Irish had barbarously drowned One hundred and eighty Protestants, Men, Women, and Children at Portendown Bridge, about nine Days after, she saw the apparition of a Man bolt-upright in the River, standing breast-high, with his hands lifted up to Heaven; and continued in that posture from December to the end of Lent, at which time some of the
English Army passing that way, saw it also; after which it vanished away. Elizabeth Price, testified upon Oath, That she and other Women, whose Husbands Children were drowned in that place, hearing of those Apparitions, went thither one Evening, at which time they saw one like a Woman rise out of the River breast-high, her Hair hanging down, which with her Skin, was as white as Snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which so affrighted them that they went away. A View of the Spanish Inquisition, and the Torments used towards such as fall into their Merciless Hands. THis Inquisition was Erected by King Ferdinand of Spain, when he Conquered Granado, of a long time possessed by the Moors, and Jews, and design'd to oblige them to confess the Christian Faith; but was soon (at the Instigation of the Pope and his Clergy) turned against the true Professors of the Gospel. The manner is, as soon as any Information is given in, to cite the Party, who dares not refuse to come; or if he fly, they have their Scouts to find him out: When he is come, they wheadle him to make him accuse himself, pretending they are ignorant of the Cause of his coming; in which Cause, to deny, he knows is the best; otherwise, they send him to Prison and Triumph, they have what to accuse him out of his own Mouth: Or, if he denies, one or other steps up and accuses him, then is he sent to Prison in a dark Dungeon strictly ex∣amined: When if he comply not with all their Demands, they put him to the Rack: The first Torture they use, is the Pulley, when binding Hands and Thumbs, and hanging heavy Weights at his Feet, they draw him up, and then suddenly suffering him to sink half way, with the Jerk, dislocate all his Joints: When he cryes out, the Lords Inquisitors roars as loud, calling him Heretick Dog; or if he call upon Christ, they revile him, bidding him let Christ alone, and tell the Truth. When they have tortured him a long while, they demand of the Tormentor (who is dressed up in black Canvis, like a Devil) if he has his other Torturing Engines ready, to which he replyes No. Then they bid him get them against to morrow, tel∣ling the Prisoner, if he recant not, all that he has suffered, is but a Flea-biting to what he must feel, when three daies after they torture him again upon a Wheel or Roaler, or by laying him in a Trough, pour Water down his Throat, driving before it a Rag, at the pulling out of which, a great quantity of Blood follows: They likewise anoint their Feet with Lard, and set them on hot Irons, and stretch them on a Rack; put lighted Torches to their Arm∣pits: Nor do they spare Matrons or Virgins, stripping them stark naked: And if at twice Racking they recant not, then they are burnt. And thus a young English Gentleman was served, for throwing down the Host, as the Priests were carrying it through the Streets of Rome, whilst the ignorant Vulgar kneeled as it passed, and Worshipped it; he at the same time say∣ing, Ah Wretches that you are! Do you Worship a Morsel of Bread? And so much of Popish Cruelties. From which, the Lord deliver all such as Worship Him in Spirit and in Truth. These Particulars, with many more, were Attested, before the Commissioners appointed for that purpose. See more of such Cruelties in Clark's Martirology. London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, 1689.
The Spanish Inquisition. depictions of tortures during the Spanish Inquisition One Burned for throwing down the Host. Some tortured in the Inquisition. Others Rack'd in the Inquisition.
