s13 99831722 36189
An Answer to several Passages, Citations or Charges In a BOOK, Lately publish'd by F. Bugg STYLED, New Rome Arraigned, &c. BEING A short Vindication of the Christian Believ∣ers of Jesus of Nazareth, who are in Derision termed QUAKERS, From the said ASPERSIONS. Blessed are the peace-makers; for they shall be cal∣led the children of God, Matth. v. 9. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, hath for∣given you, Ephes. iv. 31, 32. London: Printed in the Year 1694.
An Answer to several Charges of Francis Bugg. HAving for these several Years observed divers contentious Books written by F. Bugg and George Whitehead one a∣gainst the other, I have read their several Writings on both sides, and hereby pro∣ceed to give my Sense of the Matter. First, I apprehend the tendency of F. Bugg's striving is, for to have several Errors to be Re∣tracted and Condemned as Erroneous; which in my Judgement ought to be done by all true Chri∣stins. Secondly, G. Whitehead's Contention is to cover and cloak many Errors and Weaknesses which he and all true Christians ought to condemn, and confess: All Flesh hath sinned, gone astray, erred and fallen short of the glory of God. If any should object and say, What here is written is short: I answer, Brevity is design'd by the Author; for what is written is done in order (if happily it might be so) to appease the Fury of an inrag'd Adversary, believing the said F. B. hath been provoked, and do heartily wish both the provo∣kers and the provoked might be deeply humbled before the Lord, and beg pardon for all their Sins and Transgressions, and pursue that Christian Practise that Christ exhorted unto his Disciples to follow, who said; By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you love one another:
If this Precept was but once grafted into every Heart, then Strife and Contention would soon come to an end. Its also my Sense and Judgment, that the many Books of Contention, writ by G.W. and others, hath done much hurt to the Christian Religion, and would be glad, if it should please God to put it into the Hearts of the Governours and Rulers of the Nation to condemn the same, and order them all to be burnt. So I shall proceed to answer in short several of F.B's Objections and Charges, desiring that he, as well as others, would desist from Contention and pursue after Peace, and learn to love all men, seeing our Lord and Master Jesus of Nazereth, his Love is universal to all, and hath enlightned all by his Light and Grace, and tasted Death for every Man, and given him∣self a Ransom for all: O! who would but fol∣low such a Master, as hath shed his precious Blood for the Redemption of all? So desiring every true Believer in Christ Jesus, and follower of him, to bear his Image, and be made conformable un∣to him in Love, Mercy, Goodness and Compas∣sion, herein would that great Commandment be kept and not broken; which is, To love God with all thy Might and Strength, &c. Then the second also would be, To love thy Neighbour as thy self: Which might it be the practice of eve∣ry true Christian is the real Desire of him who desires the good and welfare of all mankind, &c. Seeing of old time, all was not Israel that was counted Israel, so may it be said in our Day and Age, all are not true Christian Quakers that are called Quakers; therefore F. B. ought not to lay
his Objections and Charges on such general Terms; for if any, under the denomination of a Quaker, are ignorant and unsound in Matter of Faith and Doctrine (I say) their Ignorance ought not to be chargable on the Body or Society of the Christi∣an People (who are in derision termed Quakers) who sincerely believe in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, both to his Humanity and his God∣head, in all respects, even as the holy Scriptures do testifie of him: Therefore, seeing F. B. grants Contention to be an Offence the Scripture con∣demns, he ought to desist therefrom, and not continue reproaching a People by whole-sale who believe all things according to the Scriptures, and that they are of Divine Authority, and were given forth by the Inspiration of the Almighty, and are profitable and of a general Service, ac∣cording to the Testimony of the Apostle Paul to Timothy, in his second Epistle, ch. 3. v. 16, 17. and if at any time he hath found any particular Man or Men under the Name of a Quaker, that are unsound in the aforesaid Matter of Faith, or are guilty of Error of any kind, relating to the Christian Religion, F. B. ought to pray to God on their behalves, That he would remove their Ignorance and give them a true understand∣ing of the things that belong to their Peace, and not vilifie the Society of a People, or any part thereof, upon the score of the Ignorance and Folly of any pretended Member. And whereas F. B. continues to take in the Ashes of the dead, who are gone to give an account of their Deeds, whether good or evil; and seeing they are not in visibility to answer for themselves, its hoped
he (viz. F. B.) will desist from it, not knowing how soon the great God of Heaven and Earth may summon him to appear before the Bar of his Justice, to give an account of his Deeds. Also note, I would not hereby be accounted one that would cover an Error in any that are dead, nor in any that are yet living, neither is any Evil or Error connived at or tolerated by a∣ny true Christian Quaker, who through the Pro∣vidence of the Almighty are come to that result, and do sincerely believe and own the same Jesus of Nazareth, that was born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, whose precious Side was pierced with a Spear, and by wicked hands crucified on the Tree of the Cross, between two Thieves; whose Blood was shed for the Re∣mission of Sins, who was dead and buried, rose again the third Day, and ascended into Heaven, in the sight of the Galileans; who is there as our Mediator and Intercessor to God our Creator; believing he will forgive us our sins, for Christ's sake, our only and alone Mediator between him and us poor mortal Creatures, who are nothing without him, neither can we do any thing with∣out him that is acceptable or well-pleasing in his sight, but as he shall beget a living Faith in us both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure: To him alone be all Honour and Praise given, both now and for evermore, Amen. Whereas F. Bugg objects against G. Whitehead, being a contentious continual Scribler, and guilty of giving base and scurrilous Language, as vile Apostates, unruly Beasts, Wolves, Dogs, Devils incarnate, together with many more of the like import, &c.
Answer, G. Whitehead is guilty of the aforesaid Charge, and he ought to repent of the same; and its well hoped he will not justifie himself in it, nor any for him, but condemn his weakness in so doing. Objection 2. Its alledged, G. W. indeavoured to cover and cloak gross Errors in divers Persons that are dead (and gone) as also in some that are yet living, &c. Answer, G. W. is supposed to be guilty in part of the aforesaid Charge, and its hoped he may see his Weakness in so doing; for the Christian Quaker in general testifieth against all Error, not only in themselves, but in all others in whomso∣ever it appears, believing there is no more Affi∣nity between Truth and Error, than there is be∣tween Light and Darkness (which are manifest to be too opposite Beings). Objection 3. Whereas F. Bugg accuses G. W. of endeavouring to cover several Errors in Thomas Fitzwater, Robert Young and Thomas Lloyd in Pen∣silvania, whose unsound Expressions are (as in∣serted in his New Rome Arraigned, &c.) pag. 37. (quoted by F. B.) God that died in us, and laid down thy Life in us, and took it up again, &c. And that when Christ ascended, he was separated from his Body: That Faith in Christ without us, as he died for our Sins and rose again, was not necessary to our Sal∣vation. Answer, The said T. Fitzwater, R. Young and T. Lloyd, are guilty of high Blasphemy for their so saying, and are greatly to be blamed for their said unsound Expressions, and all true Christian Quakers do condemn them for the same; and do
further declare, That if G. W. or any others do wink or connive at the aforesaid blasphemous Expressions, he or they are judged to be equally guilty with them: But its hoped, or at least-wise desired, that G. W. and others will give out a Christian Testimony against them for it and o∣thers, for their speaking Irreverently of the Per∣son of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; as, also, against their Persecution of G. Keith, T. Budd and others. Its here testified against, by and on the behalf of all the true Christian Believers, who are in scorn called Quakers, notwithstanding the Ignorance of any pretended Member, whose Fol∣ly ought not to be laid on the Body of the People, whether he be a pretended Preacher or Hearer. F. Bugg's three Charges against the Quakers cited, and answered. Charge the First (says F. B.) the Quakers denies him who was born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered Death upon the Cross at Jerusalem, who rose again the third Day, and ascended in∣to Heaven in the sight of the Galileans, to be Christ the Saviour of the World. Answer, The aforesaid Charge is false (as to his laying it on the general) perhaps it may be undeniably true upon some that are either dead or alive (for ought I know) but I am sure he is much to be blamed for laying his Charge so ge∣neral; but the said Citation is owned, professed and believed by all sincere Christian Quakers, therefore his Charge must needs be false. Not∣withstanding, if any pretended Member that may be dead or yet is in being, did ever deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Saviour of the World, he
is disowned for the same, and deemed no less than guilty of Blasphemy in the superlative de∣gree. For the true Christian Quaker expects Sal∣vation by no other, but by and through Faith in the heavenly Man Christ Jesus; therefore F. B.'s aforesaid Charge is false and groundless. F. B.'s second Charge, They deny (says F. B. meaning the Quakers) the Scriptures, by speak∣ing contemptuously of them, &c. Answer, The whole Charge is false: The true Christian Quaker owns the Scriptures, and pre∣fers them above all Books, Papers or Epistles ex∣tant in the whole World; and if any ignorant Man or Men hath, at any time, spoken contem∣ptuously of them, he is greatly to be blamed, and the Christian Quaker denies Fellowship with all them that have in any measure so done. F. B.'s third Charge, That their Teachers are Deceivers of the People, Favorers of Blasphemy, and of a different Faith from the Apostles, Pri∣mitive Christians and blessed Martyrs, and Ex∣cusers of Idolatry, and that their Doctrin tends to overthrow the Christian Faith. Answer, The Matter of the aforesaid Charge is a Lie upon them, viz. all true Christian Qua∣kers, whom God has given the Gift of the Mini∣stry, their Work hath been and now is, to unde∣ceive the People, and condem Idolatry and the Wor∣shippers thereof, to exhort them to the true Faith, that's agreeable to the Faith of the Apostles, Pri∣mitive Christians and blessed Martyrs, according as is testified in Scripture. If any pretended Member that hath run before his Guide, or run and the Lord never sent them, hath at any time
asserted a contrary Doctrine he is disowned for the same, therefore the Error of any unsound or unqualified Person ought not to be charged in that manner as it seems to be, viz. on the People in general. The fourth Charge, Whereas F. B. accuse Jo∣siah Coal and John Audland of giving Divine At∣tributes and Blasphemous Titles to G. Fox, un∣condemned, and still justified or excused; which said Titles F. B. hath largly cited, divers times, in divers of his printed Books, for which reason the Citations are not here inserted, being too well known to the World already. Answer, The said Josiah Coal and John Audland were guilty of Blasphemy in so doing, and it was a wonderful great Error in them, and a greater in G. Fox, for not reproving them (if he did not) Its further granted, That if any should Justifie the said J. Coal and J. Audland in their giving of it, or G. F. in the not reproving it, they are all deemed equally guilty of Blasphemy, in a high degree, both the Givers, the Receiver and the Justifier, for attributing that to a Mortal Cor∣rupt Man which was due to none but to our su∣preme Lord and Master, Christ Jesus, the Savi∣our of the World. F. Bugg's fifth Charge, wherein he accuseth E. Burrowgh, George Fox, Rob. Sandiland, George Whitehead and others, of giving base and scur∣rilous Language, calling others ill Names, &c. Answer, Its thought most requisite to return an Answer to the aforesaid Charge in these following Words, (viz.) to call Names for or about Reli∣gion are no Christians of Christ's making See
more at large W. Pen's Address to Protestants, &c. p. 242.) therefore its condemned by the true Christian Quaker in them that so do. F. B's sixth Charge against G. Fox, cited out of a Book entituled, A Battledore for Teachers and Professors: All Languages are to me (says G. F.) no more than Dust, who was before Languages were: Introduct. Again, p. 214. And next follows a few Words to the whole Matter by G. Fox, who was before Confusion or the many Languages were. Answer, If G. Fox did hold the Doctrine of the pre-existence of human Souls when he writ the aforesaid Citation, he is not so much to be blamed as he is if he spoke in reference to his Bo∣dy (i. e. the Person of G. F.) however, we will pass by the foregoing Passage, and proceed to as much brevity as may be. As to those Passages in G. F's Battledore, which are of no less import than high Blasphemy, and he was much to be blamed for his said Error, and the true Christian Quaker hereby condemneth him for it, and any one that shall go about to cover him in that or any other blasphemous Errors, believing several of his said Writings, (i.e. G. F's) to contain divers Errors and unsound Notions, and have done much hurt and stumbled many a seeking Soul: And, particu∣larly it was his great weakness, who was (but a Shoe-maker and) bred an illiterate Man, to pre∣tend to make a Battledore of divers Languages, to teach People tu, nos & vos, &c. who understood not the Signification of either but by History and Tradition (even as a Parrot can well talk so far as he hath been taught.) To conclude, What
Error or unsound Notion hath been found or may yet be found in any Book or Books written by G. F. or any others called Quakers, whether the Persons or Authors be living or dead, the said Weakness or Errors are testified against by the Christian Believers of the crucified Jesus, who are in scorn called Quakers, hoping God in his own due time will more and more refine his People, and give them a true sight of their Evils, that thereby they may forsake the same, and be more and more delighted to walk in the Light of his dear Son and our Saviour Jesus Christ, is the true desire of all sincere Christians, who have no Life nor Delight in Strife or Contention, &c. F. B's Charge against James Parnel cited. But to the End of all Disputes and Arguments, I am come; for before they were I am (said James Parnel.) Answer, It was great Blasphemy in J. Parnel, for so saying, and its hereby denied and judged as a great weakness, that proceeded through his Ignorance. Whereas F. B. accuseth the Quakers for teach∣ing, That the Name of Jesus and Christ do not properly belong to the Body that suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem. Answer, The Charge it self is false and ground∣less (mark) the Charge being laid upon the Ge∣neral (the word Quakers being of the plural num∣ber includes a great part of them, or least wise, the whole Body of the People.) If any pretended Quaker hath at any time so taught, he is culpable for the same, it being contrary to the Doctrine of the Christian Quaker so to teach, but do (in
opposition to the aforesaid Charge) preach and teach as a necessary Article of Faith, viz. to be∣lieve that Salvation is to be obtained through a living Faith in his Death, Sufferings, Resurrecti∣on and Ascension; therefore, the Name of Jesus and Christ, do most properly belong to that Bo∣dy that was born of the Virgin Mary, notwith∣standing the prejudice of F. B.'s aforesaid Charge; who further continues to acense the Quakers with questioning who was the first Penman of the Scriptures, whether Moses or Hermes? To which its answered; The true Christian Quaker never so queried, being well satisfied by Faith, that Mo∣ses, the Servant of God, was the first Penman of Holy Writ. Its farther noticed, that F. B. cites a Passage out of Ed. B.'s Works, &c. p. 273. viz. The Sufferings of the People of God (call'd Quakers) in this Age, are greater Sufferings and more Un∣just, than in the Days of Christ, or of the Apo∣stles, or in any times since. Answer, It was an Error in E. Buoughs for so saying. The Christian Quaker denies it; believ∣ing no Sufferings that can be inflicted upon por Mortals are so great; neither ought any Suffer∣ings or Persecution to be brought in competition with the Sufferings of our dear Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath taken our Cse upon himself, and became a Propitiation not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whose World; (Oh what unexpressible Love was it, that the In∣finite ing should condescend, after such an ad∣mirable manner, for the Restoration of his Finite Creat) and by Faith in the Blood of this ma∣culate
Lamb, the Christian Quaker expects Salvation, and by no other Name that can be given under Heaven, and do account it a great Blessing if the Lord should suffer Hard∣ships and Tryals to come upon them, in that his Love should be such, as to count them worthy to suffer for his holy Names sake. F. B.'s Charge against Isaac Pennington cited, &c. A Question to Prooff. p. 33. Now the Scriptures do as expresly distinguish between Christ and the Garment which he wore; between him that came, and the Body in which he came; between the Substance which was veiled, and the Veil which veiled it; there was plainly he and the bo∣dy in which he came; there was the outward Vessel, and the inward Life; this we certainly know, and can never call the bodily Garment, Christ. Answer, The foregoing Citation was an undeniable Error in Is. Pennington. which proceeded from a dfect of his Un∣derstanding; and its not at all doubted, but that if that wor∣thy Man (I. P.) were in being, he would readily retract the slip of his Pen, not only in that Matter, but in any other of the like Import; therefore, wherein any Man sees a weakness in anothers Speaking, or a slip of his Pen, let him take heed of falling into the like Evil. Its farther observed, F. B. seems to condemn the Quakers as if they denied the very fundamental Articles of the Chri∣stian Faith, notwithstanding his pretended distinction, by saying the Foxonian Quakers, as if all that had any love or respect for G. F. were guilty of denying the necessary Doctrin of the Christian Religion. Note, it cannot reasonably be supposed that such a great number of People as he (F. B.) calls Foxonians, should be guilty of such great tors as he (seems) to charge them with; not but it may be and is grant∣ed that some ignorant Man or Men may have asserted un∣sound Notions through their Ignorance; but what is that to the purpose, that he should charge the Ignorance of some par∣ticular Men, upon such a Body of People, both in England, Scotland, Ireland and America? Its not to be questioned but many hundreds in those Parts of the World, had a good re∣spect for G. F. so it cannot be well conjectured that such a num∣ber as they must be, should be guilty of the aforesaid Charge; and, I hope, none will be so rash as to judge, that they respe∣cted G. F. for any Weakness that he might be guilty of (no, it would be a great Mistake in any so to conclude); its not
to be doubted, but the wise and understanding Men among them, that he calls Foxonians, do hold and sincerely believe all the necessary Doctrins and Points thereof, that are depend∣ing upon the Christian Religion, notwithstanding F. B. hath published ten Articles (written by our Christian Friend George Keith) as if the Quakers did not hold the same, nor had Unity with G. K. in the said ten Articles, because F. B. ag∣gravates the Matter in these Words, viz. Who was perse∣cuted for his Christian Testimony by the Quakers in Pensil∣vania. Here I cannot but greatly blame F. B. for charging the Body of the People called Quakers in Pensilvania, his Charge being absolutely general (the word Quakers implies it to be such;) therefore, its inconsistent with sound Reason to think that this Body of People, which are contained in that Province, should be concerned in the Persecution of one poor Man (i. e. G. K.) no, he is greatly besides the Matter for charging the Quakers there. Its confessed, he might have laid his Charge, and prove it plain enough upon Sam. Jennings, Cook and Lloyd, and others, who are manifest to be but a Party or Faction of pretended Quakers, for they can be no otherwise; it being inconsistent with the Quakers Principle to be a Persecutor; as is mani∣fest to the World by our Friends of the yearly Meeting at Burlington, who have condemned 28 false Judges for their er∣roneous Judgment and Persecution, and we doubt not but many hundereds in Pensilvania as well as England and other Parts of the World are one with them in their just Judg∣ment and Condemnation; and its hereby declared if any are one with the 8 false Judges, they are likewise deemed to be guilty of their Evil; and, therefore, if any should so ap∣pear, they ought to be withstood, because they are greatly to be blamed. So now followeth a plain and candid Answer, in relation to the ten Articles, and a Condemnation of the Persecution of our worthy and well esteem'd Friend George Keith and others. First as to the 10 Articles, I answer, Many formerly in the years that are past through Ignorance and Weakness, did not then hold or believe all things in relation to the said 10 Arti∣cles as now worded. And for the farther satisfaction of any mo∣derate Enquirer, I do sincerely declare, in the behalf of all the Christian Quakers throughout the World, that they have Uni∣ty with the said 10 Articles, and are one with our Friend, G.K. the Author thereof, altho' there may be some among us that
do not nor cannot see clearly into all those things, by reason of the weakness of their Capacities; yet we agree so far in the main, that we dare not deny them (viz. the 10 Articles) especially the more Judicious among us; therefore, its well hoped, that if any one Man or Men should be found to deny any of the said Articles, through their Ignorance and Blind∣ness, that none will go about to charge their Blindness upon the Christian Quaker. Secondly, As to the Persecution of our Friend G. K. by those few pretended Quakers in America, they are hereby condemned for their unchristian Practice; and we deny Fellowship with them for their so doing, until they repent thereof and publickly condemn the same under their own Hands in writing, according to the request and judgment of our Friends and Brethren of the Yearly Meeting at Burlington in West-Jarsy; and we do declare we have living Unity and Fellowship with them in their said Judgment, and do hereby declare a Disunion with the Judg∣ment of that Party or Faction of the Yearly Meeting at Lon∣don; and according to the 10 Queries signed by R. Haway, they are in like manner declared to be partial in their Judg∣ment, their Judgment being wrong in Matter of Fact in di∣vers Respects, and contradictory to the Judgment of our Friends in America; for which cause the Christian Quaker denies their London Judgment, and have no more Unity with it, than we have of the Persecution of G. K. and others, which in plain Terms is none at all; neither with the con∣tention of F. B. and G. W. So desiring to desist at present, being in some measure eased of the conscientious Concern that was upon me, to write this small thing in Vindication of the despised Believers of Jesus of Nazareth, called Quakers. I recommend every one to the Grace of God in their own Hearts, which is able to keep and preserve them from the Strife of the Tongue and Pen. And as to the six Particu∣lars as F. B. charges the Quakers with denying, are owned by them, for the major part, viz. 1. The Christian Quakers own Jesus of Nazareth, who was born of the blessed Virgin Mary, to be the Christ of God, and the efficient Cause of Mans Salvation. 2. The Christian Quaker's Books are to testifie against Blasphemy and Wicked∣ness of all kinds, and to condemn Idolatry. 3. They own the Scriptures, and prefer them above all Writings extant, having a venerable Esteem for the same. 4. They own the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as his Baptism and the Supper,
desiring to be Baptized with his Spiritual Baptism (of which the Water was but an external Figure) and to partake of his Supper to the satisfaction of their hungry Souls, of which the material Bread and Wine was but an outward and visible Sign of the inward and spiritual Grace. . They (i. e. the Christian Quakers) value the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and wonderfully admire the love of the Father, in sending his only begotten Son in the fulness of time, for the resto∣ration of fallen Man. 6. They exalt the Sufferings of Christ Jesus above any Sufferings that can be inflicted upon sinful Man. Those that would know more of the Quakers Faith, we refer them to the first Part of a little Treatise, entituled, The Principles of Truth, written by our ancient and honour∣able Friend John Crocke. So here I shall make the End. Given forth and signed in behalf of the Christian Qua∣kers, by D. S. London, August the 7th. 1694. A Postscript, by way of Request. IT is hereby requested of all those that are Living, whose former or later Writings are in any sort defective, that they would write Explanations and Emendations upon them; as also upon those others that are defective, notwithstanding the Authors may be dead, whereby that which offends many will be removed out of the way; and in so doing, they will save others a Labour of doing it for them. Farewel. D. S. FINIS.
