S3459 13082247 97253
Andromana: OR THE MERCHANT'S WIFE. THE SCAENE, IBERIA. By J. S. LONDON. Printed for Iohn Bellinger, and are to be sold at his shop in Cliffords-Inn-lane in Fleetstreet, 1660.
Names of the Actors. EPhorbas, King of Iberia. Plangus, his Son. Eubulus, Three Lords, and Coun∣sellors to the King. Anamedes Three Lords, and Coun∣sellors to the King. Rinatus Three Lords, and Coun∣sellors to the King. Inophilus, Son to Rinatus, and friend to the Prince. Zopiro, Captains. Nicetes, Captains. Aramnes, Captains. Artesio, an informing Courtier. Andromana, a Merchant's wife. Libacer, her servant. Messenger. Captains, and Souldiers.
THE TRAGEDY OF ANDROMANA. Or, The fatal and deserved End of Disloyalty and Ambition. Actus I. Scaena I. Enter Nicetes. Aramnes. Nic. I Have observed it too, but the cause is As unknown to me as actions done in Countries Not found out yet. Ara. Some Wench, my life to a brasse Farthing. Nic. As like as may be: We Souldiers are all given that way; especially When our blood boils high, and pulses beat Alarums to Cupid's Battels; We'r apter To sally on a young flaming Girl, Then on an Enemy that braves it before our Trenches. Ara. I ask it not to know his privacies; For if his freedom doth not acquaint me with them, Let them be secret still—yet I could wish
An opportunity to tell him, a little circumspection Would be handsom, and set a gloss upon all. Times might be chosen of less publick notice: It looks so poorly in a Prince to be thus careless Of his own affairs: men do so talk on't — Here comes Inophilus; if any body knows, It must be he. Enter Inophilus. Ino. Your servant, Captains; saw you the Prince to day? Nic. Not we: we hop't to hear of him from you. Ino. 'Tis strange a man adorn'd with so much Wisdom, should on the sudden fall off from the Care of his own fame! I am his Friend, and so I know are you; but to speak plainly to you, He's grown my wonder now, as much as other mens. I that have found a sweetness in his company Beyond what ever Lovers dream of in a Mistris, That as he spoke, methought have smelt the air perfum'd; nor could have wish't a joy greater then living with him, next those of Heav'n, and those prefer'd the more, because I knew Plangus would be there. I say, even I of late am grown out of love with any thing that's Mortal▪ since I have found Plangus so far beneath, (I will not say my expectations) but the assurances all good men had of future gallantry. Hee's melancholly now, and hath thrown off the spirit which so well became him, and all that sweetness which bewitcht men's hearts is grown so rugged, so incompos'd to all commerce, men fear hee'l shortly quarrel with himself. Nay more, he doth not answer the fondness of his Father's love with half that Joy he us'd to do. Ara. 'Tis now about a Week I have observ'd this alteration; it shakes him like an Ague once in two dayes; but holds him lon∣ger then a fit oth' Gout: They whisper about the Court as if the King had chid him for it, and now at length found his thaunts. Ino. A poor discovery! Who might not find 'em out that would be so uncivil: I was about to follow him, but thought it an ignoble way, beneath the Name of Friendship, and so de∣sisted. About four dayes ago, meeting him ith' long Gallery, I
ask't him how he did; taking me by the hand, he wrung it, and after a sigh or two, told me, Not very well—But he had busi∣ness, and so we parted. I saw him not agen in twenty hours af∣ter; and then I askt him where he had been so long: He told me (as if he was ashamed to deny me such a poor request) I must not know; and when I told him, his often absence was observ'd. Is it, saith he? I cannot help it; but it shall no more be so; and at the last he stole away: Since when I saw him not. Nic. O this wicked Peace: Inophilus! Is there no hopes of Warre? To lye at home to see our Armours rust; We could keep the Prince sober and merry too, If he would but exchange his Court for a Camp. Ino. The King is old, and dotes upon his Son. Is loth to venter him to danger: Yet at this time there is occasion. The Argives have refus'd to pay their tribute, and are for cer∣tain preparing for Invasion: Some say they have got into Ibe∣ria already. Ara, Nay then there's hopes: If we could but find the Prince with a buff Coat again, I should be once more merry. Exeunt. SCAEN. II. Enter Ephorbas the King, Rinatus, Eubulus, Ana∣medes, three LORDS. Eph. See the Embassadors entertain'd With such an evenness, as should be us'd to men We neither fear nor love; let neither Too much obsequiousness teach them insolency, Nor any ill usage brand us with incivility: Stay you Rinatus. he sighs. Exeunt Eub. Anam. —Open thy bosom and receive torrents of sorrow, That lie like rocks of lead upon my soul; Honest Rinatus; experience bids me trust thee With a mighty secret. Thou canst not choose
But know, my son of late is much retired. I do not like that youth should be thus melancholy: Let them enjoy themselves, for age will come, Whose impotency will deny all pleasures. I do believe he loves me. Hah! Rin. Yes, doubtless, better then sickmen health, Or those who are pen'd up in darkness Love the Sun. Eph. I speak not as if I thought he did not; For thou know'st I humour him, afford him Liberty enough; I never chide him, nor express The least dislike of any action. Am not I a gentle father? Me thinks were I a son again, to such a father, I should not think he liv'd too long Shouldst thou, Rinatus? Rin. No more doth he, upon my soul: One command of yours would make him venter upon Lightning, nay almost make him act a sin, A thing he fears to name, Eph. I do believe thee: But yet, me thinks, should he be grown so impious, There might be found excuses. A Crown is a temptation; especially so near one: 'Tis not with Princes as with other Sons; and I am old too; Hath not my hand the palsie? Doth a Crown become gray hairs? To be a King might make some men forswear all conscience. But I know Plangus hath far nobler thoughts; And yet an Empire might excuse a Parricide. Rin Sir! sure you are a stranger to your son; For give me leave to say, your fears are vain: So great a virtue as the Princes, Cannot anticipate his hopes by any sin: Honour and duty have been acquainted with him now too long To be divorct. Some Sycophants there are (Such creatures still will haunt the Court) I know Love not the Prince, because he loves not them. Sir, shut your ears to them, they will betray you to your ruine. Jealousy's a disease should be below a King,
As that which seizeth on the basest spirits; Oh shut it from your soul, One may read in story What dire effects the fury hath brought forth: Kings make away their onely sons, and Princes their fa∣thers, And when they have done, they may dispair at leisure. Eph. I do not think Plangus hath plots, or on my Crown, Or me; he was virtuous alwaies, and is still, I hope: But why is he so much from Court then, and alone too? I do but ask the question. Rin. It can be no design, believe me, Sir; For Crowns are won by other courses. Aspirers must grow popular, be hedg'd about With their Confederates; then would he flatter you, Be jolly still, as if no melancholy thought were in him. A guilty conscience would then teach him policy, And he would seek to take suspition from all his carriages; Innocence makes him careless now. Eph. Thou hast almost resolv'd me; The tempest in my soul is almost laid, And wants but time to calm it. Youth hath its whimsies, nor are we To examine all their paths too strictly. We went awry our selves when we were young. Rin. Sir! Eph. Thou maist be gone, Rinatus, Exit. Rinat.
SCAEN. III. EPHORBAS, SOLUS. — The blessing of an honest servant! This Rinatus is truer unto me: He loves the King as well as I Ephorbas; And may I live but to reward him; For hee's too honest for a Court! Enter Artesio. How now Artesio? thy looks speak strong amazement; I am with child to hear the news: Prethee be quick in the deli∣very. Art. The Prince an't please your Majesty— Eph. What of him Artesio? Art. I have observ'd is much retir'd of late. Eph. So have I too; this is no News. Art. And I can whisper in your ear the cause. 'Twas Chance, no Policy of mine, betrayed his privacies: Ill Offices are not the Engines I desire to rise by; Only love to the young Prince makes me reveal them. Eph. Nay, nay, without apology; If it vvere Treason, it should not go dovvn the sooner For all the guilded preparation. Nor am I of so Feminine a humour, as To mistrust affection delivered bluntly: Plain meaning, should be plainly told; Bad Wares may have false lights; good can abide the day. Art. But I know The nature of my Office; Though Kings still hug suspition in their bosoms, They hate the causers; Love to hear secrets too, Yet the Revealers still fare the worse, Being either thought guilty of ends or vveakness. And so esteem'd by those they tell them to▪ Either unfit or dangerous to be trusted, Perhaps, Sir, vvhen the Prince and you are friends again,
You'l tell me, That had my love been real, I should have whispered the Princes errors to himself— Eph. Without a syllable of Prologue more— Or I shall verifie your fears. Art. In this brave City (take it as brief as may be) There lives a Beauty fit to command Them that command the World, And might be Alexanders Mistris, were he yet alive, And had added Empires as large as his desires: She's but a private Merchant's Wife; Yet the Prince is so far gravel'd in her affection, I fear.— Eph. Then there is hopes I may recall him: Love is a childish evil, though the effects are dangerous; A Princes Errors Grown publick, will be scandalous. Poor boy! perhaps the jealous Husband may commit a murder, I would not have him cut off so young: Love should be Princes recreation, not their business. What Physick must we give him for his cure? Art. I dare not counsel you; But in my poor judgement Some gentle Fatherly perswasions will work upon So good a nature. Eph. Could'st thou but possibly effect How I might take him napping? Art, That is beyond my skill: But I can shew you the House, and time He walks from hence in, which will be About an hour hence; for then her Husband Comes home from the Ryalto. Eph. Time will not tarry for a King; let's go. Exeunt.
SCAEN. IV. INOPHILUS. Ino. What is become of this young Prince? Or where Doth he bestow himself? Doth he walk invisible? Where have I been to look him? The Horses are in the Stables. His Page and I at home too, that us'd to be as inseperable Com∣panions. Enter Nicetus, Aramnes. Ram. Well met Gentlemen, where is the Hermit Plangus? Nic. We cannot tell, nor have we been to seek him. If at the Court, we should hear presently; if not, We might be too officious in his search, And our enquiry might make his absence but so much the more Notorious; and I'me confident he's well: His virtue guards him still from all Mischances. Ino. Though his company's the dearest thing I love▪ Yet for his good I could digest his absence, But that I doubt a mighty mischief might spring From this small Grain of indiscretion The King is old, and there are Knaves about the Court That (if he knew it not) would tell him so: And men conscious to themselves of a defiancy▪ Are still most jealous of a growing worth▪ Perhaps a thinking Father (for plodding is old age's sickness) May take notice of his Son's retirement, and misconstrue it so: Nothing is impossible— Heaven send it otherwise. Ara. This care becomes you Sir; but I dare swear 'tis need∣less: The King is but an ill dissembler; and had he but the least thought of such a thing, hee'd hide it less then the Sun conceals his brightness: Besides, a man as great Euphorbus is, whose rule of living hath been directed by the Line of Virtue, cannot mi∣strust that Vice in his own Son, of which himself was never
guilty: Had's younger years been tainted with inordinate de∣sires, or had his Crown been the effect of some audacious crime, perhaps his guilty Conscience might have mistrusted; but 'tis im∣possible where there is no guilt, to fear a punishment. Ino. You speak my hopes: But this for certain, Gentlemen, The King who was admired for his matchless sleeping, Whose night no noise disturb'd, and it was difficult To wake before his hour, sleeps but unquietly of late, Will start at Mid-night, and cry Plangus: Is greedy after News, and walks unevenly, And sometimes on the sudden looks behind him; and when One speaks to him, scarcely marks one syllable. Surely the mind of some distemper shakes His soul into this looseness. Enter Messenger. Mess. My Lord, the Prince desires To meet you half an hour hence i'th' Gallery. Ino. Me? Mess. Yes my Lord. Ino. I shall. Your Servant, Captains. All. Yours, my Lord. [Exeunt at several Doors.] SCAEN. V. PLANGUS, ANDROMANA. Pl. It cannot be so late. An. Believ't, the Sun is set, my Dear; And Candles have usurp't the Office of the day. Pl. Indeed methinks a certain mist Like darkness, hangs on my eye-lids. But too great lustre may undo the sight: A man may stare so long upon the Sun, that he May look his eyes out; and certainly tis so with me; I have so greedily swallowd thy light, That I have spoyl'd my own.
An. Why shouldst thou tempt me to my ruine thus▪ As if thy presence were less welcome to me, Then dy to one, who (tis so long ago the Sun hath forgot what light is▪ of thy presen makes me wish this absence, himself must suffer an Eclips, are still oyles to the brightest splendor: Some short departure will (like a river stopt) Make the current of our pleasures run The higher at our next Meeting Pl. Alas my Dearest! Tell those so, that know not what it is to part from Blessing; Bid not him surfeit to taste health's sweetness, That knows what 'tis to groan under a Disease. An. Then let us stand and out-face danger, you will have it so; despise report, And contemn scandals into nothing, Which vanish with the breath that utters 'um; Love is above these vanities. Should the innocent thing my Husband take thee here, He could not spight me but by growing jealous; And Jealousies black effect would be a cloyster Perhaps to kill me too: But that's impossible, I cannot dye so long as Plangus loves me: Yet say this piece of Earth should play the Coward, And fall at some unlucky stroake, Love would transport my better half To its Center, Plangus heart, and I should live in him. But Sir, you have a Fame to loose, which should be A Princes onely care and darling, Which should have an eternity beyond his life: If he should take that from you, I should be kill'd indeed▪ Pl. Why dost thou use these Arguments to bid me go, Yet chain me to thy tongue, while the Angel-like Musick of thy voice entring my thirsty ears, Charms up my fears to immobility. Tis more impossible for me to leave thee,
Then for this carkass to quait away its grave-stone, When it lyes destitute of a soul to informe it. Marriners might with farre greater ease Hear whole sholes of Syrens singing, And not leap out to their destruction; Then I forsake so dangerous a sweetnesse. Andr. I will be dumb then. Pla. I will be deaf first. I've thought a way now, I'le run from hence and leave my soul behinde me: It shall be so: and yet it shall not neither; What shall a husband banish a Prince his house for fear? A husband? 'tis but an aery title, I will command there shall be no such thing, And then Andromana is mine, or his, or any man's Shee will her self. These Ceremonies Fetter the world, and I was born to free it. Shall man, that noble creature, be afraid of words, Things himself made? Shall sounds, a thing of seven small letters, give Check to a Princes will? An. Did you not promise me, dear Sir? Have you not sworn too, you would not stay beyond the time? Have Oaths no more validity with Princes? Let me not think so. Pla. Come, I will goe, thou shall not ask in vain. But let us kisse at parting, it may be our last perhaps. — I cannot now move one foot, though all the Furies Should whip me forward with their snakes. Woman thou stol'st my heart, just now thou stol'st it. A cannon bullet might have kiss't my lips And left me as much life. The King having listned comes in softly. — Are we betrayd? What art, Speak, or resolve to dye. K. A well-wisher of the Prince. Pl. The King?—It cannot be! He starts. K. Though thou hast thrown all nature off, I cannot what's my duty. Ungratious boy, had'st been the off-spring of a sinfull-bed,
Thou might'st have claym'd Adultery as inheritance; Lust would have been thy kinsman, and what enormity Thy looser life could have been guilty of, Had found excuse in an unnatural conception. Prethee hereafter seek another father: Ephorbas cannot call him son that makes lust his diety. Had I but knowne. —(but we are hoodwink't still To all mischances) I should have had a son, That would make it his study, to embrace corruption, And take delight in unlawfull sheetes, I would have hugg'd a Monster in mine arms Before thy mother—good O heavens! What will this world come to at last! When Princes that should be the patterns of all virtue Lead up the dance to vice. What shall we call our owne, when our owne wives Banish their faith, and prove false to us. Have I with so much care promis,d my self So pleasing a Spring of comfort? and are all Those blossoms impt, and buds burnt up by the fire Of lust and sin!— Have I thus long labored against The billowes, that did oppose my growing hopes? And must I perish in the havens mouth? No gulfe but this to bedevour'd in? Could not you th's inclination, find out Another rock to split it selfe upon? Had'st thou hugg'd drunkennesse, the wit or mirth Of company might have evcus'd it. Prodigality had beene a sin A Prince might have beene proud in, compar'd to this. Or had thy greener yeares incited the to treason And atteempt a doubting father's crown It had beene a noble vece. Ambition runs through the veines of princes. It brings forth acts great as themselves and it. Spurs on to honour, and resolves great things. But this, this Leachery is such a thing
Sin is to brave a name for', A prince; I might say my son (But let that passe) and dare to show Himself to nought but darknesse, & black chambers Whose motions like some planet Are all excentrick, not two houres together In his owne sphere, the court. But I am tame to talke thus; Be gone with as much speed As a coward would auoyd his death. And never more presume to looke upon this woman, this whore. Thou losest both thy eyes and me else. Plangus is going out, but comes again. Pl. Sir, the reverence that I ow my father, And the injury I have done this Gentlewoman Had charmed me up to silence but I must Speak something for her honour: When I have done, command me to the Altar, Whilst (I confesse) you tainted me with sin, I did applaud you and condemn my selfe; It look't like a fathers care.—But when You us'd that tearm of whore to her that stands there, I would have given ten thousand Kingdomes You had had no more relation to me, Then hath the Northerne to the Southerne pole. I should have flown to my revenge swifter then lightning, But I forbeare, and pray imagine not what I had done. K. Upon my life shee is very handsome. aside. Pl. To be a whore is more unknowne to her Then what is done in the Antipodes; She is so pure she cannot think a sin Nor ever heard the Name to understand it. K. No doubt these private meetings Were to read her moral lectures, and teach her Chastity. Pl. Nay, give me leave Sir, I Do not say my addresses have been all so virtuous; For whatsoever base desires a flaming beauty Could kindle in a heart, were all alive in me; And prompted me to seek some case by quenching:
Burnings hotter then Aetna. Imagine but a man that had drunk Mercury, And had a fire within his Bones; Whose blood was hotter then the melted Ore, If he should wish for drink, nay steal it too Could you condemn him? Ep. Marry'd do they say? aside. Pl. I Did endure a heat S as could not cool. It would have kill'd a Salamander. Then taught both impudence and wit: I singled out my foe, used all the arts That love could thinke upon, and in the end Found a most absolute repulse. K Well, Plangus, youth excuses, the first fault, But a relapse exceeds all pardon. Ex. King. Pl. SCAENA. VI. Manet ANDROMANA. An. Curst be old age, and he that first number'd fourscore: What Devil has betray'd us both to a doating fool? Did I but now promise my selfe what hopes Ambitious thoughts could reach; and shall I sink Down to my first foundation without the pleasure of A Tasted greatnesse. Death and disgrace, I Dare provoke the utmost of your malice. After the sweetnesse of some sharp revenge. Libacer. Madam, my Master. Enter servant in haste. An. You may both hang together. Lib. Why this it is, if a man should kill his father For you, be should be thus rewarded as soon as Your turns served, I may be hang'd that did it. An. Since he is dead; How was it done? Lib. VVhy nothing; onely as he was taking water at the Ryalto, his foot slipt a little, and he came tumbling in the Sea; whence he was taken up, but not alive.
An. Heav'n prospers not these courses, I see it plainly, let them be acted with as much closeness, Or to what end soever, they never thrive. Libacer, We are undone, undone; the King hath found His Son here, and I have lost him to eternity. Lib. You women are the shallowest creatures; You never look beyond the present▪ Rome was not built in one day, Madam; Greatness is never sweet that comes too easily. Should Plangus be a Fool now, and obey his Father: 'Pox o' this vertue, it spoyls most men living. We have hopes yet; Revenge is something, And if my old Trade fail not, Princes are mortal as well as other men; Yet my soul inspires me with half a confidence That Leon hath not dy'd in vain. I use to see as far into a mischief as another: I'le go to him, and if I bring him not within this half hour, As hot and eager on the scent as e're he was, Take me and hang me at my coming home. Lib. Madam, here is As he is going out he meets Artesio. a Messenger from Court. An. If from thence, I may be bold to ask, How Plangus the noblest Prince alive doth? Art. Madam, as well as Souldiers can That are sick for honour, I suppose by this time H'ath left the Court, and is gone in quest for glory, Which he intends to ravish from young Argoe's brow, The valiant Leader of the Argive's Army. An. I'me confident then Sir, your business is not to me, If any body else hath sent you; Sir, be pleas'd to spare the message, And tell them, I neither have learnt the trick Oth' Court, nor yet intend it; I want no new Gowns, And have heard men forswear themselves In better language, and to better purpose Then gaining of a Lady's honour. Art. Madam, My business is from the King, Who doth intreat you would be pleas'd to bless the Court,
This afternoon with your fair presence, And bring an answer, I must not stay for one. Exit Art. An. Now we do see an end of all our mischiefs; The Prince is gone from Court, and the King hath sent for us; Doth not the name strike terrour to thy curdling blood. Lib. No by my troth not at all, as far as I see You're better then you were. Ile lay my life the old man Would turn Gamester: Take my counsel, play deep Or not at all: Not an Ace under a Kingdome. Your Grace I hope will remember your poor friends. An. If I do finde any such thing, Let me alone to melt his Ice, Go get me mourning with all hast. Exit Lib. Let froward Fortune do her worst, I shall Create my greatness, or attempting fall: And when I fall I will deserve my ruine. Exit. ACT II. SCAENA 1. Plangus, Nicetes, Aramnes. Ni. WHat Sir, And are you Melancholy When fate hath showr'd a happiness so unexpected on us? This ugly sneaking peace is the Souldiers rock, He splits his fortunes on. Bawdry's a vertue to't. P—o' these Beaver-hats they make ones head ake Worse then a Cap of steel, and bear not off a knock The tenth part so well. Pl. You're mad for fighting, Gentlemen, And we shall have enough of it. The Argives fifty thousand strong, Have like a whirlwind born down all before 'um; And I with 13000. that remain Yet undisbanded of the last expedition, Have command to fight that multitude
Of old tough Souldiers: while ours In a month or two won't have pickt up that valour That in this idle time hath slipt from 'um; They have forgot what noise a Musket makes, And start if they but hear a Drum; Are these fellows either enow or fit, On whom a Kingdome's safety should be built: Indeed were they to encounter some Mistress, Or storm a Brothel-house, perhaps they'd venture; But for my part, I yeeld; nor will I oppose my Father: If he sees good we perish, I am already sacrifiz'd▪ Yet our enemies shall dearly purchase Their Victory. Pray look to your charge, Nicetes, and you Aramnes with all care and speed▪ and when you come Into the field; then let me see this countenance, That frowning smile, and I shall like it. I love a man runs laughing upon death; But we lose time in talk. Ex. Nic. Aram. Enter Inophilus. SCAENA 2. Ino. Your servant Captains. Sir, pray a word with you. Pl. Prethee be short, Inophilus, thou knowst my business: Ino. Sir, I am mad to see your tameness: A man bound up by Magick is not so still as you, Nothing was ever precipitated thus, And yet refus'd to see its ruine. Pl Thou art tedious, I shal not tarry. Ino. You are made General. Pl. I know it: Ino. Against the Argives. Pl. So. Ino. With 13000 men, no more Sir. Pl. I am glad on't, the honour is the greater: Ino. The danger is the greater; You will be kill'd sir, And lose your Army. Pl. Is this all, I care not. Ino. But so do I, and so do all your friends.
I smell a Rat sir, there's jugling in this business, I am as confident of it as I am alive. The King might within this twenty four hours Have had peace on fair conditions. (Pl. But dishonourable) In. And would not. On a sudden useth the Ambassadors scurvily And provokes the Argives, yet himself in no posture Of defence. Pl. But— Ino. Pray give me leave sir, After this you are on a sudden created General, And packt away with a crowd of unhewn fellows, Whose courage hangs as loose about them As a sluts petticoats. Sir, he had other spirits In the Court created for such perils; Excuse me, I know you fear not to meet destruction, But where men are sure to perish, ' were well the persons were of less concernment. He might have let you stay'd till you had gather'd An Army fit for your Command, and sent Some petty things upon this expedition, Whose loss would have been nothing, and of whom It might have been recorded in our story As an honour, that they dyed Monuments Of the Kings folly. But let that pass; You'l say perhaps, you only have a spirit Fit for such undertakings — I wish you had not, Your want then would not be half so grievous. But heres the prodigy, you must fight them presently. Come, 'tis a project put into the Kings head By some who have a plot on you and him. Pl. It may be so, Imphilus, and I beleeve All this is true you tell me, and it might startle A man were less resolvd then I. But danger and I have been too long acquainted To shun a meeting now; I am engag'd, And cannot any wayes come off with reputation. Hadst told me this before, perhaps I might have thought on't: And yet I should not neither. If the King thinks I am grown dangerous,
Tis all one to me which way he takes me from his fears, He could not do it handsomer then thus; It makes less noise now.— But come, I must not fear such things, Inophilus: The King hath more vertue and honour then To do these actions, fit only for guilty souls; Nor must I fear when my Inophilus sights by me. Ino. Troth Sir, for all your complement, If you have no valour but what ows it self to my company, Your'e like to make cold breakfast of your enemies: I have other business then to throw away My life, when there is so much odds against it: Ile stay at home, and pray for you, that's all Sir. Pl. How! wilt not go then, Inophilus? Ino. The time hath been I thought it better sport To bustle through a bristly grove of Pikes. When I have courted rugged danger with Hotter desires then handsome faces, And thought no women half so beautiful As bloody gaping wounds: But sir, to go and cast away my self now, Would not be gallant, nor an action worth my envy: 'Tis weakness to make those that seek My ruine, laugh at my folly with jaws stretcht wider Then the Gulph that swallows us. I know when honour calls me, and when treason Counterfeits her voice. Pl. Well, stay at home and freeze, And lose all sense of glory in a Mistress arms. Go perish tamely, drunk with sin and peace, And mayst thou, since thou darest not dye with them, Out-live thy noble friends. Ino. I thank you Sir, but I cannot be angry.
SCAENA 3. Nicetes, Aramnes, with some Captains and Souldiers. Ni. Yonder's the bones oth' Army rally'd up together, But they look' rather as if they came home From being soundly beaten. Methinks such tatter'd Rogues should never conquer, Victory would look so scurvily among 'um, They'd so be-dawb her if she wore clean linnen. Cap. Sir, We wear as sound hearts in these torn breeches As ere a Courtier of them all. We are not afraid of spoyling our hands for want Of gloves, nor need we Almond butter when we go to bed. And though my Lieutenant is pleas'd to be a little merry, You shall see us dye as handsomely in these old cloaths As those wear better, and become our wounds as well, And perhaps smell as sweet when we are rotten. Pl. We hope it, Captains and Fellow souldiers, We are proud of this occasion to try your valours, You shal go no farther then your Prince doth, I'le be no bringer up of Rears. Let not the number of the Foe affright you, The more they are, the more wil the honour be. The Lion scorns to prey upon a Hare, Nor is the blinking Taper fit to try Eagles eyes; The weight of glory makes our danger light, When victory comes easily tis half a shame Souldiers shout, and exeunt. To conquer. Ino. Ile stay at home and grieve, that so many Daring souls should dye on such advantage. Ino. exit. SCAENA 4. King Solus. Her husband's dead too: Fates let me dye, I am too happy to remain long thus
Without a ruine great as the height I fell from▪ Plangus was my only obstacle, but him I have Remov'd: But love commanded, His presence would have countermanded all attempts, I need not fear his Magick at this distance. His looks and actions were one entire enchantment, and Powerful over a Lady's heart. I sent for her, but she's not come yet. Who waits without? Enter Artesio. There's a mourning Lady sir Would speak with the King. K. Admit her, and be gone. Enter to him Andromana in mourning, with a hood over her face, which she throws up when she sees the King. SCAENA 5. K. So riseth Phaebus from the gloomy night, (While pale-fac't Dian maketh hast to hide Her borrowed glory in some neighbouring cloud, Envying the beauty of the new born day) When darkness crouds into the other world. Madam, Why kneel you? She kneels. You, at whose name Monarchs themselves might tremble, And mortals bow with reverence great as they pay to Altars: Scepters should break in peeces and adore you; At whose sight the Sun and Moon should blush themselves To blood and darkness, and falling from their sphere Brush the audacious world to Atomes, for daring To behold a lustre so much greater then their own. An. Sir, give me leave to wonder What sin I have committed which calling Down the vengeance of the gods, Hath made me author of all this blasphemy. Sir, I beseech your Majesty if you are angry with your creature, Speak some cruel word and blast me.
Scorn me not into the other world, Where I have sins enow of my own to blush for, And shall not need to dye his cheeks for other mens offences. K. Lady, though Parthian darts are not so sharp As are those killing words, yet that breath which Utters them, is sweeter then the morning dew. Ile be dumb, for praises cannot adde, but rather Diminish Andromana's worth. An. I wonder now no longer at this language, 'Tis such as Kings are bred in; But I beseech you Sir, if there be ought You will command your servant; if Andromana Must do or suffer any thing for great Euphorbas, Lay by your self a minute, and remember A Merchant's wife must hear you▪ K. Your husband Leon's dead, I hear Lady. She weeps. Nay spare those Pearls, Madam, cast not away Such treasure upon the memory of one Who, if the best of men, deserves them not. Come, come, forget these sorrows Lady, And wear not mourning weeds before the world's destruction; Hide not those fair eyes, whose splendor would enrich Our Court: Madam, though none there be in Court Can merit such a beauty, yet I my self Have taken pains to search a husband for you; What think you of my self? An. Great Sir, your care is like your self, all noble, But suits with me no better Then Phaebus horses did with Phaeton, Ruin'd the world and him: first, Sir, You do debase you self to honour her, whose worth Is less considerable then Lovers oaths: My husband's ashes are scarce cold yet, And would your Majesty have me forsake my honour, And his memory so soon? I have not payd oblations due to his ashes yet. K. You complement away the worth we know you have Andromana,
What say you to the Prince? An. I say he is the the Prince, and great Ephorbas son, He's Plangus, and if you think there yet remains A title that can be either better or greater, I think him worthy of it. K. But do'st think him worthy Andromana? An. O heavens! Is Iove worth heaven, Or doth the Sun deserve to be a light To all the world, can vertue deserve honour? Or labour, riches: Can Gods merit Altars? It might have been a puzling question To them whose ears have not been blest with Plangus worth. But this 'tis so below him. K. But say he loves thee▪ An. I dare not say so: For when I think a Prince pretends to such poor things As I am, I feel an Ice run through my veines, And my blood curdles into flakes of snow, And bids me fear him, not with an awe or reverence But as a spotted sinful thing which is the worse For being great. Tis such a fear as I Should conceive against an armed ravisher. K. These things may be expected Lady, I confess From blood that boyls in flames hot as the Sun In scorching Libra, or sturdy Hercules When he unmayden'd fifty in one night; But from a man whose years have tam'd those vices. Whose love is dotage, and not lust, Who doth adore a handsome vertue, and payes His vowes to't, you should have other hopes. Plangus is young, a Souldier, and by consequence Something which youth excuses. But Ephorbas Hath left those toyes behinde him when he shook off his youth. And. Sir, Now my fears are out. O virtue! are there just powers which men adore, And throw away their prayers upon, That lend their eyes to humane actions, or was the name Of heaven invented to still petty sinners? Sir, sure I am mistaken
You are not great Ephorbas Sir, whose virtue Is a Theam of wonder to all neighbour Nations; Pray help me to him, I would see that Angel; The Kingdom's honour, and good men's Sanctuary. But if you are the man, whom I have pray'd for Oftner then I have slept; pray Sir, belye not A vertue which I have hitherto admired. K. I see you are a stranger, Lady (give me leave to say so) To Ephorbas; But if a Lady of thy melting years Can love this grayness, I vow my Scepter, Throne, Kingdome, and my self are thine; Tha'rt fit to be a Queen. She starts back. An. A Queen! Sir, have your subjects anger'd you? Have they rebell▪d, or done some sin that wants a name? He cleave to th' pavement till I have begg'd a vengeance Great as their crime; but this you mention Is a punishment, which your subjects must Study years to curse you for; No sin deserves it. You would blinde my eyes with throwing gold befor'um, Or set me up so high on the steep pinacle Of honour's Temple, that you would have me not be able To look down on my own simplicity. You can create me great, I know Sir, but good you cannot; You might compel, entice me too perhaps to sin; But can you allay a gnawing conscience, Or binde up bleeding reputation: I did never hear that physick could afford A remedy for a wounded honour. Ep. Th'art a Fool, Andromana▪ You must be mine, Consider on't. An. Sir, you may command your vassail, K: That's kindely said. And. But — I humbly take my leave, Goodness protect you.
SCAENA 6. Enter to him, Rinatus, Eubulus, and Aramedes. Eph. Wait on that Lady forth. Rin. Would there were not a woman in the world So we had our Prince again. Sir, are you mad? or have forgot you are a father? You have undone us all. Eph. Why what's the matter? Rin. O Sir, the Prince. Eph. He is not dead, Rinatus, is he? Rin. Sir, If he be, 'tis you have murd'red him: Was it for this you were so jealous tother day? May my Inophilus never pretend to virtue, Ile teach him a more thriving art. Come to the window a little Sir, and hear How the good people curse you; as cold weather As it is, some are so hard at it they sweat again. Eph. Prethee unriddle; hast thou drunk Hemlock Since I saw thee last? Rin. I would not be in my wits for any thing i'th world, My grief would kill me if I were; He's mad that will speak sense or reason, Now you have thrown away our Prince thus, Whose innocence was clearer then his own eyes: Can you think how you have murdred so much vertue, And not blush your self to death? Eph. I think indeed I sent him General against the Argives, But 'twas his own desire. Rin. 'Twas not his own desire Sir, to have but 13000 men, Sir was it? Was that Army fit to oppose great Argo? There came a Messenger just now, that saw the Prince Not sixteen miles from hence (for thither is the Foe marcht) Draw up his men to engage the enemy. Eph. For heaven's sake Rinatus, post him back again, Bid him retreat; command my son from me,
Not to go on till greater forces follovv him, If it be possible redeem the error; I'de give my Kingdom, life, or any thing It vvere to do agen. Rin. I'me glad to see this novv, heaven send it ben't too late. Eph. Nay stand not prating. A horn within. Rin. Tis from the Army Sir, O heaven I fear; Enter Mess. Eph. If from the Army, prethee put on better looks. Mess. Your son, nay more, your dying son, Commanded me to bring you word, He dy'd true to his honour, King, and Country-men, Nor let me stay to see the brightest lamp go out That ever grac't this orb. The King faints. Rin. O heaven, the King! vvhy this is worse Sir Then the other, let not us lose you both. Eph. Let me but hear how twas he made his Exit, And then my glass is run, I will not live One minute longer. Mess. Sir, thus it was— Tis scarce three hours ago since the brave Plangus marcht from axa with an Army, Whose souls were richer then their cloaths by far, Though their valour had put on all the bravery That Souldiers ever vvore. The Prince vvhose presence Breath'd nevv fire into these flaming spirits, Resolv'd to meet the enemy vvith his handful, And vvith a vvinged speed, fell dovvn to the Elean Straights, Determining there to try it with him. His Souldiers also true sons of War, Conteming so great odds, when victory and their Country Was to crown the Conquerors, whetted Their eager valours with impatient expectation of the enemy, who trusting to his multitude came on Wing'd both with scorn and anger, to see that paucity Should dare dispute victory against their odds. Plangus who though he saw, yet could not fear Destruction, and scorn'd to avoid it When the King commanded him to meet it,
Marshal'd his Army to the best advantage, And having given Zopiro the left wing, The body to Evarness, himself chose out the right, Because he would be opposite to Argo. And keeping a reserve as great as could be hop't for From so small a company not above five hundred men, He gave the command of them to Zenon, Who with his fellows took it ill they should be so long idle, And had not the honour to be thought worthy To dye with the most forward, and would no question have Refus'd the charge; but that the smiling Prince Promis'd them they should have time to dye. Words here were needless nor had he time to use them. Rin. What was Inophilus idle all this while? Mess. I only heard the Prince wish just as He spur'd his horse against the valiant Argo, He had had fewer by a thousand men So he had Inophilus. Rin. O trayterous boy! Mess. The Prince and Argo met; and like two mighty Tydes Encountred. Here death put on her sable Livery, And the two Gallants whose valour animated each Army, Bandyed a long time with equal force, 'Till at last great Argo fell; and on a sudden Multitudes of men accompani'd him, so that The wing went presently to rout and execution. Zopiro also, and Evarnes having slain Their opposite leaders, breath death and destruction To their reeling Foes. Thus flusht with victory, and blood the Iberians, Revel'd through the flying field 'till there came on The enemies reserve of twenty thousand men, Who fresh and lusty, grinded their teeth for anger At their fellows overthrow, and powring on Our weary Souldiers, turn'd the stream of victory. But the Princes valour, and good fortune soon Overcame this opposition, and having rallied his broken
Troops, went to relieve his friends who had far'd worse▪ When presently he saw Evarness who had pil'd up enemies About him, as an Obelisk of his own death and victory, Fall bleeding at his foot, and having kiss't it With his dying lips, intreated him to save Himself for a more happy day, and dyed. 'Twas not long after the gallant Zenon (Who had performed that day deeds of eternal fame, And with his few spight of opposition, thrice charg'd And routed some thousands of the enemy) Expir'd, which when the Prince beheld, Weeping for anger, he flew among'st his enemies, Sustain'd only by the greatness of his courage, For blood and strength had both forsook him; He spent that spark of life was left in him, In slaughter and revenge, when leaning on his weapons point That dropt with blood as fast as he, He then conjur'd me with all speed only to tell the King. I saw him dye worthy of his father, and himself. A horn without, Eph. O heaven! what means these acclamations? A shout, What do the Iberians welcome their bloody A shout again Conqueror▪ with so much joy. SCAENA. 7. Enter to them Plangus, Inophilus, Zopiro, Captains. Eph. Oh! Oh! He faints. Rin. O cowardly boy, for that base word includes All baseness; doth not shame kill thee, Or fear chill thy dastard blood to an ice, At sight of that most noble injur▪d ghost? 'Tis well, dear Plangus (if thy Divinity deserve not A more lasting name) that thou art come To take revenge on that most traiterous son, In's Father's presence, who detests his baseness More then thy self can do.— Pl. Excuse us dear Renatus,
That wonder froze us to such a silence, If when we expected such a welcome As had that Roman son whose mother Dy'd for joy to see him, we found so cold An entertainment, something made us look't upon So ike an inconvenience, that we could not But put on some small amazement. Eph. And do I hear thee speak agen, And see thee, or only dream a happiness, Whose reality stars, and my Genius deny me? Or art thou Plangus Angel come to rowse Me from despair. Pl. Sir, Pray beleeve it; and be not backward In th'entertainment of these Souldiers, if You esteem it a happiness; In a word, you are a Conqueror: And the audacious Argive have paid their Lives as sacrifices to your offended sword. Eph. A messenger of comfort to a despairing Lover Is a less acceptable thing, then this thy presence, If what you fellow told me were untruth, Thy welcome sight hath amply made amends For those tormenting fears he put me to▪ But if it were not, let me know what chance redeem'd you. Pl. If you have hear'd how things then went When I sent away that Messenger.— Eph. Yes, I have heard it: Pl. Then know when death and our own fates Had sworn our ruine, and wee like some strong wall that Long resists the iron vomits of the flaming Cannon, At last shakes it self into a dreadful ruine To those who throw it down; so had the Iberians With valour great as the cause they fought for Strove with a noble envy; who should at first Out-go his fellow in slaughtering the Argives; At last oppress'd with multitude and toyl, We sunk under the unequal burden; Then was our emulation chang'd, and who before
Strove to out-do each other, now eagerly contended To run the race of death first. Sir, there it was I (and many other braver Captains) fell, Being one wound from head to foot. O then it was Inophilus came in With about twenty other Gallants, and with what speed The nimble lightning flyes from East to West Redeem'd this bleeding trunk, which The insulting Argive had encompas't Blown up with victory and pride; He with a gallantry like none but great Inophilus, Being bravely backt by his own Souldiers, Whose actions spoke them more then men, Had not Inophilus been by, redeem'd the honour Of a bleeding day. And thus were our troops As little now as their valour great Enrich'd with victory, blood, and Jewels, of which The opposite Army wanted no store, Returnd with the renown of an atchievement As full of glory and honour to the Conquerors As ruine to the Argives, Ino. My Liedge— Had this action, and my merit been so great As our Prince would make it, I then might Own it, and expect reward.— But it was so small, so much below my duty, That I must upon my knees beg pardon That I came no sooner. Eph. This is a prodigy beyond what ever yet Was wrote in story. Inophilus, we have been too backward In cherishing thy growing vertue, we will Hereafter mend it And, dear Rinatus, be proud of thy brave son, And let the people honour the remaining Army, We shall esteem it as a favour done to us; We have a largess for your valours Captains, You have not fought in vain.
This day let our Court put on its greatest jollity, And let none wear a discontented brow▪ For where a frown is writ, vvee'l think it reason To say, that face hath Characters of treason. Exeunt. ACT. III. SCAENA 1. Enter Plangus and Inophilus talking to him. Ino. BUt Sir, when you consider she's a woman— Pl. O dear Inophilus! Let earth and heav'n forget, there are such things; Or if they ever name them, let it be with a curse Heavy as are the ills they act; a Mandrakes note Would ring a better peal of Musick In my ears, then those two syllables pronounc't agen▪ Ino. Pray Sir, put off this humour, This peevish Pet, and reason tamely; Sir, you Have lost a Wench, and will you therefore lose Your self too? Hear me but patiently a word or two. Pl. Prethee go teach the Gally-slaves that word, Things that dare own no thought beyond their chains, And stand in fear of whipping, and wanting bread: Bid them be tame and patient that fry in Sulphur, 'Tis a word I have forsworn to know the meaning of, Or if I must, 'tis but to shun it, and hate it more. Oh! were thy wrongs as great as mine, Inophilus, Or didst thou love me half so well as thou dost Plangus, Thou would'st instill into me the poyson of revenge, And puff me up with thought of vengeance, Till I did burst, and like a breaking cloud Spread a contagion on those have injur'd me. Ino. Why this were handsome in some Country-fellow, Whose soul is dirty As the thing he's mad for;
'Twere pretty in a Lady that had lost her Dog, But— Pl. I know what thou wouldst say, But for Plangus: Oh tis for none but him to be so. Those that have injur'd me are persons I once held dearer then my eyes, But how much Greater was my love, so much the more is the offence; Wounds from our friends are deepest. Had any but my father—And yet me thinks That name should have protected me. Or was it made only to secure offenders? My life was his, he gave it me, my honour too I could have parted with; but 'las my love Was none of mine, no more then vows made to a Deity, And not performd — And for that creature, Who must be lost for ills through which I must make way to my revenge, Had she betrayd my honour to any thing But him that gave me being, She had made me half amends, in that my way To vengeance had been open; Now I am spurr'd Forward to revenge by fury, and yet Held in by the rein of a foolish piety, That doth no man good but them that use it not: Tis like the Misers Idoll, it yeelded him no gold Till he had broke the head off. Nay, Inophilus, one secret more, And the horror of it blow thee from earth to heaven, Where there are no such things as women, Twill turn thy soul the inside outside outward. I cannot get it out. Prethee what is't Inophilus? Ino. Alas! I know not, Sir. Pl Do but imagine the worst of ills Earth ever groan'd under; a sin nothing but woman, Nay such a woman as Andromana durst think on; And it is that. Ino. How revenge transports you! Princes have lost their Mistresses before,
Nay, and to those have not such right to them As hath Ephorbas to what Plangus hath; Who could command her, if not Ephorbas. Pl. But I have — Oh Inophilus — I burst — Yet it will out — dost thou not see it here Unbuttons his doubles. Oh I have known Andromana as Ephorbas did last night.— Ino. Why Sir, the sin done by your Father is not yours If you could not help it. — Pl. Why there it is: Tis that which gnaws me here; But I swore By all the gods that she vvas as innocent From my unclean imbraces, as is The new faln Snow, or Ermines that will meet Ten deaths before one spot: I made my father think The thoughts of Angels were less innocent then she. No it was I betray'd him; his vertue was too great, Not to have suspected it. How do I look Inophilus. In. Like some blest man that griev'd for other sins, And could out of a good nature part with half His own whiteness to purge the others stains. Pl. Now thou sooth'st, and like some flattering glass Presents me to advantage. I am in short, One born to make Iberia unhappy. Had I as black a face as is my soul, You'd finde in respect of it Aegyptians were snow white. Me thinks I hear heaven tell me I am slow, And it is time I had begun revenge. Ephorbas has done him wrong who lov'd him More then heaven or his happiness, and would Have run out of the world to have left him free, What ever he would lay claim to but Andromana; Nay she also had been his, so't could have been without a sin, But she knew the sin she acted, and yet did it, And lives free from the stroke of thunder.
Is there such such a thing as heaven, or such a one As Justice dwells there? and can I ask the question? O the tameness of a conscience loaded with sin! Which reasons and talks when it should do. But I will be reveng'd, and thus I begin, Inophilus, He draws. Be sure when I am dead to meet my ghost, And do as that instructs thee; 'twill tell all the particulars Of my revenge, who must dye first, who last, and What way too; I have my lesson perfect. He leans the pummel on the ground to fall on it. Inoph. kicks it by with his foot. Ino. Is this the revenge befits great Plangus? Pl. Had this been done two dayes ago — Thou durst as well have met the lightning Naked, as have oppos'd my will thus. Ino. Hear me. He draws. Ask me no questions, nor answer me, — or if you do, By heav'n I'le never speak more. It is revenge you'd have, and tis a great one, a very noble one To kill your self▪ Be confident your greatest foes wish nothing more When after ages come to hear your story, What will they say? Just as they did of Cato, He durst not look great Caesar in the face; So Plangus was afraid and dyed: A very pretty story, and much to a man's credit; For shame, dear Plangus (let friendship use that title) Shew your great soul the world beleeves you're the Master of (And I dare swear you are) in this action. Nay rally up your self, and fight it stoutly, Shake from your minde revenge, and having lay'd That passion by, put on that vertue The world admires in you, 'tis now the time to shew it: The Sun broke from a cloud doubles his light, And fire the more resisted flames more bright. Andromana has injur'd you scorn her therefore, And shew she had done nothing; I'de not do her the favour To have one thought for her, or could be troubled At that she did, — As for your father, Sir, Besides the tye of nature, he knows not he hath wrong'd you:
Or if he doth, tis love that caus'd him; a word that once Made an excuse with Plangus for what offence soever. Pl. Thou hast wrought upon me, And I am resolv'd to live a day or two more: But if I like it not — Well, I will go to try to sleep a little — perhaps that may— I'me strangely Melancholy — prethee lye down by me Inophilus, I'me safe while in thy company. Exeunt. SCAENA 2. Enter Plangus as from sleep. Pl. Lord! how this spirit of revenge still haunts me, And tempts me with such promis'd opportunity, And magnifies my injuries▪ Sometimes it calls me Coward, and tells me, Conscience in Princes who are injur'd like my self, Is but an excuse they finde for that is in truth Poorness of spirit; or something baser; It tells me tis a sin to be good when all the world is bad. It makes me look upon my self, whilst wearing This garb of vertue, like some old Antiquary, In cloaths that are out of fashion in Iberia. But I will not yeeld to it, I know it is a greater glory to a mans self (and he that courts opinion, Is of a vulgar spirit) to disobey then satisfie An appetite which I know is sinful. Good heaven guard me, how am I tempted. Enter Androm. To put on my former temper, but thus I fling it from me. Throws away his sword. SCAENA 3. And. Why how now Prince? If you part with your darling so easily, There is small hopes but you have thrown all love behind you.
Pl. Heaven, how she's alter'd! I that once swore, Iove from the well-tun'd sphere Ne're heard such harmony as I did, when she spake; Me thinks I can now in comparison of her voice Count Scritch-owls musick, or the croaking Toad. And. Who is't you speak of Sir? Pl. Tempt me not, Madam, with another word, for by heav'n You know I'me apt being incenst — Wake not those wrongs that bellow louder in my soul Then wretches in the brazen Bull, or Iove Who speaks in thunder; those wrongs my goodness Had half lay▪d aside. Or if you do, I have a soul dare what you dare tempt me to. And. Sir, I must speak though Iove forbad me With a flash of lightning. You think perhaps Sir, I have forgot my Plangus. But Sir, I have infinitly in ur'd you, And could not satisfie my conscience, (If I should say my love too, I should not lye) Till I had ask't your pardon. Pl. Madam, the fault's forgiven and forgotten, Without you move me to remembert with a worse Apology. Live and enjoy your sins, and the angry gods: Nay the severest plague I wish you, is, That you may dye without one cross (for afflictions commonly Teach vertues to them that know them not while prosperous) Secure without one thought or sense of a repentance. And. Me thinks you have a steely temper on, to that Which the other day you wore, when you were More soft then down of Bees; But Sir if you but knew the reason why I have done The action, which you perhaps call treason to our loves, You would forbear such language. Pl. Reason! no doubt the man that robs a Church, Or prophanes Altars, hath reason for what he doth; To satisfie your lust, you have that reason Madam. And. That I have loved you once, I call heavn, my own heart, and you to witness;
Now by that love, by all those vows have pass't Betwixt us, hear me. Pl. O heaven! is that a conjuration! things you have broke With as much ease as Politicians do Maxims of Religion. But I will hear to know you, and to hate you more. Speak on. And. You know whilst Leon liv'd, whose due they were, I out of love resign'd my love and honour unto you. Pl. Lust, Madam. And. I knovv not Sir: Your eloquence gave it that title then. How many dangers walkt I fearless through To falsifie your pleasures? your very will. Nay more your word, nay if I thought by sympathy A thought of yours, that I imagin'd you Might blush to speak, I made it straight my own, And waked and studied as much to put it into act, As doth a Gamester upon loss to compass mony. At last we vvere betray'd Sir, to your Father's spies, Who deny'd us aftervvards those opportunities We stole before, be friended by my husband's ignorance. Novv vvas I brought to that vvhich is the vvorst of ills, A seeing, but not enoying of that vvhich I held dearest. To see you daily, and to live vvithout you, Was a death many degrees beyond my ovvn. I knevv the love vvas great, so great I durst not ovvn it. Nay more I knevv tvvas noble too, so noble I knevv my husband being dead you vvould not stick To ask your fathers leave for publick Marriage. Pl. Heaven and the gods can vvitness I intended it. And. Nay farther yet, I knevv your fathers love, Whch vvould not have denyd you any thing, Would also have granted that. Pl. Madam, you riddle strangely. And. When I had forecast these easie possibilities, lyet foresavv one thing that crost our designs, That vvas a sense of honour I had in me. Me thoughts in honour I could not condescend, you
Should debase your self so low. It pleas'd me better to be your Mistress, then your Queen. And stoln imbraces without the scandal Of a publick eye, were sweeter then those Which might bring upon me for rising greatness Is still envy'd) the rancour of the people, and Consequently distasts against their Prince. Sir now we may act safely what might have been Less secure. Your fathers name gives a protection▪ Or if that startle you, wee'l call him husband. Pl. Are you in earnest? And. As serious as love can be. Pl. Then I want words to tell you how I hate you: I would sooner meet Megaera 'tween a pair of sheets. And can you think I should have so small piety, As to be false unto my fathers bed? That I lov'd you once, I confess with shame, and that I should Have done so still, had you preserv'd those flames I think with horror, but for those sins, and Whatsoever else I must repent, I shall no doubt Have great occasion, when I shall see the Kingdome Enveloped in those swarms of plagues your sins call down, And feel a share of them my self. For heaven's sake, Madam! for my father's sake, Nay for my own too, if that have any interest, Learn now at last a vertue, that may make us As happy as much as hitherto unfortunate, And render your story to posterity so burnisht With your shining goodness, that their eyes may not Perceive the errour of your former years. Perhaps I then shall have a reverence for you, As great as any son hath for a fathers wife. You wonder, Lady, to see me talk thus different From what you saw me half an hour ago. I look't upon my self as one that had lost a blessing — But heaven hath been happier to me, for I am now So far from thinking you one, that I look upon you As a plae, no sin of good Ephorbas could deserve,
But love to you— And. Sir, — Pl. Answer me not in words, but deeds; I know you alwayes talkt unhappily. And if your heart dare do whats ill, I know it can well teach your tongue excuses. Exit Plangus. SCAENA 4. Manet Andromana. And. And is my love then scornd? The Chaos of that eternal night possess my breast, That it may not see to startle at any Undertakings, though they would make Medusa's Snakes curle into rings for fear. If greatness have inspird me with thoughts Of a more brave revenge▪ they shall be acted. A husbands murder was such a puny sin, I blush to speak it; but it was great enough For a Merchants wife: a Queen must be more Daring in her revenge, nor must her wrath Be pacify'd under a whole Kingdomes ruine. Enter Libacer. SCAENA 5. And. My better Genius thou art welcome, as A draught of water to a thirsty man, I ne're had need of thee till now. Muster those devils dwell within thy breast; And let them counsel me to a revenge, as great As is my will to act it. Lib. Madam, leave words. The rest you take in breathing makes your anger cool. Out with it, and if I do it not, if I startle At any ill to do you service, though it be to kill my mother, Let me be troubled with the plague of a tender conscience;
And lye sick of repentance a half year after. And. What need I tell thee more? Plangus must dye, And after him Ephorbas, because he is his father. Lib. Madam, he shall. But give me leave to ask you, How he, for whom alone of all the world you had a passion, Is now become an object of the hatred, so great, As others must dye because they have relation to him. And. The aire is hot yet with those words I profferd him in satisfaction. And he refus'd it, what need I speak? Is't safe that he should live knows so much by us? Lib. He had been happy had he never known what vertue meant. I wonder that paltry thing is not banisht earth, It neer did any good yet. Beggeries a blessing to't; Who ere grew rich by vertue? Madam, wee are not troubled with it. But to our business, I have thought a vvay. You knovv his father loves him, Tis he shall ruine him, and lets alone for him. And. Pish, pish, that cannot be. Lib. These women are alwayes with their Cannots, What cannot be? have you but read the Sophy? You will finde that Haly (Oh how I hug that fellow's name) Ruin'd great Mirza by his father, and his father by his son. The great Politician while all the Court Flam'd round about him, sat secure and laught, Like those throw fire-works among the waving people, That have nothing but fire and smoke about them, And yet not sindg one hair. Indeed he fell at last; 'Tis true, but he was shallow in that part oth'plot. What have we his example but to learn by it? Praise Plangus to Ephorbas then so far, That first he may fear for his Kingdome, And if you do proceed till he grow jealous of his bed, 'Twill do the better. The King coming, I must be gone, Exit Lib. Manet And.
SCAENA 6. Enter Ephorbas to her. Eph. How fares Andromana? I'me glad this greatness sits so well about thee; My Court was blest that hour I knew thee first. Wee'l live and still grow happy; we shall flourish Like some spreading tree that shall n're cease, Till its proud height o're look the skies, I hope I bad fair for a boy to night. How happy should I count my self, could I but leave My Kingdome something that had thy image in't. And. Sir, never think Iberia can be happy in another son, When such a Prince as Plangus lives the heir. Who is the subject of all men's prayers, nay The deserver too. There's not a man or woman In the Kingdome hath one good wish within their breast, But they strait bestow it upon Plangus, a Prince Whom mothers shew their little children, as something They should learn betime to worship and admire. Eph. I know, Andromana, but— And. Sir, vertues perfection Is at the height in him. What ever after ages bear I give the name of worth to, must if compar'd to him Be but as foyles to set his glory off the brighter. Nor are the men only thus taken with him. There's not a Lady in the land but sighs with passion for him, And dreams on him anights. Husbands grow jealous of him, yet with joy That they are Plangus Rivals. Eph. All this is nothing. Men talk't as loud of Me when I was young. And. Yea but they say Sir, You were not half so mincing in your carriage, Nor so majestick. Besides — Eph. I hope they do not make comparisons. Starts. And.
And. Sir, I thought we could not have discourst on a more Welcome theam then what is full of Plangus. Ep. No more you cannot. Let him as a less star enjoy his splendor, But 'must not be so great to darken me. But prethee do they compare us then? An. You're discompos'd Sir, I have done. Eph. Nay nothing but the remembrance of a foolish dream. What say they? An. Why Sir, some went so far, To say, they wondred a Lady of my years Could marry the father, though a King, When I might have had Plangus himself. Ep. They did not— An. Then I confess I blusht, and had been out Of temper, but that I thought it might be The Court fashion to talk boldly. Ep. This story jump't just with my dream to night; Me thought I saw him threatning to kill me, 'Cause thou hadst marry'd me; But the young sawcy boy shall know, I hold My Scepter strong enough to crush him into Atomes Did they not name Inophilus? An. I think they did. He had some share of praises too, but it was so, As gleanings to a lading cart, They sometimes fell beside. Ep. Then I am satisfy'd, tis an aspiring youth. Tis something that unites Plangus and him so. I must be speedy in resolves. Exit Eph. SCAENA 7. Manet Andromana. An. Who waits without there? Enter Libacer. Oh art thou come? stay, let me breathe, or else, Lib Nay spare your pains; I know it all,
I saw him drink it with as great greediness, As usurers do unthrift, lands, or jealous husbands Confirm their Cuckold-ships by ocular testimony. An: It took most rarely, Beyond our hopes. I'le leave the rest to thee, Thou art so fortunate in all designs. Go on and prosper. Lib. And I'le attend for an opportunity to meet With Plangus, and betray him to ruine As great as unavoydable. Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCAENA 1. Ephorbas solus. Eph. FOr ought I know my bed may be the next, Men are not bad by halves, nor doth One mischief stop a man in his carreir of sin. There's as much reason ith'one, as the other. Doth he affect my Kingdome 'cause, me old? No, that's not it; he knows I must dye shortly. Tis not a desire of rule and glory of their bending knees, Makes him forget his duty— He may as well covet Andromana 'cause she's handsome, He satisfies a lust alike in both; well let him be My Rival in the Kingdome, 'tis but what He was born to, and I must leave it him; But for my wife he must excuse me, Nay he shall — he pawseth. Yet now I think on't better, the grounds are slender, And my suspicions slight; no evidence against him But the peoples love, and that's no fault of his Unless deserving be a crime. Who's without there? Go call in Plangus, and bid him stay, Enter Libacer. For I must speak with him. Exit King.
SCENA 2. Manet Libacer. Lib. Nay then all's dasht, if once it comes to parly. I must not have them talk. But here he is. Enter Plangus. SCAENA 3. All health and happiness attend the Prince. Pl. Pray tell me if you saw the King; Be short, for I am very melancholy. Lib. He parted hence just now, but With such a fury revelling in his looks, There had been less danger in a Basillsk. Pl. Went he this way. Lib. Yes Sir, He is going out but turns short. Pl. But thou dost not know what mov'd him? Lib. I heard some such words as these. My Rival in the Kingdome—Theres evidence against him— The people's love — deserving is a crime — And somewhat else my fear made me forget. Pl. Who was there with him lately? Lib. I cannot tell, but about a quarter of an hour ago He askt for you, and every time he nam'd you, he seem'd angry Pl. Named me? thou art mistaken. Lib. I had almost forgot Sir, I have message to you from Andromana. Pl. I will not hear one syllable. Lib. No, so she told me, but she charg'd me speak it, or dye, For it concerned your life, which she held dearer Then her own. Pl. I value it not, but speak the mystery. Lib. When first her lips began to move, a blush Oreflow'd her face, as if her heart had sent Her tainted blood to seek a passage out. Then with a showre of tears she told me, how Inordinate desires had made her but this morning, Tempt you to th' acting of a sin she would not name;
And that your vertue had so wrought upon her She had not left one thought unchang'd. She loves you still, but with affection That carries honour, and converted thoughts; And next she bad me whisper in your ear, (For time was short) that if you loved her, Or your self, or did intend to cherish The peoples growing hopes, you shou'd not come When the King sent for you. For something had incenst him so highly Against you, that there was mighty danger in it. She bad me hast, for time would not permit her to say more. I was scarce out oth' chamber, when Your father came and askt for you, And bad me seek you out with speed Sir, I should be most proud to serve you. Pl. I thank thee friend, but prethee tell thy Mistress, Innocence knows no fear: Tis for guilty souls To doubt their safety. If she would have me safe, My only way is by present appearance to clear my self, For I beleeve my false accusers wish nothing more, Then that I should be absent. Lib. The Devil's in him sure, he guesseth so right. Aside. She told me so Sir, and would have wisht you to it, But that there was a way to serve you better by. She saith Ephorbas told her a few minutes hence, Hee'd call a councel, where they'd consult about you. The place is hang'd so that behinde the wall Sir, You may stand secure, and hear what passeth, And according to what they determine, you may Provide for your safety, only for more security She wisheth you would arm your self — Sir, pray resolve, she'l pacifie the King, That you appear not presently, Pl. Well, I will be perswaded: Tell her, I'me resolv'd, I will not come. Lib. Happiness attend you, half an hour hence, Exit Lib. I'le wait upon you. Pl. We shall reward thee.
SCAENA 4. Manet Plangus. Pl. Whence should this kindness come? and on a sudden too? A strange alteration. She who a day ago Forgot the vows her soul was fetter'd in, And but this morning tempted me to a sin, I can scarce think on without fear, should on An instant be careful for my safety, And that from a principle of vertue too. SCENA 5. Enter to him Inophilus. Ino. Who was that with you Sir just now? Pl. An honest fellow certainly; but one I know not. Ino. An honest fellow call you him. If he have not Rogue writ in great letters i's face, I have no physnomy. Pray Sir, what was his business to you? Pl. A message from Andromana, Who out of love desires me not to go to my father, Because something hath put him in a fume against me. Ino. Did the King send for you? Pl. He did so. Ino. But upon her intreaty you forbore to go? Pl. What then. Ino. Then you are mad Sir, And tacitly conspire to your own ruine. Do, take an enemies advice, and dye the object Both of their joy and scorn. Where are your senses Sir? or pray whence springs This friendship of Andromana's? Alas you should not Measure her malice by the smalness of your own. She has injur'd you, she knows it Sir. And though at present she enjoyes her treachery, She may soon fall beside it; Ephorbas's not immortal, nor can she promise to her self
Security when you have power to call her ills in question. Were't nothing else, her safety would make her To plot your death. I hinder you in talking, But pray be gone, and when you see your father, Speak boldly to him, or you are gone for ever. Pl. I tell thee once again Inophilus, Since I have said I would not go, both heav'n and thee Shall want a motive to make me stir one foot, Were danger just there before me, running With open jaws upon me, and had my word been giv'n To remain here, I would be forc't from life, Before my place. Ino. Here is a bravery now would make a man For swear all Gallantry, to fool away your life thus In a humour— I met the Court just now Sir, As full of whispers, every man's eyes spoke strong amazeme My father's sent for with two other Lords, Eubulus and Anamedes; and the Court Gates are lock't. Resolve Sir, and command me something, wherein I may have an occasion to serve you. Pl. Then I resolve to do as I am caution'd; Walk, in I'le tell thee more. SCAENA 6. Ephorbas, Libacer. Eph. What was his answer then? Lib. Tell him, I am resolv'd I will not come. Those were The very words Sir. Eph. 'was very pretty resolute methinks. If he be grown so stubborn already, The next we must expect is action. Lib. But yet he bid me if you askt why he came not, To finde some excuse or other. Eph. He could finde none himself then: Call in the Lords, we must be sudden in our execution: But prethee one thing more, who was there with him?
Lib. No body, but I met going to him young Inophilus. And heard one servant tell another in great haste Their Lord would speak with some oth'Captains of the Army. Exit. SCAENA 7. Enter to the King, Rinatus, Eubulus, Anamedes. Eph. Sit down my Lords; we have a business with you, Requires your hands and hearts, both speed and counsel; Our danger's such, that I could wish't had flown Upon us without warning, for so cross the Fates are, Our safety must be bought at such a price, That we must lose what is as dear to us Almost as it. Tis Plangus death or mine Must secure the others life; nay startle not. If I am grown as wearisome to you As to him, your calling is in vain, my Lords; Nor shall I labour longer to preserve A life denied me by the gods and you. But if there's any here who hath a son Brought to these years with so much care and love As mine hath been; think what a grief it is To lose him, and shed one tear with me. But for that son to plume kimself with feathers Pluckt from his fathers wings, would melt ones eye-balls. Yet Plangus who hath vizarded his ends With vertue, finding it useless now, hath thrown It from him, and openly attempts my crown and life. When mischiefs wheel once runs, how fast it speeds, Headlong to put in act the blackest deeds! Were my crown his, had he my life to give, Though he would let me I would scorn to live. Eub. Sir, we are cal'd upon a great affair, And if't be true, the speed of our resolves Shall be as great as it. Your Majesty hath reign'd so happily, and long, We will not think a time beyond it.
And such, so great your vertue still hath been, Strangers have been enamoured and admired it. Our enemies that could have wisht it less, Have yet sate down with envy, not attempted Ought against you, knowing (I'me codfident) By such injustice the gods would be their foes. Me thinks tis therefore much less likely That Plangus, who hath hitherto been found A miracle of filial piety, And one that we may say was born the heir To all your vertues, all your goodness, As well as Kingdom; who counts it glory As much to be an honest man, as a great Prince. I say for him, whom as he is your son, And as we hitherto have found him full Of worth and honour, we cannot but behold As him in whom the spreading hopes of all Iberia grow, and promise to themselves A still green happiness, that ne're shall knovv What Autumne, or a naked Winter means. For him that hath scarce yet put off Those cloaths which still wear the badges Of the great danger he was in, not for Himself, my Liedge, but you and us; for had He wish't the ruine of his father and his Country, The Argives would have done that for him, And he not have been call'd in question. But when we must remember with what wings He flew to meet the Torrent, both against The counsel of his friends, and his own hopes; How love to you and us spurr'd him on forward To those impossibilities, which nothing But love and valour durst have attempted. Why then methinks 'tis strange, yea very strange Thus in a moment t'have flung all nature off, And all Religion; and that Sir against you, Whom we all know and think with fear (But our sading hopes spring fresh from Plangus)
Must shortly pay your tribute to the grave. Not that we doubt your Majesty hath cause To apprehend a danger, only 'tis wish't Those who inform'd you were examin'd strictly, And Plangus sent for to answer for himself. Slanders like Mists still vanish at the sight Of Innocents, who bring their lyes to light. Eph. If an Oration could have made him clear, No doubt my fears are vain, and we shall lye Still sleeping in security, as great And lasting as Plangus, and his Complices Can wish upon us, nor wake till we are bound In the securest chains, death's fetters. That I am old is true, and Plangus knows it, He would have catch't a Cannon bullet sooner else, Between his naked hands; then have provok' My fury; but age hath froze me To an icy numness, yet shall he know My veines have fire as well as his, and when Incen, my eyes shoot as much poyson too. What you alledge about his battel 'gainst the Argive As an excuse, it is a proof against him, Though theeves rob others, yet they ight themselves, For those that rob when strangers set on them, And all unite against a common enemy. Had Plangus private interests not held Him to us, no doubt had left us naked Of all defence; but an intestine fury, To see the Argives bear away the fruits Of all his labours, all his treasons, Shot him into despair, and made him play A game was almost lost, rather then give all over. Besides, that action hath endear'd him to the people; Gain'd him the Souldiers hearts with so great ease, The danger's nothing in respect oth' rise He takes from thence to climb up to his ends. And for the vertue that hath gull'd us all, I'de blush to speak it, that a son of mine
Should ever be so base to seek a cloak For what he doth, but that I have disclaim'd All my relations to him, and would adopt A Cannibal sooner for son then he The evidence we have is what we wish were less, Then might I hug my Plangus and he me, But since the Fates and his own ills deny That entercourse; what can remain, But that we should proceed to sentence Speedy as themselves, and stop the ill, which may Strike when 'tis night, or while tis call'd to day. He knows his guilt too well, and hath deny'd To come, that so he might be justify'd. Once disobey'd as father, the next thing Will be Rebellion to me as his King. SCAENA 8. Enter to them Libaer. Rin. As sure as death This is one of the Rogues that hath his Roguery to act, And comes in like something that brought news In the latter end of a play. Now shall we have Some strange discovery—How the Rogue stares. Lib. No sooner had we shut the gates, my Liedge. Then an uncertain rumour spred among the people That Plangus was in danger; When if your ever saw a Hive of Bees. How if you stir but one, the whole swarm moves, And testifie their anger; so strait whole crowds Of people, the greatest half not knowing what they came for, swarmed to the gates, and with confused cryes, hindred them∣selves from being understoood; till some having divers times cryed Plangus, some their Prince, all with one note made up a common voice, and so continued till some Captains with one or two selected Troops made up to them, and having promised them they would secure the Prince, desired them to withdraw.
And when they came so nigh as to be heard, they did in earnest what the other had attempted with so much noise and failed in; or they told the Porter in plain Souldiers language, they would either see Plangus safe, or force the gates upon him. He in this exigent hath sent to know your pleasure. Eph. How say you now my Lords, Where is the innocence, the love to you and us? For my part I will meet the danger; Tame expectation is beneath a King, Only let me intreat you to see my Queen safe. 'Tis pity she should smart who hath no sin To answer for, but calling me husband. Plangus—Iberia shall be thine—But He goes to stab himself, Rin. stayes him. With the curses of the angry gods, and a kinde Injur'd dying father. Rin. Heav'n bless you Sir, what a despair is this? Because you hate a hangman, you will be Your executioner your self. Beleeve me, That which presents so great danger to you I look upon with joy: There is no subject That loves you or the Prince, but must be glad To see the zeal Iberians bear to a true vertue, When bending under an unjust oppression. No doubt their love had been as great to you, Had you been in like danger.—Besides, my Lord, You are not sure 'tis with the Prince's consent The Souldiers do this. My life for yours You will be safe, let the worst come— Let us go meet your fears. They begin to rise when at the instant. SCAENA 9. Andromana enters undrest, and in a fright. An. Happy am I my Lord, She weeps. This sudden fright hath rescued me from being made The subject of some villains lust, who With his sword drawn just now was forcing me
To lewd imbraces, if you command to search the Court, He cannot be far hence, for he ran that way. Rin. O impudence! Plangus stirs be∣hinde the hang∣ings. Rinatus draws and runs at him. That durst attempt a sin (darkness and woods Have too many eyes for) in the open Court. I shall be with you — the Devil hath Armor on — Eph. Drag him to torture — They fetch him out. My son! why have I liv'd to see this! Away with him to death, the air will grow infectious, Why stay you? SCAENA 10▪ Enter Zopiro, Inophilus, with Souldiers. Soul. Unhand the Prince, or else by heav'n he treads Into his grave that moves a foot to touch him. Ino. Madam, though Plangus noble self was blinde, And could not see the deep black darkness of your Hellish actions; his friends had eyes about them. Was this your love? this your repentance? This your advice, your counsel? I must confess had I, And these his noble friends here, been ruld by him, E're this he'd been a sacrifice to your revenge and you. Why stand you mute Sir? vvant you a tongue to justifie Your innocence, our svvords and vve maintain. And novv, my Liedge, vve turn to you, Whom vve have serv'd as truly As ever subjects did any Prince alive, And vvhilst you're worthy, vve vvill do so still, But vvee'l be no mans slaves alive, Much less be his that is another's, vvhile this base Witch, For so she is, constrains you to do actions Children vvould blush at, and vvise men laugh at, Which vvill after leave you both to repentance and despair. This beggar, vvhom to ther day you took up as some lost thing, Gave your honour to, and in that our safety,
That knew less to be good then Devils do, and hath Ills lodg'd in her, that would make a hell beyond that The Furies dwell in. Banish her hence, Send her to some place, where murders, rapines, Or sins yet unheard of, do inhabit, And where she can do us no mischief. Do you betake your self To your former vertue, and restore the Prince To those affections you once had for him, We then perhaps may live to see Iberia happy. Eph Why am I forc't thus to declare his shame, Which at the bound strikes me, and is made my own. You know not how well Plangus can dissemble, He is an hypocrite, I need not tell you more, Those three syllables comprehend all ill. My Queen just now scap't from his base attempt Wherein he would have forc't her to have damn'd Herself and him, and dishonour'd me. What mean't that Armour on, and why so guarded? Where was a danger threat'ned him? Or doth he think his conscience could not Sting him through it? I wish that he might live, my Lords, but as nature That as he is my son bids me preserve him; So honour which pleads to the King stronger Then nature can▪ tells, me for that very reason, I can less pardon him then something born A stranger to my blood.—But I deserve To dye as well as he; if he be grown A burden to the earth, I am so too, That gave the Monster being. Wherefore let me be dravvn to execution too, For fathers are guilty of their childrens ills. Ino. Would Plangus then have forc' Andromana; Yes, so would Daphne have ravish't Phoebus, I'le undertake Goats are less salt then she— But for his Armor—can any man that breathes One common air with her not need an Armour?
Brass walls cannot be security enough. Why speak you not Sir? are you dumb too? Pl. It is for them to speak are sure to be beleev'd, And not for him that is condemn'd as guilty; Words can excuse slight faults. If mine are esteem'd such, that all my actions, A speaking duty of one and twenty years Speak not enough to clear me, silence shall. I have no more to say therefore, But to bid you do your duty to the King, And ask him pardon for the intemperate zeal, Heav'n knows I wish't it not, nor would I buy My safety at one of my father's angry thoughts Much less his fears, For those I fall by. Obey my father, and if ye love me, Gentlemen, Shed not one tear for Plangus: For I am timely taken from those plagues This womans crying sins must bring Upon Iberia, and make you wish That you had dy'd as soon and innocent as I. An. That I was nothing I confess, that what I am I owe to Ephorbas; nay, that the greatness I am now in, tells me it is too high To be secure, my fears bear witness. I wish my life would excuse Plangus his, At least my blood wash off the blackness of his guilt, Heav'n knows it should not be one minute Ere he should be restord to his former vertues, But since it cannot be, I'le in and weep, Not for my self but him. Exit. Ino. Millions of plagues go with thee Sir, you shall along with us, we will not Trust you, or to the King, or her. Exeunt.
ACT. V. SCAENA 1. Libaer Solus. Lib. WHat Politician was there ever yet Who swimming through a sea of plots & treasons, Sunk not at last ith' very havens mouth? And shall I do so too? No, my thoughts prompt me, I shall be told in story as the first That stood secure upon the dreadful ruines He had thrown down beneath him. Yet I am nigh The precipice I strive to shun with so much care. I have betray'd Plangus tis true, and still Have found a growing fortune, but so long As jealousie binds up Ephorbas thoughts From searching deeper deeper; Tis not well That Plangus lives at all, though he be disgrac't H'has friends enow about the King, and they will finde A time to pacifie him, which will be my undoing, He must not therefore live. Andromana Is of that minde too; but how to compass it— Or when perhaps I have, what will become of me? Nothing more usual then for those folks Who have by sinister means reach't to the top Oth' mountain of their hopes, but they throw down And forget the power that rais'd them; Indeed necessity enforceth them, lest others climb By the same steps they did, and ruine them. I must not therefore trust her woman-ship, Who though I know she cannot stand without me now, Yet when she's Queen alone Fortune may alter her, and make her look upon me As one whose life whispers unto her own guilt; It is not safe to be the object of a Princes fear. Then she will finde others will be as apt
To keep her up, as I to raise her; I will prevent her first. Time is not ripe yet, but when it is (For I must walk on with her a little farther) I will unravel all this Labyinth E'ne to the King himself. Then let her accuse me, Though she should damn her self to hell, I know shee'l be beleev'd no more, then Plangus hath been hitherto. Thus shall I still grow great, though all the world Be to a dreadful ruine madly hurld. Exit. SCAENA 2. Plangus Solus. Pl. I can no longer hold, tis not ith' power Of fate to make me less; bid me out-stare The Sun, out-run a falling star, Feed upon flames, or pocket up the clouds, And so burn up a land with plagues, the son Of flaming heat, for want of rain To cool the yawning chaps of the dry earth; Or if there be a task mad Iuno's hate Could not invent to plague poor Hercules, Impose it upon me, I'le do't without a grudge: Condemn me to a Gally, load me with chains, Whose weight may so keep me down, I can scarce swell Under my burden to let out a sigh. I would o'recome all Were there a Deity that men adore And throw their prayers upon, that would lend Just ears to humane wishes, I would grow great by being punished, and be A plague my self, so that when people curst Beyond invention, to their prodigious Rhetorick This Epiphonema should be added, Become as miserable as wretched Plangus. I have been jaded, basely jaded, by those tame fools
Honour and piety, and now am wake't into revenge, Breathing forth ruine to those first spread This drowsiness upon my soul. A woman! O heaven! had I been gull'd By any thing had born the name of man! But this will look so sordidly in story▪ I shall be grown, discourse for Grooms and Foot-boyes, Be ballated, and sung to filthy tunes. But do I talk still? well I must leave This patience: And now Ephorbas Since thou hast wrought me to this temper, Ile be reveng'd with as much skill as thou Hast injur'd me. Ie to these presently, For my hour-glass shall not return ten minutes longer, And having kill'd my self before thee, Ile pluck my heart out, tell thee all My innocence, and leave thee hem'd in with A despair thicker then Aegyptian darkness. I know thou canst not choose but dye for grief, But here he is. SCAENA 3. Ephorbas Solus. Eph. Riddle upon riddle: I have dreamt this night Plangus was cloathd like innocence, all white; And Andromana then methoughts was grown So black, nothing but all one guilt was shewn. What shall I do? Shall I beleeve a dream? Which is a vapour born along the stream Of fancy, and sprung up from the gross sumes Of a full stomach, sent to the upper rooms Oth' brain by our ill Genius to spoyl our sight, And cloud our judgements like a misty night. Why do I doubt? tis ominous to stay Demurring when the way is plain: Is day Or night best to judge colours? shall I stand Trying the waters soundness, when the land
Prents firm footing? Truth by day appears, And  apers hope to find my fears And yet e thinks 'tis very strange should suddenly thus change, his nature off, I did not so young I am reslvd to know ear this mist from fore my eyes, I  be done by care, by gold, or spies▪ Exit. SCAENA 4. Andromana Sola. Andr. So Badgers dig the holes And Foxes live in them: Of all Factors State-factors are the worst, and yet least to themselves Of al their labour. This Libacer is wading To the throat in blood to do me service, And ile reward him with a halter. Tame fool, can he imagine I remove A husband and a son, to suffer him To live still and upbraid my ills. Lib. It is resolv'd. Enter Libacer▪ But here she is, I must speak fairly for a while: An. How doth it succeed now, my darling? Shall we be great? great alone? Lib. As great as pride and fulness of revenge Can swell us. Hark in your ear, Madam, Ile tell you all our plot, but softly, For perhaps the jealous walls may eccho Back the treason▪ They whisper. SCAENA 5. Enter Plangus with his Sword drawn. Pl. I bore whilst I could, but no tis grown Too great to be contain'd in humane breast, And it shall out, though hoopt with walls of brass.
Are they at it? I stood once a listning at their intreaty, This time at my own I'le stand and hearken. Steps aside. An. It is impossible. Lib. I tell you no, Ile aggravate the injuries, And tell him how basely poorly it was For a father to betray his son so. An. His piety will never— Lib. But his fury shall, Ile stab the King my self, and bring Those witnesses shall swear 'twas Plangus. Pl. Nay then tis time to strike; There, carry thy intents to hell. He stabs Libacer. An. Help, Murder, Murder, a Rape, a Rape. Ep. What dismal note was that? An. Sir, there you see your Martyr, Whose force being too vveak to save my honour, His fidelity vvas greater, and dy'd a loyal sacrifice Offerd by the impious hand of that vile man. Eph. O heaven! doth not the earth yet gape and svvallovv thee. Thy life shall be my crime no longer; I gave it thee And thus resume it vvith a thousand curses. He stabs Plangus. Pl. Sir, I at length am happy To the height of all my vvishes. I am a going suddenly—from all Faints. My troubles all your fears — But I vvill tell my story first— Hovv you have vvrong'd, and been vvrong'd your self. This vvoman— to be short— Hath tvvin'd like Ivy vvith my naked limbs Before she marryd you— — And vvould — Oh — in spight of death I vvill go on — have tempted me to bed her since — Upon refusal she turnd her love to hate, And plots my ruine — And— Next your death — I can no more— I kill'd the instrument — farevvel — —Forgive me— Dyes. Ep. Can this be true Andromana. An. Do you beleeve it? Ep. I vvish I had not cause — An. Sir every syllable vvas true he told you;
Whose vvords I thus confirm She takes Plang. Dagger, flings it at Ephorbas, and kills him. Ep. Ime slain, mercy heaven, An. You should have come a little sooner. Enter Inoph. In. Do I see vvell? or is the Prince here slain? An. He is, and cause you love him, Carry that token of Stabs Ino. My love to him, I knovv hee'l take it kindly that you take So long a journey only to see him. In. It vvas the Devil strook sure, A vvoman could not do it — Plangus Oh — Dyes. SCAENA 6. Enter to them Rinatus, Eubulus, Anamedes. Rin. Heaven defend us! vvhat a sight is here? The King, the Prince both slain? vvhat and my son too? Only this vvoman living? speak out Scritch-ovvl, Witch, hovv came they by their deaths: An. By me, hovv else? Rin. Lets torture her. An. I can prevent you, I vvould not live a minute longer, Unless to act my ills again, for all Iberia. She stabs herself. I have lived long enough to boast an act, After vvhich no mischief shall be nevv— Dyes. Rin. Lets in, and vveep our vveary lives avvay; When this is told, let after ages say, But Andromana none could have begun it, And none but Andromana could have done it. Exeunt. FINIS.
