S5428 R222006 99833245 37720
A KIND INVITATION To the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, To the due Consideration of Some Important Truths: In a Letter and Twenty Questions, sent long since to their Second-days Meeting, and now to them all. To both which, an ANSWER from their present Yearly Meeting, 1697. is desired. To William Penn, & the rest, &c.  Second-Days-Meeting. WILLIAM, with the rest of  with thee, MY Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you all, is, that ye may be Saved: for I am perswaded that you have a Zeal of God, at least many of you, though not accord∣ing to Knowledge in some things. Nevertheless, whereto ye have attained, in that I desire ye may be established, and that God will be graciously pleased to reveal the rest to you, that ye may be perfect and intire, wanting nothing. For which purpose I come, I trust by the Grace of God, with a Message of Grace and Peace to you. I am well satisfied that it is no meer Humane Pro∣ject or Artifice that at first raised you up, and hath conducted you hitherto: but a Supernatural Power, and that it is of the Lord, some way or other, (as was the Separation of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, 1 Kings 12.) for Correction and Reformation of some∣thing amiss in this Church. And therefore I dare not presume, either upon my own head, or by my own Ability, to intermeddle in it. But my Heart is inlarged towards you upon these Conside∣rations: 1. That ye do assert one of the Great and Chief Prin∣ciples of the Christian Religion, which I have observed to be very unworthily and even despitefully treated by too many, who have gotten into (or seek) Preferments and Imployment in the Church, without Check or Reproof; and so unworthily deserted by most, for fear of Reproach, or Disgrace, or hindrance in their Preferment,
that I have not known it generously asserted by above two or three in the Pulpit, (but those great Men indeed) though it be plainly a Doctrine most authentickly and solemnly professed and declared in the Church of England. 2. That ye do bear a good Testimony against other Abuses connived at; or tolerated amongst us. 3. I am moved with Pity towards you, that you should have so great Causes of Offence or Scandal given you, against the Holy and Esta∣blished Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, for the Ministerial Office; for the Admission of Proselytes; and for the great Solem∣nity of the Christian Worship, which hath been so long abused with Controversies, that I know very few Persons now amongst us, who do rightly and compleatly understand it; and even against the Person, Satisfaction, and Merits of Christ himself. But when I consider your Notions and Sentiments concerning these things, though I am well satisfied that you are under the Conduct and Energy of some Spiritual Power; yet, What that Spirit is? and, Whether One or Divers? in my Judgment, doth deserve very good Consideration. Ye know what Spirit it was, which God sent be∣tween Abimilech and the Shechemites, Judg. 9.23. and what that was, that was sent from the Lord to Saul, 1 Sam. 6.14. and what that was, that was commissioned by God in the case of Ahab, 1 King. 22.22, 23. and what that was, in the midst of the Princes of Noph, Isa. 19.14. which was from the Lord too. And that such a Spirit hath been among some call'd Quakers, is manifest both by their Actions, Speeches, and Writings; nay, the very Spirit of the Devil, and of Antichrist, is apparent and undeniable, from the Indignities offered, both in word and deed, to Holy things. But that is not the thing now to be considered, what Spirits may have appeared among them. For even among the Apostles, Satan had power to enter into Judas; and it is not improbable but those, whom our Saviour told, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of; and even Peter himself, when our Saviour said to him, Get thee behind me, Satan, might not at the time be free from some Impressions of Evil Spirits. That, 'tis likely, was a Peculiarity of our Saviours, for the Prince of this World to have nothing in him. But the thing to be considered, is, What Spirit that is which at first excited, and hath now the Conduct of the whole Body of this People? And, not, whe∣ther it be sent, or commissioned from God? but, Whether it be one of the Ministring Spirits sent forth to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation? or, One of those Seducing Spirits, to whom, in the latter times, that some would give heed, was, in the times of the Apostles, expressly said by the Spirit of God? And
great Reason there is to take this into very deep Consideration: 1. Because of the many and weighty Cautions given by our Saviour and his Apostles, and left upon record in the Sacred Scriptures, for our warning in these latter times, to beware of them, and not to go out after them; with Admonitions concerning their Subtilty, their Energy or Power, and their strong Delusions to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect; and that even Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light, that is, puts on the Appearance of an Angel of Light, (2 Cor. 11.14.) and, lastly, that we should try the Spirits, (1 Jo. 4.1.) 2. Because, if the Tryal be by Agree∣ment or Disagreement with the Doctrine, Institutions, and Ordi∣nances of Christ, and his Apostles authorized by him, they may seem to have apostatized and gone off, or, at least, fallen short of them in matters of great moment, and special concern, those be∣fore-mentioned; and therefore to be Seduced by some Spirit of Error: For I doubt not but the Devil himself hath that Malice and Envy against the Man Christ Jesus, by whom he hath been Con∣quered and Vanquished, and against the Solemn Memorial of that Victory, that could he but keep People from engaging in that Holy Covenant with Him by Baptism, and from the Solemnity of that Memorial, he would be willing himself to lead them into all other Truth, upon that condition, rather than fail. Yet, notwithstand∣ing, since they are a Sober People, have received, retain and do act upon one of the chief Principles of Christianity, and have divers commendable things in them; and what Errors they have fallen into, have been occasioned by the Scandals and Offences given by those of the Church, who will have a sad account to answer for it: I do hope, in the Mercy and Goodness of God, that if it be a good Spirit which hath the Conduct of them, he shall lead and dispose those who are Sincere amongst them, to the acknowledgement of the Truth in those things whereto they have not yet attained; and if it be otherwise, he shall be forced to resign the Conduct of them to a more powerful and better Guide; and that we shall see such a Society of Compleat Christians come out of this despised People, as are at this time hardly to be found in any part of the World, as I know of. These are my Thougots, and Hopes concerning this People in general at present. And Hopes, I say, grounded upon the Mercy of God, and Power of God, which no Good Being would oppose; nor no Evil Power can stand before. And in His Name I come unto you, knowing assuredly that neither I, nor any Humane Ability, is able to prevail against the Power that is amongst you, notwithstanding the Truths that I have mentioned already,
and shall endeavour, by the Grace and Assistance of God Almighty, through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, more fully to explain unto you in due time: But, as I said, if it be a good Power, it will favour me, and assist me in it, and rejoyce in it too: and if it be an evil Power commissioned, it must cease, and submit to that Victo∣rious and All-conquering Name: Its Enchantments must be dis∣solved, and its Sophistry and Fallacies detected. I therefore, as an Ambassador of Christ, in the Spirit and Meekness of Christ, beseech you, Be ye reconciled to the Truths of God, and receive them with that Reverence and Gratitude that is meet, without Cavelling, or regard to any Temporal concern. I do not invite you to return to the Abuses and Corruptions which you have forsaken, but to those Truths, and to the due use of those Holy things, against which you have been Scandalized by those Abuses and Corruptions. Nor do I invite you to dissolve your Society, or to leave off your Meetings, and drown your selves in a promiscuous Multitude. No, you have in part born a good Testimony, and I would have you do so still: But I invite you only to make your Testimony more Com∣pleat, Illustrious and Irrefragable, by bearing your Testimony to the whole Truth; and not any longer a Testimony, like the Feet of Daniel's Image, partly strong, and partly weak, by a mixture of Truth with Falshood; for that cannot stand long together; but to strengthen the things that remain, and set in order the things that are wanting, that ye may stand; for otherwise ye will be certainly Broken to Pieces. I invite you but to what I am doing my self with a small Company of Poor People, that is, bearing a Testimony for God, and manifestly under his Conduct: But it is neglected by them, to whom it hath been offered for a sufficient Time, and in a sufficient Manner, considering their Learning, and pretence to Knowledge: And now it is offered to you, a despised People, that God may humble the Proud and High-minded, and confound the Wisdom of the Wise, by mean and despicable things in the sight of Men. Be Wise, and neglect not the Opportunity, and you, who were last in the Worlds account, shall be first. Whatever you do, you will find there is solid Truth in the Proposal, and I wish you may receive it to the Honour and Glory of God, and your own Comfort and Salvation; and you will then find me to have been Your Sincere and Cordial Friend, E. S. 31 August, 1696.
The Twenty Questions. I. WHETHER there be not a great Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits, which are Enemies to Mankind, and with all the Power, Activity and Subtilty they can, do continually endeavour to hinder their Salvation, and Commu∣nion and Union with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? II. Whether the Word, which in the beginning was with God, and was God, was not made Flesh, and dwelt amongst Men, being born of the Virgin Mary, and called Jesus, which signifies a Saviour, and Christ, the Messiah, the anointed of God, and Jesus Christ of Nazareth? III. Whether his Appearance in Mortal Flesh was not to destroy the Works of the Devil, the Prince of the Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits; to be a Prince and a Saviour to Mankind, and the Captain of their Salvation to all who receive him, and subject them∣selves intirely to his Teachings, by his Example, and by his Do∣ctrine, and Precepts, and Orders recorded in the Holy Scriptures, and by the Motions of his Holy Spirit upon and in their Hearts and Minds? IV. Whether he be not the Only Mediatour between God and Man; so that Man can have no Communion with the Holy God, or Participation of the Spirit of Holiness, but by and through Him? V. Whether that Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits, know∣ing this, do not above all things endeavour, by all means, to with∣hold People from closing and uniting with that Holy Mediatour, and to withdraw as many as they can as much as they can from Him? VI. Whether their most dangerous and subtile Actings in this Op∣position be not principally, by Way of Deceit, under the Appearance and Pretence of Good to Man, and of Good Spirits? VII. Whether it hath not been foretold, that, in the latter times especially, there should be many false Teachers, who, with such spe∣cious Pretences and secret Energy, should endeavour to draw away People from the Faith, as to deceive, if it was possible, the very Elect; and Warnings given to beware of them, by Christ, and by his Apostles? VIII. Whether the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ be not the same, and a Holy and Pure Spirit, a Spirit of Truth and Righ∣teousness, leading into all necessary Truth, and from all Fraud, Deceit, and Fallacy, Cavils, and shuffling Evasions?
IX. Whether it be not reasonable that Christ Jesus, who had done so much for Man, should prescribe what Manner he pleased for his Peoples engaging with Him; and for their recognizing Him, and making their Solemn Address to the Father by Him; and what Orders he pleased, and would have observed and continued in his Church? X. Whether to oppose such Appointments, Prescriptions or Or∣ders, or to cavil at them, seek Evasions or Pretences to neglect them, and yet pretend to be Christians, be not a great Evidence of In∣sincerity, and of a subtile Antichristian Spirit of Satan transformed into an Angel of Light? XI. Whether Jesus Christ, besides his General Command to his Apostles after his Resurrection, to go to the Gentiles, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, &c. did not for forty days shew himself to them, speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he, through the Holy Ghost, had given Commandments unto them, and in or with those Com∣mandments give them sufficient Instructions and Directions for the Constituting his Church, which he purchased with his Blood? XII. Whether the Apostles did not in all things faithfully pursue his Commands and Directions? XIII. Whether besides his express Commands and Directions, they did not also receive the Holy Spirit, according to his Promise in an extraordinary manner, and had the same residing in them, and manifesting his Presence with them, by extraordinary Operations, to guide and assist them in their Work? XIV. Whether they having received the Command to make Disciples in all Nations, (whether Jews or Gentiles) baptizing them, as aforesaid, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he commanded them, did not in all places Preach the Gospel, exhort the People to believe and be baptized, and baptized with Water those who did believe, though baptized before with John's Baptism, and though they had received the Holy Spirit, whether Jews or Gentiles? XV. Whether the Apostles, and the People converted by them, after they had received the Holy Ghost, did not, when they came together in one, or assembled for the Solemn Worship of God, break Bread, and eat the Lord's Supper, and do as their Lord did, and com∣manded them to do; and that so constantly, that there is not known any Assembly of Christians in the time of the Apostles, nor in many Ages after, to have been held for the Solemn Worship of God without it?
XVI. Whether the Apostles did not ordain Elders, and appoint others, by special Appointment, to do the same in every City; by such Authority, that none did presume to take the Office of Elder unto himself, but who was so ordained; or the Office of Ordaining Elders, but who was so appointed; either in the times of the Apo∣stles, or afterward, but who have been Infamous ever since? XVII. Whether seeing that our Saviour himself, though he needed not, would notwithstanding be baptized with Water, to fulfill all Righteousness, and thereupon had sensible Approbation from Hea∣ven, did also by his Apostles baptize with Water; and that it is plain by their Practice, that his Apostles, and the whole Church of Christ, did understand his Command to baptize all Nations, of Baptizm by Water, and as necessary for Forgiveness of Sins; and that Baptism with the Holy Ghost was peculiar to himself: whe∣ther, I say, this being so, it be not a forced and strained Interpre∣tation, without any sound ground, and contrary to the most authen∣tick means of explaining words, to restrain that Command to Baptism by the Holy Ghost only? XVIII. Whether, if such Construction be by any Spirit more than Humane, it be not the Spirit of Antichrist, or Satan trans∣formed, to with-hold Men under his own Dominion, from Solemnly ingaging with Christ, and from Forgiveness of their Sins in his Name? or, If it be only by Opinion of Men, such Opinion ob∣stinately persisted in, be not a Damnable Sin, contrary to subjection of all Imaginations to the Obedience of Christ, and subverting of Souls, and such Teachers to be abominated and anathematized by all sincere Christians, as Seducers, and the Ministers and Instruments of Satan, though they appear in Sheeps cloathing? XIX. Whether, it having been the constant Belief of all Na∣tions, (whether Jews or Gentiles) that they had a real, though Spi∣ritual, Communion with the Gods they worshipped, in their Par∣ticipation of their Sacrifices, as St. Paul intimates, 1 Cor. 10. and may be proved by good Authority; and Christians duly disposed, having a like Communion with Christ in the participation of the Consecrated Bread and Cup, as St. Paul affirms; and the Solemn Worshipping of God, by presenting our Prayers to the Father, with those Memorials of our Saviour's Passion, being plainly a Recognition of our Redemption by Christ, and of his Dominion over us, acquired by his Passion, and that that is the only Propi∣tiation, and He the only Mediator, by which, and by whom, we Mortals born in Sin can have Access to, and Acceptance with the Father; and St. Paul having received the Doctrine of what he
taught concerning this, from the Lord; and the ancient Christians frequenting this Ordinance, after they had manifestly received the Holy Ghost: Whether, I say, this being so, to reject these either as Types and Shadows, (which are indeed Antitypes, as the Grecians express it, Solemn Memorials, and Sensible Declarations before God, Angels and Men, of present internal Actions of our Minds, for the greater Manifestation and Notoriety of the Fact) be not meer Sophistry, Shuffle and Evasion; or as needless, upon pretence that Christ is come to them in the Spirit; or of their having the Substance; be not to set up themselves in Pride above the Apostles and Holy Christians, who had so manifestly the Spirit of God; nay, above Christ himself, viz. to reject that as needless, which he instituted as necessary; and a plain Evidence of the Subtilty and Delusion of Satan, to oppose Christ, and detain and withdraw Peo∣ple from his Solemn Worship, and under the most specious appea∣rance of the Spirit of God, by sensible Motions to things appearing Good, and by False Lights, to corrupt and adulterate them, and get and keep a residence in them, as if it was the Spirit of Christ? Whether such Obstinacy, such Fallacy, in such a Matter, of such Importance in Christianity, and yet so easie to Man, and void of all Exceptions, be not plain Evidence of a Mystery of Iniquity in it? XX. Whether to deliver those things in the Name of the Lord, as immediately from the Lord, and by his Spirit, which may be plainly perceived and detected to proceed either from a Humane Spirit, or a Spirit of Error, be not a great Presumption against the Holy Majesty of God, and a great Scandal to the Holy Doctrine of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, and therefore a double and great Sin; the Sin of the False Prophets of old, and that which in Ger∣many formerly, and since in this Nation, raised so great a Prejudice against the Truth? ADVERTISEMENT. TRacts Theological. 1. Asceticks, or the Heroick Piety and Vertue of the Ancient Christian Anchorets and Coenobites. 2. The Life of St. Antony out of the Greek of St. Athanasius. 3. The Antiquity and Tradition of Mystical Divinity among the Gentiles. 4. Of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, upon a Discourse of Sir Matthew Hale's concerning it. 5. An Invitation to the Quakers, to rectifie some Errors, which through the Scandals given they have fallen into. Printed for the Author, for the Use and Benefit of a Religious Society: And are to be Sold at Mr. Holder's House in Little-Trinity Lane, 1697.
