T225 11940712 51269
Londons Tryumph, PRESENTED BY Industry and Honour: WITH Other Delightfull Scaenes, ap∣pertaining to them: Celebrated in Honour of the Right Honourable Sr. JOHN IRETON, Knight, Lord Mayor of the said City, on the 29th. day of October, 1658. And done at the Cost and Char∣ges, of the Worshipfull Company of CLOTH-WORKERS. I. Tatham. blazon or coat of arms London, Printed by Thomas Mabb, 1658.
TO THE Worshipfull Company OF CLOTH WORKERS. MVsitians are not so much praised for their long, as their well Playing; I have endeavou∣red to compose this Peece, a peece of perfect Harmony; and from several Discords, to raise a Con∣cord: The Subject I have undertooke (though a bo∣dy in it self) hath severall dependances like the Tree that gives a being to her many branches. To express much of them in little, may argue some Iudgement: But to assume that to my self, without your generous Approbation, were to conclude me to have, either none at all, or very little. I confess had my Fancy had the Liberty to Feast without confinement, it might have digested it self into some farther illustrations: Nevertheless, I doubt not but you will meet with something in your small Survey, that is, as pleasing
as fitted for the purpose you intended it; All I aimed at, is to deserve your good Opinion, in the content or satisfaction you receive by this; and from thence to derive an Ambition to subscribe my self, Gentlemen, Your faithfull Servant, JOHN TATHAM.
To the Right Honourable Sr. IOHN IRETON, Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. My Lord, THere are a sort of Persons that make Flattery their Trade, and the Subjects they work upon, are such as are self-Affected, whose Ears are still open to hear their own Praise: It is confest, where Disert In∣habits, Commendation is re∣quisite; so it put on a modest Attire, and not shape it self with the vanity of Hyperbolizing:
And as your Lordship is a known Enemy to such Aereall Nothings; So have I strove ra∣ther to follow the narrow Tract of Truth, than the common Road of Adulation. All I have aymed at in this Epitome, is to set forth the ample Love and Affection your Company bears you; And if in the Progress thereof, I have hinted any way upon your Honours Goodness, as it hath been, and is a general received Truth; So I shall not blush or be a shamed to own it, and my self in all humbleness, my Lord, Your Servant Iohn Tatham.
Londons Tryumph, Presented by Industry and Honour; Performed at the Costs and Charges of the Worshipfull Company of CLOTH-WORKERS. October 29. 1658. The Mornings Businesse. THe Body being met in Cloth-workers Hall, consisting of, 1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants in Gowns, faced with Foynes, and Hoods. 2. The Livery in their Gowns, faced with Budge and their Hoods. 3. The Foynes and Budge Batchellors in Gowns and Satten Hoods. 4. The Gentlemen Ushers with white Staves and Chains of Gold about their Shoulders. 5. Eighteen Trumpets. 6. Three Ensignes. 7. Nine Drums, and foure Fifes. 8. The Banner and Streamer Bearers in Blew Coates and Red Caps.
9. The Pentioners, in Blew Gowns, Sleeves and Red Caps, each of them bearing in one hand a Javelin; and a Target in the other, where∣on is Painted the Arms of the several Benefa∣ctours of the said Company; and the Arms of the Master, Wardens and Assistants thereof. 10. The Foot Marshall and six Assistants. About eight of the Clock, the Marshall Ranks out the Company, two by two. Begining 1. WIth the Pentioners, in the Front of whom are placed three Drums, two Fifes, and one Ensigne. 2. In the second Division, falls in six Drums, two Fifes, & two Ensignes; in the Rear of them, six Gentlemen Ushers, with Chains of Gold a∣bout their Shoulders, and White Staves in their hands, and in the Rear of them March the Budge Batchellors. 3. In the third Division, falls in six Trumpets, after them the Standard and Banner of St. George; In the Rear of which, fall in eight more of the Gentlemen Ushers, accommodated as before; and in the Rear of them, the Foynes Batchellors. 4. In the fourth Division, falls in six other Trumpets, after them the Companies Standard and Banner; in the Rear of which, falls in ten more of the said Gentlemen Ushers▪ and in the Rear of them the Livery.
5. In the fifth Division, falls in four other Trumpets, Mr. Beale, Mr. Simpson, (famous men in their quality) and others after them; the Lord Mayors Standard and Banner; after them ten more of the Gentlemen Ushers; and after them the Assistants. 6. In the sixth Division, falls in eight more of the Gentlemen Ushers; after them the present Master and Wardens; and in the Rear of them, the City's Standard and Banner. The Body being thus drawn forth into severall Divisions, the Foot Marshall and his men, place themselves in the Front, and lead down Fan-Church street along to Cheapeside and so into Warwick-lane, where the Body receives the Lord Mayor, and his Retinue, and so march up Pater Noster Row, through Milk-street; and at Guild-hall-gate embrace the former Lord Mayor, and entertain his Attendance; from thence the whole Body march through Laurence lane, Soaper lane, and down Colledge-hill, where the Pentioners, Streamers, and Banner-bearers, open to the Right and Left, and make a Lane or Guard, through the which the Budge and Foynes Batchellors and their attendant Ushers, pass to the place appointed, for them to refresh them∣selves. The Livery, Assistants, the Master and War∣dens and their Attendant Ushers with the Trum∣pets passe down to Merchant-Taylors Stairs, at the East end of Three-Crain Wharff, into several Barges: The Foot Marshall, Pentioners, Strea∣mers and Banner-bearers, Drums, Fifes and En∣signes,
repair to Baynards Castle, where they are designed to wait the Lord Mayors return from Westminster: And the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants, take to their Barges, and the severall Companies betake themselves to the like, adorned with Streamers and Banners, and fitted with Hoe-boyes, Cornets, Drums and Trumpets, and so move towards Westminster, and by the way are saluted with severall peals of Ord∣nance, in token of Love; Being landed there, they make a lane or guard, from the Bridge to Westminster-hall, through which the Company of Cloth-workers and their Attendants pass, and the Lord Mayor and his Attendants: But the Li∣very and their Attendants return to their Barge. The Master, Wardens and Assistants, and their Retinue, march up into the Court of Exchequer, where a lane or guard is again made from the Ex∣chequer Stairs to the Exchequer Bar, through which the two Lord Mayors pass, the new on the right hand, the old on the left, together with the two honourable Sheriffs, and the Recor∣der to the Bar, where after a Speech made by the Recorder, declaring the cause of their Ad∣dresses, and Answer returned by the chief Baron, the new Lord Mayor receives his Oath; And then the Company falls in as before, leading down the Exchequer Stairs, to the Chancery, Vpper Bench, and Common Pleas Bars: At each of which the new Lord Mayor, Seals a Writ, and then all march a∣way in order as before, to their severall Barges; where being entered, and the Barges on float,
they are entertained by severall pieces of Ord∣nance as acclamations of joy: The Body making all convenient speed for Baynards Castle, but the severall Companies to Pauls Wharff, and other places in order to their making a guard or lane from Pauls Wharff, all along Thames street, and up Dowgate hill, and so through Walbrook unto the Stocks along Cheapside, into Pauls Churchyard round by Pauls Chain, through which the Com∣pany of Cloth-workers, and their Attendants the Lord Mayor and his attendants are to passe. The Lord Mayor being landed at Baynards Castle, the Gentlemen of the Artillery ground accommodate his Lordship with their Company, the Marshall with Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Co∣lours, Silk-works, Pentioners, Gentlemen Ushers, Budge Batchellors, and Foynes Batchellors, all in an Equipage ready to march. The Foot Martiall having rancked them out, the Gentlemen of the Artillery ground fall in there, and leading the Van through Thames street up Dowgate hill, through Walbrook towards the Stocks, where the two Scaenes or representative Tryumphs appear, being taken in the Reer of the Gentlemen of the Artillery ground, the whole body marching, till they come to Soaper lane, where that of Industry is placed. The First Scaene. Represents the Manufacture of Cloth-work∣ing in the severall Qualities thereof; on the top
of the Pageant, is sixt a Ram (the Crest of the Companies Arms) on which is seated a Figure. The Second Scaene. A Charriot drawn by two Griffins, wherein is presented the severall qualifications of a true Honourable Person. IN the same Equipage, the whol Body march, till the first Scaene comes neer Soaper-lane end; where it makes a stand; and the other Scaene, moves with the Body, till they come neere Pauls Chain, where that makes a stand; the Mar∣shall moving on till the Lord Mayor is ready to flanck the first Scaene, in which Industry is seat∣ed, clothed in Grey, on her head a Kirchief, in one hand she bears a Card or Shears, in the other a Scepter; on the top of which Scepter, is an open hand, and in the midest of it an Eye; and at the end of the Scepter, two small Wings, like those of the Cadices; and being alwayes busied in the middest of the Stage, a Bush is represented, under which a Sheapheard sits playing on Bag-pipes, Sheep feeding by him, and other persons cloth∣ed in Grey or Russet, representing the severall Occupations appertaining to the said▪ Trade,
sometimes leaving work and falling to dancing or singing; ever in one action or other. The Song. Who can boast a happinesse more securely safe than we: Since our harmless thoughts we dress, in a pure simplicitie: And chaste nature doth dispence, here her beauties Innocence. Envy is a stranger here; blest Content our bowls doth crown: Let such slave themselves to fear, on whose guilt the judge doth frown: We from evill actions are free, as uncorrupted ayre. With the Turtles whisper love, With the Birds do practice mirth: With our harmless Sheepe we move, and receive our food from Earth: Nor doe we disdaine to be, Cloth'd with the Lambs Liverie. Which being endded, on a sudden the Lord Mayor draws neer to the Scaen, to whom Industry makes her Address:
Industry's Speech. MY Lord your Pardon if my People doe Exceed their wonted Bounds to honour you; And laying work a side, presume to play; The sight of you gives them a Holli-day. Such season'd harmless pastime cannot hurt, That labor's hard,'s not soften'd with some sport: And though I'm called painfull Industry, Figur'd with weary hand and watchfull Eye: Yet I a moderate labour like the best, Whose burthen makes us not the same detest: For where the Mean is us'd, 'tis such a Treasure, It makes the Toyle become a seeming pleasure: And as no Art or Science can be found, Or Manull Trade within the spacious round Of the vaste Vniverse without me, so Experience Fames me, and the Finders too. The Mathematician that can sound▪ the Seas; And finde their depth, number the Pleiades; Seven Stars By whom the Marriner his course doth steere, Bringing the Merchant profit far and neer: Finding out Tract-less places, but for me Had mist the ayme of his discovery. I have digrest from what I was to say; A lawfull calling is our Theam to day: The benefit of which the Antients have Set forth in severall Ideoms, wise and grave: It is a Cities glory, and in part, Is to the Governour or Head, a Heart,
To which he is a very welcome guest; Not to devoure, but temperately to Feast: And this of Cloth-working is known to be, As numerous as full of Charity. It clothes the naked, feeds the hungry, and A generall profit brings unto the Land. The Picker, Carder, and the Spinner too; The Weaver, Fuller and the Dyer doe Relate to it, though in a different kinde, Like severall Nations to one power confin'd: Yet from those various vains many do feed, And are supply'd with succour in their need: I fear I'm tedious (Sir) and may offend: I'le therefore with the Companies wishes end. May no intestine broyles disturbe your rest, But Peace continue in the City. Nations brest: That when your time doth terminate; all may Applaud your Government, and bless this day. The Speech ended, this Tryumph moves up to the Van of the Marshall, and marcheth till the Lord Mayor come up to the second Tryumph. Scaen 2. A Charriot drawn by two Griffins (being the Supporters of the Companies Arms) on each of which is set a Figure, representing Affrica and Asia; each, having a Pendant in their hands, wherein is painted the Lord Mayor and Com∣panies Arms: Between the Griffins is placed a Figure holding the Cities Banner, and represen∣ting
Temperance; she is habited in white, with a red Mantle cast lightly over her,Temperance. her Temples circled with Lillies and Roses, in her right hand she bears a Palm-branch, in her left a Bridle. In the Front of the Charriot, is seated another Figure,Prudence. representing Prudence with the raigns in her hand, guiding the Griffins; she represents the figure of Ianus, as still foreseeing; on her head a Helmet of gold, circled with Leaves, ha∣bited in white with an oringe Mantle; in her right hand she holds a Dart, about which is twisted the fish called Remora, whereof Pliny speaks, hath force to hinder the passage of Ships; in her left hand she holds a Looking-glasse,The Fish cal∣led Remora. and at her feet lyes a Hart chewing the cud. In the midest of the Charriot are placed three other Figures,Faith. representing Faith, Hope and Cha∣rity: Faith, habited in white with a Mantle of flame colour, in her right hand she bears an Al∣tar with a Heart upon it; and in her left hand a Rock; her head circled with gold, in the front whereof is the figure of a Lambe. HopeHope is Cloathed in White with a Greene Mantle, and upon her head a flourishing Tree, and in her left hand, an Ancher. Charity is Clothed in White with a blew Man∣tle,Charity.  on her head a white Vaile, holding in her left Arme a Childe seeming to give it suck, and two Children standing playing, the one grasping her right hand.
On the head of the Chariot is seated Honour, a Man with a grave Aspect, his Brows encircled with Palm, a chain of Gold about his Neck, and Bracelets of Gold about his Wrests; his Garment of Purple colour'd Sattin; in his right hand a Lance; in the left a Shield, on the which is pain∣ted two Temples, with this Motto, Hic terminus erit; alluding to the Temple of Marcellus: On the flanck of the Charriot, two figures more re∣presenting Iustice and Fortitude. Iustice cloathed in white, with a Mantle of Purple, on her head a Wreath of Stars; in one hand she holds a Sword, in the other a Ballance. Fortitude, habited in white, with a Sky colour'd Mantle; On her head a Tower, in her right hand a Pillar, or the arm of an Oake; in her left hand a Shield, on which is painted, a Lyon fighting, or grapling with a Bear: Each of the seven Virtues trampling a Vice under feet. At the rear of the Charriot, are placed two Banners, the one adorned with the Lord Pro∣tectors; and the other with the Arms of such Members of the Company, as have been Lord Mayors. The body of the Scaen is full of Hills, whereon grows several Teasels (part of the Companies Badge) and about them severall Bryers and Thistles, where Lambs feed. The Lord Mayor being drawn neer to the se∣cond Tryumph Honour, makes his addresse thus,
Honour's Speech. THough some dark Relating to the death of the Protector. Clouds do interpose our joy; And seems her comely Beauty to distroy: The  The Compa∣nies Coloures to their Armes. Argent's now by Sables over-born, And Honour should in the same Livery mourn: Yet that this day may not obscured be, We'ave set our Confin'd heart at Liberty. I come not (Sir) to tell what Honour is, Or how attended; farther than what these Do represent; a Mind Serene should be, Of Lambe-like Innocence, from Envy free: And arm'd with Courage, to pass through the Bryer▪ Of sharpe Afflictions, till the Soule retires. These are the vertues that make man compleat, Fitted for Honour, and for Honours Seat; Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence, Temperance, Iustice and Fortitude, seem to advance Your this dayes Triumph, at whose feet doth lye. Each Rebel-Vice, to shew the standers by, The power of Vertue, and encourage them To shun the Counterfeit, and take the Iem. Disert is Honours Parent; I am then Yours by Descent, receive your own agen. To speak the truth of the Antiquity, Of th' honour'd Company of which y'are free. 'Tis twelve times twelve years since that they were made A Genuine Fraternity in Trade. You are the twelfth Lord Mayor that sprung from thence: And equall with the rest in Eminence.
As Rivers pay their Tribute to the Maine, And yet from thence replenisht are again: So fares your Company, from whom you doe, Receive their Love, and they your liking too: Then Sir extend your Talent, and expose Your large Endowments to their best repose, And th' Honour of your Country; temper so Mercy with Iustice, neither may o're flow: Iustice doth bear a Sword to terrifie, And likewise Scales to weigh Offences by. May Fortitude and Temperance guide you ever: And the whole stock of Vertues leave you never; That when you shall surrender up your breath, Your Memory may Tryumph after death. The Speech ended, this Scaen keeps the place, and his Lordship with the whole body passe through Ave Mary lane, and down Warwick-lane. The first Scaen placing it self at the South end of Warwick lane, and that of Honour marcheth down Warwick lane; and is placed at the Lord Mayors gate; the Pentioners fyling on the East side the lane, hanging their Targets on their Ja∣velins. The Martiall in Pauls Church yard, cause the Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Ensignes, Streamers, and Banner-bearers, to open to the right and left, for a lane, through which the Company is to pass; causing the first right hand man to stand; the rest advancing each before his Leader, untill the Master and Wardens terminate at the Lord Mayor door; So as the Master, Wardens, Assi∣stants,
Livery, and Batchellors have as a Rear∣guard; a Pentioner with his Target hung on the top of his Javelin; and then the Ushers, Colours, Trumpets, Drums and Silkworks, file up and place themselves in several parts as a Frontguard, as the Lord Mayor and Aldermen passe into the Lord Mayors house. The Lord Mayor being entered his house, the Martial, Drums, Trumpets, and Gentlemen-Ushers, march up to the head of the Master and Wardens, two by two: The whole Body march away to Cloth workers Hall; the Colours and Silk: works are furled, and with the Scaenes are conveyed to Cloth workers Hall. Honor finis Coronat.
