T25A 99825277 29655
A Short ACCOUNT, Or STATE of Mr. Sheridans CASE Before the Late House of Commons, In a LETTER to J. T. LONDON, Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Bull in Cornhill,
A short Account or State of Mr. Sheridan's Case before the late House of Com∣mons, in a Letter to J. T. SIR, SOME Years since, I sent you a long Letter under the Title of J. L. relating to an affair, wherein Mr. S. was deeply concerned; this gave you so much satisfaction, that I have thence sufficient encouragement to ven∣ture another; especially considering his vindication is much more necessary in the present instance, and that you are still his Friend, and the per∣son to whom of all Men living he is perhaps the best known. Under that Character you were mention'd in the Copy of a Letter carri'd among other of his Papers to the House of Com∣mons, writ in his favour to a great Minister by the late E. of Or. for whom living, and for whose memory, both your Gr. and he had, and ever must have, a just value and veneration. You will find you may still own this Gentleman without blushing, and to shew you were not deceiv'd in the opinion of his Integrity, I have taken the pains, for your sake, as well as for his, whose Friend I own my self, to gather up, and con∣vey to you, the History and occasion, that has made him as publickly known in this, as he was before in another Kingdom. I promise you an impartial Relation, and by it you will see, that Envy and Malice, where with he has been long assaulted, have to little purpose spit their Venom. You are not to learn the cause of his coming for England in June, 1677. nor knowing his temper, to wonder that havi
receiv'd some favours from his R. H. gratitude oblig'd him to an acknowledgment, and honour and generosity to make and a∣vow it in the time of that great Prince's adversity, whom he found by the unsteddy course of Humane affairs, and the craft and malice of designing Men, fallen from being the Peoples greatest Favourite into their highest Displeasure. Soon after, when the D. in obedience to his Royal Brother's commands went into a temporary Exile, which however o∣therwise uneasie, was chearfully undergone by him, who al-always resign'd his own, to the will of his Prince: Your Friend having little to hinder, laid hold of that opportunity, fol∣low'd him to Bruxels, and there spending most of the time he was abroad, express'd his Obligations and Duty in the best manner he was able. This, and his openly owning himself devoted to his R. H's interest, while consistent with Loyalty, gave occasion to his Adversaries, whom envy had encreas'd, to vent their Spleen, and endeavour to sully his Reputation, of all things to him most dear, by many false Insinuations, and indeed Diabolical Inventions, hoping thereby to disable him from rivalling them in any future pretension. He is not ignorant of the Authors, nor the train, who the better to compass their honest Design, hatch'd by one, that Mole-like, works under ground, and he thinks in the dark, they resolv'd at once his ruine, by rendring him odious to the Publick, to the Country, to the King, and to the Court; and therefore he was no sooner brought before the House of Commons, than he was represented to his Soveraign, as one that had spoken ill of His Majesty, and to the wonder of himself and others, this was first whisper'd to, and after sug∣gested by, a great Lord, to whom Mr. S. owns himself oblig'd for several favours. and in particular for a very kind recom∣mendatory Letter some Years since to Mr. Secretary Coven— But that which makes his surprize the greater, is, his not be∣ing able to find, on his part, any cause for the change of this Noble-man's greatly valu'd good opinion, of which he hop'd mself still possest, because certain he never disoblig'd his
Lordship, and defies any Man to make out that in word or a∣ction, he ever spake or did irreverently or disloyally of the King, whose Service, you know, no man has more zealously promoted, nor less ineffectually, according to his Station and Power. However, in the height of his-misfortune, when to all he did not appear guiltless, he had the happiness to have a Gentleman of Honour and Quality (who by the recommen∣dation of our deceas'd, and never to be forgotten noble Friend, several Years ago, took him into his particular favour and ac∣quaintance) publickly to assert his Integrity, his Service, and his Loyalty. An Act of Friendship, he is bound by all the ties of Gratitude, ever to remember and acknowledge; few Men in this Age having the courage, or the honesty, to own any Man in adversity, or to defend innocence, when endeavour'd to be run down by faction, nise, and tumult. The ground of this Discourse in publick at the King's Dinner, was the Copy of a Letter found among Mr. S's Papers, which plainly appears to have come from another, but not to him, to whom had it been directed, he could not be therefore criminal, it being in no Man's Power to prevent any Post-Letter. And yet give me leave to say, that ingenuity and good nature may easily and very naturally make a candid interpretation of this Paper; wherein what ever Injury was contain'd, they are mostly, if not only, guilty, who since the seizing Mr. S's Writings, have sent Copies of it to all the Coffe-houses of London. But to give you the Story from the beginning, you are to un∣derstand, that the first week the Parliament met, Mr. S. was told by a Person of Honour, that he was design'd to be brought into Trouble: This was overheard from several, among whom were some Members then looking on at Mrs. C. standing in the Pillory, whereupon he was advis'd to withdraw: Receiving the same account from many others, and yet confident in his Innocence, he resolv'd not to stir. Every day he was alarm'd afresh, and told of great enquiries made after his Actions, and himself censur'd for a Papist, a Coleman, and a Jesuit. At length one Peter Norris makes complaint of his being Impri∣son'd
at Daver by Mr. Secretary Jenkin's order. Mr. Secretary said, as I am inform'd, what he did was not unknown to the King and Council. Upon this occasion Mr. S. was nam'd and a Committee appointed to examin the matter. Mr. S. appears, and acknowledges, he had given a description of Peter Nor∣ris to Mr. Secretary about the latter end of May last, and ac∣quainted him that he was told, this Man knew as much of the bottom of the Plot, as any in England, and was gone into France to fetch over a Priest suppos'd equally knowing. 'Tis not necessary to entertain you withal the questions, ve∣ry forreign to this matter, by some of the Committee put to Mr. S. 'tis enough to tell you that he truly, though perhaps not satisfactorily, answer'd all, attended their pleasures a whole week, was thrice before them, once with Dr. D. from whom as News he publickly had the story, and after, the Descripti∣on, as the Dr. himself openly confess'd. I know not whether it be necessary to acquaint you, that whatever account the Dr. had, Mr. S's was not exact as to Norris's bringing the Priest into England; for it appear'd at the Committee by Pa∣pers taken with Norris at landing, that he was to Conduct him to Amsterdam, to Sr. W. W. then there, and that he had pretended to be sent by Dr. T. in conjunction with the E. of Sh. and another Noble Peer, that the Priest had been dead a∣bove 8 Months, before he began his Journey; a Journey un∣dertaken upon as good an account and sure information, as that of a Justice of Peace of Westminsler, who rid Post 100 Miles to bring alive from the Country Beddingfield the Jesuit, Buried 12 Months before out of the Gate-house. It happen'd the evening of that Day Mr. S. was Commanded to attend the Committee, I was in Company with several Persons, of Qua∣lity, when news was sent that the E. of P. was carri'd to the Tower, and Mr. S. to the Gate-house, who in half an hour after came in himself, and guess'd the Person, and concluded what the other cou'd not deny, that the story was from one that wish'd it had been true, not out of Malice to Mr. S. beyond his name a Stranger, but to a very great Person. After Mr. S's
first Examination, he receiv'd by the Penny-post two Letters in unknown hands, without any name, the one directed to his Lodging, the other to the Royal Coffee-house; the one in Friend∣ship to three Persons of Honour, his acquaintance, nam'd in the Letter, advising him to fly, if he did not resolve to disco∣ver, as to him at least impossibilities against the D. the other was more Terrible, tho' both mix'd with threats and promi∣mises, and in this place for receiving his answer, and after for meeting appointed. But these he look'd upon as bugbears, fit only to work upon Children and Cowards. Having produc'd the Dr. who was his Author, he look'd up∣on himself acquitted from any further trouble, yet some angry Persons, displeas'd a hole was not found in his Coat, offer'd wagers he wou'd be lay'd by the Heels in ten days, of which, by two very great Persons, notice was given him, with advice to retire, at the Tria! of my Lord Stafford; but resolv'd to encounter the worst cou'd happen, he utterly rejected the Motion. On Thursday, December 9. He sound it was no longer a jest, for it was then order'd that Mr. S.'s and D. D's Papers shou'd be seiz'd, and themselves brought in Custody of the Serjeant at Arms to the Bar of the house. In pursuance of this, some Members were sent to their Lodgings between 12 and 1, who coming to Mr. S. 's were told he was abroad; they meeting one of his Servants, sent for him, who finding his Master at the Coffee-house, acquainted him that Four of the House of Com∣mons whom he knew not, stay'd for him; he goes to 'um im∣mediately. They after a diligent search for his Papers, spoke of his being sent for by a Messenger. He answer'd, that was unnecessary to one that was ready to wait on them to their house, whither as he was going, they met their Officer, and took him into the Coach. Mr. S. not long after being call'd to the Bar; was ask'd wheter a Paper then shew'd him was his Writing: He answer'd it was not, then two lines at the bot∣tom of Norris's description were shewn, which he acknow∣ledg'd. After some other questions he was Commanded to
withdraw, and a Committee order'd to see the Serjeant search his pockets. But to prevent that trouble, Mr. S. had deliver'd them all his Papers, so that nothing cou'd be found save a purse of Gold, out of which in order to be search'd for Papers, more Guinnies were said to be tumbl'd, than it cou'd possibly con∣tain. But excepting your Friends fortune, every Molehill re∣lating to him was reputed a Mountain, and no doubt many were big with expectations what he should bring forth, who was said to have several Colemans in his belly; and therefore perhaps it was, that the Serjeant sent him to Lodge at a Mid-wifes, where being laid, in spight of all art and labour, the long hop'd for conceiv'd great issue, upon delivery, was found dwindl'd to a Mouse. Parturiunt montes — He was 4 or 5 times at the Bar that day, and as often the next; his story being matter of fact, was found to agree exactly with the Doctor's, who was not seldomer examin'd, and tho no crime was object∣ed, nor any information made, yet was he confin'd a close Prisoner, and the Messenger told, if he suffer'd his escape, his own Life wou'd be in danger: an opinion, that cannot be suf∣ficiently admir'd by those who consider, that, had he any ap∣prehension of guilt, he might with ease have avoided that days fury. The worthy Coll. M. whom you knew in Ireland by the Title of Capt. came in to accuse Mr. S. but of a Circumstance, that if true, cou'd not amount to a Crime. Yet this seem'd so great, that the Gent. cou'd hardly bring it out in Mr. S.'s. pre∣sence, whatever he had done before, uttering then his words so like a Mouse in a Cheese, that the Speaker was forc'd twice to command the raising his Voice. After Mr. S. was committed, great and narrow Enquiries and Endeavours were made to find or make him more obnoxi∣ous; but in vain: His Innocence was his security from peril, tho' not from charge and trouble. Among others, Doctor Tongue's Son in Newgate was examin'd, whom Mr. S. never saw, having industriously avoided all that were or stood rela∣ted to the Kings Evidence. The Servant-maid of his Lodg∣ging
was sent for, not only to the Bar, but to Coffee-houses and Taverns, promis'd and encourag'd, threatn'd and advis'd; but alas, she cou'd not answer expectations. Even a little young Girl of about Eleven years old, not above Ten days his Ac∣quaintance, was very strictly Catechiz'd, concerning his Dis∣course and Conversation about the Parliament. Sure, these persons beleiv'd him Master of none, or of much less under∣standing, than they have since reported him. But on Saturday following Dr. D. who confess'd himself a R. C. was without Fees (tho' he was sore'd to pay them) or Pe∣tition, discharg'd. Mr. S. hearing of this, writes a long Letter to an honourable Member of the Committee, praying his Lordship to represent to the House what he thought most ma∣terial. On Monday his Lordship by an Order of the House was allow'd to see Mr. S. and bring him a Letter open'd by the Speaker, relating to a particular concern of another, from whence mighty Discoveries were expected, but they came to nothing. By this Member he pray'd to have liberty to speak for himself the next day, but hearing nothing from him, he wrote to the Speaker on Tuesday, entreating he might appear before them, and not suffer under Arbitrary power so much dreaded from others. Hereupon Mr. Speaker was pleas'd on Wednesday the 15th, to have him sent for; being call'd in, he was told, if he had any Discovery to make, the House was ready to receive it. To this he reply'd, That as to the Plot, he cou'd have none, but he had another relating to himself; viz. To know what was his Crime, and who his Accusers, and that he might according to the Laws of the Land, answer for himself. To this was said, They knew his Parts were not much short of the Person's he succeeded, and that he must not think to impose upon so great and wise an Assembly, by studi'd Words and Speeches. Mr. S. reply'd, If he cou'd, he wou'd not endea∣vour by any Rhetorical flourishes to deceive them with Fals∣hoods; That he design'd nothing but Truth very plainly wor∣ded; That he hop'd their Justice would give him leave to vin∣dicate himself, and shew the unreasonableness of running down
a Man upon general Sarmises and malicious Reports, or of con∣cluding him guilty, before he was Heard or Convicted. Here∣upon he was order'd to withdraw, and after some short De∣bate call'd in, and allow'd the Favour he desir'd; but with Caution, not to be tedious. Being thus permitted, he began the following Speech, out of which he omitted very little, and is the same in Substance with what he writ in several Letters to Members of the Committee appointed for his Examination; viz. The Lord Aunesley, Sir R. Clayton, and Sir Rovel. Gwin. The Speech of Mr. Tho. Sheridan, after his Examination before the late House of Commons, On Wednesday the 15th. of December, 1680. TIs, I confess Sir, a great Misfortune to fall under the Displeasure of the Honourable House of Com∣mons, it is a Burden, no Man, tho' never so great, is able to bear; It cannot then be a wonder, if so inconsiderable a Person, and of so little strength as I, shou'd stoop under the weight; Not that I fear any Danger to my Person, but grieve for the wounds it gives my Reputation, which I have always valu'd above my life, and that it might be preserv'd spotless, I have ever made it my study to keep a good Conscience, void of Offence, towards God, and towards Man; And Therefore I little expected to be brought as a Criminal to This Bar, or any Tribunal. But I am convinc'd, Innocence is no security against the Darts of Envy or Malice, and that he who will hazard his Body or his Soul, may take away the Life and Fame of any one at pleasure; 'tis to men of such principles I owe my pre∣sent Trouble: I do not say this to reflect upon any Member of
this Great and Honourable Assembly. My Evil is from with∣out Doors, and I know the Authors, and the Contrivance, so well, that, if it were convenient, I cou'd name them, and trace the whole Chain, Link by Link, to the first, hammer'd by Prejudice, and particular Interest. I do not wonder that, in the present Circumstances, you shou'd have one Ear open to all reports that any way relate to the publick, this is due to your Station, and to your Prudence; And because Justice and your Honour require it, I as little doubt your reserving the other Ear for the Pleas and Defence, of the Accus'd, or that you will Condemn any Man unheard. Upon this assurance it is, that I am bold to beg, with all due respect and reverence, that I may have liberty to speak for my self without interruption. If you are pleas'd to grant me this favour, I will use it as fully and briefly as I can, for your satis∣faction and my own vindication. I have been represented (I hope without offence I may say, traduc'd, for so I can make it appear) for a person of no For∣tune, a Papist, a second Coleman, and what is more rediculous, tho' not more false, a Jesuit and the Duke's Confessor. In clearing my self from these Aspersions, I must be sorc'd, to say something, which nothing but necessity, that either has none, or breaks all Laws, can excuse from vanity. As that I was born a Gentleman, of one of the Antientest Families, and related to many Considerable, in Ireland; in one County there is a Castle, and a large Demean, and in another a grea∣ter tract of Land for several Miles together, yet known by our Name. I need not say who was the head or chief, 'tis too much that my Grandfather was the last that enjoy'd the Estate, and that my Father, left an Orphan in the beginning of King Jame's Reign, soon found himself dispossess'd, and ex∣pos'd to the World, that whole County, with five others in Ʋlster, being intirely escheated to the Crown. My Parents Protestants, my Mother a Gentlewoman of England of good Fortune, a Foster, who for my Fathers sake, quitted her Coun∣try and her Relations, both fam'd for honesty, for their Loyal∣ty
and Sufferings in the late Rebellion, when my Father scap'd twice narrowly with his Life, and at last was forc'd to fly, for relieving and protecting both the Fortunes and Persons of very many English. To my Birth I had a suitable Education; I have some slen∣der pretence to Letters, am not altogether a Stranger to the Civil-law, nor the Laws of England, the means intended for my Livelihood. But, without my seeking or knowledge, some Friends pro∣cur'd for me the Collectorship of the Customs of Cork, and the management of most of the Inland Revenue of that County: This Imployment, and the Accidents attending it, together with that of the East-India Prizes, and others in the last War with Holland, put into Kinsale, enabl'd me to bring for my own proportion of Advance-money, for the present Revenue-Farm of Ireland, 9532 l. as appears upon Record in the Chancery of England; and being by a Brother of mine, then here, without my privity or desire, engag'd in this un∣dertaking, and a stranger to all the Partnership, excepting one, June last was three years I sold my Interest for 4000 l. pro∣fit This Money I imploy'd in Corporation and Church-Lea∣ses, in Mortgages, and other Securities, at 10 l. per cent. the In∣terest of that Kingdom. And after this account, if I have no visible real Estate, I hope no man can doubt but that I may live independently, tho' besides, I happen to be a younger Bro∣ther, so far from bein  prejudice, that it's possible to prove my advantage, being design'd the Heir of two elder Brothers, who neither have, nor are like to have any Children. The Bills of Exchange, drawn, and remitted to and from Ireland, by Sir John Frederick and Company, Mr. D. Arthur, and other known Merchants, will shew my proper Fond, and no Man's Bounty, supported my Expences; and therefore, because I can with great Truth, I do the more freely declare, That I neither have, nor ever had any Relation to the Duke or Dutchess of York, as a Servant or Dependant, a Sallary-man or Pensioner, and was so far from succeeding Mr. Coleman, that his Employ∣ment
never enter'd into my Thoughts, taken up with Affairs of a far different nature. My Journey to Flanders was no way criminal, and in a great measure the effect of curiosity, having before seen very little of that Countrey, Holland, or Germany; and as I went not with the Duke, so my return in his Train was purely accident. For my Religion, as I was born of Protestant Parents, so I was all along bred a Member of the Church of England, and (by the Grace of God) will live and die in this Profession; for it is not so much owing to the chance of Education, as to my choice, being satisfi'd by Reason, by Scripture, and the Laws of my Country, no inconsiderable Argument, that of all, it is the most purely Christian. Since I was seventeen years of Age I have gone duly to Church, and several times in every Year receiv'd the Sacra∣ment; I did so twice while in Fianders, as Dr. Lake and Dr. Doughty (the Duke's Chaplains) and others can witness; and I have done so six times since my return thence; there are in this Honourable House that can testify some part of this Truth. I have taken the Oathes of Allegiance and Suprema∣cy eleven times, am ready to submit to all further injuncti∣ons of Law in matters of Religion, have in Disputes encoun∣ter'd, tho unwillingly, with many of the several Orders abroad, remain'd unshaken in my Principles; This at Ghent, putting a Jesuit (more zealous than the rest) into great Passion, made him pronounce me obstinate, and declare, He cou'd sooner bring over ten of the most rigid Phanaticks of England, than hope to make me a Proselyte. Now if all this be not sufficient to wipe off the imputation of Popery, I consess I am to seek for a cle∣fence. Among other 'tis objected, That by my Interest in his R. H. I got my Brother made a Bishop, in opposition to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and contrary to Merit. To this I an∣swer, That my Brother has been as much, and as injuriously, though not so publickly, defam'd as I; that he came off with Honour; that a peek between two great Lords of that King∣dom,
and one of the greatest of this, did not only prevent his being sooner promoted, but was the occasion of his being bespatter'd with many falshoods and calumnies; that few in Ireland deserve it better; that what he enjoys, he obtain'd not in opposition to, though without the recommendation of, the chief Governour, nor by the mediation of the Duke, but of a great Minister, in the presence of my Lord Bishop of Lon∣don, from the King's immediate Grace openly shewn in Coun∣cil, and with a particular mark of His Royal Favour. I hope 'tis no Crime to honour and revere the Duke as he is a Prince, or if a private Man to love and value his innate Worth and Qualities; or to have said, as it is reported, (I wish nothing else had been with less Truth) That I wou'd ha∣zard my Life and Fortune to do him any lawful and just Ser∣vice: If it be a Crime, as I can no ways apprehend of the Bro∣ther of my King, while publickly pray'd for in all the Church∣es of the three Kingdoms, I confess my self guilty; But I am not so wedded to his Interests, as to espouse or pursue them, if he can have any such, contrary to the Duty I owe, and ever will pay, my Soveraign, my Country, my Religion, and my God. And I do here most solemnly protest, as I hope for Heaven, if I knew him in any instance a Conspirator or a Traytor, I wou'd not only detest, but endeavour to bring him to publick Justice; and if ever he can be prov'd a Criminal of this na∣ture, I will have no more respect nor regard, but less, for him, than I wou'd for any common Offender. And therefore, without the hopes of Reward, or the fears of Punishment, I cleclare in the presence of the Almighty, if I knew any part of the Papish-Plot, or the Persons concern'd in't, I wou'd long since have reveal'd the whole Contrivance: But none in their senses can believe, that a known Protestant cou'd be made pri∣vy to such a Conspiracy; to which, if necessary, might be added, that I was in a Country remote from that, where the Design is said to be hatch'd.
I own my self of so extensive a Charity, as to love the per∣sons of all honest Men, notwithstanding their differing from me in opinion, about the Modes and Circumstances of Reli∣gion, and to be for Liberty of Conscience, when consistent with the safety of the state, to all quiet and peaceable Dissen∣ters; But when 'tis urg'd and made use of to other ends, or as a Cloak for Rebellion or Treachery, I abominate all such Indulgence. But I will no longer dwell on this Subject, than to mind you of Collonel Mansel's mistake or forgetfulness, when he in∣forms this Honourable House, That in or about July 1678. I din'd at his Treat for a German Lord, in or der to a Design of his up∣on a Forreign Command, and that 2 or 3 days after, Ishou'd advise him against it, telling him the Duke wou'd very soon have occasion for such Officers. First, I do say, to have said so was no Crime; But I easily see through this Artifice, 'tis to serve as an argu∣ment, that I understood somewhat of the Plot, of which I am as ignorant as any man living, beyond what I have since learnt from the Prints and publick Fame. In the next place, I do ut∣terly deny I ever said the words, because I do not know the Duke had any such Design, and am certain I connot invent. Besides, by many circumstances, needless here to mention, that Dinner was after the Courts return from Windsor, and consequently after the breaking forth of the Plot. I desire the Gentleman wou'd recollect himself; at that time he was very great and intimate with a Roman Catholick, H. N. from whom if he heard not the words, as I am not apt to imagine, I am confident he dream'd them. He cannot be ignorant that I knew why he was disbanded in Ireland, &c. and that I al∣ways declin'd, not only as having no Interest, but as unwilling for other reasons, to introduce him to the Duke, as he often press'd; and therefore he made his application to others, but with as ill success. And now give me leave, I beseech you, Mr. Speaker, to ans∣wer an Objection, that I shou'd have prescrib'd a way how the King shou'd live without Parliaments: I am so far from
entertaining such a thought, that I ever esteem'd the Constitu∣tions of England by King, Lords and Commons, the happiest kind of Government in the world; and if the discourse called, The Rise and Tower of Parliaments, &c. be mine, of which many will have me the Author, the reading it, wou'd be of this a suf∣ficient Confutation: In that, Parliaments are magnifi'd, their power rather enlarg'd than lessen'd, and their frequent meet∣ings recommended as most convenient. In a word, whatever Character my Adversaries have given of me, I am not a Protestant in Masquerade, I can neither Lie nor Dissemble, I am really what I profess, and as the word is commonly taken, no lover of Arbitrary Government, in any single or complicated Body. As to the Letter subscrib'd by Fitz James, I do sincerely pro∣test I have no Acquaintance with any of the Name, nor ever saw the Hand before, nor the intended Messenger C. who not finding me, left it with the Maid-Servant: But in this there is nothing Criminal, As to the Computations, they are a Transcript from a Pa∣per of Sir Peter Petts, containing the number of Conformists, Non-conformists, and Papists, throughout England, taken by the Bishops order, in or about the time of the General Indal∣gence, and by him produc'd presently after the Plot, upon the talk that there were fifty thousand Papists, able to bear Arms, within Temple-Bar and about Westminster; a number near double to what, at the taking this survey, they were found, Men, Women and Children, in the whole Kingdom. For the Copy of my Cousin Wilsons writing, I confess it the only thing I endeavour'd to evade, having ingenuously, and without reserve answer'd all other questions. That individual Paper I never saw before the preceding night, when meeting it in the Drawer of my Bed-Chamber, (always open, whether I am at home or abroad) I laid it uppermost with purpose of inquiring how he came by it, and whether he knew the Au∣thor; but not seeing him till next day in presence of the Mem∣bers sent to search my Lodgings, I cou'd not ask him, and was
surpriz'd to have so Indiscreet and Reflective a Paper found in his hand, and among mine. 'Tis true, that about three weeks before, I found another of the same Contents, in an old crab∣bed hand, to me unknown; which after I had read, and con∣cluded it might possibly be left by some of my Acquaintance in their Visits, and being unable to guess at the person, not knowing how long it had layn there, being dated above a Month before, I immediately threw it into the Fire. Yet in this Paper, which has made so great a noise, there is neither Felony nor Treason; and being the Act of another, and ne∣ver by me publish'd, having neither Sub, nor Super, Scripti∣on, nor Writ to, nor from me, nor Copy'd by my order, can∣not, I presume, be a Libel, nor I hope imputed to me, to whom it came perfectly by Accident: If it were lawfull to speak ones guesses from the Contents, it shou'd seem to have come from a Learned Gentleman, one of your own Members, then in the Country, skill'd in the Spanish Tongue, to which both my Cousin and I are perfect strangers; nor was either of us out of London then, or for some time before. If I cou'd as well hit upon the Person, as his Quality, I wou'd give a more satisfacto∣ry account of this matter; and I hope this Honourable Assem∣bly will the sooner credit me, when they reflect, that upon see∣ing another Paper of my Kinsmans writing, I wou'd not by a Lie deny this to be his hand. As for my writing to Mr. Gadbury, I refer my self to the Let∣ter in Sir William Waller's hands: I have told you the acciden∣tal occasion; I desir'd from him, (whose Acquaintance I knew large, even among the Members of that Parliament) the most material of publick News; I neither ask'd for Schemes or Fi∣gures, I have ever laugh'd at the idle and ridiculous Art of Ju∣dicial Astrology, invented, at least practis'd, to impose upon, and pick the Pockets of the Ignorant and the Credulous. And now as to the Cause of my Commitment: The story Dr. D. told me as News, of Peter Norris his knowing as much of the Plot as any man in England, his going, or being gone into France to fetch a Priest to be a Witness, I can only say, as
near as I remember, I gave the same account to Mr. Secretary; not as an Informer, but as News; for not being look'd upon as such, I was not desir'd to Swear, nor cou'd I to a hear-say. In this I call Heaven to witness I had no Sinister design, but an Honest intention of having the full Truth brought to Light: Nor do I know, nor have I any reason to believe, that Mr. Secretary's after proceedings were from any other princi∣ple. Upon my telling him the Name of Norris, and his saying he had never before heard it, and commanding me to send the Doctor to him, or the others Description; As soon as I met with the Doctor, which was several days after this Discourse; and he as not knowing Mr. Secretary, resusing to go, I desir'd from him the Description, which sometime after he brought me, I gave or sent to Mr. Secretary, for I cannot tell whether. But of this I am certain, that all I knew of the Affair, was from the Doctor only; and that I never communicated it to any, but Mr. Secretary, and that by what I writ under the De∣scription, appears to be near a Month after Norris his departure, and consequently cou'd not be design'd to stop his Journey, or prevent the Priests coming over, or obstruct the fuller disco∣very of the Plot, which no man living desires more than my self, believing it the Interest of every honest Subject and Pro∣testant, (out of which number I cannot be excluded) to have all in't, from the highest to the lowest punish'd according to merit; and that tranquility it has so long disturb'd, re-settl'd in the Kingdom: And now I hope none of the Members of this Honourable House can imagine I cou'd be guilty of so Horrid a Crime, as having any knowledge of the Priests being poison'd, as is suspected, or given out he might be. I am so ignorant of this, or any part of the Conspiracy, that I do not so much despise, as decline, because not needing it, the gene∣rous offer of Mr. Speaker, or other Members Intercession for my Pardon: Lacknowledge, as I ought the Favour with all fitting respect; but I thank God, I am so Innocent, that I dare, as now I do, challenge the whole World, to make out one par∣tisular, where in Word or Action, in the whole course of my
life, I have done or spoken falsly, or unjustly; and yet no man ever suffer'd more Calumnies without any cause, or the least shadow of Truth, beyond the witty malice of those, whose Eyes are blinded, and Consciences sear'd by Envy and Inte∣test, who from pretended Friends are become my real Adver∣saries, contrary to Reason and Justice. But surther, none can believe I cou'd keep any dangerous Correspondence, when its well known that for these three years and a half all my Letters were no otherwise Directed, than for me at the Reyal Coffee∣house. Besides it appear'd at the Committee by Norris his own Pa∣pers, that this Priest Dowdall, (whose Name I never heard be∣fore,) died september laft was twelve month, eight months be∣fore I heard there was such a man in the World as Norris, and at a time when I was in another Country. And since you have thought fit to acquit Dr. D. who was my Author and Principal, and who own'd himself a Roman Catholick, I hope you will not think it equal, that I a known sincere Protestant, and but an Accessary, should stand Committed, and Commit∣ted after such a manner, as neither Felon nor Traytor, not on∣ly Accus'd, but Convicted, cou'd suffer a closer Confine∣ment. And here, Mr. Speaker, I intreat your leave to ask Pardon, if at the Committee my Behaviour has offended any of the Members of this Honourable House, and to say, whatever heat I express'd, was the effect of Passion, to which I was mov'd, by hearing several of them in publick, as at Locketts, and other Eating and Coffe-Houses, had call'd me Papist, and a second Coleman, with other Aspersions I cou'd not bear with∣out Resentment: To this was added my being commanded a Messenger for Dr. D. (an Office beneath me,) and wherein I could not expect to be sucoesful, not knowing whether he wou'd appear without Compulsion. I hope it will not be ac∣counted an unexpiable Crime for a Gentleman of more Years and Discretion, than I can pretend to, to shew himself di∣sturb'd at a conceiv'd Indignity or Affront; and in hopes it
may not be accounted so hainous, I do once more with all due Submission beg Pardon. There is one thing more I cannot without trouble touch upon, the Reflections the Written Votes, very different from the Printed, bring upon my Repu∣tation. In those 'tis said, it appears that I have succeeded Mr. Coleman, than which there never was a more groundless, false, or malicious invention: And also that I question'd your Authority, and said your Proceedings look'd like the late Re∣bellion. However Sir William Roberts came to make the Re∣port, my words were to Sir John Morton in another Room, and to him I appeal, whether they were not thus. Upon his ad∣vising that I shou'd fare the better, if I freely shew'd my Pa∣pers, I told him I wou'd not hide one, nor dispute their Pow∣er, though I had heard others did; and that the Seizing Clo∣sets and Writings, was not only Illegal, but look'd upon as one of the Causes of the last Rebellion; thereupon he wish'd I had not said the Words: I reply'd, I ment no harm by those Objections, and notwithstanding my mentioning them, they shou'd find in me a readiness to obey, and an intire submissi∣on; and added, if they were offensive, I unsaid them, and ask'd his Pardon, as I now humbly do from the whole House, if I am thought herein to have offended: And to do Sir John Justice, he was pleas'd to promise he wou'd take no notice of the Discourse, unless commanded; to whom with the rest of the Committee I refer myself, whether of my own accord I was not going along with them, when I met your Mes∣senger. If I had been guilty of any Crime, I had not only Warning, but Threats and Advices to fly many days, some Weeks be∣fore, when I was told by Letters from unknown hands, and by several persons of Honour and Quality, that I was design'd to be brought into trouble; I need not in this place say, for what reason. And here I cannot by the way but take notice of a Report made by Justice Warcp at this Bar, and spread at Coffe-Houses; that he shou'd have Search'd Mr. Sheridans Lodg∣ings, and there found only a parcel of Popish Books, whereas
he never was in mine, but at Mr. Brunetly's House, an Italian Merchant, whose Books chose must have been; and there∣fore I hope this was some Clarks, rather than his mi∣stake. And now Once no Man can be plac'd beyond the reach of Malice, and the Devices of the Wicked, and that I happen to be brought hither as a suppos'd Criminal, I am extreamly pleas'd I have the good fortune to meet with so wise and equil Judges, as compose this August and Honourable Assembly; where I am so far from sears, that I do not doubt, but upon an exact Scrutiny, and an Impartial Examination, my ha∣ving been so infinitely, and so wrongfully expos'd to the pub∣lick, will be so far from gratifying my Adversaries unjust de∣fires, that they will not only be deseated, but my self greatly advantag'd; and therefore I leave my Cause at the Footstool of your Justice, and willingly submit to your Pleasure and De∣terminations, praying no other favour, than what I am sure you wou'd grant without asking; your full Consideration of the whole Matter, your speedy Condemnation or Acquittal, as I shall be found Guilty or Innocent. The next Day after his Speech, Mr. Sheridan was freed from his Close Restraint, and his Confinement made more Tolera∣ble, by the Liberty of Conversing with whom he pleas'd: A Committee was appointed to examine, whether the Paper found loose in his Chamber, were of his Own, or Nephew's Writing; though sor it, as a Breach of Priviledge, the Lst had been Committed Five Days before. Where, by the way, it may seem odd, That Copying a Letter without Divulging it, because therein a Member of the House was reflected on, shou'd be a Crime deserving so severe a Treatment, as the Commitment of a Young Gentleman of the Temple; who, Though he own'd it his Hand, and declar'd he Transcrib'd it for his own Use, as a thing Pleasing and Witty in the Stile and Composition, was yet notwithstanding, commanded (in their Presence) to Write Three or Four Lines; which he did
with that Speed, that they cou'd not but be satisfy'd he did not Counterfeit. Some Malicious Persons will have it, that his Crime was, his Relation to Mr. Sheridan. At this Committee, both the Uncle, and the Nephew were treated, first Civilly, and after Roughly enough; the One threatned with the Pillory &c. the Other with an intended Report to the House, of his being a very dangerous Person. To which he reply'd, That he was sorry such an Opinion was taken up, without any Ground; that he cou'd not prevent their Pleasure; only desir'd, They would do. as they would be done unto; and consider, that he was as true a Protestant, as any in the Church of England; and as Honest a Man, as any in the Kingdom; that he Defy'd the disproving of either of those Two Truths; and if such Men were Dangerous, none were otherwise, but Fools and Knaves. But what-ever was the Cause, 'tis observable, that this Report was never made, tho' the Committee Sate Thursday the Sixteenth of December. After this, he was often told by several Persons, That they heard, his Name wou'd be inserted amongst the Papists, in the de∣sign'd Bill of Banishment: An Artifice too weak to srighten one of less Courage, who cou'd not but be assur'd, so unrea∣sonable a Clause was unlikely to pass the whole House of Com∣mons; or, if it shou'd, it wou'd not the King and Lords; the Great Conservers of Justice, and the Supreme Tribunal of England. Having stood Committed Eifteen Dayes, at great and ex∣cessive Charges, and after all Inquiries and Searches, nothing Criminal being found against him; he was by some Friends, as well Members as others, together with his Cosin, that they might not seem Stubborn, prevail'd upon to Petition for their Releasement; but to no purpose, some angry Members oppo∣sing the Reading of their Petitions. I am consident, this cou'd not be the Sense, because not agreeable to the Justice, tho' per∣haps to the Orders and Rules, of the whole House; yet there∣upon they were laid aside. Mr. Sheridan, having now too much Cause to conclude, he was not like to be Releas'd during that Session, since it was
not in his Power to answer the Expectations or Desires of some Persons, resolv'd to seek his Remedy by a Habeas Corpus, upon a Statute lately made, to prevent Illegal and Arbitrary Imprisonments; from which, if he cou'd not be freed, he hop'd from the Twelve Judges, and the Chancellor, if refus'd, to recover Six Thousand Five Hundred Pounds Penalty, to Sup∣port and Ease his Expence. But the Dread of the House of Com∣mons wou'd not suffer any of the many Counsellors or Sollici∣tors he consulted, to intermeddle in the Matter. Nevertheless, he was not discourag'd, but of himself pursu'd it, tho' with∣out Precedent, and contrary to the Advice of most of his Friends. I am loath to tell you, how very Nicely, some say Fearfully; the Judges proceeded in this Affair; most desiring further time, and after avoiding being spoken with, unwilling to Deny, and not daring to Grant. But I were Unjust, if I did not let you know, that some wanted not courage; as my Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Jones, Sir Job Charleton; and Sir Richard Weston, who as oblig'd by Law and Conscience, his Oath, and a late Statute, to his immortal Honour, at the first word gran∣ting the Writ, made further Application to the others, unne∣cessary. Sir William Dolben, and Baron Gregory, were out of Town, or unconsulted. Of the rest I will say no more at present; only tell you, Mr. Sheridan is advis'd to bring his Action against several, particularly against Sir Francis North, and Judge Raymond: The last of these two thinking fit to ask the Commons advice, in this particular instance of doing that justice to a Subject, which all Judges are sworn neither to Deny nor Delay. An Act of an extraordinary Nature, and without Precedent, for a Judge to expect Directions in the Execution of his Trust, from the House of Commons, who are no Court of Judicature; and who, if the Case had been dubious, as here himself confess'd it was not, ought rather to apply himself to the rest of the Judges, to His Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council, or to the House of Lords; the last Resort of Appeals in the Kingdom.
I will pass by this Judge's Servants denying his being with∣in, and sending (as I am inform'd) for Sir Thomas Stringar, a Justice of the Peace, to examine the Gentleman that Sollici∣ted Mr. Sheridan's Business, and the Witnesses, whether they were Protestants, and wou'd take the Oaths of Allegi∣ance, &c. which they, being Members of the Church of Eng∣land, offer'd to do, to his great disappointment. At length, after Twelve Days strugling with Difficulties, not only with the Judges, but with inferior Officers; the Ser∣jeant at Arms was serv'd with the Habeas Corpus, who there∣with acquaints the House: They, after three days Debate, and thrice reading over the Statute, finding all so plain, cou'd not but leave the Serjeant in Obedience to the Writ, to carry his Prisoner before the Judge; who appearing with Mr. Sheridan, the Baron took the Names of three substantial Persons, by him produc'd for Bail; declaring he wou'd send to the Speaker and Attorney-General, and if on Monday following (the utmost time allow'd by the Act) nothing more appear'd against the Prisoner, he shou'd then between three and four a Clock re∣ceive the benefit of his Habeas Corpus. But the Prorogation in the Morning prevented the Execution of the Baron's inten∣tions, and set Mr. Sheridan and his Kinsman Wilson at liberty, after almost five Weeks expensive Confinement; who, in all probability, had lain in Custody during that Session, how long soever, if a Habeas Corpus had not been then procur'd: Upon which, after Mr. Sheridan had been discharg'd, his Kinsman expected likewise his Releasement; there being no hopes his Petition wou'd be read since so often oppos'd by Mr. C. tho Mr. Godolphin, upon whose account he is said to have been com∣mitted sent word he was sorry he shou'd on his score be so great a Sufferer; and promis'd, upon any others Motion, to see and that for his Liberty: Of which, many of that House thought he had done nothing worthy the Forfeiture. And because you have heard by the written Votes, that it did not appear to Baron Weston, that Mr. Sheridan was commit∣ted by the House of Commons, when he granted the Writ, you
have here sub-joyn'd a true Copy of his Petition, and Warrant thereunto annex'd, and deliver'd to the Baron. To Sir Richard Weston, Knight, One of the Barons of His Majesties Court of Exchequer. The Humble Petition or Request of Thomas Sheridan, Shewrth, THat Your Petitioner was on the Ninth of December last, Committed by one and the same Warrant, and up∣on the same Account, with Dr. D. (who was Releas'd with∣in Two Days after) into the Custody of the Serjeant at Arms, attending the House of Commons. That Your Petitioner humbly conceives he ought to be Bail'd, neither Felony, nor Treason, nor any other Crime, nor Breach of Priviledge, be∣ing laid to his Charge; as by the Copy of the Warrant of his Commitment here-unto annexed, does appear. He therefore Humbly prays, to have His Majesties Writ of Habeas Cor∣pus, according to the Statute made Tricesfimo Primo of the now KING. And Your Petitioner shall Pray, &c. The Copy of the WARRANT. By Vertue of an Order of the Commons of England, Assembled in Parliament, this Day made, Thrse are to Will and Require you to keep in safe Custo∣dy the Bodies of Mr. Sheridan, and Mr. D. separately and apart, DURING THE PLEASURE OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS. And you are not to suf∣fer or admit any Person to them, other than such as
shall have Occasion to bring them Necessaries: And for your so doing, this shall be your Warrant. Hereof fail you not, as you will answer the Contrary at your Pe∣ril. Given under my Hand the Ninth Day of December, 1680. William Williams, Speaker. To John Topham, Esquire, Serjeant at Arms, &c. It is very obvious, and natural to observe from recounting to you this Case, that the Great Charter of England, or Magna Charta, was little thought of, or that I am much mistaken in its meaning; since nothing is more expresly for∣bid, than that any Man shou'd be Imprison'd, or Dissiz'd of any part of his Free-held, Goods, or Chattels (among which, are to be reckon'd all things a Man is Law fully possest of whe∣ther Letters, Papers, or other Matters) without due process of Law. Py 25 Edw. 3. c. 4. it was Enacted, That none shall be taken by Petition or Suggestion made to the King, or to hisThe Parliament is ne the King's Great Council. Council, unless it be by Indictment, or Presentment of good and lawful People of the same Neighbourhood, where such Deeds be done in due manner, or by Process made by Writ Original at the Common: Law; and that ne be put out of his Franchise, or Free-hold, unless he be duly brought in to answer, and fore-judged of the same, by the Course of the Law. And 28 Edw. 3. c. 3. it is Ordain'd, That no Man, of what Estate, or Condition soever he be, shall be put out of his Lands and Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor dis-inherited, without being brought in to Answer by due Process of Law. 42. Edw. 3.6.3. 'tis Decreed; That no Man be put to An∣swer without Presentment before Justices, or Matter of Record or by due Process, and Writ Original, according to the Old Law of the Land: And if any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for error. Likewise, in the Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. c. 1. 'tis Complain'd of by the Commons, as a great Grievance of the Subject, That against the Tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws, and Statutes of this Realm to
that end Provided, divers of His Majesties Subjects have been Imprisoned Without any Cause shewed; and when for their Deliverance, they were brought be∣fore Justices, by His MajestiesWhich by the by, were not then Denied, though the Laws were not half so full and ex∣press, as the late Statute. Writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and re∣ceive, as the Court should Order; and their Keepers Commanded to Certify the Cause of their Detainer; no Cause was Certified, but that they were Detained by His Majesties Special Command. And 37 Edw. 3. c. 18. 'tis Enacted, That though it be Ordained in the Great Charter, that no Man e Taken, nor Imprisoned, nor put out of his Free hold, without Pro∣cess of the Law; nevertheless, divers People make false Suggestions to the King himself, as well for Malice, as otherwise, where the King is often Grieved, and divers of the Realm put in Damage, against the Term of the same Charter: Wherefore it is Ordai∣ned, That all they who make such Suggestions, shall be sent with the same Suggestions before the Chancellor, Treasurer, and his Grand Council; and that they find there Surety, to pursue their Suggestions, and incur the same Pain, that the others should have had, if Attainted, in case that his Suggestion be found Evil. Or as it is alter'd in the following Parliament, 38 Ed. 3. c. 9. It is Assented, that if he that maketh the Complaint, cannot prove his intent against the Defendant, he shall be Commanded to Prison, there to abide till he hath made gree to the Party of his Damages, and of the Slander that he hath Suffer'd by such Occasion; and after shall make Fine, and Ransom to the King. In the Statute 16 Car. 1. c. 10. 'tis Declared, That the Reasons for putting down the Star-Chamber-Court, was not only founded on their Proceed∣ing contrary to former Statutes; but that it was also an intol∣lerable Burden to the Subject, that the Remedies for all Cau∣ses, might be had in the ordinary Courts of Justice; and that it was the means for introducing Arbitrary Government. I say then, if the same things are Exercis'd, and the Cau∣ses remain any where else, they are equally to be Discounte∣nanc'd, and Explode'd by King and Parliament, and all Free∣born
Subjects: And if the King's Officers or Ministers, from the Highest to the Lowest, do any Illegal Act, though by the King's express Command, they themselves become Cri∣minal: it cannot be suppos'd, that any Officer of any Court whatever, or Power inferior to His Majesties, can have a grea∣ter Latitude; but that whoever Executes any unlawful Com∣mand to the Prejudice of his Fellow Subject, must be Answe∣rable to the Party agriev'd, and lyable to make him Satisfacti∣on; notwithstanding any Illegal Warrant whatsoever. He that Considers the great Charge of One Pound, Six Shil∣lings, and Eight Pence per Diem, Fees to the Serjeant, and his Messenger, besides Diet, and Lodging at Pleasure, will believe no Man ought to Suffer under that Punishment but upon good Grounds, and in conformity to former Laws, without the Accusers giving Security for Prosecution and answering Da∣mages, if the Party prove himself Injur'd. 'Tis known Maxim in our Laws, that Carcer it ad custodiendes, non ad pu∣niendes homines, before Tryal or Conviction; which was so far from being Mr. Sheridan's Case, that he was Committed, During Pleasure to a Chargeable Confinement, without Cause Alledg'd, or any Information upon Oath; which is very Remarkable, if we consider Noris's Case, which was Voted by the same House, that restrain'd Mr. Sheridan in this manner, Illegal and Arbitrary, because there was neither information upon Oath, nor Crime Specifi'd; and sure, no Man can conclude the Commons may do that against a Subject, which the King cannot, without some Statute, giving the one that Power, which is Deny'd by all to the other. But, as the King can do no Wrong, though his Officers may; so I am con∣tent to admit, if they Challenge the same Priviledge, that the House of Commons may be always in the Right, provided they allow, that in the Execution of their Injunctions, some of their Members, and Ministers, may t; though the whole Body may be exempt yet thse do run the hazard of being call'd to an Account. I am certain, 'twas in order to Vindicate the Right of the
Subject, as well as to retrieve his own Liberty, and free him∣self from Charge, Mr. Sheridan attempted the Habeas Corpus; a Motion, that no doubt offended some, though not the disinteressed part of the Nation, nothing tending more to the advantage of the People, and the opposition of Arbitrary Power, at least equally to be contended against in the Com∣mons, as in the King, by every free born Subject; who if ne∣cessity makes him a Slave, and he have the Liberty to chuse, ought and must preser one Master to many. And tho it was three several days debated in the House, and that some were of opinion, the Act was not design'd in favour of any by them Committed, the contrary was so plain from the Words, that it was never brought to a Vote. And I am in∣form'd that one of the most Eminent and Deservedly Lead∣ing men of the House, a Manager of my Lord Staffords Tryal, Mr. P. advis'd their proceeding according to Law, in a Case where the Right of the Subject was so Nicely concern'd; and which was indeed, or might be, every English-man's, in which present and future Ages were equally interessed, and in which a Vote, not having at all the force of a Law, nor the exposition of a Statute, might not only Reflect, but make them Odious to all the World: An advice, which all the People in the King∣dom ought to acknowledge with Gratitude; nothing being more certainly the true Interest of the Nation than to keep all things within their proper Bounds and Channels; the King to continue to Both Houses of Parliament, what the Lords have by Fundamental Constitutions alwaies enjoy'd, and the Commons by their constantly renew'd Petitions have receiv'd from the Kings Favour, their accustomed Right, and Priviled∣ges; and neither Lords nor Commons to Entrench upon, or offer violation to any of their Soveraigns Prerogatives, which (as the great Coke sayes) are as much the Peoples Safety as the Kings Honour. And indeed it were highly preposterous that the King, who is the Fountain, Spring and Head of Law and Justice, should be concluded by this act, and the Commons should not, who
are the Lowest part in the Legislative Power and who have no manner of pretence to Judicature, nor (by Original Right) even their own Members as is consonant to Reason being all equal, and as such, having no more Power over one another, than Hartford-shire has over Essex, or Oxford over Cambridge, agreeable to that known Maxim in our own, and the Laws of all Nations, Paribus in pares non datur potestas. It plainly ap∣pears, that the Punishments of breach of Priviledge against any of the Commons, was order'd upon their applications, by the King or Lords, and never any by themselves inflicted before the latter end of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, when the case of Ferrers, because extraordinary, was referr'd to 'um by the Lords, as you will see in Cromptn's Jurisdiction of Courts. And at this day 'tis certain, the Commons can force none into the custody of their Serjeant, but in the case of Re∣fractory Persons are under a necessity of begging the Kings assistance, as is plain not only from Mr. Stowel's refulal to go along with their Messenger; but likewise from their printed Votes of the 8th of this instant January, concerning Sir John Lloyd, &c. However, since concession or continued usage have given them Power over their own Members, or over others guilty of Breach of Priviledge, let them in Gods name enjoy it still; but let them not Vote any thing they please a Breach of Priviledge, since they are known, and no other than what they ask at the beginning of every Parliament from the King's Grace, and are recorded, as first beg'd in Henry the Eighth's days by Sir Thomus Moor, then Speaker. To act other∣wise, is to set up an Arbitrary Power, never to be endur'd by any English Man, unless the most despicable of Cowards and Betrayers of his Country-Liberties. For, as the Commons are the Representatives of the Nation, so they are chosen to defend, not invade their own, when out of that station as well as the Peoples, Priviledges. While this Process was on foot, Mr. Sheridan had many Ad∣dresses and Advices to Petition a second time; which he not only refus'd before at the Serjeants instance, but after also at
that of others; and that you may be fully satisfi'd of this Truth, read the following Letter on this occasion to one of the Members, Sir R. C. SIR, HAving been inform'd, first by the Serjeant of Your House, and after by my old Acquaintance Mr. Fermin, of your Favour towards me, I can∣not without Ingratitude but return you my hearty and humble Acknowledg∣ment for so great an Obligation: But having formerly petition'd with great deference and respect to the Honourable House of Commons, otherwise against my own judgment and reason; and that not being read, having no new matter to offer, I will not give you the trouble of a second. I am apt to think, when any Cause is examin'd, it will be found amongst the hardest. Dr. D. a con∣fest Papist, and Author of the Story, being discharged without Fees or Peti∣tion in two days; and I a known Protestant kept Prisoner twenty five, tho both committed for one and the same Cause, or rather no Cause, none being mention'd in the Warrant; and for eight of those days kept closer than a Felon, or a Traytor. Had my first been dislik'd for matter of form, I might have preferr'd another, which now I think wou'd not be proper. Besides my own sufferings, my Cosen likewise taken into Custody for Copying a Paper con∣taining no Criminal, tho Reflective matter, as a Breach of Priviledge, because  Member mention'd; and yet four days after, a Committee appointed to exa∣mine, whether or no it was his Writing. I hope Sir, when these things, and the Reflections unjustly thrown upon me, are fully consider'd, I shall have my liberty, for which I will own my self oblig'd to you, and on all occasions study to approve any self, what I really am, SIR, Your most humble, and very much oblig'd Servant, T. S. I have industriously avoided in this Narrative, the overtures I have heard were made Mr. S. because not to be mention'd without Reflection on one side, or too much Honour on his. Tis enough, that he resisted all manner of Temptations, that cou'd betray or discover a Propension to dishonesty or cowar∣dize; and that as he had spoken and given it under his hand, so he wou'd make his Actions justifie his words, that he wou'd
by all possible means promote the good and service of his King and Country, without making Shipwrack of a good Consci∣ence, and that Reputation, which though clouded for the pre∣sent, he neither cou'd nor wou'd forfeit. I will add no more, than to English what a wise French man, in such an occasion has Recorded: Si vous jegez surles apparences, vous seriz souvent trompet: Ce qui paeroist n'est presque jamais la verite. If you wi not be deceiv'd, judge not according to Appearance, but judge Righteous judgment. He that has liv'd any time in the World, ought in passing his Censure upon others, to consider whether he himself has never been traduc'd or heard groundless stories, if he have not, he has had extraor∣dinary good fortune; if he have, he ought to be very slow in giving credit to Reports, which are sometimes rais'd upon very little, and ofter without any, grounds. This has been notoriously Mr. S's. Case; no man was ever more loudly clamour'd against, nor more without cause, as appears, in that after al scrutinies he is found Innocent; insomuch that one may well say. Here has been not onely a Great Cry, and a Little, but no Wool; abundance o Smoak without any Fire. Though his envious Adversaries will have it that his Cunning only protected him, I do not doubt but you will believe the contrary knowing from many years intimate Acquaintance, no man is more free and open has less of craft or sebtilty; and considering his ten pen∣none has more cause to study to preserve from danger the simplicity o the Dove by the Wisdome of the Serpent: A Caution, if ever useful, a this time more particulary necessarly. Through his Sides, 'tis well known, a very great Person was shot at who perhaps will be found Invulnerable. Dog▪ Bark at the Moon in vain Some Spots there may be in that Great and Glorious Body, but o such as can render it useless or in significant to any man of Sence or Reason Conclude then of all men by your own experience. and not upon the Relation of either Friends or Enemles; the first are not more Partial. then the last malicious. I should play the Fool extreamly, if I give you Advice, who of all the World has the least need of any; and therefore not having design'd this to you, without begging your Pardon, I will take the Liberty without further Apology, abruptly to Subscribe my self what I truly am, My Lord Your Grace's with all imaginable Respect and Sincerity, L. C. London, January the 20, 1680/1. FINIS.
