t3349 12242531 56829
The several SPEECHES OF Sr. EDWARD TURNER Kt. Speaker of the honourable House of Commons, to the KING'S most excellent Ma∣jesty, delivered on Fryday the tenth day of May, 1661. regal crown LONDON, Printed for Iohn Williams, at the sign of the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.
May it please your most excellent Majesty. THE Knights, Citizens, & Burgesses of the Com∣mons House of Parlia∣ment being there assem∣bled by virtue of your Majesties most gracious Writ, have bin pleased (I dare not say to choose, but) to name me their Speaker. It is an undoubted priviledge of e∣very Member in that House, to be heard speak, much more when he speaks for, or against himself. But Sir, whether more out of favour to me, or injury to themselves, I cannot tell, they were not pleased to hear, at least they would not accept my just Apology and Excuse from this Service. Therefore from this their Judge∣ment, if I must call it so, I doe most humbly appeal to your Soveraign Ju∣stice, beseeching your Majesty for the errours that are too visible & apparent in their Proceedings, that you will re∣view and reverse the same.
My inexperience in the Customes and Orders of the House, my inability to collect their fence and state the Que∣stions rising upon long and arduous Debates, do justly render me unfit, and therefore unworthy of this weighty imployment. Your Majesty well knowes, when a Ship puts forth to Sea she should be provided with Mariners of all sorts; in case a Storm doth arise, some must trimme and lore the sails, some must watch aloft the Decks, some must work at the Pump, but he had need be a ve∣ry good Sea man that is the Pilot. Sir, I hope I may be usefull to this your So∣veraign Vessel in some of these inferior places, but I dare not undertake to be their Steersman. I do most humbly therefore be∣seech your Majesty, that you will not take us at our first word, our second thoughts are best, pray therefore be pleased to command the Members of the House of Commons to return into their House, to recollect themselves, & to present your Majesty with a better choice. FINIS.
THE SECOND SPEECH, AFTER THE LORD CHANCELLOR Had declar'd the KING's Approbation of the Choice of the House of COMMONS. HE that knows his Masters Will, and doth it not, is worthy to be beaten with many stripes: I shall therefore hum∣bly and cheerfully, to the best of my poor skill and knowledge, apply my self to the performance of my Duty; not doubting therein to obtain Your Majesties Gracious Pardon for all involuntary Transgressions; for 'tis a Rule in Law, and in Conscience too: Actus non facit reum, nisi mens sit rea. And since I have found this Favour in the sight of my Lord the King, pray let me beg Your Majesties patience for a while, to make a stand, and from this place to look about me: Sir, a weak head is soon giddy, but the strongest brain may here be turn'd; the Pre∣sence of this Glory, and the Glory of this Presence, do transport me: whilst I con∣template the incomparable beauty of this
Body Politick, and the goodly Order of this High Court of Parliament, where at once I behold all the glory of this Nation, I am almost in the condition of St. Paul, when he was taken up into the third Hea∣vens, all he could say upon his return, was, He saw things unutterable. God, that made all things for the use of Man, and made him Governor over all his Works, thought it not fit to leave him to himself; nor to live without a Law and Go∣vernment. The Forms and Species of Go∣vernments are various, Monarchicall, Aristo∣craticall, and Democraticall; but the first is certainly the best, as being nearest to Divi∣nity it self. Aristocracy is subject to degene∣rate and run into Faction; but Democracy naturally runs into Confusion: then every man becomes a Tyrant over his Neighbor, Homo Homini Lupus: Homo Homini Daemon. This famous Island, Historians tell us, was first Inhabited by the Brittains, then by the Romans, then by the Saxons, then by the Danes, then by the Normans; and during all these Successions of Ages, and variety of Changes, though there was sometimes Di∣visum Imperium, yet every Division was hap∣py under a Monarchical Government.
Since the Entrance of the Norman Race 25 Kings & Queens famous in their generations, from whom Your sacred Majesty is lineally descended, have swayed the Royal Scepter of this Nation. The Children of Israel, when they were in the Wil∣derness, though they were fed with Gods own hand, and ate the food of Angels, yet they surfeited, and murmured, and rebelled against Moses. The same unthankfull spirit dwelt in this Nation for divers years last past; the men of that Age were weary of the Government, though it was refined to the wonder and envy of all other Nations: they quarrelled with our Moses, because he was the Lords Anointed; Nolumus hunc regnare, was their first quarrel; but levelling Parity and Confusion follow∣ed, then tyranny & usurpation was the Conclusion. We read of the Emperor Adrian, when he lay a dying, he complained that many Physitians had de∣stroyed him; meaning, that their contrary Con∣ceits and different Directions for his Recovery, had hastened his Death. So it was with us, we were sick of Reformation; our Reformers were of all Ages, Sexes, and De∣grees, of all Professions and Trades: The very Cobler went beyond his Last: These new States-men took upon them to Regulate and Govern our Go∣vernours: This was the Sicknesse and Plague of the Nation: Their new Laws were all written in bloudy Letters, the cruelty of their Tribunals made
the Judgement Seat little differ from a Slaughter house: The Rich man was made an Offendor for a word, Poor men were sold for Slaves, as the Turks sell Heads, twenty for an Asper: Yet for all this Villany there was at length found a Protector. No amendment at length would serve these Reformers turns; no Concessions, though the most Gracious that could be imagined, would satisfie these Usurpers; but Root and Branch, all must go; our late Sovereign Lord, of blessed memory, must be offered up a Sacrifice to their Lusts; Your sacred Person (Great Sir) proscribed, and all the Royal Family exiled: Monarchy it self was voted burthen∣some; & therefore they must try a Commonwealth, and the better to digest it, the People were intoxica∣ted with a belief that they should all like themselves be Princes in their turns. Amongst the Persians, after the death of their Governor, there was used to be  a five dayes Lawless∣nesse, in which time every man might do what he listed: during those five dayes there was such killing and robbing, and destroying one another, that before they were ended, the People longed again for their old Government. After the death of Your Majesties most Royal Father, here was the like Licentiousness; but alas, it continued more than twice five yeares: Liberty they called it, but it was Libertas quidlibet audendi. Your Loyal Subjects were a Prey to Wolves and Tygres, and to the most cruel of all Beasts, unreasonable men: every man did what seemed good in his own eyes, for in those daies there was no King in our Israel.
But as the former Spirit of Reformation at first brought us into this misery; so the spi∣rit of giddiness which God sent amongst our Reformers, at length cured us. The brazen Serpent was the best cure for those that were bitten by the fiery Serpent: the divisions and subdivisions of those that exercised dominion over us, weakened their own power, and stirred up the hearts, and strengthned the hands of your loyal Subjects, to restore our ancient Go∣vernment, and to bring your Sacred Majesty back to your Royal Throne in peace, as to the joy of all our hearts we see it is this day. This was the work of God alone, and it is ad∣mirable in our eyes. And as we have cause at all times to bless God that he hath thus brought your Majesty to your People; so we have just cause at this time to return our hearty thanks unto your Majesty, that you have thus brought your People to your Self. The Sun exhales the vapours from the earth, and then sends them down again in showres of plenty: So we to our great joy, do find that our obedience and affection to your Majesty are re∣turned upon our heads in plenty, peace and protection. The last meeting here in Parliament was hap∣py in healing the bleeding wounds of this Na∣tion; they were blessed also, even for their Works sake, your sacred Majesty did bless them,
and therefore they shall be blessed to all poste∣rity. But Sir we hope you have a blessing left for us too: That was your Parliament by Adopti∣on, but this is yours by Birth-right; this Parli∣ament is Free-born: I hope this honour will beget in us an Emulation to exceed the acti∣ons of our Predecessors, and not only to meet your Majesty as our Soveraign, with the duty of Subjects, but with the love of Sons to a most indulgent Father. Next to the glory of your Majesties Royal Throne, I cannot but observe the brightness of this — second orb, this Firmament is richly deckt with Stars of several magnitudes, each star appears like the morning-star, and yet each star differs from another in glory. You cannot want Commanders, either by Sea or Land, to manage your designs, whilest all these Sons of Mars stand candidate to serve you in the wars. You cannot want Counsellors to advise you in the great affairs of the Nation, whilest all these Senators, each fit to be a Consul, con∣tend who shall most ease you in the thorny cares of the Government. Amidst these Noble English Barons, and at your Majesties feet are placed the Reverend Judges of the Land, the Sages of the Law, Men so learned and expert in the Customs, and sta∣tutes of this land, that if Wat Tyler, or Jack Cade,
or the new Phanaticks of this latter age had bur∣ned our books, they were able to restore our laws in purity and perfection. And next to these, though in a lower Orbe, appear the worthy Knights, the prudent Citi∣zens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, being the third estate of Parliament. When the fame of Solomons wisdom had filled the neighbour Nations, the Queen of Sheba could not contain her self at home, but with ma∣ny Camels laded with Spices, with Gold and pre∣tious stones in abundance, she comes to Salomon to commune with him of all that was in her heart. Great Sr. whilest this your native Countrey was unworthy of you, forreign Nations were made happy in the knowledge of your Person, your piety and your wisdome: And now the Lord our God hath brought you home, and set you on your Throne, your Subjects long to see you. What striving and rejoycing was there at your first landing, to see our rising Sun? What striving was there at your Coronation to see the Imperial Crown set upon your Roy∣all head? What striving hath here lately been, in all the Counties, Cities and Burroughs of this Na∣tion, who should be sent up to hear your wis∣dom, and confer with you in Parliament? Royall Sr. these chosen worthy Messengers are not come empty handed, they are laden, they are sent up to you, heavy laden, from their several Counties, Cities and Burroughs.
