W3570B 99830942 35404
A WORD TO THE Fifth-Kingdom-Men. IN A LETTER To one of them Written from the Light within him. By One whom the World calls a QƲAKER. Printed in the Year, 1661.
Thou that cllst thy self one of the Fifth-Kingdom. THou hast slanderously reported of me, because I made an Addresse to the King, in the half of those that live up to the lght within them, that therefore I am grown a Courtier; My Hats being still plukt off my Head when I went into the Kings presence shews how it∣tle Adoration I am willing to pay to King or Kesar▪ Yet know that I will never deny Subjection, and Ci∣vil obedence to the chief Magistrate & especially our present one, whom though I doe not look on as a God, yet I doe as a good natu'd man, and I wish thou didst love any one so wel, as he doth all Man-kind; His per∣son thou woulst abuse & hast by thy practices endea∣voued as much as in thee lyes to poyson his very Soul, and that with the hatred of those of us whom he World calls Quakers; But I hope we shall be as far from being joyned wih thee in Punishment, as we are from being ued in Opinions and Pactics. Though our Oinions in the esteem of men that will not trou∣ble themselves to understand them, seem very like to thine, yet are they far from being the same. And pitty it is that the Inhibitants near Bedlam, should be whipt for the madness of others in Bedlam; Into
which place, I shall on thy Repentance, improve my Interest in the ing, that thou mayest e removed from thy pesent Prison. And further to let thee see how little I have learn'd to daub and flatter by going to the Court, I will deliver my Opinion (which I am told thou desirest) about the Declaration of the men of the Fith Kigdome, without complementing; And I say of it, It is the wost thing that ever was Printed since Pining was found out. Thou callest for Fire from Heaven to destroy thy Neighbours, and because thou canst not have it from thence, wouldst fetch it from Hell. Thou hinkest that thou under∣standest Gods Cypher in the Revelation, and falsly imagining that thou hast found out its sence, dost un∣dergoe the curse of that Book for adding to it, and know that thou sinnest more in adding things to it, then if thou hadst only added words. I perceive thou art of the testy humour of the Prophet Jonah, to Have thousands of Men, Women, and innocent Children destroyed to make good thy Prophecyes. Or rather to compare thee according to thy deserts, thou art like that Almanack-Maker, who foretold a Fire in a City and made it himself. But alas thy notions of the Revelation, and of the thousand years reign, are not agreeable to the words of the obscure Text. For Revelat. 20. 4. God will raise up the Saints which are dead, when that Reign is to begin, which now is not done. How art thou sure that thou hast calculated things in Daniel, and the Revelation right? I doubt as Sir Francis Drake in going round the world lost a day, so thou in thy Prophecyes which concern the revolutions of the world mayest have lost a day, as it is in the Scripture account a year, or as in Gods a thousand years. And indeed the thousand years raign is held by a thousand men so many several ways. The Trum∣pets then in the Revelation giving an uncertain sound,
how shall men prepare themselves to Battel? But a little to answer some of thy objections; 'Tis said, Daniel he 7th. and the 18th. The Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom and possesse it. I answer, that the 27th. verse doth tell thee how they shall take it, The Kingdom shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High. Here then by taking it, is not meant by force but receiving it when given. I therefore con∣clude that neither God nor Man did give thee this Kingdom, because thou hast not took it, If thou say∣est that the man of Sin is to be destroyed, consider those words that it is by the brightnesse of his coming; Thou rash man wouldst be an incarnate Devil even whilst thou art destroying the man of Sin. If thou ac∣countest the Parson of Rome the wicked one, as I also do, why dost thou not go thither to convert him, as one of my opinion did, spending above thirty pounds in that Journey? But thou instead of sending one to convert him, wouldst send a thousand if thou couldst to cut his throat, though he never did harm to thee, or any of thy Kindred; But thou wilt say, thou wouldst have a hand in settling this fifth-Kingdom; I answer, that is to be the Stone cut out without hands. The clearest Prophecy of this Kingdom is in Revelati∣on the 19th. and the 11th. which tells thee how this fifth-Kingdom shall be brought in, and the Saints en∣gaged in order to it. Heaven shall be opened and a man upon a white Horse appear, and the Armies which are in Heaven shall follow him upon white Horses &c. So that thou art not to go orth till the King appear in Heaven upon the white Hose. If thou sayst the Kings appearing on a white Horse is allegorical, so say I is this Kingdom too, and neither thou, nor I, nor any of our Neighbours, know what it is. Now by all thy mistakes about this, thou shewest that thou dost not follow the light, but the hear within thee. Thou and thy company have only fulfill'd that one Prohecy,
Revelation the 13th. and the 10th. He that killeth wih the Sword, shall be killed with the Sword, which hath happened to the mutinous fool-hardy men of thy perswasion, though they in their Declaration said that not a hair of their heads should be touch'd. It hath been observed that Saul when he went to seek his Fathers Asses, found the Kingdom; but any that among you sought their Fathers Kingdom, found but Asses. I wonder how it came into thy head to think that this Island must be the Seat of the fifth King; If he hath signified it to thee by any Letter that he will land here, shew it to us who know his hand as well as thou; If it be writ with that Juice which is ordinarily used for Secrecy, wilt thou fire a Town to read it by? Wee know his Seal likewise as well as thou, namely a Miracle, which thou canst not perfectly Counterfeit; Christs Miracles were to make the Lame to walk, the Bind to see, the Sick to be healed; but the Miracles thou pretendest to, work the quite contrary Effects▪ Christ did raise the dead, but thou only canst kill the Living; Christ wrought a Miracle to pay Tribute, but thou wouldst work one if thou couldst to pay none. Think what thou wilt, the Kingdom of God comes not by Observation, nei∣ther shall they say, Lo here and Lo there, but the Kingdom of God is within thee. Live but up to the Light within thee, and thou wilt need no other gory to adorn that Kingdom. Thou poor Creature whilst thou avoidest Popish Principles, runnest upon Tur∣kish, and art for a word and Inspiration and a sensual Paradice, Christ bids his Disciples that if any take their Cloaks, they should give them their Coats also, but thou takest both. Thou blamest Priests for taking away the Tenth part of mens Estates, and wouldst thy self take away the other Nine. I shall only tke notice of one thing more in thy Declaration, namely thy ambitious Design of extending thy Con∣quests
to France Spain, Germany and Rome, when thou hast setled the Fifth Kingdom here. For some Reasons best known to thy elf, thou omittest the Kingdomes of Sweden, Poland, Denmark, and those of Muscovy, Persia, and China, and the whole Turkish Empire. It may be thou art willing that these places should be preserved for the next nine and Twenty of thy Perwasion to Subdue, and thinkst it fair for Swan-Ally to be able to confond the Houses of France and Spain, the Princes of the Empire, and Conclave of Cardinals. But me thinks any 29 of thy Opinion, should be afraid to appear in Germany, where forty Thousand were defeated. However let me advise thee to begin thy bloody work of Destruction rather abroad than in England, as young Physitians travel to practice their Arts of killing in other Countrys. But to speak more seriously, my Counsel is that thou shouldst stay at home, and mortifie that Principle from whence Wars and Fightings come, so shalt thou encrease the Peace of thine own Conscience, and the quiet of the World, and not need a Fifth King∣dom to make thee happy. FINIS.
