Y102 09456497 43166
YOUNG JEMMY. An Excellent New Ballad, To an Excellent New Tune. [1] YOung Iemmy is a Lad That's Royally descended; With every Virtue clad, By every Tongue commended: A true and faithful English Heart; Great Brittain's Joy and Hope, And bravely will maintain their Part, In spight of Turk and Pope. [2] Young Iemmy is a Lad That hates all base Pretences; No Tory Masquerade, With Popish Sham-Pretences; A Heart and Soul so Great and Just, Such Conduct and Command; A Champion in his Countries Trust, Young Iemmy still will stand. [3] Young Iemmy is a Youth, Who thinks it no Transgression To stand up for the Truth And Protestant Profession; But Oh! He fights with such Success, All Mortal Powers obey; No God of War but must confess Young Iemmy bears the sway. [4] At Iemmy's powerful Voice The Drums and Trumpets sounded; And England did rejoyce When Iemmy's Fame abounded. Of Iemmy the victorious Name Did through all Europe flie, And all the Nations did proclaim His matchless Gallantry. [5] In Mastricht and in France, In Germany and Flanders, Young Iemmy did advance Amongst the Chief Commanders: By Sea and Land his Fame did flie, And all the Nations round Of Iemmy's Constant Victory And Valour did resound. [9] In Scotland Iemmy's Hand Dispers'd the Whig and Tory; And Bothwel-Bridge will stand To his Eternal Glory: There he the Rebels Force withstood, And did Their Might oppose, Both for the King and Countries Good, In spight of all his Foes. [7] But Oh! unhappy Fates! A Curse on Pride and Malice; The Popish Plotting-States Have banish'd him the Palice: They turn'd him out of Grace of late, Of Dignity and Fame, And every mighty Place of State, Yet Iemmy's still the same. [8] Maliciously they Plot (Against all Sense and Reason) 'Gainst Shaftsbury and Scot, To Cloak their Popish Treason: Tories and Papists all agree To blast his spotless Fame; But, 'spight of all their Policy, Young Iemmy's still the same. [9] For, still to lose his Bloud Young Iemmy does importune, And for his Countreys Good To spend his Life and Fortune, For to support the Church and State, Our Liberties and Laws, Against their Malice, Plots and Hate That wou'd our Rights oppose. [10] Let all good men implore For Iemmy's Restauration, Whose Conduct must restore The Ruins of our Nation; That he to Charles's Praise may live Our Freedom to maintain, When Iemmy shall his Fame retrieve, And be in Grace again. LONDON: Printed for Alexander Banks, 1681.
