18507.69 S102597 99838369 2745
A REMONSTRATION OF THE FRENCH SVBIECTS Professing the Reformed Religion vnto the French KING. Wherein are showne divers notable Passages, and matters of great waight and consideration, as well of the present as of the former Troubles and Dissentions in France. As also A Relation, containing the Rebellion of the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the Kingdome of NA∣PLES, and the Retreate of the VICE-ROY. The Sea-fight betwixt the Gallies of Spaine, and Flo∣rence, and some Pirates. The Resolution of Bethlem Gabor; besides divers Lords of Hungary, sent in writing vnto the Emperour. The Arrivall of Sir ROBERT SHERLEY at Florence, being sent Ambassassador from the King of PERSIA. Besides The late Proceedings of the Duke of SAXONY, being forsaken by his owne Souldiers, who were vnwil∣ling to goe against the Protestants. Of the Count Mansfeild, and the Duke Christian of Brunswick; as likewise what Spinola determines to do, and hath done, before Breda, Bergen op Zoon, and Sluce. With A continuance of the late Newes of all parts of Christen∣dome; and some parts of Turkey likewise. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and in Popes-head Pallace. 1622.
A REMONSTRATION Of the French Subiects, Pro∣fessing the Reformed Religion, vnto the French KING. SIR; IT is strange, and almost in∣credible, that amongst so many Subiects (which God hath beene pleased to sub∣mit vnder the obeysance of your Maiestie) who boast ordinarily, that they are much affected to the good of your affaires, & the con∣servation of your Crowne; that neverthelesse, there hath not beene one, which hath endevoured and enforced himselfe, to quench the fire which takes daily hold of your State, and by little and little consumes the same: and that to the contrary, there is found a great number that haue taken great paines to adde more fewell to it, and are yet daily seeking artificiall tricks and devises to maintaine and increase the same. By right, it should be their worke, who can make Peace and Warre when they please, if their private ends, and particular profit which made them to raise those troubles, contrary to the minde and intention of your Maiestie,
did not draw them backe, and not of those which are as∣saulted and pursued in their consciences, honors, goods, and liues, and haue no other intention then to defend and preserue themselues from violences, having never de∣tested any thing more then troubles, and seditious com∣motions; and to the contrary, nothing more loved and procured, then the conservation of Peace. Wherefore, all the Lords, Gentlemen, and all your Maiesties other Subiects that follow them, making profession of the Re∣formed Religion, moved and driven by the affection and naturall Obligation that they owe vnto your Maiestie, and to the conservation of your Kingdome, they nei∣ther could or would vse any longer delay, for to seeke and propoune of their side (as they haue done continually) all the fit and convenient meanes they could devise, to preserue your State from ruine and subversion, which haue threatned the same many times, and yet at this pre∣sent doe more then ever before, and to reestablish a good Peace and publique tranquillitie, who having continually shewed themselues prompt and willing to embrace the same, it is manifest enough, in what dangers and in con∣veniences they were likely to fall, if God through his meere mercie had not preserved them. In such manner that they haue but small hope, to come to their desire, vn∣lesse the Almightie God, will be pleased to chauge the hearts of their enemies, which are round about you, and incline them to a pacification, or Peace. Looking ra∣ther that this their good disposition which they now ma∣nifest, and their endevours which they will vse, for to e∣stablish a firme and perfect Vnion betwixt all your Sub∣iects, both of the one and the other Religion, in stead of being received and embraced. shall be slandered, and sini∣sterly interpreted, as they haue beene continually, by those which hate and feare nothing more then this recon∣ciliation. That neverthelesse, the sayd Lords, Gentlemen, and other that follow them, having continually taken great care, to make their actions daily more and more ma∣nifest
vnto your Maiestie, and to leaue assured signes and witnesses of their desire, which is to liue and die in the obedience, and naturall subiection which they owe vnto your Maiestie, and to make it appeare to all the world, how much their hearts and wills are differing from the impostures and slanders, which their adversaries, adhe∣rents, and ministers lay vpon them; and that the Forces which they haue beene compelled to gather against their mindes, doe tend to no other effect then to maintaine and conserue their Religion, honours, liues, and goods. They haue thought that such considerations ought not to hinder or stay them in their hunting and purchasing the effect of such a necessary, and salutary a Peace for this Kingdome, and to giue witnesse of their humilitie, reverence, and respect towards your Maiestie, which they would haue sooner done, if they had not esteemed and iudged that their enemies would haue thought, or at least haue gone about to make others beleeue, that the necessitie had compelled them vnto the same, considering their Enemies assured your Maiestie, that they were not likely to receiue any ayde from forraigne partes, and if they should, that they had no money to giue them content. But it is certaine and known that they never haue wanted aide and succour from aboue, and that their forces are such that none can denie, but that they are able to resist their Ene∣mies, and to execute such ill designes if they would as they are taxed withall. So then in the time of the first troubles or Civill Warres the deceased Prince of Conde, besides the Lords, Gentlemen and other that did accompany him, did receiue and accept of the conditions of Peace, con∣cerning onely the Religion and the libertie of their Con∣sciences: presently after the death of the late Duke of Guise, and the Marshall of Saint Andrew, and the impri∣sonment of the late Constable Montmorancy, which were the principall heads and conductors of the Armie. If in the second troubles, as soone as was offered vnto the a∣foresayd Prince of Conde, and his followers and parta∣kers
the restablishing of the exercise of their Religion, not∣withstanding they were affisted mightily by forraigne forces and readie to assault the Towne of Chartres, at the sight of their Enemies campe, which was most wholy disbanded and disordered; And that onely at the denun∣ciation of Peace, made by a Trumpet sent in the Kings name, the sayd Prince did not onely surcease from the assault in hand, but commaunded the fiege wholy to be raised, and his Armie to retyre, reporting neverthelesse no other reward for his prompt obedience, then a bloo∣die peace, full of perfidiousnes. If in the sayde troubles the next day after the Battaile at Saint Denis, the sayd Prince did send vnto the King Monsieur de Tiligny, to shew his Maiestie, the ruine and desolation that was likely to fall vpon this Kingdome, if it were suffered that for∣raigne forces should invade the same, which were vpon the frontiers readie to enter, and to propose and shew the meanes, and remedies to attaine a peace, touching one∣ly matters of Religion, Notwithstanding hee had the bet∣ter hand in the sayd battle; the late Constable Montmo∣rancy chiefe of the Armie there being flaine. To be short, if all your Edicts had beene alwayes made, and the peace agreed, in those seasons when those of the reformed Re∣ligion had meanes by their forces to make their Enemies belieue them, if they would haue abused the same, and that in al their parlies & treaties of peace, there is no mention made of any thing else then of matters of Religion, and that their Enemies haue never beene brought to a peace or pacification, but by necessitie, being not able by open force to attempt any thing more against them; Neverthe∣lesse to overcome more manifestly their adversaries, of the slaunders and impostures which they publish every houre against the said Lords, Gentlemen, and others that follow them, willingly passing by the vnfaithfulnes, want of cou∣rage, & desloyalty, vsed and practised against them in for∣mer time. They declare & protest this day before your Ma¦iesty, as before God, that howsoever they haue vntill this
time been dealt withal, that they neuerthelesse neuer thought to impute it vnto your Maiesty, as very well knowing, that your Maiesties nature is not agreeing with such rigours, wherof you haue shewed so many open demonstrations, that none rightly may doubt of it: and much lesse haue they desired to change, or diminish in any manner the good will, and naturall affection, which they haue borne continually to the conseruation, aduancement & greatnes of your State. And if by all the effects aforesaid, it hath been seene and knowne manifestly, that they had neuer any scope nor intention, then to serue God according to his command, and the instruction of his holy word, vnder the obedience and authority of your Acts, and Proclamations, and to be maintained, and preserued equally with your other Subiects, in their honours, lifes, and goods; but besides this they will at this pre∣sent, make such a proofe and tryall; that their ene∣mies themselues, will neuer doubt of it or call the same in question, not that they intend to go about to iustifie their former actions. And much lesse doe they intend to copitulate with your Maiesty, very well knowing by the grace of God, what is the duty of good and faithfull Subiects towards their Soneraine Prince and naturall Lord. But Sir because it is sufficiently knowne how they valewe iour, faith and words, which ought to be holy, sacred and inuiolable, and with what boldnesse haue they abused your name and authority, to the great perill and danger of your Subiects, which make pro∣fession of the Reformed Religion, it will not bee thought strange that the same in all humble manner beseech your Maiesty to bee pleased to declare by a solemnell, perpetuall, and irreuocable Edict, verified
and registred in all your Parlements, and other So∣uerain Courts, of Iustices, to the end that by the same those may be bridled and kept in, which so many times herebefore haue beene so bold as to infringe and violate them (and that without any punishment) which the late Henry the Great of happy memory, your Father had made, and your selfe confirmed. And seeing that these wich neuer could endure the v∣nion and rest amongst your Subiects, caused by the meanes of the obseruation of the said Edicts, they haue begunne to alter and corrupt the same by new interruptions; and modifications directely con∣trary to the substance of the said Edicts, and the intention of your Maiesty. They very humbly re∣quest your Maiesty to grant and agree generally vn∣to all your Subiects, of what quality or condition soeuer they be, free exercise of the said Religion in all Cities, Townes, villages, and boroughs in all places and parts of your Kingdome, and territories vnder your obedience and protection, without any exception or reseruation, modification or restri∣ction of persons, of time, or places, with all the as∣surances thereunto necessary and required. And there aboue to order and inioyne euery one to make publike profession either of the one or the o∣ther Religion, to the intent that many abusing this benefice and grace may not fallitno Atheisme, and earnall liberty, licensing themselues of all exercise and profession of Religion, and not desiring any thing else but that all good orders, the policy, and Ecclesiasticall discipline be quite reenuersed and abo∣lished. A thing certainly too dangerous and perni∣cious, and vnsufferable. And further, SIR, seeing your said subiectis
doe not doubt, that those which alwaies haue built the foundation of their desseings vpon Flanders, and calumniations which they very impudently publish to make them odious not onely to their party, but likewise to other, shall not leaue to diuulge, that your said Subiects will rather wilfully without any reason defend that which they haue once resolued to belieue, concerning the Articles of the Christian Religion, then to correct themselues and retreate any point: They declare and protest as they haue euer done, that if in any article of their confession of faith they can instruct them by the word of God comprehended in the Canonicall bookes of the Scripture: That they runne astray from the doctrine of the Prophes and A∣postles. That presently their will shake hands with them, and be of they opinion and side that shall teach them better out of Gods word; and long agoe they should haue done the same if any error had been pro∣ued in their articles. And to this effect they desire nothing more, then a meeting at a free, generall, and lawfully called Councell. Where euery one may be heard, to pro∣duce his reasons, which shall bee confirmed or con∣uicted by Gods word alone. Which is the only course taken in antient times in all like occasions. By this meanes SIR, you shall bee sure that God will shew your Maiesty, this fauour that you shall see shortly the heartes and mindes of your Subiects v∣nited and reconciled, and your Kingdome to returne in the former estate brightnesse and dignity: to the shame and confusion of your and our enemies, which haue endeauoured the contrary. Moreouer your Maiestie will bee pleased to take the paines, and consider exactely and iudge (if you
bee so disposed) if it be better to tarry for a heauy and bloudie victory of the two armies, that are now in your Kingdome, wherein the conquerour is as∣well to loose as hee that shall be vanquished. Or else to imploy them in the seruice of your Maiestie, and for the good of our owne affaires, vpon diuers faire occasions daily offered, so much concerning the tran∣quillity and conseruation of your Crown as none are comparable vnto the same that haue beene presented in our time: And by these meanes to send the tempest, and foule weather in these places, from whence it came. Whereunto your aforesaid Subiects are resolued, as likewise to all other things that shall tend to your good and the greatnesse of your State being readie to imploy to the same effect all their estates, and meanes, which God hath pleased to grant them, besides their bodies to their vttermost power. Not acknowledging in this world any other Soue∣raing or Principalites then yours: in which obedience and subiection they will liue and die, as your most hum∣ble, most faithfull, and obe∣dient Seruants, and Subiects.
Iuly 30. 1622. FRom Rome they write, that there came an ex∣traordinary Embassador from the new Duke of Parma, called the Prince di Sant Gregorio, who came very well accompanied with all the noble Cour∣tiers, and diuers others Charactered Baroni Roma∣ni, to haue audience of the Pope; now Gregory the 11. and tender all obedience and seruice in the name of the new Duke his Lord: hither came also the Sunday following, an Embassador from the Arch-duke Leopoldus, requesting his holinesse, that whereas he had certaine Souldiers in pay in Germa∣ny, for the Emperor, vnder the command of Don Pedro Aldabrandino, it would please his holinesse to write vnto the Emperor, that they might be turned ouer vnto his seruice, to defend his Country of Al∣satia against the inroades, and assaults of such ene∣mies as now lie at the aduantage to surprise such Townes, as are weake, and not able to defend themselues: It is likewise written, that the Monday follow∣ing, after the Embassador came from the Duke of Parma, the Pope went in person to the Consistory, and there transferred vpon the Duke of Parma the office and dignity of Confalonire, of the holy mother Church, as his Father had before enioyed; they will likewise haue certaine Cardinals, commanded to keepe their Pallaces as prisoners, for speaking irre∣uerently against the Bull, which was newlly made for the strict Election of the Popes: on the Wed∣nesday following, his holinesse did keepe his Ʋe∣spro
in Saint Peters, and in the morning with all sol∣lemnity, and pontificially hee entred the sacred Colledge before the Embassador of his Catholike Maiesty, where acknowledgement was made to his holinesse for the Kingdome of Naples, and the payment of 7000. crownes for that feude or feal∣ty was ratified, and accepted with the accustomed manner of protestation made to the Procurator of the Exchecker; after which the whole signiory of of the people of Rome, to keepe correspondency with the Duke of Parma, sent vnto him no Embas∣sador; the Marquesse of Lanti in the name of the whole Senate: At the same time there died also in the City Signior Peter Nati, the agent of the Duke of Vrbine, and the Bishop of Brugnati, with some others of good account. From Florence they write concerning the depar∣ture of the Count de montein, by the road of Leuca and Pisa, and that hee tooke the way of Legorne to be embarked in the Galley of Doria, to goe to Ge∣noa, and from thence his Excellency would passe to Millaine. It is also reported, that there is arriued at Florence the English, Sir Robert Sherley (with his Lady) called Il Conte de Sherley, as being an Earle of the Empire, his traine was not very great, and yet hee is sent as honourable Embassador from the Per∣sian to the Emperor, the Russian and other Princes, hauing great credit, and meanes for money and magnificent expences. From Madrid they aduise vs, that the Marquesse di surego, and Don diego messia are declared Councel∣lors of Warre for the King of Spaine: as also the Marquesse de la Nueuas, the Marquesse dimirable, and the Count di Barasciar, are made Masters of the
Kings House, and of the Queenes side or Pallace, are likewise named, Don diego Bazzero: Don Gaebriel de Velasio: Don Antonio de Toledo, and Don Emanuel manriques. It is further written, that Don Inico Bor∣gia, is created Generall of the Horse in Flanders, with intent to passe, if occasion serue, into other parts: and that the Bishopricke of Ieguenza is bestow∣ed vpon a brother of the Duke de Infantado. From Naples are diuers Letters: one writes of a great rebellion by the Gentlemen and Nobility of the Countrey, wherein the Viceroy was enforced to take the City of Saint Erma, another talks of Leuca that the Cardinall Beuilaqua comming thither to the Bathes, and expecting the gouernment of that Com∣mon-wealth, was at last by the Nobles and Gentiles so confirmed, and all his kindred aduanced to places and offices. A third letter affirmes, that there depar∣ted from that Port many Gallies full of Souldiers to be embarked at Cortary, and so to goe into Spaine; and that there was a generall imposition of 400000. crownes vpon the City and Kingdome of Naples, as also of 150000. from the City of Messina, and all for the seruice of the VVarre of Flanders. To which is added, that Don Francis Manriques was made Leutenant of the Galleies of Naples, or if you will of a squadron so named in the place of Don Fran∣cisco Zaphata, who was aduanced to bee M.r of the campe, and sent a 1000. Spainiards in the said Gallies to Milane. From Messina they aduertise vs, that the Gallies of Florence are ioyned with the King, and so set vpon som Pirates, with 250. slaues in 15. vessels great, and small, & 8. peeces of brasse, which they enforced sincking most of them: the rest made a composition
for their liues paying a 100000 crownes they also tooke a ship loaden with oile at the first sight. From Venice they write, that in the diet of Hunga∣ry (according to the Letters of Vienna) the Estates could not agree, but were at great variance; the Cler∣gy and Ecclesiasticall persons demanding the restitu∣tion of all their goods, losses, and reuenues wholly, without further impeachment. The secular Lords and Laity would by no means consent to such an account, pretending many diminutions, and that the remain∣der was reserued for the good of the Kingdom: wher∣vpon the Catholikes appeale to the Emperor, as their su∣preme Iudge, and the Protestants on the contrary side, will haue none but the Palatine: insomuch that the Emperor with all expedition sent the Count de Soler to the Elector of Saxony, to acquaint him with the matter, that hee might vse the greater hast in gathe∣ring the tributes vnder his gouernment, for the bene∣fit of his Imperiall Maiesty, who had newly sent 2000. Horse to the Duke of Bauaria. He also writ, that the wife of Oleatsi, in whose custody was the fortresse of Trezin, where the Crowne of Hungary was secured, would by no meanes depart with the same, or consent to the deliuery, before shee was paid such money and treasure, which had bin disbursed & inforced frō her. From Genoa the aduertisemēt is, that with althose Gallaies, which are returned from Faigne, there came in their company the nuntio Acquauiua am Embassa∣dor of Lenta, who was sent from the Sophy of Persia in a ship of Legorne, which disembarked it selfe at Iauo∣naleggio without touching Geuoa at all, and so they de∣termined to go to Florence, & Rome, yet he landed at Genoa Il Padre Iacinto nata Casalesio Capucino, who halfe a yeer since was imployed in Spaine, for the affaires of Bauaria.
From Coyra they write, that the partie, or faction of that Cittie were followed by a great number of the Soul∣diers of Baldirone, who mutined for want of meanes to maintaine them, and so complained on the Captaines for releasing the Prisoners, and making what composition they pleased, whereas yet they were intertained by the Grizons, and setled in Chiavena, to defend them from the Spaniards: but at last, the Bishop was layd hold vpon, and had a Guard over him, and Baldirone should haue beene sent to Prison, but that he escaped in an vnknowne habit, and so freed himselfe of his enemies. From Turnie they write, that the Duke of Savoy hath raysed many Forces from as many places of France, Lo∣raine, and Spaine, causing them to come the way of the mountaine: Wherevpon his Highnesse hath sent his In∣giners, and Pioners to supervise the Fortresses of Asti, Vercelles, Sanchia, and San German. Moreover, he hath supplied the Garrisons of Asti, and Vercelles, with foure hundred Souldiers, and added greatquantitie of provisi∣on, both of powder, shot, and victuall, fit for a warre in∣deed, which when they of Montferrate vnderstood, they made intercession to be so armed, and defended accor∣dingly, pretending chiefely, least some sodaine innovati∣on might fall vpon them One thing is certaine, that about the Countries of Aldi∣ghtera, and Confines of Savoy, you haue great numbers assembled, who came to the assistance, and service of his Highnesse. From Millane they write, that having a generall suspici∣on of the revolt of the Valtoline, and that the Switzers would helpe the Grizons all they could; there was a hun∣dred Carts loden with the Munition of Warre sent to the Garrisons, least they should be set vpon by their enemies, as the Dutch Souldiers had beene in the Count of Tiroll, which were there Mustred for the Archduke Leopaldus: For questionlesse, the Grizons were divided into many troops, and gone to the side of Pochiana, to performe some
exployt vpon the Fortresse, where Don Iohn de Medici commanded: but finding some resistance, and that as they were readie to enter, other troops came to relieue them, they desisted for feare they were too weake to en∣counter with both at once; that is to say, with the Fort, and this other supply, and so returned toward the Fort Di Santa Maria, which belongs to the Archduke Leo∣paldus. Other Letters advertise vs, that the Cittie of Millane is compelled to her proportioned contribution, being about 40000. Crownes, not onely for this yeare, but to a monethly allowance for the next yeare 1623. and that all the Citties within that Territory, haue likewise their severall Collections to maintaine the warres. That the money sent to the Catholique Switzers, hath beene be∣stowed to good purpose, because they haue stopped that Passage, by which the Protestant Switzers meant to goe and assist the Grizons, wherevpon there was a new Dis∣bursement made of a 100000 Crownes to pay those Switzers, who were vnder Colonell Berlinghier, part in full satisfaction, and part in way of a new assignation. That the Souldiers of the Knight Pecchio, being returned out of Alsatia, were sent to remaine in Bornio, and the Spaniards resident in Chiavana returned also to Millane, so that there remained onely in these parts the Count Iohn Sherbolone, and his troops. That many Souldiers are fled out of the Valtoline for want of pay, and other neces∣saries, who notwithstanding, are a new lifted in the Re∣giment of Count Franciso d' Adda, who is deputed to make an end of the businesse. That there is returned out of Alsatia to Millane, the Marquis De Valdefuentes, and from Tiroll the Captaine, Iohn Baptista Panteorla, after they had given order to leavie eleven Companies of Horse, and make other provision for the Souldiers, which they also performed with all diligence in the Bishopricke of Salz∣purgh, to maintaine and perfect the government of Count di Lodron, whose Regiment was not yet full enough. And
that the Fmbassadour extraordinary of Mantua, had ob∣tained a passage for certaine Souldiers, who were to goe from Mantua to Monsferrate. From Constantinople, the death of the great Turke is a∣new confirmed. It seemes, the Ianizaries were not ac∣quainted with his death, but that it was onely contrived by a Vicebasshaw, Generall at the Sea, or as we call Admirall, who vnderhand writ a Letter to the Basshaw of Gran Cay∣ro, that the Turke meant to come thither, & alter the forme of Government, for the suppressing the insolency of the Ianizaries, to which purpose, he was resolved to denie them their donation. This Letter was found by chance, but so found, that the Ianizaries tooke notice of the same, and supposing it true, were so enraged, that they adven∣tured vpon the Seraglio; and so one rage helping forward another, the Devill set them aworke (as you haue for∣merly heard) but at last the Viceers vnderstanding all the matter, found a time to make the other Ianizaries acquain∣ted with the treason, and promise them the augmentation of three aspers a day, which the great Sultana, the mother of Osman, being retired to Milo, with her Spahies, and and certaine Chauses, confirmed. Whereupon the greater sort of Ianizaries came presently to Constantinople, affir∣ming, that the great Empresse lay safe in the Iland of Mile, that there were three brothers aliue of the slaughtered Os∣man, and that there were also two Sultana's of his owne great with childe, and which the Mufti knew well e∣nough: Thus new tumults arose in Constantinople, yet nei∣ther were the shopps shutt, nor the government altred, nor any stranger disturbed; in the midst of which Insur∣rection, comes the Admirall of the Gallies to Constantinople, vpon whom in a fury the Ianizaries layd hands, who made what resistance he could, and so at last he was burnt with 18. Gallies: yet for the time is Mustapha confirmed, and is like to continue, vnlesse they suspect his weakenesse and vnaptnesse to such a government, and will no doubt, and so make choise of some braue Spirit, to guide the hor∣ses
of this vnruly Chariot of the Turkish Empire, contain∣ing at least fiftie severall Provinces, such as in times past were reputed Kingdomes of reasonable eminency, and opulent mightinesse. From Franckefort, the old Letters confirme the defeate of Brunswicke, who is named in the same the Bishop of Haverstate, and this is their Language: that there passed by this City 132. Cornets of horse, and 128. Ensignes of foote, belonging to the Duke of Bavaria, and were quick∣ly vnited to Monsieur Tillies forces, who defeated the Bi∣shop at the River of Maine, to the losse of 3000. besides 1000. drownd in the River of Maine; his cariages were most surprised, and some money taken, there were also taken prisoners the Count of Lipstat, and Sturnne, with the Duke of Vannas, after which the Armie of Tilley reco∣vered Holst againe, and put some to death, which made resistance: here they found two or three peeces of Artil∣lery: not withstanding all this? Brunswick escaped with full 10000. into Darmstrat, where hee vnited himselfe to Count Mansfeild, who taking their marches to Bergstro∣zen, encountred with 300. horse of Crovata, who were al cut in peeces: this Letter was writt from one, who was willing to shew his good will, but had not the Fortune of true intelligence, but we had this newes long agoe. The newer Letters, which came the 24. of Iuly, certefie thus much, that both Bavaria and Tilley are retyred out of the Palatinate, holding their quarters about the Mountaines beyond Heidelberge, and so meane to stop the passage into Bavaria: and the King of Bohemia with Mansfeild are also gone out of the Palatinate, the King went to Sedan to the Duke of Bolloigne: His Generall or Count Mansfeild, marching openly with cullours displai∣ed even to the borders of Loraine, and Lutzenbergh, and all attending the treaty at Brussels, where if it be peace, It is supposed, that Mansfeild eyther enters into the service of the States of Holland, or adventures into France. From Lipsia in Saxony, the Letters containe, that the
Elector Duke vpon the Certificate of the Emperour, hath raised together 22000. protecting something of conse∣quence for his owne honour, and the Emperours sa∣tisfaction, but as he was in his march, both horse and foote fell from him and resolved him peremptorily, that they would goe and assist the Bishop of Haversplate. From Prague the Letters advise, that those Countrie men, which were supposed to be cut in peeces by the Cos∣sacks in their returne, were indeede overthrowne by the souldiers of Glats, who in a braue and resolute sally set vp∣on their Enemies, and tooke many prisoners and a great booty, forraging the Country, and killing all, that resisted them, returning with their spoyles to their hold of securi∣ty, and as it should seeme being thereby emboldened to hold it out against the greatest perill. From France they write, that how ever the Kings armie prevayled in the siege of Saint Anthony, yet was Montal∣bon relieved, & had many supplies, so that it is not thought convenient, that the King should hazard his person against any of these great Townes; but they say, as hee was marching foreward, the Duke de Rohan, set vpon some of his Army, and put them to defeate. That the Queene Mother went from Nantes toward the Bathes of Pughes neere vnto Nevers: That the King hath graunted to Signeur Pempeio Frangipane 2000. crownes, as a pension out of the Abbey where his brother was Ab∣bot: who now deceased and the place voyd, it pleased his Maiestie to dispose of some of the revenues in this maner: and that the Cardinall Bevilacqua was at the sayd Bathes, but hearing of the Queenes approch made hast to depart into his owne Country. From Antwarp they write, that on Sunday the 21. of Iuly. The Marquesse Spinola was attended thither with 2000. horse, and the Nobilitie of Flanders and Brabant: having before hand taken order, that the Governour of
Gaunt should visite Sluice, and build 4. severall Forts, as neere it as they could, that so they might bee assured hee meant once againe to besiege the same: For they giue it out, he will haue three Armies afoote this Summer: one against Sluice, another against Broda, and the greatest a∣gainst Borghen, which shall increase as occasion serues: but when Spinola vnderstood, that many men were slaine by the fallies of the Garrisons in Berghen, who by this time hath 6000. souldiers in he, he gaue order to retire his Army some halfe a mile from  Ravelings, out of the danger of the shot, till hee came himself to direct them further, but by reason they haue not yet entrencht them∣selues, it is very probable, they doe not determine to con∣tinue the siege long: but suddenly to rise and goe to some other place. From the Hage the Letters are as favorable in the be∣halfe of the States, affirming, that there is now no going to Antwarp by the way of the River, because the Hollan∣ders with their men of warre not onely watch the same: but haue new fortifications on the land of Fertoll: as for Berghen, they are confident both of the strength of the place, and sufficiency of the men, being all old souldiers, and very neere 8000. insomuch that they make dayly ex∣cursions vpon the Spaniards, as having their Portes open all night, and by their sallies not onely put many of them to the sword, but returne with great booty: so that when∣soever Spinola's Armie makes approches, or attempts any on-set, then doe the Batteries of the Ravelings play vp∣on them, and eyther enforce them backe, or kill them in the place. Some 4. dayes since it was supposed, they would rise, wherupon the horse of Breda trooped to overlooke them, and the Governour Iustinianus (as I take it) of the house of Nassaw, sent the Prince of Orenge word of their prepa∣ration: but as it should seeme, he is carelesse of their ac∣tions, and confident to overwatch them what course soe∣uer
they take, because the Souldiers were never so willing to fight as at this houre, nor the States never so able to maintaine the Warre. Other Letters from severall port Townes assure vs, that the Rochellers haue taken divers prises, and intercepted some ships of souldiers, who haue sent prisoners to Midel∣borogh and other places. FINIS.
