9260 S101025 99836850 1140
portrait of Charles I CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD Kinge of England, Scotland France and Ireland, defendor of the faith, etc:
HIS MAJESTIES Declaration, CONCERNING His Proceedings with His Subjects of SCOTLAND, Since the Pacification in the Camp neere Berwick. LONDON, Printed by R. Young, His Majesties Printer for Scotland, and R. Badger, Printer to the Prince His Highnesse. M.DC.XL.
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the King. WE did make accompt that the Pacification which We were pleased to condescend unto, the last yeare in the Campe neere Berwick, and to grant to Our Subjects of Scotland, even then when they were in the height of their rebellion, and in the field in Armes a∣gainst
Us, had given such demonstration to the world of Our inclination to peace, and desire to spare the blood of Our people, and to winne them to the obedience which they owe unto Us, as that all misunderstandings had beene utterly taken away (as they were on Our part) and that such conditions as were then agreed upon, should have beene really performed by them, according to those bonds of Allegeance, dutie, and promise in which they stand obliged to Us. But We have since found, to our unexpressible grief, that Our Princely goodnesse and mildnesse in passing by that offence, hath produced nothing but extreame ingratitude, and in∣sufferable insolencies against Our Govern∣ment: And farther, by sundry libellous Pam∣phlets, and most false and seditious discour∣ses sent from Scotland, and dispersed purpose∣ly in this Our Kingdome of England, especi∣ally in our Citie of London, that the cause of these disorders is sought to be shifted off from the Rebels in Scotland, and most unjustly cast upon Us. Wherfore We hold Our selfe bound in that dutie which we owe to God and love to truth, not to suffer Our honour to be thus be∣trayed
and vilified by faction and rebellion, but to vindicate it from all calumnie and cla∣mour, by giving hereby a cleare and just ac∣compt to all the world of Our proceeding with Our Subjects of that Our Kingdome, and of the most materiall and remarkable oc∣currents since that Pacification, that so all those that are not partiall, or will not wilfully shut their eyes against the truth, may judge, who they are that have beene the disturbers, and infractors of the peace, and that under the maske and visour of Religion, seek to un∣dermine and subvert all Monarchicall and ci∣vill Government. Which accompt followes thus. After We had beene some time in the Campe neere Berwicke, and that Our Sub∣jects of Scotland had encamped with their Armie in view of Ours, upon an overture from them, We were contented to conde∣scend to the receiving of a Petition, in which it is expressed, that, they, falling downe at Our feet, did most humbly supplicate Vs to appoint some of this Our Kingdome of England to heare, by some of them, their humble desires. Which We hav∣ing granted, and severall meetings by those
of both Kingdomes having been held, at all which Our self, (to shew Our hearty and ear∣nest desire to meet Our subjects in a peacable way) were contented to be present, (much beyond their own expectation, as they have since acknowledged, and We are sure ex∣ceedingly beyond their merit) at the last those of Scotland were commanded to make their demands in writing, in which after they had presented their desires, (of which one was, That the acts of the late assembly at Glasgow holden by Our Indiction, might be ratified in the ensuing Parliament,) they professe, It is their griefe that We should have beene provoked to wrath against them Our most humble and loving Subjects, and that it shall be their delight upon Our gracious assurance of the preservation of their Re∣ligion and Lawes, to give example to others of all ci∣vill and temporall obedience which can be required or expected of loyall subjects. Whereupon We letting them know, that for the better clearing of par∣ticulars, We expected from them the grounds & reasons of their desires, but that We would not surprise them, and therefore gave them time to come prepared with their grounds in writing, The Lord Lowdon said, Their desires
were onely to enjoy their Religion and Liberties, accor∣ding to the Ecclesiasticall and Civill Lawes of the King∣dome; and in clearing particulars, they would not in∣sist upon any that were not such. This We willed him to set downe in writing under his hand, which he did in these words. Memorandum, that our desires are onely the enjoying of our Religion and Liberties according to the Ecclesi∣asticall and Civill Lawes of His Majesties Kingdome; To cleare by sufficient Grounds, that the particulars which we humbly crave, are such, and shall not insist to crave any point which is not so warranted; And that we humbly offer all civill and temporall obedience to Your Majesty, which can be required or expected of loyall subjects. Signed, Lowdon. To which We answered, That if their de∣sires were onely the enjoying of their Religion and Li∣berties according to the Ecclesiasticall and Civill Lawes of Our Kingdome of Scotland, We do not onely agree to the same, but shall alwayes protect them to the utter∣most of Our power. And if they shall not insist upon any thing but that which is so warranted, We will most willingly and readily condescend unto it, so that in
the meane time they pay unto Vs that civill and tempo∣rall obedience which can be justly required and expe∣cted of loyall subjects. This being the ground of the agreement on both sides, We were pleased to proceed to a finall determination of this businesse, which was brought to a conclusion upon the 17. of June, 1639: And Our Declaration of that date conformable to these grounds was thereupon made, which was not onely acce∣pted by those that came in the name of all those of the Covenant, but most humble thankes were given to Us by them for Our gracious answer vouchsafed to their Petition in the said Declaration; which was fully a∣greed upon, together with sundry Articles, by all parties. The Pacification thus concluded, the Arti∣cles on both sides were to be performed ac∣cordingly: Those on Our part were in the Declaration following. We having considered the papers and humble petiti∣ons presented to Vs by those of Our subjects of Scotland who were admitted to attend Our pleasure in the Camp, and after a full bearing by Our Selfe of all that they
could say or alledge thereupon, having communicated the same to Our Councell of both Kingdomes there pre∣sent, upon mature deliberation, with their unanimous ad∣vice We have thought fit to give this just and graci∣ous answer; That though We cannot condescend to ra∣tifie and approve the acts of the pretended Generall Assembly at Glasgow, for many grave and weighty considerations which have happened both before and since, much importing the Honour and Security of that true Monarchicall Government lineally descended upon Vs from so many of Our Ancestors; yet such is Our gracious pleasure, that notwithstanding the many disor∣ders committed of late, We are pleased not onely to con∣firm and make good whatsoever our Commissioner hath granted and promised in Our Name; but also We are farther graciously pleased to declare and assure, that according to the Petitioners humble desires, all matters Ecclesiasticall shall be determined by the Assemblies of the Kirke, and matters Civill by the Parliament, and other inferiour Iudicatories established by Law, which Assembly accordingly shalbe kept once a yeare, or as shalbe agreed upon at the Generall Assembly. And for setling the generall distractions of that Our ancient Kingdome, Our will and pleasure is, that a free generall Assembly be kept at Edinburgh, the sixt day of August next ensuing, where We intend (God
willing) to be personally present; and for the Legall Indiction whereof, We have given order and command to Our Counsell, and thereafter a Parliament to be hol∣den at Edinburgh the twentieth day of August next en∣suing, for ratifying of what shalbe concluded in the said Assembly, and setling such other things as may conduce to the peace and good of Our Native King∣dome, and therein an Act of oblivion to be passed. And whereas We are farther desired, that Our Ships and Forces by land be recalled, and all persons goods, and ships restored, and they made safe from invasion, We are graciously pleased to declare, That upon their disarming, and disbanding of their forces, dissolving and discharging all their pretended Tables and Conventicles, and restoring unto us all our Castles, Forts, and Amunition of all sorts, as likewise Our Royall Honours, and to every one of Our good sub∣jects their liberties, lands, houses, goods, and meanes whatsoever taken and detained from them since the late pretended Generall Assembly, We will presently thereafter recall Our Fleet, and retire Our land Forces, and cause restitution to be made to all persons of their ships and goods detained and arrested since the afore∣said time; whereby it may appeare, that Our intention of taking up of armes, was no way for invading of Our Native Kingdome, or to innovate the Religion
and Lawes, but meerly for the maintaining and vin∣dicating of Our Royall Authority. And since that hereby it doth cleerely appeare, that We neither have, nor do intend any alteration in Reli∣gion or Lawes, but that both shalbe maintained by Vs in their full Integrity, We expect the perfor∣mance of that humble and dutifull obedience, which becommeth loyall and dutifull subjects, and as in their severall Petitions they have often professed. And as We have just reason to believe that to our peace∣able and well-affected subjects this will be satisfa∣ctory, so We take God and the world to witnesse, that whatsoever calamities shall ensue by Our ne∣cessitated suppressing of the Insolencies of such as shall continue in their disobedient courses, is not occa∣sioned by Vs, but by their owne procurement. These Conditions in this Declaration that referre to the time past, have beene the most part of them already punctually com∣plied with by Us, that clause excepted in which We expresse, We intended to have beene at the Generall Assembly at Edin∣burgh; which yet being but an Intention, We had assuredly performed, but that We were diverted by the disorders committed
by Our tumultuary Subjects in Edinburgh, upon the persons of Our High Treasurer, the Earle of Kinnoull Our Justice Gene∣rall, Sir Iames Hamilton, Counsellors of that Our Kingdome, and diverse others Our good Subjects there; which gave Us just cause to suspect, that there could be no safe∣ty for Our Person, among people inraged so immediately after Our clemency shewed to them in the Pacification. But one of the greatest discouragements We had from going thither, was the refu∣sing of such Lords and others of that Nati∣on whom We sent for, to come to Us to Berwick; by which disobedience they ma∣nifestly discovered their distrust of Us: and it cannot be thought reasonable, that We should trust Our Person with those that di∣strusted Us, after so many arguments and as∣surances of Our goodnesse towards them. The Articles of Pacification agreed upon were these. The Forces of Scotland to be disbanded and dissolved within forty eight houres, after the Publication of Our Declaration being agreed upon.
Our Castles, Forts, Amunitions of all sorts, and Royall Honours, to be delivered after the said Publication, so soone as We should send to receive them. Our Ships to depart presently after the delive∣ry of the Castles, with the first faire wind, and in the meane time no interruption of Trade or Fishing. We were graciously pleased to cause to be re∣stored all persons goods and ships, detained and arrested since the first of November then last past. No Meetings, Treatings, Consultations or Con∣vocations of any Our Lieges, but such as are war∣ranted by Act of Parliament. All Fortifications to desist, and no farther working therein, and they to be remitted to Our Pleasure. To restore to every one of Our good Subjects their liberties, lands, houses, goods, and meanes whatsoever, taken or detained from them by what∣soever meanes since the aforesaid time. On Tuesday the 18. of June, those of Scotland came to Our Pavilion, and there We signed the aforesaid Declaration, and the
Articles were signed by them, who also signed another paper of submission to Us, as followeth. In the Camp, 18. June, 1639. In obedience to His Majesties Royall com∣mands, we shall upon Thursday next, the 20. of this Iune, dismisse our Forces, and immediately thereafter deliver His Majesties Castles, &c. and shall ever in all things carrie our selves like hum∣ble, loyall, and obedient subjects. Signed, Rothes. Dumfermlin. Lowdon. Dowglas. Alex. Henderson. A. Iohnstoun. Those of Scotland did likewise further promise and undertake, that Our foresaid Declaration should be read and published in their Army; which was accordingly done by Lyon King of Armes of Scotland, on Thursday the 20. in the presence of the Earle of Morton, Sir Edmund Verney, and Sir Iohn Borough, Our Commissioners sent thither to see the same performed. How these Articles have beene per∣formed,
on their part, comes now to be con∣sidered, and will appeare by that which followes. First, whereas We, by the publication of the Articles of Pacification, expected that due respect and acknowledgment of Our authority, which might have witnessed their Loyalty, and sense of their thankful∣nesse for so great and royall favour, We found on the contrary, that at the very pub∣lishing of it in their Camp, the same was met with a Protestation, so scandalous and dishonourable to Our Government, as Our Subjects were thereby rather encouraged in their former mutinous wayes, than reduced to that obedience which they promised. Secondly, they delivered into the hands of some of Our English Nobility, and spred, among others, a scandalous Paper, intituled, Some Conditions of His Majesties Treaty with His Subjects of Scotland before the English Nobi∣lity, are set down here for remembrance. Where∣in are contained such untruths and seditious positions, and so contrary to that which was concluded in the Articles of Pacification, as thereby it did plainly appeare, that how∣ever
they pretended a desire of peace, yet they intended nothing lesse. This false and seditious paper comming to Our know∣ledge, was after, by the Advice, and upon the humble Petition of Our Privie Councell here in England, and particularly, by such Noblemen as were pretended by them to be witnesses to the same, ordered to be damned by Proclamation, and publikely burnt by the hand of the Hangman: which was done accordingly. Thirdly, whereas it was promised, that the Forces of that Our Kingdome of Scot∣land, raised without Our warrant, and a∣gainst Our Selfe, should be disbanded and dissolved within 48. hours after publication of Our said Declaration in their Camp; they did neverthelesse for some time, keep in bo∣dy diverse Forces, and have ever since held in pay almost all their Officers, in manifest breach of those Articles, contempt of Our Royall Authority, contrary to the Lawes of that Our Kingdome, and to the great dan∣ger of all Our Subjects, who did give obe∣dience to Our Commandements there, which cleerely shewed their intention of
putting themselves againe in armes against Us. Fourthly, Whereas it was promised, that Our Forts, Castles, and Amunitions, should be restored, so soone as We should send to receive them, yet full restitution was not made accordingly; And for the Fortificati∣on at Lieth, which was with the rest re∣mitted to Our pleasure, it stands entirely as it did, though We often commanded the demolishing thereof. Fifthly, It was promised there should be no Meetings, Treatings, Tables, Consulta∣tions, Convocations, or Conventicles, but such as are warranted by act of Parliament, (and yet We were pleased to give them warrant to meet for the space of one moneth, to consult, advise, and resolve, up∣on such affaires and businesse as concerned the reliefe of their mutuall burthens only:) Neverthelesse after that time expired, which was on the twentieth day of July 1639. they did, and doe still continue their unlawfull meetings and consultations upon matters of State both Ecclesiasticall and Ci∣vill, contrary to the Laws and Acts of Par∣liament
of that Our Kingdome, and Our expresse warrant; In which Conventicles they daily vex and trouble such of Our Sub∣jects as doe not adhere to their rebellious Covenant, and pretended assembly at Glas∣gow, and the acts of the same. Sixthly, Whereas all Fortifications were to be remitted to Our pleasure to be demo∣lished or continued, and We having given commandement for the demolishing of them all raised and built without Our warrant; no obedience is given to the same, but they are still continued, to the fostering of sedition among Our Subjects, and the disturbance of the peace of that Our King∣dome. Seventhly, Whereas all Our good Sub∣jects should have their liberties and goods restored to them, yet such is the violence and furie of the people, animated thereunto by the said Protestation, scandalous papers spred, and seditious Sermons preached, as many of Our said Subjects are deterred from going to their owne dwelling and places of aboad, and threatned with the losse of their lives, in case they shall repaire to their own houses.
Eightly, Whereas in Our Declaration before mentioned, We did make knowne that We could not approve the late preten∣ded generall Assembly at Glasgow, for the reasons conteyned in Our former Proclama∣tions, yet contrary to that Our pleasure, they daily presse Our Subjects to subscribe the approbation of the said pretended assembly and acts thereof, and to sweare the same; so that whereas We did expect to have found our Subjects setled in peace and qui∣etnesse against Our repaire to Edinburgh, We heard of nothing but new disorders, meetings and molestations of Our Subjects well affected to Our service; which as it doth evidently appeare by the insupporta∣ble insolencies committed as aforesaid, up∣on the persons of Our High Treasurer the Earle of Kinnoul, Our Justice Generall Sir Iames Hamilton, and others Our Coun∣sellours and good Subjects, so doth it clear∣ly evince, that nothing was lesse intended then obedience to Our authoritie, or perfor∣mance of what was promised, or is due to Us in right of Our Crowne, and by the lawes of that Our Kingdome.
Ninthly, Whereas We were pleased to grant a free Generall Assembly, for setling and composing the divisions cunningly rai∣sed and fomented in the Church of that Our Kingdome, expecting a faire choice of the Commissioners, and such as might stand with the respect due to Our authori∣tie, they did labour to pervert Our Subjects by anticipating their voices, in making them sweare to, and subscribe the acts of the pretended Assembly at Glasgow, and making choise of such Commissioners (and no others) as adhered thereunto, and by Oath were bound to maintaine the same, and further, deterred others, whom We by Our Warrant did lawfully call to the next Assembly, from repairing thereunto, threatning them with the losse of their lives, and what worse may be committed against their persons, in manifest contempt of Our authority, and derogation from the freedome of the said assembly. Tenthly, To divert all Our good Subjects from their due obedience to Us, and to de∣bauch them to their factious mutinies and disorders, they brand all such as adhere to
Us, and have attended Our person, with the vile aspersion of Traitors to God and their Countrey, threatning to proceed against them with censures accordingly, as though the due respect given by them to Us, and their adhering to Us, and their assisting Us in their persons, were Treason: whereas by right of that Our Crown, and the Acts of Parliament of that Our Kingdome, all Our Subjects are to rise with Us, and to assist Us with their bodies and goods, and whoso∣ever refuses, or rises in Armes or rebellion against Us, or commits any act of Hostility against Our Sacred Person, are declared Traitors, and are to incurre the paine of High Treason. Lastly, Their disobedience appeares in that unparallel'd contempt of Our Royall authority, and shaking off all respect due to Sacred Majestie, by their protesting that all members of the Colledge of Justice, and all Our Lieges were not to attend the Session, and that all Acts, Decrees, and Sentences therein past against any of them, shall be nul, void and ineffectuall, contrary to Our ex∣presse warrant for the downesitting there∣of,
and to the heavie dammage of Our good Subjects, who were thereby frustra∣ted of Justice, taking by this meanes Our Royall Power out of Our hand, which a∣lone belongeth to Us, none but Our selfe being to command Our Subjects to attend the Session, or to discharge their attendance, as We in Our Princely wisdome and justice shall think fit. Having laid these insolent and seditious foundations for a Parliament, it could not in reason be expected but the structure to be raised thereupon must be full of disorder and confusion, and indeed it prooved all of a piece, for in all the progresse of the Par∣liament their actions and demands were full of undutifulnesse and disloyaltie, deny∣ing to Us the most essentiall, and inherent prerogatives of Our Crowne, and striving by all meanes to change and alter the Con∣stitutions of the Parliament, and frame of Government, as appeares by their first Act, at and after the chusing of the Lords of the Articles, where, in a most insolent and pe∣remptory way, they protested, that nothing done, or to be done in Parliament should
be valid, except the forme of electing the Articles heretofore observed were altered, every Estate allowed to choose their owne Articles, contrary to the forme kept in for∣mer Parliaments for many yeares, as will cleerely be evinced by the Records, and will be made appeare by persons of all qua∣lities yet living, who assisted at the Parlia∣ments, and were members of the same, in the Yeare 1612. and 1609. and contrary to the provisions and conditions mentioned in the Act, 1587. By their Act likewise concerning the de∣fining of the power of the said Articles, they presse totally to subvert the frame and po∣wer therof. The Articles have been, as is ac∣knowledged by themselvs, ever since K. Da∣vid Bruce his time, which is about 300. years; and by the Lords of the Articles all busines∣ses are prepared, and from them brought to the Parliament, as appeares by divers Acts of Parliament, and particularly by the fourth Parliament of K. Iames 6. Cap. 218. in which for eschewing of confusion and impertinent motions, all Propositions to be made in Parliament are to be delivered to
the Clerk Register, and by him presented to the Lords of the Articles, that all frivolous and improper motions may be rejected; which ancient Constitutions they would subvert by the aforesaid Act. So by the Act concerning the Constituti∣on of the Parliament in time to come, they urge, and thereby strive totally to alter the frame of the Parliament, and to confound and take away the third Estate, wherein the Civill power of Kings is so much con∣cerned, as Our Father, and all His Predeces∣sours in former Parliaments, both in time of Popery, and since the reformation of Re∣ligion, have beene most carefull to preserve and maintaine the Dignity, Honour, and Priviledges of the third Estate, as appeares in Anno 1560. when all Church-Jurisdiction in the persons of Bishops, is alledged to be abolished: and in Anno 1587. when all the Temporalties of Benefices were annexed to the Crowne, the Clergy retained still their Vote in Parliament, and represented the third Estate, and the Civill power and priviledges of the Church were still preser∣ved, and againe ratified, as appeares by the
first Parliament of K. JAMES 6. Cap. 24. and by diverse Acts of Parliament, Anno 1587. 1597. & 1609. By all which, and diverse o∣ther Acts of Parliament, it does cleerely ap∣peare, how much the Kings Our Predeces∣sors have conceived their Civill Power, and the Honour of their Crowne to be concer∣ned in the maintaining and upholding of the Honour, Dignity and Priviledges of the three Estates. Nay, by a speciall Act made in the time of K. JAMES 6. Parliament 8. Cap. 130. it is declared Treason, to impugne the authority of the Parliament, and three Estates, or to procure the innovation of the power and authority of the same three Estates, or any of them: and We would willingly know, how they, or any of them, can deny, but that they have sought the breach of this Act, and so are guilty of Trea∣son, and liable to the punishment thereof. Concerning the Act which they call Re∣scissory, they do not onely thereby seeke to take away the third Estate, which is Trea∣son, as aforesaid, but to annull many other Acts, formerly made in favour of the Crowne; and farther, to barre Us, in a man∣ner
totally, from Assembly, or Assembly bu∣sinesse, and cut Us off from all those pow∣ers in Civill affaires, which in the Court of that Kingdome, are in consequence hereup∣on; by which it is evident, how farre they would trench upon Regall power, and how different it is from their promise, which was, to desire nothing that is not warranted by Law. For the Act of Oblivion, in the narrative and whole streyne of it, as it is formed, and desired by them to be past in Parliament, they seeke to justifie themselves in all their proceedings, and instead of an Act of Obli∣vion, for which they petitioned Us at the Campe, they urge an Act which amounts to a Justification to be recorded in the Bookes of Parliament, altogether contrary to the nature of an Act of Oblivion, and to that which ever heretofore hath been desi∣red in like case, as appeares by the Act of Oblivion in Anno 1563. And whereas by the Act of Pacification, restitution is ordained to be made to every one of Our good Subjects of their liberties, lands, goods and meanes whatsoever, taken
and detained from them by any meanes, since the aforesaid time, this is not onely not yet performed, but as appeares by the bind∣ing part of this Act, it is never intended. And as by the abovesaid act of Oblivion, so by their Act of Reliefe, they depart from that which was condescended to at the Campe; for whereas upon their humble desire We were graciously pleased by a Commission dated at Berwick 2. of July 1639. to allow them the libertie of convening and meeting untill a certaine day, for distributing of their pretended charges, amongst such as should willingly condescend thereunto, they have not only without Our warrant kept their Conventicles, and Tables, since the expi∣ring of the aforesaid Commission, contrary to the positive lawes of the Kingdome, and the Act of Pacification, and their owne ac∣knowledgement in petitioning for the a∣foresaid Commission, but by their said Act of reliefe they doe most impudently urge upon Us, that by an Act of Our Roy∣all Power, all Our good Subjects who in the late troubles and Commotions did ad∣here to Us, and shew themselves ready to
defend Our Royall Authority, should bee made equally, if not more lyable to the de∣fraying of their pretended charges. So by the Act it selfe. We are pressed to justifie and authorise all their Rebellions and Trea∣sons, and to constraine the innocent and those that have suffered most for being faithfull and loyall to Us, to contribute to those Rebellions and Treasons; then which there can be nothing more Tyrannicall, nor contrary to Justice and Our Honour. Concerning their demands, although in all their Petitions, Declarations and Re∣monstrances, they professe, that they will never incroach upon Soveraigntie, nor di∣minish Our Royall Authority, yet notwith∣standing by their demands made in Parlia∣ment, and the reasons of them given to Our selfe, they strike at the very roote of Our Regall power. For they desire, First, that the Coyne be not medled with but by advice of Parliament. That no stranger be entrusted with keep∣ing of Our Castles, nor other person put in them, but by advice of the Estates. That no Patent of Honour be granted to
any stranger, but such as have a competen∣cie of land-rent in Scotland. That no Commission of Justiciary or Lieutenancie may be granted but for a li∣mitted time. They protest likewise against the Prece∣dencie of Our Lord Treasurer, and Lord Privie Seal, because as they alledge the same is not warranted by a positive Law. All which, though they are so essentially belonging to Us as their King, that for the most part they answer themselves; yet We have thought it not unfit to give the world this satisfaction concerning them. And first for the Coine, It is a preroga∣tive most peculiar to the Crowne, and none can meddle with it but by Our consent, without incurring the punishment of High Treason, as it is in all Kingdomes. In the second and third there lurketh a great deale of Malignity and Poyson, and they are intended meerely against the Eng∣lish, whom they would accompt strangers, as appeares by the exception lately taken by those of Edinburgh to those English sent by Us to the Castles of Edinburgh and
Downebarton. This is a most dange∣rous and seditious practice, to raise againe the partition wall betweene the two Na∣tions, and to divide them, thereby to awa∣ken those ancient Nationall animosities, which have beene most happily laid asleep by the blessed union of the two Crownes; And besides, the great dishonour to the English, that they should not be held wor∣thy to enjoy any dignities or priviledges in Scotland, as well as the Scots doe in Eng∣land: It is an injurie to themselves, For it is most just, that by the same rule the Post∣nati of Scotland (who are now admitted here to all Dignities, Priviledges and Offi∣ces, and doe enjoy them as freely as any English whatsoever) should be likewise excluded from them, for which most of their Countreymen here would give them little thankes. But what Religion there can be in shewing themselves such Incen∣diaries, We leave it to the world to judge. To the fourth: Some of themselves have obtained from Us the heritable Rights of Justiciary, over a considerable part of that Our Kingdome, and why Our power
should be more limitted to others then to them We understand not. To the fifth: No man that is not a Tray∣tor can deny that the source and fountaine of all honour is in Us, and that it is a prime branch of Our Crowne to distribute ho∣nours, Dignities, and precedeneies to whom We please, and besides, the Chan∣cellour of that Our Kingdome, holds his place and precedency without any warrant or positive law, but meerely from Our immediate and inherent power; and there∣fore why not Our Treasurer and Privie Seale, as well as He? They further boldly demand the rescin∣ding the Acts of Parliament concerning the Civill government, namely, the Act con∣cerning the Judicatorie of the Exchequer, the Act concerning Proxies, the Act con∣cerning confirmation of Ward-lands, by which they would overthrow both Our Government and Revenew. When We found them thus pertinacious∣ly resolved to persist in these their insolent and unsufferable demands, contrary to all Religion and Lawes, though they so much
pretend them both, We signified Our plea∣sure to Our Commissioner the Earle of Traquair to this purpose, That whereas it did evidently appeare unto Us, that the aime of divers of Our Subjects was not now for Religion, as they have alwayes pretended (for it was manifest by the pro∣ceeding of Our said Commissioner, how willing We had beene to give satisfaction both in Assembly and Parliament, touch∣ing all such things as were promised by Us, or sued for by them under that name of Re∣ligion) And that We did perceive by ma∣ny new strange Propositions, that nothing would give them content but the alteration of the whole frame of the Government of that Kingdome, and withall, the totall over∣throw of Royall Authority, We held it must now be Our care and endeavour to prevent that which did so neerely concerne Us in safety and Honour, and if thereupon we should immediately command the dis∣solving of the Parliament, it were no more then justly might be expected from Us. Neverthelesse, such was still Our tender∣nesse of their preservation, and of the esta∣blishment
of a perfect peace in that Our native Kingdome, as We were pleased ra∣ther to prorogate the same, and to heare such reasons as they could give for their de∣mands. Wherfore We commanded Our said Commissioner to prorogate the Parlia∣ment untill the 2. of June next ensuing, and that (since they had disputed it) by Our au∣thority only; We holding it no way fit∣ting, that any assent of theirs but obedience should be had to that act, which doth so properly belong to Us as their King, and if they should presume to protest, sit still, and disobey this our Royall command, Our further will and pleasure was, that Our said Commissioner should discharge their so doing under paine of Treason. But in case of their obedience and dissolving according to Our command, then We did require Our said Commissioner to declare unto them, that We would not only admit to Our pre∣sence such as they should send unto Us to represent their desires, and the reasons of them, but would likewise, as We were al∣ways ready to do, punctually perform what∣soever. We did promise. In the interim We
commanded himselfe with all convenient speed to repaire hither, and to bring with him all that had passed, or had been deman∣ded, both in Assembly and Parliament, that so we might not only be more perfectly inform'd of all proceedings, but likewise consult with him and those of our Councel, what course would be best for the preserva∣tion of Our honour, and the happy accom∣modation of this busines. This Our command being signified to the Parliament by Our Commissioner, was not assented unto without a Protestation, which they call a Declaration of the Parlia∣ment to this purpose. That Whereas John Earle of Traquair His Majesties Commissioner, honoured with a most ample Commission, according to His Majesties Royall word having closed the As∣sembly, and sitting in Parliament with them a very long time for debating and preparing such Articles as were to be represented in face of Parliament, did now take upon him, and that without the con∣sent of the Estates and without any offence on their part, who have endeavoured in all their proceedings to witnes their loyalty to the King, and duty to His Grace, as representing His Majesties sacred person
to prorogate the Parliament upon a private warrant procured by sinister information against His Maje∣sties publicke Patent under the Great Seale, &c. whereby hee heavily offends all His Majesties good Subjects, and endeangers the peace of the whole kingdome, for which he must be lyable to His Maje∣sties animadversion, and to the censure of the Parli∣ment, this being a new and unusuall way, without president in this Kingdome, contrary to His Maje∣sties honour so farre engaged for present ratifying the Acts of the Kirke, contrary to the lawes, liber∣ties, and perpetuall practice of the Kingdome, by which all continuations of Parliament once called, convened, and begun to sit, have ever been made with expresse consent of the Estates, as may be seen in the Reignes of sundry Princes, &c. Jac. 6. Qu. Mary. Jac. 5. Jac. 4. Jac. 3. Jac. 2. & Jac. 1. Therefore wee the Estates of Parliament, &c. are constrained in this extremitie to manifest and declare, &c. that as wee have not given the least cause or smallest occasion of this unexpected, or unexemplified Proro∣gation; so wee judge and know the same to be con∣trary to the constitution and practices of all prece∣ding Parliaments, contrary to the liberties of this free and ancient Kingdome, and very repugnant to His Majesties Royall intentions, promise, and gra∣cious expressions in the Articles of the late Pacificà∣tion,
&c. And wee doe further declare, that any Prorogation made by the Commissioners Grace alone, without consent of the Parliament, by himselfe or any Commissioner in his name, under the Quarter Seale, or by the Lords of the Councell, who have no power at all in matters of the Parliament during the sit∣ting thereof, shall be ineffectuall and of no force at all to hinder the lawfull proceedings of the Subjects, and the doers thereof to be censurable in Parliament. And further wee declare, that the Commissioner his nomination of the Articles by himselfe, his calling together those Articles, and commanding them to sit continually and proceed, notwithstanding their daily Protestations to the contrary; his keeping frequent sessions of Councell, and determining causes in Coun∣cell during the time of session in Parliament; his calling downe and calling up of money during the session of Parliament, without consent of the Estates of Parliament, notwithstanding the Parliament had taken the money to their consideration, and had pur∣posed to have given their advice for a determination thereanent; his frequent prorogating of the riding of the Parliament, without consent of the Estates, or mentioning in the Acts of Prorogation, the consent of the Articles, although it were done by their ad∣vice, are contrary to the liberties of the Kingdome,
freedome and custome of Parliament; and that they be no preparatives, practiques, nor prejudices in time comming against us, or our successors. But because we know that the eyes of the world are upon us, that Declarations have been made and published against us, &c. that our proceedings may be made odious to such as know not the way how these commande∣ments are procured from His Majestie, nor how they are made knowne nor intimate to us, and doe as little consider that wee are not private Subjects, but a sitting Parliament; or what nationall prejudices we have sustained in time past by mis-information, and what is the present case of the Kingdome; We there∣fore declare, that whatsoever by the example of our predecessours in like cases of necessity, by His Maje∣sties Indiction, and by the Articles of Pacification wee might doe lawfully in sitting still, and which in this extreme necessity were justifiable not onely be∣fore so just a King, but to the faces of our Adversa∣ries; yet out of our most reverend regard, and hum∣ble desire, to render not onely all reall demonstrati∣ons of civill obedience, but to put farre from us all shew or appearance of what may give His Majestie the least discontent, wee have resolved for the pre∣sent onely to make remonstrance to His Majestie of the reason of our propositions and proceedings in this
Parliament, &c. and in expectation of His Maje∣sties gracious answer to these our humble Remon∣strances, some of each Estate having power from the whole body of the Parliament, remaine still here at Edinburgh, to attend the returne of His Maje∣sties gracious answer to our humble and just de∣mands: and further to remonstrate our humble desires to His Majestie upon all occasions, that here∣by it may be made most manifest against all contra∣diction, that it was never our intention to deny His Majestie any part of that civill and temporall obe∣dience which is due to all Kings from their Sub∣jects, and from us to our dread Soveraigne after a more especiall manner, but meerly to preserve our Religion and Liberties of the Kingdome, without which Religion cannot continue long in safety: And if it shall happen (which God forbid) that after wee have made our Remonstrances, and to the utter∣most of our power and duty used all lawfull meanes for His Majesties Information, that our malicious enemies, who are not considerable, shall by their suggestions and lyes prevaile against Informations, and generall Declarations of a whole Kingdome, we take God and men to witnesse, that wee are free of the outrages and insolences that may be committed in the meane time, and that it shall be to us no impu∣tation,
that we are constrained to take such course as may best secure the Kirke and Kingdome from the extremity of confusion and misery: Which Declara∣tion above written, wee the Estates of Parliament required the Clerke to insert in the records thereof, and grant extracts thereof under his hand and sub∣scription. This Declaration was produced and read in the outer house of Parliament, upon Decemb. 18. 1639. according whereunto the Nobility nominated and appointed the Earles of Lothian, and Dalhouse, the Lords Yester, Balmerino, Cranston, and Naper: The Barons nominated the Commissioners of the three, Lothians, Fife, and Tweddell: The Burroughes nominated the Commissioners of Edinburgh, Lin∣lithgow, Sterline, Hadington, Dunbarre, to attend at Edinburgh the returne of His Majesties gracious answer to their humble Remonstrances. In this Protestation or Declaration, though there be a specious shew, and sundry profes∣sions of obedience to Us, yet it is evident they have wounded Our Authority in the person of the Earle of Traquair Our Com∣missioner, who did nothing in that Proro∣gation but by Our speciall commandement;
and therefore for that they cannot censure Him, without reflection upon Us; And be∣sides, it is positively affirmed, that any Proro∣gation made by the Commissioner alone, without con∣sent of the Parliament, shall be ineffectuall, and of no force, which necessarily implies, that Wee have no power to prorogue, whereas the contrary is most manifest truth. And though upon Our command there was a shew of Prorogation, yet they continued part of their Body at Edinburgh, upon pretence of recei∣ving Our answer to their Remonstrance; which, if it shall not be to their liking, they conclude with a menacing Protestation, that It shall be no imputation to them if they be con∣strained to take such course as may best secure the Kirke and Kingdome from the extremity of confu∣sion and misery, having first taken God and Men to witnesse, that they will be free of all out∣rages and insolencies that may bee committed in the meane time, then which nothing can be more boldly and insolently spoken. After this, these divided members of that distracted Parliamentary Body remaining thus at Edinburgh, did send the Earle of Dumfermlin, and the Lord Lowdon, as
their Deputies, to make their Remonstrance to Us; but because We understood, that they came without warrant or licence from Our Commissioner, and had not acquainted Him with what they were to propound unto Us, We held this like the rest, a great and insuffe∣rable disobedience, and would not admit them to Our presence comming in this man∣ner; and so commanded them to returne without hearing them. Then Our Commissioner came hither, and made a report to Us of the state of Our affaires there, with which We thought fit to acquaint the Lords of Our Councell of Eng∣land, as also with this carriage of the Parlia∣ment in Scotland, and to advise with them what was to bee done for redresse of these disorders. Whereupon Wee commanded Our said Commissioner the Earle of Tra∣quair, to make relation to the Boord of all their exorbitant demands, of which some accompt had been formerly given them by the Lord Marquesse Hamiltoun. Upon this Our command the Earle of Traquair made a large and exact representation to the Boord of the most considerable matters proposed
and agitated in Parliament, and of the inso∣lencie of their demands, and the Petitioners themselves sent from Scotland, have since their comming to Us insisted upon all and every particular of Our said Commissioners relation, and in a most bold way offered to justifie them all, by which they have more then justified the report of the said Earle of Traquair: Whereupon We were further plea∣sed to acquaint the Lords, that they had late∣ly sent Us a Petition, which carried some shew of submission and humility, but was indeed nothing lesse, wherein they desired, that some might be allowed to come from them to Us, to represent their affaires; which to make Our Subjects of Scotland the more inexcusable, Wee todl the Lords Wee had granted, though Wee had little cause to hope for any good from those that had so much forgotten their duty and allegeance to Us. When the Lords had heard the relation of Our Commissioner, Wee thought fit upon the whole matter to put this question to them, Whether considering the insolencie and height of these demands, even concern∣ing civill obedience, it were not fit to reduce
them to their dutie by force, rather then to give way to these demands, so prejudiciall to Us in honour and safety. To this Wee commanded every one of Our Councell to give his answer, and to declare his opinion by vote; which was accordingly done, and they unanimously voted in the affirmative: whereupon soone after We resolved to call a Parliament. After this, Our Subjects in Scotland, accor∣ding to the answer We gave them upon their Petition, having sent up hither foure Depu∣ties, viz. the Earle of Dumfermlin, the Lord Lowdon, Sir William Douglas, and Master Berkeley, We were pleased to admit them to Our presence, and to receive Petitions from them, which were after by Our direction subscribed by them; in one of which, they, in the name of the Assembly convened at Edinburgh, gave Us thankes for that Wee had made knowne to them, that all matters Ecclesiasticall should be determined in free nationall Assemblies, and matters Civill in Parliaments; and desired Our ratification of the Constitutions of the Assembly, in Parlia∣ment: And in the other they desired to bee
heard before Us, and some of Our Councell of both Kingdomes; and that the report made by the Earle of Traquair to Our Councell here in England, might be delive∣red them in writing under his hand; which was a most insolent demand. Immediately after this, Wee thought fit to appoint a speciall Committee of some of Our Councell to heare them, and according∣ly gave order to the Earle of Traquair to assigne them a day to come to that Com∣mittee. They refused to come, alledging that they had order and instructions to treat with none but Our Selfe: Whereupon Wee ap∣pointed them to attend Us at the Commit∣tee, though it were the day of Our appointed remove to Hampton Court, at which time they did attend Us accordingly. There the Lord Lowdon made a long speech, the effect whereof was, a Protestation of the independencie of the Parliament of Scotland, and that it is subject to no other Judicatory, a profession of their loyaltie and affection to Us, and a justification of their proceedings in the Assembly and Parlia∣ment, as agreeable to the Articles of Pacifi∣cation,
and to the Lawes and Practices of that Kingdome; and thereupon a desire that We would ratifie and confirme those their proceedings, and to that purpose command that the Parliament might proceed freely for the determining of all the Articles delivered in to them, and the establishing of Religion and Peace in the Kingdome, undertaking that whatsoever objections or informations should be made against their proceedings in Parliament, if they might receive them in writing, they would make answer to them. This discourse ended, Wee demanded what power and commission they had to give Us satisfaction, and to oblige those from whom they came, seeing if they had none, Wee should heare them upon great disadvantage, they expecting satisfaction from Us, who have power to give it, but they none to render the like to Us. They an∣swered, that which they should propose, be∣ing agreeable to Law, they were confident would give Us satisfaction. We asked who should be Judge of that; They answered the Lawes would be so cleere, that there should
be no need of a Judge; and though We insi∣sted much hereupon, they would give Us no other satisfaction; they avowing they had powers, and would bring them to Us: they were ordered to doe so at the next meeting, and so for that time were dis∣missed. After Our returne from Hampton Court, they attended Us at the Committee againe, where they produced Instructions, signed by some Scottish Lords, and others, persons of no great eminencie; which Instructions having been read, were judged by Us (all the Committee concurring in the same opi∣nion) to be no commission, nor that they had any power or authority by them to give Us satisfaction, or to oblige those, from whom they said they came, to any thing that Wee should yeeld to, or desire. Wherefore We demanding whether they had any other powers, they said they had a paper formerly subscribed by some of the Lords in Parliament, by which the Earle of Dumfermlin and Lord Lowdon onely were authorised to come and present their justification to Us, and they could for the
present have no other, the Parliament now not sitting. Whereupon Wee advising seri∣ously with the Committee what were best to bee done in this weighty businesse, and considering that if they should bee dis∣missed without further hearing, they would take occasion to clamour: Although Wee held Our Selfe bound neither in Honour nor Justice to heare them any fur∣ther, they having offered no foundation for an accommodation, nor having power to doe it; yet to the end that no colour of sini∣ster construction might be left, and that Wee might justifie Our Selfe to God and the World, that Wee have omitted nothing on Our part that might tend to peace, and to the settling of a better intelligence between Us and them, Wee did resolve, that Wee would continue to heare them, and make Our objections to such particulars as had been proposed in Parliament; and against which Wee had just ground of exception, that so it might appeare, whether they could give Us that satisfaction which they promi∣sed and presumed.
This Wee having declared to them, not one of them made shew of the least sense of this Our grace and goodnesse so expressed to them; which the Lord Marquesse Hammil∣toun observing, tooke occasion of himselfe to say, that though hee were not of their companie, yet being a Scottishman, hee held himselfe obliged to acknowledge with all humility this Our singular and Princely fa∣vour to his Countrie, and besought Us to accept his most humble thankes for it. This drew them to do the like, and so they presen∣ted their humble thanks to Us on their knees. At the next meeting of the Committee, the said Petitioners produced the paper above-mentioned, subscribed by some of the Lords remaining at Edinburgh, as aforesaid, by which the Earle of Dumfermlin and Lord Lowdon onely were heretofore au∣thorised to come and present their justifica∣tion to Us; which paper being read, the whole Committee agreed that the Petitio∣ners had no power by this paper, no more then by the former, to give Us any satisfacti∣on, or to oblige those from whom they
came, but onely to endeavour to justifie themselves, and the former proceedings of the Parliament. Of all this Wee were plea∣sed to give accompt to Our whole Councell of England, who unanimously concurred in opinion with the Committee, that the above-mentioned papers gave them no power at all. Neverthelesse Wee were con∣tented, according to Our promise, to heare them; and Wee did make objections to the most exorbitant of their demands: but their answers were very impertinent, and rather justifications of them, then any way satis∣factory: Which could not be otherwise, see∣ing those demands were for the most part so contrary to Law and Monarchicall go∣vernment, that they did answer themselves, as by Our answers to them, formerly set downe, more particularly may appeare. Concerning Our promise of a free Parlia∣ment, no man of ordinary sense can imagine We ever intended it should be so free, as not to bee limited with their owne conditions, subscribed by the Lord Lowdon, which were to enjoy their Religion and Liberties,
according to the Ecclesiasticall and Civill lawes of that Our Kingdome; and if they passe those bounds, as it is evident they have done, We remaine dis-obliged, unlesse they will have Us onely obliged, and themselves left at all liberty to fly at Our Monarchicall government, without controll, to wrest the Scepter out of Our hand, to rob Our Crown of the fairest flowers belonging to it, and to destroy Our Regall power and authority, as manifestly they have endevoured to doe by their insufferable intended Acts and De∣mands, contrary to all law and reason. If it be further objected, that they assume this liberty by Our allowing of the Cove∣nant, and commanding Our former High Commissioner the Lord Marquesse of Ha∣miltoun, and other Our subjects, to subscribe it; the answer is very ready, That there is a great difference between the Covenant and Band subscribed by Our Commandment, and their Band; for that Covenant and Band was made by Our late Father King James of blessed memory, Anno 1580. and obligeth those that sweare to it, that they
should mutually assist one another, as they should be commanded by the King, or any authorised by him. But this new Band was made without Our consent, and by it they sweare mutually to assist one another, not excepting the King, which is indeed a meere cunning combination against the King. Be∣sides, when any have beene required to sub∣scribe the Covenant, as the Lord Marquesse Hamiltoun was, and did, and in that sense which he declared in print, the principall Heads of them did not onely refuse it them∣selves, but disswaded (as much as in them lay) all Our good subjects from subscribing it, though the Covenant were all one with theirs, and so acknowledged by themselves: whereby it doth evidently appeare, that it was not Religion they aimed to secure (as they pretended) for then they would have acquiesced with these Our commands, but meerely by adhering to their owne Band, to keepe Our Subjects in that condition, as they might be alwayes tied, and conceive them∣selves obliged by Oath to take up Armes against Us whensoever the time should be
fit for a totall Rebellion; which they have never left endevouring till they have brought to passe: so that by Our approbation of the old Covenant and Band, or by the subscrip∣tion of Our Commissioner, they can have no solid foundation to justifie their now proceedings; and it will handly appeare that ever any Covenant was made in the Christi∣an world (except in cases of Rebellion and Treason, as this is) where the Head was left out, or had not a negative voice. Neither can the Earle of Traquair Our High Commissioner his subscription or al∣lowance of the subscribing of the Cove∣nant, be any warrant for their rebellious courses, seeing, as appeares by their owne Petition to him, they declare, that, Now follow∣ing the laudable example of their Predecessors, they doe humbly supplicate for the same, and that they may bee allowed and warranted to subscribe it: which cleerely evinces, that what they did before, and of themselves, without warrant of Authority, was neither laudable nor war∣rantable: As also before the allowing there∣of by the said Earle of Traquair, it is ac∣knowledged
(as appeares by that which is prefixt to his subscription) that it is one and the same Covenant with that of 1580. which, as appeares by the Reasons heretofore dedu∣ced, will no way inferre any ground, or the least shadow of reason for their trea∣sonable combinations, or taking up of Arms against Us, or Our authority, or any deniall of Our negative voice. Now upon debate of this point at the Councell Boord, the Lords were of opini∣on, that untill the Petitioners sent from the Covenanters, would acknowledge that the Supreme Magistrate must have authority to call Assemblies, and to dissolve them, and to have a negative voice in them, as is accu∣stomed in all Supreme Powers of Christen∣dome, they ought not to be heard. If they shall alledge (as they did when they came to the Committee) that their De∣mands aforesaid were but matters in fieri, and not absolutely resolved nor concluded, it is to be answered, That the impediment was not on their part that they were not concluded: Nay, the Lord Lowdon in his
first speech to Us at the Committee, did not onely justifie their proceedings in the As∣sembly and Parliament, as agreeable to the Articles of Pacification, and to the Lawes and practice of that Kingdome, but did desire that We would ratifie and confirme those their proceedings, and to that pur∣pose command that the Parliament might proceed freely, and determine anent all those Articles delivered in to them: Howsoever, good subjects ought to be wary how they come neere the suspition of Rebellion or Treason, much more how they make De∣mands that carry with them more then a suspition of rebellious and treasonable in∣tentions, as these above-mentioned most manifestly doe. Now besides the Insolencies and Acts of Rebellion and Treason above-mentioned, committed before and in the Assembly and Parliament, Wee cannot but observe and publish to the world, that their carriage hath beene no lesse exorbitant since the Parlia∣ment, and since the comming of their Pe∣titioners hither, then before: for without
any Authority or Commission from Us, they have taken upon them to levie and raise for∣ces in severall parts of that Our Kingdome, in great numbers, which they have continu∣ally exercised and trained, and have assigned them a Rendezvous, and a day to be in a rea∣dinesse to march. They have made provisions of great quan∣tities of Artillery, Munition, and Armes from forraine parts, which they have ready in Magazine to make use of against Us their Soveraigne. They have of themselves laid taxes and impositions of ten markes in every hundred upon all and every Our Subjects according to their severall Revenewes, to bee levied upon their Estates, for the maintenance of this Rebellion; and this they have ex∣acted with the greatest rigour & tyranny that can be imagined, howsoever they pretend the contribution to be voluntary. They have caused to be framed and pub∣lished, as well in Manuscript as in Print, sundry false, seditious, and scandalous Pa∣pers and Pamphlets, concerning Our procee∣dings
with them; and amongst others, one intituled, An Information from the Estates of the Kingdome of Scotland to the Kingdome of Eng∣land, &c. which having come to Our knowledge, Wee caused it to bee read pub∣likely at Our Councell Table, and the Lords in detestation thereof became humble suitors to Us, that it might be supprest by Proclamation, and burnt by the hand of the Hangman; which hath been done ac∣cordingly. They have refused the Lord Estrick, Go∣vernour of Our Castle at Edinburgh, timber and other materialls necessary for reparation of the workes lately fallen downe there, notwithstanding Our expresse commande∣ment by Our Letters to them upon their Allegeance to furnish him. They have committed sundry outrages and violences upon the persons of some of the Garrison at Edinburgh, that came out of the Castle to buy victualls. They have begun to raise Workes and Fortifications against the said Castle, thereby to blocke up that Our Royall Fort, and to
render it unusefull: And they have fortified sundry other places in that Our Kingdome, and particularly Inchgarrie, where they have mounted divers Pieces of Ordnance. They have lately imprisoned the Earle of Southeske one of Our Privie Councell, and sundry others of qualitie, for not adhering to them, and for their fidelity to Us. And whereas Wee have upon sundry oc∣casions signified Our pleasure to the Magi∣strates of Edinburgh for the performance of such things as have concerned Our service, in stead of yeelding obedience, they have made answer, That they have delivered up the power of governing the Towne into the hands of the Committee of the preten∣ded Tables, by which they have not onely voluntarily disabled themselves to serve Us, but have incurred the guilt of High Trea∣son, by conferring upon any that power of Government which they derive and hold from Us alone, and cannot bee re∣signed to any other without Our speciall warrant and command. But to fill up the measure of their Trea∣sons,
they have endeavoured to settle Intel∣ligences in parts beyond the Seas, and practi∣sed to let in Forraine power into that Our Kingdome, as Wee are able to make appeare under the hands of some of the chiefest of them; as if the fire, which by their owne Rebellions they have already kindled within the bowells of that State, were not suffici∣ent to consume it, unlesse they added fuell to it from abroad. And herein appeares first their malignity to Us their naturall So∣veraigne, in that they had rather prostitute themselves to a Forraine Government, and that such as is different in Religion, then yeeld conformity to Ours: And then se∣condly Wee cannot but take notice that the interests and safety of Our Selfe and this Our Kingdome of England, are highly concerned herein; For if a Stranger once take footing in those Northerne parts, it is not hard to judge how easily hee may bee invited by such guides as they, and such an entrance as they will readily give him, to draw neerer to this warmer Climate of the South; and then how much the English
Nation are likely to bee beholding to their Scottish Neighbours for such Inmates, is left to every true English heart sadly to consider, and in time to endeavour to prevent, lest hee bee overtaken unawares by the mischiefe which threatens every one in particular, and the whole Nation in generall; and yet all this with them is Religion and Lawes. But because the World shall see that Wee charge them not but upon very good and sure grounds, Wee have thought fit to set downe here their owne Letter: Of which We have given Our good Brother the French King accompt, being confident hee will not assist any Rebells against Us. The Letter followes, with this endorsement, Au Roy, which in France is alwaies understood from those Subjects onely to their naturall Prince. SIRE, Vostre Majesté (estant l'asyle & sanctuaire des Princes & Estats affligéz) nous avous trouv̄ necessaire d'envoyer ce Gentilhome le Sieur de Col∣vil, pour representer a V.M. la candeur & natueté tant de nos actions & procedures, que de nos inten∣tions, lesquelles nous desirons estre gravēes &
escrites à tout l'wuivers avec un ray du Soleil, aussy bien qu' a V. M. Nous vous Supplions doncques treshumblement (Sire) de luy adjouster foy & creance, & a tout ce qu'il dira de nostre part, touchant nous & nos affaires; estans tresasseurés (Sire) d'une assistance esgale a Vostre clemence ac∣coustumeé cydevant, & si souvent monstrée a ceste Nation, laquelle ne cedera la gloire à autre quel∣conque d'estre eternellement, Sire, de V.M. Les treshumbles & tres∣obeyssants & tresaffecti∣onnés serviteurs, Rothes. Montrose. Leslie. Mar. Montgomery. Loudoun. Forrester. Englished thus: SIR, Your Majestie being the refuge and fanctuary of afflicted Princes and States, wee have found it ne∣cessary
to send this Gentleman M. Colvil, to re∣present unto Your Majestie the candor and ingenuity, as well of our actions and proceedings, as of our in∣tentions, which we desire to be engraved and written to the whole World with a beame of the Sunne, as well as to Your Majestie. We therefore most humbly beseech You (Sir) to give faith and credit to him, and to all that he shall say on our part, touching us and our affaires, being most assured (Sir) of an assi∣stance equall to Your wonted clemencie heretofore, and so often shewed to this Nation, which will not yeeld the glorie to any other whatsoever to be eternally, Sir, Your Majesties most humble, most obedient, and most af∣fectionate servants, Rothes. Montrose. Lesly. Mar. Montgomery. Loudoun. Forrester. Now these affronts to Our Government, & dangers to Our State, which have no rela∣tion at all to Religion & Law, but in the vio∣lation
of them both, have necessitated Us to put the forces of this Our Realme in order, and Our Selfe into a condition to be able (by Gods help) to vindicate Our safety and ho∣nour against all those, that under pretence of Religion and Law, have already risen, or shall rise up against Us, and to preserve and keep in safety Our good and loyall Subjects, and to take care that the gangrene bee cut off before it spread too farre, to the endangering of this Our Kingdome of England. Never∣thelesse Wee professe before God and all the World, that We never did, nor ever will hin∣der them from the enjoying of their Religion and Liberties, according to the Ecclesiasticall and Civill Lawes of that Our Kingdome, and according to Our promise and their de∣sires, subscribed by themselves at the Pacifi∣cation; but that We will governe them as a just and religious Prince: In assurance where∣of, if they will yet acknowledge their for∣mer crimes & exorbitancies, and in an hum∣ble and submissive manner, like penitent Delinquents, crave pardon for what is past, and yeeld obedience for the time to come, they shall still find that Wee will bee more
sensible of their Conversion, then Wee have been of their Rebellions; and that We rather desire their Reformation, then their Destru∣ction. But if they persist in their Rebellious courses, and by that which they call the en∣joying of their Religion and Liberties accor∣ding to the Ecclesiasticall and Civill Lawes of that Kingdome, will understand nothing but the trampling of Our Crown and Royal Authoritie under their feet, and the endea∣vouring to subvert all Lawes and Religion, as they have done hitherto by their procee∣dings in the Assembly and Parliament, then We hold Our Self obliged, in discharge of that duty which We we to God; & the Govern∣ment which he hath entrusted to Us, to have recourse to Our coercive power, to prevent so many imminent dangers as threaten the publicke. This We take God to witnesse We are necessitated to, and shall not undertake without extreme sorrow and reluctation. Neverthelesse We trust that God, whose Vicegerent We are, and by whom alone Kings reigne, being likewise a God of truth, and a severe punisher of all falshood and im∣posture, will no longer suffer his glory to be
despised and profaned in Our person, by grosse Hypocrisie, under the counterfeit habit of Religion, but will arise and scatter His and Our enemies. And for this noble Eng∣lish Nation, whose glory it hath beene to have been governed many hundreds of yeers under a Monarchy, We doubt not but they will, as it becomes loyall and faithfull Sub∣jects, continue their affection to Us and Mo∣narchicall government, and not suffer them∣selves to be debauched and betrayed into an Anarchy, by such as envie the happinesse they have so long enjoyed, and the many glorious victories which they have atchieved, under Kingly government, but following the exam∣ple of the Lords of Our Councel and of Our Servants, will cheerefully assist Us in this Our just cause, wherein Our Honour and Safety, together with theirs, are so highly concerned. Our subjects in Ireland, by their late De∣claration in Parliament, have not only given Us a considerable supply toward Our present Preparations, to reduce Our disaffected Sub∣jects in Scotland to their due obedience, but have humbly offered Us their persons and
estates, even to the uttermost of their abi∣lities for Our future supply, in a Parliamen∣tary way, as Our great occasions (should that distemper continue) shall require. And this they desire may be recorded as an Ordinance of Parliament, and that it may be published in print for a testimony to all the world, and to succeeding ages, of their loyalty and affe∣ction to Us, as it well deserves. This is a sin∣gular comfort to Us in the midst of these di∣stractions, and We have no cause to doubt but Our Subjects of England, who are neerer to the danger, will shew the like tendernesse of Our and their owne honour and safety, which will be no lesse contentment to Us, and make Us, as a Father of Our people, take the same care of their preservation and pro∣sperity, that We shall of Our own. And this We assure them in the word of a Prince We shall ever doe. FINIS.
