B3415 12255668 57424
AN APOLOGIE or DEFENCE For the requisite Refuting of the shamefull, disgracefull, Writings and horrible Libell, against the Book Of TRUE REPENTANCE And Of TRUE RESIGNATION Which Gregory Rickter Primate Of GOERLITS Hath spread abroad against it, in Open Print. Answered In the Year of Christ, 1624. 10. Aprill. By Jacob Behme Also called Teutonicus Philosophus Englished by JOHN SPARROW. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the Black Spread Eagle, at the West End of St. Pauls. 1661.
Christ saith, Matth: 5. 11, 12. Blessed are you when Men despise you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of Evill of you, for my Names Sake, if they do it falsely; rejoyce and be Glad, you shall be well rewarded in the Kingdome of Heaven; for so have they persecuted the Prophets that were before you. Also Matth: 11. 25, 26. I thank thee O, Father, and Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou hast hid these things, from the wife and prudent, and hast revealed thou to Babes: Yes Father, for, so it pleased thee.
The PREFACE To the Reader who loveth God. 1. CHrist saith to Pilate: My Kingdome is not of this world; else would my servants fight for it: John 18. 36. And to his Disciples he saith: Behold I send you as Sheep amongst Wolves, Mat: 10. 16. To signifie: that where Christ shall become manifest in a Man; that Man MUST in this world be surrounded on∣ly with Enemies, who without ceasing would root out, and kill, Christ. 2. Which is the way of all true Christians, for they must walk in this world among the Devills Thorns; as now it is with the Name of the Author of that despised Book, as also with his Person, that Satan raiseth his stormy winds against the Gifts of the Holy Spirit, and will not endure Christ in his Members, as in this enimicitious Libell is to be seen, how enraged Satan is and how abominably he slanders and reproacheth theI. B. Authour, and how he sets himselfe as a Richter or Judge over Gods work, and would suppresse and not it out. 3. Dear Reader and Brother in Christ, who lovest God; though I am an Enemy from my heart, to such accursed, unworthy, reproachfull, contentious writings of controversie, not accounting those divulged reproachfull wri∣tings contrary to Christian Love and Truth, worthy any answer at all: Yet for the Command sake and Love of my Lord Jesus Christ, I would make an answer, for their sakes, who do not understand the Matter, and have not read my little Book of True Repentance and Refignation, as the way to Christ; nor know my person, and who only regard the respect and favour, of the Primate; and suppose he reproacheth me out of Christian zeal, and doth it for the sake of God, in respect of his Office or Ministry. 4. As the most Part of them are thus lead astray, to give him applause, and think, he doth right, and that it is all true which he cryeth out on in the Pulpit; seeing he makes use of Gods Name in it, and thereby so cloaketh the Matter, that Men can not see his fierce wrathfull Heart, and appeals to his Office and Ministry, then the simple people which know nothing of his dealing, how maliciously he persecuteth me, and dealeth quite contrary to his Office, and never will examine me, about it, but condemneth what himself understandeth NOT: therefore have I made an answer; to try whether any will become seeing and go forth from reproaching the gift of God. 5. And do here with testifie in the presence of God that I have answered out of no other intention, then barely for the Love-sake of our Neighbour. 6. And do admonish the Primate, to consider better of me, for he hath no Lyon to deal with, but a Lamb of JESUS CHRIST; or else he will find into whom he hath Pierced, least the Sheep in the Spirit of Christ become a Lyon, and the Sheep judge the Wolfe; And this I heartily and faithfully; Jacob Behme.
Here followeth the Title of the Libell. Judicium GREGORII RICHTERI Ministri Ecclesiae Patriae Primarij Goerlicij De FANATICIS SUTORIS ENTHUSIASTICI Libris, quorum Tituli sunt 1. Morgenröthe im Auffgang. 2. Der weg Zu Christo. 3. Von Wahrer Busse. Ad Avertendas finistras de Ministerio Goerlicensi Suspiciones.
Here followeth The Title of the Libell. The Censure of GREGORY RICKTER Minister of The Church of GOERLITS And Primate Of that Countrey concerning the ENTHUSIASTICK SHOEMAKERS FANATICK Books The Titles whereof are 1. The Aurora. 2. The Way to CHRIST. 3. Of True Repentance. For The Removing of the scandalous Suspitions touching the Ministry Of Goerlitz
The Libell begins and sayes. I. NEW manner of Speaking, bringeth common∣ly New Errours along with it. Answer. 2. The Scripture saith; Try all things, hold that which is good. 1 Thess. 5. 21. Libell. 3. So many Lines as there are, so many Blas∣phemies against God, are to be found in the Shoemakers Book: which stinks abominably of Shoemakers Pitch and Blacking: fy, fy, let this stink be far from us. Answer. 4. That little Book teacheth the way to Christ, very earnestly and sincerely; And that FIRST; how a man should go forth from the wicked wayes of this world, and enter into true Repentance, and put on Christ in Faith, and be new born in Christs Spirit, and how he must be renewed in Mind and Thoughts, and follow or imitate Christ. 5. SECONDLY; it teacheth of True Resignation, how a Penitent Man, must give up himself to God wholly and altogether and begin and finish all his works in divine Trust and Confidence, and it signi∣fieth moreover, how the Devill layes Snares, continually, for the children of Christ; that Man cannot otherwise go quite through those Snares, then with prayer and true humility; and how Christ himself brings them through with HIS power, and preserveth them; and how a Christian Man, must beJohn 15. 5. a Branch on the Vine Christ, alsoJohn 6. 53. eat his flesh and drink his bloud. if he would be a Christi∣an. 6. And THIRDLY; It teacheth very earnest penitent Prayers; how the poor Soul must in Great Earnestnesse enter into Christs Merits Suffering Death and Resurrection, and1 Cor: 15. 31. dayle dye away in Christs Death, from the Evill Earthly will: And how it must go to the Father through Christs wounds and bloud-shedding. 7. And then FOURTHLY; in the Dialogue or Conference be∣tween the Master and the Scholar, concerning the Supersensuall
Life, is signified, what our Eternall Fathers or Native Country is, and how the Entrance into it is effected. This Doctrine is the true Ground of the New Testament, as Christ and the Apostles have taught us. 8. But seeing the Libeller saith, there are as many blasphemies against God, in it, as there are Lines in that Book; it is manifest, that he blasphemeth and reproacheth the Holy Spiri; in that he calleth Repen∣tance Prayer, a blasphemy against God, for the book treateth only of Repentance and of the New Birth. 9. Dear Herr Richtender Kichter, Sir, thou Judging Judge, where will you go out, or where will you go in, when the Supream, Richter, or Judge, CHRIST, whom you disgrace, in his Members, will appear in his wrath, and will Richten den Richtenden Richter, Judge the Judging, Judge, and will himself be the jus, right or Law, and the Judgement? 10. That Richter, or Judge, will not respect a Primate or his followers, which he draws after him, nor any King, Prince or Lord of the world, according to the Authority they have had, nor their Laws, Statutes or Institutions, but will judge the LIFE; and try it in HIS Fire. 11. Where will then your reproachings and disgracings abide, which you have exercised against Christ in his Members: It is writ∣ten; he that blasphemeth the Holy Spirit, hath no forgivenesse Eternally, Math. 3. 29. What will you then Answer to him? you, who have knowingly blasphemed his Gists, and so miserably persecuted the Children of Christ? when Christ will say, What you have done to these the least of my brethren, you have done unto me, what Answer will you then Give? 12. You despise me, in that I am aLay-Man or Ideot. Layick, and not come from the high Schools or Ʋniversities with my skill or knowledge, and cry out, Fy, upon my Gifts, which yet I have received from God, as a Noble Bounty, which also is more dear to me than the whole world, and reproachest my Trade or Handicraft, with your crying fye upon it, and callest it together with my Gift a stink, how can it go well with you, when such reproaching blasphemies, and your cry∣ing fy upon it, whereby, you cry fy upon the Gift of the Holy Spirit, shall awaken in you in Body and Soul, and become kindled with Gods Anger? so that the world will become too narrow for you? what would you then afterwards give, that you had never done such a thing? 13. The Spirit which now rejoyceth you, that you may have your will upon me, with reproaches, and disgraces; If that should now be∣come a Hellish fire and enter into your Conscience, where will you then remain?
14. You force Tears from me, and earnest Prayers against the re∣proaching or blaspheming of God, in that you blame me altogether with untruth, have a care, that my Tears become not,Rom. 12. 20. Red hot Coals, upon your head. 15. I have prayed much to God for you, that God would en∣lighten you, and give you to acknowledge the Truth, but you be∣come continually the worse, I will be blamelesse concerning you, if Gods Anger touch you. 16. Why do you despise me because I am a Layick, and yet have high Divine aud Naturall knowledge? Do you suppose the Holy Spi∣rit is bound to your Schools or Universities? Did not our dearest Christ say? My Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him for it? Luke 11. 13. Also ask and you shall receive, seek and you shall find, knock and it will be opened unto you? Matth: 7. 7. 17. I have received my Gift through earnest PRAYING and knocking, and relish it so, that I would not give it for all the worlds Honours and Goods, also can never deny or forsake it, wherefore do you ascribe the Gift of God to the Devill? 18. Do but look back into the world, what kind of simple People hath he used for his work? what was Abel, Seth, Enoch, and Noah? what were the Patriarchs? Shepheards, none of them was a Do∣ctor: what was Moses? A Shepheard: what was David? A Shep∣heard; what were the Prophets, especially Elisha and Habbakkuk ho∣nest simple people, who were Tillers of the Ground: what was Mary the Mother of our Lord CHRIST? A poor honest destitute young Maid: what was the Foster-Father of Christ, during his child-hood? A Carpenter: what were Christs Apostles all of them? poor simple Handicrafts-men or Trades-men, as Fisher-men and the like; why did not Christ reject them also, seeing they had not studyed? did HE cry fy upon them, because they were Handicrafts People, as you do? 19. What was Christian Nobility from the Beginning? even Humility, and the Feare of God; where now lyeth your great boasting in the Scripture, as also in Art? shew me it. Saint Paul was a Scribe, learned in the Scriptures, but when he became a Christian, then he must first1 Cor. 3. 18. become a Fool to his Art and knowledg, that the divine wisdom might find a place in him. 20. Why do you brag so much of your Art, if you call your self a Christian? do you not know, that we are ALL ONE in Christ, which is Christ us ALL? If Christ teacheth us and loveth us, why then do you curse us; and call, Christ in US, a stink. 21. Moreover, hath not that an ill aspect or symptome, as if the ill spirit were in you, that can not endure Christ, nor willingly would see, that Men do repent and pray, being you call Repentence and Prayer, a stink? which you can not deny, being, you say that
every Line is a blasphemy against God; and you forbid the people to read it under pain of Eternall punishment. 22. Do but open your Heart, and read that little book aright, you will find some what else, therein; you have not read it at all, yet, that, I perceive, by the Title of your Libell, for you set down the Title wrong, and have not seen the little book of true Refignation, of the Imitation or following of Christ, therein; you set the Morning Red∣nesse or Aurora for the First Book, of which you know little, or no∣thing, and the way to Christ for the Seccond Book, and yet it is no single Book, but is only the Generall Title, And the Book of Re∣pentance he sets for the Third; whereas it is the First in the printed Book, and the last, he hath never seen. 23. O Primate! Satan hath blinded you, and led you into Anger, that for anger you could not so much as read it, but he hath instantly made haste with you, to reproachings and scandalizing, for it is a stink in his Eyes, thus you have imitated and followed him, do but drive away Evill affections from you, and read it aright, and you will see very much otherwise therein. 24. Also you know, that God hath converted 'some thereby, so that they are entered into true Repentance, and have attained that very thing which Christ hath promised us, that is to say, the Gift of the Holy Spirit, Luke 11. 13. there are eminent Examples neer by. 25. These Mens Gifts of the Holy Spirit, you call them all, A stink, whereby Men may espye and discerne that this little Book, is altogether against the Devill, and that in you no good Spirit must dwell, while you blaspheme the Gift of God, for you say; this Stink viz: Repentance and Prayer, which is the whole Contents of this Book, be farre from you, it may well so come to passe, that Gods Gifts should remove, and be farre from you. Libell. 26. You say also that Great Plagues hang over those places, where such Blasphemy against God, unpunished, may be devised, divulged, and beleeved; where Men may also freely without in∣terruption, think write beleeve and divulge, what they will. Answer. 27. Yes, I beleeve so too, that those places, where Men blas∣pheme the Gifts of God, and ascribe them to the Devill, great punish∣ments hang over them; Also there hangeth over the Earhly Man,
where such an Earnest sincere Repentance becometh exercised, cleer∣ly great punishment, for he must be dayly killed, and be made a Fool to the world, when he shall walk in the Divine way. 28. You see very well, how I am punished by you, in such wayes, and not only, by you, but you egg; and set on the whole City also with reproaching, upon my Neck, so that they beleeve you, and punish me; but it is the Badge Character or Mark of Christ. 29. But that you will prescribe a Modell or platform of FAITH for the People, so that they should not every one beleeve in his own Di∣vine Gift, as the Spirit of God in their soul, manifests or reveals it self, to them; Another Libell is requisite of that, this is not sufficient for that purpose. 30. But that you threaten them with punishment, that I beleeve you in, very well, If you had the Power, then, they must either into the Fire, or out of the Land, or Countrey. 31. But that you say, the way to Repentance is aEdachte. devised Do∣ctrine; that, the New Testament, saith not, for when Christ began his Gospel with John the Baptist, then he said, Repent, Mark 1. 15. and my book saith also the same. 32. The Naturall Man receiveth or perceiveth nothing of this way, 1 Cor. 2. 14. you need not punish him, he goeth without that enough in the wayes of the Devill, till Christ in Repentance doth enlighten him: Now look upon your self, and try your self, whether your self be in such away, Before you prescribe to me and other children of God, limits and bounds, in our Gifts of God, whereas your prescrip∣tion is but a defaming desgracefull Libell. Libell. 33. Further saith the Libell; God will won∣derfully rescue his honour, and will not suffer his Eternity to be taken away by such Sectarian or swarming Shoemakers, Tanners, Taylors, Woman, Priests, and Doctors. Answer. 34. I hold the same opinion and beleeve stedfastly, that God, will suffer, his honour, which he in JESUS CHRIST, with the victory over Death and Hell, hath manifested or revealed in us poor Men, to be taken away, by no Devill, much lesse a Primate, Doctor, Priest, Shoemaker, Taylor, Tanner, or Woman: but whosoever among these, shall Repent, and turn himself to him, upon those he will bestow his honour: I beleeve also well, that he will deliver his children from all Evill, and fave them.
Libell. 35. The Poyson of Arrius, which denieth the Eternity of the Sonne of God, was not so bad and pernitious, as this Poyson of the Shoema∣ker, which takes away the Eternity from the Eternall Father, and in a blasphemous way against God Teacheth the Quaternity or four∣foldnesse, in God. 36. The Eastern Countreys, in respect of the Heresie of Arrius, have been horrible punished with the Mahumetan darknesse, what kind of horrible darknesse should we then Expect, if we do not with diligent earnestnesse, hunt away and root out this Poyson out of our Native Country? Answer. 37. To this I say cleerly NO; you can not in Eternity Demon∣strate this; that I take away the Eternity from the Father, much lesse that I teach the Quaternity of the Deity; you have a long time groundlessely feigned that upon me, and cited my writings with a strange understanding, and in the Pulpit said, that I have written, that the Sonne of God was made of Quick-Silver, you should demonstrate that; else it shall remain Eternally an untruth, in such untruth it might be well said, Fy upon it. 38. I acknowledge ONE only God; which it the Eternall beginninglesse one on∣ly Good Substance, which dwelleth every where without or beyond besides or di∣stinct from all Nature and Creature in it self, and needeth no space or Place: and in subject to no Measurableness, much less to
any Comprehension of Nature and Crea∣ture. 39. And I do acknowledge that this one only God it Threefold in Persons in Equal Omnipotence and Power, viz: Fa∣ther, Sonne, and Holy Spirit: and acknow∣ledge, that this Triune Substance fills all things alike at once, and also hath been the Ground and Beginning of all Things, and still is, and will abide so, Eternally. 40. Moreover, I beleeve and acknow∣ledge, that the Eternall Power, viz: the divine breathing or speaking, is flown forth and become visible; in which out-flown word, the inward Heaven and the visible world standeth; together with every Crea∣turely Substance; and that God hath made all things by his Word. 41. That I have written in the Aurora, of Salniter, and Mercury, thereby I mean, NOT, the meer pure GOD, I mean HIS out-flown Substantiall word; viz:NOTE a shadow of the inward Ground, wherewith the word hath introduced it self into a Na∣turall working, & thereby made that Mate∣riall; so I Demonstrate the Three Principles in Nature, which are viz: a Spirituall
Mercury Sulphur and Sal; and what the Ground and Originall of them is; seeing the Totall Nature, together with all Crea∣tures; standeth therein. 42. I have written of Three Births, First of an Eternall beginningless Divine; Secondly, of a Heavenly, wherein light and darknesse, that is Gods Love and Anger is understood; and Thirdly, of a beginning or inceptive temporary one; viz: the visible world: and I understand the Salniter and Mercury in the Third, viz: the Created Substance. 43. I demonstrate what the Heavenly and Earthly Mystery is; viz: the Holy and pure Element, and its Efflux with the Four Elements, and the Constellati∣ons. I demonstrate how the Divine Pow∣ers are flown forth out of the Heavenly and become visible; also what the invisible Ground of all Substances, and what Time and Eternity, is. I beleeve very well that you under∣stand Nothing thereof, for it is not every Mans, Gift, but theirs to whom God giveth it. 44. But that you say, that I by this, will search out the Deity, and call it Devillish: thereby you shew your ignorance to the day light, that you understand nothing of the book of Nature, and also do not read the New Testament; for Saint Paul saith: the Spirit searcheth all
things, even the depths of the Deity, 1. Cor: 2. 10. 45. It is not of Mans Ability, but Gods Spirit performeth that searching through Mans Spirit: But you call it Devillish: if I should speak with you, of the hidden secret Mystery of Nature, you would be able to understand very little thereof: but I would demonstrate to you, my book of the Morning Rednesse, or Aurora, in all things; if you were not such and angry zealous or furious Man, so that a Man could but speak with you; but with such disgracing; you do but hinder the Gift of God, and make your self unworthy. 46. It standeth written, And after these dayes I will poure out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sonnes and Daughters shall Prophesie, and your Old Men shall have Dreams; and your young Man shall see visions. Joel 2. 28. also at that time I will pour out my Spirit upon servants and hand-mayds: why will you hinder the Spirit of the Lord? 47. If you see any of them, then you say, he is the Devill, and put reproachfull blasphemous names upon him, and cry out, Men should baneish him from City and Country; pray shew in your bani∣shing, your Christian Heart. 48. Are you Christs Shepheard? where is your Love? wherewith Christ hath loved us; and wherewith we should also Love one another? John. 13. Doth the Scripture bid you, drive out and hunt any into Mi∣sery? without hearing of any Cause? what doth it say to you? If thou seest that thy Brother is a Heathen: then go to him and admonish him in private, if he yeeldeth to thee, then hast thou wonne thy Brother; if not, then take one or two with thee, if he yeeldeth not then, shew it to the Con∣gregation, if he hear not the Congregation then account him as a Heathen and Publican, Matth: 18. 15. Not hunt him out, and reproach and condemn him unheard, as you have done to me. 49. You have set your self in a Judgement that doth not belong to you: read I pray the Epistles of Saint Paul to Titus and Timothy, How a Bishop ought to be; and then you will find, that you have not a right Bishops Heart. 50. Why do you reprove my BookOrient Rednesse. Morning Rednesse or Au∣rora, seeing you do not understand it, also it is not written for the Pulpit, or that it should come among the People, I have written it for my selfe, for a Memoriall to me, with such words as at that time I could understand, what is that to THEE? why have you pub∣lished, it, and leant it to other People? None had known of it, if you had not mentioned and divulged it in the Pulpit, and lent it abroad. 51. Thou supposest, thou wilt stop and hinder these writings; and yet thou thy self art he that furtherest them; None would have known any things of me and of MY writittings, if THOU thy self hadst not proclaimed them, and lent them out. 52. Afterward the Learned enquired for them, they have all had
none so ill thoughts of them, as you have; Men may indeed find as Learned People among them, as you are, surely it is not you alone that have studied, also a Man may find more fear of God, in many of them, who read these writings, and account them Good, then in you; which you demonstrate by this Libell, and by your whole Life. 53. But all the works of God, must serve him, God hath used you for an Instrument, of this Publication of them, which God hath given me to know; therefore have I patiently a long time, born upon me, your unjust reproachings and disgracings, wherein yet no true word hath been; elfe I would have answered you, long agoe. 54. You liken my Book of Repentance, to the Heresie of Arrius, and say, that theMogen∣lander. Eastern-Countryes. Morgen∣rothe. Eastern-red∣nesse, or Orient-red∣nesse. Eastern Countryes, for the sake of that, are punished with horrible darknesse, and if men do not wholly root out my writings; and hunt me therewith: out of the Countrey, then it would go just so with us also. 55. Tell me I pray, whether also Lying and Sinne be from the Devill or no; shew me the Opinion of Arrius in my little Prayer-Book; there is indeed more Devotion, and divine power in the words of that little book, then is yet at this time come into your heart; which a Man may observe by your injurious persecution, in that you would wholly root out, the Authour, for his divine Gifts sake, had you the power, I should not live one jot longer. 56. Christ said: Be ye Mercifull as your Heavenly Father is Mercifull; forgive and you shall be forgiven, Luke 6. 36. Also Blessed are the Merci∣full for they shall obtain Mercy; Also, Blessed are theOr Peace∣full. Peaceable, for they shall be called the Children of God: Matth 5. 7. 9. Where is your Merci∣fullness and peacefull Heart? do but once put away the Serpents poyson from it, and Sease from reproaching, and forcing untruth up∣on me; that I may acknowledge you, that you are a Christian in the Meeknesse of Christ. 57. Hearken, Herr Primarius, Lord Primate: do you know wherefore God took from the Eastern Countreys theRev: 2. 5. Candlestick, as he threat∣ens in the Revelations; It was for the sake of the Contention Pride and State of the Learned, in that they were only Mouth Chri∣stians, and sought only their Belly God, and earthly Lucifer; and cove∣red the Antichrist with Christ Purple Mantle: and contended about Opinihns, they forsork the Holy Spirit in Power, and set themselves in Christs stead, they were but contenders and disputes, and their Aime was only at honour and respect. 58. These things the Eastern Countreys looked upon and saw that in such Contention, Gods Love was not, and in that respect they began to doubt concerning the Faith, and seeing the Learned did but contend, and one part acknowledged Christ, and the other part
denied him, and run on to meer IMAGES and Opinions, wherein none saw conformity to the other, then the Potentates thought, with themselves, who knoweth, how it is with the Priests contention, whe∣ther there be any thing in IT or no? 59. Then came forth Mahumet, and taught the ONE only God, without Trinity; to whom the people fell away, when they saw, that therein there was no strife in respect of the TRINITY, for they had enough of strife. 60. Also God permitted it to be so, because in their Contention they did only blaspheme CHRIST, then he took the Candlestick away, and so they became Mahumetans, and began to warre and dispute with bloud and Sword, and drave out the Titulary and Mouth-Chri∣stians, and God suffered it, that they might no more, contend about Christs honour, seeing Christ honour is onlyNOTE Humility and Love. 61. Behold, and consider well, how are you, the Learned, at pre∣sent, marked or characterized; howiis it concerning Christs Kingdome among you? see and compare the Times of Arrianisme and the strife of the Learned, in respect of the Religion of your Times; and your Contention, which you have had along time. 62. Shew me the true Christ in Love and meeknesse, in all your Books of controversie or Contention, are they not meer libellous papers, and reproachfull slanders, and evill affections? wherein every one cry∣eth out, Heresie:Matth. 24. 23, &c. Mark 13. 21. Luke 17. 23. Here is Christ, there is Christ; behold, he is in the Wildernesse, in the Chamber, in the Field, Also in the Supper, in the Baptisme and in Confession; and the other say No: he is not there, it is only a Remembrance, and send forth such blasphemies reproaches and disgracings about Christs Cup Office and Person, as was done in the time of Arrius. 63. Therefore you are now your own Prophet and threaten darknesse to your selfe; it may very well befall you; and unlesse you be altogether blind, you may see it before your eyes, yet you had ra∣ther contend, and reproach Gods children, yes wholly thrust from you, CHRIST, in his Members, then repent. 64. Those who hitherto have prayed to God, and have confessed the peoples Sinnes; they have kept back the deserved punishment but you make haste, with them, out of the Countrey. 65. And seeing you call me Prophet; but with an evill acceptation for scorn and disgrace; therefore I shall tell you; what the Lord hath given Me to know; viz: that the Time is born, or come, wherein God will require an account of your strife about the Cup of Christ, and punish you for it, that which you now fear, and yet do not Repent, THAT will come upon you. 66. And thea you shall give an account to God of your reproa∣ching,
for it will be required of you, how you have walked before the Lambs committed to your trust, with Good Life andTitus 2. 1. 8. sound Do∣ctrine there you will find a heap of Scorners, in that you have made all Erroneuos and Blasphemous; and have cast your poyson and re∣proaching upon them, and bespattered them therewith; where will you become, whenEzek: 3. 18. 20. Chap: 33. 6. 8. Chap: 34. 10. Their bloud will be required at your Hands? 67. Look but upon yourLuke 6. 44. Fruit, the whole City reproacheth in respect of your powerings out, upon a Lamb of Christ, andJohn 16. 2. think in their simplicity, they do right in it, because, you bid them do it; where will you abide, when this Lamb will at the Last Judgement Day stand before your eyes, and your Auditors or Hearers, whom you have made Blasphemers, shall say, behold is not this He, whom we once accounted a Fool, and made sport in derision of him, and accoun∣ted his Life a shame, how is he now numbred among the Children of Christ and hisCol: 1. 12. inheritance among the Saints? Owe Fools and unwise, have missed the right way; Then will all Curse you, that you have lead them to such blasphemy and Reproach; Wisd: 5. O Primate! be you warned and admonished by the Life of Our Lord JESUS CHRIST; it is time to abstain; or else you will then see what hath been here told you. 68. You call, in your Libell, Zu dem Rechten Richter, to the Righteous Judge, that he should awake and defend the Majesty of God; Now if the Judgement should come vpon you seeing you do per∣secute! Christ in his Members, it is you your self that have called for the Sword. 69. Look I pray upon you own Heart, you paint a Mist or Smoak before the Eyes of the Church or Congregation, that they should beleeve you, that your Libell is right and true; why then do you not take the Certainty out of the Printed Book? It is likely you have none of them, or it doth not relish with you; For earnest Sincere Repentance puts the Flesh away; assuredly it relisheth not with you; but the People that read my little Book; and compare it with your Libell; they will distinguish us, and judge aright. 70. Have a Care, that the Dirt and Burres, which you cast upon me, do not remain sticking upon you; I will no more remain silent as I have done: abstinence were good, Peace is a good Country.
The Second Part in the Libell. The Libell saith. 71. THe Libell saith; The Shoemaker is the Antichrist. Answer. 72. If I should describe Antichrist; I could not demon∣strate him Otherwise, then that he calleth himself a Christian, and covereth himself with Christs Purple-Mantle; & acknowledgeth and teacheth Christ with the Mouth; but his Heart is altogether set against Christ, he teacheth one thing and doth another; outwardly he calleth himself a Christian, and inwardly he is a Serpent, he persecuteth Christ in his Members, and resisteth the Spirit of Christ: he flattereth and playeth the Hypocrite, and will be honoured in Christs Name, but is inwardly a devouring Wolfe; as Christ calleth the Pharisees, who sat upon Moses Seat, and Managed the Law, Matth: 7. 15. But Christ said, they were from beneath from the Father of this world, viz: from the Devill, John 8. 23, 24. 73. Herewith I would not touch or disturb the good Conscience of any; but would try the Libeller, whether a young Antichrist doth not peep out of the Shell. Libell. 74. Thou Meek and Gentle Lord CHRIST sayest, My word is True and faithfull: and thou perjured Shoemaker sayst also; My words are true; which of them both now shall credit and Faith be given to? To THEE thou True and Faithfull Christ? or to thee Shoemaker, and thy Dung?
Answer. 75. CHRIST is the Word of the Father, the way to God, the Truth and the Life, and whosoever putteth on Christ, from his body shall flow streams of Living Water; as Christ said, John 14. 6. & 7. 38. Christ said, Whosoever eateth my Flesh and drinketh my Bloud, he continueth in Me, and I in him, John 6. 54. And Saint Paul saith: You are the Temple of the Holy Spirit, which dwelleth in you: 2. Cor: 6. 16. Also, The Word is neer thee, viz: in thy Mouth and thy Heart: Rom: 10. 8. Deut: 30. 14. 76. To this LivingJohn 1. 14. Chap: 6. 53. Word which is become Man, I have wholly given up my self to be its own; And he, my Lord Christ, hath given me his Flesh and Bloud in My Faiths Desire, and so incorporated tied and united himself with me, according to the inward ground of my Soul and Spirit, that I am ascertained and stedfastly beleeve, that I am in John 10. 28.his hand, and none can pluck me on thence, alsoRom: 8. 35. 38. none can separate me from the Love of Christ, neither Height nor Depth nor Principality nor Pow∣er or Authority, nor any Creature shall separate me from the Love of Christ. 77. He, My Saviour, hath given to me to beRom: 8. 6. spiritually minded, as Saint Paul saith:Rom: 8. 14. Those whom the Spirit of God driveth, they are Gods Children, for we have not received a slavish or servile spirit, that we should fear again, but we have received A Child-like Spirit whereby we cry Abba Dear Father, that witnesseth to our Spirits, that we are Gods Children, if we be Children, then we are also Heirs, viz: Heirs of God, and Co-heirs with Christ, if we suffer with him that we may also be glorified with him. Rom: 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. 78. Therefore say I, I have my knowledge,Gal: 1. 12. Not from Man, or through Man, but from the Gift of my Saviour Jesus Christ, and desire to seduce none from Christ, but I shew them sincerely and heartily, how they should, through true Repentance and PrayerMatth: 11. 28. come to Christ my Saviour; as my printed little Book teacheth throughout nothing else. 79. Why then do you separate me away from Christ, and call my words which direct to Christ, Dung? It is a sign, and the way of Repentance, which leadeth to Christ stinketh like filth, this is the true Colour or Antichrist, for the Libeller spits Fy, and filth, against the Repentance and the very earnest Prayers in my-little Book, and calleth it a stink. 80. This I offer to the impartiall Reader to consider, of, whether this Libell of the Primate, be not dictated from the Antichristian Spi∣rit: seeing he will presse that upon me, I offer it that it might be con∣sidered and known, from whom he is.
Libell. 81. Moreover the Libell calls me a perjured Shoemaker, and in the Pulpit he hath called me, a Rascally knave. Answer. 82. This reproachfull defamation, is in all Statutes and Laws of the Empire forbidden upon pain of severe punishment, that none should disgrace anothers good Name and ho∣nour, or should make any defamatory Libell or disgracefull writings; He should be the Man to forbid others, and doth it himself. 83. O Primate! I ask you, if I had caused such a Libell to be printed against you, and had So abominably vilified and disgraced you, to what place would you have sent it and condemned it? surely to the Gallows, and the Authour with it: but what shall I say to you; even, God forgive it you. 84. I have sworn an Oath to the Emperour, also to the Prince Elector, my Gracious Lord, as also to the honourable Councill, and the City Goerlitz, to be true and faithfull in their defence, and that I have firmly kept to this very houre, and you call me a perjured or for∣sworn Fellow & Rascally Knave: I have brought my honour & reputa∣tion to Goerlitz, and you would bereave me of it, for a perjured Man is not good enough to be in any bodies company. 85. Well now, you should and ought to demonstrate that I am such a one; and flee with earnest complaint for it to the Magistrate, and implore Justice and protection: but seeing you oppresse me, therefore in the mean time these deaming reproaches shall rest upon your selfe, so long, till you set before my Eyes, my perjury. 86. You have studied upon it this Fasting Time, how you might bespatter Christs Children in the whole Church or Congregation with Serpents filth; so that they are become Reproachers and dis∣grace me, and have not stopped there, but moreover caused such de∣faming Poyson to be printed, that they may read it at home, and tickle themselves therewith, that the Devill indeed may be proudly Courted and Banqueted in state. 87. I ask also your selfe, is not that a sign of the Antichrist? was not this your Office and Ministry, that you should this Fasting Time have considered, CHRISTS, Bitter Passion Dying and Bloud-shedding, and represent it well to your Parish. Children, that they might also have laid it to Heart, but you on the Contrary have this Fasting time, contrived two Libells, and been an∣gry at miserable People; so that you have been fain to leave Christs
Passion Wounds and Death, lying on the Sick-bed; and you lay your self by it as an awakened Poyson. 88. Thus unworthy, have you been before the Eyes of God, con∣sider your self a little seriously, if men would lay it rightly to heart, it might well make ones Haire stand upright, for fear and amaze∣ment, that you possesse the place of God, and stand in the stead of the Holy Spirit, and yet poure out such poyson, upon the poor innocent People, and not only here at Goerlitz, but you also send your disgrace∣full writings into strange places and Countreys, and poyson them, so that they help you to reproach and blaspheme. 89. All this is a certain sign of the Antichrist, which the Libell would thrust upon me: I pray, and he curseth me. Now judge upon it, those that understand, with which of US; Antichrist, dwells. Libell. 90. O Christ! the Holy Spirit hathHeb: 1. 9. anoin∣ted thee with Oyle, more then thy fellowes, and hath made thee a Priest. But thou Shoemaker, the Devill hath desiled thee with Dirt and Dung, and made thee a Heretick. Answer. 91. The Holy Spirit hath anointed Christ and his Children with Gods Oyle of Gladness, and hath introduced that anointing into our Soul, so that we beleeve in him, and that I take or receive to my Self; as a Branch of Christ, and have tasted his Anointing, powerful∣ly in me; which I rejoyce my selfe IN, under the Crosse of CHRIST in my bodily Misery. 92. But that the Primate saith, the Devill hath defiled mewith Dirt and Dung: that is true after his manner, for that very Dung, wherewith the Devill hath defiled me, is his reproaching in the Pulpit against me, and this Evill dirty Libell wherewith the Antichristian Devill, hath defiled me, and made me as a Fool before the whole Congregation: so that the Ignorant People, which have a Mind to it cast such Dirt at me: But the Primate thinks it were better to throw Stones at me for then would the Book of Repentance have a riddance out of the way. But the remembrance of Steven is still taught at this very day, though the High-Priests did Stone him: Acts. 7. 57. what God builds, no Devill CAN destroy. 93. But that he also saith: and made thee a Heretick. that is also a Ray of Antichrists colours; for when Men would persecute the right true Christians, and worry burn and kill them, then hath
Antichrist cryed out, they are Hereticks; none other Cause Men had to bring against them, yet thereupon executi∣on proceeded. 94. O how will these Hereticks at the last Judgement day, be set before your Eyes; when they shall be set, in the divine Power, with Christ, in the Judgement, and judge the Antichrist, who hath persecuted and killed them; what will you then answer to CHRIST, and to me, when your Libell will burn forth IN your Soul? who? hath given you authority so to Judge? demon∣strate it out of the Apostles doctrine: There is yet time to ropent before I must, through Gods driving, summon you before the severe Judge∣ment of Jesus Christ: Observe what I say to you! I am a Christian in Christ, you call Christ in his Member a Heretick, and his power, Dirt or Dung. 95. The Mercifullnesse of Christ calleth you herewith, yet once more, to try whether you will repent, if Not, I will be blamelesse con∣cerning you, if you be set in the Judgement, you have a great Mountain before you, through which you must climb up: then if Christ leave you, you may well remain Eternally in this Cliffe. 96. Observe what is said to you, it is well known, Hypocrisie availeth nothing, it must be earnest sincerity: to sinne upon Grace, makes a Man uncapable of Grace, the hour is neer, be perswaded, you will have no Such Protector or assistance there; as you draw to your self here, upon which you relye: you must stand before My eyes, and give an account for your Malice and reproaching Blasphemy. 97. Christ, in me, and in all the Members of Christ, citoth you before the Judgement of Christ; what shall I then say to you, for all your scandalous blemishes you have put upon me here on Earth? I pray you as a fellow Member of my Soul; convert yet, while the Door of Grace standeth open, before the Great Cliffe, or Gulfe between me and you be shut: Luke 16. 26. 98. It becometh A High-Priest indeed very ill: who should bring into his mouth the Divine word of the Love of Christ, that instead thereof taketh filth into his mouth, and polluteth Christs word, which he should teach; with filth, and spit such filth, into the Heart of the People, and poison them as you do; for where filth is, there is not at all the Holy Spirit in that Mouth; but Satan. 99. The Christian Church or Congregation, should do well to open its eyes, and observe what it is Men teach them, the punishment of God followeth; be perswaded, dear Brethren, there will shortly come a Time, wherein you will well see, what I here say.
Libell. 100. CHRIST taught Men the divine Com∣mandements, but this fellow teacheth with great earnestnesse the Seduction. Answer. 101. Where standeth that in my Book, that I teach Men the out∣wordVersuc∣kung. Separation? shew me that, or else it is not so. I teach them the Anointing of Jesus Christ, with his delicate humanity after a spiri∣tual Kinde, IN us, according to the inward ground of Faith, concer∣ning which CHRIST saith, he which Eateth my Flesh and drinketh my Bloud, he continueth in me and I in him, John 6. 53, 54. 102. For THAT is the Temple of the Holy Spirit, where Christs Flesh and Bloud continueth in us, as Saint Paul saith: 1 Cor: 6. 16. Also it is the NEW Regeneration, wherein the HOLY SPIRIT in us SEAR∣CHETH THE DEPTHS OF THE DEITY: 1 Cor: 2. 10. It is the out∣powred word of the substantiall Divine Love, which marryeth, and incorporateth, it self with our Soul, as the whole New Testament teacheth. 103. Where it is written; Try whether Christ hath gotten a form in you, Gal: 4. 19. If Christ be to get a form in us; then must not that be absent, if we are to be a Branch on that Vine of Christ, then we must not cleave to an other: for none can serve two Masters, saith Christ, Matth: 6. 24. Also. My Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him for it; when that shall come, it will declare me in You: Luke 11. John 6. 14. 104. It is not an outward Seduction, but an inward Enlightning, whence the Soul, when it tasteth thisHeb: 1. 9. Oyle of Joy and Gladnesse, co∣meth into such great rejoycing, as is mentioned in my little Book concerning the Noble Sophia; which is, viz: the Substantiall Love of JESUS CHRIST. 105. I understand very well, that you know not this Noble Sophi. a, it is no good signe, that you deny her and call her an Enthusiastris.Enthusiast, I know her well and have a love to her, For, she is my Souls dear Bride; If, I knew her not, then surely, I would not have suffered so very much for her Love sake, srom you and other people. 106. Christ saith, John 10.John 10. from 8. to the 14. Whosoever entereth not through me to the Sheep, viz: Into the Sheepfold, But climbeth in, some other way, he is a Thief and a Murtherour, and but an hireling, and is come only with suttlety to rob the sheep of their food, and to shear off their wool; these belong to the Wolves, and have not the Shepheards Crook or Staffe of Christ, but the Devills Sheers, and must, hereafter eternally howl with the Wolves: But YE say, he that entereth not in through the high Schools or Ʋni∣versities, he is a Thief and a Murtherour, and so you deride the Dore of
CHRIST, viz: the anoynting or Unction of the holy Spirit, and will needs have it to be, that men must draw the divine knowledge and skill only from the high Schools or Ʋniversitles, and bind and tye up Gods Gifts, to AR▪ 107. But Christ teacheth us quite otherwise, that this thing is hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed to the seeking and hungry Babes: Math. 11. 25. As Mary also saith; He thrufleth out the Mighty from their Seat, and exalteth the miserable and lowly, who are humble in their hearts before him, Luke 1. 12. She meaneth not Might and Authority but Spi∣rit and Power. 108. O Primate! I had much to say to you here; but I know not whe∣ther it would be well bestowed or no, for you would cover your self only with Christs Purple Mantl; that you might liveRom: 13. 13, 14. according to the Lusts of the flesh; you would not become regenerated, and dayly dye away from sinne,Eph: 2. 3. but only comfort your self, that it is Christ, hath done it. 109. But I tell you, it will not availe you, unless you put on Christs Satisfaction, through earnest Ropentance and turning in, to grace; and become a Branch on the stock of the Vine Christ, that Christ in you also doe kill sinne, and renew to you your senses thoughts and mind, so that you desire to imitate Christ, else will your tickling, be unavailable, and be only an hypocriticall flattering Shew. 110. I tell it you in love, observe it well. I have received it from God, so that I know it, also the New Testament throughout teacheth you the same; I have in my little Book very well signified to you; that No man knoweth or understandeth, this Noble Sophiah, in the feeling or Experimentall Love of JESUS CHRIST,John 3. 27. unlesse it be given him from God. 111. I will not here further cast the pearle under your feet, till you are fit and prepared for it in true Repentance, if that were done, which I would wish, then would I have further speech with you about it, for now you are not yet worthy of it, seeing you contemn it. 112. In that regard also, is your teaching so cold, because you have not this power in you, for you yet have not the right Hammer to strike the Clock, you cannot yet strike the Clock which awakeneth the poor captive Soul, you must use the right Hammer; if you would strike the right Hour and awake the Soul out of sleep; you have the WORD indeed, but the right power is not in you, wherewith you should Co work with the Litterall Word it self; Therefore said Christ, The sheep hear not the voice of the Hireling, John 10. 3. for his crying and calling is but meer jugling, and a fight∣ing with a shadow; He is with his teaching, without Gods Hammer, but a Jugler, a Belly-Hammer, an Ear-Hammer, aud not a Soul-Hammer.
113. This Power, which I mean, is the Doro, to the Sheep, you often use with your blaspheming reproaches, Satans Hammer, under Christs Purple Mantle, your Heart isas Acts 8. 23. full of Gall and Bitternesse. O, alas, it is Time! Repent! Libell. 114. CHRIST hath directed us to the Word and to the hidden secret Mystery which the Be∣leeving hearts hold or retain in the Faith; but the Shoemaker leads us to head-longVerzuc∣kung. Seduction, and to Dreams which rob the beleeving hearts of Faith. Answer. 115. I lead not Men away from the Preached and written Word; you do me wrong in that, but I say, that they should bring along with them the Temple of JESUS CHRIST, to the preached or written word, viz: a Repentant hungry Soul, which heareth in its own self Christ, which is, viz: the LIVING Word, in the Litterall and preached Word; as David saith, I will hear what the Lord saith in me, Psal. 85. 9. And Christ also saith: He that is of God, heareth Gods word: and to the Pharisees he saith: therefore you hear not, for you are not of God, John 8. 47. also you are not my sheep, John 10. 26. 116. This now I intend in my meaning, that a Man should have divine Ears, viz. a repentant Soul, if he will hear Christs voyce, be it in the Preaching, in Reading or Conference; for, this, hath CHRIST taught us, whom I more beleeve then, I do, all ART whatsoever; for the Historicall Faith, to tickle and com∣fort ones self with knowing without power, and an earnest sincere will, is dead, and but aHusk. Shell, it attaineth not the divine Childship or Filiation, it must be earnest sincerity that will do it. 117. It is not enough, that we go to Church and to the Sacrament, and sit there an Houre; playing the Hypocrite and hearing a Sermon; wherein often∣times Wheat and Tares are sown together, one among another: in that you many times reproach and blaspheme; No, going to Church makes none vertuous or honest; unlesse he hear in the Church, Gods Word operatively in his Soul, for the Lord saith by his Prophets, they draw neer to me with their Lips, but their Heart is farre from me: Ezek: 29. 13.
118. Not all that go to Church and say, LORD, LORD, shall into the Kingdome of Heaven, but they that do the will of my Father in Heaven, saith Christ; Matth: 7. 2. It must not be Historicall beleeving only, but bowerfull doing; Now if they are to do the Divine will, then must the same, viz: the Spirit of CHRIST, work power∣fully IN them; for Christ saith, without ME you can do nothing, John 15. 5. 119. Therefore flattering Hypocrisie: and Luke-warmnesse; availeth not, for the true saith is not only an imprinted or imaged fi∣gure, but it is power Spirit and Life, it is a Fire of the Divine word; which there burneth, and shineth abroad, which Co-worketh with God, the right and true Faith, is the Seat of God, on which he sit∣teth and speaketh. 102. Faith is not meer historicall Breath, wherewith a Man only comforteth himself, and flattereth the Evill Beast full of false and wicked desires: No, it is a living working Power of God, its burning Fire, is the fire-flaming Love of God, which breakes forth, and doth the work. 121. Your Preaching is all in vain, if CHRIST worketh not through your word in the Hearers, but if that must be done; then you Must teach them LOVE, not Contention disgracing and Con∣temning, you must put the Dung and scorn out of your Mouth, not Judge falsely, and Blaspheme or reproach; for in reproachings, SATAN worketh, but with a pure soul, CHRIST worketh; the Re∣proaching, is the ANTICHRIST. 122. But that you say; I direct Men to Dreams, that is worthy of no answer, for it is not so: this reproaching is also a Signaturo or Sign of Antichrist, which thus defileth the children of Christ, shew it, or it is not true. 123. But that you also say; My Dreams, for such you hold my writings to be, do rob the beleeving hearts, of FAITH, that also is not so, but they lead Men from the Historicall Faith, from Hypocrisie; to the Living Faith, which is, JESUS CHRIST: and do shew them, how they should daily dye away from sinne, and become new born in Christ, and imitate or follow him in Faith and Spirit, and become ONE Spirit with Christ. 124. Which makes the Devill, afraid, that Men will no more en∣dure him under Christs Purple Mantle, but the time is Born or Come, that his Kingdom shall be revealed and brought to scorn, which No Primate shall hinder, it is so ordained of God. Libell. 125. CHRIST hath handled weighty Matters,
but the Shoemaker, slight contemptible mat∣ters. Answer. 126. Christ hath brought, and shewed us the way to Blessednesse and salvation, and the Shoemaker desireth to walk therein, but Satan calleth it a slight and contemptible way, seeing it is a Crosse-way, wherein a Man in this world in misery and humility must follow or imitate Christ; for Satan is a Spirit of Pride, and therefore he despi∣seth the Path of Christs Pilgrimage: being this way is straight and narrow, and pleaseth not the fat Belly, and the Eyes that are full of their own Honour and self-hood. 127. Christ hath destroyed Satans Kingdom, and generated Christianity, but the Antichrist hath set himself in Christs Seat, and this the Shoemaker revealeth or Manifesteth, according to the will of God, and that the Primats supposeth to be a slight contemptible matter; but when the Houre shall strike butNote Note See the first Apologie against Balta∣zar Tylcken. verse 5. 40. Seaven: then, it will have been a Good matter. Libell. 128. Christ Contemned worldly Riches, but the Shoemaker desires them. Answer. 129. CHRIST said, Come to me, all you who labour and are heavy loaden:Matth: 11. 28. Math. 11. He made no difference between Rich and Poor, which came to him; but that the Primate is troubled, that a Layick is helped by Rich people that fear God, thereby, it is likely, he sup¦poseth, somewhat goeth away from him, it belongeth to him alone to converse with the Rich, for his own Profit, to him belongeth Riches: On the contrary they Shoemaker desireth no Great Riches, in this world, for he is not Proud, as men may well see by him. Libell. 30. Christ led his Life soberly, but the Shoemaker useth commonly to be full and drun∣ken. Answer. 131. CHRIST was indeed Sober: but what the Primate layes upon the Shoemaker, he is that himselfe; Men use sometime to take him
from lying drunk under Tables, abroad, and bring him Home: Men may indeed find him ost drunk in one week, but the Shoemaker not in Three years. 132. This Article he hath wholly taken from his own Conversati∣on. Saint Paul saith to theRom: 2. 1. 3. Romans 2. Therefore O Man, thou canst not excuse thy self whosoever thou art, who judgest, for wherein thou Judgest another, thou condemnest thy selfe, seeing thou dost the same thing, which thou judgest; for we know, that Gods judgement  just against those that do such things. Libell. 133. Christ hath abstained from superfluous Laughter, but the Shoemaker laughs in all that he speaks. Answer. 134. Men find not that Christ ever laughed, but only rejoyced in Spirit, but that the Primate, hath imputed Laughter and Phantasticall∣nesse to the Shoemaker, and saith, he laugheth at every word, that is indeed an open grosse untruth, and cannot be made appear; neither can any honest faithfull Man say it; but that Nature giveth to one to laugh and to be friendly and affable, more then to another, and maketh of another a Saturnine Soure Grim looked Man, that the Primate can∣not Mend: he should do well to be silent in that, if a Man should de∣scribe him,Marcolpbus  feigned in Germany, to have been olomons Je∣r, who hen he was condemned to be hanged, desired of the King he might chose the Tree upon which he must be exe∣cuted, which being granted him: he look∣ed a while, and being as∣ked which he chose, answe∣red he could not find any that he could choose, and so escaped for that time; these and ma∣ny other sto∣ries are in a Book of him, in the German Tongue. and his foolish flouts, which he oftentimes in his Tiplings and Quaffings gives forth, a Man should be constrained to bring out some strange Monsters. 135. It seizes upon me with wonder, that he is not ashamed, being he is an Old Man, in whom a Man should seek for wisdome, that he dares write such open untruths and foolish flouting Expressions, and cause, an honest Man of Credit to be oppressed, with scorn, they are yet worse then a common jeering flouting Jester; this Libell is very like * Marcolphus his filthey scurrilous scoffings, who all∣wayes carrieth filth in his Mouth, as this Libell also doth. 136. It bringeth but little repute to a Teacher of Christ, who should forbid it others, and yet doth it himselfe: The Shepheards Of∣fice, will be handsomely served by it; none should trust his SOUL to such scoffings; he will be deceived: this Spirit standard upon the Sand, and tottereth to and fro, Men may try him now, in such scoffings. 137. Men may well know the Fowle by his Feathers: Christ said: That which is within, that cometh forth, what the Heart is full of, that comes out upon the Mouth? Also, how can you that are evill speak that which is Good? Also, Can a Man gather Grapes of Thistles, or Figs of Thorns? A Good Man bringeth Good, forth, out of the Treasure of his heart, and an Evill Man bringeth Evill forth, out of the Treasure of his Evill Heart, Luke 16. 45.
138. This I give now to the Reader, to ponder of, what kind of Good Treasure can the Primate have in Heart, when he brings forth such wondrous things out of his Heart, there must certainly needs stick many strange things, therein, which he ought indeed to be a little ashamed to bring forth; seeing he is the High-Priest, but if a Man come to him, and but displease him with one word, then a Man may hear Satan many times laugh, out from him, with reproachings and blasphemyes. Libell. 139. When Christ Taught the People, he did it openly, but the Shoemaker useth to creep into secret Corners. Answer. 140. CHRIST was a Teacher sent from God, and yet must often∣times, depart from the Pharisees, and Scribes learned in the Scrip∣tures, and go into the Wildernesse to teach the People, when they saw him teach, they would sain have killd him, and called him a decei∣ver and maker of uproars: and said: he had hisOr Art. skill and Doctrine from the Devill: and though they saw the wondrous signs or Miracles, yet they were so Mad and hardned, and supposed, Teaching, belonged only to them, and did to him also, as the Primato doth to the Shoema∣ker: Math: 11. 10. Luke 7. 34.they called him a Wine-bibber; and Minister or Servant, to rich Publicans; And John the Baptist preached also in the Wildernesse; yes in the Wildernesse was the Gospell, of Christ began by John, al∣so the Apostles must often for fear of the High-Priests, Teach in Corners, and Houses, as the Acts of the Apostles witnesse. 141. But the Shoemaker is no Preacher, but he giveth only an ac∣count of his Gift and knowledge, and speaketh often with Honest Hearts, concerning The Way to Christ; how we must convert and re∣pent, and become new-born, for CHRIST saith also thus; Where two or Three of you are met together in My Name, there am I in the midst among them: Matth: 18. 10. 142. The Primne should teach us, that when we come or meet together, we should speak of GOD and of our Salvation, and edifie or build up one another in true Love; on the Contrary, he forbids us this, whereby Men may try what spirit he serveth; A high Glasse of Wine, in his meetings, is better liked by him, then A hearty blessed Conference, concerning the New Birth. 143. CHRIST on Earth had no greater Enemies, then the High Priests, it will be so still at this Day, for all Warres and strife, come
from the High-Priests disputings and reproachings, as it is before our Eyes, if our Eyes be open to see it, but the account is neer at hand. Libell. 144. Christ desired no Kingly honour, but the Shoemaker if he could, would be King, and God to o Answer. 145. CHRIST came upon Earth, poor, that he might have com∣passion on us, and make us rich in Heaven, and like his Dear An∣gells. The Shoemaker also is upon Earth Poor, and despised, but desi∣reth from CHRIST the Heavenly Kingly Honour, and to be like the Angels, also he desireth in Christ, according to his Inward Faiths Ground, to become with and in CHRIST, Deified, that Christs Deity, may dwell and EternallyNote Note abide in him, and that, No Primate shall take away from him. Hallelu-jah. 146.Matth: 2. 1, 2. The Starre is appeared which leadeth tho wise men or Magi, to the Babe JESU: oppose it how thou wilt, O Devill! it is in vain, here is Body and Life: MY Eternall Kingdome with CHRIST and the Holy Angels, can none take away from me; and if the whole world lay full of such Libells, yet I would keep my King∣dome in Christ, and tread the Libells under foot, and not spare my outward Life for it; I know a better Life, which Christ my Lord will give me. 147. Therefore then be gone thou fair wicked world, I ask not after thy Honour, Goods nor Money,Phil: 3. 20. our Conversation is in Hea∣ven with Christ, for he is mine and I am his, the Enemy shall not part us, Hallelu-jah;Rev: 18. 2. It is fallen it is fallen, Babylon the Great City upon Earth, and become habitation of all Devills and unclean Spirits: Now is the Kingdome of our Christ; sing my Soul, and rejoyce, that the Dragon in THEE, is killed, and the Life of GOD is brought forth again. Nun last zornen Tefell und die Hell, Gott's sohn ist worden unser Gesell. Let Devills rage, and Hell, have Indignation; The Sonne of God, 's become our sweet Companion. Libell. 148. Christ desired no Title and vain ho∣nour, but the Shoemaker is brag of his Titles.
Answer. 149. The will of his Father, was the Title of CHRIST, his honour was in God, and he introduced it into our Humanity, and exalted our humanity to the right hand of the Power of God: that very ho∣nour he hath bestowed upon his Christians, that they also in him, sit at the right hand of the power of God, an reign over Sinne, Death, the Devill, Hell, and the World; THIS high Title also the Shoemaker claims to himself, an desireth, the highest kingly Title in the victo∣ry of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as a Champion over Death and Hell, he desireth such a high Title, that he may stand in the strife against Death and Hell, and that, in CHRIST he thinketh, to conquer and overcome the whole world, to be a King in Christ; & to rule over all Enimicitious Libells and reproaches of the Primate; otherwise, he desireth no worldly Titles for the Kingdom of a Christ∣an is not of this world: John 15. 19. for Christ saith, I have called you out of the world so that you may be where I am: John 17. 24. 150. But the Primate doth desire a Title, for he hath set his Titles of the High-Priests Office, and of his Person, in the Libell, with GREAT LETTERS, that men might see the Richter, or JUDGE, who hath authority over Christs Children, also, if one come a little too neer him: and did but forget to take of his Hat, for fear of him, he might well expect-some strange king of Title from him, if he were not kickt for his pains. Libell. 151. CHRIST was satisfied with the Name of a Master, but this Fellow, will be called Do∣ctor and a New Prophet. Answer. 152. Thomas said to CHRIST, My LORD, and my GOD: Joh. 20. 28. and Christ did not speak against it; now there is no higher Name then GOD: therefore it is likely the Primate seldom readeth the BIBLE; seeing, he doth not know, that Christ took, a higher Title then Master, and before Pilate he said; I am indeed a King; Luke. 23. John 18. 33. 153. It is a Wonder to me, that seeing he hath studied so much, he is not yet come to that place, where CHRISTS Titles stand IN the SCRIPTURE. 154. But that he saith, the Shoemaker, will be called Doctor and a New Prophet, that is only his Fiction, as Men use in such Libells to seign, after the Manner of Poets. The People need not beleeve it all, for a good Man may now and then Erre, especially when a Man is Drunk, an puts on a Vizard a Man can not know him; and though
he were High-Priest, if men see him go so from one house to ano∣ther, then People say, there comes a Fool, and many may well say, it were the Devill: But it is not all true; the People give them only such a Title, when they assume such Images shapes or Gestures; after∣wards they become Men again, when they put off the Vizard, many a one goeth so, only that he may come to his Paramour or where, then he makes some foolish Occasion; but men should not in such matters beleeve the Title, when the People say, one with a Vizard, is such a Beast, it is Death, or the Devill; No, he is but a captive of the Devill. 155. Thus also men Should not beleeve, when the Primate puts Titles upon the Shoemaker, and calleth him A Heretick, A Sectary, Fool, Phantastick or Fanatick, En∣thusiastick, A Rascally Knave, A forsworn or perjured Shoemaker, and more, like that they are such stretched strained Names, like a Vizard, which the De∣vill puts upon him, because he is in strife and at odds with him; It is not good to beleeve, though the High-Priest himself say it, men may be deceived, for great people may be mistaken, for, the Pharisees, were mistaken in CHRISTS Titles, how then will the Primate not be mistaken in the Shoemakers Titles, seeing he knows that he is but a Laick, and he knoweth not the Name of CHRIST-in him. 156. The good LORD, sure, was once with some Shoemaker, who had touched the Blacking, which made him stink, whence is so very much angered offended and enraged, that he supposeth, that THIS Shoemaker alwayes smells of that colouring, and therefore he is so fiercely enraged against the Shoemakers Titles; likely some Shoe∣makers Pitch remains sticking to his Hands, that is dryed to them, and in that regard, he giveth the Shoemaker such abominable Names, that he is still angry at it: He can not endure the Shoemaker yet, and is afraid, the Shoemaker may defile his own Pen, and therefore forbids him to use it: O, Primate! the Shoemaker hath his Titles IN himselfe, you can not defile them, he will Eternally keep THEM, well nough. Libell. 157. CHRIST gave the Thirsty, water of Eternal Life to drink, But the Shoemaker runs every Morning, to the Brande-wine or Strong-water, or the Water of Death.
Answer. 158. Christ at this very day bestoweth on his Children Water of Life, and giveth them His bloud of Love to drink; that very water he giveth to my thirsty Soul to drink, for which I thank him Eternally, that he hath through this Water, made me living and Seeing, that very water I drink; and that is a water for or against Death, though the Primate speaketh thereof in a perverted way. 159. But that he saith, I run every Morning to the Brande-wine or Strong-Water, that is not true, I may not nor cannot drink any Brande-wine, and have a long time had a dislike against it, it is con∣trery to me, so that I do not willingly smell to it; It is a wonder to me, that he being a High-Priest, should be so very much mistaken, he would look upon it very ill, if a mean Man should doe so, then a Man would say, he were a Lyar, I know not at all, what answer I should give to such untruth, I beleeve verily that the Satanicall spirit of Errour hath feigned this untruth. 160. I counsell you, that you hunt that away, from you, it defileth you with such untruth very much: but if you will have it right, then set before me an honest honourable Man of credit, whether he be, in the City, or out of the City, whoever he be; that can with truth say, he seeth me every Morning at the Brande-wine; I appeal to the whole City, and a Noble Councellours Cellar Keeper: whether there be any Man, that can say so, of me. 161. It is a great shame, that you cause such untruth, to be printed to the reproach of another; with you, men may well find great Cups and Glasses of Brande-wine; but as you are mistaken and do erre in this, so you are mistaken also in all other Articles of the Libell, there is not one of them true in the sense you represent them. Libell. 162. CHRIST scarce drank any wine, but the Shoemaker guzzles freely, Outlandish wine, and Brande-wine. Answer. 163.John 2. 1. to the 10. Christ made Water to be good Wine, John 2. and is himself the Good Wine for the thirsty Soul, which my Soul freely loves to drink of; but that the Primate saith, I love to guzzle Outlandish Wine and Brande-wine, that he takes from his own Example, and thinketh ano∣ther doth as himselfe doth; O, no, we poor men have not to pay for it, we must be content with a draught of Beer or small Drink as we can buy it, but men must give the Primate Outlandish wine indeed, though other Guests at the same time must be content with smaller.
164.Sak. Spanish wine causeth, that Men sometime want or loose the Primate, for a while, also men may see by the red Wine-pimples in his Face, that he drinketh strong Wine much more then I, for I have no such signs of it as he; he drinks more forraign wine in a week then I in a whole year. 165. But I understand very well where the matter pincheth, He knoweth that I through divine appointment, have often been requested to go to Great Lords and Noble-men, then thinks he, when we come to meet, we sit together, and quaff our Fill, as he useth to do, with his Companions; But No! the Nobility and Poten∣tates in Authority, which are served with full draughts, do not cause me to be sent for, to them, but only honest Lords fearing God, who earnestly seek after Salvaiton. 166. But there is in the Primate a Mistrust and grutching, he think∣eth somewhat is going away from him; but he need not fear it. Those People, which desire to have ME, they desire not to have HIM at all, there is a great difference between Hypocrisie or Flattery and telling the Truth to ones Face; whether the Primate will beleeve it or no, it is not my Custome, to slatter the Rich for gifts and pre∣sents; as he supposeth. 167. I believe verily, that some Old Ruffians, have brought him those tydings as Newes concerning Me, And the Good Lord hath be∣leeved it as Gospel, and with great earnestnesse written it, and so enraged himself at it, that he hath thereupon condemned the poor Shoe∣maker, unheard, but it would look strangely, if Men should ask after the Ground of it, and compare this Answer with the Libell. 168. It is truly a great Matter, for such a Man as you are, so to deal with the Truth. The City Goerlitz know very well, that I for a long time without necessity, have come into No Mans House, The Tap-houses and Wine-Cellers, are at quiet for all me; for you have so judged and condemned me that I would willingly come no whither; now if I should go to drink in Tap-houses; how many hundred of your Flouts should I not get; which you have cast among Common-people, which are all, your Fruits, which will follow you, you may well rejoyce at them. Libell. 169. Now if by this thou knowest the Shoema∣ker, as the Lyon by his Paw: Wilt thou then read his Books? No, but Shun them as the filthy Spawn of a Devill, and abominable Errour, and hold thee close to the Word of God, and beware of the Shoemakers Scholars or Disciples, whe∣ther
they be Noble-men or Doctors, Taylours, Men or Women; The LORD CHRIST destroy Satans Instrument, and let not THY Word be sup∣pressed or obscured. Answer. 170. In these words it may well be observed, wherefore, the Libell hath been written, viz: that he might bring to nothing and quite root out my writings, by these defamatory Reproaches; It vexes the Devill, that my writings do lay open his Smoak-Hole, and therefore it is, that he paints me with such colours; that NONE should READ me, Men might otherwise Repent, and so there would be a greater Breach made, to his Kingdome. 171. But this Devill is so very Grossely vile, that he goeth quite Naked, the People may easily observe him, and learn to know him, for men see his Pawes in his disposition and reproachings, and that he is altogether a Poysonous venemous or Spitefull Spirit; It is now quite an other Time, then it hath been, Men will not now so suddenly beleeve what every one saith; Men will see proof for it: why doth he not de∣monstrate what he sayes out of the printed Book; seeing he forbids it, to the Congregation of the People: such defamatory reproaches, are no demonstrations, men may well call them Filth and Dung. 178. He speaketh of the Lyons Paw, by which Men should know the Shoemaker; Now it may well be true, that men at present may easily see the Lyons Paw in Me, how the Lyon with contemning and reproaching, hath griped and clawed Me; but the Bloud of JESUS CHRIST hath hitherto resisted the Lyon, else he had torn the Shoe∣maker in peeces. 173. But that he saith; the Shoemakers Doctrine is Filth and Dung: therein he calls CHRISTS Mind or Thoughts, and Spirit, Filth and Dung. And that Men should beware of the Shoemakers Scholars or Disciples, to that, I say, I know of No Scholars or Disciples, but on∣ly of Christian Men, where one SOUL is refreshed by an other: I have no New Doctrine, but only the Old, which is to be found in the BIBLE, and in the Kingdome of NATURE. 174. But that he calls his reproaching Blasphemies, GODS WORD, which men should hear, only from HIM, and should so reproach; as he doth; that I offer to Christian Hearts to consider of, what Spirits Childe he is.
The Third Part in the Libell. A Spending Penny on the Way. Libell. 175. THe City of Goerlitz: still driveth thee Shoe∣maker away, and commandeth thee, to be gone thither, where thy writings are highly Esteemed; away quickly, and get thee A great way off, thou vain Mouth which reproachest and blasphemest GOD, and try thou Miserable Man, what Mis∣chief is prepared for thee. Answer. 176. O Primate! keep this Spending Penny for your selfe against you go to Heaven, I desire nothing from you: your vain reproaching Blasphemies, will indeed follow after you for a Spending Penny;1 Cor: 10. 12. Be not deceived, he that standeth, let him take heed least he fall; Though indeed you persecute Me, and intend to Bannish me; who knoweth? who it is, will, persecute you so also in a short time. 177. The Signatures, or signs of it, are at hand, it is equall that you before hand do to others, as afterwards you would it should be done to you for a Punishment; but, you must fill up your Measure; and if you do not Repent, then will the Evill Spirits one day sing you a very grie∣vous Song, and command you to go away a farre off from the Coun∣tenance of God; For what you do now at present, that you do to CHRIST in his Members; and that will He also do to you, if you do not quickly convert and Repent. Libell. 178: Thou art just like Oedipus, whom the Earth swallowed up; O take heed, that the like doth not befall thee also; his Shadow did much hurt the People who stood neer him, but beleeve me,
thy Shadow hurteth many of them exceeding much. Answer. 179. TheActs 5. 15, 16. Shaddow of St. Peter did the Devill also very much hurt, so doth my Shaddow also do hurt only to the Devil & so Antichrist; its likely you suppose, that my shadow might hurt you as to your earthly Life; because I make known the imitation or following of Christ, and so the people, who receive that Doctrine, would require of you, that you also should live as the Apostles of Christ did, and Imitate or follow their example, and that relisheth not with you, therefore you say my Shadow hurteth some, viz: the false or wicked Spiritualty or Clergy, very Mightily: It may not be otherwise; it must so come to passe. 180. But I know, very Many Spiritual Priests, or Clergy-Men, whom it will NOT hurt, but do them much good, whose Office of the Mini∣stry, is sincerely and earnestly intended by them; BUT who can, [do any thing], before the Time, which bringeth ALL THINGS to passe? 181. If the Primate with his Warning or admonition, intend so faithfully, then let him leave, his reproaching Blasphemies in the PULPIT, and only require me, to come to him, and shew me my Er∣rour, if I did but find that he had any thing of Truth, against me, and would shew me a better way; O how I would cheerfully love him, and faithfully thank him for it; he rejoyceth, that he hath but any thing that he CAN reproach. 182. AT the beginning, after his first reproaching Blasphemy, and persecution, I bowed and yeelded to him forNote J. B. did forbear writing of his Works for six years. Six years together, and wrote No word further of my works, why did not he cease to Reproach? who did any thing to him? But he could not; why? Because God had made him a driving Hammer, that must drive on the work. 183. His reproaching hath become my strength and growth, through his Persecution my Pearl is grown, he hath pres∣sed it forth, and published it himselfe, and in that regard I wish him Gods Mercy and Compassion, that he might yet partake thereof, seeing God hath used him for my instrument in my work.
184. I would deal much humblyer, towards him, if he would con∣vert, then he hath done towards me, He need not think I shun coming before his Face; I have a good Conscience, and wish him one too. 185. In no Judgement, to sentence one, unheard, doth availe, I submit not my self in such a way to his Judgement, for my heart is not convinced, with such a sentence, I am innocent of all that is laid to my charge; All that he hath spoken against me in the Pulpit, is quite con∣trary to my sence and meaning, and not one true word of it, he hath wrested and perverted all my words, with a strange understan∣ding. 186. Therefore seeing I can now, have no other Richter, or Judge, who himself will understand my Gift, I appeal from his Judicium, Censure or Judgement, before the Judgement of my Saviour JESUS CHRIST, till I be orderly heard, then I will give an Account of My cause. Libell. 187. Thou hast hitherto Imitated or follow∣ed after Cerinthus, in that thou hast feigned and Cooked wondrous Matters, and proclaimest hor∣rible things: when this Cerinthus was in the Bath, he despised the LORD CHRIST, and ra∣ged in his railing, babling vehemently against GOD, but the House fell down and Slew him: thus was the Teacher together with the Scholars or Disciples, brought to destruction. Answer. 188. Was Cerinthus against CHRIST? that I leave as it is, in its own place; I am with Christ, and acknowledge JESUS CHRIST for my LORD and GOD: and have submitted and given up my self in Obedi∣ence to him, to live according to his Will and Commandement; but that the Primate saith, that I have done Like Cerinthus, that needs well to be demonstrated, else it will not be true. 189. But that he speaks of my Wondrous Things; To that I say with truth, I have written of No Wondrous things; I have only writ∣ten, what NATURE and MAN is; but seeing this seemeth to be wondrous to the Primate, the fault thereof is only this, that He doth NOT understand it.
190. What can I help that? that he is blind concerning it; I have not written it for him, but only for those, to whom God gives, to understand it: Let him remain a High-Priest, and not be a Philoso∣pher or knower of Nature, and so we are parted; he ought not to thrust the old Sects upon me, I have seen none of those writings, it is onely his Malice. Libell. 191. Thy filth O Shoemaker, hath exceed∣ingly defiled OUR City. Answer. 192. You have so bespattered it with Dung of Reproaching Blas∣phemy, in regard of the Shoemaker, that Many, stink with reproach∣ings; that is the Filth, which hurteth them in their souls; you are the cause thereof, that it hurteth them; in that they beleeve the reproa∣chings, and take them into their heart, and so reproach Gods Gift. Libell. 193. O, that all those who read thy writings, might away, along with thee into Perdition. Answer. 194. What a Christian wish is this of the High-Priest? Man could scarce, Nay not at all, find such a one, in Caiphas: also it might not well stand, any where, in the BIBLE: It will soon come to that, that his Christian wish will be true, that the Sheep will be severed from the Goates, and be parted one from another; that the Goats may have scope and room in Hell, seeing on Earth they could endure none other to be among them. Libell. 195. Yes, thou hast kindled or inflamed all Silesia it self with thy Doctrine, where thou wilt be received by Many whom I very well know; who, as they are in respect of their Nobility, much more of Note then others, so they have a great∣er influence upon others, with their Novelties; but
you his Companions, beware and take heed least these notorious writings of this notorious Man; and you perish together. Answer. 196. Men find indeed at present in Silesia, many excellent Learn∣ed Men fearing God, which see further, then the Lord Primate doth, whose Christianity is in right sincere Earnest; who walk in the Imi∣tation or following of CHRIST, they read many good Books, which lead to the right ground or foundation Stone; they have not first learned of me the Imitation or following of CHRIST; but they had it before, and now do but rejoyce themselves in this, that God also powres out such knowledge into simple People, which is indeed A wonder of God. 197. But you ascribe it to the Devill, as the High Priests did to Christ; some of the Nobility also follow after you; yet some of the highest of the Nobility in Silesia, observe the Time, and see, that God hath some great Thing in hand, but you are blind concerning it, and hardned, as the Pharisees were also in the Time of Christ; Therefore the Day of your punishment from God, cometh on apace, and is neer, know that. Libell. 198. O, now then be gone, and come no more, that thou mayest miserably perish, and rather take a Shoe into thy hand, then a PEN. The 27. March 2624. Answer. 199. CHRIST said, if they Curse you, then blesse them, and then are you the Children of the Most high: Matth: 5. 44. Seeing therefore the Primate wisheth me a Miserable Death, his wish must needs be from the Devill, for it runs quite contrary to Gods Will and Commande∣ment, as also contrary to all honourable reason, and honesty here: Luke 6. 44.Men shall know the Tree by its fruit, and every one may well conceive out of what Spirit and Mind he persecutes me, and that he doth it to please SATAN, and is No Minister of Servant of Christ. 200. But seeingNote he curseth me, therefore, I blesse him through the Bloud and Death of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the Name of God the Father and of the Sonne and of the Holy Spirit; Amen:
and wish unto him, that this Blessing may take effect and light upon him, and generate him to be a Childe and Heir of Eternall Life, that he may become and Eternally remain to be, my brother in the Life of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, Amen, Amen, Amen: and I conclude it with my whole heart, will and desire. Dated at Goerlitz the 10. Aprill Anno. 1624. Jacob Behme. The APPENDIX to the Libell. NO Errour is so Grosse or abominable which hath not those that give Countenance to it and Maintain or stand by it. Answer. A Good Man Maintaineth, or standeth by the GOOD, and an Evill, by the EVILL, viz: by reproaching and blasphemy; But to those that love God, all things must serve to the Best for them, Rom: 8. 28. And if they stuck in the Midst of all Errours, yet they are then in Gods Hands, and preserved from Thee reproaching Blasphemer, for it is a horrour to them, and they do not willingly hear People despise and reproach others. Libell. THE Errour is first Small, and at length Great. Answer. CHRIST saith, The Kingdome of God is first Small, as a grain of Mustard Seed, afterwards it groweth as great as a Tree. Matth: 13. 31. Mark 4. 51.
Libell. In the World there is alwayes one kind of Co∣medy or Scene Acted, only with alteration of Time Place and Persons. Answer. GOD hath wrought from Eternity, and worketh in Eternity, and yet remaineth solely, the same, ONE, Only, Eter∣nall, GOD. This Translation into English finished this 26. of September, 1659.
