D1093 e643_12 R206004 99865212 165961
THE Earle of Darbys SPEECH ON THE SCAFFOLD, Immediately before his Execution at Bolton in Lancashire, on We∣nesday, October 15. 1651. Exactly taken in Short-hand, as it was spoken; and now published for the satisfaction of those that desire to be truly informed. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brooks, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Angel in Cornhil. 1651.
THe Earl of Darby was brought to Bol∣ton on Wednesday last about noon, his guard being sixty Foot and eighty horse; about two of the clock brought forth to the Scaffold, which was built at the Cross, part of that built with the timber of his own house of Latham: there was not above an hundred lookers on, besides Soldiers: pre∣sently after his coming upon the Scaffold there happened a great tumult (the occasion where∣of not being certainly known;) In appeasing of which there were some cut, many hurt, and one childe killed. The Earl was no good Ora∣tor, and the tumult put him out of speaking what he intended: he was much afraid of be∣ing reviled by the people of the town, but they rather pitied his condition: his Son came with him to Bolton, and carryed his Corps back that night to Wiggan.
The Last Words of the Earl of Derby UPON The Scaffold at Bolton, the fifteenth day of October. 1651. COming to the foot of the Ladder, to the Scaf∣fold, he said, I am thus requited for my love, and he kissed the Ladder, and said, I do sub∣mit my self to the Mercy of God; and when he was upon the Scaffold, he said, Now that it pleaseth God to take away my life, I am glad to see, that in this Town, where some were made believe I was a man of Blood, I was slndered to be the death of many: It was my desire the last time I came into this Country, to come hither as to a people that ought to serve the King as I conceive upon good grounds: It was said, that I was accustomed to be a Man of Blood; but it doth not lie upon my Conscience, for I was wrongfully be∣ly'd: I thank God I desire Peace. I was born in Ho∣nour, and I hope shall dye in Honor: I had a fair E∣state, and did not need to mend it; I had good Friends, and was respected, and did respect; they were ready to
do for me, and I was ready to do for them; I have done nothing but, as my Ancestors, to do you good; It was the King that called me in, and I thought it my duty to wait upon his Highness to do him Service. Then there arose a great Tumult among the people; after which he said (looking all about him,) I thought to have said more, but I have said; I cannot say much more to you of my good will to this Town of Bolton, and I can say no more, but the Lord bless you, I forgive you all, and desire to be fogiven of you all, for I put my trust in Jesus Christ. And looking about him, he said, I did never deserve this hard measure from above. Honest Friends (you that are Souldiers) my life is taken away after Quarter given, by a Councel of War, which was never done before. And walking up and down the Scaffold, he said, The Lord bless you all; the Son of God bless you all of this Town of Bolton, Manchester, and especially Lancashire; and God send that you may have a King again, and Laws: I dye like a Christian, a Souldier, and Christs Souldier. And sitting down in his Chair, he said to a Souldier that had been his Keeper, They are not ready (meaning the Block was not ready,) and bade him commend him to all his Friends in Chester, and tell them I dye like a Souldier. And causing the Coffin to be opened, he said, I hope when I am imprisoned in this, the Watch∣men will not lie by me with their swords. And walk∣ing up and down the Scaffold, he look'd about him, and said, There is no man that revileth me, God be thanked. And looking upon them that were upon the Scaffold, he said, What do you stay for? it is hard that I cannot get a Block to have my Head cut off. He look∣ing upon the Executioner, said, Thy Coat is too burly,
that thou canst not hit right, the Lord help thee and forgive thee. Then bowing to Mr Henry Bridgman, he said, They have brought me hither too soon, the Block is not ready for me: Mr Bridgman, tell your Brother, I take it as a great Mercy of God that I am brought hither, for I might have dyed in the midst of a Battel, and have not dyed so well, for now I have had time to make my peace with God. And turning him to James Roscow, one of the two Clerks that writ his Speech in Short-hand, he said, Do you write what I say? I may he I say not well, but my meaning is good. And looking upon the Block, he said to one of his men, Lay down your Neck upon the Block, and see how it will fit; but he refused: And a Trumpetter that was upon the Scaffold layd down his Neck to try how it would fit; after that he layd down his own Neck upon the Block, and rose up again, and caused the Block to be turned; and laying his Neck upon it again, he said, Do not strike yet: And when he rose up, he went about the Scaffold, and said, I desire your prayers, Pray for me; the Lord bless you all, the Lord bless this poor Nation. Then he gave his Handkerchiefs out of his two Pockets to his servants: Then he kneeled down, and prayed privately; and then layd down his Neck upon the Block, and said to the Executioner, When I lift up my hand, then give the Blow: And just when he gave the Sign, one of his servants said, Good my Lord, let me speak one word before: and looking up, he said, I have given you a sign, but you have ill miss'd it: And being upon his knees, he said, Honest Friends, I thank God I fear not death; I rejoyce to serve God, my King, and Country; I am sorry to leave some of my Christian Friends, but I hope the Lord will keep
them, and bless them: The Lord of Heaven bless my Wife and poor Children; the Lord bless his People, and my good King. And laying his Head upon the Block, he said, Blessed be Gods glorious Name for ever and ever, Amen: Let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory. And giving the last Sign, by holding up his hand, his Head was severed from his Body with one blow. FINIS.
