D138a e200_56 50874298 157590
A SPEECH Delivered to His MAIESTY, BY THE RECORDER OF LINCOLNE: At His Reception into the CJTY. Iuly 15. 1642. First Printed at Yorke, and now re-print∣ed at London for T. J. Agust 3. 1642. A SPEECH DELIVERED TO HIS MAIESTY BY THE RECORDER OF LJNCOLN, At His MAJESTJES Reception into the said CITTY, Iuly 15. 1642. Most gracious Soveraigne, WE your Maiesties most Dutifull and Obedient Subiects, before we were encouraged by the in∣fluence
of your Maiesties pre∣sence, knevw not what to do, being amazed with Feares and Iealousies rumoured and spred abroad, whereby diverse of your Maiesties good subiects vvere distracted: and the more, because we neither knew, nor could imagine any cause of fear or Iealousie. sir, I cannot more properly compare our Case, then to a man in perfect health yet do fancy himselfe sick of a consumption: whom if his for∣tune bee to light of a skilfull and honest physitian he is in
no danger? but if upon an Em∣prick, it is like his body shall be brought into that Condition, which before he did but fancy himselfe to be in. I am doubt∣full if those persons who have beene the cause of Raising and fomenting those feares and iea∣lousies, might chose their own physitian & apply their own medicine, it would hazard the ruine of the Common-wealth by abolishing the ancient and Fundamentall Lawes thereof. but the subiects of this Nation (God be thanked) are in a bet∣ter
case. It is not in the power of wicked men, either to make choise of a Physitian, or to ap∣plie the Medicine: Your sacred Majesty being our great phy∣sitian, and vvithout your Ma∣jesties consent and command, no medicine can be applyed. And to the unspeakable joy and comfort of all Your Ma∣jesties faithfull subjests, it is suf∣ficiently signified to the world by your Majesties most King∣ly Declarations, Expressing your Resolution to maintain and Governe by the known
Lavves of this Realme, to de∣fend the true Protestant religi∣gion established by lavv▪ by vvhich means your loyall sub∣iects shall be preserved & pro∣tected from Arbitrary govern∣ment let the most evill affected person then deny if he can but that we have from our King what is to be wished, & that without asking or petitioning for. There is only one question to be asked, & a short answer thereunto vvhat is now to be done to which every ingeni∣ous soule must acknowledg
the want is on our parts: we owe all we have to be disposed of by your Ma∣iesty, for the maintenance and preserva∣tion of Your Iust Rights and Preroga∣tives, which cannot be maintained but thereby, the Priviledges of Your Sub∣iects will be likwise defended (the same Law defending both) & under which Law the Prople of this Nation have beene most happily Governed, under Your Maiestie, and your most Noble Progenitors many hundred yeares. for the Continuation of which Govern∣ment for my own particular (prostra∣ting my selfe at Your Maiesties Feet.) I humbly offer and render unto your Maiesty my Selfe, Estate, and Fortune. And Sir, I have Warrant from the Mayor of this City, And the whole body of this Corporation to beseech your Maiesty to accept of the like offer
from them. So with this short Eiacu∣lation I shall conclude, beseeching GOD to Blesse and preserve Your Sacred Person, and this our most noble and hopefull Prince CHARLES, withall Your Royall Issue. And that this Nation and People, and all Your Dominions, may be Governed by Your Maiesty and Your Posteritie to the VVorlds end. FINIS.
