D15 e1010_16 99866956 119245
THE DECLARATION Of the Officers of the Army OPENED, Examined & Condemned, AND THE PARLIAMENT VINDICATED, AGAINST The scandalous Reproaches, Lies and Falshoods cast upon them in the said Declaration. Shewing, that it is High Treason (and hath been adjudged so by several Parliaments) for any to endeavour to make void an Act of Parlia∣ment, and they for Levying War against the Parliament are Traytors, and deserve Death, and their Estates to be sequestred, as well, if not better than Sir George Booth and his party. Also, that it is against the Fundamental Laws, Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, to have any mony raised on the People without their consent in PARLIAMENT. Together with the Legallity of this Parliament Asserted, and all Objections to the contrary Answered. By a Lover of his Countreys Freedom, E. D. London, Printed in the year, 1659.
themselves to that trouble, to declare and appeale to these Nations, to justifie themselves and their Actions, surely these Nations, nor any sort of people, in these Nations, besides themselves, do any wayes desire it of them, but rather that they would sit downe and be quiet, according to the good Councill of John the Baptist, Luke 3.14. to do violence to no man, neither to accuse any falsly, and be con∣tented with their wages, that so we may enjoy our Lives, Libertyes and Estates with Freedom, without being Imposed on, hindered or debarred of our Birth-rights, Libertyes and Freedoms, and made Slaves by some two or three mens Lusts, and Ambition that pretend themselves to be Officers of the Army; as to their Actions these Na∣tions, have often to their great sorrow, not only heard them, and read them in their Declarations and Appeales, but have felt them by the oppressions they have suffered, by reason of their falsificing and break∣ing all that ever yet they have promised or ingaged to the Parliament, & have not yet performed any one thing to them or the people, and therefore they may Declare and appeale now long enough, the good people of these Nations are now past the beleife of them. For the doing of themselves right, they say, they must necessarily insist upon the failings of others. We confess this is an old trick, and a shift, that somtimes those that are most guilty, do often pass for innocent men, by laying open, and crying out on the failings and miscarriages of others, like the thief that is persued, and cry is made after him, stop the Thief; he cryeth as loud, and as fast as any, stop Theif, stop Theif, and to by this slight get himself to escape, and passes for an honest man, so these Army Officers (those few that were the Contrivers of the late Rebellion, and Trea∣son against the Parliament and People of this Common-wealth, and framers of this Declaration) (not all the Officers) have learned this trick; to cry out of the Arbitrary power and Injustice of others, thinking and supposing no doubt, there will not any that will once Imagine or in the least think that they are any wayes guilty of any of those things, or of any Treason, Rebellion, Tyranny, or Oppression, when in all these things they are the only guilty persons as shall be made appeare anon, therefore this slight will not at this time of the day serve their turn; For as the Prophet saith, Isay, 28.20. this covering is to narrow.
They say, seeing it hath pleased God, by the hand of the wise and all disposing Providence to bring the affairs of this Commonwealth, into the state and condition wherein now they are. This is a great question amongst good men, whether this Action of these Officers of the Army in committing this horrible Treason in fo violently interrupting the Parliament, were pleasing to God, we are very apt to think and do affirm it was very unpleasing to him, as all evils are, Isay 13.11. for he will punish▪ the wicked for their ini∣quities, and so indeed we think, there was an all wise Providence of God in it, to bring things to that pass they are now at, that those men that have done these evils (which these few Officers have been the oc∣casion of) might be seen and be visibly known to the three Nations, that they may as one man, joyne and rise, to bring them to condigne punishment, that they may receive the reward of their unrighteous∣ness, 2 Pet. 2.12. What Obligation lyeth on them to give an account of their Acti∣ons by way of Declaration to the three Nations, we know not, but we could have wished they would not have given themselves that trouble, not us that sorrow which we are like to have, by the Miserys Oppressions and Slavery which will inevitably fall on us by these their late Rebellious and Traytorous Actions, if God do not through his great love Avert from us. They conceive it unnessessary to look back, or to reflect upon the secret designes which were continued in that Parliament that ended the 22 of April last, and broak forth in the late Insurrection in Cheshire. We do commend their Wisdome and care to ward this blow, and to handle this matter tenderly, because for fear of hurting themselves, and their neer Relations, as Richard, Falconbridge: Howard, and others that were well wishers to Sir George Booth, and fellow Traytors and Oppressors with them in the late Olivers dayes. A then too, was not that Assembly of their own making, and cre∣ating, and if there were any plot carried on by them, it was they that gave them the means and occasions, and were not they in the mean time good Stewards, to be on the watch Tower of these Nations, and to let so much villany be hatched, and not to give the people warn∣ing thereof, that had not God blessed the Parliament in their Coun∣cils
by a wise management thereof, it had been sad to these Nations, yea to all sorts of people, and to whatsoever as they say is valuable and deare to them. But was that so dangerous a Designe, as these men say in their De∣claration, then what may we think was these Officers designe, and of Lamberts labouring to beat and Conquer Sr. George Booth and his Army, was it that they might not force and impose upon the Parlia∣ment the Supreame Authority of these Nations, what Lawes they pleased, or elect forceably to interrupt them, but that Lambert and those few their Officers of the Army would reserve that for them∣selves to do, for which their very▪Children after them will curse the day that ever their Fathers had a hand in so vile and bloody an Act as this is likely to prove in the sequell & sad effects that do attend it. But it is well that the Black mouthes of Col. Packer, Lieut. Col. Dukenfield. Major Creed, Capt. Locker, Capt. Walley, Capt. Sorrell, and Capt. Brown, and the rest of the Officers, is now for ever stopt from charging our faithfull Parliament, as having a hand in that horrible Plot of Sir George Booth as they have done, not on∣ly in that Paper, secretly hinting it, but plainly in words to divers honest Congregationall men have affirmed it, as to Mr. VVilliam Rif∣fin, Mr. Robert Ostler, and to divers others of the Militia of Lon∣don, Southwark, and the Tower, and rendred that as the reason, why the Parliament were so slow in their proceedings against them, but they may see here that these their Officers, that are their guides to betray their Masters, do vindicate them from any such matter, and do not in the least cry out, or lay any blame on them for any such thing. They go on, and say, that before the recalling of the late Parlia∣ment they had divers consultations and thoughts of heart, in what way and manner they might most effectually provide for the peace, and good Government of this Common-wealth. We do not in the least quection, but that they had divers consultati∣ons, and great thoughts of heart before they did recall this Parliament (but they might better have said, readmitted them) for they wanted as little of their call, as they did of their first & now latter interruption. But were not their Consultations and great thoughts of heart never to recall them; (to speak in their own Language) but to have kept up
Richard still, and onely to have refined his Councill, and to have made them up of such men as they should have judged would have served Their Turnes, and in what did come to pass in the sitting of this Parliament, they were Acted one by others, beyond their consulta∣tions and great thoughts or heart, even by the honest inferiour Offi∣cers and Souldiers (who we doubt not will be a meanes to restore them againe to their Trust that they may settle these Nations in peace & freedom) together with divers Applications from the most well af∣fected to the good old Cause, in London, Southwark, VVestminster, and divers other places, for we know it did not please them, nor answer their Aimes, that ever they should be admitted to sit do stand clothed with by the Choyse of the People, and by the Authority of an Act of Parliament, made in the 17th year of the late King, which is in this treatise resited hereafter at large, no we say it was against their wills, and not in the least with their consents, and therefore their great thoughts of heart have rested in them ever since, to take on them the Supreame Authority and Power to break all our Lawes in pieces, as we do plainly see in their now pittifull Declaration, they indea∣vour to do. And we think, (that the very remembrance of the many great things) which they say (you might have said which God by them) had been effected for their good (yea and we say for the peace and good Government) of this Commonwealth, during the sitting of the said Parliament should have kept them in their awefull and dutiful obedi∣ence to them, and to their just Authority, that they might have com∣pleated, perfected, (or rather that God by them) might have finish∣ed and setled us under a good peaceable and durable just Government that we might according to the saying of the Prophet have sit eve∣ry one under his Vine and under his Figg-tree, and none have made us affraid, Mich. 4.4. but oh we see the contrary, an inundation of misery, like to befall us, if God in his Infinit Love and Wisdome do not prevent it, but the Lawes, Libertyes, Freedomes that we have purchased with so much Blood and Treasure, we hope the good people of these Nations will not let goe at so easy a rate as they think they will.
And now they come to tell us, as if there were some compact and agreement, between the Parliament and them, before their sitting, for they say, And being likewise fully perswaded, that the Govern∣ment of these Nations might be most happily placed, upon the founda∣tion of a Common-wealth, and that upon such principles as was then agreed upon by us, And also from some previous meetings with some worthy and leading Members of that house, who upon debate with us approved of the Principles aforesaid, and communicated them to divers of their fellow Members. First, The Members in their private capacitys could make no Par∣liamentary compact or agreement. What was approved of, or agreed to by any particular Members, though they were divers, in any pre∣vious meeting, as they call it, in order to their designs, that binds not the Parliament, or is any way obligatory to any other of the Mem∣bers; neither indeed to those Members themselves in their Parlia∣ments capacity, for such previous meetings and discourses, might be but their condescentions in that kind, but as those Officers pretend can no otherwise be urged, but as their personal failings and errours, pretending to that which could not be admitted in Parliament; for it is most certain, that no Parliamentary Compact or Approbation can be, but in a Parliament capacity, that is to say, at a Session in Parliament; therefore whatever was previous or might pass amongst some before their re-assembling is out of doors, and can no other∣wise be made use of, except it be to shew the ignorant simplicity, or rather private Anti-parliamentary designs of those Officers. But this Agreement that they would closely insinuate to be made, they do not speak it in plain words, at length, (but in figures, for they say, and that upon such principles as was agreed upon by us, which doth no way hold out any compact or agreement, between the Par∣liament and the Officers of the Army, or by any particular Members of Parliament and them, but that they the Officers of the Army, had agreed upon, the Bases, Foundations, and Principles, upon which the Common-wealth should be settled, and the Parliament should only have set with their eys shut, & right or wrong, by their Authori∣ty seetle the Common-wealth on the Foundation & Principles, which they the Officers of the Army, had agreed upon; and this seemeth to us to be clear, because their Proposals in their Petition and Ad∣dress to the Parliament, was not agreed on till the 12 of May, after
their sitting, and so could be no consent and agreement by any pre∣vious meeting, and therein they do propose a Parliament, and a Co∣ordinate Senate for Life (which is to say A house of Lords, to have a Negative on all the People of the three Nations) which would be worse then the Norman Yoarke, and also in their Petition and Propo∣salls from Darby, by the Northern Brigade they say, that a Co-ordi∣nate Senat for life is the only way, so that let the Parliament see it never so distructive to the three Nations, and all the good People thereof, yet they the Officers of the Army having agreed on it, the Parliament must establish it, but how this doth agree with the pro∣ceedings and freedome of Parliaments let all the world judge, a Par∣liament that hath but the hearts of Children, much less of free born Englishmen, would dye before they will so basely give away all the Liberties of England at one blow, as they must have done if they should have done such a thing. And from hence it is plaine, that except the Parliament would have setled the Government upon their own termes, let them have done never so good Actions, (as bad they did none) they would have interrupted them, if they had not done what they had divided, Therefore these are pittifull and poor shifts to plead, they do but more and more bewray their own weakness, and disco∣ver to all the World the pride, Vanity, and aspiringness of these Officers of the Army, to have the honour of setling these Nations on their Foundations and Principles, though the Parliament and all the good people in the three Nations should judge them to be to the ut∣ter overthrow and ruin of all our dearly bought Rights, Libertyes and Freedomes; They say that not only old displeasers would have been forgot∣ten. Who did remember old displeasures we do not know, but we are sure Lambert did not forget his since 1652, but hath had revenge in his heart ever since to this Parliament, for what cause no man know∣eth, for injury they never did him any, save that he then did miss of going, as Lord Deputy for Ireland, as he now did miss to be Major Generall of the Army of England and Scotland, which made him then to act their interruption, and this now which sheweth to all the good People of these three Nations, him to be of a Pittifull, Ambitious, Heart and Spirit. They further say. But that the single welfare & settled Govern∣ment of this Commonwealth would have been onely aimed at. Whether the single welfare and settled Government of this Com∣monwealth
was onely aimed at by the Parliament, and that to be set∣tled in two months as they say, as was exprest by one of the Cheefest amongst themselves, and then to go up with Moses to Mount Ne∣bo and die. Whether we say it was singlely aimed at, by all we cannot tell, but this we are sure it was aimed at by all, but those that have joyned with them in their Trayterous designe, as vaine Fleetwood, Salloway, Rich, Sidenham, Holland, VVhitlock, Strickland, with others, these we confess with sorrow of heart, did not singly aime at the wel∣fare and good settlement of this Commonwealth, upon the Foundation of durable peace and freedome by successive yearly Parliaments, but upon their Utopia of a Coordinate Sennate for Life, which is a House of Lords, and so bring us back, to slavery worse then the Norman Yoake. This indeed the men above specified did aime at, and by their te∣dious and long speeches, and their great tenderness of Conscience (expressed) therein towards the good people of the three Nations, did procrastinatant put things back very much, as it is well known they did about the Engagement that the Parliament was passing for al persons in publick trust to take, but this they seeing would tye them so fast, that if it were once passed into a law, they could not have played their game, and have acted their designe, so well as they think now they have, which to the grief of all wise, Godly sober men is looked on as very great evil. And for the setling of it in two months, is this a fault they did it not, nor yet in six moneths, and then with Moses to go up to Mount Nebo & die, whose fault was it, was it not these men the Officers of the Army, did not their Act of Indemnity & free Pardon which now they find fault with, take them up night six weeks, and then the, Militia Acts, Sr. George Booths Rebellion, and the Acts for Scotlands Union, and for Irelands well Government, and setling all the Souldiers, and Adventurers Lands, and we would not have them forget, that they trouble them with their impertenant Papers, for about three weeks, and yet cry out, that they did not intend or aime at the settlement of these Nations, when that two dayes invery week the Parliament sat in a grand Committee of the House about the Government, some four months, and about six weeks after that in a Committee in the Spea∣kers Chamber; And what progress was made, and how near finish∣ed, and what the reasons were it was not perfected, they the persons
above named know very well; and we are afraid, that all the Confusi∣sion, Blood, Rapine, and oppression that is like to follow, for want of such settlement, will fall on their heads, whoever they were that have been the obstructers and hinderers of it, and then instead of going up to Mount Nebo to dye, their place will be Tophet, Isay 30.33. except that they repent, that the Lord may be merciful unto them, which we pray they may. They say, It was the opinion of many Learned and able persons who understood affairs of that kind, that by their former interrup∣tion they wholly dissolved. This is a strange opinion to come from these men, when they acknow∣ledged them the Supream Authority in their Declaration of May 6th 1659. and in the 4th pag. of this Declaration, that they should return to the exercise and discharge of the trust formerly reposed in them, but if they were wholly dissolved by their former interruption, then they had no Trust upon them, & so none to exercise or discharge; but they do in this (as themselves say in this Declaration) like men that are drowning, who are ready to seiz on every twigg to save them, so here they would fain have them by last interuption, to be whol∣ly dissolved, but that twigg is not strange enough to save them, though they here are driven to catch at their first interruption, to say, they were dissolved. One specialty they alleage, and that is, because the people have since reseized that Trust which they had formerly given them, who upon Writs issued out to them, have elected other persons to sit in other Assemblies; These are the substance of rhe words. 2. This can be no ground at all, that they were wholly dissolved, ex∣cept the people by these their Trustees, had made void that Law, which they by them once did make, in the year 1641, in a full and free Parliament, the substance of the Act followeth, viz. ANd be it declared and enacted by the King our Soveraign Lord, with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Par∣liament now assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That this present Parliament now assembled, shall not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose, nor shall at any time or times during the continuance thereof, prorogued or adjour∣ned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise passed for that purpose; And that the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this present Parliament be adjourned, unless it be by them∣selves
or by their own Order: And in of Commons shall not at any time or times duting this present Par∣liament, be adjourned, unlesse it be by themselves, or by their own Order; and that all and every thing or things whatsoever done or to be done, for the adjournment, proroguing, or dissolving of this pre∣sent Parliament, contrary to this present Act, shall be utterly void & of none effect. Now if, the peoples Elections do repeale Acts of Parliament, then we have no Acts of any force▪ upon the Election of any new Parliament, till that Parliament revive them, and if that should be admitted, then the Parliament (in the Armies sence) that was in Sept. 1654, call'd by Oliver and sat 5 Moneths, and did nothing, whose Motto was, (Hoc Parliamentum sedit & surrexit ne infecta) which was chosen as this Declaration seteth forth, by the Election of the people, made void, all Lawes that were made before that choice, and must so continue till by a Parliament, they are new made, revived, and confirmed, and then indeed, what a con∣fusion will this bring on all the people of there three Nations, but this sure is no good Doctrine, and that these Officers themselves will not plead, or offer to breath any such thing in any other case for a world, because, the Title of all their great Estates of Kings Lands, they have bought, are null and void. 3. And it is clear and undeniable, that if they by their Election make void this Law, that they mae in as full and free a Parliament as ever sat in England, then it follows, they may, and do by their Ele∣ctions make void all other Lawes, or else not this. 4. But then consider, had not Oliver that Usurper, forcibly intru∣ded on the Peoples Freedom, and debarr'd them of them, and for to carry on his own ends Amuses them with another Parliament, in such way and manner as he is pleased to let them; and because the people would willingly use any means to, Obtain their Libertie again, do now chuse: therefore they make void this Act of Parliament, and so dis∣solve the Parliament; but we are not of that opinion, that they are (or can be) dissolved, but by an Act to be passed for that purpose, as is plane by the very words of the Act. 5. It is true, if this Parliament stood cloathed onely by the choice upon the Kings Writ, then they had been dissolved by the Kings death; but they stand not now simply by the choice upon the Writ, but on and by a Law, and Act of Parliament, and had it not been thus, the Kings mock Parliament at Oxford, yea Olivers and Rich∣ards mock-Parliaments had been Good and lawful, and this none; but
we see no man will plead for the King mock Parliament at Oxford for to be a Lawfull Parliament, for he himself calleth it but a Mon∣grell one, and so indeed were Olivers and Richards Parliaments Mon∣grell and meer mock Parliaments, as the Officers in this Declaration confess, for they say this Parliament had some shew of Authority, then the other had none. But now they tell us of An expression of an eminent Person, who sat in both the late Parliaments as a Member, and was deeply concerned in these late Actings; and the words are, viz: That the people by their Electing Members, to represent them in Parliament, had cut that knot with their own Sword, which by no other wayes Was capable to be dissolved or broken. 6. What and who this Member is we know not, but however his saying is not Law, nor doth it carry with it the Power and Authority of Parliament to make voyd an Act of Parliament, much less wholly to dissolve a Parliament, it is but that eminent Gentlemans saying, and so we leave it; only we see they are driven to great streights that have no better Arguments then the single saying of an Eminent Per∣son. But we further argue that the People distributively could never make a Law or Act of Parliament, and therefore cannot make one voyd, for no Law can be made in this Nation, according to the anci∣ent Fundamentall Lawes of England, but by the people Assembled in Parliament: see Magna Charta, Sr. Edw. Cooks second part Insti∣tures, cap. 29. 8. Againe as to their reseizing their Trust they had formerlie given them by their new Elections. This would have held, if the people had not given away this Po∣wer out of themselves, and so have tied up their own hands, by this aw that they the people by their own consents in, these their Trus∣tes did make and is binding to them, till by the same consent a Law be passed tor that purpose, as the Act doth Expresly say. But all do acknowledg them to be a Lawfull Legall Parliament in the year 1640. 1641. till about Decemb. 1648. And then they say they were forced, and the King put to death, & so by both these was not a Parliament. To his we answer, That force upon a Parliament doth not make voyd a Parliament, it doth indeed break their Priviledges, and taketh away thir Freedoms as is evident, See Remonstrance of the House
of Commons, in the seaventh year of K. James, An. 1610. where the King Commanded a restraint, to debate his Majesties Right of imposing upon the People, they say in their answer. We hold it an ancient Generall and undoubted Right of Parlia∣ment, freely to debate all matters that do concern the people, Which freedom of debate being once foreclosed, the Essence of the liberty of Parliament is with all dissolved, they do not say the Parliament by this force is dissolved, but the Essence of the Freedome of it, See the Lords and Commons Petition of the 14 Jan. 1641. About the breach of Priviledge, and their Declarations and Remonstrances about the Kings comming with force to take away the five Members: Book of Declaration, pag. 36. Declaration of June 5th, 1642. We say the severall forces op the Parliaments of England, and the severall forces that have been on this Parliament, did not Make them voyd, or dissolve them, nor all the forces Garblings and purgings of this Parliament, do not dissolve them, but so long as 40 with their Speaker remaine, they are the Legall Parliament of England according to the Legall fundamentall constitutions & Lawes of this Nation. As to the Kings death that then they were dissolved we have said somwhat to that afore. And we do further say, That it was in the year 1642. declared by the Parliament of England, that in the Lawes sence he was then dead; That the King by his actuall Warr against the Parlia∣ment did their upon forfeit his Kingship and Crowne, and became a private person and an Enemy. And this appeares by the Votes of Parliament 20 May, 1642. Resolved, That whensoever the King maketh Warr upon the Par∣liament, it is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his people, contrary to his Oath, and tending to the dissolution of this Go∣vernment, So that in the judgment of Parliament, in full Parli∣ment, that when the King did make a Warr, he then in the fence of the Law died, and did cease to be King, and that Government, was dissolved, and so by consequence the Parliathent did cease and was dissolved. But we see this was not so, and that Mr. Prinn, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Need∣ham, yea the King and all his party never did say so a that time and do not we all see the Parliament then took the Government on them, and have so continued it, till by the Armies interruptions they have been hindered.
But they say, The Lords house is part of this Parliament, and they are hindred and do not sit, and therefore this Parliament is dissolved. To this we answer, That if it were lawful for Henry the 8th. and the Parliament then, to dissolve the Abbots and Priors, and King Charls the Lords and Commons to dissolve the Bishops by Act of Parliament upon breach of Trust, which they did, See the Act for abolishing Bi∣shops. Then it is lawful for the Commons alone, upon Breach of Trust to dissolve the King and Lords; But the King did forfeit his Trust by his making war on the Parliament and people, as by the Votes aforesaid, and the Lords did fofeit their Trust, by sideing with the King, and refusing to joyn with the Commons in Parliament to proclaim Duke Hambleton, and the Army of Scots under his com∣mand in the year 1648 when they invaded this Nation, to be Rebels, and also, for refusing to joyn with the Commons in putting the King to death for his, Treasons, Blood and Murthers commit∣ed on the people, they forfeited their Trust, it was lawful then for the Commons to dissolve them, and to take the Government on them; whatever may be said to the contrary, it is clear, as in the book of De∣clarations, pag. 150 a question answered, how Lawes are to be under∣stood, vid. the question it self. But to put it out of question, That this Parliament is a Legal Par∣liament still, notwithstanding all that can be said, The Lords and Commons do deside it. See Book of Declaation and Collections of publick Orders, Ordinances and Declarations, 451, 452, 457, 458, in a Letter of both Houses of Parliament, 29th March 1643, in an∣swer to the King of the 23d of March 1643. We the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of En∣gland, &c. have resolved, by the concurrent advice and consent of the Commissioners of Scotland, to represent to your Majesty in all humility, as followeth; That this present Parliament convened, according to the known and Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (the continuance thereof is established by a Law, and consented to by your Majesty) (which it seemeth by the Kings Letter of the, 3d of March 1643, was de∣nyed to be a Parliament) as these men do now. Therefore the Lords and Commons say, We think our selves bound to let your Majesty know, that sithence the continuance of this Parliament is settled by a Law, (which as all other Laws your
Majestie is sworn to maintaine) we must in duty, and accordingly are resolved with our lives and fortunes to defend and preserve the just Rights, & full power of this Parliament. To this agreeth the Earle of Essex, his Letter to the Earle of Forth, Jan. 30. 1643. My Lord the maintenance of the parliament of England, and the Privi∣ledges thereof, is that we are resolved to spend our blood, as being the Foundation whereon all our Lawes and Libertyes are built. This and the other above-said, the Lords and Commons in their Declaration of 23 of March. 1643 they second and averr The Parlia∣ment of England (that is this present Parliament) is the only Basit, the cheif support and Pillar of our Lawes and Liberties, so that we do not know what can be said more & fuller, if men be not stark mad & blind, to cleare this Parliament to be a Legall and just Authority if this do not. And we further say, There cannot be any other Legall, and just Au∣thority in the Nation, nor any other just Legal Parliament, but what must take their rise being and beginning from them. In the next place they tell us, That they like drowning men were desirous to lay hold ow any thing that had the least appeimatice of Civil Authority, thereby hoping not only to keep these Nations from sinking into confusion, but to see it happily settled upon the Bases aforementioned. They would by these words make us beleive they were very carefull men, for to save these Nations from sinking into Confusion, just like a wicked Pilot of a Ship, that hath run it on a Rock, that so she is like to be lost, and he himself as well as the restin the ship, is like to sink and be destroyed, therefore he runneth about, and laboureth to save the ship what he can, so do these men when they have brought and run the Ship of the Commonwealth by their rash and inconsidered and wick∣ed actions on the Rocks of danger, and Sands of sinking Confusion, they would now pretend to us their great care to save us, and therefore lay their hands on any thing that had but the least appearance of Civil Authority, then we see by these Officers on Confession, that the in∣strument of Government made by Lambert and some others, by which Oliver was made Protector by the Army, and the Petition and Ad∣vice that was made by his mock Parliament, that made he and his Son Richard Protector, had no the least shew or appearance of Civil Au∣thority and so indeed they had not, but all they did, was force and vio∣lence on the people.
But it seemes this Long Parliament had some little appearance of Civil Authority; by these Officers own confession, then do not they now Rebell against the civil Authority, but it had and still hath, not only a little appearance of Civil Authority, but is the just and only Legall Authority, yea the supreame Authority of these Nations as they themselves do sill acknowledg in these Nations, and would have settled these Nations under such a just and good Government as should have been upon the Foundation and Basses of a free Common∣wealth, but that was never these Officers intent the Parliament should do, but the Parliament must settle it on their Basses and Foun∣dations they had agreed on, as is before mentioned, or else they must by them be interrupted, and we do Appeale whether this be not to inslave us, and to take away at once all our Freedoms and Libertyes for a Parliament to be imposed on, and not set free, and to have a free Debate and Exercise of their reason to Assent or Dissent is the insla∣ving of every man in the three Nations, but such is the practise of these Officers of the Army, for they say, on this ground they did by their Declaration of the sixt of May, 1659. Invite the Long Parli∣ament to sit to the Exercise of their Trust. This is not so, neither is their any such ground in their Declaration, nor any such expression, this is their false Addition, their Declaration followeth, viz. THE Publique concernments of this Commonwealth being through a Vicissitude of dangers, deliverances and back-slidings of many, brought into that state and postute wherein they now stand, and our selves also contributing thereunto, by wandring divers ways, from righteous and equal paths; and although there hath been many essaies to obviate the dangers, and to settle there Nations in Peace and Prosperity, yet all have proved ineffectual, the only wise God in the course of his providence disappointing all endeavours therein. And also observing to our great grief, that the good Spirit which forme ly appeared amongst us, in the carrying, on of this great work, did daily decline, so as the Good old Cause it self became a reproach, We have been led to look back, and examine the cause of the Lords withdrawing his wonted presence from us, and where we turned out of the way, that through mercy we might return and give him the glory. And amongst other things, calling to minde, that the long Parlia∣ment consisting Of the members which continued there sitting untill the 20th of April, 1653 were eminent Assertors of that Cause, and
had a special presence of God with them, and were signally blessed in that work (the desires of many good people concurring with ours, therein) we Judge it our duty to invite the aforesaid Members to re∣turn to the exercise and discharge of their trust, as before the said 20 of April, 1653. And therefore we do hereby most earnestly desire the Parliament, consisting of those members who continued to sir since the year 1648, until the 20th of April 1653, to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust, and we shall be ready in our places, to yield them, as becomes us, our utmost assistance to sit in safetie; for the improving the present opportunity for setling & securing the Peace and Freedom of this Common-wealth: praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their endeavours. Signed by direction of the Lord Fleetwood, and the Council of Officers of the Army, Tho. Samford Secret. 6 May 1659. But we seeing their cunning, that they would hide from the world their then Engagement to the Parliament, that is, to sit in safety, these words they are ashamed to republish, (therefore have we re∣printed their Declarations as above) for they never intend any such thing, except they would pass all their Proposals, though they should judg them in their Consciences to be against reason, & that they ten∣ded not only to the impoverishing the people of these 3 Nations, but to their utter ruine and slavery, except they would do that, they must not sit in safety was these Officers resolve? And do we nor know how in those Proposals they cry up the honour of the late usurper Oliver in these words, their ever honoured General, and therefore his Son Richard must have 10000 li, per annum setled on him, and his mother 8000 li. per annum for her life, and all their debts to b paid, which came to 30000 li. and the Parliament, did know very well that this Nation was not able to bear this; and to do it would be an hor∣rible, oppression and breach of Trust, they the Officers of the Army by setting up Oliver and his Son, and keeping their Courts hath run the Common-wealth in debt 30 hundred thousond pounds; hut this these men will have of the Parliament, or else they must not sir in safety without interruption. They sind fault with the Act of Oblivion, and say, It is imperfect and in effectual, but they do not shew wherein, nor in any one
branch; and in their Proposals from Darby and their late Repre∣sentation of the 5 of Octob. 1659, they do not find fault with the Act of Indempnity and Free pardon; It is strange they should not see it, and find it before, if there were any fault in it, that they might have had it remedied by the Parliament; but as the old saying is, If men have a mind to beat a Dog they may quickly find a stick: and so now head up any thing to make the Parliament odious & unsaith∣ful. And besides, did not 12 Fleetwood, Vain, Sidenham, Salloway and others know of it before if there were any imperfections in the Act? if so, then why did not they inform the House to have had it remedi∣ed? or, did they only keep it for their time, when they should have brought their work to the pass it is now at, that they might lay it as an Odium on the Parliament? Truly, such practises do not become ci∣vil men, especially such as pretend to things of a higher concernment, as righteousness and holiness; but besides this was breach of trust and unfaithfulness in them, and great uncharitableness to the Parliament and this Common-wealth. The fears they express are all generals, not one particular fastened on, only our-selves and divers others, were left liable to ruine at their pleasures; that is, at the Parliaments pleasures; We do won∣der at this expression, when did the Parliament give that cause by any action of theirs, to any sort of people, the worst enemies they ever had, so to think of them, much less to speak, and Print it of them in a Declaration by way of charge, as these Army Officers do. We confess, there is some kind of Jealousie for them to so think and speak, if they measure the Parliament by their late actions about the Parliaments first Act of Oblivion, if they call to mind their de∣cimating of the Cavaliers, which all these Officers of the Army had a hand in, and will remain a blot in their Scuchion, as a brand of in∣famous horrible unfaithfulness for ever, and breech of Covenant that ever was, and we do think God will not forget, but remember to punish them for it; we would desire them for this, seriously to con∣sider the Lords dealing with Saul for his breach of Covenant with the Gbeonites, 2 Sam. 21.1, to the 10th verse. The next thing we hear of is, their 12th Proposal, for the union of the forces of this Common-wealth, and there they tell us, they did una∣nimously own the Lord Fleetwood to be Commander in Chief of the Land Forces.
All this still doth but discover what was in their hearts, which now they have brought to pass, to force, compel, and impose upon the Parliament their Proposals as so many Laws, whether the Parliament should judge them for the good of these Nations, yea, or no; or else they were resolved they should not sit in safety, but be inter∣rupted. What if the Parliament, upon debate, had Reasons to per∣swade and prevail with them, (from former practises of other Gene∣rals, as they had in the late Usu per Oliver Cromwel it was) nor be∣coming their trust to the People, to grant their Proposals though una∣nimous in it; must they therefore interrupt the Parliament? We are sure this is so far from Liberty of Conscience, as it is against Reason and Conscience. They say, They were deceived in their expectations, and say, They were promised othe waies, it should be done in Parliament as they desi∣red it. That is that Fleetwood should be Generalissimo of all For∣ces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and to grant Commissions, for this we shall find is their grief. But we appeal to all rational men, Did ever any Prince in the world give such a Commission to any one man, to Command all his Forces in all his Dominions, except he meant to disthrone himself, no we are sure it cannot be presidented, and then much-lesse in a Common-wealth. It is true, this Parliament did give to the late Oliver Cromwell a vast Power, for which they have seen their folly, and by the great∣ness of his Power, we see what he did, and blame not the Parliament if they were cautious in giving unlimited and vast Commands unto one man, how godly soever he may pretend, for the former did pre∣tend to as much-of that, as this or any other man can. Then they tell us wherein there expectations were deceived, and that is, His Commission being restrained to the Forces in England and Scotland, (and not to Ireland) and limited to the 6th of May next, or be revoked at pleasure. Was not that Power enough for any one man, to have committed to him the Command of all the Forces of two great Nations, look all the world over, you shall not find the like, and we are sure that ere long the Officers of the Army will be of another mind. As for the limitation of his Commission, what reason can any man give why any General should have his Commission unlimited? What if before the 6th of May next, this Common-wealth should have him
setled, & that there would have been no need of an Army, then no need of a Generall, but they would it seemeth provide for that, by having the Generalls Commission unlimitted, whether the Common-wealth had need or no of an Army, they would keep up a Generall and so an Army. For the revoaking at pleasure, surely we cannot think that this was put in as a complaint in sober blood against the Parliament, because it is so unreasonable a thing to deny the supream Authority, which they did & do so now own in this their declaration that they should not have Power to revoak their General Commission at Pleasure, put the Case that their General should be plotting against them, and carrying on in the Army a designe to bring in Charls Stewart, or to make himself King (as we fear their is one or both in this designe that hath thus been mannaged) and they have not only rumers and Circumstances, but some proofe of it, shall not the Supreame Authority now at their will and pleasure have power to take away and make voyd his Commission, yea & clap him by the heels too: or will you think it is reasonable for them to let him alone to go on & act his design, & they stand still and look on with their hands in their Pockets; did you, or can any men that are in their witts, judge this becomming a Supreame Authority, and the trust that is in them. They say, That the Army might be wholly subservient to their wills, they resolved that all Commissions should be given out by the Speaker. We are sorry, and we are glad, sorry we are that their should be such a proud and haughty spirit in the Officers of the Army, to Scorn to be subject and subservient to the wills and commands of the su∣preame Authority, we are sure they ought so to be; We are glad that they now deal plainly with us, that all the good people may see they do not intend to be under Subjection to any Authority but themselves, and how this agreeth with Godly and Religious Offi∣cers we are to Learne. As to the Resolve of Parliament, that all Commissions should be given out by the Speaker; There was a great deal of reason for it, for if the Parliament did reserve in them, the chief Command as Generall, and the Lord Fleetwood was but under them their Lieut. Generall, then there was a great deal of Reason, that all Commissio∣ners should be given out by and from them, and that under the hand of their Speaker, and is it not so in all Commonwealths, look into
the Neitherlands and Switzerlands, do you think that they are, or ever were so unwise as to give the Supreame Power of Command of Armies out of the Supreame Authority, no, if they had, they had long agoe been swallowed up in Monarchy. But this they tell us, was for peace sake, submitted unto by the Army. We could have wished they would have gone on, and for peace sake to have submitted to the Parliament still, that we might have had a Government setled, that peace might have been in all our Ha∣bitations, but now we fear abundance of Trouble, Ruen, yea Blood and Confusion is like to insue if God do not prevent it. And now they say, From hence grew up in the Army factions, what new Moulding, Changeing and Transforming thereof (to the discompossure of the whole) how parties were made, headed, and encouraged by divers Members sitting in Parliament, & strengthen∣ing not only by bringing in divers persons into Command of pre∣judiced minds, but by removing faithfull Officers into remote parts of this Commonwealth, without any cause shewn, or any Consultation had with the Commander in chief thereupon, was not only notoriously known by those, who are concerned in Milli∣tarie offaires, but obvious to common Observations. We are struk with great Amzement, and wonder at this strange say∣ing of these Officers of the Army, that they should lay this to the charge of the Parliament, we wonder all the Officers that were tur∣ned out by Oliver Cromwell for their honesty, did not give the lye to this horrible slander, for it is very well known that had it not been for the Parliament, they had never got into the Army, and at the first sitting down of this Parliament, Consultation being had, what course should be taken to settle the Army, they know it was agreed unto, that there should be a Committee of Seaven; that should be the Nominators and the Approvers of all Officers that should be Commissionated in England, Ireland, and Scotland, yea and of Dunkirk also; and the names of these Commissioners that by order of the Parliament were Established, for this business were as follow∣eth, viz. Sr. Arther Haslerig Knight and Barronet, Sr. Henry Vaine, Knight, Lieut. Generall Fleetwood, Lieut. General Ludlow, Major Gen. Lambert, Colonel Desbrow, Colonel Berry, these are tht seaven, and they were the Judges of all persons fitness, or unfit∣ness to be put into the Army; and we do say and publish it to all the
world, because some of us do know it, that the whole modellizing of the Army now, was by Fleetwood, Lambert, Desbrow and Berry, and the reason they gave to the rest of the Number, viz: Sir Arther Haslerig, Sr. Henry Vaine, Lieut. Generall Ludlow was because the whole Army they were Strangers too, and did not know them, but they Fleetwood, Lambert, Desbrow and Berry did, and on this Ground what Officers soever that Fleetwood, Lambert, Desbrow and Berry did obect against, was laid aside, and what Officers they would have put into the Army, was so, except some few, as Col. whaly and Major Gen. Boteller that prime Blade, that did that which no man ever did against the Law of the Land, and Liberties of the people, as Northamptonshire can witness, and yet this man was Nominated to be Quartermaste-Generall of the Army; But the Parliament did not think him worthy, and therefore laid him aside; yet after this, this Committee did againe Nominate him to Command one of the Troops for the Militia of Northamptonshire, though they knew the Parliament had rejected him once before, was not this pla n force on the Parliament, complaint was made to this Committee, that he be∣ing at Northampton with the Militia Troop, the Militia then sitting, and the Parliaments Proclamation aganst Sr. George Booth, being by the Committee sent to him to Proclaime the Mayor of Northamp∣ton and Sheriff of the Countie having both refused it, yet he wuld not did not Proclaime it, which said Committee abovesaid knew of all this, and yet as we may say via et Armies continued him upon the List, may we not now easily Judge who bred Factions in the Army, and new Molded by Choping, Changing, & Transforming it, was it not Lieut. General Fleetwood, Lambert, Desbrow and Berry? for none now came into the Army, nor was left out of their Army, but they were the Causers of it, & the Parliament did not refuse any that they under any five of their hands did present to them, except Col. VVhaly, and Boteller, and one Cap. Goff of Col. Allureds Regiment, against whom there were Articles, & for whosoever were turned out, or left out of the Army, we must acquit the Parliament of that clear∣ly, there being no collour to fasten that on them, for how should they do that when they never came to their Cognizance; we can tell who put Col. Daniel out of the Army to make Pearson his Lieut. Col. to be Colonel; Also we can tell there was in the Parliament Arti∣cles of a high Nature against Col. Kelsey, Col. Gibbons, and Major Daborn, and also before this Committe of Nominators, and yet
such was the prevalencie of Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborow, and Ber∣ry, that they passed the House notwithstanding. We can tell why Capt, Evans, and divers other Officers were left out in Col. Okeys Regiment, and out of Col. Riches Regiment and in divers other Regiments, was it not to bring in their one Prote∣ctorian Creatures, that were of a single person Interest for King Keasser, or any thing but a Common-wealth. We can tell the reason why there could be a Regiment found out for Col. VVhaly whom they the Officers of the Army had turned out, & their could not be a Regiment found for Col. Allured whom Oliver turned out, and also how long was it till a Regiment could be found for Major General Overton, but for all the Protectorian Kinglings there could be found Commands presently, so that by all this it is easily to be discerned, who they were that did make Factions and did breed Distractions in the Army, not the Parliament, but these men, the Officers of the Army, that were of the Committee of No∣mination who were able, alwaies to overvote the other three, Haslerig Vain, and Ludlow. For the removing of the faithful Officers they speak of, to re∣mote places of this Common-wealth, without consultation had with the Commander in Chief, which was so notoriously known. We say, these men are driven very hard to it, to find matter of complaint; and therefore they pick up any thing they can lay hold on that cometh next to hand, that they may be doing, and keep their hands in ure; and truly as they say in this their Declaration, That when they called this Parliament they were like drowning men, and so catch'd hold on any twigg to save themselves, and do they not now discover themselves to be quite drowned in their senses and rea∣sons, when they lay hold of such arguments to save their now loft cre∣dit, when they passed this their silly Declaration, stuft with so much weakness and falshood. Faithful Officers were removed by the Parliament into remote parts of this Common-wealth, without consulting with Fleetwood, therefore the Parliament must be interrupted. Is not this a weighty reason? and we pray, what were these faithful worthy Officers, Col. Fitch that is now Lieutenant of the Tower will tell them they were 4 pittiful Captains of Col. Barksteads Regiment, (his Predecessor,) that after Col. Fitch come to the Tower and had ben there some
good space, yet these four Falthfull Officers never would own him, or once come to him, which did breed some kind of fear in him, that he could not put trust in them, and so desired that he might exchange them for 4 of his formerly own Regiment which was in Scotland, which was accordingly done, but Colonel Fitch must give a charge & say it is false, for he did Testifie that Fleetwood was spoken too abont it, and this let him call to mind & he will remember it was spoken by him in Sr. Arther Haslerigs Chamber in VVhitehall, when this was alleaged to him; and can any men in their right sences, judge these four faith∣full Officers removall from the Tower to Innerness in Scotland, a sufficient argument to violate and interrupt a Parliament, and there∣by ruin this Commonwealth, we think not. But we have it said by this meanes the aforementioned designe and generall Insurrection (that was hatcht by these Officers of the Army, for ought we know in Richards Parliament, as they say themselves in their own Declarations) took further incouragement, spreading it self into every part of this Nation, we confess this is to be taken notice of, for surely these four faithfull Officers do not only deserve to be sent out of the Tower to Innerness in Scotland, but into the Land of Uto∣pia, under the Government that Lambert hath carried towards Scot∣land in his Pocket, for they are men of a very infectious nature, and for ought we know they may cause it to spread (as they have now into Scotland, where they have taught some of them to rise against the Par∣liament,) so into Ireland, and may also do the like all the world over. But we can say this charge came from him that is the father of lyes, and it will prosper, and they that are the Authors of it like him, for this is so cleare the contrary as can be, for these Officers were remo∣ved after Lambert returned back from Chester, and they took their Commissions about the 23 or 24 of Sept. which was after that the Parliament had voted Sept. 22. 1659. "To make any more Generall Officers of the Army then they had already made was needless, dange∣rous and Burthensome, and so could not be any occasion of the spread∣ing of that Insurrection in every part of this Nation, for there was no such thing in being till after. Then they tell us where this Insurrection brook forth, namely at Chester, and how it was alayed, (by the blessing of God) and Lam∣bert, and his Brigades chearfull indeavours. We will say little to this because they have so often, talked of this matter, of their great exployts and indevours, that it is now quite worne threed-bare, but
may we With safety say it was a Blessing of God, yea or no, we are sure little of it is yet seen what we may, we do not know, but it looketh like a Judgment, we pray it may not so prove to the Nations. And by and by they tell us the full sence of this mercy, put it into the hearts and minds of some Officers of that part of the Army to meet and consider how the same might be improved to the Glo∣ry of God, and good of this Commonwealth, and thereupon resol∣ved upon a paper. What fulness of sence these Officers had we cannot tell, nor what kind of sence to make of it, except the sence that is in Bedlam that should put them on to resolve upon that Paper (that was signed at Darby by these Officers of the Northern Brigade, under the com∣mand of the Lord Lambert) which together with a letter was sent to the Lord Fleetwood, desiring if he saw it fit to Communicate it to the Generall Councill of Officers for their Approbation, as the thing that must be done to improve this great mercy to the glory of God, and good of this Commonwealth, let but their proposalls be but viewed and there will be found in them not one thing tending to it, either for the glory of God, or good of the Commonwealth, but to Gods dishonor and the Commonwealths loss and dammage, for they desire that Fleetwood may be Generall, and Lambert Major Gen. Desbrow Lieut. Generall of the Horse, Generall Monk, Major Generall of the Foot, and a Co-ordinate Senate for life, (which is to say a House of Lords, which they the Officers of the Army intended to be of) and that the Army might not depend on the civil Authori∣ty, but be above and not under, they desire that no Officer may be put into the Army but by themselves, nor put out of the Army but by themselves likewise, and can we think this is for the glory of God, or good of the Commonwealth, is their any thing that can be squeez'd out of their Proposals, that can be separated from self greatness grander oppression Pride and Predominacie, and we will grant it is for the glory of God, and good of the Commonwealth, but there is not any thing; and whether Pride, Ambition, Oppression be a way to advance or improve a mercy for Gods glory and the peoples good, we are to seek both in Law and Gospel. And do we not see that they have improved this mercie they talk of according to their Paper, (that out of their fullness of sence they resolved on) to purpose, have they not now a Generall and all other Generall Officers which they themselves have made, since they forced
the Parliament, and do what they list, put in and put out whom they please at their own wills, rule and raigne like so many petty Princes, having all at their Commands, our Lives, Libertyes and Estate with∣out controle, for no Law will debarr them, they can declare them Null and Voyde, no Parliament or Supreame Authority can bound them, they pluck them up by the roots, but we think they have mis∣improved this mercy very much, even to the ruin, not only of them∣selves, but of the three Nations and our posterityes after us, to Gods greatest honour and shame of Religion, and therefore if these be the waies to improve mercies to Gods glory, and the Commonwealths good that these Officers take, God bless us and all Gods people from it, for this is a sad way of improving mercies. They would make us beleive they were very dutifull and cautious they send it to the Lord Fleetwood, and then with a great kind of sub∣mission, if he saw it fit, to communicate it to the Generall Councill of Officers, but was he consulted with all before it was sent from Darby, to Scotland and Ireland, and before it was red in Lamberts lodgings in VVhitehall; But if these Officers could but have actually obeyed the Parliament, and had done their duties in the discharge of their severall commands as they can dissemblingly now speak of it, it had been well for themselves and this Commonwealth. That the Lord Fleetwood msght shew his tenderness as not to offend the Parliament, he consults with Sr. Arther Haslerig there∣upon; and in order to further Councill, Sir Aenry Vaine, and Major Salway is also to meet, but Sir Arther Haslerigg did not meet, though they had so agreed, but the next day he informeth the Parliament, and therefore he is disingenious. These are their Langua∣ges, they can collour over their black designe, and paint them with Vermillion, and make them seem very pleasant at the first view, but they are easily deserned, for this plot was laid long before and design∣ed, witness Major Harlow his information which was about August, and that it was so to us appeares, because this was notwithstanding the great tenderness under pretence held out here, that for fear of offen∣ding the Parliament, they would consult with Sir Arther Haslerig, for before that it was communicated in Lamberts Lodgings to a many Officer, and they agreed generally to meet on the morrow by Nine in the morning, and therefore this was but one of their Juggles. But now their expectations are frustrated, and Sir. Arthus is not Ingenious.
We cannot say any thing to either of them, but this we can say, he was faithfull to the Parliament, and the Commonwealth, to informe them of the paper, because he had some discoveries of the designe by some others, and it may be from some that were to be the Consul∣ters, and then hearing that it was red in Lamberts Lodgings, knew all that had been said to him by Fleewood and Lambert, were but delusi∣ons, and therefore we do conceive he did like a brave and good Eng∣ishman, not only to informe the House of the Paper but of the de∣signe in the Paper also, which designe saith he was against the Par∣liament to bring in a new Government, by setting up a Single Person, did that Noble Patriot of his Countries freedome say any thing that was not true, have not these Officers now made it good to a tittle, and are they not introducing a new Government which Lambert the Go∣vernment maker hath in his pocket, which only must walk a while to take the Scotch Aire, and then to be produced, therefore we do think Sir Arthur Haslerig was faithfull and very ingenious, though they say "there was nothing in the Paper but what was manifested to the contrary, where their Ingenuitie is we are to seek, for do they not say in their Paper that a Co-ordinate Senate for life is the only way, and is not this to that end and purpose , is not this a new Govern∣ment, do any of our Fundamentall Birthrights know a Co-ordinate Senate, no no and therefore whether Sir Arthur Haslerig were dis∣ingenious let the world judge, but they are not in the least ingenious that will dare to bolster up themselves in their evils they have com∣mitted, tell lyes, and forge falshoods as these Officers have done in many places of this Declaration. Then they tell us that the house was possest with prejudice and misinformation, and in their debates exprest great anger against Lambert and the rest of the faithfull Officers, for Lambert and the other Officers were against it, and laboured to suppress it both at Darby and London, and we cannot tell what. We have read, nay some of them can remember when such expres∣sions to a Parliament was worthy of no better answer then the To∣wer, and one of the greatest breachs of their priviledges that can be, and indeed a breach of all our Liberties, look but back to presidents For the late King in his speech to the Parliament took but notice of some debate in the Parliament, of but one man that began it, and the whole Parliament judge and declare this a great breach of priviledge
of Parliament, Declara. 14. Decemb. 1641. as we shall set it at large anon; and you will find that many have been sent to the Tower for lesser Crimes then to say so to a Parliament, but these men may say and do any thing. For their Faithfullness we can say little of, but unfaith∣fullness very much: except to break covenant with God An∣gels and men be faithfullness, that he was against it we do not be∣leive, because we find by wofull experience he loveth it so well, that he purposes to lay down his life for it, which is a signe that he nei∣ther at Derby nor London was against it: forall the Lord Fleetwoods information to the contrary. But they go on and say the Paper it self nor the matter of that was before them, nor the persons admitted to speak for themselves. Surely these Officers of the Army we conceive, were not well in their wits when they passed this Declaration, else they would never have declared and discovered so much weakness as they do, are not informations in the House, let them be of what nature they will, first to be debated before the party be heard, that they may conclude in what way or method to proceed in. The Paper as much as concerned the debate was before them that is the information of it, and therefore we find what they order on the debate. Thursday 22 of Sept. Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood having acquainted the Parliament with the effect of an Address intended to be made to them by some of the Army: They ordered that Col. Ashfield, Col. Cobbet, and Lieut. Col. Duckenfield be, and we hereby required forth∣with this afternoon to bring to the Parliament the Originall Paper or address in their or one of their hands, intended by some of the Ar∣my to be presented to the Parliament, and that the Coppy thereof in the hands of the Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood be also brought to the House this afternoon; And thereupon Ordered that Lieut. Gen. Fleetwood do give the said Col. Ashfield, Col. Cobbet, and Lieut. Col. Ducken∣field notice of the said Order. And doth it not appeare that before they came to any resolve a∣bout what was in the Paper, both the people and matter of fact was before them, and surelie if they had at that time desired to proceed against the persons they should have been brought before them too: but who shall we beleive the Jornall Book of record of the House or these Officers of the Army, for the Jornall Book saith Fleetwood in∣formed
the House, and they say Haslerigg only, indeed we may see they are willing to carry on wicked deeds by comitting many greater. And after many obliquies cast on the Parliament, as that they carri∣ed on a Faction or design against them, They say, The Officers of the Army thought it their duty to represent to the Parliament, their inno∣cency, & to vindicate themselves from those false aspersions which they say were falsly and unworthily cast upon them. These Officers have been, and are so full and frequent▪ in carrying on designs against the Civil Power and Authority of this Narion, as they measure every man else by themselves, & all men that do speak the Truth, that doth but discover their evils, that man is presently a designer, & a factious man, nay a whole Parliament shall not escape them, as we see they do not in this their Declaration. But we would fain know where this design lay, and what were the false and unworthy expressions that were unworthily and falsly char∣ged upon them, that is, That there was some dangerous de∣sign against the Parliament on foot in the Army, and intentions to introduce a new Government, and set up a single person, Is this false? have they not made it good (do not we see it to our sorrow? and did not their Paper and actions clearly demonstrate such a thing to the Parliament before, therefore they were truly and worthily char∣ged with that matter of fact. The next thing is, That they might obviate the forementioned de∣signs, they desire that the Army might receive their Commissions with the advice of such persons as by experience had knowledge of their abi∣lity and fitness for service. What design is this they would make clear, and remove out of the way? It is that the Parliament should not be the Supream Authority above them, and therefore they would have Power from the Parlia∣ment to put into the Army whom they pleased, and to put out whom they pleased without the Parliaments controle. And we ask them, by what means came all the Officers to the Ar∣my since the 6th of May last, but by themselves, were not Fleetwood, Lambert, Disborrow and Berry the men, that said as they do now, They knew all men by experience their fitness and and abilities for service; and they do know, that very few or none came into the Army or Militia's in the three Nations, but what past their Test, as is aforesaid.
And that they might not be turn'd out Arbitrarily, but by the usu∣all way of a Court Martial. How tender of Arbitrary Government these men would seem to appear, Absalon like, Oh that I were Judge in Israel! I would do Justice. 2 Sam. 15.4. but it was but to get his Fathers Kingdom from him: so do these men, they would make all men believe espe∣cially the Officers and Souldiers of the Army, but it is but to get the Power and Kingdom into their own hands, and then what do they do? Arbitrarily put men from their Commands, without any such thing, or any thing laid to their Charge, or any Tryal in the least; yea and that men of honesty and faithfulness, and some of them great suf∣ferers for the Cause, the Good Old Cause of this Common-wealth in Olivers daies, and not only nine as the Parliament did for just cause of evil, but 15 some of their names do follow, viz. Col. Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Col. Herbert Morley, Col. Sanders, Col. Allured, Col. Hacker, Col. Okey, Col, Markham, Lieut. Col. Farly, Major Bar∣ton Major Evelin, Major Sedaskew, Adjutant Gen. Nelthrope, Capt. VVagstaffe. As to what they say about the Freedom of all people, and well of themselves to Petition and present their desires to the Parliament in a submissive way. To this we will say no more then the Parliament saith themselves in the Answer to their Petition, and this Proposal, viz. Resolved, That this be the Answer to the third Proposal: The Parliament declareth, that every member of the Army as Freemen of England, have right of petitioning the Parliament; But withall thinks fit to let them know, that the Petitioners ought to be very careful, both in the manner, and the matter which they desire: That the way of promoting & presenting the same may be peaceable, and the things petitioned for, not tencing to the disturbance of the Com∣mon-wealth, nor to the dishonour of the Parliament; And that it is the duty of Petitioners to submit their desires to the Parliament, and acquiesce in the judgment thereof. And we think that this answer of the Parliament, should have given them full satisfaction, as to all the rest that was to follow, and might have saved the Officers that labour of writing Letters and sending them with the Representation to all Regiments of Horse and Foot, and Garrisons in England Scotland and Ireland. What did it signifie lesse then a force on the Parliament, that let the Parliament give
never so satisfactory an answer, as they in honesty or Conscience could, not enslaving themselves, nor the people, they were resolved, to have their own wills, all as their Paper spoke, though it were to their ruin and three Nations also. The Resolve of Parliament they mention of Octob. 10th Let the Re∣solve speak for it self. Resolved, That this be the answer to the first Proposal: That the Officers of the Army have received, and shall from time to time re∣ceive marks of the favour of this Parliament, and countenance an∣swerable to their merit and faithfulness. And it doth answer fully the reasonable part of their desire, which they speak of, if men in their reason look on it; but it seemeth these Officers of the Army would have the Parliament to make good this Resolve to them, and from time to time set marks and favours on them, though they commit Rebellion and Treason, and think they me∣rit so much from them; for this they were a doing, which did occa∣sion the proceedings of the Parliament against those 9 Officers. In∣deed the Parliament did too much shew them, and give them too many marks of their favour in their Act of Pardon for their former Treasons and Rebellions, and Villany committed in the late Usurpers daies Oliver Crumwel, though they now find fault with it. The second Resolve the same day, viz. Resolved, That this be the Answer to the second Proposal: That it is the duty of all persons, especially of the Members of Parliament, to inform the House of any thing, which in their apprehension may concern the publick fafety, and it is the undoubted right of the Par∣liament to receive, and debate those informations, and to resolve what they think fit thereupon. And is it not the clear and undoubted right of every man in Eng∣land that is a lover of his Countrey, to inform the Parliament of any matter or thing, but especially of that which doth concern the safety of the whole, and it is the undotbted Right and Priviledge of the Parliament to reciene, debate, and resolve upon those informations, and to debar the Parliament of it, is to debar them of all Liberty and Freedom, and in them to inslave all the free people of the 3 Nations, for they do represent them, & to impose or restrain the Parliament, is to impose and restrain all the Free people of these three Nations, take what Parliaments have done in this kind to their Kings: In the notable Petition of Grievances by the whole house of Parliament in
the seventh year of King James, and comparing the Arguments that were used to inform the House of the matter of those Grievances, we shall see clear, that they then did Judge it their duty to hear and de∣bate of what they were informed of, viz. The Petition it self and the Judges Argument of the peoples Right, printed by Richard Bishop in Anno 1541, and the Jour∣nals of the Parliament in the third of Charles 1628, January 26 Mr. Walters Speech (Page the 7th of that Journal book) where he did inform the House, there were divers Ships laden with Corn for Spain: Hereupon, a Committee was appointed to enquire about Trading into Spain, they also Order, some of the Privey Council should presently move the King about stay of the Ships; And yet it seemeth they had but a bare information, though they did debate and resolve; for on the 29th of January which was three days after; It was ordered, That a Message should be sent to His Majesty, that now it is evident (it seems it was not so before) that divers Ships are bound for Spain, and to desire stay of them. See also Petition of Lords and Commons, in vindication of the Priviledges of Paliament, of the 14th of December 1641, Where their words are, That the King ought not to take notice of any matter in agitation in the Parliament, and that he ought not to be displeased with any debate in Parliament, they being only Judges of their own errours, and none other, and this Priviledge and Li∣berty freely to inform and debate in Parliament is not, they say theirs only but the whole Kingdoms, wherein every one of the people are concerned. We come now to that they take notice of in Page 11, That if per∣sons do inform the House of any thing, be it never so frivelous and false, which in their apprehension is for publick safety, then it is the undoubted right for the Parliament to debate, and resolve thereup∣on, and if they think fit the men and distinctions of them and their fa∣milies, who are informed against, before they be heard or their case stated, These are the substance of their words. That is a most uncharitable saying of a Parliament, and a most vild re∣proach cast upon not only them, but all the Free people of England,
thus to abuse those who by their own choise they have Trusted; When did we ever find a Parliament to do any such thing, and was the sending Lambert (if he had gone) to the Tower, or the outing him and the other eight of their Commissions a ruining them and their Families? what ar∣guing is this? but the Parliament may not do it, it is a sin in them, but Fleetwood, Lambert and the Grandees of the Army may do it, and worse, and it is no sin in them, but a Vertue, Witness fifteen at a clap, with∣out giving any reason, and yet the Officers of the Army do not mutiny now against them, and say they are ruined now they are turned out, and is it possible to think by a Parliament that is a popular Council (that they could if any amongst them would attempt to do any such thing) it could be done. The next thing we meet with is a great complaint, That an Act of Parliament passed on Tuesday the 11th of Octob. 1659 contrary to the usual Orders of the House, thrice red in one and the same day, and passed into an Act We would fain know if the Parliament are not the only Judges of their own Orders, it hath been alwaies so adjudged in all Parliaments, we think there is none above them, and if there were, they being without doors cannot be Judges of what they do within doors, because they can∣not be Judges of the Reasons, and debate what leads the Parliament to do this or that; and therefore if they read it thrice in one day, it was ac∣cording to the usual Orders of the House. Besides, it is an Act of Parli∣ament, that is agreeable to the Fundamental Laws of England, a greeable to Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, it is in maintenance of the Freedoms and Liberties of the People, and therefore if it had been read in the House but once, and passed as it is, it had been, and is a good Law, let it speak for it self, viz. An Act against raysing moneys upon the People, without their con∣sent in Parliament. BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority there∣of, that all Orders, Ordinances and Acts, made by any single per∣son and his Council, or by both or either of them, or otherwise, or by any Assembly or Convention, pretending to have Authoritie of Parlia∣ments from and after the 19th day of April 1653, and before the 7th of
May 1659, and which have not been or shall not be Enacted, allowed or confirmed by this present Parliament, be, and are hereby declared, deemed, taken and adjured to be of no force or effect, from and after the said 8th of May 1659. And be it further enacted, That no person or persons shall after the 11th of Octob. 1659 Assess, Levy, Collect, Gather or Receive any Cu∣stome, Impost, Excise, Assessment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage or any sum or sums of Mony, or other Imposition whatsoever upon the people of this Common-wealth, without their consent in Parliament, or as by Law might have been done before the 3d of November 1640. And be it further enacted and declared, that every person offending contrary to this Act, shall be, and is hereby adjudged to be guilty of High Treason, and shall forfeit and suffer as in case of High Treason. Provided, That this Act, or any thing herein contained, shall not be construed or taken to make void or impeach one Act made this Parlia∣ment the 12th of July 1659, Entituled, An Act of Indempnity and free Pardon, nor any Article or clause therein contained. Provided also, That nothing in this extend, to interrupt the possession of any Souldier ot Adventurer, or any Purchaser, their Heirs or Assigns, in possession of any Lands or Hereditaments in Ireland, or of any Pur∣chasers of any Lands or Hereditaments in this Common-wealth, unless where this Parliament hath taken or shall take further or other Order therein. Tuesday October 11. 1659. Ordered by the Parliament, That this be forthwith printed and Published, Tho. St, Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament. That this Act is agreeable to the Fundamental Laws of our Nation, it appears by the express words of the Great Charter of Englands Liberties, granted by King John, Anno 1215, in the 17th year of his Reign, con∣firmed by Henry 3d in the 9th of his Reign, and several times afterwards, and by Edward first in the 25 & 28 years of his Reign, these 3 Kings did grant, give and confirme to all the Freemen of England, for themselves and their Heirs for ever, the Customs, Liberties therein contained, and
these have been confirmed, by at the least 33 Parliaments. See Sir Edw. Cooks 4th part of his Institutes Folio 14.34. and the Petition of Right: That no Tax, Tollage Subsidie, Custom, Contribution, Loan, Imposition, Excise or other Assessment whatsoever, should be laid on the People without their consent in Parliament. See the Petition of Grievances 7th Jacobi by the whole house of Com∣mons, where, they clearly affirm: That the People of this Nation have a propriety in their goods exempted from all Impositions whatsoever in times of Peace and War, without their common consent in Parli∣ament. And it was in that Parliament voted and resolved, in the Commons house of Parliament, That all impositions laid on the people without consent in Parliament, were against the Original Fundamental Lawes, and property of the people, See the Conference of the Commons concerning the Right and, Priviledge, of the people, 3 April 4 Caroli 1928, entered in the Parliament Journal, printed 1642. See the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli 1628, viz. They do pray your most ezcelleht Majesty, that no man hereafter be, compelled, to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax or such Charge, without Common consent by Act of Parliament, to which the King agreeth and confirmeth in, these words, Le Droict, soit faict comme il est desire, Let right be done to the people as they do desire. The whole house of Commons in Feb. 6. 1640, "did impeach Wil∣liam Laud Archbishop of Canterbury of High Treason, for the which he was excuted, For advising his Majesty, that he might at his own will and pleasure Leavy and take money of his people, without consent in Parliament; and this he affirmed was warrantable by the Law of God. See also Mr. St. Johns Speech about Ship-mony, at a conference with the Lords, in accusing the Judges of High Treason, together with the se∣veral Speeches of Mr. Hide, Mr. Walker, Mr. Pierpoint Decem. 21, Jan. 14, Feb. 11, 1650. and July 16, 1641. By all which it appears, that this Act of Parliament passed by the Par∣liament Tuesday the 11th of October our Old, Ancient and Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms, what ever? these Officers have said or can do. Yea, Parliaments have been so tender of the matter, that when the King hath demanded but and aied in a new and unusual, way, though mo∣ved for him in Parliament, that before they would agree to any such thing they must confer with their several Countries. And at the Parliament 9
Edw. 3. a motion was made in Parliament, for a Subsidy, to be granted of a new kind, The Commons answered, They would have conference with their several Counties, and places that have entrusted them, before they treated of any such thing; and this Act of this Parliament, we again affirm, making it High Treason, to Leavy or raise Money without con∣sent in Parliament is agreeable to the Fundamental Laws of the Land, Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, and is but a further confirma∣tion, and strengthning of all our old Lawes, made to maintain the peoples Liberties, and therefore we hope the people of this Common∣wealth, will, dy rather then lose any tittle of them, or to pay one penny on any pretence whatsoever, that is contrary to the aforesaid Laws, Free∣doms and Liberties. And for their finding fault for reading it thrice, and passing it in one day, they may be ashamed to mention this, when they (these very Offi∣cers) in the late Tyrant Olivers daies, in his Mongrel and mock Parli∣ament, of 17 Sept. 1653, in one day, did not read thrice, if they read them at all, but the Titles, did passe A 100, of the late Tyrant Olivers Ordinances and that in one day, these went down then for good Laws, why, because they liked to have it so, and many of them concerned them∣selves, greatness, yea divers sums of Mony, Lands and Arrears given them, which they never did deserve; therefore they can indure them, though they were the most destructive and oppressive things to the people that ever were passed. Then they fright us with Free-quartering of the Aamy, supposing that this will scare men, to enslave themselves, and pay rather then to Free∣quarter. But that Bug-bear will not do it and we say, the Nation had better to quarter freely, then to pay, but that may not be done neither, without breaking in on our Liberties and Freedom, See the Petition of Right. And because the Parliament passed this Act, they suppose they drove on this design, that if the Army should crosse their actions, they would put them on this necessity. And good reason, if so be they will turn Knaves and False Traytors and Rebels against the Supream Authority, of these Nations, (as they did then and in this Declaration do acknowledge the Parliament to be) and take away all our Liberties, yea, and Laws too, by their interrup∣ting them; we think it was wisdom in the Parliament, to do what they could to preserve and strengthen the peoples Freedoms and Liberties.
Then they tell us of a great many other mischeifs that is like to fol∣low by passing this Act, we see they account for the Parliament to pass a Law for the peoples Liberties & Freedoms is by these Officers accoun∣ted a mischief, but if they had Voted and passed a Law, that more Generall Officers for the Armie is necessary of good benefit & safety to this Com∣monwealth, though it were to the oppression of the people by making these Officers great in Name & Power, & in wages to have had out of the ruins of the people 1000 l. per annum a year more then now they have thought it had been read three times in an hour, it should have passed for a good Law, blessed reformes we promise you, and good Religious self-denying men, fit for the Church of Christ to trust to, that they may have Libertie of Conscience, but this surely is a strange Paradox that the Churches should be so weak and silly, so besotted and infattuated as to ex∣pect that from them, for can they do them any good that are a wicked, perjured, false, forsworne people, and in this late business chiefly, nay they have and still do carry it on by fashoods and lies, and can God prosper such a people. Nay how is it possible they can expect to have Libertie of Conscience from them, when they will not suffer them to have Libertie and Free∣dome of their; persons and Estates, except they run into the same excess of riot as themselves, of Treason and Rebellion to do all they command, and to pay them what monie they please, to raise Levie and Assess upon them without Law, if once the Church-people refuse payment of their Taxes, to Prison they go, their houses Plundred, and their goods taken by force from, them, and is not this a very fair Libertie of Conscience, written in Capitall Letters, for be assured if they put not into theirs mouths, they (will) even prepare warr against them, Micha 3.5. But what is become of the great cry, that the Parliament was a carry∣ing on a Presbiterian design; and for persecuting persons for their Con∣sciences, with which they have deceived all the Church people, it is not to be found in their Declaration, Letters Papers as once charg∣ed on the Parliament, we wonder the Churches do not now abandon them, and rise against them, for so many liers, deceivers and impostures that have thus cheated, deluded, and deceived them by their lyes and false∣hoods. Then they enunairate their severall mischiefes which they would make the world believe do and will fall on many people by this preci∣pitate Act as they are pleased to say.
They begin with the most choice and Godly Ministery, their mainte∣nance will be voyd. What carefull people are these men now, anon you shall hear of them to take away this choyce Godly ministers maintenance, onely with a promise of a more certaine and less vexatious maintenance, which signifies none at all, for that is all they can do, they may, and we beleive will, hinder this most choice Godly Ministerie of their mainte∣nance, but never intend to give them any, for this generation of men now striving to get up, are not for Church nor Ministry, save onely for Ambition, Honour, and Riches, and that the most choice and Godly Ministers see and know and are wiser then either to beleive or trust them, but there is no such thing taken away by the Act. Then they tell us prophane and scandalous Ministers will get in that in great numbers have been ejected in the space of six years; And they should have said madd whimsical Ministers will get in as Sterry & Sedgwick and other Enthusiasts they had spoken truly, for like people there must be like Priest, for they do no wickedness, but their Euthasa∣mes tells them God set it on their hearts, though it be to do the greatest Villanie in the world, but this is only one of their Enthusane lies, for there is not by this Act any such doer open as all men may see if they please. They would make us beleive that the late Usurper with them his fel∣low Traytors, had ejected many prophane and scandalous Ministers. It is feared nay known that they have ejected many good Godly and choice men, and have preferred many a scandalous Episcopall and igno∣rant Sot; did not they eject Mr. John Simpson, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Feak Mr. Cordwall and many others in City and Country, and did they not preferr divers others in the Countries that were scandalous enough, do but aske and every boy will tell them. Now comes their Grand Lie: The Adventurers and Souldiers Land in Ireland left at a loss and in confusion. We wonder men are not asham'd, but that they have a brow of Brass that will lie so horidly in the sight of the Sun, is not their a provission in that Act expresly for the prevention of these very matters, as all may see by the Act recited in this treatise; what can any imagine to think of this people, but that they have like "Ahab sold themselves to work mis∣chief, and to do wickedness, 1 King. 21.20. and all the rest of their in∣numerable mischiefs may be looked on like this, to be nothing else but
lies, slanders and reproaches cast on the Parliament to make them odi∣ous to the people. But if there will such a mischief come on Ireland and Scotland, Why then did not they let the Parliament alone without interruption, that they might have made sure provision against that confusion as they were about, as every man knoweth that hath but read of the Diurnalls, that there were two Acts under consideration for the settling of Scotland and Ire∣land, and to make provision for all, but they do in this as Nero did by Rome, set the City on fire himself, and then lay it to the Christians, that they might be punnished for what he most wickedly did; So these Officers they interupt the Parliament that were a taking care for all these things, and them they say they have lest all things to ruin and in confusion, telling these lies to make them odious. There is one thing troubles them very much, their Estates that the late Tirant Oliver hath given them, is left in a dangerous and uncer∣taine condition. They may, thank themselves, harm watch, harm catch, self do, self have, as the Proverb is, are not they the Causes of all the mischiefs, and therefore no matter, it hurts none but themselves, if it were true, but this is as the rest, one more to be set on their score of Lies. But they have a small salve here, these mischiefs and many more should follow if this Act could be deemed as vallued. It shall be deemed, as vallued, though it be to your destructions and ruins, and shall stand a law, when you for transgressing against this Act may loose your Heads or be hanged at Tyburn, as we shall make it ap∣pear you deserve it more then many of your betters (whose shooes the best of you are not worthy to carrie) for doing a great deal less, have suf∣fered both by the Axe and Halter. But they say there was a strange designe which they could hardly be∣leive that any Supreame Authority would have driven one to expose people to such in conveniences. They here to make it appear they glory in their wickedness, that they dare rebell against the higher Powers, and so resist the Ordinance of God, Rom. 13.2. they own them the Supreame Authority, and yet they re∣bell against them, they are the veriest State Heretick in the world, or that ever the earth bore, for they are convicted, they have sinned, and yet they justifie themselves, Titus 3.11. The designe of the Parliament that was driven on, if they be ignorant was to try whether they would be obedient as honest Servants, or be
Knaves and Traytors to rebell, and this was the Parliaments designe good Mr. Lambert, and the rest of your Octavion Tribe. And though they did not, or would not know the Parliaments designe, yet all the world knoweth and seeth their designes now to be a vaine, ambitious, wretched design, tending to the ruin and Confusion of all the three Nations, and not some perticular persons as they say this Act doth, but they scorne to deale by retail, they will do all by wholesaile, by the gross ruin and con∣found all together. Now we are come to what was done on VVednesday the 12th, of. Octo. 1659. We shall not say much to this, nor yet to Thursday, because there hath been said enough of it by another book, called the Relation of the State of the Case between the Parliament and Armie. Onely we cannot chuse but must take notice that these Officers did in∣tend to oppose the Parliament, though they say in their Godlie letter to the Army in Scotland, they had not half an hour to consider of it, but God set it on their hearts, these Officers for their Blasphemie must have Bottomlys punnishment which they inflicted on him to be board through the Tongue for their horred Blasphemie. They say the Parliament having thus prepared things, hoping they had a great influence upon part of the Armie, and having sufficientlie by their late Acts perplexed those whom they doubted might oppose them. Why the Parliament should not have had not only, an influence on part of the Armie, but a command over the whole, there is no honest man can give any reason and is it not clearly implyed in these Officers words, they had an intent to oppose the Parliament, for they say the Parliament by their Acts had sufficientlie perplexed those that might oppose them, (yea and we say did intend to opose them) for who could the Parliament or any else imagine could oppose the Parliament but these Officers of the Armie which did it, the more is their shame. Well that the Parliament might have courage to go on they say, "And that the Government of these Nations was so sure in their own hands as in all probabilitie things might come to confusion, except man∣naged by themselves. Was this their great feare that the Government should rest sure in the Parliaments hands, we will beleive them without swearing, for we think they have spoken scarce a true word in all this Declaration but this, but that it might not then, nor by their good wills ever shall, rest sure
in the Parliaments hands, they take a course to interrupt them, and ever will till all the good people rise and subdue them. Yea and are not all things like to come to confusion; now they have taken it out of the Parliaments hands, for nothing will be last∣ing or dureable in this Nation, but what comes through, and by the Parliaments hands as to a Government and that let them be assured. And then they find fault, the Parliament lockt themselves up the doors of the Lobby fast shut and guarded, that none might un∣derstand their proceedings. Good lack is this they would be at, wee know they would alwayes force the Parliament, and was it not a wonder the Parlia∣ment did not send for Lambert and his eight: confederates to have sat in the House, up in the Gallery with nine Whips or Rods, that they might have taught the Parliament to have said their Lesson they had set them, and to have well scourged others that were dull, or stub∣born and would not hear, for it is cleare that this they aimed at, and we see have effected, that except the Parliament will do what they please, they must not sit but be interrupted, slaverie in the highest, how can the free people suffer such things as these, that two or three men shall thus abuse three Nations. That the Parliament might vigorously put the designes in practice, ther is an occasion administred from one of the Letters, which was signed by severall Officers according to appointment of the Generall? Councill, produced by a Member of the House, it being of no other purport then the sending the said representation as aforesaid. Was there not a sufficient ground given for the Parliament, so to proceed as they did, we are of that opinion, and in is that Noble brave Englishman Generall Monk and his Armie in Scotland, as ap∣pears by his Letter in answer to the Officers Letter sent by Col. Cobbet, dated at Edenburgh, October 27th, 1659, viz. now by ap∣pointing a Committee to recommend that Petition to all Regi∣ments for subscriptions, after so great a progress made in it by a few, and the Parliaments Negative sence declared of it, what could there be in designe, but a stirring up the Armie against the Parliament, so they and we with them think it was high time for the Parliament to take that course they did, and had great reason to fall foul upon these nine Officers as they did to Casheire them, and in doing but that, they shewed themselves very mercifull, for it was Treason by the Law as shall be shewed anon.
They go on, and say as they did the day before so they now, ha∣stily, they passed into an Act before the raise for the making voyd the Lord Fleetwcods Commission. Was it not high time when the Parliament did see that he either could not or would not keep the Armie in Order, under good disci∣pline, but rather stir them up to disorder and disobedience, as it was apparent by his actings all along, first in moving in Parliament for Lambert to be Major Generall, and then his abetting Darby Propo∣sals by the representation, when the Parliament had given their Nega∣tive to it, the Parliament did conceive that to Govern the Army by Commissioners as well as the Navy and Ireland: and Scotland was more sutable to a Commonwealth and less dangerous, and therefore they did well, wisely, maturely and gravely. They seem very much to be agrieved that the Parliament by their Generalls under them, viz: their Commissioner for Governing the Armie should give out Orders and Command, Col. Morleys, Okeys, Mosse's, Hacker's, and Col. Tompsons Regiment s for the peace of the Nation, and protecting the Perliament in safetie; Surely were these men in their right wits they would never blame them, was there not a just necessitie, did they not know you would force the Parlia∣ment, and if they did try what they could do to prevent it, they did but their duties and it was well done, and might have been then the ruin of these Officers (though we know it will be stil1) had not they basely forfeited their honours, & brook their Faith in not marching all their forces to their quarters, there to abide till further order from the Councill of State, as by the Councill they were ordered, and do they think God will not avenge this perfidiry, yea he will divine and hu∣mane History assures us of it, See 2 Sam. 21.1. to 11 verses, and the History of the Turks, pag. 247. Amurath the 6th Emperor of the Turks, and Uladislaus King of Hungary, who made a Peace with the Turk, and basely (like these Officers by the Enthusasme of the Pope, as they do by Sathan,) was perswaded to break with the Turk without any just occasion given him, and when Amurath was bu sied with other Enemies, cometh and invadeth his Country with a very great Army, at last they came to fight, and Amurath seeing himself going to the worst, his Army like to be beaten, seeing great slaughter of his men, beholding the picture of a Crucifix, in the displayed En∣signes of the Vollentary Christians, plucks the writing out of his Bosom, wherein the late League was comprised, and holding his
hands up, with his eyes cast up to Heaven crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy name made with me, without cause violated; Now if thou be a God, as they say thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong they have done to thy Name and me, and shew thy power upon thy perjurous people, who in their deeds deny thee their God. The issue was, God did revenge this falsness of the King of Hun∣gary, himself slain, and all his Army lost: so without question, if the Commissioners Sir Arthur Haslerig, Col. Morley, Col. VValton and the Forces they had with them, if they had but put it to the test then, as it will now with General Monck, and had but spread before the great God of Heaven their declaration of the 6th of May, & their Representation of the 5th of October, (to instance no more though there are many) sutely God would have then, and assuredly God will still avenge their great, grosse and vild falsness. Col. Okey marched with three Troops into London, for countenan∣cing the drawing together the Militia Forces, in Order to a conjun∣ction with them. Was it not well he did so? and had not the Militia of London done better to have risen and have set free the Parliament, then to have layn still and to suffer themselves and three Nations to be en∣slaved by three or four ambitious men? Yea, and we believe that they would have done it had not these Officers Emissaries as Packer, Creed, Brown, Kiffen, Ostler, Gostpride,, and others buzd false things in their ears, as that the Parliament were frinds to Sir Georg Booth and his party, and were for persecuting for Conscience in matter of Religion, which we know they were clear of, and these Officers do not now lay any such thing to their Charge in any Paper, nay we say, they the Officers of the Army are friends to Sir George Booth and his party, for Tryal they will not bring any of them to; for how can they when he did but endeavor to do that which Lambert and these Officers have done, and have by their new Whym-wham Committee of shifty set at liberty Nov. 2 1659. the Earl of North-hampton, Lord Falkland, Lord Castleton, Lord Herbert, Son of the Earl of VVorster, Lord Howard, and the Lord Belases, which were of Sir George Booths party; these Officers may do any thing, they have the World in a string, but it may happen, that some of them may be noosed in it shortly.
But we are glad, that since that, the Committee of the Militia of London, have had their eies opened, and do see they have been abu∣sed by people that profess other things and they did behave them∣selves like English men and good resolute Cittizens, and we trust they will stand by General Monck and his Army in restoring this Parlia∣ment. They say, That the conjunction of these Forces for the safety of the Parliament, did tend naturally to the engaging the City, Countrey and Army in Blood. Who was the beginning of this? Was it not these Officers? What if a Troop of Thieves conspire that such a night they will rob and plunder such a Town, the people in the Town are informed of it, and they get what force they can, & send to their neighbours for help, the thieves they come and assaile, and find Eorces to defend the Town against them; I but this saith the Thieves tends to put us in Blood: just so do these Officers of the Army. They say, The Officers of the Army having received notice ef these things, and being greatly amused at so strange and sudden a muta∣tion. 1. Notice of what thing, that Fleetwoods and the other eight, had their Commissions taken from them, and the Government of the Ar∣mie put under seaven Commissioners, and they now give out Orders, this is it that amuses them, we think indeed they were very much amused and be moped, else they would never have been so mad as to have risen up against the Supream Authority, to whom they had promised, and sworn fidelity. 2. It was not so strange and sudden a mutation to them, as they pretend, for they do very well know, that they the Officers of the Army, did intend long before, to interrupt the Parliament; and therefore could not expect the Parliament would do less, or otherwise then they did; for had they left all things as they were, yet if they had not done all, that the Officers had or would Propose to them, they must turn out, and be gone. Are not these pretty ser∣vants, that the people must our of their penury pay, and maintain like Princes, for nothing else but to make them slaves and vassels. But what shall the people of the three Nations think, of the strange and suddain mutation, that these Officers by their Treason and Rebel∣lion bave brought upon them, that have not only anuld 9 or 10 mens
Commissions that there was just cause for, but have anuld all Go∣veinment, and have plucked it up by the very Roots; they have just cause not only to be amused, but to think there never was so vile and wicked an action, done by any in the world, and have good reason to rise as one man to subdue them, and to bring the contrivers of this horrid Treason to condign punishment. The other thing that amuseth them is; That the Office of the Commander in chief should be this minute executed by the hand of their Lord Fleetwood, and the next by the hands of Sir Arthur Hasle∣rigg, Col. Morley and Col. Walton. This troubles these Gentlemen very much, that they should be under obedience, a thing they cannot indure, but for the Commander in Chief their Lord Fleetwood, he might have (if he had been as good as his Word, Promise and Faith to the Parliament that day) given out Orders still, as one of the seven, for he was one of them, but that he basly, contrary to his Trust and Promise run away, and gave these men notice of what was done, and so these Gentlemen came to be Amused. But what if Fleetwood when he made so much hast, to carry these Officers word, had by the way been called aside by dearh, by any ac∣cident whatsoever, would it have been so strange a thing to them to have had Lambert the next minute, to have given out Orders, though he had had no Power or Authority so to do? no surely, this would have been no wonder, but is it not strange that the Army of a Common∣wealth under the ordering of the Supream Authoritie, should pick and chuse their General, and whom they please shall command them but whom the Supream Authority appoints to Command them, they will not obey, these are very godly actions we promise you things that become persons professing Religion, do they not? nay we think the Janizaries under the Turke never did the like, Well, now they say, That Orders (by the above-named Commissi∣oners) being so speedily hastened out, for the drawing of forces toge∣ther, were in great doubt that such strange and violent courses, did portend some sad and fatal event. What sad and fatal event, could the Consciences of these Guilty Officers dictate to them, more then that they were told, they had lost their Commissions? it is true, their guilty Consciences might
tell them they deserved to loose their heads, and Estates, for contri∣ving and acting force on the Parliament, and that made them so mad as they were, and are, to persue their designs even to Blood. But we would fain know what fatal and sad event these persons needed to fear from the Parliament, if they were innocent, especial∣ly, from that Parliament, which they say were eminent Assertors of the Good Old Cause, and God had owned them, and signally blessed them in what, in opposing the common enemy and bringing Delinquents to condigne punishment, but they having Apostatized from the Good Old Cause, to the committing of the same evil and wicked Actions that the Malignants of the Royal parry did before them, as to break, interrupt and force Parliaments, to take away our Funda∣mental Laws, Rights and Liberties, which we have by our Fundamen∣tal Laws, the Property and Freedom in our persons and Estates, not to be imprisoned, or money raised or imposed on us, but by our own consent, and that by Act of Parliament; we say, they committing & acting the old Malignants business over again, for the same things they act and do, See the Declaration of the Parliament 15 of De∣cember 1641, We do think their very Consciences did tell them, that the sad & fatal event would be, that which they in their own hearts were con∣vinced of was their dues, that is to loose their heads, and Estates, and this we say more deservedly then any of the Kings party, or Sir George Booth and his party; because neither of them ever ingaged to be faithful to the Parliament, but these have many times, and have proved false. And now that they might prevent what their guilty Consciences told them they did deserve, (though for what they had done, if they had there acquiesced, there was not a thought to touch one hair of their heads) which was as above-said the Ax and Sequestration, they held it their duty to take Arms, and also, not only to preserve them∣selves, but their friends and honest interest. A very fair design, to preserue themselves and honest Interest, to commit Treason, Rebellion and perjury both against God and man, to lye, slander and reproach honest men, to break Faith, Covenants, and Promises, with all men, nay with three Nations, as if the doing of these things were the way to preserve themselves and honest In∣terest,
is not this to speak wickedly for God, and to talke deceitfully for him, Job. 13.7. and as the Apostle saith, to do evill that so good may come thereof, Rom. 3.8. But what is this honest interest, they must at so great a price as the ruin of three Nations, and all the honest interest of all the good peo∣ple of the same preserve, we profess we are at a very great soss, be∣cause we can find none that they can or will preserve but such as themselves, that will joyne with them in their ungodly and unwar∣rantable wayes and courses, for the honest interest in these Nations: We say the Parliament hath; yea and that they would have maintained and secured, and that not only inword, but by reall deeds, which these people neither will nor can. Then they tell us they marched to VVestminster to the Pallace-Yard, and their they find Col. Morleys Regiment in divers places in a hostill manner, and then indeavours were used to informe them of the true state of affaires, and to draw them to such a compliance with the rest of their Brethren in the Army, but they found that fruitless therefore they were necessitated to put themselves in Armes. We would fain know what sad and fatall events hath and will of ne∣cessity follow, on there so strange and violent courses to take and put themselves in Armes against the Parliament the Supreame Authority of these three Nations, some we see already, that is they are a persu∣ing it to Blood and Rapen, and we do hear they are a setting up a Tyrannicall Government over these Nations, worse the VVilliam the Norman Conquerors, and si not this strange that men of Godliness should do it, is this to maintayne the honest interest, O God punnish these wicked people. We do not question but you used meanes to inform them, but you were Rebelliously in Armes first, and that we know, for some of us did see you getting your forces togeather by ten a Clock at night, and therefore this is one of their old, new learned Cavelier Lyes, and as God prospered them, so he will these men, because they take the same courses and wayes, by lyes, falshoods and reproaches, to carry on their designes, but their indeavours did not answer their ends, no more we hope will all their messages & Messengers they send to that faithfull true English man Generall Monck and his faithfull Army, e∣specially their foolish message by way of a Letter of the 29 of Octob.
1659. sent to them signed by 21 grand Officers, who when they sign∣ed it, surely were asleep, for it is the silliest pittifullest peice that ever saw the Sun, and indeed so is all their Papers, but an ill cause can produce no better. And because they would not be perswaded by their non sencicall Arguments, therefore they were necessitated to take Armes, we pray what to do, we to let them know, they should have Club Law to beat it into their heads, instead of Libertie of Conscience, but we beleive, if they had not got a Quorum of the Council of State which commanded all forces to march to their quarters, till further order from the Councill, they had found Club Law from the Parliaments forces, but it was otherwayes at that time ordered. Well now they say for the same ground and reasons, and also that they might not incourage such a dangerous opposition to the appa∣rant hazard of the publick peace they put a period and determinati∣on to the Parliaments meeting together, are not they Traytors for so doing by Act of Parliament, viz. An Act of Parliament passed July 17. 1649. Declaring what of∣fences shall be judged Treason. Whereas the Parliament hath abol∣lished the Kingly Office in England and Ireland, and in the domini∣ons and Terrirories thereunto belonging, and having resolved and de∣clared that the people shall for the future be Governed by its own representations or Nationall meetings in Councill chosen and intrust∣ed by them for that purpose, hath settled the Government in the way of a Commonwealth and free State, without King and House of Lords. Be it Enacted by this present Parliament and by the Authority of the same, that if any person shall malitiously or advisedly publish by writting Printing, or openly declaring that the said Government is Tyrannicall usurped, or unlawfull, or that the Commons Assembled in Parliament are not the Supreame Authoritie of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive, or indeavour to stir up, or raise force against the present Government, or for the subversion or alteration of the same, and shall declare the same by any open deed, that then every such of∣fence shall be taken, deemed, and a judged by Authority of this Par∣liament to be high Treason. This bringeth to our remembrance a saying of Ben. Johnson that famous Poet, in his Tragedie of Catlyns Conspiracie, who brings
Catelyne speaking, viz: The ills that I have done cannot be safe, but by attempting greater, and I feel a Spirit within me chide my sluggish hands, and say they have been Innocent too long, a wicked say∣ing of a wicked Prince, but he had a Spirit of Enthusances, and so have these men that puteth them on all these mischiefs, for they say God put all these things in their hearts, having put a force upon the Par∣liament by their paper from Darby, and their representation of the 5th of October, 1659. therefore they thought themselves not safe, till they had done greater, therefore they resolve to throw away all Modestie, Reason, and Sobriety, and to act now like bruit beast, break all rules and raines of government, tear it all a peices, and let all loose to the lust and will of nine or ten Ambitious men, to commit Rapine, spoyl blood and Plunder on the good people of these Nations, and rather then to lay down or forgoe nine or ten peeces of Parch∣ment ingage three Nations in Blood, what do these men think of themselves, will they not take warning, but proceed from evill to worse, to do as Hazell did, 2 King. 8.12.15. that slew his Master, and after that as the Prophet did foretell, committed strange unheard of things, that they like Nero, prove Monsters of Men. But they say they have put a period and tetermination to the meet∣ing of the Parliament. It is true for the present they have, but they shall meet one more, and all they can do cannot desolve them as we have proved before, and truely if they would take any good Council, they would find it the safest and best way for them to throw open the doors, and to let them sit againe in honour and safetie, but we feare they are given up, and fitted for destructions by the insolent evils we see they still go on to commit, that all the Tyrants over England, nay Oliver himself did not dare to touch with his little finger. And now we come to a matchless piece of Villany and Treason, such is all the Tyrants, and Kings that ever were in the three Nati∣ons never came neer it. For they say, That they think themselves further obleiged for pre∣venting of the manifold evils and inconveniences which must necessari∣ly fall upon the other good people of the nation as well as themselves, by reason of severall Orders, Acts, pretended Acts or other Declarations or any of them Enacted, made or past on Monday the 10th of this in∣stant Octob. and on Tuesday and Wednesday next following to de∣clare
them and every of them null and voyd to all intents and purposes, and do hereby declare them, and every of them, and every Clause and Sentence therein invalled null and voyd to all intents and purposes, and all orders and prooeedings thereupon had or done in as full and ample manner as if they never had been. That their wicked deeds they have committed, we think doth drive them from one evil to another, but they would if they could make us beleive that the Committing of Treason and Felonie, in breaking and taking away all our Liberties, yea Lawes at once, that are our fences and guards against evils and oppressions, should and is the way to pre∣vent mischiefs from falling on us, a strange Parradox, they had best to get Mr. Sterry and Mr. Sedgwik to go and consult with their Enthu∣san Oracle, and then to come forth with their Inchantments to be∣witch all the people of these three Nations, or else this Doctrine will not down. But we can tell them, and Preach a better Doctrine to them, but it is Law, but is as true as the Gospel, that it is Treason, yea high Trea∣son for any persons out of Parliament to offer or councill to make void an Act of Parliament, we will give them some presidents out of records Rich. 2.5. of his Reign, Wat Tayler and Jack Straw, and other Rebels by force and violence were resolved (as these Offi∣cers of the Armie are) to make voyd and to abrogate divers Lawes that they did not like, but for this their resolution and attempt in full debate in Paliament was declared to be high Treason against the King and against the Law, 5 Rech. 2. No. 30.31. for which divers of the chief Actors were condemned and executed as Traytors. In the 11th Rich. 2. confirmed by the Parliament of 1 Hen. 4. Chap. 3, 4, 5. As appeares by the Parliaments rols, and the Statutes that are printed, three prime Councillers, the Arch Bishop of York, the Duke of Ireland, the Bishop of Exetor, five Knights, six Judges (whereof Sr. Robert Trisillian chief Justice was one) Blake of the Kings Councill at Law, and the under Sherif of Middlesex were impeached and condemned of High Treason, some eight of them executed, and the rest Banished, and all their Lands and goods se∣questred and forfeited, and none to move to procure their pardon, for but indeavouring by force of Armes, and opinions in Law deliver∣ed to the King, tending to subvert the Lawes and Statures of the Land, and overthrow the Power and Priviledges and Proceedings in Parliement.
27. Jack Cade and hss accomplises were the 29 of his Reign, Capt. 1. Adjudged high Treason by Act of Parliament, And the Parliament 31 Hen. 6. Cap. 1. Madea memorable Act about this matter. n the 8 of Hen. 8. VVilliam Bell and Thomas Lacy, with Tho∣mas Cheny conspiring (as these Officers do, and have done) to overthrow the Laws and Customs of the Land, this was adjudged High Treason, and some of them executed as Traytors, See Mr. St. John Argument against the Earl of Strafford Page 178. In the Reign of the late King Charles in the years 1640, 1641, Thomas Earl of Strafford Lord Deputy of Ireland was by the whole house of Commons in Parliament impeached of High Treason, and and he was by the Parliament adjudged and declared that he had committed high Treason, and was declared and adjudged a Tray∣tor, and was for it executed, for treasonably endeavouring by words actions and Councils, tending to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England & Ireland, and introduce an Arbitrary & Tyrannical Go∣vernment; and have not the Officers of the Armie done far worse, "the whole house of Parliament, Feb. 6. 1640. did Impeach VVill. Laud Archbishop of Canterbury of High Treason in the same Tearm See the Journal of the Parliament, An Act for Staffords Attainder, and the Ordinance of Parliament for the Archbishops Attainder. 2t December 14 Feb. 11. and July 6, Sir John Finch, then Lord Keeper, had six other Judges, were all Impeached of High Treason for the same. See Mr. St. Johns Argument about Ship-mony: And the Speeches of Mr. Hide, Mr. Pierpoint, Mr. Hollis, at their Impeachment July 16, 1641. These are a few of the many Testimonies, that our Nation hath brought forth, which might we, should think, deter persons from committing the like, and let us tel them, that these persons were as well guarded some of them, yea, and that with an Army as these are, and yet they could not save themselves or friends, nor no more will these, we will assure them. And now they tell us, they thought fit to declare all this to us that we may not suffer prejudice by it, and hope all peaceable peo∣ple and unprejudiced persons will acquiesce in the necessity and justice thereof. They might have saved themselves this labour and not have decla∣red this to us, for we are resolved not to obey them in it, not acqui∣esce,
and yet we shall at last be found the only faithful and peaceable, People; for our Lawes, Liberties and Freedoms, we will maintain against all, that shall endeavour to beguile us of them, and this we say is justice, and necessity, and the contrary is injustice and wicked∣ness. And then they come and say, that it is upon their hearts to give us Liberty of men and Christians. We think it is not on their hearts, it is but the old Juggle of En∣thusame, that doth but deceive them, for do not they tell a most grosse lye, to say that we shall have our Liberty as men and Christi∣ans, when they take away our Fundemental Birth-rights, Freedom of Parliament and our Laws that is the gaurd of our Liberties, we desire none of these indeavours, for our Liberties the Lawes hath provided them for us, and we will have it without their leave. Yea they say, We shall have a reformation of our Laws, and a faithful, godly, painful preaching Ministery. A full reformation, that is, to destroy all Law, yea, and Gospel too, let them talke never so much, for that is that they will be at, and if they be not supprest, these three Nations will find it so; there∣fore we hope the good Ministers of the Gospel will not believe them though they promise fair, for they can do nothing, if they were to be believed, but if they the godly Ministers, joyn with the good people to suppress them, that we may have the Parliament sit in Honour and Freedom again, to settle us a Goverment, then a godly ministery may be setled, for all their Utopian things will not stand we assure them. As to the Ministers maintenance, we believe they will take that away and pay themselves and Army, and that the Ministers will find to be the end of it, and for these godly Ministers, that is some few Whimsical fellows they will give maintenance to, but the other we warrant shall be made to do, as is spoken in 1 Sam. 2.36. And it shall come to passe that every one that is left (of their godly Ministers that they pretend so much love to) in thine house shall come & crouch fror a piece if silver & a morsell of Bread and shall say. Put me I pray thee into one of the Priests Office, that I may eat a piece of Bread. This is the more certain maintenance that the godly Ministers shall find at their hads. They say they have no aim to set up a Millitary or Arbitrarie Government, but have already provided a Committee of Shiftie (for of safe they are none.)
What strange men are these, are they not all or the most of them of the Armie that are of that Whym-wham Committee or Juncto of Traytors, and doth not the Army set them up, and give them their rule to walk by, and is not this the power of the Sword, I the next we would desire them to tell us. And for the arbitrariness of it, we know it is arbitrary, & so do they, & illegal and Treason too, for what is not done as to Laws, Rules and Government in this Nations, by comon consent in Parliament, is Ty∣rannical and arbitrary, and we nope, that this all the good people & godly faithful Mlnisters in the three Nations do know, and will do the best to defend their ancient Fundamental Lawes, that is to have Parliaments to sit in Freedom and honour, and this Parliamen to be restored, it yet standing by a Law that cannot be revoked, but by themselves, and rather then to suffer themselves to be abused, and in∣slaved by a few inconsiderable Arbitrary men, to die like true Engllsh Heroes. Judges 19.30. And it was so that all that saw it, said, There was no such deed done nor seen, from the day that the Children of Israel came up out of Egypt, unto this day (no we are sure it cannot be presedented) Consider of it, take Advice, & speak your mind. JUDGES 20.1. FINIS.
