E3744 E110_14 99858909 110969
Exceeding Joyfull Newes FROM DOVER, Wherein is declared hovv a Noble man was sent from the King, to demand the Castle to be resigned to Him; But was bravely repul'st by the Governour of the said Castle. ALSO Horrible Newes from Portsmouth, declaring How Collonell Goring hath abused the inhabitants of the said Town that stand for the Parliament. With certaine Observations concerning the particular actions of the said Collonell Goring, since the beginning of this Parliament Whereunto is annexed the Parliaments Resolution concerning the sending of forces to Portsmouth and other places, which are oppressed by the Malignant party of this Kingdom. It is Ordered that this be Printed and published. Iohn. Browne Cler. Parl. London, Printed for Hen. Fowler; August 12. 1642.
Exceeding Ioyfull Newes from DOVER. THe Governor of Portsmouth having at the beginning of this Parliament, discovered a Plot to the Parliament, con∣cerning the design of bring∣ing the Army up to London; which good service (being so acceptable to the Parliament) he being made by the King Governor of the said Town, was likewise established and confirmed Governor of the same by the Parliament; since which time he hath built Sconces and Fortifications, with severall other works under pretence of a good service done to the King and Kingdome, as in∣deed it had beene, if rightly imployed, that Town lying open upon the Sea, and being one of the chief Ports of this Kingdome: But
he having strongly fortified himselfe, and with all under-hand by trifling favours and large promises, won to himselfe a party in the Town, beside the Garison. He now tooke time to de∣clare his treacherous intentions, and to bring that to light which he had long fostered in his bosome. Wherefore finding that the difference be∣tween the King and Parliament, was almost at the height, and fearing that the malignant par∣ty would have the worst, he thought now while he had the power in his own hand, to re∣quite the Parliament with treachery for their honorable gratitude. Wherefore he resigned the said Fort to the King, to the end that it might be imployed a∣gainst the King; for however their pretence of standing for the King, may appeare for the pre∣sent to those that looke no further, yet let but the discerning eye of reason look forward to the end, and quickly a discovery will be made of their black and treacherous intentions. Neverthelesse, though the said Collonell Go∣ring had resigned the Town to his Majesty, and
had a great party in the Town; Yet there were also a considerable party for the Parliament, which if they had been timely seconded might happily have reduced it to its first state of obe∣dience. Which Collonell Goring espying gave a strickt command through out the Town, that upon paine of imprisonment, all men that were either capable of bearing Armes themselves, or able to find men to serve for them, should meet on the Bowling Alley compleately armed, for de∣fence of the King, Parliament and Kingdom. This he did only to discover who went for the Parliament, knowing that they would absent themselves. Which was according to his imagination, for almost halfe the Town & of the better sort declare too that they stood for the King and Par∣liament, but in a contrary sence to that which he intended. Neverthelesse by reason of the Garrison Sol∣diers, and the party which he had obtained in the Town, namely, poore mechanick persons, such whose fortunes are desperate, and divers
of the Kings servants. The said Collonell Go∣rings party was much greater than the other, by which meanes, Collonell Goring having given command, they were forcibly disarmed their goods ceised or namely all manner of Ammu∣nition, and many other insufferable injuries done unto them, to the great grief and terror of all the Inhabitanss there about, God grant that there may bee some speedy course taken to sup∣presse the present, and to prevent future mis∣chiefes of the like nature. For the malignant party did not only aime at that Fort only (if report speake truth) but at Dover also, for it is credibly reported that the last week a Noble-man came to Dover, & in his Majesties name, demanded that the Castle should be resigned to him but the Governour thereof asked him if he had likewise authority from the Parliament, who answered no; nei∣ther cared he for their authority, withall tel∣ling him that if he did not peaceably resigne it, ere long it should be too hot for him, with many other braving words, which the Gover∣nor hearing, being incensed, called for a guard,
telling him that he would lay him where he should be cold enough till that time came; which the valliant Lord seeing, like an unman∣nerly Courtier, turned taile and rid away, not so much as thanking the Governor for his kind entertainment. God grant that all those that are intrusted by the Parliament in matters of such high concern∣ment, may as truly and honorably discharge their duties. The High Court of Parliament likewise will not be wanting in their care and Counsels to be assistant in so religious designe; for they de∣clare that the war being thus begun by his Ma∣jesty, they hold themselves bound in conscience to raise forces for the preservation of the peace of the Kingdom, and protection of the subjects in their persons and estates, according to Law. In the opposing of all which, they desire the hearty concurrence of all the well disposed sub∣jects of this Kingdom, and shall manifest by their courses and endeavours, that they are car∣ried by no by respects, but by the publick good, which they will alwaies preferre before their Lives and Fortunes.
So that it rests only that the free borne English Nation do consider whether they will adhere to the King and his Parliament, by which they have enjoyed all that is deare unto them (and without which they have no possibility of en∣joying any thing) or to the King, seduced by wicked Counsell and Cavaliers, who have de∣signed all to slavery and confusion, which by Gods providence and our joynt endeavour may be timely prevented. FINIS.
