H2855 E1881_1 R209860 99868714 170515
The Horrible and Bloody CONSPIRACY Vndertaken by many Des∣perate Persons who to cry up and in∣troduce the Interests of Charles Stewart would have destroyed & burned the City, made an attempt on the lower seized upon many honorable personages, and covered all things with Fire and Blood. The Names of those speedily to be tryed by the High Court of Justice, are, ohn Russell ohn Mordan ir William Compton Sir Richard Willis, Sir Henry Slingsby Doctor Howet. The Names of those apprehendd on Saturday May the 15. and since. are, Sir William Leighton, Mr. Brandone. Mr. Manly. Mr. Blunden. Mr. Topham, Mr. Dean, Mr. Friar. Mr. Smith. &c. ogether, with the gallant Mustring of the Trained bands of the City on Friday May 21. ondon, Printed for Tho. Vere, and Wil. Gilbert∣son, without Newgate 1658.
A more full Account of the Names of those Confpirators who (to imbrew again the Nation in a new war) would have Levyed a new Army for the Interests of Charles Stewart, and have fired the Ci∣ty of London in severall pla∣ces to accomplish their bloody Designes. YOV may remember that not long stuce we did represent unto you the gallant Reso∣lution of the Common-coun∣cil and the Militia of the Ci∣ty of London, declaring that they would lay down both their lives and fortunes in the cause in which God hath ow∣ned his Highnesse for the defence of the Common-wealth of England, and the main∣tainance
of their own Rghts and libertyes. At the same time there were represented many Declarations and Remonstrances from the Army in Scotland, Ireland and o∣ther places, declaring the same Rerolution to live and dye with his Highnesse. It wil not be amisse, to give you a more full and large account of them, that so the generall inclination of the Souldiers and o∣thers of this nation being found you may in∣crease your admiration that any men should be so unreasonable, as to go about to untwist a Thrée-fold cord which is not easily broken by indeavouring to dissolve the strength be∣twixt England, Scotland and Ireland, which is so firm, and so united. And how could they bing about this Indeavour bu by firing the City of London, the place that gave life un∣to many of them and accomodations to them all, and this to be done, when the City and the the Nations had given assurances upon assurance that they would stand with his Highnesse against all Enemyes whasoever: for they throughly represented, that as often as they look back upon the times past, and call to min the wonderfull things that God hath done for them within the compasse and
revolution of a few years, they cannot but stand amazed at the Admirable Series and course of the Divine providene which hath still gone on in a way not only beyond, but be∣sides their expectation, that so they might be made to know that it was the Lords own doing, and that they themselves were onely but weak and unworthy instruments guided and directed, and acted also by a power above them. They have faithfully represented, that they do find the Lord hath brought glorious things to passe for his people such as some∣times they did neither look nor hope for, such as do make them to acknowledge and con∣fesse that God knoweth better what is good for them then they themselves do. They are pleased to remember the good cause which they first ingaged in, and their frequent and renewed ingagements, and their constant Actings, and prosecutions of it; which, al∣though it was under severall forms and by se∣verall means, yet it was still the same. Viz. The bringing the Nations out of slavery, and the asserting of the spirituall and civill liberty to the people of Grd But above all things, they cannot forget
how highly Instrumentall, God hath made his Highnesse all along in this businesse; so that under God they may say; that by his Highnesse it is that they have not perished in their own follies, nor qecome a prey to the malice of their Enemies. They have declared, that they are truely sensible of the mistakes, divisions & animosi∣ties that have bin amongst them, insomuch that some would have confined the mind and end of God in the great action to their formes, some again to their advantages, and advancement, and by striving so vehement∣ly and so obstinately for their own wayes, the Cause of God had bin betrayed, and the people of God brought into a worse con∣dition then ever had it not bin for the piety and the prudence of his Highnesse, who still followed the good hand of providence, and was still guided and upheld by it. But now when it hth pleased God to give them some fruit of their Prayers and endeavours, and some reward of his High∣nesse labours, when after their long, their troublesome, and dangerous Pilgrimage through the red Sea of blood, and wildernesse of confusion, they have obtained to some pro∣spect,
nay to some tast and Function of Cana∣an the resting place of Gods people: Now after the foundation of Sion hath béen begun to be laid, and that they had hopes of chang∣ing the Tabernacle into a Sanctuary (a san∣ctuary which they might both hope and pray; might continue untill Shiloh come) they can∣not but entertain great grief and heavy im∣pressions of their hearts, to perceive that there should be some of those who once went among them, still doubting, and murmuring, nay disparaging the promised Land and dis∣heartning the people, and indeauouring to bring them back again to the house of Bon∣dage to have their tasks trebly augmented, if not their Generations altogether rooted out. At such a time they doe acknowledge they would be wanting to the cause of God, and to their own duties and ingagements, if they should not beare witnesss against such per∣sons and actings, especially sine they under∣stand that some of them are willing to have the people of England to beléeve, that his Highnesse Army in Scotland is such as they would have them. Therefore in all humble manner they have made their addresses to his Highnesse, and
have both professed and protested that they still doe and will adhere to the glorious Cause in which they were first engaged, and in the defence the prosecution and advance∣ment of that cause they shall (as hitherto they have done) be ready alwayes to adven∣ture their lives and fortunes, for they know no other way (as providence now hath orde∣red things) to maintain and advance that Cause, but only by continuing true and faith∣full to his Highnesse, by whose prudence and valour it hath for a long time bin solely pre∣served and by whose piety they are confident not only to have their Ingagements, but e∣ven the very wishes of their hearts fulfilled, and that in the pursuance of this Cause they will stand by his Highnesse with their lives and fortunes against all persons what soever, not only, the common Enemy, but even those who heretofore have béene so much their friends (if they shall make an op∣position) for whom although they have great tendernesse and bowells of compassion, and for whom they are even bold to become In∣tercessors to his Highnesse, that all good meanes may be used to bring them to a right sence, yet they can no wayes suffer them to
hinder, much lesse to destroy the worke of God. They therefore beséech his Highnesse to be strong, and of a good courage, and they shall ever pray, that as the Lord hath hither∣to prospered him he will evermore continue to make him happy and victorious. This being the sence and resolution of the thrée Armies in the thrée Nations, of the City of London, and all men who are in∣tire to wisdome and understanding, who can imagine that so unreasonable a spirit of folly and division should possesse some men as to breake this staffe of Vnion to destroy the peace of the Nations and to indeavour to mingle all things with fire and blood. And that this is so, may appear by the ex∣amniation of severall pactyes of quality who lately have bin aprehended upon suspition of Treason; you have heard many wéeks since that Colonell John Russell who served the late King in his wars, and is Brother to the Earle of Bedford was committed to ye Tow∣er upon the atttainder of high Treason, & that sir William Compton, Brother to the Earle of Northampton, and sometimes Go∣vernor of Banbury in Ox fordshire, for the
late King was comitted not long afterwards to the Tower upon the same account. Since that time Mr John Mordant bro∣ther to the Earle of Peterborough hath béen committed to the Tower. Sir Richard Willis heretofore Governor of Newark for the late King hath bin also ap∣prehended, and carryed from Covent Garden to the Tower of London for high Trea∣son. Sir Henry Slingsoy of Yorkshire, Knight and Baronet: hath upon the same Account béen carryed to the Tower of London. Doctor John Hewet. Chaplain to the late King, and Doctor of Divinity, hath also bin lent to the Tower upon the account of high Treason against the present Government and the person of his Highnesse the Lord Protector. It was suspected that some of the Presbi∣terian party, and the Anabaptists should by a strange mixture joyn together, and have a hand in this desprate plot. It was thought also that some of the men of the fifth Monarchy should take the bridle in their mouths, and run quite away from all order and Government: but upon the exam∣ination
of many of them it did not appear yt they had any Ingagement in this bloody com∣bination. It was contrived by the Cavaléers, and carryed on so far, yt one Mr. Manly a Turkish Merchant had received a Commission from Charles Stewart, which in January last was dated at Bruges in Flandrs. This Mr. Manly by his Commission was to be one of the Colonells in this Design, which was to be carryed on with all vigour and privacy. It séems that Charles Stewart had so good a conceit of him, that he gave power to the said Mr. Manly to make whom he pleased officers under him, and to give them Com∣mission as it is confessed by some of his com∣panions who desiring to understand the full latitude and the depth of the Design be made answer to them, that they were not to enquire into farther perticulars, but satisfie themselvs that the others who in chief were to com∣mand with him were all persons of worth and honour. Danger appearing to be so considerable and on foot too it was high time for his High∣nesss to look about him. It hath béen a great
providence that in all the plots that have bin laid to imbroyle the Ntion in a new warr, they have been wonderfully discovered, be∣fore they came to take effect: Of this we may make a long Catalogue, but they are all fresh and present in our memoryes. His Highnesse by the mercy of God having understood of this combination which tended so much to the ruine of the publike, and im∣brewing the Nation in a bloody war, again thought fit by the Advice of his Counsell, that a high Court of Iustice should be called for the Tryall of the Delinquents that are so dangerous to the state: And on Monday May the 17. the Commissioners of the said high Court of justice did méet in the painted chamber, where they had a méeting in order to the Tryall of these Delinquents not long before. On this afternoon they took the Oath appointed by a former Act of the Parlia∣ment, The right Honourable the Lord Lisl one of the Commissioners of the great Seal w chosen to be Lord President of the Court, And a Debate being made cencerning the choyce of other Officers, it was resolved that the same Officers who attended thelate high
Court of justice, should be made choyce of to serve in this; It was ordred also, that a place should be made for them to sit in, as heretofore at the upper end of Westminster-Hall, and Carpenters were appointed for the carrying on of the work. But neither the nomination of the Com∣missioners, nor the preparations of the Court, nor the apprehending and exami∣ning of so many of the Plotters could deter their accomplices from going on in their most desperate designe. Therefore an ex∣traordinary care was taken to prevent them and on Saturday May the 15. the Guards were doubled at White-hall, and in all the other placs where the Guards are usually kept. Severall Innes and Taverns were examined and some Armes were discovered, at the severall Gates of the City and in o∣ther places, about sorty of the Cavaléer party were brought to White hall, some were sent to the Gate-house, some to Pau, some to the Councers, some to the Tower, some to one Prison, some to another for that night was appointed to be the night in which they would make their generall Insurrection. They had appointed severall places of
Rendezvouz in severall places of the City, as some of them acknowledged when they were examined. They had many Regiments listed. Eleven a clock at night was the time in which they were to have bin ready to act, and the better to carry on what they had in∣tended to perpetate, they had an intent to re the City in severall places. Amongst those who were apprehended on Saturday night and carried away to Prison, was one Sir William Leighton, who in the late warrs commanded the King owne Troope, and was afterwards a Colonell in Colchester. There was also a Major apprehended who formerly had béen a Major of horse in Glo∣cestershire for the late King, an served him afterwards at VVallingford under Colonel Blague. There were severall others who were ta∣ken with this Major at the sign of the Bell. in Carterlane, who have confessed much, they were carried with said Major unto the Tower. There were also severall Captains and o∣ther officers taken who were of ye late kings party, and are now in Custody in the Tower
severall Apprentices were taken and are stil in Custody, some of whom have made large Confessions. You are to understand that so many have bin apprehended, that the Lord Leiut. of ye Tower hath ever since ye said Saturday night bin constantly imployed in taking Informa∣tions and Examinations, and in sending out warrants for the apprehending of suspected persons. There is taken one Mr. Topham a Silk∣man of Canon-street, who confesseth he was entertained as a Captain in Manleys Regi∣ment, and for the better managing the design there were brought to ye said Tophams he use al sorts of Ammunition a great part of which as Topham himself confesseth was caryed a∣way, & a great part thrown into the house of office when they found the Design to be dis∣covered. This Topham and Manly were principal mn that were to act in this City, and they had undertaken to seize on the right honou∣rable the Lord Robert Titchborn, unto whose valour and Vigilance the City oweth much for it's safty. Sir William Leighton was to surprize ye guard of the Souldiers at
Pauls, and to make sure of ye Tower of which shortly you will have a more large account. There is one Fryer in Tower-street who is apprehended & carryed to the Tower who was to be a Commander in Manlyes Reig∣ment, & who had furnished those of his party with powder, buets, & other materials for war There is also one Captain Dean apprehen∣ded for this Conspiracy, who with some o∣thers, had promised to beat down all before them in Holborn, Covent Garden and those parts of the City. There is also one Brandon & John Blundon apprehended who were both to be Comman∣ders in the Army. And many more are taken dayly, as a Linnen Draper living at the go¦den Key in Cheapside, and many others who being sent to severall prisons, and some upo the guard among the Souldiers it is impossi∣ble for ye present to give a list of their names On Friday May the 21. the Train'd bands of the City of London had a general muster in insbury fields, where they gallantly showed how experienced and how resolute they were to maintain the honour of the Ci∣ty and their own Interests and sfty against all Opponents whatsoever. FINIS.
