H3411 E980_8 R202526 99862776 168559
THE Humble Desires OF A FREE SVBIECT AND True Lover of the Liberties of the three NATIONS, OF ENGLAND SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND, And of the Dominions, and Ter∣ritories belonging to them; Whereby To unite them in Love, and Amity. LONDON, Printed for Fr. Coles, 1659.
The humble desires of a free subject, &c. IN the first place, he humbly desi∣reth to know by what immedi∣ate Power, and under whose Commands he and all other free people are to be subject to pay Cu∣stoms, Taxes, and all other Leavies, and Im∣positions; not that he hath the least desire to contradict, or resist any lawfull Power, but to satisfie himselfe and the people, and encourage them in giving obedience there∣unto. II. Secondly, He doth then demand in the behalfe of the aforesaid people, that those who have such a Power, and are intrusted with it over all Liberties, Priviledges, Freedomes, Immunities, shall declare unto the World without any dissimulations, or mentall Reservations whatsoever; what the people shall trust unto from them as their Supreame or chiefe Governor, or o∣ther subordinate Governors, and Magistrats
in the three Nations, whether Military or Civill. III. Thirdly, he desires that the said people may have a Parliament that shall be freely chosen, and without the exceptions of those who are intrusted to make choyce of them, as being men fearing God, and void of Co∣vetousnesse, and Hypocrisie. And when the said persons so chosen shall sit in Parli∣ament, he doth desire that they shall there Act freely, without the least molestation or interruption, and not to be opposed by the Lord Protector, or his Counsell, or the Ge∣nerall, or any of the Generals of the Army, or Armies, either by Sea, or by Land, be∣longing to the three Nations of the King∣domes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions, and Territories thereto be∣longing: IV. Fourthly, that the Parliament thus elect∣ed, and assembled, they shall be desired to call unto account any whatsover, of what summe, or severall summes of mony, or monies they have received, and what
charges and expences, have been disbursed and laid out within these seven last years, or more, as they themselves shall think fit. V. Fifthly, that all persons whatsoever who have been intrusted by former Parliaments, or by the Lord Protector, or Council, or any others by their Commissions, shall be lyable to be called in question; and give unto the Parliament, or the Commitee for that pur∣pose chosen, a faithfull, and a true account upon oath, of all those monies which from time to time they have been intrusted with, and what they have either received or dis∣bursed, and what summes of mony they have still lying in their hands, for the use of the publick. VI. Sixthly, that not any of the said free peo∣ple of the three Nations, and Territories thereto belonging, shall not be molested, or imprisoned, or have any violence offered to their persons; but shall have full power and liberty to seek for their redresse unto the Law, and the Courts of Iustice, according to the ancient constitutions of the Laws of
the three Nations, and the Dominions be∣longing to them. VII. Seventhly, that the aforesaid people may have the free liberty of their consciences in Religion, provided they do not deny the Deity, or the three persons in the Trinity, or hold forth any thing that shall tend unto blasphemy, or prophanness, or is repugnant to the truth contained in the Word of God. VIII. Eighthly, that all those who heretofore have been opposite, or who have either actually borne armes, or privately and sini∣sterly maintained, or upheld any thing that is contrary to this present Government, and shall for the time to come submit, and come in, and subscribe to be true and reall, and cordially faithfull, to the peace of these three Nations, and the establishment of this present Government; that then the said per∣sons shall live quietly in their severall habi∣tations, and vocations, and be admitted to be unmolested by those persons who are the Supreame Magistrates, as aforesaid.
IX. Ninthly, that whereas Monopolies have been so prejudicial to the State, and so cry∣ed down by Parliaments, that for the future they may be all taken away, and that there be no further grant for any Monopoly whatsoever, within these three Nations, or any part of the Territories, or Dominions belonging unto them. X. Tenthly, that all Cities, Townes, and Corporations, and all Manufactories shall enjoy their priviledges, freedomes, and im∣munities, unles they be regulated to the con∣trary by the Authority of the Parliament. XI. Eleventhly, that some way may bee found out to ease the people, if possible, of their taxes and burdens; and for the time to come that the taxes be so indifferently, and so proportionably laid, that a due regard be had unto the estates of every particular person; but those who are rich and men of quality & substance, may be raised so much above them in the taxes and impositions, as they exceed them in their possessions and estates.
XII. Twelfthly, that due incouragement be given to all schooles of good learning in the education of youth, and that the Ministers of the holy Word, such who as well in their conversation, as in their learning are wel qualified therunto, may have so li∣beral a proportion of eternal things, as may be sui∣table to their families, and the dignity of so great a calling. XIII. Lastly, for the better reducing of all men toge∣ther, to a right temper, and to the better under∣standing of one another, and for the the removing of all jealousies, discontents, and feares, that there shall be an Act of Grace, whereby to confirme the hearts of the people, and to conforme them to a free submission to one Government; that so the lawes of the Land may flourish and continue in their ancient Splendour and Vigour, and no noise, nor the fear of any noise of intestine Trumpets, or be Divisions heard amongst us, that we may all with as much joy as safety, sit in peace under the shadows of our own Vines, and feed on the fruits thereof with such an effectuall thanksgiving, that it may not serve only to resort and commend, but be a sanctified invitation to promote the happiness we enjoy. FINIS.
