H3474 e968_6* R202519 99899514 153990
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF Many Thousand Citizens and Inhabitants in and about the City of LONDON. To the Parliament of the COM∣MON-WEALTH of ENGLAND. Together with the PARLIAMENTS Answer thereunto. LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-alley, 1658.
To the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England. The Humble Petition of Diverse, Citizens and Inhabitants in and about the City of London. Sheweth, THat whereas after a long Contest in this poore Island against Tyranny and Injustice (wherein the treasure of the Nation hath been exhausted, and the precious Blood of many thousands spilt, the Parliament being Necessitated to spend their Time for many Years in maintaining the War, and providing for the Defence of themselves, and such who engaged with them in that quarrell) God hath been pleased (we hope in Mercy to the Nation) to bring You once again together in a time of Peace, to heal our Breaches, to Establish firm∣ly the Ancient Rights and Freedomes of England, which were the subject of this great quarrell (which God decided on our side) and to settle such wayes of dispensing impar∣tiall Justice, that the Name of God may be exalted in Righteousness, and no man in the end have cause to repent of the Blood and Treasure expended in the pursuance of the same. Your Petitioners therefore humbly crave leave to present to your Honours their sense of some of the principall things wherein that Tyranny consisted, against which we did then in Judgment and Conscience Engage; Which were, 1. The late Kings Usurpation over Parliaments, Com∣mitting and keeping diverse of their Members in Prison, as long as he thought good, without bringing them to try∣all; In preventing their Meeting, and Dissolving them when they were met, at Pleasure: His Deniall and opposi∣tion of their Supream Trust, to provide in all things for the safety and welfare of the People, under pretence of a Negative voice. II. The Challenging of such an Interest in the Militia, as to Command the same at his Pleasure, without the Par∣liament
and to place the Subordinate Commands of the same in whom he pleased: whereby he claimed a Power to enforce Obedience to any of his illegal Commands, both in matters Religious and Civill; which directly tended to the razing out the very Name and Beeing of Parliaments, which have been the Ancient Preservers of the Nations Freedome. III. His Introducing and exercising of an Arbitrary Po∣wer by his Councel and others, over mens Persons and E∣states, when they ought to have been tryed by the Laws of the Land. IV. His assuming a Right (under pretence of Necessity for the Nations good, and to secure it from future At∣tempts, whereof he onely would be Judge) to Leavy Mo∣ney upon the People without their Consent in Parliament; wherein (as in the Particulars aforesaid) he pretended he was unaccountable for what he did, either to the Parlia∣ment, or any earthly Power whatsoever. And your Petitioners doe humbly crave lve to minde your Ho∣nours of the many Signal Testimonies, which God hath given of his displeasure against all who have endeavoured to support the afore∣said Tyranny, or have espoused it as their quarrell, und r any noti∣on whatsoever: And of the price now put into your hands to secure the Nation, from future attempts and dangers of the like Nature: And not onely the Armies Declarations, and the Agreement of the People, proposed by them (remaining upon Record in your House) but the Ruines and Spoiles of the Land, and of the many Thousand Families therein: The expence of many Milions of Treasure, the wounds and scars, and lost members of very many, and (above all) the precious blood of such, who were slain in the quarrell, together with the long waiting, earnest and patient expectation of many good people (retaining in their hearts affection to the good old Cause) cry aloud to you to call upon God with us for Wisdome, that you may be taught, and enabled to establish such a sure foun∣dation of Right, Freedome and Justice, that the People of the Na∣tion may not be put again upon such hazards of their Lives and expence of their Estates for the defence of the same.
Therefore Your Petitioners Humbly pray, That together with the constant succession of Free Par∣liaments duely Chosen, the Supream Power and Trust, which the People (the Original of all just Power) commit unto them, to make Laws, Constitutions and Offices for the Government of the who, and to call all Officers of Justice, and Ministers of state whatsoever to account, may be so clearly Declared and Secured against all Attempts to the contrary, that no question may henceforth arise concern∣ing the same. That the Militia may be settled with such Wisdome and full Security, that it may not be in the power of any to make use thereof against the People or their Successive Par∣liaments either to destroy their Beeing, or their Freedome. That no Money may be Leavied upon the People (on any pretence whatsoever) but by their common Consent in Parliament. That our Civill Warres being long since ended, the Peo∣ples Persons and Estates may be onely subject to be dispo∣sed of according to the Laws of the Land; and that hence∣forth none may be reputed Offenders, or proceeded a∣gainst by imprisonment, or otherwise, but such who shall be really found transgressors of the Law: And that there may be speedy consideration had of the long Imprison∣ment of many Persons well-affected (and some in remote places) without any due prosecution: And we the rather press this, because it hath been the practise of former Par∣liaments, and in particular of the late Memorable Long-Parliament, to take notice of, and redress the grievances of the People, to relieve those who were illegally oppressed and to restore them to the enjoyment of Liberty, their common Birth-right by the Law of the Land; which the Lord hath signally owned, and blest from Heaven, and the good People have abundantly rejoyced in. That so long as it shall be judged Necessary to keep up an Army for the preservation of the People from the at∣tempts of the common Enemy, Domestick or Foraign, the
Officers and Souldiers who have hazarded their lives for the Nations Liberty, may not be turned out of their respe∣ctive imployments without a legall triall at a Court-Mar∣tiall, that so the Military Power may be preserved in the hands of such, who are not meerly Mercinary, Newters, or Disaffected. And that as the safety of our Religion is concerned in the Defence of our Civill Rights, so such provision may now be made for the encouragement of the sincere Pro∣fessours of the same; that no tender Conscience may be oppressed. And in doing these things you will be glorious Instruments in the hand of God, and Honourable in your Country, And the Lives and Estates of your Petitioners shall be freely exposed to hazard in your just Defence. And Your Petitioners, &c. Your Petitioners accompting it no small part of their Birth-right (as English-men) not onely to chuse their Suc∣cessive Representatives, but also freely to present their de∣sires and grievances to them when Assembled in Parlia∣ment, drew up the Petition above written; with inten∣tions to have submitted the matters therein contained to the judicious consideration of the last Parliament, at their last Session, when the Doores were set open to all its mem∣bers, but were by the sudden unexpected Dissolution thereof prevented. But we humbly crave leave to acquaint your Honours with severall unusual and intollerable Breaches made upon our Freedome, and the dear bought Liberty of all the Peo∣ple of England, concerned with ours therein; both du∣ring the time of the modest, sober, and peaceable proce∣dure in the management of the said Petition and after∣wards; Whilest we were promoting it many threatnings were cast forth against the persons concerned therein; Af∣ter the Dissolution of the Parliament, the Petition it self was highly Censured; and some of the Petitioners were imprisoned for appearing therein, and others discharged from their Imployments for favouring the good things Petitioned for.
Wherefore Your Petionrs farther pray, That the Right of sober, peaceable Petitioning unto Parliaments may be asserted and secured to the People. That your Petitioners may be vindicated, and such who have sustained illegall restraint, or been turned out of their places for owning the said Petition, may be repaired and satisfied. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. This Petition being signed by many thousands, was presented to the Parliament, by several Justices of the Peace, Gentlemen, Merchants and Citizens, who presented the same to the Parliament in the Name of the rest. Tuesday, the 15th. of February, 1658. The House being informed, that those Gentlemen of good affections to the Common-wealth, who for∣merly attended to deliver a Petition to this House, were without at the doore, they were called in, and Mr. Samuell Moyer in the name of the rest, presented to the House their Petition, and afterwards the Petition∣ers withdrew. The Petition was read, and was directed to the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, and was intituled; The Humble Petition of divers Citizens and Inhabitants in and about London. Resolved, &c. That the Answer to be given to the Petitioners shall be, That the House hath read their Petition. That some of the particulars mentioned in their Petition, the House hath alrea∣dy taken into Consideration, and that such others as are fit for the consideration of this House, they will in due time consider of them, and doe expect that the Petitioners should acquiesee therein, according to their own expressions. The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Spea∣ker gave them the Answer of the House accordingly. Jo. Smythe Clerk of the Parliament
