L2494 669.f.16[29] 99870127 163185
A List of the Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, Generals, Maior Generalls, &c. and Colonells, of the Scots Kings party slaine and taken Prisoners, Duke Hamilton: Lieu. Gen. Leshly. E. Derby beheaded. Lieu. G. Middleton. Maj. Gen. White. Maj. G. Montgomery. Maj. G Roe Oneal. Maj. Gen. Graves. Maj. Gen. Massey Bishop of Clogher Gen. By his Majesty DEATH the Hieroglyphix. A PROCLAMATION: WHEREAS the Crown and Scepter of England, Scotland, and Ireland have so often been taken from me, not∣withstanding all my Re-inthroniza∣tions, and I have been still laid by, yet now my Victorious Sword hath placed me in Tryumph, where I sit clothed with the Royall Robes, and weare the Crown without distur∣bance, where Wormes are my Companions, and the Bones of all the dead my Subjects. If therefore any of the Generation of CHARLES STƲART, or other English, Irish, or Scots whatsoe∣ver, presume to josle me, or be my Competitor, he shall soon be my Captive; If the first step be in the Throne the second shall be in the Grave; I have long given warning, but wilbe at Courtesie no longer; And now I have begun to set so good footing on this part of the Earthen Globe, that I shal attempt to Conquer all the Emperours, Kings and Monarches in the World. Given at the Rout at Worcester, the remarkable third day of Sep∣tember, 1651. before my Regall Picture. DEATH. THE WOEFVLL MIRROVR of MONARCHY REVELATION 13. 18. HEre is wisdome, Let him that hath understand∣ing count the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a Man, and his number is six hundred three∣score and six. Let him that hath but so much Wisdome as by A∣rithmaticke to adde so small a Summe, count, and here hee shall finde it (punctuall) to an Ʋnite. 1 It must be substracted out of the Number which is comprehended in a Man, and that as hee is the Beast. 2 This Number must amount to the just Summe of 666. 3 The Scots King comming into England with his Irish Papists, and Presbiterian Kirke, upon the account of the Nationall League and Covenant, And by them Proclaimed King of Brittaine; Exactly beareth this number of the Beast. the brIttIsh King.—003 hIs IrIsh papIsts—004 natIonaLL LeagVe,—156 anD—500 presbIterIan kIrke.—003 666 A List of the Family from which CHARLES the second King of Scotland descended, that sat in the fatall Throne of Scotland, and came to untimely ends. THe late King Charles (his own father) be∣headed at White-hall gate. King James (his Grandfather) poisoned. Queen Mary before him beheaded at Foddring by Castle. King James the fifth murdered. King James the fourth slain at Denfield. King James the third slain at Baneksborn. King James the second at Rxborough. King James the first put to death by his Subjects. King Alexander the third killed with a fal from his horse King Donald the seventh twice deposed, and at last cast into Prison, and his eies put out. King Duncan the second slain. King Malcolme the third slain at Alnwick. King Mackheth slain. King Duncan the first slain. King Malcolme the second put to death by his Subjects. King Grimus slain. King Constantine the fourth slain. King Keneth the third murdered by a Scotch woman. King Culenus murdered. King Duffus murdered in the County of Murray. King Indulphus slain. King Malcolme the first murdered by his own servants. King Constantine the third deposed. King Constantine the second slain. King Donald the fifth killed himselfe. King Alpinus beheaded. King Dougallus drowned in the river Spey. King Fergus the third poysoned by his wife. King Eugenius the eighth murdered. King Ambirkeletus murdered. King Eugenius the fifth slain. King Maldxin strangled by his wife. King Ferquerd killed by a Woolfe. King Donald the fourth drowned in the River Tay. King Ferquard killed himselfe in prison. King Constantine the first murdered. King Edgenius the first slain. King Fethalmashus murdered by an Harper. King Augustinus slain. King Romachus beheaded. King Donald the third murdered. King Donald the second slain. King Findocus murdered as he was hunting King Nathalocus murdered and cast into a Privy. King Athrico killed himselfe. King Euthodius murdered by his servants. King Satrael murdered. King Ethodius murdered by an Irish Harper King Conarus died in prison. King Mogallus murdered. King Lugthacus murdered. King Dahdanas beheaded by his Subjects. King Evenus died in Prison. King Gillus murdered. King Durstus slain. King Thereus banished by his Subjects. King Routha deposed. King Nothalus murdered. King Ferethatius murdered. King Fergus the first drowned at Carickefergus in Ire∣land. Besides what have befallen others, not mentioned in histories, and this Charles Stuart is but the 110 King that ever was of Scotland, who is Proclaimed Traytor, and Fugitive in England. His Uncle was poisoned, and his mother and brother both fled, and proclaimed Tray∣tors to England. A List of the Earles, Lords, Knights, Generall Officers, and Colonells of the Scots KINGS party, slaine and taken Prisoners. Lords taken Priso∣ners. EArle Cleaveland Earl Rothes. Earl Lautherdale. Earle Kenmore Earle Leven Earle Kelly Earle Corneway Earle Shrewsbury. Earle Marshall Earl Craford Earl Cornworth. Lord Leith Lord Ogleby Lord Burginie Lord Humbee Lord Lee. Lord Grandison Lord Montgomery Lord Molineux Lord Peasly Lord Cranston Lord Sinclare. Lord Spany. Lord Kilmore Lord Talbot. Lord Hugh Montgomery, Lords slaine and dead of their wounds Duke Hamilton Earle Derby. Lord Newton. Lord Eniskillen. Lord Liberton. Knights tooke Pri∣soners. Sir Timothy Fetherston∣hough. Sir James Lumsden Sir Wil. Douglas Sir John Gell. Sir Tho. Trallop. Sir James Graham Sir George Keith. Sir Wil. Keith. Sir Tho. Tompson. Sir Tho. Terry Sir George Melvill Sir John Dalzell. Sir James Fowle. Sir James Lockier Sir John Packington Sir John Douglas Sir Tho. Urquart Sir John Tompson Sir James Graham junior. Sir Alexander Forbs Sir Thomas Simkins Sir Wil. Hart. Sir John Brown. Sir David Oglesby. Sir Phillip Eustruther. Knights slaine and put to death. Sir Robert Lumsdale. Sir Henry Hide. Generall Officers taken Prisoners. Lieutenant General Leshly Lieut. General Middeleton Lieu. General James Weymes Major Generall Massey Major General Graves Major Generall Piscoty Major General James White Major General Deel Major Gen. Montgomery Adjutant Gen: James Bick∣erton Adjutant Gen: Waddel Adjut: Gen: James Doukin Adjut. Generall Christopher Wormesly. Engineer General Fosset Commissary Gen. Moor Marshall Gen: White Quarterm. Gen. Oliphant. Waggon-master Gen: Alex: Hariot Generall Officers slain. Major Gen: Hen. Roe Oneal Maj: Gen. Shane O Cane. Colonells taken Priso∣ners. Colonel Lumsden Col Hamilton Col: VVallip Col. Gourdoun Col. Ker Col. Alexander mac Donell. Col. Coney Col. Thoral. Col. Booth Col. Ashurst Col. Egerton Col. Holland Col. Bradshaw Col. Blake Col. Mateland Col. Straughan Col. Barthlick Col. Sinkler Col. Rowse Col. Stuart Col. Hume Col. Drummond Col. John Cashallum Col. Bullet Col. James Guardian Col. Wil. Cunningham. Col. Kilhead Col. Andrew Milves Col. Wil. Hurry Col. Wil. Keith. Col. Benbow Col. Spine. Col. Lodowick Drummond Col Boza. Col. Turner Col. Fleskin Col. John Butler. Col. John Hume Col. George Keeth. Col. James Turner Col. Lowther Col. Marlo Col. Bewcanon. Colonells slaine. Col: Rice mac Colleketagh Col Phil: mac Tool O Neale Col. Hugh Maguyre Col: Oneal Col: Hugh mac Mughan Col: Straughan Col: Hamilton Col: Florence Fitz Patrick Bishops, Magistrates, and eminent Clergy-men, Phi∣sitians, &c taken pri∣soners. Bishop of Clogher Mr. Fanshaw Secretary Mr. Jackson Chamber-man. Mr. Freeman Chamber-man Mr. Bray Chamber-man. Thomas Listour Mayor of Wor∣cester. Mr. James Bridges Sheriffe Dr. Rob. Burnet Dr. Cuningham Dr. Chute Dr. Davis Dr. Darly Dr. Forrest Dr. Kendday Dr. Rosse. M. Rob. Douglas Kirk-man Mr. James Hambleton Kirk-man M. Mungo Law Kirk-man M. George Puliston Kirk-man M. George Rutters Kirk-man M. John Sharpe Kirk-man M. Hugh Ramsey Kirk-man M. Andrew Ker Kirkman. M. Rob. Mercer Kirk man M. Iames Merk Kirk-man. M. Andrew Merk Kirk-man M. Iohn Carter Kirk-man M. Rob. Blgboy Kirk-man M. David Liddal Kirk-man M. Wil. Cloyd Kirk man M. Iohn Waller Kirk-man M. David Leech Kirk-man. Slain and put to death Bishop of Downe Nicholas Love Minister Dr. Lewen Eusebius Andrewes Consil. &c. LONDON Printed by Robert Ib∣bitson, 1652.
