l2851 e1696_1 99868317 170274
THE CIVIL WARS OF FRANCE, DURING THE BLOODY REIGN OF CHARLS the Ninth: Wherein is shewed, The sad and bloody Murthers of many thousand Protestants, dying the streets and Rivers with their blood for thirty daies together, whose innocent blood cries to God for vengeance. And may stand as a Beacon fired to warn, and a a Land-Mark to pilot all Protestant Princes and States to a more secure harbour than peace with Papists. Faithfully collected out of the most antient and modern Authors, by a true Protestant, and Friend to the Common-wealth of England. London. Printed by H.H. for W. London and are to be sold at the Sun and Bible near Py-Corner. MDCLV.
To that flourishing Sprig of Virtue, and growing Branch of Honour; the most ingenuous T. H. of Grays-Inne, Esquire. SIR, THese first Fruits with bending humility, stoops to be pluckt by your sweet hand; and tast∣ed by the good relish of
your favorable acceptance; and if they have but the ho∣nour to pearch on the least branch of your noble mind, it is all I crave from the seat of your juditious approba∣tion; and though I boldly knit the thread of my La∣bour to your noble name, yet the great affections I ow, and the greater your merits demand; emboldens me to conclude, That as your incomparable worth is my encourager, so will it as easily pardon as beget this boldness. Therefore it is, that with strong presum∣ption of your genuine in∣terpretation,
this peice takes Sanctuary under the refreshing shelter of your noble Patronage, from the scorching heat of malitious censure. May you be dire∣cted to tread the steps of your brave Progenitors, e∣specially to trace the Re∣nowned walks of the Right Honourable your noble Fa∣ther; whose valour for his Countrey, and immoveable constancy to a good cause, may stand as a pattern of I∣mitation to future ages, and challenge a Room among the truly worthy: Thus noble Sir go on, that as in
your younger years you have stamped your actions in the mint of virtue, ther∣by coyning Renown as an inseperable adjunct to your great parts; so may you by continuance in the same Tract, cut out to your self a habitation in the hearts of all that love and honor vir∣tue. So sitting in the lap of Prosperity, it may at last be sanctified in order to eter∣nity. And may the hopeful promises of your lively and capacious Soul inlaid with Gallantry, so fructifie, that they may struggle with your years for growth, and
fill the longing world with expectation. Now Sir since I have boldly begun, let me humbly end, ingeniously confessing my self in a great degree unfortunate, in hav∣ing no nobler a sacrifice, to offer at the shrine of so much Honour and Virtue: All I request is, that I may march under the Banner and conduct of your favour and commands; For I am, Noble Sir, Your Humble Servant.
ERRATA. PAge 5. line 11. for pacings read parings. p. 5. l. 21. f. check hers, r. check-mate hers. p. 25. l. 26. f. there r. her. p. 63. l. 26. f drawning r. drowning. p. 70. l. 13. f. had not r. had not ta∣sted. p. 77. l. 8. f. but to a little belief, r. to en∣force a little belief. p. 89. l. 35. f. bis brave sol∣diers, r. this brave Souldier. p. 101. l. 21. f. war r. way. Courteous Reader, THou art desired to pass by the unavoidable errata's of the Press.
The Epistle to the READER. THIS following Narra∣tive is a Theme so sadly copious, that if thou art a true Protestant, thou canst not but bewail the sad fate of many thousand innocent Christians whose sufferings, and their enemies cruelty strove for preheminence, who died not so much like Martyrs, as murthered like sheep; being not o∣vercome by force, but betrayed by Treachery, and perjury. Who can but from the depth of sadness turn his sorrow into tears, forcing open the bowels of his compassion, through
the flood-gates of his eyes; when we shall consider, so many Lords and Gallant Commanders breath their last, by an ignominous and base death, not to be compared for cruel∣ty, perjury and treachery, in any age or History; for indeed these sad ca∣lamities challenge the Tribute of a bleeding heart; so that if the Rea∣ders understanding be not already garrisoned with prejudice, or if the times be but patient of hearing truth this Book may prove of some use to this Nation. The ruins of Truth is often en∣velloped in the sable clouds of Obli∣vion. Nimium altercando amit∣titur, Truth may be lost in a crowd; therefore my industry to preserve an∣tiquity, may stand as an argument against calumny; for each Book prest into the world, is as a Bark at Sea; the first as subject to censure, as the last to storms; therfore I cannot but expect a shower of censures; yet, as
Mr. Feltham saies, It is the easiest part to censure; and though men think thereby to be accounted wise, yet (sayes he) there is no∣thing discovers a Fool more; for he that knows least censures most; Ignorance gives disparagement▪ a lowder tongue than knowledge; like Rats that love to eat Books they cannot read, and however I may suffer the venome of Asps, which grow on some mens tongues, yet have I done without crime, what I ought to do in conscience; and the more impetuous the storms, and rapid torrents of calumny assault and beat upon my endeavours, the more shall I, like the Traveller in the Fable, hug my self in the Cloak of my own Innocency and Integrity; that though the success of my Labour prove abortive to some, yet shall I enjoy the fredom of my own desire, and reward my self with that con∣tent, that the envious World can
neither give, nor take from me. It is not unknown to the World that something of this nature is ex∣tant, yet may I humbly and truly say, is short of this: for the Origi∣nal Structures and composure of this Narrative, fetches his Materi∣als from sundry Authors, both Mo∣dern and Antient; and being cul'd from the Reliques of Antiquity, by a careful gleaning out of many into one, may therefore challenge the privilege to say, that all others want somewhat of this; being an exact Epitomy of the most remark∣able passages of the Civil Wars, during this Kings Reign; yet as succinct as an orderly proceeding can admit. And Courteous Reader, that thou mayest be perswaded to go further then the Entrance, I do as∣sure thee, that the body of this Histo∣ry is collected from the best Writers of both sides, whose tinctures of re∣flection according to their Byasses, is
so ballanced, that the Narrative stands free from the prejudicate part of either, being as impartial as pen can collect from the Original of antient Records; and as well distanced from the gashes of a par∣tial Pen, as the two Poles from one another, or the Antipodes from us. For I find what any Protestant wri∣ter inserts of the worst part, is no less published, than known by the Catholicks themselves, for they cannot deny the act, only they excuse the manner. And this advantage will come by this collection, that whereas it was in large volumes, now it is reduced and fitted to the time, and purses of those that had no occasion, and less abilities to ac∣complish the perusal or purchasing of large Folio's, which I think was the grand reason of stifling the knowledge hereof to many of this age. Reader, thou art here presented
with the most horrid Rapes, Mur∣thers, Perjury, and Treacherous Cruelty of a Prince and Court, that ever landed on European shore, for in few daies all the Protestant No∣bility and Gentry, with Ladies and innocent Gentlewomen and children to the number of fourty thousand, were inhumanely butchered, and cut off by the Kings special Command∣ment. Here thou mayest see a Prince besmearing himself with the Goar blood of his own Subjects, and at last wallowing in his own; we shall here see Religious Vows and Pro∣mises, no stronger ties to the King, and Court, than a Rope of sand to a wild beast; being gone so far in perjury, that the Kings faith was accounted like the Greeks, whose unfaithfulness to their promises, is become Proverbial, that when one would express perjury, they term∣ed it Greca fides, for though a Creditor had ten bonds, and as ma∣ny
Sureties and Seals, yet will he find it extreme hard to accomplish his debt: so when a Jew is to deal with a Genoa, he puts his finger in his eye fearing his Treachery. They resolve to have no other virtue ram∣pant than perjury and cruelty; A∣bandoning that part of Religion, which ties to a strict observance of Duty. Omnia Religiosa nunc ri∣dentur; they will wade no further in Religion than may serve their cruel ends; insomuch, that in one Town which the Protestants kept, they engraved on the gate this Mot∣to, Roy sans foy, ville sans peur, the King had no faith, nor they no fear. And as the Roman Emperor Caligula, said of Seneca's Works, they were Arena sine calce, sand without lime, having no connexion, so was the King of France his So∣lemn Oaths, and Promises. It is a Christian accomplishment in Princes to govern, non per timorem, sed
per amorem, as it is said of Octa∣vus Augustus. And when any judg∣ment befalls this Nation, let them remember, that as they made it an Acheldema, or Field of Blood, so will God the place of his Plagues, for who knowes not that the Blood of so many thousand souls, crys to hea∣ven for vengeance, upon the third and fourth Generation; and I could wish that all Protestant Princes would beware how they shake hands with such faithless People. Now the right use of these sad and sudden murthers should be to learn us the necessity of being ready prepared for such violent deaths, and that prosperity is as diet to us, Adversity as Physick, reducing to a right tast of these mortal enjoy∣ments; How happy will the Torments of cruelty be, when our cyes are fix∣ed by faith on an Eternal inheri∣tance, linking our selves in that golden Chain of Salvation, which
extends from Eternity to Eternity, Death comes not unexpected when a soul is interessed in Christ our Savi∣our; how necessary is it for us to live ready to dy. He that too closely hugs transitories, makes a rent in his constancy, and a greater in his soul. How can a Christians Judgement but be at nonage, when he values not the true worth of Celestials, but puts them in the ballance with Ter∣rene things; He indeed hath found the Philosophers stone, that can turn all events into a Subjection to Gods Will. It was the gratious words of Holy Greenham, having food and rayment let us take the rest as an o∣verplus: these poor Souls had no o∣ther warning peice to dy than sud∣den and violent deaths; that like the flying fish, reported to be in great hazzard, by the Shark and Dol∣phin in the Sea, yet when advan∣ced into the air to escape, he is by Birds of prey in no less danger; so
were these poor Saints of God; in War hazardous, in Peace undone; What shall we say of that Religion, which perjury, cruelty, blood and the greatest cruelties, are reckoned as virtuous Jewels in the Crown of their Government, they are sweet when seasonable and parallel to their murtherous Hearts, and it must needs presage ruin to that Nation, that stands on no other Pillars for their foundation, than bloody and infamous Plots, and Treachery; who will not conclude that Nation lies level to justice, and I wish the large field of Liberty allowed the Papists in England to walk in, may not insensably grow our ina∣voidable and swift ruin, since it is well known by all how they wait for our destruction. But to contract, let me intrea
my sincere and publick intentions, (which is all I adopt to be mine) and that ex abundanti amoris, out of the surplusage of Love thou wilt waft my Endeavours to the Haven of thy kind embraces, where I cast Anchor and rest.
Reader, these Books following are printed for, and are to be sold by Richard Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible neer Py-Corner. THe General Practice of Physick, Folio. Drummonds Hist. of 5. Kings of Scotl. fol. The Fortune Book in fol. English. Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixot, Fol. Mr Collings Cordials, 1st. 2d. & 3d. part, quarto. His Vindiciae Ministerii, quarto. His answer to Mr Sheppard, quarto. His answer to Fisher and Hammond, quarto. His answer to Boatman, Prin, & Humfries, qua. Dr Holdsworths one and twenty Sermons, quar. Euclides Elements in quarto Eng. History of seven Champions, quarro. Packet of Letters, quarto. Cupids Messengers, quarto. The birth of Mankind or Womens book, quar. The perfect Pharisee under Monkish holines, qu. The false Jew, quarto. Mr Collings 5 lessons for a Christian to learn, 8. His Faith and Experience, octavo. Mr Wincolls Poems, octava. Excellency of Christ, octavo. Erasmus Colloquies, octavo. Wings and Libourns Urania Practica, octavo. Velitationes Polemicae, octavo. Janua Linguarum, octavo. Brinsley's Cordelius, octavo. Mr Sidenham's Mystery of Godliness, octavo. Mr Sidenham's hypocrisie discoved, octavo. Paul Hobson's last book of Queries, octavo. Watson's untaught Bridegroom, twelves.
Place this fol: i: Men quartered Aliue. Roasted on a spit Rauishing woomen Burning men Aliue Beating mens Braines out Ripping vp woomen wth Child Cutting Throats 300: protestants Murthered in a Church Stabbing with daggers Men Cutt in peeces
The Civil Wars of France. CHAP. I. The Contents. THe Reign of Charls the ninth, A Parlia∣ment called, the Government committed to the Queen Mother during the Kings minority, the names of Hugonet and Papist forbid on pain of death, Prince of Conde and King of Navar in discontent departs the Court, the King of Ne∣var made Lieutenant General, and joyntly inter∣essed in the Government with the Queen Mother, the Princes desire a Toleration of Religion for the Protestants, which is privately granted, the Protestants multiply, and the Princes protect them, demanding the Queens promise for Tolera∣tion, the Protestants that were in Prison for Re∣ligion freed by a Decree of the Council, the Duke of Guise surrenders the Keys of the Palaces to the King of Navar, the King crowned, the Prin∣ces of the Bloud, and Duke of Guise contends at the Coronation about precedency, the King gives it to the Duke of Guise, the Constable for∣sakes the Protestants, and cleaves to the Duke of Guise, the Queen Mother for her own advantage joyns with the King of Navar, and gives some liberty to the Protestants, which so enrages the Catholick party as presently all former Edicts in behalf of the Protestants were broken by a con∣trary
Edict that no Religion should be suffered in the Kingdom but the Romish, the King and Queen Mother subscribes thereunto, the Prote∣stants at their request have a Conference granted, they meet, and confer in a hot Dispute, but agree not; the Catholicks murder many Protestants in Paris, the eight Parliaments of France assem∣bles, the Duke of Guise disapproved of it, and so in a fury departs the Court, and goes for Spain; the Protestants deluded by the Queen Mother, gives her a List of all their Forces; the King of Na∣var turns Catholick; the eight Parliaments meet, and with the consent of the King and Queen Mo∣ther do decree a free and publick Toleration of the Protestant Religion, but speedily a sad and cruel Massacre; the Duke of Guise furiously as∣saults the Protestants at a Sermon, and murders two hundred of them; the Protestants complain to the Prince of Conde of breach of Covenant and Edict; the Duke of Guise seises on the King, and carries him to Paris; the Queen Mo∣ther writes to the Prince of Conde for aid a∣gainst the Duke of Guises Attempt; the Prince in his journey to Court suddenly retires to Orle∣ance, and possesses it; the first Civil War begins. The death of King Francis, and Reign of King Charls.FRancis second King of that name, dying the fourteenth of December, 1560. made entrance for the Reign of Charls the ninth; and as the first died of a Feaver, so the last reigned in a Frensie; the legitimate off-spring of his Predecessours disease: whose short Reign was thought too much lengthened, by the train of all sorts of bloudy cruelties, which filled this poor distra∣cted Nation of France: whose wicked Reign
was also attended with the sable clouds of Fla∣gellum Dei, which swept both Field and City. The beginning of his wicked Reign had a bloudy ending to the poor Kingdom, and him∣self; for the bodies of the murthered Prote∣stants was a Prey to the Birds of the Air, and Beasts of the Fields; the whole Nation wear∣ing the Pensive Weeds of a Ruinous Distracti∣on; for through the Lords just Judgments on the Nation, they suffer nothing less than all Roberies, Rapes, and all sorts of Cruelties, with horrid Massacres for the space of twelve years. And as the Prologue of his Reign was Perjury and Treachery, so was the Epilogue Bloudy to himself, and poor Nation, especially to the poor innocent Protestants. A Parlia∣ment sits, and the Govern∣ment com∣mitted to the Queen Mother du∣ring the Kings mi∣nority.A Parliament being called, they begin the 23. of December. Now at this time in the Court of France, was Katherine de Medices, Pope Clements Brothers Daughter, and this Kings Mother, who being born in Flo∣rence a City of Italy, had conferr'd upon her the Government of this Kingdom in the Kings minority; for it is well known that according to the Laws of this Nation, neither the Ad∣ministration nor Inheritance thereof, can justly be cast on the shoulders of a Woman; and yet against this Law, and through the negligence of the King of Navar, the said Queen Mother was joyned with him in the Office of Prote∣ctorship; the confirmation of her Regency be∣ing allowed of by the Chancellour; was after∣wards confirmed by the Speakers. Now in this Assembly of Parliament, one John Quintin (a Doctor of the Common Law at Paris for the Clergy) pleads that none of the
Religion Reformed (for so they called the Pro∣testants) should any more be tolerated or suf∣fered, and desired that the Laws in that case provided, might be put in speedy execution; but the day following, that brave Commander and good Christian, Gasper de Coligni the Ad∣miral of the Protestants, complained to the Queen Mother against the said Quintin, who presently excuses himself, and in his second Speech moderates his Plea to the Admirals con∣tent. The Par∣liament a little en∣larges the Protestants privileges.Now the Estates proceeds in their consulta∣tions, making themselves and the beginning of this year somewhat happy, by some moderation in matters of Religion, whereby the reproach∣full names of Papist and Hugenot was forbidden upon pain of Death: which name Hugenot they fixed in disdain and derision to the Prote∣stants, and was derived from a Gate-house in Tours, called St. Hughs Gate, where they met in Assemblies. Many good and necessary Laws were then published, but with more confusiom than ad∣vantage; for Laws though good and many, yet through want of a due execution by the Magistrates power, makes the good intent thereof to be perverted and turned into an in∣direct Channel, giving the people cause to slight such wholesom Laws, and grow bad un∣der a good Government. Great contentions and private animosities arose between the Princes of the Bloud (that is, the Prince of Conde and King of Navar, who were Protestants) and Francis Duke of Guise, who was descended of the House of Lo∣rain, and now Grand Master of the Kings
House; who being a strong Catholick, was no less a bitter Enemy to the poor Protestants: the Queen Mother in her affections did secretly incline to the Duke of Guise; yet to secure her own interest and power in the Kings minority, carried fair to both:The Prin∣ces of the Bloud be∣ing Pro∣testants in discontent absent from Court. but the King of Navar and Prince of Conde with the Constable, see∣ing themselves justled out of that power and favour in Court, which as due they did expect, and also foreseeing the event which must neces∣sarily ensure, having onely the pacings of the Duke of Guise; they absent from Court, with all their Attendants, resolving to right their wrong on the Queen Mothers Regency, and the Guisans usurpation of their unlimited po∣wer. Now the Queen Mother by her subtil and natural insight to secret affairs, judged so at their Discontent, that she politickly cast her Cards, that both might have a good hand, yet deald her self the Trumps; checking their power, that they might not check hers. The King of Navar by the Queens po∣licy jointly governs with her.To which purpose she makes a new Agree∣ment with the Navarois, concluding him in the Government, that taking the Title and Power of Regency to her self, he should be called [and but called] Lieutenant General to his Majesty. All this but in Paper and Ink, composed of a double intent: but those that can break Oaths witnessed by God and all the World, how soon can they swallow and digest the breach of such Paper-promises; like that good Actor in Smyr∣na, that cried, O Terram! yet pointing to the Heaven; and O Coelum! yet pointing to the earth; which when one of the Spectators saw, in anger he said to the company, This fellow has made a Solicism, spoken as it were false
Greek with his hand. And indeed here it was so with the Queen Mother, too many Leagues being betwixt her heart and her mouth, for we shall ere long see these two parties, the Princes of the Bloud, and Duke of Guise and Queen Mother make greater wounds in a short time, than Ages can afterwards cure. The Prince of Conde we must understand was now at liberty, and freed from the unjust Sentence against him in the Reign of Francis the second, which was for some pretended Fact, but indeed was for his Religion sentenced to be executed; but the Kings death prevented it. The Prote∣stant Prin∣ces desire a Toleration.The Prince of Conde, and King of Navar, with the Admiral and other principal of the Protestants, desire of the Queen Mother a To∣leration for their Religion; but the Queen Mother now tottering between these two Fa∣ctions of the Princes of the Bloud, and Gui∣sans, counted all things below the present dan∣ger of either parties getting power, and so thought it not fit therefore to deny their re∣quest; telling them withall, that it could not yet publckly be granted by her to the content and satisfaction of all; therefore she would se∣cretly promise them (her best way of bargain∣ing) that she governing by common consent with the King of Navar, would by indirect by ways so work under hand upon emergency of occasions, which might daily occur; that at last it should incensibly, yet assuredly come to pass to their own desire; which says she sud∣denly proclamed, might render you in danger and my self out of power to help you. These things the Queen Mother promised, being forced by necessity and dissembling polli∣cy;
for her own safety and security; but it is ill making a fast Bargain with a loose Mer∣chant; nothing by her being less intended than really promised; for she thought it fit and con∣venient, for preservation of her Son's and own interest, not wholly to put under hatches, nor quite to extinguish the power of the Duke of Guise, who was an apt weight to ballance and counterpoise the Power of the Princes of the Bloud; desiring to carry it so to both that she might displease neither, till she had a sure staff of the one, and the other no power lest to op∣pose hers; which at last answered her hellish Plot; so that reserving many things to the benefit of time and future industry, she left no stone unrolled to provide for time to come, and to remedy the present Distractions. The Prote∣stants in∣crease, and the Princes of the Bloud pro∣tect them, and presses the Queen Mother for her promise of Tolera∣tion.Now the goodness of God in converting many to the Protestant Religion, appears in a great and vast multiplication of the Professours thereof; the King of Navar and Prince of Conde with the Admiral, protects and defends them; who earnestly presses the Queen Mo∣ther to perform her Promises for a free Tolerati∣on of their Religion; she findes many nice excuses, and well-spun pretences to evade the dint of their resolute desires and her absolute promise, endeavouring by most subtile arts of perswasion, to put off the performance of her Promise till a seasonable oportunity offered to ripen her Designs. But the King of Navar daily pressed forward, and grew more and more earnest, for the speedy effecting of it; and he did so publickly reason their case, that many of the Kings Council yielded to the force of his Arguments; disbanding their former Reasons
on the contrary; for the King of Navar al∣leged, that it pittied his soul to see so many Protestants and the Kings true Subjects scat∣tered from their peaceable habitations, for fear of death and danger; and did further profess, it did deeply penetrate his heart with an abhor∣tency, to think of any more effusion of blood. Amongst those of the Religion were many of pregnant wit, and Christian courage, that with small Tracts in Print dispersed, as also with sober Petitions seasonably presented, did at last help forward their desires to a speedy Grant. A Decree for Release of all Pro∣testants that were imprisoned for their Religion.The Queen being now forced to yield, gave way by a Decree of the Council at Fontain∣bleau the 28. of January 1560. That the Ma∣gistrates should release all such Prisoners as stood committed for matters of Religion to their for∣mer freedom; prohibiting all Reproaches of ei∣ther party, with Heretick or Papist; To search no mans house. The Protestants by this being not fully authorized by a full Toleration and free Exercise of their Religion, yet were some∣what satisfied by this seeming Inclination thereunto, at least being protected from the present violence daily threatned: The Queen Mother would not suppress their power, yet would she depress their growth. The King of Navar has the Keys of the Palace de∣livered to him, which his great Enemy the Duke of Guise kept.Now the King of Navar falling short of the full Grant of the Queens Promise, proceeds further to a full Grant, which she had secretly made to him; requiring that as he was the Kings Lieutenant General the Keys of the
Palace might be assigned to him, which the Duke of Guise as Grand Master always, and at this day kept. The Queen as she was loath to offend the Duke of Guise and his party, who with the Duke of Lorain upheld the Catholick Cause and Religion; so was she as carefull to please the King of Navar and Protestant Prin∣ces, till time gave a more secure season to bring about her desires; for her desire was to be firm∣ly seated betwixt them both, by a plausible car∣riage to either, and keeping them both depen∣dents to her power, and both equal in strength, that neither might have encouragement to mur∣mour. To which purpose she is the more willing to favour the King of Navar in his request, by reason at this time she findes the power of the Duke of Guise a Pin higher than the Princes of the Bloud, and invested with more power than jumped with her purposes; she conceived this a fit oportunity to pull down the Guisans power to an equal ballance with the Princes of the Bloud, which suiting with her own interest she willingly executed; their growth at this time being high and insolent, and at all times of an aspiring nature, as that they could not be content to fit under the Pent-house of their present power, but must suddenly aspire to the pitch of their ambitious aim. So the Queen caused the Keys of the Palace to be delivered into the custody of the Kings Lieutenant Ge∣neral the King of Navar. At this the Duke of Guise is highly en∣raged, whose pride findes no bounds but reser∣ved and secret revenge, waiting for a fit oportu∣nity to desplay his envenomed hate, so that he dissembles his inveterate anger and malice he
bore to the Princes of the Bloud, and Admiral, so he onely makes some shew of discontent for the tacit Toleration granted the Protestants; (which doubtless was as real as his malice to their persons) for the sad event will too soon and sure∣ly demonstrate; so that now the discords of these great men seemed to be enveloped in a good satisfaction of their present conditions, all discontent seeming to be vanished and laid aside in the Grave of obscure forgetfulness. The King of France crowned.Now is thought the fittest time to confirm the Kings authority by crowning him though in his minority, which was ordered to be done according to the usual Ceremonies accustomed to all the Kings of France in their Coronati∣on; to which end and purpose the King jour∣neys to Rheims, and there by the Cardinal of Lorain was solemnly crowned, and conducted to the City of Paris. The King at the Co∣ronation gives the right of precedency from the Princes of the Bloud to the Duke of Guise.Now at this time of Coronation the Prin∣ces of the Bloud and Duke of Guise contend about precedency; but it was ordered by the King [though against order] that the Duke of Guise should precede all the rest, which accord∣ingly was performed; the Duke of Guise here∣upon like Tinder to the Spark, took fire of Am∣bition, flying high with an exasperated spirit, to the Princes, Admiral, and principal of the Protestants; and to make his power greater, and to ingraft himself more firmly to wrestle with opposition, and to strenghthen his malici∣ous resolution,The Con∣stable turns Ca∣tholick. he and the Constable strikes a League together for the preservation of the Ca∣tholick Religion; and to endeavour the utter extirpation of the Religion Reformed. But the Queen Mother hearing of their in∣tended
intended purposes, presently Aprehended her own danger by the Guisans growing greatness; and what tall Cedars they would grow if this con∣federacy took root according to their desires; she also considered that the Princes of Lorain were unsatisfied with her late proceedings in be∣half of the Protestants, and would Assist and endevor a conjunction with the Guisans faction, to deprive her of her Government, (A thing she only desired peacable to enjoy,) shee There∣fore to preserve her own Interest, enters into a firm union with the King of Navar, the better to ballance the Guisans power and secure her self; so that in this juncture of time shee was well pleased that the King of Navar and his party should have some power, which she resolves should stand her instead against the Duke of Guise and his Adherents. Which indeed fitly served for her own ends; It was therefore commended to all the Parliaments, by new edicts, and Decrees, No further to molest any of the Religion; and to restore the goods, houses and possessions, of those that only for the cause of Religion were deprived of them. The Par∣liament in Paris with the assi∣stance of King and Q. Mother dashes in pieces all former Edicts for Toleration, and passes an Edict that no Re∣ligion should be suffered but the Romish, and that all the Protestants should be expelled the Kingdom.This gave an ill gust to the Guisans palat; who being enraged with malice set on foot all their power in a strong opposition of the Government; whereupon the Cardinall of Lorain took occasion at the Councell table, (the King and Queen Being present) to speak against those of the Religion, and a∣gainst the Tolleration, and Edicts lately passed
in their behalfs; whereupon it was resolved with consent of the Councill, to summon A Parla∣ment to meet at Paris! which accordingly appeared at the day appointed, the thirteenth of July and then and there in a full appearance of Palament they shewed to the King their dis∣like of the Edict passed the 28. of January, Beseeching his Majesty to force his subjects to An open profession of the Catholik Appostolik, and Romish Religion, upon such pains as should he adjudged of in Councill. Which Councill brought forth an hellish bratt from the bosoms of their wicked desires, for now, contrary to all former edicts, they pass an edict; That all Pro∣testant Ministers should be expelled the Kingdome, no religion to he professed but the Romish, all Protestant Assemblies forbidden, in all places in the Kingdome; And thus was the poor Pro∣testants banished their habitations, and con∣demned to seek refreshment and abode, else where; and to this edict did the King and Queen Mother subscribe: whereupon the cheif of the Protestants were very much greived, in regard they knew themselves free from any guilt that might challenge such hard measure, from the King, and Court of France to such faithfull allegiance; concluding it must needs proceed from some inveterate malice or deep design; Therefore, The Prote∣stants de∣sire confe∣rence and had it granted.The Prince of Conde and Admirall being not able to hinder this edict, presently flies to the Queens promise which she had assuredly given them: but now as assuredly broke; so that no redress could be, found there; Where∣upon they demand of the King liberty for a conference, between the Ministers of the Pro∣testants,
and the Kings Prelats; To examine the Articles of their Doctrins before the Kings presence: being not without hopes by this moderate way to Interpose, that if possible some liberty might be granted. At first it was not allowed of, but afrer second considerations it was thought meet to answer their desires and give a hearing. The Pope hearing of this meeting for a con∣ference, and doubting some liberty might there∣by follow to be granted to the Protestants, and disadvantage of his Authority: presently speeds away the Cardinal of Ferrara, his Legat, to the Court of France, withall giving in com∣mand, that the cause might be referred to the Councell of Trent, which by him was published. The Protestant Ministers that were banished by reason of this late edict, and settled their a bodes in Geneva, now had safe conduct allowed them for there security in their journy to Poissy; five leagues from Paris, being the place apoint∣ed for the conference. Them that were at this meeting for the Protestants were Theodora Beza,Theodora Beza. Pe∣ter Martir and others; with the K. Court and Prelats meet at Poissy but break up and no good done. Peter Martir a Florintin, John Virell, Augustin, Virnmelio, Marlorat, and other Ministers to the Number of twelve, with twenty-two Deputies from the Protestant churches. On the Romish side came, (besides the King and Court) the Cardinalls of Lorain, Tournon, Armagnac, Bourbon, Guise, and Chastillon, together with the Bishops and Pre∣lats; many Doctors of Sorbon also; with
many others sent for from most Cities and Universities in the Kingdom. This meeting began the nineth day of September in the year 1561. the Relation being at large Record∣ed I leave the reader to peruse at his liberty. But this conference proved not such a salve for the sad distractions of the kingdom as was expected, for the Catholicks resolved to conti∣nue in force the late edict against the Pro∣testants; so that they were in many places forced to stand upon their own guards against the violent attempts of the Catholicks cruelty. This made the Papists take up couragious resolutions Mutining in divers places,A mutinie in Paris and many Protestants stoned and distroyed with fire and sword. especially at Paris: where the poor Protestants through the violence of cruell and bloody men, suffered the enemies persecution, with stones, staves, swords, and in their return they set fire on the Suburbs of St. Marceau. At St. Medard they Ring the Alarum Bell, they kill and wound many, others they take and hang; One Ga∣baston Knight of the warch lost his head for atempting to appease the people, so suffered some others also! The whole Kingdom being full of broils and in a civil flame of combustions; that it seemed to all spectators as if the whole Land was turned upside down; And thus were the poor Protestants at the merciless cruelty of their malitious Enemies. Hereupon the Queen Mother fearing this might disquiet and annoy her Regency,An Assem∣bly of eight Parlia∣ments. and endanger the tranquillity of the Kingdom, during the Kings Minority. Especially fearing the Duke of Guise should be too powerfull; she therefore causes to be Issued out orders for calling and assembling of the eight Parlaments
of France, with the Princes of the Blood; Noblemen, and they of the Privye Councill; to consider of the estate of all the Provinces, and to consult about a way to heal these brea∣ches to her content and lasting peace of the Kingdom: she knew this was the ready way to enjoy her power which must necessarily fall, if either party rise; if either partie prevailed in a suc∣cessive power, they would too soon give a pull at hers. the Duke of Guise in A Rage departs the Court for Spain.The Duke of Guise and his confederate Catholiks, was so swelled at the heart; That his breast the Poyson of his purposes, could not be contained within the limits of modera∣tion, But like a rapid Torrent bandies against this course, And as water cast upon lime burns inwards till it breaks without into a flame; so this cruel Duke foaming with malice and cherishing those furies that Hell would cast out, disaproves of this Assembly, and openly enveighs against the King of Navar, the Prince of Conde, Admiral and chief of the Protestants; and so in discontent departs the Court for Spain, there to plott for effecting a tragicall and more bloody effusion of Protestant blood, then by his presence could be effected in the French Court. Whereupon the Queen Mother still to strengthen hir self betwixt these two factions, dissembles hir secret intentions, and gives out publickly an inclination to cleav to the Protes∣tants, which indeed did astonish all that heard thereof; Nay she did so hipocritically mannage her secrefie, That the Admirall and all the Chief Protestants could give no other interpretation of her carriage then Reality;
and she the more effectually to penetrate into their perswations, more to confirm their cre∣dulous opinion and perfectly to blind their eies, she declares her carriage to he the bottom of her intentions. the Prote∣stants de∣luded by the Queens dissembling gives her A list of all their forces.So making her impious treachery, turn trea∣son parent. The Protestants believing all true she said, were so farr deluded into a firm belief thereof; That they gave her a list of two thou∣sand, one hundred and fifty Protestant church∣es; who by their Deputies offered their Goods and persons to the King, to withstand the force of the Guisants: who had invited the Spaniards into France; And thus with this deep dissimulation covered with fair pretexts, the Protestants were drawn in to discover their strength which when shee collected, her desires were satisfied with this handsome dissimulation; But none could know it but the eternall and alseeing eye of God, for she had so carried it, that the very Catholick party thought all as reall, as it was Hypocriticall. At this time the King of Navar being not fully fixed in the firmament of an established mind,the King of Navar turns Ca∣tholick. The Reverend servant of Christ Theodora Beza, laboured much to bring him to a right understanding of the truth; but he like a carnall pollititian, replies quod pellago se non ita commissurus esse quin quando libere pedem referre possit. That he would launch no further into the deeps, then he might with safety return again. And so he fully declares for the Catholicks; which by a little dispondency of Spirit did weaken the Protestants, and strengthen the Guisants. But now like lightening before death, wee shall see a greater part of bloody treacherie
then ever was acted in any Christian Nation. For, In this year 1561. mens Spirits were so malitiously bent, that they were redy to receive any fire of commotion: The Protestants have no security nor safety for lives or goods, there was great danger for these poor Christians that professed the name of the Lord; yet like palme the more depressed the more they grew; like trees upon high Mountains, though under the power and in the cie of the greatest storms and gusts, yet are more firmly rooted then those that grow in fruitfull valies; so these poor Saints of God through their affliction did increase more and more; whereupon did arise to them great troubles and persecutions: in regard the late edict against them gave courage to the Catholicks to persecute them by Authori∣ty; by which also it did frustrate their more publick meeting; And, Here it is to be taken notice of; That for∣merly the custome in France of pounishing the Protestants was (besides their estates seased on for the Kings use) their bodies were to be burned, at the Tyrannicall request of their Lords and nobillity: but now God who is rich in mercy, has freed his poor servants from the unheard of and slavish bondage, and given a little more liberty though against the will of his and their adversaries.The eight Parlia∣ments meets with the King and Queen Mother And now according to the forementioned order of the Queen, the eight Paliaments of France, meets, where was present with them the King, and Queen Mother; and thus this great Assembly of Estates, from all the Provinces meets at St. Germans in Lay, near
to the City of Paris, where with the Royal assent of Charls the ninth, Was that fa∣mous and so much celebrated edict brought forth wherein there was great Liberty to the weary Protestants, that was so tossed up and down: which indeed had proved more happy then I can express, if they might have enjoyed the benefit of performance with as much liberty as it promised. The eight Parlia∣ments with the King and Queen decree A liberty for the Prote∣stants but speedily a sad and cruel Mas∣sacre of 30. thou∣sand Pro∣testants.The contents of this edict (which did Invest the Protestants with these privileges) were, A free liberty to enjoy, profess, and exercise their Religion; To have Assemblies, and publick mee∣tings, at sermons: But without the Towns, and in the Subburbs onely. This Edict crossing that which was made in July last took date the seventh of January (which for the great liberty it gave; the present freedom from persecution, and hope of peace to all the Nation) was com∣monly called by the name of the edict of Ja∣nuary; But Alas! alas! wee shall too soon see the sad effects of this edict; for instead of bringing forth the peaceable fruits of a desired and expected tranquillity; it brought forth such a sad Perisian Massacre, as it may well be termed a monster of nature, wherein was such a slaughter of poor Protestants, as for the horidness of the fact it is not to be parrelled: For before wee come to the end of this sad History, wee shall see such a slaughter of Noble gentel∣men, Gallant souldiers, poor Ladies and Gen∣tlewomen, and other innocent souls; as in three dayes were no less slain then ten thousand: whereof 500. were Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Ladies, that were invited to Paris by the Kings dissimulation and treacherous bayt to their sad
ruin; And in other parts of France in ten dayes by the Kings own commandement, were Murtherd most inhumanly thirty thousand Innocent Soules; besides what the wars destroyed: Such were the sad effects of solemn engagements, as if there were no other way of keeping Covenant, then by breaking it. Nay this edict of peace was by the Kings command, and so was the Masacre; Oh! that it may stand as a Pyramide to all Nations to be ware how they Make a Peace with those that know no way of Lawfull keeping, but unlawfull brea∣king their most sacred and solemn Oathes, promises, and engagements. This edict being proclaimed did much trouble and dismay the Principal Catholicks, setting them all on fire with rage and malice; But the greatest enemies the Protestants had were the Duke of Guise, King of Navar, the Constable, and Cardinalls; the Queen also was a secret enemie and Ianus like had two faces: One full of the greatest dissemulation that ever was found in a female sex, taking their parts onely with fair words before their faces, yet had the foulest heart & wicked inven∣tions as could be imagined. And so to support her own power, between the indifferent state of the Princes of the blood and the Guisans. The Queen Mother being now returned to Fontanbleav, Assures the Prince of Conde by all the protestations of Reality that her intenti∣ons was no less resolute to preserve the Edict of pacification for their good; then it was to secure her own life: and so likewise protested to the King of Navar and Duke of Guise that she would never forsake the Catholick partie. Now
what a wonderfull art of dissimulation was this Queen arrived too, what depth of deceit lay hid in her breast! which she so ordered by fair pretences that the Protestants that had cause, and the Catholicks that had no cause of mistrust yet both alik doutbed of her Reality. The Duke of Guise aforesaid being at Spain, was absent from this Assembly of estates,Asad Mas∣sacre of the Prote∣stants at Vassay where the Duke of Guise blasphe∣ming fell on them at a sermon and mur∣thered 200. which was the begin∣ing of the first Civil war. and consequently affented not to this famous Edict granted, by the King, Queen, and eight Parlia∣ments, But he no sooner heard of it, but his wonted malice begins to work; it is not to be conceived or imagined how full loaden he was which malice and venemous intentions of In∣jurie to the poor Protestants; and so boyling with incredible sorrow at this decree in their behalfs, he resolves to wreak his furie on their Innocency: He therefore with the constable, Cardinal, many Gentlemen of the prime Catholicks, and two squadrons of Lances, advances towads Paris: Now as they march from Ianuile to Vassay (a little Town in (Cam∣pagne) comming neer, and understanding the bell was ringing to Sermon he draws nigher, and whilst the poor Protestants were serving God in his holy Ordinances in a barn; he furiously sets upon them crying Death of God kill those Huguenots; Whereupon he murthered to the number of two hundred men and weo∣men; some had their heads cleft in two, others their hands and heads cutt off; so that the walls and Galleries of the barn were died with the blood of the slain; The Duke with his sword drawn stood among them, charging his men to kill without sparing; The faithfull
Minister of Gods Word was brought to the Duke, who cursing called for the Provost, and commands him to be hanged on a Gibbot, yet through Gods mercy he was released at the re∣quest of the Prince of Portion; this sad mur∣der we shall shortly see will produce sad effects. The Prote∣stants com∣plain to the Prince of Conde of the Breach of the E∣dict, and demands justice of the King.Those that were the principal of the Pro∣testants were Lewis of Bourbon, of the Bloud Royal, commonly called Prince of Conde, after the name of a certain Town; which Prince was of great force with the King, in regard of his alliance, so that when the Duke of Guise attempted the breach of the famous Edict, en∣deavouring the utter ruine thereof, especially in his bloudy cruelty at Vassey, which coming to the hearing of the Admiral and his Brother Francis de Andelot, Captain of the Fantery, and other Princes, Noblemen and Gentlemen, of the Protestants; they flock daily in heaps with Complaints to the Prince of Conde, of the outragious malice, and violent attempt of the Duke of Guise, against their Brethren the Protestants; demanding also of the King, Ju∣stice for that bloudy Breach of his special Edict and Command. The Duke of Guise to counte∣nance his wicked in∣tentions seizes on the King and carries him to Pa∣ris.Presently after the Duke of Guise arrives at Paris with his bloudy Train, and thought it not unfit for carrying on of his Design to get the King into his power, that what afterwards he did, might be in the Kings name; well knowing what great Authority the name of the King would carry in France. Where∣upon he, with the Constable, and Marshall of St. Andres, seizes on the Kings person, and so carries him from Fontanbleau to Paris; and there fell a defacing and overthrowing the pla∣ces
where the Protestants used to assemble, which so encouraged the Romish party, that in every place they abused the Protestants, as the most cruel barbarous, would blush to act. The Queen Mother by Letters de∣sires the Prince of Conde's help for the King and her assi∣stance.Hereupon the Queen Mother fearing the po∣wer and fierce pride of the Guisans, makes a virtue of necessity, and writes with her own hand to the Prince of Conde; which Letters were produced by the Prince, (and at the As∣sembly of the Princes of Germany at Frank∣ford, holden under Ferdinand the Emperour) were openly read; the Contents were, Earnest∣ly to intreat his speedy succour, and in so great danger and distress, not to forsake her, but to ac∣count both the Mother and the children (meaning her self, the King, and his brethren) as com∣mitted to his faith and natural kindness; desiring him that he would with all carefull speed, power∣fully to provide for their common safety; assuring him, that she would imprint his willing care into the Kings minde, that he should never be a loser by it. The Prince of Conde possesses Orleans.The Prince of Conde being on his journey to Court, news was brought him in the way how things were carried, That they had taken the King and brought him to Paris. Then presently the Admiral advances towards him, and overta∣king him, they make a stand, and there con∣sulted what to do; whereupon seeing their own danger, the Duke speedily hasted to Orleans, and possessed it. And this was the beginning of the first Civil War.
CHAP. II. The Contents. THe Prince of Conde publishes a Manifesto, laying down the Reasons of taking Arms. Burges and Orleans are the Potestants refuge. The King declares against the Prince. The Ar∣mies meet, but engage not. The Prince and Ad∣miral dispose of their Armies into Garisons. The Kings Army takes and sacks some Towns; takes Burges on conditions. The Queen Mother unmasks her self, causing the Protestants to be proclamed Rebels. The Prince and Admiral deli∣vers up Roan, Diep, and Haverdegrace to Queen Elizabeth of England. The Kings Army be∣sieges Roan, where the King of Navar is slain, and the City stormed and sacked for three days, to∣gether with cruel murdring. De Andelot joynswith the Admiral. The Prince of Conde and Admiral advances to the City of Paris. The Kings Army advances for defence of the City: The Prote∣stants march toward Normandy to receive Queen Elizabeths supplies. The Kings Army follows them; they joyn Battel, where both Generals are taken Prisoners. The Admiral with his Army marches to Normandy. The Duke of Guise with the Kings Army besieges Orleans; the Duke slain before it. The Admiral returns from Normandy and enters Orleans. A Treaty is be∣gun, and Peace concluded at Orleans, with free liberty for Religion, which is publickly proclamed.
THe Divisions thus increasing, made way to erect a Theatre for a sad Tragedy: for the Prince of Conde published a Manifesto, and sent Letters also to the King, Parliament of Paris, Protestant Princes of Germany, and to all other Christian Princes. The Prince of Conde prints a Manifesto of the grounds of his pro∣ceedings.The Reasons laid down by the Prince of Conde for his taking Arms. were these, The de∣fence of the famous Edict of Toleration, which was made by the King, being the high Road to Peace: if duly observed, which could not but be kept without horrible breach of faith, and assured ruine of the French Nation; in regard there were so many of the Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation that were Prote∣stants, and daily came in to the Religion. And those of Noble birth, that were in pow∣er, dignity or otherwise above others, thought it not meet to suffer the cruel punishments, and Massacres, daily inflicted on some, and threat∣ned to others, since God had given them power to help themselves. And further it was declared, that the Duke of Guise a new-come Foreiner, translated from the Forests of Lorain, should usurp such power in France, such dominion and command, as the Princes of the Bloud must lose their proper in∣terests to be his slaves and vassals, against all the Laws of the Nation; further declaring, That if the King should cause an observation of the Edict for Religion already signed, and that Arms might be laid down on the Kings part, they were ready to do the like, and would speedily lay down their Arms; To this he ad∣ded the Queen Mothers singular care (as it was reported and as indeed she did outwardly shew)
for preservation of peace, and pulling down the powerful rage of the Guisans; which in∣deed she so dissembled that on the very account hereof it is certain, above twenty thousand Catholiks joyned themselves to the Protestants in defence of their cause. Burges & Orleans proves a Sanctuary, and hid∣ing place in time of GodsThese flames being begun could not so easi∣ly be extinguished; mauy cruelties being com∣mitted on the bodies of the poor Protestants without mercy, & such as will no question draw out tears from the eies of serious Christians be∣ing such sad examples of crueltie as cant be be∣lieved should have proceeded from any that had known that ever Christianity had been in the world; nothing being drunk more eagerly then the blood of the poor Saints; Yet in this callamity God provided a place of refuge for such as he pleased in mercy to preserve from their cruelty: For Bourges, and Orleans, being kept by the Protestants,The King declares against the prince of Conde. did greatly ad∣minister comfort to many distressed Christians that fled theither. Hereupon the King at Paris declares against the Edict and the Prince of Conde. The Queen Mother now arms those she pri∣vately huggs in the bosom of ther affections. The Prince of Conde desires to lay all private interests aside for preservation of the Publick efusion of blood; But the King of Navar, the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and Marshall of St. Andre, by an Edict, banishes the Pro∣testants out of Paris, and sudenly advances towards the Prince of Conde with twelve thou∣sand foot, and three thousand horse; They find the Prince strong enough to encounter them, contrary to ther expectations; and De Andelot
and Boucart, strongly urged to engage the Kings Army.the Queen with sub∣tilty and treacherous pollicie beguils the Prote∣stants. But the Queen Mother abuses them with her subtile treachery, telling them the hopes of agreement was too near for them to undo all by a too hasty ingagement: in so much that she fed them with hopes till the Ca∣tholick Army increased in strength both with French and forein forces. Thus the Queen having delayed and pro∣tracted all hopes of Issue by battle, the Prince of Conde maintains his Army about two months in such peace to the Country, as was not in the least found to be outragious, by spoyling or robbing; such was the Christian and carefull discipline of the Prince and Ad∣miral of the Protestant Army; which in France was the greater wonder, because whoring rob∣bing and blaspheming was the usual attendants and constant harbingers to the Catholick camp; which could not be avoyded because the King could not keep to so strickt a discipline as the Prince of Conde and Admiral. The Prince and Admi∣ral disperse the Armie into seve∣ral Pro∣vinces.The Prince of Conde, and Admiral, wisely & prudently, like valliant & carefull Comman∣ders take all waies to use their present power for future advantages and ensuing Storms; so they send out to several Provinces, men of approved fidelity to the Protestant cause, which proved (next to Gods blessing) a great help to their success, in possessing many strong holds in sundry parts of France, as Roan, Deip, Angiers, Blois, Vendosme, Tours, Poictiers, Ragency, Maus, Angoulesme, Chalon upon Soan, Maskon and the most part of Daulphin. The Kings Army secures what they had, and falls upon several Towns, taking and miserably sacking
them: which shall shortly in particular be related with all the sad circumstances of their cruelty.The Ca∣tholicks take Bourges o conditions. Now the Kings Army sits down before Bur∣ges, the 10. of August, where they felt the valour and courage of the Protestants, by many salies even to their trenches, but in regard they had no time to fortifie the place their innate valour was forced to yield to necessity, whose law has no bounds; and so the Governour Monseiur D'Yvoy, began to capitulate, and at last on con∣ditions yielded; but was out of favour ever after; by the Prince of Conde and Admiral.the Queen discovers her selfe agrinst Prote∣stants and prcolaims them Robels. And now the Queen shews her selfe in her colours; casts of her vizard, and openly ap∣pears what she was inwarly; For the Catholick cause, and against the Protestants, and so moved by her implacable malice, and inward hatred, she with the consent, of the King, caused the Principal of the Protestants to be Proclaimed Rebels; and thus made way for a more open discovery of her most secret treachery, whose close hypocrisie til now was so hid under hatches by deceitfull slights, that on all hands her deep dissimulation was esteemed real: But we shall shortly perceive that the copy of mens actions are sooner read than the copy of their countenances. The Prince of Conde delivers up Roan, Deip and Haverde∣grace to the Queen of Eng∣land.In this mean while the Protestants had de∣livered up to the Queen of England the Towns of Roan, Haverdegrace, and Deip, as pledges for her security. And now the Kings Army marches towarde Roan, and on the five and twentieth of September 1562. the whole Army Lodges at Darnettel, two Leagues from the City of Roan; where the Count Montgommery was Governour for the Protestants, and com∣mander
of the City;The Kings Army Ad∣vances to Roan. having with him for defence thereof, two thousand English, and twelve hundred French foot; four troopes of horse, and an hundred Gentlemen of quallity, whose valour was well known to the Army of the Kings, that on all times and upon all oc∣cations felt the power of their resolutions; whose strength and provision failing, together with the Kings taking their principal fort, did much trouble and hinder their promised success; whereupon they sent to Haverdegrace for such supplies as could possibly be spared, which in part was effected, although the Kings Army had planted Cannons along the River: but their great want could not be supplied with a little; although at one time, from the English, arrived with great difficulty to their greater necessity, seven hundred men, with monyes, and ammunition:King of Navar slain. And here at this seige was remarkably slain the Apostate King of Na∣var, who felt the reward thereof from a divine hand of puunishment. The City taken by storm and for three dayes no∣bus cruel∣ties and murthers.The twenty sixt of October the Kings Army storms the City, and with great loss and valor on both sides takes it, and for the cruelties they used against the poor Protestants, lying at their mercy for the space of three dayes, I refer the Reader to peruse in the Massaces at Roan, which is fully, and shortly related in the following Chapter. Count Montgomery saved himself through great danger, in a galley passing to Haverdegrace, and so for England. The Ad∣mirals Brother D'Andelot with 11000. horse and foot joyns with the Prince of Conde and Admiral.Lewis of Burborn, Duke of Montpenseir,
took from the Protestants severall Towns; whose barbarous course of cruelty, and trea∣cherie, is also contracted into a narrow com∣pass which follows in the next chapter. Mean while D'Andelot, with five thousand foot, and four thousand horse, with great policie, and and no less danger and toyle, marches through the enemies power, and at last joyfully and seasonably arrives, and joyns with the Prince of Conde, and Admiral, who with great joy, and welcome, embrases him; as much sorrow presently balances all, for the success in another place was differently carried, by the like Ad∣venture of a Noble Commander the Baron of Duras: who having levied five thousand horse and foot in Gascoin and Provinces adjacent; endeavouring to pass through difficulties, was obstructed by a sharp encounter by the Kings Horse, under Command of Monsieur de Mou∣luc, and Burie, and at last was defeated, yet with good part he escaped to the assistance of the Prince of Conde and Admiral,The Prince and Admi∣ral advance with their Army to the walls of Paris. who now all march against Paris, the Metropolis of the Nation; and in their March taks in Estampes, Piviers and Dordane, and so marches to Paris, where, after some skirmishes, beat back their enemies with Terrour and Confusion into the City, putting them all to a stand in their coun∣cils, but the Queen by Treaties and often Mes∣sengers, did so with ther subtilty treat with the Prince and Admiral, that by delayes the City was strengthened, and their gallant Enterprize suprized for want of quick execution; but the truth is, the Protestants at all times were ready to embrace peace in the midst of their power, and so suffered that convenient oppor∣tunity
to slip, and fall into the hands of the Queens policy, which opportunity had the Ca∣tholicks ever enjoyed, peace had not gone be∣fore their cruelties. But it falls into course here to let the world take notice of this full de∣monstration of the Princes and Protestants Declarations, That they sought only liberty for heir Estates and Lives, and therefore would to their own prejudice, wait an opportunity to effect their peaceable desires; But alas! it is to be bewailed that ever the Protestants (down-right in their actions and words) should ever have to deal with such an enemy, whose treachery is their refuge, and cruelty their mercy. Now when they see their Enemies Designs they begin to remember the loss of their own; yet falls on the City by a general Assault, shoots many Cannons, at last face the City to provoke and incite the Enemy to battel, all which not answering their desires, the Prince and Admiral draw off their Army. The Kings Army ad∣vances to the defence of the Ci∣ty, and the Prince withdraws and mar∣ches to∣wards Norman∣dy.And now the Kings Army having by this time gathered a great strength from all parts, ad∣vances under the command of the Duke of Guise, and Constable, and so follows the Princes Army, who now resolves to march into Nor∣mandy, to joyn with the Forces and Provisions that Queen Elizabeth of England had then, ac∣cording to covenant, promised the Protestants; being six thousand men, twenty pieces of Cannon, much Ammunition, and fifteen thousand Ducats; This March being resolved on at Beauss, on December 14. they advance by the way of Chartres, and so for Normandy. The Kings Army follows the Protestants swiftly, and the Protestant Army being very
weary, and both Armies very near, they were by a manifest necessity driven, to a Battel.The Kings Army fol∣lows, and they join battle. The Protestant Army under the command of the Prince of Conde, and Admiral, lodged a∣bout Dreux, being a Town twenty six Leagues from Paris, and situated on the confines of Normandy, in which place, on a Plain the 19. of December they joyn Battel; The Kings Army was reckoned to be nineteen thousand foot, and two thousand Horse. The Prince of Conde's Army consisting of twelve thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse. And now the Battle of Dreux begins, where the Admiral of the Protestants with great cou∣rage leading the Van, fell upon the Kings Ca∣valry, commanded by the Constable, and at first onset slew Gabriel de Momorancy, and laid dead on the place Count de Rochefort, the whole ca∣valry running away,The Con∣stable taken prisoner. the Constable himself taken Prisoner; and the Duke of Nevers, Mon∣sieur de Givry, d'Annebault, La Bross, and his Son, with many other Gentlemen, and Ca∣valeirs, slain upon the place, The Duke of Au∣maule, Brother to the Duke of Guise, and Beau∣vais, were wounded. Now the Princes forces being in a too eager pursuit of the Enemy, was furiously set upon by the Duke of Guise, where, after a furious on set, and doubtful shock on both sides endu∣red, at last the Prince of Conde was taken Pri∣soner,Prince of Conde ta∣ken priso∣ner. and on the Kings side was taken Mon∣sieur d'Anvelle, being sore wounded; which the Admiral perceiving, rallies and advances, but the former encounter so wearied and weak∣ned his men, that after a sharp conflict, he was put to the worst, and so made an honourable
retreat. In this encounter was slain on the Ca∣tholike party the Marshal de St. Andre. The same night all the Army of the Protestants were met together, where the Admiral, by general consent, was chosen General of the Army in∣stead of the Prince of Conde Prisoner. Both Armies leave the field, the Duke of Guise, by the speedy advance of night upon him, was forced to lodge upon the Plain at Blainville, where the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Guise (two mortal enemies) both sup∣ped, and lay in one bed together. The next morning after Battle the Admiral presents himself with his Army in the field in Battalia. There was in this battle slain seven thousand, whereof on the Protestants two thousand foot, and one hundred and fifty horse, and doubtless it was a dubious engagement, for had the Protestants carefully maintained their first encounter in an orderly station, they had not been so assailed, and foyled at last, but Vi∣ctory had crowned their valour without hazard of doubt; but however, the Battle proved fa∣tal to the Catholicks, and famous to both, in that both Generals were taken Prisoners. And as the Admiral was chosen General, so for the Catholicks was the Duke of Guise General in lieu of the Constable prisoner. The Duke of Guise hereupon suddenly marches to lay siege o Orleans. The Admiral proceeds to the Resolution be∣fore determined,The Admi∣ral marches for Nor∣mandy. and keeps his march for Nor∣mandy, but before their March, takes Selles in Bervy, St. Aigna, Sulli upon Loire, and Mon∣trichard, and so leaving the care of Orleans to his Brother D'Andelot, he advances towards
Normandy to meet with Queen Elizabeths sup∣plies, and so to come with more strength to an∣noy the Catholicks, and assist his Friends. The Duke of Guise with the Kings Ar∣my layes siege to Or¦leans.On the fifth day of February the Duke of Guise lays siege to Orleans, where the King and Queen Mother, came in person, D'Andelot was Governour of Orleans, who was also assisted with Monsieur de St. Cyr, the Sieur de Avaret, Bussay, Duras, and Bouchavanes, under whose command were fourteen companies of foot, con∣sisting of Germans, and Gascoins, with five Troops of French Horse, that were old Soul∣diers, to whose valour was joined for assistance the unanimous consent of the Citizens to withstand the enemy, whose harmonious and joint resolutions for defence of Religion, and Liberty, did strive to out-vy the Souldiers va∣lour, and thus being resolved to dy in pursuit of so good a cause, they encourage one ano∣ther to repulse the enemies assaults The De∣fects of the Town-walls being supplyed with Resolutions, which made weakness impregnable, and stood as a Rock against the strongest shock of the enemies force. Now the Duke, with the whole strength of his Army, sets upon a Fauxburg of the City, and suddenly surprizes it the first day,The Duke of Guise threatens to destroy men, wo∣men and children in Orleans, but is him∣self cut off. which so encouraged the Catholick party, and espe∣cially the hot spirit of the Duke of Guise, whose inveterate malice could not be contained in the bounds of moderation or secresie, but openly de∣livers it by word of mouth, and writes by Let∣ters to the King, boasting that twenty four hours should not pass, so sure as he would in the same compass, force the City to his obedience. And
further declared, The day should be made memo∣rable, by destroying both men, women and chil∣dren; sparing none. But behold his hellish rage was confined by a judgement from Heaven, whose death was not much unlike our late Duke of Buckingham, for the same night there was a young Gentleman, descended of a noble fami∣ly, known by the name of John Poltrat, Sieur de Merebourn; who being mounted on a Spa∣nish Jennet, and watching his own opportunity did by his proper, and private motion, shoot the Duke of Guise into the shoulder with a Pistol laden with three bullets, and so this wretched enemy of God and the poor Protestants dyed the four and twentieth of February, who by Gods justice, was deprived of his unjust and bloody intentions; the said Poltrat being after∣wards taken and executed, did freely declare at his death, that what he did in destroying the Duke, was to deliver France, and especially the City of Orleans, from his violent and bloudy threatnings. The Admi∣ral returns from Nor∣mandy, and with his Army en∣ters Orle∣ans.This accident in the Kings Army stopt their furious assaults, till the seasonable advance of the Admiral from Normandy with Supplies, which made a full stop in the siege; who after he had greatly annoied the Catholicks in Nor∣mandy, came to Orleans the 17. day of March, and enters the City, where was Prisoner the Constable, General of the Kings Army taken at the Battle at Dreux; and in the Kings Army was the Prince of Conde Prisoner. Now the Kings, Queen Mother, with the Privy Counsellours, and Deputies of the Court of Paris, were about to arraign the Prince of Conde, which being ballanced with
a fearful expectation of the like to the Consta∣ble, they let their resolutions fall. A Treaty begun and finished with the E∣dict of Ja∣nuary for liberty granted.The Queen Mother at this time, fearing the issue of War, and seeing success alike to both, doubted her, desired expectation would fall, by reason of the unexpected and constant supplies the Admiral had on all straits; she therfore en∣ters on the Old Way, Her only way, making use of that Proverb, VVhere force will not pre∣vail, shee'l peice it with the Foxes tail. And so sets on foot a Treaty of Peace with the Admi∣ral, and principal of the Protestants, holding an assembly in the Isle of Oxen, The Consta∣ble, though prisoner assists in Council, and at first vows he will not admit of any peace groun∣ded on the Edict of January; The Prince of Conde prisoner with the King, desired also to have liberty to send a messenger to confer with his Council at Orleans; who gives him to un∣derstand, that the Queen nor he can in the least derogate from the famous Edict of Liber∣ty in Ianuary, so solemnly made, and sworn at the instance of the Estates, and so great as∣sembly of the 8 Parlaments in France. The K. & Q. Mother, let the Protestants know it should not be altered, but only to please the Catho∣licks, and that Arms being laid down on both sides, they should by little, and little, assuredly obtain their free liberty. So presently the Articles of peace were drawn up in form of an Edict, containing the Ar∣ticles of the Edict in Ianuary, which was as a∣foresaid, That the Protestants should have the free exercise of their Religion, and shauld have the freedom of the same in certain places, every one to live free in their conscieuces, from trouble
and Molestation, That all Princes, Lords, Gentle∣men, Captains, and Souldiers, should be free from all troubles, for any thing done in time of the wars and so every one, to be restored to their dignities, goods, privileges and prerogatives; which Edict, was concluded,The Edict for Liberty proclamed by a Trum∣pet. signed and confirmed in the Kings Conncil at Amboise, verified in Parli∣ment, and on the eighteenth day, was procla∣med throughout the Town, Camp and Court, by sound of Trumpet, and the same day the Prince of Conde and Constable, were both freed from prison, The Reiters were also conveyed to their Confines, being paid in full for their ser∣vices, so returning home to their own habita∣tions. The many Executions, murthers, Rapes, Robberies, Massacres, general and particular, committed on the persons of the poor Prote∣stants, during this first Civil War, from A∣pril 1562. to this present March 1563. when the peace was concluded, I have for the benefit of all Christian, sober perusers, abstracted from large volumes, and here inserted by them∣selves, that the judicious Reader may by a Chri∣stian simpathy tast the sad afflictions that these poor Protestants did endure, being so shame∣fully murthered, as to this day stands as a stain to the honor of the French Nation, when ever they please to review their predecessors cruelty, and yet all comes short of what this little book will tell thee.
CHAP. III. The Contents. A Lamentable and sad prospect of the bloody cruelties committed on the Protestants in France, during the first civil wars, not sparing old, nor young, virgins, nor women with child; Their cruelties at Paris. At Senlis. Their mur∣ders at Les Bordes. A godly Minister cruelly used; yet providentially escaped. Three Gentle∣men stabbed by their own cosen, and sixteen more killed by Treachery. Sad slaughters at Nevers. La Charity yielded on conditions, yet all put to the Sword. Lamentable murthers and cruelties. At Amiens Bibles burnt. The murthers at Abe∣ville. Four hundred murthered at Meaux. Vir∣gins abused, and children dashed against the walls. The cruel murthers at Troys, the sad bloudshed at Bar upon Sein. Cutting off womens breasts, then take their hearts and eat them. At Sens a hundred of good birth murthered. The cruelties at Auxere. At Chastillon women murthered, that were ready to be delivered. The horrible and cruel murthers at Maus, at Montagris, at Gy∣en. A child cut in two and liver eaten. The mur∣thers at Aurilac. Many hanged in Molins. At Angiers, after promise of life, all murthered. Horrible blasphemy. A Ministers eyes put out, and body burnt. At Aze a Minister, and thirty Protestants drowned. In Tours, one hundred and fourty massacred, and the River dyed with
blood. The Queen Mothers Incivillity. At Va∣longre many of Quality massacred, and a Mini∣ster blasphemously and inhumanely slain. A child roasted. Children killed in the womb. The sad murthers at Bloys. One buried alive. The un∣heard of massacre at Tholouse, Rivers filled with bodies, and dyed with blood. Three thou∣sand stand on their guard, are promised life on submission, yet are massacred. The horriblest blasphemy that ever was heard, and one hundred and twenty burnt. The Murthers at Mont de Marsan, at Carcasson, at Foix, at Aurenge, where Virgins of six years old are ravished. Nine∣ty killed after promise of life. Murthers at Gre∣noble. At Bearne. At Revel. At Monpelleir a Captain quartered alive. One hundred murde∣red after promise of life. The like at March Ca∣stle. Women with childe ripped and buried a∣live. THe Protestants during this sharp war had many cruelties, and sad sufferings done to their persons without any pitty, or remorse, the which was not in one City, but in most parts of France, and with such bloodshed, as will make any Christian heart to bewail their said sufferings, and may serve to teach us our habitation is not in this world, and so may encourage us to look out for another, whose foundation and building is in Jesus Christ, that Rock of ages, that good and gracious anchor-hold in time of Storms and Tempests; and to let us a little taste what a happiness it is that when men come with bloo∣dy resolutions to assault our innocency, then for a soul to have his eye fixed on heaven, by a
firm faith of assurance in Gods mercy, that though mens rage be like the lofty billows, yet our salvation, and our strength is in God, and thrice happy is that soul that can assuredly say in times of persecution, that God is my Rock and hiding place in times of Storm.Cruelties at Paris. The poor Saints of God in Paris were cruel∣ly persecuted by the bloody papists, who being fully delighted, and set on blood, together with the help of the Parliament there, did spare none that fell into their bloody hands, either in the City of Paris, or such as by appeal or summons were brought thither. The bloody usage of Christians at Senlis.Many dear and pretious Saints of God at Senlis, suffered the fury of bloody and deceit∣full men; some murthered in a popular tumult, some beheaded, others cruelly whipped, impri∣soned, and sent to the Gallies, not so much as sparing women. There mur∣thers at Les Bor∣des.At Les Bordes, the Duke of Nevers being Governour of Campagn, his Lieutenant slew many men, and women, imprisoning others, and spoiling their houses. Their un∣heard of crueltie to a Godly Minister of Christ.At Chaalons, a godly Minister of Gods word, Mr. Fournier was so basely abused, as the merciless cruelty by his Enemies, and Gods merciful deliverance must crave leave to have a little remembrance, and indeed is worthy our Christian perusall and observance. This Godly servant of Christ, being prisoner was stript of his cloaths, put into a Cart, and with many abusive jears, taunts and scoffs, was often in danger of his life by the common-people. At Monchon, he was cast in prison,
where a Captain and many Souldiers came and told him he should be cut in peices, afterwards the Judges came and commanded him to be loaden with Irons; after a while, the Duke of Guise being made Governour, he was cruelly tortured, by straining his thumbs so hard, till blood issued out, they then bind his hands be∣hind his back, and tying a Rope to his thumbs, they hoist him up, and then suddenly twitches him down five or six times, tying also great stones to his toes, and so let him hang till his vitals failed him almost to death; at last he was put into prison, and no Chyrurgion allow∣ed to dress his wounds, although the Cords had made gashes in his flesh to the bones, insomuch that he underwent great pain, that he could not lift his hand to his mouth, but had almost lost the use of them, this did this Servant of Christ endure, like a true Soldier with invincible cou∣rage and patience, and by the special provi∣dence of God, news was brought that the Duke of Guise was dead. The very next day one Bussi had order from the Constable to let him free, which yet said, Bussi came, and told this faithful Minister of God, with all acquaint∣ing him that he should be let free, but it should be to the peoples rage. But let us yet see ano∣ther special providence,A singular token of Gods care of his faithful Ones. for at the same time came by the Prince of Portion with his German Horses, who sent in word to the Town, that if Mr. Fournier was not speedily delivered to him, and from their cruelties, he would not leave so much as the tokens of a foundation, but raze it to ruin as a monument of their merciless deserts. Which message so terrified the enemies of this Godly soul, that immediately he was safely con∣veyed
to the Prince,he gathers a Congre∣gation and yeilds his soule to God. which faithfull servant of the Lord after he had resided a little space at Ver, and gathered a Congregation, he pre∣sently after resigned up his soule to the Lord that gave it and so put a period to the miserable attendance of this life, and begun that life of glory. A Trea∣cherous and base murther of Moun∣seir de St. Estiene, his two Brothers and 16. more all stabbed by his own Cosen Ger∣main.Mounseir de St. Estiene, in his jorney from Orleans, retiring himself with his two brothers and some others for Refreshment to his own house neer Reims, they were not long there till the house was beset by fifteen hundred men, who being forced to yield, had liberty on their words, to go forth to speak with the Duke of Nevers, whom (as they said) desired to see him, and going out was there basely and trea∣cherously murthered by the Baron Ceruy, his own Cosen German; so were his two Brethe∣ren also, with sixteen others basely and un∣worthely, stabbed and distroyed without the least composition; Their wives they spoyled of all they had, and led away prisoners. The Catholicks of Nevers on the eleventh day of May,The sad slaughters at Nevers. 1562. summoned into the Town many Gentlemen of the Country, presently shut the gates, and in three daies after fell on them and Murthered them without pitty: The Minister's they cast into prison, one miserably perished by their cruelty; another miraculously escaped; presently after bloody Fayete arrives, ran∣sacks their houses, rebaptize their children, & be∣ing filled with his desires of bloud, and 50. thou∣sand crownes, returns to his house of Auver∣gue. La Cha∣rity yielded on Con∣ditions yet all were put to the sword contrary to Covenant.The Town of La Charity, being beseiged by cruel Fayete, was to him yielded on honorable
terms by the Governour Issertiux; which Con∣ditions were signed and sealed the tenth day of June, the Grand prior entring the Town ac∣cording to conditions, presently snatched the capitulation out of the Governours hand, and then fell to spoil, and murther, so that none escaped. Bibles burnt and the Prote∣stants murthered at Amiens.At Amiens, all Bibles, Testaments, and psalms, were sought for and openly with much profanness were burned, the Guisans murthe∣ring and killing the poor Protestants, and casting their dead bodies into the River; shooting some to death, and hanging others, Base cruel∣ty.At Abbevilly; the Lord Harcourt was slain▪ and many others; one Belliart they dragged along the Streets with his face on the ground, and then drowned him. At Meux 400. mur∣thered.The Protestans at Meaux, being the stronger partie, continued the exercise of their Religi∣on for a while, but at last the Parliament at Paris gave judgement against them, whereupon a company of souldiers enters the Town, dis∣arms the Citizens, and unworthyly, and cowardly murthered above four hundred poor Protestants; and as if it were not enough, as if their blood-thirstiness could not be quen∣ched, Mounseir De'Boysy enters with souldiers,Virgins a Bused in the streets children dashed a∣gainst the walls. committs unheard-of, and inhuman villanies, deflouring virgins in the open streets, many massacred and drowned, children dashed against the walls, divers papist preists murthered some with their own hands. At Troys, Bibles and Books of divinity were rent and torn in pieces, the Protestants murthered; their houses sacked, eighteen men hanged like doggs,Cruelties at Troys. and women dragged through the streets and cast into the River.
The sad murther at Bar upon Sein.The sad cruelties used to the Protestants at Barr upon Seine are hardly to be compared in this first civil war, although in the latter part of the book I shall let the world be accquainted with such cruelties as that the most horrid murtheres yet extant come not so near them as to bear a shaddow of comparison.They mur∣ther women and maydes and cut off their bre∣asts and took out their hearts and eat them. But to our purpose, this Town the Papists entered, and committed such outrages and cruelties, especi∣ally against women, as it is not fit to be rela∣ted but with an utter detestation, for they spa∣red not maides nor poor infants, some of their breasts they cut off, open their stomacks, cutts out their hearts, and in a furious manner gnawed them with their teeth; boasting that they had tasted of an Huguenots heart, and with hellish blasphemies they ravish women, and virgins.A Popish father murthers his Prote∣stant sonn A just re∣ward. There was one Mounseir Ralet a young Advocate, and son to the Kings Procter, who, by his fathers own procurement, was murthe∣red, which was a sad and prodigious thing, and in January following, about fifty horse of the Garrison of Antrim surprized the Town at break of day, and took it in for the Prote∣stants, and with their pistols caused him to ex∣piate the death of his son.A gallant Gentleman murthered in his own house. The Peasants committed horrible murthers on the poor Saints of God, Monseiur de Vigney, with his wife and servants, they murthered in his own house. In Sens, a hundred of good birth and qual∣lity were inhumanly and basely murthered,100. of good quali∣ty murthe∣red at Sens the mur∣ther at Auxere. women read to be delivered wurthered. and slain, being thrown into the River naked, one hundred houses spoyled and their vines pulled up.
At Auxere, one Cossen was barbarously Massacred: they also stabed a fair young gentlewoman and cast her body into the River, with many other outrages. In Chastillon upon Loire, they cruelly mur∣thered men and women, young and old, nay they spared not women with child ready to be delivered. The sad and horri∣ble mur∣thers com∣mitted with geat cruelty on the Saints of Christ in Maus. 50. cast in∣to apond to feed fishes.At Maus, they spoyled the houses of the protestants both within and without the Town, for eight legues compass, two hundred were cruely put to death, not sparing women of quality, and poor innocent children, not having the least respect to their own kindred, some hanged up, some they beheaded, others being dayly Massacred, they cast into the river half dead, above one hundred and twenty men and women, and children were murthered in the neighbouring Villages, a Captain most cruely cast fifty of these poor innocent servants of God, into his fish-pond, to feed his pikes: and his Leiutenant fills two trenches with fifty pro∣testants that were slain, and many were thrown into ditches: a Godly weaver had his throat cut,ones mouth filled with leavs of the New Te∣stament. and his mouth stuffed with leaves of a New Testament, which was found about him: in Villages neer and further off about sixscore persons were butchered, and many fields strewed with the bodies of the slain, whose flesh the birds and beasts had devoured. Murthers at Monta∣gris.At Montagris (which was a hiding place for many poor protestant families, and which was under the command and countenance of the Lady Rene of France, Daughter to King Lewis the twelfth, and Dutches Dowager of Ferrara) To this place was sent by order of the
Duke of Guise one Mallicorn, a Knight of the order, who with four companies, enters the Town, & killed an antient man, and threw him into the River with others, committing several outrages, but the virtuous Lady with the prote∣stants was safe in the Castle; this Mallicorn sends word to the Duches that he would batter down the Castle, if she would not yield to deliver up the protestants into their hands: But see the Galland reply of this noble and religious Lady, to this murtherous villain;The Christi∣an & noble answer of a virtuous Lady to the summons of a bloody murtherer. I charge you to look what you enterprise, for no man in the Realm can command me but the King only, and if you pro∣ceed to the battery, I will stand in the breach, to trie whteher you dare kill the Daughter of a King neither do I want means or power, to be revenged on your boldness even to the infants of your re∣bellious race, this gallant Ladyes Answer, overturned the bold attempt of this fellow to a dishonourable departure. At Gyen a child cut in two and the liver eaten.At Gyen, amongst other insolent cruelties and outrages these furies of hell, and children of the Devils begetting, committed such an horrible cruelty as common impiety would not foster, for they cut a young child in two peices alive, and with a horrible fury they eat his Liver. Murthers at Aurilac.At Aurilac, Bresons enters rhe Town, mur∣thers eight men, spoils the Town and Castle, and basely ravishes wives and maidens. In Molins many han∣ged with∣out Law.In Molins, Monsieur de Montare gave his Troops liberty to spoil the protestants houses, and without any form or shadow of Law, han∣ged two Artificers and four others, drowned five more, and suffered the hangman to hang three merchants of Dauphine; besides many o∣thers they murthered.
Neer Issoudun, at a village called Lisayn, thirteen young men of Issoudun, were beaten down in the water,A sad slaughter. and at Issoudun it self Sarzay enters, and imprisons the protestants, and most of them miserably died in prison, being smothered under the ruins of a Tower. A promise of free li∣berty, yet presently all murthe∣red.At Angiers, Puygaillard a Gascoin Captain, sent by the Duke of Montpenseir, enters the the Town, promising the Protestants a free ex∣ercise of their Religion, but in two dayes af∣ter their houses were spoiled, and the prisons by his command were filled with men and women, and fourscore of both sexes were murthered by the cruelty of the Papists, with cruel torments, and inventions of inhumanity;80. mur∣thered. women of all qualities were put into sacks, and dragged through the mire of the streets, and their bo∣dies thrown into the River, also virgins shame∣fully ravished, and they that resisted their lustful Villanies, were presently stabbed with daggers. And the Edict of the Parliament of Paris, was published that none should exercise the protestant Religion, whereupon many Gen∣tlemen and others, about Angiers, lost both life and goods. A guilt Bible they hung up∣on a Halbeird, and in a Triumphant and blaspheming way cryed, Behold truth hanged, the truth of the Huguenots,Horrible and unsuf∣ferable blasphemy. the truth of all the Devils, behold the mighty God will speak, be∣hold the everlasting God will speak, and coming to the bridge, they threw it into the River, crying louder, Behold the truth of all the Devils drowned. An aged Gentlewoman beaten to death, dragg'd through the Town, calling her the Mother of all the Huguenots. Two young maids ravished before their Fathers face
A valiant Captain after promise of life, yet contrary to faith given, was basely murthered,Treacherus Cruelty. breaking his body upon a Cross, and so left him hanging in great misery till he dyed. A Mini∣sters eyes put out and his body burned.At Ligueul, they hanged the poor Protestants, put out a Ministers eyes, and then burned him, and thus they run up and down roving, and raging, burning both men, women and children; without any mercy or pitty, they flay'd a young man alive. A Minister at 75. years drowned, and thirty protestants.The Village of Aze, they burn down, mur∣ther thirty Protestants, and drown a godly Mi∣nister, John de Tour, at seventy five years old. At Paris, in the year fifteen hundred six¦ty two, a decree was made by the Parliament of Paris, commanding all Catholicks present∣ly to rise in arms,Men encou∣raged by the parlia∣ment to forsake their trades to murder the protestants. to sound the bells in every place, to destroy all of the Religion reformed, without respect of quality, sex, or age, and so to root them out utterly, whereupon all Rogues, Vagabonds and Rascals, rise in arms, forsaking their callings, to help forward the murthering the poor protestants, whose rage was such for their Ruin, that they looked like Tygres and Lions, rather then men. In Tours, one hundred and fourty were de∣stroyed and cast into the River,140. mur∣thered in Tours. and the Pre∣sident being suspected to favour the protestants, he was beaten with staves, stripped to his shirt and hanged up by one foot, with his head in∣to the water downwards, and whilest he was living, they ripped his belly,The height of bloody cruelty and popish ma∣lice. pluckt out his guts, threw them into the River, stuck his heart on the top of a Lance, and carrying it about said, It was the heart of the president of the Hu∣guenots.
A sad slaughter.Not long after the Duke of Montpenseir gives order that their should be erected Gibbets wheels, and stakes, whereupon many especi∣ally of the richer sort, were murthered to the number of some hundreds,and River dyed with their blood. insomuch that the River was dyed with the blood of the Prote∣stants. In this City was a godly Matron, who for constancy, joy in tribulation, and comforta∣ble example may beg leave to stand in this hi∣story as a monument of Gods glory, for she endured their cruel torments, scoffs and jears, with undaunted and Christian patience,A Christi∣an pattern. whom at last they basely hanged, the particulars I re∣fer the Reader fully to peruse in Mr. Clarks Martyrologie, page the 303. Not long after the City of Roan, was besie∣ged, and two Forts taken, and without mercy they put all to the Sword; but that which is most to be wondered at was this,Q. Mothers incivility. the Q. Mo∣ther leads her Son the King, being then young, to shew him the naked bodies of the women, weltring in their own blood, at last the City being taken, the Souldiers massacred all they could meet withal, many English and Scotch Souldiers were hanged, the sick and woun∣ded cast into the River,Base cruel∣ty. Augustin Marlerot the Minister, with three Counsellours, were con∣demne to death, and so the next day they with five Captains were basely and unworthily han∣ged.Many of quality murthered, and a Mi∣nister blas∣phemously and inhu∣manly slain. At Valongre, many of eminent quality, and repute was massacred, among the rest a God∣ly Minister of the Gospel they most barbarously murthered, stripped and dragged him naked up and down his house, and then spurned his bo∣dy,
and with blasphemous, and reproachfull terms, they say, Now pray to thy God, and preach if thou canst, they stuffed his mouth with the leaves of his bible, saying, preach the truth of thy God, and call upon him to help thee. A child roasted. Children killed in the womb, 500. han∣ged.In Agen, two young children were roasted, and many slain. At Rein, they destroyed children in their mothers womb, keeping some women for their lust, above five hundred men were hanged up∣on Gibbets, amongst whom was a grave Coun∣sellor in his Gown and Cap, they mangled one and filled his wounds with salt. Murthers at Bloies.At Blois, some women escaping their fury by swimming three times safe to shoar, yet at last were bloodily murthered, many tyed to stakes were cast into the River; Virgins and Wives ravished;Maids ra∣vished. the Protestants complain to the Duke, whose bloody answer crowns him with infamy, for saies he, There is no Reme∣dy, we have too much people in France,A wretch∣ed Speech of the Duke of Guise. I will deal so, as victuals shall be good cheap. As if there were no way to make the ground fruitful, but to water the earth with the blood of the Saints. One Moluc met a Captain called La Mothe, stabbing him divers times with a dagger, thru∣sting him through, saying, Villain,Horrid blasphemy to be trem∣bled at by Gods peo∣ple. thou shall die in despight of God, yet this poor soul lived af∣ter, and this bloody blasphemer found one of the Devils good scholars. One Peter Roch was forced to digg his own grave, and then they made him ly down in it to try if it would fit his body, then they cast earth upon him, and buried him alive,One buried alive. oh! Hellish cruelty.
A procla∣mation to kill all Pro∣testants.At Tholouse, some Counsellers proclamed that all the Protestants should be killed, for that the King and Pope had given liberty for the same, this rejoices the bloody persecutors in ringing the bells. Now this City of Tholouse was so populous, and full of Protestants, that therein was numbred to be thirty thousand,30000. protestants in Tho∣louse. whereupon was a cruel and sad Massacre of the poor people of God; when they put any in pri∣son whom the place could not hold, they knockt them on the heads, and so killed them at the Prison doors;Rivers fil∣led with dead bo∣dies. the Rivers were filled with dead bodies, which in heaps were thrown in; many cast alive out of their windowes into the Ri∣vers, and if any save themselves by swimming they are presently knocked on the heads, like Dogs. Some of the Protestants being assembled in a body to one part of the Town, they stood up∣on their own defence, resolving rather to dy like men, than Dogs; So that the Papists a∣greed and promised the 16th. day of May,3500. Pro∣testants stand on their Guards, are promi∣sed life, but basely mur∣thered. that if they will deliver in their arms to the Town-house they shall retire with safety, and their lives should be saved; but oh! they were misera∣bly destroyed, as if there were no God to revenge covenant-breakers; for they fall upon them and murther all they lay hold on, to the number of three thousand and five hundred, who lost their lives by Popish treachery. In Limoux, the Papists used all manner of cruelties,Virgins de∣floured. deflouring women and maids in an abominable manner, the Minister murthered, two Gentlemen with six more were hanged. A Widdow, and loving Mother, redeemed her daughters virginity with a great sum of money
for a ransom, but the villains that promised, did presently ravish her in her mothers sight and presence,A sad and perfidious murther. and then killed both the mother and Daughter; nay after peace was proclam∣ed, fourteen coming to Town were presently murthered. The most sad and horrible blasphe∣mous mur∣ther that ever was beard of.In Nonnay, many sad cruelties were com∣mitted, for Monsieur Chaumont having surpriz∣ed the place, murthered many poor Protestants, with horrible blasphemies against God himself; one was commanded to blaspheme God, who refusing it, was speedily hewed in pieces; for the same cause another was knocked on the head, with the But end of a musket; Another, because he would not give himself unto the Devil, was drawn up and down by the Ears, and at last had his brains beat out with a ham∣mer upon his own Anvil; all manner of cru∣elties was used, especially to the principal of the Town, whereof many were thrown down a steep hill to make sport; some burnt in their own houses, others thrown out at windowes, some stabb'd in the streets; women and maids shamefully abused, and barbarously handled; a young woman that was found hid in a house, with her husband, was first ravished before her husbands face,A sad mur∣ther. then was she forced to hold a Rapier in her hands, and one thrusting her arms made her kill her own husband; they send about a Drum to sell Prisoners, and none coming to buy, they there murthered them,120 burnt. there was six score burnt to ashes. A godly Christian stoned and burned.These cruel Papists, and bloody Brats of Fury, took a godly Christian, one Janetta Calvin, and carrying her to the City of Brig∣nole, they shamefully stripped her, and then
whipt her cruelly, they crown her with thorns, then they stone her, and afterwards burned her. Cruelty at S. MartinsAt St. Martins in Castillon, they took the wife of one Andrew Renand, stript her naked, and attempted the violating of her chastity, which she resisting was with great cruelty whipt and wounded with their Swords, at last they shot her to death. Some there heads cut off, others buried a∣live.In Moni de Marsan, six of the chief men of the Town had their heads cut off, and others, after divers waies were executed, one was bu∣ried alive; a young virgin persued by some vil∣lains to ravish her, leapt out of a window and so dyed. Murthers at Carcas∣son.At Carcasson, the Protestants were hearing a sermon out of the Town, they return suspect∣ing nothing, they find the gates shut upon them, the Papists in Town shot divers times at them, afterwards come out of the Gates and persue them, slew many, hurt others, they beat one down to the ground, and then cut off his Nose, and pulled out his eyes, others they hanged;Many cru∣elties. one they beheaded, one they took and made his face, hands and feet black, then said he had a Devil, then hanged him, and at last threw his body to the Dogs.Some have arms and legs cut off, and then be∣headed. Prote∣stants burned in Churches. In Foix, no sooner was the Town taken by the Lord of Pailles, but the Protestants were cast into prison, some having their arms and legs cut off, and then beheaded, some burnt, others hanged, others put to the Galleys. In Aurenge, they destroy, without taking notice of Sex, Age or Quality: some they stabb'd, some they threw up with their Hal∣berds; some hanged; others burnt in chur∣ches;
off some they cut their Privy members, sparing neither old nor bed-rid, nor the poor diseased in hospitals; women and maids are killed, others hanged out at their windows, and shot with Harquebusseirs, sucking chil∣dren massacred at their Mothers breasts,Virgins of six years old ravisht 90. killed after pro∣mise of life. virgins of five or six years old ravished and spoyled, the wounds of the dead were filled with leaves torn out of Bibles; those in the Castle yiel∣ding upon oath and promise of safety, were all stabbed, or thrown over the walls, to the num∣ber of ninety Protestants. At Greno∣ble.At Grenoble, they slew many, throwing them over the bridge into the River. At Beaun.At Beaun, the exercise of their Religion was taken from them, all their godly Ministers put into prison, eight hundred forced out of the Town, the Souldiers spoil their houses, and all they find in them are slain. Their mad∣ness and horrid cru∣elty to a faithful Minister of Christ.In Mascon, the blood-thirsty villains having seized on a learned and Godly Minister, called Bonnet Bor, whose Godly conversation the more enraged these wicked blood-hounds of Hell; this Godly Soul had been Minister twen∣ty years, and in these daies of murther and cruelties had been ransomed three times, him they carried through the Town, with many jears and abusive scoffs, beating him with their fists, then profanely they made a Proclamation, That whosoever would hear this holy man preach, they might come to the slaughter-bouse. At which place again they mocked him, and beat him for two hours together, he intreated the favour of them, that he might pray to God before his death, then one stept out, and cut off half his nose, and one of his ears, saying,
Now pray as long as thou wilt, and then we will send thee to all the Devils, whereupon the godly soul kneeled, and so fervently poured out his soul to God, that his Enemies sighed, and after prayer, directing his Speech to him that cut off his Nose, said, Friend, I am now ready to suf∣fer what thou hast ready to inflict upon me; but I intreat thee and thy companions to remember the outrages committed by you upon this poor City, for there is a God in heaven, at whose Tribunal you must shortly give account of these your cruel∣ties. In which mean while a Captain going by, cryed, send that wretched man to the Devil, which one of them hearing, took him by the hand, pretending to have him to the River to wash his blood of, but when he came thither he threw him into the River, and cast stones at him till he was drowned. the Mur∣thers at Revel.At Revel, hearing of the confusion and sad slaughters, and of their merciless cruelties at Tholouse, many saved themselves, flying to Castres, and elsewhere, but left their families and goods to the mercy of these hell-hounds; some Protestants being apprehended by virtue of a Commission from the Parliament, were carried to Tholouse, and imprisoned, some con∣demned to the Gallies, some fined, and others banished. At Mont∣delleir.In Montpeleir, they yielded on terms of life, but were slain as they came out. At Millan, about thirty Protestants going under the condduct of one Peigre to relieve a Protestant Village called Cooper, they were all taken by one Vessin, and were presently cut in pieces, and their Conductor Peigre was led
to Tholouse,A Captain quartered alive. Breach of promise and 100. killed. and at the command of the Car∣dinal Armagnac, he was quartered alive. At the Castle of Granes, one Savignac de∣livered up the Castle on terms of life to all within it, yet they were so base as (in their usual way of keeping covenant) they break promise, and kill about one hundred Prote∣stants, being all in the Castle, except six or seaven. Horrible breach of faith.March Castle, a Castle belonging to the Sig∣neur of Peyre, a Protestant, was in the be∣ginning of February, besieged by Coffart, who having taken it by Treason, he kept his Faith as if he had no faith at all, for he murdered all in cold blood after promise of life. A special providenc.The Baron of La Fare, trying all means to have a maid of excellent beauty at his wret∣ched pleasure, besieged Florac, the place where she was, but was forced from it, so as the Gentlewomans virginity and Citizens blood, were both saved. At Cisteron, the Protestants being fled, the Papists fell bloodily upon the poor innocent women and children,VVomen with childe ripped and buried a∣live. and slew of them to the number of three, or four hundred, some wo∣men with child were ript up; many buried a∣live; some their throats cut like sheep, and o∣thers drawn through the streets, and beaten to death with clubs. These and many more, Christian Reader, were cruelly committed on the poor Protestants in France, during this Civil War, they are so sad they need no comment;An unpar∣ralled murther. but indeed that which follows is not to be paralleld for perfidi∣ous treachery; Breach of the faith of a King, and Court, and for hellish and unheard-of cru∣elties,
sad murthers in cold blood, upon Lords, Gentlemen, poor Ladies, Rivers swimming with bodies, and died with blood; Indeed the most sad Tragedie that ever was yet acted upon the theatre of the world, by Turks, Heathens, or Christians. CHAP. IV. The Contents. THE King and Queen Mother lay siege to Haver de grace, which surrendered on He∣nourable tearms; The King is declared out of his minority, and swears to observe the Edict of Pacification, but keeps not his oath nor promise; The Council of Trent meet; a League is made between the King of France, and King of Spain called the Holy League; the Cardinal of Lorain, posts to Rome, to desire the Pope to cause the French to observe the decrees of the Council of Trent; Great heart-burnings arise; The Pro∣testants dayly complain to the King of their in∣juries, desiring him to keep to his covenant, but to no purpose; The King and Queen Mother in progress, rides through the Nation, and secretly confer with the Popes Messenger, and the King of Spain. They come to Lyons, and forbid the exercise of the Protestant Religion; Many Pro∣testants cruelly and inhumanly murthered by the Catholicks in several places. The King and Queen Mother treacherously leavie six thousand, Swit∣zers to destroy the Protestants; Letters are in∣tercepted, which discover a bloody plot against the
Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and all the Protestants. The Prince, Admiral and Princi∣pal Protestants seize on Troys, Lyons, and Tholouse. The King and Queen Mother forced to ret reat to Paris. Th beginning of the second war; the King sends an Herauld to the Prince of Conde and Admiral. Their answer. The Prin∣cipal of both Parties treat, but to no purpose; The Prince and Admirals answer to their De∣mands. The Protestants never embrace a more sure ruin, then a peace with the King, The Ar∣mies meet and engage; the success. The Prince of Conde, and Admiral, march to join with Prince Casimir, who had raised twelve thousand men for their aid; The Duke of Lorrain made General of the Kings Army. Prince Casimirs Noble Declaration in defence of the Protestants. The Prince of Conde's Gallant speech to the Army. A gallaut Resolution in a free Contribu∣tion through the Princes Army. Prince of Con∣de and Admiral join with Prince Casimirs Ar∣my. The Prince of Conde besieges Chartres; The Queen Mothers treachery and speech; a peace concluded, but full of Treason, Guile and hypocri∣sie. The Protestants no sooner dismiss their Ar∣mies, and deliver up their Garrisons, but are speedily filled with Souldiers of the Kings. A bloody Cabinet Council erected by the King. They plot to cut off the Protestants, but are dis∣covered; The Kings Army suddenly begirts the chief of the Protestants, but they escape with their families to Rochel. The Queen of Navar comes to Rochel with horse and foot; Cardinall Castillon flies to England disguised. The Prince of Conde and Admiral, publish a manifesto to all Christian Princes; the Queen of Navar de∣clares
for the Protestants. A bloody Edict is pub∣lished by the King that none should profess any other Religion but the Romish, the King of France strangely declares to all the world, That he meant not what he said. WE concluded the latter part of the se∣cond chapter with a Peace concluded at Orleans, whereupon was publickly proclamed a free liberty for the Protestants, according to the Edict of Pacification. Now the King and Queen Mother endeavour to reduce Haverde∣grace, to their obedience, which the Protestant party had delivered up to the Queen of Eng∣land, as aforesaid.The Kings Army be∣sieges Ha∣verdegrace. To which purpose they lay siege, the Town holds out a good while, till at last being sore streightned and no hopes left of relief, they come to conditions of surrenders, but before Hostages were delivered, and English Fleet of sixty brave Ships appears under sayl, fleering directly to the Port, but the Earl of VVarwick, like a true hearted Englishman, (scorning to dishonour his Nation with such per∣fidious treachery as most of the French acted) he sends word to the Admiral of the Fleet,Honoura∣bly surren∣dred. that the Town was to be surrendred that day, being the seventeenth day of July, and so performed his Contract to his great Honour, I cannot compare this noble act to any but that brave Roman Consuls, who being taken by the Cartha∣ginians in Africa, had liberty given to return to Rome to effect the release of some Prisoners, and in them his own in exchange, promising to return prisoner if he could not. Now when he came to the Senate, he perswades them not o accept of the conditions, and so according
to his promise returned, and was miserably tor∣mented to death. Oh that it might be said so of our Charls the Ninth, that he had but been regardful of his Oaths, and covenants, then had not we been partakers of such a sad spectacle of cruelty, by reading this bloody Tragedie. The Catholicks now after this peace at Orleans feared the greatest visible power rested in the Prince of Conde; So the Queen Mother treads in her old paths of deceit, intending by her cunning subtilty to cut off all pretences of right to the Government by the Princes of the blood;The King declared out of his minority, and swears in the pre∣sence of God to ol∣serve the Edict of Pacificati∣on. to which purpose she causes the King (now but fourteen years old) to be declared King and past his Minority: She carries his Majestie to Roan, and there the fifteenth day of December 1563. they went Solemnly with all the Lords of the Court, and Officers of the Crown, to the Parliament; Where in the presence of the Counsellours, he received the usual Ceremonies used in France at the Coro∣nation, the Parliament publishing the Decla∣ration of his Majority, the King there pub∣lickly protested, and swore in the presence of Almighty God, That be would for ever after du∣ly observe the Edict of Pacification, threatning all opposers, for such was his express will and pleasure. Thus all things seem in a peaceable way; one would now think so much blood, expences of treasure, and a consumption of his subjects, would weary any nation, and make any King rejoice. For a peace is the more sweetned by the effects of a Civil war already felt, for two extreams illustrate each o∣ther. The peace not keptBut alas this peace succeeds not the hope∣full
expectation of his peaceable subjects, in many places it was not observed. The Coun∣cil of Trent meets. The King of Spain, and France make a league and call it the Holy leagueAnd now assembles that Council, known by the name of the Council of Trent; who meet for the maintainance of the Catholick Reli∣gion. Now the Cardinal of Lorrain, being an a∣ctive Agent to forward any design that might put the Protestants backward; the Council to fit his purpose finds this expedient. That the King of France and Spain should make a firm and inviolable League, and that the King of Spain should assist with such forces as might be needful to the aid and succour for the King of France. Which League was called the Holy League. And that nothing might be wanting to break that famous Edict, the Cardinal promises his best aid to assist their commands, assuring them that the King and Queen Mother stand firmly for what they decree. The Car∣dinal posts to Rome, and endea∣vours all be can a∣gainst the protestants.Now as soon as this Council broke up, the Cardinal posts to Rome, and labours with Pope Pius Quartus, to send to the King and Queen Mother of France, to cause publickly the Decree of the Council to be observed throughout the Kingdom of France, presently they begin to have it put in execution, for the Embassadours of Spain, Italy, &c. de∣mand of the French King the Observati∣on of the Decrees of the Council of Trent, that the Edict should be disannulled, and He∣reticks rooted out. Secret ani∣mosities in the hearts of both parties.Now begin new firebrands to be cast a∣gain, all their designe from first to last be∣ing to work out the poor Protestants, who
would be glad of peace with lives, and liberty, but could have it granted no wayes but in jeast, in order to their more secure ruine in earnest, for they never meant to be in earnest with their most solemne promises, and prote∣stations: When they cannot overcome by Warre, then a Peace most be made, and in that Peace, a damnable plot couched to de∣stroy them: when by Gods mercifull providence the Plot is discovered, and they Arme for defence of Lives, and Liberty, and by Gods blessing grow too potent and powerfull for their treacherie and Armes; then a peace a∣gaine, and thus they play fast and loose till they cut the Throats of the two peaceable Pro∣testants, who were no way to be overcome but by peace,The Pro∣testants complain to the King of their daily wrongs, desire jus∣tice and the per∣formance of his pro∣mises but to no pur∣pose. Insomuch that wee may here insert a paradox in Divinity; that, it had been no sin in this cause to be unbeleeving, nay they had no other way to be saved but by unbeliefe. And thus the Edict, that should have been the Cord of Peace, was now a breaking in pieces by all the powers of Hell and Rome; in∣somuch, that those that were worse affected to the Edict, and most forward to crush it, cry∣ed out; They could not endure two Religions, which seemed (say they) as prodigious, as two Sunns. And now as just Occasion was the cause of complaints, soe now the Protestants sound in the Kings Ears their sad conditions, and how little the Edict was like to be kept, if such cour∣ses were nourish; but the King heard to little purpose, for it made a noise in his Eare but not in his obdurat heart; for this King instead of hearing the complaints, and redressing the
wrongs, of his to good subjects; turnes his Ears, forsaking the good Example of King Lewis the first of France,A nota∣ble exam∣ple of Jus∣tice. who used three dayes in a week publickly in Person to hear the complainnts of his subjects, and judge their Cause. A poor woman, desiring the Emperour Adrian, to hear her Complaint, and do her justice, he answered, that he was not a leisure; the poore woman then replies boldly,the King and Queen Mother in progress meet the Popes Mi∣nister and King of Spain and secretly confer in person to∣gether. that he ought not to be at leisure to be Emperour; Au∣gustus Caesar, exceedingly rejoyced to do justice, and hear the causes of his subjects; insomuch as the night could not allay his vigorous mind to do justice; nay, when he lay sick, he would order the parties to appear at his bed side. But this King was so far from following the Command of God, or example of Heathens; so far from delighting to settle his own Throne in the peace of his subjects, that he seeks to over∣throw his own tranquillity in his subjects ruine. To which purpose the King and Queen Mother make their progress through many parts of the Kingdom, and smoothly coloured their plots, and conferences with the Duke of Savoy in Dauphine, with the Popes Minister at Avi∣gnon, and with the King of Spaine, on the confines of Guienna; whereby they might better cōmunicate their secret Counsells with∣out the hazard of revealing their trust to French men, whom they thought by their Al∣liance, one way or other, might reveale their secret, hellish plots, to the Protestants. And it is to be taken notice of, that now at this time was laid a Plot, which Embasadors nor Coun∣cells intrusted, must not know.
The King & Q. coms to Lyons for∣bids the exercise of Prote∣stant Re∣ligion and fortifies the place.In this progress, the King and Q. Mother comming to Lyons, they forbid the Protestants the exercise of their Religion, being one of the Towne assigned them for freedom; the Prote∣stants being numerous in this City, the King orders a Citadell to be built, not stirring out of the Towne till it was finished; Now this was an Example to other Towns and did very much exasperat and hearten the Catholicks a∣gainst the Protestants; who with cruell Courage seize on them in sundry Towns, and shamefully abuse them; So that, Many Pro∣testants in many places murthered.In Crevan, in Burgongue, the Catholicks fall on the Protestants, and murther many, being met together for the exercise of their Reli∣gion. Curee Governour of Fendosme a Prote∣stant, was murthered by command of Cavigni Leiutenant▪ to the Duke of Montpenseir, at Tours; they fell so furiously upon the poor Protestants, murthering some, hurting others coming from the Sermon, and with great rage came into the Town with their bloody swords in their hands, and being dyed with blood,A gallant Gentle∣man mur∣thered. they proceed further, falling on all they meet with, murthering without destinction of sex, age, or Quality; Drawning, Killing, and distroying, all they could find: many Protestants of Qua∣lity were murthered without any account given of their death, by justice on the Mur∣therers. Now the daily threats against the Protestants, put them into a doubt of their security;The sad massacres at Tours. for the King and Queen Mother having concluded with the King of Spain; secretly to assist one another; It now fiftly falls out to discover that treacherous part which all this while lay hid
under the plauseble pretences of an Edict of Liberty, which indeed was that part of Hy∣pocrisie, which as a Cloak, covered all their per∣fidious Treacherie, and breach of promise: That now what was written on the word of a King, before the Eternall God, was no more kept or observed, than if it had been only written in sand;the King and Q. Mother Raises an Army of Switzers pretending to defend the Prote∣stants but was a plot to cut them of. His Oathes, being as car∣fully broken, as solemnly made. And that which gave the Protestants too sure grounds of fear, least a storm should fall undiscovered, till unavoydable, was this: When Ferdinando Alvares de Tolleda Duke of Alva, was marching into the Low Countries with a puissant Army, to subdue the Prote∣stants there, that embraced the reformed Reli∣gion against the King of Spains will, and de∣sire; the Queen Mother ordered the raysing of six thousand Switzers, and brought them into France, pretending forsooeh, that they went for guarding the fronteirs of the Kingdom a∣gainst the attempts that might be made by the Duke of Alva's Army: But see how the light of Heaven penetrats into the dark designes of Hell; Letters are intercepted in their way, from Rome,Letter in∣tercepted & the Plot discovered and Spain, wherein was discovered a plot for the Protestants, for therein was found, That it was decreed in a secret Councell, to appre∣hend the Prince, and Admirall, to destroy the one, and keep the other Prisoner: and there∣fore if the Prince, and Admirall, escaped this bloody Tragedy prepared for them, and should try it by Arms, that then on a sudden, ere they could Arme, or be provided: those six thousand Swit∣zers were to arrive at Paris, where was to re∣main two thousand; as many into Orleans;
and the rest into Poictiers; and thus was the six thousand Switzers pretended to be raised for defence of the Protestants against the Duke of Alva, that was indeed for their utter ruin: the King and Queen Mother concluding, that if the head were off,The wick∣edness of the Duke of Alva. the body would fall to the ground; calme the winds and the billows will soon surcease their rage; Now this bloody Duke of Alva, carried himself against the Pro∣testants in such an unhuman way, that he per∣mitted his Soldiers to ravish Virgins; and one time at his Table boasted;the Prince and Ad∣mirall and chief Pro∣testants take Lyons, Troys and Tho∣louse for their de∣fence. that besids privat Massacres, and what the War had destroyed; he had Caused to be put to death by the Hangman, Eighteen Thousand in six years time. And now the Protestants seeing so clear a Plot in the midst of Peace; nay that under pretence of safety lurked ruin, and Treacherie; They prepare to defend themselves by force, and stand on their own ground, for their Lives, and Estates, because they see peace is the direct road to a murderous death, resolving rather to die in field like men, and Soldiers, than be cut off by Plots, (Oh! that they had continued and never embrased Peace may all true Prote∣stants say ere this History ends) they there∣fore to the aforesaid purposes, seize on three principall Towns, Lyons, Troyes, and Tho∣luse; The King of France as the usuall Cus∣tom is, was then preparing for Meaux,the King forced to a disorderly retreat from Meaux to Paris. to solemnize the day af St. Michaell: the Prince of Conde, with five hundred Protestants, ap∣proach Meaux, the King and Queen Mother hearing thereof, Retire with great disorder, and fearfull hast to Pars, with six thousand Swit∣zers and other Horse; and thus begins the
second War, being armed on all sides, and a generall rising in the Land. Now sundry parti∣culars which happened in this second War, for our better proceeding in this Tragicall History, and for our present purpose must only be touched at, carrying along with us the most observable deeds,The King sends to the Prince of Conde and Ad∣mirall. for a more clear understanding of the whole business; that we may go on in som or∣der till we come to the rest. The second War thus beginning, the King sent an Herald to the Protestants, whom the Prince and Admirall received in behalf of the rest; to whose message they return this Answer: That they were resolved to continue the Kings good subjects, and what they did was for the defence of their religion & liberty, granted by the Edict, which the King by Oaths, had promised faithfully to keep; that they desired nothing more then the security of their Lives, and Estates, in A peaceable enjoyment of the liberty of their Con∣sciences, which might the better enable them to be the more firmly fixt in obedience to his Majesties Command,The heads of both sides meet and treats but to no pur∣pose. But if they should disband, it were the most compendious way to their assured Ruin, and a plaine laying of their necks to the block, and so offer their throats be to be cut by their merciless enemies, the Kingdome being full of Swisses, Flemings, Italians, and Germans. Hereupon the heads of both parties meet at St. Denis, the Constable desires the Prince, and Admirall, to relie on the Kings word, of whose performance he hoped they need not doubt to what ever he promised: (Oh! that the poor protestants had found is so, then had not forty thousand Innocent souls been slain basely and murthered treacherously.
The Prince and Ad∣miralls noble an∣swer to the constalle.To this, answer was returned, that it was not now time to trust in the Kings word, which how little it was kept was too visibly to be read, in the bloody effects of the constant breach thereof. An Edict being made and sworn to by the King, was by the same King violated, which was a manifest signe of treachery, and perjurie, and so perfidious,The Prince and Ad∣miralls noble an∣swer to the Constable. as few christian Kings would signe to: so that they could no more depend upon the Kings word which had hitherto been a snare, a sure trap to catch them in: and truly they that run may read, that all along this sad History, the poore Protestants were never und on but when they took the Kings word, which indeed at all times proved but the um∣brage, or shadow of a promise,The Pro∣testants, never em∣braced their ruin but when they trus∣ted to the Kings word in a peace. being alwayes made with a resolution never to be kept, which at last proved a faithfull paslage to their utter ruin; so that now this meeting brought nothing conducing to peace: for it is certaine that in such a short tract of time, I could never yet hear or read of such a constant practise of co∣venant breaking, which all along in this Kings reigne was so often practised; as if it had been reckoned amongst their meritorious works, as if there were not a God to punish per∣jurie, or treachery. And now the Protestants, lay their Army down before Pis, and shortly after both Ar∣mies meet, and on the tenth of November gave battle; and the Protestants received the worst by reason de Andelot came not into the Princes assistance till midnight,The two Armies give Battle. after the battle; therefore next day they enter the field with their Army, shew themselves in battalia,
ready to fight the enemie, and so standing some houses before the great citty of Paris, they bury their dead,the Con∣stable slain. cure their wounded, but the Catholicks in Paris durst not come out to engage: in this battel was slain the Constable on the Kings side. On the fourteenth day the Prince and Ad∣miral with their Army,the Prince of Conde and Admi∣rall with their Army march to joyn with the Prince Casimirs Army of 11. thous∣and. marched to Campagn, and so past into the confines of Lorrain, to joyn with Prince Caisimir, son to the Prince Pala∣tine of Rhine, Elector to the Sacred Empire; whose royall worth cannot shine through the description of my pen, according to the lus∣tre of his native, and intrinsick worth: who had now for the defence of the Protestants, ray∣sed an Army of ten or eleven thousand, who in their march took in som towns; In this mean while the Duke of Lorrain was created Generall of the Kings Army, and the Duke of Anjon Lieutenant Generall, now Prince Casimir aforesaid, writ to the King, protesting that it was not any profit, or privat interest of his own that prompted his resolutions,Prince Casimirs noble de∣claraton in behalf of the pro∣testants. but only, and really, to assist those that afflicted, and persecu∣ted, for the same religion, had required his help, And further declared, That if yet the King would grant them free liberty, according to his promise in the last Edict, he was ready to retreat. A noble and brave resolution, of a gallant Prince, and a true friend, such friendship shall never want it's reward in this or another world. Sincerity in affection, will endure the touch of affliction, But here succeeds a block that must be re∣moved out of the way, which the Prince of Conde, out of a tender respect to a conscionable
performance of his promises, did only surmise; which was bravely and couragiously performed as follows. The Prince of Conde, had promised to the Prince of Casimirs Army at their approach to the confines, the sum of one hundred thous∣and crowns:the Prince of Con∣des Brave speech to the Army with Christian resolution to keepe his cove∣nants. the present want of which did much perplex the Prince of Conde: but cal∣ling the Army together, he there soberly and wisely related their present condition, ac∣quainting them, that their generall welfair con∣sisted in their particular assistance: and that in outward apearance the Prince of Casimir was the greatest pledg of their hopes, and on whose help did depend their future hapiness, if God blessed their willing resolutions; and therefore it were better to hazzard their. private estates for a pros∣perous Issue, then lose life, liberties, and estates, to a bloody cruell, and perjured enemie. and so excited them freely, to contribute what they could, and with the price of their present assist∣ance, to redeem their lawfull liberty, Estates, Lives, and Families. A gallant and free contributi∣on of the Prote∣stants Army with their noble re∣solutions not to be parralleld.So there were two Ministers appointed to re∣ceive their free contribution: now though no∣thing could be worse spared, yet nothing was more freely given; for this brave Comander the Prince of Conde like a pious adventurer, (with a forward inclination to redeem their liberty, though with loss of estates) sets them a faire coppy to imitate; for he was the first that gave all his monies, and plate, yet not contented, gave the very rings off his fingers, and, all the valuable riches he had: the Ad∣mirall chearfully follows this Christian, and unparralled example: then as willingly follows
the chief officers of the Army, and so from the gentlemen to the privat soldiers, and from them to the footmen and boyes in the Camp. There was such joyfull and freewill-offering even to the valew of all they had, by which chearfull contribution, was made up in monies,The Ar∣mies of P. Casi∣mir & P. Conde joyne fore∣ces. Plate, chaines of Gold, Rings, and Jewels, to the valew of fourscore thousand Franks: which for the present satis∣fied Prince Casimir's Army, who doubtlesse would not let their resolutions stop in a vigo∣rous prosecution of their purposes, though they had not had this rare piece of affection, and care of their prosperity: But it was more the noble prince of Condes care to perform his promis, then any promptitude in the Princes Army, who wer exceedingly pleased: Now all parties being ful∣ly satisfied, on the eleventh of January 1568. they both joyned in a harmonious conjuncti∣on,Rochell for the Prote∣stants. both of force and affections. In the mean while the Pope sends aid to the King of France, being four troops of Italian Horse, six com∣panies of Italian foot, with two French Re∣giments, and four thousand Swisses, who were all joyned to the Kings Army under comand of the Duke of Anjou. Whilest these things were agitating, Rochell declared for the Protestants,The Pro∣te stant sn their march be∣seiged Charteres. which proved e∣ver after by the wise and mercifull care of God a good sanctuary for his poor people, Now the Prince of Conde with Prince Casi∣mir, advance and in their way beseige Char∣teres, which place was now as a store∣house for Paris, and the parts ad∣jacent, for it was a plentifully filled with Corne: Now the Kings Army encamped
before Sein, and was loath to put all to the ha∣zard of a battle, which did put Charteres to a great strait. The Queen Mother of France her treacherous Speech.The Queen Mother perceiving which way the game was like to play, falls to trade in her old Treacherous policy, the only way for her security (who used to say) She could make three sheets of paper do more, then the power of a whole Army. To which purpose, she sets on foot a Peace, which indeed was no less necessary for the Ca∣tholicks, then desired by the Protestants, which may admit of one necessary observa∣tion. The prote∣stants in the height of their po∣wer yet al∣waies rea∣dy to em∣brace the least moti∣on of peace.That when the Protestants had the greatest advantage of the King, yet the least notice of peace was hearkned too and imbraced; though in the full carrier and pursuit of their unresi∣stable power, and prevalency. Therefore it may safely be concluded, That if they had had a∣ny other intent in taking arms, but for Lives, Liberties, Estates and Families, they would never have laid down arms to embrace a peace, which at all times they found as a Snake in their bosomes, and did expose them to the grea∣test cruelty an inraged enemy could inflict. So that now the Catholicks disadvantage in po∣wer, meeting with a peaceable, though pow∣erful enemy,A peace with full liberty of conscience, but oh, trea∣son and de∣ceit is the sad effects. were the wheels that moved to a conclusion of War, and so to sit down under a settlement; so that the War having continu∣ed about six Moneths, a Peace was concluded at Lonianieau, with the same liberty allowed to the Protestants as was expressed in the Edict of Pacification, granting liberty of Religion, That they should Really, Fully, and Publickly en∣joy
the liberty, and free exercise of the Religion reformed, and that it should be executed according to the tenure of the Edict, notwithstanding all Restrictions, and Interpretations to the con∣trary. And thus this second war was peaceably ended, by the Protestants, and no less trea∣cherously intended by the Catholicks. The peace begins and ends in treason by the papists.Now I shall shew you the Treachery therof, and the sad effects; for alas it is not to be ima∣gined what treason is hid under this fair viz∣zard of Peace; To see what a foul sin they make of such a fair virtue; they pretend no∣thing more then a firm, and durable peace, and intend nothing less. But ah! poor Protestants that you had foreseen this Foxes Snare, this storm of bloody cruelty intended: but truly their laying wait for innocent blood, could not be descerned nor penetrated into, unless by the deep wisdom and narrow search of a divine eye: so dark, and so deeply laid, was there hel∣lish Treason; for a few daies discovered their intentions to be full of deceitful treachery, and that they put onely the name of peace on their most horrid and bloody designs, taking Gods holy name in vain, by all their promises, void of performances. But the poor Protestants saw not their intentions.The prote∣stants dis∣miss their Armies, & no sooner deliver up their Holds to the K. but they are filled. So that the Princes and Admiral, dismisse their Armies, and the Strangers are safely con∣ducted into Lorrain; and all the Towns that the Protestants did deliver up to the King, were presently by his command, possessed and strengthened, with Garrison Souldiers, Rochel only excepted, which place enjoyed the benefit of an antient condition, granted two hundred
years before, between the King and them, viz. Never to have a Garrison put into the Town against their desires. The Protestants had also by the Edict of peace these three under their command, Men∣taubon, Cognac, and La Charite, to be held full two years, and no more, in the Prince of Conde's name. The King not trust∣ing to his Court coun∣sel picks a choice crew fit for his purpose, and calls them a Cabinet Council.Now the King and Queen Mother not tru∣sting to their present Council (some whereof being supposed to have too tender consciences to swallow the bloody plot intended) therefore erect a choice Council, pickt on purpose, which his Majesty calls a Cabinet Council, consisting of such as would contrive, and carrie on, any blody design whatsoever. Insomuch that those which by their Birth and place might challenge a room in the most privy Councils, were now utterly excluded, and exempted as men not fit to impart unto the secrets of the Kings and Q. Mothers Intentions. A Hellish plot by the Cabinet Council.And now let us see a little what this Brave Cabinet Council will act, what a brat of blou∣dy resolutions they can creat out of their hel∣lish Breasts; They at last conclude, that force of arms is not the direct road to travel in for subduing of their Enemies, but Macbevil must be called to Council, and his politicks put in practice; resolved they are to try what plots (the attendants of the Devils Councils, and the Legitimate son of Hellish production) will do; so at last they conclude, and vote it to be ena∣cted, as that which must be put in practice, viz. the death of the Prince of Conde and Ad∣miral, and so to cut off all future fears of their attempts, as also hopes from the Protestants, so
that no troubles for Religion might after a∣rise. But the fear of God is not before their eyes, they run swiftly to shed bloud, not conside∣ring that Gods vengeance can persue them more swiftly. This design they commit rather to secrecie than strength, and therefore that they might have one fit for their designs, they chuse one Cavagnes, to whom they impart the business, who being a man fit for bloud and cruelty, was ordered to take the charge upon him, as one that could drink deep draughts of innocent bloud without any regret, and with full de∣light, who could be full of cruelty without the least pitty; now all was thought so sure, that if the Prince and Admiral did not escape, they should inevitably fall into the cruelty of their adversaries. The plot discovered to the Prince and Admirall.Thus the plot being laid, they forgot that God could see, and as the Psalmist saies, He shall redeem their souls from deceit and violence, and precious shall their blood be in his sight. And so it pleased the Lord of his good grace, & mer∣cy, to discover their deceit & intentions of Bloud for it was no sooner contrived in dark, but disco∣vered in light, by one that speedily posted to the Prince and Admiral, and revealed the Plot, yet the Kings Army was so quick that ere the Prince and Admiral removed from their quar∣ters,They are surrounded, yet by Gods mercy es∣cape with their fami∣lies to Ro∣chel. they were by orders of the King, Queen Mother, and the rest of the Cabinet Council, surrounded in Noyers, a Town situated on the confines of Burgundy, which they had so cun∣ningly ordered to avoid suspition, that lifting and removing under pretence of fresh quarters,
they came at last to quarter at a small distance from them; and doubtless they had been taken and destroyed, if GOD had not surround∣ed them in mercy from the purposes of the Kings treachery. The Prince and Admiral, knowing the scope and drift of their Serpentine windings, and turnings, speedily advance towards Ro∣chel, with wives, children, Servants, and two hundred Horses; where at last they safely, through many dangers, arrive, and were joy∣fully entertained by the Rochelois. The Queen of Navar also comes to this Rendezvous at Rochel,Q. of Na∣var joins with the protestants. accompanied with a considerable number of horse, and foot. The Cardinal of Chastillon, who lived at Beauvois far remote from Rochel, did with great hazard travel in a Seamans habit to the Sea∣coast,The Cardi∣nall of Chastillon escapes to England. and so by Gods good Providence em∣barqued, and safely arrived in England; where in Queen Elizabeths Court, he was freely welcome, and there he did faithfully ne∣gotiate with the Queen in behalf of his fellow Protestants in France. The Prince and Admi∣rall with the chief protestants publish a Manifesto to all Chri∣stian Prin∣ces.The Prince and Admiral, seeing their past danger and present safety, solved now to defend themselves, and secure their Religion, Lives, and liberty, by Power, which could not be al∣lowed nor obtained by peace. To which pur∣pose they publish a Manifesto to all Christian Princes in the world, wherein they briefly de∣clare, That in the integrity of their hearts, and cleer witnesses of their consciences, they had ma∣ny waies peaceably endeavoured to enjoy their li∣bertie, and lives, under a loyal obedience, and subjection to the Kings commands, and that the
world could not but take notice how little conditi∣ons of peace was observed by the King, that in the midst of Peace, it was not to be recounted what unsufferable injuries, and cruel murthers, were dayly heaped and committed, upon the poor Protestants, even to the loss of the Estates and Lives of many of their dear friends; which op∣position was the greater, being done by the Kings Liberty, granted contrary to Articles of peace, and Edict of Pacification, promised by Oaths and Covenants; therefore though they dayly wai∣ted, yet now they saw no other way but to arm in their own defence, which was the least they could do, being tyed by the laws of God and Nature, to preserve their Religion, Lives and Estates of themselves, with their poor wives, children, and families, that else would be left to the power and rage of bloody and deceitful men, and that this was their only design of taking arms. And fur∣ther did declare, that if they could espy and other way to enjoy their Estates, Liberty and Lives, they would speedily lay down their arms; yet not∣withstanding they desired and resolved to continue his Majesties faithful Subjects in obedience to all lawful commands, wishing a period to their lives, the same moment their obedience ceased; if they could but herein see security for enjoyment of their Religion and Lives. The Q. of Navars noble De∣claration in behalf of the prote∣stants.At the same time the Queen of Navar with some dashes of her illustrious pen, and a full Testimony of a Christian Resolution, does, by Letters declare, That she could do no less than joyn with the Prince of Conde, and Protestants, which, with the life of her self, and children, as also the miserable Reliques of the Kingdom of Navar, The Cardinal of Lorrain, on the one
hand, and Spaniards on the other, did jointly in∣deavour by force and policy to destroy, which was so discernable, that all the world was witness to her injuries. And indeed this Noble Queen,The Q. of Navars high merits in part de∣scribed. would be ecclipsed of her due value by the draught of my rude pen, the highest Encomiums will but stain her virtues; but to a little belief of her high deserts, know only this, That her enemies confessed her virtues, and Christian valour, to exceed the very applause of her Friendly admi∣rers, and therefore her deserts was concluded as much undeniable to them as unspeakable by her friends. Thus the very beginning of this pretended peace ends in a third Civil War, whose effects was as bloody, as sharp, and at last we shall speedily see in a Tragical Massacre of many thousand Protestants, of all degrees and sexes, so securely were the Protestants lull'd asleep in their too credulous opinion of the King and Court. Now in this Cabinet Council of the Kings, was Charls Cardinal of Lorrain,The King publishes a bloody E∣dict that no Religion should be exercised but the Ro∣mish on pain of death, which cuts off all former promises and Edicts, as if they had never been made to be kept. Brother to the Duke of Guise, a man of a most crafty and terrible nature, insomuch that at Rome he was no less reputed; for he was a bitter enemy to the Protestants, and for the cruelty of his nature was termed, the Firebrand of all Civil Flames, whose hands being deep in the blood of the Protestants, For by his means, and the willing mind of the King, and bloody Coun∣cil,
was published an Edict in his Majesties name, levelling the famous Edict of January, and enjoyning, That none should profess any Religion but the Romish, and that it was trea∣son to embrace any other, requiring upon pain of death a general conformity to the Catholick Re∣ligion. Which bloody Edict was accordingly pub∣lished, whereupon all the Protestant Ministers were banished all places of the Kingdom which were in the Kings power. The King declares he meant not what be said, Oh deep deceit.And that the King may stand amazed at this deep hypocrisie, this following Sentence was expressed in this Edict printed at Paris, And it was further then declared, that albeit the King had in many Edicts before that time, per∣mitted the freedom of Religion, yet his meaning was to retain, and cause to be retained of all men, the only Romish or Popish Religion within his Realm. Which Edict and clause being so wonder∣fully strange to all that heard or saw it, and because it stained the Kings name with the most horrid spot, of perjury, and breach of faith, it was therefore in other impressions (af∣terward printed) purposely omitted in the E∣dict. This Edict was published with an incredi∣ble confluence of all sorts of Catholicks, and received with the highest celebrations of joy as can be imagined, and the rather, because the Catholicks much doubted of the Queen Mo∣thers intentions, in regard of her dissembling carriage to the Protestants; and now all was put out of doubt by this Edict; Which clear∣ly demonstrates that the King and Queen Mo∣thers
intentions all along was to destroy the Protestants, root and branch, only took their best opportunity to effect their desires with the least noise of suspicion, and greatest security to drive the nail home to the head, and their bloody Swords to the hearts of the most inno∣cent souls. And thus begins strong preparations for a third Civil War for Religion, the sad effects whereof we shall peruse in the next chapter.
CHAP. V. The Contents. THe Protestants gallant Resolutions; Both parties arm; Queen Elizabeth aids the Protestants. The protestants take several towns; the Armies face one another, but ingage not; the Battel at Brisac, where the Prince of Con∣de is slain; the Prince of Navar, and Prince of Conde, chosen Generalls of the protestant Army; the Admirall and whole Army swears subjection to these two young Princes; the Queen of Navar coins money to pay the protestant Ar∣my; the Princes and Admiral draw their Ar∣my into Garrisons; the Kings army sits down before Cognac, but are valiantly repulsed; they take Mucidan, put all to the Sword, but lost Count Brisac; the Duke Deux Pont, with 14. thousand, marches to join with the Princes, but dies himself by the way. The Pope sends Forces to ayd the King; Both armies engage; the Kings Army retires to Garrisons; the Princes take in Chastelrault, and Lusignan Town and Castle; they lay siege to the great City Poictiers; the Kings forces besiege La Charite, but leave it after the loss of many brave Gentlemen and Commanders; the Duke of Anjou besieges Cha∣stelrault, but after great loss leaves it; the young Duke of Guise advances to Court, and his Fa∣thers place at once; the Cabinet Council meets; the Armies ingage in a bloody Battel; the Kings
Army besieges Angeli, but receives a gallant shock of a resolute defence by that brave Com∣mander Monsieur de Pilles, and at last yielded honourably; the Kings Army disbands; the pro∣testants increase, and are Masters of the field. The King summons his forces together and gives the command to Marshall de Coss; the King, Queen Mother, and Cabinet Council, plot to linck a peace, and the Protestants ruin together; the protestants at all times willing to embrace a peace; the end of the third Civil War; the K. and Queen Mother speed Messengers to the prin∣ces and Admiral to make way for a peace; they yield to imbrace a treaty, the King propounds for both armies to join against a foreign Enemy; A firm peace concluded with free liberty of the Edict. Several protestant Princes congratulate the King for his happy peace; the King subscribes to keep the Edict; the Armies dismissed; the peace not fully observed; the King with the Council plot destruction; the King and Court feed the pro∣testants with favours to make them the easier to swallow their own ruin, and his love together; the King dissembles with the Princes in shewing a dislike to the Catholick party; the prince of O∣range, and his Brother offer the King of France their assistance against the King of Spain, and is accepted; the Count of Nassaw. disguised goes to the King; the King invites the Admiral to Court; the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal Lor∣rain, depart the Court, the better to allure the Princes and Admiral to their Ruin; the Prince of Orange takes the Spaniards slips; the King propounds his Sister the Lady Margaret in mari∣age with the Prince of Navar; the Popes Em∣bassadour arrives at the Court; the Kings plot
to surprize Rochel; the King pronounces the Ad∣miral not guilty; many protestants at Roan mur∣thered; the Admirall perswaded of the Kings Reality by a Letter under his own Hand and Seal. The prote∣stants no∣ble resolu∣tions.NOw begins the third bloody War, where∣in the Protestants solemnly covenanted together, so to cleave fast one to another, so to knit themselves firmly together in their affecti∣ons and resolutions, as no future transactions should, with the help of God ever make them to forget, or forsake, the cause of God concerned in the Protestant Religion, but resolutely to maintain it, to the loss of their lives, and all that was dear to them. Both sides prepare for war.Hereupon the King arms amain, so also the Princes and Admiral, who send out a fleet of thirty sail for Provision for the Army to supply them for the ensuing Winter. The Queen of Navar also endeavours all she can for their aid and assistance. Q. Eliz. aids the protestants.Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, sent o∣ver to their aid one hundred thousand Crowns, besides ships of Corn and Ammunition. A thing to be treasured up in the remembrance of her lasting fame. The prote∣stants take in many Towns, both armies meet, but fight not.The Prince and Admiral advance with their Army, and soon levels the force of many strong Towns to their power, in taking them in, and so become Masters of the Field. At length both Armies meet, yet no battel, in regard of the cold season: neither Army would fight, but on advantage, which would be given by neither. The Winter being now past, in the year
1569. the Armies engage at Battel at Brisac the 16. of March,The Battel at Brisac, the prince of Conde slain to his eternal ho∣nour, figh∣ting on his knees to the last. wherein the Prince of Con∣de was wounded, and his horse shot under him, yet did valiantly defend himself on his knees, in the midst of his Enemies, but at last was slain. On the Kings side was slain the Duke of Monsalez, whom de Andelot the Admirals Brother, charged so furiously, that with his bridle hand, he lifted up the Bever of his Hel∣met, and discharged his Pistol in his face, and so laid him dead on the ground. Great was the slaughter on both sides, of Gentry especial∣ly, wherein the Protestants were worsted by the Catholiques comming upon part of their Army in full bodies, which unfortunately was scattered by their too great security, and sudden approach of the Kings, yet their demeanor in the fight was such, that the Kings Army had reason to bewail their great loss, and admire their Enemies valour; and undoubtedly in outward appearance, had the body been en∣tire, and both encountred on equal advanta∣tages, the day was generally believed would have been otherwise; for the Horse only was engaged, but the foot never came to any service, but secured themselves in a body. And thus died that brave Prince of Conde; exceedingly commended for virtue and valour, and asmuch bewailed for his loss. Prince of Navar and prince of Conde Generalls for the pro∣testantsAfter this Battel the Protestants rallie their Forces, and by a General choice of the Army, Henry Prince of Navar, and Henry Son to the deceased Prince of Conde, were both elected Generals of the Protestant Army. The Prince of Navar was of a noble and gallant Spirit, full of Urbanity and Civil
courtesie;The Prince of Navar shews a gallant spi∣rit in a pi∣hy speech. of a Warlike courage, and being na∣turally given to valourous and heroick actions, he embraces this courteous invitation, and like a Souldier of a long standing (being but fifteen or sixteen years old) he lengthned their hopeful expectations by a short & pithy speech, wherein He promised to protect the true Religion, and to persevere constantly in defence of the common-cause, till death or victory proved the Issue. Now to ballance this Royal assent, and Christian magnanimity of so tender a Sprout of virtue,The Admi∣ral and whole Ar∣my profess fidelity and obedience to the prin∣ces of the blood, and the prote∣stant cause. the Admiral, and Count de la Roch∣fou-caut, first submitted, and swore fidelity; then followed the principal Officers, and Sol∣diers, in joint Resolutions to order their steps after his Royal commands, and the religious ends proposed in his Speech. All of the Army protesting fidelity to the Princes of Bourbon: And thus with a volley of applause was this Gallant young Prince elected General of the Army, and Protector of the Protestants, whose yeers were far younger than his wise conduct of affairs, in whom it was hard to say whether his resolution, valor and wisdom, or youth was more perspicuous, for he seemed, as if nature, which accomplishes others by degrees, had finished him in a trice. He was no sooner come to his Horizon, but his deserts lifted him up to his Meridian. The Queen of Navar, mother to this virtu∣ous Prince, approved well of their choice, and his acceptance; so that she sharpned all their resolutions by her couragious assistance of the Protestants.
The Reli∣gious and Noble Q. of Navar coins money and inserts a christian and reso∣lute Motto.She was a religious Queen, in whom resided much virtue and constancy to a good cause, Wherefore she caused monies to be coined with her picture on one side, and the Princes on the other, with these words. Pax Certa, Victoria Integra, Mors Honesta. A Motto becoming her noble Spirit. Thus they fall to consultation how to order the Army, with the best prudence; they resolve to divide and draw into Garrisons, so also does the King. The Prin∣ces Army draws into Garrisons.So the Princes and Admiral retire to Saint Jean D' Angeli, Brave Monsieur de Pilles defen∣ded Xaintes; Montgomery and Puviant take charge of Anglolesm, Ienlis commands with a strong garrison in Londun, and Monsieur d' A∣ciere, with seven thousand foot, and six thou∣sand horse, remains at Cognac, where the late Battel was fought. The K. be∣sieges Cognac is forced to leave it. Mucidan taken, and all put to the Sword.Hereupon the Kings Army under command of the Duke of Anjou, attempted to sit down be∣fore Cognac, but the continud valor in their often sallies, amaz'd the enemy to a retreat. The Army thus forced to leave Cognac, layes siege to Mu∣cidan, where the Count of Brisac on the Kings side was slain, yet the Town was taken, and not only Souldiers but all Inhabitants suffered the rage of a bloody Sword, and inveterate E∣nemy. The Noble protestant Duke of Deux-Ponts with fourteen thousand joins with the Princes Army, be dies in his March.To the assistance of the Princes and Admi∣ral advances the Duke of Deux-Ponts. with an Army of fourteen thousand, in which Ar∣my
my was VVilliam of Nassaw, Prince of O∣range, with Lewis and Henry his Brothers; in their march it pleases God the Duke the General died by the way, and so the Charge of the Ar∣my was committed to the Lieutenant General, Count Volrade of Mansfield, Three daies after the Armies meet with great joy on both sides. The Pope mean while assists the Catho∣licks with four thousand foot, and eight hun∣dred horse,The Pope and others aid the K. commanded by Paulo Sforza; the Duke of Tuscany sent also to their assistance a thousand foot, and two hundred horse; The Duke of Alva sends three thousand VValloons and three hundred Flemish; but Gods just judgments followed their insolent carriages, for such Miseries, wants, and sicknesses followed them, that by the way abundance died. On the 23. day of June 2569. both Armies approach neer together,The Armies engage. and next morning by break of day the Princes fell on Strozzi's quar∣ter, who was Col General of the Infantry, who were all routed, and he taken Prisoner; there was slain S. Loup, and Rogucleauz Lieutenants to Strozzi, twenty two Captains, and 350 of their best Souldiers; on the Protestants side was slain in all 150. The Noble Princes of Navar charges in the head of the Army.The Prince of Navar commanded the other part of the Army, and charged the Enemy to their quarter, with a great deal of manly cou∣rage, beyond expectation, himself charging in the front of his Army. Which was so much the more remarkable, in regard danger at first seems most terrible, so that they that beheld this valour, had their senses lifted up with ad∣mination, and the whole Army puffed up with
expectation, that the world would be filled with the renown of his actions. The Kings Army draws into Garrisons.And so after a little skirmishing, they both withdrew. Hereupon the Duke of Anjou, see∣ing little hopes of overcoming the Invincible manhood, and great power of the Protestants, he dismisses the Nobility, and settles most part of the Army in Garrisons till the first of Octo∣ber, against which time all was ordered to be in readiness to appear. The Prote∣stants take in Cha∣stelrault.The Prince and Admiral advance with their Army, and take in the Town of Castelrault, and enter in the King of Navars name, by whose authority, as first Prince of the Blood, all things were dispatched. The Town and Castle of Lusig∣nan taken.They speedily advance to Lusignan, and ta∣king the Town, laie siege to the Castle, which though impregnable for strength, yet could not withstand the battering assaults of their valour; so was forced to yield on conditions; marching with flying colours. The Articles being as faithfully performed as promised, which though according to Justice, yet contrary to the Catholiques constant practice; which was a great dishonor to their Army, and whole nation. The Strong City of Poictiers, beseiged but left.Speedily after they march and lay siege to the Strong City of Poictiers, a City of the great∣est Circuit of any in France, except Paris; be∣ing the Head of the adjoining Provinces, and where all the wealth and treasure of the Catho∣liques in the Country was brought for security. The Duke of Guise, enters with a party to de∣fend the City, and after strong assaults, and much loss on both sides, the Admiral falls sick with continual care and pains to prosecute the
siege to a conquest, so they rise with their Army, and leave the place. The catho∣licks be∣siege La Charite, but are for∣ced away with great loss.Now the Kings forces under the command of Monsieur de Sansat, laie siege to La Charite, and after a sharp assault, and stout resistance, with the loss of many gallant Gentlemen, they were forced to leave it, being kept by a resolute and valiant commander Monsciur de Guerchy, Cornet to the Admirals own company of Gens d' Arms, whom we shall afterwards find basely murthered. The catho∣liques be∣siege Ca∣stelrault, but leave itThe Duke of Anjou not able to raise the siege of Poictiers, did in the mean while lay siege to Chastelrault (a place but lately taken by the Protestants) but finding a stiff resistance by their valour, were forced to tetire with the loss of Fabiano del Monte, commander of the Tus∣can Forces, with two hundred fifty Souldiers, and many Gentlemen; The Admiral advan∣cing to their relief; the Duke was forced next day to march away, and lodge his Army at Sello. The Duke of Guise admitted to his Fathers place and Cabinet Council.The Duke of Guise about this time goes to Court, and for his faithfullnesse to the Catho∣lick cause was admitted to his fathers place, and to the Cabinet councill; this Councill now meets again to consult of the affaires of the Kingdome; at last concludes to draw their forces together, and fight the Princes Army, which although the Prince was on disad∣vantage, yet they resolved unanimously the fight the Catholicks. The Armies engage in a bloody and furious battel.After sundry skirmishes and sharp encoun∣ters, the Armies both meet the beginning of October, when first the Prince of Navar with ample and Christian Speeches, recommen∣ded
to them all the cause of Religion and Li∣berty; now they engage first with terrible thun∣dering of Cannons, and much slaughter, but they presently close and fall on with wonder∣full fury, the horse and foot being strangely mixed together in the heat of the Battle, nay such was the heat of their valour on both sides, that the very common attendants of the Ar∣mies, such as Sucklers, Boyes, Pioneers, were deeply engaged for either party; And herein the Admirall acted so much of his wonted valour, that he shewed himself a va∣liant Soldier, and couragious Conductor; for with a furious assault and fixed resolution in the head of his cavalry he charges the Rein-grave, and though the Admirall had re∣ceived a shot in the cheek with a Pistoll, yet discharged his Pistoll in the Rein-graves face, and there layes him dead on the place, and fought valiantly, allthough the blood from his wound did fill his Gorget,the Prote∣stant Ar∣my forced to retire. and run down his male. At last the Protestants Army being worn out with a tedious march, was forced to retreat, and with the Prince, the Count of Nassaw, Count Volrade, all which without any disorder meet that night at Partenay. the K. besie∣ges St. Jean d'Angeli, which brav Pilles did keep.After this bloody Battel, the King, Queen Mother, and Duke of Anjow, sit down before St. Iean d'Angeli which was kept by that famous & renouned commander Armand Sieur de Pilles, whose same spread it self through∣out all France by his stout resistance of the Kings power, and valorous keeping of the place, for against the continuall assaults of the whole Army,His exces∣ding valor. his brave Soldiers kept it for two months, and one time in this seige a truce was
made, that if in certain dayes relief came not, they should yeeld on conditions:Relief by a handsome policy. the day comes, and St. Severin with forty horse deceives by policy the sentinells, and Kings Army, and as friends passe all to the relief of the Place. After many bloody assaults and great loss to the Kings Army, the place not able any long∣er to continue, did at last deliver up on honourable rearms;Yields on honourable terms. To depart with their Goods, Arms, Horses, and ensignes displaied; and for four months should not carry armes in defence of the Protestant religion. But as Monseiur de Piles made his seige famous, so the Catholicks made themselves infamous,But disho∣nourably kept by the King. by his Majesties breach of faith given; for as they advance to receive the articles of the Kings promise, and their own deserts, they are spoyled of Armes, Apparell, and Monies, rob their baggage, take away their Horses, and spoil their Men. Nay a Regiment quartered at St. Jultan halfe a League off, under the command of Sarrien, fals on, Beats, Kills, Murthers, and destroyes many,They are murthered. casts some into the River, and he that can make a safe escape to Angou∣lesme is happy, though he have nothing else but his shirt. Whereupon Mounseiur Piles was freed from his engagement by a non-performance of the Kings promise.10000. men lost at the siege, and five thou∣sand canon shot spent. The King lost at this seige, Sebastian of Luxembourg, Duke of Martignes, and governour of Brittain; five thousand can∣nons shot spent, ten thousand men of War lost, twenty five or thirty Commissaries of the artillery which was slain in their charge; many crept away from the Army, and such hot service, insomuch that the Camp decreased eighteen or twenty thousand men.
The K. dis∣bands the Army.In the year 1570, for many reasons, and af∣ter much consultation had, the King did re∣solve to disband his army, which accordingly was don. The Prin∣ces Army increases.Now the Protestants labour to gather Strength, by the Industrious pains of the most incomparable Prince of Navar, (who pas∣sing the expectation of his age) presently Armes the nobility and others in those partes, on whom his father the King of Navar had great influence, by reason of their near allian∣ces, and neighbour hood: whereby the Princes Army was now again got to such a degree of strength, That they were masters of the field. The K. Ar∣mie meets, and Mar∣shall de Cosse Ge∣neral.The King seeing things go contrary to his desire and expectation, summons his Army together, and in regard the Duke of Anjou was sick, the charge of the Army was delivered to Marshall de Cosse; the Armies never came so neer as to give battel, but often skirmishing, and little likelhiood there was for the King to conquer the Protestants by force; which o∣pinion, as it was grounded on good reason, so was it increased by newes which came to the Court, that Prince Casimir was raising new forces for aid of the Protestant Princes, which indeed put the Catholicks in a great doubt and fear of any success against them The K. & Cabinet Council meet, and plot a peace and ruin together.Now begins the bloody game, for the King, Queen Mother, Duke of Anjon, and Cardinall of Lorrain, meets privately together, and ac∣cording to their disposition, and custome, fall a ploting, holding it the best way (when they could not mend it) to think of accommodation, and giving liberty to the Protestants; Who might better have enjoyed it by war than by
peace, as the Issue proved. If it had pleased the Lord to discover the inside of their treachery, which, though fatal to the poor Protestants, yet so dishonourable to the King of France, and the French Nation, that it cannot but draw down Gods just Judgements upon them. The secret Council thought this way of peace might be the quickest, and safest way to their designs of destroying the Protestants, better than by War; for if they could cut off the chief sup∣porters of the Protestant cause, the rest would follow; and so they aim at an opportunity to gain a peaceable (though bloody) access to their persons, which in time of War their Sword could not reach; so by this means, hoping to cut off the Root, the Branches would wither; Indeed it had been well if it had fallen out that the branches had naturally withered; but ah! sad and doleful, we shall see a horrid and bloody Tragedy, which will astonish any heart but flint, to hear and read this sad and miserable story; and truly it makes my heart bleed to think of the sad cruelties and unparalleld mas∣sacres of Gods people. And now they discover their Inclinations to peace, which they knew at all times would gladly be embraced, and acceptably welcom to the Protestants, if covered with Liberty and Lives, the things they only desired. For if they had delighted in any thing but Allegiance, or fought for any thing but liberty, they would not now incline to peace in the midst of their unlimitted power; but poor souls, they had been far more happy if they had dyed like men in Warr, than murthered in their Bods like Dogs.
This third war was sharp, and thought the greatest, in regard of the Kings unfaithfull dealing, in the breach of his promise, that he should give a free liberty for religion, and en∣gage to keep it, binding himself thereto by Oath, yet the same King speedily after, breaks all oaths and promises, declaring that solemn engagement before God to be void, and that what he then promised was not so meant by him, and therefore proclaimes it death, for any man to professe any Religion but the Ro∣mish and Catholick. Now the Princes and Admirall in the be∣half of themselves and Protestanrs, did declare in the sincerity of their hearts, that they desired nothing more then the performance of the Kings edict, and socurity to enjoy their Liberties, Lives, and Families. Thus having given as succinctly as possibly I can, the most remarkable passages of this War, we shall now come to the last Tragicall part of the most unheard-of treachery, and bloody massacre, that ever I read or heard of,The K. sends to desire a peace. to take it in all it's circumstances. After many battels and much loss of treasure and blood, a treaty was begun by the King and Q. Mother, who sends messengers to the Prin∣ces and Admirall, signifying, how desirous they were of a firm and inviolable peace. The Ad∣miral yields to a treaty.The admirall being so often deceived with fair pretences of peace, could not be so ill an observer but to learn somthing by transactions past, therefore was so afraid and jealous that he knew not well how to advise, seeing all their fair pretexts of peace since he could remember, was but a shorter cut to their invitable ruin:
so that the burnt child dreads the fire, yet being desirous of a peace on good grounds (which proved as a Quagmire to swallow up all their hopes) he yeelded to embrace a treaty. Now the King, that he might better colour and varnish over his treachery, sends messengers to the Admiral, to signifie in his Majesties name, that the King himself had now found out a sure way for a lasting peace, which way his Majesty thought so safe as none could doubt of his integrity therein, which indeed was a subtile piece of policie as follows. The subtle and trea∣cherous de∣sign of the K. propoun∣ding a war against the K. of Spain as a means to a peace one with another.That now both Armies which had so long fought against one another in the feirce flames of a Civill War, might now unanimoufly joyn against the Duke of Alva, as a forein enemie; and one that had been too great an in∣strument of the late combustions in France. And that it might appear no French Romance in regard of the suddeness, and the ayd lately received by his Majesty from the Duke of Alva against the Protestants, as also supplies from the King of Spain his Master, therefore he further signified, that his Majesty the King of France, had high cause prompting him to a War with the King of Spain, and among many this was not the smallest,the Kings pretended reasons of war against the King of Spain. viz: that the King of Spain, had by violence taken from his Majesty the King of France, the Island Florida in new-found-land, suddenly slaying all the French Soldiers, as also the Marquesdome of Finall, the Inhabitants whereof had lately sur∣rendred themselves under the command of the King of France. And therefore he desired in his Majesties behalf, that the ground of this war might not be misinterpreted, but taken in a good sense, and that his Majesties ends of propoun∣ding
both Armies to joyne against the Duke of Alva in the Low-countries, might be looked upon as a designe of his Majestie to unite all former discords in a firm bond of union, and concord, by cleaving together against a common enemie: And to set off this business the better, he further propounds, that it was now a fit opportunity to imploy Count Lodovick of Nas∣saw, Brother to the Prince of Orange, for ma∣nagement of the business, that he might easily by the assistance of his Commanders and Sol∣diers, suddenly surprise certain Cities which mighe be of great advantage to the future hopes of success. the Admi∣ral reasons the case, & could hard∣ly be brought to believe this war real, and oh that he had ne∣ver belie∣ved it.Now this penetrated the more into the Ad∣miralls heart, in regard, this Count of Nassaw was one that had been under his command for two years, who behaved himself with an ex∣ceeding courage, and approved valour and fi∣delity, in a great proof to the Admiralls know∣ledge, and there needed no spur to the Count, being a man banished out of his own Country for Religion, by the Duke of Alva, and was a man of much resolution and courage. The Admirall receiving this message was wonderfully put to understand what to do or say, for although he seemed not to suspect the Kings fidelity, yet he saw strong reasons to look about him, for though he valewed not his own life, yet he drew along with him the wellfare of all Protestants, therefore he con∣sidered thus with himself. The great power of the Cardinall and Guisans in the Kings Court, and was also too well known to be no less greatly in favour with the King, and Court of Spain, against
whom this war should be: and therefore could not conceive how this war with Spain could really be caried on, when these men were the prime managers of the affairs of France, having also severall pensions from the King of Spain, therefore could not but increase and confirme his jealousie to suspect treason and deceit, when he considered, that these men were dependents of Spain, who were of the King of France his Cabinet Councell, and yet for them to wage war against the King of Spain. Oh! Treachery. The Admirall could not but take notice, that at the same time the Embassadour of the King of Spain, was admitted into the Privie Coun∣cell of France, (which to forein nations seemed utterly incredible) and that also one Brirragio a Lumbard (reported a traitor to his own Coun∣try) being ignorant of the Law, was for his subtil wit hoysted to the honourable office of Chancellour, in the room of Michael Hospitall displaced, a man well known to be a true Patri∣ot to his own Country, and also so, learned and able, as the like could never be found in France. Thus the Admiral (on whom did hang all the weight of affaires) doubted what to do in this great strait,The Ad∣mirall in a strait what to resolve on. he therefore considered on the contrary side what his adversaries would say against him; that they would hereby take oc∣casion to report him backward to Peace, as one delighting to live in the fuell and fire of blood and civill wars, not knowing how to live but in troubled waters, not able to endure the sweet relish of a quiet peace; these reasons, amongst others, did perplex his wavering mind.
Now the Kings Messenger in behalf, and for defence of his Majesty,The Kings Messengers reply to the Admiralls Objections. did anwer to all the Objections of the Admiral, and said, That the suddenness of the King of France his resolutions to war with the King of Spain, was. That he and his Mother the Queen, had been informed by one Albery come lately from Spain, That for certain King Philip a little before had poisoned his Queen, the French Kings Sister, and had basely given out through all Spain, that he had such things against her, as for the credit of many persons of honor were not fit to be published. The Ad∣miral per∣swaded by Count Lodowick to the war with Spain.Now all this being said, moved not the Ad∣miral so much, as the free and chearful resolu∣tions of the Count of Nassaw, whose indefa∣gitable earnestness was boundless, and perswa∣sions to the Admiral endless till effected. The Admiral hereby perswaded, laies aside all dis∣honorable thoughts that might stain the Kings loyalty, and so stood ready to embrace a peace, to which purpose was sent Beavois, and Teligni the Admirals Son, and with them Monsieur de la Chossetire, the Prince of Navars Secretary, and so on the eleventh day of August 1570. was a peace concluded according to the Edict of Pacification in January,A peace concluded with free Liberty. That every one should have free liberty of conscience to use and profess the Reformed Religion. Rochel and Montauban, was to be held in the Princes name for the space of two years by the Protestants. The Arti∣cles of Peace were afterwards published and Re∣gisted in the Parliament. But alas! we shall see that this Sun-shine of Peace (like the poor Traveller in the sable) sooner makes the Protestants cast off the cloak
of their security, than all the blustering storms of the Kings Warlike forces could. For by embracing a peace, they hug in their bosoms, and nourish in their hearts their own calamities and know it not, by reason it is printed and gilded with the name of peace. Several Protestant princes sends Em∣bassadours to congra∣tulate with the King and his peoples tranquilli∣ty in the peace con∣cluded. The King olemnly gives his faith for e∣ver to ob∣serve the Edict.Not long after this peace thus concluded, several Princes of Germany that had respect to the Protestant Religion, among whom was the three Electors, the Palsgrave, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh; all sent their several Ambassadors to the French King, to congratulate this happy peace, and to shew their joyful resentment of the same; promising, that if any new commotion should arise, they would assist him to the uttermost a∣gainst the Contrivers and authors there∣of. To this Embassage the King replies by words, and afterwards, subscribes to a Book with his own hand, giving his faith by both, That he would for ever, most sacredly and faith∣fully observe the late Edict of Pacification. But alas his heart was too many leagues from his mouth, his promises are no better than if writ∣ten in water with ones finger, being too far short of truth, and intention, which is sad to confider, that the King should have no way to keep his faith, but to break it, that oaths and promises which should ty devils fast, is the onely way to levell all faith and en∣gagements. For now it is to be taken notice of, that wher∣as before the Kings age made his Authority fit only to advise and countenance, now he ma∣nages affairs with his own Council and com∣mand,
for being now come to the years of 22. he displaies himself on the Theatre of the World in such a splendid equipage, that all might see him to be of a fierce resolute nature, and above all an absolute dissembler, as one of the French nation very well observed, and if he did not, yet this History will sufficiently evi∣dence. The Ar∣mies dis∣missed, and the Prin∣ces and Admirall go to Ro∣chel.Now this peace being thus concluded, the Armies are dismissed, and the Strangers retire to their own Country; after which the Prin∣ces retired to Rochel: for now to effect the deep and bloody plot, nothing wanted but the Art of perswasion to entice the Princes, Q. of Navar, the Admiral, and Principal Prote∣stants Lords, to come to Paris; nothing more desired, for their the trap was laid for their de∣struction; and doubtless this mock-peace had never been embraced, if it had pleased God to have given them an insight to the bottome of this unheard-of, and unimaginable depth of Treachery, and Deceit; which being hatcht and brought forth in the Hellish Court of the Cabinet Council, we shall too soon see the speedy and sad effects of it, the Lord knows it will too soon come to the birth of their bloo∣dy hopes, and cruel desires, for as vengeance persues blood at the heels, so a hideous storm of cruelties succeeds this peace. The Peace, though fully concluded of, be∣tween the King and Protestants, yet was not fully observed in all places according to the E∣dict. So that the Princes and Admiral (to give a reason why they stood at such a distance from his Majesty) send to Court Theligny, Bri∣quemault, Beauvais, La Nocle, and Cavannes;
They are no sooner come, but the King wel∣comes them to the Court, and professes that it is his Royal pleasure, that the full Observati∣on of the Edict was no less than he really in∣tended, and therefore to scatter all mists of doubt from the Princes and Admiral, he de∣sired that they would acquaint him of his real resolutions for their good. The King and Cabi∣net Coun∣cil plots the ruin of the Prote∣stants, be∣ing desirous to get the Princes & Admiral to Paris, and so to cut them off.And now they begin their Politick Maxim, Parvi sunt Arma foris, nisi sit consilium domi. That policy is of more force in Military af∣fairs than valour. They now to the Trade of Politick treachery; the King and his Cabi∣net Council meets, and their Result is, With speed and secrecie, by Serpentine Labyrinths, and enfoldings, to bring the principal Protestants in∣to the Not of destructior; A Wor being thought too hazardous, and weak to effect, therefore must the principle of Machevil take place in their judgements and practice, i. e. To effect their desires, though they swim through a Sea of blood. For now they have hopes that their plot might take effect, in regard that their private actings were now mannaged by those that were jointly concerned in the effects of their desires, and hoped to have some share in eheir bloody success. The King by fair car∣riages in∣tends to slide into the Prote∣stants affections, and so draw them to Paris, and cut them all off, which was the plot laid for them.To which purpose, a good opinion of the Kings sincere intentions for the Protestants good, must be fixed in the minds of the Prin∣ces of the blood, the Queen of Navar, and the Admiral, so that all their foul actings
might seem so fair, as no tincture of suspition should enter into their thoughts, he penetrates their hearts with shews of love, but his own heart is filled with deceitful plots and treache∣rous Resolutions, endeavouring so to insinuate into their good natures, that he might lodge in their hearts good thoughts of his bad in∣tents; so that all carriages must be screwed up to the highest pin of affection and love, as we shall shortly see conferred on them by an out∣ward confluence of all favours, that the least doubt might not have any footing to the preju∣dice of their bloody aims; hoping by this means, to have their desires and success to lodge under one roof. All their plot being to get them to Paris (the Theatre of this most horrid and cruel Tragedy ensuing) unarmed, and then by further progress, to put in execution the practi∣cal part of their bloody plot; so marshalling their affairs, that all the Protestants shall be im∣mediately cut off in the bloodiest war that ever was known. Now the plot being laid, the Gin being set, they fall to work, labouring to bring this blou∣dy brat to the Birth; To which purpose the King and Queen Mother calls to Council the Duke of Anjou, the Cardinal of Lorrain, the Duke of Guise, and Alberti Conde Count de Retz, and speedily resolve them of their se∣cret intentions, if by any means it could be effected, they therefore desire their best aid and assistance, together with their approbation; which needed not be doubted, for they were men ready enough at all times to act the Kings pleasure. The King therefore begins, sending out
strict orders to all the Provinces of his King∣dome,Now the King be∣gins to dis∣semble, strictly command∣ing an ob∣servation of the Edict, which he intends not should be observ∣ed. The King outwardly carried it harshly to the Catho∣licks to more to work the Protestants to their lure. to have a high esteem and regard to the late Edict in behalf of his good Subjects the Protestants, and that it was his Majesties ex∣press command to have it strictly observed; and to make their Hearts understand what they heard by the ear, the King gives Order to have this message proclaimed at Rochel, the Seat of the Princes and Admiral, assuring them in particular, of the Kings favourable intenti∣ons, to what he had confirmed with his Royall Hand, which should be kept inviolable from all attempts of the strongest perswasion. And yet to penetrate more deep, to make one act of dissimulation out-vy another, to let the world see he was a good proficient in the Art of Trea∣chery and Bloodshed, he carries himself out∣wardly very harsh to the Catholicks, telling the Commissioners, that the Power of the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal of Lorrain, was not to be feared, for that the Government now re∣sted in himself, and had no dependency on a∣ny of their commands, and therefore, though they live at Court, yet needed not the Princes of the Blood, or Admiral, fear them as Adver∣saries, for they lived as Subjects, not as Mast∣ers; and that ere long he hoped all acts of for∣former hostility, and enmity, should be by his means buried in eternal forgetfulness, and that both parties should be reconciled, to the Kings desire, and their own good. All which did not only peirce the hearts of the common people, but wonderfully wrought upon the hearts of the Princes and Admiral, with the chief of the Protestants; who now begun to believe the Kings intentions real, and that be∣ing
now weary of the bloudy Civil Wars, and Distractions, and beginning now to govern by himself, and not by his Council, might at last sincerely desire a firm peace. But alas they are too short sighted to espy, and too sincere to doubt, that such unparalleled de∣ceit should lodge in the hearts of devils, much less in a King, a Christian King, not so much as in his thoughts, much less in his intentions and practice; but it is the less wonder, seeing it is so, that not only in publick actions of great men, but also in our common intercourse with things of smaller moment, we all experience that the greatest hatred and malice, is covered with the greatest love and friendship; and that there is no greater knavery then that which bor∣rows a cloak of Religion to cover it with: some men again make use of friendship, as a stepping stone to their own ends; as the For being environed with a high Wall, and hot∣ly persued by his Enemies, was put to great straits for his liberty, for he could not leap o∣ver the Wall; at last espying one by the Wall side stooping for a stone to throw at him, he sud∣denly leaps on the mans back, and by that step of advantage leaps over. Little did the poor Princes and Admiral, with the Queen of Navar, and Nobles, and Gentlemen of the Religion, think their No∣ble blood to be so neer spilling by such base and unheard-of cruelties, covered under so much love; who would not pitty to read that so much valor as was in these brave Commanders should be murthered, and laid in the bloody grave of a Treacherous death, which shortly we shall sad∣ly peruse.
The first thing the Admiral embraced by these perswasions was the War against the King of Spain, which made the way easier to the rest that followed, and yet he often said to his Son∣in-Law Teligny, that he suspected the rowling wit of the Queen Mother, whom he was afraid would lead them on in this enterprize, and leave them in the midst. The Prince of Orange and Count Lodowick his Brother profer their service to the King in the war of the Low Countrys.The Count of Nassaw, advising with his Brother the Prince of Orange, sends word to the King, That if it were his Majesties plea∣sure to War against the King of Spain in the Low Countries, they would so order themselves under his commands, as that by their service therein, his Majesty should find them faithful and useful; and perceive their affections to him and the cause in hand; to this the King replies in loving Letters; commending their resoluti∣ons, and gave them hearty thanks for their lo∣ving Message, which tended highly to a free manifestation of their affections to his Ser∣vice. The Empe∣rour medi∣ates be∣tween the Prince of Orange and the K. of Spain The King of France encourages the Prince of Orange against the perswasions of the Emperour.Now Maximillian the Emperour pretending to pitty the Estate of the Prince of Orange, had obtained by Embassadours to the King of Spain, that the Prince should have his goods restored, conditionally that he should not set∣tle his habitation in the Low Countryes, but in some other place, and yet nevertheless should enjoy freely all his Revenues. As soon as the French King hears hereof, and doubting it might be a hindrance to his pre∣sent design, he speedily posts Messengers to the
Prince of Orange, to perswade him, that what the Emperour had done, was nothing but to hinder their progress in so good and advantagi∣ous a cause, and being only a devise to break up his leavies that he had begun in Germany, let∣ting him further understand, that if he will please to give him credit, he should not want assistance sufficient to regain his Estate from the King of Spain. These perswasions of the King, being not suspected to come from dissimulation, and hy∣pocrifie, by the Prince of Orange, so did he firmly believe all to be real; insomuch as he proceeded in his Musters, resolving a while to bear the charges thereof, whilst all things else, fitting for the war, were in readiness; though the charge at that time was very heavy. Count Lodowick disgrised goes to Court, and treats with the King, and agrees about the War.Now Count Lodowick his Brother, being of a resolute disposition, essayed his own fortunes, and by encouragement from the King he secretly journies from Rochel, taking with him onely two companions, giving out he was going for the Prince of Orange his Brother; but in a disguised habit he privately departs, and that night arrives at the Court which then was kept at Bloys; where the King and Queen Mother, shewed great demonstrations of a joyful wel∣come, and at this time the King in person him∣self did treat with the Count without the assi∣stance of any of his Council, which the rather was done that the Count might see and report, that now he acted by the Counsel of his own command, that so the Admiral and Princes might see and understand his promises could not be hindred or frustrated by the counsels of their adversaries about him at Court; that so
also they might receive the better encourage∣ment to come to Court, seeing their Enemies was not of his Council. At this meeteng of Count Lodowick and the King, it was agreed, that the War should go forward against the King of Spain,The Admi∣rall desired by the K. to come to Court, and be Captain General in the War. with all possible speed, and that the Count should go before to prepare; that the Admiral shall go Captain General, desiring further of the Count that he would signifie as much to the Admiral, and to desire him in his Majesties name to come to Court, the better to treat and confer fully thereof; whose advise should have as great power with the King as could be expected; that he should have allowed for his Guard fifty per∣sons in Arms at Paris,The K. ve∣ry earnest to have the admiral at Court un∣der spetious pretences of favour. for safety of his person; or should have any other security, that might put him out of hazard of his Enemies At∣tempts, and might also bring him into a good opinion of the Kings real intentions; Oh! deep dissimulation! This being don betwixt the Count of Nassaw, and the King, the Count returneth to Rochel, who poor Prince not see∣ing this depth of Treacherous deceit, used all Rhetorical Art of perswasions to the Princes, and Admiral, to journey to the Court; and indeed he was the only Spur to them, and much perswaded them of the Kings real intentions, and how joyful the King would be of their Company and Counsel in his affairs. The King now returns to Paris, and takes his pleasure, that the World might see he min∣ded only recreation; but, God knows, plotted his poor subjects ruin, who with the Cabinet Council sits close for effecting their bloody de∣sires in the plot laid for their destruction.
The Duk of Guise & Cardinall of Lorrain feign a dis∣content, & depart the Court on purpose to allure the Princes & Admirall to Court by their ab∣sence from it.To which purpose the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal Lorrain give out (the better to draw and allure the Protestants to Court in their ab∣sence) their high displeasure against the late proceedings of the King in behalf of the Pro∣testants by his favours conferred on them, ther∣fore in great disdain and greater Policy, the Cardinal of Lorrain departs the French Court, and carries with him Cardinal Pelvey, Duke of Pontmenseir, and the Prince Dauphine, pre∣tending to go to the Election of a New Pope, but indeed was only to draw the Princes and Admiral to Court by being encouraged with their adversaries absence, that they may come to Court with more confidence and less fear, but we shall shortly see that though they divide in opinion, yet they unite in Counsel and bloody crueltys. The Prince of Orange his Fleet takes the Spaniards Ships, and sells them as Prizes in Rochel, by the Kings per∣mission.And that this Treachery might still be more compleatly freed from all suspition, and all things seem to be carried on by the Kings mind, his Majesty gives leave to the Prince of Orange his fleet to hover about Rochel, and by oppor∣tunity to set on the Spaniards Ships and Portu∣galls, which might happen to sail along that Coast, taking such as they cold; which they did, and brought them into the Haven of Ro∣chel, where they openly sold their prizes, which the K of Spain by his Embassadour often com∣plained of. But to set the world a fair copy of a Kingly treachery to his poor Subjects; to lay the Top∣stone of Dissimulation in the fairest pretences of affection and desire of peace, the King u∣shers in one of the handsomest pieces of Hypo∣crisie that ever carryed the face of Reality, for
although the thing he pretended was really ef∣fected, yet the grounds and ends by him pro∣posed, which was the only thing pretended by him) was clean contrary to his promise, and what he did in it was basely to defile his own actions with his ruin. And indeed it put all out of doubt of the Kings integrity. The King propounds his Sister the Lady Margarite in mariage with the Prince of Navar.The business was this; The King sends Mounseir de Byron with pro∣positions to the Queen of Navar, that the La∣dy Margarite the Kings own Sister, should be given in mariage to her Son, the Prince of Navar, that the anticut consanguinity, and present peace, might be more confirmed and established to the liking of all parties: And in∣deed this did put on a great confidence in all, especially the Princes, the Queen of Navar, and Admiral, that the King was now real in what he professed and propounded. But Oh, the bloody effects it produced, shall at last too sad∣ly be related. An Em∣bassadour from Rome arrives in the French Court.In the midst of these transactions secretly carried on, arrives (in the depth of a most sharp winter) in the King of France his Court, the Cardinal Alexandrio, who came from Rome by the advice of Cardinal de Pelve (that went from the French Court with Cardinal Lorrain) This Pelve was sometimes a Scholar in the College of Montaigue, and during his study there was a Servant to the Cardinal of Lorrain, and afterwards was grown to be a Scullion, but now being advanced to the place of Cardinall, was so fitted for any Treason, or act of cruelty, that nothing, though never so horrid would, stick in his throat, but he was able to swallow down that which was able to damn a World for the sinfulness thereof.
Now the Instructions that Cardinal Alexan∣drio brought along with him from the Pope, was to perswade the King to enter into the So∣ciety of the Council of Trent, the first and principal Article whereof was, That the Confe∣deration should join their power, to make war up∣on the Turks and Hereticks, meaning all Prin∣ces that suffered the use of the Protestant Reli∣gion. The Cardinal was honourably received and welcomed to Court, he urged how much it was against the profession of a Christian King to make peace with Hereticks, and to war a∣gainst the King of Spain; how it did weaken his Friends and strengthen his Enemies; trea∣ting in Leagues with Forein Princes, that were excommunicated by the Apostolick Sea, which negotiation was so mannaged, as the result was not published, but it was publiquely rumored amongst the Common people, that he had not the effects of his desire; yet the Cardinal re∣turned cheerfully to the Pope, and it was re∣ported that he did say, he had such answer from the King and Queen Mother as was not fit to be published. The King for a secure mannagement of the Wars against the King of Spain,The Kings strange plot to surprize Rochel. gave Com∣mission to Strozzi, and the Baron de li Guard, to rig forth ships from Burgess and Rochel, and to surprize any Vessels that were going through the English Seas to the aid of the Duke of Al∣va, in the Low-Countreys; the Spanish Em∣bassadour complains hereof, but these two Captains had secretly and privately an under∣hand Commission to seize on Rochel, and by open or secret force, to get into their power for
his Majesty, although all was carried fair on against the Duke of Alva. The King also gave command to the Admi∣ral to send Espials into Peru, and Island in the New found World (which being plentiful of Gold, the Spaniard had possessed himself there∣of) and there to attempt what he could against the King of Spain; which business, according to his Majesties command, the Admiral under∣took, committing it to one of his Gentlemen, who with a certain Portugal, skilful in those navigations he had joined in Commission. The King heaps un∣expressible favours on the Admi∣ral and Friends.Now the King heaped unexpressable favours on the Admiral, Count Rochfoucault, and The∣ligni, with the rest of the principal Protestants, and chief Noblemen of the Religion; for what ever was taken from any of them in time of the Civil Wars, was now most lovingly restored by the Kings command; and if any one that the King could learn was a friend to the Admiral, to him he did shew singular re∣spect, even to the height of an unimaginable dissimulaeion. He commanded one time to be given to the Admiral one hundred thousand pounds of his own treasury in recompence of his great losses. When the Cardinal of Chastillon (formerly fled to England disguised, and having great Revenues and Wealth) his death being known to the King, he did give to the Admiral all the fruits of the whole year, with all his rich and costly Houshold-stuff: and though all former Admirals in Council, and publick Ceremo∣nies, had ever given place to the Marshall of France, yet for the Admirals greater honour, it was the Kings will and pleasure that he
should sit next Monseiur de Momorancy, who was the first Marshall, and above all the rest. The K. de∣sires the Duke of Savoy to favour the ProtestantsThe King also writes to the Duke of Savoy, that for his sake he would please to be favoura∣ble to the Protestants under his Dominion, & it should ly upon him as an acceptable favor. It is not to be thought what kindnesses the King shewed to the Protestants, even to the great amazement of the Catholicks, and re∣joicing of the Protestants, The K. so far dissem∣bles, that by his shew of respects to the Pro∣testants the Catholicks suspect him. who poor souls thought all true that he said; but this love pro∣ved bitter hatred, like Judas kiss, nay the King did so carry it, that the Catholicks be∣gan to surmise, and say, that the King did not only favour the Protestants, but would himself turn one shortly. And in regard there was a mighty enmity betwixt the Duke of Guise, and the Admiral, by reason of a report fixed on the Admiral, as if he should be an instrument of his Fathers death;The Admi∣ral and Duke of Guise re∣conciled, and the Admiral declared not guilty of the Duke of Guises death. the King therefore to make up all brea∣ches, and in order to a perfect peace, he pre∣scribes a perfect form of Reconciliation (the foundations whereof was laid six years ago in the Town of Molins) where the King summo∣ning the principal estates of his Kingdom, did on consultation and deliberation; declare and pronounce the Admiral not guilty of the death of the Duke Guise: a thing his Majestie was before bound in conscience to do, but now was acted and done as a piece of good policy; this block being taken away as an advance for the Admiral to the Court. But as we said before, the most solemn bond and ty for a secure peace, is the Lady Marga∣rite, Sister to the King of France, to be gi∣ven
in mariage to the Prince of Navar, who was Son to the most virtuous Queen of Navar. who also had all the last civil war been General of the Protestant Cause, and couragiously de∣fended it to his Eternal Praise; which mariage the King did declare, That he did it for the ef∣fecting and establishing a durable peace, and as a signal testimony of his loyall affections to the Pro∣testants. And yet in the mean while the Papists in Roan murthered divers Protestants, and grie∣vously beat others as they came from a Ser∣mon.Many Pro∣testants murthered in Roan. And in regard that it was objected, That the King of France his Sister was of the Ro∣man Religion, and the Prince of Navar a Pro∣testant, it could not well be effected to a good purpose; To which the King answered he would free her by a Dispensation from the Pope, that no Impediment might stand in the way to so great a good, as a sure peace betwixt him and his Subjects, nothing being more delightful or desired by him. As soon as this was spread to the Courts of Forein Princes, it did amaze the Popish Par∣ty, that ever the King should proceed in behalf of Hereticks. But on the contrary it did ex∣ceedingly possess the hearts of the Prince,The K. plot takes effect and Admiral, and all forein Princes of the same Religion, with exceeding joy, being such a large demonstration of the Kings affection, and as a Seal of fidelity to all he promised, and did also drive out of their hearts all jealousies of plots, or secret Contrivances; but the Ad∣miral which had most reason, and was most backward to believe all reall, yet he at this time
was now most forward to believe, and most ready to be confirmed, not only by this, but also by a Letter which the King sent him by his Son Theligni,The Admi∣ral at last perswaded and delu∣ded by a Letter from the King. under the Kings own hand and Seal, assuring the Admiral, That whatever he should do in the Business of the war in the Low Countries against the King of Spain, should be by his Majesty allowed of and ratifi∣ed, as if done by his special command, such was his alluring baits, and pretences of good will and trust to the Admiral. And thus the poor Protestant Princes are too much perswaded of the Kings faith, who in∣tended their ruin without remedy; we shall shortly see them come to Paris, and embrace the mountains of treacherous pretences of faith and affection, and so be swallowed up in their Enemies malitious and unparallel'd cruel∣ty, for all the huge promises of the Kings stood but as an Earnest till their plot was ripe, and then they are more swift to shed blood, than real to what they promise, and truly such a piece of Kingly tteachery is not in any age to be par∣rallelled.
CHAP. VI. The Contents. THe Queen and Prince of Navar, with the Prince of Conde, comes to Court; the Ar∣ticles of the War of the Low Countries put in writing; the Mariage between the Lady Marga∣rite and Prince of Navar agreed on; the King heaps honours on the Admirall and friends; the King invites the Admiral to Court, and protests his own life is envelloped in his; a cross in deri∣sion of the Protestants is pulled down by his Ma∣jesties command; the Plot almost discovered by a lively instance; the King threatens severe pu∣nishment to any that shall affront the Admirall or Protestants; the Admiral comes to Court, and welcomed; the King allowes 50. for his Guard; the Count Lodowick of Nassaw, enters the Low Countries, and takes in Montz; A league offensive and defensive with Queen Elizabeth of England, but proved a deep plot; the Queen of Navar poisoned by the Kings Apothecary, by whose death the Prince is King of Navar; the joyful and bloody mariage of the King of Navar, and the Lady Margarite; the Kings plot to take Ro∣chel; the names of the Protestants in Lyons is taken in a bloody Book; sad complaints commeth to the Admiral, and great suspition of a bloody Massacre at hand, but he believed it not; the Ad∣miral
from a Window shot in both Arms with a Harquebuzier as he walked in Paris; the King in great rage dissembles his treachery, but publi∣shes his hypocrisie by a shew of grief and discon∣tent; he that shot the Admiral escapes, having fresh horses waiting for him; the Admiral shews himself a true Christian, and patient sufferer; the matter examined by Judges, and the Issue; he that shot the Admiral had commission from the King for it; the Admiral like to dy requests the Kings visit; the King and Queen Mother with many Attendants perform his request; they pro∣fess sorrow, and dissemble wonderfully; the King and Admiral discourse alone; the Admi∣ral commits his injuries to the Lord; the King intreats the Admiral to lodge in the Loure; the Admiral refuses; a great suspition of Treason by a sudden speech of the Count de Retz in the Protestants hearing; the Admiral requested a Guard for his person, which the King grants; the Admiral and Protestants advised of their ruin, but they depended on the Kings promises, carriages, mariage, and solemn Oaths for their se∣curity and safety. THe last Chapter concluded with the great favours of the King to the Protestants, whereby he had so won into their affections, and to perswade them all he said was true, and to embrace his cruelty for loyalty▪ now in this chapter we shall see the effects of his desires ac∣complished; for we shall behold all the No∣bles of the Protestant Religion, and Prin∣ces, with the most of the Gentry, environed in Paris by the Treacherous baits of the Kings allurements.
The Queen of Navar with her Son the Prince, and the Prince of Conde, with a nu∣merous train of the Nobili∣ty & Gen∣try of the Protestants all come to the Court with many brave Com∣manders. But Oh! my heart bleeds to think of the bloody issue.In the beginning of June, the Queen of Navar, and Connt Lodowick of Nassaw arrived at the French Court at Paris, the Count came to receive orders about the War in the Low Countries; the Queen of Navar was courte∣ously invited by the King to help prepare all things fitting for the Wedding, who to that purpose came, and was received with a joyful welcome, both of the King and whole Court; but as now we see their faces smiling with a good aspect, so we shall shortly see their hearts full of poison. Two daies after arrives the Prince of Na∣var, the Prince of Conde, accompanied with the Count de Rochfoucault with all the Trains of the Princes, being the chief Commanders, Cavalliers and Gentlemen of the Religion; amongst which was brave Pilles, Briquemault, and Pluveault. Collonels and resolute Souldi∣ers, who in time of the War, through their undaunted and resolute valour for the Prote∣stant cause, may challenge a right of honour amongst the prime in France; their courage being such as their Enemies yiel∣ded to them much glory and renown, as well as felt the power thereof. Amongst the rest also, came to Court that famous Commander the Sicur de Guerchy, that defended the City Sancere, where all miseries were endured, and their enemies cruel mercy; a place which was driven to such extream wants, as no filthy thing was left unfed upon; also came the Marquess de Revel, the Sieurs de No∣ve, de Collumbiere; one Lavardin a famous Commander of Horse; with many Noble Lords, and gallant young Gentlemen, all Pro∣testants,
in the Bud of their years, with a great many more f quality and reputation; but alas we shall see these poor innocent Gentlemen basely murthered by the Kings command, and so deprived of all that Gallantry, which their sprightful valour promised to fill the World withal. Articles of the Low Countrey war put in writing.The Count of Nassaw had with the King concluded on Articles for the Low Country war, which Articles were put in writing: So that we may say the King used the Count and the Prince of Orange in this War, as the Monky did the Cats foot to pull the Chessnuts out of the fire. Articles of the mari∣age.And now to the mariage of the Lady Mar∣garet, and Prince of Navar, the agreement being made, That the Prince of Navar should have with the Lady Margaret four hundred thousand Ducats, whereof three hundred thou∣sand should be paid by the King, and security given by the Queen Mother, and the Duke of Anjou; the mariage to be in the City of Paris; and now Christian Reader the plot begins; The King advances a Gentleman of the Ad∣mirals to high Honour, his name Cavagnes, a Gentleman of great Worth and really hono∣rable in himself, for excellent parts, and no less valour, whom the King,The Admi∣ral intrea∣ted by the K. to come to Court. the better to work his Designs, sends as Messenger to the Admi∣ral, to intreat his presence at Paris, in order to honour the King and Court in this mariage, as also to consult about the War against the King of Spain, assuring him, that the King intends his safety in that City as much as his own; and that although the Parisians did cordially hate him by reason of their great superstition in
that City, being with seditious preaching of Moncks and Fryers dayly inflamed to cruelty, and bloodshed against the Protestants, yet his Majestie would take such care of his person, as he should be as safe as the watchfull eye and command of a King would make him A stone Cross pul∣led down by the K. command at the Ad∣miralls re∣quest.The King finding a stone cross erected in Paris in a reproachful Triumph against the Pro∣testants in time of the Civil Wars, did at the request of the Admiral pul it down, in re∣gard it was a publick occasion of offence. And thus the King and his Council were hid with the love-hood of secrecie, that whilst they could see others, others could not see them. But a∣las God can easily discover all their close con∣trivances when he pleases; but it must be let alone to the secret will of God, why at this time he was pleased to let his people, and the Earth be burthened and oppressed with such hellish designs, that one would think should make Devils afraid to contrive; but however, God suffered them to act their lustful rage and bloody cruelty, yet he pleased so to unmask the pretences of friendship, that in despight of Worldly secrecie, the whole Universe may per∣ceive the plot of Popish cruelty. This wonderful and Tragical instance will cleerly evince any Impartial Reader, and if there were no other, yet would it stand alone, as an irrefragable Argument, that there was a premeditated plot to cut off the Admiral and Protestants; which story for the strangeness of the Discovery, and the Kings more strange way of Justice to prevent the further spreading of his plot, take as followeth, and because
of its use, I hope may prove no digression. The secret design of the K. and Council to destroy the Protestants is almost discovered in this cleer and pretty Sto∣ry.There was in the Court of France at this came one Monsieur de Lignoroles, a young Gen∣tleman of a sharp and accute wit, attended al∣so with a high and bold Spirit, which Gentle∣man was the Duke of Anjou's great Familiar, which reason, together with the neerness of af∣fection to each other, the Duke did impart to him the secret Counsels of the King, with this Plot of cutting off all the Protestants, by a fair pretence of an alluring carriage, till they were under his power and mercy. This young Gentleman by his great inti∣macy with the Duke, grew also into high fa∣vour with the King and Queen Mother, and for his wit and carriage, drew the eyes of all the Court towards him; attracting great e∣steem from King, Queen Mother, and Court. This unfortunate Gentleman, more happy in the imployment, than wise in the improvement of his parts; who being in the high Road of Honour, wanted but few steps to a high pre∣ferment, which time, and his wise mannage∣ment would necessarily have courted him with, and conferred on him, This Gentleman (I say) hapned by his great esteem to be admitted to the presence of the King and Nobles; and once on a time when many Nobles of the Re∣ligion were present with his Majesty, through some occasion of a Treaty for a peaceable en∣joyment of freedom of Religion according to the Edict. At this time the King was highly moved with the Protestant Nobility; this young Gentleman, seeing the King angry, presently stepped to the King, and whether to please the
King, or to let his Majestie know he was thought worthy of counsel, by the great trust some had put him in, or moved by ambition to appear no stranger to the Kings nearest se∣cresies, which sometimes in young wits many times runs before a discreet conduct of their advantages; But he (I say) whispers in the Kings ear, Desiring his Majesty that he would please to silence his mind, with a patient forbear∣ance of anger, and to smile away their insolency and folly, for his Majesty well knew that few days would ripen their destruction, and lay them level to justice, which saies he, by a secret policy of your Majesties great Wisdom and compleat contri∣vance, was almost brought to a full conclusion last meeting; and which no doubt in the end will speedily, and securely, render your Majesty in a full and ample capacity to be avenged on their haughtiness. The King at these words startled within himself, being touched at the quick to have such a secret imparted to one that was not of the conspiracy, whose raw retention might prove fatal to them all; wondering how, and by what means, he should come to the knowledge thereof. Now the King in whom lodged a know∣ledge beyond his years, dissembled his under∣standing at this time, and made no shew of a∣ny thing that might tend to the understanding of his speech; but speedily retired to his cham∣ber, with a mind full of anxity and fury, and presently without any delayes examines the Count de Retz, who denies that ever he reveal∣ed any thing to any or to him; he then char∣ged the Queen Mother, who answered she was
not to learn of him to keep secrets; at last he fell to examine the Duke of Anjou, who con∣fessed it, and fell to perswade the King, that it was as securely locked from any further disco∣very, as in his own breast; and like a Spring lock would shut but not open of it self; That his Majesty need not fear that any secret impar∣ted to Ligneroles should ever come neerer his mouth than his heart; the King answers, No more it shall, and I wish it had never come there, for I shall take order that he shall not have time to do it. So the King calls George de Villequier, Vi∣count of Guerchy (whom his Majestie knew ha∣ted Ligneroles perfectly) and commanded him to use his Discretion for a speedy removal of Ligneroles out of this world, and to put off the effecting his desire no longer, and that day to bring to pass his pleasure, and command, without fear or delay, which with the Assi∣stance of another, was accordingly done; as soon as the King heard hereof, he was seeming∣ly angry, and commanded the Vicount, and Count Charls his assistant, to be imprisoned in the Palace, but in a Months time, by the in∣treaty of Monsieur de Angolesm, as also by par∣ticular grace and favour, they were set at Li∣berty. This Story needs no Comment. The King charges the Magi∣strates of Paris, that none in the City should offer the least affront to the Admirall or Protestants.After all the Kings favors to the Protestants and pulling down the stone Cross, erected to
their dishonour; the King knowing the ex∣treme inveterate hate the Parisians bore to the Admiral and Protestants, he wrote a Letter to the Provost de Marchands, one Marcel, which is one of the highest places of advancement in Paris, giving out severe threatnings against a∣ny that should give occasion of commotion, or Affront to the Admiral at his comming; So also did the Queen Mother, and Duke of An∣jou write to Marcel, and Magistrates of the City, insomuch that nothing was now left as a hindrance or objection for the Admirals coming and safety. The King sends a Protestant Gentleman to invite the Admi∣ral to Court who comes and is joy∣fully wel∣comed.Shortly after the King sends a Noble Gen∣tleman of the Protestants, named Briquemault, to the Admiral, being a faithful assistant of the Admirals, as also a man of singular vertue, and esteem among the Protestants, and at last proved a sad, though Christian, Sufferer for the Protestant cause, him the King sends to the Admiral, to let him know, how greatly his Ma∣jesty longed for his counsel, in so weighty a business as the War, which could not be done without his assistance, and present aid of his great Wisdom; and therefore was impatient of his delay. The Admiral at last is now perswa∣ded and resolved to go to Paris; he comes, and no sooner arrived, but was very honourably and affectionately embraced, with a courteous and joyful shew of welcome, and so was speedily conducted to the King, who under fair pre∣tences of friendly ends, with a mouth full of courtesy; with well pleased words, and a worse tuned heart; with courteous expressions bai∣ted with Treason, he calls the Admiral Fa∣ther, protesting, That in all his life he had not
enjoyed a day adorned with more variety of con∣tent thad this day was,The Kings unheard of and devi∣lish dissi∣mulation. wherein he assures him∣self than his real desires of peace, and the suc∣cess thereof, shall for the time to come, shelter un∣der one Pent-house, and lodge under the roof of a sweet tranquillity; and that he hopes a period will be put to all his troubles, not questioning, but all as well as himself, were no less glad in this ex∣pectation; hoping that times to come would reap the future, as the times now the present benefit, of this blessed day; wherein he wished, and as much hoped, that all former acts of civil dissen∣tions should new be put in one grave of oblivion; in remembrance of the sad war past, and Com∣memoration of this Sunshine day present. Now what a wonderful thing it is to con∣sider, that the King should so perfectly dissem∣ble with one that had so often brought the pow∣er of his Crown and Kingdom to so many doubtful hazards, as to call him Father, and to make the World think his treachery to be sincerity. The Queen Mother and her Sons, with the rest of the great Courtiers, received him with greater demonstrations of joy and love than the Admiral expected. The King allows the Admirall 50. of his Friends to guard him.The King also allowed him fifty Gentle∣men to be about him in Paris, armed for the greater security and guard of his person. Now the King, Queen Mother, and Ad∣miral falls on consultation about the Wars of the Low Countreys. But however the King was in jest with the King of Spain, yet the Count Lodowick of Nas∣saw, was in good earnest; who with a resolu∣tion according to his Manly spirit, he enters
the Frontiers of the Low Countries,The Count of Nassaw enters the Low Coun∣tries, and takes in Montz. taking with him as Partners and assistants, three French Gentlemen, Saucourt, La Nove, and Genlis, men of great esteem and account with the Admiral, besides many Gentlemen that they gathered to go along in the Expedition; which the Admiral hearing, advised the Count not to be too rash, well assuring him that such strength as was requisite, would take forty days to gather; but the Count, as banished men are, being enflamed with the sight and desire of his own Country, and desirous not to depend too much on the Kings changeable mind, sud∣denly resolved, and as speedily attempted to take in Valentiennes, but finding a repulse, speedily hasted to Montz, and though strong by nature and Art, yet took it, which comming to the ears of the Court of France, and the whole nation, did the more confirm the Pro∣testants, that the Kings mind was real. Now Genlis being from the Count to Paris, related the whole progress of the War to the King, desiring leave to raise certain bands of footmen and Horsemen, to streng∣then Montz, which being quickly granted, he as speedily raised four thousand foot, and four hundred horse, but in his Martch was set upon by the Duke of Alva, and quite overthrown, which was wrought by the treacherous advice of the Duke of Guise,The trea∣chery of the Duke of Guise. by private intelligence to the Duke of Alva, of all that was done, which thing was very ill resented by the very Catholicks themselves, because many of the Romish religion were flain in the busi∣ness.
The King of France: is afraid that his war in jest, might make the King of Spain war in earnest.These things troubled the King very much, for fear his counsels might be disclosed to the King of Spain, and so might occasion some quarrel, to the breaking forth of a War; yet he gave order to the Admiral to assist the Prince of Orange in Germany with as many horse and foot as he thought fit; which was done, and because moneys might be had for their pay, the King called for the Treasurer, and command∣ed him to deliver the Admiral so much money as he should desire, commanding him that the receipt should not express the cause,Great dis∣simulation by the K. but should run thus, Paid such a Sum to the Admiral by the Kings Commandement, which is for certain uses the King commands should not be written; to which the King subscribes with his own hand; the King wrote a Letter also to Mondu∣cet, to use his best endravour for the release of those taken under the conduct of Genlis, by the Duke of Alva. To the full effecting of their desire,A League with Q. Elizabeth of Eng∣land, and the first Article was, the observation of the E∣dict, but it proves a deep plot a∣gainst the Protestants, and ties the hands of the English from all assistance in their greatest need and extremity. it was thought convenient to enter into League with Queen Elizabeth of England, which the King committed to the Admiral, which he did so diligently and industriously handle, that by his elaborate pains, in a speedy time, By faith given, by Embassadours sent, and by Oaths it was con∣firmed, concerning a further procuring of o∣ther Leagues, as might most stand for the Low Country War, and of those Leagues by the Admirals care, the principal Condition, was, That the Liberty of Religion should be continued
according to the Edict, and that the King should most solemnly observe, and keep his most sacred Oath and Promise, so strictly made for Liberty to the Protestants, according to the Edict of Pa∣cification. And now,The Reli∣gious Q. of Navar poisoned by the K. Apo∣thecary, a sad presage of further treachery. Courteous Reader, I must give thee a sad Tast of what follows, like one of Jobs Messengers, for the Queen of Navar be∣ing all this while at Court, thinking of a joy∣ful Mariage of her hopeful Son, it pleased God to permit a sudden sickness, and as sudden a death in the fourty third year of her age, who being on too good grounds suspected to be poi∣soned, was therefore opened by Physicans, but they would find no figures of poyson, but by more narrow search in earnest, and by the ad∣vice of one A. P. it was found, That her brain was poisoned with an invenomed smell of a pair of perfumed Gloves, ordered by one Re∣nat, an Italian, and the Kings Apothecary, who kept a shop on St. Michaels bridge in Paris, neer to the Palace. And it is well known that the same Renat, some certain years ago, gave a pair of poisoned Pomander Gloves to Lewis Prince of Conde, which the Prince leaving with one La Gross, his Chirurgion, was by degrees poisoned and swelled so, that the wonderfully and nar∣rowly escaped with his life. But these Gloves that poisoned this virtuous Queen, were ordered in such a secret sort, and just proportion, that having worn them a while, a violent Feaver seized on her, which ended her life in four daies. And thus died this Noble Queen, bewailed exceedingly by all the Protestants, for I find
her Enemies say,The Queen of Navar in part de∣scribed. She was a Lady of a noble Spirit, invincible courage, many degrees a∣bove most of her Sex; qualities besides her Chastity and Magnificence, worthy Eternal praise. She was one that dived into the deep Myste∣ries of Divinity, which raised her illustrious mind to a high pitch of Christianity; being also very judicious, of a ready wit, invincible in adversity, absolute in her actions, capable of Counsel, comprehending things with great vivacity of Spirit, delivering her mind with an admirable grace, either by word or writing, her comprehension of deep things was of a tre∣ble magnitude above any of her sex; neither can my pen drop her praise, but her infinite merits, and if it were possible for any pen to e∣rect Trophies of Honour to the peerless chal∣lenges of her immortal praise, the lustre of her incomparable merits would be the truest guide in the darkest night. This noble Queens Death gave way to the Prince her Son to be King of Navar,The Q. death inti∣tles her Son the P. to be K. of Navar. to whom the Kingdome came. This unhappy death was looked on by many as very ominous, portending a sure prognostick of some unfortunate Catastrophe, many bing struck with amazement at this sudden treoche∣ry, and bloody death; concluding it to be a sad Fore-runner of some mischief to come. But that which made many Protestants cast away all fear, was the Kings loving carriage to them, insomuch that things at this time looked with a peaceable countenance through∣out the Kingdom of France. Now the day of marriage between the La∣dy
Margaret, and the King of Navar was ap∣pointed; which was a great day of joyful hopes to all the Protestants, and made all things seem more serene and calm on their side; in that also the Guisans, and the rest of the chief Catholicks, shewed great discontent there∣at; for all good men judged it an assured pledge of the Kings fidelity, and of peace, in as much as he shewed such outward joy, and declared, It was not so much for the wedding, as that he said it was for a strong knot of Peace, and would tend to a general satisfaction of peaceable Spirits, and for the Good of the whole Nation. August the 17. the King of Navar,The K. of Navar and Lady Mar∣garite ma∣ried with great joy on both sides, but greater sor∣row suc∣ceeds. and the Lady Margaret, was maried with great Solemnity before the great Church of Paris, on a Scaffold, in sight of all the People; and there was a certain form of words, so ordered as a∣greed with both parties, which by the Kings commandment was pronounced by the Cardi∣nal of Bourbon, the King of Navars Uncle; and so was this mariage solemnized with the joy of all good men, being kept with Banquets, dancing and Masques, with a strange mixture of Papists, and Protestants together. Thus the poor Protestants thought with joy to welcome their own comforts, but alas their hopes are frustrate in a contrary success of their expectations, and the Kings promises. After this the Bride with great magnificence, accompanied with a great confluence of Gal∣lants, was led to the Church to hear mass, The Bridegroom misliking these Ceremonies, did with Henry Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and other Noblemen of the Protestants, walk, and wait without the Church door for the Brides return.
The Queen Mother & Dukes of Anjou & Guise plot.But the Queen Mother, and her bloody Companions, with the Dukes of Anjou and Guise, consult about the last Tragical act; which was to kill the Admiral, and to divide the Protestants; thus-like moles, under ground, they drive on their Hellish designs in Secre∣cy. The King, to delude the more, speaks pub∣lickly,The K. pub∣lickly de∣clares, that he gives his Sister in Mariage as a ty of Union and peace. The Admi∣ral of the Kings fleet endeavours to surprize Rochel. That he gives not his Sister in mariage to the King of Navar only, but as it were to the whole Church of the Protestants, to join with them in a undissoluble union; and as a ty to their peace and safety; Oh! painted ruin; whither at last will the fury of thy bloody Chariots drive thee? Now while these things proceeded thus at Pa∣ris, Strozzi as aforesaid, Admiral of the Kings Fleet, rides before Rochel, and at select times sends Captains and Souldiers into the Town, under pretence of buying necessaries for their Fleet, and sometimes did come ashoar himself, but the King had given him Commission to seize on the City, although, as before it was given out, that he say to entrap all the sup∣plies going from Spain to the aid of the Duke of Alva in the Low Countries. The like Treachery was used in another part of France, by Gonzague Duke of Nevers, with a party of Horse neer to La Charite, where a bridge passes the River Loyre; which the Pro∣testants then had;The prote∣stants at Lyons had their names put in a bloody Book, this Gonzague requests Li∣berty of the Town to muster, shewing the K. Letters, which indeed he had. The Governour of Lyons, commanded: he names of the Protestants to be written in a Book, which in regard of their Horrid cruel∣ties
committed, and devillish Bucheries com∣mitted in this City, was justly called the bloo∣dy Book. The Admiral,The Admi∣ral de∣sires to de∣part Paris, but the K. desired his stay, which on some o∣ther grounds he did, but sad complaints, and great suspition of treason came to his cars, but he believes it not. after the mariage (being then the time he appointed and desired to return to his own house) did move the King about his departure; but so great was the Court revel∣lings, that the Admiral coul not have private access to his Majesty to deal in State-matters. Rochel at this time was in a manner besieged with Souldiers, arriving hourly, giving out terrible threats against the Town; which made the Protestants begin to cry to the Admiral for succour, and relief (for indeed the Admiral was as a nursing Father to them) in other Towns also was heard secret murmurings, terrifying the most cleer-sighted Protestants, giving too sure cause to think a bloody and terrible specta∣cle would be shewed beyond present concepti∣on, which will shortly be seen in a horrible manner. The Admiral knew not what to answer to all these sad complaints, that uncessantly flow∣ed in, as one wave on the back of another, and all to get him from the Court. He answe∣red to all, the King had made us swear before him to be Friends; the Lady Margaret is gi∣ven in mariage, and doubtless is a firm pledge of the Kings fidelity, what can be done more? is not all clear from the least suspition of fraud? yet he resolved to depart, only waited for a fit opportunity to take leave. But the Deputies that were sent from the Reformed Churches, complained of the cru∣elties still committed on the Protestants, and understanding of the Admirals intentions to
depart, they apply themselves with all speed to him, and delivering him their books and peti∣tions, they earnestly beseech him not to absent from the Court till he had pleaded the cause of the Churches, and delivered their petitions to the King and Council. Hereupon he resolves, like a good Advocate, to stay a while and plead their cause. But there was another great cause of the Admirals stay; for there was on arriers to the Ruttiers of Germany great sums of money for their service under the Admiral during the Wars; in which he laboured earnestly to ef∣fect. But oh! I tremble to enter into the en∣suing narrative, so full of inhumane and cru∣el bloodshed; oh! that I could enough be∣wail the sad fate of these poor innocent souls, led as sheep to the slaughter; to consider that so many brave Commanders that scorned any other death than like Souldiers, must now suf∣fer base murthers, and bloody slaughters; oh! lamentable, and to be pittied of all Protestants, nay, and of ingenuous Papists, that so ma∣ny innocent children, and women, should suffer for they know not what; for we shall shortly see all the Protestants of France in mourning, and following the Hearse of their own Ruin, in the Papists unparalleled cru∣eltie. The Admi∣ral coming from Court: with a: great train of Nobles and Gentlemen is treacherously shot in both the Arms with a Harqurbuss.These businesses being the occasions of the Admiralls stay, he did on the 22. day of Au∣gust repair to the Kings Privy Council to ef∣fect
his desire, which day was the fifth day after the King of Navars marriage, but about noon returning from the Council with a great number uf Noblemen and Gentlemen, reading a petition as he went, was shot thorow both arms with two bullets by a Harquebuzier out of a Window, who feeling himself shot shew∣ed no alteration of countenance, saying only, through yonder window it came, what kind of treachery is this? It was no news to the King to know his will and command was perfor∣med.The Admiral speedily sends to the King a Gentleman of his company to give notice of it; who being at Tennis with the Duke of Guise, shewed such dislike, as that in a rage he threw away the Racket that he played withall, being exceedingly and outwardly vexed, and taking with him his Brother in Law the King of Navar, he retires into the Castle of the Lour; the King swearing and promising to execute such severe justice upon the offenders,Deep hy∣pocrisie. that the Admiral and all his Friends should think themselves exceedingly satisfyed. The King causes the City gates to be shut, pretending lest the Murtherer should escape, but indeed was lest the Protestants should es∣cape their cruelty.The King therefore to delude the Admiral and Protestants, caused all the Gates of the City to be shut, except two only, which were pretended to be open for bringing in provision; yet there was careful watch kept by a strong Guard, with a colour of singular care of his Majesty to find out the Murtherer, and that if he were in the City he might by no means es∣cape, but the truth was, lest any of the Pro∣testants should escape this cruel plot laid for their blood by getting out of the City, or net of destruction; the King swearing and blas∣pheming, that he would not by any means that they should escape, which had committed
such a horrid act; those that durst presume to commit such a hainous crime, even at the gates of his Royall Palace. The Queen Mother also seems discontented, for saies she, Who would have thought any ones impudence could arrive so high as this affront, to the great prejudice of his Majesty, and if ever the King suffer this to go unpunished, in the end the next attempt will be on his Royal person. But alas, alas! for a King, Queen, and Court so to dissemble, as if there were no God that could see into their hearts, and discover to the World, that this was done by the Kings special command and commission, as we shall shortly see it was. Presently after the Admiral was shot, some Gentlemen of his retinue entered by force and violence, into the house from whence the shot was; where they find only the woman of the House, and a Boy, that was his lacquey which did the deed, finding also a Harquebuss lying upon the Table in the Chamber from whence it was shot, but the wretched villain they found not, for that he was fled out of the back Gate,Fresh hor∣ses prepa∣red at se∣veral gates to speed a∣way the Murtherer with secu∣rity. and so mounted on a Spanish Gennet, which was waiting for him, he speedily posted to St. Anthonies Gate, where another fresh horse as∣sisted his more swift flight, and if he had gon to Marcelles gate, there was also another wait∣ing for him. Now the King to perswade the Princes, Ad∣miral, and all the Protestants, that he was real∣ly sorry, and how much it was against his will (though God knows to his great satisfacti∣on and inward content) he commands sundry to post out into all parts to persue him.Set a thief to catch a thief.
The Admi∣ral shews himself a good Chri∣stian and patient suf∣ferer.Now the Admiral being safely conveyed to his lodging, shewed great piety, according to his Godly soul, filled with grace and prudence, most like a constant and true Christian, and faithful, holy servant of Christ. The Prince of Conde, and King of Navar, had thought to have departed Paris; but the Kings carriage levelled all suspitious thoughts, and so turned their resolutions to a longer stay at Court. Three Jud∣ges to exa∣mine the murther.At request of the King of Navar and Prince of Conde the King (to dissemble with more facility) did order three principal men of the Parliament of Paris, Thuan, Morsant, and Viol, to examine the business, whereupon it was found that the House belonged to one Villimure a Priest and Cannon of St. Germane, once the Duke of Guise his Schoolmaster, and now a retainer under him. That the woman that was in the house, being brought before the Judges, did acknowledge, that a few daies before there came to her one Chally, once a Master de Hostel of the Duke of Guises house, and now Steward of the Kings houshould, commanding her to respect much the man, that had done the deed, and to lodge him in Villumures own bed∣chamber, in regard he was his Friend. Several speeches there was concerning the person that did it; some said it was one Man∣revel, who in the last Civil War traiterously flew his own Captain, a most valiant Com∣mander, and Noble Gentleman in the Admi∣rals Army, and thereupon immediately fled to the Kings Camp. Others said it was Bondot, an Archer of the Kings Guard; Now when this confession of the Woman of the house aforesaid, was brought
to the King, he commanded Monsieur de Nance Captain of his Guard, to apprehend and bring Chally before him, but Chally as soon as he heard the stroke of the piece, fled into the Kings Castle of the Loure, hiding himself in the Duke of Guises chamber, but as soon as he heard of the Kings command, he fled; Now De Nance, Captain of the Kings guard, being informed of his escape (and no doubt was himself the Informer) answered that Chal∣ly was a Gentleman of good repute, and no doubt but on notice given of the Kings mind, would appear before his Majesty or the Magi∣strates. The man that shot the Admi∣ral, had commission from the K. to do it. Ob horrible! The Admi∣ral in dan∣ger of death de∣sires the K. visit.But not to hold the Reader longer, I find it recorded by the most exact Narration, that it was Manrevel, one whom the Duke of Guise had at his request to the King, and by his Commission procured, to kill the Admiral, which at large is fully related in the Civil wars of France. The Admiral now wounded, and under the Chirurgians hands, dressing his wounds, com∣manded his Son Teligny to go to the King, and humbly to beseech his Majesty in behalf of his Father to vouchsafe him a visit, for that the wounds lately received were likely to terminate his life, and put a short period to his daies; desiring therefore to see his Majesty, and deli∣ver something to his care that might greatly concern his Majesties safety.The K. Q. Mother, & many other visit the Admiral. To which the King in his wonted strain of courtesie answe∣red, He would perform his request, and so in the afternoon the King goes to visit the Admi∣ral, taking along with him the Queen Mo∣ther, the Duke of Anjou, the Duke of Mon∣penseir,
a most affectionate Servant to the Church of Rome, the Count de Retz a great familiar of the Queen Mothers, with Chavigny and Entragny, both chief Ringleaders in the bloody Butchery following: the King no soo∣ner arrives at the Admirals lodging, but he lovingly saluted the Admiral, demanding kind∣ly and courteously some few questions concer∣ning the state and health of his body, to which the Admiral answered with such a Christian, mild, and sweetly-quieted countenance with Gods dealing, as all that stood by, admired at his patience. The King hereupon seemed to be so much moved, that he uttered these words, The hurt my Admiral is done to thee, but the dis∣honour to me; and (swearing a great Oath) saies,The K. by a deep oath protests to revenge the Admi∣ralls Hurt, I swear I will so sharply and severely re∣venge both this hurt and dishonour, that justice shall have no cause to complain, nor the World left without example of my integrity to your deserts. And so made many Oaths, and Protestati∣ons of the Resolutions to punish the Offender, as also of his great care he had to preserve the Protestants, and the Admirals life, against all his Enemies; but oh! these pretences of friend∣ship will at last prove a smiling harlot, that whilest she kisses is like Judas to betray. The King further demanded of the Admi∣ral how he did approve of the Judges, who had Commission by his appointment to exa∣mine the business, who answered, that he could not dislike of his Majesties care and choise, yet humbly intreated his Majesty to let it stand with his good pleasure, that Cavagnes might be in Council with them; but the wrong he told his Majestie he had committed to God, yet
desired his Majestie would give order for a strict search, and narrow scrutinie into the fact, which the King again with his usual Protestations, vowed to do, and to revenge his wrong as much as his own. The K. and Admiral being alone the Admi∣ral declares much faith∣fulness to the King.The Queen Mother and her two Sons with∣drew, and left the Admiral and King alone; the Admiral began to advise the King to re∣member, that he had often told his Majesty of the danger that hovered over his head, by some persons neer to him, and although he was the mark was shot at, yet there was no less hanging over his Majesties head, and that long ago there was treason plotted against his Life, which his Majesty might please to take notice of as friendly advice, and to beware betimes; And further declared, that now God was pleased to give large symptoms of the decay of his earthly tabernacle, and he doubted that his good name would be hoysted up to the pinacle of envious slan∣der by his Enemies, and that he often told his Majestie the real Authors of all the late distrac∣tions of the Civil War, faithfully opening the causes thereof, and that he took God to be his witness of his faithful and cordial heart to the King and Kingdome, and he never yet knew what was in this world dearer than his Countrey, and publick safety; all which Discourse the Ad∣mirall before his death, declared to be spoken betwixt him and his Majesty. The King desires the Admiral to lodge in the Loure for his security, but was indeed in policy to secure his life, and level it to his bloody will.To all which the King after such answer as he thought fit, with a high voice desired the
Admiral to take protection in his own Castle of the Loure, wherein his security should be equally envell oped with his own; and this he wished might be embraced, for fear some sud∣den commotion might happen from the rabble of that mad and tumultuous people; which was a speech preparatory for the plot, and yet so much were these poor Protestants blinded in their strange belief of the Kings protestations, and not suspecting what followed, that they never understood the treacherous intent of these prepared Pills of Hellish Dissimula∣tion. The Admi∣ral refused his gilded pretexts of love and care for his ruin. A great token of of treason.The Admiral most heartily thanked his Ma∣jesty, and excusing his non-acceptance at pre∣sent till advice had with his Physicians, which when he received, it was by them all concluded to be not safe, in regard the least motion would increase his pain, and so it was resolved not to stir. The Count de Retz, turned to some of the Admirals Friends in the Chamber, saying, it were to be wished the Admiral would fol∣low the Kings loving invitation to lodge in the Loure, for it was to be feared that some sudden tumult might arise, that the King might not be able to appease; which was no sooner spoken, but it deeply penetrated the Admiral and all his Friends; and though they had no proof of reason to fear, yet the Admiral desired the King to grant him the favor of a Guard. The King grants the Admiral a Guard, and flatters damnably.To which the King lovingly answered, He
should have as firm a guard for his person as he desired. Further saying, that in his safety consisted his own, and that he would defend the Admiral as the hall of his eye, having in ad∣miration his fortitude and constancy, protesting, he did not believe so much valorous courage could reside within the brittle walls of mortallity. Thus the King, Queen Mother, and the rest carried it with great signs of reality, returning to the Loure, committing the care and custody of the Admiral to the Duke of Anjou, one of the conspiracy against him. The Admi∣ral and Protestants advised to take leave of the Court, and their own ruin, but they trust more to the Kings pro∣mise than their Friends advice.But though the Admiral and Gentlemen a∣bout him, saw not the ecclipse of the Kings treachery, through the deep dissimulation of affection, yet the Vidame of Charteres, a cleer-sighted and wise man, through his foresight of a bloody Comet, advised the King of Navar, the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, with the Nobility, Gentlemen and chief of the Protestants, presently to take leave of their own ruin in time; which was both too certain∣ly and evidently hanging over their innocent thoughts, assuring them that blow of the Ad∣mirals was but the prologue to a more bloody tragedy, which could not but speedily ensue. But the King of Navar, Prince of Conde, the Admiral, with the rest of the Nobility and Gentry of the Protestants, said, That they could not but trust to the Kings solemn Oaths, his sacred vows and covenants, as a secure harbour from all threatning and ensuing storms; besides the late marriage, was an evident demonstration of the Kings intentions, tying at once, both affinity to the Protestant King of Navar, and security for his promises.
CHAP. VII. The Contents. THe King and Queen Mother by Letters, let the world know how the Admirall was hurt, to their great grief; They order a Guard for the Ad∣miral, but is such a one as secured the Admiral, or any of his Friends, from escaping their ruin; The Gentlemen of the Admirals Friends lodged in the same Street where the Admirall lodged, which was desired in pretence of their security also, but proved their secure destruction; The names of the Protestants in Paris, with their several Lodgings put into a Catalogue; The Nobles and Gentlemen of the Prote∣stants meet in the Admirals Cham∣ber, and advises to remove for security from the threatnings of an ensuing storm, yet resolve to rely on the Kings Oaths, and Promises; The King and Queen Mother assembles to take or∣der
for the manner and time of the Admirals Murther; To colour this plot they order that it must be given out, That the occasion was through the difference betwixt the house of Guise and Chastillon; On Consultati∣on it was resolved to spare the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, if they would turn Papists; The Duke of Guise, and his bloody Followers force a strong report to be spread throughout all the City, of their danger by the Admirall and his Adherents, and so complain to the King, and depart the Court in shew of discontent, but pri∣vately lie in Paris to prosecute his hel∣lish Plot, and the Kings command; two thousand men on Sabbath night are commanded by the King to be in arms; The King sends word to the Admirall that he needs not fear, for all was done by his command; Some Protestant Gentlemen profer to watch all night with the Admiral, but were refused; the Officers of the City Assemble, and are commanded by the King to destroy the Protestants: The tokens to distin∣guish the murtherers from others to be a Napkin about their arms, and a cross
on their caps: Divers Lords guard the King all night: The bloody murther∣ers approach the Admiralls Lodging: The Admirall is fearful, yet often si∣lenced his suspition by as often reiter∣ating the Kings Oaths, Promises, Leagues, Covenants, and Law of Na∣tions, &c. They enter his Lodging, kill all they meet with: The Admirall rises, goes to prayer, and commands his Servants to save their lives by flight: They get on the tops of houses, but are persued and slain: They thrust the Admirall through the body, beat him on the head, shoot him with a Pi∣stol, and wound him the third time, whereof he dies, his body thrown out of the window, the Duke of Guise kicks him on the face with his foot: They cry out Kill, Kill, this is the Kings com∣mand: The Alarum bell rings to a sad and generall Massacre: The Admi∣ralls head cut off and sent to the Pope: All in the Admiralls lodging murthe∣red, among whom two young children of honourable birth: Brave Count Rochfoucault basely murthered: The Admiralls Son basely slain, his Lieu∣tenant fights gallantly for his life, but is
slain: many brave Noblemen and Gen∣tlemen basely murthered: they give the plunder to the Soldiers, crying kill, this is the Kings command: They spare neither young nor old, but kill women and children, and women with child, till the very streets are covered with dead bodies: nothing to be heard but sad crys and groans of the dying, with cruel shouting of the Murtherers: The River dyed with blood: ten thou∣sand slain this day. WE concluded the last chapter with the great preparations of the King, Queen Mother, and Councfl, ro effect their Plot; and yet how they coloured all with a distem∣bling carriage of love too, and sorrow for the Admirals condition; now in this chapter we shall see the saddest massacre that ever was acted by any Prince, or in any Place. Thus we leave the Admiral, basely, coward∣ly and bloodily wounded, and knew not how to have justice;The K. and Q. Mother write Let∣ters testi∣fying their sorrow for the Admi∣rals hurt, and yet done by the K. cōmand. and so lay in his wounds ex∣pecting death as the inevitable issue of his Ene∣mies cruelty. Now we shall further see the Kings dissimu∣lation, and treachery; for the very same day the Admiral was thus wounded, does the King (the more neatly to colour his own act of treachery, with smooth pretences) write Letters to Embassadours of Forein Princes, and Letters also to the Governours of all his
Provinces, shewing, How sadly he resented the Admirals hurt. how ready he was to execute ju∣stice in the punishment of theForget∣ting him∣self. Agent, desiring that all the world might know how muchHow much it re∣joiced his aeart, is no errata. it did grieve him to the Soul, that any such thing should happen. And yet he ptesently after declares o∣penly, that he was slain by his Command, for treason against his person, as by other Letters we shall shew in due place. The Queen Mother did also write letters to the same purpose. But Christian Reader, when thou perusest the whole story, then wilt thou be able to judge of this deep Hypocrisie before ehe face of God, and as it were against the face of Heaven! But to proceed, The King orders a Guard that the Prote∣stants might not escape their Guard, being their Enemies, an intended for their Ruin.The Duke of Anjou, the Kings Brother, commanded Cossin Captain of the Kings Guard to place a band of Souldiers to watch before the Admirals Gate, giving strict charge that no Catholicks should enter. Now none could be pitched on as the grand Enemy to the Admiral and Protestants, and friend to the Guisans, than was this Cossin, as we shall see by the following narrative. The Admi∣rals friends that lay scattered up and down the City, were desired under pretence of care and affection to remove their lodging into the same street with the Admiral, that they might be sure not to escape. Oh! Monstrous and Hellish Plot, covered with the Kings care.Now the Duke of Anjou, as an inheriter of
his Brothers Dissimulation, strives also to co∣lour his damnable Plot and Treason, in the lovingest and highest demonstrations and and care of the Admiral and Protestants, and therefore advises that the Admirals friends that now lodged so far distant from his person, as the Fauxburgh, might have liberty to have their lodgings neerer to him; for saies he, they being so far assunder, they might on any uproar be hurt, and no means to prevent it, which being neer∣er one another, they might join force to affe∣ction, and better afford one another their joint aid. And so presently commanded the lodgings in that street to be provided. Now this was a bait that took off all suspiti∣on; for alas who could suspect or imagine this to be out of any treacherous intent, but ra∣ther of care and respect? but Oh sad and hellish plot under the vizard of friendship! these poor Noblemen, Gentlemen and brave Com∣manders that might have escaped from the ca∣lamity, are intangled and allured into a nar∣row street, as into a fold or narrow path of de∣struction; no way to escape the fury of their Enemies rage and cruelty. All the names of the Prote∣stants and place of a∣bode is ta∣ken into a Catalogue against the day of their calamity.The next day the Duke of Anjou and Duke of Guise, commanded the Undermasters of the streets, vulgarly termed Quartermen, to take a view of all the Inns and victual-houses, from one house to another, and to take all the names of the Protestants, and so to bring in an Ac∣count of their names, and places of abode, in writing, and to deliver them to the Duke of Anjou, and Duke of Guise; so that presently after, the Protestants begun to discover some bloody intentions, through the prospect of
these preparations. Now the King had by this time set a Guard, of fifty Harquebuzeirs at the Gate of the Admirals Lodging; and great store of Arms were carried into the Loure, and about the evening all the people of the City were in arms. The Prote∣stants meet advice gi∣ven to re∣move from Paris, but they still re∣solve to de∣pend on the K. vows & promises.Hereupon the chief Noblemen and Gentle∣men of the Protestants, assemble together again in the Admirals lodging, where amongst the rest was the Vidame of Charteres, who as before, so now advised speedily to try if by any means the Admiral might be forthwith carried out of Paris; and that presently the rest should dis∣lodge; yet all refused this Counsel, resolving to rely on the word of a King, sealed with so many Vowes, Covenants, and Solemn pro∣testations in the presence of God, and to the clear witness of all Princes and States. The K. and Q. meet and consult of their bloody cut∣ting off the Protestants in a merci∣less cruelty and devil∣lish massa∣cre.In the afternoon the King and Queen Mo∣ther walk forth into a Garden named Tegliers, accompanied with the Duke of Anjou, Gonza∣gue, Tavignes, and Count de Retz, which gar∣den being remote from Resort, was thought the fittest place for secrecie, and a silent place for privacy, and very well fitted for the present con∣clusion of their last and bloody consultation; Here in this bloody Council it was considered of and spoken; That the Princes, Admiral, with the Noblemen, and Gentlemen of the Religion were now securely entangled in the Fetters of their own confidence, which was so well wedged into their minds, as prisons could prove no better instruments to ripen their desires; the Admiral he was lying bedsick, and could not stir by reason of his wounds; the Prince of Conde was fast in the Castle of
Loure; the City Gates kept shut all night, and watched all day; those Gentlemen that lodged in the Suburbs, were now lodged in the same street with the Admiral, and all within the Gates of Paris; the rest of the principal Pro∣testants in other Towns were all unarmed and unprepared, besides there was not ten Protestants to a thousand Catholicks, that the Parisians were in arms, and able to make sixty thousand fighting men, and that in one hour all might be slain, and if these were destroyed they would never make head again in the Kingdom; but on the contrary, if the Admiral recover, such an opportunity would never offer; therefore saies the Queen Mother this season must not be lost, but taking time by the Foretop, all our desires will now come to a period in a success proportionable to all our wishes; if we let slip time it withers, like a neglected rose on a stalk with a languished head; if we shake hands with this golden opportunity, our designs will grow under the Sunshine of our desires; Thus they lie perdue under the shelter of an unmercifull and bloody Balcony; all being resolved to be so swift in execution of the Kings pleasure, that no time shall be delayed between his commands and the execution but the moment of perfor∣mance, for now they resolve to take journey from contemplation to action, they have learn∣ed the Theory of Treachery, perjury and cru∣elty, now they come to the practical part of this sad Tragedy. But this being a gross and downright mur∣therous way, and no handsome Apology pro∣vided to cast over the eyes of peoples understan∣dings; it was thought fit to frame some smooth
pretext,They study a smooth pretext for their bloo∣dy cruelty to cosen the vulgar con∣ceptions, and honest interpretations: But oh! who can hide the greatest secrets from Gods searching eye? to take off the force and dint of vul∣gar reports; and so to divert the natural cur∣rent of this tragedy, into the illegitimate name of convenient necessity; whereupon they order that the common vogue of the peoples tongues should be tipt with this specious pretence, that the Duke of Guise and Admirals enmity was the cause of this Massacre. They resolve to spare the K. of Na∣var and Prince of Conde if they will turn PapistsNow in this bloody Assembly it was moved whether the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, should be destroyed in this Massacre, or whether saved; the King of Navar in regard of his affinity, was concluded to be saved; but for the Prince of Conde, it was doubtfully carred; they considered first, whether for his age it were best to spare him, or secondly whe∣ther to put him to death in revenge of his Fa∣thers protection of the Protestant cause, as al∣so in a hatred of his Fathers name; the Duke of Guise urged with a pressing forwardness to have both the Prince of Navar, and the Prince of Conde to dy amongst the rest, but all thought that too abominable (if any thing could be so indeed to such bloodthirsty wretches) that two young Princes, in the flower of their age, of the Royal Family, the one in the imbraces of his dear Spowse, under the protection of such neer friends, and late conjunction by mariage, that they should be so miserably destroyed; so that the opinion of Gonzague was prevalent, who pleaded, that with fear of death, and tor∣ment, they should be violently turned to the
Catholick Religion.The plot is committed to the Duke of Guise to put in execution next day. And so this Hellish vaux-like Council broke up with firm and fixed Re∣solutions, to act their several parts; and so it was appointed, that next morning about three or four a cloak, it should be put in execution, and that all things should be committed to the mannagement and care of the Duke of Guise. On Saturday morning it is bruited and noi∣sed throughout all the City of Paris,A report is spread that the Duke of Guise was in danger of the Ad∣miral and friends. that the House of Gise was in danger of the Admiral and rest of the Protestants, by their great threa∣tenings; The Dukes of Guise and Aumale speed to the King, and complain of their danger, and insolent threatnings of the Admiral and Adherents against their lives, protesting sorrow to his Majestie that their services were not accepted, but their persons slighted, and so desired leave of his Majesty to absent from Court, and retire to their houses,The Kings horrible dissembling for they were ready to depart; the King with a frowning countenance, saies, Go where you please, I will have you at all times if you be found guilty of the Admirals Hurt. So with a shew of discontent they mount their Horses, and bloody resoluti∣ons at once, but instead of going home they ly in Paris all night.Bloody treachery. The King sends the Duke of Guise to provide 2000 men in arms on Sabbath day at night. All things being resolved on, the 24. day of August, being Sabbath day, at twilight the Duke of Guise, with orders from the King comes to President Charron, Provost des Mar∣chands, the chief head of the People of Paris, giving him to understand, that by the Kings command he was fotthwith to provide and or∣der in readiness two thousand armed men, which accordingly was done. The Admiral having word brought thim, that
there was great noise of armour,The Admi∣rall at the noise of ar∣mour fears danger, and sends to the King. Oh! bloody and cruel command of a King. They refuse to let any Protestant Gentlemen to watch with the Admiral. The Offi∣cers assem∣ble and are com∣manded by the King to destroy the Protestants whom he calls Re∣bells. and great threatnings heard in all parts of the City, and preparations of all things in order for a tumult that night; presently he sends word to the King, who gave answer, that the Admiral needed not fear, for all was done by his command, and that he had appointed in certain places of the Citie, a number of men in arms for fear of any tumult. This evening some Protestant Gentlemen profer to watch with the Admiral, but poor Gentlemen they were refused: A sad presage of Treachery, my heart relents and bleeds to write the rest. When the Duke of Guise saw all things ready, he called to him one Marcel, charging him a little after midnight to assemble together the Masters of the Streets (commonly called Diziners) into the Town House, for he was to declare from his Majesty, and by his command, several things; they assemble according to the appointed time, Charron the Provost des Mar∣chands guarded with Entrague, Puygailart, and certain other Guisans, did there declare, that the King had given him in command to de∣stroy all the Rebells (meaning the Protestants) to cut off root and branch of that Rebellious race, letting them understand, that the business was so mannaged to their hands, that now with great facility his Majesties desire might be accomplished; for the Admiral, and all the chief were securely under their power, being lodged within the walls of the City; that it was first intended they should begin with the Admiral, and the principal Protestants lodged in that street, and then with speedy alacrity to
follow on, and to cut off the rest in the City, and Suburbs, and that the like should be done to the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom, which was in the Kings power; for his Maje∣stie would take order that it should be speedily effected.The token given to be ringing the great Bell, and the murthe∣rers to be distinguish∣ed with a Napkin on their arms, and a cross on their caps, and to begin at the Admi∣rals lodg∣ing first. Orders gi∣ven to be couragious in shedding blood. Divers Lords guard the King. The bloody Murthers assaults the Admiralls lodging. Now for better order in this bloody under∣taking, the token given should be with ring∣ing the great Bell of the Palace, called Tocksein, at break of day, which said bell was only rung on great and emergent occasions, and that the distinguishing marks should be a white cross on their caps, that candles should be lighted at e∣very window, that without confusion or dis∣order they might proceed from house to house to the exact execution of the Kings command. Now the Duke of Guise, the better to pre∣pare all things, acquaints the Captain of the Kings Guard, consisting of Gascoins, French and Switzers, that they would be in readiness to go on with a bold courage, exhorting them to be speedy in bloody executions: So at mid∣night the Provost, Sheriffs and Captains of each ward in the City had the same commissi∣on given them. The Duke of Montpenseir and Duke of Ne∣vers, with many other Lords of the Court, take arms, and being accompanied with their Friends, guard the Kings person, all the Guards being in Arms at the Gates of the Lour. At the Prefixt hour the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Aumale. and Monsieur de Angoulesm, Grand Prior of France, the Kings bastard Brother, with other Commanders to the num∣ber of three hundred, went to the Admirals
house. where they found by the Duke of An∣jou's order, Cossins company with lighted ma∣ches placed for a Guard before it, and on both sides the Streets; Some of the Gentlemen and Commanders of the Protestants that was lodg∣ed in this Street, awaken with the noise of men running up and down in arms, and ligh∣ted Torches; they presently got up to enquire what was the matter, but alas poor Gentle∣men it was now too late they were all dead men, no way to escape. The Admi∣ral is still perswaded of the K. fidelity, & repeated his Oaths, Pro∣mises, Leagues, Publick Faith, sa∣cred respect to the Law of Nations, and credit with other Princes.By this time the Admiral understood of the noise, and though he had but ten persons in his house able to bear arms, and in his own chamber but two Chirurgians, one Minister, and two Servitors; yet was he so confident of the K. promise, as he could not be made afraid, trusting (as he often did repeat) upon the Kings good will to him, testified by so many and ample proofs of assurance. having like confidence, that if the Parisians did but once know the Kings mind to be against this tumult, they would soon cease, but especially when they saw Cossin the Kings own Captain waching at the gates for his defence. But alas he did little think who they were, and by whose command, or to what intent, all was don; these reasons were the Admirals Re∣mora's, to stop the passage of any belief of trea∣son hid in the Kings heart: and it is common∣ly found that most suffer Shipwrack on the rocks of crudelity; and as one saies, it is no heresie to affirm, That many have been saved by their infidelity. The Admiral recounted the Oath and Edict of Pacification, so openly and so often sworn,
recorded by the King, Queen Mother and the rest. The late League with Queen Elizabeth of England. The Articles covenanted with the Prince of Orange. His faith given to the Prin∣ces of Germany. The mariage of the Lady Margaret, his own Sister with the King of Navar; being done on no other account as the King publickly declared, but to keep his faith, and to declare his integrity to all he pro∣fessed; which solemn act was but six days old, and which doubrless he would not suffer to be defiled with innocent blood; Lastly, it would stain the glory of the Nation with Forein Princes and States; and of posterity never to be believed more; besides the great shame, as also honour and constancy of a Prince, all which the Admiral said, he could not believe would ever be forgot by the King, or buried in the grave of cruelty and blood. And thus he perswaded himself with the Kings faithfulness to keep his promises, and oaths. He breathed in no other air than that which might gently fill his Sayls with belief of the Kings integri∣ty; setting say I towards the cape of good hope, but alas, alas! he sails by this cape to his own ruin, They enter the Admi∣rals lodg∣ing, kill all they meetAs soon as the Duke of Guise, and bloody Noblemen drew neer the Admirals lodging, Cossin knockt at the Gate, which he was to keep (a goodly guard for the wolf to keep the Sheep) he that opened the Gate was presently stabbed, as soon as they enter with a number of armed men they kill all they find within the porch. which were a few of the King of Na∣vars Harquebuzeirs; only one escaped to the Admirals Chamber; crying, Sir the Lord calls
us to him; when the Admiral understood it, he caused those that were in his Chamber to lift him out of his bed, and casting a night-gown upon him, he arose on his feet, and with his Minister, Mr. Merlin, in short ejaculations did commend their souls to God;He rises, goes to pra∣yer, com∣mands his Friends & servants to shift for their lives. the Admi∣ral commands all his Friends and Servants to save their lives by flight if possible, and take no more care for him, For that he was willing and ready to surrender his Soul to the Lord, calling for his Spirits, which for a time was lent for his use, saying, this violent and un∣expected cruelty was not only intended for his destruction alone, but for the dishonour of Christ, and the bloody persecution of so ma∣ny poor Saints and Servants of God; which at the Petition of all the Godly Protestants, and the Lord good Grace he had his heart drawn out to the faithful defence of the Pro∣testant Cause, through many hazards and dangers, The sincerity whereof he left to the Lord to Judge, and that he had no other end. Then Mr. Merlin the Minister with the rest, got up to the top of the House, creeping out of the Windows to the Gutters to hide them∣selves, but alas, most of them were sought out and slain in the next house; yet through Gods mercy the Minister wounderfully escaped; as you may at large see in the reverend Author Mr. Clark his Examples, a Book worth the per∣usal of every Christian. Presently ascends up the stairs a Germain, named Benvese, who maried the Cardinall of Lorrains Daughter, with him also Cossin the Gascoin, Attin, a Piccard, a Familiar and
Depender on the Duke of Aumale, (one that not long before sought to murder de Andelot by Treason) as also Hamfort an Avernois;These bloo∣dy Mur∣therers break into the Admi∣rals cham∣ber, and blasphe∣ming God, thrust him through, knock him on the head shoot him with a Pi∣stol, wound him again and so he dies. all be∣ing prepared and armed with Swords, Targets, and Shirts of male. These break into the Ad∣mirals Chamber, who being no so sooner en∣tred, but Benvese advances towards him, and bending his drawn Sword at his Breast, said, Art thou the Admiral? who with a Christian countenance full of constancy and quiet satis∣faction in Gods good pleasure, answered, I am so called, and withall said, young man thou oughtest to consider my age, and the weak case I am now in, but do what thou wilt, for thou canst shorten my life but a very little. But he blaspheming God thrust him through the Breast, and after strook him on the head; then Attin shot him with a pistol in the breast; the Admiral was not with these wounds quite dead therefore Benvese gave him the third wound upon the thigh, and he presently fell for dead, so lying gasping; death freeing him from mise∣ry, wafting him with speed to the Haven of rest and happiness, where all tears are wiped from his eyes. His body thrown out of the win∣dow, the D. of Guise with his foot kicks him on the face.Now the Duke of Guise and rest of the No∣blemen, staied below in the Court to hear how things went; the Duke of Guise with a lowd voice cryed, Hast thou done Benvese? who re∣plied, I have done, the Duke replied our Che∣valier (the Kings bestard Brother) will not be∣lieve it, unless he see it, throw him out of the Window; So Benvese with the help of the rest did lift his body to the window, who yet breathing laid hold with his hand on the win∣dow, but these butcherly blood-hounds and
cruel Murtherers (whom a hundred at once durst not in his life venture to face in the field) violently thrust him out of the window into the Court; the Duke of Guise presently draws nigh, and because his face was bloody and dirty he kneeled down the berter to know him, and with a napkin wiped his face, saying, now I know it is him, and so kicked him on the face with his Feet, whom all the Murtherers in France feared so much when he was a∣live. They pro∣ceed, cry∣ing kill, this is che K. comand, this is the K. comand.Presently the Duke of Guise and his ignoble Train of Nobles, goes out of the Court, cry∣ing, Armour, Armour, we have had good suc∣cess, and a happy beginning, let us now pro∣ceed to the rest, for it is the Kings Command∣ment; which words he repeated often, This is the Kings command, This is his command∣ment, this is his Will, this is his express Plea∣sure. The Alarm bell rings to a gene∣ral Massa∣cre.Then was caused to ring the bloody token for a General Alarum, being the great Bell of the Palace, and instantly it was bruted and published as the cause of this Murther, That the Protestants had conspired against the King, Queen, and Court; and were about to put this design into practice, being armed to that purpose. The Admi∣rals body cruelly a∣bused, his head cut off and sont to the Pope by the King.Then a certain Italian of Gonzagues band, cut off the Admirals head, which was sent to the King and Queen Mother, and by them preserved with spices, and so sent to the Pope, and Cardinal of Lorrain at Rome, as a rich Present; Others cut off his hands, others his secret parts, then the common rascally rable for three daies together dragged his dead body
(which was mangled and besmered with blood and filth) through the streets, and afterwards drew it out of Town to the common Gallows, and so with a rope left his body hanging by the feet at Montfaucon. These cruelties were the badges of the Kings commands, and these bloody Hell-hounds wore their Masters Li∣very. All they find in the Admirals lodging are basely mur∣thered, a∣mong whom 2 children of honoura∣ble birth.Now the Nobles and their cruel Murtherers brake into the rest of the Admirals chambers, and those they found in their beds, or hidden in any corners, they mangled with many bloody-wounds, and so cruelly destroyed them, a∣mongst which number thus slain, was two young innocent babes, Pages of an honoura∣ble birth and extract; which indeed seemed to all that heard it to be too great an act of cruel∣ty; but what was bad enough to be done was their best deeds, whereby they hoped with the help of the Popes Bulls to prove not only par∣donable, but also meritorious. Count Rochfou∣cault, a brave and noble Com∣mander basely slain and ex∣treamly pittied.There was basely murthered the Count Rochfoucault, which for his great wisdom, plea∣sant wit, and exeeding valour, was highly esteemed of by King Henry, and for the same cause this King shewed the like favour; This brave Commander, Statesman and Nobleman de Naunce was commanded to kill, but for the true worth he knew was lodged in the heart of this brave Worthy, and for the old acquain∣tance he had with him, he utterly abominated it in an absolute refusal, but one Laberge an Avernois, and Limb of Hell; one that was willing to sell his Soul for a little profit, one that would receive a reward, though it were from the Devils hands; one that would enter
upon any bloody service, though his pay was damnation;Deut. 27.25. Cursed is he that taketh are-ward to slay an in∣nocent per∣son, and all the people shall say Amen. The Admi∣rals Son, a noble and valiant Gentleman basely slain his brave speech. This bloody unworthy fellow of∣fered himself to the King to murther this brave nobleman, if his Majesty would grant him the Count's Captainship of Horse; and thus was this gallant Count basely murthered by men, not to be spoken of for men, when the Count will be remembred, and named with re∣spect in the Court of honour. At the same time also, and in the same place, the Admirals Son Teligny was slain; he was a young Gentleman of great accomplishments both of wit and valor, insomuch that the King by his respects and affections shewed to him, did do homage to his great deserts, even to ex∣alting him to the highest strain of Adulation; this gallant young Gentleman, I say, being designed to such a cowardly death, and base murther, cryed out, That now he saw it was even grievous for him to live, in that he was the cause of his Fathers confidence of the Kings Love, in that he had often commended the Kings faithfulness to him; and so this brave Gentleman refused not this death offered him, yielding his life as a sacrifice to their wrath and cruelty, and thus was this poor Gentleman miserably butchered. His Lieu∣tenant shews great valor, and fights stoutly, but is murthe∣red.But his Lieutenant, a resolute and brave young Gentleman, having the advantage of his arms, lengthened out his life in a stiff and stout resi∣stance, shewing that he would do what he could not, who like a valiant Souldier, wrapping his cloak about his arm he fought for his life to the feeling and applause of his bloody and merciless enemies, but at last overpowred with number and strength, was as unworthily slain as highly applauded.
Many brave No∣blemen & Gentlemen basely bloo∣dily and inhumanly murthered in their chambers and streetsAt this time also was murthered Collonel Montaumar, and Rouray Son to the Baron Des Adretts, with all the rest of the Gentlemen that had relation to the Admiral; amongst whom were many flourishing young Noblemen, and Gentlemen, all being basely and cruelly murthered, and butchered in the prime of their youth, and so cut off from all future hopes of high attempts; who as they were the cream of the Protestnt Gallantry, so were they the But of their Enemies cruelty. And thus fell these No∣ble Gentlemen, that at all times carried so much intrinsick worth as purchased immortal praise. After this, Cossins Souldiers with the No∣blemens bands,The Soldi∣ers enco∣raged to blood by having the plunder free for their re∣ward. Men, Wo∣men and children murthered, & children taken out of the womb alive and mur∣thered, the street stre∣wed with dead bodys went ransacking from House to house, tearing all away that was worth car∣riage, and in such a manner as is commonly done at taking a Town by storm; and so ma∣ny grew rich by others poverty; For the Duke of Guise, Duke of Montpenscir, the Cavalleir King Henry's bastard, Gonzague, Tavignes, and other Principal Lords, encouraged the Soldiers to proceed to blood with promise of all the booty free for their pains, still crying out, This is the Kings commandment. So all the day from Morning to evening, the skum of the City, the gleanings of all villains, did run up and down with their bloody Swords raging and glorying in their bloody Massacres, & unheard of murthers; for they spared not the aged, nor the women with child, nor the poor innocent babes, some whereof being taken a∣live out of their Mothers wombs, without pitty they cruelly and presently destroyed, and in a Triumphant joy they threw the slain bo∣dies out of the Windows, insomuch that there
was scarce a lane that was not strewed with the dead bodies of the poor Protestants. Nothing to be heard but the doleful crys and groans of the dy∣ing, and terrible noise of the murtherersAnd as the City felt the rage of these Tygers, so the Suburbs also, where was nothing but murthering, and all sorts of cruelties commit∣ted, men, women and children, rich and poor, old and young, nothing to be heard in Paris, and the Subburbs, but a horrible and terrible noise of arms, horses, and harquebuziers, with a doleful, sad, and lamentable howling, and crying of poor souls going to the slaughter, and knew not wherefore; a piteous complaint of such as cryed to the villains for mercy; toge∣ther with the merciless and cruel shouts of mur∣therers, and bloody Hell-hounds, crying kill, destroy, for the King commands it, mixed with the sad groans of the dying; that it see∣med as if heaven and earth had met together, as if the Heavens would have rent with thun∣der. Oh! sad, Oh! wretched King, to stain thy honour with such perfidious breach of pro∣mise, to water thy Kingdom with the blood of Gods people, and so to dissemble with the world, as if dissembling were further from thy thoughts than thy heart from reality. Streets and Ri∣vers dyed with blood.The Pavement, Market place, and Rivers, were died with blood, and it was heard say, by the murtherers, that they had put an end to that quarrel, that neither pen, paper, decrees of Justice, nor open War could accomplish in twelve years.10000. protestants murthered, in one day by the K. command. About ten thousand souls makes this Lords day famous for ever, with effusion of their pretious and innocent blood, such as no age or time can parallel; for there was at this time
in Paris, sixty thousand men, with Pistols, Pikes, Poinyards, Curtelaces, Knives, and such other bloody Instruments, who run up and down swearing and blaspeming the sacred Ma∣jesty of God; cruelly massacring all they meet, the streets being covered with mangled bodies, Gates and doors defiled with blood; And yet we see but in part what cruelties were commit∣ted, if we compare what we have read, and what we shall read together. For now having given thee a sight of such Treachery, Poisonings, perjuries, Cruelties, and damnable dissimulations, with the many murthers committed on the Admiral and Friends in Paris, I shall endeavour in the next chapter, to give a tast of such sad Massacres, and cruelties, as will affright and astonish the heart of any true Protestant; and if thou hast any grain of true Christianity in thee, thou canst not but be toucht with a fellow-feeling of these sad and unheard of murthers and crueltys.
CHAP. VIII. The Contents. THe King labours to turn the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, to the Catholick Religion, by threatning of death, and promises of Life; Their answers; Many Gallant and Peerless Commanders, hewen in peeces at the Loure, crying out to the Kings Oaths and Promises in the Kings hearing; That brave and unparalleled Comman∣der Monsieur de Piles basely slain, cry∣ing out aloud to the King, protesting a∣gainst his treacherous cruelty and per∣jury; Two hundred gallant Gentlemen slain; Count de Montgomery, and Vi∣dame of Charteres escape to England; A Plot against Rochel, but prevented; La Charite surprized, and all the Pro∣testants cut off; The murther at Pa∣ris renewed next day; the bodies of
the dead thrown into the River Sein; In two daies above ten thousand slain, whereof five hundred of Noble blood, Gentlemen, with many Ladies and Gentlewomen, that came to the mari∣age; The King sends by Post to com∣mand all the Protestants to be cut off, following the example of Paris; Three Noble Gentlemen in the Court murthe∣red; The strange, sad and cruel death of a brave Gentleman Monsieur de la Place; Peter Ramus, that famous Professor of Logick basely slain; A sad yet comfortable death of a Godly young Christian; A terrible and unheard-of cruelty committed on a Gentlewo∣man with child; Merciless cruelty committed on a poor child; The most Cruel, Horrid and unheard of but∣chery at Lyons, not to be paralleled in any age, the blood running through the streets reeking hot, to the terrour of the Catholicks themselves; The Bloody Massacre at Meaux; The like sad Massacre at Troys; The bloody Murthers at Orleans; The cruel butcheries at Tholouse: The cruel slaughters and bloody murthering of six thousand Protestants at Roan. The
Murthers at Angiers; A Godly Mi∣nister that had laid the first foundati∣on of a Church in Paris, is murthered by the Kings command. WHilst these sad cruelties were executed at the Admirals Lodging, and in the City and Suburbs of Paris, Let us now be∣hold with pitty a number of brave Comman∣ders murthered in the Kings Castle of the Loure, by the Kings commandement, and in his sight. For the King of Navar and Prince of Conde did lodge in the Loure, with many other brave Commanders, which came to ac∣company the King of Navar and Prince of Conde. The K. pro∣mises par∣don to the King of Navar, & Prince of Conde, if they will turn Pa∣pists.The first thing the King falls on after his bloody Butchery in Paris, was to deal with the King of Navar and Prince of Conde, to whom he gave command to be brought into his presence. The King told them all that was done, that he had now cut off all the instruments of the late Civil Wars, and he hoped would prove a prevention of future troubles; for by his com∣mand the Admiral was slain with his Train, and that no less was done in other Cities to all the Protestants; but saies he, by reason of your young and tender years, and neer alliance in consanguinity and marriage, therefore it is I desire you should be pardoned; but we shall see it on sad terms to these poor tender hearts, ready to break with grief at their friends death, and their own too sad and rigid fate. Poor Princes betrayed by the cruelty of a perfidious
merciless King; The King tells them their Lives depended on the reforming their Judge∣ments, and turning to the Catholique Religi∣on, for he is resolved never to have any more than one Religion in his Kingdom; and if they embraced not this Snake in their bosome, they must be stung with his bloody Sword, as the deserts of their obstinacy. The K. of Navars answer to the K. of France.The King of Navar humbly beseeched his Majesty to remember his Promises, Engage∣ments, and now the near alliance by mariage, lately contracted, and not to force him in those things, which only he must be accountable to God alone for: that he would please rather to imprison his body, than his soul, and not to force him to make shipwrack of a good consci∣ence by a violent assault. Now the Prince of Conde like a resolved Christian also,The P. of Conde's zealom an∣swer to the King. did with much zeal answer the King in this manner, That he having given his Oaths, and promlses in solemn and publick Protestations to all of the Religion, would not, he hoped, forget the great ty of performance, which all men are bound to observe, under pain of Gods heavy Judgements, and there∣fore he wondered his Majesty should so soon be perswaded to break his most Solemn Vows and Protestations, which by the Law of God and Nations he was bound to keep, but know (saies this noble Prince) that for my Religion it is so closely enshrined in a fixed resolution to preserve with my soul, that it is beyond the reach of Mortality, and I hope by Gods grace, am so resolved, that loss of life shall not shake my steddy soul to batter my conscience. And though your great threatnings peirce my under∣standing,
yet shall they not make me lose my hold of that Religion, which by Gods grace is planted, and by your promises, and oaths freely granted to me the free exercise of, and as for my body and goods you may use as you please, but my unspotted soul is in the hands of God. Many No∣bles and brave Com∣manders, that waited on the K. of Navar, and Prince of Conde, by the K. order, and in his fight are cut in peices, cry∣ing out to his Oaths and Pro∣mises. Brave Monsieur de Piles his sad death la∣mented and pittied by his ene∣mies yet basely mur∣thered in the K. fightThis notable answer of this tender young Prince, did so move his raging cruelty, that letting loose the reins of his furious indigna∣tion, he calls him Rebell, and the Son of a Rebellious person, with horrible threatnings that he should lose his life, if within three daies he did not obey his command, and with∣out any more ado, he assaults him with a furi∣ous countenance, issuing out these terrible words Mass, Death, or Bastile. But now their poor Friends that waited up∣on them, being many gallant Gentlemen, as also their Servitors in their chambers, their Schoolmasters, and those that had the bring∣ing them up, were thrust out one, by one, a∣mong the crowd of Murtherers, being the K. Guard of Switzers, that stood in two ranks, prepared for blood and cruelty: These Gentle∣men crying out to the Kings Oaths, Promi∣ses, and fidelity, were nevertheless by the K. command, and in his own sight, unmerciful∣ly hewen and cut in pieces. There did dy of note amongst these in the Loure, the Marquess de Rennet, with several others of noble blood, as also many brave Gen∣tlemen, but no mans death was so much be∣moaned of many both friends and enemies as brave Monsieur de Piles, whose valour, though great, yet could not be victor over his Religi∣ous
and Godly zeal, whose great courage and greater Christianity, fought for Mastery: for he had defended (as aforesaid) the little Town of St. Jean de Angeli, against the K. great Army for fourty daies, who at last yiel∣ded not so much to their valour as their num∣ber. There this brave Commander got such Re∣nown, that of his Enemies who felt his valor he was highly honoured, and was thought to be beloved, and much esteemed of by the King. This brave de Piles, I say, with Leranne, O∣dou's Son, were both lodged (by the Kings command) all night in a Wardrope next the King of Navars own chamber; but this com∣mand of the Kings was looked on by the poor Gallant Gentlemen rather to be an act of spe∣cial favour, then base treachery; these no∣ble Commanders, a little before day, hearing a great noise of running of men in Armour, with doleful cryings, and howlings of the slain for mercy, wondered what should be the mat∣ter, and so arose; who were no sooner up, but de Naunce approaches their chamber; and tells them, it was the Kings Commandment that they should come down into the Court, leav∣ing their weapons behind them, and so to de∣part out of the Castle. He dis∣claims against the Kings treachery Proclaiming his Trayterous infidelity and cruelty in the Kings hearing.Now when this brave Monsieur de Piles saw himself disarmed, and thrust out amongst the murthering Souldiers, who stood ready to kill him, and viewing the sad spectacles of so ma∣ny
of so many of Gods people already slain, he cryes out with a loud voice to the peircing of the Kings ear; protesting against the Tray∣terous infidelity of his bloody cruelty; that Covenants nor Oaths could not bind his loose hands and cruel heart, no more than fetters can ty the raging Ocean; but who is deaser than he that will not hear, for his words peir∣ced the air, but not this Tyrants heart. So having a rich Cloak, he takes it off, and gives it an acquaintance, Saying, Take here this token of Piles, and let posterity know poor Piles most shamefully, cowardly and unwor∣thily slain, by the perfidious command of a perjured King; Oh! my good and noble Monsieur de Piles, replyed he, I am none of them, I thank you for your Cloak, but I will not receive it on that condition,He is thrust out amongst the Mur∣therers, & slain. so imme∣diately Monsieur de Piles was thrust through the body with a Partisan by one of the Kings Guard, and so was there basely murthered and slain. And thus died this most noble and valiant Gentleman, pittyed by his Enemies that knew him to be a valiant Commander; thus was he haled to a cowardly death, that never knew what compulsion meant, but when his virtues and valour, incited him to good actions; so his body was thrown into the quarry with the rest, the beholders crying out, these are the Tray∣tors that plotted our destruction, and would have killed our King. Now it pleased God to dispose of Leranne otherwise, who being thrust through the Bo∣dy with a sword escaped by running into the Queen of Navars chamber who preserved him
from their cruelty and presently obtained his pardon: and also by the assistance of her own Doctor of Physick, he recovered and lived. 200 Gal∣lant No∣blemen and Gentlemen basely slain by the K. command.Amongst these Gentlemen, and at the same time, was also murthered, Pontbreton, Pluvi∣ault, Bandine, Francourt, Chancellour to the King of Navar, Pardillan, Lavardin, and other chief Commanders Gentlemen to the number of two hundred, whose cryes no more peirced the Kings cruel heart, than an arrow can an Adamantine Rock. Count De Montgo∣mery, and the Vidam of Charte∣res with some others escape to England.Now it fell out by Gods good providence o∣therwise with those of the Protestants that lod∣ged in the Fauxburg, At St. Germain beyond the Sein, amongst whom was the Count de Montgomery, and the Vidame of Charteres; who presaging some intended mischief, having a cleer foresight of this Tempest, provided for an escape, and so would by no means be drawn to lodge with the Admiral; who now hearing the noise and understanding the matter in∣stantly fled, but were quickly persued by their grand enemie the Duke of Guise, who as soon as the day had relieved the night, passed the wa∣ter with many horse and foot, and overtaking the Protestants in their flight found some with∣out shoes, some without arms, others without Saddles, some without bridles, all equally un∣able to make resistance, and so were without mercy scattered and cut off, the Count De Montgomery and Vidame of Charteres with a∣bout ten in company by the good mercy of God saved themselves, and after many dan∣gers and difficulties got to the Sea side, and so escaped over to England, bringing sad news in their dejected countenances for the loss of their
dear and pretious Friends; who were also as kindly welcomed by our good Queen Elizabeth as safely escaped from the cruelty of their trea∣cherous and perjured King. Whilst these bloody and unheard of crueltys were committed in Paris,A bloody plot against Rochel, but preven∣ted. Strozzi the Kings Admirals lay hovering at Rochel, endeavouring to surprize it, under pretence of a Banquet to be made for his Friends of the Castle of La Cheine, but being discovered he retreated with∣out the effects of his desire, or performance of the Kings command. The Pro∣testants murthered at La Charite. The mur∣thers at Paris is renewed next day.But the poor Protestants of La Charite as aforesaid was entraped by the Italian horse, and were now put to the Sword. But to return to the bloody City of Paris, the next day the slaughter was renewed, for all that was found hidden in corners or private places of the City were all sought out, brought forth, and murthered, insomuch that the day before, and this day were massacred in Paris, above ten thousand Protestants of all degrees and sexes, the very common Labourers, Por∣ters, and the most rascally and desperate vil∣lains of the City, did this day abuse the dead bodies by pulling off their cloaths, and throw∣ing them naked into the River of Sein. The places of preferment which now lay empty by reason of this horrid massacre, were now by the King given to whom he pleased. The Ad∣mirals office he gave to the Marquess de Villars &c. And so like a true Tyrant leaves no∣thing his poor Subjects can call their own but their miseries. In this butcherly Massacre at Paris were sacked above four thousand houses, and above
five hundred Barons, Knights, and Gentle∣men, who had held the chiefest imployments in the War, with many noble and gallant yong Ladies and Gentlewomen that had now purpos∣ly met together from all parts, to rejoice in ho∣nour of the King of Navars mariage with the L. Margaret, who poor Noblemen, Gentlemen & Ladies thought of nothing more then of jol∣lity and pleasures, but now suffer the Tyran∣nical rage of a furious King, and bloody death to be pittied by all that shall hear this sad sto∣ry; for poor Ladies they expected no such tra∣gical welcome from a Royal King, contrary to his Oaths, and their spotless innocency: and it must needs stick as the greatest badge of in∣humanity and cowardice, nay a true character of a bad cause, To murther like Devils, not fight like men. Immediately after these unheard of murthers were acted in Paris, the King not yet glutted with blood, sends Messengers by post to all parts of the Kingdom (often shifting horses for more speed) with express command to all other Cities, to follow the example of Paris, com∣manding all Protestants which were amongst them to be slain; and yet at the same time the same King writes other Letters, wherein he laid the fault of the Murthers upon the Admi∣ral and the Duke of Guise. Now this com∣mand of the King to cut off all the Protestants in all Towns and Cities under his command, it cannot he expressed how chearfully, willingly and readily they were obeyed by the greatest part of the Cities in France, for on the receipt of his Majesty Letters they fell on the Prote∣stants at Meaux, Troys, Orleans, and other
parts, murthering them without all pitty. And now let us a little read with melting hearts the sad affliction of Gods Church, let us bring the sad ruins of a good cause to our neer view, by a spiritual improvement, as a prospect draws the object nearer; for we must now relate the sad catastrophe of many thou∣sands of poor Christians, who fell under the cruel and bloody command of the King to all his Magistrates, which indeed is not to be ex∣pressed, what sad cruelties were committed to the wonderful astonishment of all that hears or reads it; for no sooner does the King let loose his cruel commands, but speedily the bloody Papists break out with horrid Massacres, more like Devils than men. For now in Paris the Prisons that had any Protestants (by which reason they escaped for a time) were now brought forth, and basely slain by the multitude of murtherers, in which were three gallant Gentlemen of great reputa∣tion, viz. Captain Monius, a very valourous and stout Gentleman; next Lomen, Secretary to the King, and greatly honored and esteem∣ed for his faithful service in his place; and lastly Chappes, an antient Lawyer of fourscore years. And was also of great renown and fame in the Court of Paris, all three were basely murthered as cannot be expressed. Amongst the rest must be set forth that un∣parallel'd bloody and treacherous death of Mon∣sieur de la Place, President of the Court of Wards; which must I say for the strangness of the murther begg leave to have place in this history. Their comes a Captain armed to the Gen∣tlemans
house and acquaints him that the D. of Guise had slain the Admiral by the Kings commandment, and also many other Prote∣stants, but out of his deserts, he desired to protect him from their fury; with all desiring to see his Gold, which he might as well bestow on him for saving him, as on others for de∣stroying him; the Lord de la Place admires at the Captains audatious and petulant demea∣nour, and so confidently required of him whe∣ther he thought there were a King or no; the Captain blaspheming desired him to go to the K. to know his pleasure, the Lord De la Place thinking danger too near, absented from him to a place of better secutity; the Captain here∣upon plunders his house, This poor Gentle∣man, seeking shelter in three houses for his life, was refused, and so at last was forced to return to his own house again, where finding his wife very pensive and sad, he rebuked, and exhor∣ted her not to be so full of dispondency of spi∣rit, for death was the utmost, and heaven the crown of their afflictions and sufferings; and so spoke fully and sweetly of the promises of God; which jointly knit their hearts together in comfort, and so calling together his Family he sweetly exhorted them, expounding out of a chapter to them; then went again to prayer, and so resolved with the assistance of Christ to suffer all Torments of death, rather than dis∣honour God in the least drawing back, present∣ly after comes the Provost Marshal to his house with many Archers. with a pretence to secure him, and conduct him to the King; who an∣swered, that he freely desired to continue his o∣bedience to the King, but could not see how to
escape the fury of the present danger by conti∣nual massacres. Presently after comes the Provost des Mar∣chands, with order to bring him to the King, but he excused it as before, but he would not have any delay or excuse, so that this Noble Lord resolves to meet death by a Christian pre∣paration; and so embracing his wife, he de∣sires her never to forsake the true faith, but to continue steadfast in the fear of God; and so willingly and Christianly advanced, like a true martyr of Christ; and indeed it fell out so as this Godly soul expected, for in the way the murtherers waited with open mouth and bloody hearts, with their daggers, that he did no sooner approach but they stabbed him, that he fell down dead; they pillaged him, cast his body into a Stable, covering his face over with dung, and so the next day threw his body into the River. And thus died this blessed Servant of Christ in the heigth of their cruelty, and his Spirit full of Christian magnanimity. Amongst these many murthers in Paris was Peter Ramus slain; a man famous for learning, being the Kings Professour in Logick, the bloody Murtherers breaking into the College of Priests, they basely massacred him, then cast him out of the chamber window, that his bo∣wels with the fall, issued out on the ground, to a sad view of all tender hearted Spectators, then was his body dragged through the streets, and by certain yong Schollars whipped, being com∣manded to do it by their Popish Tutors. On the Lords day a Godly young man wal∣king abroad in the morning, and hearing that
the Admiral and the rest were destroyed, and seeing little hopes of life, he presently returned home, and with a Son-like care to his loving Mother, told her of the danger, and so spee∣dily secured her in a place of great secrecie, and so shut himself up in his study, and powring out his Soul before the Lord in prayer, and preparation for strength to suffer for his name; presently the Murtherers ascend, and with Bat∣tleaxes, and other bloody Instruments, brake into his study, and so knockt him down, this poor Soul receiving the blood in his own hands, his body they threw into the River. Thus dyed this young man and old Christi∣an, and may stand as a pattern for our Imita∣tion. Two Ministers belonging to the King of Navar were also murthered, and thrown into the River; but all the rest of the Ministers of Gods word, were by a singular and special hand of Gods Providence preserved and kept from the rage of these bloody Tygars. There was in this City a Gentleman, whom the Murtherers found a bed with his Wife, who was then nigh her time of delivery, they no sooner knock, but poor Gentlewoman she o∣pens the door to these bloud-hounds, they pre∣sently stab her husband in his bed; now the Midwife seeing them bent on blood, earnestly intreated them to spare her, at least till the Child was born, this being the twentieth child that God had given her, but their bloody minds admitted of no mercy, but presently trust a dagger up to the Hilt into her fundament, this poor soul feeling her self mortally wounded, fled into a Corn loft to see if God would
please to bring the fruit of her womb to a birth, but these villains persued her and stabbed her in the belly, whereof she presently dyed, then they threw her body out of the window into the Streets, which fall forced the child out of her body, with the head formost, gaping and yawning for life, in a sad, doleful and lamenta∣ble manner, and so it died. One of these villains snatching up a Little child in his arms, the child began to play with his beard, but instead of compassion this base murtherer had such a flinty heart, that he wounded it with his dagger, and so cast it in a goar blood into the River. But this bloody Massacre at Lyons cannot be paralleled by any age, the bare narrative will cloy and Reader at first view; Oxen and sheep could not be destroyed with less pitty and more cruelty, than those poor Protestants of all sex∣es and degrees, from the Cradle to the Bed∣rid: Indeed its the most astonishing and hor∣rible murther that ever Christian heard or read of. For No sooner arrived the Kings commandment to Mandelot Governour of Lyons, certifying of the Massacre at Paris, and commanding to destroy all the Protestants, but Mandelot or∣dered the Gates of the City to be shut, decla∣ring it to be death for any Protestant to come out of his house, and then by a cryer, and af∣terwards by sound of Trumpet he proclaimed that all the Protestants should speedily repair be∣fore him, they quickly obey and come, he then sends them to Prison, they poor souls sub∣mit, and so followed the officers that was ap∣pointed to lead them, but by reason of the great
multitude of them, they are dispersed into se∣veral prisons; Mandelot, the bloody Gover∣nour, Commanded the common Executioner to take aid to him, and destroy them all; but he, having his conscience smit with pitty, reply∣ed, He was an Executioner of the Law, but not to put to death without law; he put to death all such as the world was witness to their publick condemnation, and so desired Mandelot to seek some that might better dispence with a bloody conscience. This cruel Governour having his desire fru∣strate by an honest refusal, commands the Soul∣diers that were garrisoned in the Castle to mur∣ther them; they reply it consisted not with their honour to destroy men in cold blood, and too cowardly to cut the throats of those that had not wherewith to defend, being a thing too far off from valour, or the part of a true Soul∣dier to destroy men at mercy, lying supplyant before them, nor saw they any cause why death should be inflicted upon poor innocent souls. Dear Lord, what Protestant heart can con∣tain to read this sad and lamentable murther without thought of revenge, who has a spark of Christianity that can read, and not wish himself able to revenge their cause, only God is the Avenger of the cause of the innocent, and doubtless God has a Scourge for this Na∣tion. The Governour being refused by a conscien∣tious Hangman, and honourable Souldiers, more fit for Alexander and Caesar than this bloody and cruel Tyrant; he I say rather than let the command of a King ly dead, gathers together the scum of wicked men, and spawn
of the Devil, the legitimate of-spring of a Hellish brood, the Watermen, and bloody Butchers, who being let into prison with their bloody Knives and instruments, (oh unmer∣ciful wretches!) such as they find prostrate at their feet, holding forth their petitions in their sad requests in a bleating Oratory, crying to Gods mercy and mans pitty. These Butchers of innocent souls, instead of pitty, for sport cut of their fingers, and tops of their noses, and then fell a murthering; throughout the City was such doleful noise of the dying, and lamentable howling of women and children, that all those that were zealous in the Romish Religion, abhorred their cru∣elties, and had their hearts so peirced with the sad groans of the dying, that they thought they were devils that onely had human shape, or that they were Indian Tygars, or wild beasts only had assumed the shape of men; nay many wo∣men of the Popish Religion that were with child, and now nigh their time of Delivery, were so affrighted with these sad cruelties, that they parted with child; The murthers and mas∣sacre was so great that out of one of the prisons called the Arch-bishops house, the blood of the slain was seen running down the streets in the day time, in great abundance to the astonish∣ment and horrour of all the Beholders, for it run warm and smoaking hot through the streets and so into the River. Amongst them that were butchered in this Prison, was an antient man, named Francis de Bossu, a Merchant that had to his Sons two Religious young-men, whom he had carefully trained up in the fear of the Lord: As soon
as the Murtherers approached with their Axes, he exhorted his Sons, Not to fear death, for it was but a quick passage to their Fathers house, for that through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdome of God; for it has alwaies been, and will be to the end of the World, the lot of all Gods people to be as sheep among wolves; if we suffer with Christ we shall also reign with him, this short cut of ours will be, but as a Bridge for our more spee∣dy passage to eternal life; let us joyfully follow this company that is gone before us; and so the old Christian and aged Father imbraced his two young Sons, and they him, with mutual embraces, and held so fast together, that with the Murtherers blows they fell all flat to the ground together, crying to the mercy of God, and thus with many wounds was the godly Soul, and his two Sons cruelly murthered, by these bloody Butchers, and which is not to be forgotten, These three bodies along time af∣ter were wonderfully knit together, which affor∣ded a sad sight to the Spectators. After all these cruelties were done, Mandelot the Governonr commanded to be proclamed, that no man should commit any more mur∣thers, and that if any one would discover any of the actors of such horrid villainyes, they should be rewarded with a hundred Crowns for their information; but alas, this was in a base, scornful and disdainful way, for from that time they ceased not to kill and murder all they knew had escaped the common destiny, and on Sabbath day morning those poor Protestants that had escaped their fury, was now by order of this base and bloody Mandelot, destroied and hewen in pieces.
These bloody Villains passing through the Streets with their bloody Instruments, boasted that they had died their white Doublets with the blood of the Protestants, one bragging that he had killed an hundred, some more, some less: On the first of September their dead bo∣dies were ordered to be thrown into the River, but a great part of them Mandelot ordered to be boated over to the other side of the River, and laid on a green bank, neer to an Abby na∣med Esne; and there the people came and abu∣sed their bodies: and one thing (for the like was never heard of) is not here to be omitted; The Apothecaries viewing the bodies said, they used to make medicines of mens grease; and being there were many fat bodies, there might be monies got, and so wished the Butchers to pro∣cure them their grease, and they should be re∣warded, the bloody fellows speedily choose out the fattest, launched them with their bloody Knives, and sold their fat for three shillings a pound. So at last their bodies were some thrown into a great pit, the rest into the River. The people inhabiting on the borders of the River, admired to see so many dead carcasses come down, having their bodies basely man∣gled, some with eyes out, others their noses, hands and ears cut off, and stabb'd in every part of their bodies. Not long after the Popes Legat arrived at Lyons, who coming out of the great Church from Mass, the bloody Murtherers of so many innocent Christians kneel down before him for absolution, and as soon as the Legat was told who they were, and for what they kneeled
down, he made the sign of the cross, and ab∣solved them of their sins whether they repented or no, and doubtless these bloody Devils were canonized at Rome for Saints. The Kings Letters and commands coming to Cosset the Kings Atturney at Meaux; he forthwith ordered those of his bloody crew to come to him, who accordingly at seven a clock at night came, and received Orders to shut up the City Gates; at which time also they went through the Town doing nothing all that night but murther, kill and distroy the poor Prote∣testants; in the morning they apprehended two hundred, and committed them to prisons; Cosset comes to them, and having a Catalogue of their names, he calls them out one by one, and base∣ly murthers as many as they could, being a∣weary they went to supper, and after a little re∣freshment they returned again, and now they brought quicker Instruments of death, be∣ing Axes, and so fell again to call them out by their names, and butchered them most cruelly, amongst whom was a godly Elder of a Church, who praying for his Enemies, they reviled him, and having on a buff Coat, they fearing it should be spoiled with blood, did open it before and stabb'd him in the breast, whereof he died. Amongst these also thus slain was an antient Gentleman Sheriff of the City, whom they cruelly handled, for first they cut off his nose, and privy members, then thrust him often in∣to the body, tossing him up and down, that at last he fell down dead, crying out to God for mercy. As soon as the speedy post with the Kings Letters came to Troyes, the poor Protestants
were quickly imprisoned, the Bayliff Summons the Keeper of the Prison, who being sick sent one Martin to know his pleasure, the Bayliff told him all their Prisoners must be slain; and so commanded a pit to be digged in the Prison that the blood might not run down the Streets, now the Jaylor and his bloody associates going to murther these poor innocent souls, no soo∣ner saw them, but their consciences gave back, standing amazed at the horridness of their task, and so return, but the Bayliff got them, and filled them so full of wine and strong drink, that without any fear or danger they came a∣gain, and called them forth by their names, he that came out first had a chearful countenance, and calling on the name of the Lord he open∣ed his Breast and was killed presently; the next that came, being several times wounded with a Halberd, and not killed, did at last cheerfully take the Halberd by the point, and put it to his breast, saying, Here bloody Murtherer, here, right at the heart, right at the heart, and so was thrust through and died. All the rest were cruelly murthered, and cast into a great pit on the back of the Prison; and although some were not quite dead, yet they cast them in, one of these poor Souls having more life than the rest, rose up in the pit above his Fellows, but was presently smothered with Earth, and al∣though there was a pit digged in the Prison to save the blood, yet such was the effusion of Christian blood, that it run out of prison strea∣ming down the Gutters of the streets, to the amazement of the Popish Inhabitants. But now at Orleance, the place of the last Treaty of peace, and the place where it was
solemnly proclaimed with full command for Observation of the Edict. At this place, I say, the Kings Letters came, commanding to murther all, and happened to come the same day that three hundred were met together at a Sermon, whereupon the Maior and Officers commanded the Companies in arms to fall on, and to execute speedily the Kings command, oh Tyrant, and bloody command! One of the Murtherers went to a noble mans house in∣viting himself, and his bloody followers to Supper, where they were made welcome with good chear, no sooner was Supper ended, but they blaspheming murthered him, and all his family, and then plundered his house. There were many that lived on the outside of the Town, amongst whom was heard such sad murtherings, and cruelties, that all night long was heard nothing but howlings and cryings of men, women and children massacred, shooting off of Guns, and Pistols, breaking doors, and rumbling of Carts that conveyed away the dead bodies, all which were mixed with the cryes of the bloody Murtherers, crying Kill, Kill them all, and then take the Spoil; and thus they continued all the week in these sad and bloody murthers, and plundering, blas∣phemously singing in scorn, where is now their God. On Tuesday they came to a Doctor of the Civil Law, who being found in earnest pray∣er to God, they had not the power to kill him, only took a little plunder with them, next day they came again, and views his Library, what books they demanded he gave them, they told him he must be killed, he therefore goes to pray∣er
again, and afterwards desired of them that if he must dy to murther him there, which they refused, they take him and lead him through the Streets, and coming to the Schools he desired them to kill him where he taught so many; but they led him a little further, and so knocked him on the head. One that was for∣ced by hunger out of a secret place where he hid himself, was presently slain. Such as for fear revolted, they forced to kill their friends or were killed themselves. As soon as the Kings bloody Message came to the City of Tholouse, the Gates were pre∣sently shut, but it pleased the Lord of his good grace and Providence so to order it, that the Protestants were gone that morning out of the Ciry to a Sermon, and as soon as the noise of the Massacre came to their ears, many returned not again to the City! But others would ven∣ture so far as to go to order their affairs for a Return, but poor souls they never returned back, for as soon as they came to the Gates they were suffered to enter, leaving their swords at the Gates, amongst whom was many of great account, and on wednesday morning all the poor Protestants were imprisoned, with com∣mand that none should on pain of death hide any of them. Amongst these were six Counsellers; which like good Christians encouraged the rest: at last they were all brought into one place, and so the bloody Murtherers being ready with axes and knives they were one by one destroyed, their bodies stripped naked, and lay for two daies; The six Counsellours being hung up in their long Gowns upon Elm Trees in the Palace
yard; which would move any one to compas∣sion there being in this City three hundred thus murthered. In Roan as soon as the Kings command came, there was an infinite number slain in few daies, six thousand men besides women, whom they used as cruelly as can be imagined, their bodies were stript and caried out in carts, being put into the pits in great heaps. At Bourdeaux, as soon as the news of the Massacre at Paris arrived, and command from the King to follow their Example. The Pro∣testants were boating over the River to a Ser∣mon, but orders followed them that they should be apprehended, whereupon the Gates of the City were shut, yet the Ministers through Gods good mercy and grace escaped, and safely lan∣ded in England. The Governour was some∣what timerous to act the Kings command in such a bloody subjection to cruelty, but the Lord Monpessat assured him, how acceptable it would be to his Majesty, and for their bet∣ter encouragement he enters the house of the Lord of Obiers, and basely murthered him in his own Court. And then presently the froath and Scum of the Town, assembled and murthered all the rest, amongst whom was a Minister that came out of the adjacent Countrey, Also there was a reverend old Deacon of a church whom they dragged out of his sick bed through the Streets, and so basely and inhumanly mur∣thered. As soon as the bloody Message of the Kings cruell command arrives at Angiers, they fell on all the Protestants without mercy or pitty,
to sex or age, for no sooner were the Massacres begun at Paris, but one Monsorel a bloody and cruel Papist, posted and soon arrived with orders from the K. to destroy all; he no sooner arrives but desires a speedy conduct to one Masson de Rivers, who was a Godly and zealous Pastor of a Church; a very able and elaborate Dis∣spenser of the Mysteries of the Gospel; and one excelling in wisdom, knowledge and lear∣ning; He it was that laid the foundation stone of the first Church of Christ in Paris: This bloody Monsorel meets Mr. Masson's wife at the Door, and kindly saluted her, de∣manding where her Husband was, she answe∣red in the Garden, whither she conducted him, who as soon as he commeth to him, em∣braces him kindly, saying doest thou know my message, and the busmess I come to thee a∣bout, it is (said this villain) to kill thee pre∣sently, for the King commands it; and so presents a Pistol to his Breast, Master Masson replyed, I know not wherein I have given his Majesty such cause; but one thing Sir I hum∣bly beg at your hands, to give me so much space as to commend my soul to God by pray∣er; which as soon as he had ended, this cruel and merciless Tyger pistoled him. And so this faithful Servant of Christ fell dead at his feet. Not long after, arrives another bloody Har∣binger from Paris by the Kings Order, who drowned many, amongst the rest, was the virtuous wife of this Godly Minister of Christ Mr. Masson: a Christian getting into an obscure place of a Rock, the entrance being narrow, was, after he got in, covered with a
Spiders web; the bloudy Persecutors passing by, some of them said it was a fit place for an escape from danger, others said, can any be here and this Spiders web whole, whereupon they departed, which may very well be re∣markably observed as a special Providence of God.
CHAP. IX. The Contents. THe King prolaims pardon to all those that had escaped in Woods, and Rocks, who no sooner comes home, but treacherously destroys them all, in a most cruel manner. For thirty days nothing but killing of poor innocent Pro∣testants. The Copy of the Kings let∣ters, laying the fault of the Admirals death and the murthers on the D. of Guise; yet the same day sends Letters to command it to be done, and caused all the murthers to be done by his comand, both in Paris, and all over France. The King in Parliament opens his design, and acknowledges all to be done by his own command. The Kings Speech in Parliament. The true Copy of the K. Declaration, printed at Paris. The President of Parlament congratulates the King for his bloody success. The
Advocate advises the King to cease the murthers, and to colour his cruel∣tits with the name of Justice. A Par∣liament is called, and Proclamation is made that all murthers should cease. Many gòes to view the body of the Admiral hanging on the common Gal∣lowes. The King and Queen Mother goes also; but his body over night was secretly taken away and buried: so they lost their journey. Judges pickt out to condemn the innocent with the pre∣tence of Justice. The Admiral dis∣honoured by a man of straw, and Li∣bels printed. The King sends to sur∣prize the Admiralls wife, but she was fled to Geneva. The Admiral a little described. Brave Caviagnes and Bri∣quemault tortured to confess themselvs and the Admiral Traytors, they shew much Christianity, the Judges refuse to sit in judgement against them, new Iudges are chosen, they are condemned and led to the Gallows, their Speech, they are hanged in sight of King, Q. Mother, Prince and Nobles with many thousand Spectators. The Man of Straw for the Admiral, hanged with them. Some Letters collected
according to the Original, which gives much light to the History, and disco∣vers how Queen Elizabeth of England resented the Murther, with the Ge∣neral pitty and Dislike of the whole English Court. These cruelties spotted the French Nation with a great Odi∣um among Forein Princes. The Duke of Guise his Letter to his Wife inter∣cepted, and the Plot discovered. The King notwithstanding his former E∣dicts granted, and Oaths to keep his Promises, does now proclaim, that none should exercise any Religion on pain of Death, but the Romish. A form of Abjuration sent to those that would come in, and forsake the Protestant Religion; and when they did, they were murthered contrary to the Kings pro∣clamation: A true Copy of the Re∣membrances of the King to all his Lieutenants, and Governours of his Provinces, with a Copy also for Ab∣juration. NOw when all was murthered that could very well be laid hands on, and the King understanding that divers Protestants, had in many parts of the Kingdom fled, and left their Habitations for security of their Lives; He
acts the second and worst part of his Devilish Treachery and cruelty; for after many sweet baits of inticing and alluring promises for them to come in, he at last published Letters, and sent Messengers; Wherein he shewed, The great grief it was to him that so much blood should be spilt in the Nation, contrary to his will, promising to punish the Actors of such horrid villainies, with as much crueltie as Justice could inflict, and they deserve. And that if the Admiral, and his Associates. deserved the death inflict∣ed for their treasonable practices, yet was it no reason so many innocents should bear part of this punishment, that had no hand in the Plot. Now many poor Protestants that had left all, and fled into the woods, being encouraged by these inticing and fair pretexts, returned home, especially they that had fled from Diep, Roan, and Tholouse; now we shall see the King like a Thorny Bush to the poor sheep, that in a storm they run to shelter, and instead thereof are intangled, and their wool pull'd off their backs. But oh wretched Tyrant, and worse King! whose furious and bloody mind, like an impetuous Whirlewind, or Hiricane, could not be kept in bounds, but ere two daies past he imprisons them all, and appoints base fellowes to murther them, with cruel Tor∣ments. And thus for thirty daies together was no∣thing but horrible slaughter throughout the Kingdom of France; insomuch that there were about a hundred thousand little Babes, Widdowes and children wel-born that father∣less
and Motherless, lived long in wandering, and beggary. And truly that reverend and faithful Servant of Christ, did not miss the Mark of the Kings treachery and perfidious dealing, when he made this Anagram on his name; CHARLES VALOIS, Anagram, Chasseur desloyall, i. e. Perfidious Hunter or Persecutor. In this calamity many that would have sa∣ved their lives among their own friends, could not have the favour, nay their own parents re∣fused them, others betrayed by their friends, and yet it pleased God to move the hearts of some of their Enemies, by their high detest∣ing these cruelties, and villainies, insomuch as they hazarded their own lives to save some of the Protestants. Was ever such unheard of cruelties permit∣ted and commanded by any Christian King, and Court with such delight of shedding Pro∣testant blood; We may say of the French na∣tion (as the case here stood) as the poor. Indi∣an said of the Spaniards. The story stands recorded thus. A Prince of the Indians being so far wrought upon as to receive baptism at the hands of a Fryer, he first questioned, whether the souls of such as were baptized went? Answer was returned, To Heaven; then saies he, whether must they go too that are not baptized; They answer, To Hell; but he further demanded,
To which of these two places the Spaniards went? Answer is returned, To heaven, then said the Indian, Let me go to Hell if the Spa∣niards go to Heaven; for I cannot believe hea∣ven to be a good place, that is a reward for such bloody Butchers; and Masters of such unheard of cruelties. May we not say so of this sad Massacre of France? but I leave the ap∣plication to the judicial reader. The King now fearing the Dishonour of falsehood, treachery, and perjury, and that it might not fix any reproachful blot, or stain on the Kings name; This King at the same time that he sends Letters through France, giving in command to cut off and destroy the Pro∣testants, the same King with the same hand, and at the same time, sends Letters to the Go∣vernours of his Provinces; wherein he lets the world know that the late mischief in Pa∣ris, had to his great sorrow hapned by means of the Duke of Guise, who having raised the people, they tumultuously broke through the Guard, which he had appointed for the Admirals safety, and with great Fury killed the Admiral and his Friends, and that he with the Queen Mother and Brethren, were through the danger of a furious multitude, forced to re∣treat for safety to the Lour, all which he said was against his mind and will, and therefore he desired the Edict of Pacification to be kept inviolable. The like Letters he writ to England, Swit∣zerland and Germany; which because they bear one tenure, and pen'd after one manner, I have to avoid prolixity, incerted only this follow∣ing Letter.
The true Copy of the Kings let∣ter to the Governour of Bur∣gundy. Cousin, YOu have perceived what I wrote unto you Yesterday, concerning my Cousin the Admirals wounding, and how ready I was to do my endeavour to search out the truth of the deed, and to punish it, wherein nothing was left undone or forgottou. But it hapned since, that they of the house of Guise, and other Lords and Gentlemen their Adherents, (whereof there be no small number in this City) when they certainly knew, that the Ad∣mirals friends would proceed to the revenge of his hurt, and because they were suspected to be the Authors thereof, were so stirred up this last night, that a great and lamentable sediti∣on arose thereof, insomuch that the Guard by me appointed for his defence about his House, was set upon, and he himself with certain of his Gentlemen slain, and havock of others made in divers places of the City, which was handled with such rage, that I could not use the remedy I would, but had much ado to em∣ploy my Guards, and other Defence, for the safety of my self, and my brethren in the Ca∣stle of the Loure, to give order hereafter for the appeasing of this Sedition, which is at this hour well appeased, thanks be to God, and came to pass by a particular and private quarrel of long time fostering betwixt these two houses.
Whereof when I foresaw that there would suc∣ceed; some mischievous purpose, I did what I could possibly to appease it, as all men know, and yet hereby the Edict of Pacification is not broken, which I will to be kept as straitly as e∣ver it was, as I have given to understand in all places throughout my Realm, and because it is greatly to be feared that such an execution might stirr up my Subjects, one against ano∣ther, and cause great murthers through the Ci∣ties of my Realm, whereby I should be greatly grieved, I pray you cause to be published and understood in all places of your Government that every person abide and continue in the safeguard of his own house, and to take no weapons in hand, nor one to hurt another up∣on pain of death; commanding them to keep and diligently to observe our Edict of Pacifi∣cation, and to make the Offenders and Resi∣sters, and such as would disobey and break our will, to be punished. You shall assemble out of hand as great force as you can, as well of your friends as of them that be appointed by me and others, advertising the Captains of Castles and Cities in your Government, to take heed to the safeguard and preservation of the said places, so that no fault ensue on their behalf, advertising me also as soon as you can, what order you have given herein, and how all things have passed within the circuit of your Government. Hereupon I pray God to keep you, Cousin, in his Holy safe-guard. At Paris August 24. signed Charles, and underneath BRULAND. Now at the same time, were Orders given
out by the King, for all Towns and Provinces within his Power, to follow the example of Pa∣ris, and to murther and put to death all of the Religion, and the very next month he wholly abolishes that famous Edict, giving command to root out all the Protestants both from Estates and Places, and at last as we shall see, causes a Form of Abjuration to be made, and causing it to de proclaimed, That no Re∣ligion should be exercised in the Kingdom but the Romish. Now we see by these Letters that the King would fain lay the blot of this foul crueltie to the antient Quarrel of the houses of Guise and Chastillon, therefore the Guisans foreseeing the foulness of the fact, strove as much to evade the dint of the Dishonour, as the King did, though the Guisans were the Plotters and chief Agents in the practical part of this cruel Tra∣gedy; whereupon they handled the matter so, that the King was forced to acknowledge, and avow publickly this horrid act, and indeed none more fit than the King that commanded it. And truly the sad effects of these unheard-of cruelties, would make any one disown it, and gladly would the King don so, for he lov∣ed the effects, and now could neither evade the dishonour, nor Gods just Judgements. But he is not yet ripe for them; although in these ma∣ny massacres he had not spared, but basely cau∣sed to be butchered, an infinite number of gal∣lant Noblemen, and Young Ladies, with a∣bundance of learned men, many reverend old men, many young Gentlewomen and Virgins, many honourable Matrons of good account, women with child, and little infants at their mothers breasts.
Now the King being forced, to let the world know his perjury, and cruelty, he labours to set a good face on his cruel heart, so that the King that had the four and twentieth day of August, 1572. declared by Letters to all the Provinces and several Princes abroad, that the tumult in Paris, arose betwixt the two parties of the Guisan and Admiral; now but two dayes after, being the twenty sixth of the same mouth, This most mighty King (and by consent of all nations commonly called) the most Chri∣stian King, comes into the Parliament, with a great Train of his Brethren, and other Prin∣ces and Lords of his Court attending him, where in a full Assembly of his Council, he ascends the Throne, and sitting thereon, he di∣rects his Speech to this great Assembly in man∣ner following, The Kings Speech in ParlamentThat having been informed, that the Ad∣miral with certain of his confederates, not∣withstanding all his favors, & gratious pardons granted to their former Rebellions, yet have now plotted against my person, with my mother and Brethren, to our utter perdition, which being discovered, I was forced to prevent my own ruin, by Justice to procure theirs, and by a speedy course, have heaped on their own heads what they would have heaped on mine. For this cause therefore it was, that by my command the Admiral and his Complices, are deservedly cut off, hoping thereby, that a period is not only put to their Treason against my self, and Nobles, but also to future troubles, which would have fallen on this poor Nation, to an utter ruin thereof. Now although at first, he had both by words
and Letters, laid the whole Business on the fury of a popular tumult, headed by the facti∣on of the Guisans, yet now at this time, un∣masking his Design, he discovers himself like his actions, and now laid down his Reasons and grounds of this manner of proceeding a∣gainst these Rebells, as he calls them; and so further declared, That he thought it not altogether unfit to make his Magistrates acquainted with it, That what was done at Paris in the late Slaughters, was by his own commandment, for the safety of his own life, and national tranquillity, and also that they might proceed with the like seve∣rity, against such Traytors, and Rebells of such a wicked Conspiracy, and that it was a sudden thing, and not premeditated (a deep reach to take off the edge of suspition) hapning in a manner, saies he, by chance, and not by a∣ny plotted contrivance. This Speech of the Kings, was by himself, and the Parliament commanded to be written, and entered into the Records of Parliament, proclaimed by Heraulds, and published in print, a Book also was published by the Kings com∣mandment (which because it is within four daies of the same date of that Letter, wherein he laies the blame of the Admirals death, &c. on the Duke of Guise, and here takes it to himself) therefore I say I thought fit to insert that printed Book by way of Declaration, which is as followeth.
A Declaration of the King, concerning the occasion of the Admirals death, and his Adherents and Complices, hapned in the City of Paris, August 24. 1572. By the King. HIs Majesty desiring to have all Seigniours, Gentlemen, and other Subjects under∣stand the cause of the Murther of the Admiral and his Adherents and Complices, which late∣ly happened in the City of Paris, the four and twentieth day of this present month of August, lest the said deed should be otherwise disguised and reported than it was indeed, His Majesty therefore declareth, that which was done was by his express commandment, and for no cause of Religion, nor breaking his Edicts of Pa∣cification, which he alwaies intended and still mindeth and intendeth to observe and keep, yea it was rather done to withstand and prevent a most detestable and cursed conspiracy, begun by the said Admiral, the chief Captain there∣of, and his said Adherents, and Complices, against the Kings person, his Estate, the Q. his Mother, and the Princes his Brethren, the King of Navar, and other Lords about him, wherefore his Majesty by this Declaration and Ordinance, giveth to understand to all Gen∣tlemen, and others of the Religion, which they pretend Reformed, that he mindeth and
purposeth that they live under his Protection, with their wives and children in their houses, in as much safeguard as they did before, following the benefit of the former Edicts of Pacification, most expresly commanding and ordaining, that all Governours, and Lieutenants General, in every of his Countreys and Provinces, and other Justices and Officers to whom it apper∣taineth, do not attempt, nor suffer to be at∣tempted, any thing in what sort soever upon the persons and goods of them of the Religion, their wives, children and families, on pain of death to be inflicted on those that shall be found faulty, and culpable in this behalf. And ne∣vertheless to withstand the troubles, slanders, suspitions and defiances, that may come by Sermons and Assemblies, as well in the houses of the said Gentlemen, as in other places, as it is suffered by the said Edicts of Pacification, it is expresly forbidden, and inhibited by his Majesty to all Gentlemen and others of the said Religion, to have no assemblies, for any cause at all till his Majesty hath provided and ap∣pointed otherwise for the Tranquillity of his Realm, upon pain of disobedience and confis∣cation of body and goods. It is also expresly forbidden under the pain aforesaid, that for the aforesaid accasions none shall take or retain any Prisoners, or take ransome of them, and that incontinently they certifie the Governours of every Province, and the Lieutenant General, of the name and quality of every such Priso∣ner, whom his Majesty hath appointed shall be released and set at liberty, except they be of the late Conspiracy, or such as have made some practice or device for them, or had intelligence
of, and they shall advertise his Majesty of such ro know his further pleasure. It is also ordained, that from henceforth none shall take or arrest a∣ny Prisoner for that cause, without his Maje∣sties commandment, or his Officers, nor that none be suffered to roave abroad in the Fields, to take up Dogs, Cattel, Beefs, Kine, or o∣ther Beasts, Goods, Fruits, Grain, or any thing else, nor to hurt the Labourers by word or deed, but to let them alone about their work or calling in peace and safety. At Paris August 28. 1572. signed Charls, and underneath Fizes. Imprinted at Paris by Iohn Dalleir, Stationer, dwelling on Saints Mi∣chaels Bridge at the sign of the White Rose, by the Kings Licence. There was Letters also writ by the King to the Officers of Burghs, also remembrances sent to the General Lieutenant of Burgundy, which being to the same purpose, is omitted for bre∣vity. The Kings Oration, in the great Assembly aforesaid, being ended; before this Assembly broke up, one Christopher Thuane, the President of this Assembly in Parliament, being one of a high Spirit, and subject to admire his own parts and actions, ready to wonder what a fool he could make of Solomon, being a man repor∣ted
to be notable for his light brain and cruel heart, who trusting more to a slipery tongue, than a sound cause, congratulated the King for his wise Policy and good success in a speedy conquest over his Enemies. But alas! how did he conquer? Only by wearing the vest of the Innocent, to conceal and cover the deformed ugliness of his perfidi∣ous perjury. But the Advocate of the Finanees succinct∣ly delivered his mind to this purpose. That though his Majesty had just cause to punish Delinquents, yet it were more becoming the justice of a Prince, to proceed according to the Lawes by himself decreed and establi∣shed, and so more fit for his Majesty to com∣mand a speedy cessation of such violent slaugh∣ters, and to enter upon a judicial proceeding, according to the Laws, which was well known to be the proper and peaceable establishment of Empires and Kingdoms. This advice takes well, for now the King begins to do unjustly in the name of Justice; so he proceeds to dissemble a Legality for all his future Butcheries, unwilling to murther any more without a statute, and pretence of Justice for it. This being a brave principle of a Tyrant; and that whereas the Laws at first were known to be the legitimate daughter of judgement, it must now be made the adopted daughter of Tyranny. Now is an arrest of Parliament, with his Royall assent, so that immediately Heraulds went about the City, and an Edict was pro∣claimed in the Kings name, That all mur∣thers
should cease; but those that he intended more immediately to have a hand in himself, by sitting in judgement and quallifying his cruel∣ty, and bloodshed, with the name of Ju∣stice. And first let us see a little of this new Ju∣stice of the Kings, which now must be exer∣cised on the dead Admiral, which being as a∣foresaid, hung by the heels on the common gal∣lows of Paris, the people by flocks and mul∣titudes gathered to see it. The Queen Mother, to delight her self with that sad vew of her Sons and her own bloody cruelty, she takes the King and his Brethren, and so advances towards this sad sight, but his body was in the night conveyed away by two of the Marshall de Momorancies Servants, and was secretly buried at Chantilly, whose faithful∣ness and adventure is beyond a terrene Re∣ward. And now the King begins to put in execu∣tion the advise of the Advocate; being also per∣swaded to it by Morvilleir, a wicked fellow, and the first that brought the Priests into the Kingdom of France, now it was thought fit to bring to publick Justice, those that were ta∣ken flying and hiding themselves, and so after the usual manner of Judicial proceedings, should be examined by chosen Judges cull'd on purpose, and so by Sentence condemned, that in view of all the world, they might receive their execution as the effects of justice, and re∣ward of there Treasonous practices. The Judges thus appointed, was Birage, Thuan, Limege and Belleuxe; who presently gave order for a man of Hay made in shape of
a mans body, and so to personate the Admiral, whom they had murthered; and so it was dragged through the streets by the Boreau, his memory was condemned and razed out of re∣membrance, his arms and Ensigns of Honour and Chivalry demolished, his Castles and Farms razed to the ground, his Children pro∣nounced infamous, and unnoble, and all the trees in his woods to the growth of six foot to be cut down. And now to make way abroad in the World, in the Court of Forein Princes and Nations for a more neat excuse to their unheard-of base∣ness; They disperse Libells full of dishonour to the Admiral, and his Adherents, and stuft with the Defamation of their memories, and that their Actions might not run in a Line Antartick to their words, The King dispat∣ches his Grand Provost with all diligence to seize upon the Admirals wife, and Mounseir de la Vall the Son of Andelot deceased, who by Gods good Providence were already fled to Ge∣nova, and the better to escape further danger, went to live among the Switzers in the Canton of Bearn, the younger Children both male and female were condemned to death in their tender years. They give also new charges to their Ambas∣sadours, negotiating in Germany, Poland, England, Switzerland, and other Forein Coun∣treys, to justify the actions of the King and Catholicks, tending also to the Publick re∣proach and shame of the Admiral and his Friends. But God used these things afterwards as a further mean to discover their treachery, and
so proved against their expected advantage. For had the King and Court of France declared at first that they designed to cut of their Enemies, as the exuberous branches of the Kings indulgency, and now grown his E∣nemies hy their plotted treachery, this would have excused them from perjury and treason, but to pretend that they intended not what they really resolved to do, and nothing less than what they did, This I say was the height of dishonour to the Crown of France. And thus died that famous, Religious, and Noble Commander Gasper de Colligny Admi∣ral to the Protestant Army and cause, for the space of twelve years; whose deserved Fame li∣ved with great renown in the hearts of all the Godly, and with no less terrour and amaze∣ment often filled the Kingdom of France, whose valour purchased great merit from his Enemies; He that made the King and Court afraid, in a hasty and disorderly retreat from Meaux to Paris. And that I may add one mite to the Treasure of his true worth, this is he that many praised and all admired, that through a wise conduct of his affairs, terrified his boisterous Enemyes, to a submissive calm of subjection; A man so inspired with great cou∣rage, and constancy, that to take a Description by any pen, would be the highest road to lay his merits in the grave of obscurity, being a man full of the sail of valour and sound judg∣ment, a star of the greatest magnitude in the affairs of highest importance, shining for ever in the lowest obscurity of discords, sudden dangers, and insurrections. One that cannot be enough admired, commended or honoured,
being above all a man of profound judgement in point of reality. This being the least part of honour that is paid to his eternal worth by all that knew him. He, he it was that basely suf∣fered, the unresistable shock of a perfidious, and treacherous death, cowardly murthered by those that durst never draw a Sword with a Re∣solution of valour against this Champion, but trembled at his Remembrance and Presence, who was never overcome by valour but by co∣wardice. Amongst the rest that were brought to a Le∣gal murder. was one named Caviagnes Ma∣ster of the Requests to the King, and one na∣med Briquemault, both inward friends to the Admiral, and in great reputation in the Court of honour and Camp of Chivalry. Now this brave Commander and old Soul∣dier Briquemault, having great renown by his service under King Francis, and King Henry, was therefore honoured by all but such as love no Rivals, nor valued any crueltie if they could but out shine others loyalty, by their own treachery. This brave Gentleman was a∣bout fourscore and ten years old, and poor Gen∣tleman had gone through too much proof of fidelity, now to end his life under the command and protection of such a cruel Tyrant. Now these gallant Commanders aged with experience, and filled with innocent integrity, were like Lambs before Wolves, threatened to be torn in pieces unless without delay, they would with their own hands subscribe that they were of the Admirals Councel, to cut off the King, by an untimely death; together with the Queen his Mother and his Brethren,
and promising pardon, if they would accept of it; These innocent Gentlemen cryed out, That they were ready to suffer the Torments of their merciless cruelty upon their bodies, rather than pull down vengeance upon their spotless souls, so humbly beseeched the King to spare his torments, seeing none could peirce so far as force themselves to a false accusation, yet if his Majesty pleased to totment their bodies, they hoped God would so in his mercy order it, as to lessen the pain thereof by his gratious presence in their souls; in whose goodness they hoped to depend for aid, rather than perjure their own Souls by a false accusation of them∣selves, and others, being as full of innocency and integrity as they of cruelty and perjury; they were resolved never to accuse murthered in∣nocency, wherein they never were guilty, nor commit such an execrable crime as the King requested; and (say they) though the King va∣lues the tranquility of his Realm before the blood of Christians; yet we hope to embrace a peaceable conscience, in trampling underfoot the high esteem of a transitory possession; for what will it gain us to gain our lives and lose our immortal souls? The Judges having some remorse of consci∣ence, began to deny the embracement of that infamy,The Jud∣ges toucht in consci∣ence do re∣fuse to fit in Judge∣ment. which must justly fall on their unjust Sentence; for indeed their reasons were unre∣fistable; and these Judges understood the in∣tent of the King by the Defendants Pleas, so they refused any more to hear, or determine, much less to give Sentence, whereupon were new Judges appointed in their room, and to
them was joined a Tormenter, and Nota∣ry, as might suit with them, so at last these eminent and brave Cammanders and Gentle∣men, were by a shadow of Law, and illegal Legality, condemned to dy, and so the 22. of October 1572. in the fight of the King, Queen, Mother, her Sons, with many thousand ga∣zing on them, they were led to the gallows, seated in the prime street of the City, but be∣fore execution, as Briquemault ascended the Ladder, came to him the under Provost of the Town, whom the King had commanded to insinuate into him and to profer pardon for life, if he would confess what was laid to his charge, saying further, that his Majesty being of an easie nature, and courteous affability, would as speedily grant pardon, as he ask it, but he, like one truer to his own soul, then the K. to his pro∣mise, replyed, That it was the K. duty to ask par∣don of God, if the day of Gods mercy had not past upon his cruelty and perjury, and so was far from asking forgiveness for that, whereof God and his soul were witnesses of his innocency, yet to prove himself as good a Christian as the King a ernel Tyrant, he cordially desired God of his great mercy to forgive the King. And so lifting up his eyes to heaven, he uttered these Words, Oh my God, upon whose Tribunal seat I stand, and whose face I hope shortly to see, thou knowest well that I know nothing, nor did not so much as once think of any Con∣spiracy against the King, nor against his E∣state; though I stand charged with the same in my process, but I beseech God to pardon the King, and all those that have been the cause of this my unjust death, even as I desire par∣don
at thy hands for my sins, and offences committed against thy Divine Majesty; so as∣cending another step of the Ladder, he onely said, I have somwhat to utter to the King, which I would be glad to communicate unto him, but (saies he) I see that I may not; and so shrunk up his shouldiers, forbearing to use any further speech; so these two brave Gentlement were at last with halters about their necks, most basely, unjustly and dishonorably thrown off the Lad∣der by the Hangman; whose deaths ere this are accounted for; and as Briquemaults con∣stancy was much commended, so was his death much bewailed by many Catholicks, that were spectators of this sad crueltie. Two things was very ill spoken of by the Catholicks and Protestants; first the presence of the King, as a thing unworthy the Head of Justice, to see the Execution; Secondly, That Briquemault being a Gentleman of Good descent, was basely hanged, being a thing rare in France, but especially now in regard he was reputed of his Enemies to be free from the charge for which he died; about an hour after this unheard-of Justice and execution the bloody Catholicks of Paris, drew their bodies through the Streets, thrust their dead bodies through with daggers, shooting of dags at them, cutting off their ears, and omitted no other kind of cruelty, and barbarous villany that could be imagined. And thus the Noble Gantlemen, by their Christian Moderation and composedness of mind, reared Trophies of Honour out of the Ruins of their own misfortunes, Et Miserias infularum loco habuere, wore their disasters like
holy vestments as robes of honour, They let the world know they could not only do but suffer, and that passive fortitude is as good as active valour, Et facere & pati fortia, hoc Romanum est, L. Flo. And now to perfect all, they likewise with these two famous Gentlemen, cause to be hang∣ed a man of straw made for a shadow of the Admiral. These barbarous cruelties, strange Treache∣rie, and unheard-of perjury in these bloody proceedings against the poor Protestants of France, brought an odium and bred a Hatred from Stranger Princes, but especially in Po∣land; likewise did much frustrate the French Negotiations in behalf of the Duke of An∣jou. And Courteous Reader, since the first begin∣ning of publishing this sad Tragedy, there came in the interim a book to my hand; wherein is somwhat discoverd of this History, but specially the resentment and judgement of Sir F. Walsing ham then Ambassador in France for Q. Eliz. of blessed memory, as also some orher Letters, the matter contained therein I have shortly col∣lected for the publick good, which though ab∣stracted here, yet may more at large be read in the Author.
In a Letter to Sir Tho. Smith, page 245. —And therefore I hope her Majesty will stand upon her Guard, and strengthen her self with the Amity of the Protestant Princes of Ger∣many, who (as I hear) are awake, and mar∣velously stomack this late cruelty, and do think that the danger thereof will reach to themselvs, if they do not seek to prevent it. One Roulart a Catholick and Canon of Nostre Dame and al∣so a Counsellour in the Parliament, uttering certain Speeches in misliking this lawless kind of proceeding without Justice, was apprehen∣ded and committed to Prison, and in prison murthered as disorderly as any of the Rest; wherewith divers of the Catholicks themselves were offended. This manner of proceeding breedeth General distrust in them of the No∣bility, and every man feareth Gods venge∣ance. Paris, 16. Sept. 1572. F. Walsingham. In a Letter to Sir Francis Wal∣singham, page 246. —The Ambassadour proceeded, shew∣ing also outwardly, a marvellous inward grief of mind for this shameful fact, professing him∣self ashamed to be accounted a French man. —Although indeed the same informa∣tions
had been true, yet the manner of the cruelty used cannot be allowed in any kingdom or Government, and least in that place where the King might by order of Justice have done due execution, both to the Admiral, and all others that should have proved offenders: for it cannot be denied, that the same forces that murthered so many, might have more easily at∣tached them all, or the principals, and brought them to answer to Justice when the King would, &c.—whose age and knowledge ought in such case to have foreseen how Offen∣ders ought to be justified with the Sword of the Prince, and not with the bloody Swords of Murtherers, being also the mortal enemies of the party murthered, &c.—And as for the Admiral, she confesseth, that she was very sorry for his death, as for one whom she thought a good Minister to continue Amity betwixt their two Majesties, and she had cause to be∣wall the rest of the Noblemen for the like cause &c.—Her Majesty did greatly lament their death, and doth surely perswade her self, that if the King shall not use his power to make some amends for so much blood so hor∣ribly shed, God, who seeth the hearts of all, as well Princes as others, will shew his Justice in time and place, when his honour shall ther∣in be glorified, as the Author of all Justice, and the Revenger of all blood-shedding of the innocents, &c. Woodstock, Sept. 9. 1572. W. Burleigh, F. Knowles, Rob Leicester, T. Smith, James Croft.
In a Letter to Sir Francis Wal∣singham, folio 250. SIR, I See the Devil is suffered by the Almighty God for our sins, to be strong in following the persecution of Christs Members; and ther∣fore we are not only vigilant of our own defence against such trayterous attempts as lately have been put in ure there in France, but also to call our selves to repentance, &c. —I desire to have the knowledg of as many principals as were slain, and what Pro∣testants did escape, we are much perplexed with variety of Reports, &c. Woodstock 19. Sept. 1572. W. Burleigh. In a Letter to Sir Francis Wal∣singham, page 251. THe Lamentable Tragedy that hath been there used of late doth make all Christians look for a just revenge again at Gods hand, as it hath pleased him to fear us, and so pinch us in the mean time, with the scourge of Cor∣rection by the sufferance of his people thus to be murthered, &c.—That we may see as well the fall of his and our Enemies, as the blood of his Saints to be so innocently spilt, even for his mercies let him turn it ten fold upon their heads, &c.—If he
continue in confirming the fact, then must he be a Prince detested of all honest men, what Religion soever they have, for as his fact was ugly, so was it inhumane, for whom should a man trust if not his Princes Word? and these men whom he hath put to slaughter not onely had his word, but his writing, and not private but publick, with open Proclamations, and all other manner of Declarations, which could be devised for their safety, which now being violated and broken, who can believe or trust him? Sept. 11. 1572. Rob. Leicester. In a Letter to Sir Francis Wal∣singham, page 252. SIR, THis sad accident in France seemeth to us so strange, and beyond all expectation, that we cannot tell what to say to it, the mat∣ter appeareth all manner of waies so lamentable, The King so suddenly, and in one day to have dispoiled himself, and his Realm, of so many notable Captains, so many brave Souldiers, so wise and so valiant men—You would not think how much we are desirous to hear what end these troubles will have, whether it rangeth further into all France, or dy, or will cease here at Paris, our Merchants are afraid to go now into France, and who can blame them? who would where such liberty is given to Soul∣diers, and where nec Pietas, nec Justitia, doth
refrain and keep back the unruly malice of the raging popular? Woodstock Sep. 12. 1572. Tho. Smith. In a Letter to the Right Honoura∣ble his very Good Lords, the Lords of Her Majesties most Honourable privy Council, page 253. —That she was not a little a∣stonished, and perplexed, upon the hearing of the late miserable and most lamentable accident in such sort, as she knew neither what to say or Judge of the matter, seeing those murthered without pitty and compassion, without regard had either of sex or age, without ordinary form of Justice, who upon assurance of the Kings word, laying all suspition aside, did misdoubt nothing less than that which happened unto them; who thought their lives then in most safety when by proof it appeared they were in most danger &c.—That though she was much astonished at the first report made of the great slaughter, and horrible murther, without regard had either to sex or age of those of the Religion, who laying aside all distrust, and re∣posing themselves upon his words, did most confidently throw themselves into the arms of his Protection, &c.—And as for the cruelty (saith he) exercised both here in my Town of Paris, and elsewhere, it is a thing
that hath hapned against my will to my great grief; of late (saith he) the like disorder hath hapenned at Roan, for the which I am very sorry; and therefore for the redress thereof I have all this morning been devising with my counsel for exemplary Justice to be done upon those which shall be found to be offenders, &c. —The Marshall de Cosse, hath Commission sent him, as I am informed, to ex∣ecute as many of the Religion, within his Charge, as have been known in these late wars to have served the Princes, and born char∣ges; If the Marshall Montmorency had been in this Town at the day of execution, both he with all his Brethren, the Duke de Bulloin, and Marshall, had been slain, as I am credibly informed. Paris 24. Sept. 1572. In a Letter to Sir Francis Wal∣singham page 262. —The cruel Murthers at Roan is now long ago written unto us, when we thought all had been done, and by the same Letters was written unto us that Deip was kept close, and the same execution of the true Christians loo∣ked for there, but as then not executed, howbeit Sigoigne did warrant all our Englishmen to be out of danger, and not to be afraid; but what warrant can the French make, now Seals and words of Princes being traps to catch in∣nocents, and bring them to the butcheries? if the Admiral and all those murthered on that
bloody Bartholomew day, were guilty, why were they not apprehended; imprisoned, inter∣rogated, and judged, but so much made of as might be, within two hours of the assumation, is that the manner to handle men either culpa∣ble or suspected? So is the Journeyer slain by the Robber, so is the Hen of the Fox, so the Hind of the Lion, so Abel of Cain, so the in∣nocent of the wicked, so Abner of Joab: but grant they were guilty, they dreamt Treason that night in their sleep; what did the innocent men, women and children at Lyons? what did the sucking children, and their Mothers at Roan deserve at Cane? at Rochel? what is done yet, we have not heard, but I think short∣ly we shall hear; will God, think you, sleep still? will not their blood ask vengeance? shall not the Earth be accursed that hath sucked up the innocent blood poured out like water upon it, &c.—I wish you were out of the Countrey, so contaminate with innocent blood, that the sun cannot look upon it, but to prognosticate the wrath and vengeance of God. The ruin and desolation of Jerusalem could not come till all Christians were either killed there, or expelled thence. Reading 26. Sept. 1572. In a Letter by Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary to her Majesty, p. 263. —The Best is we stand I thank God, upon our Guard, nor I trust shall be taken and killed asleep, as the Admiral was, &c.—
It doth me good to see the Princely compassion that her Majesty doth take on the poor Vidame who is escaped by good fortune into England; her Majesty hath written for him to the King. The Copy I send you, you shall do well to press the Answer, and bring it with you; I dare say, it will do you good if you can do it, Haec est vicissitudo rerum humanarum, haec est communis casus hominum. All that be not bloody and Antichristian must needs condole, and lament the misery and inhumanity of this time, God make it short, and send his Kingdom amongst us. Sept. 27. Tho. Smith. In a Letter to Sir Francis Wal∣singham, page 264. —We have understood by re∣port from Roan, that on Thursday was seven-night, there was a general slaughter made of all that could be imagined Protestants, so as the very Channels of the Streets did run with blood. Sept. 25. 1572. W. Burleigh. In a Letter to the Lord of Burleigh page 269. —Doth well enough discern that he late cruelty here executed is void of all man∣ner
of Just defence, and therefore in Gods just judgement is like to receive just punishment; and if the same do not happen so soon as we desire, our sins is the let. They here are so far imbrued in blood, as there is no end of their cruelty; for no Town escapeth where any of the Religion are found, with General murther∣ing and sacking of them, and yet they protest all this to be done against their Will, though it be evidently known it is done by their Com∣mandment. This manner of proceeding seem∣eth to all men so strange, as no man can tell what to judge of it, openly no man dare but commend it, privately few are found that do not utterly detest it. Paris 8. Octo. 1572. F. Walsingham. In a Letter to the Earl of Liecester, page 282. —Generally all men do cry out and say, That the Liberty of France is lost, yea and some the most vehement Catholicks do wish both themselves, and that they have, out of this Countrey, &c.—What will be the issue of these Tragical doings here, God only knoweth, but generally every man feareth that all will go to ruin. Paris 1. of Nov. 1572. F. Walsingham.
In a Letter of Sir Francis Wal∣singham, page 304. —I further shewed him the re∣doubling of her Majesties grief, as well to see such as by no means could be privy to any con∣spiracy given up even to the vile and base peo∣ple; whose execution was without respect of age or sex in a most barbarous sort; as also to see those that are alive forced by Edicts lately set forth, either to abjure their Religion, to fly, or else to be murthered, a kind of procee∣ding which sheweth, that his meaning is to root out all the Professors of the Gospel within his Realm. Paris 25. of Decem. 1572. F. Walsingham. Now we may see how things were resented by blessed Queen Elizabeth, how at first the King by his Ambassadour would perswade her to believe, that he had reason for what he did, although he desired to excuse it by necessity. Many other things of high concernment is couch't in those excellent Letters, worthy se∣rious perusal at large. Now although the King did declare it to the world, that he intended not to break the Edict of Pacification, but that liberty should be granted to their Persons, yet the all-seeing God discovered their deeds of darkness, in the day-light, and that the King only deceived
the World with his wonted Hypocrisie, which will plainly appear by the tenure of a Letter in∣tercepted from the Duke of Guise, at the Court in Council, being written from Paris to his Wife, the same day that noble Brique∣mault was ignobly hanged; the words were these, The King hath decreed in Council, utterly to root out this seditious vermin of the New Re∣ligion. And thus this King and Court, washed their bloody, and crimson hands in the blood of the Protestants. And that the World might see that effected, which he so often publickly proclaimed was never intended, his heart and his tongue being not Confederates, shewing himselt now perju∣red to purpose, he causes to be proclaimed, That those that had any charge in the Nation, should for sake their Religion and their Places; insomuch that there was no small village, but the poor Protestants were compelled to hear Mass, or speedily perish by the Sword, and yet so basely bloody, and murtherous did the French Nation shew themselves at this time, that even those that through a sudden fear em∣braced by temptation, a sad Apostacy, abjuring the Protestant Religion, yet were presently murthered. The Remembrances of the King sent to all Governours of Provinces, and also the form of Abjuration, I have here inserted, according to the Original Copy, that the world may see the perjury of a faithless King.
Remembrances sent by the King, to all Governours, and Lieutenants of his Provinces, to put out, and remove all those of the RELIGION from their Estates, and Charges, although they would abjure the same; saving such as have but smal Estates and Offices, to whom his Majesty permitted continuance, on condition that they abjure the said Religion, according to the Form of Abjuration sent for that pur∣pose. THe King, considering how much his Officers, and Majestrates of Justice, and such as have the Administration and dealing of his fines and payments which be of the New Religion, are suspect and hated, and put his Catholick Subjects in great mistrust, if they should presently exercise their Offices after these fresh commotions: Therefore least the people should thereby be brought to a new occasion of stir, and they of the new Religion be in danger and hazard of their own persons, although they would ab∣jure their said new Religion, and profess the Holy faith and Catholick Religion of Rome; His Majesty desiring to avoid the new mis∣chiefs and troubles which may come, hath ad∣vised to discharge the said Officers, from the
exercise of the said Offices, untill he shall o∣therwise appoint. And yet nevertheless in the mean while, if the said Officers be obedient unto his will, and live quietly in their Houses, without attempting, practising, or taking any thing in hand against his Service, they shall receive their wages, and they that will resign their said Offices to Catholick persons, and come to his Majestie, shall be honourably provided for. And as touching other small Offices without wages, which cannot be trou∣blesome, as Notaries, Sergeants, and such, where the Officers have none Authority, which cannot be so odious nor mistrustful to the peo∣ple as the other; His Majesty is advised, that such small Officers which will abjure the said New Religion, and confess the faith Catho∣lick, Apostolick and Romish, and therein live continually hereafter, shall continue in the exercise and enjoying of their estates: but they that will continue in their new opinion, shall depart from their Offices until his Maje∣stie have otherwise provided. And this is for the great mischief and inconvenience that may betide them, if they should exercise their said Estates, because of the great mistrust and sus∣pition which the Catholicks have conceived of them of the new Religion. Nevertheless his Majesty well considering, that the most part of the said Officers have none other way to live, but the exercise of their said Offices, willeth that they shall be in choice to resign to Catholike and capable persons, and then to come to him for that effect, and he will grant them the greatest favour and moderation of his Treasury that is possible. The which resolution
and pleasure of his Majesty, he willeth to be declared to the said Officers of the new preten∣ded Opinion, as well by Governours, and Lieutenant Generals of his Provinces, as by them of his Courts of Parliament, of the Chamber of his Accounts, of the Court of his aids, them of his great Council, of the Treasury of France, the Generals of his fines, His Bayliffs, Seneshals, Provosts, Judges, or their Lieutenants, and every one of them as shall appertain; and to this intent his Maje∣sty willeth and intendeth, that every one of them in their calling shall send particularly and apart for every of the said Officers of the new Religion, which be of their incorporation, charge and jurisdiction, and shall admonish them in this behalf, to conform themselves to his Majesties mind, and if any of them in Authority, because of their said Estates, will return to the bosom of the Catholick and Ro∣mish Church, it shall be said to them, that his Majesty liketh very well of it, and that he ta∣keth a great and singular affection therein, and that it shall give him the greater assurance and credit of their good will, and that his Maje∣sty will not bar them from his service hereafter, but will provide for them as their behaviour shall deserve; and notwithstanding for the rea∣sons above said, he willeth that they shall cease from the exercise of their Estates, and Offi∣ces, untill he otherwise appointeth. And be∣cause that in many places of the Realm, they have proceeded by way of seizing the Goods of them of the new Religion, which be dead or absent, or hid themselves, and sometimes of those, which be in their own Houses, al∣though
his Majesty gave to understand by his Declaration of the 28. of August last, that he would, and intended that they of the new Religion should enjoy their Goods, neverthe∣less to the intent there should be no doubt of his purpose, and that no mistrust might arise thereupon, he declareth, willeth, and intend∣eth again, that according to the Declaration of the 28. of August, they of the New Reli∣gion, which be living, whether they be present or absent, and be not culpable or charged with the last Conspiration, or to have attempted a∣gainst his Majesty, or his Estate, since his Edict of Pacification, shall be restored to their Houses, and put in possession of all and singular their goods moveable and immoveable, And that the Widdows and Heirs of them that be dead, may and shall succeed them, and apprehend all and singular their goods, and that they shall be maintained in them, and kept under the protection and safeguard of his Majesty, so that no hurt shall be done or said unto them, in any manner of ways and sort. Willing for this purpose that all necessary sure∣ty shall be given them, and that all Officers, Magistrates, Maiors, and others, which have publick charge, shall maintain them in all safety, forbidding all persons of what estate, quality, or condition soever they be, not to hurt them in person or goods upon pain of death; and nevertheless his Majesty willeth that they of the New Opinion shall submit them∣selvs, & promise upon pain to be declared Rebels and Traytors to his Majesty, that they shall hereafter live under his Obedience, without attempting any thing to the contrary, or taking
their parts that do attempt against his Maje∣sty, and estate, or things against his Ordi∣nances, and to acknowledge none but his Ma∣jesty, or such as he shall appoint under him, to have authority to command them, and if they know any that shall enterprize against his Majesty, and service, to reveal them inconti∣nent to him and his Officers, as good and faithful Subjects; and to take away all doubt and suspition as well from the Nobility as o∣thers, because that in the Declaration of the twenty fourth of the last moneth these words are contained (except they be of the chief, which had commandment for those of the new opinion, or those which made practises or devises for them, or those which might have had intelligence of the said Conspiracy) his Majesty declareth that he meaneth not of things done and past, during the troubles which were before the Edict of Pacification in August 1570. and that their shall be no Inquisition thereof, and none shall be troubled in goods or person therefore (but for that respect they shall enjoy the benefit of the Edict of Pacification) but that the said Words extend only to those which be found to be guilty, or accessary to the late conspiracy, done against his Majesty and Estate, and that others which are imprisoned, shall be set at li∣berty; and as touching them which will make profession of their faith, and return to the Catholick Religion, his Majesty desireth that his Governours and Officers shall excite and comfort them as much as they can, to that ef∣fect, and execution of that good will; and that their friends and kinsfolks should also be exhorted to do the like for their part, and if
any should hurt them in goods or body, his Majesty willeth ready and speedy execution to be done on them; and to the intent that they may follow the form which hath been kept in professing the faith, which they do make that return to the Apostolick and Romish Church; there is sent herewith a memory thereof. From Paris the 22. day of September, 1572 signed Charls, and beneath Pinart.
The form of Abjuration of Heresie, and Confession of Faith, which they which have swarved from the faith, and pretend to be received into the Church, ought to make. FIrst, they which have swarved from the Faith, and desire to return into the com∣pass of our Holy Mother Church, ought to pre∣sent themselves to their Curates or Vicars to be instructed of that which they ought to do; that done, they shall be sent unto the Reve∣rend Bishop of the Diocess, or his Chancel∣lour or Official, to make the said Abjuration and confession in Manner and Form follow∣ing. I. N. born at &c. in the Diocess of &c. Acknowledging by the grace of God, the true faith Catholick and Apostolick from the which I have through my fault gone astray, and se∣parated my self since, &c. and desirous to re∣turn to the flock of Christs sheep-fold, which is the Catholick, Apostolike and Romish Church, confess to have abjured and cursed all the Errours and Heresie of the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Huguenots, and all other He∣resie whatsoever, wherewith I have heretofore been defamed or touched. And I agree to the faith of our Holy Mother the Church, and de∣sire you in the name of God, of his Son Je∣sus Christ, and of the glorious Virgin his Mother Mary, and of all the Saints of Para∣dise, That it would please you to receive me
the Flock and Sheepfold of Gods people, which live under the obedience of the Pope, Ordain∣ed by our Saviour Jesus Christ, Vicar in the said Church, submitting my self patiently to a∣bide, and willing to do, the penance which it shall please you to enjoyn me for the absolu∣tion of my faults committed whilest I was in the aforesaid Sects, whereof I ask and require pardon of God, and of his said Church, and of you (that are appointed my Pastors by God the Creator) absolution, with such penance as you shall judge to be wholsom for the satisfaction of my sins, and to the intent you should know, that I have and do make this abjuration from my heart, I confess more∣over before God and you, That I believe that which is contained in the Symbole or Creed of the Apostles, and Athanasius, and other Con∣fessions of faith made and approved by the whole Councils of the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romish Church, that is, I believe in one onely God, The Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visi∣ble and invisible; and in one Lord, our Lord Jesus Christ, The only Son engendered by God the Father before the Constitution of the World, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God, engendred not created, Consubstantial with the Father, by whom all things were made, who for us men, and for our Salvation, descended from Heaven &c. as in the belief of morning prayer; I believe like∣wise, acknowledge and confess all that which is contained in the books as well of the Old as of the New Testament, approved by the said Holy and Apostolike Church of Rome,
ac∣cording to the sence and interpretation of the holy Doctors received by the same, rejecting all other interpretation as false and erroneous. I acknowledge the seven Sacraments of the said Catholike, Apostolike and Romish Church, that they were instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and that they be necessary for the salvation of mankind, although that all of them are not of necessity to be confererd on all, that is to say, I confess that the said seven Sacraments are these, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, which is the Sacrament of the Altar, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and Marriage. And that the said Sacraments confer grace, and that of them Baptism, Confirmation, and Order cannot be reiterated without Sacriledge. That the said Sacraments have the effect which the said Church teacheth, and that the form and usage wherewith they be ministred to Christi∣ans is holy and necessary. I acknowledge also that the holy Mass is a Sacrifice and Oblation of the very Body and Blood of our Saviour Je∣sus Christ, under the form of bread and Wine mingled with water, which substances of Bread and Wine under the said Forms (are in the Mass by the words which serve for conse∣cration, said and pronounced by the Priest) transubstantiated, and transformed into the Substance of the said body and blood of Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding that the Qualities and Accidents remain in the said Forms, after the said Consecration, and that the Mass is wholesome and profitable, as well for the quick as the dead; I acknowledge the concomitance, that is to say, that in receiving the body of Jesus Christ, under the form of Bread alone,
I likewise receive the blood of Jesus Christ. I confess that prayer and intercession for saints, for the quick and the dead is Holy, good and Helthful for Christians, and is not contrary (for any respect) to the glory of God; That Prayers made in the Church for the faithfull which are dead do profit them for the remission of their sins, and lessening of their pains in∣curred for the same. That there is a Purga∣tory, where the Souls abiding, are succoured by the prayers of the faithful. I confess that we must honour and call upon the Saints which reign with Jesus Christ, and that they make intercession for us to God, and that their Reliques are to be worshipped. That the Com∣mandments and Traditions, of the Catho∣like, Apostolike, and Romish Church, as well they which pertain to the form and ceremonies of Divine service, and to assist the same, which I think are to draw Christian People to Piety, and turning to their God, as Fasting, abstain∣ing from meats, observation of Holy Dayes, and Ecclesiastical Policy, according to the tradition of the Apostles and Holy Fathers continued since the Primitive Church till this time, and afterwards brought into the Church by the Ordinances of Councils received in the same of long and Antient time, or of late, be good and holy, to the which I will and ought to obey, as prescribed and appointed by the Holy Ghost, that the Author and Director of that which serveth for the keeping of Christian Religion, and of the Catholike, Apostolike and Roman Church. I believe also and accept all the Articles of original sin, and of Justi∣fication. I affirm assuredly that we ought to
have and keep the Images of Jesus Christ, of his holy Mother, and all other Saints, and do honour and reverence unto them; I confess the power of Indulgence and pardons to be left in the Church by Jesus Christ, and the use of them to be very healthful, as also I acknow∣ledge and confess the Church of Rome to be the Mother and Chief of all Churches; and conducted by the Holy Ghost, and that other pretended particular inspirations against the same, come of the suggestion of the Devil, the Prince of Dissention, which would sepa∣rate the Union of the Mystical body of the Sa∣viour of the World. Finally, I promise streight∣ly to keep all that was ordained at the last Ge∣neral Council of Trent, and promise to God and you never more to depart from the Catho∣like, Apostolike and Roman Church, and if I do (which God forbid) I submit my self to the penalties of the Canons of the said Church made, Ordained, and appointed against them which fall into Apostasie. The which abjura∣tion and confession I have subscribed. And now as the Sun shines with a glorious Splendor by its beautiful rays to all the world, so this bloody Kings. Cruelty with a Horrible Infamy, was erected to all the world; Who at the first hurt of the Admital shewed an un∣questionable resolution to revenge his wrong, and yet done by his special commandment. Then when so many thousand Protestants were cruelly murthered in Paris, with the Ad∣miral and Nobles, Ladies, and young Gen∣tlemen and Gentlewomen, he presently layes the sad accident to a sudden eruption, by the
difference of the Guisans and House of Cha∣stillon, and so sends Letters abroad to all his Provinces, and to foreign Nations to that pur∣pose; yet the same day sends Letters to cut off all the Protestants according to the example of Paris, and that what was done to the Admi∣rals, and his Adherents, was by his special com∣mand for treason plotted and intended by the Admiral and his Complices. Then those poor souls that were fled into Woods, Rocks and Mountains to hide them∣selves from his bloody Fury, he allured into a Net of Destruction by a Proclamation of Liberty, Estates and Lives, and they were not come home above two days but by his com∣mand basely and unworthily murthered. And whereas he publickly declared, and pro∣claimed liberty to the Protestants, according to the Edict of Pacification, now we see he publickly decrees no Religion to be exercised but the Romish Religion, on pain of death. Making as we also see a Form of Abjurati∣on, yet those that were tempted by Satan to forsake the good way of the Lord, were not∣withstanding murthered. So that whatsoever this King promised, was as soon, and with as much ease broke as made. Let us now gather together a few Observa∣tions on the most remarkable passages, and al∣so give some notable examples of Gods Justice and Severity, to such Covenant-Breakers and perfidious Tyrants, and then proceed to the end of his Reign, and the beginning of Gods Just Judgements on him, and his Adherents, in a visible and wonderfull demonstration ther∣of to all the world.
CHAP. X. The Contents. SOme few Remarks on the perfidious Treachery in this sad Massacre; Fourty thousand poor Protestants cut off in few dayes. The most ingenuous Papists whispered of this perjury and treachery of the Kings; Compared with other cruelties, but holds no Com∣parison with the vildest; These poor Protestants cut off by the Oaths and Promises of a King, enough one would think for the strongest ty of security. Examples of the like cruel Treachery and perjury, condemned by the light of Nature, and several Examples of Hea∣thens, worth the study and perusal. The great and high esteem of an Oath amongst the Heathens in a few Ex∣amples; So few Examples of Gods just Judgements on several Princes, and o∣thers,
that have broke Truce, Engage∣ments, Promises and Oaths, which are collected out of Scripture and Hi∣story. The Brave Examples of Hea∣thens, worthy our Imitation in this Sunshine time of the Gospel; though they had but the Light of Nature, yet they soared above the present practice of many Christian Kings, nay beyond the Practice of many Professours in these latter Dayes. The Duties of Kings and Powers of the World, which is not inconsistent with prudent Policy and sound Christianity. The many in∣conveniencies of Cruelty and Oppres∣sion; The little ground of suspition of the Admirals Plots from sundry strong Arguments. LEt me a little comment on this sad History, and draw out some Christian Considerati∣ons on this Tragedy, to shew what judgments God justly inflicts on such villanies, and trea∣chery, being such heavy sins as pull down Gods vengeance, not only on themselves, but the place, even to the third and fourth Generarion. And now let this sad, doleful, and unparal∣lel'd Massacre be erected in view of all the World, let it not be forgot by any tract of time; Let it stand on a hill as A beacon on fire, to all true Protestants, to take heed of
peace with such faithless men, that have no way to enslave their Enemies, but a treacherous and deceitful peace. Disdain it not that it is old, I could wish every age would renew it, That it may be set as a Land mark to avoid the Distraction of such Treacherous and per∣jured Princes and Nations, as know no sin∣cerity, but what is lodged in the outward be∣haviour, and not able to keep that neither; such as know not what is the meaning of sin∣cerity of heart, unless it be courtesie and civi∣lity, and know not that neither, such as have no hearts but their Tongues, which they tip with peace, but intend Treason in their a∣ctons. To what can we parallel this unheard-of Mas∣sacre, had it been amongst Heathens, Barba∣rians, Turks, it had been the less to be won∣dered at;Bellum Tartari∣cum. I have read of many cruelties com∣mitted by the Tartars; The King once for one mans fault destroyed a whole street and killed, even men, women and children, not sparing women with child.Cruel Ty∣ranny, yet short of the French. Another time there was a whole Legion of men cut off for one mans fault; for another mans fault he caused twenty thousand to be killed. Half his Army revolting, the rest retired to him, like Jobs Messengers with the News, and tells him the reason why they went not on in a successful progress to the performance of the Design he sent them about; yet this Tyrant causes his Army to cut them all off to the number of fourteen thousand; he tyed six hundred thou∣sand by their hands and feet together, and cau∣sed them to be cut off. Now all these cruelties were not to be tainted with either perjury, or
breach of promise, and if it had, it was by a Heathen; but our cruelty and blood-shed is by a Christian King, to his own Subjects, in a base Treacherous way, contrary to Oaths, and Covenants before the Eternal God, by a King and Nation that had so much of the Heathenish darkness dispersed that we cannot say but they were Christians according to pro∣fession, though not according to practice. Nay had their cruelty and murthers reached no further than to those they say had plotted against them, and so deserved it, then had it been better excusable, but why ten thousand Innocents in one day, and thirty thousand af∣terwards, all as ignorant of Treason, as the King and Nation guilty of blood and perjury; why so many poor Innocent Noblemen, Gen∣tlemen, poor Ladies and Gentlewomen, Stu∣dents, aged persons, sick, children, innocent of actual sin, all must dy to quench the blood-thirstiness of this King, Oh! sade and dole∣ful to consider. Nay further, had it been in a sudden, un∣resistable and mad outrage, of a popular Tu∣mult, guided by the fury of their own fancies; But it was by the Kings special command, they had no other light to guide their bloody zeal, but the Kings Authority, which they so often mentioned, as the Eccho reached Heaven, but could not peirce their pitty, and done by plots and Contrivances, premeditated and resolved to be done. And lastly, had it been in a time of War, to cut off so many poor innocent Souls, it might also been somwhat pardonable, a raging Sword, sometimes knowing no bounds, espe∣cially
when in bloody Hands. But all was done in cold blood, not in a storm, or heat of blood, nay the only time was in peace, and nothing to be seen but favours, and acts of Grace; poor Protestants they were catched in no net, but pretences of Peace, and the fullest demon∣strations of affections, that might be, nay it was done also contrary to Promises, Covenants and Contracts, making a Mariage to defile it with blood, no other intent being wrapped up in that wedding but a plot for blood. These sad and lamentable Spectacles of mans wrath, and the Devils policy, how can it but peirce the very hearts and Souls of all Godly Christians, nay I dare say of ingenuous Pa∣pists, who cannot but abhor the thoughts, and mourn to see such a bloody Tragedy acted up∣on the Theatre of a Christian Kingdom by the Treacherous plot, unheard-of perjury, and down-right command of a Christian King? When we shall consider the sad slaughters of so many of Noble blood, many gallant young Gentlemen, with many young Ladies, that came to attend and compleat so seeming and promising a harmony of Reconciliation be∣twixt both parties, in the mariage of the La∣dy Margaret, and King of Navar; to consi∣der also how many poor innocent infants, and silly souls, were basely murthered by the hand of abject and forlorn fellows; That its credi∣bly written by good Authors, that there could not be so few as fourty thousand souls cut off in few days by this sad cruelty and Massacre. I find it also recorded by good Authors, that many men of quality, who were both Religi∣ous, and the most ingenuous Papists, whispe∣red
of this cruelty and falshood, so clearly a∣cted by the King in his special commandment. Histories cannot be produced to parallel this cruelty; The bloody command of King Mi∣thridates, who with a Letter and Messenger put to death one hundred and fifty thousand Roman Citizens that were all scattered in sun∣dry parts about their Merchandize. This I say cannot reach this Kings Treachery, for the rea∣sons aforesaid. The Tragical Histories of the K. of Spains Murthers in Hispaniola, though they tran∣scend in number, yet not in the nature of the offence; although it is recorded, that in seven∣teen years, he destroyed six Millions of poor Indians, roasting some, throwing others a∣live to be devoured of wild Beasts, yet cannot it come near to our sad story. We may compare it to Silla, who by a base Proscription, in one City cast out four thou∣sand and seven hundred Citizens, wher∣of one hundred and fourty were Senatours; and not long after, the Triumvirs proscribed three hundred Senatours, and two thousand Roman Knights, and many other crueltyes. And as Q. Catulus said of these cruelties, so may I well apply it to these sad disasters, Cum quibus tandem victuri sumus, in bello armatos, in pace inermes occidimus? with whom at last shall we inhabit, if in war we cut off armed men, and in peace disarmed? The same Silla after he had given his Faith, for the preservati∣on of four Legions of his Enemies, for all they implored his merciless trechery for favour and pitty, yet he commanded them all to be cut off.
Peter of Arragon which destroyed eight thousand French in the Island of Sicily, is but a flea-bit to this cruelty. Many other examples of cruelty might be ushered in upon the Stage of Observation, but what should we do with any more, unless we could bring one to parallel it? which by the narrowest search into all History I think can∣not be done. Indeed none of these I have named can fix on the borders of this Cruelty; they did it against their Enemies, some of them against a forein Nation, but this King Charls against his own Subjects, and under the peaceable protection of a Loving King, as they thought. Those Tyrants owned their bloody acts, and gave reasons for it; but our King Charls hid his cruelties in the bosom of his Councils, and varnisht them so with fine-spun pretences; that all he did looked not like what he said, till God would not let it be hid, but forced him to confess it to all the world. The Protestants never could be got to yield to his Power, but his faith and promises; which they depended upon, as a sure staff, and prop to lean upon in all times of disturbance and tumults; else would their force and valour ne∣ver have stooped to his rotten faith, and withe∣red promises; we see his promises and Oaths were linked together like Ropes of sand; he intended not to ty himself by the most solemn Oaths, and Engagements, but Others must be tyed to their Ruin by them. What unworthy waies and means this King took (unbecoming the Majesty of a King) to feed his cruel and bloody heart, making use of
the mariage of his own Sister, as a bait to this horrid villany; and so abused the mariage bed with a bloody Tragedy, besprinkling her wed∣ding Robes with blood; which indignity and dishonour, no Nation under the Sun, either of former, or of the ages since, can forget or paral∣lell. It is a piece of such base Treachery, as we shall see condemned by the practice of heathens that had only the light of nature; it is such a sin as God often times repaies with his Judge∣ments. The Story of Camil∣lus.Camillus with the Roman Army, having besieged the Falerians, a School-master of the City one day betrayed all his poor Schollars, to the Roman Army, by leading them out to play, at last brought them into the Enemies Camp, so was carried to Camillus, and then said, Sir, I have here brought you all the Chil∣dren of the City, and delivered them up into your hands, that so you may have the City on your own terms. But Noble and brave Camillus, scornfully and Christianly answered, That a Noble General should seek Victory rather by valour, than the Assistance of such base Treachery. And so worthily abhorring this base perfidi∣ousness, he commanded the School-master to be stripped, and then to be whipped back to the City by his own Scholars; which as soon as the Citizens from off the Walls perceived, they were so taken with this Noble Act, that they presently made peace with the Romans.
Thus is Treachery and Gallantry rewarded at once. When the Sabines besieged the Castle of Rome, the Governours daughter of the Castle betrayed it to the Sabines, on condition to have all the braslets of gold; which being promised she secretly led them in at gate in the night; and afterwards, Tacius the General bid all the Souldiers follow this Example, to perform his promise, who threw his Braselet and Buckler, also that he wore on his Arm; The Souldiers doing the like she was presently for her Treache∣ry rewarded with death. Ariftomenes, King of the Messenians being expelled his own Kingdom by the Lacedemoni∣ans, was forced to retire in flight to the King of Arcadia for succour, but being of a reso∣lute nature, resolved to be revenged upon Spar∣ta, whilest his own Countrey was spoyled by the Lacedemonians; but the King of Arcadia most treacherously discovered it to the Lacede∣monians; for which perfidiousness his own sub∣jests stoned him, cast him into an abject place, and set up a Pillar with this inscription. Difficile est hominem perjurum fallere Divos. Here was an exemplary punishment of an unworthy King; it is said, that the bloody and Deecitful man shall not live out half his daies; which was seen by our cruel and bloody King, for few of them that had a hand in the Massacre in France, but by a Divine hand of Providence, they were selected out to their just punishment, and were deservedly slain at the siege of Sancere and Rochel.
And the King himself died miserably at the age of five and twentieth years, his blood is∣suing out in all parts of his Body. Oh! the Heavy Judgements that follow breach of pro∣mise are many from the Scriptures; The Dis∣honour that accrews to such an Action in a King is great; and is condemned by these two or three examples not unworthy our serious perusal. The famous story of Attilius Regulus.Attilius Regulus, General of the Romans, being overcome and taken Prisoner by the Car∣thagenians, was afterward upon his word ad∣mitted to journey to Rome with conditions of peace; which he thinking dishonourable, ad∣vised the Citizens not to accept thereof, and though he knew death would ensue, yet he to keep his Oath and promise turned back, and ma∣ny others that came with him, though much in∣treated by wife, Parents and children, yet re∣turned with him to their Enemies, according to their Oath; though thay were sure of death. Now it hapned that two of these returned not, and kept not their promises, but they were bran∣ded with such infamy, that at last they slew themselves. Darius Junior, accounted nothing more sacred than keeping his Oaths and Cove∣nants. Fabius Maximus.Fabius Maximus, having contracted with Hannibal for Redemption of the Roman Cap∣tives, sent to Rome for the monies, which the Senate refused; yet Fabius rather than break his promise, sold his Estate, and discharged his Covenant. Lovangus King of China.Lovangu King of China being besieged in the City of Hangcheu by the Tartarian Army,
he kneeled on the Walls, and desired that his life might satisfy for theirs of the City, in these words, Spare not me, for I will willingly be my Subjects victime. Oh rare Love of a King to his Subjects! there wanted Brave A∣lexander or Caesar to crown this illustrious te∣stimony of Love to a people, by saving his willing offer of life, which the Tartars spared not. I shall only lay down remarkable judgments of God from Scripture, and Examples Histo∣rical, upon perjury, breach of promise and co∣venants, which are odious before God, good men and Heathens. Philip of Macedon.It is left to posterity on record, that Philip of Macedon left such infamy behind him, through the light esteem and low reverence of a Solemn Oath, and his faith given in Leagues, that his posterity suffered great and heavy Judge∣ments from God, as a just reward of such a great sin, himself at the age of forty six years was slain, and his family quite rooted out; his Son was killed by his Wife Olympias; a∣nother Son which he had by Cleopatra was tor∣mented to death in a brazen Bull; the rest of his Sons died the like death; and his great son Alexander died miserably, and suspected to be poisoned. In the 34. chap. of Jeremiah, there is a live∣ly instance of Gods Just Judgement threaten∣ed for breach of promise, read from the tenth verse to the end of the Chapter. God will not be mocked. In the 17. of Ezckiel ver. 18, 19, 20. and 21. are these words; Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant, (when lo,
he had given his hand) and hath done all these things, he shall not escape. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, as I live, surely mine Oath that he hath broken, even it will I re∣compence upon his own head, &c. In the 2. of Samuel 21. ver. 1, 2. there is Gods Judgments also against Covenant-brea∣kers, a famine, year after year, for three years together, and why? but because Saul had shed the blood of the Gibeonites, against Gods Commandement, and his own Engagement; and Gods wrath could not be appeased till seaven of Sauls Sons were hanged. Oh! the Just and heavy Judgements of the Lord a∣gainst this sin. tis a scarful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; for God is a consuming fire, and with God is terrible Ma∣jesty. Many are the Judgements of the Lord a∣gainst this Sin, both in Princes and people; I shall only give a few more from History, and proceed to the latter part of this Tragical Massacre. King of Sparta.Lisander King of Sparta used to say, Boys were deceived with dice and Cockles, but men with Oaths; for he made no conscience of them: But God punished him accordingly, for he was slain at the Walls of the Thebans, and this was him that first said, If force will not prevail, wee'l piece it with the Foxes Tail. King of Jerusalem.Almerick King of Jerusalem, making a League with the Calyph of Egypt, did by Oath bind himself to the performance; but contra∣ry to his promise, warring against them,
was miserably wasted, and as miserably ended his dayes. The Egyptians punished Perjury by death. Valdislaus King if Hungaria.Valdislaus King of Hungaria, concluded and confirmed a Peace by Solemn Oath, with the great Turk Amurath; but the King of Hungaria, by the Popes perswasion, breaks his Solemn Oath, and wars against the Emperour of the Turks, and proceeding to Battel, the whole day was carried dubious on both sides; But presently the great Turk Amurath takes out of his bosome the Articles agreed on, and covenanted too by Oaths, and holding up in his hand, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, utter∣ed these words; Oh Jesus Christ! If thou art a God as these Christians say, Revenge this wrong done to thy name and me, and pu∣nish these Covenant-Breakers; which words were hardly spoken, but God shewed his pow∣erful Judgements on the King of Hungaria, and his whole Army; For presently the King Valdislaus amidst his Enemies was slain, and his whole Army routed, few escaping. Agesilaus, General of the Spartan Army, marching in Asia Minor, made Truce with Tissaphernes Lieutenant to the King of Persia, till he had sent to the King his Master to know his Pleasure; but instead of sending to the King for ayd in advise and Counsel, he con∣trary to his Oath, sends for a Great Army to surprize the General of the Spartan Army; But Gods Judgements followed at the Heels of this perjury; for the Army was quite o∣verthrown, according to the prophesie of the Spartan General, who said, the Gods were an∣gry,
and no doubt would be revenged on his perjury. The Romans in antient times highly reve∣renced faith and Oaths in case of publick affairs between Prince and People, or between King and King; and to that purpose they had a Temple erected, and dedicated, where constantly they used to repair, and there so∣lemnly promise, and swear to all the conditi∣ons of peace and Truces, and so cursed those that went about to break them first, and ther∣fore for greater and more strict confirmation thereof, they offered Sacrifices to the Image of Faith, for the greater Testimony of the In∣tentions, and love to keep their Oaths, most solemnly made: How will our King Charls the Ninth be ashamed by these poor Hea∣thens. The Psalmist sayes, A man ought not to break covenant, but stand to it though to his great hurt, yet such a bold wickedness hath possessed several Popes, that they undertake to discharge any that shall break their oaths with Hereticks as they say. This audacious and impious practice of con∣fronting Gods command, calls for vengeance from Heaven. That any man should be so boldly blasphe∣mous, as to say they will pardon this sin, which God has denounced such fearful Judge∣ments against. There was in antient time, a people in Ita∣ly called Aequi, their Memory only now re∣maining. These people made League with the Romans, and give Oath to keep it; but not
long after they raised an Army, and spoiled the Romans, falling on them, contrary to Cove∣nant; the Romans send three Ambassadours to complain; but their Captain General slighted them, and bid them deliver their Ambassy to an Oak-tree standing by; One of the three Ambassadours spake to the Oak-Tree, in these words; Thou hallowed Oak, and what ever else in this place belongs to the Gods, hear and bear witness of this Disloyal perjury, and breach of Covenant, and favour our just com∣plaints, that we may at last by the help of the Gods, be revenged on this perjured people. So they returned home, and presently raised an Army, set on this perjured people, and by the just Judgements of God utterly destroy them off the face of the earth. To omit many other Examples of this Na∣ture, take but this one more. King of Lacede∣monia.The King of Lacedemonia, and the Ar∣gives being at War, Cleomenes the Lacedemoni∣an King, made Truce for seven days; and the third night following fell on them, and made a great slaughter; and with this excuse thought to evade the dint of the shame, and Gods justice: for sayes he, It is true I made Truce for seven days, but I did not mention nights. Yet God followed this perjured King with these Judgements. The Wives of the slain Argives arm under the command of Tolesilla their Captainess; enter the City, and puts to the Sword and flight the power and forces of the perjured King Cleomenes; afterwards he was banished into Egypt, where he miserably
died a desperate death, being his own Execu∣tioner. Thus we see what heavy Judgements God has made, and does execute, upon all such as are contemners and breakers of this holy E∣dict, and Law of God; The Lord is to be feared and obeyed, for in all his Judgements none greater threatned, nor heavyer and surer falls on, than on bloody and perjured men. A thing abhorred and hated by Heathens, before ever they were so far enlightened as to know the Law of God was above the Law of Nature; for though they had but the light of Nature, yet they held it a sin unpardonable, and no Punishment accounted enough, as they could invent. There were some that recorded these cruelties and treacherys of the Kings, and instanced the Law of the twelve Tables. Si patronus clienti fraudem facit sacer esto, if the Sovereign cheat his Subjects, let them be out of safety or Pro∣tection. He that in antient time despised the keeping of Oaths, was no more to be called a King. The Right hand was called a Pledge of Faith; The Throne is established by Justice, and it is an Abomination for Kings to do wickedness: The Throne is upheld by mercy saies Solomon, But this King by his Treachery, Perjury, and Cruelty, degraded himself of his peoples af∣fections, for he valued not the lives of many thousand, so his bloody cruelty could be satis∣fyed. Scipio accounted it an honourable thing to save one Citizen, rather than to kill a thou∣sand Enemies. There was no power and au∣thority
so great as the Dictators at Rome, it was such an Assembly which met together, as had the power of War and Peace, nay they had the command of life and death at their will, and that without any Appeal; and yet it was not lawful for them to execute a Citi∣zen, unless his cause was publickly and justly heard, and he legally committed and condem∣ned. But indeed it is the manner of Murtherers to bereave of life without Law, or cause of death. Nay had this horrid Massaere been a bare down-right murther, it had been the less; but it was covered with fraud and deceit. The King and Court must personate a Religious habit, and pretence of a Religious vow, mak∣ing Gods holy Ordinance stoop to his deceitful and tteacherous intention. The Duties of Kings and Powers of the World, which is not in∣consistent with prudent Poli∣cy, and sound Christianity. A King ought by his Christian demea∣nour to have a rich store-house and ex∣chequer of Affection, and allegiance in his peoples hearts; and he, who takes care therein to lay such provision of love, as that it may be as a firm Rock, as a strong foun∣dation, what is there then that he may not command, which is in their power to perform, then the arms of the peoples affections open, and are spread to imbrace any command; this
is the way to have the key of their hearts, and to open that treasury of respect; which by the wise mannagement of his power (received from them) he hath ready laid up. Loving Subjects are most uniting in a har∣monious consent of obedience to all his Com∣mands; love to a Prince created by himself, will make cowards valourous, even to defend him from the shock of his Enemies assaults: And it is seen with greatest lustre, and to his best advantage in his Straights, when he hath made all his Subjects on the least notice, ready to be voluntiers in the greatest dangers, and hottest attempts for the Honour of their own Prince. But when Kings spend too much on the stock of his Peoples willing minds of Subje∣ction, and prodigally trade away that stock of Love treasured up in his people, what does he but expose himself to all assaults of fury and cruelty, without pitty? as it has been the end of many Princes; nay when love is abused and turned to hatred, in what a tottering Throne does he sit? But whatsoever the Theory of an absolute Monarchy be, yet a Good King loves the pra∣ctical part of Justice, his Power being more safe in his Laws than his Will. Though his power and his Command may claim a strong Authority to do as he pleases; yet he will not make his Power arbitrary, nor beyond the limit of equal justice to all. Now for Oppression, Tyranny, Cruelty, and perjury, to be seated in the heart of a King, and he in the heart of his Kingdome, Oh!
how it levells his peoples affections, and stems the tide and current of their allegiance, razes the very foundation of his own security, and is the most compendious way to his own utter ruin. It doth by a strange instinct, raise tumults, and vicissitudes, that like a rapid Torrent of confusion, falls upon his own head, as the re∣ward of his vicious merits. What foundation can such a King have, when it is builded on a Quagmire, seated on the terrible aspect of the peoples hatred, accrewing by his Treacherous Tyranny? An ingenuous people can no more brook op∣pression, than the River Danube, can mix with the muddy streams of Sava. But this King to establish his Throne of Cruelty, and Tyranny; Peaceable like, be∣troaths his People and Himself, in an indis∣soluble bond of Peace, never to be broke on his part, yet no sooner made before the view of heaven, and in the sight and presence of God, but he registers his falsehood, cruelty and per∣jury, in a suddain breach, with the blood of his own Subjects, taking the advantage of their punctual observance, to disarm them, and take their Towns, which on the peace granted were delivered; and so erects his bloo∣dy Engines of deceit upon the ruins of his own promise. Now Christian Reader let us a little see the small probability that the Admiral should at∣tempt what they pretend; which reasons, for general satisfaction, I shall gather together; because it is declared by the King, that it was
for a Plot against him and the Court, although it is clear, that it was resolved on by the King, Queen Mother, and Cabinet Council, to de∣stroy the Admiral and his Friends; which by the Kings Commandment is lamentably, and wofully effected, to the great dishonour of the King, and the whole French Nation, and cannot but ly as a blot to after ages; and a time there must be to satisfy God and the World for it. Now who can imagine, that the Admiral should think with a few Gentlemen allowed for his Guard, to attempt any thing against the King, within Paris, there being in the Court constant watch, and at the entrance to the Ca∣stle, a strong Guard of Scots, Switzers, and Gaseoins, and was then more strictly kept in regard of the number of Lords, Noble-men, and Gentlemen, met to solemnize the mariage of the King of Navar, and the Lady Mar∣garet, and that it is well known that in three hours space, may be ready at command, sixty thousand men in arms. Besides all these Reasons, the young No∣blemen and Gentlemen that came with the King of Navar and Prince of Conde, had no other arms than their Swords and Innocency; which latter in the greatest danger would de∣fend them best. And yet further to clear all doubts, the Princes and Noblemen of the Protestants, for a Pledge, and Testimony for a Solemn En∣gagement of their innocency, they brought with them, their Wives, Sisters, Children and Kinswomen, having no thoughts of any
thing but Triumph and Recreation; The Nobles and Gentlemen intending to shew their expert skill at the Tilt and Tourney. Now if it be said it was after the Admirals Hurt, that he studied to be revenged. It is answered, With what probability can any sober mind, imagine or conceive that the Admiral lying wounded on both arms, tyed up, and hourly waiting when one Arm should be cut off by the Doctors advise, that the Ad∣miral, I say, being Guarded by the Kings own Guard, should attempt with three hun∣dred Gentlemen of his Guard, to surprize the King, &c. being so sick as few daies was ex∣pected to pass over, till God would call him to himself, that any should think three hun∣dred so resolute as to set upon a City wherein was sixty thousond in Armes by the first A∣larum? But doubtless had such a thing been known or suspected, he would have been secured by Cossin and his men, who had by the Kings commandment environed and beset him; how soon might the sick Admiral been apprehended as well as murthered? There was never any thing laid to his charge which could be proved by the least witness, nor what they laid to his charge, had the least men∣tion of time, place, adherents, means, or wit∣ness; so that if it had been proved or suspect∣ed, the King should have proceeded according to Law and Justice, which are well known to be the props and Pillars on which a Kingdoms happiness stands secure. But suppose we that all these things had been
really true, and that the manner of the Ad∣mirals death and his Complices had been al∣lowable by all nations, yet let us consider a little, and demand a reason of the insolent cruelty, infamous barbarism, and unheard-of bloodshed, of those, that were thought by them∣selves altogether innocent of any plot, being antient Matrons, many Noble young Ladies, and Gentlewomen in the flour of their Age, cut off so basely and barbarously, a number of women great with child, against the Law of nature were cast into Rivers before the time of their Delivery; many aged persons also which lay sick in Bed, Many Counsellours, Advo∣cates, Proctors, Physicians, &c. that con∣sulted only with their books, and the rest se∣questered from the conference of any Counsel, by the Sex and degrees; Why was there also so many learned Teachers and Professors of the Arts and Sciences; amongst whom was Peter Ramus, that famous man for learning through out the world, who stands in the memory of the truly learned, as really, as these bloody actours render France infamous? How many young Students, without hearing or pleading their cause, were here destroyed by this sad De∣cree of the King and Council? Lastly, what Armour was found, what wea∣pons was found in any of the Protestants hou∣ses, by which means suspition might grow to proof? Or why was the Kings Letters sent to command the like murthers at Meaux, Lyons, Troys, Tholouse, and all over his Dominions, such slaughters were committed till the very blood of Gods saints made the Rivers swell, and streamed through the streets reaking hot,
that at least 40000. were slain by his bloody command. Thus has this King and Court imbrewed their hands in the blood of so many thousand innocent souls, even to the great expectation of some vengeance, which in Gods due time must needs break out on that land, to the third and fourth Generation; if a General repen∣tance do not expiate this deserved punishment. Now Christian Reader, to bring this Kings reign to a close, I shall only abstract the most notable passages together, which hapned after this sad Massacre.
CHAP. XI. The Contents. THe Protestants that escaped this sad Massacre, fled to many Pla∣ces; Some set forth Books of this per∣jury and bloody cruelty; Others flie to divers Towns and Cities, and for∣tifie them; Rochel strongly fortified; Fourty seven Ministers fly to Rochel, and escape; The King and Court keep a day of Thanksgiving for this Vi∣ctory; The Rochelois refuse a Gar∣rison sent by the King; The French King lets the King of Spain know the War against him was in jeast, as well as his Oaths and Promises. The Counts Army routed and spoyled by Treache∣ry. Monsieur de la Nove turns to the Protestants; The unparallel'd Siege of Sancerre, yet yielded on honourable terms; The unheard-of siege of Ro∣chel;
Yet had honourable Conditions granted. The Protestants fortifye and resolve to sell their Lives at a Dear Rate. The King takes Villars and per∣forms not Covenant; The Protestants take in sundry Towns; The King be∣sieges Sommiers, and with great loss leaves it, and they besiege it again, and take it on terms; The King be∣sieges Caussade, and with great loss retires, the Protestants are encouraged by their good Success; They Protest against the Kings last Edict contrary to the Edict of Pacification; Their No∣ble and gallant Declaration: Their demands of the King, and desire of Peace; The King terrified with their Resolutions; The King recovers of a desperate sickness. A Parliament cal∣led, and the Protestant Deputies re∣solve to meee them, but no good done; A new Plot discoverod, Count Mont∣gomery with his Fleet from England, is besieged at St. Lo; he escapes in per∣son, and is besieged at Danfront; he yields on terms of life, but the King breaks Engagement, and basely behea∣ded him in Paris. The Conclusion of this sad History. The King dies wallow∣ing
and rowling himself in his own blood; The Duke of Anjou succeeds to the Crown, but is justly murther∣ed. The Duke of Guise is murther∣ed. The Queen Mother broke her Heart and died. AFter this sad and lamentable Butchery and blood-shed, the poor Protestants that were escaped, fled with all speed to the several Sanctuaries, which God in his mercy had decreed for their preservation. Those that inhabited upon the coast of Bre∣taign, Picardy, and Normandy, which were Provinces lying on the Sea over against Eng∣land. They fled to Queen Elizabeths Prote∣ction, and if occasion offered, to fight under the command of Count Montgomery, who then was in the Queens Court. The poor distressed remnant of Protestants in Dauphine, Provence and Lyonois, fled into Swisserland, amongst whom was the Admirals sons and Andelots, who by the fame of their Fathers Authority, and the tenderness of their years, were joyfully welcomed from such a Land flowing with blood and vengeance. Some imploy their time and Talents in set∣ting forth to the World in Writing this horrid Treachery and Massacre acted in France, and to let all the Protestants in other parts of the World beware by their sad example: letting the World know the stratagem that the French Court use, is to destroy by Peace, and that to shake hands in a peace with Papists, is the
ready way to destruction; the instance whereof was so fresh in their minds, that they needed no grand Jury of examples to inforce belief; their own late woful experience being sufficient to testifie this for a truth. The Protestants of Burgundy and Campagn fled to the Cities of Germany. The Protestants in the heart of the King∣dome, and towards Rochel, flocked to some strong Towns, which it pleased God of his goodness to reserve for their safety, which pla∣ces they fortified with all the strength they could; They that inhabited in the Isle of France, Nivernois, and Beausse, were posses∣sed of Sancerre. Those that lived in the Pro∣vinces of Languedoc and Gascoiny, placed them∣selves in Nismes and Montaubon. And the Pro∣testants in Guienne, Poictou, Zaintonge, and Anjou, fled to Rochel; which proved a safe har∣bour from the cruel Birds of Prey; Henry Jaques, Maior of the City, had the Civil go∣vernment thereof. To this City also resorted three thousand five hundred men, and came from sundry parts, which had been Souldiers in the Wars, and men of approved valour; al∣so to their assistance came fifty Gentlemen of good quality from the adjoining parts about the City; there came thither also fifty seven Ministers of Gods Word, which by Gods mer∣cy were preserved in this sad blow; and for Am∣munition and other Provision, there wanted none to supply their necessity of a strong and lasting siege. Now at last the King, Queen Mother, with his Brethren and Court, orders a Day of ex∣traordinary thanksgiving, to be returned for
the good Success against the Protestants. Thus they reared up Castles of Triumph to their E∣ternal dishonour, which practice is condemned by a Turk, Sultan Orchan second, King of the Turks, when he had overcome the Christi∣ans in Battail, word being brought to him, ad∣vise was demanded what should be done to those Prisoners that yet alive remained in their mer∣cy, whether they should be killed or not? who more like a Christian than a Turk replyed, Oh no, it is not the part of a Souldier to drown Mercy in Cruelty, for saies this brave Sultan, Mercy is the Alms of Victory, a noble saying of a Heathen. Now the King sends Monsieur de Byron to Rochell, to place a Garrison, the Protestants refuse it; being a priviledge granted them by the King to receive no Garrisons; whereupon Byron proclaims a War against them. Poor souls, they had sadly felt the smart of the K. perfidiousness, by their too credulous opinion of these fair pretences; and therfore now thought good to preserve their lives from Treachery, or dy with honour. And now to let the World know what little reality is sometimes found in Princes; the King of France declares to the King of Spain, that the war which he seemingly countenanced under command of Count Lodowick of Nassaw, was only a plot to bring about his ends; which as it could not be seen by all, so could it not but be believed by the King of Spain; so that the undertakers under Count Lodowick, were sharply persecuted by them that afterwards got power over them. Thus were these poor Souldiers betrayed out
of the Kings own Treachery. Only Monsieur de la Nove was preserved secretly; who being safely conducted to the Kings Court, his Ma∣jesty commands him to Rochel, to solicite the City to a Composition, Brave Monsieur de la Nove, stoutly, and like a Christian, answers the King, That it was against his Conscience to advise his fellow Protestants, to lay their throats open to them that would too readily cut them; But the King commands, and together with his secret desire to see Rochel spurs him on, so having came to Monsieur de Byron, who was at St. Jean de Angeli, and after a visit to him, delivering the Kings Message, he enters Ro∣chel; who by a joint Consent of all the City was chosen their Captain General, who wil∣lingly accepted of it, and gave a good proof of his faithful adherence to the Protestant cause. In January, by the Kings Commandment, Monsieur de la Chastre with six thousand men, besieges Sancere; where finding a furious and resolute Enemy, which would not yield to their Summons, after the expences of great toil and labour, discharging in two moneths about six thousand Cannon shot, they made an assault, but were bravely repulsed to the E∣ternal praise of the Sancerrois valour and Re∣solution. The 18. of March by a second bat∣tery on all sides, they at last made a great breach, and so assault and attempt to scale, but the besieged (who questionless had many friends slain in the bloody Massacre) had some sparks of their Friends blood in their minds, which then shewed it self in their resolutions; that they fall on the Enemy by a strong de∣fence, and made not only a Halt in the Catho∣licks
proceedings, but made them retreat with the loss of sixty of their best Souldiers dead in the ditch, two hundred mortally wounded, and two hundred utterly lamed; all with the loss of seventeen men of the Protestants; which piece of valour so cooled the courage of the Kings Army, that they resolved no more at∣tempts to be made again such impregnable de∣fendants. So they begirt them close on all sides, no relief being able to come to them; which did so extreamly streighten the besieged, that they were forced to eat their Asses, Mules, Horses, Cats, Dogs, Mice, Moles, Leather, and at last to eat parchment, and trappings of Horses, horns, wild roots, Girdles, making bread of the seeds of flax, and herbs mixed with Bran, and of straw and Nutshels, they made use of slates, Grease, Tallow, and Oint∣ments served for pottage, frying therewith the Excrements of Horses and Men; nay the ve∣ry filth in the streets also; such as went out to seek relief, were either killed by the Enemy, or lived on Sprigs of Vines, herbs, red Snails and Blackberries; they endured all miseries till fa∣mine had imprinted old age on the Visages of Children, so that the youths appeared like the Ghosts of the deceased. Eighty persons died by the Sword, but the famine destroyed five hundred. Some Souldiers and Townsmen, choosing to cast themselves upon the Enemy, than dy by famine, adventu∣red out; whereof some were killed, some im∣prisoned, and others executed: The King ha∣ving sworn that he would make them devour one another, was disappointed by a special hand of Providence, and a thing no waies expected
by the besieged Protestants, who indeed look∣ed for a general Massacre according to the K. threats; who was resolved to bring their houses of a threatning height as low as their founda∣tion, and their aspiring resolute minds, lower than them, resolving to raze the City into a solitude, and to bury his Resolution in their Ruin: but it pleased God that the Duke of Anjou, this Kings Brother, being chosen K: of Poland, Ambassadours were comming for him, and by the way hearing of this siege, they earnestly solicite the Bishop of Valence to perform his promise, for the Bishop had sworn in the name of the King his Master that all Towns molested for Religion should be free. So the poor Town was saved from the fury of a bloody and cruel Enemy, and yielded on con∣dition to depart with their arms, bag and bag∣gage, those that stayed to be free from any fur∣ther question for what was past, with a promise to preserve the Honour of women and maids. The King, with an Army of fifty thousand men, and sixty pieces of Artillery, besieges Rochel both by Sea and Land. The Town was fortified strongly, nothing wanting to annoy the Enemy, and encourage valor among them∣selves. In one Months time was shot no less than thirteen thousand cannon, and many as∣sauls: But alas the Catholicks were too weak to encounter with the Protestants strength and Courage. Till at length having endured some Moneths, the King, Queen Mother, Duke of Arjou, all the Nobles, with the Cavalry and all the Infantry both Swiss and French, arrive to this famous siege the beginning of February 1572. of the French Nobility, there was the
Duke of Alancon, third Brother to the King, the Duke of Montpenseir; the Duke of Au∣male, the Duke of Guise and Mayen, his Bro∣ther, The Duke of Nevers, Bouillon, D' U∣qes, and the Duke of Longueville, the Prince Dauphine, the Count of Manlevrier, Marshal de Cosse, the Bastard, De Angoulesm, the Count de Retz, Monsieur de Moluc, and all the Ca∣tholick Commanders in the Civil Wars and Massacre. In Rochel there was a great number of Horse∣men, and Gentlemen, eight Companies of Inhabitants, nine companies of Strangers, one Company of the Mayers, one Company of Volentiers, consisting of twenty Musquetiers, twenty five armed with Costlets of Proof, and thirty Harquebuzeirs; Two thirds whereof were Gentlemen and such as had command in the late wars. The siege continued with great valour on both sides, and great loss to the Kings Army; which in the assaults made, and often sallies, lost the Duke of Aumale, and Cossin Field-Marshal, who was the first that entered the Admirals lodging; an infinite number of Gen∣tlemen and Officers, with twenty thousand Souldiers, and the Duke of Anjou wounded in the Neck, side and left hand by a Harque∣buzeir: but six thousand fresh Switzers com∣ing to the siege, did much straiten the Rochel∣lers, that at last having no hope of Relief, they grew in great want of Victuals, yet in their straits the hand of good was wonderfully seen; for in the midst of their wants, when all other provision failed, there came before the Haven an infinite number of small fishes, which pro∣ved
a great Supply in their needs. Which won∣derful sign of Gods goodness amazed them the more, because it was never before, nor since that ever the like was seen. During this sharp siege, the same occasion happened now, as did at Sancerre; for the Ambassadours of Poland being come for the Duke of Anjou, proved a relief for the Roche∣lois, when they expected none. So Articles were agreed on both sides, That there should be a free exercise of Religion in Rochel, Montauban and Nismes, and to other Towns to be in their houses without search, That Baptism and Matrimony should be freely administred, not above ten persons meeting together: and that those that had a mind to sell their estates might do it, and live where they pleased. Thus ended the two famous sieges of Rochel and Sancerre. Let us now observe a little the Transactions of both parties during these Sie∣ges. Whilst these sieges continued, the other Provinces which the Protestants had in their power, they fortifie. The Baron of Serignac, a discreet and virtuous Protestant, and no less valourous, did with some others fortifie Mon∣tauban, and afterwards they advance into the Field with their Troops, and garrison Terride, assault Buzet upon Tar, and many other Pla∣ces, and strongly fortifies the Towns that they had kept during the Civil Wars; so at an As∣sembly held at Realmont in Albigeois, they con∣sent to separate to their several charges apart. A part of Quercy towards Cadenac was the lot of the Vicount of Gourdon; the Count of Serignac, governed towards Montauban and Gasconie.
The Viscount of Paulin had the command of Lauragais: And the County of Foix, and the Mountain Country was under the command of Vicount Cauont. These Commanders resolve to defend their several charges, to secure themselves, as well as God would enable them; retiring all to their several Commands. The Earl of Villars, Admiral and Lieute∣nant to the King, gathers forces against the Protestants, takes in St. Geniz, and contrary to Articles carries the Lord of the Place away Prisoner. The Protestants to ballance this loss, takes in Foreze, Montesquian, and other places. Against the Protestants does the Marshall de Anville appear in arms, claps siege to Som∣miens, the Earl of Candale brother to the Mar∣shall arrives to his Assistance, and strengthens the Siege, who now with a resolute charge as∣sault the Town, but meeting with a sharp en∣counter, were forced to as nimble a retreat, and that not without the loss of 300. of their most resolute Souldiers. After a months time, and five thousand Cannon shot spent, the Marshal by his Brothers perswasions to revenge the loss of his Captains and Souldiers, set on a fresh assault, and having before his eyes lost many of his men, fell on himself, but was as gal∣lantly repulsed as assaulted. The Town now being straitned, and their wals beaten down, yielded on honourable terms; after which the Marshall seeing and considering the Protestants resolutions there, and elsewhere, concludes it best for him to disband, which being done, he made seizure and sale of the estates of those Protestants, which lay within the power of his merciless cruelty.
The King besieges Caussade, and meeting with resolution amongst the Protestants, who did so wast his Army, that the Kings Admi∣ral drew off, and persued by the Vicount of Gourdon, in their March to the siege at Ro∣chel. Wherepon the Protestants assemble in many places, & settle the Countie of Montauban, orde∣ring that City to be their Principal seat, and in that County the Vicount of Paulin being cho∣sen Governor of Nismes, it was made the prin∣cipal seat in the County of Languedoc, which lay under the Government of St. Romain. These preparations and resolutions thus ta∣ken, strikes an arrow in the Kings heart, who now too late saw that all the blood he and his Council had shed, proved not as he expected; and now the horrour of so much blood fell up∣on his bloody and guilty conscience, insomuch as he knew not which way to turn, once he was resolved to fall on those that had perswad∣ed him, that the cutting off the Protestants would terminate his Troubles in a quiet calm and enjoyment of one Religion, and that put∣ting a period to the Protestant power would e∣state him in the throne of his full desires. Ano∣ther while he would stop his brother the King of Poland, and not suffer his absence in such a pinch of occasions. But God will not now let blood go long un∣avenged, even on the prime instrument of such wicked cruelty, thus straightened on all sides, he is ready to be oppressed with anger and vexa∣tion, stranger Princes openly reproach him, for the irreparable injuries done to the poor in∣nocent Protestants, and his too loyal Subjects,
for a King, which should be a Protector of his people, to prove a Tyrant, a cruel murtherer, and Butcher of his own Subjects. The King with anxity of mind falls into a desperate sick∣ness at Vitry in Campagn, as he was setting forward his brother towards Poland, but he re∣covers again: in the midst of these actings, the Protestants of Languedoc fortifie themselvs. Now the King to give some hopes to grant the Protestants their desires, summons a Parliament to meet at Campagn; the Protestants in several Provinces prepare their Deputies with instru∣ctions, and had it given them in Commission, to speak home, against the Authors of the late unheard-of cruelties, and murthers; the Q. Mother, and the rest are afraid of the Touch, and so at first labour to pacifie the Protestant Commissioners with fair words, but that will not do, the Protestants must not play away their lives in an equal stake of fair words, the late woful experience of their murthered friends frighted them from putting too much trust in these words; whereupon not receiving content to their just and honest demands; they with∣draw to their several charges, and endeavour their own security and safety. In the mean time the Count Montgomery ar∣rived with his fleet from England in a part of France, called Le Payes de Constantine, a part of the Province of Normandy, who being safe landed had assistance from several Protestants, and seized on several Towns, as Danfront, Ca∣rentane, St. Lo, and Valognes, but the Prote∣stants had better success in all parts than in this Province of Normandy. The Kings Army under the command of the
Field Marshall lay siege to St. Lo, wherein was the Count Montgomery, and all his ships lying under the command of the Town; the Count secreatly escaped from the danger of so weak a place, but Jaques Sieur de Martignon, with Villers and St. Columb, leave St. Lo, besieged with a party under command of Fervagues, and Malicorn, and so they persue the Count with two Regiments of foot, six hundred horse, and four small field pieces, and ere they were a ware begirts them close in a small Town cal∣led Danfront, which though a weak Town, yet the Castle was well seated, insomuch that they resolved to stand, and dy like Souldiers, with Swords in their hands at a breach, than be shamefully murthered, or dy on a Scaffold. At this siege by the valour of the Count, and Friends, the Catholicks lost St. Colomb, and a great many Gentlemen Voluntiers, and two hundred of their most valiant men; but at last no longer able to continue, they yield to Mar∣tignan, with these tearms, viz. to have their lives, carry away their arms; and yet it was so as they were to remain sometime in the po∣wer of Martignan and Vassey, with security for the Counts life. But was it ever read of in such a small History, and in Wars of so short time that ever there was such a common breach of faith and promise when signed and sealed for a strict observance, as a good Author says, he that is a base so, is constantly false in friend∣ship. The Count being in his Enemies custo∣dy, yielded to too much cruelty, on terms of mercy; who I dare say, had rather died a thou∣sand deaths like a true Souldier, then be so base∣ly delt withal, for in the night he was guarded
away Prisoner to Paris, and there basely exe∣cuted in the sight of the King, and Q. Mother, who received much joy at his death; but the just God saw all these treacheries, and justly re∣warded some according to their bloody deserts. And now to conclude this sad and dolefull reign of a bloody Tyrant; let us see after his blood reign and flatigious life, a sad and suita∣ble death, a spectacle of Gods anger, and an embleme of his bloody dealing; who falling sick in the prime of his years, being forced to his Bed, he was sore tormented and handled with a great effusion of blood, which issued out of all parts of his body; and that which very much astonished many, he did once rowl himself in hit own blood, vomiting blood through all the Conduits of his body; that it may be said as of Tiberius Caesar, Lutum San∣guine Maceratum, a lump of clay soaked in blood. So this King by the just judgement of God expired his last, the 24. year of his age, and in the year of our Lord God 1574. Julius Caesar sacrificing to the Gods, found a Beast without a heart, which was looked upon as ve∣ry ominous; and surely may we not infer from this Kings bloody reign, that he Had no heart, a bloody Heart, or, A Heart, and a Heart. Thus this King, having lived in other mens blood, dyed in his own; which as it was the issue of his own deserts, so it was an imme∣diate hand of Gods justice. And it cannot but be taken notice of that the rest of the chief Agents of this bloody Tragedy were strangly and justly cut off. The Duke of Anjou, being then King of Poland, succeeds this King Charls, by being called from
Poland to the Crown of France. Yet God follows him, for by the means of a young Ja∣cobine Monck, named Fryer Jaques Clement, the said King was stabbed in the same Chamber where he held Council for the acting the late Tragedies. The just hand of God persued the Duke of Guise, who was murthered in the Kings own Chamber, five and fourty waiting with Ra∣piers and Poinyards to do it. The Queen Mother with grief broke her heart, and died the first of January after. To conclude, it hath been observed by a good Author, that since the year of God, 1560. that of a thousand murtherers which remained unpunished by men, there was not ten escaped the Divine hand of God, but came to deserved and wretched ends, suitable to their bloody and butcherly lives. Laus Deo. FINIS.
