N706 E176_11 99859112 157094
A new Plot against the Parliament. ENGLANDS DELIVERANCE, OR, A GREAT DISCOVERY being a true relation of the treacherous practises of the Papists now resident in this Citie. Likewise the reason of the guard placed at the Earle of Worcesters, and Sir Basil Brooks, and my Lord Peters House in Aldersgate-street. With the Heads of those orders given by the Ho∣norable House of Parliament, concerning the raising of Forces to suppresse the Commotions in England, and to guard the Ile of Wight. LONDON: Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.
ENGLANDS DELIVERANCE. THe mercies of our God are mani∣fold, as may be plainly feen, by this strange Discoverie, which he hath made known in a most mira∣culous manner, for which we of England, and all true Protestants have just cause to praise God, and to crie out with David, Lord what is man that thou art mindfull of him: or the Son of man that thou regardest him? What are we sinners that thou shouldest protect us? what have we done, worth this great deliverance? Surely the mercies of our God, are manifold, and his love endureth for ever, as may appeare in this affaire which I am now to discourse of. The manner of the Plot, and how it pleased God to bring it to light. ON Munday being the fifteenth day of No∣vember, it happened that a poore man be∣ing
necessitated, and wanting a lodging, fearing Officers, and being imprisoned was constrain∣ed to take up his lodging in a Ditch, neer the Pest-house, where lying, some small time, two Gentlemen came and lay down upon the bank, who after they had lain so me small time, began to discourse of businesse of eminent danger, which induced this poore man to give eare to their discourse, and softly to creep by degrees neerer and neerer, so that he could easily under∣stand their discourse, and their intentions. The substance of their discourse. Their discourse was this, That they wondred that their friend did not come and declare what Noblemen they were, that were to be cut off in this enterprise: withall, the manner how they should proceed in their attempt, and many o∣ther things of dangerous consequence, which made the poore man very desirous to see what outsides those men had, that were so fraught with Treason: At last rising up hastily, he was discovered by the men, whose guilt and feare to be known, urged them so far, that they  readie to adde Murther to Treason: as if that had not been enough to sinke them into the bot∣tomlesse pit of endlesse miserie: For immedi∣ately one of them drew his sword and ran at the innocent man and wounded him dangerously,
so that he fell down, as if he were killed, then immediately they ran away. The poore man when they were gone, got up as well as he could and came to some members of the house of Parliament, and discouered it, whereupon the house then sent out three Warrents for to take three French men which they did suspect, who beeing taken were brought to the Parlia∣ment house the 16. day of November, and vpon their examinations there was command given that the Earl of Worcesters house in the Strand should be garded, and Sr Basill-Brooks, because they did suspect that a Papist Prist was harbord there, which was a chief incendiary and inven∣tor of this treachery. Likewise it was ordered by the House of Commons that forces should be raised with all speede to secure the Ile of Wight. 1 That their should bee an account taken of all the Papists about London. 2 There was two Lords nominated that should be apoynted to raise forces to secure the Kingdome, one beyond Trent and the other on this side Trent, and for all other officers they are to be appoynted by the Parliament. 3 That there should be a privie scarch made for the priest aforesaid, in the house of the Earle of Worcester and Sr Basill Brooke & to prevent further mischiefe there is a gard set about them by the command of the house of Parliament.
Being the 16. of November Likewise this day there was an order from the Parliament, for disarming of Papists, and for the better proceeding they began at my Lord Peeters in Aldersgate-street. This is the whole relation of this greate de∣liverance which it hath pleased God to lay open and bring to knowledge, wherefore let vs praise God, for though our enemies are in∣numerable, though our troubles be many, yet the Lord delivers vs out of all, let vs amend our lives, let vs truely repent, let vs not dis∣please so gracious a father, so gracious a redee∣mer, let vs blesse God for the meanes of our de∣liverance, let vs blesse God for our gracious King. let vs blesse God for this happie Par∣liament: and last of all let vs pray for the esta∣blishment of Religion, let vs love one another, and live in vnitie and peace together, so shall God protect vs and blesse vs here one earth, and crowne vs with eternall glory in the Kingdome of heaven.
FJNIS.
