O396aa 36282248 150150
ORDERS AND RVLES Appointed by the Last Will and Testament Of Sir THOMAS HOLT, Knight and Baronet, To be Observed in the Electing, and after the Election, of the Ten Poore Persons Inha∣biting in his ALMSHOUSE at Aston Juxta Birmingham in the County of WARWICK. With the Assent and Assistance of Dame ANNE HOLT, The Relict of the said Sir THOMAS HOLT, And of Sir ROBERT HOLT Baronet, his Grand-son, and his Heires Males. PSAL. 112.9. He hath dispersed, he hath given to the Poore, his Righteousnesse endureth for ever. London, Printed in the Year, 1656.
THE ORDERS AND RULES Appointed to be Observed in the Electing, and after the Election of the Ten Poore Persons inhabiting in this Almshouse at ASTON. FIRST THe Number of the Persons that are to be Relieved there, shall be Ten, viz. Five Men, and five Women. SECONDLY, The Places from which they shall be chosen, are out of the two Hydes, within the Parish of Aston, viz. Aston Hyde, and Nechells or Duddeston Hyde. In the Election, The Inhabitants of the Lordship of Aston shall be admitted in the first place, of Nechels in the second, of Duddeston in the third, of Witton in the fourth, of Saltley in the fifth, of Er∣dington in the sixth, of Little Bromwich in the se∣venth,
of Bordsley in the eighth, of Derritend in the ninth, and last, all lying within the Parish of Aston. THIRDLY, The Conditions of the Persons shall be such, They shall be all single Persons, and shall continue single, They shall be Pious, Sober, well reported of, or such as shall promise and endeavour so to be. They shall be such as are become Old, Decrepit, Lame, Blind, Impotent, or likely to be a burthen to the Parish of Aston. And no Witch Wizzard, Sorcerer, or one that is acquainted with any Familiar Spirit, No Blas∣phemer of Gods Name, or Common Swearer, no Fornicator, No Felon, No Common Drunkard shall be chosen or admitted. FOURTHLY, After Election, these shall all duly and orderly repaire to the Church every Morning and Evening, to hear Divine Service and Sermons, as∣well on Working-dayes, as on the Lords Day, and Holy-Dayes, whensoever Holy Exercises shall be performed there. And in their Repair to the Church, as also in their return from it, they shall goe all in Decent and Comely manner, that is to say, First, Two Men, Secondly, Two Men, Thirdly, One Man, and one Woman, Fourthly, two Wo∣men, Fifthly, two Women together. In the same Manner and Form, to witt, Two and Two, shall accompany every Corps to be buried in the Church or Churchyard of Aston (except the Person decea∣sed be thought to have died of the Plague, or some such contagious disease. They shall every day, Morning and Evening meet together at some con∣venient Hour, in some one Room of the Almes∣house, Then and there to confesse their sinnes to God, to pray for a blessing upon themselves and
others, and to give thanks for Gods mercies, and more particularly for the liberall Maintenance al∣lowed them in that Place. If no one of the Almes People can read, the Parish Clerke, or some other shall be procured to performe Prayers for them. FIFTHLY, They shall be Helping, Aiding, and As∣sisting one to another in time of Sicknesse, and in all Needs and Necessities. They shall avoid all those Enormities aforesaid which made them uncapable of Election, viz. Witchcraft, or Sorcery, Blasphe∣ming of Gods Name, or common Swearing, Fornica∣tion, Felony, and common Drunkennesse. None of them shall Marry, None of them shall Begge af∣ter they be chosen into the Place. SIXTHLY, The causes for which any of them shall be expelled, shall be the same for which at first they should not be admitted, viz. For Witchcraft, or Sorcery, for Blaspheming, or incorrigible Swear∣ing, for Fornication, for Felony, for common Drun∣kennesse. Or, If any of them shall Marry or Begge: Lesser punishments to be inflicted upon them, For every neglect of going to Church, For every disorderly going, For every times absence from Private Prayers, Morning, or Evening: for every Oath or notorious Lye: For every the least di∣stemper by Drink. When they are in health, and able to performe these Duties aforesaid, they shall be lovingly admonished for the first time. For the second time, they shall lose foure pence out of their weeks allowance. For the third and fourth time, and so forwards, if they shall double and treble their fault, the Penaltie shall likewise be doubled and trebled upon them, by the discretion of those that are designed for that purpose, according as the qua∣litie of the Fault, and the disposition of the Partie Delinquent shall require. And in case no amend∣ment
appear, upon so Moderate a course held, but the Parties offending shew themselves desperately incorrigible, then shall they be expelled out of the Societie. All the Penalties which shall be inflicted or imposed upon any of the said Ten Poor Almes people, for neglecting any of the duties aforesaid, or for committing any of the faults aforesaid, shall (by that Person which hath, or by those Persons which have power to punish them for the same) be given or distributed to the rest of the ten poor Alms-people, which shall be no Delinquents, if they shall deserve it, or else, shall be bestowed upon, or to some other Charitable Use, or Uses, as the said Person, or Persons, who shall impose the said Penal∣ties upon them, shall in his, or their discretion ap∣point or think fitting.
The Morning Prayer. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing Praises unto thy Name, O most High. To shew forth thy loving kindnesse in the Morn∣ing, and thy faithfulnesse, every Night. Our voice shalt thou therefore hear in the Morn∣ing, O Lord, in the Morning will we direct our Prayers unto Thee and will look up. ALmighty and most mercifull Lord God, who Createdst all things by thy Great Power, and who sustainest all Crea∣tures by thy Gracious providence: with∣out whom we have nothing, and from whom we have all things which we do enjoy, or the Hopes whereof we can Ioy in, because thou givest unto All liberally, and upbraidest none. We acknowledge Lord, that Thou mightest most justly upbraid us, for our unworthinesse of the least, and our unthankfulnesse for the greatest of thy Mercies: and that for both, Thou mightest lay upon us the forest & hea∣viest of thy judgements. Even by the offence of One, Iudge∣ment came upon All to Condemnation: and yet besides that, we have added Rebellion unto Sinne, and aggravated out Guiltinesse by our long continued Wickednesse: so that our Sinnes are become exceeding sinfull. We have sinned, O Lord, against the light of Reason, as we are Men, oft doing that, which even Nature teacheth us, that it is a shame
to do: and against the Light of Religion, as we are Chri∣stians, holding the Truth in unrighteousnesse, and sinning wilfully, even after we had received the Knowledge of the Truth. We have not only loved Evill more then Good, but have too long been unto every good Work Reprobate, or too apt to say, or think of every commanded Dutie, What a wearinesse it is? Even to Will well, hath not been present with us, and how then to perform that which is good, O Lord, we know not: being only wise to do evill, and doing that with both hands earnestly. Thus have we provoked Thee to anger most bitterly, therefore maist thou justly leave our blood upon us; for who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? though we know not the Power of thy Wrath, Thou maist justly make us feel it. But remember, O Lord, thy tender Mercies, and thy Lo∣ving kindnesses, for they have been ever of Did: and hath the Lord forgotten to be Gracious? hath He in anger shut up his tender Mercies? For thy Names sake, O Lord, par∣don our iniquities though they are great! Is any thing too hard for the Lord, and the Power of his Goodnesse? Oh let thy Mercy then so rejoyce against Iudgement, that our Soules may ever rejoyce in thy Mercy. Hast thou not said, O Lord, that where Sinne aboundeth, Grace may much more abound? Magnifie then Thine own abounding Grace, in being Gracious to us, of Sinners chiefe, as we know more in Our selves, then we do or can know of Others: And if our own Hearts condemne us, Thou art greater then our hearts, and knowest all things; Yea thou hast set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light of Thy Countenance. But remember thy words unto thy Servants, wherein thou hast made us to hope, that Thou wilt forgive our Iniquitie, and remember our Sinne no more! And hath the Lord said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall He not make it good? Remember Him also, and His precious Merits, in whom thou sayst thou art well pleased, that for this End was he born, and for this cause came He into the World, that He might bear our Griefes, and carry our Sorrows, that He might make his Soul an offering for Sinne: and did not thy Wisdome pro∣vide satisfaction to thy Iustice therein: didst not Thou lay help upon One that was Mightie, and able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by Him? Yea, was not he made unto us, Wisdome, and Righteousnesse, and Sanctification, as well as Redemption? Oh then, as thou
madest Him to be Sinne for us, who knew no Sinne, so let us be made the Righteousnesse of God in Him. And as thou sparedst not thine own Sonne, but deliver∣est Him up for us all, how shalt thou not with Him also freely give us all things? How shall not our God also sup∣ply all our Needs according to his Riches? We were cast up∣on thee from the Wombe, and have ever since lived only on thy Goodnesse, and thy good things, as the Earth is full of thy Riches. Now therefore when we are Old, and Gray-headed, O God forsake us not; but as thou art good, and dost good, so be not thou thy self weary in well-doing: re∣member thou hast said, the goodnesse of God endureth conti∣nually. And do Good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: our Hearts de∣sire and Prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved: But be more peculiarly gracious unto this Nation, this Land of our Nativitie: And for his sake, whom thou gavest to be a healing of the Nations, heal our breaches: let all those that rule over Men be just, ruling in the feare of God. And be so with thine owne immediate servants that do thy worke in thy House, that it may prosper in their hands. And shew, Lord, that thou art a God of the Valleyes, as well as of the Moun∣tains: that though the Lord be high, yet He hath respect unto the Lowly, and Lowest in Condition. Right the Wronged, comfort the Sadded, supply the Impoverished, support the Weakned, heal the Diseased: Thus, Lord, be thou All to All, that thou mayest be faithfully owned, and thank∣full acknowledged to be All in All. And being thou, Lord, condemnest all unthankfulnesse, placing the unthankfull amongst the most unholy: We give thee thanks for the Founder of this Place, the nourisher of our persons, Sir Thomas Holt Knt. and Baronet. Blessed be the Lord God who did put such a thing as this into his noble Heart, and did turn it as a river of water to refresh us. Blessed be the Lord who remembred us in our low estate: who as thou workest in all both to will and to doe, of thy good pleasure, didst work in him to Will so Charitably, and to Doe so bountifully. And blesse we pray thee all his sur∣viving and succeeding Relations: those especially, whose Pietie hath so imployed his Charitie, and improved his good Intentions into great Actions for our good: As thy Mercy is from everlasting to everlasting, and thy Righteousnesse unto Childrens Children: so Lord, whilst the name of the Wicked doth rott, let His name live in Them, and let their Names stand written in the Book of life for ever after him.
And now we praise thy Name, O Lord, for the refresh∣ment and ensafement of us the night past, and for the enlarge∣ment of thy goodnesse towards us so far of this present day: Remember still thine own good word, that the Lord will command his loving kindnesse in the day time: as thou art graciously pleased to adde another day unto our lives, so adde other mercies unto our dayes, especially putting such Grace into our hearts, that we may seek first the Kingdome of God and his Righteousnesse, that so all other things may be added unto us: And then put thy fear in our hearts that we may never depart from from thee, but rather be so in the feare of the Lord all the day long, that by it we may depart from all evill. And that we may not fall from thee by any impatience under thy just Hand, by any unbeliefe in thy Mercy, or by any temptation from the enemie of our soules, to any evill, or from any Duty, uphold us Lord with thy free Spirit. And being we know not what to pray for as we ought, let the same Holy Spirit help our infirmities in praying for all, as thy deer Sonne our Saviour, in whom thou art a God that hearest Prayer, hath himself taught us to pray, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy kingdome come, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven, Give us this day our dayly bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evill, for Thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
The Evening Prayer. Give ear unto our Prayers, O God, and hide not thy Self from our Supplications. Hear thou in Heaven thy Dwelling Place, and when Thou hearest, forgive. Let our Prayers be set be∣fore thee as Incense, and the lifting up of our hands as the Evening Sacrifice. MOst Holy, and most Dreadfull Lord God: with whom is terrible Majesty, so that even the purest of the Heavenly Angels tremble before it, and cover their faces, as even them thou hast charged with folly. With what Coun∣tenances, with what confidences, can we then sinfull and impure Creatures, lift up so much as our eyes unto Heaven; having so much and so long sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight: to provoke the eyes of thy Glory. Rather therefore, standing a far off, may we smite upon our brests, and the joynts of our Loynes being loosed, and our Knees also smiting one against ano∣ther, may we here trembling and sorrowing say, God be mercifull unto us sinners; who have not been only aliena∣ted, but even enemies in our mindes by wicked works, as it were to augment yet more the fierce Anger of the Lord against us. And yet seeing it hath pleased Thee, O Father, by thine own Sonne to reconcile all things unto thy self, we have holdnesse and accesse with confidence by the faith of Him, unto thy Throne of Grace. Hoping and believing that in & by Him, we shall obtaine mercie, and finde Grace to help in
time of need. And such, O Lord, is all our time; even as to temporall things, when could we truly say, that we had need of nothing? but as to Spirituall things, when could we not truly say, that we have need of every thing, being by nature All of us, wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blinde, and naked. And yet, O Lord, there is hope in Israel concerning this thing: even such have looked unto thee, and were lightned, and their faces were not ashamed: the poor man cryed, and the Lord heard him. And thou art the Father of Lights, with whom is no variablenesse, neither shadow of turning: And Iesus Christ is the same yesterday, & to day, and for ever more. Why then should we be cast down, poor souls, or why should we be disquieted within us: We hope still in God, that we shall yet praise Him, for the help of His Coun∣tenance; Though thou art the High and Lofty One, that in∣habitest Eternitie, yet hast thou regard of poore Mortals; yea, thou hast promised, saying, to this man will I look, even to him that is Poor, and of a contrite spirit, that trembleth at thy Word, to revive the spirit of the Humble, and to revive the hearts of the Contrite ones: to remember the Congrega∣tion of thy poore for ever. But alas, O Lord, we finde and feele too much securitie and impenitencie in our hard hearts, opposing, weakning, or depraving our Beleeving; because thou gavest Christ to give repentance unto Israel, aswell as remission of sins: And we have too long made our hearts as an Adamant stone, least we should hear thy Law, and so be humbled and penitent. But thou, Lord, smotest the rock it self, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflow∣ed, and ran in dry places like a River: touch our hearts, & we shall relent to tears; move our eyes, and we shall then look up unto him whom we have pierced, and so mourn and be in bitternesse for our sinnes, for which he so suffered: So let us be before thee here, that when we come unto Thee hereaf∣ter, thou mayst wipe away all tears from our eyes: that there may then be no more sorrow, nor crying, nor any more paine for us, as for the Impenitent and Unholy, the smoke of whose Torment ascendeth up for ever, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. In the mean time, O Lord, because none can understand his errors (as who knoweth how oft he offendeth?) O cleanse thou us from our se∣cret sinnes; but especially keep back us thy servants from presumptuous sinnes, let not them have dominion over us. Yea, wash us throughly from all iniquities, with the blood of Iesus Christ, which cleanseth from all sinnes. For if our Transgressions and our sinnes be upon us, and we pute away
in them already, how should we then live for ever, if our sinnes lye down with us in the Dust: and how Iustly migh∣test thou cut us off here now with pining sicknesse, and from day even to night make an end of us? or make us to possesse only moneths of vanity, and wearisome nights to be appoint∣ed to us. But as thou hast said, that by Christ all that be∣lieve are justified from all things: even so, most Gracious Lord, be it unto us thy servants according to thy word: en∣abling us to look up unto Iesus, who is the Author and Fi∣nisher of our Faith: yea, Lord, we believe, help thou our un∣beliefe. And seal we pray Thee, our pardons here: and thy justifying of our persons, by thy sanctifying of our Natures: for hast Thou but one blessing, O our Father? wilt thou for∣give only, and not give also? O give unto us those Sancti∣fying, those saving Graces of thy Spirit, whereby thou makest thine meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light. That we may be first partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in this world, and then partakers of the Divine Glory, in that which is to come: Perform O Lord, thine own promise, according to thy own Method in promising, that, the Lord will give Grace and Glory: guide us with thy Counsel, and afterwards receive us unto Glory. And now, Lord, as we prase Thee for thy multiplied mer∣cie all this day past, so we pray thee for thy continued mercy all this night coming: when the shadows of the Evening are stretched out, keep us, O Lord, under the shadow of thy wings, untill all callamities are overpast: for thou, Lord, only canst make us dwell in safety. We stand in Ieopardy every hour, but most exposed unto dangers, and with least helps in the night: oh then let the Angells of the Lord encamp round about us, and preserve us: So shew that they are all Ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heires of Salvation. But because as unto much longer life, our Bones are dryed, our hope is lost, and we are already almost cut off for some of our parts, Lord make us so wise as to consider our lat∣ter ends; that as death is the end of all, and after death judgement, so whilst living we may lay it unto heart: till death worketh in us, so to live in thy feare, that we may dye in thy love, and in that thy loving kindnesse which is bet∣ter then life, Thou mayst say, O Lord, to any, or all of us, ye fools, this night your Soules shall be required of you: work in us therefore (as thou also hast wrought all our works in us) to remember thee on our beds, and to meditate
on Thee in the night watches, because thou knowest our down-sitting, and our up-rising, and understandest our thoughts afar off: when therefore we awake, let us be still with Thee. And as with long life, thou hast in some mea∣sure satisfied us, so now shew us thy Salvation; Givens, O Lord, such a prospect of the Heavenly Canaan, as may make us more willing to leave this wildernesse; more de∣sirous to be dissolved and to be with Christ, in whose presence is the fulnesse of joy, and at whose Right Hand there are plea∣sures for evermore. To sweeten our reposes, say unto our soules, I am your Salvation: say, Lord, your God hath not appointed you to wrath, but to obtain Salvation, by your Lord Iesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him: so shall we ever be with the Lord. In whose Name, and with whose words we ask all, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy kingdome come, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven, Give us this day our dayly bread, And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evill, For Thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
For the Sick. WIthout the Law you cannot know sin, sinne being the Transgression of the Law, and without knowledge of sin, you cannot have either Contrition for sin, or reformation from sin, or any manner or measure of repentance unto life. First, therefore let us hear the voyce of the Law: God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage. I. Thou shalt have no other gods before Me. II. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likenesse of any thing, that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me: and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandements. III. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vain. IV. Remember the Sabbath-day, to keep it holy. Six dayes shalt thou labour, and do all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, Thou, nor thy Sonne, nor thy Daughter, thy Man-servant, nor thy Maid-servant, nor thy Cattell, nor thy Stranger that is within thy gates. For in six dayes the Lord made Hea∣ven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seveth day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath-day, and hallowed it. V. Honour thy Father and thy Mother: that thy dayes may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. VI. Thou shalt not kill. VII. Thou shalt not commit adulterie. VIII. Thou shalt not steal. IX. Thou shalt not bear false witnesse a∣gainst thy Neighbour. X. Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours
House, thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Wife, nor his Man-servant, nor his Maid-servant, nor his Oxe, nor his Asse, nor any thing that is thy Neighbours. Now what man is he that liveth and sinneth not? Yea, who knoweth how oft he offendeth against this Law? And so this truly is, as it is called a fiery Law, both as given with fire at first, and as to its effect signified thereby, the consuming of Transgres∣sors at the last. Only by Christ Iesus cometh life, and by Faith in him, all our help and hope of life. John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believeth in Him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Now therefore let us hear a summary of necessary Belief. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth: and in Jesus Christ his only Sonne our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascen∣ded into Heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty: from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I beleeve in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholike Church, the communion of Saints, the for∣givenesse
of sinnes, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen. Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer li∣veth, and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be consumed within me. Psal. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. 1 Sam. 2.6. The Lord killeth, and maketh alive, he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.
The Prayer for the Sick. O LORD our GOD, with whom is the Fountaine of Life, and to whom belong the issues of Death. We confesse our selves to be by nature sinfull, and by sinne abhominable, and therefore unwor∣thy to speak unto Thee, or to bespeak a mercy from Thee, even for our selves. Yet in obedience to thine own command, that Supplications, and Prayers, and Intercessions be made for all, we here desire to intercede unto Thee in the be∣half of this our Languishing and Pained (or Sister Brother) we know, O Lord, that it was for sin only that thou at first threatnedst great plagues & of long continuance, and sore sick∣nesses, and of long Continuance. And we acknowledge our demerits by sinne, even of all thy threatned judgements: but we know too, that thine own Sonne, our Saviour himself, took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses, and that thou hast said, concerning my servants, command ye Me: and that many a time, turnedst thou thine anger away from them, and didst not stirre up all thy Wrath, For that thou re∣membrest they were but flesh. For thy Well-beloved Sons sake therefore, let us begge of thee for this thy Servant, that thou wouldest remove Thy heavie hand from himor Her, and extend thy pitty toor Her him: for thou knowestor She his Frame; Re∣member thator Her he is but dust,: and therefore plead not against him with thy great power. Can it, O Lord, magnifie thy Might to break a Bubble, or crush a Moth? or to kill a Worme? oh then magnifie thy mercie rather! remembring thine own promise also, that thou wilt not contend for ever, neither be alway wroth, because otherwise the Spirit would
fail before thee, and the Souls which thou haft made. And therefore untoor Her his dayes amongst us on earth, that (He)or She may be the better fitted for Thee and Heaven. That by this neernesse unto death,or She he may the better learn to live, and by that addition to his life,or She he may the better learn to dye.or She Or if in thy secret wisdome, thou hast determined this to beor Her his last visitation, send down thy holy Spirit to strengthen, guide, and comfortor Her him before, and in the hour of death, to strengthenher his Faith, thather he may without any detracting, or distempering fears or doubts, believe and rest upon thy Love, to guideor sher his affections, thator she he may without any worldly sorrowes, or snares, freely resigneHer self him∣self unto thy Fatherly disposing: and to comfort * his soule in the anguish ofor Her his body, with a gracious tender of the joyes of Heaven both unto Body and Soul; That so the enemie, who daily waits for every advantage (for we are not igno∣rant of his devices) may not gain by thisor Her his weakenesse. Say Lord toor Her him therefore, now thy sinnes are for∣given thee; that soor Her he may with all assurance of thy love,or She throwHer self himself into thine Arms of mercy, and into thy hands commendor Her his spirit. Thus Lord, hear our Prayers for him, and hearor Her his groanings for * himself, and hear our us all; The Lord hath said, that whatsoever we ask the Fa∣ther in his Name, He will doe it: In his only Name there∣fore, and with his own words, we thus farther aske all, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy kingdome come, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven Give us this day our dayly bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evill For Thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. The All-sufficient Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the all-satisfying Love of God the Father, and the all sanctifying fellowship of God the Holy Ghost, be with this ouror Sister (Brother) and with us all, now and evermore. Amen.
