O432 E173_18 R17727 99860256 112373
THE ORIGINAL Of the Popish LJTURGIE, OR, The Arguments alleadged by the Papists, in Defence of the Booke of COMMON-PRAYER, taken out of their owne Service-Booke. By which wee may also easily perceive upon what ground ours doth stand, and what Alliance it hath with theirs. London Printed, and are to be sold by Henry Walker, 1641.
THE ORIGINALL OF THE POPISH LITƲRGIE. 1 THey alleadge that their Service, and their Legend and the Rule thereof were all given of one spirit: and that he who set those Songs; and the rest that is in the Service was an holy man, and did it by Heaven∣ly inspirations. For they say that it was given from Heaven by our Lord himselfe, wich they prove thus. The Lord Jesus Christ (say they) endited the Rule himselfe by his holy mouth, to Saint Brigit; the Legend by an Angell, and the Service by an holy man and Saint Peter: This holy man they bring into be Saint Brigits Confessor, and her master; for he taught her Grammar and songs, and gover∣ned her and her houshold. Of whome our Ladie said thus unto her, S to thy Master, that shee who loveth the holy Truth in all her powr, hath furthered him so much into the charity of the same ho∣ly truth, that he is one of the Priests that God loveth most in the World, therefore it was given to him to endite. This is the Service whereof our Lady said to Saint Brigit an other time, thus? he that en∣diteth the Rule and that spirit that tould thee the lessons, the same spirit gave him to endite, For there came to him so great a winde in his eares, that his breasts and the Celles of his head, were all in∣wardly fulfilled, in which fulfilling all his heart was inflamed to the love of God, whereof, after that fulfilling and inflaming, and so moving of his tongue, he brought forth the words and the notes, and therefore it is not seemely (say the Papists) that they should be altered. 2 They alleadge that the Holy Ghost wrought both by the An∣gell
and by S. Peter, but diversly in each of them, for God say they) being enclined to mans nature, enlighteneth his soule after his good∣will and pleasure, with the spirituall understanding of his word, and that in two ways, First it seemeth to thee (say they speaking to St. Brigit) as a person shewing thee those things that thou hast to say speaking of the Angell that appeared to her in mans likenesse. 2., it seemeth to rhy M. as though his eares and mourh were filled with winde, and as though his heart were stretched out with brening Charity to God a blather full of winde and in that sweee heart-brenng hee gat knowledg of some words and sayings, which hee could not before, and how he should make Responses, and rutherns and Hymes, and order the songs in notes. And either of these way (doe they affirme) is of the Holy Ghost, after the departing of his vertue, tht is to say, to the Angell, to the shewing of the lessons; and to the othe, th t is to Master Peter in ordaining of the same. Therefore it behoveth neither to shorten no to lengthen the same by the wit of Man: yet if any word seeme darke it is law∣full to make it more cleere by plain translation, an other time (say they) our Lady said to Saint Brigit. Say to him that writeth my song, and my praising, tht the Lord will give him crownes of re∣ward in Heaven, for every syllable that is in the song. And it shall be said to him in Heeven (say they) Loe here commeth the Praser that endited the song. Thirdly, after these fearefull blasphemies and abominable lies they proceed further in ther said service book, where they do more over relate an other le of an Angell that was sent to Saint Brigit to translate the latter Service into thier own language, When (say they) Saint Brigit had dwelt many yeeres in ROME, in a Car∣dinalls place, that joyneth unto Saint Laurences Church in Dama∣son, when as shee not knowing, say they, what lessons should bee read by the Nunnes in her Monastery, which Christ bid her build, shee therefore prayed to the Lord Jesus, say they, and he appea∣red unto her, and said, I shall send thee mine Angell, that shall re∣veale and indite unto thee the Legend that shall bee read at Mar∣tns by the Nunnes in the Monastery, and write thou it, as hee saith unto thee.
Then had Saint Brigit a Chamber joyning unto the said Church of Sant Laurence, and a window to the high Altar whereby shee might see the body of Christ each day, in which Chamber each mor∣ning after shee had passed her set howers of Prayers shee made her readie to write with pen and inke and Paper or parchment, atten∣d ng unto the Angell of God, and when he came he stood up by her side having always, as they say, his face towards the Altar, where the body of Christ was hid in a box accodng to the custome there. And so standng he endted the sad legend distinctly and in order in the mordery tongue, and shee devoutely wrote it each day at the An∣gells mouth, thus was that written whith the Angell departed to her in lessons, as they should be read at Mattins, weekely through the yeee, And when he had done (they say) he said to Saint Brigit; loe I hve shapen a coate to the ueene of Heaven the mother of God. Oh how glad ought you to be to sew on this Heavenly Coate! And when Saint Briget had written the Legend from the An∣gells mouth in her owne tongue, then the Angell bad her to take it to Saint PETER for to draw it into Latine, and said thus unto her, say, he said, to his master that he and I are both one member in God, for he is as it were the outward member and I am the inward member. Therefore let hm write these words that I say to thee, and let him put there to, nd take therefrom as it pleaseth him, for we both are govened of one spirit, whereas Peter hath turned this Legend in∣to Latine, when he sent it to Master Alphonse, which was a Doctor of Divinity to whom our Lord bad that all the Revelations should be tken, after they were drawne into Latine, to him the lessons & revelations were brought, to see that they were set in true con∣ven ent termes, without errour or darknesse, for hee was a great Clarke. From hence they conclude that the Service booke ought to be used, in singng, reading, and praying, with more diligence and de∣votion then other rayers, not onely for the holy ordinance, and the setting thereof, but because they are more bound thereto (say they) in divers wise. One for the ordinance and obedience of ho∣ly Church, where all that are bound to divine Service are bidden strictly in vertue of holy obedience, to say or sing the said service,
not altering a word from it, for that is forbidden (say they) by holy Church, under great pain, and the Prelates of the Church bee charged to take heede thereof. An other thing is in respect of your foundations. The third bond is from the rule of your profession (say they) whereby ye are solemnly bound to the observance of this set forme more then any Prophets; for it pleaseth God more (say they) as is more profitable to us. And then they relate a story of the soule of one whom they call an holy religious man, which appeared to his Abbot after his death, and bad him to exhort his brethren to say this holy divine service with all reverence and devotion, that the Angells might offer it up to God, while they so duly observe it, for this holy Service (he said) in earth pleaseth God, as much as that which is done of Angells before his high Majesty in Heaven. It is also (say they) better to observe this forme, and more power∣full with God, then ten thousand other Prayers. To make the people beleeve that it is very perilous to them to be absent from the Church during the time of Divine Service; they tell them an abominable lie, which is placed in their Service book; which is as followeth. THere was (say they) a great and worthy Clarke that left the World and became a religious man in the City of Paris, and kept the rigour of his Religion in great straightnesse all the dayes of his life who was absent from the Quire at a certaine time (yet by the licence of his Abbot) But after he was dead and buried, one night as the Abbot stood at mattins with his brethren, he see one to stand in the same place where this man used to sit when he was at Mattins
himselfe; who lowly enclined to the Abbot, understanding that it was the same mans soule, he went with him out of the quire into the Chapitre house, where the Soule was immediately taken, and so tormented for a long time, and after his torment he appeared a∣gain to this Abbot, and then the Abbot asked him the cause of his paine, he answered and said, for Divine Service, because I was absent from it. Then said the Abbot, I did for good cause give thee leave to be absent from divine Service, when thou wast absent: The Soule an∣swered and said, an unlawfull leave is not leave, but violence of the order. Then the Abbot asked him what might deliver him from this paine, and he said a trentale of Masses sung for him in the Covent, which was done, and the soule was delivered, These abominable lies and seducements, doth the Church of Rome ground their Popish Service book upon (as may appeare in their own booke so called) having no better foundation then here you see. FINIS.
