P1488 E116_33 R18041 99860331 112451
A perfect Diurnall of the severall pas∣sages in our late journey into Kent, from Aug. 19. to Sept. 3. 1642. By the appoint∣ment of both Houses of Parliament. Published for the satisfaction of those who desire true Information. UPon the nineteenth of August, 1642. being Fri∣day, late at evening, there met at Moore-ditch some 200. Troopers well horsed, and every man fur∣nished with Armour and Carbines, and some 300. or thereabouts of Dragoneers, all under the command of Colonel Sands, Generall of the Army for that ex∣pedition, Sir Jahn Seatone, Sir Miles Lucy, and Captain Lee, being Commissioners or Counsellers, together with Col: Sands, for the ordering and appointing of the souldiers their severall and particular services, ac∣cording to the place, time and persons appointed by them to goe, as they received instructions, and power from the Parliament for the peace and safety of the whole Kingdome. We marched all Friday night, and Saterday mor∣ning, and rested not till we came to Dartford, which was about eight of the clock in the morning, where we baited 2. or 3. houres. After that time when we were gathered together by the sound of a Trumpet, we advanced forward in our journey untill we came to the way which turned to Cobham-hall: Then the Colonel chose out some Dragooners to search Cob∣ham-hall,
for we heard they were mightily provided against: Yet this nothing at all disheartned us, but we (making all ready for our own defence, and the safety of the King and Parliament, whose service we went about) marched forwards until we came to the place: when we were come, the Lady through feare sent out word to us, that we should have the Magazine delive∣red unto us, which when we had it, we loaded 5. wag∣gons, and sent them to London, and took three war-horses. When our company the same day was thus divi∣ded, the rest advanced forwards, untill we came to Strood, neer Rochester, where we heard of great prepa∣rations making against us, then we had command with all speed to make ready for our own defence, at which preparation one of our souldiers pistols acci∣dentally went off, and shot his fellow quite through, Armour and all, and hurt another, which we beleeve was the occasion of a false report sent to London, that halfe our company were slaine. And when we had prepared our selves by way of defence, then the Col: divided our company, one part for Rochester bridge, where we did expect a pitcht battail by all relations, we meeting divers of the Gen∣try with their wives behind them on horseback, as we conceived for feare of the skirmish. Then came out Col: Sands from the parlie which he had with some of the Magistrates, saying to his Captains, There is no way but one, Win it and weare it, make ready fellow souldiers. The Captains demanded which should goe forward, whereupon the Col: comman∣ded about 40. Dragoons to goe first, and some Troo∣pers to follow after, but the businesse was quickly en∣ded,
the bridge yeelded up & unchained. When this was done, our Col: commanded centinel to be kept upon the bridge, to keep any from passing to and fro, but such as could give a just account whither they went. Now while centinel was thus strictly kept, the Lord Roper (which for the present was both unknown and unexpected, though in time convenient was intended to be sought after) came in his Coach with his Lady and other Gentlewo∣men, and a Sumpter-horse following the Coach, both which were commanded to stand, and stay the Colonels pleasure, untill he came from Upnall Castle, which was 3. miles from Rochester, for after he had set centinel upon the bridge, he went with the rest of the Troops and Dra∣gooners to take possession of the Castle. When he came, we found no great shevv of resistance, for those who usually attended the Captain for defence of the Castle, were most or all of them forth at harvest; when they heard news of our comming, they made haste to come in, but it was too late, for we stopped them by the way. The Colonel marched up to the gate of the Castle with some few men to enter in, none daring to resist. We took possession of the Castle, which stood close by the sea side, (the Captain was playing at bowls) and left a suffi∣cient guard to keep it. Then we took possession of the Fors, nd left a sufficient guard there, and then returned back to Rochester, and entred the City with peace, and took with us the Lord Roper, and lodged him at the Crown, with a strong guard day and night. But before we were discharged from the service of that day, we went with our Col: to take possession of Chattam Dock, where the Kingdomes store-house is; in which place lyeth some 300. Peeces of Ordnance, 60. whereof are brasse Peeces, besides 30. or 40. peeces of Ordn. which are at Vpnall Castle. The Ammunition which is in the
store-house was to be conveyed away that night, if we had not then taken possession of it. Some of us were con∣strained to watch all that night, though we travailed all the night before. But such was the love of those who li∣ved in Chattam, manifested to us, that they brought great store of food to us, in such plenty, as served us the next day after, and would not suffer us to pay for it, & made us very welcome so long as we stayed, & were very sor∣ry when we went away. We cannot say we found such love in Rochester, they both not being far distant one frō the other. Now here we are to give the Reader to understand, that up∣on a false report which was carryed to London concerning half our company being slaine, Captaine Browne and some of his company came after that work was done to help us on Saterday night, and Capt. Chapman and some of his company came the night after them, and Cap. Banes, & many other of our friends came to see us, for which we are much obliged to them for their care of us, and love to us, in that they came to put their shoul∣ders to the work with us. This is our first dayes proceedings. On Munday being the 22. of the same month, some of our company by the command of our Col: sallied forth to search the house of Master Littleboy, his wife & daugh∣ter being Recusants, some of our souldiers (after they had searched the lower part of the house) went up to the highest place of one part of it, and there they found the place where Mrs. Littleboy and her daughter worshiped the picture of the Queen of heaven, and the Crucifixe, which was pictured upon the rafters of the house, for it vvas not seiled, vvhich pictures they took avvay, vvith some other Popish books, and broke dovvn their Altar: but we found no Ammunition nor money. We searched up and dovvn for vaults and caves, but found none. After
a little time of discourse vvith her daughter, vve finding none else but she in the house, and some fevv servants, when vve had refreshed our selves with vvhat their free gift vvas now to bestovv upon as, vve peaceably de∣parted. On Tuesday morning vve guarded the Lord Roper from the Crowne at Rochester to Vpnall Castle, and there left him wth a strong guard of a roote company which came on munday from London to Rochester; which being done, we all being mounted, marched after our Col: a little beyond Chattam, and boarded the great ship called the Soveraigne, and the ship called the Prince Royall, aad left a sufficient guard in each of them, and there returned to Rochester and there quartered all that night. On Wednesday being Bartholmevv day, before vve marched forth some of our souldiers (remembring their Protestation which they tooke) went to the Cathedrall about 9. or 10. of the clock, in the midst of their super∣stitious worship, with their singing men and boyes, they (ovving them no reverence) marched up to the place where the Altar stood, and staying awhile, thinking they vvould then have eased their worship, and demanded a reason of their posture, but seeing they did not, the soul∣diers could not forbeare any longer to vvait upon their pleasure, but vvent about their vvorke they came for. First they removed the Table to its place appointed, & then tooke the seate which it stood upon being made of deale board, having two or three steps to goe up to the Altar, & brake that all to pieces, it seems the Altar was so holy, that the ground was not holy enough to stand up∣on: This being done, they pluckt down the rails, and left them for the poore to kindle their fires; and so left the Organs to be pluckt downe till we came back again, but it appeared before we came back they tooke
them downe themselves. When this work vvas finished. we then advanced towards Maidstone, but in the midst of our way we came to Sir Peter Recaults house, a place where Sir Edward Deering and the rest of that faction met concerning the seting of the Commission of Array, we found Sir Peter but not Sir Edward in his house, wee found and brought away with him in and about his Coach good store of money and a trunke full of Plate, which was discovered by one of his maids, which when the old Lady heard who discovered it, shee threatned to be the death of her; whereupon our Col: Commanded her to be brought away; and carried in the coach where our engins was, and so shee was preserved from that ac∣cident. The foure horses which drew Sir Peter to Vpnall Castle to keepe the L. Roper company, were afterwards employed in service for the safety of the King and Parl: but before we employed the horses or the coach in such a service, we brought the coach & 4. horses that night to Maidstone with us, and whilst we were busie about setting up of our horses, the coach man got through a back way in the Inne with his coach & so made an escape, and rid away so fast, that we had much adoe to overtake him, and lay hold on him, but when we had him, we bound him with match, and brought him back to Maidstone. There was another of Sir Peters Servants which gave out malignant speeches against the Parliament, which by the command of our Colonel we bound, and laid upon the hedge, with an intent to punish him, and bring him away prisoner; but that Sir Peter passed his word for his forth∣comming. This night we sallied out to Sir William Butlers house, there having some resistance shot open the door; but Sir William was not to be found, we searched the house, and found three bags of money under the ruffe of the house,
and another under a kettle. Whereupon our Col: demanded of one of his men servants, where the private vaults were, the fellow shewed our Col: the house of office. Afterwards we found divers muskets in the house, ready laden with bul∣lets, besides halfe pikes, holpers, bows, and other ammunition, two horses, and divers Papist books and pictures, and brought all away with us to Maidstone, and quartered there that night, where we found the malignant party shut up their shops for feare of us. On Thursday we advanced towards Canterbury, where by the way we visited Sir Robert Dorrell, and searched his house, onely for Sir Edward Dering, and then our company was divided; some of our souldiers sallied forth the same time to search Sir Edward Deerings house, and others to the Earl of Thanet, First when we came to Sir Edwards house, the Lady and Mr. Henry Deering made us welcome, whether it was out of feare or love we know not: and when we searched the house, we found 100. li. in money, and some ammunition, and there stayed all night. And then the other part of our company sallied forth to the Earle of Thanet, where we enred the house without any resistance, and search∣ed, where we found good store of Ammunition, both pikes, armour, head-pieces, swords, gunpowder, bullets, and match, but not one Musket. When we had done searching, we quartered that night in the house, in a faire kitchen, by a good fire, there we had such provision as the house could afford. The next morning being Friday, (we were glad when we saw the light ap∣peare, because we had but hard lodging, some in chairs, and the rest upon the dresser boords, except one or two who got into a bed) our Col: sent a wagon to be loaden with the Ammunition. When that was done, we gave full satisfaction for what provision we had, and then mounted upon our horses, and marched a∣way with the waggon to Ashford, where we met the rest of our company, and there we bayed for an houre or two, which time the bells rung for joy. Then we advanced towards Canterbury, but before we came thither, our company againe was divided, one part went forward, and the rest came after with the waggon. It was night before we got to Canterbury with our waggon, where we met with the rest of our company, and were all very joyfully entertained, with such respect, that the people shouted for joy at our first entrance, and there we quartered that night. On Saterday morning before we departed, some of our souldiers visited the great Cathedrall, and made havock of all their Popish reliques, and got into the shriving roome, where they took away a whip which whipt the Papists at some certaine time of the yeere. When they had done their pleasure, we all marched to Dover, and came thither by 3. or 4. a clock in the afternoone, and when we were entring into the towne, the Castle welcomed us in with 3. volley shot of Ordnance charged with Bullets, which sang sweetly over our heads, for the town, yet stood in a valley. We being entred we were not welcome by most of the town, yet we cared not for that, so long as we had money to pay for what we wanted: there we searched onely the houses of those who were malignants, where we found good store of money and ammunition. But strangers that sojourned there, wee medled not with them, onely we took from our home-spun enemies, and quarte∣red there all Sabbath day. And while we lay there, a false relation of our pro∣ceedings w sent to London, bearing date the 29. Aug. On Munday morning being the 29. of Aug. Col: Sands took possession of Deale Castle, and left a sufficient guard in it for defence of the King and Parl. other part of our company went aboard of the Lord of Warwicks ship, where his
Lordship most royally and joyfully entertained us, being very glad to see us. The same day some of our company sallied out to the deane of Canterbury where we found Borgraves son a swearing damming fellow; we found no Arms but onely some Gun-powder which was hid in the top of the house. After the searching the Deanes house, we marched to Colonell Hamonds Unkle, whom we brought along with us to Dover, and there left him prisoner in the Gaole. On Tuesday our company was divided; one part marched towards Canterbu∣ry again, and the other towards Hide, where we visited a Castle betwixt Dover and Hide, and so quartered that night at Hide. On Wednesday, part of our company advanced towards Feversham where we searched by the way at Bouton a Papists house, but found nothing. Than wee came to Feversham, and in Preston streete at the entera ce of the Towne wee searcht another Papists house, where we found a coslet and other old furniture, and a great Crosse, and then we marched into the Towne, where we were loving∣ly entertained by the trained bond, who gave us two valley shots, and we an∣swered them the like and so departed and ma ched to Linkstead to the Lord Ropers house and searched it, where we found no Armes but some plate, to the value of 50. or 60. pounds worth: we were kindely entertained and so departed. On Thursday morning being the 1. Sept. before we departed, there was a Bar∣ber and a Tapster expressing inveterate speeches against the Parl. and us His Ma∣jesties good Subjects. We laid hands on them, and bound them back to back, and set them upon a ho se, and rode them through the town to our Colonel, and after that through the town again, and then slipt a halter about each of their necks, and carryed them to the gallows, and there wished them to prepare themselves, which while they were so doing, a Trumpeter (one of our own appointing) came riding Poste with a Reprieve for them, and so the halters were out, and their lives saved for the present. After this was done, we re-advanced to Maidstone, and there quartered that night. On Friday morning before we departed from thence, the town being troubled with some malignant spirits, who burned so inwardly with malice and hatred, that they could no longer forbeare, began to speak malignant words against the Par. the same night we came into the town, and abused one of our company. But the next morning we served him as we had done the others at Tenderden. Besides we took another fellow in Maidstone, who stood for the Commission of Array, who wished all their heads off that would not obey it. We produced witnesses to prove what he said, & examined the witnesses before a Justice of Peace, and so brought him along with us, to be left to the Parl. This being done, and our service for that time almost expired, we returned to Rochester, again, where we marched again to Vpnall Castle, and visited the Lord Roper, & Sir Peter Ricault, who made us welcome: After which time we garded them from the Castle to the Crowne at Rochester, and when order was taken for their safe conveyance by water, we stayed no longer there but mar∣ched that night to Graves-end, and when the Deane of Canterbury thought all was secure and we departed, some of our company tooke him as he was go∣ing to bed at the crowne in Rochester, which when he was apprehended we sent him to Graves end to be sent to London with the Lord Roper and Sir Peter. On Saturday we all met together at Dedford, and so marched home to Lon∣don, where we found the welcommest place. We are not ignorant of a blasphemous pamphlet against God, and scanda∣lous against our proceedings in Kent; composed by Doct: Paske, for the doing wherof we refer him to the wisdome of the Parliament. FINIS.
