S2168 E340_19 R200879 99861504 159744
A SEA-FIGHT: TWO Ships taken by Captain SOUTHWOOD, and Captain FAULKNER. PRINCE CHARES HIS Letters, with a Commission; and other Letters and Papers taken at PAROES, with Provisions and Ammunition going to relieve Pendennis Castle. With 6 Pieces of Ordnance, 3 Murderers, 20 Barrels of Gun-powder 10 Barrels of Beef, 6 Chaldron of Coals, 3 Fat of Peas, 100 weight of Match, One Cask and a half of Bread, a Barrel of Candles. Also, 50 Head of Cattel taken at Aram. 30 Casks of Sal∣mon taken at Bereskellet; and a ship taken at Dingle with two great Guns, 2 Murderers, 2 Chbers, and the Rebels all taken prisoners. These Papers being examined, are commanded to be printed and are published according to Order of PARLIAMENT. London, Printed by Iane Coe, June 12. 1646.
SEVERALL Victories, AND GOOD SER∣vices done by CAPTAIN Henry Southwood, and Captaine Faulkner against the rebels in Ireland, as also the taking of a Ship going to rlieve Pendennis Castle, with Letters intercpted from Prince Charles. CAptaine Henry Southwood, and Captaine Thomas Faulkner; being imploed in the Command of 2. Merchants men of Warre, sayling upon the Coasts of Ire∣land, put in at Bareskellet, and there went on shore and tooke 30. Csk of Salmon from the Rebels, and drove away 60. of them▪ who fled from the place before them.
And the said Capt. Henry Southwood in the VVarspit Frigot, and Capt. Thomas Faulkner in the Increase Frigot, took a ship at the Dingle De-Couch in Ireland, laden with Oade, persumed Oyle and Sugers, two Guns, and two Murderers, and all the men prisoners; from thence they say∣ld toward the Iles of Aran, they took one of the Isles of Aran before the Bay of Galloway, and abou 500 head of Cattell; besides sheepe, horses, and other Beasts, ut of which they made use of provisions: there they had a Designe to have fallen upon a ship in the Road of Glloway with 24 Guns, and her Consort with ten Guns, but the day coming on (for it was intended to be attempted in the night) and they being discove∣red could not perform it, the enemy being provi∣ded with smal shot that they could not come on, so they returned to the Island of the Blaskeres; and from thence the next day they set out from Ferretors Island, and sayled towards Caplier, and discovered some Sayl of ships within some ten leagues of Caplier before them: wherupon com∣mand was given, and we chased them some twen∣ty leagues, and then discovering them to bee the Parliament ships that came from Minhead, that businesse was disserted, and it being distresse of weather, our ships put in the channel in the coasts of England, where on Saturday morning Iune 6. they discovered the Amirall Captain Bttens Kerch, and had some debate with the Comman∣der of it, and from thence sayled to and again (by reason of ill weather) all that night, and on the
Lords day in the morning (being neer the Coasts of France we made way towards it, and discove∣red the end in a short time, and put into a Port called Paroes, where were divers French Vessels in the Harbur▪ and in the Road discovered a Man of VVar of the Kings, which was a Dagger boat about 70 Tun; whereupon we made sayle towards her, the Commander whereof percei∣ving us, caused the Cables o be cut, and ran im∣mediatly ashore; we came presently to anchor, within pistoll shot of her, and made some shot, they soon answeed us, and the fight was vey hot, but the water flowing, we weighed anchor, intending to board her, which the enemy seeing, made means and got their Vessll off the shore, and set sayle, but being hardly pursued, and their Boat tken before with six men in her, they ran ashore with the ship againe some three miles from us, thinking that we could not follow the chase by reason of the danger of the Rocks tho∣row which we was to sayle, and all this while both Parties continued shooting, the Enemy playing very fast upon us, but we followed them close, so the enemy came ashore agin, and seeing us follow them so close, fired their Guns upon us, which being done, they were so plyed with our smal shot▪ and Case-shot out of our great uns, that they having not time to shoot again, before our men boar∣ded them, divers of them leaped over-board, amongst which there were 3 that were drowned, two of them Irish, and one shot.
There were 2. Knights and some others of quality be∣longing to the Shipp but were a shore before, and many of them were Irish; the men were all Irish Souldiers most of them that were going to joyne with the enemy in Pendenn Castle; having boarded her, we got her off the shore, notwithstanding the Inabitants and others pld divs small shot against us, insomuch that Cap∣tane Faulkner received a shot through the Crowne of his Cap after he boarded her, but had no hurt at all, and the Bullets flew thick about us, yet we had not one man hurt, we made many shot at them; but in brief we tooke the Sip, and all therein, and brought her away: The Cap∣tains name of this Ship that was sent by the Prince to Pendnns is Captaine Thomas Dyamond; who had his Commission fo Prince Charles for the designe, A List of what was taken in Ireland, and at Peroes in Brittany, by Cap∣taine Henry Southwood, and Cap∣taine Thomas Faulkner. At Beresketley in Ireland. 30. Caskes of Salmon taken from the Rebels. 60. of the Rebbels driven from thence. At Dingley-de-couch A Ship taken of the Kings loaded with Wares, Oade great store.
Perfumed Oyle, and some Suger. 2. Great Jron Gunes in her. 2. Murdring Peices. 2. Chambers. The men that were in her taken pri∣soners, at the Jsle of Aram. 50 Head of Cattle taken from the Rebbels, some Horses were there, di∣vers Sheepe Goats and other Beasts. Taken at Peroes in Brittany on the Borders of France on Sunday the 7. of June 1646. by the said Captaine Southward, and Captaine Faulkner. 1. Ship of the Kings (sent from Prince Charles, from Jarsey to re∣lieve Pendennis) of 70. Tun burden P. Charles His Commission to Capt. Diamond Commander of the Ship. A Paper of instructions to Captain
Diamond, to bring accompt from Pendenis of the strength, and state of that place, what provisions they had received, and what they wanted. A letter from Prince Charles to Penden∣nis. Letters from the L. Culpepper, and others. All tackles belonging to the ship. 3 Letters in the Cook-room of the ship. 2 Lanthorns. 2 Iron Crowes in the Gun-room. 30 Fatham of spare cable. 2 Anchors for the ship. One cask and a half of bread. One barrel of Mustard-seed. One barrell of candles 8 priming horns. 100 Weight of Match, and other Remnants. A great quanti∣ty of shot great and small. 12 Great Oars in the ship to row it. 3 Dry fats of Pease, with corn, flesh, &c. 6 Chauthorn of Sea-coales. 10 Barrels of Beefe. 65 Hogs cut up, and salted. 10 Tun of Syder. Twenty Barrels of Gun-powder. 10 Muskets. 6 Pieces of Ordnance. 2 Murdering Pieces and 2 Chambers. FINIS.
