S2409 E1000_4 R207835 99866863 168708
SEEK and YOƲ SHALL FIND; OR, CERTAINE QUERYES OF Highest Import. Most humbly tendered to be con∣sidered on as no little conducing to the laying a foundation of a more RIGRTEOƲS GOVERNMENT▪ AND TRƲE CHRISTIAN COMMON-WEALTH. Printed in the year, Of care and fear.
I. Query. VVHether have not Parliaments of England in times past set up Popery? and whether may they not possibly do so again hereafter? whe∣ther in case a Parliament should set up Popery,Matth: 10. 28. Luke 12. 4, 5. may Rom: 14. 5. 22, 23. they therein be disobeyed by the people? If they may be disobeyed in one particular, will not the people sooner learn thereby to disobey them in another? and whether are not the people▪ even every particular mans conscience absolute judge of the grounds for obeying or disobeying Parlia∣ments in such cases? II. Query. Whether is not the pretence of giving Parlia∣ments a power to settle or provide for Religion, and yet reserve in our own Power an Evangelical, even an unconfiscable Prerogative, Judging whe∣ther it be better to obey God than man, according as our own consciences stand▪ perswaded, be not an absolute contradiction? And whether they that attribute such a power to Parliaments as they themselves will question and disobey, when they think good, do not expose to questioning and in effect weaken & quite enervate the Pow∣er
of Parliaments, or else condemn themselves in censuring Independents, men of different judge∣ments in matters of Religion, for with holding of obedience from Parliaments in matters of Re∣ligion or Gods worship, wherein they never gave the Parliament, or meant to give them power. III. Query. If the people of a Common-wealth in general may deny obedience unto Popish Acts or Ordinan∣ces, or upon any other the like just occasion, and they themselves be Judges whether the occasion be just or no; Whether may not Independants, men of different perswasions most of those whose purses and hearts have continually ad-hered to this Parliament, the Souldiary that have valiantly fought for them, and the present Army who were the chief instruments under God of restoring this Parliament unto the free exercise of the trust re∣posed in them by these Nations, being no small number or part of the Common-wealth, whether, I say, may not they do the like▪ in all respects? or whether ought they in case they were a lesser, part, so yeeld obedience to Popish Acts and Or∣dinances, in case a major part approve of, and a∣gree with a Parliament to establish them. IV. Query. Whether would it not be a Godless course for a people to hazard any thing at the disposal of others, or to be swayed by most voices, which is the way of Parliaments, and may possibly, if not more then probably, be dicided in such a man∣ner,
as yeelding obedience thereunto would prove a disquieting unto their Consciences, and sinfulRom: 14. 5. 22, 23. to them whilest they lived, and damnable to their souls afterwards. V. Query. Whether would it not be a comfortlesse if not an ungodly course for the people of this Com∣mon-wealth, so far differing in matters of Religi∣on, as that they profess before hand that they dare not yeeld to one another upon peril of damnation, to make choice of, or to be active in, restoring, abetting, and ayding of a Parliament in discharge of their trust wherein they had been interrupted▪ with intent, or Covenant to become afterwards all of such an opinion or Religion, as such Parliaments, by most voices, should agree on? and whether is it any whit lesse absurd than prophane for men to say they will be of such a Religion as shall be setled, before they have ex∣amined and see evidence to convince them? and whether it be in the power of man to believe what he will, or really to be of any, much lesse of what Religion he will, before he see convin∣cing reasons, and be fully perswaded of the verity thereof in his own judgment and conscience? VI. Query. Whether if Parliaments may make Lawes for setting up a Religion with imposing in the things of Christ, or of their worship, establishing what Church Government they please, or the like; Whether were this otherwise, than to attribute unto a mixt multitude, even to the John 15. 18. 19. &c. 17. 9. 11. 14. world, if
not absolutely, as it is distinguished from the Saints in Scripture; at least by most voices to make choice of a Religion, Lawes, and Discipline, wherewith the Saints, houshold, and Church of God must necessarily be governed? VII. Query. Suppose a Protestant, Lutherane, Calvinist, or Independent of any sort, or any other differing in opinion; Whether may they out of hypocri∣sie, or implicitly, submit and be conformable to one anothers Discipline or Doctrine, whereof they doubt, before they be convinced? Whether have either of them an infallible way to convince the other, and bring them over to be really and sin∣cerely of their opinion or Religion? If they have any, why do they not hold it forth, and reduce it into practice? If they have not, why should they be offended with one or other if they continue differing in opinion. VIII. Query. Whether opposing Gods people or their wayes be not a fighting against God? Whether it be not extream rashness, if not absolute madnesse and presumption to attempt any thing which may possibly prove a fighting against God? And whe∣ther any man in these dayes can have a fuller as∣surance in his own conscience, or give better evi∣dence unto others that he doth not oppose the people of God, whilest he opposeth such as differPhil: 3. 8. Acts 26. 9. from him in opinion; than Paul whilest he perse∣cuted the Church, and thought he ought to doe many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Na∣zareth?
IX. Query. Whether have Parliaments that are truly Chri∣stian or Evangelicall, any Power or Authority given them Magistratically to inter-meddle tou∣ching Gods worship, or in any matters of Religi∣on between God and a mans conscience? If yes; when was such power and Authority committed to them, by whom, when, and by what convey∣ance? And whether in such case may they not be said to be as much masters of our faith as of our estates and persons? and ought not the people, in such cases dutifully to submit to have their Reli∣gion, no lesse then their old Houses of Stone or Brick throughout the Common-wealth, dismant∣led, demolished, or pulled down, and others of Sand or Loame to be new Erected and set up in∣stead thereof? X. Query. Whether have not Parliaments, power and Au∣thority all alike? May not one Parliament repeal what a former Parliament Enacted to the worlds end? and whether then according as a good, bad or worse party shall prevaile in Parliament, must not the people be one while Papists, and another while Protestants, and after that Papists again, and then Protestants again, as it befel this oor captivated Nation towards the end of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Q: Mary, Q: Elizabeth, in as few years as this Parliament, hath lasted? XI. Query. Whether is it not more reasonable and genou∣rous as men, and far more Gospel-like as Christi∣ans
to suffer people to try the spirits, and examine all opinions, and so in judgement to leave one Re∣ligion and professe another as they shall find themselves perswaded of the truth thereof in their own hearts; rather then for the Magistrate or Powers to force people from one Religion to another before they be convinced of the righte∣ousness thereof, as the Kings and Queens afore∣mentioned did, and as Parliaments will do the like again hereafter, if they accept of, or assume unto themselves, a power or Authority of impo∣sing in matters of Religion? XII. Query. And last of all, What more mischievous and desperate inlet unto all prophanesse and Atheism can there possibly be (so far as people are capeable of becoming down-right Atheists) than for the Powers to force the people into this or that Reli∣gion or ways of worship before they can convince them? Or for any person to make profession thereof with his mouth, whilest his heart contin∣ually cryeth out thou lyest? FINIS.
