T2 E647_10 R208849 99867770 120094
CERTAIN QVERIES, OR Considerations presented to the view of all that desire Reformation of Grievances. Comprised in these Heads following. 1. A new Representative. 2. Concerning Adultery and Whoredom, Cursing, Swearing, Blasphemy, &c. 3. Reforming the Custom Houses, and Excise Offices. 4. About old Holy dayes. 5. Regulating Doctors and Chirurgions, and Lawyers boundless Fees. 6. The putting down Tythes, and to have a constant, equal maintenance for the Ministry, and Schools otherwayes. 7. About Reforming the City of London. 8. Concerning Monopolizing Post Letters, and other things. 9. Concerning Copy hold Land. 10. Concerning Law Suits, and Lawyers. 11. The putting down all Fairs. 12. About the Calling of the Jews. 13. Concerning Murtherers and Felons, and such like capitol offenders. By D. T. A well-wisher to publike Reformation. 1 CHRON. 28.9. The Lord will be with you, while you are with him; but if you forsake him, he will cast you off for ever. MICAH 6.8. He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? ECCLES. 5.4, 5. It is better not to vow, then after the vow to enquire. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Black. spread-Eagle at the West end of Pauls, 1651.
To his Excellency Oliver Cromwell, Lord Generall over all the Forces under the Parliament of the Common∣wealth of ENGLAND. Right Honorable, WHen I take into consideration the great Ingage∣ments which lies upon my self, and all that sought God in the day of our straights and fears, to wit, that if he would deliver us, we would perform our vows, which was to glorifie his name; and that we would each one of us move in our sphear and places to help forwards the building of that great work of reformation; now it hath pleased God in some good measure to remove out of the way much of that rubbish which before hindred; and now the builders have more plainess and free∣dom to work then formerly; all that yet hath been done,
though very much, hath been but as it were, Nehemiah like, to build with the trewel in the one hand, and the sword in the other, and through hast it may be there will be cause seen to pull some things down again, and mend other things; and seeing God hath so Ingaged us to help forwards this work, some as master builders, others as inferiour workmen, others as labourers to bring materials to these builders; of this sort onely I would be found: And therefore seeing God hath been pleased to use your honor so signally hitherto in this great service, I am now bold to offer this my mite towards that part of the work which remains; not to instruct or teach, but rather to minde of that is well known before, both to you and those that build with you in Parliament and Army; I know my Lord, you take your self to be Ingaged to pay Vows to God, and I know by your many Letters which have come from you, that you and the Army have in the dayes of seeking God made many; you know its better not to vow, then after the vow to enquire; therefore my Lord, up and be doing, and the Lord will be with you; and weare not many of them to ende∣vour to free this Land from bonds, and make it a free Nation, and to endevour the Reformation of it, and to procure the real good of all people, so far as it is good for them; but all that may be accompted good by all, is not indeed good for them; some accompt that a priviledge which might be hurtfull to themselves and others, as in case of universal choice by all people of a new Representative, &c. when a body is distem∣pered it must not have all it calls for, that were the way to destroy it self: I intend nothing but what may be for real good to all, and that I would have all have, both for this life and a better. My Lord, I have heard you so free of late to my self and others since Worcester Fight, how your heart was bent for the publique good, and I know your Genius runs full and fast that way; and having so often askt help that
way, by all whose hearts are upright towards God and the good of men; my Lord, this consideration imboldens me to offer this poor mite to your Lordships serious consideration, which is the ensuing Queries, or considerations for the pub∣lique good, and reformation of several things therein con∣tained, that the Land may be reformed, and God delight to dwell amongst us, when such Laws shall be enacted which are for the punishing of evil doers and the praise of those that do well; Then shall Magistracy, which is a blessed Ordinance of God, when they seek not themselves but the peoples good, be honored by the good, and feared by others; and if this Par∣liament, for whom we have so much cause to bless God, do further acts of Reformation before they give way to another, our posterities shall bless God for them; but when I consider the long, tedious, illaborate, unwearied pains these have had, to struggle with all difficulties for our good; methinks we should not in modesty tye them much longer to sit, save onely to settle some great things in hand, and then take their ease, and let a new be chosen to sit to finish the rest of the work, for its very great, and much yet behind. My Lord, I beseech you take these poor broken endevours into your patronage; and accept it, or any part of it that likes, and the rest lay aside, knowing you can understand my minde in stamerings; and if any thing be worth pursuite, to minde that; but I submit all to you, begging God to give you, with the whole reformers now in power with you, a spirit of wisdom and discerning, to know the mind of God towards this poor Nation, and the Saints therein, and to pursue the fulfilling that will and minde of his; which is the desire and prayers of the weakest and unworthiest of all that intermedles in such waighty affairs. November the 18o. 1651. D. T.
Certain Queries or considera∣tions about reforming of divers grie∣vances in these times of Reformation. First Head. WHether it be not requisite to have a new Representa∣tive, and if so then which may be conceived the safest way to have it chosen in this juncture of time? Whether by Counties, Shires, Cities, Towns, and Corporations, as formerly; and if so, whether its likely or possible that any good choice at this time can so be made? and whether such a repre∣sentative thus chosen will not be likely to undo most of that which hath been already done by this Parliament, by so much great and illaborate pains and care; and with the expence of so much trea∣sure and blood for ten years or more past? For its unlikely, nay impossible, that Multitudes should make any good choice at this time; considering that most mens spirits stand still opposite to a real and sound reformation; Therefore it is to be considered how the choosers, and chosen ought to be qualified; for its conceived that most men have lost that priviledge of being choosers, having in one kinde or other been helpers of the common Enemy, and opposers of Reformation, or Non-ingagers to present Power and Providences. And then whether some better way may not be found out, whether those persons which have been constant friends to this
Parliament, and never forsook them, but have laboured with them at all times; Whether these men that never lost their pri∣viledge of choosing, have not most right to it? Nay, if it be not safest to put the choice into such hands? and is not this the Party commonly called Congregational Churches, such as Mr. Sidrack Simpson, and Mr. John Simpson, Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. John Goodwin, Mr. Feak, Mr. Jacy, and Mr. Kiffin, &c. are Officers in? Not that these people should onely choose Representors, or Par∣liament men amongst themselves for all places; But that they should be enjoyned to take in to their Assistance to joyn with them in that choice, all that can be found out in that place or division where such choice is to be made, that are honest, well-affected men to this present Power, and to real Reformation, though not in such Church waies; for it cannot be thought possible to finde or distinguish any society of men in the Land by any restriction what∣soever, but such societies before named; for it is conceived to be far from the thoughts of such societies upon any other terms to think upon, much less to desire any such priviledge; which will prove rather a great work and burthen, then priviledge, for this is onely proposed through an apprehension of the unsafeness of any other wayes of election; for what restrictions can be given, that men, even very guilty in publique acting, do not make shifts to evade, as many instances might be given in elections of lower Natures in London and elsewhere, by late experience: and no doubt all the honest hearted toward the republique will rejoyce, if the Parlia∣ment in their wisdom do find out a safe way, whoever be excluded, so the work go on well; For that is not conceived proper, but that every such place where such persons are to be chosen, may be chosen by the next such Church or Churches, as above, to that place; and if any such persons can be found in that place qualified fit for that imployment, then to choose there; if not, then such as live as near it as may be, such as may know the customes and constitutions of those people and places. And its verily believed, that seeing all other societies of men in the Land, have lost their priviledges; if it be one belonging to them at any time; and seeing God hath so signally appeared against their actings, and for the other people of Churches, whether all Parties would not be content to refer this choice to them, and be well∣pleased? specially if they finde afterwards such a representative
should be chose, which will carry on works of righteousness, and justice, ease the people of taxes, pay publique debts, and set up the power of godliness, and such like. And is it not reason that the people should now ease this Parliament, that have so unweariedly served them, and wrastled with so many difficulties and dangers, to the impairing of their healths, and many spent their lives for us? so now we may give them rest, seeing that God by them hath brought us so near our rest from common Enemies, & now choose others to take up this burthen from their shoulders, and carry it another time? And then to take into consideration how long each representative ought ordinarily to sit before a new one be called? and whether its proper and convenient that Parliament men should have such other offices of such large imployments, as to take them off the work in Parliament? and whether such large salleries ought to be given, as in the Custom House, Excise Office, and selling publique Lands, and the Post houses in London that would yeild many thousands by the year for the relief of the poor, and Letters carried much cheaper, and yet go to a publique good use, whereas now its in the hands of one that wants it not, that exacts great prices, to the hindrance of Trade, whereas the City of London hath offered, and would be glad of it for their poor that are so numerous and miserable; were these and such like reformed, there need not be so much Excise, and such taxes upon the people as there is; And whether Lawyers ought to be Parliament men, till the Law be reformed, or if they do, whether such ought to plead causes in any Courts of Justice, or sit Judges in those Courts so long as Parliament men, but rather to tend upon their work in Parliament. And whether it be not necessary to make alterations in divers places of the number of Parliament men, places being much alter∣ed since the first divisions, and to add more to London and some other places that are much increast, and to detract from others, as Cornwal, and many inconsiderable Towns and places in the Land. Second Head. Whether those Acts against Adultery, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Blasphemy, &c. be ever likely to reform those detestable wickednesses; except they be strengthned with more in∣largements.
As first, for Adultery, whether it be possible to find out that sin by that Act, except by the Parties own confession against them∣selves, which is not likely any will do, to the taking away of their own Lives. And therefore whether it would not be agreeable to right reason, grounded upon Scripture, that if persons do such actions as may plainly be judged is equivolent to that sin? Whether it may not be called that sin, and so be proceeded against as guilty of that sin? As for example, for a man and woman, both or one of them married, and shall be found naked in bed together, or in a room together naked, as hath been reported of those called Ranters, and such like profane persons; whether this may not righteously be called Adultery, and judged accordingly, else its impossible to find out that sin, and therefore that Act else is of little or no force; and the like may be said of whoredom and such like uncleannesses; and certainly if such remedies were provided, the Land would be soon in great measure cleansed of such like abominable practises, whereby now God is provokt, and the Land defiled. So for Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness, Blasphemy, and the like. Do those Acts against them enable men to reform them? Or are they reformed one jot? Surely not, and therefore better remedies are to be provided, as when such wickednesses are com∣mitted in the streets daily, and never was those sins of Drunkenness, Cursing, Swearing, Blaspheming the name of the great God more frequent then in these dayes; and is not the reason plainly thus, if men have a minde to reform it, they cannot: For these reasons following. First, a warrant must be gotten from a Justice of the Peace, which is very hard oftentimes to procure. For Justices of the Peace are so few in number, and live so far asunder, that it takes much time and labor to go to them, and oftentimes they are not at home, or at leasure, and then it is a hard thing to know such offenders names to put into the warrant, for which the Clark must have a fee of 12. d. and after the warrant with so much difficulty obtained, it may be its as hard to get a Constable to serve it, partly because they either are not at home, or loath to carry them so far as to a Justice, being so far off them; or else it may be guilty of the same faults themselves, as too many, both of them and Justices also are oftimes,
and so they have no mind to punish that in others, they use them∣selves, and then for the most part the offender is gone, and not to be found before all this can be effected, which discourageth those that would reform, seeing the hardness of it. Remedies against these premised. If power might be given to any person hearing such Oaths and Cursing as aforesaid, and seeing a Drunkard, presently to lay hand upon them, and require aid of any next hand to help and assist him or them, and so to have them to the next Constable, or Justice, without any warrant, and that Constable might have power given him in that behalf, to execute the Law in as full a manner upon such Offenders, being fully proved by two witnesses, as a Justice of peace now hath, or that there may be a Justice, or Commissi∣oners appointed in each precinct or Parish, or Commissioners according to the greatness or smalness of those divisions, and they might have power to administer an Oath to such witnes∣ses, and by this means in a short time the Land may be purged from such detestable abominations; and if any such officers shall refuse to do their duty, they may be punishable by a superior power, and so the remedy being so near at hand, its likely Reformation may follow. Third Head. Concerning Custom houses, and Excise Offices; Whether such vast and large salleries ought to be given in such necessitous times as these are, to the Commissioners that for the most part are men that have little need of it, and when others as well able for the work, and as well deserving, would be willing to serve the State for some 200. or 300. li. per annum, as well as some of these for 10. or 1200. li. per annum, or more, and now these men or some of them rule with Rigor, and much oppression, as is much and gene∣rally complaind of them, to the great dishearting of Merchants, yea oftimes for such trifles as was never known by any in those places of Customes formerly, which rends much to the dishonor of the State, whom is pretended do require it of them. And whether there ought not to be a reformation of such so fre∣quent exacting of Oaths in the whole Land, and so in Custom∣houses and Excise places, whereby men are insnared, and too often forst to swear against, or to the accusing of themselves, a thing so
unnatural, and so much complained of formerly, and they that re∣fuse so to swear shall be accompted as guilty, and proceeded a∣gainst accordingly; whereas in other Courts no proceeding against any person but by evidence; and hereby seamen do often swear, when they that administer such Oaths, cannot but fear that they swear against their own Consciences, and so whether the number of Oaths in such Offices, and in companies, when men are made free, and take Offices of Wardens and the like upon them, and so in Colledges at Universities, and all such like places, specially when exacted by the old Popish unwarranted Custom of laying the hand upon a book, or upon one of the Evangelists, and kissing the book, or why not rather by lifting up the hand according to Scripture example, as it was by the Parliament and others in the late Covenant taking; and the rather, because some men have lost their causes, because their witnesses could not be permitted to swear, except by this ceremony of kissing the book, and so was forst to stand down, and could be no witness, and so the cause was lost by that means as was adjudged; therefore if any shall swear by lifting up the hand, and yet sware falsely, he may be proceeded against as a perjured person, as well as the other way. Fourth Head. Whether it be not high time to reform the keeping shut up the Cu∣stome and Excise Houses, and Schools for Children, and other. Offices in Westminster Hall, and other Courts of Justice there, and elsewhere, upon every old Popish holy day, to the keeping in memory such vanities in the minds of youth and children, which else would be buried, and the name of Ashterouth not once named amongst us, which these customs still hold up; therefore should be put out of the next years Almanacks, which tend to the keeping in memory such Popish times, which tend to prophanness and superstition, and so these times by this means shall be handed over to the next Generation; which is so contrary to our Covenanted reformati∣on according to the Scriptures, and best reformed Churches, as New England, and many other places, nay even in Scotland also, which is a shame to England to be so far behinde them in such a gross custom: Nay, whether it be not now high time to lay down the observing the fifth of November, considering its become a form, and used but to formality, and vanity, and much hurt and ryots in
London hath been on these daies, and some blood shed; but if any day ought to be kept, is it not more like the Jewish practise, to keep the last and greatest mercies in memory, and include others in that? as that in Jer. 23.7, 8. It shall be no more said, the Lord liveth that brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, but the Lord liveth that brought them out of the land of the North: So, hath not God of late given us a signal and great deliverance out of the hands of a Northern enemy? and Crowned this the third of September, 1651. at Worcester? Let it not now be only said, The Lord liveth that delivered us out of the hands of Spaniards and Papists, but the Lord liveth that delivered us out of the hands of Tyrants, Bishops, and Scots; and summe up all in that day, if we must needs observe one annually; and the rather, because many fear upon grounds, that that Gunpowder work was like Gowries Conspiracie, and there∣fore they that hide can finde, without such divine inspiration as is commonly conceived and preached upon that day. Again whether the ommissioners at Custome Houses, specially London, where much goods come in, ought not to sit longer pub∣likely to dispatch mens businesses, that come far, and lose much time, they sitting commonly but about one hour in the forenoon, and what that time will not do, men must go and leave undone, and come another day, to the great hurt of many that weight and crowd after them; and that they may sit as well there in the after∣noons to dispatch men, as in the forenoons, which may well be done for such large falleries. Fifth Head. Whether the great and common fees given to Doctors of Physick, and Chirurgions, ought not to be regulated, as also Midwives; Consi∣dering that many drop into the grave for want of advice & means, that have not such large fees to give for it, and many mean Families that use such means, having much sickness, of times undo themselvs, as the poor-woman in the Gospel did in following the chargeable Physitians; whereas if their price were set, as it is in Holland, the means would be more frequently used at the beginning of sicknes∣ses, and so prevent the increase of it, which destroyes multitudes lives, or else exhausts their smal substance which should provide bread for the subsistence of their Families; and hereby the Physitians would have much more practice, and so live as well as now of such
unbounded unreasonable Fees, as is observed in Holland, the Dr. his Fee is some seven Stivers, which makes about 8. d. sterling, and so they have great practice, for people so soon as they ayle ought. presently send for a Dr. and so the Doctors have much practice, and are rich, and people are observed to be more healthy and longer lived generally then, in England; The like may be said of Lawyers, as Councellors which Ruin and destroy multitudes of Families in making Lawsuits so tedious and chargeable, in take∣ing such vast and boundless Fees, whereas if all Fees of all sorts were set, beyond which they may not exceed, and have as strict a Law against them as is against usurers, for not exceeding six per cent. certainly it would save the undoing of many a Family. Sixth Head. Concerning Tythes for the Ministery; Whether it be not too Jewish for the maintenance of the Gospel Ministry, and very oppressing to the people, and very unequal, both in paing it, and also in the distributing it to the Ministers, some having many 100 by the year, and commonly the worst diserving having got into the greatest Be∣nefices, and have axacted their Tithes with Rigor, and starved their souls, when others better diserving, could not have enough to half feed and maintain their Families comfortably, which hath been the cause that the Land hath been filled with Droans, but have taught the people little else but formality instead of Piety, which hath filled the Land so full of ignorant Malignant Spirits of late times. Remedies against such evils are conceived these. First, that all tenants may have liberty to buy out all the Tythes of Land, and so to make his Land tythe free, and that at a certain set price, as in wisdom and Justice shall be thought meet, and all Im∣propriators to have mony for their parts, and the other parts, which have commonly belonged to the Minister, of all kindes to be sold, and brought into a publique bank, to be laid forth and imployed for either the Ministers and Schools, and such other pious and good uses, or otherwaies, as in wisdom be thought meet for the common good; and by this means much more Land would be tilled, when Farmers may injoy the fruit of their own labors, and Ministers not so much contend with their Parishes as oftimes for Tythes at Law; and therefore it is conceived much bet∣ter
if some publike bank were erected, and holpen by some small excise upon some superfluous commodities which will not oppress the people, as of Wine and Tobacco, &c. and make the Costoms small, that so they might the better indure Excise; & were it not also convenient to have the whole Land surveighed, and alter many pa∣rishes that are too big and populous, since parishes first divided, and so divide them into several places for people to meet at to hear the everlasting Gospel; the glad tidings of Salvation to poor dark Souls, that perish for want of vision, as in Wales and Cornwal, and the North of England; and again, many places in the Land, specially Cities and great Towns, two or three meeting places might be put into one, and yet not all them make a full con∣gregation neither, and so some of those wast houses might be spa∣red for other select Congregations to meet in publikely, and not to stand shut up, or some twenty or thirty at a time there, as is fre∣quent in many places in and about London; and were it not better if Pauls London, were either pulled down and sold for much be∣fore it fall down, or else a little mended, and either made a place of publike judicature, as to bring the Courts at Westminster down into the heart of London, or else to clean the best street in London, Cheapside, of the noysome and troublesome market, would be quite free from such annoyances if it might be removed into the body of that Cathedral, and the yard and places about it, and so would it be a dry place for all meat and provisions upon wet, and hot, and cold dayes; and to the like use might the Westend of Christchurch in Newgate market be used, to the clearing that Street, and some such like, might divers such like wast and vast places in the Land be used, that now are of no use. And were it not better if there were placed in every preaching place in the Land a pious and faithful Minister, only to divide the word, and he to be sent forth by faithful Churches in each place adjacent to every such place, or else to let faithful knowing com∣missioners appointed to send forth such Ministers & no other, who are fitly qualified with gifts & Godliness for such a work, and then let them have a competent and sufficient maintenance out of the publike bank, and so none may be discouraged, nor have cause to complain for want of livelyhood, nor spend their time to wrangle and contend for Tithes, but what spare time they have, they may imploy it in some other way, as to keep School, or give Physick, or
in some other imployment, which might be but as a recreation to them, and by this help the better to provide for the present and future comfort of their wives and children, and yet never hinder their studies nor preaching neither; and this would make them useful in a Common wealth, having commonly the best parts; so shall the Land be filled with the knowledge of God, and at least civilize the people, and so this Land shall be the glory of the world, and the next age shall bless God for what we did for them, and God will then delight to dwell amongst us, and fill us with bles∣sings spiritual and temporal. Seventh Head. Whether some alteration, or at least great Reformation ought not to be of the Government of the City of London: seeing of late ages it hath been so chargeable to the Chamber, and troublesom to the common Councel, and whether the great and wastfull expences up∣on the Lord Majors Oath day, upon the City and Companies, at least now they are exhausted, and such and so much great Feastings in Companies, which wasts much food and makes it dear, and exhausts the incombs of Halls, to the great oppressing of the Members of each Company, to serve in such Offices, and by fines paying coming into the cloathing, which thy are forced to; and besides were these laid aside, abundance of means might be given to the necessitous poor of each Company, which are very numerous, which now they cannot have, because spent in feasting and such vanities. Eighth Head. Whether monopolizing commodities into the hands of Companies: As of East Indie Commodities, or Greenland, or for woollen cloth, the staple and Native Commodities of the Land, which God hath invested all with, or whether any one man ought to monopolize any one thing into his hands, to the hurt of others, as that of Post Letters, as before, and all these, and all ingrossers do alwayes tend to the hurt of many, to inrich one or few, and certainly Cloth would be muh more vented beyond the sea, if it were common, specially if a good course were taken to keep away Fullers earth, as is not, for its in Holland alwayes very common, whereby they make much Cloth, which else they could not, and so shortly will need little of our Cloth.
Ninth Head. Whether Lordships be not a great oppression to Copy-holders; And if so, whether the people should not be delivered from it? Tenth Head. Concerning Lawyers and Law suits: Whether some way might not be found out to have fewer vexatious suits, and whether or∣dinary differences between man, and man which most are such, are ordinary and plain enough, and may be ended otherwaies; as plain debts, why may there not Commissioners in each place, or else friends, as arbitrators chosen to end them as well as a jury, after much time, and mony spent upon Lawyers, which too oft foments such differences, and makes them wider then else they would be; and so of assaults and batteries, and such like, and by this means may end differences, speedily, easily, and in love and content; whereas to sue in Courts, as now we must for every trivial thing, it tends to little else but to vex one another, and oftimes men more seek their wills then right, and how many men have undone themselves and Fa∣milies to have their wills one of another, more seeking revenge then right, whereas such references of differences would be a means to keep men from such wastfull suits, and so keep love a∣mongst men, except in such cases, that just debts shall be owing to one that lives remote from the Creditor, or Titles of Land that are hard to determine, in such cases some other way may be found to facilitate such suits also, and bring trials speedily to an end; As thus, instead of serving writs, &c. which oftimes cannot be ser∣ved, sometimes, and that very common, by reason of the falseness of Bayliffs and under Sheriffs, that for friendship or bribes will not serve them, and by this means many a debt hath been lost, and the time of six or seven years expired before a writ can be served, and therefore it were good that Act were either re∣pealed or longer time given; for by that Act many a just debt hath been lost this time of Wars, because many could not get Writs served in troublesome places, and also many gone into the Wars, and could not be sued; were it not better, that instead of Writs serving at great charge and trouble, it might be ordered, that if lawfull summons be left under writing with any debtor; or at his house at seasonable times, either with themselves, or to any con∣siderable parson of ripe age belonging to the Family where such person dwels, to deliver to this debtor, why this may not be as
effectual as a Writ, and then after such summons given, then to pro∣ceed against them, and bring it to a sudden trial and issue, and so take judgement against their estates rather then their persons, and this shall be any estate personal or real, and certainly some such way the wisdom of a Parliament might finde out, if Lawyers hinder not, that might be much better then now it is; and were it not much bet∣ter that mens estates should pay debts, whether real or personal? And were it not a good Reformation, if a Register or Record were kept in every County or Division where Land lieth, as in Holland, and about Taunton Dean in England; that if any incombrance be upon Land, as morgage, or any other, that then it might be entred in that Register Office, that any might see at pleasure, and then so many de∣fraudings could not be about passing over one and the same Land, as now is, divers times to several men, and cannot be found out when any buy it. And because in many cases Land payes no debts, do not men run oft times in debt wilfully, and then buy Land, and so defraud Creditors, and leave their Estates to their posterity? and certainly it is not just that a man should give portions to chil∣dren, either in mony, goods, or Land, nor to any other, of that which is not his own to give but other mens Estates; and this is frequent to give Estates to children, and yield their own bodies to prison, and so defraud Creditors of their just dues, to the undoing of ma∣ny a poor Creditor; and this is one cause, because they have so much liberty in prisons, that so long as they have mony, they may go and live abroad, only appear in serm time; nay the prison quarters, as is reported of the upper bench, reaches as far as Holland, there∣fore it were much better if mens Estates might be forst to pay debts, of what kinde soever it is, and their bodies free, and so pri∣sons might be freed of such a number of poor distressed miserable creatures, and not suffer such extream want as many do, and others that live idly and sinfully that have means, but will not part with it, shall be forst to pay debts with it and free their persons, to take some lawfull callings to do good in a Common wealth; and in prisons men live like bruits, in all idleness, looseness, and wic∣kedness, learning craft to deceive their Creditors; therefore were it not better if it were as it is in Holland and else where, in Free States, that Estates pay, and persons freed from Prison, and in case of mens failing, men shall deliver up their books and Estates upon Oath to their Creditors, and that shall satisfie them; and if it be
afterwards found they have a concealed Estate, then that Estate shall be divided also, and they proceeded against as perjured per∣sons; but if they deliver up justly, they shall have a share with their Creditors to begin the world again to maintain their Families withal, and not to imprison their bodies, to the ruining of them and their Families, and unfitting them for any good use in a Com∣mon wealth; whereas men thus imprisoned brings many a poor Family to ruin, as well as robs the Common wealth of a Subiect that might else be usefull otherwayes, and if any man judge he have cause to imprison a man, then he shall allow him a competent livelyhood, and keep him in a Chamber by himself from bad com∣pany in prison. And further, if any Norman Laws yet lies upon us, as is supposed to do, it is certainly high time to be eased of them, and to have in∣stead of them such sutable Laws agreeable to this age, and the con∣stitution of the people, which they themselves shall make by their Representatives in Parliament, and its thought the Multiplicity of Lawyers, and their taking such large Fees is the cause of keep∣ing these yokes still upon us. Eleventh Head. Whether it be not much for the good of the City of London, and of all Trade in the Land to put down all Fairs within this Nation of Eng∣land, and all the territories thereto belonging, and that for these reasons following. First, it is an exceeding great cause of the spoiling of all whole∣sale Trade in the whole Land, specially London, when some few men in London shall go to such Fairs, and forestall all others that stay at home, to the hindrance of all home Trade; for what need Country Shopkeepers come or send to London for their goods, when its brought home to them so oft, and by this means many of them get into debt in London, and then come not thither to pay their debts, but bestow that mony in Fairs, and so those that stay at home, lose both their debts and Customers; nay almost all Fair-keepers do finde it to be such a slavish chargeable thing to keep Fairs, and so little got by them, and yet once begun, they must go on in them Winter and Summer; that they would much
rejoyce, and many have often offered to give much money to have them all put down, and it much hinders all wholesale Tradesmen in the Country also, for all petty Tradesmen and Retailers, if no Fairs were would buy of them, and for want of such Trading, they are much impoverisht, and decay, and oftimes break in Londoners debts; And so the most part of the Trade of the Land is in some few mens hands, & yet the Charge eats out their profit for the most part too, and indeed very few get by them, but Inns, and victuallers, and such like; and yet if no Fairs were kept, Markets would be con∣stantly bigger, and so those Innholders would have a constant Trade all the year, whereas now it is for a glut, for a few nights, some twice a year, or the like, and so they would get by it: But there are other evils in these Fairs: As first, they are the occasion of highway thieves, as know the set times, take the opportunities to rob men of their monies as they go and come to and from those Fairs; and this hath been very frequent. Secondly, they are the occasion that Pedlers, Stageplayers, Cutpurses, and many such vain, wicked, and idle persons come there, and draw youth together to vanities, an occasion of much corrupting youth, when upon such occasions they meet at such Fairs, which then they will take liberty to do; and so much drunkenness and uncleanness being the true product of such meetings, so all these inconveniences, and many more being considered, the much hurt they do, and little or no good, together with the consideration of the full and generall Trade there would else be constantly in all the Land, were all Fairs put down: All considered, it were questionless a great good Re∣formation to have all Fairs put down; and for Cattle, and such like things that are of growth amongst us, great Markets would do, as is conceived, much better then Fairs.
Twelfth Head. Concerning the Jews. Whether we should not as well endeavor their conversion, as to believe it, and pray for it? and how can we do this, except we suffer them to come amongst us, to the end we may converse and dispute with them, and make it out to them by Scripture and a holy Conversation, that our Jesus, whom their forefathers crucified, is the Lord and Christ, that so they may look upon him, and mourn for him, or rather for themselves, as one mourneth for the loss of his only son, and then that Redeemer that came out of Zion, may turn away iniquity from Jacob: And is this any more then their believing forefathers did for us? the fruit of whose prayers now we reap; they prayed for us their little si∣ster, when had no breasts; nay they, when they were a Natio∣nall, and a peculiar Church, received the Gentiles to be amongst them, and converted many of them by that means to be proselites; its very like we might do the like by them now, if they were a∣mongst us; and its more likely, this people in England should be a means to convince them rather then any other Nation in the world; First, because they love & esteem English people. Secondly, we have, and its likely we shall have more of the power of godliness in this Nation, and less formality and superstition then any Nation in the world; and is it not said, the Gentiles by this means shall emu∣late the Jews, and make them look after Christ by this means. And further, consider, that the time of their conversion is not far off, and if once they are called, it will be a happiness to be a∣mongst them, for they will be the riches of the world, as Paul to the Romans argues, If their casting off were riches to us, because we came in the room of them, then how much more their call home? and consider, that our Redeemer came from them, and our priviledges as believers, is, as we are the children of believing Abraham, their Father according to the flesh, of whom they still boast; and he is our Father, if we believe in the same Messias as he did. They are therefore our brethren, let them live with us, and let us love and tender them for their Fathers sake.
Thirteenth Head. Concerning Murtherers and Felons, and such like Capitol offen∣ders. Whether it were not more Scripture like to have Manslayers die publikely, by such kind of deaths as they destroy others by? and for Thieves, whether it ought to be so practised amongst us, to take away life for Theft; or at least if any steal to satisfie hun∣ger with, but rather more agreeable to Scripture, that satisfacti∣on be made for their Theft, and in case they have it not to pay, then after some sharp corporal punishment, as whipping, or the like, to satisfie the Law; which may be inflicted less or more, ac∣cording to the nature of the offence, the Magistrates standing by to judge how much, as in Holland, &c. then the offendor to re∣turn to prison: And were it not good if all such and other pri∣sons were made workhouses, where such Felons may remain, and be forced to work to get their bread, and to earn out that debt they have robbed any person of, according to Scripture example, He that steals must make restitution four-fold, then at least one fold; and certainly, were this course taken, it would far more deter Thieves then that death they so commonly suffer: For is not this common with many of them to follow Theft as a Trade, and so will not leave it, but resolve to steal to satisfie their lusts, and if they be taken, and come to prison, oft scape by being burnt in the hand, and then fall to the same course again; and many of them come into Newgate at London again, and other prisons within a few dayes, nay hours, after so released; and many of them have said, they owe a debt, and that they must pay, and that is to death, and they will satisfie their lusts while they live, and they can be but hanged for it: so death deters not such persons, but sharp corpo∣rall punishment, and afterwards working in prison till they have satisfied all such Thefts, would more deter then death by far, and also be a means to keep them from much evils and robberies, which they could not do when so kept in prison in lawful imployment. And the like in other prisons for debt, were they workhouses, where all that live and lie for debt were made work, then men of estates, that will lie in prison, and not pay, would rather pay, then work hard; and others that have nothing to pay, may either be
released, to go into some lawful Calling, to earn wherewith to maintain themselves and families, or else be made work in prison, to earn bread, and have beds, and not to feed and lie, too oft in holes and dungeons, like beasts, and so in time may earn more then they spend towards satisfying their Creditors; if some such courses might be taken, prisons would not be so inhabited with guests, that for want of imployments live idly, which is the mother and nurse of all impiety; and prisons be so like the confines of Satans King∣dom; certainly some such way might be found out for the Re∣formation of such wicked practises. FINIS.
