11925.7 S92705 54532355 180787
Manured By Sie Dressed and Maintained; Printed at  for Thom
SALOMON that most re∣nowned & roy∣al King, weigh∣ing the wret∣chednesse of this world, by the weight of his wonder∣full wisedome; could no lesse but redouble his words and say, Vanitas vanitatum, Eccle. 1. 2. vanitas vanitatum: & omnia vanitas. Which seing it is so (Right ) it be∣hooueth
euery one of vs, not somuch to auoid the causes that may prouoke vs to vanity, as to practise all the means that may procure vs to piety; and to walke with such foresight in this terrestriall pilgrimage, as we may haue fruition of felici∣ty in the Celestiall Paradise; according to the counsell of our Sauiour Christ, who willeth vs first to seeke the Kingdome of God, and his Mat. 7. 33. righteousnesse: and not dis∣senting from the saying of the Apostle, who perswa∣deth vs to set our affections on things that are aboue, & Col. 3. 2.
not on thinges that are on the earth; Insomuch that all our knowledge is but vaine, that is seduced with vanity: all our wisedome is but meare folly, that is car∣ried away with earthly co∣gitations: yea al our doings detestable that tend onelye to temporall dispositions; for there is none to bee dee∣med wise indeede, that will not bestow his talent in the treasure of Gods word, con∣sidering it is so precious, that it ought more to be de∣sired then Gold, yea then much fine Gold: and it is so delectable, that in sweetnes
it excelleth the hony, and the hony combe, wherein Psal. 19. 10. Dauid did oppose his whole Psal. 119. 97. delight: And it is so expe∣dient for vs to profit therin, as he that hath much, may yeeld somewhat, sithence that he that hath lesse, shall not bee excused with no∣thing; the Lord will looke for ten Talents, where hee Mat. 25. 22. left fiue, and wil punish him that maketh no profit wher he bestowed one. Heereof it is I haue proceeded in this enterprise, and bestowed my time to the benefit of others which although it bee not comparable to any commē∣dable
worke, yet that is not excusable for any to detract his duty, seing God will ac∣cept of a Mite, of a willing mind, neither ought to bee contemptible amongst o∣thers, though all bee not currant: for the building is furthered by inferiour helpes, though it be framed by finer heads. Againe the world is now growne into his last age, wherein Sects, Schismes, and errors doe spread, and sinne and iniquitie. aboun∣deth: Insomuch as (I feare mee) it is with ma∣ny of vs in ENGLAND,
as it was with the people of ISRAEL, they loathed Exod. 16. Manna that fell from Hea∣uen for the sustenance of their bodies, and too too many of vs doe little regard that spirituall Manna, (the word of GOD) that is sent for the succour of our soules. Heereof it I haue made choice of your good  and presented my labours to your Godly patronage, assuring my selfe as you be fauourers and fol∣lowers of Gods word, so you will be defenders of the fruites of the same, and ra∣ther bee preferrers then de∣facers
of a forward action, not doubting but your  will well accept of it, as a worke ymporting and proceeding of good will, by the consideration of that ex∣ample of the poore widdow preferring the simplicitie of the giuer, before the suffici∣ency of the gift, knowing that the imperfection of the present may bee couered by the presumption of the Po∣et; and I may say in the want of well doing, Est vo∣luisse satis. Thus being loath to bee too tedious in my E∣pistle, hauing obserued breuitie in all my said book,
I referre the consideration thereof, to your graue cen∣sures; submitting my selfe to your good curtesies, and committing your to the protec∣tion of the Al∣mightie. Your to command.
To the Christian READER. HEE that doth publish a matter to the iudgement of many, the same requireth to bee done, not lightly, but deliberate∣ly; considering it is a subiect to sundry censures, and in reading and iudging all are not Candi∣di Lectores. In regard wher∣of (good Christian Reader) I
haue published my paines to thy profit, and presented thy liking of it, to thy looking ouer, hauing (as nigh as I may) not onely cut off all such occasions, as might cause cavillation, but al∣so ministred such matter as con∣cernes our consolation: and al∣though it bee not pollished pre∣cisely, for the expectation of the curious; yet it is finished plaine∣ly for the information of the simple. Now it may bee there be many that will vse obiectiōs against the Triple forme of this Treatise, because no art hath reduced althings (and rightly) to Dicotomies. True; but wisedome may contriue much
compendiously, and yet profita∣blie: besides although I haue framed it as an easie entrance for the erudition of the igno∣rant, I haue not excluded what may further bee added by the consideration of the learned, & abiect much more might bee in∣serted in many places for pro∣lixitie, yet much lesse I feare mee is obserued of the most part for their vtilitie. Some will require a more direct placing of thinges in their order; Certes that is well placed, that is well applied: And those that doe more respect the manner of pla∣cing, then the matter it selfe, may bee noted in the number of
those, who would haue the Psalmes of DAVID to proceede, and not to follow the Booke of IOB; making a scripulous question without cause, when wee all know they are both included in the Scrip∣tures, and containe comforta∣ble matter for our saluation. Some will not like so many di∣uers sortes of sundry things con∣gest together in one heape, o∣ther will require more prospy∣cuitie, some one thing, some another: Insomuch that hee that expecteth to please the o∣pinions of all people, must either refraine from open Publication of any thing, or referre himselfe
to their generall dispositions in iudgement: And this is the common successe of acceptance; many will commend it, most will mislike it, few will follow it. But as my meaning was to profit the simple, by the set∣ting foorth of it; so I shall per∣swade the godly to a good liking of it: and as for the froward, I will not refell their foolish questions in disputation about it, knowing what the Apostle Paul saith, that foolish and vnlearned questions, ingender strife. So wishing all to measure by the meete they would receiue themselues, and so to report
as  pect  pris I both submit myselfe to repre∣hension, so it be pertinent; and commit euery one to his owne liking, so it be indif∣ferent. Vale. Yours in the Lord.
GODS Acre of Land, taken out of the holy Scriptures; And diuers other learned Au∣thors. EVERY mans know∣ledge ought to bee reasonable towards Man  not presu God, that hee pre∣sume not to vnder∣stand aboue that Rom▪  which is meete to vnderstand. Applyable to himselfe, that ac∣ding to his knowledge, hee shew  same in his life and conuersati∣on Luke 12. or else his great knowledge will oemne him.
Profitable to others, that as hee receiued the gift, hee minister the er. 4. 10 same to others. Hee that would attaine to an e∣fectuall knowledge of God, must remember his precepts, his promi∣ses, and his threatnings. The eternall power of God, may be knowne by the reuelation of his Word, by the creation of the world, and by the consideration of all his Workes. The infaillible prouidence of God, may appeare vnto vs by the Dan. 6. 6. Ionas. 1. 15 preseruation of Daniell in the Lions Denne: of Ionas in the Whales bel∣ly, and of the three Children, in the fiery Ouen. The prouidence of God is won∣derfull, Gods proui∣de won∣derfull. M. P. for he worketh by means. For meate is a meane to serue is prouidence for the preseruation of health and life here, hee that con∣temneth to eate because his proui∣dence is infallible; doth contemne his prouidence, without meanes:
For if it were so that meate could not be had, then should wee not tie his prouidence to this meane, for without meate, God can helpe and giue health, and life here. Against meanes, for his power and wisedome is infinite, and therefore wee should depend vpon his prouidence, euen when all is cleane against vs. The exceeding mercy of God, is made manifest vnto vs in the Gods  manifest. Scriptures, by the miraculous ex∣amples of compassion, by the ma∣nifold words of consolation, and by the death of his onelie Sonne for our propitiation. Hee that mistrusts the mercy of God, denyeth him to bee Loue, Gods mercy must not be mistrusted. wherein consisteth all the hope of poore sinners, because of his great loue, he sent his onely Sonne to suf∣fer death, for the remission of our sinnes, (Truth) because hee promi∣sed for the loue of his Sonne, par∣don to all poore sinners, so oft as they require it in faith, with a con∣trite
heart Power, because hee is as true of his promises, as hee is able to per∣forme them; and as hee is of power so will hee doe whatsoeuer pleaseth him. The super-aboundant loue of God, appeareth vnto vs in this, that Gods super-aboundant Loue. he sent his owne Sonne for our re∣demption, for our iustification, and for our sanctification. The ioyes of Heauen, prepared for those that loue God, are such: Ioyes of Heauen. 1. Cor. 2. 9. as the eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, and the heart can∣not conceiue. Euery man ought to know the difference in beleeuing, A God is to be belieud, he is the only true, & al∣mighty Difference in beleeuing. M. P. God, this faith is Historical, for so Diuells beleeue as well as the wicked, of God: All is true that he saith in the scriptures of him, & so do the euill Christians, as wel as the good, vnlesse they bee Heretickes. In God, is to loue him, and to trust
in his goodnesse, and in beleeuing, to ioyne our selues to him by loue, and obedience, this Faith is Euan∣gelicall, onely propper to the elect, (who liue by Faith.) It is not sufficient for vs to say, we know God, loue God, and feare 1. Iohn 2. God, vnlesse wee keepe his com∣mandements. God sheweth vpon earth, mercy, Iere. 9. 24. &c. wherein consisteth our saluation: Iudgment, wherewith he punisheth the wicked: Iustice, whereby he pre∣serueth the godlie. God, often times crosseth and Iohn 9. 3. Luke 13. 3. punisheth man vpon earth, for his owne glorie, as appeareth by the Blinde-man; for example to others, as appeareth by the Galilean; for triall of his faith, as appeareth by Iob that patient man. God in times past, spake, and preached to his people by dreames, by visions, and by reuelations. God hath apointed three places Three pla∣ces apointed▪ for all persons, the ioyes of Heauen,
for the godlie, the paines of Hell, for the wicked, the vse of the Earth, or all per∣sons. for both. God is worthilie said to bee Rich in mercy, in that hee respecteth the od rich in ercy. humble freelie. Mightie in Iustice, in that hee iudgeth the wicked iust∣lie. Bountifull in grace, in that hee sa∣ueth Barnard. sinners pittifully. God requireth no more at our hands: but these three things, Feare, Deut. 10. 12. Obedience, and Loue. God ought to bee beloued of vs, with all our hearts, with all our souls Deut. 10. 12. Rom. 8. 28. and with all our strength, all things worke for the best to them that loue God. God is loued effectually three God loued three waies. manner of waies, entirelie, in hauing a good will to him: reioycing great∣lie, hee is such a one as hee is: order∣lie, in referring our selues, and all that we haue to him, in such manner and measure as he willeth. Loue, is the end of the Comman∣dement.  Tim. 1. 5.
Loue, cannot be without a good conscience. A good conscience, can∣not be without Faith. Faith, cannot bee without the word of God. Wee ought continually to bee thankefull to God, because, of him, Rom. 11. 3. through him, and for him are all things. True thankefullnesse, consisteth True thank∣fulnesse. M. R. in three thinges, commemoration, because in recounting Gods excee∣ding benefits, hee hath done for vs, wee shall finde the better occasion (if we will consider) to bee the more thankefull for them, as Dauid did which made him in feruencie of spi∣rit burst forth into these speeches: What shall I render vnto the Lord, for all Psal. 116. 12. 13. 14. his benefits bestowed vpon me. Abiection, because if we measure Gods benefits with our deserts, wee shall finde our selues not worthie of the least, but in respect of our im∣perfections, wee are no better then abiects, which we should not onely
acknowledg, and say with the same Prophet, Lord what is man that . 114. 3. thou art so mindefull of him? But also in regard thereof say (with him) I will not die: but liue (to this end) to declare works & goodnes of god, sal. 118. 17. he hath done for mee. Narration, because it is not enough for vs to receiue Gods benefits and be mind∣full thereof, but also wee are bound to make others to profit thereby, and praise God, as the same Psalmo∣graph Psal. 6. 16. did, come (saith he) and hear∣ken all yee that feare God, and I will tell you what hee hath done to my Soule. Wee ought continually to haue the feare of God before our eyes, Pro. 9. 10. Pro 19. 23. Luke 1. 15. because it is the beginning of wise∣dome, because it causeth vs to de∣part from euill, because his mercy is on such from generation to gene∣ration. It was the treasure of Heze∣kiah. Esay. 33. 6. There be three kindes of feares, Feares three ndes. childelie feare, this appertayneth to
the godlie: who feares God onelie for his goodnesse, without any fi∣nister Acts 9. 31. respects. Seruile feare: this is proper to the wicked, who feare 2. Kings 7. 3▪ God onelie for his punishment. Naturall feare: this is common to Mat. 14. 26▪ both, for faith often times faileth the very elect. The feare of God, (as Saint Bar∣nard saith) is the water of wholesome wisedome, hee that hath this feare before his eyes, his waies are beau∣tifull, the well of Life: Hee that hath this feare before his eyes, his paths are peaceable, the beginning of knowledge: Hee that hath this feare before his eyes, his footesteps are vnmoueable. This may inforce vs to feare God because he is said to be terrible, and Exod 23. a God of reuenge, because his house shall soone bee ouerthrowne: that Eccle. 27. 3▪ feares him not, because he is such a Mat. 10. 28. one as is able to cast both body and soule, into hell fire. God repented him of three things Gen. 6. 6.
that hee made man on the Earth, that he made Saule King, that hee m 15. 11.  Sam. 24. had sent euill to the Israelites. God neuer repented, although it seemed to mans iudgement, when a∣ny thing goeth contrary to his tem∣porall election: because his eternall Hosea. 13. 14 1. sam. 15. Eccle. 39. 16. councell is immutable: because hee is not man that hee should repent: because all his workes are excee∣ding good. God ought to bee worshipped of vs with our hearts, sinceerelie, be∣cause with the heart man beleeueth Rom. 10. 10. vnto righteousnesse: with our mouthes boldlie: because with the mouth hee confesseth vnto saluati∣on, with our workes accordinglie, Iam. 2. 17. because by workes hee sheweth the fruits of his faith and profession. In the true worship of God, this is to bee considered, if wee acknow∣ledge Luke 12. 9. him in our hearts and denie him with our mouthes, or any of our members, he will denie vs, and this is no better then Idolatrie, if
wee draw nigh him with our lippes, Psal. 18. 41. and are farre from him with our hearts, he will not heare vs, for this is meere hipocrisie, if we doe workes without faith, hee will not accept Rom. 14. 13. them, for it is but iniqoitie. Whatsoeuer we neede; wee must Phil. 4. 6. require the same of God by Prayer, For although he knoweth our want Luke. 21. 39. before we aske, yet wee must pray: because hee hath commaunded wee should, because we continually want that grace which hee hath promised Luke. 22. 40. to giue: because the diuell is busie, least we fall into temptation. Prayer is verie expedient and profitable, (considering our whole Prayer pro∣fitable. M. Pla. saluation in the calling vppon the name of God) for thereby hee is wholly present with vs, by his Fa∣therlie prouidence, by the which he continually watcheth ouer vs: infallible power, by the which hee sustaineth and succoureth our weakenesse, being euery moment readie to perish: infinite goodnesse,
by the which hee receaueth vs into fauour being miserablie laden with sinne. Our Prayers are to bee vsed ge∣nerally Prayers at ll times. at all times; because the Lord hath promised to heare vs at what time soeuer wee call vpon him Ezek. 18, 19. faithfullie: in all places, because he Psal. 139. 6. is euery where, whither shall I goe from thy spirit (saith Dauid): for all persons, because it is our dutie to pray one for another. Iam 5. 16. In our prayer wee are to consider in whose presence wee stand, that Eccle. 18. 22. Considerati∣on in prayer. seeing wee stand in the presence of God (to whose maiestie so innume∣rable thousands of Angels doe assist and bee subiect,) wee may haue a reuerent regard of his maiestie, in preparing our selues to prayer, least thereby we tempt him. To whome wee speake, that see∣ing wee enter common with him, that knoweth the secrets of our hearts, (before whome nothing is more odious then hipocrysie) wee
call vpon him in truth, least he re∣iect our suits, what wee desire, that seeing prayers at aduenture are vn∣profitable (which proceede more Iam. 4. 2. of custome from the lippes, then of zeale from the heart) wee aske those things which bee most to the glory of God, and the comfort of our consciences, least wee aske and receiue not. We must offer and continue our Prayers faithfully without doubt∣ing, because the Lord hath not pro∣mised to graunt, but onelie to such Mar. 11. 24. as beleeue to obtaine, and therefore hee saith, whatsoeuer you desire when you pray, beleeue that you shall haue it, and it shall be done vn∣to you, charitablely without wrath; because wee cannot bee assured of Gods fauour, vnlesse wee forgiue (which is after the manner of a Sa∣crament vnto vs) hereof saith our Sauiour Christ, when you pray, Mar 11. 25. forgiue, that your father may for∣giue you. Incessantlie without fain∣ting;
because the Lord requireth perseuerance in our Prayers, accor∣ding to that same saying of S. Paule. In due season wee shall reape, if wee Gale. 6. 9. faint not. We must not offer our prayers to any I doll; for it is abhomination in the sight of God, to any earthlie Deut. 17. 15. Iere. 17. 5. man, for cursed is hee that putteth his trust in man. To any heauenlie Saint; for Christ is our onely medi∣ator. Iohn. 17. 3. Our prayers must bee vsed and Prayers vsed. Iohn. 5. 22. offered to God by Christ Iesus, be∣cause power is giuen into his hands, because in him, the Father is well Math. 3. 17. pleased; because without him we can doe nothing. Ioh. 15. 5. Hee that offereth an effectuall Psal. 145. Peter. 3. Math. 6. Iohn. 3. Psal. 109. prayer, must haue a liuelie feeling Faith. least it be hindred: peace and loue with his neighbours, least it be no regarded: a life answerable to this Faith, least it bee turned into sinne. Our prayer hath his perfection Prayers per∣fection▪ 1. Cor. 5. 2▪
from Christ, or else it could not pre∣uaile: for hee was made sinne for vs, that we might bee made the righte∣ousnesse of God, for to him that worketh not, but beleeueth in him Rom. 4. . that iustifieth the vngodly, his faith is counted righteousnesse, for wee beeing iustified through Faith, haue peace towards God, through Rom. 5. 1. him. Christ Iesus, may very fitlie bee called our eyes: because by him we Christ our eyes. see the Father. Our mouth: because by him we speake to the father. Our hand: because by him wee offer to the father. The Lord will not alwaies pre∣sentlie heare our prayers, or grant our requests; because hee will trie our faith and patience, Hereof saith Dauid, I waited patientlie for the Psal. 40. 1. Lord, and he enclined vnto me and heard my crie: because they are im∣pertinent: for wee know not what to pray as wee ought: and therefore Rom. 8. 26. wee aske and haue not, because wee Iam. 4. 3.
aske amisse, because they accord not with his pleasure: for this assu∣rance Ioh. 5. 14. we haue, if we aske according to his will, he heareth vs. To this end, in prayer wee should lift vp our eyes, that they may not Psal. 119. 37. incline or bee carried with vanitie. Hereof saith Dauid, turne away my eyes from regarding vanitie. Our hands, that wee should remember our selues to be farre off from God, vnlesse we lift vp our hearts also on high: and therefore saith the same Psal. 25. 1. Prophet. To thee haue I lifted vp my Soule. Our hearts, that there∣by we should know if our hearts be not farre from terrestriall cogitati∣ons, we shall hardly receiue any ce∣lestiall consolations. We may lawfully in prayer aske corporall benefits of God: because Corporall benefits. we should thereby know that he is the author and giuer thereof, and should not onelie be thankefull to him for it, but thereby to seeke, loue, and worship him, because we should Ios. 7.
bee perswaded of his good proui∣dence towards vs, in that hee hath Ios. 7. not onely promised, hee will neuer faile vs: but also hath an outstretch∣ed hand, to helpe them that call vp∣pon him. Because our faith of reco∣ciliation and remission of sins, shold bee exercised through the asking of these corporall things. The feruent prayer of the righte∣ous Prayer a∣vaileth. Exod. 8. much aualyeth, not onely for them, but for others. At Moses pray∣er the plague ceased. Elias, great 1. King. 17. plenty of raine. Queene Hester de∣liuered Hest. 14. her, and her people. We ought to referre all our pray∣ers, Prayers &c referred. requests and doings to Gods good pleasure, following the exam∣ple of Christ, when he was crucified Mat. 26. 4 without cause by the Iewes. Of Da∣vid, when he was dispossessed of his 2. Sam. 15. 26 Kingdome by his sonne, and of Iob, Iob. 2. 7 & 13 when hee was afflicted most grie∣uously by Sathan. The meanes whereby wee are Saluation▪ drawne to saluation, is Faith, ,
and Charity; The chiefest of these is loue, because it serueth heare and Co. 13. 13 in the world to come. The worke of a true faith is buil∣ded True faith builded. vpon things past, we belieue the death of Christ is past: things pre∣sent, wee belieue at this present, hee sitteth at the right hand of his Fa∣ther; and things to come, we belieue that Christ shall come to iudge the August. quicke and the dead. Faith doth grow and increase in vs, three manner of waies; By the hearing of the word of God prea∣ched: Faith in∣creaseth 3. wayes. M. P. because it layeth before our eyes, the promises which God in his Gospell hath made vnto vs in his Sonne. By the reuerent receiuing of the Sacraments, because they be∣ing rightly receiued of vs, are as pledges and seales of the promises of God, made vnto vs in his word. And by prayer and inuocation, be∣cause God hath made an especiall promise to vs thereby, that hee will heare whatsoeuer we aske according
to his will. A true and liuely faith must bee A descripti∣on of true Faith. M. S. Simple in belieuing the word of god without inquiring or searching in Gods mysticall matters by humane reasons. Sound in defending the truth thereof with inclyning or lea∣uing to the erronious opinions of the aduersaries of the same. Constant, in following the same word without doubting, for any reason of mans blame that seemeth contrary, nor to be drawne away from it by tempta∣tions, promises or threatnings ei∣ther of torment or of death. Such as will know whether they Faith the knowledge. haue an effectuall faith, must consi∣der, the fruis of it is, good works: for Iam. 2. 17. faith without workes, is dead. The triall of it is Affliction, for it is not suf∣ficient Phil. 1 29. for vs to belieue in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake. The end of it is Saluation, for he that con∣tinueth to the end (hath this com∣fort) Mat. 24. shalbe saued. A Iustifying Faith is knowne by
these effects: It bringeth foorth Mat. 7. 18. Iam. 3. 18. Galat. 5. 6. fruits; It worketh by loue: It appre¦hendeth Gods mercy offered in Ie∣sus Christ. Faith differeth from Hope, and Faith the difference. yet wee hope in thinges present, as when I hope I am in Gods fauour. things past, as when I hope my sins be forgiuen me: things to come, as when I hope to haue eternall life. Charity is a singular vertue, for Charity a vertue. without it, what is Faith? It auayleth little though it moue mountaines. Knowledg, it profiteth little though I speake with tongues of men and Angels. Martirdome, It helpeth little though I offer my body to be 1. Cor. 13. burned. Wee ought to liue in loue & cha∣rity, How to liue. 1. Tim. 1. 5. because it is the effect and ful∣filling of the Commandement and whole Law: Because it is a testimo∣ny vnto vs of our translation from 1. Iohn. 3. 14. death to life, whereby we are made 1. Iohn 4. 8. the Children of God and heires in heauen: Because it worketh the cause
in vs, for God is loue, and hee that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God in him. Workes of superarrogation are Workes of superarro∣gation. very friuolous, for our works are in no wise availeable to saue vs, by rea∣son of their Imperfection: because all righteousnes is no better then fil∣thy Esa. 64. 6. clouts (or as some writ) menstru∣ous Rom. 11. 6. clothes. Gods election, because we should then chose God rather by our works, then he should elect vs of his meere grace, and then grace were no grace. Christs passion, be∣cause his sonne should haue suffered in vaine, if we had any sufficiency of our selues. Although works are not the cause of our saluation, yet partly they are the effects of it: good works are ve∣ry necessary to bee vsed amongst Christians; That thereby God may glorified: That by their good ex∣amples Mat. 5. 16. 1. Peter. 3. 1. 2. Peter. 1. 10. others may be wonne to the word: That by them they may make their Election sure.
Dauid numbred three degrees of our saluation. Gods mercy, whereby Psal. 40. 10 Degrees of saluation. he fatherly pittieth vs: His righte∣ousnesse, wherby he continually pro∣tecteth vs: His truth, whereby ap∣peareth his constant fauour towars vs. There be three causes of our sal∣uation: The efficient cause God the Saluation 3. causes. M. P. Father is the begining of our salua∣tion. The materiall cause, Christ Ie∣sus is he in whom our righteousnes is resident. The Instrumentall cause, faith is the meane whereby wee ap∣prehend the same. S. Paul approueth the formall cause of our saluation to be the free mercie of God: for whom hee pre∣destinateth, Rom. 8. 30. he calleth: whom hee calleth, he iustifieth: and whom he Ephes. 2. 8. iustifieth, he glorifieth. By grace yee are saued through faith. Although there be many reasons whereby we may assure our selues to be elected, yet we may briefly gather our election, by the holy Ghost,
which testifieth with our spirit, that Rom. 8. 15. we are the Children of God: by the fruites of the spirit, in hauing good workes or will to doe well. By re∣morse of conscience, ioyned with the loathing of sinne, and loue of righteousnesse. Election is knowne by these testi∣monies, Faith is gathered by sancti∣fication, Election. Beza. 2. Thes. 10. 11 and according to the truth: truth is gathered by calling, throgh the preaching of the Gospell: The Gospell assureth vs of a certaine hope of glorification. Touching Election and Reproboti∣on, Elestion and Reprobatiō. M. Deut. this is to be considered: That the only will and purpose of God is the chiefe cause of both. That his free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of saluation. That the hardnesse of heart, is an inferior cause of damna∣tion. This vndoubted perswasion wee ought generally to haue: Euery one is elected, or reiected at the be∣gining: Euery one is an vnprofita∣ble
seruant, when hee hath done his best: Euery one shall haue reward according to his worke. Wee ought not to condemne or Condemne not. Psal. 64. 4. iudge any to bee Reprobate (albeit to be without feare of God) and re∣uerence of man, are signes of repro∣bation. Because it is a secret, onely reserued to God, and therefore hee Mat. 7. 1. Iam. 4. 12. hath said, iudge not, that ye be not iudged. Because the Lord is not so mercifull in forgiuing, as hee is mi∣raculous in calling; making of a per∣secutor Acts. 9. 3. an Apostle, as hee did by Paul. Because the very Godly haue 1. Kin. 19. 10. beene very greatly ouer gone in this matter, as that great Prophet of the Lord Elias in iudging the people of Israell. These three steps do lead vs into Barnard. Destruction 3. steps. destruction; The dissembling of our weakenes, The ignorance of our wretchednes: The excusing & per∣seuering in our wickednes. The Scriptures are written for vs, Scriptres writteo. That we might know the will of god
and follow it. That wee might be∣leeue that Iesus is Christ the Sonne Ioh. 20. 31. of God. That in belieuing we might haue life through his name. The whole Scriptures are diuided Barnard. Scriptures deuided. into three parts: Lawe, Prophets, Gospell. The Law consist in doing, the Gospell consist in belieuing. This may perswade vs to belieue the authority of the scriptures to be true: The secret testimony of the Bib: holy Ghost in our heartes, which causeth vs to consent thereto. The incomprehensible Maiestie of God appearing in the simple and sincere doctrine therein. The godly agree∣ment of all parts together, with the orderly disposition, certainty and successe thereof. The Scriptures doe set forth vnto vs (amongst many other) three spe∣ciall matters which wee ought to re∣member: The frailty of man, and his prone inclination to euill; The Iustice of God, and his seuere pu∣nishment apointed for obstinate
transgressors. The mercy of God, and his free pardon promised to pe∣nitent sinners. Euery one ought effectually to know and search the holy scriptures (for knowledge,) because the igno∣rance of them is the cause of all er∣ror. (for confirmation,) because we must belieue nothing, but that which is approued by them. (for consolation,) because in them is Acts 17. contained eternall life. We may gather knowledge in the scriptures three manner of waies, by attendant hearing of the same well preached; By diligent reading of the Acts. 8. same with vnderstanding: By con∣tinuall conference with such as can open them. The word of God then draweth vs vnto him, when it is so preached and heard, as wee vnderstand and learne what is taught therby. When we receiue thankfully that which is giuen, promised and assured therin. When we be moued with desire and
diligence to doe that which it com∣mandeth. Word of god perfect word 1. Peter. 4. 8. The word of God hath then his perfect worke, when it is Preached truely, Belieued faithfully, Follow∣ed effectually. Such as will not belieue the word of God, what followeth: If the righ∣teous searcely be saued, where shall the vngodly and sinners appeare? Euery vnfaithfull, shall dye in his vnfaithfullnesse, saith Esdras. Eue∣ry Esdras. 15. 4. Ioh. 3. 18. 2. Thes. 1. vnbelieuer is condemned already And shall bee punished with euerla∣sting perdition. Ignorance can no way be excusa∣ble, Ignrance vnexcusable Rom. 1. 19. for that which may be knowne of God, is made manifest vnto vs: For those that know not the Lawe, shall perish without the law. For the offering for ignorant sinnes, in the Leuiticall law, argueth no excuse to Leuit. 4. 12. be admitted. Our Sauiour Christ describeth Mat. 13. A descripti∣on. by the parable of the Sower, three vnprofitable hearers of the word.
Such a one as heareth it, and vnder∣stādeth it not, by reason the euil one commeth and catcheth it away out of his heart. Such a one as heareth it, and receiueth it presently with great ioy, but when persecution or tribulation commeth, by reason of the word, he is offended. Such a one as heareth it, but the cares of this world, and the deceitfullnesse of riches choake it, and the same is made vnfruitfull. We ought to resort to the Church of God, because his holy ministeries Church of God must be vsed. M. Fox. are there laid open, which are hid and obscure to many: because wee may be vnited and copled together by receiuing the Sacraments: be∣cause if the Lord hath promised to grant our requests, where two or three bee gathered together in his name, how much more will hee bee mindfull of a multitude that so as∣semble themselues. The Church of God hath three Church 3. Ornaments. ancient and excellent Ornaments,
Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments. Preaching, ingendreth Faith. Prayer, increaseth it. Sacraments, confirme it. The Church or Congregation Congregati∣on must pray without dif∣ference. ought to pray for all men, without any difference of Nation, kind, age, or order: because the Lord by cal∣ling of all sorts, yea sometimes those that are the greatest enemies to the Gospell, will haue his Church ga∣thered together after this sort, and therefore prayers to be made for all; because God should not else be ma∣nifested to bee the onely God of all men, vnlesse hee should shew his goodnesse in sauing of all sorts of men: because his sonne Christ Ie∣sus should not be seene to be the on∣ly mediator betweene God and of al sorts of men, by hauing taken vpon that nature of man, which is com∣mon to all men, and made interces∣sion for all. Sacraments are signes or badges Sacraments of Christianity, seales or pledges of
our faith, assurance of our saluation whereof there be two, Baptisme and the Lords supper. The sacrament of Baptisme, tea∣cheth Bib: Baptisme. vs to put on Christ, that his righteousnesse may couer our sin∣fulnesse: assureth vs that wee are grafted in Christ, that all our cor∣ruption is cleane washed away, char∣geth vs to mortifie and dye to sinne, that wee may become his seruants, and liue in mutuall amity. The sacrament of the Lords sup∣per, Bib: Lords sup∣per. sheweth vs, that the body and blood of Christ crucified is the only food for the regenerate, assureth vs that Christ is wholy ours, and that by faith our soules are fed and nou∣rished in him vnto euerlasting life: requireth a thankfull remembrance of his death, with vnity amongst brethren. The sacrament of the Lords sup∣per Sacraments M. Dent. is vnworthyly receiued, when wee receiue it onely by the visible signe, without regard of the invisible
grace, when wee receiue it more of custome, then good consideration, or more for feare, then good affecti∣on: when wee receiue it disorderly (being drunked) or with a corrupted conscience (continuing in malice or enmitie. The sacrament of the Lords sup∣per must bee receiued reuerently: therefore let euery one try and ex∣amine his knowledge. Eaten effec∣tuall, therefore let euery one try and examine his faith. Disgested thank∣fully, and therefore let euery one try Article Religio. 26. and examine his repentance. Good Ministers are most fit to minister the holy Sacraments, yet Good Mini∣sters most fit wee may receiue them by the euill, because they doe it in Christ his name, and not in their owne: be∣cause their wickednesse cannot take away the effect of the ordinance, be∣cause of Christs institution & pro∣mise, so it bee rightly receiued by faith. These three things are to bee no∣ted
(whereof hitherto hath arisen some question) concerning the sa∣crament Note three things. of the Lords supper; By whom we receiue it, we ought to re∣ceiue it at the hands of the good mi∣nister, if it be possible; yet wee must not reiect the ministrie thereof by the wicked, so it bee done formally. With whom we receiue it, wee may communicate with euery one, so the 1. Cor. 5. 11. bee not such as are not notoriously knowne to be Drunkers, Adulterers and such like, for that is prohibited. How ought we receiue it, we may re∣reiue 1. Cor. 11. 27 at all times, so our faith & con∣firmity bee fit for the same: other∣wise it will turne to our condemnati∣on, saith Paule. It is a pitifull (nay rather a pesti∣ferous thing) to see such placed in Apittifull thing. the ministry as bee Ignorant in learn∣ning, for where there is no vision, the Prov. 29. 18. people perish. Negligent in their cal∣ling, for they are accursed that doe Iere. 48 10. the worke of God negligently. Im∣pudent in their liuing, for their lewd∣nesse
maketh the word of god worse liked of. 1. Sam. 2. 17. Idle Ministers, vnpreaching Pa∣stors, and such like, are nothing else, Idle Mini∣sters. Esa. 56. 9. 10. Ezek. 13. 4. but; Blind watchmen, Dumme dogges, Subtill Foxes, who destroy Gods vine for their owne advantage. Godly Preachers will bee very Godly Prea∣chers. carefull, of the sinceritye of their doctrine, that it bee agreable to the word of God: Of the integrity of their liues, that they bee confirma∣ble to the same word: Of all their whole actions, that they bee profi∣table to the example of others. These sayings may moue Prea∣chers and such like, to bee very care∣full; Sayinges to moue Prea∣chers. Because they must one day yeeld an accompt of their Steward∣shippe. Watchfull, Because his blood Ezek. 33. 6. 1 shall be required at their hands, that dies in their iniquity through their Wisd. 6. 5. negligence. Fearefull, Because an hard Iudgement shall try him that beareth rule. Godly Preachers and Pastors are
greatly to bee accepted, for their of∣fice sake: Because they represent Luke. 9. 41. Mark. 10. 41. 1. Thes. 5. 13. the person of God. Loued, for their workes sake: Because they dispose his secrets and misteries. Obayed, for Commandement sake: Because they are appointed Ouerseers, and watchers for our soules, as those Heb. 13. 17. that must yeeld accompt for them. S. Peter willeth preachers, pastors 1. Pete. 1. 18. and such like, to feede their flocke, caring for it; Not by constraint, but willingly: Not for filthy lucre, but of a willing mind: Not as though they were Lords ouer Gods heritage but as examples to them. S. Paule shewed a most worthy ex∣ample to preachers and such like, by An example to preachers Acts 20. 31. his dutifulnesse in preaching; For hee ceased not by the space of three yeares, to preach and warne euerie one both night and day with teares: by his painefulnesse in labouring; For he wrought with his owne hāds to minister to his necessities, not 1. Cor. 4. 12. onely because he would be chargea∣ble Act. 20. 23.
to none, but also to helpe to re∣lieue others: by his contentment in liuing, for although his liuing was little, yet hee well accepted of all e∣states, without coueting any mans siluer, Gold, or apparell. Preachers must teach the word of God, whether they regard it or no: because it may bee a Testimony a∣gainst Deut. 18. 19 the vnbeleeuers, or neglec∣tors of the same at the latter day: Iere. 7. 27. because the Lord will vse the means of his seruants to make the wicked more faulty to proue his: because it is their duty to be instant in season 2. Tim. 4. 2. and out of season. The spirit of Prophesiyng and Io. 11. 51. 1. sam. 10. 10. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. preaching is sometimes giuen to the wicked aswell as to the Godly, as by Caiphas, Saule, Iudas the Apo∣stle. Therefore we must try the spi∣rits whether they be of God. The word of God ought not to Gods word not to be ex∣empted to a∣ny. be exempted from any estate, nei∣ther ought to be contemned in any person in respect of his condition,
calling, or vnworthynesse; profes∣ing the same profitably, considering God hath called Plowmen from the fields, to be Prophets; Shepheardes 1. King. 19. 19 Psal. 78. 7 Mat. 4. 18. from the folds, to be zealous profes∣sors: Fishermen from the nets, to be followers of him. We must not condemne, or con∣temne Ministers not to bee contemned. the Ministers of God, if by infirmity they fall into horrible of∣fences, for Sathan hath beguiled the most Godly professors, as Lot Genes. 19 30 that ancient Patriarke, became in∣cestious. Dauid that excellent pro∣phet, 2. Sam. 11. 25. committed Homicide. Peter that good Apostle proued periured. Ioh. 18. 27. It is very dangerous to despise, pensecute, or conspire the death of A dāgorous thing. the Ministers of God, as may ap∣peare by these three Examples. 1 Iesubel did threaten the death 2. Kin. 19. 35. & 36. of Eliah, yet hee liued and was taken vp into heauen; when shee died, and was eaten of Dogges. 2 Saule intended the death of Da∣uid, yet he escaped & became King; 1. sam. 31. 4.
but Saule procured his owne death 2. sam. 1. 9. 15 most desperately. 3 Herod put to death Iohn Bap∣tist, Acts. 12. 13. but as his deedes were detesta∣ble before God, so his end was igno∣minious to the world, for he was ea∣ten to death with wormes. Preachers Pastors and such like, Preachers subiect to contempt. M. Gray. of all others are most of all subiect to contempt and enmity: Because Sathan by pollicy procureth many to a disdaine of their persons, as a meane to induce them to a disliking of their Doctrine: Because the spirits of error are now spread a∣broad, 2. Tim. 3. 2. which will deceiue the hearts of many, and cause them to become cursed speakers, especially against Gods ministers: Because these are 2. Tim. 3 those perillous daies, wherein it was long sithence prophesied, that many should bee dispisers of them which are good. Peter was three times commaun∣ded Bar. to feed his flocke, which is ex∣pounded three waies: with sound
doctrine, with honest life, with good Ioh. 21. Flocke fed Hospitality. This word (Behold) doth com∣monly import some great admirati∣on vnto vs, as it is vsed concerning Christ at his Natiuitie: Behold (saith Luk. 2. 10. the Angell to the Shepeheardes) I bring you glad tidinges, that vnto you is borne this day, a Sauiour, which is Christ the Lord. At his passion, Be∣hold (at his yeelding vp of the ghost) Mat. 27. 51. the vaile of the temple was rent it twaine the earth shaked, Stones cloven, the graues opened &c. At his second com∣ming, Behold (saith our Sauiour Apoc. 22. 12. Christ) I come shortly, and my reward is with mee to giue to euery man as his worke shall bee. Christ Iesus came into the world, Christs comming. not as a iust Iudge, but as a Phisiti∣an: Not as a destroyer, but as a Sa∣uiour: Not to call the Iust, but sin∣ners to repentance. Christ Iesus descended and came (as it was promised) Of the seede of Christs Li∣neage. Abraham. Bethelem brought him
forth, Of the tribe of Iuda. Naza∣reth Theoph. brought him vp, Of the stocke of Dauid. Capernaum was his dwel∣ling place. Christ Iesus was transfigured vp∣pon Mount Thabor, was crucified Mat. 17. 1. Heb. 13. 12. Luk. 24. 50. Acts 1. 3. Christ trans¦figured. at Ierusalem: was taken into Hea∣uen, at Bethaniah. Hee liued vpon the earth before his passion Thirtie Three yeares. After his resurrecti∣on, Forty daies. Christ Iesus consisteth of three Christs of 3. parts. parts. God-head, Soule, and Bodye, who as touching his humanitie, had no father: as concerning his diui∣nitie, had no mother. It was necessary that CHRIST Christs death neces∣sary.  Mat. 26. 56. Gen. 3. 15. 1. Ioh 4. 9. 1. Tim. 2. 6. Heb. 6. 11. should die: That the Scriptures might be fulfilled. That he might bruise the Serpents Head. That we might haue life through him. Christ is said to die (generally) for all the world, (specially) for those that belieue: (valiantly) for that he ouercame death. Christ had small comfort of his
Apostles, when he was taken priso∣ner: for Iudas betrayed him, Peter forsware him, all the rest forsooke him, And a great multitude follow∣ed him to his death: all to see the end of him. The benefit we reape by the death Colos. 1. 20. 1. Iohn. 2. 2. Galat. 3. 13. Mat. 11. 30. of Christ, is great. Hee reconciled vs to his father. Hee redeemed vs from the curse of the Law. He shew∣ed vs an easier way to heauen. Christ by his death became for man, Curse, considering the quality of his death. Sinne, considering Deut. 21. 23. Esa. 53. 9. Phi. 2. the integrity of his life. Seruile, con∣sidering the qualilie of his estate. It was requisite that Christ should Christs re∣surrection requisite. rise againe after death; because hee foreshewed it to his Apostles: be∣cause his flesh might not see corrup∣tion, because we might be iustified through him. It was necessary that Christ shold ascend after hee was risen, that hee might bee fully glorified, that hee Ioh. 7. 39. Iohn 16. 7. Ioh. 17. 3. might send downe the Comforter:
that hee might become our Media∣tor. Christ said that the Comforter at his comming should reproue the Ioh 16. 8 9. 10. world of sinne, because they belieue not in him. Of righteousnesse, be∣cause hee is gone to his father. Of Iudgement, because the Prince of this world is iudged. A wonder∣full example Esa. 53. 7. Christ hath shewed vs a worthy example of Patience, because being oppressed and afflicted, hee did not open his mouth; but was like a sheep dumbe before the shearer: Of Hu∣mility, because hee tooke vpon him Phil. 2. 7. the shape of a seruant beeing equall with his father. Of Loue, because he laid downe his life for vs: than this, what loue can be greater? Christ is very fitly called a Priest, Christ a Priest. because by his onely Sacrifice hee appeased his fathers wrath. A King, because he raigneth over all. A Pro∣phet, Ioh. 5. 22. Acts. 7. 37. because hee declared his fa∣thers will. There be three things that beare
record of Christ in heauen, the fa∣ther . Iohn. 5. 7. who sent his sonne, the word which became flesh: the holy ghost which proceeds from both. There be three things that beare Rom. 8. 16. Ioh. 3. 5. Ephes. 1. 7. witnes of Christ vpon earth, Spirit, this assureth vs of our adoption, Water, assureth vs of our Regenera∣tion: Blood, assureth vs of our re∣demption. Christ being the Truth, maifesteth▪ to vs his Nature, so that in him wee Christ ma∣nifesteth his nature. must begin: the Way, manifesteth to vs his Will, so that in him we must continue: the Life, manifesteth to vs his office, so that in him we must Beza. end. Hee that will come after Christ, must deny himselfe, wherein is laide before vs Bondage, in denying him selfe. Take vp his crosse, wherein is laid before vs Basenesse, in taking vp the crosse. Follow him, where∣in is laid before vs Hardnesse, in fol∣lowing Christ. Christ amazed and appeased his
enemies three manner of waies, by Christ ap∣peased his e∣nemies. his sound doctrine, by his straunge Miracles, by his mild answeres. Christ descended into Hell, as may appeare by these places, for so Psal. 16. 10. Ioh. 20. 17. Ephes. 4. 9. we confesse in the creede of Nicene, Athanasius, and the Apostles. Many produce these direction, to approue that the power, and not the soule of Christ descended. His speech to the Theife vpon the crosse, this day shall thou bee with me in Paradise. His yeelding vp the Ghost, when Luke. 23. 4. he said, it is finished. His Agonie in the Garden, in sweating drops of Blood and water. God spake most by parables to Gods speech by parables. the multitude, because by seeing, they should see, & not perceiue, be∣cause by hearing they should heare and not vnderstand: because it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets. The great Miracles and wonders Christ wrought in the world, were
done partly to this end: to she Mat. 15. 31. the great power, glory and goodnes of his father. To proue himselfe Acts. 2. 22. the Sonne of God, and that hee was sent of him. To confirme the au∣thority Ioh. 11. 42. and excellency of his doc∣trine, to winne the vnbeleeuers of it. Ioh. 2. 23. Miracles are often called in the Beza. Heb. 2. 4. Miracles called signes. Scriptures, Signes: Signes, because they appeare one thing, and repre∣sent another. Wonders: Wonders, because they import some strange and vnexcusable thing. Vertues: Vertues, because they giue a glimps of Gods power. Three singuler benefites shewen to man, by the father, he sent his The fathers 3. benefit. Sonne for our reconciliation: by the Sonne, his righteousnesse is our imputation: by the holy Ghost, Yet all one vnyon. this proceedeth from both, for our sanctification. It is a singuler comfort vnto vs, A singular comfort. D. King. to consider the exceeding loue of Christ towards vs, (by that hee hath done,) because hee did not
onely sacrifice himselfe vppon the crosse for our sakes, but also satisfi∣ed his fathers wrath for our sinnes. By that hee still doth, because hee did not onely suffer for vs, but be∣came also a continuall intercessor for vs. By that he will doe, because he hath not onely saued vs, but also come to iudge. Such as will presume of the time Mat. 24. 36. markc. 13. 32 1. Thes. 5. 1. Acts. 1. 12 that Christ shall come to iudgment, may e reproued by these places, or it is not for vs to know the times and the seasons, the father hath put in his owne power▪ The comming of Christ is of 3. sortes. Vnto men, Into men, Against Iohn 1. 14 Iohn 14. 18. Apoc. 22. 12. men, Vnto men, in the flesh. Into men, by his spirit. Against men, in Iudgement. It stands vs not so much vpon to Christs com¦ming to Iudgment not to be dis∣puted on. vse disputation, of the time of Christs comming to Iudgement, as to be in a daily preparation, and re∣formation of our liues, considering, euery mans end is imminent & vn∣certaine,
euery mans death is his lat∣ter Iam. 4. 14. Heb. 9. 27. Eccle. 11. 3. day, euery man as he dieth, so he shall be iudged. The comming of Christ to iudg∣ment will bee, Fearefull to the wic∣ked; Christs com¦ming feare∣full. because that day to them wil be the beginning of their woe: Ioyful▪ to the Godly, because it is to them the ful fruition of their felicity. Wō∣derfull to both, because of the sud∣daine alteration of all things. These three things doe argue the A signe of the worlds end. Mat. 4. 23. Mat. 24. world to draw to an end. The Fig-tree, because it florisheth. Charity, because it waxeth cold. Iniquity, because it aboundeth. The comming of Christ to iudg∣ment will be of a suddaine, as a wo∣man Christs com¦ming sud∣daine. trauailling with Child. As lightning from the East. In the ho∣wer we thinke not. Bee sober and watch, for happie are those ser∣vants Luke. 12. 37. which the Lord when hee commeth shall find waking. Although it was said One Thou∣sand Fiue Hundred yeares and
more since, the day of the LORD is at hand; And yet the worlde in∣dure: We must not suppose those words to be frivolous or frustrate: for thereby the Lord doth make manifest vnto vs (His infinite wise∣dome) In Computation of yeares, because hee doth not reckon or re∣cord the time, according to our knowledge or reason: For one day is with him, as a Thousand Psal. 19. 4. yeares, and a Thousand yeares as one day. (His exceeding mer∣cy) In delaying of the day, because he would not haue vs perish, but 2. Pet. 3. 9. would all men to come to repen∣tance. Our ympudent misery, In Rom. 2. 4. consideration thereof, because we doe not vse the bountifulnes of his patience and long suffering accor∣dingly. Account to be made. Rom. 2. 25. Mat. 12. 37. Wee must yeeld accompt at the later day of all our sines, committed (In cogitation, our thoughts shall ei∣ther accuse or excuse vs, In cōmunica∣tion, our words shal either iustifie or condemne vs.
In Action, our works shall then haue Heb. 9. 27. their due reward. Our great accusers at the yeeld∣ing The Law our accuser. vp of our last accompt, shall be the Law: beside that, we shall stand helpelesse before so many Iudges as haue excelled vs in good workes. The Deuill, besides that, wee shall bee cast by so many euidences as haue giuen vs example of good life. Our Consciences, we shall be conuinced with so many witnesses as haue admonished vs with whole∣some counsell, and by their vertu∣ous deeds, haue beene patternes for vs to imitate. The Pope doth rather preferre, then make himselfe equall, with the The Pope. excellency of our Sauiour Christ. Hee will bee the Supreame of all the world, exempting himselfe from all obedience to an earthly Prince, or reuerence to any people, when Christ was content to acknowledge mat. 17. 27. the authoritie of the Magistrate in Tole, yea euen to such as were ene∣mies
to Religion. Hee giueth out his feete to bee kissed of men, euen of Kings and Emperors: when Christ did neuer so lay foorth his feete; but that he washed his poore Ioh. 13. 5, 15 disciples feete, and that because they should doe, as hee had done to them. Hee doth of pitty free one or o∣ther euery day from the paines of Purgatory. Purgatorie, when our Sauiour Christ did free none at all from those hellish paines. The Soule of man after death Soule of man. doth goe either to Ioy or paine ime∣diately, whereof there be three ex∣amples, (besides manifest proues,) that may flatly refell their erroni∣ous opinions of such as falslie af∣firme there is a Purgatorie. The Soule receiued into Abrahams bo∣some. The Soule of the Theife ascending into Paradice. The soule Luke. 16. 22. Luke. 23. 33. Lu. 16. 2. of the Rich man descending into Hell. These three thinges are worthy
continually to bee noted. The se∣crets Note three things. of God are vnsearchable. The Ioyes of Heauen are vnspeakeable. The paines of Hell are intollerable. A vertuous man disposeth his A vertuous man his dis∣position. way in this world Prudently, to dis∣pose and order things present: Pe∣nitently, to consider his misdeedes past. Prouidently, to prouide and foresee for things to come. S. Paul deuideth man into three Mans devi∣sion. parts, Spirit, for then is man fully sanctified, when his mind thinketh nothing. Soule, for then is man fully sanctified, when his will couets nothing. Body, for then man is fully sanctified, when his body exe∣cutes 1. Thes. 5. 23. nothing, contrary to the will of God. A Godly Christian ought to liue in this world, Soberly, concerning D. Milwood. himselfe, that hee keepe his body temporately without abusing the gift of God, wantonly or wastfully. Iustly, concerning his neighbour, That hee deale plainely, vprightly,
and charitably, without dissimulati∣on. Godly, concerning God, That he presume not to much of himselfe but referre all to Gods good plea∣sure and prouidence. A man should not do amisse saith Augustine, If forgetfullnes confoūd not his memory. If error obscure not his vnderstanding. If iniquity▪ depraue not his will. The state of man is three waies to Mans estate be considered, by creation, hee was made like to the Image of GOD, Ephe. 4. 24. which Image is expounded heere, by fall and sinne, hee became slaue vnto Sathan, and so procured the same thraldome to all posterities. By Regeneration, hee is ingrafted into Christ by faith, and in him hath re∣couered the former right. A man is happy in this world that Man happie can reioyce in aduersity, following the example of Paule. Beare all 2. Cor. 11. 30 crosses patiently, following the ex∣ample Ioh. 1. 1. of Iob. Lament his sin sor∣rowfully, following the example of Luke. 22. 62
Peter. Euery man should be mindfull of his Creation, because he is dust and to dust he shall returne. Of his Con∣uersation, Gen. 3. Eccle. 12. 24. because hee must one day yeeld account of his liuing. Of his Dissolution, because his end is vn∣certaine, Eccle. 11. 3. and as he falls, such iudge∣ment followes. Heerein consists the whole duty of man towards God, to feare him, for his Iustice: because it is horri∣ble Mans duty. to fall into his hands. To loue him for his goodnes, because hee lo∣ued Heb. 10. 31. vs first: To keepe his Com∣mandements, 1. Iohn. 4. 19. 2. Iohn. 5. 3. to confirme it, be∣cause those that loue him, wil keepe his commandements. S. Iames willeth euery man to be, Iam. 1. 19. Swift to heare, Slow to speake, Slow to wrath. No man hath cause to glorie in himselfe, if hee consider what hee is of himselfe, By Substance, hee wa Gen. 3. 7. made of the dust. By Nature, h is the child of wrath. By Knowledg Ephes. 2. 3.
he is but a beast. Iere. 10. 14. For a man to glory or attribute a∣ny praise to himselfe in any good at∣tempts, It is Vanity, because of him∣selfe hee cannot thinke a good 2. Cor. 3. 5. thoght, much lesse do a good deed. It is Arraganey, because he attribu∣teth Iam. 1. 17. that to himselfe, which is pro∣per to God, for euery good and per∣fect gift commeth from aboue. It is Iniquitie, because hee doth not ac∣knowledge Colo. 3. 17. the giuer thankefully, for all praise and honor is to bee gi∣uen to God. Herod by abridging GOD of Acts. 12. 23. Herod end. his glory, came to a most misera∣ble end. This may abate the high aspiring Eccle. 10. 9. mind of man, His birth beeing sin∣full, His life beeing miserable, His body being wormes meat. Euery man must haue a Godly Mans care to liue. Exod. 20. 9. 1. Tim. 5. 8. care to liue in this world, because God hath commaunded hee should labour Sixe daies, because hee is worse then an Infidell, that provi∣deth
not for his houshold: because he may avoid the inconuenience of 2. Thes. 3. 10. Prou. 12. 11. Idlenes, which bringeth much euill. A good Christian ought to bee wise, vnto that which is good, Sym∣ple, Rom. 16. 19. 1. Cor. 1. 20. concerning euill: Foolish in re∣spect of this world. Heretickes and erronnyous per∣sons Hereticks dangerous. are verie dangerous to be per∣mitted amongst Godly Christians, considering their condition: Be∣cause they thinke it not enough to erre and doe euill themselues, ex∣cept Esa. 3. 10. Wis. 14. 21. they draw others with them as appeareth. In considering their cor∣ruption: Because by continuance they will defile many, for a little lea∣ven, leaueneth the whole lumpe. Heb. 12. 5. Considering the season, because in these latter times many shall giue 1. Tim. 4. 1. heed to spirits of error and doctrine of Deuils. Wicked men are ftly compared in the Scriptures, To Thornes, be∣cause Comparison they be as prickes to procure hurt to the Godly.
To Chaffe, because as the wind doth scatter the Chaffe, so shall the be soone cut off from the face of the earth. To tares, because as Tares are to bee bound in bundels and burnt, so shall they in hell fier. Wicked men are called by sun∣dry names, and compared in the A compari∣son of wicked men. Scriptures, To Foxes, because they are subtill in vndermining, and do∣ing of mischiefe, Insomuch as the Church requireth to haue the foxes Cant. 2. 15. taken away. To Dogges, because they are Currish in controlling and barking against all goodnes. Heere∣of Paule willeth the Phillipians to Phil. 3. 2. beware of Dogges. To Beasts, be∣cause they are prophaine in their liues, and degenerate from their kind worse then beastes. So Paul 1. Cor. 15. 32 complaineth that hee fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men. The wicked and vngodly, are Wicked men not to be sup∣ported. not to bee supported purposly, be∣cause it is an abhomination before
God to iustifie the wicke. Accom∣paned Prou. 17. 15. willingly, because it is dange∣rous, for hee that toucheth pitch, Eccle. 13. 1. shall bee defiled. Condemned vt∣terly, because the Lord will haue Rom. 9. 15. mercy on whom hee will, and when he please. These sayings may terrifie such as attempt any euill. The face of the 2. Pet. 3. 12 Rom. 2. 9. Lord is against him; Tribulation and anguish shall be vpon his soule: There shall bee no end of plagus Pro. 24. 20 to him. God tempteth no man to euill, God temp∣teth not any. but we are drawne to it, by the De∣uill, who watcheth to worke our o∣uerthrow. By our owne concupi∣scence, to consent to his suggesti∣ons. By vicious company, and ill perswasions of others, when wee bee seduced. The Deuill will vndermine vs in our musings, if wee take not great Barnard. The Deuill vndermi∣neth. heed, for in them he talketh with vs wittily; hee eggeth vs cunningly: Hee deceiueth vs craftily, whom if
wee resist by faith, the Lord will o∣verlooke vs fighting, succour vs fainting: crowne vs overcomming. The Deuills haue knowledge af∣ter Iam. 2. 19. a sort, for they beleiue there is a God, and feare and tremble. They can pleade scripture for their owne purpose: They acknowledge the Mat. 4. 6. mat. 829. comming of Christ to Iudgement. The Deuill hath three euill pro∣perties, he is subtill as a Serpent, for hee can transforme himselfe into many shapes, (yea into an Angell The Diuels properties 3. M. Smith. of Light) and vse many shifts to de∣ceiue withall. Hee is sttong as a Lyon, for he is not so busie in seek∣ing daily for his prey, as he is forci∣ble to resist where he assaulteth. He is cruel as a Tyger, for where hee hath any entrance at al, he will neuer rest, vntill he bringeth to confusion. The Deuill vseth three pollicies The Diuels pollicies 3. to tempt Christ in the Wildernesse, perswading him, to distrust in God, To the desite of riches and honour: To a vaine confidence of himselfe.
Wee haue three cruell foes that fight against the spirit in this life. Three cruel foes. The Flesh, The World, And the Deuill. The fiercest foe in this fight is the Deuill: whom wee may ex∣pell with these three weapons. Faith, Prayer, The word of God. Wee ought not to follow the lusts of the flesh, but lead our liues holie, Beza. 1. Pet. 2. 11. because those lusts though they flatter vs, yet they cease not to fight against our saluation. Because wee are Cittizens in heauen, and there∣fore ought to lead our liues thereaf∣ter although we be strangers heare. Because the glory of God is greatly set forth by that meanes, whilest by example of our honest life, euen the most prophane men are brought vnto God, and submit themselues vnto him. There are many walke in this world (saith Paul) whose God is Phil. 3 19. their belly, whose glory is their shame, whose end is damnation. The wretchednes of this worlde
made Salomon say, the day of death is better then the day one is borne: Eccle. 7. 3. made Iob say, My soule is cut off Iob. 10. 1. though I liue: made Paul say, I desire to bee loosed from this life. Phil. 1. 23. What should wee so account of this world, seeing the fashion of it goes away. The wisdome of it is meere foolishnesse. The amity of 1. Cor. 7. it, is enmity with God. Vse this world as though ye vsed it not saith Paule. These three thinges may with∣draw Note three things. a man from desiring long life in this world. The wretchednesse of his life, because it is but a contin∣uall temptation and full of misery. The grieuonsuesse of his sinnes, be∣cause they will more increase by continuance. The greatnesse of his Accompt, because it will be the more fearefull at the yeelding vp. The Godly desire to bee out of Godly their desire. this world, because it is variable and nothing but vanity, because of the innumerable euills they are sub∣iect
vnto, because they long to bee clothed with the heauenly habit. Life is very sweete, and so sweete that it hath prouoked the Godly to Life sweet. M. Dodd. prolonge the safety of it by shifts. Dauid doubting of euill dealing, fained himselfe mad to saue his life. Paule perceiuing their cruelty that would kill him, had rather in the night bee let downe in a Basket, then abide. Peter fearing death, did forsweare his Master. The faithfull and Godly in this world doe daily Fight, by reason of their aduersarie. Faint, by reason of their Infidelity. Fall, by reason of Psal. 37. 24. their infimity, yet the shall not bee cast away. These three thinges are worthy to bee considered, hee that liueth three things to be consi∣dened. best doth daily sinne. Hee is happy that hath grace to repent. Hee is blessed to whom God imputeth no sinne. Although euery man is a sinner,
yet euery sinne is not of like consi∣deration, for some sinne of Ignorance 1. Tim. 13. 2. Sam. 11. 2 Dan. 3. 1. as Paul did: some of Infirmity, as Dauid did: some of Malice, as Na∣buchadnezzar did. Euery sinner must beware of Sinners to beware of 3. things. Mat. 24. 50 Rom. 6. 1. these three things, of Procrastination In delaying the time of repentance, Of Presumption, In presuming still vpon hope. Of Prouocation, In sin∣ning obstinately against the holy Ghost. Sinne is nothing else but a sweete poyson, a flattering death, and a de∣struction Sinne two sorts. of the soule: whereof there bee two sorts, Originall, and Actuall ADAM did further his fall and increase his sinne in the Garden 3. Adams fall waies, by Ambition, because hee Gen. 3. 6. thought to be as GOD knowing good from euill. By Hypocrisie, be∣cause Gen. 3. 10. he hid the cause of his naked∣nesse, which was the breach of gods Gen. 3. 12. Commaundements. By Impeniten∣cy, because hee was so farre from ac∣knowledging
his transgression, that hee burdened God with his fault, in that he had giuen him a wife. It appeareth by this that sinne is Execrable, because it repented God Sinne exe∣crable. Gen. 6. 6 Zepan. 1. 3. that he had made man on the earth. Detestable, because hee destroyed dumme creatures for our cause. In∣tollerable, because he would not spare his onely Sonne for our sinnes. It is an exceeding comfort to a sinner, to consider, That God is as An excee∣ding com∣fort. M. Rog. well a Father as a Lord. That Christ is as well a Sauiour, as a Iudge. That the Scriptures includ, as well a Gos∣pell as a Law. Sinners should not despaire of Gods mercy, if they did but per∣ceiue Sinners not to despaire. his goodnesse, which appear∣eth vnto them, by his readynesse in calling, before they cry (saith the Lord) I will answere, and whilest Esa. 65. 24. they are yet thinking what to speak, I will heare. By his worthynesse in Wis. 11▪ 20. sparing hee maketh as though hee saw not the sinnes of men, because
they should amend. By his vnwil∣lingnesse in stricking, hee taketh Ezek. 18. 23. no pleasure in the destruction, but in the conuersion of Sinners. What greater comfort can sin∣ners haue, sith Christ himselfe saith Sinners comfort. Aske, and ye shall haue. Seeke, and yee shall find. Knocke, and it shall be opened vnto you. I stand at the doore and knocke, &c. Hee that will obtaine mercy by Apoc. 3. 20. true repentance, must acknowledge his sinnes sorrowfully with the Pro∣digall Sonne: Must shew a hearty contrition for the same, and loath them. Must doe good workes wor∣thy Acts 26. 20. amendment afterward. Hee that is fully perswaded of the forgiuenesse of his sinnes, it behoo∣ueth him to remember these three Remem∣brance of 3. things. things. The mercy of God, that he be thankefull vnto him for his gra∣tious goodnesse shewen vnto him, by remitting his offences, and re∣ceiuing him into his fauour. The Subtilty of Sathan; that hee watch
and pray continually, for the De∣uill 1. Pet. 5. 8. goeth about like a roaring Lyo seeking whom he may deuoure. The frailty of himselfe, that see∣ing his owne infirmity hee may the rather depend vpon God, and craue his mercy to increase his faith and strengthen his weakenesse, or else he shall not bee able to withstand the opposite euils he is subiect to. God sheweth himselfe to all his people: Mercifull to the Elect, In M. Pe. pardoning their sinnes. Good to the Reprobate, Albeit they cannot feele the sweete comfort of the same▪ Iust, to both of them: In giuing Iudgement. The Lord will not reiect the suit of a sinner, neither accept of it, vn∣lesse in asking he hath a speciall re∣gard of these three thinges. Of the time: For the Lord will not bee found at all times, but requireth op∣portunity. Heereof saith the Pro∣phet Esay, Seeke the Lord while h Esa. 55. 6. may bee found, and call vpon hi
while he is neare. The Fiue foolish Virgins comming to late, were ex∣cluded. Mat. 25. 12. Of the manner: For the Lord will not onely haue such as call vpon him, depart from iniquitye, but will also haue their prayers pro∣ceede from the very hart. Then shalt thou call (saith the same Prophet to the Hypocrites,) Esay. 58. 9. and the Lord shall answere, thou shalt cry, and hee shall say, heere I am. Of the end, For God requi∣reth not onely opportunity of vs in asking; as appeareth by the woman of Canaan, but also respecteth the Mat. 15. 28. end of our requests, in asking accor∣ding to his will, otherwise wee may aske, and receiue not, because wee aske amisse, to consume it on our Iam. 4. 3. lusts. Hee that will reclaime a sinner, Obseruation of 3. things. D. King. must obserue three thinges in hand∣ling of him, which the Apostle saint Peter practised with the Iewes. 1 Demonstration of the matter, in shewing him (by the word of God)
it is a sinne, that it may so appeare vnto him: whereby hee may the better acknowledge it before God. 2 Reprehension of the Offence, In reprouing him (by the Iudge∣ments of God, pronounced against the same) that hee may both heare the punishment hee hath worthily deserued, and also thereby, bee the more terryfied from attempting e∣uill. 3 Exhortation to the sinner, In perswading him (by the promises of Gods mercy) that he may not on∣ly bee driuen from despaire, but also by that meanes bee drawne to a∣mendment. The same notable example of Manasses in his conuersion, doth A notable example. minister singular matter to euery sinner, wherein hee may note three speciall causes for his comfort. Note three speciall cau∣ses. 1 That God will punish the wic∣ked, that hee intendeth to saue: that by this meanes they may seeke him by repentance, according to that
same saying of the Psalmist, when hee slewe them, hee sought thē and Psal. 78. 34 returned, and sought God earely. 2 That the mercy of God is ve∣ry great, who although hee will not suffr sinne to passe vnpunished, yet he is ready to forgiue, though it bee very grieuous, as hee hath promised by the Prophet Esayas, to such as Esay. 55. 7. 8, & 9. hartily repent. 3 That those whom God hath Luke. 1. 75. thus called, are not to returne to their sinnes, as the dogge to his vo∣mit, but as becommeth new borne Children, to liue in holynesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of their life. God keepeth his Children com∣monly in this world sparingly, that they may not be to proud with pro∣sperity; that by this meanes they may the better see their owne mise∣ry: that thereby they may the ra∣ther depend on his mercy. Godly care of time. The Godly thinke that day to be ill spent, wherein they Doe nothing,
that may make to the glory of God: Wherein they Say nothing, that may make to the comfort of them∣selues. Wherein they Thinke no∣thing, that may make to the edyfi∣yng of others. Tribulations and affliction are to the Godly and faithfull a confirma∣tion A confirma∣tion of Gods loue. M. Dent. of Gods loue: Because he will not suffer them to bee condemned with the world, and therefore hee chastiseth those whom hee loueth. A probation of their faith and pati∣ence: Because he will see if they will stand as strict to him now, as they promised in prosperity, not that God is ignorant of the issue, but be∣cause hee would haue it appeare to others, that hee doth Crowne such Mat. 24. 13. with his glory, as continue constāt. A purgation of their liues: Because he vseth these crosses to make them remember their miserable estate that by these meanes they may bee made perfect against the day of re∣stauration.
The Godly doe reioyce in Tri∣bulation, knowing that Tribulation bringeth forth Patience; Patience, Experience: Experience, Hope: And hope maketh not ashamed. The afflictions of the Godly dif∣fer from the wicked, because the Beza. 1. Peter. 4. Godly communicate with Christ in their afflictions, and therefore shall in time also be pertakers of his glory: because in suffering these crosses, their adoption is sealed in them by the spirit of God, although the Infidels thinke farre otherwise, who in afflicting the Godly, blas∣pheme God. Because they are not afflicted for their euill doings, but for righteousnesse sake, which mi∣nistreth vnspeakeable ioy to them. The faithfull in their afflictions, The faith∣fuls confi∣dence. 1. Cor. 10. 13 haue this confidence in God: that hee will la no more vpon them, then hee will make them able to beare. That hee will deliuer them out of their troubles in a good time. Apoc. 2. 10. That hee will giue them a Crowne
of life in the end. Such as suffer affliction may take Comforta∣ble saings. Act. 14. 22. comfort by the consideration of these sayings. Wee must by ma∣ny afflictions enter into the King∣dome of Heauen. All that liue 2. Tim. 3. Rom. 8. 18. Godly in Christ, shall suffer perse∣cution. All the afflictions in this life, are not counted worthy of the glory of the life to come. Afflictions are very necessary for the Godly, because their faith is Beza. am. 2. 3. afflictions necessary. tryed through afflictions, which ought to bee most pure, for so it is behooueable for them: because patience is a farre passing and more excellent vertue, is by this meanes ingendred in them. Because the Crosse is as it were the Instrument wherwith God doth pollish and fine them, therefore the workes and ef∣fects of afflictions, is the perfecting of them in Christ. Patience is very expedient for Christians: That by it their faith Patience expedient. Phil. 4. 5. might be confirmed. That there∣by
they may bee made perfect and Iam. 1. 4. Hob. 10. 36. intire. That after they haue done the will of God they might receiue the promise. There bee three worthy exam∣ples 3. worthy Examples. of patience set foorth vnto vs. The Example of Christ himselfe Iam. 5. 10. the onely patterne of patience. The Example of Iob, whose pa∣tience ye haue heard of. The Example of the Prophets, whose patient examples appeare vnto vs. These three poynts are required of the faithfull. That their talke Psal. 37. 30. 31. &c. bee Godly; That Gods law bee in their hart: That their life bee vp∣right. There bee three thinges verie dangerous for the Godly, Prosperi∣ty 3. thinges dangerous. of themselues: because it maketh them to forget God. Heereof saith Dauid, I said in my prosperity I will Psal. 30. 6. not bee moued. Prosperity of the wicked: because it maketh them dispute with God, thinking hee doth
not rightly consider of them, as the Psal. 73. 13. same Prophet did. Extremity of af∣fliction: because it maketh them dispaire of God, thinking he would destroy them vtterly; Insomuch as the same Psalmist burst foorth with Psal. 39. 13. these sayings. Stay thine anger from me that I may recouer my strength before I goe hence, and be not. Cornelius was a deuout man in Acts. 10. 2. three respects: He feared God with all his Houshold. Hee gaue much Almes to the people. Hee prayed to God continually. And Iob a iust man in three re∣spects. Hee feared God. Hee es∣chewed Iob. 1. Iob. 31. 16. euill. Hee did good workes. Hee that will bee acceptable to God, must bee, Iust in word; Vp∣right Barnard. in deede: Vndefiled in his thought. The Iust doe reioyce at the pu∣nishment of the wicked, because Psal. 94. 2. therby God sheweth himselfe Iudge of the world, and by this meanes continueth his honour and glory.
Because heereby hee sheweth hee Psal. 41. 11. hath care ouer his Children, in that hee punisheth their enemies: Be∣cause Deut. 17. 13. 2. Thes. 3. 14. by their example others may feare, and bee reformed in some measure. Wee ought to loue and do good to our enemies: Because Christ Loue our e∣nemies. himselfe did so, whose example wee ought to ymitate. Because it is not Luke. 3. 24. Mat. 5. 46. prayse worthy, to loue where wee are beloued, for so doe the Hypo∣crites and Publicanes. Because it Rom. 12. 17. 20. is our duty, not onely to suffer iniu∣ry, but also to doe good. Such as continue in malice and Mark. 11. 25. hatred should consider their praiers are vnprofitable, if they aske mercy and forgiue not. The Lords supper 1. Cor. 11. 27 is prophaned, if they receiue it vn∣worthyly. They themselues are 1. Ioh. 3. 13. 15. but Manslayers if they liue not in charity. These three thinges (saith the Sonne of Syrach) My soule loueth, 3. thinges to be loued. Eccle. 25. 1. Vnity of Brethren. Loue of Neigh∣bours:
And agreement of man, and wife. Euery one ought to know, how Knowledge how to liue. farre and in what manner he ought to loue. A mutuall friend in God; because in louing other he shall of∣fend God: for he that loueth father or mother (much lesse a common friend) more then mee saith our Sa∣uiour Christ, is not worthy of mee. Mat. 10. 37. A malicious foe, for the loue of God: because he cannot loue God 2. Ioh. 4▪ 20. whom hee hath not seene, if hee lo∣ueth not his brother that hee hath seene. A manifest sinner, for hu∣manity sake: because wee ought to haue a consideration of his soule, though we haue a detestation of his 2. Thes 3. 15. sinnes, according to the councell of the Apostle, who willeth vs to ac∣compt such a one not as an enemie, but admonish him as a brother. There bee three things prohibi∣ted, which ought not to bee vsed of 3. Things to be prohibi∣ted. any to their very enemies. To en∣uie their estate: Because enuie tur∣neth
to a mans owne euil in the end Galat. 2. 21. according as it was written, No en∣uious persons or such like, shall not inherit heauen. To reioyce at their full: because it is dangerous, Pro. 24. 18. least the Lord see it (as Salomon saith) and it displease him, and hee turne his wrath from him, to bee a∣uenged on thee. To render euill for evill: because it is the part of a Rom. 12. 20. good Christian, not to vse the meanes to further a mischiefe, but to ouercome euill with good. Dauid beeing both a Prince and Psal. 78. 72. A Kings charge. a prophet, sheweth wherein a Kings charge standeth. To prouide faith∣fully for his people. To guide them by counsell. To defend them by power. Such as are called to bee Rulers Magistrats. and Magistrates, ought to bee men of courage, fearing God. Men Exo. 18. 21. dealing truly, hating Couetousnes. Deut 1. 13. Men of wisedome and vnderstan∣ding. Such as intend euill attempts, or
vse any rebellious meanes, or mis∣chiefe against Gods annoynted, Kings and princes must remember Kings and Princes should remem∣ber the end of these three Examples 3. examples 1. Sam. 24. 5. 6. Dauid hauing but priuily cut off the lappe of a King Sauls garment, was touched vehemently in his hart for it. Absolon hauing betrayed King 2. sam. 18. 14. Dauid his Father, came to an vn∣timely death, for he was hanged by the haire of his head vpon an Oake. Achitophel being a coadiutor in pre∣ferring 2. sam. 17. 23. the lewd practises of Absolon, against his father; when hee percei∣ued his counsell preuailed not, hee went desperately and hanged him∣selfe. Hee that will vse reuerent obedi∣ence to his Prince, must bee very Daungerous to offend. carefull to consider, how dangerous it is to offend, in thinking euill: for the foule of the heauen shall carry Eccle. 10. 20. the voyce, and that which hath wings shall declare the matter. In Exod 22. 28. vttering euil, for it is written: Thou shalt not speake euill of the rule of
thy people. In committing euill, for if the Lord doth detest the euill intent, and forbid filthy speeches, how much more doth hee abhorre his act of euill, and will punish the Malefactors. There bee three poynts com∣mendable ad necessary for him 3. Commen∣dable points. Hest. 10. 3. aec that is in authority. To haue the fauour of the people. To procure their wealth. To bee gentle and louing towards them. Good and Godly Magistrates Magistrats obeyed. Rom. 3. 5. ought to bee obayed in respect of Conscience, Because they are ordey∣ned of GOD, whose will is, they should bee obeyed. Feare, because they are his Ministers to take ven∣geance Rom. 13. 4. Iudg. 16. 6. on them that doe euill. Ne∣cessitie, because where no rule is, all things goe to ruine. Heerein consists the whole duty Magistrats duty. Wis. 6. 8. of Magistrates, That the higher they are placed, the sorer is their tryall. That their negligence in suffering euill, is their iniquity. That
the ill example of themselues is a double sinne. There bee three thinges not tol∣lerable in any Magistrate. Partia∣litie, Leuit. 19. 15. Deut. 1. 17. in respect of persons, for that is abhomination in the sight of god. Mat. 4. 24. Crueltie, in ministring Iustice, for such measure as they meete, shall be met to them againe. Bribery, in detayning right, for fire shall con∣sume Ioh. 15. the houses of bribes. Hee that will bee Master ouer a Masters duty. Godly Houshold, must know his owne duty to his Family, Wife, Children and seruants, and how to se them being well disposed or euill enclyned. The duty of the Housholder, is: Pro. 27. 23. Psal. 78 5. 1 Tim. 5. 8. To know the state of his flocke. To instruct them in the feare of GOD. To prouide carefully for his family. The Husband ought to haue a Honsholders care. speciall honest care and loue to his Wife, in three respects. Because she commeth of his owne flesh, and therefore who will bee biteer to his
owne body. Because they are the weaker vessels, and therefore who will not beare with their infirmities. Because shee was made a comforter to man: and therefore hee is worse then a beast, that will bee cruell to her. There bee three causes should Wife obedi∣ent. moue and make the Wife obey, ho∣nour and submit herselfe to her husband. The Priority of mans 1. Tim. 2. 14. Creation: Because Adam was first fomed, Eue afterward for his sake. The Superiority of his placing, because man was made to beare rule Ephe. 5. 23. Superioritie. Whereunto Paule very well alludeth and saith: That as Christ is the head of the Church, so is the man of the woman. The iniquitie of the womans procuring, because the 1. Tim. 214. Gen. 3. 16. man was deceiued by the woman, whereupon God inioyned her (a∣mongst other) this punishment of subiection. Parents must haue a great regard Parentes. of their children, in obseruing three
thinges. That they bring them vp Ephe. 6. 4. carefully in the Information of God, least they growe gracelesse. That they bridle them discreetely, Pro. 22. 6. while they are young, least they grieue them when they are old. That they prouoke them not too rigorously at any time, least they Collo. 3. 21. discourage them. Such Children as are obedient to Childrens duty. their Parents, shall haue this bene∣fit: They shall liue long vpon the earth. They shall prosper in all M. Perk. their proceedings. They shall haue ioy of their owne Children. Children ought to obey their Parents, by the Law of God, by the course of nature, by the rule of reason, so it be in the Lord. Masters should continually re∣member, Maisters duty. That they haue a Master aboue that seeth all. That they shall receiue for the wronge they of∣fer, of him who respecteth no per∣sons. That they bee as carefull to redresse their faults, as ready to re∣proue
their seruants escapes. Heerein consists the dutie of ser∣uants: To obey their Masters in Seruants duty. Ephes. 6. 6. the Lord, without murmuring. To doe their duty in singlenesse of heart, without eye-seruice. To suf∣fer patiently rebukes and chastise∣ments without resisting. Riches oftentimes be the meanes Riches. to cause Impiety, as appeares by the Parable of the young man. Securi∣ty, as appeares by the Parable of the rich man. Misery, as appeares by the Parable of Diues and Lazarus. Wicked, wealthy worldlings Amos. 6. 1. Esay. 65. 13. Iam. 5. 1. Mat. 20. should doe well to consider conti∣nually of these places. A rich man shal hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen. Such as gather their goods by v∣sery, bribery, extortion or such Pro. 28. 8. like vnlawfull meanes, what follow∣eth. They gather them for such as (Salomon saith) will bee good to the poore. The rust of their gold Iam. 5. 3. and siluer as (S. Iames saith) will bee
a witnesse against them, and eate their flesh as it were fire. They lye in graue like Sheepe, as (Dauid saith) and death gnaweth vppon Psal. 49. 14. them. Although worldlings doe make Phil. 3. 8. Worldlings God. their God of their goods, yet the iust man doth but esteeme Gold & Siluer to bee coloured Earth, yea but dunge. Worldly and voluptu∣ous feeding, to bee filth and famine. Dignitie and delight, to be smoake which the ayre consumeth sudden∣lie. Riches are good in this respect, If wee can vse, and bestow them to that end they are giuen vs: If wee can as willingly leaue them, as re∣ceaue them: If wee set not our Psal. 62. 10. hearts on them, as they increase. It is a vaine thing for a man to hunt so greedily after these worldly goods, or take such delight in ga∣thering: Esa. 49. 17. 1. Tim. 6. 10. Because he shall take no∣thing with him, when he dieth: be∣cause hee cannot prolong his life
with them though hee hath abun∣dance, because they will not auaile Ephe. 5. 5. him in the day of wrath. Coueteousnesse is contemptible Coueteous∣nesse. Eccle. 6. 2. & c in any, especially in such as GOD hath sent plenty vnto: because it is a plague to a rich man to want a liberall heart. Because it is the root 1. Tim. 6. 10. of all euill. Because it will bee their owne destruction in the end. Riches should not make a man high minded, if hee did but thinke vpon God. Because hee is but his Steward ouer them for a time. Be∣cause hee can ympouerish him as he Iob. 1. 12. Acts. 12. 23. did Iob. Because hee can punish him as he did Herod. God hath chosen in this world, Gods choice. Foolish thinges, to confound the wise. Weake thinges, to confound the mighty. Vile things & thinges 1. Cor. 1. 17. which are not, to bring to nought things that are. Although begging bee a misera∣blelife, yet wee must not despise the Begging. poore; For he that despiseth them
despise him that made thē. For God hath made them as instruments for Pro. 17. 5. Deut. 25. 11. the triall of our hearts and charitie. For God hath chosen the poore in Iam. 2. 5. this world, that they should be rich in faith and heires of his kingdome. Aduersitie and pouerty is often∣times Iob. 1. Aduersity. sent of God, for the triall of our faith, as appeares by Iob, whose safety of substance was taken away. For amendment of our liues, as ap∣peares by the Prodigall sonne, who by these crosses was reclaymed. For Pro. 20. 13. neglect of our vocation, as appeares by Salomons saying, loue not sleepe least thou come vnto pouerty. Wee ought to giue to the poore, for the glory and honour of GOD. Pro. 3. 9. Giue for Commaundement sake: Mat. 5. 16. For good example to others. Giue for necessitie sake: For a signe of Iam. 2. 18. the sincerity of our profession. Giue for natures sake. Poore a comparison. Pro. 12. 10. It may appeare vnto vs by way of comparison, wee ought to giue to the poore, for if a good man will
haue pitty on his beast, how much more ought we to respect a Christi∣an. Ioh. 3. 16. If wee ought to lay downe our liues for our brethren, how much more ought wee to relieue them with our goods. If a Factor ought to dispose his goods where his tem∣porall Master pleaseth: how much more ought wee to distribute them, where our eternall Master appoyn∣teth. Hee that giueth to the poore, Gifts to the poore secret. Mat. 6. 2. Rom. 12. 8. Eccle. 35. 10. must bestow his beneuolence: 1 Secretly, without ostentation. 2 Liberallie, according to his a∣billitie. 3 Chearefully, without grudging. This assurance hath hee that gi∣ueth Pro. 19. 17. Pro. 28. 27. Mat. 25. 40. to the poore: Hee lendeth to the Lord: He shall not lacke; He shall not want his reward. The poore ought rather to bee bidden to Feasts, then the rich: be∣cause such haue most need. Because Mat. 25. they can make no recompence. Be∣cause it is most acceptable to God.
Feasting is not amisse, so it bee vsed; In remembrance of Gods be∣nefits: Nehe. 8. Feasting al∣lowed. For the maintenance of mu∣tuall friendship. Towards the reliefe of the poore. Wee must bee more mindfull of the poore, if wee did but remember A daunge∣rous thing. Pro. 28. 27. how dangerous it is: To hide our eyes from them, such shall haue ma∣ny curses. To stoppe our eares at their cry, such shall cry and not bee Pro. 21. 13. heard. To shew no mercy at all: such shall haue mercilesse condem∣nation. Iam. 2. 13. Pure Religion consists in this: To visit the fatherlesse and widdows Barnard. Religion. in aduersitie. To follow the Ex∣ample of Christ. To keepe thy selfe vnspotted of the world. Such as will bee perfect Christi∣ans in Religion ought not to bee Reuel. 3. 19. Christians. Hot, Cold, Luke-warme; but zea∣lous professors. It is very daungerous to deale A daunge∣rous thing. craftily in this worlde, because it greatly offendeth God, who is the
Author of truth: Because it defrau∣deth a mans Neighbour with a shew of honest meaning. Because it de∣stroyeth the deceiuer in the end. Pro. 19. Hypocrites may well Iuggle with the world, but they cannot deceiue Hypocrites. these three. GOD, For hee seeth their secrets, and will one day re∣ueale all. DEATH, For hee commeth of a suddaine, and will de∣stroy them with all. The DEVIL, For he waites for their Soules to re∣ward them for all. An Hypocrite is resembled to these three thinges. A sheepe in Wo to you Hipocrits. skinne: Hee talketh smoothly. A Foxe in subtiltie: Hee intendeth craftily. A Wolfe in crueltie: He attempteth villany. Truth is a most excellent treasure Truth ex∣cellent. and worthy to bee, Honoured: Be∣cause it ouercommeth all thinges. Embraced, Because it defendeth all things. Aduanced, Because it in∣dureth for euer. Such as delight in Lying, should
but remember the Author of it. It Lying. is a seed of the Deuills sowing. The euill of it, It is abhomination before the Lord: And the end of it, It procureth sorrow to his owne soule at the last. This discommodity commeth of lying: when one doth accustome it, hee shall seldome leaue it; when Lying the discommodi∣ty. hee saith truth, hee shall hardly bee beleeued; when hee is knowne to be such a one, the better sort will ab∣horre him. Hee is happie that in his com∣munication hath an eye in feare to Heb. 10. 3. Feane of God. Gods Maiesty, because it is feare∣full to fall into his handes. To his Brothers frayltie: Because it is the easiest thing of a Thousand to of∣fend him. To his owne safetie, be∣cause he must giue accompt of eue∣ry Idle word. Our Communication ought to Communica¦tion what. Esa. 19. Heb. 6. 16. bee yea, and nay; yet wee may law∣fully Sweare: For the glory and worship of God. For confirmation
of truth and equity. For discharge of our conscience being lawfully called The Magistrate may lawfully re∣quire Oathes. an oath, so it bee done for the manifestation of Iustice, Iudgement, and Truth. But wee ought not to sweare, vainely, when there is no cause at all: Lightly, vpon euery smal occasion. Rashly, without good consideration. Who shall inherit heauen (saith Psal. 24. Dauid) He that hath cleane hands & a pure hart. He that hath not lift vp his mind to vanity. He that hath not sworne to deceiue his neighbour. The Mischeifes that insue of Le∣chery, Lechery. are many, if we confer the be∣ginnig with the end, at first it tick∣leth the flesh with touching, after∣wards it poisoneth the mind with fil∣thy delights; and last of all by con∣senting to sin, both body & soul are ouercome. The sin of Lechery is the pleasāts to the deuill, because it hur∣teth body & soule, because he was ne¦uer touched with it, being a spirit: because
it bringeth a heape of other sinnes withall. The Lecherous man in this life Lechery tor∣mented. is three waies tormented, with the heat of the Harlot; with the paine of his hurt: with the worme of his owne conscience. The Sonne of Syrach, saith there Eccle. 25. Sirach his hatred. are three thinges which his soule hateth. A poore man that is proud. A rich man that is a lyer. An old A∣dulterer that doteth. There bee three speciall reasons, that fornication should be eschewed Because it defileth the body with a peculier kind of filthinesse, Because Fornicators Sacriligious persons. a fornicator is sacriligious, for that our bodies are consecrated to God: Because we ought both in body and soule, to serue him, who hath saued vs. This briefly is to bee obserued in Eccle 26. A Whores Comparison. a Whore: Shee brings a man to a morsell of bread, therefore compa∣red to a Dogge. Shee hunts for the precious life of him, therefore com∣pared
to a Sowe. Shee leades him the high way to Hell, she is there∣fore compared to Dung. A whore is to bee abandoned, if A Whore a∣bandoned. Deut 23. 17. Pro. 23. 28. 2. Esd. 16. 42. it were but for these causes, because God hath forbidden any such to be suffered: Because shee increaseth the transgressors among men: Be∣cause shee enuieth honest and ver∣tuous women. There bee three thinges may ter∣rifie A Theife terrified by 3. things. Bradford. a Theife in his lewd attempts: the precept GOD hath set downe, (that is) Thou shalt not steale. The Positiue Law of this Land (that is) Death of body. The ympor∣table iudgement to come: destruc∣tion both of body and soule. A theife by following one (that is the Deuill) hee offendeth three. Hee displeaseth God, by breaking his commaundement. Hee hurt∣eth his neighbour, by taking away his right. He hateth his owne soule, Pro. 29. by following sinne. This inconuenience commeth of
Idlenesse, when one is rooted in it, Idlenesse the inconueni∣ence. it will hardly be remoued: when he hath the end of his lust, it will bee most loathsome: when he is so idle, the deuill is most occupied. There be 3. things that grieued the wise man: A man of warre, that Eccle 26. 29. Wiseman grieued. suffered pouerty. Men of vnder∣standing that are not set by. When one departeth from righteousnesse to sinne. God punisheth his people for their sinnes with 3. kinds of plagues Plauges 3. kinds. which commonly goe together. Warre, Famine, and Pestilence: And where hee blesseth, there followeth three benefits, Peace, Plentie, and Blessings 3. kinds. Salubrity. Christian Souldiers fight but faintly, if they want these weapons. Ephe. 6. 12. Souldiers weapons. The Sheild of Faith, The Helmet of Hope, The Sword of the Spirit. Euery Christian Souldier hath 3. Souldiers enemies. Iam. 4. 1. Ephe. 6, 12. enemies to incounter with, the lewd affections of themselues: The euill prouocations of the people. The
dayly suggestions of Sathan. There were three persons spared Persons spa∣red from the Warres. Deut. 20 7. Deut. 24. 5. Deut. 20. 8. in the old Lawe from going on war∣fare, hee that was betrothed to a maid, he that was but new married: he that was faint hearted. God sendeth Raine, Cold, Heate, Tempest and such like oftentimes, Iob. 37. 13. Weather. to punish man, to profit the earth, to declare his fauour towards man. One may eate flesh at all times, so it be done without scruple or doub∣ting, Flesh. without offence of our brother without breach of Godly orders. For euery creature of God is good, and nothing ought to bee refused, if 1. Tim. 4. 4. it bee receiued with thanksgiuing. Our meats are sanctified vnto vs Beza. 1. Tim. 4. 5. Meates. by the word of God and prayer, be∣cause wee confesse and acknowledge that God is the maker and giuer of those creatures which wee vse, be∣cause we are of the number of those, who through Christs benefits haue recouered that right ouer al cretures
which Adam lost by his fall: Be∣cause by our Prayers wee craue of the Lord that wee may vse those meates with a good conscience, which wee receiue at his hands. Such as by their Doctrine will Difference made of meates. Fox. make difference of meates, the same may bee called Deuillish or de∣ceitfull, in three respects. 1 Because the teachers of them make lawes of thinges which are not their owne, for God created the meates. 2 Because they ouerthrowe with their decrees, the end wherfore they were made of God, (to wit) that wee should vse them. 3 Because, by this meanes they rob Christ of his glorie, who will be honoured in the vse of them. Our behauiour ought to be vsed, Behauiour to be vsed. To our Betters, reuerently; To our Equals, louingly; To our vnder∣lings, lowly. We ought to call our Elder, Fa∣ther; our Younger, Brother; euery
man our Neighbour. Marriage was instituted for three ends. Mariage. 1. For a remedy against Inconti∣nencie; It is allowed of the Patri∣arkes. 2. For the propagation of Chil∣dren; It is condemned by the Pro∣phets. 3. For the consolation of Man & Woman; It is followed by the Apo∣stles. Men are made three manner of Mat. 19. 12. waies. 1. By Nature; such are borne of Chastitie. their mothers belly. 2. By Art; such as be made chast by men. 3. By Grace; such as haue made themselues chaste for Heauen. Wee haue great cause to reioyce at these daies, more then our prede∣cessours had. 1. Because Christ hath made ea∣sie Mat. 11. 31. vnto vs that importable yoake they were subiect to.
2 Because hee hath brought v the glad tydings of saluation, which Rom. 16. 17 they longed to see. 3 Because many Prophets and Mat. 13. 17. righteous men haue desired to see these daies. Although honest Mirth bee tolle∣rable, yet foolish or excessiue mirth Mirth. is Vaine. 1 Because such mirth shall bee mingled with mourning, and the end of such ioy is Lamentation. Wicked: Because thereby wee cleane forget the meanes that shold make vs remember our misery. Eccle. 7. 4 Dangerous: Because our Sauiour saith, Woe bee to them that now Luk. 16. 25 laughe, for they shall wayle and weepe. There are three kind of Fooles. 1 Such as are naturally borne Fooles three kindes. Pr. 17. 21. 25 without witt, and those (as Salo∣mon saith) are a griefe to the father, and a heauinesse to her that bare them. 2 Such as become fooles, and 1. Cor. 3. 18.
are so contented to bee counted in this world, that they may be wise in the world to come. 3 Such as are giuen ouer to their owne lusts, and follow all kind of filthinesse; these are they whom Dauid called Fooles, who lewdly say in their hearts (as they falsly think) Psal. 53. 1. there is no God. A wise man is noted and discer∣ned three manner of waies. 1 By discreet Silence, for as Salo∣mon Pro. 27. 28. A wise man noted three waies. saith, his peace is counted wise: not that any should be restrained of speech, but that they should obserue opportunitie in speaking; Heereof saith the Philosopher. Qui nescit tare, nescit loqui. 2 By modest Speach: For it is pro∣per to fooles to bee full of friuolous talke, but hee that hath knowledge (saith the wiseman) spareth his Pro. 17. 27. words. 3 By sober Life: For hee that is heauenly wise indeede will (as St. Iames saith) shew by conuersation Iam. 3. 13.
his works in meeknes of wisedome. Sickenesse is very necessary for Eccle. 7. 4. Sickenes ne∣cessary. 2. King. 20 2. Heb. 12. 6. man for three causes. 1 Because thereby hee is put in mind of his owne frailtie. 2 Because thereby hee shall bee better incited to call vpon God. 3 Because it is a testimony vnto him of the loue of God. Loath to die Hee that is loath to frame him∣selfe to die especiallie in sickenesse, Heb. 11. 13. doth shew himselfe Vnnaturall: Be∣cause hee so little desires to bee at home with his heauenly Father, considering hee is heere, but as a stranger and a Pilgrime. Vnwise, 1. Cor. 7. 13. Because hee taketh felicitie in the vanitie of this world, considering the fashion of it goes away. Wret∣ched: Because hee had rather still liue to augment his misery, then frame himselfe by a Godly end, to embrace eternall blessednes. In our sicknesse wee ought to re∣member M. Dent. three things. 1 To seeke to God to purge our
sinnes, which are the cheife cause of all our diseases. 2 To vse the helpe of the Phisi∣tian, as a meane by whom God wor∣keth. 3 To dispose our temporal goods where they may make most to his glory that gaue them. For a man to make his Will in Will made. sicknesse or health it is Lawfull; be∣cause the Lord willed Hezekiah to 2. King. 20. 1. put his house in order before he di∣ed. Godly; because his mind being quiet in worldly matters, hee shall the better apply it to heauenly mo∣tions. Necessary; because a good stay being made, it shall cut off oc∣casion of contention, that may hap∣pen afterward. The mindes of men are very mu∣table, M. Rodg. and their opinions (especially such as be peruese) are very scripu∣lous to please: For, he that did well, offended some, and yet was an Apo∣stle. Hee that did worse, pleased many, and yet was but a Beast. He
that did best of all, could not please all: and yet was a God. ENLAND hath three special Enland thankfull for three causes. causes to bee continually thankefull to God for. 1 The free passage of the Gos∣pell. 2 The blessed time of Peace. 3 The Godly Gouernour there∣of. Which Passage, Peace, and Prince; The Lord for his mercy sake, still prosper, preserue, and pro∣tect. Amen. FINIS.
A Morning Prayer to bee vsed in Priuate Families. O Lord our God and heauenly fa∣ther, we thy vnworthy Children do here come into thy most holy and heauenly presence to giue thee praise and glory for all thy mercies & mani∣fold blessings toward vs: especially for that thou hast preserued vs this night past, from all dangers and feares therof hast giuen vs quiet rest to our bodies and brought vs now safely to the be∣ginnig of this day, and dost now afresh renew all thy mercies vpon vs, as the Eagle reneweth her bill, giuing vs all things aboundantly to enioy: as food, raiment, health, peace, libertie, & free∣dome from many miseries, diseases, ca∣sualties, & calamities, which we are sub∣iect vnto in this Citie euery minute of an houre, & not onely so, but also for vouchsafeing vnto vs many good things, not only for necessity, but euen for delight also. But aboue all (deare Father) wee praise thy name for the
blessings of a better life, especially for thy most holy word & sacrament, & all the good we enioy thereby: for the co∣tinuance of the Gospell amongst vs, for the death of thy son & all that hap∣pinesse which we haue therby. Also be∣cause thou hast chosen vs to life before we were, & that of thy meere goodnes, and vndeserued fauour towards vs, & hast called vs in thine appointed time, iustified by thy grace, sanctified vs by thy spirit, and adopted vs to be thine own children & heires apparent to thy great Crowne. O Lord, open our eies euery day more & more, to see & con∣sider of thy great & marueilous loue to vs in all these things, that by the due consideration therof, our harts may be drawn yet neerer vnto thee, euen more to loue thee, feare thee, and obey thee: that as thou art inlarged towards vs in mercy, so we may bee inlarged towards thee in thanksgiuing: and as thou dost abound towards vs in goodnesse, so we may abound towards thee in obedi∣ence & loue. And sith (deer father) thou
art neuer wearie of doing vs good, not∣withstanding all our vnworthinesse & naughtines, therfore let the considera∣ton of thy great mercy and fatherly kindnesse towards vs, euen as it were force our hearts, & compell vs to come into thy most glorious presence with newe songs of thanksgiuing in our mouths. We pray thee (O most merci-God) to forgiue vs all our vnthankful∣nes, vnkindnes, prophane & great a∣busing of all thy mercies, and specially our abuse & contempt of thy Gospell: together with all other sins of our life, which we confesse are innumerable, & moe then can be reckoned, both in o∣mission of good things, & commission of euill. We most humbly intreat thee, to set them all ouer to that reckoning which thy sonne Christ hath made vp for them vpon his crosse, and neuer to lay any of them to our charge, but fre∣ly forget all, & forgiue al. Naile downe all our sins & iniquities to the crosse of Christ, burie them in his death, bath them in his blood, hide them in his
wounds: let them neuer rise vp in iudg¦ment against vs; set vs free of the mise∣ries that are vpon vs for sinne, & keepe backe the iudgments to come both of soule & body, goods, & good name▪ Be reconsiled vnto vs in thy deer Son, concerning al matters past; not once remembring or repeating vnto vs our old & abhominable iniquities, but ac∣cept vs righteous in him, imputing his righteousnes to vs, & our sins to him. Let his righteousnes satisfie thy iustice for our vnrighteousnes, his obedience for our disobedience: his perfection for our imperfection. Moreouer wee humbly beseech thy good Maiestie to giue vs the true sight & feeling of our manifold sinnes, that wee may not bee blinded in them through delight, or hardned in them through custome, as the reprobates are: but that we may be euen weary of them, and much grieued for them, labouring & striuing by all possible meanes to get out of them. Good Father, touch our hearts with true repentance for all sins; let vs not
take any delight or pleasure in any sin, but howsoeuer we fall through frailtie, (as we fal often) yet let vs neuer fal fi∣nally; let vs neuer lie downe in sinne, or continue in sin, but let vs get vp vpon our feet againe, & turne vnto thee with all our harts, & seeke thee whilest thou mayest bee found, & whilest thou dost offer grace & mercy vnto vs. O Lord increase in vs that true and liuely faith whereby wee may lay sure hold on thy son Christ, & rest vpon his mercies al∣together. Giue vs faith, assuredly to beleeue al the great & precious promi∣ses made in the Gospell, and strengh∣then vs from aboue, to walke & aboūd in all the true & sound fruites of faith. Let vs grow daily in the sanctification of the spirit, and the mortification of the flesh: Let vs liue holily, iustly, and soberly in this present euil world, shew∣ing forth the vertues of thee in all our particular actions, that we may adorne our most holy profession, and shine as lights in the midst of a crooked & fro∣ward generation, amongst whom wee
liue, being gainfull to all by our liues and couersations, & offensiue to none. To this end wee pray thee, fill vs with thy spirit, and all spirituall graces; as loue, wisedome, patience, contentment meekenes, humilitie, temperance, cha∣stitie, kindnes and affabilitie: and stirre vs vp to vse prayer & watchfulnesse, reading & meditating in thy Law, & all other good meanes whereby wee may grow & abound in all heauenly vertue blesse vs in the vse of the meane from day to day: make vs such as thou woul∣dest haue vs to be, and such as wee de∣sire to be, working in vs both will, deed purpose, and power. For thou O Lord, art all in all: thou wilt haue mercy vpon whom thou wilt haue mercie: & whom thou wilt, thou hardnest. Haue mercie vpon vs there∣fore (deere father) & neuer leaue vs to our selues, nor to our owne willes, lusts & desires, but assist vs with thy good spirit, that we may continue to the end in a righteous course, that so at length we may be receiued into glory, and be
partakers of that immortall Crowne, which thou hast laid vppe for all that loue thee, & truely call vpon thee. Further we intreat thee O heauenly Father to giue vs all thinges necessarie for this life; as food, raiment, health, peace, libertie, & such freedome from those manifold miseries which wee lye open vnto euery day, as thou seest meet. Blesse our stocke & store, corne and cattell, trades & occupations, & all the works of our hands: for thy bles∣ssing only maketh rich, & it bringeth no sorrows with it. Grant these thinges good father vnto vs heere present, and to all thine absent, praying the in spe∣ciall fauour, to remember our friends & kinsfolks in the flesh, all our neigh∣bors & wellwiller, & all those for whom we are bound to pray, for Iesus Christs sake our onely mediator & aduocate. Amen.
An Euening Prayer to be vsed in priuate Families. O Eternall God, and our most lo∣uing and deare Father, wee thy vnworthy children doe here fall down at the foote of thy great Maiesty, ac∣knowledging euen from our hearts, that wee are altogether vnworthy to come neere thee, or to looke towards thee, because thou art a God of infinit glory, and we are most vile and abho∣minable sinners, such as were concei∣ued and borne in sinne and corrupti∣on: such as haue inherited our fathers corruption, & also haue actually trans∣gressed all thy holy statutes and lawes, both in thoughts, words, and deeds, be∣fore we knew thee, and since, secretly & openly, with our selues, & with others, our particular sinnes are moe then can be numbred: for who knoweth how of∣tentimes hee offendeth? But this wee must needs confesse against our owne selues, that our hearts are full of pride, couetousnes, & the loue of this world;
yea, the very sinckes of sin, and dung∣hils of all filthinesse; so that thou hast hast iust cause to proceed to sentence of Iudgement against vs as most dam∣nable transgressors of thy holy Com∣mandements; yea, such as are suncke in our rebellios, and haue many times and often committed high treason a∣gainst thy sacred Maiesty: and there∣fore thou mayest iustly cast vs downe into Hell fire, there to bee tormented with Sathan and his Angels for euer: and we haue nothing to except against thy Maiesty for so doing, sith therein thou shouldest deale with vs, but euen according to equity, and our iust de∣serts. Wherefore (deere Father) wee doe appeale from thy Iustice to thy Mercie, most humbly intreating thee to haue mercy vpon vs, and freely to forgiue vs all our sins past whatsoeuer, both new and old, secret and open knowne and vnknowne, and that for Iesus Christ his sake our only Media∣tor and Redeemer.
Giue vs therfore) deere father) euery day more & more sight and feeling of our sins, with true humiliation vnder the same. Giue vs also that true & liue∣ly faith, wherby we may lay hold vpon thy deere son Christ, & all his merits, applying the same to our owne soules: so as wee may stand fully perswaded, that whatsoeuer hee hath done vpon the Crosse, he hath done for vs parti∣cularly, as well as for others. Giue vn∣to vs faith (good father) constantly to beleeue all the sweete promises of the Gospell, touching remission of sins & eternall life, made in thy son Christ. O Lord increase our faith, that wee may altogether rest vppon thy promises which are all yea & Amen. Yea, that we may settle our selues, & all that wee haue, wholly vpon them: both our soules, bodies, goods, name, wiues, chil∣dren, & our whole estate, knowing that al things depend vpon thy promises, power & prouidence: And that thy word doth support & beare vppe the whole order of Nature. Moreouer we
intreat thee O Lord, to strengthen vs from aboue, to walke in euer good way and to bring foorth the fruits of true faith in all our particular actions, stu∣dying to please thee in al things, and to be fruitfull in all good works, that wee may shew foorth vnto all men by our good conuersation, whose children we are: and that we may adorne & beauti∣fie our most holy profession, by walk∣ing in a Christian course, and in all the sound fruits & practise of Godlinesse and true religon. To this end wee pray thee sanctifie our hearts by thy spirit yet more and more; sanctifie our soules and bodies, and all our corrupt naturall faculties, as reason, vnderstanding, wil, & affecti∣ons, so as they may bee fitted for thy worship and seruice, taking a delight and pleasure therein, stirre vs vp to vse prayer, watchfulnes, reading, and me∣ditation in thy Law and all other good meanes wherby we may profit in grace and goodnes from day to day. Blesse vs in the vse of the meanes that wee
may die to sin, and liue to righteousn Direct all our steps in thy word,  none iniquity haue dominion ouer v Assist vs against our special infirmitie and master sins, that wee may get th victory ouer them all, to thy glory, and the great peace & comfort of our ow consciences. Strengthen vs, good Fa∣ther, by thy grace & holy spirit again the common corruptions of the worl as pride, whoredom, couetousnes, cō¦tempt of thy gospell, swearing, yin dissembling and deceiuing. Oh dear father, let vs not be ouercome of those filthy vices, or any other sinfull plea∣sures, and fond delights wherewith thousands are carried headlong into destruction. Grant these things, and all other need∣full graces for our soules or bodies, for Iesus Christs sake. In whose name we further cal vpon the as he hath taught vs saying, Our Father which art, &c. FINIS.
