S1807 R183484 52529285 179053
royal blazon surmounted by a crown against a background of stylized foliage and other motifs PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the currant Parliament to the Eleventh Day of March 1697. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our She∣riffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Con∣stitute, Greeting: Forsamuch as We by Our Proclamation of the date the Twenty Ninth Day of July last by-past, did Adjourn this Our present currant Parliament to the Fifteenth day of December then next to come, now instant; and whereas the present state of Our Affairs does not require the Meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the said Day to which it was Adjourned. Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our privy Council, are resolved to continue the said Adjournment from the said Fifteenth Day of December instant, to the Ele∣venth Day of March next to come; and that the Members of Our said Par∣liament be not put to unnecessar Trouble and Charges, We do hereby with Advice foresaid, continue the Adjournment of Our said currant Parliament, from the said Fifteenth Day of December instant, to the said Eleventh Day of March next to come: And We do hereby Order and Require all the Members of Our currant Parliament, to Attend the said Eleventh Day of March next to come at Edinburgh, in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent thir Our Letters seen ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the rema∣nent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our ancient King∣dom, and there by open Proclamation, make Intimation that Our said Par∣liament is Adjourned to the said Eleventh Day of March next to come. And Ordains these Presents to be printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Ninth Day of December, And of Reign the Ninth Year 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. St. Concilii. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.
