A96 P2239 [ocm]64550745 184285
The ABHORRENCE, OR, Protestant Observations in Dublin, upon the Principles and Practices of the Protestants at London. A popish thing under ye mask of a Church of England man. Abdicraunt DOMINUM, et Abducerunt Populum ad Nequitiam. 3. April. 1690. Published Saturday February the First, 1689. IN all Ages some Prodigies or Monsters, have appeared amongst Mankind, that have been ingenious at the peril of the Publick, such who compass their ends not by fairness and strength of Argument, but by insinuating themselves into Mens affections by all the basest Method of subtilty and adulati∣on, which sort of flattery is indeed a Col∣lective accumulative baseness, being compound∣ed of the most sordid, hateful qualities inci∣dent to Mankind, viz. Lying Servility, and Treachery, each of which being detestably deformed singly, must certainly in conjunction make up a most loathsome ugly Gu lt. But not to trouble our selves to search for Prece∣dents in former Story, we see before our eyes more than sufficient! much more than future Ages will ever credit. We behold indeed so much, that after one Century the truth of these things shall be taken for feigned Hyperboles, or abominable Lyes. Who will ever believe this general Defection? Who can imagine that Bishops, Noblemen, &c. would ever Harlotize that Sacred Character of Nobilitas est sola atque unica Virtus, and suffer themselves to be ingender'd with Treachery! Nay, that such Men who bear so great a Character in Church and State, would ever see, nay assist!) so foul a Monster as Treason to deflower their Virgin Loyalty, and at once to Rob the Glory of the Reformati∣on, (the Church of England) of all her pretence to the Beauty of a most Pure and Primitive Chri∣stianity. O horrid! O abominable Invitation! Religion (that Sacred Name! that true interest of all Christians Souls) is continually abus'd to palliate and countenance the most abominable Undertakings: And Men of turbulent and rest∣less Spirits will be sure to find, or make some pretences or occasions of Quarrel under the most Just and Equal Government. But as such Proceedings stand, in respect to Religion, the Reverend William Sherlock, D. D. (foreseeing what might come to pass, as well as what had hap∣pen'd in the World) declares in a Sermon on Sept. 9th. 1683. Pap. 11. 13. There is nothing more expresly contrary to the revealed Word of God, than Treasonable Plots and Conspiracies against Sovereign Princes: Christian Religion (says he) is the greatest Security of Government, both in its Precepts and Examples; it commands EVERY Soul to be subject to the Higher Powers, and threa∣tens Eternal Damnation against Rebels. And (as things now stand) were there any true con∣cernment for Religion, can We imagine that the most prosest Atheists! the most lewd pro∣fligate Wretches! the greatest Monsters, and Prodigies of Wickedness! (as many of our In∣viters are notoriously known to be) should be so Zealous for Religion? These two Words (says the Bishop of Ely, in a Sermon, upon the sme day, p. 17.) of the wicked Polititian Caiaphas, Venient Romani, are effectuall Incen∣tives to stir up the People to Cry, Crucisie him! Crucifie him! Always (says that Reverend Pre∣late) Popery! Popery! serves the turn of any great Incendiary to break through all Divine and Hu∣mane Laws. And John Fitzwilliams, D. D. on that day Preaches to all Christians, That Sub∣jects withdrawing their Obedience from their Law∣ful Prince, is a denying the Authority of God; a shaking off Gods Government from their Shoul∣ders, that even the Almighty should not Reign over them; They have not rejected Thee, but Me, that I should not Reign over them, 1 Sam. 5.7. Treason against the King, (says this Reverend Divine) is a kind of Sacriledge, and Revolt from him, an Apostacy from God, and a Resisting him, an Opposing of God, Rebelling against him, Fight∣ing with God; The setting up a Counterfeit Prince against the True One, an introducing a Plurality of Godheads, the Obeying of an Usur∣per, Idolatry; the slandering his Annointed, and his Footsteps, a Blaspheming of God; the blaming his Conduct, a quarrelling with Providence, &c.
To these may be added the Suffrage of many more, the best and most Learned of the Church of England: By which it is fully evident, our Principles, of the Principles of the Church! are for Loyalty: And I will now challenge the most Malicious Abdicator, even Burnet himself, (who has thrust in his black Face to bespot her Beauty) to shew me the contrary, otherwise than by the Complexion of his own accursed Actions. And further, the Laws of our Coun∣trey are in this case adequate to those of our Re∣ligion, and do attaint Those that Invited the Frince of Orange of the highest Crime that can be committed (in respect to Civil Government) upon earth, and Condemn for High Treason those that maintain the Invitation. First it is a known Maxim of the Common Law, That the King of England holds his Power from, and is accountable to none but God, Rex Anglia sub nullo nisi, tantum sub Deo, Bracton. And by the Sta∣tute Law, 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. To compass or ima∣gine the death of the King, Queen, or Prince of Wales. To levy War against the King, or adhere to his Enemies to give them Aid or Comfort within the Realm or elsewhere, is High Treason. And by the Statute 13. Car. 2. cap. 1. If any intend to De∣pose the King, or to levy War against him, or to move, [or Invite] any Strangers to Invade any of his Ma∣jesties Dominions, is also High Treason. Inviolably to keep, and Religiously to observe which Laws, all the Nobility, Lords Spiritual, as well as Lords Temporal, Clergy, Lawers, and the greatest part of the whole Gentry of England, besides most of the Tradesmen, and inferiour sort of People, one time or other, (upon some manner of occasion) have Sworn, and upon the Holy Evangelists de∣clared, That it is not Lawful, upon any account whatsoever, to bear Arms against the King, or a∣gainst any, that are in Commission under him. And likewise, That his Majesty James the Second, is the Only Supream Governour in all his Dominions: And that They will do their utmost to resist Any Forreign Prince that shall Invade him. But alas! When I reflect upon the sad and dreadful Complexion of the Times! when I be∣hold the Monstrous Ingratitude, and Treachery of Some, persisted in with such an Obstinacy as is not to be found, but in Apostate Angel, who cannot, and amongst Traytors and Rebels who will not Repent. However I say, some of Us may speak for our selves, yet I must and will blame Those whose Undutiful Actions made the first Scene in this Bloody Tragedy of Rebellion! Those who have boldly ventur'd (upon peril of their own Dam∣nation) to streign a point of strict Duty, and dis∣pence with the before-mentioned Laws of Con∣science, and of our Countrey, having nothing to plead for themselves, but that old pernicious Principle of Doing Evil, that Good might come thereof. Our Church, the Bulwork and Glory of the Reformation! The most Pure and Apo∣stolical Church upon Earth, (who as the Bishop of Ely (in his Sermon before cited, Pag. 33.) says, Never takes the Sword against her Lawful Sovereign; was never in that Danger as now: Now is the time, says our Adversaries, that Heresy is swallow∣ed up in Atheism; Now is that lamentable time, wherein with horror we behold the sad Convul∣sions of our beloved Reformation: Our Chur∣ches are now to be new Moulded into all the sordid and slovenly Methods of the Coventicle, Our Episcopal Rites, and Jurisdictions, into all the Faces of Calvinism and Presbitery. And I tremble to think what Satisfaction must be given to the Divine Vengeance, for that vast effusion of Christian Blood, &c. that is now like to be spilt in the damnable progress of this most Un∣natural and Impious Rebellion. This Paper shall Weekly demonstrate our Loy∣alty to the King, whom you have most barba∣rously Abdicated, to the great Scandal of Chri∣anity it self. You shall upon all occasions find us Abhorrers of this Rebellion. Our Actions shall speak our Fidelity Sworn to James the Second, whilst You pay your Perjur'd Allegiance to the Ʋsurper. And we will Now begin to set our selves heartily to do His Majesty Right, against your Invasion, in order to send the War home to you, who so Wickedly began it. Dublin, Printed for Alderman James Malone, Bookseller in Skinner Row.
