A3747A R172509 [ocm]64550885 184333
THE Arraignment AND TRYAL OF The Coach-Man and Foot-Boy, on Friday last, the 13th. of this present December, 1661. at the Sessions-House in the Old-Bailey, who murthered their Royal Master the Prince of Transilvania, as he was asleep in his Coach, near Rochester. Being a perfect and full account of Their peaching each other at their Examination be∣fore the Lord Mayor, Lord Chief Justice, and the rest of the Honourable Court. The manner how they were brought in Guilty by the Jury; with an Order thereupon for their being conveyed to Maid∣stone in Kent, and the Desires of John Jacob to the Court thereupon. TOGETHER With the Trial and Condemnation of the 2 Souldiers that killed Mr. Grouster the Brickler in Turn-again-lane: The manner of their first quarreling, how they slew him, there flight thereupon; and the taking of them afterwards and committing them to Newgate, who on Saturday last vvere both Condemned to be Hanged for the said Murther. London, Printed by R. W. 1661.
An Impartial, Perfect, and True Account of The Examination and Confession of the Coach-man and Foot-Boy at their Arraignment and Trial at the Sessions-House in the Old-Bailey on Friday last, the 13th of this present December, &c. MUrther is a crying sin, that calls aloud for Vengeance, and will never cease till it be heard; And although Revenge be not executed upon the Authors thereof pre∣sently, at last it lights heavy on them; for innocent Blood will never be hid, although never so secretly committed, which doth plainly appear by Iohn Iacob the Iewish Coach-man, and the Foot-Boy, (both Servants to the Prince of Transilvania) who consulted together to murther their Royal Master when they had him in a private place, where they ima∣gined none might espy them; But the All-seeing Eye
of God they could not escape, whose Bloody action was open to him, though hid in obscurity for a time from the World, neither did it long so continue; for being not contented with the Wealth they had taken from him after he was murthered, coming up to Lon∣don to sell some of his Apparel, a Hanger, and a Watch, [as the Witnesses testified in the Old-Bailey] they were apprehended and committed to Newgate, where they remained till Sessions in order to their Trial: And on Friday last the 13th of this present December, they were both brought from thence to the Sessions house in the Old Bailey, there to answer for what they had done, and being brought to the Bar before that Honourable Court, the Lord Mayor asked the Coachman, Wha mo∣ved him to do that Barbarous deed, and whether the Boy was as chief an Agent as he, or drawn thereto by his perswasion. To which he replied, That his intent was not to kill him, or to do him any harm, onely when he was sleeping to take some money from him, which he was in Arrears, knowing that then he had great store, and that he intended to take no more then was due to him, which was about some nine pound, but seeing him stir and begin to awake when he was about it, and fearing his displeasure, he said he knew not what to do, being heartily sorry for what was done. The Court told him. Not the stirring of his Master, or fear of his Displeasure he minded, but a bloody intent to murther him for what Riches he had then in possession, asking him, Whether he was guilty, or not guilty? He made an∣swer, That he was not guilty of Wilful Murther, for that he was resisted, and perhaps he not slain him, said he might have suffered himself for offering such an at∣tempt when he was asleep.
The Foot Boy standing at the Bar all this while, did seem to be very attentive and observed the Coachman all the while he was speaking, whereupon the Lord Chief Justice began thus to examine him: Sirrah, said he, did John Jacob, prisoner at the Bar, tell you he would take money from your Master when was a∣sleep, or did you know that he was indebaed to him for Wa∣ges, as he sayes. My Lord, replied he, [weeping exceedingly] I knew not of any money my Master owed him: But when we came within seven or eight miles of Roche∣ster, he asked me how far we had thither, and so near as I could (having been there once before) I told him; and as he was fitting in the Coach Box and dri∣ving forwards, he turn'd him about, and beckned me to him, I going then by the Coach side, and when I came to him he stooped down, the Horses drawing but easi∣ly, and bid me tell him when he was asleep, for he used to lie along and sleep in the Coach oftentimes, especi∣ally when he went far; and about an hour after he had spoken to me I told him, not knowing the reason why he asked me, thinking he would offer no injury in the least to him; he asked me again, If I were sure he was asleep, and I said yes: Whereupon he came down from the Coach Box to the Boot, and looking upon him a little while, he drew out of his Pocket a Knife, a long black handle Knife, and immediately stabbed him in two or three places, at which I was greatly amazed, wondring much thereat, asking what he intended to do. Here the Boy seemed to be in a pause, holding down his head, seeming extream pensive, not uttering a word more; till at last he was commanded to say on further, which he did in this manner:
Then, my Lord, he came to me, and took hold of me saying, If I would not help his body out of the Coach, he would kill me, which with great fear I did: Whereupon the Court asked the Boy, If he gave him a∣ny money? He told them, That he promised him 100 pounds to conceal it, but he said he would not, and a∣gain thereupon he threatned to kill him, forcing him to take the money. Upon which, the Lord Mayor made answer, that it was the most inhumanest and barbarous Act that ever was committed, asking the Coachman, whether the Boy was privy to his intent. He answered No, but said he took the money when he gave it him. Then the Court asked him again, whether he was Guilty, or not Guilty, to which he replied as formerly, That he was not Guilty of wilful Murther. The Court told him they thought it would not be found so, and thereupon the Jury went upon them, who brought them in both guil∣ty: But the Prudence of the Judicious Court in doing of Justice was such, after the Jury had gave their vir∣dit in, that they thought it not meet for them to suffer here, but where they had done the Fact, therefore Con∣demned them not, but ordered them to be sent to Maid∣stone Sizes in Kent, there to be further Tried, and re∣ceive reward for what they had done. Since which time the Coachman hath taken all upon himself, being willing to save the Youths life (if he can) who is about 13 years of age, who in all likelihood by John Jacobs words, was but instrumental to the murther; yet not∣withstanding that, Justice must be satisfied with Real and Impartial Truth, which they are both to answer at the next Sizes in Maid-stone, which when the Coach∣man heard, he pleaded at the Bar, that he had a Letter
from His Majesty Alphonso King of Portugal, in order to be transported thither, there to be Tried; but being asked to shew it, said he had lost it, being very unwil∣ling to go to Maid-stone: The cause whereof (as yet) is onely known to himself, but perhaps Time may tell it to others. After this, they were both returned unto Newgate, where they remained that night. The next morning, being Saturday, December the 14th. The two Souldiers that was taken on Lord Mayors Day last in Turn-again-lane, was brought from New∣gate again to the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey, and there found Guilty by the Jury of Wilful Murther; the manner whereof was thus: On the Day after Simon and Judes [commonly cal∣led Lords Mayors Day] one Mr. Grouster a Brick-laier living in Sea Coal Lane, came to a Pewterers house, an acquaintance of his, that sold Drink, to be merry, ha∣ving appointed him to come in the Evening, and each of them to beat a Drum together, for they both took delight in that exercise, and would often use it; where they had not long continued, but 4. Souldiers being in the house, and hearing the sound of the Drum (two of them lodging there, and the other two at the sign of the Hand and Hammer, near the same house) were very ea∣ger to go up the stairs, which one of them presently did. Mr. Grouster seeing him come up so boldly, de∣manded, What he would have? telling him he would willingly accept of his company, and the rest of his fel∣lowes that were below, provided he and they would be civil. Upon which, he replied, He would come up, and stay too; what was that to him. Mr. Grouster told
him it was to him, and he should stay no longer, ar thereupon turned him down the stairs, and when  had done, he came up again and shut the Chambe door. The Souldier being down, told the rest of h Comrades what had hapned, whereupon after som Discourse amongst themselves, which they were take notice of to have, they altogether ascended the stair with their Swords drawn, and knocking at the door▪ Mr. Grouster the Brick-laier came and opened it, whom presently they all struck at, but one of them hit him so violent a blow on the Head with his Hanger, that he fel down upon the floor, and died immediately, which the rest seeing presently fled, two whereof were taken within half an hour after the murther was done, com∣ming down the same Lane, who were both committed to Newgate by the Right Honourable the Lord May∣or, where they remained till Sessions, and being found Guilty by the Jury on Saturday last of Wilful Mur∣ther, they were both Condemned to be hanged at Ty∣burn for the Fact. FINIS.
